==PAGE:1==
 
Comparison of cardiomyocytes de-
rived from human embryonal stem 
cells with cardiomyocytes from hu-
man foetal hearts 
February 2015 
Kristina Grunnet-Lauridsen 
S092784 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Aim 
The overall aim of this project was to compare cardiomyocytes derived from human 
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) with cardiomyocytes derived from human fetal hearts. 
Specifically the aim was to compare cardiomyocytes of different ages, phenotypes and 
differentiation stages as well as to test and optimize culture conditions of both hESC 
derived and foetal heart derived cardiomyocytes. 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Comparison of cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonal stem cells with cardiomyocytes from human foetal 
hearts 
Abstract 
The use of cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) enable re-
searchers to study and understand electrophysiological, morphological and cell-biological prop-
erties of cardiomyocytes. In addition cardiomyocytes can be a powerful tool in determine effects 
of new drugs, beneficial as well as damaging. But crucial for studies of cardiomyocytes derived 
from hESCs, are how similar they are to cardiomyocytes of actual humans. In this study a com-
parison between hESCs derived cardiomyocytes with cardiomyocytes derived from human foe-
tal hearts have been made. Beating clusters of cardiomyocytes from the two sources have 
shown to contain approximately the same number of cardiomyocytes, based on expression lev-
els of CTNT. hESC derived cardiomyocytes were though found to exhibit a different structural 
composition determined by gene expression levels of ACTN2. Furthermore did the two types of 
cardiomyocytes exhibit different expression levels of GATA4. In the present study gene expres-
sions levels of CTNT have also been shown to increase during culturing of cardiomyocyte of 
foetal origin.Cardiomyocytes have been differentiated from hESC with a 50% success rate and 
ROCKi have been seen to have an impact on differentiation. 
 
 
Laboratory of reproductive biology, Feburary 2015 
 
Kristina Grunnet-Lauridsen 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
4 
 
Content 
1. 
Stem cells ............................................................................................................................ 5 
1.1 
Fertilization .......................................................................................................................... 5 
1.2 
Embryonic stem cells .......................................................................................................... 5 
1.3 
Foetal stem cells ................................................................................................................. 7 
1.4 
Adult stem cells ................................................................................................................... 7 
1.5 
Induced pluripotent stem cells ............................................................................................. 8 
1.6 
The future use of stem cells ................................................................................................ 9 
2. 
Heart anatomy, physiology and foetal heart development ................................................ 11 
2.1 
Anatomy adult human heart .............................................................................................. 11 
2.2 
Physiology of the adult human heart ................................................................................. 13 
2.3 
Development of the foetal heart ........................................................................................ 15 
3. 
Culturing cardiomyocytes .................................................................................................. 22 
3.1 
Differentiation of embryonic stem cells to cardiomyocytes ............................................... 22 
3.2 
Culturing cardiomyocytes with conditioned media ............................................................ 24 
3.3 
Culturing cardiomyocytes derived from tissue .................................................................. 26 
3.4 
Comparison of human cardiomycocytes with stem cell derived cardiomyocytes ............. 29 
4. 
Method and materials ........................................................................................................ 32 
4.1 
Comparison between foetal and hESC derived cardiomyocytes ...................................... 32 
4.2 
Culturing cardiomyocytes from foetal heart ...................................................................... 34 
4.3 
Differentiation of cardiomyocytes from embryonic stem cells ........................................... 37 
5. 
Results .............................................................................................................................. 39 
5.1 
Comparing hESC derived cardiomyocytes with foetal aggregates ................................... 39 
5.2 
Foetal Cultures .................................................................................................................. 43 
5.3 
Foetal Cultures .................................................................................................................. 43 
5.4 
hESC derived cardiomyocytes .......................................................................................... 54 
6. 
Discussion ......................................................................................................................... 58 
6.1 
Comparing hESC derived cardiomyocytes with foetal aggregates ................................... 58 
6.2 
Foetal hearts ..................................................................................................................... 59 
6.3 
hESC derived cardiomyocytes .......................................................................................... 61 
7. 
Conclusion ......................................................................................................................... 64 
8. 
Future work ....................................................................................................................... 65 
Acknowledgements ..................................................................................................................... 65 
References .................................................................................................................................. 67 
[Overskrift]  ................................................................................................................ 73 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
5 
1. Stem cells 
Today we know about multiple types of stem cells, in this section they will shortly be described 
and the section will be ended with a bid of some of the future uses of stem cells. However the 
section will be started with short review of fertilization because it is here the story of the stem 
cell begins. 
 
1.1 Fertilization 
When the spermatozoon has entered the ovum, the membrane surrounding the ovum becomes 
solid due to glycoproteins covering the surface – the zona pellucida. The fusion of the two, form 
the zygote which contains the genetic material carried by the male and the female. At this point 
the zygote is a single diploid cell, however it will soon due to mitotic division, divide to more 
cells, this is called the cleavage process. Each cell division takes from 12 to 24 hours, and the 
dividing cells are termed blastomeres and they make up the blastocyst(Figure 1). By day 3 after 
fertilization the ovum contains eight blastomeres, they are undifferentiated but begins to form 
gap junctions which enables them to respond to physiological and environmental signals. By the 
next mitotic divisions, the cells will start to bind more firmly together, by a process called com-
paction, the cleavage continues as differentiation of the cells begin.  
 
 
Cells will now differentiate into the inner cell mass (the ICM) and trophoblasts. The ICM will dif-
ferentiate to become an embryoblast and will eventually give rise to all embryonic tissue and the 
trophoblasts the outer chorionic sac and placenta. Eventually the size of the blastocyst be-
comes too big to stay in the zona pellucida and it will hatch through it. The zona pellucida will 
eventually disappear, and the blastocyst will attach itself to endometrium of the uterus. Later on 
the embryoblast forms what is called an embryonic disc, the disc contains two layers, a layer of 
epiblasts and a layer of hypoblasts, which are respectively primitive ectoderm and endoderm 
tissue. Around day sixteen after fertilization the epiblasts will form a primitive streak, this marks 
the beginning of gastrulation. The gastrulation process reorganizes the two layered embryonic 
disc into a three layered embryo containing all three germ layers.  Through the processes of 
somitogenesis, histogenesis and organogenesis these three germ layers will become all struc-
tures and organs of the body[2]. 
 
 
1.2 Embryonic stem cells 
Embryonic stem cells (ESC) are derived from the cells of the ICM and by culturing these cells of 
ESC lines can be obtained[1]. Due to the ESCs pluripotency they could potentially, become a 
source to generate healthy cells for diseased patients or tissue grafts. However the use of em-
Figure 1 - The developing embryo[1] 
==PAGE:6==
 
6 
 
bryonic stem cells, raise an ethical dilemma on one hand to prevent or relieve suffering, and on 
the other hand respect the value of human life.  
 
 
As mentioned ESCs originate from the 
ICM, which can be harvested in the lab. 
Donations of embryos from which ESCs 
are harvested, are typically leftovers 
originally generated for in vitro fertiliza-
tion. The ICM is obtained by using im-
munosurgery on the trophectoderm, 
and subsequently the ICM can be plat-
ed on a feeder layer. The feeder layer 
will typically made of radiated fibroblast 
that cannot proliferate. These feeder 
cells can support the growth of the ICM, 
which will attach to the feeder layer and 
expand, and a hESC line will have been 
formed[4] (Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However for the newly formed hESCs to be classified as an hESC line, it needs to have the fol-
lowing abilities.  
 
It needs to be an unspecialized cell that reproduce itself as well as give rise to more 
specialized cells. 
 
 It needs to be able to proliferate and be capable of long term self renewal without dif-
ferentiating.  
 
It needs to be pluripotent this include it should be able to differentiate spontaneously,  
into cells of the three germ layers; the ectoderm, the mesoderm and the endodermal 
cell layers.  
 
It needs to be able to give rise to benign tumors called teratomas containing cells of 
the three germ layers. 
The three germ layers just menetioned are the cells that can give rise to all tissue and or-
gans of the human body. The ectoderm cell layer can give rise to for example skin cell and 
brain neuron. The mesoderm cell layer can give rise to among others muscle cells and with 
that cardiac muscle cells and red blood cells. The endoderm can give rise to cells like lung 
cells and pancreatic cells  
 
 
Figure 2 – Extraction and culturing of ESC from a fertilized agg[3] 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
7 
Even though the natural thing for hESCs is to differentiate and specialize, it is possible to main-
tain their pluripotency in culture by growing them under appropriate conditions. The cells should 
be subcultured called passaged, so they won’t clump together and form what is called embryoid 
bodies (EBs) because they then would start to differentiate.  The undifferentiated state of ESC 
is also expressed on a molecular level, and can be detected by the expression of the transcrip-
tion factors Nanog and Oct4 which are important in the processes of cell differentiation and em-
bryonic development. Nanog and Oct4 are associated with keeping the hESCs in an undifferen-
tiated state, and making them capable of self-renewal. However man can take advantage of dif-
ferentiation in EBs, and when using specific mediums with different chemical compositions and 
growth conditions, differentiation can be controlled and directed towards a desired cell type. 
Man has in this way successfully created heart cells, muscle cells, blood cells and nerve cells 
among others[5].  
 
1.3 Foetal stem cells 
A more specialized stem cell is the foetal stem cell it can be obtained from foetal blood and tis-
sue. The foetal stem cell is believed to have similar properties as adult stem cells, but it is seen 
to have a greater proliferation capacity, and be less restricted to a particular lineage. The foetal 
stem cell therefore have greater therapeutic potential. However there are ethical issues associ-
ated with the use of foetal stem cells, as the life of the foetus will be ended. However it can be 
argued that foetal stem cells are obtained from terminated foetuses, that would otherwise just 
become surgical waste[6].   
 
As mentioned foetal stem cells show greater proliferation capacity and are considered to be less 
restricted to a particular lineage. This is consistent with a study from 2010 of Van Vliet et al. 
compared foetal and adult cardiomyocytes progenitor cells.  Progenitor cells were isolated by 
magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) from foetal and adult human hearts. Some were cultured 
towards cardiomyocytes and others differentiated towards angiogenetic, adiponenetic and oste-
ogenic cells. The results revealed a significantly higher proliferation rate of the foetal progenitor 
cells, than of the adult progenitor cells. A higher frequency of beating was observed among the 
cardiomyocytes derived from foetal progenitor cells than from adult progenitor cells; however 
the cardiomyocytes derived from the adult progenitor cells, exhibited a more mature action po-
tential. When examining the angiogenic potential of the progenitor cells, they saw that both 
types of progenitor cells formed capillary-like structures. However the foetal cells formed intri-
cate endothelial tube-like structures, whereas the adult progenitor cells formed longer tubes with 
fewer gap-junctions that contained mainly smooth cells. A RT-PCR analysis indicated mRNA 
expression patterns, consistent with adult progenitor cells forming mostly smooth muscle-like 
cells, whereas foetal progenitor cells forming endothelial-like cells. The potential of the progeni-
tor cells, to form into other types of cells of mesodermal origin was examine by differentiation in-
to adipogenic cells. Here the foetal progenitor cells formed significantly more lipoprotein-
containing vacuoles than adult progenitor cell, and gene expression levels from RT-PCR was 
consistent with these observations. At last they examined the osteogenic potential, but even 
though upregulation was seen in a number of transcription factors associated with osteogenetic 
differentiation in the foetal progenitor cells, no substantial differentiation was seen in ether adult 
or foetal progenitor cardiomyocytes[7].  
 
1.4 Adult stem cells 
As just described stem cells can also be derived from adult tissue, many adult tissue types con-
tains among their differentiated cells, undifferentiated cells called adult or somatic stem cells. 
These stem cells can renew themselves and differentiate into more specialized cell types of 
==PAGE:8==
 
8 
 
their tissue origin so they can restore tissue after injury or natural apoptosis. Although they are 
called adult stem cells they are also found in children and in the umbilical cord.  The history of 
the adult stem cells began in the 1950s where it was discovered that the bone marrow con-
tained two different types of stem cells; hematopoetic stem cells and bone marrow stromal stem 
cells (mesenchymal stem cells). The hematopoetic stem cells give rise to all the different blood 
cells of the body whereas the mesenchymal cells can generate bone, cartilage and fat cells that 
support the formation of blood and fibrous connective tissue. Later on adult stem cells have 
been detected in many tissues and organs where they are through to reside in specific areas – 
so called “stem cell nishes”. Here they can remain quiescent for long times before being acti-
vated to maintain tissues e.g. after injury[8].   Even though these adult stem cells are found in 
many tissues, ranging from brain to heart to blood vessels they are only used medically for few 
purposes so far.  Bone marrow and cord blood stem cells are used to treat diseases and condi-
tions of the blood, skin stem cells are used after burns and limbal stem cells for corneal re-
placement[9]. These adult stem cells found in the stem cell niches is typically only a small frac-
tion of the cells that resides in each tissue and the capacity for these to divide outside the hu-
man body is limited. In 1987[10] the first case of transdifferentiation was reported. Transdiffer-
entiation is the when an adult stem cell type differentiate into another tissue type that what is 
expected from the cells’ predicted lineage. Whether the phenomenon of transdifferentiation can 
occur in human and whether transdifferentiation actually occur due to differentiation to another 
lineage, or because the donor cell fuse with a recipient cell making it secrete factors, that induce 
the recipient’s own cells to begin the repair process is under debate in the scientific community. 
Furthermore when transdifferentiation have been observed only a small part of the cells differ-
entiate.  However it has recently been demonstrated by using in vivo genetic modification that 
certain adult cell types can be reprogrammed into other cell types[8][11]. 
 
1.5 Induced pluripotent stem cells 
Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are pluripotent cells that are induced from somatic cells 
[12]. The iPSC was first described by Takahashi and Yamanaka in 2006. They had discovered 
that by introducing four factors; Oct3/4, Sox2, c-Myc and Klf4, which had earlier been associat-
ed with maintenance of pluripotency, via retroviral transduction into mouse embryonic fibro-
blasts, they could obtain pluripotent colonies. They demonstrated that their colonies had ESC-
like morphology,  and by RT-PCR that their cells lines were similar to ESCs.They demonstrated 
teratoma formation when injecting the cells into nude mice and all three germ layers was de-
tected to arise from them[13].  Already the following year in 2007 two independent research 
teams publicized studies, where they demonstrated induced pluripotency in human fibroblast 
one by Takahashi and Yamanaka et al. using the same procedure and the same four factors as 
in mice[14]. The other team led by u J, Vodyanik MA used Oct4, Sox2, Nanog and Lin28 in a 
lentiviral system instead of a retroviral system[15].  
 
The iPSC have the advantage of overcoming the ethical concerns regarding the use of ESC 
and foetal stem cells.  But even though iPSC lines have been shown to express all the hall-
marks of ESC lines, studies have detected molecular and functional differences in iPSCs de-
rived from different tissue types. From genetically identical mice pluripotency was induced in 
four different somatic cell types between passage 4 and 6 quantitative PCR was preformed and 
these data suggested the that the iPS cells had a transcriptionally memory of their somatic 
origin. The ability of the four different types of iPS cells where tested for their ability to produce 
EBs and here a difference was seen too in the ability to EBs and by differentiation towards spe-
cific cell lines different potentials was seen as well, in patterns suggested to reflected their cell 
type of origin. However when continuing passage of the four different iPSC lines they gradually 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
9 
lost their transcriptional and epigenenic memory and by passage 16 there was no longer any 
differences between the four cell lines[16]. 
 
However the clinical use of iPSCs faces some serious hurdles to overcome, one of them being 
the use of oncogenes used for reprogramming. This have led to the idea of developing an iPS 
inducing system without the use of oncogenes. However the use of oncogenes is not the only 
hurdle to overcome because the use of viral vectors especially the use of retroviruses which ex-
pression cannot be controlled after iPS induction and have been identified as tumorigenic as 
well. But alternative strategies have been used and are currently being investigated. One is to 
use a lentiviral vector that can be controlled by using doxycycline which only allows fully repro-
grammed cells to be selected. Though nonintegrating viral -, episomal - and minicircle vectors 
have been successfully used, although the efficiency rate have been shown to be lower than 
with the use of viral integration systems. Most recently cocktails of chemicals or molecules and 
different kinds of RNA have been shown to be able to induce pluripotency[17].   
 
1.6 The future use of stem cells 
One of the primary goal within stem cell research is to gain a better understanding and prolifera-
tion and differentiation of them. This is because it is essential to have a better understanding of 
these events, to use them in a clinical setting. A better understanding of regulation of differentia-
tion and abnormal cell division could also lead to a better understanding of serious medical 
conditions as cancer.  ESCs might help us gain a better understanding of embryonic and human 
development.  (REF). http://stemcells.nih.gov/info/basics/pages/basics6.aspx 
These proliferation and differentiation pattern could be studied across ESC, foetal and adult 
stem cell as it is clear from the above that they have different capabilities. 
 
One advantage of iPSC is the possibility of generating a particular cell type of need with the ex-
acts genotype of a patient as Dimos et al. did when they in 2008 reported to have generated 
motor neurons from two different amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients. Motor neurons 
are in patients suffering from ALS degenerated which leads to progressive paralysis and even-
tually death. Dimos et al induced pluripotency in fibroblasts from to ALS patients. The iPS cells 
were tested with DNA fingerprint analysis to verify the cell lines were a genetically match to the 
donor. By using direct sequencing and an allele-specific restriction fragment length polymor-
phism they could compare the ALS genotype of the patients fibroblasts with the iPS cells which 
reflected the patients’ medical history with the expected polymorphism. The iPS cells could by 
using a defined motor neuron differentiation protocol be differentiated into motor neurons.(REF) 
These “diseased” iPSC could potentially be genetic engineered to reflect a healthy phenotype. 
 
However before particular cell types derived from iPSCs becomes a treatment option some 
safety issues must as mentioned be overcome in regards to replacing oncogenic genes and vi-
rus vectors[18]. However till these issues have been resolved, cell lines as the ones derived 
from the two ALS patients can be used to study genetic diseases and produce disease models, 
that are exact replicas of a genetic disease of interest. In addition to the work that have been 
carried out on ALS models of sickle cell anemia, other blood disorders and Parkinson’s disease 
are being modeled and researshers in Germany have mimicked various heart arrhythmias  by 
creating cardiac cells that beat irregularly[19].  
 
Furthermore with the development of human models from all four types of stem cell, new drugs 
can be tested  which can possibly prevent future medical disasters as it was seen in 1999 when 
FDA approved Vioxx a Merck product that was used as an anti-inflammatory and pain killer for 
==PAGE:10==
 
10 
 
osteoarthritis patient. Vioxx was approved by FDA after being tested on 5,400 subjects, howev-
er a few years after Vioxx entered the marked it was withdraw as patients taking Vioxx gets 
heart problems. Vioxx has been taken by 20 million American and have cause 88,000 having a 
heart attack and 38,000 deaths[20].  
 
Beside the use in disease modelling and drug screening tests, iPS cells can be used to study 
disease of individuals. Could be a heart defect, by inducing fibroblast to cardiomyocytes next 
generation sequencing (NGS) can be used to identify mutations, which in turn can give us a bet-
ter understanding of the underlying cause of that particular heart defect. Furthermore it will pos-
sibly eventually be able to use stem cells as replacement cell therapy with any of the four 
sources of stem cells[21]. 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
11 
2. Heart anatomy, physiology and foetal heart de-
velopment 
To understand the development of the human foetal heart it is important to know the anatomy of 
the adult human heart.  Furthermore will an understanding of the physiology of the heart come 
in handy to understand the research within cardio regenerative medicine. 
 
2.1 Anatomy adult human heart 
The heart consists of mostly of heart muscle called myocardium. In addition the inner surface is 
covered by a layer of cells called endocardium and an outer called the epicardium[23].The heart 
is divided into four chambers divided by septa. The upper chambers are called the atriums; the 
right and the left atriums, they are parted from each other by the atrial septum and separated 
from the lower part of the heart, by the atrioventricular septum. The lower chambers are called 
the ventricles; the left and the right ventricles, which are divided from each other by the ventricle 
septum. The right side of the heart takes care of oxygen-poor blood from the body and guides it 
to the lungs, whereas the left side gets oxygen-rich blood from the lungs and returns it to the 
body again. 
 
Blood is returned from the upper 
body, via superior vena cava into 
the dorsal proximal part of the 
right atrium. Blood from the lower 
part of the body is transported by 
the bigger inferior vena cava to 
the lower part of the right atrium, 
just near the atrial septum, 
where its orifice is covered by 
the valve of the inferior vena 
cava. The blood collected in the 
right atrium is send via the atrio-
ventricular opening also called 
the tricuspid orifice to the right 
ventricle, however it need to 
pass the tricuspid valve first. The 
tricuspid valve consists of three 
cusps which bases are attached 
to a fibrous ring that surrounds 
the tricuspid orifice, and their 
apices point into the ventricular 
cavity. On their atrial surfaces 
they are smooth, whereas their ventricular surfaces are rough guiding the blood flow. In the up-
per left corner of the right ventricle does the pulmonary artery arise, just next to the ventricular 
septum. The pulmonary artery through which blood is send to the lungs, is protected by the 
pulmonary semilunar valves (the pulmonary valve). The pulmonary semilunar valves consists of 
three valves two in front and one behind. They are attached to the artery wall just where it 
meets the ventricle, and between the valves and the wall of the pulmonary artery are three si-
nuses; the sinuses of Valsalva[24] which helps facilitate the blood movement[25]. Blood is re-
turned from the lungs, through the four pulmonary veins into the left atrium. Form here it passes 
 
Figure 3 - Blood flow in the human heart[22]  
==PAGE:12==
 
12 
 
through the left atrioventricular opening, to the left ventricle which is guarded by the bicuspid 
valve (the mitral valve). As the tricuspid valve of the right atrioventricular opening, the mitral 
valve is attached to the circumference of the left atrioventricular opening, but it only consists of 
two cusps but they are larger, stronger and thicker than those of the tricuspid valve. From the 
left ventricle blood is pushed through the aortic orifice and returned to the body (Figure 3). The 
aortic orifice is guarded by the three aortic semilunar valves (the aortic valve) they are attached 
and are similar in structure to the semilunar valves of the pulmonary semilunar valves, but they 
are larger, thicker and stronger and also here are found aortic sinuses[24]. 
 
 Muscle fibre structure 
2.1.1
The actual contraction mechanism of a cardiomyocytes happens in the muscle fibres functional 
units, the myofibrils. The muscle fibres of atrial myocytes differ a bit from ventricle myocytes. In 
the this section the composition of the ventricle myocytes will be explain, followed by a short 
outline of the differences in atrial myocytes(ref).The muscle fibre is surrounded by its cell mem-
brane the sarcolemma. Within the sarcolemma is the myofibrils found and between them is a 
tubular system called the sarcotubular system. This system consists of the sarcoplasmatic retic-
ulum (SR) and the transverse tubuli (T-tubuli) (Figure 4). The SR holds a reservoir of Ca2+ ions 
and the T-tubuli is important for how quickly transmission of the action potentials happens. The 
myofibrils are arranged in sarcomeres and a sarcomere is separated from an adjacent sarco-
mere by z-disks (Figure 5). 
 
The atrial myocytes are quite similar to the ventricle myocyte however they do not contain an 
extensive T-tubule system as the ventricle myocytes, however instead they contain prominent 
SR elements, which have been called z-tubules. These are like the T-tubules perpendicular to 
the sarcomeres, but not connected to them, and from these z-tubules the SR extends and not 
directly from the sarcolemma as it does in ventricular myocytes [71].  
 
The sarcomeres consist primarily of two types of proteins; myosin (thick filaments) and actin 
(thin filaments), which are both arranged in long filaments within each sarcomere. From the my-
osin filaments are extend what is called “crossbridges” carrying myosin heads (Figure 7). The 
actin filaments are attached directly to the z-disk, whereas the myosin filaments are attached 
with titin[28][29] (Figure 5). The actin filaments consists of spherical actin molecules arranged 
Figure 4 - Schematic drawing of muscle fibre[26] 
Figure 5 - Arrangement of filaments within sarcomeres[27] 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
13 
in a double spiral. Along these double spi-
rals are long tropomyosin filaments 
placed, these filaments covers myosin 
binding sites. For every 7th actin molecule 
are a troponin complex found. The tro-
ponin complex consisting of troponin C, I 
and T (CTNC, CTNI and CTNT). CTNT 
connects the troponin complex to the tropomyosin, CTNI inhibits binding of myosin to actin and 
CTNC binds Ca2+ ions [23](Figure 6).  
 
2.2 Physiology of the adult human heart 
 
 Electrical activity – cardiac action poten-
2.2.1
tials 
The cardiac action potential plays an essential role in the 
contraction of the heart. The ventricular action potential 
can be divided into four phases; plateau, repolarization, 
depolarization and partial repolarization. The action po-
tential is due to changes in membrane permeability of 
three ions Na+, K+ and Ca2+. As phase one begins Ca2+ 
channels will slowly open delaying the repolarization mak-
ing a plateau. As the Ca2+ channels closes and K+ chan-
nels opens making an efflux of K+ ions and the membrane 
potential drops till the resting state, it repolarizes. Then a 
sudden influx of Na+ results in depolarization of the mem-
brane from resting state. At last, Na+ influx stops making 
the membrane potential drop toward resting state again 
and it is now partially repolarized. The atrial action poten-
tial develops in a similar manner but it drops to the resting potential faster [32].  
 
 Contraction mechanism – excitation-contraction coupling 
2.2.2
The relation between the action potential and contraction of myofibrils is explained by the exci-
tation-contraction coupling theory. When an action potential reaches the sarcolemma, it travels 
via the T-tubuli to the myofibrils Ca2+ channels it opens and Ca2+ enters. Through ryanodine re-
ceptor-channels (RyR) on the SR the entered Ca2+ induces release of more Ca2+, leading to 
calcium sparks[33].  Ca2+ ions can now bind to CTNC, this binding causes a conformational 
change and CTNI will now bind weaker to the actin filament. This causes the tropomyosin fila-
ment to be pushed away from the myosin binding site on the actin filament. The myosin head 
carries an ATP, this is cleaved to an ADP+P and as the myosin head is bound to the actin-
tropomyosin complex the energy from ADP+P is released, causing a conformational change in 
myosin making the myosin head bend. The actin filament will now slide over the myosin filament 
and the sarcomere contracts (Figure 8)[23].As Ca2+ unbinds from troponin the actin filaments re-
laxes, Ca2+-ions is pumped back into the SR and Ca2+ is exchanged with Na+ ions over the myo-
fibril. At last the Na+ gradient is maintained by a Na+ K+ exchange the Na+ K+ATPase (Figure 
8)[33]. 
 
Figure 6 - Actin filament structure[30]  
Figure 7 - Binding of myosin head to troponin 
complex[31] 
==PAGE:14==
 
14 
 
Figure 8 -Contraction and relaxation of the sarcomeres due to calcium 
stimulation[33]  
 
 Impulse formation and propagation in the heart 
2.2.3
The heart beats due to rhythmical propagation of action potentials made by the pacemaker 
cells. The propagations start in the SA node and propagate through a conduction system to the 
myocardium. The constant spread of action potentials is 
due to the pacemaker cells exhibiting an unstable 
membrane potential. The action potential is transmitted 
to the adjacent cells, and that is how the impulse prop-
agates throughout the heart. By the ending of each ac-
tion potential a slow depolarization happens, to make 
ready for a new action potential. The frequency of the 
action potentials is dependent on three parameters;  
  
 
The size of the resting potential 
 
The depolarization speed  
 
The threshold potential. 
The action potential will as just mentioned start in the 
SA node (Figure 9-1), because that is where the depo-
larization happens fastest. From here it spread to the 
surrounding atrial muscle and travels via the main conduction pathway (the intermodal pathway) 
to the AV node (Figure 9– 2). From the AV node the action potential are divided into the left and 
the right ventricle via His bundle (Figure 9– 3) and travels via the left and right his branch 
(Figure 9- 4) in the septum between the two chambers to the purkinje fibres (Figure 9– 5) and to 
the ventricular myocytes[23]. This propagation explains why the heart contract as it does. 
 
 
Figure 9 - Formation and propagation of action 
potentials[34]  
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
15 
 Cardiac cycle  
2.2.4
The cardiac cycle explains how the blood is pumped around in the heart due to the impuls for-
mation and propagation. The cardiac cycle consists of four phases as it follows. In the early di-
astolic phase the heart is relaxed, the atriums fills with blood but towards the ending of the dias-
tolic phase the pressure in the atriums rises as they start to contract and the AV-valves (the tri-
cuspid and bicuspid valves) opens up. At this point the pressure in the ventricles is lower than 
the pressure in the atriums and the ventricles will fill with 70 % of the blood. The ventricle vol-
ume will expand and the systolic phase begins. The systolic phase begins with the atrial systolic 
phase where the atriums contract, the atrial pressure rises further and the last 30% of the blood 
is pushed into the ventricles (Figure 10 - phase 1). At this point the action potential reaches the 
ventricles and the ventricle systole begins. An isometric contraction of the ventricle starts and 
the ventricular pressure rises above the atrial pressure making the AV-valves closes (Figure 10 
- phase 2). As the ventricles contracts even more  the pressure rises above the pressure in the 
aorta and the pulmonary artery (the big central arteries) making the semilunar valves opens, the 
muscle contracts and the blood flows out to the big central arteries (Figure 10 - phase 3).  The 
ventricle pressure decreases till it is lower than the pressure in the big central arteries making 
the semilunar valves close again. The ventricles can now relax again making the semilunar 
valves close (Figure 10 - phase 4), the pressure of the ventricle drops till it is lower than the 
atrial pressure and we are back to the beginning of the diastolic phase (Figure 10)[23].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Development of the foetal heart 
As the foetal heart development is a highly complex I will start by explaining the basics charac-
teristic before going in more depth with the subject. 
 
 Development of the human heart in short 
2.3.1
The development of the human heart is a complicated process so to start in short the develop-
ment start at day 18 after fertilization. At this point the cells that will eventually form the heart is 
found in the head region of the embryo but as the embryo and the heart develops it will be 
moved down in the right place. By day 20 two tubes have formed, and over the next days they 
will fuse. By day 23 the tissue will start the reorganize, first into an s shape and then a d shape. 
 
Figure 10 - The cardiac cycle[34]  
==PAGE:16==
 
16 
 
Until now the pre-atrial tissue have been located underneath the pre-ventricular tissue but will 
by day 35 be turned so it is oriented above (Figure 11). The four chambers of the heart will be 
further developed till about week 8.  
Figure 11 - Development of the human heart[35] 
 
 Formation and looping of the heart tube 
2.3.2
As stated just above, cells of the mesodermal cell layer, giving rise to the heart is first seen just 
after gastrulation. The mesodermal layer is placed between the ectodermal and endodermal 
layers and it will start to spread laterally and cranial from the primitive streak within the cranial 
part embryonic disc. Cardiac progenitor cells form what is called the cardiac crescent at the cra-
nial end of the disc. The cells of the cardiac crescent consist at this stage of cardiac progenitor 
cells and two endothelial tubes, and it is said to constitute the primary heart field. As the embry-
onic disc 
folds the 
develop-
ing heart 
is moved 
to the 
neck of 
the em-
bryo and 
further 
folding 
will en-
sure it be 
coming 
place just 
above 
the de-
veloping 
foregut. 
As the 
cardiac 
crescent 
fuse the 
two en-
dothelial 
tubes 
placed 
within it 
(Figure 
12).   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 - Fusion of the cardiac crescent[36] 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However the two endothelial tubes will soon fuse into one, creating the primitive heart tube[37]. 
But the fused endocardial tubes are not the only 
components of the primitive heart tube, because sur-
rounding them are a layer of cardiac jelly – a gelati-
nous non-cellular material which separates the primi-
tive heart tube from a myocardium layer. Already 
now the primitive heart tube contains progenitor atri-
ums, ventricles and endocardium. Moreover have 
many of the embryos, major vessels have started to 
develop, and are already now connected to the in-
flow and outflow tracts. At this point the inflow is 
supplied by six vessels and the out flow by the 
paired dorsal aorta. By day 22 a primitive circulatory 
system has been formed, the heart starts to beat and 
blood begins to circulate 2 days later (Figure 13).  
 
In the cranial oriented end cells, from a second cardiogenic area have been attracted to contrib-
ute in the development of the cranial pole of the heart tube. Through additions of cells from the 
secondary cardiogenic area as well as recruitment of other cardiac progenitor cells to the cranial 
and caudal end of the heart tube, it elongates significantly and the primitive heart tube is now 
ready to start folding.  
 
The folding starts on day 23 with the process of looping. The primitive heart tube bends itself to 
the right into a C-shape, making the right side of the tube, the inner curvature and the left side 
the outer curvature of the developing heart[37]. However as more progenitor cells are attracted 
to what was the cranial and caudal ends it will soon take on an S-shape which keep elongating 
till the 28th day. After elongation stops the primitive heart will keep rotating around its own axis 
till it reaches a d shape in which the primitive ventricle is now placed caudally and with the 
primitive atrium cranially[36].   
 
 Cardiac realignment 
2.3.3
As looping of the cardiac tube comes to the end, just before septation begins, there is a direct 
pathway through the atrioventricular canal between future left atrium and left ventricle. Further-
more is the future left ventricle continuous with both the aortic and pulmonary outflow vessels. 
In order to make this right, chambers have to expand and realignment must occur[36]. For the 
left atrium to be developed the lungs and the pulmonary vasculature is required. As the lungs 
out pouch from the trachea, vessels develop around them and make contact to the atrial part of 
the heart via the developing pulmonary veins. By the same time the superolateral walls of both 
Figure 13 - Primitive circulatory system formed by 
day 22[36] 
==PAGE:18==
 
18 
 
pre-atriums have ballooned out to either side of the outflow tract to form the atriums (Figure 14-
B)[38].  
 
From the ventricular loop the ventricles are de-
rived, and when bending together the walls of the 
atrioventricular canal (AV canal) are joined and 
make almost exclusively the left ventricle while the 
rest of the heart tube make the right ventricle, the 
myocardium surrounding the foramen is called the 
primary ring. Along the primary ring remodelling 
permits separation of the atriums and the dividing 
outflow tract are shared between the developing 
apical components and the ventricles. To spit the 
atriums between the ventricles via the primary fold, 
the AV canal needs to expand because the right 
atrium should be continuous in the inner curvature, 
with the wall of the outflow track and with the de-
veloping right ventricle. Just after the expansion 
the right side atrioventricular musculature, be-
comes incorporated to the right atrium as the vesti-
bule of the tricuspid valve. The leaflets of the tri-
cuspid valve will now delaminate and form the en-
docardial cushions. On the left side of the atrioven-
tricular canal, the development of the left ventricle 
and mitral valve will happen in a similar fashion. To 
complete the left ventricular development, the prox-
imal part of the initial outflow tract is transferred 
from the right ventricle to form the aortic vestibule. 
At by that the realignment is completed (Figure 14) 
[36]. 
 
 
 
 
 Formation of the septa 
2.3.4
Cardiac septation starts at the 28th day, the septation takes a few weeks and with the basic pro-
cesses of differential growth and remodelling, the primitive cardiac chambers will be made. 
 
Atrial and atrioventricular septa 
At day 26 the roof of the atriums will develop a depression along the midline. Due to this, two 
days later a crescent- shaped myocardial wedge will start to extend into the atriums and expand 
the primitive atrial chambers, this crescent is called septum primum. At the same time, from the 
venous pole, a projection of cells has entered the atriums - the spina vestibuli. The spina ves-
tibuli will join the septum primum and together they grow towards the atrioventricular canal, 
gradually separating the atriums, only leaving a foramen – the foramen primum (Figure 15).  At 
the same time in the regions of the atrioventricular and the outflow tract, extracellular matrix is 
secreted between the endocardium and the myocardium. This secretion causes the endocardial 
layer to balloon out in the lumen making so-called cushion tissue, and as the septum primum 
separates the atrial chambers, these two cushions develops at the boarder of the developing 
 
Figure 14 - Realignment of the heart[36] 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
19 
ventricles. The two cushions will fuse by the end of the 6th week to form the atrioventricular 
septum. The atrioventricular septum will soon after fuse with the septum primum, but just before 
the septum primum closes will a small perforation crated near the dorsal end of the septum pri-
mum create a new foramen – the foramen secundum to leave a gap between the two atriums. 
Now a new septum will form adjacent to the septum primum, but it is thicker and more muscular, 
this is called the septum secundum. The septum secundum grows in a cranial to caudal and 
ventral to dorsal direction and leaves an opening  - the foramen ovale just at the buttom of the 
right atrium. Because the septum secundum is thick and muscular as oppose to the thinner sep-
tum primum, this will ensure blood flow from the right to the left atrium but not in the other direc-
tion for the rest of the foetal state, these two foramens will close at birth[36]. 
 
 
Figure 15 - Interatrial septum made by fusion of the septum primum and secundum[36] 
 
Ventricular septum and outflow tracts 
From the end of the 4th week till the 7th week the cardiac lumen gets protrude by the ventral 
bulboventricular sulcus, making the muscular interventricular septum separating the right and 
the left ventricle chambers. This muscular interventricular septum is also called the primary in-
terventricular septum.  It soon starts to thicken and myocardium trabeculae to form the inner 
walls of the chambers. Between the trabecular myocardium and the epicardium a more compact 
layer of myocardium forms. From the primary interventricular septums right wall, another tra-
becula will form; the moderator band. The moderator band will connect the interventricular sep-
tum to the right atrioventricular valve via an anterior papillary muscle. This septomarginal tra-
becula will be formed because the right ventricular chamber expands to form a large part of the 
mature right chamber (Figure 16).  
 
As the interventricular septum creases, the two ventricles keep contact via an interventricular fo-
ramen. The interventricular septum will eventually fuse with the conotruncal septum and the 
atrioventricular septum, separating the right ventricle from the left. The conotruncal septum 
gives rise to the two outflow tracts; the aorta and the pulmonary artery. The conotruncal septum 
starts as the conotruncal swelling, on the side of the truncus arterious (Figure 16), as one tube 
shared by the two ventricles, as a common outflow tract. During the 7th week the conotrancal 
swelling start to divided and it will eventually spilt into two separate tubes which will spiral up 
through the heart as the two outflow tracts[36].  
==PAGE:20==
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Development of the valves 
2.3.5
Atrioventricular valves 
Between the 5th and the 8th week, the atrioventricular valves begin the form, from the rim of the 
right and left AV canals. These leaflet valves are through to arise, from the endocardial cush-
ions. The development is not fully understood, but it is suggested that the development is con-
tributed by epicardial derived connective tissue. Ventricular out pockets are formed from the 
myocardial wall, which makes thin strands of cells from the chordae tendineae and small papil-
lary muscles. The valves will be organized so they allow blood flow from the atria to the ventri-
cle, during the diastole but will shut back during systole. The left valve will develop two leaflets, 
and are therefore called the bicuspid valve (mitral valve) whereas the right will develop three it 
is called the tricuspid valve[36].  
 
Semilunar valves 
Two smaller cushions have form on the developing conotruncal septum, these will be remod-
elled, and form two cavities at the origin of the future ascending aorta and pulmonary artery. 
These cavities will become the primordia of the semilunar sinuses. Similar cavities will simulta-
neously form on the aortic and pulmonary sides. All of these will later become the semilunar 
valves and the valvular sinuses and they are completed by the 9th week[36].  
 
 Development of the pacemaker and conduction system 
2.3.6
Already in the primitive heart tube, cardiomyocytes exhibiting pacemaker activity that can be 
observed, but soon all activity will be transferred to a cluster of cells in the sinoatrial region. This 
cluster differentiates to become the SA node – which is the pacemaker of the heart,. From the 
SA node through the crista terminalis, will a main conduction pathway be establish. This path-
way ends up in a secondary pacemaker center, within the atrioventricular junction, this second-
ary pacemaker area  will form the AV node. The AV node regulates contraction of the ventricles 
and conduction of impulses to the ventricles over the atriums. With the development of the AV 
node is the bundle His formed too. The bundle of His sends out two branches through the sep-
tomardinal trabecula one into the left, and one into the right ventricle. Purkinje fibre branches 
will spread out to deliver the depolarized signal to the rest of the ventricles.  The myocardial 
cells in the conduction system have contracting potential in the beginning, but will later on dif-
Figure 16 - Initial formation of the interventricular canal[36] 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
21 
ferentiate into cells that generate and conduct action potentials, and will be responsible for me-
diating rhythmic wavelike contractions in the heart[36].  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
22 
 
3. Culturing cardiomyocytes 
Cardiomyocytes can be obtained from various sources, they can be differentiated from different 
types of stem cells, and be obtained from foetal, neonatal and adult heart. Cardiomyocytes from 
these different sources can be identified on morphology, gene expression and expression pat-
terns. However the question is how similar are these different types of cardiomyocytes. 
 
In this section I will explain some of the basic principles behind cardiomyocyte differentiation, 
how they can be cultured and what is known so far from comparison studies. 
 
3.1 Differentiation of embryonic stem cells to cardiomyocytes 
The earliest studies of cardiomyocyte differentiation were carried out in mouse embryonic stem 
cells (mESC), but in regards to hESCs differentiation a lot can be learned from these early stud-
ies, like gene expression patterns and cultivation methods. When inducing hESCs towards the 
cardiac cell line, cardiomyocytes that exhibiting spontaneous contractile activity, at a rate of 30-
130 beats per minute will be generated. Molecular, phenotypical and electro physical studies 
have shown these cardiomyocytes having authentic cardiac characteristics and they respond to 
a number of pharmacological agents as the adult human heart does. They express a number of 
genes like GATA4, myocyte enhancer factor (MEF-2), Nkx5 and structural proteins as sarco-
meric α- and β-myosin light chain (MHC), tropomyosin, α-actin and desmin. One way to induce 
cardiomyocytes is by the use of serum, however as serum is complex and rich in various growth 
factors and cytokines. Therefore have a great effort been put into using serum-free media with 
the addition of defined growth factors and cytokine, to understand cardiomyogenesis and better 
control the ESC differentiation.  Some of the factors that have shown to be successful in cardi-
omyocyte differentiation are transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), leukemia inhibitory factor 
(LIF) and cripto-1[39]. 
 
Several structural formations have been used to induce cardiomyogenesis among them are var-
ious types of EB formation and mono layered formation. EB formation was used in some of the 
earliest studies of cardiomyocytes differentiation in mESC. From these early studies critical pa-
rameters for optimization was identified and they included the following: 
 
 
Starting number of cells used to form the EBs 
 
The medias and serums used during culturing 
 
The cell line there was used  
 
For how long time the EBs was cultured. 
It was observed when mESCs were dissociated to single to single cells and aggregated they 
would soon after form spheroids. These spheroids contained an inner layer of ectodermal-like 
cells and an outer layer of endodermal cells, assimilating embryonic development. Within the 
EBs cells, would soon after different into mesodermal cells and a fraction would lastly start to 
exhibit spontaneous contractions[40]. However dissociation of ESCs to single cells results in 
poor survival of the cells, and by that difficulties in forced EB formation. However this can be 
overcome by adding Rho-associated kinase inhibitor (ROCKi) just after dissociation as it result 
in increased survival. Even though ROCK has shown to play a crucial role in heart develop-
ment, nothing so far have indicated inhibition of ROCK in cardiomyocytes differentiation is hav-
ing a negative impact[41].  
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
23 
Later on other types of EBs have been developed and they include spin EBs, microwell EBs 
and micropatterned EBs. In short spin EBs are developed by seeding of ESCs in low attach-
ment U or V-bottomed multiwell plates and forced to aggregate by centrifugation. This gives the 
opportunity to determine the number of cells used and nearly identical sized EBs. This method 
has later on showed to be highly efficient with optimal concentrations of growth factors. Mi-
crowell EBs, are EBs generated in microwells pre-coated with matrigel extracellular matrix that 
enhance cell adhesion. Growth of hESCs in microwells has shown to sustain self-renewal of 
cells leading to less background differentiation. Lastly micropattern EBs are size specific colo-
nies there have been plated onto matrigel extracellular matrix islands, this will as the two other 
types of EB formation alter the behaviour of the cells to differentiate into all three types of germ 
layers.  As an alternative to EB differentiation there is monolayered differentiation, coculturing 
and the use of cardiac progenitor cells. The advantage of differentiating cardiomyocytes in 
monolayer is that it theoretically will be more reproducible with addition of specific growth fac-
tors, as you are not dealing with complex EBs and several replating steps which is often re-
quired in EB differentiation. A variation of monolayed differentiation is coculturing, in which mi-
totically inactivated cells can provide factors in addition to serum needed for differentiation. 
Lastly a way to obtain cardiomyocytes is by isolation of cardiac progenitor cells from a differen-
tiated population of ESCs. As ESCs are thought to proceed towards the cardiomyotic cell line-
age by the same path as progenitor cells, this could provide a powerful tool in obtaining cardio-
myocytes. The isolation is based on gene expressions or cell surface antigens within a cell pop-
ulation, this can be carried out with e.g. magnetic-activated cell sorting[40].  
 
==PAGE:24==
 
24 
 
 
 The cardiomyocytes lineage 
3.1.1
As mentioned a lot of effort has been put into serum-free differentiation to establish signalling 
pathways to induce cardiomyocytes. This has proven effective and a simplified pathway has 
been established.  When the EB is first formed cells spontaneously differentiate to the ectoder-
mal and endodermal cells, soon followed by differentiation of mesodermal progenitor cells. 
These early stages of differentiation can be detected by transcription expression of respectively 
Oct4, Nanog, Sox2 and Oct4 and cell surface markers Tra-160, SSEA4, EpcCAM and NCAM, 
SSEA1. By inducing bone morphogenetic protein (BMP4), Activin A, fribroblast growth factor 2 
(FGF2) and Wnt3a and inhibiting insulin the progenitor mesodermal cells will differentiate to 
precardiac mesodermal cells expressing transcription factor TIMIXL1 and by continued induction 
of the just mentioned growth factors the precardiac mesoderm will develop to cardiac meso-
dermal cells. The Cardiac mesodermal cells transcript Mesp1 and cell surface markers KDR 
and PDGFRα. Differentiation into cardiac progenitor cells is induced by Dkk1 which inhibit 
Wnt[40] that would otherwise inhibit expression of Nkx2.5 and GATA4[42]. The progenitor car-
diac cells can now transcribe Nkx2.5 and GATA4 and cell surface marker SIRPA. The progeni-
tor cells will then differentiate to embryonic cardiomyocytes which can be detected by cell sur-
face marker VCAM-1 in addition to the transcription factors and cell surface marker expressed 
by the progenitor cardiac cells (Figure 17)[40]. 
 
3.2 Culturing cardiomyocytes with conditioned media 
When culturing any type of cell it will secrete factors to its surrounding to communicate with it 
and so do stem cells. These factors are often referred to as secretome, microvesicles or exo-
some and they can be obtained when culturing stem cells in a medium, this type of medium is 
called conditioned media (CM).  The factors secreted by stem cells are typically tissue regen-
erative agents, various growth factors and other types of cytokines. Furthermore some studies 
have reported stem cells causing tissue repair due to factors secreted by them having beneficial 
effect on the tissue regeneration. Other studies with condition media have also showed the se-
creted factors having a beneficial effect on tissue repair alone, without the original stem cell 
source. Besides the beneficial effects of using CM there is also the advantage of avoiding im-
mune incompatibility and will therefore having promising prospect as pharmaceuticals. Though 
no clinical trials have been initiated yet but two pilot studies have been initiated one in hair folli-
cle regeneration and one in wound healing[43]. Due to the just mentioned benefits of using CM, 
there has been an interest in studying the effects on cardiac function and cardiomyocytes differ-
entiation, however very few studies have been carried out so far. 
 
 Protective and improved cardiac functions with conditioned media 
3.2.1
Two studies exploring the effect of CM have been done on whole hearts. The first studied the 
effect of CM on cardiac function following myocardial infarction. The other investigated the pro-
tective effect of CM collected from hypoxic cells. 
 
In the first study Timmers et al. knew that mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) derived from adult 
bone marrow had showed to be a promising stem cell type, for treatment of cardiovascular dis-
eases, however it had also been suggested that some of the effect exhibited by the MSCs was 
due to factors being secreted from them. So the group started to collect CM from a MSC cell 
line derived from hESC. They had earlier seen that MSC-CM treatment following cardiac injury 
reduced myocardial apoptosis and oxidative stress. In the current study myocardial infarction 
was induced surgically by left circumflex coronary artery ligation in pigs. 2 ml MSC-CM or MSC 
none conditioned media (NCM) was given twice daily, for seven days via a catheter in the jugu-
Figure 17 - Differentiation from EB to embryonic cardiomyocyte[40] 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
25 
lar vein. After MSC-CM stimulation in vitro they saw enhanced angiogenesis and higher capil-
lary density was observed, at the border areas subjected to MSC-CM compared with MSC-NCM 
in vivo. Collagen density, which is associated with stiffness of the aging heart, in the border and 
remote area was lower in MSC-CM treated pigs than in MSC-NCM treated pigs.  One hour after 
coronary artery ligation, similar decreased cardiac function was seen in the two groups and 
three weeks after induction of myocardial infarction, the pig hearts were examined again. This 
examination showed an increased left ventricular internal area in all pigs however it was more 
pronounced in MSC-NCM pig suggesting less remodeling of the area in MSC-CM pig. Echocar-
diographic showed decreased wall thickness of infarct area of MSC-NCM pig but not in MSC-
CM. Furthermore did the MSC-CM treated pig show enhanced systolic and diastolic perfor-
mance. At last myocardial infarct size had become smaller in the MSC-CM treated pigs[44]. 
 
In the other study the protective effect of hypoxia exposed CM was investigated. When the 
heart suffers ischemic injury – a restriction in blood supply, the heart can usually survive for a 
short period of time and then recover when the blood supply returns to the injured site (reperfu-
sion). However this reperfusion can paradoxically exacerbate the damage even more. It has 
earlier been shown that induction of multiple brief episodes of ischemia protects from a subse-
quent sustained ischemia attack. Primary cultures of neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were exposed 
to hypoxia and CM was collected. New cardiac cells and an isolated rat heart was exposed to 
the hypoxia CM. CM was diluted in PBS, and exposed to fresh cardiomyocytes, and subjected 
them to hypoxia. They saw a dilution with 75% CM, protected the cells as if they were not sub-
jected to hypoxia, but the CM had to be present during hypoxia. Hypoxia CM obtained from 
skeletal muscle cultures exhibit the same protective function of cardiomyocytes. Next the pro-
tective effect was examined on an isolated rat heart in a Langendorff system here they also saw 
a protective effect. Furthermore the Langenforff heart released  protective factors as well, and 
media collected in the first 10 minutes after ischemia, was so protective that a dilution of only 
10% CM could effectively protect cardiomyocytes cultures[45]. 
 
 Differentiation properties 
3.2.2
To my knowledge only three studies have investigated the effect on conditioned media in differ-
entiation of cardiomyocytes. Two studies have been performed on different types of human 
stem cells and one on rat stem cells. In the first study CM was obtained from cardiac ventricular 
fibroblast and in the second and third study CM was obtain for human cardiac waste tissue 
 
In the first study it was determined that it was possible to induce rat cardiac progenitor 
cells(CPCs) and into mature cardiomyocytes, as oppose to MSCs, by the use of CM derived 
from cardiac ventricular fibroblast-conditioned media. CPCs were derived from the embryonic 
heart tube and identified by Nkx2.5 staining[46]. Nkx2.5 is a transcription factor associated with 
heart development[47]. MSCs were derived from bone marrow and identified by flow cytometric 
analysis of different MSC associated antigens. CM was collected every 2nd day for a week from 
a culture of ventricular fibroblasts and was stored at -20 oC till use. The media was diluted and 
contained when culturing, 80% CM and 15% DMDM and 5% FCS. Following culturing phase-
contrast microscopy showed CPC morphology gradually changing but not of the MSCs. Immu-
noflourescence staining  revealed 80% of the CPCs staining positive for alpha-cardiac actinin 
and western blotting showed cardiac troponin, beta-MHC and GATA-4 expressions as oppose 
to the MSCs[46]. 
 
.In the second study CM was obtained from 500-700 mg ventricle tissue from five forensic au-
topsies (≤12 h post-mortem) that was cut into 1 mm3 pieces and cultured in 75 cm2 flasks (150 
==PAGE:26==
 
26 
 
mg/flask) with DMDM, 10% FBS and penicillin and streptomycin. Two days later the CM was 
collected and centrifuged and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter. Human adipose stem cells 
(hASC) were cultured with the CM for two weeks. The differentiated hASCs were subjected to 
reverse transcriptase PCR analysis and clearly expressed GATA-4, Mef-2c, cardiac α-actin, 
CTNI and β-actin as oppose to undifferentiated hASCs that only expressed β-actin and to less 
extend α-actin. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis clearly showed staining of CTNI, desmin, 
CTNT and α-actinin from CM treated hASCs but almost not exisiting staining from undifferenti-
ated hASCs[48].  
 
In the third study on CM, CM was obtained from surgical waste and used to differentiate MSCs 
towards the cardiac cell line. 600 mg of myocardium was cut into 1 mm3 pieces and cultured in 
in 75 cm2 flasks (150 mg/flask) with IMDM. The tissue was cultured for six days and media was 
changed every 2nd day. CM was filtered through 0.7 μm pores and then through 0.22 μm pores 
and stored at -20oC till use. Differentiation was conducted when the MSCs were in passage 3 
and two different medias was used a conditioned one and a non-conditioned (NCM) consisting 
of only IMDM and the cells were cultured for 3 weeks. From the cells cultured with CM an in-
creased proliferation rate was seen, RT-PCR analysis of mRNA levels showed expression of 
Cx43, CTNI, CTNT, Nkx2.5 and VEGF in CM treated cells however CTNI was also spontane-
ously expressed in the NCM treated cells. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis was carried out 
on day 6 and day 21 of culturing staining for Cx43, CTNI, CTNT and ACTN. Significant expres-
sion difference was seen between the two cultures as no expression of Cx43 and CTNI was 
seen in the cells grown with NCM and only little expression of CTNT and ACTN was present 
whereas all four genes was clearly present in the cells cultured with CM. By the 21st  day little 
staining had emerged on from all four genes on cells cultured with NCM, however no doubt the 
staining was significantly more expressed on the cell cultured with CM. Afterwards an antibody 
array methods was used to determine factors present in the CM but not in the NCM. Compari-
son between the two showed the 4 of 23 cytokine were present in significant amounts (P≤0.05); 
Growth-regulated oncogene (GRO), IL-6, IL-8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-
1). The authors states that IL-6 have been shown to be released because of stress caused by 
myocardial injury and it have been seen to induce the secretion of MCP-1, IL-8 and GRO. Fur-
thermore it is been found that endothelial cells produce IL-8 and GRO to regulate chemokines 
to induce myocardial neovascularization and protect against apoptosis of cardiomyocytes. From 
the antibody array they also found 6 of 41 growth factors were present in significantly larger 
amounts (P≤0.01); basic-fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), epidermal growth factor (EFG), 
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1), insulin-
like growth factor binding protein-2 (IGFBP-2)and TGF-β.  bFGF, EGF, TGF, IGFBP-1 and 
IGFBP-2 have all been shown in culture to have cardiogenic potential.  TGF-β has been report-
ed to induce immature cardiomyocytes from BM-MSCs[49]. 
 
3.3 Culturing cardiomyocytes derived from tissue  
The adult heart contains very little regenerative capability, and have until recently been consid-
ered terminally differentiated after birth. Due this very little regenerative capability it has proven 
extremely difficult to obtain primary cardiomyocytes cell lines[50]. To my knowledge very few ar-
ticles are published on the study of primary cultures of human cardiomyocytes, however the list 
is long for animal studies on this subject[51][52][53] and much knowledge have been gained 
from these.  The first culture containing heart tissue was made in 1912 where single cells where 
observed to migrate away from explant pieces of embryonic chick hearts. In 1955 the first single 
cells were isolated and maintained in culture from chick embryo myocytes and five years later 
mammalian myocytes were cultured for the first time. As adult myocytes are more strongly con-
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
27 
nected to each other than embryonic myocytes they have proven more difficult to isolate and 
culture which was not seen until 1976 and 1977 respectively[53].  
 
Cardiomyocyte cultures can be used for various research purposes, like studying different heart 
conditions, like ischemia and the following hypoxia and reoxygenation.  In a pure cardiomyocyte 
culture you also have the advantage of being able to eliminating other cell types like fibroblasts 
and endothelial cells, which are found in the heart. In addition, studying single myocytes have 
admitted great insight to the cellular and subcellular physiology[50].  
 
 Characteristics of cardiomyocytes cultures 
3.3.1
Foetal cardiomyocytes maintain many of their properties in cultures as they do in vivo, when ob-
tained they exhibit a spherical morphology and contains contracting proteins but no sarcomeres. 
After 24 hours culturing of these foetal myocytes sarcomeres will have formed and they will start 
to contract spontaneously.  They have shown the ability to proliferate in in vitro and when con-
fluence is reached they will form structures resembling normal myocardium, and synchronous 
contraction throughout a culture plate can be obtained. 
 
However cardiomyocytes obtained from neonatal cultures contains contractile proteins as well 
but only a part of these have the ability to start spontaneous beating. This decrease in sponta-
neous beating cells from foetal to neonatal cultures seems to be dependent on the age of the 
donor as fewer beating cells are observed as the donor age increases. Cells that beat and cells 
that do not beat but both contain contractile proteins are histologically and morphologically simi-
lar, but they have lost their ability to assemble sarcomeres[54]. 
In a study Li et. al. compared pediatric and adult cardiomyocytes, cells were identified on mor-
phology, here it was seen that the two types of myocytes were significantly different in size. Pe-
diatric cells were approximately 4395 ± 436 μm2 whereas adult myocytes were 12,315 ± 2103 
μm2. As the myocytes were cultured they proliferated and underwent phenotypic changes. After 
10 days in culture a complete loss of sarcomeres was seen and as the cells were passaged 
they also lost myofibrils. The growth rate of pediatric myocytes were significantly faster than 
adult myocytes. As the pediatric cells reached confluence they exhibit contact growth inhibition 
whereas it already happened for the adult cells at 50% confluence where they started to in-
crease in size instead of proliferating.  The pediatric cells could be cultured for 6 months  by 24 
passages before they increased in size and took a star-like shaped[55]. 
 
However, two types of adult cardiomyocytes can generally be obtained from adult tissue, de-
pending on the isolation procedure used; either by perfusion of the whole heart with lytic en-
zymes or with complete enzymatic digestion. Cardiomyocytes isolated with lytic enzymes yields 
rod-shaped cardiomyocytes, these cells are however generally regarded as smaller units of my-
ocardium. Sarcomeres in most these cells are organized and some exhibits spontaneous con-
traction. However the organized sarcomeres prevent the cells from attaching to the culture dish 
surface, making them unable to grow in vitro, studies have however showed that few of these 
cells attach to the dish, these can be grown in vitro, but extensive morphological changes oc-
curs within the contraction protein organization. On the other hand cardiomyocytes isolated by 
complete enzymatic digestion, as the study Li et.al. conducted, cardiomyocytes will form spheri-
cal shapes, these will undergo phenotypic changes as well with complete loss of sarcomeres 
and will therefore rapidly attach to the culture surface from where they will start to prolifer-
ate[54]. 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
28 
 
 Culturing of cardiomyocytes 
3.3.2
As mentioned many studies have been conducted with tissue derived from animals and from 
these critical parameters have been identified. 
 
Cell purification 
Freshly obtained cells from cardiac tissue will include a mixture of myocytes, smooth muscle 
cells, endothelial cells and cardiac fibroblasts. Foetal cardiomyocytes proliferate faster than 
paediatric and adult cells, however all types of cells can rapidly be overgrown by cardiac fibro-
blast in a mixed culture, though paediatric and adult cells faster. Isolation of myocytes is there-
fore to be desired when culturing.  Purification of cultures is most efficient in the beginning of 
cell culturing and can be done by several methods or in combination. These methods are 
termed pre-plating, dilutional cloning and chemical selection. In short does the pre-plating 
method take advantage of the fact that fibroblasts attach quicker to culture plates than cardio-
myocytes, two hours after initial plating of mixed culture the not attached cells; the cardiomyo-
cytes, can therefore be replated, relatively fibroblast free[56][54]. When using dilutional cloning, 
cells are seeded at a low density, after 1-2 weeks in culture cardiomyocytes can be identified by 
morphology and picked for further culturing. Lastly chemical selection is based on chemical in-
hibition of fibroblasts, however this method should be used carefully as chemicals might inhibit 
other types of cells like the desired cardiomyocytes[54]. 
 
Media 
Essential for all cardiomyocytes cell cultures are the culture medium, as it impacts morphology, 
growth and other characteristics of the cells. For example has the concentration of FBS shown 
to have great impact of the cultured cardiomyocytes. Foetal myocytes cultured in media contain-
ing 0-10% FBS maintain their phenotype and contractile properties but show no or very little 
proliferation. However when cultured in 20% FBS whey will quickly lose their contractile proper-
ties but they can be kept for more than 30 passages. Besides serum concentrations the basic 
media used have shown to have an impact as well. IMDM have been found to preserve the car-
diomyocytes phenotype in adult myocytes better than when cultured in DMEM, minimum 199, 
alpha medium and minimum essential medium all supplemented with 10 % FBS. The superior 
effect of IMDM is probably due to particular calcium concentration and the addition of particular 
vitamins[54]. 
 
 Progenitor cells as a cardiomyocyte source 
3.3.3
More recently scientists have turned their attention from isolation of more mature single celled 
cardiomyocytes to progenitor cells. Progenitor cardiomyocytes have been isolated from foetal 
and adult hearts by three different methods; by MACS or flowcytometry using Sca-1[57] (stem 
cell antigen 1) c-kit or MDR-1 as surface markers. Cells can also be isolated when culturing 
pieces of tissue as they will migrate from it, however they will have to be characterized e.g. by 
flow cytometry as cardiac tissue does not consists of a homozygous cell population. Lastly cells 
can be isolated on the basis of transcription factors expression specifically of progenitor cells 
with e.g. Islet-1[58].  
 
Isolated progenitor cells will in culture double every day and can efficiently be differentiated into 
cardiomyocytes by addition of TGF-β[57], 5-azacytidine, oxytocin, a combination TGF-β and 
BMP67, however a combination of 5-azacytidine treatment followed by TGF-β  and ascorbic ac-
id have shown to be the most efficient differentiation method with almost 90 % of the cell cov-
ered dish staining positive for troponin and/or actinin. Spontaneous beating has also been re-
ported by using this method as early as 1.5 week after start of differentiation. Beatings will start 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
29 
is small dense clusters but if cultured optimally, cells have been observed to beat synchronous 
over entire 60 mm dishes[58].  
 
The advantage of isolating progenitor is that they can provide us with a better understanding of 
cardiomyocytes differentiation and proliferation in general and under specific conditions like hy-
poxia and pharmaceutical influence. Furthermore can differentiation of progenitor cells teach us 
about paracrine factors released by the cells at different stages of differentiation and their ef-
fects, and then again give us a better understanding of differentiation[59]. 
 
 Immortalized cardiomyocytes cell lines 
3.3.4
As it is apparent of the above about culturing mature cardiomyocytes there is serious issues in 
terms of studying actual myocytes in culture as they either wont proliferate but maintain mor-
phology or they will proliferate but won’t maintain their morphology. However this has been cir-
cumvented by the development of immortalized cardiomyocytes cell lines. To my knowledge on-
ly three types of immortalized myocyte cell lines has been made one from mouse atrial cardio-
myocytes; the HL-1-line[60] , one from human foetal ventricular cardiomyocytes; the RL-14[61] 
and one made from an adult human ventricle; the SV-40 from abm[62]. 
 
The HL-1 line was the first to be developed, is derived from the AT-1 mouse atrial cardiomyo-
cytes tumor lineage[60]. The AT-1 cell line is derived from an atrial tumor obtained by simian vi-
rus 40 (SV-40) large T antigen expression targeted on the atrial natriuretic factor promoter[63]. 
Morphological examinations of the HL-1 line reflects that of adult cardiomyocytes and mainte-
nance of adult cardiac phenotype after proliferation and gene expression analysis were also 
similar to those of adult atrial myocytes[60]. 
 
The RL-14 was developed in a similar manner as the HL-1 line, however here cardiac fibro-
blasts were immortalized by insertion of the SV-40 gene and the immortalized fibroblasts were 
then subsequently fused with primary foetal cardiomyocytes[64]. Four additional cell lines of 
adult ventricular myocytes can been made in the same way as the RL-14, they have been des-
ignated AC1, AC10, AC12, AC16[65]. Studies on the RL-14 line have shown it expresses drug 
metabolizing enzymes in comparable level to that expressed in primary human foetal and adult 
cardiomyocytes, which makes it a true candidate as an in vitro model to study drug metabolizing 
enzymes of the human heart[61]. Unfortunately no studies have been published about the de-
velopment or morphology of SV-40 from abm, but abm themselves have shown the cell line 
have positive markers for GATA-4, ACTN2 and MYH2[66]. 
 
3.4 Comparison of human cardiomycocytes with stem cell derived cardi-
omyocytes 
From the above written it is clear that cardiomyocytes can be derived from various sources, 
however crucial for the use of cardiomyocytes derived from hESC is how similar they are to car-
diomyocytes derived from the human heart. Very few studies have been conducted some with 
ESCs and some with iPSC. 
 
 Comparison of hESC with heart tissue 
3.4.1
One way to validate how similar hESC derived cardiomyocyte are to cardiomytes of the human 
heart have been to look at gene expressions. Mircoarrays of beating hESC derived cardiomyo-
cytes clusters was compared with undifferentiated hESCs, 530 genes was shown be to signifi-
cantly upregulated and 40 was significantly down regulated, those being genes typically associ-
ated with pluripotency. By comparing the 530 genes to genes identified by WebGestalt it was 
==PAGE:30==
 
30 
 
seen that 331 was marked as expressed in the human heart and 100 of them were marked as 
significantly overexpressed in the human heart. Many of the genes marked as overexpressed 
are associated with cardiac development and cardiomyocytes function[67].  
 
In a second study expressed transcript levels between hESC derived samples and foetal and 
adult heart samples was measured. hESC derived samples showed highest similarity with foetal 
samples and the older the hESC derived samples was the more similar. hESC derived samples 
7 weeks old showed 82% similarity and samples 3 weeks old showed only 80% similarity, 7 
week old samples was also more similar to adult samples with 78% similarity, than 3 weeks old 
samples that was only 74% similar. However similarity between foetal samples and adult sam-
ples was the highest with 89%. Undifferentiated samples was also compared as a reference to 
the adult sample and they showed 67% similarity[68]. 
 
In a third study beating cardiomyocytes clusters derived from hESCs were divided into two 
groups depending on beating rates, one group consisted of clusters beating with a rate from 8-
50 beats per minute (BPM) and the other group had a BPM of 50-148. The average BPM of the 
below 50 BPMs were 26±2 BPM and the above 50 BPM were 89±5 BPM. Slower beating has 
been observed in ventricle cardiomyocytes and faster in atrial cardiomyocytes. Foetal samples 
were of unknown origin, neonatal samples were of atrial origin and adult samples were of both 
atrial and ventricular origin. NKX2.5 which is associated with heart development and the struc-
tural gene ATCT1 was expressed several folds higher in both the slow and the fast group of 
hESC derived cardiomyocytes than in any of the cardiac tissue. However ACTC1 was higher in 
the fast beating group than in the slow beating group. Another structural gene MHY6 was also 
higher expressed in the fast beating group and a similar pattern was seen between the atrial 
and ventricle adult tissue. On the other hand the structural gene TNNT2 (CTNT) was higher ex-
pressed in the slow beating group and the ventricular adult tissue than in the fast beating group 
and the atrial adult tissue. One structural gene MYH7 was higher expressed in adult ventricular 
tissue than in any of the other cardiac types. Lastly PLN an integral membrane protein that 
regulates the calcium pump in cardiac tissue was highest expressed in the hESC derived cells 
and in the ventricular adult tissue (Figure 18). 
 
Figure 18 - mRNA expressions from different types of cardiomyocytes[69] 
 
hESCs derived cardiomyocytes was also group in an alternative way; from EB formation to har-
vesting of the cardiomyocytes. Three groups was made an early group from day 1-24, an inter-
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
31 
mediate group from day 25-55 and a late group from day 60-76. Form the early group the late 
group NKX2.5 was down regulated towards the levels detected in human tissue. ACTC1 de-
creased with time whereas MYH6 increased and TNNT2, PLN, MYH7 did not increase or de-
crease significantly over time[69]. 
 
 Comparison of hiPSC with heart tissue 
3.4.2
Microarray was performed on hiPSC differentiated toward the cardiac cell line. Samples was 
collected on day 2, 6, 14, 21, 28, 35 and 42. From day 2 to day 6 no significant change in gene 
expression profiles was observed however as the cells started to beat in syncytium from day 6 
to 14 significant changes in gene expression profiles was observed. The cells kept beating till 
day 42 where the study was terminated and the gene expression changes observed from day 6 
to 14 were persistent. The differentiated hiPSCs exhibited expression of different transcription 
factors and cardiac structural markers on a medium to high level and connective tissue markers 
was expressed as well. These expression patterns was consistent to expression patterns found 
in a human heart samples. Expression of cardiac maturation markers was evaluated as well and 
expression was first detected on day 6, expressions increased to day 14 from where it remained 
stable[70]. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
 
32 
 
4. Method and materials 
In this experiment three foetal hearts of age 7+4, 9+3 and 9+2 pre conception been used, they 
are referred to as H7, H8 and H9 respectively. The hearts were obtained from clinical abortions 
conducted at Regionshospitalet Randers. Consents from the women carrying the fetuses have 
been received, as well as an ethical accept from “The Scientific Ethical Committee for the Capi-
tal Region’” (De videnskablige komiteer for Region Hovedstaden, KF (01) 258206). hESCs of 
the stem cell line LRB10, have been used for differentiation experiment. LRB10 is a line routine-
ly used for differentiation towards the cardiac lineage. 
 
4.1 Comparison between foetal and hESC derived cardiomyocytes 
hESC derived cardiomyocytes clusters was compared to foetal samples. Three hESC derived 
beating clusters that started beating at day 16, and was collected soon after, and three beating 
clusters that started beating at day 19, and that was cultured till around day 30 was used. From 
the beating clusters beating areas was cut out, and snap freezed and non-beating areas from 
these clusters was snap freezed as well. The clusters from day 16 clusters were called day 15 
samples and the clusters from the day 19 samples were called day 30 samples. Uncultured 
samples from H7, H8 and H9 were divided into atrial and ventricle parts. The foetal heart sam-
ples were further divided into two groups, a “week 7” and a “week 9” group. H7 samples were 
grouped in the week 7 group and H8 and H9 were grouped in the week 9 group.  
 
 Q-PCR 
4.1.1
4.1.1.1 RNA extraction 
In this section centrifuging are at 13.4 rmp for 15 seconds and the flow-through is discharged 
unless anything else is stated. Reagents are obtained from RNA-free DNase set (Qiagen) and 
columns from RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) unless anything else is stated. 
The cells were disrupted by adding 350 μl of a 100:1 RLT/β-Mercaptoethanol (Sigma) mix and it 
was vortexed to loosen the pellet. The mix were transferred into a QIAshredder spin column and 
centrifuged for 2 minutes at full speed, before tossing the shredder. 350 μl 70% ethanol were 
added and mixed by pipetting and the mix was placed in an RNeasy spin column and centri-
fuged. 
 
350 μl RW1 were added to the RNeasy spin column and centrifuged, then 80 μl DNase I in a 
1:7 solution with RDD was added to the columns and they were leaved for 15 minutes incuba-
tion. After the incubation period 350 μl RW1 were added and centrifuged, next 500 μl RPE was 
added and centrifuged, and another 500 μl RPE was added and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 
13.4 rmp before the flow-through was tossed away. Now the collection tube was replaced by a 
new one and the columns were centrifuged again at 13.4 rmp for 1 minute. Columns were trans-
ferred to Eppendorf tubes and 30 μl DEPC-treated water (Ambion) was transferred to the col-
umns containing extractions from week 7 and week 9 and 10 μl DEPC-treated water to the col-
umns containing day15 and day30 samples, before they were centrifuged for 1 minute at 13.4 
rmp. 
 
The RNA extractions were collected and stored at -80oC till use. RNA extractions were carried 
out according to appendix 1. 
 
4.1.1.2 cDNA synthesis 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
33 
cDNA master mix was made with reagents from omniscript RT kit (Qiagen) and with random 
hexameres (Qiagen). cDNA master mix was made with the components according to Table 2 
and Table 1. cDNA master mix were made on ice and RNA extractions were thrawed on ice be-
fore they were mixed. 
 
 
Table 1 - cDNA master mix solution  for week7 and 
week 9 samples 
Table 2 - cDNA master mix solutions for day15 and 
day30 samples 
Component 
Volume (μl) 
10xBuffer RT 
2 
dNTP Mix 
2 
Random hexamers 
2 
Omniscript reverse 
transcriptase 
1 
RNA template 
13 
Component 
Volume (μl) 
10xBuffer RT 
2 
dNTP Mix 
2 
Random hexamers 
2 
Omniscript reverse 
transcriptase 
1 
DEPC-treated water 
3 
RNA template 
10 
 
The cDNA mixes were vortexed before cDNA synthesis at 37oC for 60 minutes.  
 
4.1.1.3 Q-PCR 
 
Q-PCR master mix were made on ice, according to Tabel 3. All samples were run in replicates 
and plate setups can be found in appendix 2. The sequences of the primer sets used can be 
found in Table 4. Primers were obtained from tag Copenhagen and diluted 1:10 with DPEC-
treated water before use. 
 
Tabel 3 - Q-PCR master mix solution 
Component 
Volume (μl) 
DEPC-treated water 
3 
Forward primer  
1 
Reverse primer 
1 
SYBR green 
10 
cDNA template 
5 
 
Table 4 - Primer sets GAPDH and B2M are housekeeping genes, CTNT  and ACTN2 is a structural gene and GA-
TA4 is associated with foetal heart formation 
Gene 
Forward primer 
Reverse primer 
GAPDH 
5’ CGGAGTCAACGGATTTGGT 3’ 
5’ GGATCTCGCTCCTGGAAGAT 3’ 
B2M 
5’ GCTATCCAGCGTACTCCAAAGAT 3’ 
5’ TTGCTGAAAGACAAGTCTGAATG 3’ 
GATA4 
5’ TCCAAACCAGAAAACGGAAG 3’ 
5’ CTGTGCCCGTAGTGAGATGA 3’ 
CTNT 
5’ CTTGGAGGCAGAGAAGTTCG 3’ 
5’ GAGCGAGGAGCAGATCTTTG 3’ 
ACTN2 
5’ CATTGTCCACAGCATTGAGG 3’ 
5’ TCATCCATGGTGACAGTGCT 3’ 
 
After transferring master mix and cDNA to LightCycler 480 multiwell plate 96 (Roche), they were 
sealed with LightCycler 480 sealing foil (Roche) and centrifuged at 2800 g for 3 minutes. The 
plates were then run in a LightCycler 480 II and according to the program in Table 5. 
==PAGE:34==
 
34 
 
 
 
Table 5 - Q-PCR program 
Step 
No of cycles 
Temperature ( oC) 
Time 
Pre-incubation 
1 
95 
10 min 
Amplification 
45 
 
 
 
 
95 
10 sec 
 
 
60 
20 sec 
 
 
72 
30 sec 
Melting curve 
1 
 
 
 
 
95 
15 sec 
 
 
60 
1 min 
 
 
97 
 
Cooling  
1 
40 
30 sec 
 
Afterwards the data was analyzed with the LightCycler ®480 Software release 1.5.0 SP3.  
 
 Beating rate 
4.1.2
All day15 and day30 samples exhibited a beating rate of less than 50 BPM. Cultures subse-
quently made from foetal hearts exhibited expected beating rates of less than 50 BPM for ven-
tricular cultures and more than 50 BPM for atrial cultures. 
 
4.2 Culturing cardiomyocytes from foetal heart 
 
 Transportation 
4.2.1
From foetal hearts were collected in Randers till they were cultured in Copenhagen approxi-
mately 7 hours went by, during this time the heart were kept at ice at all times. The hearts were 
transported on in transportation tubes (falcon), containing 2 ml maintenance media (MM) con-
sisting of Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium: Nutrient Mixture F-12 (Gibco) supplemented with 
10 % FBS (Gibco), 0.5 ml Glumatax (Gibco), 0.5 ml Penicillin (0.05 U/ml) and streptomycin 
(0.05 mg/ml) (Gibco), 0.5 ml Non-essential amino acids (Gibco), 1.5 ml sodium pyruvate(Gibco) 
and 0.5 ml insulin-transferrin-selenium (Gibco). 
 
 Culture start 
4.2.2
Upon arrival excess tissue was removed with syringes and the hearts were parted into atriums 
and ventricles and were separately subjected to the following protocol. The heart tissue were 
washes with heated dulbecco's phosphate saline buffered solution( PBS) (Gibco) before being 
chopped into smaller pieces about 1 mm3 with McIIwains tissue chopper. Samples were collect-
ed by snap freezing for Q-PCR. Furthermore were four single pieces cultured in 4-well dishes 
(ThermoScientific) to monitor their morphological development and registration of beating rates. 
The rest of the chopped tissue type was divided into four parts and cultured on 0.1% gelatine 
(Sigma) coated plates in 3 ml MM. Culture plates and 4-well plates were kept at 37oC and high 
oxygen and media was changed every 2-3 day. This means of each heart a total of eight culture 
dishes were obtained; four containing atrial tissue and four containing ventricle tissue and two 
4-well dishes were obtained; one containing atrial aggregates and one containing ventricle ag-
gregates. 
 
During the first week plates were examined every day and beating aggregates were transferred 
to new plates – a “beating mechanical passage plate” and a “beating enzymatic passage plate” 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
35 
diving beating aggregates equally between the two.  By the end of the week non-beating aggre-
gates were divided into a non-beating mechanical passage plate and a non-beating enzymatic 
passage plate too (Figure 19). 4-well plates were too passaged once a week by mechanical 
passage. 
Figure 19 - Every second beating aggregate was transferred to a plate meant for mechanical passage and every 
other second beating aggregate was transferred to a plate meant for enzymatical passage 
 
 Passage 
4.2.3
Plates were passaged once a week either mechanically by cutting or enzymatically with trypsin, 
to ensure cultures not being overgrown by other cells present in the heart. Aggregates from cut-
ting plates were cut out of the original plates and transferred to new gelatine coated plates. 
Trypzination plates was washed with 1 ml heated DPBS and treated with 0.5% trypsin (Gibco) 
till aggregates loosen from the plates. Trypsin and aggregates were transferred to 10 ml tubes 
containing in 9 ml IMDM(Gibco)with 10% FBS and penicillin and streptomycin and spun down at 
300 g for 5 min.  
 
The supernatant of H7 was discharged and half of the pellet replated on 0.1% gelatine coated 
plates till next passage. However for the passage of H8 and H9 supernatants was discharged 
and pellet was replated on 0.1% gelatine coated dishes and left for 2 h incubation at 37oC and 
high oxygen. After 2 hours incubation plates were swirled and lose cells and aggregates were 
replated again for further culturing. The number of beating aggregates was recorded every day 
for the first two weeks of culturing and from there on every 2-3 days. 
Every week just before passage a beating and a non-beating aggregate were collected from 
each tissue type and passage type by snap freezing for Q-PCR. A beating aggregate from each 
tissue type was collected for histology being embedded in 4% bacto agar and fixated in 4% 
PFA.  
 
 Histology 
4.2.4
4.2.4.1 Fixation and embedding 
By culture start a pieces of tissue were collected and before each passage beating aggregates 
were too collected. The collected tissue and aggregates were embedded in 4% agar bactor 
==PAGE:36==
 
36 
 
(Becton Dickinson) and fixated for two hours in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Hounisen labora-
torieudstyr) and then stored in 70% ethanol till use. 
 
The fixated samples was embedded in paraffin (Histolab) by the following dehydration protocol: 
Samples were left for: 
 
2*15 min in 80% ethanol 
 
2*20 min in 96% ethanol 
 
3*20 min in 99% ethanol 
 
3*20 min in xylene (VWR chemicals) 
After dehydration they were embedded in 63oC paraffin in embedding rings and left for drying 
overnight. 
 
4.2.4.2 Paraffin slides 
Paraffin embedded tissue were cut in 5 µm thin slides on microtome. Paraffin slides were trans-
ferred to 42-44oC dH2O to soften the paraffin and slides were transferred to superfrost plus 
glass (thermo scientific) and left for drying. 
 
4.2.4.3 Immunohistochemistry 
Day I 
Buffers: 
Citrate buffer (pH 6): 10 mM trisodium citrate (Merck) in dH2O with 0.05% tween (Merck) 
PBST: 0.05% tween in PBS 
Water with tween (WT): 0.05%  tween in dH2O 
Antibody dilution buffer (ADB): 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma-aldrich) in PBST 
 
Paraffin slides on superfrost glass were rehydrated by the following protocol: 
 
2*5 min in xylene  
 
2*2 min in 99% ethanol  
 
1*2 min  in 96% ethanol  
 
1*2 min in 70% ethanol 
 
30 sec in dH2O 
Antigens were retrieved by boiling the superfrost glass in citrate buffer for 15 min. After cooling 
in dH2O for 20 min a 6 µl 1:200 dilution of troponin T cardiac isoform Ab-1 mouse monoclonal 
antibody in ABD, was added to each paraffin slide. The superfrost glass were incubated over 
night on an orbital shaker at 5oC at 40 rpm. 
 
Day II 
Buffers: 
EPBB: 0.3% H2O2 with 0.1% NaN3 in PBST 
 
To block none specific tissue 6 µl EPBB was added to each paraffin slide and incubated for 10 
min at room temperature on orbital shaker at 40 rmp. Afterwards the superfrost glass were 
washed in 3*20 times in WT. 6 µl of 1:200 dilution of polyclonal Rabbit Anti-Mouse Immuno-
globulins (DAKO) with ADB and incubated for 30 min at room temperature on an orbital shaker 
at 40 rmp. To envision the staining 6 µl DAB+ (DAKO) diluted 1:50 in DAB+ buffer (DAKO) was 
added to the paraffin slides till staining occurred and were then immediately transferred to 
dH2O. Nuclear staining were done by dipping the superfrost glass in Mayers Hematoxylin (Am-
pliqon) 20 times and the slides were then placed under a running tap for 15 min. Lastly the 
slides were dehydrated by the following protocol:  
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
37 
 
1*1 min in 70% ethanol 
 
1*1 min  in 96% ethanol 
 
2*1 min in 99% ethanol 
 
2*2 min  in xylene  
Slides were subsequently covered with cover slides.  
 
4.3 Differentiation of cardiomyocytes from embryonic stem cells 
A total of 3 differentiation experiments were conducted. hESCs were cultured of feeder layers of 
human foreskin fibroblasts in stem cell media containing 40 ml knockout DMEM (Gibco), 7.5 ml 
KnockOut-serum replacement(KSR) (Gibco), 1.25 ml 20% HSA (CSL Behring), 0.5 ml glutamax, 
0.5 ml Non-essential amino acids, 0.5 ml Pen/step, 0.1 ml mercaptoethanol (Gibco) and 0.05 ml 
4 ng/ml basic-fibroblast growth factor (b-FGF). To start differentiation hESCs must be feeder 
free and cells was passaged to feeder free conditions on matrigel (Gibco) in feeder free stem 
cell media containing stem cell media supplemented with conditioned media from human fore-
skin fibroblasts in a 1:1 solution. 
  
Three differentiation experiments was carried out in a regular fashion (experiment 1 and 2), and 
one was supplemented with ROCKi (StemCell) from the first feeder free passage (experiment 
3).  
 
 Regular hESC differentiation 
4.3.1
Cells was passaged for a few passages to obtain feeder free conditions. At day 0 5,000 cells 
were seeded in Y-buttom-plates (ThermoScientific) to obtain EBs. Each well contained 200 µl 
EB-media consisting of 40 ml knockout DMEM, 7.5 ml KSR, 1.25 ml HSA, 0.5 ml glutamax, 0.5 
ml Non-essential amino acids, 0.5 ml Pen/step and 0.1 ml mercaptoethanol. The plates were 
left at 37oC and low oxygen.  Two days later media was changed to 20 % FBS media consisting 
of 38.5 ml knockout DMEM, 10 ml FBS, 0.5 ml glutamax, 0.5 ml Non-essential amino acids, 0.5 
ml Pen/step and 0.1 ml mercaptoethanol. The plates were transferred to incubator with high ox-
ygen and 37oC. On the sixth day EBs was replated from Y-bottom plates to U bottom plates 
(ThermoScientific) and washed as they were replated to get rid of dead cells. Media was 
changed at day 9 and day 12 and on day 16 media is changed to 5% FBS media consisting of 
46 ml knockout DMEM, 2.5 ml FBS, 0.5 ml glutamax, 0.5 ml Non-essential amino acids, 0.5 ml 
Pen/step and 0.1 ml mercaptoethanol. EBs was cultured to day 30 with media change on day 
19, day 23 and day 26 (Figure 20) 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
38 
 
Figure 20 - Overview cardiomyocytes differentiation 
 
 Optimization of hESC differentiation 
4.3.2
In an attempt to optimize hESC differentiation two experiments were conducted with regular dif-
ferentiation media supplemented with conditioned media. One experiments was conducted with 
condition media from hESC derived cardiomyocytes and conditioned media from foetal cells 
(experiment 4)  and one experiment with just conditioned media from foetal hearts (experiment 
5). Media from hESCs derived cardiomyocytes was obtained by differentiation using the above 
mentioned differentiation protocol and media was collected from beating EBs and stored at -
80oC till use. Media from foetal heart was obtained from cultured dishes with at least 3 beating 
aggregates on, and it was stored at -80 oC as well. Just be before use of conditioned medias 
they was sterile filtrated though 0.20 µm filter (VWR international).  
 
 In experiment 4 two rows of wells were cultured in a regular fashion with differentiation media 
as a control, two rows were cultured with media conditioned by hESC derived cardiomyocytes  
in a 1:1 solution with differentiation media and two rows were cultured with foetal heart condition 
media 1:1 solution with differentiation media (Figure 21). In experiment 5 three rows were cul-
tured with differentiation media and three rows 
with foetal heart conditioned media in a similar 
setup as. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21 - 96-well plate during differentiation with 
three different medias 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
39 
5. Results  
5.1 Comparing hESC derived cardiomyocytes with foetal aggregates 
Gene expression of three genes was measured to compare the hESC derived clusters and the 
foetal aggregates, two structural genes; CTNT and ACTN2 and on gene involved in myocardial 
development and differentiation; GATA4 
 
 Gene expressions 
5.1.1
Gene expressions will first be compared between hESC derived samples, then expressions 
from foetal samples and at last a comparison between the two will be made 
 
5.1.1.1 Relative levels in hESC derived cardiomyocyte culsters 
In both the day 15 and day 30 samples, all three genes were seen to be higher expressed in the 
beating areas than in the non-beating areas.  
 
When comparing the gene expression levels only in the beating areas of day 15 samples, with 
the beating areas in the day 30 samples gene expression levels of ACTN2 and GATA4 increase 
too, whereas CTNT gene expression levels decreased. In the non-beating areas CTNT and 
GATA4 expression decreased, whereas ACTN2 gene expression levels increased.  
 
ACTN2 were expressed highest in the beating areas, whereas GATA4 were expressed highest 
in the non-beating areas. Common for all samples were that the gene expression of CTNT were 
lowest (Figure 22).  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22 - Relative levels of CTNT, ACTN2 and GATA4 expressions in hESC derived cardio-
myocytes clusters. “+” indicate beating areas and “–“ indicate non-beating areas. Day 15+, 
Day 15-, Day 30-, n=3, Day30+, n=2, bars are indicating SEM 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Day 15+
Day 15-
Day 30+
Day 30-
Relative levels expressed in hESC derived cardiomyocyte 
clusters 
CTNT
ACTN2
GATA4
==PAGE:40==
 
40 
 
5.1.1.2 Relative levels in foetal samples 
From the levels expressed in foetal samples is was seen that levels of CTNT was lower ex-
pressed in atrial samples than ventricular. Whereas the GATA4 expression was higher in the 
atrial samples than in the ventricular samples. However the ACTN2 was expressed at approxi-
mately the same levels in all foetal samples, however not the ACTN2 level in week 7 atriums, 
but when evaluating the Q-PCR results it were seen that the double determinations of the two 
samples were very far apart and furthermore had the meltingcurves been odd, so I have chosen 
not to trust this result All gene expression levels increased with the age of the hearts. GATA4 
was highest expressed in all samples and CTNT the lowest (Figure 23).  
 
 
5.1.1.3 Comparison of the relative levels 
The highest expression of CTNT was found in day 15 beating areas where expression was 
highest in non-beating areas. However in day 30 samples the expression was higher in the 
beating areas compared to non-beating areas. For both week 7 and week 9 samples atrial ex-
pression was lower than ventricle expression (Figure 24). 
 
Figure 23 - Relative gene expression levels in uncultured foetal samples. Week 7, n=1, Week 
9, n=2. Bars are indicating SEM 
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1,0
Week 7 - Atrium
uncultivated
Week 7 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Wekk 9 - Atrium
uncultivated
Week 9 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Relative levels expressed in uncultured foetal samples 
CTNT
ACTN2
GATA4
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
41 
 
ACTN2 was too higher in the hESC derived clusters than in the foetal samples but here expres-
sion was highest in the beating samples and it increased with the age of the samples. Expres-
sion was at about the sample level in both atrial and ventricular samples from both week 7 and 
week 9 samples (Figure 25), again the week 7 atrial samples is not shown. 
 
Figure 25 - ACTN2 expression from hESC derived cardiomyocyte clusters and foetal aggregates 
Day 15+, Day 15-, Day 30-, n=3, Day30+, n=2,Week7 n=1, Week 9 n=2. Bars are indicating SEM 
 
At last GATA4 expression showed to be highest expressed in the beating areas of day 30 sam-
ples, this expression had increased with age as the beating day 15 areas showed a lower ex-
pression, it did too in the foetal samples. The expression was lowest in the foetal week 7 ven-
tricular sample and it was too low in the week 9 ventricular samples (Figure 26). 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Day 15+
Day 15-
Day 30+
Day 30-
Week 7 -
Atrium
uncultivated
Week 7 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Week 9 -
Atrium
uncultivated
Week 9 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Mean of relative levels of ACTN2 
Mean of relative levels of ACTN2
Figure 24 - CTNT expression from hESC derived cardiomyocyte clusters and foetal aggregates.   
Day 15+, Day 15-, Day 30-, n=3, Day30+, n=2,Week7 n=1, Week 9 n=2. Bars are indicating SEM  
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
Day 15+
Day 15-
Day 30+
Day 30-
Week 7 -
Atrium
uncultivated
Week 7 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Week 9 -
Atrium
uncultivated
Week 9 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Comparison of differentiated and foetal samples 
Mean of relative levels of CTNT
==PAGE:42==
 
42 
 
Figure 26 - GATA4 expression from hESC derived cardiomyocyte clusters and foetal aggregates 
Day 15+, Day 15-, Day 30-, n=3, Day30+, n=2,Week7 n=1, Week 9 n=2. Bars are indicating SEM 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
Day 15+
Day 15-
Day 30+
Day 30-
Week 7 -
Atrium
uncultivated
Week 7 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Week 9 -
Atrium
uncultivated
Week 9 -
Ventricle
uncultivated
Comparison of differentiated and foetal samples 
Mean of relative levels of GATA4
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
43 
 
5.2 Foetal Cultures 
 
 Transportation  
5.2.1
Earlier studies (data not shown) had revealed foetal hearts would be preserved the best by 
transporting the foetal heart at 0oC compared to 37oC. Studies had revealed higher gene ex-
pressions and more beating aggregates would be a result of transportation occurring at 0oC 
compared to 37oC. 
 
5.3 Foetal Cultures 
 Transportation  
5.3.1
Earlier studies (data not shown) had revealed foetal hearts would be preserved the best by 
transporting the foetal heart at 0oC compared to 37oC. Studies had revealed higher gene ex-
pressions and more beating aggregates would be a result of transportation occurring at 0oC 
compared to 37oC. 
 
 Differences between primary cultures of atrial and ventricular myocytes 
5.3.2
5.3.2.1 Gene expressions 
Q-PCR was done on beating and non-beating aggregates derived from all three hearts. When 
comparing the gene expression levels, it is of interest to have a point zero to compare with. For 
this point zero uncultured samples could have been used, but as levels in uncultured samples 
was up to 100 fold higher than in the cultured aggregates, it did not make any sense to include 
them, instead p0 expression levels have been used.  
 
However uncultured samples were compared to each other instead. Gene expressions were 
higher in ventricle tissue, than in atrial tissue. For both atrial and ventricle tissue decrease was 
seen with the aging of the hearts, as H8 is the oldest and H7 is the youngest (Figure 27). 
 
 
Figure 27 - CTNT levels in uncultured samples. For all samples n=1 
 
 
 
5.3.2.1.1 
Atrial versus ventricular expressions 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
H7 ventricle
H8 atrium
H8 ventricle
H9 atrium
H9 ventricle
Relative CTNT expression in uncultured samples 
==PAGE:44==
 
44 
 
It should be noted here that p0 values across passage methods are identical, but are shown to 
have as a point zero level for the gene expressions. 
 
CTNT gene expression from atrial and ventricle samples of H8 and H9 are varying a lot, how-
ever atrial expression from H8 are generally higher during the two first passages, whereas ex-
pression is higher in ventricle samples during the next two passages. CTNT gene expression in 
H9 are higher in ventricle aggregates during the two first passages, whereas atrial expression 
become higher in the last passages (Figure 28). 
 
 
 
Figure 28 - CTNT expression from mechanically passaged atrial aggregates, from passage 0-2 on beating and non-beating aggregates. 
“M” are denoting mechanical passaged aggregates and “E“ are denoting enzymatically passaged aggregates. Missing bars is due to 
missing samples. For all samples n=1 
 
5.3.2.2 Immunohistochemistry 
Immunohistochemistry was successfully done on uncultured atrial tissue and on two beating 
aggregates; one atrial and one ventricle in passage 4. All three were derived from H9. 
 
From the uncultured atrial piece of tissue coloring of CTNT was very dense throughout the 
piece (Figure 29). 
 
0,00
0,01
0,02
0,03
0,04
p0
p1
p2
p3
H8 comparison between atrial and 
ventricle beating aggregates 
Atrium M
Atrium E
Ventricle M
Ventricle E
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
H9 comparison between atrial and 
ventricle beating aggregates 
Atrie M
Atrie E
Ventricle M
Ventricle E
 
Figure 29 – Immunostaining of CTNT in H9 atrial uncultured tissue 
10 x enlargement 
20 x enlargement 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
45 
 
By passage 4 CTNT staining were still quite dense with only a few gaps, but is was not as in-
tensely stained as the uncultured sample (Figure 30). 
 
 
Figure 30 – immunostaining of CTNT in H9 atrial passaged 4 beating aggregate 
 
However from the ventricle aggregate from passage 4 of tissue much less of the aggregate is 
stained and it was actually only in the centre of the aggregates staining was detected, even 
though the entire aggregate were seen moving. However the staining in the centre is much 
more intense than in the atrial aggregate (Figure 31). 
 
Figure 31 – Immunostaining of CTNT in H9 ventricle passaged 4 beating aggregate 
 
 
5.3.2.3 Beating 
Most aggregates attached during the first week of culturing and beating aggregates was ob-
served already two days after culture start. These beating aggregates could be maintained for 
up to 5 passages in culture. 
 
10 x enlargement 
20 x enlargement 
10 x enlargement 
20 x enlargement 
==PAGE:46==
 
46 
 
H7  
From H7 beating aggregates were 
only observed from ventricle tis-
sue cultures. The number of beat-
ing aggregates peaked at day 5 
after culturing with a total of 106 
beating aggregates. By each pas-
sage (on day 7, 14, 21 etc.) a de-
crease in beating aggregates fol-
lowed by an increase were ob-
served as seen from day 8 to 11 
and day 16 to 19 (Figure 32).  
 
 
 
 
H8 (9+3 pc) 
From H8 both atrial and ventricular beating aggregates was obtained. The number of beating 
aggregates derived from the atriums peaked at day 4 after culture start with 15 beating aggre-
gates, whereas it peaked at day 8 from ventricular derived aggregates with 32 beating aggre-
gates (Figure 33).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H9 (9+2 pc) 
 
Figure 32 - Beating aggregates observed from H7 ventricles 
Figure 33 - Beating aggregates observed from H8 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011121314161921232628
Total number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H7 - ventricle aggregates 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
11 12 13 14 16 19 21 23 26 28 30 33 35
Number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H8 - Beating aggregates 
Atrial aggregates
Ventricular aggregates
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
47 
The number of beating aggregates from atrial and ventricular origin derived from H9 peaked at 
day 7, with 210 beating ventricular aggregates and 66 beating atrial aggregates (Figure 34). 
 
 
 Differences between passage techniques 
5.3.3
Passage was carried out to maintain the aggregates so they would not be overgrown by fibro-
blasts, which are naturally occurring in the human heart.  
 
5.3.3.1 Gene expressions 
When looking at the general picture for mechanical versus enzymatically passaged beating ag-
gregates there is a clear indication of aggregates obtained by enzymatic passage does express 
a higher level of CTNT and this level increases as the passage number does. For the mechani-
cally passaged aggregates gene expression levels are more even throughout the passages 
(Figure 35).  
 
Figure 34 - Beating aggregates observed from H9 
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
3
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 16 19 21 23 26 28 30 33 35 37 40 42
Total number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H9 - Beating aggregates 
Atrial aggregates
Ventricular aggregates
==PAGE:48==
 
48 
 
 
 
Figure 35 - Gene expressions of mechanically versus enzymatically passaged aggrgates. “M” are denoting mechanically pas-
saged aggregates and “E” are denoting enzymatically passaged aggregates. For all samples n=1 
 
The expression levels obtained from the enzymatically passaged atrial aggregates shows a sim-
ilar pattern as CTNT expression levels rises in non-beating aggregates, however so does it in 
the beating aggregates. Moreover are the expressed CTNT levels in H9 non-beating aggre-
gates once again seen to be higher than in the beating aggregates, but the same is not true for 
H8 where the opposite is seen (Figure 35) 
 
5.3.3.2 Beating 
Beating data presented in this section are obtained from beating plates and non-beating plates 
as beating aggregates emerged after the first week too, but they were not transferred to the 
beating plates anymore. This is the reason why more beating aggregates can be seen after day 
8 when comparing mechanical and enzymatic passage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0,000
0,005
0,010
0,015
0,020
p0
p1
p2
H7 ventricle - mechanical vs 
enzymatic passage - beating 
aggregates 
M
E
0,000
0,010
0,020
0,030
0,040
p0
p1
p2
p3
H8 ventricle - mechanical vs 
enzymatic passage - beating 
aggregates 
M
E
0,000
0,100
0,200
0,300
0,400
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
H9 ventricle - mechanical passage vs 
enzymatic - beating aggregates 
 
M
E
0,000
0,100
0,200
0,300
0,400
0,500
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
H9 atrium - mechanical passage vs 
enzymatic - beating aggregates 
M
E
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
49 
H7 
The aggregates were passaged 
by mechanical and enzymatically 
passage. Fewer beating aggre-
gates was seen when the aggre-
gates was passaged enzymatical-
ly versus mechanically. Already 
14 days after culture start no more 
beating aggregates was observed 
on enzymatically passaged plates 
in oppose to the mechanically 
passaged plates where beating 
aggregates was observed till day 
26 (Figure 36). 
 
 
 
H8 
When the atrial derived aggregates from H8 were cultured it was seen that more beating aggre-
gates was present at the enzymatically passaged dishes, than on the mechanically passaged 
dishes. The mechanically passaged aggregates also stopped beating before the enzymatically 
passaged aggregates (Figure 37). However for the ventricular aggregates the mechanically 
passaged aggregates kept beating the longest, but for the most of the culture period more beat-
ing aggregates or an equal number of beating aggregates was observed from the enzymatically 
passaged than from the mechanically passaged (Figure 38). 
 
 
 
Figure 37 - H8 atrial aggregates - mechanical versus enzy-
matic passage 
Figure 38 - H8 ventricular aggregates - mechanical versus en-
zymatic passage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H9 
0
1
2
3
4
5
8
9
11 12 13 14 16 19 21 23
Number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H8 - atrial aggregates 
Mechanical passage
Enzymatic passage
0
5
10
15
20
8 9 11 12 13 14 16 19 21 23 26 28 30 33 35
Number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H8 - ventricular aggregates 
Mechanical passage
Enzymatic passage
Figure 36 - Number of beating aggregates of mechanically pas-
saged plates versus enzymatically passaged plates 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 16 19 21 23 26 28
Number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H7 - ventricle aggregates 
Mechanical passage
Enzymatic passage
==PAGE:50==
 
50 
 
The atrial aggregates obtained from H9 responded better to mechanical passage than enzymat-
ic passage, beating aggregates from enzymatic passaged plates was seen till day 35 whereas 
beating aggregates from mechanical passaged plates was seen till day 40 (Figure 39).  On the 
other side the ventricular aggregates passaged by enzymatic passage seemed to respond bet-
ter during passage 1 from day 8 to 14, from where more beating aggregates was seen on me-
chanical passaged plates. Beating aggregates was seen on mechanical passaged plates till day 
42, whereas the last enzymatically passaged aggregates stopped at day 37 (Figure 40). 
 
 
From the above it is clear that more beating aggregates was observed arising from ventricular 
tissue than from atrial tissue, however for H9 the ratio between beating and non-beating aggre-
gates were recorded and these suggest that the ratio of beating aggregates compared to non-
beating aggregates are higher, meaning there is at all times a higher ratio of beating atrial ag-
gregates than non-beating aggregates compared to the ratio of beating ventricular aggregates 
compared to ventricular non-beating aggregates. 
 
 Differences between beating and non-beating aggregates 
5.3.4
For most of the aggregates CTNT expression was generally found to be higher during the first 
couple of passages in non-beating aggregates compared to beating aggregates. For later pas-
sages though the expression became higher in beating aggregates compared to non-beating 
aggregates. This was true for both atrial and ventricle aggregates as well as enzymatically pas-
saged and mechanically passaged aggregates (Figure 41). 
 
 
Figure 39 - H9 atrial aggregates - mechanical versus enzymatic pas-
sage 
Figure 40 - H9 ventricular aggregates - mechanical versus enzymat-
ic passage 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
8 9 1011121314161921232628303335374042
Number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H9 - Atrial aggregates 
Mechanical passage
Enzymatic passage
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
8 9 1011121314161921232628303335374042
Number of beating aggregates 
Days since culture start 
H9 - Ventricular aggregates 
Mechanical passage
Enzymatic passage
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
51 
Figure 41 – CTNT expressions in beating aggregates compared to non-beating aggregates during passages. n=1 for all samples 
 
 
 Morphology and other observations 
5.3.5
This section contains information derived from single cultured aggregates in 4-well dishes. 
 
Beats per minute 
The number of beats per minute was noted for the aggregates. As seen from Figure 42 with a 
few exceptions, beating rate enhances till culture media is changed to fresh media, as indicated 
by a red circle. Furthermore are the beating frequency observed to be higher in atrial aggre-
gates than in ventricular aggregates. 
 
 
 
Figure 42 - BPMs of H9 2 atrial and 2 ventricular aggregates, media change is marked by a red circle 
 
Morphology 
As seen from the pictures, during the first couple of days a three dimensional piece of tissue 
adhere to the plate. When it has adhered, in this case between the first and the second day, it 
quickly start to flatten out and fibroblast grow out from the aggregate, and the aggregate ex-
pands. After the picture of day 7 was taken the aggregate was passaged mechanically. On day 
8 it is seen how the aggregate have already attached once again.  This particular aggregate 
started to beat at day 6 and kept beating til day 37 where it stopped. As it is clear from the 
picture no obvious morphological change have happen, neither are there any obvious change 
by day 44, where a fibre of the aggregate started to beat again (Figure 43) 
 
0,00
0,05
0,10
0,15
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
H9 ventricle - mechanical passage 
+
-
0,00
0,10
0,20
0,30
0,40
0,50
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
H9 atrium - enzymatic passage 
+
-
0
50
100
150
200
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14
Beats per minute 
Days after culture start 
BPM - H9 atrial aggregates 
First atrial aggregate
Second atrial aggregate
0
10
20
30
40
50
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Beats per minute 
Days after culture start 
BPM - H9 ventricular aggregates 
First ventricular aggregate
Second ventricular aggregate
==PAGE:52==
 
52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Day 1 
Day 2 
Day 3 
 
 
 
Day 4 
Day 5 
Day 6 
 
Day 7 
Day 8 
Day 37 
 
Day 40 
Day 44 
 
Figure 43 - Ventricular aggregate beating from day 2-44, morphological change 
 
Another interesting observation was made from second ventricular aggregate was an aggregate 
that had adhered on day 2 as well, it had start beating by day 4, but had stopped already 5 days 
later. Then 35 days went by, and after it had been mechanically passaged it suddenly started to 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
53 
beat again. Of Figure 44 it can be seen how the aggregate have become quit smaller, though 
thicker at day 44.  
 
 
Day 2 
Day 4 
 
 
Day 8 
Day 9 
 
 
Day 42 
Day 44 
Figure 44 - Ventricular aggregate not beating from day 9-42, starting to beat again on day 44 
 
From the two examples above is seems as all aggregates attached at day 2, however it was not 
the case. Aggregates was observed to attach already at day 1 whereas others first attached lat-
er and others never attached. For what goes for beating, contractions began from day 1 to as 
==PAGE:54==
 
54 
 
late as the 10th day after culturing. As it is too obvious from the above the aggregates were 
beating for longer and shorter periods, and aggregates adjacent to each other was seen to start 
beating in synchronous even though aggregates in close proximity did not beat in synchronous.  
 
 
5.4 hESC derived cardiomyocytes 
 Effectivity 
5.4.1
 
Beating clusters was observed in all 3 experiments 
however the success rate in terms of beating clus-
ters (Figure 45) varied a great deal. In the first ex-
periment only one beating cardiomyocyte cluster 
developed from 39 possible EBs, the second ex-
periment yield 45 of 91 possible EBs, whereas the 
last experiment, which was supplemented with 
ROCKi from the first feeder free culturing to EB 
formation, gave 18 of 124 possible. These are 
success rates of 2.6%, 49.5% and 12.5%. Howev-
er in some clusters multiple beating areas arose 
but these are only counted as single clusters. 
These clusters with multiple beating areas was 
observed in 9.6% of all the clusters, most commonly was one extra beating area observed, but 
up to four different beating areas was seen in one cluster.  
 
Cluster that arose from ROCKi supplemented cultures compared cultures not supplemented 
with ROCKi were similar, however cells grew a lot faster as seen from Figure 46 showing cul-
tures obtained from the same passage from feeder layers, four days after the third passage in 
feeder free conditions.   
 
 
Figure 46 - hESCs four days after passage, on the left is a culture supplemented with ROCKi on the right a culture 
without 
 
As mentioned most beating cluster arose from day 16 to 23 (Figure 47). From the first beating 
cluster was observed there seems to be a pattern of increasing number of beating clusters till 
the 7th day after the first beating cluster is observed, which was followed by a drop. This was 
true for both the ROCKi free and ROCKi supplemented differentiation. 
 
Figure 45 - Example of beating area in cardiomyocyte cluster 
Culture supplemented with ROCKi 
Culture without ROCKi 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
55 
 
Figure 47 - Beating clusters observed in differentiation experiment 2 and 3 
 
 Development  
5.4.2
The three differentiation experiments that were conducted in a regular fashion were all success-
ful in providing beating clusters. Beating within the clusters typically started between day 16 and 
23, however beating was detected as early as day 12 and as late as day 30. At day 0 5,000 
hESCs were forced to form EBs, by day 2 a small EB could be observed in each well. This EB 
grew in size during the next couple of days and by day 9 it had started to flatten out over the 
well. The EBs kept propagating over the well till about day 16, from whereon it practically re-
mained as on day 16 size wise (Figure 48).  
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
D12
D16
D19
D23
D26
D30
Number of beating clusters 
Days after differentiation start 
Differentiation experiment no. 2 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
D16
D19
D23
D26
Number of beating clusters 
Days after differentiation start 
Differentiation experiment no. 3 
(supplemented with ROCKi) 
Day 0 
Day 2 
Day 6 
Day 9 
Day 12 
 Day 16 
==PAGE:56==
 
56 
 
 Optimization of differentiation 
5.4.3
Two separate differentiation experiments was conducted with conditioned media, but either of 
them led to beating clusters, not even from those wells that were differentiated with normal dif-
ferentiation medias.  
5.4.3.1 hESC cardiomyocyte conditioned media 
Though no beating clusters were obtained from differentiation, differences during development 
of the cluster from the different types of media were observed. EBs cultured with hESC differen-
tiated cardiomyocyte conditioned media stayed more defined till day 9 whereas control EBs, the 
EBs differentiated with differentiation media had flattened more out. By day 16-19 conditioned 
media EBs appeared thicker than the control clusters (Figure 49). 
 
FBS media 
hESC derived CM con-
ditioned media 
FBS media 
hESC derived CM con-
ditioned media 
 
 
 
Day 2 
 
Day 6 
 
 
 
 
 
Day 9 
 
Day 12 
 
 
 
 
 
Day 16 
 
Day 19 
 
Figure 49 - Development of clusters differentiated in conditioned media 
 
Day 19 
Day 23 
Day 30 
Figure 48 - Development of EBs from day 0 to 23 picures from day 0 to 6 are magnified 20 times, the bar showing 200 µm 
and pictures from day 9 to 30 are magnified 10 times, the bar showing 400 µm 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
57 
5.4.3.2 Foetal cardiomyocyte conditioned media 
Differences were also observed from the foetal cardiomyocyte conditioned media. At day 6 
there was generally observed fewer cells surrounding the conditioned media EBs. These EBs 
too stayed more defined till day 9 and they too appeared thicker by day 16-19 than the control 
clusters (Figure 50). 
 
FBS media 
Heart conditioned me-
dia 
FBS media 
Heart conditioned me-
dia 
 
 
 
 
Day 2 
 
Day 6 
 
 
 
 
 
Day 9 
 
Day 12 
 
 
 
 
 
Day 16 
 
Day 19 
 
Figure 50 - Development of clusters differentiated in conditioned media 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
58 
 
6. Discussion 
6.1 Comparing hESC derived cardiomyocytes with foetal aggregates  
The higher expression of the three genes seen in beating areas of the hESC derived cluster 
than the non-beating areas are as expected, as they are beating, and the non-beating areas are 
not. As the levels of the genes increased from day 15 samples to day 30 samples it could indi-
cate maturation of the beating areas. In the non-beating areas CTNT and GATA4 decreased 
with age, this could indicate de-differentiation of these areas.  As CTNT is a gene there is typi-
cally used to determine the number of cardiomyocytes in a sample, the decreasing CTNT levels 
seen in the beating areas from day15 to day30 indicate fewer cardiomyocytes are present, but 
as ACTN2 are increasing it indicates more sarcomeres have been developed. GATA4 levels in-
creased with age indicating beating areas become more and more committed to the cardiac lin-
age.  
 
In the foetal samples CTNT was seen to be expressed higher in ventricular tissue than in atrial 
tissue, this was also consistent with our earlier findings (data not shown). The elevated levels in 
ventricle samples, indicate they contains more cardiomyocytes. Furthermore does CTNT also 
increase with the aging of the heart, too indicating more cardiomyocytes. As the levels of 
ACTN2 where kept quite consistent as the hearts aged this suggesting no new formation of sar-
comeres only refinement of the sarcomere content. GATA4 levels were too increasing with age 
with is consistent with the hearts maturing. 
 
 Comparison of the relative levels 
6.1.1
 
First of all to the validate these expression patterns more samples should be taken, to increase 
the sample size. However the higher expression seen in hESCs derived clusters compared to 
foetal samples are consistent with earlier findings by Asp et al.[71].  
 
The comparable levels of CTNT in both hESC derived beating areas and foetal samples, 
indicate both types are containing approximately the same number of cardiomyocytes. 
 
The higher levels of ACTN2 in hESC derived beating areas, compared to the foetal samples 
could suggest more sarcomere are present in the hESC derived samples. However the CTNT 
levels indicated that approximately the same number of cardiomyocytes was present in the two 
samples. The elevated ACTN2 levels could indicate more sarcomeres being present, but they 
are maybe not as organized in the hESC beating areas, as in the foetal samples.  
 
The higher levels of GATA4 in hESC derived samples, compared to foetal samples makes 
sense in that the hESC derived samples are “younger” than the foetal hearts, and as the cells 
have more recently committed to the cardiac lineage.   
 
At last it should be mentioned that hESC derived beting areas all had a BPM on less than 50, 
meaning they were exhibiting a ventricular-like-phenotype and it could for future studies be in-
teresting to compare the areas with a BPM on less and more than 50 and compare to aggre-
gates derived from atrial and ventricular tissues. 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
59 
6.2 Foetal hearts 
 
The huge decrease in CTNT expression found from uncultured samples to p0, could be ex-
plained by adult cultured tissue looses organized sarcomeres as they adhere to culture dishes  
and by that lose contraction abilities[54], this could be the case as well for the foetal samples. 
They probably do not lose all organized sarcomere but they may lose some and by that a de-
crease in CTNT is seen. 
 
 Differences between atrial and ventricular cultures 
6.2.1
6.2.1.1 Gene expressions and beating aggregates 
The CTNT gene expression were generally higher in ventricular samples compared to atrial 
samples, this could explain the difference in the higher number of beating aggregates that were 
obtained from ventricle tissue.  
 
Furthermore CTNT levels was seen to be higher in the youngest heart and lowest in the oldest 
heart, however as the size of the heart increases a great deal from week 7 to week 9, it is ex-
plained by the myocytes becoming less dense. 
 
6.2.1.2 Beating data 
As mentioned more beating aggregates were derived from ventricular tissue than atrial tissue. 
This might seem odd as the hearts pacemaker is found in the atrium, however the ventricle part 
of the heart is a couple of times bigger than the atrial part making it possible to derive a lot more 
aggregates from ventricular tissue than from atrial tissue. 
 
However the number of beating aggregates that arose from the hearts could also be explained 
by the tissue from H8 atriums were cultured in one dish whereas tissue from H9 atriums were 
cultured on 3 dishes, and this may be reflected in the number of beating aggregates. However it 
does not explain why so few aggregates were obtained from H8 ventricle tissue as it was plated 
on four dishes and so was H9 ventricle tissue. 
 
The number of beating aggregates already peaked at day 5 for H7; the younger heart whereas 
it kept increasing the first seven days of culturing for both the older hearts; H8 and H9. At day 7 
a natural drop of beating aggregates was seen in all three cultures, however soon after, beating 
aggregates was observed on non-beating culture plates of H8 and H9 and the number in-
creased until day 10 after culture start. This could indicate one of two things, or maybe due to 
both, either beating aggregates can start to arise more than a week after initiate culturing or 
more aggregates can start to beat when they get more space to grow on, which they will get as 
they are passaged. 
 
6.2.1.3 Immunohistochemistry 
The immunohistochemistry result reflected perfect coherence with CTNT level seen expressed 
in uncultured samples compared to cultured samples, as there in both were seen much higher 
expression in uncultured samples than in cultured samples. The CTNT staining in passage 4 
from atrial and ventricle beating aggregates did too reflect the CTNT expressions found by Q-
PCR, as the relative CTNT expression was 0.06 in the beating atrial aggregate and 0.03 in the 
beating ventricle aggregate. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:60==
 
60 
 
 
 
 Differences between passage methods 
6.2.2
6.2.2.1 Gene expression 
 
CTNT levels were generally higher in enzymatically passaged aggregates than in mechanically 
passaged aggregates, this is most likely due to enzymatically passaged aggregates containing 
more pure cardiomyocytes than mechanically passaged.  
 
The increase in CTNT beating aggregates of enzymatically passaged aggregates could be due 
to two to either of two reasons,1) either does the level of CTNT increase over time within the 
aggregates, maybe because of less contact inhibition between aggregates over time as some 
aggregates are lost. 2) or aggregates that keep beating for a long time have just contained 
higher levels of CTNT for the beginning. This last explanation could explain the jumping levels 
of CTNT seen over time. However it does not explain the massively higher levels detected in 
the uncultured samples, as they point toward level do decrease in the tissue, making the first 
explanation the most plausible.  
 
The more even expression levels of CTNT seen in enzymatically passaged aggregates could 
then be explained by, these aggregates being surrounded by more fibroblasts could inhibit the 
cardiomyocytes growth. 
 
6.2.2.2 Beating data 
 
From the beating data there was no clear pattern whether mechanical passage or enzymatic 
passage was the better passage method as the H8 atrial aggregates kept having more beating 
aggregates when passaged enzymatically, so did the H9 ventricular till the third passage, 
whereas the H7 ventricular and H9 atrial aggregates kept having more beating aggregates 
when passaged mechanically. What goes for the H8 ventricular aggregates mechanical and en-
zymatic passage gave approximately the same number of beating aggregates throughout the 
culturing. However for the two passage methods there is different pro and cons. The mechani-
cal passage method is definitely more gentle to the aggregates as cutting can be exercised at a 
small distance to the aggregate, and in that way you make sure not the harm any beating units. 
On the other hand when passaging enzymatically aggregates are lost when spun down in IMDM 
as they stick to the surface of the tubes. However the enzymatical passage can help get rid of 
unnecessary fibroblasts that might prevent the aggregates from beating, as it was seen with the 
single cultured aggregate that did not beat for 33 days, but after a passage lost some surround-
ing fibroblasts and started beating again. Another thing observed from the aggregates cultured 
separately was that a ventricular aggregate from H7 was  beating till day 44 through 5 passages 
meaning double the time other aggregates was  beating from H7. This could indicate aggre-
gates cultured alone have a better chance of keep beating. 
 
 Differences between beating and non-beating aggregates 
6.2.3
As adult cardiomyocytes do not contract in culture this might explain why non-beating samples 
expressed a higher level of CTNT than the beating samples, these non-beating samples could 
have been more mature than the beating samples.  
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
61 
 Morphology and other observations 
6.2.4
 
During the first 14 days of culturing the number of beating aggregates seems to increase and 
decrease in waves. These waves are almost consistent with the media being changed; this was 
also seen with the beating rate of the H9 aggregates that increased and decreased with the 
change of media. This could indicate the aggregates emit beating enhancing factors that affect 
the pace and the number of beating aggregates. However there is also the possibility that fresh 
media contains factors that inhibit beating. There is also a possibility that the beating aggre-
gates are all beating all the time but that they are just beating at such a slow rate just after me-
dia change, so they were not seen beating when beating was registered. This theory would also 
be backed up by the aggregates emitting beating enhancing factors. As the number of beating 
aggregates were seen to increase till day 10, it is possible that the number of beating aggre-
gates could have been even higher, as passage probably damage beating aggregates. 
 
However the increase in beating aggregates seen a few days after passage could also be due 
to the aggregates needing time to recover after passage as extracellular structures can be 
damaged during passage. This is also supported by the observations made of aggregates start-
ing to beat synchronously when lying adjacent to each other which must have been caused 
from aggregates forming channels between each other 
 
 
6.3 hESC derived cardiomyocytes 
 Efficiency 
6.3.1
As only three differentiations was conducted successfully it is hard to say something clear about 
success rates of the differentiation method, an even more as the success rates varied so much. 
However the most likely explanation for the big difference should probably be found in the stem 
cells themselves as and their ability to differentiate could have been compromised during pre 
culturing as they possibly could have started to differentiate. Of Figure 51 appearance of the 
hESCs used for the experiments can be seen. Of experiment 1 there is very few hESCs which 
can explain the success rate of only 2.6%. However from the highly successful experiment 2, 
the stem cells are of normal appearance, they lies quite close and large nuclei’s can be ob-
served and the high success rate can therefore be explained. Cells of experiment 3 are more 
confluent than cells of experiment 1 but not as confluent as those of experiment 2, they look 
more healthy than those of experiment 1 but less healthy of those of experiment 2 and the mid-
dle success rate can therefore too be explained. 
 
 
 
 
Experiment 1 
Experiment 2 
Experiment 3 
Figure 51 - Day 0 pictures of hESCs in 10 x enlargement 
==PAGE:62==
 
62 
 
 Beating rate 
6.3.2
From the differentiation experiments, beating rates of the clusters was registered and divided in-
to two groups, a group with less than 50 beats per minute (BPM) and more than 50 BPM. The 
number of BPMs was grouped in this way to detect their tissue-like type. Clusters beating less 
than 50 BPM are addressed ventricle-like clusters and more than 50 BPM are atrial-like clus-
ters. 65% of the clusters were ventricular-like and 35% atrial-like. Clusters detected from day 16 
to 23 exhibited a similar ratio between ventricular-like and atrial-like clusters emerging, however 
from day 23 toward day 30 the ratio between the two seemed to get more even (Figure 52). 
 
 
 
Figure 52 - Betaing rate in differentiated clusters 
 
 
An interesting observation made was that hESCs cultured with ROCKi before EB formation only 
exhibited beating in one area of the cluster(n=18), whereas multiple beating areas was seen in 
10 % of the cultures without ROCKi (n=46). Some of the clusters with multiple beating areas 
contained both slow beating areas and fast beating areas.  These slow and fast beating areas 
have been shown to be caused by  differences in action potential durations, the longer the dura-
tion is the slower the beating frequency is and vice versa. The longer the duration of the action 
potentials are, the more the beat frequency assimilate a ventricular phenotype and fast duration 
of the action potential assimilates an atrial like phenotype [69]From an organogenic point of 
view it does make sense that multiple types of cardiomyocytes can arise from one EB, as multi-
ple types of cardiomyocytes are formed in the heart during its development. As no clusters with 
multiple beating areas arise from clusters pre cultured with ROCKi, it indicates ROCKi do have 
an effect on cardiomyocyte generation when cells are pre cultured with ROCKi.  
 
 Development 
6.3.3
As seen from (Figure 20) hESC derived clusters did not increase in size from day 16 and for-
ward this makes perfectly sense with them being differentiated towards the cardiac lineage as it 
had been shown that foetal cardiomyocyte cultures do not proliferate in media containing 5 % 
FBS[54]. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
D12
D16
D19
D23
D26
D30
Beating rate of clusters  
Less than 50 bpm
More than 50 bpm
==PAGE:63==
 
 
 
63 
 Optimization of differentiations with conditioned medias 
6.3.4
The hESCs used for experiment 5 does not look as healthy as the once used from experiment 
2, however they either looks as bad as those used for experiment 1, meaning there should have 
been a possibility judging from morphology that cardiomyocytes could have been obtained from 
these Figure 53.  
Figure 53 - Day 0 pictures of hESCs used for experiment 5 in 10 x 
enlargement  
 
However it was noted during culturing that a change in proliferation rate had happen. Suddenly 
cells started to proliferate at a much higher rate which could suggest that something had hap-
pen to the hESCs as they suddenly had a higher proliferation rate, this could be due to differen-
tiation of the hESCs. If this was the case it could explain why no beating clusters were obtained 
from this experiment. 
 
The morphological differences seen in hESCs differentiated with condition media shows that 
there is a different differentiation potential when using the conditioned media  this could be due 
to other cytokine, growth factors and metabolites being present in the media that could have 
been emitted from hESC derived cardiomyocytes and foetal cardiomyocytes. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
64 
 
7. Conclusion 
Comparison between beating areas obtained from hESC derived cardiomyocyte clusters with 
foetal samples showed similarities between the two types of cardiomyocytes. Approximetly the 
same number of cardiomyocytes were seen in the two types. The hESC derived cardiomyocytes 
seemed to contain more unorganized sarcomeres than foetal cardiomyocytes. Expression in 
hESC derived cardiomyocytes were seen to be a lot higher than in foetal cardiomyocytes, how-
ever this is consistent with hESC derived cardiomyocytes being younger than foetal cardiomyo-
cytes. 
 
Uncultivated tissue exhibited a higher level of CTNT, determined by Q-PCR and immunohisto-
chemistry, than cultured aggregates, suggesting a partial loss in sarcomere due to this culturing. 
Furthermore did tissue of ventricle origin result in more beating aggregates as well as a higher 
CTNT level than tissue from atrial aggregates. Primary cultures of foetal cardiomyocytes were 
seen to be able to be cultured as aggregates for up 5 passages. by either enzymatic passage or 
mechanical passage. None of the passage methods was seen to be superior in terms of the 
number of beating aggregates obtained. However CTNT levels were generally higher in enzy-
matically passaged aggregates and aggregates passaged enzymatically also showed an in-
crease of CTNT during passage suggesting more cardiomyocytes being formed. Lastly it should 
be mentioned that non-beating aggregates exhibited a higher level of CTNT than beating ag-
gregates probably due to maturation of these. 
 
From the differentiation experiments it can be concluded that it was possible to differentiate to 
beating clusters in 50% of the possible EBs. When culturing stem cells with ROCKi prior to EB 
formation, it was seen that no multiple beating clusters was found, as it was in 10% of the stem 
cells derived clusters not pre cultured with ROCKi. Even though no beating clusters was seen 
from differentiation experiments with conditioned media, there was seen clear morphological dif-
ferences between clusters differentiated with regular differentiation mediums and mediums sup-
plemented with conditioned media.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
65 
8. Future work 
 
1) More samples, of hESC derived cardiomyocytes and foetal heart be collected to con-
firm results that have been found here 
2) hESC derived cardiomyocytes should be divided into two groups based on beating rate, 
so they could be divided into an atrial-like-phenotype and a ventricle-like-phenotype 
that could be compared with atriums and ventricles of foetal origin 
3) Aggregates from foetal cultures should be cultured for more than a week, and under 
less dense conditions 
4) Immunohistochemical analysis should be made of hESC derived beating samples, in re-
gards to CTNT expression but also other structural genes like ACTN2 that could visual-
ize the sarcomere construction 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
66 
 
Acknowledgements 
First of all I would like to thank Uffe Hasbro Mortensen, professor at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark for putting me in contact with Claus Yding Andersen 
and making it possible to work within stem cell biology during my thesis. I would 
like to thank Claus Yding Andersen, professor at the Laboratory of Reproductive 
Biology at The Juliane Marie Centre, at Rigshospitalet for letting doing my thesis at 
his laboratory. At the Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, I would like to give a 
special thanks to Maj Linnea Vestergaard, PhD student for daily supervision. 
Here I would also like to thank Marjo Westerdahl, bio analyst for help to various 
tasks in the laboratory. At last I will thank Jane Alrø Bøtkjær, master student for 
help with immunohistochemistry. 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
67 
References 
[1] 
H. et. al Lodish, Molecular cell biology. 2013, pp. 677–979. 
[2] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_embryogenesis. 
[3] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://stemcells.nih.gov/info/scireport/pages/appendixC.aspx. 
[4] 
J. C. Mountford, “Human embryonic stem cells: Origins, characteristics and potential for 
regenerative therapy,” Transfusion Medicine, vol. 18. pp. 1–12, 2008. 
[5] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://stemcells.nih.gov/info/basics/pages/basics3.aspx. 
[6] 
K. O’Donoghue and N. M. Fisk, “Fetal stem cells.,” Best Pract. Res. Clin. Obstet. 
Gynaecol., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 853–75, Dec. 2004. 
[7] 
P. van Vliet, A. M. Smits, T. P. de Boer, T. H. Korfage, C. H. G. Metz, M. Roccio, M. A. 
G. van der Heyden, T. A. B. van Veen, J. P. G. Sluijter, P. A. Doevendans, and M.-J. 
Goumans, “Foetal and adult cardiomyocyte progenitor cells have different developmental 
potential.,” J. Cell. Mol. Med., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 861–70, Apr. 2010. 
[8] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://stemcells.nih.gov/info/basics/pages/basics4.aspx. 
[9] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.closerlookatstemcells.org/Stem_Cell_Types.html. 
[10] 
R. L. Davis, H. Weintraub, and A. B. Lassar, “Expression of a single transfected cDNA 
converts fibroblasts to myoblasts.,” Cell, vol. 51, pp. 987–1000, 1987. 
[11] 
Q. Zhou, J. Brown, A. Kanarek, J. Rajagopal, and D. a Melton, “In vivo reprogramming of 
adult pancreatic exocrine cells to beta-cells.,” Nature, vol. 455, no. 7213, pp. 627–32, 
Oct. 2008. 
[12] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://stemcells.nih.gov/info/basics/pages/basics6.aspx. 
[13] 
K. Takahashi and S. Yamanaka, “Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse 
embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors.,” Cell, vol. 126, no. 4, pp. 
663–76, Aug. 2006. 
[14] 
K. Takahashi, K. Tanabe, M. Ohnuki, M. Narita, T. Ichisaka, K. Tomoda, and S. 
Yamanaka, “Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined 
factors.,” Cell, vol. 131, no. 5, pp. 861–72, Nov. 2007. 
[15] 
J. Yu, M. A. Vodyanik, K. Smuga-Otto, J. Antosiewicz-Bourget, J. L. Frane, S. Tian, J. 
Nie, G. A. Jonsdottir, V. Ruotti, R. Stewart, I. I. Slukvin, and J. A. Thomson, “Induced 
pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells.,” Science, vol. 318, no. 
5858, pp. 1917–20, Dec. 2007. 
[16] 
J. M. Polo, S. Liu, M. E. Figueroa, W. Kulalert, S. Eminli, K. Y. Tan, E. Apostolou, M. 
Stadtfeld, Y. Li, T. Shioda, S. Natesan, A. J. Wagers, A. Melnick, T. Evans, and K. 
Hochedlinger, “Cell type of origin influences the molecular and functional properties of 
mouse induced pluripotent stem cells.,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 28, pp. 848–855, 2010. 
[17] 
R. O’Doherty, U. Greiser, and W. Wang, “Nonviral methods for inducing pluripotency to 
cells,” BioMed Research International, vol. 2013. 2013. 
[18] 
J. T. Dimos, K. T. Rodolfa, K. K. Niakan, L. M. Weisenthal, H. Mitsumoto, W. Chung, G. 
F. Croft, G. Saphier, R. Leibel, R. Goland, H. Wichterle, C. E. Henderson, and K. Eggan, 
“Induced pluripotent stem cells generated from patients with ALS can be differentiated 
into motor neurons.,” Science, vol. 321, no. 5893, pp. 1218–21, Aug. 2008. 
[19] 
S. American, “diseases in a dish,” no. March, pp. 40–45, 2011. 
[20] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5470430. 
==PAGE:68==
 
68 
 
[21] 
T.-Y. Lu and L. Yang, “Uses of cardiomyocytes generated from induced pluripotent stem 
cells.,” Stem Cell Res. Ther., vol. 2, no. 6, p. 44, Jan. 2011. 
[22] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.urmc.rochester.edu/Encyclopedia/GetImage.aspx?ImageID=125864. 
[23] 
Human fysiologi – en grundbog. . 
[24] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://www.bartleby.com/107/138.html. 
[25] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://www.healthline.com/human-body-maps/coronary-
sinus. 
[26] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://spaces.imperial.edu/thomas.morrell/cha_10_tortora_muscle_tissue.htm. 
[27] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actin. 
[28] 
Human fysiologi – en grundbog p. 88-89. . 
[29] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XoP1diaXVCI. 
[30] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://www-
rohan.sdsu.edu/course/ens304/public_html/section1/Muscle.htm. 
[31] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.lookfordiagnosis.com/mesh_info.php?term=Tropomyosin&lang=1. 
[32] 
Human fysiologi – en grundbog p. 141-142. . 
[33] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://o.quizlet.com/i/A-QGI3GdWDAXWJEBFnNiZw.jpg. 
[34] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: Http://droualb.faculty.mjc.edu/Course Materials/Physiology 
101/Chapter Notes/Fall 2011/chapter_13 Fall 2011.htm. 
[35] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heart_development#mediaviewer/File:2037_Embryonic_Dev
elopment_of_Heart.jpg. 
[36] 
Larsens human embryology. . 
[37] 
A. Moorman, S. Webb, N. A. Brown, W. Lamers, and R. H. Anderson, “DEVELOPMENT 
OF THE HEART : ( 1 ) FORMATION OF THE CARDIAC CHAMBERS AND ARTERIAL 
TRUNKS,” 2003. 
[38] 
R. H. Anderson, S. Webb, N. A. Brown, W. Lamers, and A. Moorman, “DEVELOPMENT 
OF THE HEART : ( 2 ) SEPTATION OF THE ATRIUMS AND VENTRICLES *,” no. 2, 
2003. 
[39] 
H. Wei, O. Juhasz, J. Li, Y. S. Tarasova, and K. R. Boheler, “Embryonic stem cells and 
cardiomyocyte differentiation: phenotypic and molecular analyses.,” J. Cell. Mol. Med., 
vol. 9, pp. 804–17, 2005. 
[40] 
C. L. Mummery, J. Zhang, E. S. Ng, D. A. Elliott, A. G. Elefanty, and T. J. Kamp, 
“Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells to 
cardiomyocytes: A methods overview,” Circulation Research, vol. 111. pp. 344–358, 
2012. 
[41] 
S. R. Braam, R. Nauw, D. Ward-Van Oostwaard, C. Mummery, and R. Passier, 
“Inhibition of rock improves survival of human embryonic stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes after dissociation,” in Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 
2010, vol. 1188, pp. 52–57. 
[42] 
E. D. Cohen, Y. Tian, and E. E. Morrisey, “Wnt signaling: an essential regulator of 
cardiovascular differentiation, morphogenesis and progenitor self-renewal.,” 
Development, vol. 135, pp. 789–798, 2008. 
[43] 
J. A. Pawitan, “Prospect of Stem Cell Conditioned Medium in,” vol. 2014, pp. 7–9, 2014. 
[44] 
L. Timmers, S. K. Lim, I. E. Hoefer, F. Arslan, R. C. Lai, A. a M. van Oorschot, M. J. 
Goumans, C. Strijder, S. K. Sze, A. Choo, J. J. Piek, P. a Doevendans, G. Pasterkamp, 
and D. P. V de Kleijn, “Human mesenchymal stem cell-conditioned medium improves 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
69 
cardiac function following myocardial infarction.,” Stem Cell Res., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 206–
14, May 2011. 
[45] 
B. Chanyshev, a Shainberg, a Isak, Y. Chepurko, E. Porat, and E. Hochhauser, 
“Conditioned medium from hypoxic cells protects cardiomyocytes against ischemia.,” 
Mol. Cell. Biochem., vol. 363, no. 1–2, pp. 167–78, Apr. 2012. 
[46] 
X. Zhang, M.-R. Shen, Z.-D. Xu, Z. Hu, C. Chen, Y.-L. Chi, Z.-D. Kong, Z.-F. Li, X.-T. Li, 
S.-L. Guo, S.-H. Xiong, and C.-S. Zhang, “Cardiomyocyte differentiation induced in 
cardiac progenitor cells by cardiac fibroblast-conditioned medium.,” Exp. Biol. Med. 
(Maywood)., vol. 239, no. 5, pp. 628–37, May 2014. 
[47] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/1482. 
[48] 
M. Perán, E. López-Ruiz, L. González-Herrera, M. Bustamante, A. Valenzuela, and J. A. 
Marchal, “Cellular extracts from post-mortem human cardiac tissue direct 
cardiomyogenic differentiation of human adipose tissue-derived stem cells.,” 
Cytotherapy, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 1541–8, Dec. 2013. 
[49] 
A. V Schittini, P. F. Celedon, M. a Stimamiglio, M. Krieger, P. Hansen, F. D. A. da Costa, 
S. Goldenberg, B. Dallagiovanna, and A. Correa, “Human cardiac explant-conditioned 
medium: soluble factors and cardiomyogenic effect on mesenchymal stem cells.,” Exp. 
Biol. Med. (Maywood)., vol. 235, no. 8, pp. 1015–24, Aug. 2010. 
[50] 
S. Parameswaran, S. Kumar, R. S. Verma, and R. K. Sharma, “Cardiomyocyte culture — 
an update on the in vitro cardiovascular model and future challenges,” vol. 998, no. April, 
pp. 985–998, 2013. 
[51] 
P. Sreejit, S. Kumar, and R. S. Verma, “An improved protocol for primary culture of 
cardiomyocyte from neonatal mice,” Vitr. Cell. Dev. Biol. - Anim., vol. 44, pp. 45–50, 
2008. 
[52] 
H. M. Piper, S. L. Jacobson, and P. Schwartz, “Determinants of cardiomyocyte 
development in long-term primary culture.,” J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol., vol. 20, pp. 825–835, 
1988. 
[53] 
J. S. Mitcheson, J. C. Hancox, and A. J. Levi, “Cultured adult cardiac myocytes : Future 
applications , culture methods , morphological and electrophysiological properties,” vol. 
39, pp. 280–300, 1998. 
[54] 
M. R. Koller, Human cell culture vol 5. Kluwer academic publishers. 
[55] 
R. Li, D. A. G. Mickle, R. D. Weisel, S. Carson, S. A. Omar, L. C. Tumiati, G. J. Wilson, 
and W. G. Williams, “Gwdiovawular Human pediatric and adult ventricular 
cardiomyocytes in culture : assessment of phenotypic changes with passaging,” vol. 32, 
pp. 362–373, 1996. 
[56] 
I. S. Polinger, “SEPARATION IN EMBRYONIC OF CELL TYPES CELL CULTURES 
Embryonic heart cells in culture generally resemble either muscle cells or fibroblasts [ 3 
8 , lo ]. In 24 h cultures made from embryonic chick hearts 4-18 days of age , muscle-like 
cells ( M cells ) com,” vol. 63, pp. 78–82, 1970. 
[57] 
M.-J. Goumans, T. P. de Boer, A. M. Smits, L. W. van Laake, P. van Vliet, C. H. G. Metz, 
T. H. Korfage, K. P. Kats, R. Hochstenbach, G. Pasterkamp, M. C. Verhaar, M. a G. van 
der Heyden, D. de Kleijn, C. L. Mummery, T. a B. van Veen, J. P. G. Sluijter, and P. a 
Doevendans, “TGF-beta1 induces efficient differentiation of human cardiomyocyte 
progenitor cells into functional cardiomyocytes in vitro.,” Stem Cell Res., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 
138–49, Nov. 2007. 
[58] 
A. M. Smits, P. van Vliet, C. H. Metz, T. Korfage, J. P. Sluijter, P. a Doevendans, and M.-
J. Goumans, “Human cardiomyocyte progenitor cells differentiate into functional mature 
cardiomyocytes: an in vitro model for studying human cardiac physiology and 
pathophysiology.,” Nat. Protoc., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 232–43, Jan. 2009. 
==PAGE:70==
 
70 
 
[59] 
P. van Vliet, M.-J. Goumans, P. a Doevendans, and J. P. G. Sluijter, “Human 
cardiomyocyte progenitor cells: a short history of nearly everything.,” J. Cell. Mol. Med., 
vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1669–73, Aug. 2012. 
[60] 
J. O. B. D. Elcarpio, A. N. B. Ahinski, and N. I. J. I. Zzo, “HL-1 cells : A cardiac muscle 
cell line that contracts and retains phenotypic characteristics of the adult cardiomyocyte,” 
vol. 95, no. March, pp. 2979–2984, 1998. 
[61] 
Z. H. Maayah, O. H. Elshenawy, H. N. Althurwi, G. Abdelhamid, and A. O. S. El-Kadi, 
“Human fetal ventricular cardiomyocyte, RL-14 cell line, is a promising model to study 
drug metabolizing enzymes and their associated arachidonic acid metabolites.,” J. 
Pharmacol. Toxicol. Methods, vol. 71C, pp. 33–41, Nov. 2014. 
[62] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://www.abmgood.com/Immortalized-Cardiomyocytes-
SV40-T0445.html. 
[63] 
N. A. L. Jr, C. C. Glembotski, M. E. Steinhelper, L. J. Field, and W. C. Claycomb, “Gene 
Expression and Atrial Natriuretic Factor Processing and Secretion in Cultured AT-1 
Cardiac Myocytes,” pp. 1835–1841, 1835. 
[64] 
P. Cells, “( 12 ) United States Patent,” vol. 1, no. 12, 2007. 
[65] 
M. M. Davidson, C. Nesti, L. Palenzuela, W. F. Walker, E. Hernandez, L. Protas, M. 
Hirano, and N. D. Isaac, “Novel cell lines derived from adult human ventricular 
cardiomyocytes,” J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol., vol. 39, pp. 133–147, 2005. 
[66] 
“No Title.” [Online]. Available: http://www.abmgood.com/Immortalized-Cardiomyocytes-
SV40-T0445.html#documents. 
[67] 
J. Synnergren, K. Akesson, K. Dahlenborg, H. Vidarsson, C. Améen, D. Steel, A. 
Lindahl, B. Olsson, and P. Sartipy, “Molecular signature of cardiomyocyte clusters 
derived from human embryonic stem cells.,” Stem Cells, vol. 26, pp. 1831–40, 2008. 
[68] 
J. Synnergren, C. Améen, A. Jansson, and P. Sartipy, “Global transcriptional profiling 
reveals similarities and differences between human stem cell-derived cardiomyocyte 
clusters and heart tissue.,” Physiol. Genomics, vol. 44, pp. 245–58, 2012. 
[69] 
J. Asp, D. Steel, M. Jonsson, C. Améen, K. Dahlenborg, A. Jeppsson, A. Lindahl, and P. 
Sartipy, “Cardiomyocyte clusters derived from human embryonic stem cells share 
similarities with human heart tissue,” J. Mol. Cell Biol., vol. 2, pp. 276–283, 2010. 
[70] 
D. Puppala, L. P. Collis, S. Z. Sun, V. Bonato, X. Chen, B. Anson, M. Pletcher, B. 
Fermini, and S. J. Engle, “Comparative gene expression profiling in human-induced 
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiocytes and human and cynomolgus heart tissue,” 
Toxicol. Sci., vol. 131, pp. 292–301, 2013.  
[71]  
M. D. Bootman, D. R. Higaz, S. Coombes and H. L. Roderick, “Calcium signaling during 
excitation-contraction coupling in mammalian atrial myocytes”, Journal of cell science, 
vol 119, pp. 3915-3925, 2006 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
71 
Figure 1 - The developing embryo[1]................................................................................................. 5 
Figure 2 – Extraction and culturing of ESC from a fertilized agg[3] ..................................................... 6 
Figure 3 - Blood flow in the human heart[22] ................................................................................... 11 
Figure 4 - Schematic drawing of muscle fibre[26] ............................................................................. 12 
Figure 5 - Arrangement of filaments within sarcomeres[27] ............................................................... 12 
Figure 6 - Actin filament structure[30] ............................................................................................. 13 
Figure 7 - Binding of myosin head to troponin complex[31] .............................................................. 13 
Figure 8 -Contraction and relaxation of the sarcomeres due to calcium stimulation[33] ........................ 14 
Figure 10 - Formation and propagation of action potentials[34] ......................................................... 14 
Figure 11 - The cardiac cycle[34] .................................................................................................... 15 
Figure 12 - Development of the human heart[35] .............................................................................. 16 
Figure 13 - Fusion of the cardiac crescent[36] .................................................................................. 16 
Figure 14 - Primitive circulatory system formed by day 22[36] .......................................................... 17 
Figure 15 - Realignment of the heart[36] .......................................................................................... 18 
Figure 16 - Interatrial septum made by fusion of the septum primum and secundum[36] ...................... 19 
Figure 17 - Initial formation of the interventricular canal[36] ............................................................. 20 
Figure 18 - Differentiation from EB to embryonic cardiomyocyte[40] ................................................ 24 
Figure 19 - mRNA expressions from different types of cardiomyocytes[69] ........................................ 30 
Figure 20 - Every second beating aggregate was transferred to a plate meant for mechanical passage and 
every other second beating aggregate was transferred to a plate meant for enzymatical passage ............ 35 
Figure 21 - Overview cardiomyocytes differentiation ........................................................................ 38 
Figure 22 - 96-well plate during differentiation with three different medias ........................................ 38 
Figure 23 - Relative levels of CTNT, ACTN2 and GATA4 expressions in hESC derived cardiomyocytes 
clusters. “+” indicate beating areas and “–“ indicate non-beating areas. Day 15+, Day 15-, Day 30-, n=3, 
Day30+, n=2, bars are indicating SEM ............................................................................................ 39 
Figure 24 - Relative gene expression levels in uncultured foetal samples. Week 7, n=1, Week 9, n=2. Bars 
are indicating SEM ........................................................................................................................ 40 
Figure 25 - CTNT expression from hESC derived cardiomyocyte clusters and foetal aggregates. .......... 41 
Figure 26 - ACTN2 expression from hESC derived cardiomyocyte clusters and foetal aggregates ........ 41 
Figure 27 - GATA4 expression from hESC derived cardiomyocyte clusters and foetal aggregates ........ 42 
Figure 28 - CTNT levels in uncultured samples. For all samples n=1 ................................................. 43 
Figure 29 - CTNT expression from mechanically passaged atrial aggregates, from passage 0-2 on beating 
and non-beating aggregates. “M” are denoting mechanical passaged aggregates and “E“ are denoting 
enzymatically passaged aggregates. Missing bars is due to missing samples. For all samples n=1 ......... 44 
Figure 32 – Immunostaining of CTNT in H9 atrial uncultured tissue .................................................. 44 
Figure 33 – immunostaining of CTNT in H9 atrial passaged 4 beating aggregate ................................ 45 
Figure 34 – Immunostaining of CTNT in H9 ventricle passaged 4 beating aggregate ........................... 45 
Figure 36 - Beating aggregates observed from H7 ventricles .............................................................. 46 
Figure 37 - Beating aggregates observed from H8 ............................................................................. 46 
Figure 38 - Beating aggregates observed from H9 ............................................................................. 47 
Figure 39 - Gene expressions of mechanically versus enzymatically passaged aggrgates. “M” are denoting 
mechanically passaged aggregates and “E” are denoting enzymatically passaged aggregates. For all 
samples n=1 .................................................................................................................................. 48 
Figure 40 - Number of beating aggregates of mechanically passaged plates versus enzymatically passaged 
plates ............................................................................................................................................ 49 
Figure 41 - H8 atrial aggregates - mechanical versus enzymatic passage ............................................. 49 
Figure 42 - H8 ventricular aggregates - mechanical versus enzymatic passage .................................... 49 
Figure 43 - H9 atrial aggregates - mechanical versus enzymatic passage ............................................. 50 
Figure 44 - H9 ventricular aggregates - mechanical versus enzymatic passage .................................... 50 
==PAGE:72==
 
72 
 
Figure 31 – CTNT expressions in beating aggregates compared to non-beating aggregates during 
passages. n=1 for all samples .......................................................................................................... 51 
Figure 45 - BPMs of H9 2 atrial and 2 ventricular aggregates, media change is marked by a red circle .. 51 
Figure 46 - Ventricular aggregate beating from day 2-44, morphological change .......................... 52 
Figure 47 - Ventricular aggregate not beating from day 9-42, starting to beat again on day 44 .............. 53 
Figure 48 - Example of beating area in cardiomyocyte cluster ............................................................ 54 
Figure 49 - hESCs four days after passage, on the left is a culture supplemented with ROCKi on the right 
a culture without ............................................................................................................................ 54 
Figure 50 - Beating clusters observed in differentiation experiment 2 and 3 ........................................ 55 
Figure 51 - Development of EBs from day 0 to 23 picures from day 0 to 6 are magnified 20 times, the bar 
showing 200 µm and pictures from day 9 to 30 are magnified 10 times, the bar showing 400 µm ......... 56 
Figure 52 - Development of clusters differentiated in conditioned media............................................. 56 
Figure 53 - Development of clusters differentiated in conditioned media............................................. 57 
Figure 54 - Day 0 pictures of hESCs in 10 x enlargement .................................................................. 61 
Figure 55 - Betaing rate in differentiated clusters .............................................................................. 62 
Figure 56 - Day 0 pictures of hESCs used for experiment 5 in 10 x enlargement .................................. 63 
Figure 35 .................................................................................. Fejl! Bogmærke er ikke defineret. 
 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
73 
 
[Overskrift]  
[Text]  
 
 
 
==PAGE:74==
 
74 
 
 
