==PAGE:1==
.BTUFShT5IFTJT
#Z$BNJMMB#JUTDI-BSTFO
+VMZ

2VBOUJmDBUJPOPGNBKPSBMMFSHFOT
CZJNNVOPBGmOJUZDISPNBUPHSBQIZ
By Camilla Bitsch Larsen 
July 2015 
Master’s Thesis 
!
Quantification of major allergens 
by immunoaffinity chromatography 
hhh!
==PAGE:2==
Camilla Bitsch Larsen
Quantiﬁcation of major allergens
by immunoaﬃnity
chromatography
Master’s Thesis
July 2015
Supervisors:
Senior Chemist Thomas Mygind, ALK A/S Early Stage Process Development
Professor Peter M. H. Heegaard, DTU Veterinary Institute
==PAGE:3==
Quantiﬁcation of major allergens by immunoaﬃnity chromatography
This thesis was prepared by
Camilla Bitsch Larsen
Thesis supervisors
Senior Chemist Thomas Mygind, ALK A/S Early Stage Process Development
Professor Peter M. H. Heegaard, DTU Veterinary Institute
Early Stage Process Development
ALK-Abelló A/S
Bøge Allé 3
2970 Hørsholm
Denmark
Web:
www.alk.net
Phone:
(+45) 45 74 75 76
Project period:
5th January 2015 - 15th July 2015
ECTS:
32.5
Education:
Master of Science
Field:
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for achieving
the degree Master of Science at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
i
Preface and acknowledgements
This report bas been submitted as the completion of the Master of Science in Pharmaceu-
tical Design and Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project
was carried out in collaboration with the Department of Early Stage Process Development
at ALK A/S. Supervision was provided by Senior Chemist Thomas Mygind from ALK
and Associate Professor Peter M. H. Heegaard from the Veterinary Institute at DTU. The
work was carried out from January through July 2015, and accounts for 32.5 ECTS.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor Thomas Mygind for his
academic guidance and constructive feedback, but most of all for his dedication to this
project. We have had many rewarding discussions, from which I have learned a great deal.
Huge thanks to the technicians Nina Ravn Borch, Dorthe Helene Kierkegaard, Birgitte
Bjerre Thellefsen, and Morten Vinding for the laboratory training, their helping hands,
and good company in the laboratory.
Also special thanks to Per Horn for oﬀering me a project that combines my academic
interests, and for his interest in the project.
Peter M. H. Heegaard, thanks for providing administrative support as well as professional
guidance.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the monthly grant I have received from ALK.
Hørsholm, July 2015
Camilla Bitsch Larsen,
s093321
==PAGE:5==
ii
Abstract
More than 20% of the world’s population are aﬀected by IgE-mediated allergic diseases,
such as allergic rhinitis, conjunctivitis, and asthma [WHO, 2002]. ALK is the leading
company within the development and production of allergen extracts used for allergen
speciﬁc immunotherapy (ASIT). Instead of targeting the symptoms, ASIT targets the
underlying cause of the disease, and induces long-term immunological tolerance.
The allergen extracts are derived from natural source materials such as grass pollen. Be-
cause of large natural biological variation in the extracts, extensive quality control and
standardization of the extracts are required to obtain a safe and eﬃcacious ﬁnal product.
In relation to this, the content of major allergens as well as the overall potency of the
extracts, are important quality attributes in ALK.
The current method of quantiﬁcation, which is used during development and in quality
control, is laborious and time consuming, and therefore ALK would beneﬁt greatly from
the development of an alternative method, which decreases analysis time and improves
eﬃciency, without compromising the quality of the products.
In this report, the development of an immunoaﬃnity chromatography (IAC) method
for the quantiﬁcation of major allergens, is presented. Proof of concept was successfully
demonstrated that polyclonal antibodies raised against a speciﬁc allergen, Phleum pratense
6, could be immobilized on CNBr-activated Sepharose beads. Chromatographic conditions
were established, which allowed quantiﬁcation of a speciﬁc allergen by measuring the UV
absorption of the eluate in relation to a relevant in-house reference (IHR).
IAC constitutes a method, which, compared to the currently used analysis, substantially
reduces the analysis time, minimizes the manual work required to perform the method,
as well as introduces greater ﬂexibility in the laboratory. Furthermore, the precision and
accuracy appear similar to the currently used method.
However, before implementing
IAC as a routine analysis, further development is required. This implies an even greater
reduction in analysis time as well as more proof of concept studies targeting major allergens
derived from other species.
==PAGE:6==
iii
Resumé
Over 20% af verdens befolkning er påvirket af IgE-medierede allergiske sygdomme, som
for eksempel allergiudløst høfeber og astma [WHO, 2002]. Den farmaceutiske virksomhed
ALK er verdens førende indenfor udvikling og produktion af allergenekstrakter, som bruges
til allergenspeciﬁk immunterapi (ASIT). ASIT er ikke symptombehandling. Derimod be-
handles den underliggende grund til allergi, og ASIT forårsager samtidig langvarig immu-
nologisk tolerance.
Allergenekstrakter stammer fra naturlige råvarer som for eksempel græspollen. På grund
af den store naturlige biologiske variation i ekstrakterne er omfattende kvalitetskontrol
og standardisering påkrævet for at opnå et sikkert og eﬀektivt slutprodukt. I den sam-
menhæng er indholdet af såkaldte ’major’ allergener samt styrken af ekstrakterne vigtige
kvalitetsparametre.
Når ALK udvikler og kvalitetskontrollerer ekstrakterne, anvendes i dag radial immunod-
iﬀusion (RID). Metoden er både arbejdstung og tidskrævende. Udvikling af en alternativ
analytisk metode, som kunne reducere analysetiden samt mængden af manuelt arbejde,
ville således være en betydelig forbedring af den nuværende analysemetode. Dette skal
selvfølgelig ske uden at gå på kompromis med kvaliteten af produkterne.
Denne rapport præsenterer udviklingen af en ny metode til kvantiﬁcering af major
allergener, som er baseret på antistof-aﬃnitetskromatograﬁ(IAC). Det fremgår bl.a. af
rapporten, hvordan det i proof of concept-studier var muligt at koble monospeciﬁkke
polyklonale antistoﬀer (mod Phleum pratense 6) til CNBr-aktiveret Sepharose uden at
miste antigen-bindingsaktiviteten. De kromatograﬁske betingelser blev bestemt, således
at det var muligt at kvantiﬁcere et speciﬁkt allergen ved at måle UV-absorptionen af
eluatet i forhold til en in-house reference (IHR).
IAC har vist sig at være en metode, som sammenlignet med RID betydeligt reducerer
analysetiden, minimerer det påkrævede manuelle arbejde, samt giver større ﬂeksibilitet
i laboratoriet. Derudover viser de indledende forsøg, at præcisionen og akkuratheden af
IAC er sammenlignelig med RID. Der er dog brug for yderligere udvikling af IAC-metoden,
inden den kan valideres og implementeres som en rutineanalyse i ALK. Dette involverer
bl.a. en endnu større reduktion i analysetiden, samt nye proof of concept-studier, hvor
major allergener fra andre specier analyseres.
==PAGE:7==
List of abbreviations
ASIT
Allergen speciﬁc immunotherapy
CNBr
Cyanogen bromide
CRM
Certiﬁed reference material
CV
Coeﬃcient of variation
DM
Dry matter
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Gly
Glycine
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography
IAC
Immunoaﬃnity chromatography
IgE
Immunoglobulin E
IHR
In-house reference
LC
Liquid chromatography
LoD
Limit of detection
LoQ
Limit of quantiﬁcation
OD
Optical density
PBS
Phosphate buﬀered saline
Phl p
Phleum pratense
RID
Radial immunodiﬀusion
SCIT
Subcutaneous immunotherapy
SDS-PAGE
Sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SLIT
Sublingual immunotherapy
UV
Ultraviolet
UV-VIS
Ultraviolet-visible
WHO
World health organization
iv
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Immunotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Allergen extracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Standardization of allergen extracts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Standards and references
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Strategy for standardization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Quantiﬁcation of proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Radial immunodiﬀusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Immunoaﬃnity chromatography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Antibodies as aﬃnity ligands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Solid supports
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Immobilization chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Loading and elution conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Validation parameters of analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Speciﬁcity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.2
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
Linearity and range
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.4
Precision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.5
Limit of detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.6
Limits of quantiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Purpose of project
17
3.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Experimental strategy
19
4.1
Preloading of aﬃnity column
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Excess of antibodies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Binding and elution conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Comparison study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Method development
21
5.1
Reagents and materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
v
==PAGE:9==
vi
Contents
5.2
Immobilization of antibodies (A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Binding conditions (B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Elution conditions: Initial screening (C) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5
Elution optimization (D) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5.1
Elution buﬀer: 6 M urea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.5.2
Elution buﬀer: 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Test for non-speciﬁc binding (E)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Test for antibody leakage (F) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.6
Wash optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.6.1
Wash conditions: Low pH and salt step-gradient (G) . . . . . . . . .
30
5.6.2
Wash conditions: Neutral pH and NaCl-gradient (H) . . . . . . . . .
31
5.7
Final analytical method (I)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Pre-validation of IAC
35
6.1
Linearity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Repeatability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
IAC versus RID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3.1
IAC quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3.2
RID quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Discussion
41
8
Conclusion
47
9
Future perspectives
49
References
51
A Coupling protocol
55
A.1 Solutions and buﬀers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Coupling procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
B SDS-PAGE protocol
59
C RID protocol
61
==PAGE:10==
1
|
Introduction
Allergy is one of the most common chronic diseases in the Western world. As much as
20% of the world population suﬀers from allergic diseases [WHO, 2002]. Allergy is caused
by a hypersensitive immune reaction in which individuals have become sensitized toward
a normally innocuous substance, called an allergen. For some individuals symptom reliev-
ing medications, such as anti-histamines, is suﬃcient to deal with the allergy symptoms,
whereas many patients can beneﬁt greatly from immunotherapy. Immunotherapy is the
repeated administration of the speciﬁc allergen that is responsible for the symptoms, ei-
ther by subcutaneous injections or by sublingual drops or tablets. Immunotherapy modiﬁes
the course of the disease, and induces long-term immunological tolerance through complex
mechanisms that are not completely understood [Frew, 2010].
ALK is the leading pharmaceutical company in the development and manufacturing of
immunotherapy. As a pharmaceutical company, ALK is committed to comply with the
laws, regulations, and guidelines issued by the various authorities in order to obtain and
maintain marketing authorization.
Moreover, these regulations are designed to ensure
the product quality and consistency as well as patient safety. The issuance of Guideline
on Allergen Products: Production and Quality Issues in 2009 [EMA, 2009] increased the
standard with regard to standardization, characterization, and control of allergen extracts,
and for the ﬁrst time, the quantiﬁcation of individual allergens (major allergens) was in-
cluded in a guideline. The basis for immunotherapy is allergen extracts, which are derived
from natural sources, and constitute a complex mixtures containing varying amounts of
allergenic and non-allergenic components. However, most patients respond to a relatively
limited number of allergens, designated major allergens. ALK was one of the pioneers in
introducing standardization, in which determination of major allergen content constitutes
an essential part. The current method used to quantify major allergens in ALK is ra-
dial immunodiﬀusion (RID), and it has been used for several years (validated for the ﬁrst
time in 1995). Besides being used for standardization, RID also play an important role
in the characterization and control of the allergen extracts, both during development and
production of marketed products.
RID is an immunochemical method developed in 1965 [Mancini et al., 1965]. The basic
principle is that an unknown amount of allergen is applied to a circular well in a manu-
ally prepared agarose gel containing monospeciﬁc polyclonal antibodies against a speciﬁc
allergen. The allergens are then allowed to diﬀuse radially for 48-72 hours before pressing,
drying, and staining is performed. Although the principle of the method is simple and
well-known, RID has several drawbacks when used as a routine analysis. First of all, the
results are not ready for at least two days. Secondly, RID is very laborious and require a
lot of manual work, which increase the risk of rejected test results.
1
==PAGE:11==
2
1 Introduction
Therefore, ALK has a great interest in the development of an alternative method
for quantiﬁcation of major allergens. For this purpose, immunoaﬃnity chromatography
(IAC) using direct detection of the analyte is an attractive approach to quantify a speciﬁc
major allergen in allergen extracts. Liquid chromatography (LC) is widely used in the
pharmaceutical industry to purify and detect speciﬁc analytes. By combining the ﬂexibility
of LC with the speciﬁcity of antibodies, a powerful analytical tool can be generated, which
potentially reduces the analysis time and manual labor substantially. In the development
of such a method, several essential factors must be assessed. These include choice of solid
phase, immobilization chemistry as well as identiﬁcation of optimal binding, washing, and
elution conditions. Moreover, time and ﬂow rate are factors that must be considered.
This master project represents the preliminary experiments conducted in order to ac-
knowledge IAC as a powerful and favorable technique compared to RID. Ultimately, the
purpose is to replace RID for routine quantiﬁcation of speciﬁc major allergens throughout
the development and production of immunotherapy. ALK can greatly beneﬁt from such a
method in the sense that it enables much faster analysis time, while reducing the manual
work needed by technicians. Furthermore, by minimizing the manual labor, and thereby
the risk of introducing errors, the precision can potentially be improved.
==PAGE:12==
2
|
Background
2.1
Immunotherapy
It is estimated by World Health Organization (WHO) that more than 20% of the world
population suﬀers from IgE-mediated allergic diseases, such as allergic rhinitis, conjunc-
tivitis, and asthma as well as atopic eczema and dermatitis. The symptoms of allergy
ranges from harmless itching and running nose to anaphylaxis [WHO, 2002]. Several types
of medication are available, and for some of the individuals medication for symptomatic
relief is suﬃcient. These types of medication block the symptom-causing chemicals, e.g.
the histamines released by mast cells upon exposure to the provoking allergen, whereas
the underlying allergic disease remains unaﬀected. However, some individuals are so tor-
mented and aﬀected by their disease that symptom relief is not enough. Allergen speciﬁc
immunotherapy (ASIT) provides a great alternative for these people in that it targets the
cause of the disease rather than treating the symptoms. By assigning increasing doses of
the allergen to patients in a controlled way, it is possible to modify the immune response
upon exposure. The prime target of ASIT is the induction of long-term immunological
tolerance toward the respective allergen. The typical route of administration is either by
subcutaneous injections or by sublingual tablets. The course of ASIT for the two adminis-
tration routes diﬀer in the sense that subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT) is the repeated
administration of escalating doses of the provoking allergen until a maintenance dosage
has been achieved, whereas sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) is the daily administration
of a ﬁxed dose of allergen during the whole course of treatment. For both SCIT and SLIT
the course of treatment is typically three years.
The exact mechanisms underlying the clinical and immunological eﬀects of ASIT is
very complex, and to some extent remains uncertain.
However, a substantial amount
of clinical evidence and practice support the use of ASIT. Several clinical trials report
long-term clinical eﬃciency after cessation of treatment, including reduction of symp-
toms, decreased immunological reactivity, and improved quality of life [Eifan et al., 2011,
Durham et al., 1999, Durham et al., 2010].
2.2
Allergen extracts
Allergens are deﬁned based their ability to elicit an IgE-mediated immune response in sus-
ceptible individuals. They derive from a wide variety of source material, such as pollen,
animal hair and dander, house-dust mites, and insect venom. For more than a century,
allergen extracts derived from natural sources have constituted the basis for immunother-
apy as well as diagnosis of allergy. The extracts are biological products of high complexity
3
==PAGE:13==
4
2 Background
with varying amounts of allergenic and non-allergenic constituents such as polysaccha-
rides, lipids, and a various proteins. After processing, it is primarily a mixture of proteins
that constitute the active ingredient of an allergen extract. The concentration of allergens
in extracts naturally varies. This variation is inﬂuenced by, for example, the extraction
process and biovariability. The latter being responsible for variable expression levels in
the source material. A complicating factor of allergen extracts is the genetic diversity
among patients. This diversity causes the patients to respond with individual patterns
of reactivity to diﬀerent allergens, both with respect to speciﬁcity and potency. It is the
reactivity to the diﬀerent allergenic components in an extract that deﬁnes the active sub-
stances. However, a limited number of allergens causes moderate to strong IgE-binding in
the majority of the patients allergic to that speciﬁc allergen source. These allergens are
called major allergens, and are deﬁned as allergens capable of stimulating an IgE-mediated
immune response in >50% of the patients. Other speciﬁc IgE-binding allergens are desig-
nated minor allergens [King et al., 1995]. One major allergen may comprise several closely
related allergens typically from a single specie, and are designated isoallergens. Examples
are Phleum pratense 6 (Phl p 6) and Phl p 5, which derive from the Timothy grass pollen.
Moreover, each isoallergen may have multiple forms of closely similar sequences. These
are designated isoforms [King et al., 1995]. In practice, this gives rise to the presence of
multiple protein bands on an SDS-PAGE gel. This is observed later in Chapter 5.
2.2.1
Standardization of allergen extracts
The naturally occurring variability in allergen extracts has prompted the need for some
kind of standardization in order to control the variability, and to secure consistency and
reproducibility for optimal safety and eﬃcacy in clinical use. In practice, improved stan-
dardization secures easier diﬀerentiation between allergic and non-allergic individuals as
well as a more precise deﬁnition of the speciﬁcity and degree of allergy.
Finally, the
outcome of ASIT becomes more reliable and reproducible [Larsen et al., 2008].
In terms of batch-to-batch standardization it is suﬃcient to consider the proteins of an
allergen extract as the active ingredient [Larsen and Lowenstein, 2014]. The challenge is to
preserve the complexity of allergens in extracts, i.e. ensuring that all potential allergens, to
which humans are exposed, are contained in the drug product (Figure 2.1). Furthermore,
even though it is a limited number of allergens that stimulate IgE production in most
patients, any antigen in a given source material is a potential allergen. Standardization of
the potency, also known as biological activity, is therefore an important aspect of batch-to-
batch control as it reﬂects the anaphylactic potential of the extract. Finally, it is important
to standardize not only the overall IgE binding potency, but also the content and ratio of
individual major allergen, which constitute the majority of the IgE binding capacity of an
extract [Larsen et al., 2008].
Standards and references
As already stated, the purpose of standardization is to minimize the variation in potency
and composition, both qualitatively as well as quantitatively, of the allergens in the ﬁnal
product. An important aspect of standardization is the use of references and standards.
However, as no internationally accepted standards exist, and due to application of diﬀerent
standardization procedures among manufacturers, comparisons of allergen extracts from
diﬀerent manufacturers cannot be made [Larsen et al., 2008, Calderón et al., 2011].
==PAGE:14==
Standards and references
5
Funded by the European Commission in 2001 through 2005, an allergen standard-
ization project named "Development of Certiﬁed Reference Materials for Allergenic Pro-
ductions and Validation of Methods for their Quantiﬁcation", abbreviated the CREATE
project, was launched. One of the objectives of the project was to evaluate the potential
use of puriﬁed recombinant allergens as certiﬁed reference material (CRM). So far, two
CRMs have been established; the Bet v 1 from birch pollen and the Phl p 5 from grass
pollen. These will eventually be included in the European Pharmacopoeia as interna-
tional standards, calibrated in an absolute units. However, the current standardization
practice in Europe is based on each manufacturer to establish their own in-house ref-
erence (IHR) in accordance with the European Pharmacopoeia for each source material
[EMA, 2009, Eudralex, 1994]. As a consequence each manufacturer expresses the potency
of an extract in their own units [Larenas-Linnemann and Cox, 2008]. The IHR must be
extensively characterized by various in vitro methods as well as in vivo testing in humans
for determination of biological activity (only applies to the very ﬁrst IHR). These tests
form a reference point for equilibration of the subsequent batches, which can be accom-
plished using in vitro methods exclusively. Consequently, the need for in vivo testing when
performing batch-to-batch standardization is eliminated. The qualitative and quantitative
composition of regular production batches should meet predeﬁned and justiﬁed acceptance
criteria when compared to the IHR [EMA, 2009].
Source material 
In-house reference 
New IHR 
Final product 
Drug product 
Extraction 
Standardization and 
formulation 
Lyophilization 
Drug substance 
Source material 
Drug product 
Drug substance 
IHR production 
Subsequent batches 
Final product 
Figure 2.1: General manufacturing process of an IHR. Once the drug substance has been obtained, a
portion of the batch is removed, lyophilized, and promoted to IHR. The remaining batch may become
drug product once it has been standardized and formulated. The subsequent batches is then compared to
the IHR, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
In Figure 2.1 above, a general manufacturing process of an allergen preparation is out-
lined. Once the extraction process is completed, the obtained substance is designated
drug substance.
The drug substance is a stable preparation at the latest step before
mixing. From here, the drug substance is either lyophilized to generate an IHR (only if
needed), or further processed to generate the drug product. This includes formulation and
==PAGE:15==
6
2 Background
standardization to a nominal strength [Kaul et al., 2011]. In ALK, the dry matter (DM)
concentration of the drug substance is determined and expressed in the unit mg DM/mL.
Consequently, as the major allergen content is expressed relatively to an IHR, the unit
becomes mg DM/mL sample.
Strategy for standardization
It is untenable to test the clinical eﬃciency of each and every production batch. In practice,
the batches are compared to an IHR using a wide range of in vitro methods to secure a
uniform composition, content of major allergens, and potency of extracts. A typical batch-
to-batch standardization procedure is based on [Larsen and Lowenstein, 2014]
• Semi-quantitative assessment of the allergen composition of the extract in order to
ensure that all important allergens are present
• Quantiﬁcation of speciﬁc major allergens to ensure that essential allergens are present
in constant ratios
• Determination of the total allergenic activity of the extract to ensure that the overall
potency is constant
This project will focus on the quantiﬁcation of major allergens, and therefore the methods
that are used to assess allergen composition and total allergenic activity will not be further
elucidated. There are several ways to quantify speciﬁc allergens, some of which will be
discussed in subsequent Section 2.3.
2.3
Quantiﬁcation of proteins
In this section methods for quantiﬁcation of proteins will be reviewed and discussed.
Initially, the principles of radial immunodiﬀusion (RID), which is the current method
used in ALK, will be described. This is followed by a brief description of enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which is one of the most commonly used techniques to
quantify proteins. Pros and cons will be highlighted. The section is completed by a detailed
description of the new proposed quantiﬁcation method, which is based on immunoaﬃnity
chromatography (IAC).
2.3.1
Radial immunodiﬀusion
As brieﬂy mentioned above, the current method applied in ALK to quantitatively deter-
mine the amount of a speciﬁc major allergen in an allergen extract is RID. The principle
of the analysis is that an unknown amount of allergen is applied to circular wells punched
out in a uniform layer of agarose gel containing monospeciﬁc polyclonal antibodies against
that speciﬁc major allergen. The gel is manually moulded on a glass plate. The allergens
then diﬀuse radially for 48-72 hours before the plate(s) are pressed, dried, and stained.
The antibodies are immobilized in the gel by applying a pH close to the isoelectric point of
the antibodies. The antibodies are present in excess, and diﬀusion of the antigen contin-
ues until equivalence between antigen and antibody has been reached. At this point, the
antigen-antibody complexes form ring-shaped precipitates, which are subsequently stained
with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Figure 2.2). To enable quantiﬁcation of the major allergen,
==PAGE:16==
2.3.2 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
7
a standard curve is generated from a serial dilution of a relevant IHR, which are applied
to the same plate. The areas of the precipitates are directly proportional to the amount
of allergen in the extract (expressed in mg DM/mL sample) [Mancini et al., 1965]. Once
the plates have been scanned, and the areas of the precipitates have been measured, the
amount of the speciﬁc major allergen can be interpolated from the standard curve.
3 µL 
8 µL 
6 µL 
4 µL 
4 µL 
4 µL 
7 µL 
7 µL 
4 µL 
4 µL 
7 µL 
7 µL 
8 µL 
6 µL 
4 µL 
3 µL 
IHR 
IHR 
Samples 
Figure 2.2: Example of a RID plate. In the top and bottom is applied a dilution serie of an IHR from
which a standard curve is generated. In the middle, two samples have been applied, each in two diﬀerent
volumes. The plate are subsequently scanned, and the areas of the precipitates are measured automatically
by a software program.
From the above described principles, it is evident that RID has some distinct drawbacks.
First of all, the analysis extend over several days, making it very inﬂexible as it must
be carefully scheduled. This also result in results that are delayed for at least two day.
Another disadvantage is the tedious work of moulding a totally levelled agarose gel con-
taining antibodies that are equally distributed. Moreover, a maximum of three diﬀerent
samples can be analysed per gel, and two gels are required for duplicate determination.
Thus, analysis of multiple samples requires a number of gels, making it very laborious for
technicians to perform the analysis.
2.3.2
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Another widely used method for quantifying proteins is ELISA. It is a plate-based im-
munoassay that measures the concentration of an analyte (usually antibodies or antigens)
in a liquid sample. An enzyme is linked to either an antibody or an antigen as a marker
for detection of a speciﬁc protein/peptide. ELISA exists in multiple formats, however, the
basic principle is somewhat the same.
In ALK, a Sandwich ELISA has been developed to determine the content of speciﬁc
major allergens in drug products (Figure 2.1). The principle of Sandwich ELISA is illus-
trated in Figure 2.3. It is based on the application of two antigen-speciﬁc antibodies. A
capture antibody is immobilized on the surface of a microplate. Upon addition of sample,
the speciﬁc antigen is captured by the immobilized antibodies. Non-speciﬁc components
are washed away before a second antibody, called a detection antibody, is added. The de-
tection antibodies must bind to a diﬀerent epitope on the target antigen than the capture
==PAGE:17==
8
2 Background
antibody. Because the detection antibody is conjugated to an enzyme, a change in color is
produced upon addition of its substrate. The optical density (OD) of the sample is then
interpolated on a standard curve, which is typically generated from a serial dilution of the
target analyte.
Figure 2.3: A typical sandwich ELISA set-up [MitoSciences, 2015].
Both monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies can be used as capture and detecting anti-
bodies.
Monoclonal antibodies are inherently monospeciﬁc for a single epitope on the
antigen, which allows for good detection and quantiﬁcation of small diﬀerences in antigen
concentration.
Sandwich ELISA oﬀers high speciﬁcity since two target-speciﬁc antibodies are used.
This "double" speciﬁcity has the advantages that no sample clean-up is needed before
application. Moreover, a third antibody can be applied to increase the signal ampliﬁcation,
and to avoid the need for enzyme conjugation to every detection antibody in diﬀerent
ELISAs.
In this format, the enzyme is conjugated to a secondary antibody, which is
speciﬁc for the constant Fc region of the detection antibody, and not the capture antibody.
This can be achieved by using capture and primary antibodies from diﬀerent species.
The use of Sandwich ELISA also have some limitations when applied to allergen ex-
tracts. In general, it is not all antibodies that can be used, as the capture and detection
antibody must recognize diﬀerent epitopes on the antigen. Furthermore, these epitopes
must be appropriately spaced so they do not hinder each others binding. Moreover, as
previously mentioned, several isoforms of the diﬀerent major allergens exist. This must be
taken into account when selecting antibodies for the ELISA. One of the greatest obstacles
is the high concentration of drug substance (approx. 50 mg DM/mL DS or 0.45-0.85 mg
protein/mg DM). As a consequence of the comprehensive sample dilution that is required,
signiﬁcant variation is introduced, which reduces the precision of the method.
2.3.3
Immunoaﬃnity chromatography
Immunoaﬃnity chromatography (IAC) is a specialized form of aﬃnity chromatography,
which combines liquid chromatography (LC) with the use of speciﬁc antibodies immobi-
==PAGE:18==
2.3.3 Immunoaﬃnity chromatography
9
lized covalently onto the solid phase. It is a powerful technique to purify analyte(s) from a
complex matrix. It relies on the reversible interaction between an antigen and the immobi-
lized speciﬁc antibody. Figure 2.4 below illustrates a typical chromatographic procedure.
It can be divided into ﬁve steps; 1) loading/injection of sample onto the column, 2) a wash
step to remove non-speciﬁc matrix components, 3) elution and measurement of protein
of interest, 4) regeneration of the column to remove potential persistent components, and
ﬁnally 5) equilibration of the column to prepare the beginning of another cycle.
Loading 
Wash 
Elution 
Regeneration 
Equilibration 
Sample  
injection 
Preservation 
Figure 2.4: The cycle of a typical chromatography procedure.
An illustrative IAC system is shown in Figure 2.5 below. The system relies on a pump,
which delivers pressurized liquid solvents (the mobile phase) to the antibody-conjugated
Sepharose column (stationary phase). The sample is injected into the system by an au-
tosampler. The ﬂow of the mobile phase delivers the injected sample to the column. Based
on the speciﬁc interaction between the antigen (a speciﬁc major allergen) and the anti-
bodies, the antigen is retained on the column, whereas non-speciﬁc components passes
through with the mobile phase.
In continuation of the column is an ultraviolet (UV)
detector, which measures the absorption of the eluate to monitor the separation. A com-
puter is connected to the system, which records the signal intensity as a function of time,
generating a chromatogram. The peaks in the chromatogram represent the diﬀerent com-
pounds of the sample. Due to the speciﬁcity of the column, only a single peak is expected
to appear in the chromatogram that are generated upon elution of the target antigen.
Solvents 
(mobile phases) 
A 
B 
Pump 
Sample 
Injector/ 
autosampler 
Column with solid support 
UV detector 
Chromatogram 
Waste 
C 
D 
Figure 2.5: Schematic overview of an IAC/LC system.
==PAGE:19==
10
2 Background
In the following subsections the main components as well as the underlying principles of
IAC will be described.
Antibodies as aﬃnity ligands
The basis of IAC is the selective binding of an antigen of interest by speciﬁc antibodies.
Antibodies can be divided into several classes and isotypes, however, they all share the
same basic structure. A typical antibody is approximately 150 kDa in size. It is composed
of four polypeptide chains; two identical heavy chains (50 kDa each) and two identical light
chains (25 kDa each), which is linked together by disulﬁde bonds. The light chains are
composed of one constant and one variable domain, whereas the heavy chains are composed
of three constant domains and a variable domain. It is the four variable domains, which
are responsible for the antigen binding [Padlan, 1994].
The antibodies used for IAC can either be monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies. Poly-
clonal antibodies are typically produced by immunization of an animal with the respective
antigen. The resulting antibodies are derived from diﬀerent B cell linages, recognizing
multiple epitopes on the same antigen with a wide range of binding aﬃnities. Polyclonal
antibodies are either monospeciﬁc or polyspeciﬁc. If a polyclonal antibody is monospeciﬁc,
it recognizes diﬀerent epitopes on a single antigen. A polyspeciﬁc antibody describes an
antibody that recognizes diﬀerent epitopes on diﬀerent antigens. Monoclonal antibodies,
on the other hand, are inherently monospeciﬁc, recognizing a single epitope on one antigen
with identical binding aﬃnity. Monoclonal antibodies derive from a single B cell linage.
The highly selective nature of antibodies as well as their strong binding to their targets,
makes their use in aﬃnity chromatography very useful. In this project, the antibodies used
are monospeciﬁc polyclonal antibodies against Phleum pratense 6 (Phl p 6), which is a
common grass allergen.
Solid supports
Depending on the application, several types of solid supports for immobilization of antibod-
ies are available. These are typically divided into low-performance and high-performance
supports. Low-performance supports include carbohydrate-based beads such as agarose
and cellulose, whereas the high-performance supports are composed of materials of higher
mechanical stability, e.g. glass- and silica-based beads [Schiel et al., 2006]. The diﬀerent
types of solid support should exhibit some common properties, which include:
• Low degree of nonspeciﬁc binding
• Easy modiﬁcation for attachment of antibodies
• Chemically inertness
• High polarity with no charges
The solid support used in this project is an agarose-based media, sold under the trade
name Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). It is a cross-linked beaded
4% agarose matrix consisting of D-galactose and 2,3-anhydro-L-galactose units with an
average size of 90 mm. The Sepharose matrix has been widely used for many years in
==PAGE:20==
Immobilization chemistry
11
aﬃnity chromatography. This is, in particular, because of the low cost and the availabil-
ity of a relatively uncomplicated and eﬀective procedure for immobilization of antibod-
ies [Porath et al., 1967, Pfeiﬀer et al., 1987, Rodero et al., 2001, Theodoridis et al., 2002,
Ding et al., 2013]. Additionally, the Sepharose is chemically stable in a wide pH range, i.e
pH 2-11, and is stable toward the commonly used aqueous buﬀers without shrinking or
swelling.
Immobilization chemistry
An essential part of the IAC is the coupling of the antibodies to the solid support in a
way that do not diminish the antigen-binding activity of the antibodies. Several diﬀerent
methods of antibody immobilization are available. These constitute both random and
site-directed immobilization.
One of the ﬁrst and most commonly used methods for covalent immobilization of
proteins to agarose beads is through cyanogen bromide (CNBr)-activation of the hy-
droxyl groups on the surface of the agarose beads [Axén et al., 1967, Kümel et al., 1979,
Kohn and Wilchek, 1981, Moser and Hage, 2010]. Once activated by CNBr, both cyanate
esters and cyclic imidocarbonates are formed, which can both react with primary amines to
yield isourea derivatives and substituted imidocarbonates, respectively (Figure 2.6). The
cyanate esters are much more reactive and therefore more isourea derivatives are formed
[Kohn and Wilchek, 1981]. Pre-activated Sepharose is commercially available, which elim-
inates the time needed for activation as well as the handling of hazardous reagents.
H2N- -NH 
-NH2 
OH 
OH 
Sepharose 
CNBr 
O–C    N  
OH 
Sepharose 
OH 
O–C 
NH2 
+ 
H2N- -NH2 
-NH2 
-NH2 
-NH2 
H2N- 
≈pH 8 
-NH2 
-NH2 
H2N- 
C=N 
O 
O 
C=N 
O 
O 
-NH2 
-NH2 
Cyanate ester 
 
Cyclic imidocarbonate 
 
Isourea derivative 
 
Substituted imidocarbonate 
Sepharose 
Sepharose 
Sepharose 
Sepharose 
Figure 2.6: CNBr-activated immobilization of antibodies onto Sepharose. CNBr activates the Sepharose
beads, yielding the very active cyanate ester, and, to a lesser extent, the less active imidocarbonate. These
are reacted with the antibodies, which are coupled through their primary amines.
As depicted in Figure 2.6, coupling via CNBr-activation causes random immobilization
of the antibodies. Thus, factors such as steric hindrance and multipoint attachment may
have an inﬂuence on the antigen-binding activity. Consequently, some of the antibodies
will not be available for antigen binding. However, the aim of this project is not to purify
==PAGE:21==
12
2 Background
as much as possible, but rather quantitatively measure the content of major allergens in
an extract.
The outcome of the method is therefore not aﬀected by the unfavourable
orientation of some of the antibodies, as long as enough are available for antigen binding.
Furthermore, the work conducted through this project is performed to establish a proof
of concept, i.e. that IAC provides a better and eﬀective alternative to RID. With this
in mind, the use of CNBr-activated Sepharose, a well-known and established method for
protein coupling with commercially available and simple coupling procedures, provides a
good initial basis for immobilization of antibodies.
Loading and elution conditions
In order to obtain selective binding and elution of the target allergen, the loading and
elution conditions must be ﬁt for the purpose.
The interaction between antigens and
antibodies is highly speciﬁc, and consists of several reversible weak interactions (e.g.
Van der Waals, hydrogen bonds, and electrostatic).
Upon binding of an antigen to
an antibody, a dynamic equilibrium is established, which can be expressed as follows
[Reverberi and Reverberi, 2007]:
Ab + Ag
ka
≠≠Ô
Ó≠≠
kd
Ab≠Ag
Keq = ka
kd
= [Ab ≠Ag]
[Ab][Ag]
where Keq is the equilibrium constant, ka is the association rate constant, and kd is the
dissociation rate constant. Consequently, a high value of Keq indicate a strong binding
between antigen and antibody.
The choice of binding buﬀer should both aim at minimizing non-speciﬁc interactions, while
maximizing the speciﬁc interaction between antigen and antibody.
Optimum binding
conditions is typically obtained at physiological conditions, that is, at a pH of 7.4 and
an ionic strength of 100-200 mM NaCl or KCl [Reverberi and Reverberi, 2007]. At these
conditions the Keq is in the range of 106≠1012M≠1 [Moser and Hage, 2010]. It is expected
that using phosphate buﬀered saline (PBS) pH 7.4 will ﬁt the purpose of facilitating the
binding of the antigen to its antibody.
During the elution phase, the highly speciﬁc and reversible interactions mentioned above
must be disrupted. Optimal elution conditions induce rapid elution of the antigen as well
as good separation between a speciﬁc antigen and non-speciﬁc components, while retaining
the antigen-binding activity of the antibodies. In terms of the equation of equilibrium,
to elute the antigens from the antibody-column, the value of Keq must be decreased by
increasing the relative value of kd versus ka [Reverberi and Reverberi, 2007].
General
approaches of dissociating antigen-antibody complexes are typical by changing the pH
and/or ionic strength, or by adding denaturants or organics. However, the latter may be
harsh on the antibody function. The most widely used elution buﬀer for antigen-antibody
dissociation is 100 mM glycine-HCl (Gly-HCl) pH 2.5-3.0, which is also generally gentle
on the antibody function [Fornstedt, 1990].
In this project, the immobilized antibodies are monospeciﬁc polyclonal antibodies. It
actually constitutes a mixture of antibodies with diﬀerent aﬃnities.
Consequently, an
eﬀective elution scheme of the antigens may require several diﬀerent elution conditions
==PAGE:22==
Detection
13
[Hage, 1998]. Furthermore, whether isocratic, step, or a gradient should be applied must
be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
Detection
Once the antigen of interest has been eluted from the immunoaﬃnity column, the antigen
is detected by a ultraviolet-visible (UV-VIS) detector.
Typically, detection of protein
exploit the fact that proteins ﬂuoresce upon UV radiation at 280 nm. At this wavelength
the ﬂuorescence arises primarily from the presence of tyrosine and tryptophan residues,
and to a lesser extent from phenylalanine and disulﬁde bonds.
As the content of the
before-mentioned amino acids may vary from protein to protein, the absorption at 280 nm
may also vary.
Another approach is to measure the ﬂuorescence of the peptide bonds at 205-210 nm.
This will most likely generate much higher absorption signals. However, many buﬀers also
absorb at this wavelength, including the commonly used Gly-HCl buﬀer. Thus, the choice
of detection wavelength must be considered as both 280nm and 205-210 nm have beneﬁts
as well as limitations.
2.4
Validation parameters of analytical methods
As previously stated, the quantiﬁcation of major allergens in allergen extracts is an essen-
tial part of the standardization of allergen extracts in ALK. Once the IAC method has
been developed, it must be validated in order to conﬁrm that it is suited for its intended
use, as required by the regulatory authorities [FDA, 2014, ICH, 2005, Shabir, 2003]. Typ-
ical parameters that are evaluated during an analytical method validation are speciﬁcity,
linearity, accuracy, precision, limits of quantiﬁcation, and limits of detection [FDA, 2014].
Some of the parameters will be touched upon in the development of the IAC method.
Below is a brief description of the above-mentioned parameters in relation to IAC. The
deﬁnitions provided are based on the ICH guideline Validation of Analytical Procedures
[ICH, 2005].
2.4.1
Speciﬁcity
The speciﬁcity of a method is concerned with the extent to which other substances in
a sample matrix interfere with the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of target analyte.
In IAC, the speciﬁcity of the method is mostly deﬁned by the applied antibody. The
antibodies used in this project is monospeciﬁc polyclonal rabbit antibodies, which are the
same as those used for RID. The speciﬁcity of the antibodies have already been tested
as a part of the RID validation in ALK (according to an in-house procedure), and will
therefore not be tested in this project. Furthermore, the antibodies have also been tested
for cross-reactivity, which is occasionally known to occur between closely related species,
and no cross-reactivity was observed.
The term speciﬁcity is used interchangeable with selectivity, especially in chromatography.
The selectivity of a chromatographic method is a term describing the ability of the method
to distinguish between several responses. In this project, however, it is expected that only
one response will appear during elution due to the above-mentioned monospeciﬁc nature
of the antibodies used.
==PAGE:23==
14
2 Background
2.4.2
Accuracy
The accuracy of a method describes the degree of agreement between a measured value
and an expected reference value. The accuracy of a method can be evaluated in several
ways. If a CRM is available, the accuracy can be assessed by analyzing a sample of known
concentration and compare the result with the true value.
However, no oﬃcial CRM
exist for measuring antigens. Furthermore, the results of the method can be compared
with results from a an established reference method. In this project, the accuracy of the
developed IAC method will not be assessed. However, a comparison of IAC and RID will
be performed to test how well the results agree with one another (Section 6.3).
2.4.3
Linearity and range
The linearity of an assay reﬂects its ability to return values that are directly proportional
to the concentration of the target analyte in a sample within a given range. The linearity
can be demonstrated directly on the drug substance by a serial dilution or by dilution of
an IHR. Evaluation of linearity is performed by visual inspection of a plot the shows the
signal as a function of analyte content. Besides the visual inspection, data from linear
regressions, such as the coeﬃcient of determination (R2), may be helpful in evaluating the
linearity. For RID, the acceptance criteria are visual linearity as well as R2 Ø 0.95.
The range of a method expresses the interval from the lower to upper concentration or
amount of an analyte in a sample, which provides a suitable degree of linearity, precision
and accuracy. The speciﬁed range depends on the application of the method, however,
ICH recommends the minimum speciﬁed range to be 80-120% of the test concentration
[ICH, 2005].
2.4.4
Precision
The precision of a method reﬂects the variability in data from replicate determinations
of the same sample under normal operating conditions. In other words, it represents the
scatter of data rather than the exactness of the result. Precision is typically measured
as the coeﬃcient of variation (CV), and can be considered at three levels; repeatability,
intermediate precision, and reproducibility.
• The repeatability, also called intra-assay precision, describes the precision under the
same operating conditions over a short time interval. ICH recommends to assess the
repeatability by using at least nine determinations covering a speciﬁed range, e.g.
three concentrations in three replicates [ICH, 2005].
• The intermediate precision assesses the eﬀect of random events, i.e. the variation
within laboratories such as diﬀerent days, diﬀerent technicians, and diﬀerent equip-
ment (if available).
• The reproducibility expresses the precision obtained between diﬀerent laboratories,
and assesses whether the method provides the same results in diﬀerent laboratories.
In this project, the repeatability is a subject of evaluation, whereas the intermediate
precision and reproducibility will not be assessed.
==PAGE:24==
2.4.5 Limit of detection
15
2.4.5
Limit of detection
The limit of detection (LoD) is used to establish the minimum level of an analyte at
which it can be reliably detected, regardless of the imprecision of the results. The LoD is
typically lower than LoQ. The LoD will not be determined in this project as the primarily
focus will be to assess the linearity and repeatability of the assay.
2.4.6
Limits of quantiﬁcation
The smallest and largest concentrations of an analyte in a sample that can be quantita-
tively determined, with suitable precision and accuracy, are termed limits of quantiﬁcation
(LoQ). Determination of LoQ is most often assessed when only low levels of analyte is
present in the sample. In this project, the LoQ will only be visually determined as the
intended measuring points should be well within the LoQ where acceptable repeatability
and linearity have been established.
==PAGE:25==
3
|
Purpose of project
3.1
Hypothesis
If antibodies can be appropriately immobilized on Sepharose beads by means of CNBr-
activation, it will be possible to speciﬁcally adsorb a particular major allergen from an
allergen extract, while non-speciﬁc components passes without binding. Once eluted, the
major allergen content in the eluate is measured by an UV detector, and by means of a
standard curve generated from an IHR, it is possible to quantitatively determine the major
allergen content of any allergen extract.
3.2
Objective
The main objective of this Master’s thesis project is to develop an alternative analytical
method for the quantiﬁcation of speciﬁc major allergens that is based on IAC.
One the of the main limitations of using RID as a routine analysis is the laborious and
time-consuming work associated with the analysis.
Moreover, the execution of a RID
analysis stretches over several days, making it a very inﬂexible analysis. Finally, the use
of RID primarily applies to drug substance as drug product is too dilute.
In this project, the aim is to develop a method that can quantify major allergens by
means of IAC. This will facilitate a faster and automated analysis. The main focus of the
project will be to deﬁne the diﬀerent conditions required during loading, wash, elution,
and regeneration, to enable selective UV detection of a speciﬁc major allergen.
Below are listed some parameters that must be fulﬁlled to obtain a successful outcome of
this project. These include:
• Eﬃcient immobilization of the antibodies to the Sepharose in a way that permits
binding of suﬃcient antigen.
• Selective dissociation of the antigen-antibody complexes during elution, which prefer-
ably allows recycling of the column.
• Establishment of linearity in wide range, as well as preliminary assessment of the
precision of the method.
• Quantiﬁcation of a major allergen that is in accordance with the result obtained by
RID.
17
==PAGE:26==
4
|
Experimental strategy
The development of a novel analytical method involves multiple experiments in order
to determine the basic conditions under which the method should be performed. The
development of an IAC method is no exception. Typically, such a development process
do not proceed in a chronological sequence, and sometimes retesting are required.
In
the preparation for the experimental part of the project, some considerations about the
development of the IAC method have been done. These are elucidated in the the following
sections.
4.1
Preloading of aﬃnity column
The alternative quantiﬁcation method is based on IAC, a very powerful method to purify
a speciﬁc molecule in a complex mixture. The intention is to immobilize the same type of
antibodies that are currently utilized for the RID analysis; monospeciﬁc polyclonal anti-
bodies. In this way, the separation of the proteins harness the highly speciﬁc interaction
between antibody and antigen. One of the advantages of using polyclonal over monoclonal
antibodies, besides being much cheaper, is that they can detect the various isoforms of
the allergens, making them more suitable for quantiﬁcation of allergens. However, poly-
clonal antibodies are inherently a mixture of antibodies recognizing various epitopes with
diﬀerent aﬃnities. This may cause broadening of the peaks, as antigens associated with
antibodies with low- or mid-range aﬃnity may eluate before those bound to high-aﬃnity
antibodies. Therefore, it must be considered how to obviate this during dissociation of
antigen-antibody complexes in the elution phase. A possible solution to this may be to
perform a "preloading" of the column with an excess of allergen extract followed by an
elution. This causes the antibodies of highest aﬃnity for the major allergen to be blocked,
leaving the mid- and low aﬃnity antibodies available for quantiﬁcation of major allergens.
4.2
Excess of antibodies
The solid support to which the antibodies are immobilized is CNBr-activated Sepharose.
It is a widely employed and simple method for immobilization of ligands through primary
amines, and is commercially available at several vendors. This type of coupling causes the
antibodies to be immobilized with a random orientation, and consequently the activity
of some of the antibodies will be compromised, especially if the antibodies are attached
through amine groups on the antigen-binding sites. In this project, it is not crucial to
know the exact antigen-binding capacity of the column. Instead a critical element of this
assay is to ensure a persistent excess of available antibodies on the solid support compared
19
==PAGE:27==
20
4 Experimental strategy
to antigen. Thus, a strategy for verifying an excess of available antibodies is to be evolved.
Such a strategy will also enable the possibility of monitoring the performance of the column
in relation to inactivation or leakage of antibodies.
4.3
Binding and elution conditions
Once immobilization of antibodies has been performed, the next step in the development
is to evaluate the binding and elution conditions required to associate and subsequently
dissociate a major allergen from the immunoaﬃnity column.
It is expected that the
optimum binding conditions mirrors the physiological conditions of the human body, i.e.
a pH of around 7.4 and an ionic strength that corresponds to approximately 100-200
mM NaCl.
PBS pH 7.4 is expected to fulﬁl this purpose.
A critical element for the
IAC method to succeed, is the dissociation of the antigen-antibody complexes, preferably
without destroying the antigen-binding activity of the antibodies. Thus, a selection of
diﬀerent elution conditions will be evaluated, which includes low pH, ionic strength, and
denaturing/chaotropic agents.
The eﬃciency of the selected binding and elution conditions will be evaluated by in-
spection of the chromatograms, but also to a great extent by sodium dodecyl sulphate-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). During the IAC, sample fractions will
be collected in order to evaluate the content of the peaks. SDS-PAGE separates proteins
according to their size, and can therefore be used to qualitatively determine the protein
composition of the collected fractions. Once the proteins have been separated by means
of electrophoresis, the proteins are visualized by silver staining, which can detect lower
amounts of proteins compared to Coomassie Blue-staining. Upon comparison of the re-
sulting protein bands with a reference extract or an IHR, as well as a marker, it is possible
to estimate the size of the proteins.
4.4
Comparison study
The above-mentioned experiments will be followed by a comparison study, which involves
assessment of the linearity as well as preliminary studies on the precision of the IAC
method. Finally, a comparison of the current quantiﬁcation method, RID, and the novel
IAC method will be performed. For this purpose, two preparations of the same allergen
extract will be used to assess the agreement between the two methods.
==PAGE:28==
5
|
Method development
This chapter describes the development of an IAC method for quantiﬁcation of major
allergens, exempliﬁed by Phl p 6. The chapter includes a description of the methods used.
The results generated in the preliminary tests will be included and constitute the basis for
decisions in the further development before a few method validation elements are touched
upon in Chapter 6.
A: Immobilization 
of antibodies 
B: Binding of allergen 
to antibody-Sepharose 
C: Initial elution buffer 
screening: Gly-HCl pH 
2.5-3.0, urea, ethylene glycol 
D: Elution optimization 
on LC-system: Gly-HCl 
(pH 2.7) and urea 
E: Test for non-specific 
binding to Sepharose 
F: Test for 
antibody leaking 
Mass spectrometry 
G: Wash optimization: 
Low pH (3, 3.5, 4) and 
NaCl-gradient 
Longer column:  
5x200 mm  
(~4 mL gel) 
Other low pH 
elution buffers: 
H3PO4 pH 2.5  
(G): Elution: Low 
pH and salt-
gradient / isocratic 
Salt: 0.5-1.5 M 
NaCl + 0.75 M 
NaCl 
H: Wash optimization: 
pH 7.4 and NaCl-
gradient 
Salt: 0.5-1.5 M 
(NH4)2SO4 
I: “Final” method:  
Wash: PBS pH 7.4 + NaCl step-gradient 
Elution: 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.7 + 100 mM NaCl  
Figure 5.1: Overview of the method development process undergone in this project. The stated letters
refer to the diﬀerent sections in the chapter. Light blue indicates experiments that have been performed,
but which will not be elucidated in the report.
21
==PAGE:29==
22
5 Method development
Figure 5.1 above shows a simpliﬁed overview of the development process that has been
undergone during this project. To ease the review, and in order to create an overview of
the development process, the following sections hold a letter in the section headline, which
refers back to the ﬁgure above. The light blue boxes, indicate performed experiments that
will not be elucidated in the subsequent sections.
5.1
Reagents and materials
Solid support: CNBr-activated Sepharose 4 Fast Flow was obtained from GE Health-
care Life Sciences. Coupling buﬀer (100 mM NaHCO3 pH 8.3, 500 mM NaCl), quenching
buﬀer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), high pH wash buﬀer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 500
mM NaCl), and low pH wash buﬀer (100 mM NaOAc pH 4.0, 500 mM NaCl) were pre-
pared in the laboratory. Antibodies: Monospeciﬁc polyclonal rabbit IgGs against Phl
p 6 was provided by Dako A/S, and concentrated and puriﬁed in-house by ammonium
sulfate precipitation. SDS-PAGE: NuPAGE R
• Novex R
• 4-12% Bis-Tris gels, NuPAGE R
•
Sample Reducing Agent (10X), NuPAGE R
• LDS Sample Buﬀer (4X), NuPAGE R
• Antiox-
idant, and NuPAGE R
• MES SDS Running Buﬀer for SDS-PAGE were obtained from Life
Technologies. IAC solvents: Phosphate buﬀered saline (PBS) X 10 pH 7.4 was obtained
from Ampliqon A/S (1.4 M NaCl, 80.51 mM Na2HPO4·H2O, 19.6 mM KH2HPO4). Elu-
tion buﬀers (100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5-2.8, 8 M urea, 6 M guanidine chloride, 50% ethylene
glycol pH 9.5, 100 mM citric acid) were all prepared in laboratory.
5.2
Immobilization of antibodies (A)
In this proof of concept-project, monospeciﬁc polyclonal antibodies raised against Phl p 6
were immobilized on Sepharose beads for quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6 in allergen extracts. The
concentration of the Phl p 6-antibody solution (in 0.9% NaCl) was estimated by measuring
the absorption of the solution (diluted 10-fold) at 280 nm. By applying the Lambert-
Beer law with an extinction coeﬃcient of 1.36 [Small and Lamm, 1966], the concentration
was estimated to 27.4 mg/mL (undiluted.
The recommended amount of antibody to
be immobilized on the CNBr-activated Sepharose 4 Fast Flow is 2-5 mg antibody/mL gel
[Kavran and Leahy, 2014, Ostrove, 1990]. Thus, the coupling eﬃciencies for three diﬀerent
concentrations of antibody (5-, 10- and 20-fold dilutions) were compared. Three portions of
1.5 mL gel (375 mg dry Sepharose) were prepared. The coupling of antibodies to CNBr-
activated Sepharose was conducted according to manufacturers protocol (Appendix A)
[GE Healthcare Life Sciences, 2011]. After the antibody incubation, the supernatant was
removed and the absorption at 280 nm was measured. Table 5.1 summarizes the coupling
eﬃciencies obtained from the immobilization of diﬀerent amounts of antibodies.
Table 5.1: Coupling eﬃciencies in preliminary immbolization study.
c(antibody) loaded
(mg/mL)
Supernatant
OD280
c(antibody) in
supernatant
(mg/mL)
Coupling
eﬃciency (%)
5.46 (1:5)
0.792
0.582
89.3
2.73 (1:10)
0.221
0.163
94.0
1.37 (1:20)
0.104
0.077
94.4
==PAGE:30==
5.3 Binding conditions (B)
23
To obtain better reproducibility in later antibody-coupling experiments, it was decided
to immobilize 2 mg antibody pr. mL gel. The coupling eﬃciencies following immobi-
lization of both 1.37 and 2.73 mg antibody/mL gel were approximately 94%, and thus
a coupling-concentration of 2 mg antibody pr. mL gel is expected to result in a similar
coupling eﬃciency. New batches of antibody-coupled gel were regularly prepared during
the laboratory period with no adjustments in the coupling procedure.
5.3
Binding conditions (B)
The conditions at which an antigen binds to speciﬁc antibodies is expected to mirror the
physiological conditions. As the ionic strength and pH of PBS (pH 7.4) reﬂects that of
the human body, it was used as loading buﬀer to facilitate the binding of allergen to the
antibody-coupled gel.
To evaluate the binding of allergen to the antibody-coupled gel, 0.5 mL antibody-
coupled gel was transferred to eight 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. The allergen extract was
diluted in PBS pH 7.4 to 10 mg DM/mL. 200 mL diluted allergen extract of two-fold increas-
ing concentrations (Figure 5.2) was added to the gel, starting at 0.15mg DM/mL. The tubes
were vortexed and left for 10 minutes at room temperature before they were centrifuged
at 4000 rpm for 5 minutes. The supernatant was removed, and analyzed by SDS-PAGE
according to the protocol outlined in Appendix B. The applied extract was added to the
gel as a reference.
c(DS)=0.15 µg DM/µL 
m(DS)=0.975 µg 
c(DS)=0.30 µg DM/µL 
m(DS)=1.95 µg 
……. c(DS)=18.2 µg DM/µL 
m(DS)=118.3 µg 
Centrifugation 
Supernatant removed  
for SDS-PAGE analysis 
Figure 5.2: Set up of the preliminary binding experiment. Allergen extract of increasing concentration
is added to Eppendorf tubes containing antibody-coupled Sepharose. The target antigen (red) binds to
the speciﬁc antibodies, and are retained.
Upon centrifugation, the supernantant containg non-speciﬁc
components are removed and analyzed by SDS-PAGE.
Figure 5.3 below illustrates the result of the above-mentioned SDS-PAGE analysis. Al-
though it is impossible to conclude how much allergen is bound to the antibody-coupled
gel, the intensity of the bands indicate that more Phl p 6 has disappeared from the solution
compared to other proteins. For example, if comparing the intensity of the framed Phl
p 6-band in lane 1 (reference) with the intensity of the band in lane 4 (L3), the latter is
==PAGE:31==
24
5 Method development
substantially weaker. On the contrary, if the same two lanes are inspected, the intensity
of the band appearing at approximately 33 kDa, is equally pronounced.
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Figure 5.3: Silver stained SDS-PAGE gel. The supernatants collected upon addition of allergen extract to
the antibody-coupled gel, are shown in L1-L8 (concentration of added extract is stated in brackets). The
blue frame encircles the Phl p 6 protein bands. The sizes of the marker proteins are shown in dalton.
Based on this result, PBS pH 7.4 appears to be a suitable binding buﬀer, which facilitate
the binding of Phl p 6 to the immobilized antibodies, and will therefore be used in further
development. Furthermore, it also indicates that antigen binding is possible. In other
words, steric hindrance and unfavourable orientation of the random immobilized antibodies
do not seem to obstruct the binding of allergen.
5.4
Elution conditions: Initial screening (C)
The interaction between antigen and its speciﬁc antibody is usually very strong, and often
harsh conditions must be applied to dissociate the antigen from the antibody. Which type
of elution condition is most eﬃcient depends on the speciﬁc composition of hydrophobic,
ionic, and hydrogen bonds involved in the particular interaction. Thus, the objective of
the following experiment was to identify an elution condition which facilitate dissociation
of antigen and antibody, while retaining the binding activity of the antibody.
Initially three elution buﬀers were prepared that represent diﬀerent elution conditions; low
pH, denaturing, and organic/chaotropic. The buﬀers were 100 mM glycine-HCl pH 2.5, 8
M urea, and 50% ethylene glycol pH 9.8, respectively. The content of three of the Eppen-
dorf tubes from the binding experiment described above (approx. 0.5 mL antibody-coupled
gel with antigen bound, Section 5.3) was transferred to three disposable polypropylene
columns of 1.2 mL bed volume (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Each gel was washed in 5 x 500
mL PBS pH 7.4. Hereafter, 10 x 250 mL elution buﬀer was applied to each of the columns,
and the eluates were collected for SDS-PAGE analysis (Appendix B). The collected eluates
were designated E1-10.
==PAGE:32==
5.4 Elution conditions: Initial screening (C)
25
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Figure 5.4: Result of SDS-PAGE on the eluates collected during elution with 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5.
The volume of each eluate is 250 mL. E = eluate. The blue frame encircles the Phl p 6 protein bands,
whereas the green frame encircles a non-speciﬁc protein. The applied allergen extract has been added as
a reference. The sizes of the marker proteins are indicated in dalton.
Figure 5.4 above shows the result of the SDS-PAGE analysis upon elution using 100 mM
Gly-HCl pH 2.5. The blue frame represents the area in which Phl p 6 is expected to be
present (based on in-house reference pattern). In E2, a weak band is observed, which is
most likely Phl p 6. Within the green frame, another band is observed that is not related to
Phl p 6. The size of the protein is approximately 50 kDa, which is in accordance with the
size of a heavy chain from an antibody molecule. Alternatively, it may represent binding
of non-speciﬁc proteins from the sample matrix.
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Figure 5.5: Result of SDS-PAGE on the eluates collected during elution with 8 M urea. The volume of
each eluate is 250 mL. E = eluate. The blue frame encircles the Phl p 6 protein bands, whereas the green
frame encircles a non-speciﬁc protein. The applied allergen extract has been added as a reference. The
sizes of the marker proteins are stated in dalton.
Much in resemblance to Figure 5.4, two protein bands of diﬀerent sizes are observed in
Figure 5.5 above, which represents the result of SDS-PAGE analysis of the eluates upon
elution with 8 M urea. Weak Phl p 6 bands are observed in E3 and E4, whereas the
non-speciﬁc protein is present in E2-E5.
==PAGE:33==
26
5 Method development
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Figure 5.6: Result of SDS-PAGE on the eluates collected during elution with 50% ethylene glycol pH
9.8. The volume of each eluate is 250 mL. E = eluate. The applied allergen extract has been added as a
reference. The sizes of the marker proteins are stated in dalton.
Based on Figure 5.6 above, the use of 50% ethylene glycol pH 9.8 as elution buﬀer does not
appear to be a suitable choice as no proteins bands at all are observed on the SDS-PAGE
gel.
The above results lead to the preliminary conclusion that low pH or denaturing elution
conditions are best suited for dissociation of the antigen-antibody complexes. Moreover,
it is evident that the use of PBS pH 7.4 as binding buﬀer seems appropriate, and therefore
no further attention will be put into this.
5.5
Elution optimization (D)
The results of the initial screening for appropriate elution conditions in Section 5.4 above,
indicated that the most viable elution conditions were either low pH or denaturing (Figure
5.4-5.5). The organic agent did not result in any bands on the gel (Figure 5.6), and was
not pursued. From this point on, the developing steps were performed on Waters 2695
Separation Module (HPLC-system) using UV detection as it provides a more automated
approach. The applied columns, in which the Phl p 6-antibody-coupled gel was packed,
was Tricorn 5/50 columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). This column has an internal
diameter of 5 mm, and a length of 50 mm.
An important thing to consider when using UV detection, is the background absorbance
caused by the applied buﬀers. Consequently, the absorption spectrum was measured for
each of the applied buﬀers. Initially, the focus was put on buﬀers that did not exhibit any
absorption at 280 nm.
The next step was performed to verify the potential use of low pH or denaturing conditions
for dissociating the antigen-antibody complexes. Based on the obtained results, it could
hopefully be established which condition is the most useful.
==PAGE:34==
5.5.1 Elution buﬀer: 6 M urea
27
5.5.1
Elution buﬀer: 6 M urea
Urea had previously shown to be a potential useful elution agent (Section 5.4). To verify
this on the LC-system, a 6 M urea solution was prepared. Furthermore, a batch of Phl p
6-antibody-Sepharose was prepared according to the procedure in Appendix A. Approxi-
mately 1 mL coupled Sepharose was packed in a Tricorn 5/50 column. Table 5.2 outlines
the program, which was performed on the LC-system (6 M urea instead of 0.1 M Gly-HCl
pH 2.5). The loading phase was initiated by injections of 25 mL allergen extract (diluted
to 10 mg DM/mL). Sample fractions were collected during loading and elution, and were
subsequently analyzed by SDS-PAGE.
The resulting SDS-PAGE gel, did not reveal any protein bands (data not shown),
and consequently it was decided to evaluate the use of low pH conditions during elution
instead.
5.5.2
Elution buﬀer: 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5
To evaluate the use of 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5 as elution buﬀer, a new Tricorn 5/50
column was packed with a fresh portion Phl p 6-antibody-coupled Sepharose. Table 5.2
outlines the applied program. Once the Sepharose had been ﬂushed through with PBS pH
7.4 to equilibrate the column, the loading phase was initiated by injection of 25 mL allergen
extract (10 mg DM/mL). During the course of the program, fractions were collected
whenever interesting peaks appeared in the chromatogram, and these were subsequently
analyzed by SDS-PAGE (Appendix B).
Table 5.2: Initial chromatographic conditions
Buﬀer
Isocratic,
step, or
gradient
Flow
(mL/min)
Time
(min)
Column
volumes
Sample loading
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.200
25
5
Wash
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.250
15
4
Elution
0.1 M Gly-HCl pH 2.5
Isocratic
0.250
25
6
Regeneration
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.250
15
4
The result of the SDS-PAGE analysis is presented in Figure 5.7 below. Most noticeable
are the protein bands in the two last lanes; E(8’) and E(9’). The blue frame encircles Phl
p 6 identiﬁed on the basis of visual comparison with the reference pattern, whereas the
green frame encircles unidentiﬁed proteins of approximately 50 kDa and 25 kDa.
In consequence hereof, it was evaluated whether the non-speciﬁc proteins derived from
binding of sample matrix components to the solid phase, or if it could attributed to
antibody leakage from the column. The latter was a possibility as the size of the non-
speciﬁc protein bands correspond to the size of a heavy and light chain of an antibody
molecule (Section 2.3.3).
==PAGE:35==
28
5 Method development
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Figure 5.7: Result of SDS-PAGE on fractions collected during loading (L) and elution (E). Elution buﬀer:
100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5. The numbers in the brackets refer to the time (in minutes) of sample collection.
The blue frame encircles the Phl p 6 protein bands, whereas the green frames encircles non-speciﬁc proteins.
The applied allergen extract has been added as a reference. The sizes of the marker proteins are indicated
in dalton.
Test for non-speciﬁc binding (E)
To test if non-speciﬁc binding to the solid support occured, extra CNBr-activated Sepharose
was prepared and incubated with coupling buﬀer lacking antibodies to generate a negative
control. The executed program is outlined in Table 5.2. The loading phase was initiated
by injection of 25 mL allergen extract (10 mg DM/mL). Fractions were collected during
the loading and elution phase when peaks appeared in the chromatogram. These were
subsequently analyzed by SDS-PAGE (Appendix B
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Figure 5.8: Negative control to test for non-speciﬁc binding. Fractions were collected during loading (L)
and elution (E) on a column with no immobilized antibodies. The blue frame encircles the Phl p 6 protein
bands. The numbers in the brackets refer to the time (in minutes) of sample collection. The applied
allergen extract has been added as a reference. The sizes of the marker proteins are stated in dalton.
==PAGE:36==
Test for antibody leakage (F)
29
From Figure 5.8 above it cannot be declined that the presence of non-speciﬁc proteins in
the eluate, does not derive from sample matrix, i.e the allergen extract. This is based on
the apparent observation that no proteins are present in the eluate fractions (E(6’)-E(11’)).
In conclusion, the presence of non-speciﬁc proteins does not appear to be a consequence
of interfering matrix components that sticks to the column material.
Test for antibody leakage (F)
In order to evaluate if the two extra protein bands, encircled by a green frame in Figure
5.7, were caused by leaked antibodies, the program from Table 5.2 was performed on
a blank sample. If the two extra protein bands are caused by leaking antibodies, they
are expected to reappear during elution, regardless of the presence of injected allergen
extract. Whenever peaks appeared in the chromatogram, sample fractions were collected
and analyzed by SDS-PAGE according to Appendix 5.9. The result in presented in Figure
5.9 below.
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Figure 5.9: Test for antibody leakage by application of a blank sample. Fractions were collected during
elution (E) and regeneration (Reg.). The numbers in the brackets refer to the time (in minutes) of sample
collection. The green frame encircles a non-speciﬁc protein, whereas the two purple frames encircle the
location of the heavy and light chain. A diluted preparation of the antibody solution has been included as
a reference. The sizes of the marker proteins are stated in dalton.
No proteins are visible in the eluate fraction (E(5’)), nor have the proteins reappeared in
the fractions collected during regeneration (Reg(8’)-Reg.(11’)). However, a third protein
of approximately 66 kDa is now observed. Based on the size, it may be caused by the
presence of serum albumin in the antibody solution. Thus, from Figure 5.9 it cannot be
established that the non-speciﬁc proteins are a consequence of antibody leakage.
As an alternative approach to clarify the identity of the non-speciﬁc proteins, fractions
containing the non-speciﬁc proteins were pooled, and run in a new SDS-PAGE. Instead
of silver staining, the gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The non-speciﬁc
protein bands were excised, and subjected to trypsin digestion before analysis by mass
==PAGE:37==
30
5 Method development
spectrometry (MS). Unfortunately, the results were inconclusive, and did not clarify the
origin of the non-speciﬁc proteins.
5.6
Wash optimization
In order to address the non-speciﬁc protein bands shown in Figure 5.7 (green frames)
above, it was investigated whether reﬁnement of the wash between loading and elution
could eliminate the presence of these bands. Until now, PBS pH 7.4 had been applied as
washing buﬀer. However, the removal of non-speciﬁc material may beneﬁt from applying a
salt (step) gradient. This applies especially to complex sample matrices containing several
diﬀerent compounds, which can react non-speciﬁcally with the column.
5.6.1
Wash conditions: Low pH and salt step-gradient (G)
It was speculated that the use of washing conditions harsh enough to remove non-speciﬁc
components, while maintaining the antigen bound to the column, could be feasible. This
could preferably stop the possible leakage or at least ensure that they did not co-elute
with the target allergen.
Thus, to investigate how harsh conditions could be applied
during the wash, two solutions of 100 mM Gly-HCl were prepared with a pH of 3.0 and
4.0, respectively. Additionally, a concurrent step-gradient of 0.5-1.5 M NaCl was applied
as illustrated in Figure 5.10 below.
4 min 
4 min 
pH 3.0 / 4.0 
1.50 M NaCl 
1.25 M NaCl 
1.00 M NaCl 
0.75 M NaCl 
0.50 M NaCl 
4 min 
4 min 
4 min 
Figure 5.10: Graphic illustration of the tested wash conditions.
The applied NaCl step gradient was
initiated at 0.5 M. For each four minutes, the concentration of NaCl increased by 0.25 M until 1.50 M.
The washing step was followed by an elution step using 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5 at
0.250 mL/min for 15 minutes. The loading and regeneration conditions were the same as
represented in Table 5.2. Samples for SDS-PAGE analysis were regularly collected during
both the washing and elution step.
Figure 5.11 below represent the results of the SDS-PAGE analyses. From Figure 5.11(b)
it is evident that no proteins are detected by the SDS-PAGE analysis, indicating that the
use of a washing buﬀer of pH 4.0 concurrent with a NaCl step-gradient did not cause the
antigen to be eluted. In Figure 5.11(a), a clear Phl p 6-band is present in the W (10’) lane
(encircled by blue frame). In the same lane, the non-speciﬁc protein of around 50 kDa is
also present, although at a much weaker intensity.
==PAGE:38==
5.6.2 Wash conditions: Neutral pH and NaCl-gradient (H)
31
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Light chain 
Heavy chain 
(a) pH 3.0
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Heavy chain 
Light chain 
(b) pH 4.0
Figure 5.11: SDS-PAGE on fractions collected during loading (L), wash (W), elution (E), and regeneration
(Reg.). (a) 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 3.0 and the concurrent NaCl step-gradient. (b) 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 4.0
and the concurrent NaCl step-gradient. The blue frames encircles the Phl p 6 protein bands, whereas the
green encircles a non-speciﬁc protein. To both gels, the applied allergen extract as well as the immobilized
antibody solution have been added as a reference. The sizes of the marker proteins are indicated in dalton.
The above results indicate that using a washing buﬀer of pH 3.0 and a NaCl step-gradient
comprises too harsh washing conditions. This is based on the fact that the antigen is
eluted during the wash.
Instead this condition appears to improve the elution of the
antigen as the band at 50 kDa is now much more vague. With regard to the wash at pH
4.0 with NaCl step-gradient, these conditions could be viable washing conditions, as no
protein bands are present in the fractions collected during the wash. On the contrary, no
protein bands are observed in the fraction collected during elution either. Thus, whether
the signal was to low to be detected by SDS-PAGE or whether the antigens were still
bound to the antibodies remained unknown.
5.6.2
Wash conditions: Neutral pH and NaCl-gradient (H)
Based on the results from the section above, a wash step using a NaCl-gradient at neutral
pH, i.e.
pH 7.4, was investigated.
The washing step was followed by an elution step
applying 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.7 and 100 mM NaCl (isocratic). Table 5.3 below shows
the program that was performed.
For practical reasons, buﬀer A was PBS pH 7.4 and buﬀer B was a 2 M NaCl solution.
Over 30 minutes (10 column volumes), the gradient went from 100% buﬀer A and 0%
buﬀer B to 50% buﬀer A and 50% buﬀer B. Three cycles of the LC-program outlined in
Table 5.3 was performed with injection of decreasing amounts of allergen extract (diluted
to 10 mg DM/mL), that is, 50 mL, 35 mL, and 20 mL.
During elution in the ﬁrst and third cycle samples were collected and analyzed by SDS-
PAGE (Figure 5.12).
==PAGE:39==
32
5 Method development
Table 5.3: Optimized chromatographic conditions.
Buﬀer
Isocratic, step,
or gradient
Flow
(mL/min)
Time
(min)
Column
volumes
Sample loading
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.200
25
5
Wash
PBS pH 7.4 and 2
M NaCl
Gradient: 0-50%
2 M NaCl
0.330
30
10
Elution
100 mM Gly-HCl
pH 2.7 + 100 mM
NaCl
Isocratic
0.400
25
10
Regeneration
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.330
30
10
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Figure 5.12: SDS-PAGE on fractions collected during elution (E) and regeneration (Reg.) when a NaCl-
gradient is applied during the wash. The blue frame encircles the Phl p 6 protein bands. The applied
extract has been added as a reference. The sizes of the marker proteins are indicated in dalton. * Upon
injection of 50 mL allergen extract. ** Upon injection of 20 mL allergen extract.
In Figure 5.12 above, the Phl p 6 band is clearly present (framed in blue). Furthermore,
the band which previously appeared around 50 kDa has now completely disappeared.
5.7
Final analytical method (I)
Based on the promising results presented in Section 5.6 above as well as time constraints,
the conditions in the diﬀerent phases were not changed further. However, the duration
of each cycle (sample loading, wash, elution, and regeneration) was 1 hour 50 minutes.
Consequently, the duration of each phase was reduced to an extent, which was not thought
to aﬀect the outcome. Table 5.4 below shows the "ﬁnal" IAC-program. This program suc-
cessfully facilitates the loading of a complex allergen extract onto an aﬃnity column that
speciﬁcally binds the Phl p 6 allergens. Moreover, the elution condition eﬀectively induces
dissociation of allergen from the antibody, which can then be detected and quantiﬁed.
Finally, the IAC-column can be regenerated and used again.
==PAGE:40==
5.7 Final analytical method (I)
33
Table 5.4: Final chromatographic conditions.
Buﬀer
Isocratic, step,
or gradient
Flow
(mL/min)
Time
(min)
Column
volumes
Sample loading
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.200
20
4
Wash
PBS pH 7.4 and 2
M NaCl
Step: 0-25-50%
2 M NaCl
0.330
20
7
Elution
100 mM Gly-HCl
pH 2.7 + 100 mM
NaCl
Isocratic
0.400
20
8
Regeneration
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.330
15
5
The program in the above table was shortened to 1 hour 15 minutes. It was subsequently
used to evaluate elements of linearity as well as precision of the assay.
This will be
elucidated in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:41==
6
|
Pre-validation of IAC
In Chapter 5, the conditions for sample loading, wash, and elution were determined. To
assess the performance of the method, a pre-validation was performed. The investigated
parameters were linearity and precision. The chapter is ﬁnalized by a quantiﬁcation of
Phl p 6 by both IAC and RID. The steps performed to assess these parameters are being
described, followed by a presentation of the results.
6.1
Linearity
The linearity and range of linearity of the method were investigated. This was done to
identify in which range the peak height (maximum absorbance at 280 nm) is directly
proportional to the major allergen content (expressed in mg DM/mL sample). Increasing
volumes of allergen extract were injected into the IAC-column; 2.5, 5.0, 7.5, 10.0, 12.5,
15.0, 17.5, 20.0, 25.0, 30.0, 35.0, and 40.0 mL, diluted to 10 mg DM/mL. The loading,
wash, and elution conditions are outlined in Table 6.1 below (the same as Table 5.4 in the
previous Chapter 5).
Table 6.1: Final chromatographic conditions.
Buﬀer
Isocratic, step,
or gradient
Flow
(mL/min)
Time
(min)
Column
volumes
Sample loading
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.200
20
4
Wash
PBS pH 7.4 and 2
M NaCl
Step: 0-25-50%
2 M NaCl
0.330
20
7
Elution
0.1 M Gly-HCl pH
2.7 + 100 mM NaCl
Isocratic
0.400
20
8
Regeneration
PBS pH 7.4
Isocratic
0.330
15
5
The maximum height of the elution peaks (expressed in mAU at 280 nm) was plotted
against the amount of extract applied to the IAC-column. The plot is shown in Figure
6.1 below.
In the range from 7.5 to 30 mL loaded extract, the method can be well approximated
by a linear regression with a coeﬃcient of determination (R2) of 0.9982. When more than
30 mL allergen extract is loaded, there is no more direct proportionality between the peak
height and amount of loaded extract. Additionally, once the line reaches a plateau the
criteria of an excess of antibody compared to allergen is no longer obeyed.
35
==PAGE:42==
36
6 Pre-validation of IAC
y = 1,2703x - 0,1526 
R² = 0,9982 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
0,0 
5,0 
10,0 
15,0 
20,0 
25,0 
30,0 
35,0 
40,0 
45,0 
mAU (max) for each run 
µL allergen extract applied (10 mg DM/mL) 
Figure 6.1: Linearity plot obtained from injection of increasing volumes of allergen extract.
6.2
Repeatability
The repeatability of the method, that is, the variability in data from replicate determina-
tions of single injections, was also investigated. Due to time constraints it was not possible
to assess repeatability of several analytical runs.
Four single injections of increasing amounts of allergen extract were loaded onto the
column, that is; 4 x 7.5 mL, 4 x 12.5 mL, 4 x 17.5 mL, 4 x 20 mL, 4 x 25 mL, and 4 x 25 mL
allergen extract (10 mg DM/mL). The IAC-program is outlined in Table 5.4. The peak
height of each the elution peaks were plotted against the amount of extract applied to the
column, and can be seen in Figure 6.2 below.
y = 1,3664x - 1,8415 
R² = 0,98776 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
mAU (max) for each run (280 nm) 
µL allergen extract added (10 mg/mL) 
16.6% 
0.72% 
0.45% 
0.87% 
0.80% 
0.55% 
0.77% 
Figure 6.2: Repeatability plot for single injections obtained by injecting four times the same volume of
allergen extract. The %CV for each point is indicated below the data points.
==PAGE:43==
6.2 Repeatability
37
For each four injections, the coeﬃcient of variance (CV) was determined, and can be seen
in the ﬁgure above. Both by visually inspecting the data points and by comparing the
CVs, it is evident that the variability is larger when only 7.5 mL is injected. The CV for
the rest of the data point is 0.4-0.9%.
During the elution phases, samples were regularly collected and analyzed by SDS-
PAGE according to Appendix B, to qualitatively assess the purity of the eluates. The
resulting SDS-PAGE gel is shown in Figure 6.3 below. It shows the presence of only Phl
p 6.
97400 
66200 
45000 
31000 
21500 
14400 
Phl p 6 
Figure 6.3: SDS-PAGE on fractions collected during the elutions (E) and regenerations (Reg.) of the
repeatability experiment. "1.X" = ﬁrst injected volume (7.5 mL). "4.X" = fourth injected volume (20 mL).
"5.X" = 25 mL injected allegren extract. Time of collection is shown in brackets. Blue frame = Phl p 6
protein bands. The sizes of the marker proteins in indicated in dalton.
In Figure 6.4 below is shown an example of an elution peak from which the peak height
has been read oﬀ, and plotted in Figure 6.2. Besides a little peak tailing, a sharp peak is
observed, indicating the presence of only a single component. The peak tailing may arise
from suboptimal packaging of the column.
Figure 6.4: Example of a chromatogram obtained during elution of Phl p 6. Absorption (AU) versus time
(minutes).
==PAGE:44==
38
6 Pre-validation of IAC
6.3
IAC versus RID
Once the range of linearity as well as repeatability had been investigated, the IAC method
was subjected to quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6 by means of a standard curve generated from
an IHR. The result was then compared to the result obtained from quantiﬁcation of Phl
p 6 in the same allergen extract by RID.
6.3.1
IAC quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6
An IHR was diluted to 10 mg DM/mL in PBS pH 7.4, and a standard curve was prepared
by injecting 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 mL IHR into the column. The applied IAC-program
is outlined in Table 5.4 in the previous chapter. Hereafter, duplicates of two diﬀerent
amounts of allergen extract, within the linear range, were applied to the IAC-column (2
x 15 mL and 2 x 25 mL, diluted to 10 mg DM/ mL). To generate the standard curve, the
maximum peak height at 280 nm was plotted against the amount of IHR applied to the
column (Figure 6.5).
y = 1,3738x - 0,3466 
R² = 0,98835 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
mAU (max) for each run (280 nm) 
µL allergen extract added (10 mg/mL) 
Standard curve (IHR 000838426) 
Figure 6.5: Standard curve obtained by application of increasing volumes of an IHR. Red lines indicate
the data points obtained from duplicate injection of two diﬀerent volumes of a drug substance.
From the above standard curve it was possible to calculate the amount of Phl p 6 in the
allergen extract. This is done by interpolating the obtained peak heights on the standard
curve, and by correcting for dilution factors. The result is shown in Table 6.2 below.
Table 6.2: Results of IAC quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6.
mL
allergen
extract
applied
Peak
height
(mAU)
Peak
height
avg.
(mAU)
Inter-
polated
Amount
(mg
DM)
Conc.
diluted (mg
DM/mL
sample)
Conc.
undiluted
(mg DM/mL
sample)
Avg. conc.
(mg DM/mL
sample)
15
17.28
17.13
12.72
127.20
8.48
46.98
51.59
15
16.97
25
37.24
35.68
26.22
262.20
10.59
58.10
25
34.11
==PAGE:45==
6.3.2 RID quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6
39
6.3.2
RID quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6
The result obtained by IAC was compared to the result obtained by RID. Obviously, to be
comparable the same allergen extract was analyzed in both analyses. Moreover, the IHR
derived from the batch as well. The procedure to perform RID is described in Appendix
C.
The areas of the precipitates were analyzed by using the Image Pro Software, which
automatically measures the areas. The areas were then plotted against the amount of IHR
applied (mg DM). The plot is shown in Figure 6.6 below.
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
0,0 
0,5 
1,0 
1,5 
2,0 
2,5 
3,0 
3,5 
4,0 
4,5 
Area – mm2 
Applied - µg 
RID standard curve 
y = 22,27x + 8,761 
R2 = 0,96359 
Figure 6.6: Standard curve obtained by applying a dilution serie of an IHR to the RID plates. The red
lines indicate the data obtained from RID analysis of a drug substance.
Based on interpolation of the obtained precipitation areas on the standard curve, the
amount of Phl p 6 can be measured. Data is shown in Table 6.3 below.
Table 6.3: Results of RID quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6.
mL
allergen
extract
applied
Area
(mm2)
Avg.
area
(mm2)
Inter-
polated
(mg DM)
Conc.
diluted (mg
DM/ mL
sample)
Conc.
undiluted
(mg DM/mL
sample)
Avg. conc.
(mg DM/mL
sample)
4
53.046
54.72
2.06
0.52
58.47
57.72
4
51.463
4
58.679
4
55.691
7
84.123
87.12
3.52
0.50
56.96
7
84.458
7
90.358
7
89.529
To summarize, the concentration of Phl p 6 determined by IAC and RID in the same
extract, was 51.6 and 57.7 mg DM/mL sample, respectively.
The validated intermedi-
==PAGE:46==
40
6 Pre-validation of IAC
ary precision of RID is CVip Æ 6.9, thus an estimated 95% conﬁdence interval becomes
57.7±10.2 mg DM/mL sample. Based on this, it can be tentatively concluded that the two
determinations are not diﬀerent.
==PAGE:47==
7
|
Discussion
A standardization procedure for allergen extracts intended for immunotherapy as well as
diagnostics, is crucial in order to control the naturally occurring variability derived from
the use of natural source materials. Furthermore, for manufacturers of allergen products
to obtain and maintain marketing authorization, they are, among other things, required
to provide data for batch-to-batch consistency [Eudralex, 1994]. In Europe, this is heavily
based on comparison to a well-characterized IHR using a deﬁned panel of in vitro methods.
An essential part of the standardization and characterization of allergen extracts as well
as IHRs, is the quantitative determination of major allergen content.
The current method for major allergen quantiﬁcation, RID, has been used in ALK for
decades. RID is a well-established and validated method, however, is it very laborious
(Appendix C), and in addition, the results are delayed for at least two days. Furthermore,
the risk of introducing errors that lead to inaccurate results and require the samples to
be retested, is high. Such errors arise from the great deal of manual work involved in the
analysis, and encounter errors such as irregular moulding of gel or uneven distribution
of antibodies in the gel.
Therefore, ALK has a high interest in exploring alternative
quantiﬁcation methods.
Several analytical methods for quantiﬁcation of speciﬁc proteins exist. One of the most
widely used is ELISA, which is a well-known and sensitive technique. Some years ago,
ALK made an eﬀort to develop an ELISA that could be used to quantify major allergens
in drug substance (Figure 2.1), with the goal of replacing RID. The outcome revealed
an unsatisfying precision, especially, the intermediate precision was poor with a CV >
20%, and therefore the project was abolished. The low precision resulted primarily from
technician-to-technician variation as well as variation introduced by extensive dilution
and pipetting. The challenge is that the drug substance is very concentrated, and requires
much dilution (up to a million-fold). Thus, sample preparation required large volumes of
diluent versus sample.
Beside reducing labor and analysis time, a novel method permitting the use of less di-
lute or even undiluted samples, is favourable. Liquid chromatography (LC), especially
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), is widely used in the pharmaceutical
industry as a routine analytical tool. This is primarily due to the ﬂexibility it oﬀers, both
with regard to the diverse nature of analytes that can be applied as well as the many dif-
ferent modes that can be used, e.g. aﬃnity chromatography [Gray and Lawrence, 2008].
By combining LC with highly selective antibodies you get a powerful analytical tool for
separation and measurement of speciﬁc antigens from complex mixtures [Hage, 1998].
41
==PAGE:48==
42
7 Discussion
One of the most common uses of IAC is in relation to sample clean-up prior to quan-
tiﬁcation by HPLC or mass spectrometry [Cho et al., 1996, Scott and Trucksess, 1997,
Kondo et al., 2000, Theodoridis et al., 2002, Senyuva and Gilbert, 2010].
In this report, a proof of concept study is represented that demonstrates the use of
IAC for direct quantiﬁcation of a speciﬁc major allergen in a complex sample matrix.
Initially, the monospeciﬁc polyclonal Phl p 6-antibodies were covalently immobilized on
CNBr-activated Sepharose at diﬀerent concentrations (approximately 0.9-3.6 mg anti-
body/mL gel). Based on the relative concentration of antibodies in supernatant after in-
cubation compared to the concentration of antibodies added, the coupling eﬃciencies were
found to be 89-94%. On the basis of the coupling procedure provided by Kavran & Leahy
[Kavran and Leahy, 2014], it was decided to immobilize 2 mg antibody/mL gel in the later
coupling experiments to obtain better reproducibility. This also resulted in coupling eﬃ-
ciencies around 90% (data not shown). However, a subsequent and more thorough search
through related literature has revealed that it may be possible to immobilize as much as
6-8 mg antibody/mL gel [Rodero et al., 2001, Huwe et al., 2001, Theodoridis et al., 2002,
Zhao et al., 2003]. This could potentially increase the column capacity, and consequently
enhance the signal during elution. However, factors such as steric hindrance and mul-
tipoint attachment may become more signiﬁcant, and consequently precluding an actual
increase in column capacity. This constitutes a subject for further investigation as it might
be favorable to increase the signal intensity.
The antibodies were immobilized to the commercially available CNBr-activated Sepharose,
which has been widely used to immobilize proteins through primary amines. It has been
applied both for direct analyte detection as well as for sample clean-up before detection
using another method [Delaunay-Bertoncini and Hennion, 2004]. Its simple coupling pro-
cedure and well-established performance, makes it a good choice for a proof of concept
study. However, it also has some drawbacks. As it is an agarose-based matrix, it has
a low back pressure resistance, and thus requires application of samples under low ﬂow
rates. The maximum ﬂow rate that can be applied to the Sepharose in a 5x50 mm col-
umn is 0.8 mL/min (250 cm/h) [GE Healthcare Life Sciences, 2011]. To further reduce
the analysis time by increasing the ﬂow rates, it might be advantageous to use a more
rigid base matrix, such as silica [Clarke et al., 2000, Schiel et al., 2006]. Alternatively, by
increasing the internal diameter, the ﬂow rate can also be increased. For example, if the
internal diameter is increased to 10 mm, the maximum ﬂow rate can be increased to 3.3
mL/min. Generally, increasing the ﬂow rate is advantageous as it reduces analysis time.
On the contrary, a certain "contact time" is required for the antigen to bind to the an-
tibodies during the loading phase, especially if the antigen-antibody interaction is weak.
The maximum ﬂow rate that can be applied during the sample injection, which facilitates
maximum binding of antigen, is therefore a point for further evaluation.
During the development of this method, non-speciﬁc proteins were occasionally observed in
the collected eluate fractions (e.g. Figure 5.7). This is not an unusual observation, as non-
speciﬁc interactions may occur between the analyte and interferences from sample matrix,
and solid-support and/or immobilized antibodies [Delaunay-Bertoncini and Hennion, 2004].
Most commonly, hydrophobic and ionic interactions account for the undesirable adsorp-
tion. As seen in Figure 5.7, one of the non-speciﬁc proteins had a molecular weight of
around 50 kDa, while the other was approximately 25 kDa. This corresponds very well
==PAGE:49==
7 Discussion
43
with the size of an antibody heavy and light chain, respectively. Antibody-leakage from
CNBr-activated supports has previously been reported [Kümel et al., 1979, Ostrove, 1990,
Kim and Hage, 2006]. Therefore, an experiment was conducted to test if antibodies leaked
from the column (Subsection 5.5.2 in Chapter 5). The same protocol was applied with the
injection of a blank sample. The potential heavy and light chain was expected to reap-
pear in the SDS-PAGE gel if the presence of the two extra protein bands was caused by
antibody-leakage. As shown in Figure 5.9, this was not the case. The fractions containing
the non-speciﬁc proteins was instead subjected to mass spectrometry. Unfortunately, this
did not clarify whether the proteins derived from leaking antibodies. Alternatively, the
presence of antibody heavy and light chain could have been investigated by Western Blot.
Moreover, a negative control was produced by preparing a portion of Sepharose ac-
cording to the protocol, but without addition of antibodies. Once packed into a column, it
was subjected to sample loading, wash, elution, and regeneration as the previous runs. It
could then potentially be elucidated if the non-speciﬁc proteins derived from non-speciﬁc
binding of allergen extract components to the Sepharose. Figure 5.8 shows that no matrix
components appear to have bound to the Sepharose matrix. Instead, the non-speciﬁc bind-
ing may arise from non-speciﬁc interactions between matrix components and the positive
charge on the isourea derivatives formed upon immobilization of the antibodies (Figure
2.6). In order to evaluate this, antibodies with no aﬃnity for the target could be immo-
bilized onto the Sepharose, followed by the same loading, wash, and elution scheme.
Whether or not the non-speciﬁc proteins derives from matrix interferences or from leaking
antibodies, remains unknown. If it is antibodies, it could either be a consequence of dis-
ruption of the covalent immobilization bond, or due to non-covalent interactions between
immobilized antibodies and "sticking" antibodies. In order to minimize the presence of
non-speciﬁc proteins in the eluate, it was evaluated if the wash between loading and elu-
tion could contribute to this. Initially, it was established how harsh the washing conditions
could be without dissociation of antigen-antibody complex. As seen in Figure 5.11(a), a
pH of 3.0 and a NaCl-gradient of 0.5-1.5 M resulted in dissociation of the antigen-antibody
complex. On the other hand, increasing the pH to 4.0 did not result elution of the antigen
during the wash, and thus constituted viable washing conditions. However, no protein
bands were observed in the fraction collected during elution either. The reason for this
can either be that the detection signal was to low to be visible on the SDS-PAGE gel, or
perhaps the antigens were still bound to the antibodies. Either way, the eﬀect of neutral
pH and a concurrent NaCl-gradient was also investigated. It was speculated that by al-
tering the ionic strength of the mobile phase it could cause disruption of the non-speciﬁc
binding interactions without aﬀecting the antigen-antibody interaction. The wash was
followed by an isocratic elution at pH 2.7 and and 100 mM NaCl. Figure 5.12 shows the
result of this investigation. It was hereby successfully demonstrated that by immobiliz-
ing monospeciﬁc polyclonal antibodies against the Phl p 6-allergen on Sepharose, it was
possible to capture the allergen from a complex allergen extract. Moreover, by applying
a NaCl-gradient before elution of the allergen, the presence of non-speciﬁc proteins in the
eluate was removed before elution.
Once the loading, wash, and elution conditions were established, the duration of each
stage was shortened to an extent that was not thought to aﬀect the outcome. Due to time
limitation, drastic changes were not implemented. The resulting duration of each cycle is
==PAGE:50==
44
7 Discussion
1 hour 15 minutes. If a sample is analyzed in duplicates at two diﬀerent concentrations,
the resulting analysis time has been reduced from 48-72 hours to 5 hours. However, in
order quantify the amount of a speciﬁc allergen, a standard curve must be generated from
an IHR. If the standard curve consists of four data points in the linear range, the analysis
time becomes 10 hours, which is still a substantial reduction in time.
Preferably, the
generation of a standard curve is only needed once per column. Alternatively, a standard
curve can be generated occasionally to verify the linearity and the persistence of an excess
of antibodies available for antigen binding. The decreased analysis time oﬀers much more
ﬂexibility compared to RID. While RID must be carefully scheduled as it, for example,
cannot be performed on Thursdays due to weekends, IAC can be performed any.
In addition to the substantially reduction in analysis time as well as the minimal
amount of manual work needed to perform IAC, the consumption of antibodies is also
reduced in IAC compared to RID. In the preparation of a Phl p 6-antibody coupled
column (5x50 mm, 1 mL packed gel) approximately 100 mL antibody solution is consumed,
whereas a RID analysis of Phl p 6 requires 140 mL antibody solution. Furthermore, as the
IAC column is reusable, the actual consumption of antibodies per analysis decreases even
further. The maximum number of cycles the column can stand has not been assessed,
however, based on the preliminary results it seems to be around 30 cycles and possibly
more. This constitutes an interesting subject for further investigation.
A part of this project was to assess the repeatability and linearity, including range of
linearity, of the method.
These parameters are an essential part of a future method
validation. The linearity deﬁnes in which range a sample is quantiﬁable, i.e. in which
range the peak height (mAU) is expected to be directly proportional to the concentration of
target allergen in an allergen extract. The repeatability describes the expected variability
in replicate data. The linearity was assessed three times; during linearity determination
(Section 6.1), repeatability (Section 6.2), and quantiﬁcation of Phl p 6 (Section 6.3). The
coeﬃcient of determination (R2) was 0.988-0.998 in the range of 7.5-30 mL applied allergen
extract. In comparison the RID, the acceptance criteria for linearity in RID are visual
linearity and a R2 Ø 0.95. The linearity validation of RID resulted in a mean R2 of 0.983
(In-house RID validation report, 2010). Thus, at this point the IAC is competitive with
RID. Deliberations on whether to ﬁt the data using a third degree polynomial regression
may be relevant in the future. That said, it constitutes a whole new area for discussion
that are not relevant for this particular project. The linear regression model is often more
simple and practical to use.
The repeatability between ﬁnal reportable results, deﬁned as the actual result obtained
from replicate determination of speciﬁc allergen concentration, has not been investigated
due to time limitation. Instead, the variability between single injections at diﬀerent in-
jection volumes was determined (Section 6.2). The CV was calculated for each injection
volume (see Figure 6.2). For the 7.5 mL-point, the CV was 16.6%, however, the residual
measuring points showed a CV of 0.4-0.9%. Thus, when eliminating the biases introduced
by sample preparation, such as pipetting, the variation between single injections is very
low (<1%). As the IAC requires minimal preparation compared to RID, the repeatability
is expected to be similar to RID (CVrep Æ 4% (In-house RID validation report, 2010)).
Based on these results, the recommended measuring range is within 10-30 mL allergen
extract (diluted to 10 mg DM/mL). This could potentially be extended by increasing
amount of coupled antibodies, as suggested earlier.
==PAGE:51==
7 Discussion
45
The ﬁnal part of the project was to perform a comparison between the presented IAC
method and RID (Section 6.3).
Therefore, the concentration of Phl p 6 in the same
extract using the same IHR was determined. This resulted in a concentration of Phl p
6, determined by IAC, of 51.6 mg DM/mL sample, whereas it was 57.7 mg DM/mL sample
based on RID. Based on the intermediary precision established during the validation of
RID (CVip Æ 6.9%), the 95% conﬁdence interval becomes 57.7 ± 10.2 mg DM/mL sample.
Consequently, it cannot be concluded that the two methods of determinations are diﬀerent,
as the concentration of Phl p 6 determined by IAC is within this conﬁdence interval.
==PAGE:52==
8
|
Conclusion
The overall aim of this master’s thesis project was to perform the preliminary experiments
required to prove that IAC is a suitable method for quantiﬁcation of major allergens in al-
lergen extracts. It was successfully demonstrated that monospeciﬁc polyclonal antibodies
against Phl p 6 could be immobilized on Sepharose beads without eliminating the binding
activity of the antibodies. Operating conditions, i.e. the conditions during which the aller-
gen extract was applied, washed and eluted, were identiﬁed. These conditions succesfully
facilitated the binding of Phl p 6 to the immobilized antibodies, the removal of non-speciﬁc
protein binding, and ﬁnally the dissociation of the antigen-antibody complexes. By mea-
suring the absorbance of the eluate at 280 nm is was possible to detect the presence Phl
p 6. A single comparison study of the IAC-based method versus RID was conducted. Phl
p 6 in an extract was quantiﬁed using both methods. The result obtained by IAC was
within the 95% conﬁdence interval of the result derived from RID. Consequently, based
solely on this single comparison, the results were considered to be equal. However, further
characterization of the IAC method is required in order to make a general statement that
IAC and RID produces the same results.
Below is a table that summarizes some of the key features of IAC compared to RID.
IAC
RID
Analysis time
5 hours (10 hours*)
48-72 hours
Manual work load
30-45 min.
2-3 hours
Scheduling
Flexible
Tight
Antibody consumption
(Phl p 6)
π 140 mL
140 mL
Sample application
Drug substance,
drug product,
in-process samples**
Drug substance,
(in-process samples***)
* Including generation of a four-point standard curve
** Requires minimal sample preparation
*** Requires extensive sample preparation
The work presented in this report, provide a solid foundation for the further development
of IAC, and it is believed IAC will some day replace RID as a routine analysis.
47
==PAGE:53==
9
|
Future perspectives
The overriding purpose of the whole project is to ﬁnd a replacement for RID to quantify
major allergens. The experiments performed during this master project were undertaken
to establish proof of concept that IAC can be used to achieve this goal. The IAC method
has resulted in simplicity and improved eﬃciency, due to more automated analysis, and
minimal manual work required. The analysis time has been substantially reduced com-
pared to RID, which also results in greater ﬂexibility.
The presented IAC method has been developed from scratch, and therefore further op-
timization is needed before it can be validated, and implemented as a routine analytical
method in ALK. Subjects interesting to investigate in the near future include;
• Successful immobilization of Phl p 6-antibodies to CNBr-activated Sepharose has
been veriﬁed. However, the eﬀect of immobilizing a higher amount of antibodies,
such as 5, 7.5, and 10 mg antibody/mL Sepharose, is an interesting subject for
future experiments.
This could potentially increase the capacity of the column,
thereby extending the measurable range.
• The chromatographic conditions during loading, wash, elution, and regeneration has
been established. One of the next steps is to evaluate the inﬂuence of parameters,
such as ﬂow rate and time. Currently, the duration of each cycle in the IAC method
is 1 hour 15 minutes. It is believed that the time can be further reduced by increasing
the ﬂow rates (maximum 0.8 mL/min), and/or by proceeding to the next stage as
soon as the signal intensity has reached the baseline. For example, as seen in Figure
6.4, the duration of the elution phase could potentially be decreased to 10-11 minutes.
• The present project has been conceptualized by the use of Phl p 6-antibodies to
capture the major allergen Phl p 6. However, this only constitute one isoallergen
deriving from one specie. In order to enhance the applicability of the method as
well as establishing its full potential, immobilizing antibodies targeting other major
allergens, must be investigated. This may include a change of elution buﬀer as the
antigen-antibody interactions may diﬀer, although 100 mM Gly-HCl pH 2.5-3.0 is
one of the most commonly used buﬀers to dissociate antigen-antibody complexes
[Fornstedt, 1990].
Finally, the potential of IAC is not only limited to analysis of drug substance (as RID
typically is). IAC also has the potential to be used for analysis of both drug product as
well as in-process samples collected during the extraction process. The use of IAC as a
in-process analysis oﬀers the possibility to monitor the extraction process, and to obtain
49
==PAGE:54==
50
9 Future perspectives
extraction proﬁles. These may comprise a helpful tool for process optimizations during
the manufacturing of allergen extracts.
==PAGE:55==
References
[Axén et al., 1967] Axén, R., Porath, J., and Ernback, S. (1967).
Chemical coupling of peptides and
proteins to polysaccharides by means of cyanogen halides. Nature, 214:1302–1304.
[Calderón et al., 2011] Calderón, M. A., Larenas, D., Kleine-Tebbe, J., Jacobsen, L., Passalacqua, G.,
Eng, P. A., Varga, E. M., Valovirta, E., Moreno, C., Malling, H. J., Alvarez-Cuesta, E., Durham, S.,
and Demoly, P. (2011). European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology task force report on
’dose-response relationship in allergen-speciﬁc immunotherapy’. Allergy, 66(10):1345–1359.
[Cho et al., 1996] Cho, B.-Y., Zou, H., Strong, R., Fisher, D. H., Nappier, J., and Krulla, I. S. (1996).
Immunochromatographic analysis of bovine growth hormone releasing factor involving reversed-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography-immunodetection. Journal of Chromatography A, 743:181–194.
[Clarke et al., 2000] Clarke, W., Beckwith, J. D., Jackson, A., Reynolds, B., Karle, E. M., and Hage,
D. S. (2000). Antibody immobilization to high-performance liquid chromatography supports - Charac-
terization of maximum loading capacity for intact immunoglobulin G and Fab fragments. Journal of
Chromatography A, 888:13–22.
[Delaunay-Bertoncini and Hennion, 2004] Delaunay-Bertoncini, N. and Hennion, M. C. (2004).
Im-
munoaﬃnity solid-phase extraction for pharmaceutical and biomedical trace-analysis - Coupling with
HPLC and CE - Perspectives. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 34(4):717–736.
[Ding et al., 2013] Ding, P., Mi, Z., Hou, Y., He, Y., and Xie, J. (2013). Determination of Ochratoxin
A in Feed by Immunoaﬃnity Cleanup and Liquid Chromatography. Journal of AOAC International,
96(3):599–602.
[Durham et al., 2010] Durham, S. R., Emminger, W., Kapp, A., Colombo, G., de Monchy, J. G. R., Rak,
S., Scadding, G. K., Andersen, J. S., Riis, B., and Dahl, R. (2010). Long-term clinical eﬃcacy in grass
pollen-induced rhinoconjunctivitis after treatment with SQ-standardized grass allergy immunotherapy
tablet. The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 125(1):131–8.e1–7.
[Durham et al., 1999] Durham, S. R., Walker, S. M., Varga, E.-M., Jacobsen, M. R., O’Brien, F., Noble,
W., Till, S. J., Hamid, Q. A., and Nouri-Aria, K. T. (1999). Long-term clinical eﬃcacy of grass-pollen
immunotherapy. The New England Journal of Medicine, 341(7):468–475.
[Eifan et al., 2011] Eifan, A. O., Shamji, M. H., and Durham, S. R. (2011).
Long-term clinical and
immunological eﬀects of allergen immunotherapy. Current opinion in allergy and clinical immunology,
11(6):586–93.
[EMA, 2009] EMA
(2009).
Guideline
on
allergen
products:
Production
and
quality
issues
(EMEA/CHMP/BWP/304831/2007).
[Eudralex, 1994] Eudralex (1994). Speciﬁc requirements for the production and control of allergen prod-
ucts. Vol. 7 (7BIm11a).
[FDA, 2014] FDA (2014). Guidance for Industry: Analytical procedures and methods validation for drugs
and biologics (Draft guidance).
[Fornstedt, 1990] Fornstedt, N. (1990). Aﬃnity chromatographic studies on antigen-antibody dissociation.
The FEBS Journal, 177(2):195–199.
[Frew, 2010] Frew, A. J. (2010). Allergen immunotherapy. The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology,
125(2 Suppl 2):S306–13.
51
==PAGE:56==
52
References
[GE Healthcare Life Sciences, 2011] GE Healthcare Life Sciences (2011).
Instructions 71-5000-15 AF:
CNBr-activated Sepharose 4 Fast Flow. Technical report.
[Gray and Lawrence, 2008] Gray, A. and Lawrence, P. (2008). Basic HPLC theory and practice. In Venn,
R. F., editor, Principles and Practice of Bioanalysis, chapter 3, pages 41–67. CRC Press, 2nd edition.
[Hage, 1998] Hage, D. S. (1998). Survey of recent advances in analytical applications of immunoaﬃnity
chromatography. Journal of Chromatography B, 715(1):3–28.
[Huwe et al., 2001] Huwe, J. K., Shelver, W. L., Stanker, L., Patterson, D. G., and Turner, W. E. (2001).
On the isolation of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and furans from serum samples using immunoaﬃn-
ity chromatography prior to high-resolution gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Journal of Chro-
matography B, 757(2):285–293.
[ICH, 2005] ICH (2005). Q2(R1): Validation of analytical procedures: Text and methodology.
[Kaul et al., 2011] Kaul, S., May, S., Lüttkopf, D., and Vieths, S. (2011). Regulatory environment for
allergen-speciﬁc immunotherapy. Allergy, 66(6):753–764.
[Kavran and Leahy, 2014] Kavran, J. M. and Leahy, D. J. (2014). Coupling antibody to cyanogen bromide-
activated sepharose., volume 541. Elsevier Inc., 1 edition.
[Kim and Hage, 2006] Kim, H. S. and Hage, D. S. (2006). Immobilization methods for aﬃnity chromatog-
raphy. In Hage, D. S., editor, Handbook of Aﬃnity Chromatography, chapter 3, pages 35–78. CRC Press,
2nd edition.
[King et al., 1995] King, T. P., Hoﬀman, D., Lowenstein, H., Marsh, D. G., Platts-Mills, T. A. E., and
Thomas, W. (1995). Allergen nomenclature. Clinical and Experimental Allergy, 25:27–37.
[Kohn and Wilchek, 1981] Kohn, J. and Wilchek, M. (1981).
Procedures for the analysis of cyanogen
bromide-activated Sepharose or Sephadex by quantitative determination of cyanate esters and imido-
carbonates. Analytical Biochemistry, 115(2):375–382.
[Kondo et al., 2000] Kondo, F., Matsumoto, H., Yamada, S., Tsuji, K., Ueno, Y., and Harada, K. (2000).
Immunoaﬃnity puriﬁcation method for detection and quantiﬁcation of microcystins in lake water. Tox-
icon, 38(6):813–823.
[Kümel et al., 1979] Kümel, G., Daus, H., and Mauch, H. (1979). Improved method for the cyanogen
bromide activation of agarose beads. Journal of Chromatography, 172:221–226.
[Larenas-Linnemann and Cox, 2008] Larenas-Linnemann, D. and Cox, L. S. (2008). European allergen
extract units and potency: review of available information. Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology,
100(2):137–45.
[Larsen and Lowenstein, 2014] Larsen, J. N. and Lowenstein, H. (2014). An overview of allergen extracts.
[Larsen et al., 2008] Larsen, J. r. N., Houghton, C. G., Vega, M. L., and Lø wenstein, H. (2008). Manu-
facturing and standardizing allergen extracts in Europe. Clinical Allergy and Immunology, 21:283–301.
[Mancini et al., 1965] Mancini, G., Carbonara, A. O., and Heremans, J. F. (1965).
Immunochemical
quantitation of antigens by single radial immunodiﬀusion. Immunochemistry, 2(3):235–254.
[MitoSciences, 2015] MitoSciences
(2015).
Sandwich
ELISA
Kits
-
Microplates.
http://www.mitosciences.com/microplate-sandwich-elisa-kits.html. Last accessed July 12, 2015.
[Moser and Hage, 2010] Moser, A. C. and Hage, D. S. (2010). Immunoaﬃnity chromatography: an intro-
duction to applications and recent developments. Bioanalysis, 2(4):769–790.
[Ostrove, 1990] Ostrove, S. (1990). Aﬃnity chromatography: General methods. Methods in Enzymology,
182(3):357–371.
[Padlan, 1994] Padlan, E. A. (1994).
Anatomy of the antibody molecule.
Molecular Immunology,
31(3):169–217.
[Pfeiﬀer et al., 1987] Pfeiﬀer, N. E., Wylie, D. E., and Schuster, S. M. (1987). Immunoaﬃnity chromatog-
raphy utilizing monoclonal antibodies. Factors which inﬂuence antigen-binding capacity.
Journal of
immunological methods, 97(1):1–9.
==PAGE:57==
References
53
[Porath et al., 1967] Porath, J., Axén, R., and Ernback, S. (1967).
Chemical coupling of proteins to
agarose. Nature, 215(5109):1491–1492.
[Reverberi and Reverberi, 2007] Reverberi, R. and Reverberi, L. (2007). Factors aﬀecting the antigen-
antibody reaction. Blood transfusion, 5(4):227–40.
[Rodero et al., 2001] Rodero, M., Jiménez, A., Chivato, T., Laguna, R., and Cuéllar, C. (2001). Puriﬁca-
tion of Anisakis simplex antigen by aﬃnity chromatography. Parasitology Research, 87(9):736–740.
[Schiel et al., 2006] Schiel, J. E., Mallik, R., Soman, S., Joseph, K. S., and Hage, D. S. (2006). Applications
of silica supports in aﬃnity chromatography. Journal of Separation Science, 29(6):719–737.
[Scott and Trucksess, 1997] Scott, P. M. and Trucksess, M. W. (1997).
Application of immunoaﬃnity
columns to mycotoxin analysis. Journal of AOAC International, 80(5):941–949.
[Senyuva and Gilbert, 2010] Senyuva, H. Z. and Gilbert, J. (2010). Immunoaﬃnity column clean-up tech-
niques in food analysis: A review. Journal of Chromatography B, 878(2):115–132.
[Shabir, 2003] Shabir, G. A. (2003). Validation of high-performance liquid chromatography methods for
pharmaceutical analysis - Understanding the diﬀerences and similarities between validation requirements
of the US Food and Drug Administration , the US Pharmacopeia and the International Co. Journal of
Chromatography A, 987:57–66.
[Small and Lamm, 1966] Small, P. A. and Lamm, M. E. (1966). Polypeptide chain structure of rabbit
immunoglobulins. I. gamma-G-immunoglobulin. Biochemistry, 5(1):259–267.
[Theodoridis et al., 2002] Theodoridis, G., Haasnoot, W., Cazemier, G., Schilt, R., Jaziri, M., Diallo,
B., Papadoyannis, I. N., and de Jong, G. J. (2002). Immunoaﬃnity chromatography for the sample
pretreatment of Taxus plant and cell extracts prior to analysis of taxanes by high-performance liquid
chromatography. Journal of Chromatography A, 948(1-2):177–185.
[WHO, 2002] WHO (2002). Prevention of Allergy and Allergic Asthma (WHO/NMH/MNC/CRA/03.2).
[Zhao et al., 2003] Zhao, M., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, X., and Chang, W. (2003). Development and charac-
terization of an immunoaﬃnity column for the selective extraction of bisphenol A from serum samples.
Journal of Chromatography B, 783:401–410.
==PAGE:58==
A
|
Coupling protocol
A.1
Solutions and buﬀers
Step 1: Activation buﬀer
Dilute 25 mL 2 M HCl in 50 mL water for a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mM.
Step 2: Coupling buﬀer
Component
Final concentration
Stock
Amount
NaHCO3, pH 8.3
100 mM
1 M
100 mL
NaCl
500 mM
5 M
100 mL
Mix the two 100 mL-solutions, and add water to 1 L.
Step 3: Quenching buﬀer
Dilute 5 mL of 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 in 45 mL water for a ﬁnal concentration of 100 mM.
Step 4: Buﬀers for resin wash
Table A.1: High pH wash buﬀer
Component
Final concentration
Stock
Amount
Tris-HCl, pH 8.0
100 mM
1 M
25 mL
NaCl
500 mM
5 M
25 mL
Mix the two 25 mL-solutions, and add water to 250 mL.
Table A.2: Low pH wash buﬀer
Component
Final concentration
Stock
Amount
NaOAc, pH 4.0
100 mM
1 M
25 mL
NaCl
500 mM
5 M
25 mL
Mix the two 25 mL-solutions, and add water to 250 mL.
Storage buﬀer
20% ethanol solution.
55
==PAGE:59==
56
A Coupling protocol
A.2
Coupling procedure
Step 1: 
Preparation of 
resin and antibody 
Step 2: Coupling 
antibody to the 
resin 
Step 3: Quench 
the reaction 
Step 4: Wash the 
resin 
Figure A.1: Overview of the steps involved in the immobilization of antibodies onto CNBr-activated
Sepharose beads.
Step 1: Preparation of resin and antibody (4-5 hr)
1.1 Measure the absorbance at 280 nm of the ﬁnal antibody solution and calculate its concentration
(A = Á · l · c)
1.2 Concentrate the antibody to 1-2 mg/mL if it is too dilute
1.3 Determine the amount of resin needed. Approximately 2 mg antibody can be coupled to 1 mL swollen
resin.
1.4 Weigh out 250 mg of dry resin for every 1 mL of hydrated resin needed.
1.5a Add 5-column volumes of cold activation buﬀer to resin.
1.5b Wash with 10 to 15 column volumes of cold 1 mM HCl. Use small wash volumes, e.g. 1 column
volume) and let the mixture equilibrate a few minutes during each wash step.
Determine the column volume.
1.6a Incubate on a nutator or platform rocker for 2h at 4¶C.
1.6b Next step
Step 2: Coupling antibody to resin (4 hr or O/N)
2.1 After swelling the resin, centrifuge it at 1000 x g for 5 min. Decant the supernatant.
2.2 Add antibody in coupling solution (approx. coupling solution:medium = 0,5:1) to the resin. If necessary,
adjust pH to desired value, and incubate it O/N on a nutator or platform rocker at 4¶C or for 4 hours at
RT.
To obtain good reproducibility, it is wise to adjust total reaction volume to a ﬁxed value with coupling buﬀer.
To test for nonspeciﬁc binding to the resin, extra CNBr-activated resin can be prepared and incubated with
coupling buﬀer lacking antibody to generate a negative control.
Step 3: Quench the reaction (4 hr)
Objective: To wash any unreacted antibody from the resin and then ensure that there are no unreacted
CNBr sites remaining.
3.1 Centrifuge the resin at 1000 x g for 5 min.
3.2 Remove the supernatant and save.
3.3 Measure the OD280 of the supernatant ? save supernatant for SDS.
3.4 Add 5 column volumes of coupling buﬀer to resin.
3.5 Incubate on nutator mixer for 30 min at RT.
3.6 Spin down resin at 1000 x g for 5 min and decant the supernatant.
3.7 Add 5-10 column volumes of quenching buﬀer.
3.8 Incubate on nutator for 2-3 hr at RT.
==PAGE:60==
A.2 Coupling procedure
57
3.9 Spin down the resin at 1000 x g for 5 min and decant supernatant.
Step 4: Wash the resin (1 hr)
Objective: To remove uncoupled antibody from the resin and prepare resin for long-term storage.
4.1 Resuspend the resin in 10 column volumes of high pH wash buﬀer.
4.2 Spin down the resin at 1000 x g for 5 in and decant supernatant.
4.3 Resuspend the resin in 10 column volumes of low pH wash buﬀer.
4.4 Spin down the resin at 1000 x g for 5 min and decant supernatant.
4.5 Repeat step 4.1-4.4 two more times.
4.6 Resuspend the resin in 5 column volumes of storage buﬀer.
4.7 Spin down the resin at 1000 x g for 5 min and decant supernatant.
4.8 Add 1 column volume of storage buﬀer and store resin at 4¶C.
==PAGE:61==
B
|
SDS-PAGE protocol
Samples analyzed by SDS-PAGE mostly constituted fractions from the LC, and were applied to the gel
undiluted. The reference extract was diluted to 0.25 mg DM/mL. Samples, reference extract, and marker
were prepared according to Table B.1.
The solutions were thoroughly mixed, followed by heating for
10 minutes at 70¶C to denature the proteins.
The solutions were cooled to room temperature before
application to gel.
Table B.1: Volumes applied for denaturing.
Sample
Volume of
sample (mL)
Volume of sample
buﬀer (mL)
Volume of reducing
agent (mL)
Marker
90
*
10
Reference
65
25
10
Samples
65
25
10
*Marker is pre-diluted with sample buﬀer, and thus no further sample buﬀer is applied.
The electrophoresis buﬀer was prepared by diluting 50 mL Running Buﬀer in 950 mL Milli-Q water. To
the inner chamber, 200 mL electrophoresis buﬀer containing 500 mL antioxidant was added (until wells
were covered). The remainder of the buﬀer was poured into the outer chamber. To each well of the 4-12%
Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels, 10 mL marker/reference/sample was applied. Electrophoresis was carried out
at 200 V (400 mA) for 35 minutes.
Silver staining
To visualize the separated proteins, the gels were silver stained with an automatic gel stainer (GE Health-
care Processor Plus) under constant rocking. In Table B.2 the silver staining solutions are listed.
Table B.2: List of silver staining solutions
Solution
Content of solutions
Fixation
40% ethanol (96%), 10% glacial acetic acid, 50% Milli-Q water
Incubation
0.83 M CH3COONa and 8.0 mM Na2S2O3·H2O dissolved in 600 mL
ethanol (96%) and 1400 mL Milli-Q water (1300 mL 25% glutardialde-
hyde is added to 250 mL solution)
Silver
2 g AgNO3 dissolved in 2000 mL Milli-Q water (50 mL 37% formalde-
hyde is added to 250 mL solution)
Developing
50 g Na2CO3 dissolved in 2000 mL Milli-Q water (25 mL 37% formalde-
hyde is added to 250 mL solution)
Stop
29.2 g Titriplex III dissolved in 2000 mL Milli-Q water
Gel drying
21% ethanol, 7% glycerol, and Milli-Q water to 1 L
Once the electrophoresis had ﬁnished, the gels were placed in the gel-staining tray, which automatically
59
==PAGE:62==
60
B SDS-PAGE protocol
changes the silver staining solutions according to a protocol. In every step 250 mL solution was added
to the tray. The staining protocol was initiated by ﬁxation of the proteins by leaving the gels in ﬁxation
solution for 30 minutes. This was followed by incubation in incubation solution for 30 minutes. Then the
gels were washed 3 x 10 minutes in Milli-Q water, followed by silver staining for 40 minutes. The gels were
washed 2 x 1 minutes with Milli-Q water before the developing solution was added. The development took
approximately 8 minutes after which the stop solution was added for 10 minutes. Finally, the gels were
washed 3 x 5 minutes in Milli-Q water and stored in the gel drying solution for minimum 30 minutes.
==PAGE:63==
C
|
RID protocol
1% agarose solution in Tris-veronal buﬀer was heated to melting under magnet stirring, and subsequently
placed in a water bath at 56¶C prior to use. Two glass plates (10x10 cm) was thoroughly cleaned in 96%
ethanol, and placed on a levelled table. 70 mL undiluted Phl p6-antibody (monospeciﬁc polyclonal rabbit
IgG) was pipetted into a tube and brieﬂy placed in the water bath. 15 mL warm gel solution was added,
and carefully mixed without cooling and creation of air bubbles. The gel solution containing antibodies was
quickly spread in a uniform layer covering the entire glass plates, and again ensuring that no air bubbles
was created. The gels were left until solidiﬁed. The plates were positioned on an appropriate template
and wells (4 mm, 15 mL) were punched with a gel puncher as indicated on the template. Table C.1 shows
the amount of IHR applied to the gel, which form the basis for generation of a standard curve.
Table C.1: Amounts of applied IHR.
Sample
Volume of
IHR (mL)
Amount of
IHR (mg DM)
IHR
3
1.4
IHR
4
1.9
IHR
6
2.9
IHR
8
3.8
The DM concentration of the IHR and sample was 30.2 mg DM/mL and 54.4 mg DM/mL, respectively.
Both were diluted to 0.48 mg DM/mL (in accordance with in-house procedure), and applied to the two
gel plates in duplicates according to Table C.2. IHR A and B represent the same IHR batch, but in two
diﬀerent dissolutions. The plates were placed in a humidity chamber, and left undisturbed for diﬀusion
for 48-72 hours.
Table C.2: Amounts of sample applied to the RID plates
IHR A
8
6
4
3
S A1
4
4
7
7
S A2
7
7
4
4
S A3
4
4
7
7
S B3
7
7
4
4
S B2
4
4
7
7
S B1
7
7
4
4
IHR B
3
4
6
8
Once the incubation time was over, the plates were pressed. A wick wetted in Milli-Q was placed on
top of the gel followed by ﬁlter papers, and a dedicated weight. This helps to suck out non-precipitated
protein/antibody from the gel. The ﬁlter paper were regularly replaced. After approx. 30 minutes, the
ﬁlter papers and the wick was removed, and the plates were left in 0.9% NaCl solution for 15 minutes. The
pressing was repeated, which facilitates the removal of excess unbound antibody. The plates were dried
completely before staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue for 10 minutes. The plates are then washed in
deionized water for a few minutes before they are left in the destaining solution (46% ethanol, 47.5% glacial
61
==PAGE:64==
62
C RID protocol
acetic acid) until appropriately destained. The plates were dried in warm air before they were scanned and
the precipitates analyzed utilizing the Image Pro Software, which measures the areas of the precipitates.
The areas are then plotted against the amount of IHR applied (mg DM).
