==PAGE:1==
Surface asperity deformation at 
diff erent levels of bulk deformation
Artur Ferfecki
January 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
i
Abstract
v
Preface
vii
Part 1 Prelude
1
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Surface asperity deformation at different levels of bulk deformation . . . .
3
1.2
Analysis of plastic waves in the workpiece surface while sliding against
rough tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Surface asperity deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Mechanism of plastic waves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Experimental equipment
9
3.1
Introduction to Universal Tribo - Tester 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Universal Tribo - Tester 2 force calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Parts of set-up used from previous experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Choice of lubricant
15
4.1
Investigated lubricants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Mechanisms of lubrication in metal forming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Lubricant application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Lubricant testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
i
==PAGE:4==
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4.5
Strip reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.6
Conclusion for choice of lubricant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Workpiece material and design of samples for experiment
23
5.1
Test material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Design of experiment workpieces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.1
Workpieces for surface asperity deformation . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.2
Workpieces for plastic wave experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Part 2 Surface asperity deformation at different levels of bulk
deformation
29
1
Design of experiment
31
1.1
Conclusion for design of experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2
Experimental procedure
35
2.1
Preliminary preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.2
Experimental procedure for test under tension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.3
Experimental procedure for test under compression . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3
Data analysis
39
3.1
Characterisation of asperity deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.1.1
Surface characterisation by contact probe
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.1.2
Alicona 3D measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.1.3
Alicona 2D measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2
Measurement of length and width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Analysis of measured force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Results and discussion
43
4.1
Results from experiment under tension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Comparison of the experimental results with simulation . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Conclusion
47
6
Further research
49
==PAGE:5==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iii
Part 3 Analysis of plastic waves in the workpiece surface while
sliding against rough tool
51
1
Tool speciﬁcations
53
1.1
Horizontal tool
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
1.1.1
Calculation of the internal stresses in the tool and material choice
53
1.1.2
Tool angles and distance between the peaks . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
1.2
Drawings of the horizontal tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
1.3
Design of the other tools for the experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
2
Experimental procedure and parameters
59
2.1
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
2.2
Experimental parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3
Data processing
63
3.1
Proﬁle measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.1.1
Workpiece proﬁle measurement after experiment
. . . . . . . . .
63
3.1.2
Proﬁle of workpiece after simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
3.2
Measurement of the proﬁle of horizontal tool for experiment
. . . . . . .
64
3.3
Processing of pulling force data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4
Simulation
67
4.1
Introduction to simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.2
Model of horizontal tool with radius for simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.3
Simulation parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.1
General parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.2
Pulling length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.3
Friction factor between the workpiece, dies and horizontal tool . .
69
4.3.4
Pulling speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.3.5
Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.4
Simulation procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.5
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5
Results and discussion
71
5.1
Pulling force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.2
Comparison of ﬁnal workpiece proﬁle from simulation and experiment . .
73
5.3
Effective strain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.4
Effective stress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6
Conclusion
81
==PAGE:6==
iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
7
Further research
83
Bibliography
87
Appendices
89
A Suplement material and documents
91
B
Drawings of horizontal tool
95
C Proﬁles of specimens before deformation
100
C.1
Tension proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.2
Compression proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D Results - asperity deformation
109
D.1 Results for tension experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
D.2 Results for compression experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
An extension of general friction model presented by Wanheim and Bay [1] include
the effect of bulk deformation is proposed. The friction model connect the response of
asperity deformation and therefore development of contact area ratio when different values
of strain are applied. The experiment is carried out for different values of normal pressure
applied on the examined surface. The present work is focusing on dry lubrication without
considering wear, meaning that the tribological phenomena reduce to being a matter of
friction and in relation to numerical simulations indeed a matter of modeling friction.
The experiment is later compared with simulation made for plain strain and plain stress
situation for each of the applied pressure. The results are presented in combined chart
which represents the results for experiment and simulation respectively.
Theoretical description of plastic waves presented by Wanheim and Abildgaard [3] is
compared with experimental work. The experiment is carried as sliding of the hard, rough
tool sliding against soft, smooth workpiece. The simulation is made along the experiment
in order to verify the use of simulation software to predict behaviour of the plastic waves.
The resulted proﬁles from simulation and experiment are compared and force used for
pulling the rough tool is compared with the theoretical work. Good agreement between the
experiment and theoretical work was obtained while when simulation and experiment are
compared the results are fairly close to each other but further investigation has to be made
in order to approve use of the simulation software to estimate behaviour of the plastic
waves.
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This master thesis contributes as a mandatory part of master education in Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), materials and manufacturing technology study program.
The thesis was performed at Section of Manufacturing Engineering, Department of Me-
chanical Engineering.
Several persons have contributed academically, practically and with support during the
period of making the master thesis. I would therefore like to thank to the main supervi-
sor Niels Oluf Bay for the help and advice in setting the direction of the project, to the
co-supervisor Chris Valentin Nielsen for his help in programming the MATLAB scripts,
using the software for simulations and for his patience, support and valuable input during
the period of master thesis.
I would also like to say my thanks to Jacob Rasmussen for his help in using variety
of measuring equipment and to Ömer Can Kücükyi for his time on setting one method for
surface characterisation.
Finally I would like to thank my friends from the project room 301, namely Jacob Obitsø
Nielsen and Daniel Nielsen, for having a good time during writing the thesis and to my
family and friends because without them I wouldn’t be where I am now.
Artur Ferfecki
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Part 1
Prelude
1
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Overview
The thesis is part of a COMESURF project which is partly running in the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Section of Manufacturing Engineering at DTU and partly
running in Risø research centre. The project itself is focused on origins of friction and this
part of the master thesis will investigate the asperity deformation depending on the amount
of gross plastic deformation of the underlying bulk material and the mechanism of plastic
waves movement during metal forming.
The master project consist of two main parts:
• Surface asperity deformation at different levels of bulk deformation.
• Analysis of plastic waves in the workpice surface while sliding against a rough tools.
1.1
Surface asperity deformation at different levels of
bulk deformation
The conditions of friction in metal forming precesses which occurs between tool and
workpiece material are important to understand. The friction conditions have direct in-
ﬂuence on lifetime of a tool, ﬁnal product quality and the process feasibility [16]. The
friction is present on a localised real contact areas where the tool and workpiece are in
direct contact. The model introduced by Wanheim and Bay [1] contributed signiﬁcantly to
the understanding of friction behaviour and is adopted in a big number of text books about
metal forming and also is successfully used in number of ﬁnite element codes used for
simulation of metal forming processes.
3
==PAGE:14==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
However the model has a weakness in not counting for the plastic deformation of the
subsurface. Other research groups are taking into account the plastic deformation of the
subsurface through an upper bound approach, a slip-line solution and by using numerical
analysis but on the other hand they are ignoring the junction growth due to the friction
which is introduced in the Wanheim-Bay model. The previous research works also ne-
glect the inﬂuence of strain hardening on the behaviour of surface asperity deformation
[5][6][7][8]. The outputs of this project can be used to formulate a more accurate model
describing the behaviour of asperity deformation in different levels of bulk deformation
which can be applied in FEM simulations.
Objectives
• Investigate the development of contact area for different values of normal pressure
in different levels of bulk metal deformation.
• Improve existing Wanheim-Bay model.
• Comparison of experimental results with simulations in order to verify the accuracy
of experiment and ﬁnd the reasons of possible misalignment.
1.2
Analysis of plastic waves in the workpiece surface
while sliding against rough tool
The mechanism of plastic waves is investigated. The mechanism is deﬁned as sliding of
a rougher tool made of harder material against softer and smoother specimen. During the
sliding movement the plastic waves in the specimen will be formed and that will allow rel-
ative movement of the material in specimen against the tool [3][16]. The mechanism takes
place in the metal forming precesses and contributes to the overall response of the mate-
rial during metal forming and therefore it in necessary to understand this phenomena closer.
Objectives
• Analyse the contribution of plastic waves mechanism to mechanism of metal form-
ing.
• Compare the simulation for plastic waves with the experimental results in order to
verify suitability of use the simulation software to predict the behaviour of plastic
waves.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
2.1
Surface asperity deformation
The understanding origin of friction and lubrication are crucial for understanding
behaviour of material in metal forming processes. In the same time the mentioned phenom-
ena are the most difﬁcult do describe and therefore are often solved by trial experiments
and lately by ﬁnite element models. In this work dry lubrication is used only and therefore
the tribological phenomena is simpliﬁed to friction.
Even the tribological mechanisms were simpliﬁed to the friction only, it remains com-
plicated phenomena and was investigated by many research groups in history and in this
days as well. A good point where to start is a work of Bowden and Tabor [2]. Bowden
and Tabor explored two major friction mechanisms: ﬁrst mechanism is sliding resistance
which is caused due to shearing of layers due to adhesion and second is welding between
two surfaces and the resistance due to dragging or ploughing of a harder through a softer
material. The third mechanism was added later by Wanheim and Abildgaard [3] who
introduced plastic waves phenomena.
It was noticed by Bowden and Tabor [2] that friction is not effecting only a surface
but also inﬂuence bulk of a workpiece due to deformation under the surface. They also
investigated real contact area from deforming asperities. The asperities were deformed
until the total area of contact is sufﬁcient to carry the normal load and they observed break
down of Amontons-Coulomb’s friction model because the real contact area becomes large.
Orowan [4] applied the shear ﬂow stress which he stated as an upper limit to the friction
when rolling was modeled and thanks to that he avoided the overestimation of friction
stresses when Amontons-Coulomb’s friction law was applied. Orowan also combined
5
==PAGE:16==
6
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Amontons-Coulomb’s friction law with constant friction law introduced by Tresca and the
result was sharp change between region when the the friction was growing under growing
nominal pressure and region when the friction reached the maximum shear ﬂow stress.
The transition between mentioned regions was smoothed by Shaw [5].
The contact area development, parameter on which this thesis is also focused, is valuable
parameter to observe because it describes and quantify the friction models and therefore
the friction models can be validated or neglected. The increase of real contact area with
bulk deformation was discovered by Fogg [6] who made this observation during stretch
forming where subsurface deformation is large. It was observed that with bulk deformation
yield pressure decreases when overlaid by tensile stresses in the stretch forming operation.
Wanheim and Bay [1] used slip-line analysis to determine the real area of contact by
assuming the asperities have identical geometry made from ideal plastic material loaded in
plane strain. Bay [7] extended the analysis to be able to describe also strain hardening in
an average sense for a forward rod extrusion example. Slip-line analysis was applied by
Challen and Oxley [8] to deﬁne three mechanisms described as wear, rubbing and cutting.
Wilson and Sheu [9]made model for longitudinal asperities in rolling using upper bound
analysis. The model is valid for wide range from large rations to apparent contact because
interaction which occur between the single asperities is build directly into the model.
Sutcliffe [10] included bulk deformation into his model which is based on a slip-line
analysis. On top of that he includes an estimation of strain hardening effect when the
experimental results are compared with analysis which is working with rigid-ideally plastic
material.
Thanks to the development of ﬁnite element models it was possible to apply elasto-plastic
ﬁnite element analysis with strain hardening effect to compression of three asperities with
free sides made by Makinouchi [11]. The model was than extended by Ike and Makinouchi
[12] to include ﬁve asperities and periodic boundary conditions. Finite element model
presented by Korzewka at al. [13] includes asperity deformation under different straining
directions. The strain hardening in this model was assumed as uniform over the entire
model. Wang [14] introduced friction model which is based on ﬁve-asperity model and
which included bulk deformation inﬂuenced by edge effect.
The goal of this master thesis is to extend the Wanheim-Bay friction model
τ = mαk
(2.1)
==PAGE:17==
2.2. MECHANISM OF PLASTIC WAVES
7
,where τ is the friction stress, m is the friction factor, α is the real contact area ratio and
k is the material shear ﬂow stress, to include the inﬂuence of strain hardening coefﬁcient
and also to handle with different levels of bulk deformation in same time.
2.2
Mechanism of plastic waves
The mechanism is deﬁned by Wankeim and Abildgaard [3] as a sliding of a rough hard
surface against a smooth soft specimen. In the same paper the wave experiment is made
by coining of a tool surface onto specimen. Bay and Wanheim showed in earlier work [15]
that by coining with a rough, hard surface against a smooth, soft specimen it is possible to
achieve very high degree of ﬁling of the undulations. The suggested mechanism of plastic
waves is presented on ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Suggested mechanism of plastic waves with slip line ﬁeld: 1. moving tool, 2.
stationary specimen. Arrow indicates direction of movement [3].
From the ﬁgure 2.1 quick note can be made that when the tool will be sliding the
asperities on a workpiece can be either sheared off or undergo some plastic deformation.
In general it is suggested that the plastic waves are formed in the same principle as a plastic
bulge is formed in wire-drawing with light reductions [3].
Necessary tangential force for each of the waves can be calculated using equation [3]:
F
2ka = 1
2 tan γ[m∗(1 −cot γ) + 1 + π
2 −2γ]
(2.2)
where F is the tangential force, k is the yield stress in pure shear, a is a distance
between asperities γ as a slope of a asperity and m∗which can be interpreted as the shear
stress of an intermediate ﬁlm. As can be seen the tangential force does not depend on
the size of the asperities but depends on the slope of the asperities instead. Therefore an
assumption can be made that many small asperities will require the same plastic work as a
==PAGE:18==
8
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
few large [16]. Using the equation for tangential force and equation 2.1 the m-values can
be calculated as shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Friction factor m as a function of asperity angle and shear strength of interme-
diate ﬁlm [3].
In ﬁgure 2.2 m is presented as function of m∗and γ. When γ = 0 m is the same as m∗.
When the value of slope γ will increase, the friction factor m will increase noticeably even
if the shear strength of the intermediate ﬁlm is zero. For example for slope γ = 10◦the
friction factor m will be 0.4 for m∗= 0 [16].
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental equipment
3.1
Introduction to Universal Tribo - Tester 2
The main equipment used for the experiment is a Universal Tribo - Tester 2 (UTT 2).
The UTT 2 was developed by DTU/IPU in collaboration with metal forming companies
in Scandinavia. The special task that UTT 2 was build for is to simulate the tribological
conditions in a wide range of metal forming processes which are present in the industry.
The metal forming processes which can be performed include strip reduction, bending
under tension, draw dead test and plane strip test. The advantage of this equipment for the
big metal forming companies is no need for stopping the production in order to test new
metal forming parameters because the test can be performed on the UTT 2. The machine
also offers huge experimental possibilities for the research purposes in DTU.
Among the variety of features offered by the UTT 2 vertical compression in 3nd axis +
horizontal pulling in 1st axis (as shown in ﬁg. 3.1) are used for purpose of this master
project. The UTT 2 can be operated in both manual and automatic mode. The automatic
mode is used for runing the experiment because it allows to control the sliding length in
deﬁned values and also the data from all the load cells are recorded and exported to a ﬁle
after the experimental run. The manual mode is used for operating purposes like changing
the setup of the experiment and adjusting the tools.
9
==PAGE:20==
10
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT
Figure 3.1: Universal tribo-tester 2: 1) vertical load cell, 2) horizontal pulling cell, 3)
working place.
An important part of the UTT 2 which is also worth mentioning here is the manometer.
The manometer is a gauge indicating the pressure setting in the vertical load cell. The
pressure is adjusted manually by a screw and then displayed on the manometer. It is
important to keep in mind that the true pressure is displayed on the manometer only when
the vertical punch is in the very upper position. The manometer displayed values are
in bars and the resolution is 5 bars. A picture of the manometer can be found in ﬁgure
A.1 in appendix A. The upper limit of the range on the manometer is 160 bars which is
comfortable for the range of pressures which will be used for the experiments. On the
other side the lower limit of the manometer is 0 but bellow 5 bar it is very hard to predict
what pressure is set and this can limit the experiments.
3.2
Universal Tribo - Tester 2 force calibration
In the beginning of the work the UTT 2 was calibrated for the vertical force. The
calibration gauges for 2 and 10 tons were used in order to cover the whole range of the
machine. The calibration was done by setting the pressure on the manometer and recording
two corresponding outputs. One value was the force displayed on the force gauge which
was placed under the load cell and correspondingly the value from a Labview program
was recorded. The resulted calibration curves with combined results for 2 and 10 tons for
both recorded values are presented ﬁgure 3.2 and ﬁgure 3.3.
==PAGE:21==
3.2. UNIVERSAL TRIBO - TESTER 2 FORCE CALIBRATION
11
Figure 3.2: Combined calibration curves for 2 and 10 tons plotted with manometer
pressure.
As can be seen the curves of the lower load range and higher load range link to each
other and therefore the applied load is stable and linear in the combined tested range.
Figure 3.3: Combined calibration curves for 2 and 10 plotted with load cell unit.
The trend line for the calibration for 2 tons follows equation 3.1 for predicting load
based on manometer and equation 3.2 for LabView respectively
F = 0.0763 · x −0.0425
(3.1)
F = −5.2029 · 10−5 · x −0.16139
(3.2)
==PAGE:22==
12
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT
where F is the applied vertical force and x corresponding value on horizontal axis.
In the calibration for 10 tons the trend line follows equation 3.3 for manometer - force
dependence and equation 3.4 for Labview - force dependence.
y = 0.0793 · x −0.1361
(3.3)
y = −5.0766 · 10−5 · x −0.1727
(3.4)
To be sure that the calibration results are solid the coefﬁcients of determination, R2,
for the calibration in lower load range are examined:
R2 = 0.9961
(3.5)
R2 = 0.9997
(3.6)
where equation 3.5 and 3.6 are values for manometer and LabView measurements, respec-
tively, and equation 3.7 and 3.8 shows the R2 values for the higher load range.
R2 = 0.9996
(3.7)
R2 = 1.0000
(3.8)
Conclusion for calibration of UTT 2
It can be seen that all R2 values are very close to 1 which means that all measured
points ﬁt very well to the linear trend and therefore the UTT 2 is calibrated and can be
used for further experiments. The curve based on the manometer will be used for setting
up the pressure in the UTT 2 in accordance with the desired applied load and the curve
with the values from LabView program will be used for tracking the exact force which
was applied.
3.3
Parts of set-up used from previous experiments
Channel tool is used in all experiments as a base. In the middle is channel on which
the specimens for tension and compression are placed. From sides are walls which helps to
keep specimens and tools in desired position, guiding them while they are moving during
experiment and preventing the ﬂow of the material to the sides. Picture of channel tool is
in ﬁgure 3.4.
==PAGE:23==
3.3. PARTS OF SET-UP USED FROM PREVIOUS EXPERIMENTS
13
Figure 3.4: Channel tool.
Frame is used in compression experiment to allow ﬂow of the specimen for speciﬁed
distance and than keep it under compression. The frame is moved by pulling cell. The part
of the frame which is in contact with workpiece is holding tip which is polished on side
which is in contact with workpiece. The picture of frame can be found in ﬁgure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Frame.
==PAGE:24==
14
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT
Rigging screw is used to connect the pulling cell with tension workpiece, frame in
asperity deformation experiment and horizontal tools in plastic waves analysis. On top of
that it is also used to tight the listed parts to ensure when the pulling cell is moving for
speciﬁed distance the connected parts will move for the same distance. The rigging screw
is presented on ﬁgure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Rigging bar.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Choice of lubricant
4.1
Investigated lubricants
This section will describe the choice of lubricant used to perform the experiment of
asperity deformation and plastic waves. There is almost endless offer of lubricants on
the market. Due to the ﬁne dimensions of the asperities it has to be possible to apply the
lubricant in very thin layer. This criterion is essential to avoid the inﬂuence of the lubricant
layer on the asperity deformation. To the other criteria the used lubricant has to withstand
the maximum load of 10 tons, work well with aluminium, which is used as a workpiece
and show good performance not only in normal pressure but also in sliding. Based on the
available lubricants in the workshop and the experience with the lubricants, four lubricants
were chosen as a main candidates:
• Zinc stearate
• Soap based Gardolube L 6185
• Soap based Gardolube L 6185 mixed with ethyl alcohol
• Polymer based Gardolube L 6250
4.2
Mechanisms of lubrication in metal forming
This section contains a discussion of the mechanisms of lubrication which are present
when the lubriants having different compositions are used. The fundamental mechanisms
of lubrication are presented in ﬁgure 4.1.
15
==PAGE:26==
16
CHAPTER 4. CHOICE OF LUBRICANT
Figure 4.1: Basic mechanisms of lubrication [17].
The investigated lubricants are all in solid state and all of them are non reactive so it
reduced the expected lubrication mechanisms to the ones listed in ﬁgure 4.1.d. One can
point that the mixture of soap + ethyl alcohol is in liquid state but the alcohol is used only
to disolve the lubricant itself and doesn’t have inﬂuance on the lubrication mechanism.
4.3
Lubricant application
The way the lubricant was prepared and applied varies for every tested lubricant. The
zinc stearate is carried as a ﬁne powder and it was applied with use of paper napkin and
the surplus powder was blown away to keep the uniform layer along the surface.
Gardolube L 6185 is in form of soap grains. In production, Gardolube L 6185 is ap-
plied by tumbling. However this method cannot be used in this case because the metal
balls would deform the asperities. When Gardolube L 6185 was used, the grains were
rubbed into the surface by nail and polished until the the lubricant was distributed along
the surface. When it comes to the last tested lubricant, Gardolube L 6185 was mixed
with ethyl alcohol in 50:50 weight percentage. The soap grains were then pummel to
obtain the relatively smooth paste. In this point it is important to keep in mind that this
mixture should be prepared just before it is used and should be used in the same day as the
experiment is performed because of the alcohol evaporation. The mixture was applied in
==PAGE:27==
4.4. LUBRICANT TESTING
17
similar way as the solid Gardolube L 6185, by smashing it into the surface with nail and
removing the surplus with ﬁnger.
4.4
Lubricant testing
When the specimens were ready the experiment itself could begin. The lubricant was
tested on the same machine as the deformation of asperities experiment will be performed.
The channel tool with holding tool was used to perform the lubricant test. Before the
experiment started it was made sure that all surfaces which will be in contact with the
specimen are clean by cleaning them with ethyl alcohol. The test was done by using the
constant compression which was set to 37.6 [kN]. To see the inﬂuence of the lubricant
the specimens length was measured before and after the experiment and the ratio between
initial and resultant length was calculated. This ratio is representing the performance of
the lubricant with higher ratio corresponding to better lubrication.
Before the test, the lubricant was also applied on the tool surfaces. While the verti-
cal force was applied the workpieces were free to go in one direction and squeezed out
from the channel tool under applied pressure. The lubricant was changed after each run and
all the surfaces which are in contact with the workpiece were cleaned with ethyl alcohol.
The experiment was carried out in set of 12 workpieces. A sketch describing the principle
of evaluation the testing of lubricant can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Sketch showing evaluation of lubricant test.
The ratio of length before deformation and after deformation was calculated as
ratio = L2
L1
(4.1)
where L2 is length of specimen after it was deformed and L1 is length of specimen
before deformation.
==PAGE:28==
18
CHAPTER 4. CHOICE OF LUBRICANT
Table 4.1: Add caption
Gardolube L 6185
Zinc stearate
Gardolube L 6185 + ethyl alc.
length
length
length
length
length
length
before
after
ratio
before
after
ratio
before
after
ratio
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
20.98
40.14
1.91
20.99
32.30
1.54
20.98
39.09
1.86
21.00
39.23
1.87
20.99
37.62
1.79
20.98
39.30
1.87
20.96
36.44
1.74
20.99
33.38
1.59
20.99
40.67
1.94
20.96
38.51
1.84
20.98
34.20
1.63
21.01
36.24
1.72
average
1.84
1.64
1.85
ratio
The workpieces were then examined on the Shadowgraph model 7 by looking on the
deformed surface. It was found that in case of the solid lubricant the deformation is not
equally distributed as can be seen from ﬁgure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Deformed asperities examined on the Shadowgraph model 7.
The reason for the inhomogeneous deformation distribution was assigned to the in-
ﬂuence of uneven thickness of the lubricant layer on the bottom of the channel tool and
bottom and top surface of the specimen. After that one more specimen was deformed but
without lubricating the channel tool and the punch. The results were improved but still
not sufﬁcient and it was concluded that it is not possible to apply Gardolube L 6185 in
uniform thickness with used method of applying the lubricant and therefore this type of
lubricant was expelled.
==PAGE:29==
4.5. STRIP REDUCTION
19
4.5
Strip reduction
After eliminating Gardolube L 6185, it was suggested to test polymer based lubricant
Gardolube L 6250. The advantage of this lubricant is that it is applied in liquid state and
therefore it should be possible to use it in a thin equal layer. The detailed documentation
to Gardolube L 6185 can be found in appendix A. It was also suggested to test two types
of cleaning before the lubricant is applied. One batch was cleaned with the standard
ethyl alcohol and the other one was cleaned by using an etching bath. The reason to
try the etching is to clean the surface and also the etched surface can bond much better
with the lubricant. After preliminary tests with the etching bath it was decided to use 5%
NaOH concentration. This concentration is sufﬁcient to clean properly the surface without
affecting the geometry of the asperities, which was proved by comparing the non-etched
and etched asperity proﬁles (ﬁgure 4.4). Not only the concentration of the etching bath
decides about the resulted surface but also time for which the specimens are in the bath.
It was decided to etch the surface for 30 seconds in one case and for 60 seconds in other
case. For testing the performance of zinc stearate and Gardolube L 6185 for different
surface cleaning techniques, the strip reduction test was used. The reasons for choosing
strip reduction test was that it is much easier and faster to make aluminium strips than
specimens with asperities, the test itself is simple and it represents very good the abilities
of the lubricants.
((a)) Plot of asperities proﬁle before the specimen was etched.
((b)) Plot of the asperities after the specimen was etched.
Figure 4.4: Plot of the asperity proﬁles.
==PAGE:30==
20
CHAPTER 4. CHOICE OF LUBRICANT
After the strips were etched in the bath for speciﬁed time they were taken out, the
remained etchant was removed by water and the strips were dried with a heat gun. Then
Gardolube L 6185 was applied on the surface with a brush and then the surface was dried
again with the heat gun to remove the water from the solution. This was made for each side
of the strip separately. Zinc stearate was applied in the same way as for the compression
specimens. One set of the strips was made out of ﬁve strips with the same surface treatment
and lubricant. Each set was tested on the same side of the tool used for the strip reduction
experiment. The measured values were the reduction of the strip and the applied load. The
load curves were plotted with the same color for each set of strips and compared as can be
seen in ﬁgure 4.5. The strips were also compared by naked eye.
Figure 4.5: Plot of the load curves after strip reduction test.
From the ﬁgure 4.5 it can be seen that the highest load necessary for reduction of the
strip is for the zinc stearate without etching in NaOH. It can also be observed that the
way the surface was cleaned before the lubricant was applied does not affect the lubricant
performance in case of using Gardolube L 6185 but has an distinguishable impact when
the zinc stearate is used. When the strips with different lubricant which were etched for
the same time are compared (60 seconds of etching) the results are similar as is shown in
ﬁgure 4.6.
==PAGE:31==
4.5. STRIP REDUCTION
21
Figure 4.6: Plot of the load curves after strip reduction test for stripes with 60 seconds in
NaOH bath and different lubricants.
Based on this observation one could conclude that it would be easier and better to keep
the zinc stearate as lubricant for the asperity deformation experiments. However, because
the tool for the strip reduction had to be changed after the set of strips cleaned with etching
for 60 seconds and zinc stearate one more test had to be done to eliminate the possible
inﬂuence of the tool.
Figure 4.7: Plot of the load curves after strip reduction test made on the same tool for
strips with 30 seconds in NaOH bath
It was decided to test the two lubricant on strips which were etched for 30 seconds
because when the stripes were examined by naked eye the resultant surface after strip
==PAGE:32==
22
CHAPTER 4. CHOICE OF LUBRICANT
reduction was more stable along the set of strips for 30 seconds etching than for 60 seconds
etching. As can be seen from ﬁgure4.7, the load is lower for the strips lubricated by zinc
stearate.
4.6
Conclusion for choice of lubricant
As a result of the performed tests the zinc stearate was chosen as lubricant for the
asperity deformation experiments and plastic wave experiments. The main advantages of
the lubricant compared to the other ones are:
• can be applied in very thin and uniform layer,
• is easy to apply and easy to remove,
• the ﬁlm doesn’t brake when the force is applied, and
• is easy to get.
As another output of the lubricant experiment it was decided to etch the workpieces
before the lubricant is applied. The etching will result in stronger bonding of the lubricant
to the workpiece surface and it will also clean it properly. The etching bath should be in
constant movement to ensure the uniform concentration.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Workpiece material and design of
samples for experiment
5.1
Test material
Among the wide spectrum of the metals which can be used, aluminium was chosen as
the material for the specimens. Particularly the choice of 1050 aluminium was done. The
chemical composition of the 1050 aluminium is
• Aluminium: 99.5
• Copper: 0.05
• Iron: 0.4
• Magnesium: 0.05
• Silicon: 0.25
• Titanium: 0.03
• Vanadium: 0.05
• Zinc: 0.05
The reason for the choice of 1050 aluminium alloy is that it is an easily deformable
alloy which leads to low forces which are required during the experiment. Usage of low
forces makes the whole experiment easier to make and also it lowers the requirements
for lubricant. The test material came in form of plate of 10 mm width. The directions
XYZ were drawn on the plate to make sure all specimens will be produced with the grains
deformed in the same direction.
23
==PAGE:34==
24
CHAPTER 5. WORKPIECE MATERIAL AND DESIGN OF SAMPLES FOR
EXPERIMENT
To know exactly the properties of the material the alloy was tested on the materials
testing machine. The resulted stress-strain curve is shown in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Stress-strain curve for the experiment material.
As can be seen from the material curves the material is fairly isotropic. The curves
follow the Hollomon’s curve,
σ = Cϵn
(5.1)
where σ shows the true stress, C is the material constant, ϵ is the true strain and n represents
the hardening exponent. The corresponding measured data are listed in table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Material constant C and hardening coefﬁcient n for given 1050 aluminium
material
Direction X
Direction Y
Direction Z
C
140
143
136
n
0.21
0.22
0.22
5.2
Design of experiment workpieces
When the material for the experiment is settled the workpieces have to be designed to
fulﬁl the needs of the experiment. The workpieces were also designed having in mind to
use parts of the current set-up mounted on UTT 2.
==PAGE:35==
5.2. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT WORKPIECES
25
5.2.1
Workpieces for surface asperity deformation
As can be seen from the title of the project the main focus is to observe deformation of
surface asperities. Therefore it is necessary to make asperities on top of every workpiece.
The asperities are designed in exactly the same way for both tension and compression
part of the experiment. The asperity slope γ was set to 10°with the distance between the
peaks of 1.5 mm. The angle was chosen in order to simulate possibilities of producing the
samples by machining and the mentioned dimensions of asperities are limit for what is
possible to make by standard machining.
The specimens were machined to the shape and tolerances speciﬁed on the drawing
but without the asperities. In the end asperities were made by use of EDM. The EDM was
chosen to reach high precision of the asperities.
Samples for tension
The tension samples have two holes on each end. To one of them the pulling device
is mounted and the second is for connecting the "break" which holds the one end of the
sample on place while pulling and therefore the sample will elongate. The ﬁrst design of
the workpiece had almost the same width as a width of the channel in the channel tool
and the width was the same along the entire sample. The friction during the experiment
reached too high values and the specimen started to neck as can be seen in ﬁgure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Example of ﬁrst design of tension sample with neck after preliminary test.
The changes were made and the region with asperities was narrowed to decrease the
friction between the walls of the channel tool and the specimen. However the beginning
and the end of the sample stayed with the width close to the channel width to provide
guide for the sample during pulling. The ﬁnal drawing of the samples for tension can be
seen from ﬁgure below (Fig. 5.3).
==PAGE:36==
26
CHAPTER 5. WORKPIECE MATERIAL AND DESIGN OF SAMPLES FOR
EXPERIMENT
Figure 5.3: Design of the tension workpiece.
Samples for compression
The samples for compression are simpler than the ones for tension because they will
be compressed in a closed tool and therefore the need for the aditional pulling or guide as
it was in the case of tension samples is gone. In fact the compression samples are simple
blocks with speciﬁed asperities on the top as demonstrated on ﬁgure 5.4. The length of the
compression sample is 21 mm and this length was carefully chosen according to maximum
load which the UTT 2 can apply and the desired q/C values.
==PAGE:37==
5.2. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT WORKPIECES
27
Figure 5.4: Design of the compression workpiece.
5.2.2
Workpieces for plastic wave experiments
The specimens for plastic wave analysis were ﬁrst designed as a simple block. After
ﬁrst test it was found that the design does not fulﬁl the expectations, as will be explained
later in the report, and the changes had to be done. It was decided to make one big asperity
on top of the workpiece (ﬁgure 5.5) to lower the friction. Since the sample is not moving
during the experiment, the friction between the workpiece and the base was not a big issue
distracting the results. The specimens were made 60 mm long.
Figure 5.5: Design of the workpiece for plastec waves analyse
==PAGE:38==
==PAGE:39==
Part 2
Surface asperity deformation at
different levels of bulk deformation
29
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 1
Design of experiment
The aim of the experiment is to test the samples in tension and in compression as
well. First of all it is important to deﬁne the regions of tension and compression. For this
the assumption of plain strain will be used combined with Levy-Mises ﬂow rule. The
directions of stress and strain are deﬁned in ﬁgure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Deﬁnition of stress-strain directions.
From the assumption of plane strain in ϵ2 direction it can be written that
ϵ2 = 0
(1.1)
and from volume constancy
ϵ1 = −ϵ3
(1.2)
The Levy-Mises ﬂow rule is used to describe the deviatoric stress σ,
2,
ϵ2
σ,
2
= 3
2
¯ϵ
¯σ0
(1.3)
31
==PAGE:42==
32
CHAPTER 1. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT
where ¯ϵ is the effective strain and ¯σ is the ﬂow stress of the material. Combining the
equations (1.1) and (1.3) one gets,
ϵ2 = 3
2
¯ϵ
¯σ0
σ,
2 = 0 ⇒σ,
2 = 0
(1.4)
The deﬁnition of deviatoric stress is introduced as follows
σ,
2 = σ2 −σm = 0
(1.5)
where σm is the mean stress, therefore it can be written that
σ2 = σm = σ1 + σ2 + σ3
3
⇒σ2 = σm = σ1 + σ3
2
(1.6)
Based on the deﬁnition of effective strain,
¯ϵ = 2
√
3ϵ1
(1.7)
the Levy-Mises ﬂow rule can be written as,
ϵ1
σ,
1
= 3
2
2
√
3
ϵ1
¯σ0
(1.8)
Then the deviatoric stress σ,
1 can be written as,
σ,
1 = σ0
√
3
(1.9)
using deﬁnition of deviatoric stress for direction 1,
σ,
1 = σ1 −σm
(1.10)
and combining equation (1.9), (1.10), (1.6) one gets,
σ0
√
3 = σ1 −σ1 + σ3
2
= σ1 −σ3
2
⇒σ1 −σ3 = 2
√
3σ0
(1.11)
if σ1 = q and σ3 = −p the equation (1.11) can be written as,
p + q = 2
√
3σ0
(1.12)
Using von Mises yield criterion,
k = ¯σ0
√
3
(1.13)
equation (1.12) can be written as
p + q = 2k ⇒p
2k + q
2k = 1
(1.14)
==PAGE:43==
33
Based on the equation (1.14) the plot can be made which divides the region where
the sample will be under tension and where it will experience compression in direction 1
speciﬁed in ﬁgure 1.1. The plot is shown in ﬁgure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Limiting values of normalized pressure.
The blue line represents the ideal plastic material with hardening exponent n=0 for
von Mises ﬂow criteria. The black line shows the same curve for the material with strain
hardening exponent n = 0.21. The region above the black curve is a compression region
and the space below the black curve is under tension. The other way how to interpret the
chart is to look on constant q/C. If the example is taken as q/C = 0.7 which corresponds
to the red line in ﬁgure 1.2, the intersection between the black and red line covers region
when the workpiece is compressed but no additional force is applied. When it is desirable
to get less strain 0 ≤ϵ ≤0.08 the specimen has to be in compression and the left side of
the red line is used. On the other hand when it is necessary to obtain higher values of strain
0.08 ≤ϵx ≤1.4 the specimen has to be in tension and the right side of the line is used.
The values of q/C were chosen to cover the maximum range of the α −ϵx chart tak-
ing into account the limitations of the experiment. The overview of the target normalized
pressure is listed in table 1.1. One of the limitation of choice of the q/C values is the scale
on the manometer used for setting the pressure on the UTT 2 which didn’t allow to control
the pressure setting below 5 bar. The limit on the other end of the scale, in high pressure,
is the fast increase of the α value in low ϵ, so it makes it difﬁcult to distinguish between
each of the test runs. It should also be taken into account that the number of samples was
limited and therefore it wasn’t possible to take smaller steps between each q/C value.
==PAGE:44==
34
CHAPTER 1. DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT
Table 1.1: Overview of target normalized pressures.
q/C
type of stress
0.15
tension
0.25
0.40
0.85
compression
1.00
1.50
1.1
Conclusion for design of experiment
The general trend which should be observed after the experiment is the increase of the
contact ratio with increasing strain for the constant normal pressure. This is because when
the workpiece is elongating the geometry of the asperities changes and the asperities are
becoming more ﬂat so after applying the pressure the contact will be higher. Another pa-
rameter inﬂuencing the development of contact area ratio is the decrease of yield pressure
while elongating the specimen and therefore it is easier to deform the asperities if there is
a stress component in the other direction.
The idea behind tensile experiment is to create tensile stresses while pulling the specimen
and therefore it will elongate increasing the strain where from the compression experiment
is expected that the sample will squeeze out of the channel tool when the pressure is
applied. Than when it ﬁlls the speciﬁed gap made by moving with the frame tool the
compressive stresses will be created inside the specimen.
The experiment was done for seven sets of samples. First of all the vertical pressure
only was applied and no sliding was included. This set of samples was compared with
case when sliding was added to see if sliding will help in describing the contact area. The
explanation will follow in chapter 7. When the decision was made the responds of the
samples for three pressures was tested and for each pressure two batches of samples were
used.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 2
Experimental procedure
2.1
Preliminary preparation
The ﬁrst step before the experiment itself is done is to adjust and align all the compo-
nents to ensure the parts are not overlying and no component will be damaged. The crucial
part is the vertical tool which is in contact with the workpiece. Because it is moving up
and down it can cause the force loss while sliding on the sides of the channel tool or even
crack if the tool would hit the channel tool from the top as can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1.
When all the components are ﬁxed on the place the specimens are etched and lubri-
cated according to the procedure described in chapter 4. It is suggested to prepare only
that number of specimens which will be used in the day of experiment. It is also important
to lubricate the bottom and walls of the channel tool and the vertical tool as well.
2.2
Experimental procedure for test under tension
When the preliminary preparation is done, the workpiece can be placed on the channel
tool and ﬁxed from one side with the ending block and fastened from the other side with
tightening bar. The rigging screw has a thread on each ends and is used for the ﬁnal
tightening of the workpiece and thanks to that the workpiece will follow and elongate for a
speciﬁed distance during the experiment. The ending block is made out of two parts: 1)
ﬁxed part which is connected to the end of the specimen (5) 2) detachable part (6) which
is taken out after applying pressure to allow add the sliding component. The setup for
experiment in tension is demonstrated in ﬁgure 2.1.
35
==PAGE:46==
36
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Figure 2.1: View on the tension experimental set-up. 1) wall of the channel tool, 2)
workpiece, 3) tightening bar, 4) bottom of the channel tool, 5) ﬁxed part of ending block,
6) detachable part of ending block, 7) vertical tool.
When the specimen is ready the pressure is set on the manometer. The pressure is
set using the prepared excel ﬁle to get the desired p/C value as it is described in chapter
describing the calibration of UTT 2. To reach the value of p/C which is planned to test, the
trial run with applying pressure only is suggested to see the exact value of the pressure from
the LabView document. After the pressure is set everything is read to make the experiment.
For the experiment UTT 2 is controlled fully in automatic mode using prepared Lab-
View script. First step is to move with the vertical tool down until it reaches the workpiece.
When the vertical tool puts pressure on the workpiece it is left like this until it reaches
steady state. After steady state is reached the elongation is applied by speciﬁed distance.
The distance is controlled by LabView and was decided in order to ﬁll the range of strain
of one of the p/C curves listed in chapter 1 and according to the observation during the
experiment. As a last step of the experiment the sliding component was added. This
happens by removing the detachable part in the end and the horizontal pulling cell moves
for distance speciﬁed by value in LabView. Again the set-up is kept until it reaches steady
state and than the load cell moves up. The workpiece is unloaded and one experimental run
is ﬁnished. The workpiece has to be taken out for further investigation. The experimental
set-up has to be cleaned as well to have the same conditions in every run.
==PAGE:47==
2.3. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE FOR TEST UNDER COMPRESSION
37
In the beginning it was planned to make one set of experiment when applying pres-
sure and elongation only and one set when adding sliding as well. After ﬁrst two batches of
experiment while applying pressure and elongation on one batch and pressure, elongation
and sliding on the other one it was decided for later experiments to always add sliding.
After the specimen is taken out and cleaned, the ends of the specimen were cut and
marked with "steel number punch" as shown in ﬁgure 2.2. The workpieces are now ready
for measurements.
Figure 2.2: Tension samples with cut ends.
2.3
Experimental procedure for test under compression
The set-up for the compression experiment is using the frame in order to keep the
workpiece under compression. The frame is movable and is moved by the horizontal
pulling cell in the same way as the tension samples were elongated but in reverse direction.
In order to deﬁne the space for the specimen, two blocks are mounted around the channel
tool. To one of them the ending tool is screwed deﬁning the position of the specimen in
the set-up and in the same time preventing the ﬂow of the material during the experiment.
The second block has a hole allowing to move with the frame tip to the channel tool. The
experimental set-up is presented in ﬁgure 2.3.
==PAGE:48==
38
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Figure 2.3: Set-up of the experiment under compression 1) holding tool, 2) compression
workpiece, 3) holding tip, 4) vertical tool.
When all of the preliminary operations are done the specimen can be placed in the
channel tool and the experiment can begin. The ﬁrst step is to move the vertical punch
down and add pressure on the workpiece. In tension, the conditions are kept the same
until steady state is reached. Because the specimen was designed to ﬁt exactly the space
between the demarcation tool and the tip of the frame, no elongation should be observed.
Next step is to move the frame in order to let the workpiece elongate for the desired length
by specifying the distance in LabView. When steady state is reached, the setup is unloaded
by moving the vertical punch up and one run of the compression experiment is done. Again
the specimen is taken out and cleaned for later measurements.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3
Data analysis
After the experiments were done it is important to extract the data which will be used
later to investigate and conclude on the experiment. The aim of this project is to investigate
deformation of the asperities in different levels of bulk deformation and therefore the key
parameter are how much the workpiece deformed in length and width and how the surface
with asperities changed during the deformation.
3.1
Characterisation of asperity deformation
3.1.1
Surface characterisation by contact probe
As a ﬁrst candidate the same method as for describing the geometry of asperities of
the specimen before deformation was used. This method was based on the measurements
made on a Hommel measuring instrument. The Hommel uses a contact probe to analyse
the surface and plot the 2D proﬁle.
The measured proﬁle was then taken and examined by a MATLAB-script. The MATALB-
code based on the speciﬁed range found the ﬂattened surface and automatically calculated
the alpha value as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
39
==PAGE:50==
40
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
Figure 3.1: 2D proﬁle measured using contact probe and afterwards analysed by a
MATLAB-script.
Because the deformation of the surface is not equal in elongating direction after
the experiment, the limitation of this method is in the number of proﬁles which would
have to be taken to interpret correctly the surface. Because the Hommel is operated
manually, the high number of proﬁles needed is connected to very long time necessary
for the measurements. To save time, the same was done using FTS Taylor Hobson (FTS)
measuring device, which is also using a contact probe. The FTS can run in semi-automatic
mode and can be programmed to take measurements on the surface in speciﬁed distance
apart each other. The other limitation of the measurements by using contact probe is
the uncertainty of the calculated contact area ratio. The uncertainty comes from the,
sometimes, not clear transition between ﬂattened and non-ﬂattened part of the asperity and
therefore the result is inﬂuenced by the decision where the ﬂattened surface starts and ends
as can be observed on asperity nr. 8 from right on ﬁgure 3.1.
3.1.2
Alicona 3D measurement
As another surface characterisation method the Alicona 3D measurement was done.
The resulted 3D proﬁle suffer for the same problem as the previous method which is not
clearly distinguishable transfer between the ﬂattened surface of the asperity and the non
ﬂattened. The 2D proﬁle obtained from the 3D measurement and MATLAB-script was
used to evaluate the contact area ratio.
==PAGE:51==
3.1. CHARACTERISATION OF ASPERITY DEFORMATION
41
Figure 3.2: 2D proﬁle of the deformed surface from 3D alicona measurement.
As can be seen from ﬁgure 3.2, this method has the same problem as the method
presented before - the uncertainty of the contact area ratio value due to the questionable
transition between ﬂattened and non ﬂattened surface.
3.1.3
Alicona 2D measurement
The Alicona is also able to make 2D images of the specimen in high resolution by
stitching more small pictures together. The image was processed by drawing the lines
which identiﬁes the ﬂattened surface of the asperity. The image with drawn lines was then
processed in a MATLAB-script for recognition of the lines and calculating the contact area
ratio. An example an image with drawn lines is shown in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Example of 2D proﬁle image with drawn lines.
It was found that the ﬂattened surface is much more clear compared to the previous
evaluation methods and subsequently it is easier to identify the desired surface and the
results will be more solid.
For the specimens in tension, the ﬁrst and last three asperities were skipped because
they can be inﬂuenced by edge effects and therefore the result could be inﬂuenced as well.
The compression specimens were treated similarly to the tension in terms of surface char-
acterisation. The ﬁrst asperity was not taken into account and last 6 were cut off as well.
==PAGE:52==
42
CHAPTER 3. DATA ANALYSIS
First asperity was not considered for the same reason as in case of tension - risk of edge
effect. The last 6 asperity were neglected because the applied pressure is not controlled in
the region.
3.2
Measurement of length and width
The measurement of length was used for calculating the strain of the workpiece and
also for calculating the area on which the pressure was applied. Because the length could
not be simply taken as a sum of the initial length of the specimen and elongation distance
the length had to be measured and it was done on the Shadowgraph 7. The recorded values
were noted and the strain was calculated. To be able to calculate strain the initial length
and the length after deformation had to be measured. The measurement for the dependence
of ϵ −α was done for the same number of asperities as in case of contact ratio analysis
meaning the three asperities from the beginning and end of the specimen were skipped in
case of tension. When it comes to the length used for calculating the area on which the
pressure was applied the whole length of the face with asperities was measured.
The width was measured by a digital micrometer on 5 spots along the workpiece and
recorded. The average width was calculated and this value was used for calculation of the
area where the pressure was distributed.
3.3
Analysis of measured force
The data recorded by the load cell were processed as follows. The data for the vertical
load cell were identiﬁed and extracted. The steady state was found by plotting the load
values as function of time and the average from the last 20 values of the steady state was
calculated. The resulted value was recalculated using equations 3.2 and 3.4 to give the
exact applied force which was used for determining the applied pressure.
From the LabView data it was found that when the vertical tool enters the channel tool the
friction between the sides of the vertical tool and the channel tool causes loss of applied
pressure. This results to drop in the values of the values in data sheet. The values were
corrected and used in calculation of applied pressure. The drop was bigger and more
obvious in case of compression because the vertical tool for compression is slightly wider
than the one used for tension.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Results and discussion
When the experiments were ﬁnished and all data were recorded the results can be
analysed and judged. The strain and contact area ratio dependence was compared if they
follow the trend of increasing contact area ratio value with increasing strain as it mentioned
in chapter 1.
4.1
Results from experiment under tension
The results taken from the experiment for the tension experiment applying 7 bar
pressure are presented chart 4.1. The difference between the two lines is that the red line
represents the results when no sliding of the specimen was included and the blue line is
showing the results when sliding was part of the experiment.
Figure 4.1: Comparison of experiment with and without sliding.
43
==PAGE:54==
44
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
It can be seen that the results when the sliding was applied are more consistent than the
values plotted for the case when no sliding was added. It can be conﬁrmed also from the
pictures of the surface made by Alicona that it is much easier to distinguish the ﬂattened
surface when sliding was present than when it was not.
When sliding is added the whole specimen slides for speciﬁed distance and due to the
friction stress between the ﬂattened asperities and the vertical tool the deformed region
becomes more apparent. On the other hand when sliding is not used only the side of the
workpiece which was pulled experience small amount of sliding but the rest of the part
experience smaller deformation. Based on this observation it was decided to add sliding to
all experimental sets.
4.2
Comparison of the experimental results with
simulation
The results from simulation were added to the combined plot with compression and
tension experiment data. The resulting chart is presented on ﬁgure 4.2. The detailed data
from the experiment which were used for plotting the chart below can be found in tables
in appendix XX.
Figure 4.2: Comparison of results after experiment with tension and compression for three
pressures and with repetitions included.
It can be observed from the simulation results that development of α −ϵ is not linear
and the slope decrease in higher strain values. This was expected and the reason for this
==PAGE:55==
4.2. COMPARISON OF THE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS WITH SIMULATION 45
is that with higher level of bulk deformation the asperities start to interfere between each
other and thanks to that they are more resistant to deformation as was investigated in [6].
Finally the inﬁnite pressure would be required to obtain contact area α = 1.
When it comes to closer comparison between experiment and simulation it can be seen
that the tension experiment is in the plane stress according to the simulation which was
also expected because the tested area is narrower than the tool and therefore even if the
specimen will ﬂow slightly to the sides under the applied pressure, it will not reach the
walls of the channel tool and the specimen can be considered to be in plane stress. It
can even be seen that the simulation overestimate the development of contact area with
increasing strain because few points of the experiment lies under the simulation curve for
the plane stress simulation.
On the other hand the experiment for the compression is far from the expectations. The
results still follows the same trend for α −ϵ but when compared with simulations the
experiment values does not ﬁt.
One explanation for this can be loss of the pressure during the experiment. This is caused
by the tiny gap between the end of the vertical tool and the holding tool of the working
space. To this gap small amount of material can escape when the pressure is applied. By
this the pressure is not equally distributed along the surface of the specimen and higher
pressure is concentrated in the side where the small amount of material escaped. As
addition to this the pressure is also not equally distributed because the elongated part is
not in contact with the vertical tool as it is explained in chapter 3.
The other parameter which can play role in representing the compression results is the
way how the results for contact ratio α are obtained. As can be seen from the chart above
and from the tables with results in appendix the highest α value is 0.9585 and it should be
higher according to what the simulation is predicting. The reason for thatis that the gap
of undeformed material which separates the deformed asperities is so small that when it
comes for drawing the lines which deﬁne the borders of deformed asperities the width of
the lines itself is thick enough to ﬁll half of the gap of undeformed material. On top of that
it is not that clear when the deformed asperity begins and where ends.
Other parameter which can be responsible for the relatively low α values in high pressures
is the lubricant which can be entrapped in the undeformed valleys and block the asperities
to deform.
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
The results for the tension part of the experiment are in good agreement with the
simulation and also with previous experiments. For the compression part it was expected
that the results will be in bigger agreement with the simulation. As it was mentioned in
previous chapter the possible explanation of the misalignment of the experimental results
with the simulation is the loss of pressure due to the material ﬂow to the gap between the
holding tool and vertical punch.
XXX I guess one line is not enough XXX
47
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Further research
The entire experiment was made using material with hardening coefﬁcient n=0.21. The
hardening coefﬁcient is important factor in deﬁning the material characterisation important
for this experiment. It is suggested to use different material with lower n value for the
same experiment. It would allow to use the tension samples for much higher values of
p/C pressure because as it was shown the results from the tension experiment are more
consistent.
The different lubricant can also be used in order to eliminate the situation when the
entrapped lubricant prevents the asperities to deform.
49
==PAGE:60==
==PAGE:61==
Part 3
Analysis of plastic waves in the
workpiece surface while sliding against
rough tool
51
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 1
Tool speciﬁcations
Similar experiment was carried out on the Universal sheet-tribo-tester 2 machine and
many components from the previous experiment are used in this project. In order to
perform desired the experiment the tools for the experiment have to be designed and made.
Each of the tool is modelled in 3D CAD software (Autodesk Inventor 2015) and assembled
together with the full experimental set-up which was already modelled and provided by
the supervisor Chris Valentine Nielsen. The assembly was done to ensure the compatibility
with existed parts of the experimental set-up. The drawings of each tool can be found in
appendix. The dimension tolerances used for the tools are chosen based on the similar
tools which were used for the similar experiment in the past.
1.1
Horizontal tool
The horizontal tool is moving as was mentioned in x axis of the tool. The tool is sliding
on the teﬂon layer in order to provide low friction coefﬁcient from the bottom side of the
tool and to prevent base of the set-up against any kind of scratches which would be making
problems in later usage of the base.
1.1.1
Calculation of the internal stresses in the tool and material
choice
To prevent crash of the tool during the test and to ensure that the tool can withstand
load applied by the press without change of dimensions several calculations were done to
see which material can be used for the tool. It is important to mention that the width of the
tool was determined by the base of the tool and was decided to use maximum width what
the base allows. For the better illustration the ﬁgure below 1.1 shows the sketch of the tool
and applied forces.
53
==PAGE:64==
54
CHAPTER 1. TOOL SPECIFICATIONS
Figure 1.1: Sketch of applied forces on the workpiece during plastic waves experiment.
The maximum applied normal pressure which can be used based on the machine
speciﬁcations is 12 tons. Therefore the normal stress, σn, is calculated as follows:
σn = F
A = 12000 × 9, 81
60 × 10
= 196, 2 MPa
(1.1)
where F is applied normal force and A represents the perpendicular area to the applied
force.
To calculate the tangential stress the shear has to be calculated ﬁrst. The shear stress
is calculated in equation (1.2) below:
τ = n × k = n × σo
√
3 = 150
√
3 = 86, 6 MPa
(1.2)
where the k is the ﬂow stress of the material which is than developed to σo
√
3 which
represents the von Mieses material ﬂow criteria and n stays for the friction factor. Because
in the calculation is taking into account the worst scenario which can occur, the friction
factor, n, is speciﬁed as 1.
The shear factor is used for calculation of pulling force, P as follows in the equation (1.3):
P = τ × A = 86, 6 × 60 × 10 = 51963 N
(1.3)
==PAGE:65==
1.1. HORIZONTAL TOOL
55
where A is the area parallel to the pulling force. When the pulling force is known it is
used to calculate the tangential stress can be calculated according to equation (1.4):
σt = P
A = 51963
10š
= 519, 63 MPa
(1.4)
where sigmat is the stress in pulling direction and A is the area perpendicular to the
pulling force.
After the sigman and sigmat are obtained the results are compared with the maximum
stress in each of this two load directions speciﬁed by the producer in the material charac-
teristic. As a material to compare the results with the SVERKER 21 steel was chosen. The
SVERKER 21 properties can be found in appendix along with the stress properties of other
materials. The maximum allowed stress in tension for the mentioned material for 58 HRC
is 943.5 MPa which is almost double of the calculated value for stress in tension in the
tool. It means that even with use of safety factor of 1.8 the material would still withstand
the applied load. Finally SVARIGE 21 which will be hardened to 58-60 HRC was chosen
as the material for the tool production.
1.1.2
Tool angles and distance between the peaks
The horizontal tool has the asperities on one side of the sliding surface with strictly
speciﬁed angles and distance between the peaks. To determine the angles of the asperities
on the horizontal tool the minimum and maximum angle was established. The minimum
angle γmin was set as 0°meaning completely ﬂat surface. On the other side of the range
the maximum angle γmax was set as 30°. The limit angles were determined from the chart
representing friction factor m as a function of γ and is presented below.
==PAGE:66==
56
CHAPTER 1. TOOL SPECIFICATIONS
Figure 1.2: Friction factor m as a function of γ.
The maximum limit angle γmax is chosen to be 30°because when we take closer look
on the chart 1.2 the materials will fully shear (m=1) when the angle γ is around 27°for
m∗=0,3. To be on the safe side the angle was chosen as slightly higher and therefore it is
speciﬁed as 30°. In order to inspect the behaviour of the material in full range of the angles
before the material will shear the minimum angle was set to 0°as mentioned before. The
range from 0°to 30°was divided by step of 5°to be able to observe the material behaviour.
This leads to 6 tools with different asperity angles.
The distance between the peaks for all of the 6 different angles is deﬁned to 1.5 mm.
In paper [? ] it is mentioned that many small asperities will require the same speciﬁc
plastic work as a smaller number of bigger asperities. To investigate if the distance between
the peaks effect the wave movement the tool with 15°was chosen and made with 3 mm
spacing between the peaks and 0.5 mm spacing besides the one with 1.5 mm distance. The
table below presents the overview on the tools with different types of angles and distances
between peaks.
==PAGE:67==
1.2. DRAWINGS OF THE HORIZONTAL TOOL
57
Table 1.1: Angles nad distances between peaks for the horizontal tool
T\ γ
0°
5°
10°
15°
20°
25°
30°
0.5 mm
X
1.5 mm
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
3 mm
X
1.2
Drawings of the horizontal tool
In the end the tools were drawn (as can be seen on ﬁg. 1.3) with necessary tolerances
and send to the workshop and later on for hardening.
Figure 1.3: Drawing of the horizontal tool with 15° angle of asperities and 1,5 mm spacing
between them.
1.3
Design of the other tools for the experiment
The horizontal tool is a key tool to speciﬁying the direction of the experiment. However
in order the experiment can be done other tools has to be designed and made. Because
it was decided to make the experiment on workpieces of two dimensions in length, the
tools for demarcation of the working space hve to be designed. This tool is responsible
for keeping the 30 mm workpiece centered according to the vertical punch, prevent the
ﬂow of the material and doesn’t allow to move to the workpiece while the horizontal tool
is pulled away.
Follow-up to the tools for demarcation the blocks enclosing the base have to be made
with the srew hole for the tools for demarcation. Beside that it was necessary to make
a horizontal tool in legth of 30 mm. The detailed drawing of all the tools which were
==PAGE:68==
58
CHAPTER 1. TOOL SPECIFICATIONS
designed for this particular experiment can be found in appendix. All the other components
necessary for the experiment were taken from the previous set-up and ready to use.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 2
Experimental procedure and
parameters
2.1
Experimental procedure
The same as before asperity deformation experiment was started, also in plastic wave
experiment adjustment and alignment of all the components has to be done to ensure
the parts are not overlying and no component will be damaged. The focus is again on
vertical tool which is moving up and down and can cause the force loss while sliding on
the sides of the channel tool or even crack if the tool would hit the channel tool from the top.
After it is made sure that the vertical tool is on right place next step can be taken. As
next, all components are cleaned with ethyl alcohol. The workpiece is than etched for 30
seconds in 5% NaOH bath, dried with heat gun and lubricated with zinc stearate. Later
the vertical tool and horizontal tool is lubricated with zinc stearate as well. Instead of
lubricating bottom of the channel tool with zinc stearate, strip of teﬂon is placed. The
teﬂon strip has same width as channel in channel tool and thickness of 0,5 mm. The teﬂon
strip has to be replaced after each experiment. The experimental set-up can be seen from
ﬁgure 2.1 (in purpose of better illustration one wall of the channel tool is missing along
with ending blocks in the ﬁgure 2.1).
59
==PAGE:70==
60
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND PARAMETERS
Figure 2.1: Experimental set-up for plastic waves experiment 1) channel tool, 2) workpiece,
3) rigging screw, 4) vertical tool, 5) horizontal tool, 6) teﬂon strip.
When the teﬂon strip is placed, the ending blocks are mounted on the channel tool.
The horizontal tool can be than placed into the channel through the hole in ending blocks.
The horizontal tool can hit the hole in ending blocks while pulled out, if the blocks are not
properly adjusted. The adjustment has to be done before each experiment run. After that
the workpiece is placed to the channel tool and pressure used for the experiment can be set
according to manometer. After that the experiment itself can begin.
During ﬁrst part of the experiment the vertical tool is moving down until it reaches
the workpiece. When the vertical tool get in contact with workpiece the pressure is applied
and the asperity on the workpiece deform and the contact area between the horizontal
tool and workpiece increases. Now it is possible to tighten the rigging screw, because
before the pressure was applied the horizontal tool would be pulled out when tightening
the rigging screw. Until the pressure stabilizes the set-up remains untouched. After the
pressure reaches steady state the horizontal tool is pulled for speciﬁed distance while the
pressure is still applied from the vertical tool. During that part the plastic waves will be
created. Then the workpiece is unloaded by moving with the vertical tool up and one run
of the experiment is ﬁnished. The workpiece is taken out for further investigation as well
as a data recorded by the load cells.
==PAGE:71==
2.2. EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS
61
2.2
Experimental parameters
After the ﬁrst trial experiments it was found that the horizontal tool does not meet the
speciﬁed requirements for surface roughness. Because the roughness is higher than desired
the material pick-up can be observed on the horizontal tool after the tool was pulled. The
tool was etched to remove the aluminium from the surface and in order to decrease the
surface roughness it was decided to polish it manually. For the polishing diamond paste
were used. The polishing process started from the paste with diamond grains of 7 µm
in diameter and continued through 5 µm, 1 µm to 0.25 µm. The surface was measured
by contact probe after polished 3 times with the same paste. The ﬁnal achieved surface
roughness decreased from 0.9 µm before the tool was polished to 0.25 - 0.17 µm.
The desired contact ratio between the workpiece and horizontal tool was established
as ∼0.33 to have surface big enough to analyse the result of the experiment and in the
same time to decrease the contact area and therefore friction forces in compare to the fully
ﬂat workpiece. The desired contact ratio was achieved by applying XX bars.
When the the vertical pressure was speciﬁed sliding length of the horizontal tool should
be established as well. The ideal sliding length would be the lowest where steady state
pulling force would be observed. Three sliding lengths were chosen, namely 6 mm, 8 mm
and 10 mm. It was found that steady state is not observed in any of them and therefore
shortest sliding length was chosen because risk of pick-up of material on the horizontal
tool is increasing with longer sliding length.
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 3
Data processing
Simulation and experiment were done simultaneously and data from both sources have
to be analysed. In order to compare if simulation matches with experiment the resulted
workpiece proﬁle created by sliding of the horizontal tool have to be obtained for both,
experiment and simulation. In order compare the effect of the ﬂank angle on the horizontal
tool to energy required for pulling the tool pulling forces were examined.
3.1
Proﬁle measurement
3.1.1
Workpiece proﬁle measurement after experiment
The proﬁle was measured by contact probe on Hommel proﬁlometer. Three proﬁles
across the width of the workpiece were measured to identify if the deformed surface has
same geometry across width of the workpiece. Because maximum measuring length of
the Hommel instrument is limited to 20 mm, the proﬁle was measured from third asperity
counting from side of the pulling cell when the workpiece is placed in the experimental
set-up. After measurement the proﬁles were aligned. The comparison of the three proﬁles
from one specimen can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1 where ﬁrst and last proﬁles going from top of
the ﬁgure 3.1 are proﬁles measured 3 mm from each side of the workpiece and the proﬁle
in the middle is measured in the middle of the workpiece.
Figure 3.1: Comparison of three proﬁles made across the width of one workpiece after
pulling of the 15◦3 mm distance between peaks horizontal tool.
63
==PAGE:74==
64
CHAPTER 3. DATA PROCESSING
It can be seen that the three measured proﬁles are almost same and therefore only one
representative will be used for compare the experimental proﬁles with proﬁles from the
simulation. For purpose of the comparison the proﬁle which was taken in the middle will
be used. The vertical lines are separated 3 mm from each other and therefore represents
the distance of the original asperities.
3.1.2
Proﬁle of workpiece after simulation
The ﬁnal proﬁle from the simulation is taken simply as a screen shot from software
used for ﬁnite element analysis. The resulted proﬁle can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Proﬁle of the deformed workpiece after simulation of pulling horizontal tool
with 15◦asperities and 3 mm distance between peaks.
3.2
Measurement of the proﬁle of horizontal tool for
experiment
When the horizontal tool for the experiment was ready the tool was measured with
FTS proﬁlometer. The resulted proﬁle was than examined by SPIP software. SPIP is
is software specialized for evaluating surface topography. The measured proﬁle of the
horizontal tool can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Detail of the measurement for horizontal tool with 5◦asperities angle and 1.5
mm distance between the peaks.
==PAGE:75==
3.3. PROCESSING OF PULLING FORCE DATA
65
From the ﬁgure 3.3 the radius on the top of the peaks and bottom of the valleys can be
observed. All the horizontal tools were measured in order to identify the radius. The rest
of the proﬁle details of the horizontal tool can be found in appendix XX. The measured
radius was used as a input to the model of horizontal tool used in simulation.
3.3
Processing of pulling force data
The pulling force was measured by the pulling cell and saved into data ﬁle. The pulling
force was than isolated from the rest of the recorded data. Arithmetical average of the
range where the pulling force was applied was calculated and than plotted as on a chart
according to the used horizontal tool used for the experiment.
The pulling force was calibrated for use with another set-up and therefore to know the
value of the pulling force for plastic waves the force had to be recalculated by use of
moment equilibrium:
Mc = Mw
(3.1)
where Mc is moment calibrated according to different set-up than is used for the waves
experiment and Mw is moment for the waves set-up. The moment equilibrium can be
written as:
Fc · lc = Fw · lw
(3.2)
where Fc is the pulling force calibrated to the different set-up, lc is a moment arm
from the load cell used for recording the pulling force to place where the pulling force
was applied in the different set-up, Fw states for the pulling force for waves experiment
and lw is a arm of the pulling force in wave experiment. The pulling force for the wave
experiment can be calculated as:
Fw = Fc · lc
lw
(3.3)
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 4
Simulation
4.1
Introduction to simulation
The mechanism of plastic wave was simulated along the experiment by FEM simu-
lation software. The used software is called i form and was developed in colaboration
by University in Lisbon and DTU. The process was simulated in order to ﬁnd the match
between the simulation and the real experiment to be able to predict the consequences of
the mechanism of the plastic waves and is one of the objectives for the master thesis.
First of all the die were made based on the actual dies designed in the earlier chap-
ter. The peaks on the horizontal die were ﬁrst made using single points but later on it was
discovered that the simulation is not working properly. The sharp peaks were changed to
the tiny arches an each of the peak and valley. This also corresponds more with the reality
as can be observed from the proﬁles of the horizontal tools. For all the simulation runs
on the top of the workpiece was added another brick of supported workpiece made from
much harder material (characteristic of tool steel). The reason for that is to distribute the
pressure uniformly along the softer aluminium workpiece because the harder workpiece
will not deform under applied pressure.
First attempt for the simulation started with the 60 mm ﬂat workpiece. For simpliﬁ-
cation in the ﬁrst stages the friction between the dies and the workpiece was set as 0.
To substitute the vertical tool the constant, uniform pressure was used along the whole
workpiece surface. For more uniform pressure distribution and due to other circumstances,
between the workpiece and the applied pressure block of much harder material than the
workpiece was added. Because the added material is chosen as tool steel, the applied
pressure will not deform the added block. The overview on the simulation setup can be
seen on ﬁgure ??.
67
==PAGE:78==
68
CHAPTER 4. SIMULATION
Figure 4.1: Overview of the simulation setup.
4.2
Model of horizontal tool with radius for simulation
In the beginning of the simulation study the horizontal tool model was made with the
sharp peaks and valleys as it is speciﬁed on the drawings. It was discovered that it causes
big problems during the simulation which leaded to crush of the simulation. It was also
realised that the horizontal tool will have radius on top of each peak and bottom of a valley
also after the tool will be manufactured. To ensure the smooth transition between the
radius and slope of the asperity it was made sure that the radius is tangential to the slope in
the point of transition. The chart from the resulted points was made and was compared
with the proﬁle with sharp peaks and valleys. The chart is presented on ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.2: Comparison of a part of a horizontal tool proﬁle for sharp peaks and valleys
and for part of the proﬁle with 1.4 mm radius on top of the peaks and bottom of the valleys
for 15◦slope of the asperities and 1,5 distance between peaks.
==PAGE:79==
4.3. SIMULATION PARAMETERS
69
When the points for the model of horizontal tool were deﬁned the top of the peak with
radius was moved to 0 for more convenient further use of the model in simulation. The y
coordinate of the points for radius on top of the peaks and bottom of the valleys are plotted
correspondingly to the x coordinate which is connected to the speciﬁed distance between
the peaks.
Few different radius values were tried in the simulation and it was found that 1.4 mm
radius works well with the simulation. One can say that 1.4 mm radius is big if compared
to the distance between asperities which is 1.5 mm but it is important to remember that
the radius is only on the peak and the radius smoothly continues to the slope under the
speciﬁed angle of the asperity. Separate model of horizontal tool is made for each of the
tools which were designed for the experiment.
4.3
Simulation parameters
It would be natural to use the same parameters in the simulation af for the experiment.
However when the simulation was run with the same parameters as in the experiment the
simulation crushed. Therefore some of the parameters in simulation had to be changed.
4.3.1
General parameters
The simulation is run in plane strain condition. The total number of steps was speciﬁed
as 90 which can be divided to 30 steps where the horizontal tool is stationary and in this
part the pressure is build. From step 31 to 90 the horizontal tool is pulled with speciﬁed
speed.
4.3.2
Pulling length
The pulling length of the horizontal tool is 6 mm and is same for the simulation as it is
for the experiment. 6 mm corresponds to 60 steps in the simulation.
4.3.3
Friction factor between the workpiece, dies and horizontal tool
The biggest change is in the friction coefﬁcient between the workpiece, dies and
horizontal tool. For purpose of the simulation the friction factor m is set to 0.
==PAGE:80==
70
CHAPTER 4. SIMULATION
4.3.4
Pulling speed
The speed of pulling the horizontal tool from step 1 to step 30 is 0 mm/s. After step
30 it is set to 1 mm/s and remain constant until the end of the simulation in step 90. The
pulling speed is same as the the speed used for pulling the tool in experiment.
4.3.5
Pressure
The pressure used in the simulation was calculated based on the value recorded by the
LabView program after the experiment was done. The equations from part 1 section 3.2
are used to obtain the true used force in tons. This force is converted to newtons by,
F[N] = F[t] · g[m/s−2] · 1000
(4.1)
where F is the applied force and g is the standard acceleration due to gravity. Than the
applied pressure is calculated as,
p[MPa] =
F[N]
A[mm2]
(4.2)
where p represents the applied pressure and A the surface on which the force is applied.
After the calculation the pressure 67 MPa was obtained and used in the simulation. The
pressure is build from 0 MPa to desired 67 MPa in 25 steps.
4.4
Simulation procedure
When workpiece and all dies are merged to one ﬁle the simulation itself can begin. As
it was mentioned before the simulation can be divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part the
pressure is applied on the workpiece in steps of ∼2.5 MPa/step. The horizontal tool in
this stage is stationary. During this part the material of the workpiece will ﬁll the asperities
on the horizontal tool as can be seen in ﬁgure ??.
Figure 4.3: Detail on the simulation after the vertical pressure was applied and the gaps
were ﬁlled.
==PAGE:81==
4.5. DISCUSSION
71
During second part the horizontal tool is pulled and the movement of plastic waves
will occur. The result can be seen from ﬁgure ??.
Figure 4.4: Detail on the workpiece after the simulation is ﬁnished.
4.5
Discussion
In the real experiment the workpieces and dies has some tolerances and therefore
the gap between die and workpiece will not be 0 as it is in case of simulation. This can
inﬂuence the result as the workpiece in real experiment will have the tendency to rotate.
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 5
Results and discussion
5.1
Pulling force
After the pulling force was calculated the results were plotted to a chart showed in
ﬁgure 5.1. Horizontal axis represents different horizontal tools used for the experiment.
Figure 5.1: Results for pulling force - asperity angle dependence.
As can be seen the pulling force increases linearly to the increasing ﬂank angle on the
horizontal tool. This observation correspond to the theoretical prediction of the effect of
increasing ﬂank angle in ﬁgure 5.2.
The chart is also showing the difference in pulling force when tool with 1.5 mm and
3 mm distance between peaks was used. When the resulted force for 15◦angle with
1.5 mm distance between peaks tool is compared with tool with 15◦and 3 mm distance
between peaks it can be said that the forces are almost identical. This conclusion is also in
agreement with the theoretical prediction in paper XX.
73
==PAGE:84==
74
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 5.2: Theoretical prediction of the effect of increasing ﬂank angle on the horizontal
tool to the friction factor.
On ﬁgure 5.2 the friction factor (explained in part 1, chapter 1) is growing almost
linearly in region from 0◦to 15◦ﬂank angle.
To know exactly the pulling force only the friction force was to be extracted from the
pulling forces shown in ﬁgure 5.2 and therefore it would be possible to identify the friction
factor and compare the experimental results with theoretical prediction for the speciﬁc
friction value.
The pulling force pulling force was also plotted in ﬁgure 5.3 as a time depended along
with the vertical pressure applied on the workpiece. The regions of different stages of
experiment procedure are found and marked into the plot. It is observed that the vertical
pressure corresponds to the pulling force and as can be seen the change in applied vertical
pressure occurs in moment when the horizontal tool starts to be pulled.
==PAGE:85==
5.2. COMPARISON OF FINAL WORKPIECE PROFILE FROM SIMULATION AND
EXPERIMENT
75
Figure 5.3: Combined plot of pulling force with vertical pressure.
5.2
Comparison of ﬁnal workpiece proﬁle from
simulation and experiment
Obtained proﬁles from the simulation and experiment are compared and can be seen
from ﬁgure 5.4.
==PAGE:86==
76
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
((a)) Proﬁle for the simulation with 5◦horizontal tool.
((b)) Proﬁle for the experiment with 5◦horizontal tool.
Figure 5.4: Resulted proﬁles from simulation and experiment while using 5◦horizontal
tool.
When the two proﬁles are compared it can be seen that they look fairly similar to
each other. The proﬁle is uniform along the measured length and relatively low which is
connected to the used ﬂank angle 5◦on the horizontal tool.
With increasing ﬂank angle the proﬁle becomes more obvious but in case of 10◦the
proﬁle from the simulation (ﬁgure 5.5(a)) is still not that apparent. In case of measured
proﬁle from the workpiece (ﬁgure 5.5(b)) the waves are uniform on the investigated length
and the proﬁle is higher in which corresponds to the bigger ﬂank angle 10◦.
((a)) Proﬁle for the simulation with 10◦horizontal tool.
((b)) Proﬁle for the experiment with 10◦horizontal tool.
Figure 5.5: Resulted proﬁles from simulation and experiment while using 10◦horizontal
tool.
The reason for the non clear proﬁle is that the maximum possible zoom in the simula-
tion software does not allow bigger magnitude and therefore the proﬁle is not that apparent
in smaller ﬂank angles.
When it comes to the results between experiment and simulation for horizontal tool
with 15◦ﬂank angle the results start to vary as can be seen from ﬁgure 5.6.
==PAGE:87==
5.3. EFFECTIVE STRAIN
77
((a)) Proﬁle for the simulation with 15◦horizontal tool.
((b)) Proﬁle for the experiment with 15◦horizontal tool.
Figure 5.6: Resulted proﬁles from simulation and experiment while using 15◦horizontal
tool.
((a)) Proﬁle for the simulation with 15◦horizontal tool with 3 mm distance between
peaks.
((b)) Proﬁle for the experiment with 15◦horizontal tool with 3 mm distance between
peaks.
Figure 5.7: Resulted proﬁles from simulation and experiment while using 15◦horizontal
tool with 3 mm distance between peaks.
5.3
Effective strain
The simulation allows to investigate the effective strain values for each of the used
horizontal tools. The results from the simulation will be compared in this section.
==PAGE:88==
78
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
((a)) Effective strain for the horizontal tool with 5◦asperities.
((b)) Effective strain for the horizontal tool with 10◦asperities.
((c)) Effective strain for the horizontal tool with 15◦asperities.
Figure 5.8: Resulted effective strain for while different use of horizontal tool was simulated.
It can be observed from ﬁgure 5.8 that the effective strain is increasing with bigger
angle of the asperities on the horizontal tool. This observation can be explained as the
height of the asperities is increasing with bigger angle and therefore while the horizontal
tool is pulled, the resulted plastic waves are "travelling" longer distance.
==PAGE:89==
5.3. EFFECTIVE STRAIN
79
The results for the same slope of the asperities but different distance between peaks
can be seen in ﬁgure 5.11.
((a)) Effective strain for the horizontal tool with 15◦asperities and 1.5 mm distance
between peaks.
((b)) Effective strain for the horizontal tool with 15◦asperities and 3 mm distance between
peaks.
Figure 5.9: Resulted effective strain for same angle of the asperities and different distance
between peaks.
The comparison shows higher values of effective strain in case when horizontal tool
with 15◦asperities and 1.5 mm between the peaks is used but the thickness of effected
material is thinner. When the vertical pressure is applied the workpiece is ﬁlling the space
between the asperities which is half in case of 1.5 mm than in case with 3 mm distance
between the peaks. Therefore when the horizontal tool is pulled bigger amount of material
is moving and the effected thickness is higher in case of 3 mm peaks distance. However
the number of passed asperities is half in case of 3 mm peak distance than in 1.5 mm and
it results in higher local values of effective strain.
==PAGE:90==
80
CHAPTER 5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
When effect of the same horizontal tool on material with different strain hardening coefﬁ-
cient, n, is compared the results can be seen in ﬁgure
((a)) Effective strain for the horizontal tool with 5◦asperities and workpiece material
with strain hardening coefﬁcient n = 0.21.
((b)) Effective strain for the horizontal tool with 5◦asperities and workpiece material
with strain hardening coefﬁcient n = 0.42.
Figure 5.10: Resulted effective strain for same angle of the asperities and different work-
piece material characteristics.
The values of effective strain for both cases have fairly same values but in case of n =
0.42 the effected area is thinner than for n = 0.21. This happens because of easier work
hardening of the material with bigger strain hardening exponent and therefore the material
becomes harder after sliding of the asperities.
5.4
Effective stress
When effective stress is compared it is found that the values of stress do not vary much
and specially in case when 10◦and 15◦horizontal tool was used the results are almost
==PAGE:91==
5.4. EFFECTIVE STRESS
81
identical. The values when 5◦horizontal tool was used are little bit lower than the 2 cases
mentioned before but the change is only minor.
((a)) Effective stress for the horizontal tool with 5◦asperities.
((b)) Effective stress for the horizontal tool with 10◦asperities.
((c)) Effective stress for the horizontal tool with 15◦asperities.
Figure 5.11: Resulted effective stress for different angle of the asperities.
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
As can be seen from the part III chapter 5 when the experiment is compared with the
simulation the results are very close to each other. However further investigation has to be
done in order to be able to get closer with the parameters used in the simulation to the ones
used in experiment. Therefore the work contained in this master thesis should be used as a
direction of further research and after that ﬁnal judgement of appropriateness of use of the
simulation software for prediction of the plastic waves behaviour.
The experiment conﬁrmed the theoretical prediction of energy requirement for differ-
ent slopes of the asperities on the tool mentioned in paper [16].
83
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 7
Further research
As was explained the radius on the horizontal tool used in the simulation does not
corresponds with the radius which was measured on the manufactured horizontal tool. For
purpose of more accurate comparison between simulation and experiment the simulation
should be made with the same radius on modelled and measured horizontal tool.
When the results of pulling force were obtained the values of friction force between
teﬂon strip and the horizontal tool were not deducted and therefore are still included in the
overall results. To be able to extract the friction force the ﬂat horizontal tool (0◦asperities)
should be used and the teﬂon strips should be placed from the bottom and also from the
top of the tool. Than the vertical tool will press directly on the teﬂon strip on top of the
horizontal tool and the horizontal tool will be pulled. The resulted values obtained from
the LabView ﬁle for horizontal axis should be divided by two because the same friction
occur from both sides of the tool. This friction force should be than extracted from the
pulling force values presented in part III chapter 5 section 1 to see the the force required
for creating the plastic waves in the workpiece material only.
The experiment of the plastic waves was performed only on one material and it would be
interesting to observe the same mechanism on different material with different properties
and compare the results for that material with simulation.
Another suggestion how to improve the results of plastic waves experiment is to pol-
ish the horizontal tool to lower Ra vales. This would decrease the friction forces between
the workpiece and horizontal tool and therefore the risk of pick up of the workpiece
material on the horizontal tool.
It would be beneﬁcial for comparison of the proﬁles for lower slope of the asperities
85
==PAGE:96==
86
CHAPTER 7. FURTHER RESEARCH
to see the resulted proﬁle from the simulation in higher detail. For that purpose the code of
the simulation software should be changed and adjusted. The simulation software should
be also adjusted to be able to simulate the smaller radius on the peaks of horizontal tool
and add the friction between the horizontal tool and the workpiece.
It is suggested to measure the hardness of the material after the experiment was performed
to see the effect of the work hardening by the horizontal tool. Another measurement
which can be used in order to compare the experiment with the simulation is to measure
the effective stress and strain in the workpiece material. This can be done in Risø DTU
National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1] T. Wanheim, N. Bay, A model for friction in metal forming processes, Annals of
the CIRP, 27 (1978) 189-194.
[2] F.P. Bowden, D. Tabor, Mechanism of metallic friction, Nature, 50, 3798 (1942)
197-199.
[3] T. Wanheim, T. Abildgaard, A mechanism for metallic friction, Proceedings of the
4th International Conference on Production Engineering, Tokyo (1980) 122-127.
[4] E.Orowan, The calculation of roll pressure in hot and cold ﬂat rolling, Proceedings
of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 150, 1, (1943) 140-167.
[5] M.C. Shaw, A. Ber, P.A. Mamin, Friction characteristics of sliding surfaces under-
going subsurface plastic ﬂow, Journal of Basic Engineering (1960) 342-346.
[6] B. Fogg, Preliminary study of the inﬂuence of stress and deformation in the substrate
on junction growth and friction, Proceeding of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
182 Pt 3K (1967-1968) 152-161.
[7] N. Bay, Tool/workpiece interface stresses in cold forward extrusion, Advanced
Technology of Plasticity 1 (1984) 259-266.
[8] J.M. Challen, P.L.B. Oxley, An explanation of the different regimes of friction and
wear using asperity deformation models, Wear 53 (1979) 229-243.
[9] W.R.D. Wilson, S. Sheu, Real area of contact and boundary friction in metal
forming, International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 30, 7 (1988) 475-489.
[10] M.P.F. Sutcliffe, Surface asperity deformation in metal forming processes, Inter-
national Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 30, 11 (1988) 847-868.
[11] A. Makinouchi, H. Ike, M. Murakawa, N. Koga, A ﬁnite element analysis of
ﬂattening of surface asperities by perfectly lubricated rigid dies in metal working processes,
Wear, 128 (1988) 109-122.
[12] H. Ike, A. Makinouchi, Effect of lateral tension and compression on plane strain
ﬂattening processes of surface asperities lying over a plastically deformable bulk, Wear,
87
==PAGE:98==
88
CHAPTER 7. FURTHER RESEARCH
140 (1990) 17-38.
[13] D.A. Korzekwa, P.R. Dawson, W.R.D. Wilson, Surface asperity deformation
during sheet forming, International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 34, 7 (1992) 521-539.
[14] Z.G. Wang, Y. Yoshikawa, T. Suzuki, K. Osakada, Determination of friction law
in dry metal forming with DLC coated tool, CIRP Annals-Manufacturing Technology, 63
(2014) 277-280.
[15] N. Bay, T. Wanheim: Wear, 38 (1976) 225-234.
[16] N. Bay, T. Wanheim, Contact Phenomena under Bulk Plastic Deformation Condi-
tions, Advanced Technology of Plasticity, 4 (1990) 1667-1691.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
89
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
Appendices
91
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX A
Suplement material and documents
Figure A.1: Manometer displaying the pressure in vertical load axis (axis 3).
93
==PAGE:104==
94
APPENDIX A. SUPLEMENT MATERIAL AND DOCUMENTS
 
 
Process Instruction 
 
 
 
 
CHEMETALL GMBH 
 
 
 
 
 
Surface Treatment 
 
Trakehner Straße 3 
D-60487 Frankfurt a. M. 
P. O. Box 90 01 70 
D-60441 Frankfurt a. M. 
Phone: 
+49 (69) 7165-0 
Fax: 
+49 (69) 7165-3018 
Internet: 
http://www.chemetall.com 
 
 registered trademark 
The above data have been compiled to the best of our knowledge on the basis of thorough tests and 
with regard to the current state of our long practical experience. No liabilities or guarantee deriving 
from or in connection with this leaflet can be imputed to us. - Reproduction, in whole or in part, only 
with our express permission. 
G a r d o l u b e ® L  6 1 8 5  
Product information 
Gardolube L 6185 is a water-soluble, low-dust lubricant on the basis of soap for the dry 
treatment of aluminum slugs prior to forming. 
It represents an alternative to zinc stearate powder and wax systems. 
Characteristic product data 
Colour: 
yellowish 
Consistency (20 °C): 
plastic, soft granulate 
Miscibility with water: 
soluble 
Bulk density: 
approx. 0.6 g/cm3 
pH (2 % in water): 
9 - 10 
Scope 
Gardolube L 6185 is used in the production of aerosol cans and technical components 
made from aluminum. The application of this product is particularly recommended in case 
of large, flat to slightly concave slug shapes. The plastic lubricant film applied by tumbling 
facilitates cold extrusion and can be subsequently removed with alkaline, aqueous spray 
cleaners and/or pickling. 
The finished parts are characterized by their gloss. 
Application 
The product is applied by dry tumbling in closed drums. The aluminum slugs are placed in 
the drum and the required amount of Gardolube L 6185 powder is uniformly added 
through the drum opening. 
Treating time: 
10 - 20 minutes 
Speed: 
 8 - 15 min-1 
Lubricant quantity: 
 60 - 100 g per 100 kg of slugs 
==PAGE:105==
95
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX B
Drawings of horizontal tool
A ( 5 : 1 )
A
Department of Mechanical Engineering
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Technical University of Denmark
Skala 1:1
Title:
 
 
Format: A3
Drawing no.
DB-name:
TOOL_10DEG
Matr: SVERKERE 21
 
 
Draw.(DB): 2015_008
     
Date:
20-Aug-15
HORIZONTAL TOOL WITH 10 
DEG ASPERITIES
2015_008
Name: Artur Ferfecki
9,93 B0,02
22 B0,1
R2,5
P10,1
95,25 B0,05
150,75 B0,2
155,75 B0,2
170,75 B0,2
Ra 0,1
63 hypper
9 B0,05
A
H 0,02 A
10n
160n
(0,75)
(1,5)
Alle kanter : Skarpe
 
Hrdes og anl«bes til 58-60 HRC
 
 
 
97
==PAGE:108==
98
APPENDIX B. DRAWINGS OF HORIZONTAL TOOL
A ( 5 : 1 )
A
Department of Mechanical Engineering
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Technical University of Denmark
Skala 1:1
Title:
 
 
Format: A3
Drawing no.
DB-name:
TOOL_5DEG
Matr: SVERKERE 21
 
 
Draw.(DB): 2015_009
     
Date:
20-Aug-15
HORIZONTAL TOOL WITH 5 
DEG ASPERITIES
2015_009
Name: Artur Ferfecki
22 B0,1
P10,1
R2,5
9 B0,05
95,25 B0,05
150,75 B0,2
155,75 B0,2
170,75 B0,2
Ra 0,1
63 hypper
A
H 0,02 A
9,93 B0,02
5n
170n
(0,75)
(1,5)
Alle kanter : Skarpe
 
Hrdes og anl«bes til 58-60 HRC
 
 
 
150n
==PAGE:109==
99
A ( 5 : 1 )
A
Department of Mechanical Engineering
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Technical University of Denmark
Skala 1:1
Title:
 
 
Format: A3
Drawing no.
DB-name:
TOOL_10DEG
Matr: SVERKERE 21
 
 
Draw.(DB): 2015_008
     
Date:
20-Aug-15
HORIZONTAL TOOL WITH 10 
DEG ASPERITIES
2015_008
Name: Artur Ferfecki
9,93 B0,02
22 B0,1
R2,5
P10,1
95,25 B0,05
150,75 B0,2
155,75 B0,2
170,75 B0,2
Ra 0,1
63 hypper
9 B0,05
A
H 0,02 A
10n
160n
(0,75)
(1,5)
Alle kanter : Skarpe
 
Hrdes og anl«bes til 58-60 HRC
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
100
APPENDIX B. DRAWINGS OF HORIZONTAL TOOL
A ( 5 : 1 )
A
Department of Mechanical Engineering
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Technical University of Denmark
Skala 1:1
Title:
 
 
Format: A3
Drawing no.
DB-name:
TOOL_15DEG
Matr: SVERKERE 21
 
 
Draw.(DB): 2015_002
     
Date:
20-Aug-15
HORIZONTAL TOOL WITH 15 
DEG ASPERITIES
2015_002
Name: Artur Ferfecki
170,75 B0,2
22 B0,1
P10,1
R2,5
Ra 0,1
9 B0,05
9,93 B0,02
A
H 0,02 A
15n
150n
0,75
(
)
1,5
(
)
150n
63 hypper
95,25 B0,05
150,75 B0,2
155,75 B0,2
Alle kanter : Skarpe
 
Hrdes og anl«bes til 58-60 HRC
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX C
101
==PAGE:112==
102
APPENDIX C. PROFILES OF SPECIMENS BEFORE DEFORMATION
Proﬁles of specimens before
deformation
C.1
Tension proﬁles
((a)) Workpiece nr. 1.
((b)) Workpiece nr. 2.
((c)) Workpiece nr. 3.
((d)) Workpiece nr. 4.
((e)) Workpiece nr. 5.
Figure C.1: Plot of the asperities geometry before deformation.
==PAGE:113==
C.1. TENSION PROFILES
103
((a)) Workpiece nr. 7.
((b)) Workpiece nr. 8.
((c)) Workpiece nr. 11.
((d)) Workpiece nr. 12.
((e)) Workpiece nr. 13.
((f)) Workpiece nr. 14.
((g)) Workpiece nr. 15.
Figure C.2: Plot of the asperities geometry before deformation.
==PAGE:114==
104
APPENDIX C. PROFILES OF SPECIMENS BEFORE DEFORMATION
((a)) Workpiece nr. 16.
((b)) Workpiece nr. 30.
((c)) Workpiece nr. 31.
((d)) Workpiece nr. 32.
((e)) Workpiece nr. 33.
((f)) Workpiece nr. 34.
((g)) Workpiece nr. 35.
Figure C.3: Plot of the asperities geometry before deformation.
==PAGE:115==
C.1. TENSION PROFILES
105
((a)) Workpiece nr. 37.
((b)) Workpiece nr. 38.
((c)) Workpiece nr. 39.
((d)) Workpiece nr. 40.
((e)) Workpiece nr. 42.
((f)) Workpiece nr. 43.
((g)) Workpiece nr. 44.
Figure C.4: Plot of the asperities geometry before deformation.
==PAGE:116==
106
APPENDIX C. PROFILES OF SPECIMENS BEFORE DEFORMATION
((a)) Workpiece nr. 45.
((b)) Workpiece nr. 47.
((c)) Workpiece nr. 48.
((d)) Workpiece nr. 49.
((e)) Workpiece nr. 50.
((f)) Workpiece nr. 51.
((g)) Workpiece nr. 52.
Figure C.5: Plot of the asperities geometry before deformation.
==PAGE:117==
C.1. TENSION PROFILES
107
((a)) Workpiece nr. 53.
((b)) Workpiece nr. 54.
((c)) Workpiece nr. 55.
((d)) Workpiece nr. 56.
((e)) Workpiece nr. 57.
((f)) Workpiece nr. 58.
((g)) Workpiece nr. 61.
Figure C.6: Plot of the asperities geometry before deformation.
==PAGE:118==
108
APPENDIX C. PROFILES OF SPECIMENS BEFORE DEFORMATION
((a)) Workpiece nr. 66.
((b)) Workpiece nr. 67.
((c)) Workpiece nr. 71.
Figure C.7: Plot of the asperities geometry before deformation.
C.2
Compression proﬁles
Figure C.8: Proﬁles of specimens before deformation used for 34 bar pressure.
==PAGE:119==
C.2. COMPRESSION PROFILES
109
Figure C.9: Proﬁles of specimens before deformation used for 34 bar pressure.
Figure C.10: Proﬁles of specimens before deformation used for 40 bar pressure.
Figure C.11: Proﬁles of specimens before deformation used for 40 bar pressure.
==PAGE:120==
110
APPENDIX C. PROFILES OF SPECIMENS BEFORE DEFORMATION
Figure C.12: Proﬁles of specimens before deformation used for 60 bar pressure.
Figure C.13: Proﬁles of specimens before deformation used for 60 bar pressure.
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX D
Results - asperity deformation
D.1
Results for tension experiment
Table D.1: Results for tension experiment without sliding and with 7 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
1
0
0.13
0.0056
0.1465
8
1
0.13
0.0229
0.2193
7
3
0.13
0.0464
0.2652
2
5
0.12
0.0554
0.3248
3
7
0.12
0.0736
0.4233
4
8
0.12
0.0827
0.4060
5
9
0.12
0.1680
0.4218
Table D.2: Results for tension experiment with sliding and 7 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
50
0
0.13
-0.0005
0.2024
49
1
0.14
0.0162
0.2665
58
3
0.12
0.0490
0.3463
51
5
0.12
0.0825
0.396
48
7
0.12
0.1221
0.4777
12
8
0.12
0.1412
0.5436
111
==PAGE:122==
112
APPENDIX D. RESULTS - ASPERITY DEFORMATION
Table D.3: Results for tension experiment with sliding and 7 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
38
0
0.12
0.0006
0.2082
44
1
0.12
0.0170
0.2649
52
3
0.12
0.0489
0.3146
43
5
0.11
0.0820
0.3545
53
7
0.11
0.1306
0.4536
Table D.4: Results for tension experiment with sliding and 13 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
16
0
0.24
0.0010
0.2671
13
1
0.24
0.0180
0.3754
14
2
0.24
0.0338
0.4259
11
3
0.25
0.0552
0.4987
15
4
0.24
0.0712
0.5636
Table D.5: Results for tension experiment with sliding and 13 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
p/C
ϵ
α
40
0
0.24
0.0066
0.3307
33
1
0.24
0.0174
0.3828
45
2
0.24
0.0350
0.457
39
3
0.23
0.0614
0.5228
31
4
0.23
0.0722
0.5648
Table D.6: Results for tension experiment without sliding and with 24 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
56
0
0.42
0.0056
0.3885
66
1
0.41
0.0464
0.5941
61
2
0.40
0.0554
0.6924
71
3
0.39
0.0736
0.7066
67
4
0.39
0.0827
0.8019
==PAGE:123==
D.2. RESULTS FOR COMPRESSION EXPERIMENT
113
Table D.7: Results for tension experiment with sliding and 24 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
57
0
0.42
0.0192
0.573
55
1
0.41
0.0271
0.6105
54
2
0.40
0.0453
0.7126
30
3
0.40
0.0737
0.7674
42
4
0.38
0.0929
0.7761
Table D.8: Results for tension experiment with sliding and 24 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
32
1
0.38
0.0808
0.7354
37
0
0.39
0.1007
0.8321
47
3
0.38
0.1018
0.8148
34
2
0.38
0.1107
0.8362
35
4
0.37
0.1223
0.8426
D.2
Results for compression experiment
Table D.9: Results for compression experiment with sliding and 34 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
113
0
0.79
0.008
0.6070
114
1
0.79
0.032
0.8300
115
2
0.79
0.049
0.8570
111
3
0.79
0.045
0.8692
112
4
0.79
0.042
0.8780
Table D.10: Results for compression experiment with sliding and 34 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
118
0
0.79
0.005
0.5911
120
0
0.79
0.016
0.5966
116
1
0.79
0.007
0.6347
119
2
0.78
0.050
0.8709
117
3
0.79
0.0490
0.8455
==PAGE:124==
114
APPENDIX D. RESULTS - ASPERITY DEFORMATION
Table D.11: Results for compression experiment with sliding and 40 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
104
0
1.00
0.0104
0.7252
101
1
1.00
0.0706
0.9206
102
2
1.00
0.0883
0.9478
103
3
1.00
0.0950
0.9554
105
5
1.00
0.0806
0.9450
Table D.12: Results for compression experiment with sliding and 40 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
108
0
1.00
0.0194
0.7226
110
1
1.00
0.0425
0.8094
109
2
1.00
0.0761
0.9326
107
3
0.99
0.1013
0.9540
106
5
0.99
0.1029
0.9585
Table D.13: Results for compression experiment with sliding and 60 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
ϵ
α
127
0
1.51
0.0150
0.8525
125
0
1.52
0.0484
0.9140
124
1
1.51
0.0775
0.9536
Table D.14: Results for compression experiment with sliding and 60 bar pressure.
nr.
elongation [mm]
q/C
epsilon
alpha
130
0
1.51
0.0437
0.8762
128
0
1.51
0.0514
0.9242
129
1
1.51
0.0935
0.9309
