==PAGE:1==
Questioning the Glasshouse
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Christina Erikshøj, S093377
Mathilde Landgren, S093378
Date: 26th June 2015
==PAGE:2==
Illustrations frontpage, sources: [thest, 2013], [turbosquid], [wisegeek] and [Sculman, 1960]
==PAGE:3==
I
PREFACE
This report is the result of a master thesis in MSc Architectural Engineering 
at the building department of the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). 
The master thesis has had a duration of five months starting on the 26th of 
January 2015 and with a final deadline on the 26th of June 2015. 
We are two master students, Christina Erikshøj and Mathilde Landgren 
involved in the project, both writing for 30 ECTS points, resulting in a total of 
60 ECTS points for the thesis. 
We wish to thank the people who have been involved in our thesis during the 
process. First of all a thank you to our supervisor Toke Rammer Nielsen from 
DTU, who have supported us with guidance and advice. 
A great thanks to Jørgen Schultz from Steensen Varming, who has been a 
great support as well. It has been a pleasure for us to work with a real case 
and gaining experience from this.
Furthermore we appreciate the coorporation with Henrik Schmidt and 
Robert Janson from Lundgaard & Traanberg Architects and for involving us 
in their project T30 and by showing interest in our project and contributions 
through the process. 
At last but not at least we would like to say thanks to the intervieewed 
architects and engineers for spending time and energy on us and our project. 
Signatures:
Christina Erikshøj, S093377 	              	
Mathilde Landgren, S093378
==PAGE:4==
II
RESUME
Glashuse har været omdebatteret indenfor byggebranchen gennem de senere 
år, da fokus på energioptimering og energieffektive byggerier er intensiveret. 
Denne fokus har ledt til højere krav til bygninger i brugstiden, herunder er 
klimaskærmen en vigtig parameter. For glasbyggerier afstedkommer dette 
flere udfordringer i forhold til indeklima og dermed også energi. 
Indeværende kandidat speciale ønsker, at undersøge perspektiver på 
glashuset, med fokus på facaden, både i forhold til fordele og ulemper.
Flere perspektiver på glashuset er blevet tilgået med en holistisk vinkel 
gennem et omfattende litteraturstudie, og der er også samlet viden via flere 
interviews af både arkitekter og ingeniører. Ved at følge et konkret projekt, 
er betydningen af de tæt samarbejde mellem arkitekter og ingeniører blevet 
understreget. Gennem de to forløb er flere konkrete problemstillinger blevet 
identificeret og sideløbende løst i den tekniske del af specialet. 
De tekniske undersøgelser har taget udgangspunkt i dagslyset i byggeriet, 
da de foretagne interviews og projektmøder lagde stor vægt på dagslys 
og transparens som en afgørende arkitektonisk værdi. Ved metodisk at 
graduere glasfordelingen i facaden ud fra den lokale kontekst har det været 
muligt at reducere glasarealet uden at forringe dagslyset. Dagslys Faktoren 
ses som en god indikator for  dagslysforholdene i de tidlige designfaser, hvor 
Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI) er yderst anvendelig gennem hele design 
processen, fordi den både kan give et billede af områder med overbelysning 
såvel som underbelysning. Dagslysundersøgelserne er dermed brugbare til 
yderligere at kunne definere zoneinddeling af kunstig belysning med henblik 
på beregning af energiforbrug samt at optimere solafskærmningen, hvor der 
er behov. 
Tekniske undersøgelser relateret til udformningen af facaden i forhold til 
glasarealer, placering af disse og brug af solafskærmning er blevet lavet 
for at kunne vurdere betydningen af disse tiltag, uafhængigt af hinanden. 
Undersøgelserne viser, at det ikke er lige så effektivt at reducere glasarealet 
som det er at bruge en solafskærmning. For at opnå den samme effekt 
skal glasarealet reduceres til omkring 40 %. Yderligere viste det sig stadig 
problematisk at overholde selv energirammen for BR10, på trods af at 
tiltagene også blev kombineret. Undersøgelser tyder altså på, at det ikke er 
via modificeringer af selve facaden, at de store energibesparelser ligger, så 
glasarealet er ikke af så afgørende betydning, hvilket giver en større design 
frihed og mulighed for arkitektonisk kvalitet. 
==PAGE:5==
III
ABSTRACT
Glasshouses has been subject to discussions within the building industry  in 
recent years, as the focus on energy optimization and energy efficient building 
design has increased. This focus has resulted in more comprehensive demands 
to the buildings during the occupied hours, and the building envelope is a 
significant parameter. For glasshouses this gives rise to challenges concerning 
indoor climate and thereby also the energy consumption. 
This thesis has investigated the potential of glasshouses with focus on the 
facade, both in regard to beneficial qualities and disadvantages.
 
The perspectives of the glasshouse have been addressed from a holistic 
approach and comprises a wide literature study, and knowledge has also been 
gathered from interviews with both architects and engineers. In addition to 
this we have followed a real design project, which has made us realize that a 
smooth and close cooperation between architects and engineers is vital for 
a design project.
The technical studies are based on the daylight in the building, as the 
statements during the interviews and the project meetings placed great 
emphasis on daylight and transparency as vital issues for the architectural 
value. During methodical grading of the glass distribution in the facade seen 
in the local context it proved to be possible to reduce the glazing area without 
reducing the daylight. The Daylight Factor is considered a good indicator for 
the daylight conditions in the early phases of the design project, whereas 
the Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI) is a very useful parameter throughout 
the complete process, because this parameter can serve as illustration both 
for areas with too high and too low levels of light. The daylight investigations 
are thereby useful to be able to define the division in zones with the purpose 
of calculation of the energy consumption and optimization of solar shading, 
where needed.
The technical investigations related to the design of the facade regarding 
the glazing areas, the distribution of these and the use of solar shading has 
been performed to be able to evaluate the impact of these approaches, 
independently of each other. The investigations show that it is not as efficient 
to reduce the glazing area as it is to use solar shading. In order to achieve 
the same effect the glazing area must be reduced to approximately 40 %. 
Furthermore it proved to be problematic to fulfil even the energy performance 
framework of Building Class 2010, despite the fact that the approaches also 
were combined. Thereby the investigations indicate that significant savings 
cannot be achieved through such adjustments of the facade design, so the 
glazing area is not of that great importance, which brings more freedom and 
better possibilities for the architectural quality. 
==PAGE:6==
IV
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 1. INTRODUCTION 
	
	
1.1 Background	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 2
	
1.2 Problem Statement	
	
	
	
	
Page 4
	
1.2 Introduction to Report	
	
	
	
	
Page 5	
	
	
 2. METHOD
	
2.1 Introduction	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 8
	
2.2 Used Programs	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 9
	
	
2.2.1 Velux Daylight Visualizer	
	
	
Page 9
	
	
2.2.2 IESVE	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 10
	
	
2.2.3 DaySim	 	
	
	
	
	
Page 11
	
 3. LITERATURE STUDIES 
	
	
3.1 Introduction 	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 14
	
3.2 History of the Glasshouse		
	
	
	
Page 15
	
3.3 Perspectives of the Glasshouse	 	
	
	
Page 18
	
3.4 General Knowledge	
	
	
	
	
Page 21
	
	
3.4.1 Glass in Buildings	
	
	
	
Page 21
	
	
3.4.2 Solar Radiation 	 	
	
	
	
Page 22
	
	
3.4.3 Daylight	 	
	
	
	
	
Page 26
	
3.5 Interviews		
	
	
	
	
	
Page 30
	
	
3.5.1 Interviews with Architects	
	
	
Page 32
	
	
3.5.2 Interviews with Engineers	
	
	
Page 37
	
	
3.5.3 Sum Up - Interviews 	
	
	
	
Page 43
	
3.6 Sub-Conclusion 	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 44
 4. PROCESS IN PRAXIS
	
	
4.1 Introduction	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 48
	
4.2 The case T30 in Process	 	
	
	
	
Page 49
	
	
4.2.1 The Case T30	
	
	
	
	
Page 49
	
	
4.2.2 The Case in Process	
	
	
	
Page 50
	
4.3 Sub-Conclusion	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 65
	
==PAGE:7==
V
 5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
	
	
5.1 Introduction	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 68
	
	
5.1.1 Introduction to Model	 	
	
	
	
Page 69
	
5.2 Daylight Investigations	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 72
	
	
5.2.1 Daylight Study - Glass Types	
	
	
	
Page 74	
	
	
	
	
5.2.2 Daylight Study - Reflectances	
	
	
	
Page 78
	
	
5.2.3 Daylight Study - Geometry of Atriums	 	
	
Page 80
	
	
5.2.4 Daylight Study - Design of Facades	
	
	
Page 82
	
	
5.2.5 Sum Up - Daylight Investigations	
	
	
Page 91
	
	
5.2.6 Investigation of the Solar Irradiation	
	
	
Page 92
	
	
5.2.7 Glare Study at the Workplaces	 	
	
	
Page 95
	
	
5.2.8 Daylight Analysis in Daysim	
	
	
	
Page 101
	
5.3 IESVE Investigations	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 108
	
	
5.3.1 Glass Types	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 112
	
	
5.3.2 Facade Design	 	
	
	
	
	
Page 124
	
	
5.3.3 Reduction of Glazing Area	
	
	
	
Page 139
	
	
5.3.4 Radiant Temperature Asymmetry	
	
	
Page 141
	
	
5.3.5 Natural Ventilation in Atrium	
	
	
	
Page 145
	
	
5.3.6 Final Model Evaluation	 	
	
	
	
Page 151
	
5.4 Sub-Conclusion	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 154
 6. CONCLUSION
	
	
6.1 Conclusion	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 158
	
	
References	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Page 160
	
	
==PAGE:8==
Source: [Dunlap, 2012]
==PAGE:9==
1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:10==
2
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 BACKGROUND
The glasshouse is a debated typology, as the benefits of the design also 
causes side-effects concerning the visual comfort, thermal indoor climate 
and energy consumption. 
The energy use for buildings amounts to 30-40% of the total energy 
consumption in Denmark [SBi 2013-05]. As the building mass represents a 
major share of the total energy consumption, an increased focus has been to 
try to limit the energy consumption from the buildings. During the past years 
the building requirements for energy and indoor climate have been tightened 
to decrease the energy consumption, and this has led to an increased focus 
on glasshouses. 
Despite of the increased focus on energy, there is generally still a high 
percentage of glazing in new buildings. The inconsistency of an increased 
focus on energy efficiency and the high amount of new high glazed buildings 
is an interesting development. 
The concerns about glass buildings are often based upon the increased 
energy consumption due to the high percentage of glass in the facade, as it 
will lead to higher energy consumption for heating and cooling to stabilize 
the indoor climate compared to other building types. These higher energy 
demands are mainly caused by the high U-values of the glass and  frames 
compared to the insulated facades. Therefore it can be difficult to fulfill the 
energy performance framework for the latest energy demands. 
It can therefore be questioned whether it is possible to have an totally 
glazed facade at all, and how much the percentage of glass would have to be 
decreased to fulfill the energy demands.  
Looking at the problematics, energy is required to accommodate indoor 
environment demands, and at the same time regulations are set to limit the 
energy use, which pull the demands in two seperate directions, whether to 
prioritise the indoor environment demands or the energy demands. These 
inconsistenties makes building design in glass sensible, as there are challenges 
both according to the indoor environment and the energy efficiency.  
The high amount of glass can be explained by the related advantages, for 
instance free heatgain from the solar radiation, which can at some times of 
the year decrease the energy demand for heating. Furthermore the increased 
daylight has the advantage of a decreased energy consumption for artificial 
light.
Daylight is in general evaluated as one of the biggest advantages, when 
having a high percentage of glass in the facade, as it results in a high Daylight 
Factor (DF) in the building. The recent years the demands for the daylight in 
a building has increased, so there is an inconsistency of whether to prioritise 
the indoor environment demands related to the daylight or the energy 
demands. 
As it appears there are variuos opinions, whether it is a good idea to build 
with high percentage of glass in the facade, as the material properties of 
glass have considerable benefits but also considerable disadvantages which 
==PAGE:11==
3
1. INTRODUCTION
influence on each other and makes it a complex question. 
The relations between the facade design, the indoor environment and 
the energy consumption for glasshouses is very challenging but also very 
complex. This will therefor be the base for further investigations...
==PAGE:12==
4
1. INTRODUCTION
1.2 PROBLEM STATEMENT
Glass is a material widely used in building envelopes, but the material is not 
unproblematic in relation to indoor environment and energy consumption 
therefore issues regarding these aspects are often seen in glass buildings. 
The thesis seeks to cover and investigate the qualities and issues when 
building in glass from a holistic perspective. Therefore three approaches to 
cover the subject will be taken. 
Firstly the subject will be studied through literature to gain background 
knowledge and identify the problems related to indoor environment and 
energy. A study to get a holistic perspective of current problematics will be 
made by conducting interviews with both architects and engineers from the 
business world and thereby clarifying the qualities and issues seen from both 
professions and discuss the cooperation as a mean, to make more optimised 
solutions.  
Secondly the thesis will follow the process of a specific case in the finishing 
stage of a design concept for a glass building with an engineering firm and an 
architectural firm. Following a process, the intention is to clarify specific issues 
encountered during the process in regard to daylight, indoor environment 
and energy consumption.
Thirdly, the desire is to implement the gathered knowledge from the study 
and process in relation to problem areas for glass buildings into technical 
investigations.
The desire is to make investigations relating to the building envelope in the 
perspectives of daylight, indoor envrionment and energy consumption. More 
precise the effect on these three perspectives, when changes are made for 
the building envelope. The changes, which is wanted to be studied, is the 
glass area and distribution to clarify how big an impact these changes have 
on optimising the building envelope. To be able to make these investigations 
a dynamic building energy software will be used for providing knowledge 
on the different subjects within the indoor environment and energy, while 
daylight simulations tools will be used to document the daylight conditions 
in the building. 
Through the process and the gained knowledge within the three approaches 
parallels will be drawn to see how the different aspects influence on each 
other and if general conclusions can be made.  
==PAGE:13==
5
1. INTRODUCTION
1.3 INTRODUCTION TO REPORT
The final product of the master thesis consists of this main report and an 
attached appendix collection. First there are some overall prerequisites, 
which are important to mention before introducing the detailed format of 
the report.
The focus for the project is concerning buildings with a high percentage of 
glass in the thermal envelope, and does not include double skin facades. 
Mainly the facade design, and its impact on the daylight, the indoor climate 
and the energy consumption, will be evaluated. 
To be able to get some qualified results, the project is based upon a real 
project case “T30”. The responsible architects are Lundgaard & Tranberg, 
who assigned the engineering company Steensen Varming to assist with 
technical knowledge and documentation. As the developer has an agenda 
for publishing the project, there will be a certain degree of anonymization in 
the report. 
The project “T30” is in the design phase, where the inputs from the engineers 
still can have an influence on the facade design and layout of the plans. Having 
a real case as base for the project gives a direct insight in the coorporation 
between the architects and the engineers, and how big an influence the 
engineers can have at the development of the design.
The technical investigations have their base in the Danish building 
requirements and regulations, and the climatic data for Stockholm in Sweden, 
as this is the local context for the real case project, T30. 
The format of the report is overall divided into the following three chapters: 
	
Literature Studies
	
Process in Praxis
	
Technical Investigations
The three chapters can be read independently, but to give the overall picture 
they have to be considered together, as the thesis has been developed in 
in a synergy between the processes. Through the literature studies and 
the process in praxis parallels will be linked together and to the thechnical 
investigations.
==PAGE:14==
Source: [Ingenhoven]
==PAGE:15==
2. METHOD
==PAGE:16==
8
2. METHOD
2.1 INTRODUCTION
To be able to get a holistic angle upon the project several processes have 
come to play. The overall method for the process of the thesis is also the 
process of the report, and to give an overview  it is visualized in a diagram as 
seen below in figure 2.1. 
20/1
16/2
5/3
19/3
9/4
Litt. study
Introduction
Basic modelling
Detailed
Method
Interview
21/5
Figure 2.1: The process of the report diagrammatic. 
As the diagram indicates the process is divided into three parallel chapters, 
the relation will be further described in the following. 
The yellow arrows indicate the relation between the method, the literature 
studies and the interview study. 
The blue arrows indicate the process in praxis, subdivided for each project 
meeting with the architects and engineers. The specific dates are written 
above the blue arrows. 
The mix of yellow and blue is green which is used to symbolize the influence of 
the process in praxis and the literature studie upon the process of the thesis 
and the technical investigations. The process of the technical investigations 
is subdivided into three parts: the introduction, basic modelling and the 
detailed investigations. For this subdivision the interaction between the 
three processes is clear and further underlined with the dashed lines. The 
first part is the introduction of the project and start up for the thesis as well 
as the development of T30 by the architects and the engineers. The second 
part consists of the basic modelling, with high interaction and finalization 
of the literature study and process in praxis, which leads to the third part. 
The third part of the process is the final summation of the three processes 
gathered in the thesis through the technical investigations. 
It has been important for the project to distinguish between the three parts 
to see how they influence each other and progress through the project. 
==PAGE:17==
9
2. METHOD
2.2 USED PROGRAMS
Through the process different simulation programs have been used, which 
will be described in this section. 
Pilkington Spectrum: 	Used to investigate the construction of the glazing, 
	
	
	
further descriptions are available in “Appendix B - 
	
	
	
Pilkington Spectrum”.
VDV: 	 	
	
“Velux Daylight Visualizer”,  used for daylight 
	
	
	
simulations.
DaySim:	
	
Used for further daylight simulations. 
IESVE: 		
	
“Integrated Environmental Solutions – Virtual 
	
	
	
Environment” a dynamic simulation tool, used for the 
	
	
	
overall simulations in the technical investigations.
2.2.1 VELUX DAYLIGHT VISUALIZER
One of the main focuses in the report is the daylight in glasshouses. The 
simulation program “Velux Daylight Visualizer” (VDV) is used to make the 
main daylight simulations. The program has been chosen because of the 
good illustrative outputs, and as it is proved to be good for simulations in 
different settings compared to other programs. Figure 2.2 shows the results 
for a test for several available daylight simulation tools, done by the State 
Building institute, SBi, in Denmark [SBi 2013:20]. 
Figure 2.2: Different programs ability of calculating the daylight factor in 5 different room types [SBi 
2013:20].
VDV is a simulation tool intended to ease the documentation and calculation 
of daylight for professionals. The program is developed by Luxion in 
collaboration with the Velux Group, a big Danish developer of skylights 
[Velux].
IMPORT FROM SKETCHUP
There are two ways of modelling in Velux Daylight Visualizer, either by 
modelling directly in the program, or by modelling in SketchUp and then 
import it. In this project the models have been developed in Sketchup, as it 
is a good modelling tool for a complex design.
==PAGE:18==
10
2. METHOD
When developing the model in SketchUp with the purpose to import the 
model to VDV, there are some important factors to take into account. At first 
it is important that all rooms are closed, with no small openings, as these 
can not be calculated. Furthermore all surfaces have to be defined by a 
material on both sides of the pane. This is important as these materials will 
be imported as well and all material properties have to be assigned to these, 
to be able to change the transmittances of the glass and the reflectances of 
the other surfaces. 
2.2.2 IESVE
“Integrated Environmental Solutions – Virtual Environment” (IESVE) is an 
international dynamic simulation software. The software consists of several 
integrated modules to simulate the indoor climate of a building, such as 
the daylight, temperatures, ventilation and the energy consumption of the 
building. The modules used in this report are: ModelIT, SunCast, ApacheSim, 
ApPro, RadianceIES and MacroFlo [IES, ApacheSim]. 
MODELIT
The modelling of the building can either be made by importing a model from 
e.g. SketchUp, or by modelling it directly in ModelIT. Import can result in 
minor mistakes, which can complicate the process [IES, ModelIT].
SUNCAST
The Suncast simulation has to be done prior to any thermal simulation 
or daylight simulation to make sure that the shade from the surrounding 
buildings are included [IES, Suncast].
Suncast is also used to perform an analysis of the solar irradiation on the 
facades. The Solar Energy Analysis displays the results in kWh/m2 and the 
cumulative % availability. The outputs are graphically displayed with colour 
indications on the facades [IES, Suncast].
APACHESIM
ApacheSim is the module calculating the thermal analysis based on 
mathematical modelling of the heat transfer processes in the building, 
related to the inputs from the other modules. Construction templates and 
thermal templates are assigned to the model in this module. The profiles to 
control the thermal consitions are defined in ApPro [IES, ApacheSim].
 
MACROFLO
Macroflo is the module used to analyse the air and thermal exchanges of the 
building. MacroFlo simulates the airflow through all openings in a building. 
The opening types consider all kinds of openings, from smaller cracks, holes, 
windows and doors. MacroFlo is therefore interesting, when considering the 
infiltration, natural ventilation and the hybrid ventilation in a building. The 
templates are assigned to specific constructions [IES, Macroflo].
RADIANCEIES
RadianceIES is based on Radiance, which is developed by the Lighting Systems 
Research Group at Lawrence Berkley Laboratory in California. Radiance 
is a software package, developed as a research tool at first, which can be 
==PAGE:19==
11
2. METHOD
used for calculating the daylight in a room with high accuracy. Radiance 
uses a 3-dimensional geometrical model, based on which it produces a 
photorealistic image showing the radiance values. Radiance is a sort of ray-
tracing algorithm, which traces the solar rays backward, which means that 
it is traced from the sensor point  to the scene in focus. Radiance has two 
main outputs, the “illuminance output”, from where Daylight Factor, lux and 
contours can be seen, and the “luminance output” from where photorealistic 
colour images and glare analysis can be made [IES, RadianceIES].    
VISTA
Vista is used to review all the results from the dynamic thermal simulations 
made in ApacheSim. Results for the entire building, a group of rooms or one 
room can be seen here. The results can be illustrated by graphs or in tables, 
selected for specific dates or a year [IES, Vista].
2.2.3 DAYSIM
DaySim is an educational programme, developed by the National Research 
Council of Canada Institute, and it is available for free download online. 
Daylight simulations can, as described earlier, either be static or dynamic, 
depending on the sky conditions and other parameters. DaySim can both 
manage the static and the dynamic simulations, but is mainly developed for 
the purpose of the dynamic simulations [Reinhart, 2010].
DaySim is a Radiance-based software, based on backward ray-tracing like 
explained for RadianceIES. DaySim analyses the annual daylight conditions 
inside and outside the buildings. The program can include solar shading 
defined by the users, and need of electric light with dimming profiles in the 
calculations. The program has mainly been developed with the purpose 
of integrating the daylight conditions and user behaviour with the need 
for artificial light. Furhtermore the effects of the energy consumption 
for artificial light has become a part of the program [Reinhart, 2010]. The 
simulation outputs are climate-based daylight metrics, among the outputs 
are the Daylight Autonomy (DA) and the Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI) 
as well as the risk of glare and the energy use of the needed electrical light 
[Reinhart, 2015].
The Daylight Factor (DF) is also an output from DaySim, as a more simple 
analysis, based on a CIE overcast sky, compared to the DA and UDI, which are 
based on all sky conditions over a reference year. The needed weather file 
has to be loaded to use the local geographical reference year [MicroShade, 
2013].
The building can be modelled in 3D in eg. SketchUp and afterwards exported 
to DaySim to do the daylight simulations. Afterwards the results can be 
analysed by visualizing the results in SketchUp, by importing the results back 
to Sketchup from DaySim, using the plugin Su2ds [MicroShade, 2013].
==PAGE:20==
Source: [Optimedia, 2014]
==PAGE:21==
3. LITERATURE STUDIES
==PAGE:22==
14
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter has focus on the process in the literature studies. To get an 
overview of the literature study it is divided into two phases of approaching 
the knowledge related to glasshouses, which is illustrated in figure 3.1; 
where the literature study and interview study follows the previous chapter 
“2. Method”. 
20/1
16/2
5/3
19/3
9/4
Litt. study
Method
Interview
Introduction
Basic modelling
Detailed
21/5
Figure 3.1: Interaction between the method, literature study, interviews and the thesis.
The first phase is the literature study, which contains the history of the 
glasshouse, a litterature study of perspectives of the glasshouse and a study 
of the general knowledge. These parameters are investigated to have a 
common base for understanding the development of the glasshouse and 
what led to how it is today and the related problems and qualities. The general 
knowledge study gives a common background for how glass influence the 
indoor climate and energy in general. 
The second phase of the literature studies is based on several interviews. 
The interviews are done by both architects and engineers separately to give 
a holistic indication of the problems and qualities in the glasshouses as it 
is today. The interviews also focus at the importance of the cooperation 
between the architects and the engineers to improve the architecture and 
the building performance. 
The main points of the qualities and problems related to the glasshouse are 
finally summed up in a sub-conclusion having highlighted the main aspects 
to further analysis in the techincal investigation. The interaction between the 
litterature study and the technincal investigations is illustrated in the following 
figure 3.1, where the entire process of the thesis is build up diagrammatic. 
==PAGE:23==
15
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.2 HISTORY OF THE GLASSHOUSE
The use of glass in construction can be traced back centuries. Over time 
the use and thereby technical capability has increased. Several factors have 
influenced this, but they all take their starting point in the desired quality of 
glass; to let in light.
 
In churches, coloured or stained glass was used in the gothic architecture 
(1200-1600) and played an important role in giving the interior special 
lighting effects [Eekhout, 1990] [Weller et al., 2009].
The glasshouse originated in constructions, which were built to protect 
or grow plants. At first it was a construction, an orange house or a plant 
house, which could be assembled in winter and disassembled in summer. 
These had been used in Germany since the middle of the sixteenth century. 
In order to reduce the process of assembly and disassembly the orangery 
had 3 permanent walls and the south wall and roof were made movable. The 
permanent orangery appeared, when the plants rather than the orangery 
were made movable. This type was developed to its full potential between 
1700 and 1730 [Kohlmaier et al., 1991]. Making the orangery permanent 
also had the benefit of making the heating easier, because the joints could 
be sealed properly, which reduced leaks, and the heating source could be 
installed permanently [Kohlmaier et al., 1991].
The glasshouse originated from social purposes and evolved to a greenhouse 
or a winter garden. It was a way of capturing nature indoor, so the concept of 
the glasshouse was still connected to the basic principles of the plant houses 
[Kohlmaier et al., 1991]. The sizes of the plant houses were, however, not 
sufficient anymore for the growing concept of the winter gardens. They were 
not only to capture some nature but to capture a landscape and bacame a 
part of the lifestyle of the nobility [Kohlmaier et al., 1991]. The interest and 
expansion of the winter garden also have to be seen in the light of a growing 
interest for exotic plants, which started in the beginning of the 19th century, 
and was caused by the colonialism and the expansion of international trade 
[Kohlmaier et al., 1991]. 
At the start of the 19th century the winter gardens were combined with the 
living accommodations and by that became integrated in the daily life instead 
of being a place for festive events only. The nobility still held the privilege to 
have winter gardens, which was a sign of their position in society, because it 
was very expensive to build, maintain and to heat [Kohlmaier et al., 1991]. 
The middle class, however, also gained capital due to the industrialization 
and could compete with the nobility in an expensive lifestyle, so they started 
to build their own smaller plant houses, which spread out to the cities and 
became more and more common for every villa to have [Kohlmaier et al., 
1991]. 
The industrialization had an important role in the development and spreading 
of the glasshouse. The industrial period provided the technology and 
capability to build all glazed houses. The production of glass was improved 
making it possible to produce glass in bigger sizes, which led to a decrease in 
the price [Eekhout, 1990]. Iron structures were as well developed  and used 
==PAGE:24==
16
3. LITERATURE STUDY
in buildings in combination with glass (in the 19th century) which together 
opened for new possibilities in enclosing space. Out of this a new glass-and-
iron architecture arose, which had its peak, when the famous Crystal Palace 
was built in 1851 in London. The palace was special because it was a product 
of modular construction  and prefabrication, which was made possible by the 
industrialization [Eekhout, 1990]. The industrial growth reduced the nature 
in the cities and increased the need for green areas. Public winter gardens 
therefore became popular and were very positively received. Here women 
and men could gather, protected from unpleasant weather. The first large 
public winter garden was built between 1842 and 1846 in London [Kohlmaier 
et al., 1991]. 
With the construction of the Crystal Palace (Figure 3.2) and the modular 
construction an epidemic for similar glass buildings swept through Europe 
resulting in a large number of exhibition buildings, glass arcades, market 
coverings and winter gardens to be built. Besides the benefits developed on 
the constructive part in the industrial revolution, progress was also made in 
solving heating, ventilation and sun shading to control the environment in 
the glass buildings [Eekhout, 1990]. The Crystal Palace could be considered 
to be the starting point for modernism’s occupation with the ‘lightness of 
construction’ but it also awoke another architectural direction of ‘constructing 
with light’ [Richards, 2006].
The tendency to build glasshouses stopped when the First World War  broke 
out [Eekhout, 1990]. However, the alternative direction of ‘constructing with 
light’ started to evolve in a short period from 1914 to 1932. Among others 
the Glass Pavilion by Bruno Taut in Cologne, Germany, in 1914. Mies van der 
Rohe also made a design for an unbuilt project in Berlin in 1922, but it was 
in Pierre Chareau’s Maison de Verre in Paris in 1931 that a new architectural 
language, which had not been seen before, emerged [Richards, 2006]. The 
Glass Pavilion was considered the breakthrough for a new architectural way of 
thinking, where focus was on how design could add to the quality of life. The 
potential of the qualities of glass began to emerge with light, transparency, 
reflection, translucency and opacity which changed the perception of space 
in architecture. 
Mies van der Rohe was also convinced that it was time to find new ways with 
the use of glass. He designed skyscrapers in Berlin in 1921-1922 where he 
explored the idea of constructing the walls entirely of glass. He saw the glass 
as a skin, which would be slipped over the steel structure. This would have 
the effect that the glass would reflect and mirror the structure and by that be 
an integrated part of the structure, rather than hiding it. 
Frank Lloyd Wright was also working in the United States with the idea of 
open up space and eliminate the division between inside and outside. This 
was also done by Le Corbusier in Paris. Le Corbusier was the first to attempt 
making an integrated curtain wall system, but it failed. The technology 
wasn’t far enough in solving the environmental challenges, the curtain wall 
presented, and it took a another 50 years to control the impact of the solar 
gain by tinting, air-conditioning, integral multilayered facades and shading 
devices. 
Over the next 50 years the main development potential of glass was focused 
Figure 3.2: Crystal Palace, A cast-iron 
and plate-glass building erected in Hyde 
Park, London for the Great Exhibition of 
1851 [leasliecreasey].
==PAGE:25==
17
3. LITERATURE STUDY
on the curtain wall and the needed technology. Glass was a symbol of 
progress and became a material that symbolized the modern architecture. In 
this process the material properties were overlooked, and it was more seen 
as a cladding material. 
Onwards the crossing between ‘lightness in construction’ and ‘construction 
with light’ kept on being a dilemma for the glass architecture to really emerge. 
The focus was kept on the building envelope, and not the structure of space 
and awareness of how transparency can contribute to the architecture. 
It was in fact artists and not architects, who contributed to change the 
perception of glass and light. Artists started their experimentation in the 
mid 1960s, and experimented with light and dark, sunlight and shadow, 
time and space, sound and silence using different materials related to glass 
such as plexiglass, fibreglass etc. Other artists experimented with industrial 
materials such as steel, aluminium, fluorescent light and mirrors to express 
particular phenomena. They created illusions on water and projected and 
reflected light. It took decades, before the ‘light artists’ and evolving glass 
architects fully crossed boundaries, and it had an effect in ‘making light 
material’ [Richards, 2006].
The first building to explore the new transparency was the Willis Faber 
& Dumas offices in Ipswich (Figure 3.3), England in 1971-75, by Foster 
Associates (Norman Foster). The building has a curtain wall facade, which 
follows the curvy form of the building. The glass is butt-jointed (placed 
together side by side) with silicone joints to maintain visual continuity. The 
facade uses Pilkington single-glazed toughened solar tinted glass. This causes 
a shimmering effect, which results in external reflections, while the interior 
provides internal reflections. At night lighting levels within the building 
causes a reversed daily situation and brings the building to life reducing the 
material boundaries between spaces. 
During the 1980s progress was made in the glass industry, which included 
the evolution of hard and soft coatings on the inner surface of the glass 
envelope, double and triple skins, solar-control glasses, K-insulation glass, 
integral blinds and shading devices. The multi-layered facade could begin to 
accommodate integrated climatic control as thermal regulation and energy 
recovery. Imroving the function of separate layers with different functions 
contributing to the overall united facade expression, and this opened up for 
new possibilities in lightness and spaces [Richards, 2006].
This new progress affected the 1990s, which represents a decade with more 
experimentation, because the new progress allowed it. There was a wider 
availability of glass and materials, technology could resolve climatic issues, 
and there was an interest to experiment with transparency, space and light. 
This resulted in a decade, which represents experimentation with glass 
architecture and demonstration of glass technology [Richards, 2006].
Figure 3.3: Headquarters of Willis Faber 
& Dumas, by Foster Associates (Norman 
Foster), built from 1971-1975, Ipswick 
(England) [nfartchitecture]. 
==PAGE:26==
18
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.3 PERSPECTIVES OF THE GLASSHOUSE
As a part of the literature studies several articles are selected with some 
interesting views upon different qualities and problems related to the 
glasshouse. In this section an overview of some of these views will be 
described to give a general idea of the various perspectives on qualities and 
problems related to glasshouses. 
The article “Seduced by the view” by the U.S. Green Building Council [Urban 
Green, 2013] is based upon a field study of several glasshouses in New York 
City. The analysis indicates that an average of 59% of the window area was 
covered, by either blinds or shades, which decreased the possibility to look 
out. This includes both residential and office buildings. The investigation also 
indicated that more than 75% of the buildings had more than half of the 
windows covered by solar shading. The article concludes that the high use 
of blinds or shades mainly was due to the need of privacy in the residential 
buildings, and not because of the direct sunlight, and in the office buildings it 
was mainly because of the glare, overheating etc. [Urban Green, 2013]. Figure 
3.4 shows the problematic of the high use of curtains in an office building. In 
the article they also state that “.. the bigger the windows, the easier it is to 
rent or sell an apartment or office space” [Urban Green, 2013: p. 3], which 
indicates how big an influence the developer has to say in the the process of 
constructing and how big a factor economy is. The related problems to glass 
facades such as glare, noise, overheating and cold facades in winter times 
are according to this author often overlooked and the article states, “from 
an environmental perspective, glass buildings are a major step backwards” 
[Urban Green, 2013: p. 3]. The windows insulate not as efficiently as regular 
walls filled with insulation. When looking at the lifetime of the building, 
the glass facade will last for 50 years or longer, whereas the technical parts 
will be changed for more efficient solutions more often. In the long run the 
facade will therefore be the most inefficient part of the building, with the 
biggest energy consumption, so why use glass facades at all? It is not only the 
tenants in the glass buildings paying the costs of higher energy consumption, 
but the entire society, which has to power the buildings and thereby increase 
the related pollution in the cities and globally [Urban Green, 2013].
There are many interesting statements in the article like; why glasshouses so 
often are built, when there are so many related problems, it seems to be for 
the economical and architectural benefits. When looking at the userbehaviour 
shading of different kind is used most of the time and thereby covering the 
view, which for residential buildings can be seen as a reaction for claiming 
the privacy back due to the increased transparency. For office buildings, the 
shading is used to limit glare, overheating and big light contrasts, but again 
the blinds and shades are covering the view. The view can be considered 
as the most important advantage of the glasshouse, and therefore it is a 
big consern when it is blocked. Overall the article certainly points out some 
important issues to consider in relation to view, shading and user behaviour 
in a glasshouse. 
This leads to the very subjective approach from the article, “Can an All-Glass 
Office Building Really Be Considered Green?”, by Lloyd Alter von Treehugger 
Figure 3.4: Glass facade of office build­
ing, showing internal curtains [photog­
raphersdirect].
==PAGE:27==
19
3. LITERATURE STUDY
[Alter, 2014], where the main question is, why so many glass buildings 
are being built, when so many problems are related to this typology. One 
concern regards the daylight in the buildings and the thought of having glass 
from floor to ceiling, as the light under table-height is not defined as daylight 
anyway, and as the view from the lower part of the window is only useful for 
the people nearby the facade, and not the people further back in the room. 
Another concern mentioned regarding the big glass facades is from the 
company’s point of view. Companies are often attracted to the transparency 
of the glass facades to show an open, welcoming and thereby attractive 
company, but often it is forgotten that glass is not always transparent. 
Glass can have the opposite effect of mirroring its surroundings due to the 
orientation and effect of light, thereby the transparancy is eliminated, and so 
is the idea of a transparent company. The overall opinion in this article is that 
curtain walls and glass facades are only built for increased investment for the 
developer and promotion of the companies, and not for the architectural 
value. The if there are problems related to the glass facades conserning 
indoor climate and high energy consumption when in use, it is often the 
tenants, who have to pay, and not the developer. The energy problems are 
caused by an increased energy consumption for glass buildings compared to 
other building typologies [Alter, 2014].
Alsoin this article it is the quality of daylight, transparency of the facade and 
the related economics, which are mentioned as important factors related to 
using glass facades. 
The article “Useful daylight illuminances: A replacement for daylight factors”, 
by Nabil et al. [Nabil et al., 2006], mainly focus on the daylight, and how the 
daylight is considered according to the building regulations. Many building 
regulations require simulations to document the daylight factor (DF) in the 
rooms, which are differentiated for resident and office buildings respectively. 
The DF is, however, as they underline in the article, not necessarily an indicator 
of the quality of the light in the room. The article suggest to be more aware 
of the useful daylight illuminance (UDI) instead of the DF, as the UDI is more 
detailed with time-varying sky and sun conditions, instead of the DF, where 
only an overcast sky is used. The UDI include the risk of occupant discomfort 
and unwanted solar gain, which are associated with high levels of daylight as 
well as the useful levels of daylight illuminance [Nabil et al., 2006].
Previous studies by the Danish SBi, SBi-318, “Windows and daylight - a field 
investigation in office buildings” [SBi 318, 1999], also indicates the problems 
between the useful daylight and the requirements. The report had the goal 
to point out, that the building requirements related to daylight and windows, 
should be made considering the size, shape and placement of the windows 
in office buildings to ensure a good and satisfying visual and thermal indoor 
climate. The studies indicate that the biggest inconveniences due to the 
windows are the risk of glare caused by the direct light and high differences 
in the luminance. Furthermore slim vertical windows were considered as 
an nuicance for the employees, who would prefer wider windows to have 
a better view out. The same studies showed that the main part of the 
employees valued the view out, the cycle of the weather, and to ventilate 
the room manually higher than the daylight conditions in the room [SBi 318, 
1999].
==PAGE:28==
20
3. LITERATURE STUDY
Here is a study, which focuses on office buildings and the working 
environment for the employees, but with an output, which might be different 
than expected. This is very relevant to consider in the process of designing a 
building, where glass has a big impact. It is even more important to be aware 
of that it is not the quantity of glass but the quality and placement of glass, 
which ought to have the main focus.
When discussing view out and the quality of daylight it is also important to 
consider the solar shading, which will most likely be needed caused by both 
visual and thermal discomfort. In the article “Indoor thermal environmental 
conditions near glazed facades with shading devices - Part 1: Experiments and 
building thermal model”, by Bessoudo et al., investigations of the thermal 
effect near glass facades, when adding solar shading have been made. The 
investigations show the relation between the addition of shading systems 
and an improved operative temperature and radiant asymmetry during cold 
sunny days. These relations also depend on the properties of the windows as 
well as the tilt angle of the window. Even for cloudy days the solar shading 
had an effect, and the heat loss was decreased a bit. The interior surface 
of glass can be very warm during warm sunny days and the opposite very 
cold during cold days. As the article states, the primary goal of a building 
is to provide comfort, shelter and space for the people working or living in 
the building, and the energy consumption should be seen as a secondary 
goal. Therefore they claim that a building can be described as a success, 
if a comfortable indoor climate is achieved without increasing the energy 
consumption of the building [Bessoudo et al., 2010]. 
The investigation proves that external solar shading has some good qualities 
regarding the thermal indoor climate and not only the negative relations like 
closing off the view and limiting the daylight. 
Generally the above-mentioned side effects express a common understanding 
of the related problems and qualities when designing glass facades. They all 
agree that a glass facade has to be designed with consideration to limit the 
following related problems. It is an open question, why so many buildings 
with glass facades are built, when they are consuming more energy than 
other types of facades, and have a lot of related problems, which in many 
cases are a disadvantage and takes the focus from the architectural qualities. 
==PAGE:29==
21
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.4 GENERAL KNOWLEDGE
This section focuses on the basic features of glass and solar radiation to get 
an overview of the aspects which affects the daylight, indoor climate and 
energy performance of a building. The notions are selected to give a brief 
overview of glass in the building industry today and the related material 
parameters conserning energy and indoor climate. This section forms the 
basis of the general knowledge used for the technical investigations.
3.4.1 GLASS IN BUILDINGS
During the past years the use of glass in  buildings has been increased rather 
rapidly, but the knowledge and the quality of the glass have had difficulties to 
develop accordingly. Therefore the market has a great amount of specialised 
glazings developed for specific projects, which later have been put on the 
market. Many scientists are working on analyzing and developing the glass 
to fulfill the needed requirements, and secure that the glazing on the market 
have qualities, which meet the requirements [SBI-192, 1999].
Glass is a unique material and as it is said “Glass is like a diva among building 
materials” [Weller et al., 2009]. The reason for this statement is the unique 
material properties for glass. Glass is a very sensitive and brittle material, 
which reacts immediately at improper use, as its elastic properties are subject 
to regular temperature conditions. The brittle material properties and high 
risk of breaking without warning is due to the high content of silicate, which 
limits the elastic behaviour of the material, but this is at the same time the 
reason for the hardness and the strength of the glass. Plastic behaviour occurs 
when the glass is heated up and floats [SBi 192, 1999]. Minor scratches and 
mistakes in the surface are, however, enough to increase the risk of breaks, 
since it limits the strength of the glass considerably [Weller et al., 2009: 12].
Another unique quality of glass in the building industry is the transparency, 
which is due to the atomic structure. Glass is in scientific sense a frozen liquid, 
which hardens without crystallisation, and thereby the material becomes 
transparent. The main part of glass in the building industry is soda-lime 
silicate glass. The atomic structure of glass has a lack of boundary surfaces, 
which prevents reflection of light in the range of visible light and long wave 
UV-light, and instead it lets the light through the pane, whereas the short-
waved UV-B and UV-C light is absorbed in the pane [Weller et al., 2009].
FLOAT GLASS
The float glass method was invented in 1952-59 by Pilkington company from 
the UK. This method made the production of high optical quality sheet glass 
easier, and it became a commonly used production method [Weller et al., 
2009]. The method is performed by continuously casting and floatation of 
the liquid on a metal bath, which gives the advantage of a flat, parallel and 
polished surface already from production, and therefore further handling 
after this process is limited [SBI 192, 1999] [DS EN 572-1, 2012]. The benefit 
of float glass is that it is transparent, has a smooth surface and no optical 
distortions, which makes it optimal to look through [Pilkington, 2014].
Figure 3.5: Float glass at the bottom 
and low-iron glass at the top [Byg­
gnadsglas].  
==PAGE:30==
22
3. LITERATURE STUDY
LOW-IRON GLASS
Regular float glass has a greenish colour, which is increased depending on 
the thickness. It is the content of iron oxide that naturally gives the colour 
[Pilkington, 2014]. The colour is mostly visible along the edges of the glass. 
To make the glass more transparent and without colour the content of iron is 
reduced. This type of glass is known as low-iron and extra-clear glass [Weller 
et al., 2009]. 
TOUGHENED GLASS
Some of the disadvantages for glass as a building material are the brittle 
fracture behaviour, and its low tensile strength, which causes risk for 
damage. To compensate for these disadvantages, the glass can be thermally 
toughened, which means that the glass is prestressed in the factory to 
overcome higher tensile stresses without any damages. The prestress in the 
glass gives the glass a higher tensile bending strength, which is better than 
float glass [Weller et al., 2009]. Due to the prestress, toughened glass has a 
high content of energy stored in the glass, which upon fracture will result in 
the glass to shatter into a lot of small pieces. This type of glass minimises the 
risk for being injuried due to glass splinter when breaking, and is therefore 
very commonly used for rooflights in buildings [Pilkington, 2014].
3.4.2 SOLAR RADIATION
RADIATION
The solar spectrum constitutes a small part of the spectrum of electromagnetic 
waves. Solar radiation is overall divided into three kinds of radiation; the 
ultraviolet radiation (280-380 nm), the visible light (380-780 nm) and the 
infrared radiation (780-2500 nm) [AGC]. The ultraviolet radiation, UV-
radiation, is electromagnetic radiation with a high energy intensity and 
thereby also high temperature. The visible light is seen in the colour spectrum 
from violet for the low values to red for the high values, with indigo, green, 
yellow and orange in between.
Heat radiation constitutes a bigger spectrum of the electromagnetic waves. 
It can overall be divided in two categories; heat radiation from the solar 
spectrum constituted by the previous three described kinds of radiation; 
ultraviolet radiation, light and short infrared waves. The other category is 
heat emitted from objects in the form of long infrared waves (above 2500nm) 
[AGC]. Whenever a temperature difference occurs, heat will be transferred 
from the cold point to the warmer point. Heat is transferred in three ways: 
[AGC] [Rode et al., 2010]: 
Conduction: 	 Heat is transferred from molecule to molecule when they 
	
	
collide with each other. 
Convection: 	 Differences in temperature causes difference in density and 	
	
	
thereby movement of the heat through a liquid or a gas.
Radiation: 	
The heat is transferred in the form of electromagnetic 
	
	
radiation. 
EMISSIVITY
The emissivity factor, ε, is the ability of a body to emit energy in the form of 
Figure 3.6: Toughened glass, which 
shatters into a lot of small pieces when 
breaking [Elite Art Glass]. 
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the solar spec­
trum [Batterixlcom, 2015].
==PAGE:31==
23
3. LITERATURE STUDY
radiation. It is related to the surface characteristic of the body. Low emissivity 
equals a low heat transfer. Glass is impermeable to long-wave radiation, 
but will absorb the longwave infrared radiation, which then easily can be 
re-emitted as heat, which gives glass a high emissivity [Weller et al., 2009]. 
Therefore a glass will emit a certain percentage of energy, for a glass with no 
coating, ε = 0.8, this will be around 80 %, where a coated glass with ε = 0.05 
only will emit 5%. This difference in the emissivity means that the energy 
will stay in the glass and heat it up. Energy glass is generally defined with an 
emissivity ε ≤ 0.20, which is quite low [Pilkington, 2014].
G-VALUE
The solar energy transmittance through the glass is defined as the g-value. 
This value describes the ability of glass to transmit the radiation as heat to the 
interior. The value is a percentage of the radiation hitting the glass outside, 
which is transmitted through the glass. The transmittance can be directly and 
as the secondary heat, which is absorbed by the material at first, and then re-
emitted into the interior [Weller et al., 2009]. This will be further described 
later in the report. The greater the value is, the more heat is transmitted to 
the room [Pilkington, 2014]. This is desirable in the wintertime to get free 
heat and thereby reduce the need for heating, but can be more critical in the 
summertime, if the internal gains are high.
When describing the qualities for glass it is important to differentiate 
between the visible radiation, the sunlight, the heat radiation and the energy 
transmittance passing through the surface [SBi 219, 2008].
U-VALUE
The U-value (thermal transmittance) describes the heat loss through a 
building component and material from the internal surface to the external 
surface through conduction, convection and radiation. The U-value is defined 
as the reciprocal value of the total resistances (Rtot) including the surface 
resistances as seen in the following equation: 
	
U=1/Rtot [W/(m2K)]
For a good insulated material, the heat transmission is low, which is defined 
through a low U-value. When referring to glass the low heat transmission will 
result in a high surface temperature on the inside of the glass. In winter time 
this will reduce the temperature drop and draft from the windows, and it will 
be the opposite situation during summertime with lower surface temperature 
on the inside of the glass [Pilkington, 2014]. If the U-value is very low, even 
lower than 1.1, there will be a high risk of condensation on the external side 
of the glass. This will mainly be in the spring and autumn periods, where the 
condensation will happen, when the temperature increases in the morning 
after a cold and clear night, and thereby the humidity will increase as well 
[SBi 219, 2008].
MULTI-PANE AND COATED GLASS
Nowadays the building industry has a big focus on minimising the energy 
consumption and thereby optimizing the thermal properties for the building 
envelope. To ensure good thermal properties for the glass as well as the 
other facade components in the construction, multi-pane glass is used. Multi-
==PAGE:32==
24
3. LITERATURE STUDY
pane glass consists of at least two panes of glass, which are joined along 
their perimeters by a shear-resistant connection. The joined edges create a 
hermetically sealed cavity filled with air or gas, which improves the thermal 
insulation compared to a single pane [Weller et al., 2009]. 
Glass does not transmit long wave infrared radiation, which therefore will be 
absorbed by the glass, and then be emitted to the room as heat. Normally the 
heat transfer goes from cold to warm, and therefore the low emission (Low E) 
coating is designed to increase reflection of the heat absorbed by the glazing 
to the inside and not the outside, so the heat is retained inside and enhances 
the thermal comfort during cold wintertimes [AGC]. During summer, the 
process is reverse, and the Low E coating reflects the longwave radiation 
from the sun outwards to limit the heat gain from the sun [Pilkington, 2014].
Low E coating consists of a very thin film of a metal or a metal oxide, which is 
either added during or after production. The coating made during production 
is very durable and has a hard and strong surface, which is not vulnerable 
to scratches, whereas the coating made after production is less resistant 
to environmental impacts and therefore placed on the inside of the multi-
pane glass [Weller et al., 2009]. An important feature of the coating is the 
possibility to decrease the amount of infrared and ultraviolet radiation, which 
passes through the glass, but at the same time lets the visible light through. 
The ultraviolet light causes fading of interior materials. The infrared light is 
often referred to as the short wave from the sun, and heat radiation from 
warm surfaces is referred to as longwave infrared [Glass Education Center].
Coatings can be used as solar shading as well, but here the coated pane is 
the outer pane of the multi-pane glass. Hereby the solar energy is reduced, 
which means the g-value is rather low. This also results in a reduced light 
transmittance. The solar shading can be adjusted to the given building and 
its needs, by using different coatings. The coatings can either increase or 
decrease the reflectance of the facade, or give the glass a tint of a colour, 
most commonly in the grey, green and blue scale. If using an antireflection, 
coating it will seem as if it has a greater transparency [Weller et al., 2009].
GLASS AND THERMAL COMFORT
Glazing has a higher thermal transmittance compared to ‘regular’ external 
walls, where insulation lowers the thermal transmittance. A high thermal 
transmittance equals more heat gain and loss, which evidently affects the air 
temperature and the indoor environment. 
All surfaces emit long wave radiation, including people through the skin, 
so a radiant heat exchange is occurring between all the surfaces. Glass is a 
material with good properties for absorbing and transmitting solar radiation. 
When absorbing the radiation the inside surface temperature is affected, 
because the temperature is increasing [Stampe, 2001]. This affects the long 
wave radiation exchange between the surfaces and the occupant. For the 
heat balance of the occupant the relation between radiation emitted to the 
surroundings and the energy received from the surroundings are important 
for the comfort. In summertimes the inside surface temperature of windows 
can increase significantly and lead to discomfort due to long wave heat 
exchange between the surface and the occupant leading to a heat gain and 
Figure 3.8: Illustration of the concept for 
Low E coating.
==PAGE:33==
25
3. LITERATURE STUDY
a warm discomfort. In wintertimes the surface temperature can be quite 
low also compared to the other surfaces in the indoor environment and the 
occupant [Hoffmann et al., 2012]. In cold wintertimes the windows can be 
really cold, and the radiant heat exchange between the occupant and the 
surface will lead to a cold discomfort due to heat loss for the occupant. The 
heat exchange and discomfort is dependent of the geometry of the interior 
and placement of the occupant in relation to this. In summertimes the 
discomfort in terms of a warm feeling is reinforced by the transmitted solar 
radiation or short wave radiation. The short wave radiation is absorbed by 
the outer surface, clothes or skin and leads to a temperature increase. In 
cold winter times the effect of the short wave radiation can have a different 
influence, where it might feel pleasant if you’re feeling cold and get warmer 
by the absorbing the radiation. The transmitted solar radiation can be in two 
forms: direct or diffuse. The direct solar radiation has higher intensity and 
depending of the amount of exposure, can raise the skin temperature locally, 
if only few body parts are exposed [Huizenga et al., 2006] [Poirazis, 2008] 
[Hoffmann et al., 2012]. 
In winter, the inside surface temperature is often several degrees below the 
room air temperature. This can cause a cold down draft, because the air 
temperature, moving along the cold surface, will be cooled down and seek 
down towards the floor evidently leading to cold feet [Hoffmann et al., 2012]. 
It can be concluded that glazed surfaces affect the thermal comfort in overall 
3 ways: [Hoffmann et al., 2012]
-	
Long wave radiation from the cold or warm interior glass surface to 	
	
the occupant.
- 	
Solar radiation transmitted directly through the window producing a 	
	
heat load on the occupant. 
- 	
Increased convection by the window, caused by the difference 	
	
between the glass surface temperature and the ambient air 
	
temperature.
MEAN RADIANT TEMPERATURE
As described all bodies exchange thermal radiation with their surroundings. 
The mean radiant temperature describes the average temperature of the 
surrounding sufaces, which radiates heat. 
Low mean radiant temperatures affect the energy consumption because they 
increase the need for a higher air temperature. This is because of the radiant 
heat exchange occurring between all surfaces, including the occupants. A 
low mean radiant temperature of the surroundings causes the occupants to 
loose heat, and therefore a higher air temperature is needed to compensate 
[Madsen, 1998]. 
RADIANT TEMPERATURE ASYMMETRY 
A very specific measure of the effect on thermal comfort of the longwave 
radiation is the radiant asymmetry. Here the effect of surfaces with 
temperatures different than the air temperature are evaluated. 
The radiant asymmetry is defined as the difference between the plane 
radiant temoerature ∆tpr of two opposite sides of a plane through the persons 
==PAGE:34==
26
3. LITERATURE STUDY
center of gravity. That can be either cold or warm thermal radiation from the 
horizontal surfaces or the vertical surfaces. It is seen that occupants are less 
tolerant towards cold thermal radiation from a vertical surface (must not 
exceed 10 0C) and less tolerant towards warm thermal radiation from the 
ceiling (must not exceed 5 0C) [Madsen, 1998] [DS 474] [DS 469].
To calculate the radiant temperature asymmetry the exchange of radiation 
between two surfaces can be calculated, taking into account the emissivity 
of the surfaces and the angle factor. The angle factor describes the relation of 
the quantity of energy radiated from one surface 1 to another surface 2, and 
the total quantity radiated towards a hemisphere over surface 1. Therefore 
the angle factor takes into account the internal placement of the surfaces in 
relation to each other and their radiation. The following formula desribes the 
relation [Rode et al., 2010]:
Φ1-2 = F1-2 · A1 · ε1 · ε2 · σs (T1
4 - T2
4)
3.4.3 DAYLIGHT
ANGLE OF INCIDENCE
The angle of incidence is the angle between the light ray on the surface of 
the glass and a line perpendicular to the glass. The angle will differ depending 
on the time of the day, the time of the year and the geographical location. 
The angle of incidence of the sun decides the amount of light transmitted 
through the glass, and therefore there is a difference depending on the time 
of the year. This means that the amount of sunlight is greater during winter 
than summer at a southern oriented glass as the angle of incidence is big, 
whereas it is smaller in summer at eastern and western facades as the angle 
of incidence is big and the sun is low on the sky as seen in figure 3.10 [SBI 
192, 1999].
TRANSMISSION, ABSORPTION AND REFLECTION
Regular glass allows solar radiation in the area between 300 to 3000 nm to 
pass through. When the light from the sun reaches the glass it is not just 
penetrated directly through. The light will be divided into three; some 
light will be reflected (R), some absorbed (A) in the glass, and some will be 
transmitted (LT) through the glass. The total radiation hitting the glass is 
always 100% of the sum of the three parameters,  as seen in the following 
equation [SBi 219, 2008]: 
	
I = LT + R + A 
The specific division of these three parameters depends on the type and 
thickness of the glass, the type of gas in the cavity and the type and placement 
of the coating. Besides these physical parameters of the glass, the angle 
of incidence of the sun on the surface is very important, as this angle also 
defines how much light will be reflected and transmitted through the glass, 
which again makes the work with glass very complex and dynamic [Weller 
et al., 2009]. A part of the radiation will be reflected for every transmission 
from glass to gas etc., and therefore several reflections between the panes 
can occur depending of the amount of panes and surface treatments [SBi 
219, 2008]. The transmitted light is defined as LT, which is the capability 
Angle of 
Incidence
Figure 3.10: Angle of incidence: the an­
gle between the light ray on the surface 
and a line perpendicular to the surface.
Figure 3.9: Radiant asymmetry from a 
cold window [Madsen, 1998: Fig. 6].
==PAGE:35==
27
3. LITERATURE STUDY
of the glass to transmit the visible sunlight, and therefore the higher light 
transmittance the more sunlight is let through the glass [Pilkington, 2014].  
SURFACE REFLECTANCES
Surface reflectances are equally important as daylight in a room, since it 
softens the direct light and creates a better visual comfort in the room. As the 
direct light enters the room, it will be reflected at all surfaces and led further 
into the room, and therefore most of the brightness in the back of a room is 
mainly consisting of reflected light. In general surfaces with high reflectances 
are often used for ceilings, while surfaces with the low reflectances often 
are used for flooring [SBi 219, 2008]. As general rule of thumb the Danish 
Building Regulation, SBi 230, recommends a value of 0.7 for the ceiling, 0.1 
for the floor and 0.4 for the internal walls [SBi 230, 2014: Chap 6.5.2 sect. 
1]. These recommendations have to be revalued due to the furnishing of the 
specific room, since the furnishing has a big influence on the reflectances. 
ILLUMINANCE AND DAYLIGHT FACTOR
Illuminance defines the amount of light at a horizontal plane at a specific 
sensor point indoor compared to a horizontal plane at a specific sensor point 
outdoor. The illuminance is measured in lux, which is lumen per squaremeter 
(lm/m2). The illuminance level consists of several contributions of the 
transmitted light through the glass, which is defined by the direct radiation 
from the sky, the diffuse reflected radiation from the exterior surfaces and 
the diffuse reflected radiation from internal surfaces [SBi 219, 2008].
The illuminance level in a room is highest close to the window and decreases 
rapidly, when the distance to the window increases. When evaluating the 
illuminance level, the lux-level will be measured at a height above floor level 
at 850 mm, which corresponds to the surface of a desktop. The illuminance 
in a room will vary depending on the illuminance outdoor and therefore big 
variations will occur in the room. Due to this, it is useful to look at the daylight 
factor (DF), which gives a better indication of the daylight in the room [SBi 
219, 2008]. The daylight factor is a percentage, defined by the ratio between 
the interior illuminance at a sensor point and the exterior illuminance at an 
overcast sky, as seen in the following equation: 
	
DF = Ein/Eext·100 
where Ein is the internal luminance level (lux) and Eext is the external luminance 
level (lux) [Fontoynont et al., 2004].
The daylight factor as described here, is based on the sky conditions of a CIE 
overcast sky,  a definition of an equal overcast sky, which is mixed by an overcast 
sky, partly clouded sky and a clear sky without sun. CIE is the shortening of the 
Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage. The recommended daylight factor 
at a workstation is 2% and can be reached by having an illuminance level at 
10,000 lux outdoor, which is a general definition of a CIE overcast sky, and 
200 lux indoor at the horizontal sensor point, as seen in figure 3.11. The DF is 
in general calculated in a grid with a distance from the wall and a grid at 0,5 
m [Fontoynont et al., 2004] [SBi 219, 2008]. The DF has some limitations as 
the CIE overcast sky often underestimates the luminances near the horizon, 
Figure 3.11: The illuminance level out­
doors and the preferred lux-level at a 
workplace [SBi 2013:20: Fig. 2].
==PAGE:36==
28
3. LITERATURE STUDY
which has the consequence of under and overlit spaces [Reinhart, 2010].
LUMINANCE AND GLARE
Luminance defines the amount of light radiated from a surface towards 
the eye and is measured in candela per m2 (cd/m2). When direct sunlight is 
reflected from a surface there is a high risk of glare due to high luminances. 
This is a limitation of the direct sunlight and is one of the main reasons for the 
need of shading devices. The big differences of the intensity of the direct and 
diffuse light can be decreased by reflecting some of the direct light further 
into the room and thereby decrease the big luminance differences in the 
room [SBi 219, 2008]. 
Glare is one of the main reasons for visual discomfort and can either be 
caused by high luminances, high luminance differences within the visual 
area, or by high light sources close to the eye. Two types of glare are mainly 
used: 
Vision limited glare 	 occurs when there is a big difference in luminance of 	
	
	
	
the focus of the eye and the surroundings.
Uncomfortable glare 	 occurs when a small area in the edge of the 	area of 
	
	
	
vision has very high luminance compared to the area 
	
	
	
of vision. 
In general the human eye has the capacity of a broad interval of luminances, 
but the degree of glare is often defined by how well the eye adapts to the 
luminance difference [SBi 219, 2008].
The preferred luminance level at a work plane is 45-105 cd/m2. Screens often 
have a luminance at 50-100 cd/m2 and a wall has a preferred luminance level 
at 30-60 cd/m2. To evaluate the contrasts in the field of view, the preferred 
ratios of the task (Lt), working plane (Lwp) and the wall illuminance (Lw) are 
defined as Lt:Lwp:Lw = 10:4:3 [van Ooyen et al., 1987], where Lw is mainly 
considered for the parapets in the atrium since a glass building. 
The following luminances are the maximum recommended values to avoid 
discomfort glare, when doing tasks involving a computer screen with an 
average luminance at 85 cd/m2 [Ruck, 2000]. 
Max. 300 cd/m2	
for surfaces in the field of view within the immediate 
	
	
	
background.
Max. 850 cd/m2 	
for surfaces in the field of view within the general 
	
	
	
background. 
Max. 850 cd/m2 	
for any surfaces at 0.6 x 0.6 m within the field of view.
UDI AND DA
The overall task of the daylight simulation is to predict, with a high certainty, 
illuminance and luminance level at a specific point, considering time, 
3d-modelling and dynamic sky conditions [Reinhart, 2010]. In many ways 
the average daylight factor is a limited definition of the daylight conditions 
in a room, as it only considers the simple conditions of a CIE overcast 
sky. If considering the variation of daylight in a room the Useful Daylight 
Illuminance (UDI) has become a more used definition. The UDI was proposed 
==PAGE:37==
29
3. LITERATURE STUDY
by Mardaljevic and Nabil in 2005 as a dynamic simulation tool [Reinhart, 
2010]. The UDI can, as well as the DF, describe the level of sufficient daylight 
at a workstation during the year. The difference from the DF to the UDI is 
that the UDI is based on a climatic-based analysis over a year, and thereby 
time-varying sky and sun conditions, which predicts the hourly levels of the 
absolute daylight illuminance instead of only looking at the CIE overcast sky. 
The UDI includes the risk of occupant discomfort and unwanted solar gain, 
which are associated with high levels of daylight as well as the useful levels 
of daylight illuminance. The occurrence of daylight illuminances has been 
divided into three groups in the UDI, as follows [Nabil et al., 2006].
	
< 100 lux 	
below the level of useful light
	
100-2000 lux 	 within the range of useful light
	
> 2000 lux 	
above the level of useful light
 
The Daylight Autonomy (DA) is the amount of time, where the daylight is at 
the preferred level, and there is no need of artificial lighting, which means 
that there will be either 0% or 100% artificial light. The preferred level of DA 
is between 50-70%, were below 50% is too low and above 70% is too high 
[Reinhart, 2012]. The DA is just as the UDI based on a climatic-based analysis 
over a year [Reinhart, 2010]. Continuous Daylight Autonomy, (DAcont) is the 
DA where dimming is added to the light, which will result in some energy 
savings for the artificial light, since the light will be matched with the daylight 
in the room and partly covering of daylight will count as well instead of only 
full hours like for DA. The Maximum Daylight Autonomy (DAmax) indicates the 
risk of too high illuminance levels, which will result in glare. In DaySim the 
DAmax is defined as 10 times the desired minimum illuminance level [Reinhart, 
2012].
The UDI and DA can both be calculated by using different simulation tools, 
which was described in the chapter “2.3 Method”. 
ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
The design of artificial light has become an important design task, together 
with the interior design and the daylight design. 
The design of the artificial light has become a part of the interior design since 
the second world war, due to the increased use of electricity for light. This 
led to an increased interest in artificial light, and research in old materials 
along with new materials were made to improve the quality of light. Well 
designed interiors are often aligned with an efficient and functional lighting 
and is becoming more integrated within the architecture. The light is now 
a big part of the architectural value, if it is worked with by sensitiveness 
and adjusted to the purpose, and not only by technical appearance. As for 
daylight the artificial light has to be considered with care, to avoid glare, big 
disturbing contrasts, odd shadows or false colours in the light. Designing the 
artificial light is an art in itself, dependent on a close cooperation between 
architects and electrical engineers. Often it is seen that an approximation 
of daylight in colour of the artificial light is preferable as well as some 
differences in intensity and shadows, to achieve as natural and living interior 
light environment as possible [Read et al., 1933] [SBi 230, 2014].
==PAGE:38==
30
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.5 INTERVIEWS
INTRODUCTION
This section contains research performed in collaboration with the business 
world. Interviews with architects and engineers are performed to get a 
holistic and more practical aspect on the perspectives of glasshouses. The 
interviewed architects and engineers are from different companies and the 
selection is based on their experience and field of work. They have through 
their work a lot of experience and knowledge from a more realistic and 
practical perspective. They have participated in projects from the beginning 
till the end, so they know the dilemmas and challenges in the process and 
can describe these from an architectural and an engineering point of view. 
There is generally various opinions about glasshouses, and an often used 
statement is that engineers are usually very negative about glasshouses, while 
the architects are very positive. This is put to a test, when each profesion 
is questioned about the qualities and problematic issues when building in 
glass. Getting an understanding about the perspective from each profession 
sets a foundation for a mutual understanding, and which will contribute to 
achieving more optimised solutions. Furthermore specific relevant issues 
can be pointed out for further investigations.
The cooperation between architects and engineers is questioned to hear 
how the cooperation is experienced, and what could be done to improve 
the cooperation in the future. 3-4 interviews have been performed of 
respectively the architects and engineers to get different perspectives and 
views on the subjects. 
The interviews are performed as a mix of questions and conversation. 
This means that a few general questions have been on the agenda for all 
interviews, and during the interviews more specific questions have occurred, 
based on the course of the interview and the opinions and exoeriences of 
the interviewed person. The general questions are listed below.  
	
- Why is glass used so much in buildings?
	
- What are the qualities of glasshouses?
	
- What are the problematic aspects of glasshouses?
	
- How is the cooperation between architects and engineers?
	
- What could be done to improve the cooperation?
After the interviews, they have been transcribed and processed in relation to 
the main subjects of: 
Pros: 	 Architectural value, daylight, thermal indoor climate, energy, 
	
cooperation, statics.
Cons: 	 Daylight, thermal indoor climate, energy, cooperation, statics.
General: Own opinion, technical description. 
Each subject has been provided with a colour, so relevant information in the 
interviews have been assigned a colour and main points have been drawn out 
and rewritten if necessary to the most important essence. The transcribed 
==PAGE:39==
31
3. LITERATURE STUDY
and processed interviews can be seen in “Appendix A1-A7”.
In this chapter an analysis of the interviews will be made seperately for the 
architects and the engineers. The analysis will be divided into the subjects 
as previous described and further summed up to give an onverview of the 
outputs separately for the architects and the engineers. For both analysis 
some key points are gathered as important aspects for further investigation 
in the technical investigations. Finally the two analysis will be summed up to 
make a common sub-conclusion pointing out differences and similarities of 
the key aspects between architects and engineers.
==PAGE:40==
32
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.5.1 INTERVIEWS WITH ARCHITECTS
The following section and exposition are made based on the interviews 
of the architects. Key points in relation to the questions are divided in the 
subjects of architectural quality, atriums, the facade, daylight, thermal indoor 
environment, energy and cooperation and the subjects will be described. 
Below the participants in the interviews are listed: 
	
Lundgaard & Tranberg Architects:
	
Henrik Schmidt, Architect M.A.A., partner.
	
Robert Janson, Architect M.A.A.
	
Mikkelsen Architects:
	
Stig Mikkelsen, Architect M.A.A.
ACHITECTURAL QUALITY
During the interviews the interviewees directly and indirectly expressed the 
architectural qualities of glasshouses. A general point of view is relating to 
the transparency, which bring two desired qualities; the potential of having a 
lot of daylight and having visual connections.
Visual connections are important both in regards to external and internal 
views. In relation to having the visual connection to the outside, Henrik 
Schmidt states: “The big benefits of glasshouses are, that you can make the 
most out of a location” [Schmidt, 2015: 11.34-13.42]. Robert supports this 
aspect by describing that having a nice view add one more dimension to the 
architecture, which make glass important [Janson, 2015]. It is, however, not 
only the aspect of connection to the outside visually, but also the feeling of 
connection to the outside, because it would give a feeling of disconnection 
to the outside world, if it was not possible to sense the weather and the 
time of day [Schmidt, 2015]. Furthermore the connection to the urban life 
in the world outside contributes with an energy to the indoor environment 
[Mikkelsen, 2015]. Glass enables an openness in the building, which affects 
the experience of the indoor environment, because it provides internal views. 
It is possible to look through the building, which also creates interesting 
spatial experiences of the interior, intensified by the quality of glass to reflect 
the surroundings [Schmidt, 2015] [Mikkelsen, 2015]. Furthermore the fact 
that you can see the working life in the house will also participate to this 
feeling or energy of ‘the pulse’ in the building [Schmidt, 2015].
 
ATRIUMS
Places which often have an excessive amount of glazing are atrium areas etc. 
Henrik describes these as being examples on contexts, where glass can be 
used, because you want to have the outside-feeling but it’s not warm enough 
all year long to be outside [Schmidt, 2015]. The atriums can then create this 
middle- climate zone, where you get the feeling of being outside, but you 
are independent of rainy and windy weather. Henrik finds the way atriums 
can bring nature into the building fascinating, by means of either local or 
more exotic plants. This brings something extra, other experiences, which is 
only possible with glass [Schmidt, 2015]. Robert also finds that glass can give 
==PAGE:41==
33
3. LITERATURE STUDY
some qualities, which can be better exploited by making rooms with double 
room height or atriums etc [Janson, 2015].
FACADE
All glazed facades have to some extend the same qualities as atriums, when 
standing right next to the internal facade, but in some cases one can feel 
exhibited, so it depends on the environment outside the facade [Janson, 
2015 ] [Schmidt, 2015]. Henrik Schmidt points out that the facade design 
should also depend on the function inside. If people are sitting right next to 
the busy city life, and they are working, it can feel wrong because you are 
sitting in a social context but you are not social, to this issue Henrik Schmidt 
states: “In my opinion good architecture is a matter of identifying yourself 
with the architecture and how it feels to be in it, both inside and outside” 
[Schmidt, 2015: 00.57-03.35].
The design of the facade has to be processed carefully to create good 
architecture. Henrik Schmidt also states that it is the subdivision of the 
windows, which make the glass facade interesting. This means, how you both 
from the inside and outside look through the grid, created by the division 
of the windows [Schmidt, 2015]. If this is successful: “..then you can form 
the light to some extent and in particular create a graphical experience in 
the light, which can be really interesting, and in here a lot of architecture is 
hiding” [Schmidt, 2015: 19.23-20.48]. When working with the grid it is a part 
of working with the degree of detailing on several levels, which is important 
to create a scale and make the facade more interesting and by this also create 
an interaction of light and shadow [Janson, 2015].
The facades can be uninteresting if they are all smooth and uniform. Examples 
of this are the curtain-wall and when structural glazing has been used for the 
facade [Janson, 2015] [Schmidt, 2015]. To create some variety and a more 
interesting look, closed squares can be used in the design [Schmidt, 2015] 
and by this also have the possibility to use a mix of materials to create an 
interesting design [Janson, 2015]. Stig Mikkelsen describes the transition 
between open and closed facade to be the big challenge architecturally, 
because it can be too messy, if there are too many transitions in a too small 
scale, and here a total glazed facade outside can create a whole context in the 
expression [Mikkelsen, 2015]. Having closed squares can be problematic, if 
the transition between open and closed is not desired. Examples can be seen, 
where the closed squares are covered with glazing, which make it difficult to 
identify the open areas from the closed ones [Janson, 2015] [Schmidt, 2015]. 
What to use is a question of the desired expression, but if the glass covering 
the closed areas are replaced by another material, it can be discussed if the 
glasshouse then still can be perceived as a glasshouse, because there is no 
precise definition of that [Schmidt, 23.20-25.47]. Robert Janson suggests: 
“..it is probably the criteria that you experience it as transparent” [Janson, 
2015: 13.52-14.31].
Stig Mikkelsen also expresses his passion for glass as linked to the potential 
of creating simple, elegant detail, construction wise. Glass can be used for 
edges and endings and give a nice finish like no other material can do in the 
same way, but a lot of work lies in designing this kind of details [Mikkelsen, 
2015].
==PAGE:42==
34
3. LITERATURE STUDY
Robert Janson finds the disadvantages of using glass in the fact that the 
material doesn’t have any texture and that it doesn’t really age [Janson, 
2015]. Robert Janson states: “Glass has no character and will therefore not 
get prettier over time, in best case it will be unchanged and in worst case it 
will get uglier over time” [Janson, 2015: 10.10-10.34].
Other disadvantages are related to the transparency, which can bring with 
it undesired qualities, if they are not taken into consideration in the design. 
The general perception is often that glass is invisible, and here the mistake 
is, because glass can be untransparent under many lighting conditions. Seen 
from the outside in daylight the glass can appear dark and not transparent 
at all [Janson, 2015]. If you on the other hand consider the glass at night, the 
situation has turned, and the glass is transparent from the outside, while it’s 
not from the inside, which can be a bit scary [Schmidt, 2015] and give the 
feeling of being exposed, because people can look at you [Janson, 2015]. 
 
DAYLIGHT
The benefit of using glass is the daylight you get in the room, which allows 
you to work without turning on the electrical lighting [Janson, 2015].
The disadvantages are over illumination and contrasts. Big, uninterrupted 
glass facades where the light is just pouring in, can be uninteresting because 
the light isn’t graded [Janson, 2015], which can cause rough contrasts. In 
older buildings with thick walls, there is a softer light because there is more 
reflection and the light is more formed into the building [Schmidt, 2015]. 
In classical buildings the light will be reflected further into the room, so it’s 
important to be aware of the difference [Schmidt, 2015]. The function is also 
a factor to consider in the design of the facade, where a facade with too 
much changing between open and closed area for example won’t provide the 
equal distribution of daylight, which is desired in offices [Mikkelsen, 2015].
Having a big amount of glazing it often has to be glass with coatings, which 
affects the light and makes it more boring, even though technology is 
improving. So the quality of the light is problematic, when using a lot of glass 
[Schmidt, 2015].
 
THERMAL INDOOR ENVIRONMENT
Closed areas are also to be considered from an indoor climate perspective, 
where they can be beneficial to have [Schmidt, 2015].
In relation to sitting close to the facade there is also the side-aspects of down 
draft and thermal radiation, besides the architectural qualities of connection 
to the outside, light and view [Schmidt, 2015].
 
ENERGY
It is a challenge to fulfill the requirements for daylight and energy. To fulfill 
the daylight requirements big glazing areas are needed, but this isn’t in 
accordance with the energy requirements. There are so many possibilities for 
optimization that they are beginning to work against each other [Mikkelsen, 
2015]. It is a struggle to make it all come together. The requirements can be 
a limiting factor in the design, but it is not controlling the design, and if it is 
the desire to work with contrasts and transparency, then it is not limiting 
[Janson, 2015]. A limiting factor from Robert Janson’s point of view can be 
the sunshade and the coating on the glass, which are sometimes necessary 
and make the glass less transparent than desired [Janson, 2015].
==PAGE:43==
35
3. LITERATURE STUDY
The energy requirements have caused the windows to increase in layers and 
have framing systems, to get a better performance, which according to Stig 
Mikkelsen influence on the design. The framing system is pretty massive 
so to balance it, the windows need to have an appropriate size [Mikkelsen, 
2015]. Daylight brings a lot of quality to the building, which can not all be 
measured, but glazing is still considered to be one of the biggest challenges 
in relation to energy. It should be considered to be more ambitious in other 
aspects, so the daylight and the qualities from this were not compromised 
[Mikkelsen, 2015].
 
COOPERATION
A mutual understanding is important in the cooperation process between 
engineers and architects. Then you can establish a creative environment 
and challenge the requirements, which can be too ambitious sometimes 
[Schmidt, 2015].
The architects express that they are aware of the practical aspect in concern 
to the rules and regulations, and that they want to be in a position, where 
they can cooperate [Schmidt, 2015] [Mikkelsen, 2015]. Several aspects are 
influenced by the design, and they are trying to integrate solutions, which 
are not only considered from a design point of view [Mikkelsen, 2015]. The 
architects also want the projects to be realized, so it’s important that the 
engineers participate from an early stage in the process [Mikkelsen, 2015], 
also to confirm that the project is on the right track and can be realized, 
otherwise it’s just an unrealistic idea [Mikkelsen, 2015].
To have a productive cooperation and a positive attitude is therefore 
necessary, and it requires people to be committed and understand the 
challenges from both sides [Mikkelsen 2015]. It can be difficult to describe 
the cooperation between engineers and architects, because it’s different 
from project to project, and it’s very dependent on the persons involved 
[Mikkelsen, 2015]. Sometimes engineers can have a negative attitude and do 
not even want to explore the ideas from the architects, which is very difficult 
to work with [Schmidt, 2015].
The lack of cooperation can result in a lot of unused potential, because 
every profession puts in these safety margins to be sure on their side. 
If the professions also cooperated in deciding the safety margins, the full 
potential would be used, and more optimized solutions could be found. A 
third participant in the cooperation to optimize the solutions is the external 
suppliers, who should also be iparticipating in the cooperation, as they have 
a more specific practical knowledge, which is required in the cooperation 
[Mikkelsen, 2015]. 
SUM UP FOR INTERVIEWS WITH ARCHITECTS
The visual connections glass creates is important. This is to be understood as 
the visual connection towards the outside, where you can exploit the possible 
view, as well as the emotional connection to what is happening in the world 
outside. The visual connection is also important in relation to internal views, 
which brings an openness to the environment and the reflecting glass creates 
spatial experiences. 
Glass can be used to simulate an outside feeling, without being dependent 
on outdoors cold temperatures and bad weather, this is particular put into 
practice in atriums etc. 
==PAGE:44==
36
3. LITERATURE STUDY
A smooth, uniform glass facade can be uninteresting, therefore it is important 
to work with the degree of detailing on several levels for example the framing 
systems of the windows, and the edges of the floors.  
A glasshouse doesn’t necessarily need to have an all glazed facade, closed 
areas can be integrated as well and create a more interesting design, but how 
the transition between open and closed areas and the related effects hereof 
needs to be considered in the design. In here lies the dilemma of when the 
glasshouse is not considered to be a glasshouse any more, which does not 
have any specific guidelines. Therefore the division between closed and open 
areas and the material used for the closed areas should be considered, if the 
desire is to create a glasshouse. 
Mutual understanding for each other is very important in the cooperation 
between architects and engineers. The architects are aware that the design 
influence many aspects and are aware of the associated problems in relation 
to indoor climate and energy consumption. They are positive towards the 
cooperation with the engineers in creating better solutions and values a 
mutual understanding to find and explore new solutions. At the same time 
they are also very aware of the significant role the engineers possess in 
confirming the project and the principles so it can be realized. 
The architects agree on the dilemma and challenge between fulfilling the 
daylight requirements and the regulations concerning energy. One of the 
benefits in using a lot of glass is the amount of daylight which is important 
in relation to work, but also brings other qualities to the interior, which is 
difficult to measure. Glass is considered to be a sinner in relation to energy, 
but it should be considered to be more ambitious in other aspects in relation 
to the regulation.
Furthermore it is suggested that suppliers should be included in the 
cooperation because they hold specific practical knowledge, which could be 
beneficial in creating more optimised solutions together.  
Based on the exposition of the interviews a list of relevant subjects which 
could be investigated further is described below:
	
Facade design -  Investigation of the placement of windows. 
	
Daylight - Investigations of the daylight through different methods, 	
	
as daylight brings a lot of qualities, which are not always optimal to 
	
describe using the daylight factor.
==PAGE:45==
37
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.5.2 INTERVIEWS WITH ENGINEERS
The following section and exposition are made based on the interviews 
of the engineers. Key points in relation to the questions are divided in the 
subjects of architectural quality, daylight, thermal indoor climate, energy and 
cooperation and will be described. 
	
COWI:
	
Michael Jørgensen, MSc. Architectural Engineering, Section - Energy, 	
	
Indoor climate and sustainability 
	
DTU:
	
Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor, Department of Civil 
	
Engineering 
	
Grontmij: 
	
Ole Teisen, Chief Advisor, Planning & Design, Facilities Management
	
Jonas Vendel Jensen, MSc. Energy Engineering, Mechanical & Energy
 	
Engineering, Planning & Design
	
Mikkelsen Architects:
	
Philip Hørmann, Construction Architect, Cand. Scient. Arch.
ARCHITECTURAL VALUE
The biggest advantage of the glass facade is the architectural value [Teisen, 
2015]. The most important architectural values of the glass facade, mentioned 
of the engineers, are the transparency and the view out, as Michael 
Jørgensen says, “It can give a good contact to the exterior, therefore a good 
contact to the outdoor climate and the outdoor environment and wipe out 
the borders between outdoors and indoors” [Jørgensen, 2015: 06.03-07.14]. 
When working with glass it is possible to work in several layers of the building 
envelope, and as Philip Hørmann says “there is something about glass you 
add outside, it has the transformation between outside and inside and what 
is in between” [Hørmann, 2015: 05.16-05.45]. The prestigeous qualities of 
glass is the possibility to enjoy the good view and sunlight indoors, while it 
protects against the unwanted rain and wind [Nielsen, 2015]. 
It is a general impression that the glass facade has some architectural 
qualities, which are valued higher than the price of the construction [Jensen, 
2015]. The architectural values for glasshouses also include the materiality 
and the possibilities for details and connections. Philip Hørmann values the 
slim details related to the design with glass, when describing the architectural 
value of glass [Hørmann, 2015]. These details can for instance be seen, 
when pulling back the deck from the facade and let the glass facade cover it. 
Thereby an homogeneous facade is ensured and only a slim connection of the 
glass facade is visible. By solving the facade connection like just described, 
the glass percentage of the facade increases by around 30%. According to 
the engineers this solution has only an architectural quality and no further 
engineering qualities [Jørgensen, 2015].
==PAGE:46==
38
3. LITERATURE STUDY
DAYLIGHT
For the engineering point of view there are mainly two obvious qualities for 
glass buildings, which is view and daylight. What makes glasshouses unique 
is the way you can get a shower of light indoor just like outdoor [Jørgensen, 
2015]. The glass division of the facade has to be arranged according to where 
there is a need of daylight. 
When defining the problems relating to the daylight in glasshouses the list 
is longer from the engineering point of view. In modern office buildings, 
the client often prioritise many employees in the room, and for example to 
accommodate the potential of three rows of workplaces in the depth, with 
optimal daylight conditions, big windows are needed [Jørgensen, 2015]. 
With the big windows a long list of problems follows, for instance the issue 
of big contrasts in the light, which results in high risk of glare. Glare is also 
a result of overexposure of light, caused from the direct light and reflected 
light from the interior surfaces. The shower of light can therefore also be a 
disadvantage [Jensen, 2015].
In Denmark the daylight conditions in a room is often only defined by the 
daylight factor (DF), which is based upon an overcast sky, and does not take the 
variating light intensity outside into account. If instead looking at the Useful 
Daylight Index (UDI), the span of useful daylight will be illustrated instead of 
just an average. Good daylight is therefore not just a synonym of 100% glass 
[Jensen, 2015]. To accommodate the risk of glare and overexposure of light, 
the glass is either treated with a coating or a solar shading is installed. By 
using coating the light transmittance is reduced, which results in a dimmed 
daylight and smaller change of the colour of the light, and the quality of the 
daylight will therefore be reduced [Jørgensen, 2015]. When using controlled 
external solar shading, it will be in use in the summertime and thereby shade 
for the view and in wintertime it is often not in use, even though there is still 
a risk of glare [Jensen, 2015]. In the Danish Building Regulation the daylight 
is measured in an average daylight factor, which in the 2020 requirements 
can not even be fulfilled with a dense building with 100 % glass in the facade. 
The strict requirement for energy and indoor climate in 2020 can therefore 
be complicated to achieve and at the same time reach the preferred daylight 
[Hørmann, 2015]. To accommodate this problem, it could be efficient to 
work with the UDI instead of only the DF [Jensen, 2015]. If the areas of the 
windows are decreased remarkably, the users can feel completely detached 
from the surrounding world [Jørgensen, 2015].
THERMAL INDOOR ENVIRONMENT
Common for all interviewed is the opinion that there are no qualities related to 
the thermal indoor climate in glasshouses. The general problems mentioned 
regarding the thermal indoor climate is the risk of overheating due to the 
heat gain from the big glass facade. This overheat results in an increased use 
of the solar shading, which as well will limit the view out. Furthermore the 
increase of ventilation can cause draft, which is a problem in office spaces 
which have strict requirements to wind speeds to avoid discomfort and flying 
papers. This is not the case in the atrium where a bit of draft due to the natural 
ventilation would not be considered as discomfort, as it is a recreative area, 
and some outdoor conditions are expected [Teisen, 2015]. All in all there are 
several risks for increased discomfort due to the big glass facades. 
==PAGE:47==
39
3. LITERATURE STUDY
There is a tendency and rumor which says that engineers are skeptical 
towards glasshouses, and as Michael Jørgensen says “... it is because 
engineers traditionally have the responsibility for the indoor climate, and for 
the solution to work when the building is put in service. So it’s us they call if 
there is overheating or if it is too cold or too warm right? Or if there is draft” 
[Jørgensen, 2015: 20.49-03.25]. This tendency therefore is highly related to 
the disadvantages related to glasshouses. 
ENERGY
A general attitude from the engineering point of view, concerning to the 
relation between energy and glasshouses is clearly described by Jonas Vendel 
Jensen as he says: “Now that I am an energy engineer, and both struggles 
with the energy and indoor climate, and if I had to compare a glasshouse 
with other solutions it doesn’t have many qualities measured in energy and 
indoor climate” [Jensen, 2015: 07.15-07.39]. One of the problems with glass 
facade energy is the risk of local temperature drop in wintertimes due to the 
cold bridges along the window frames in the facades. These local weaknesses 
are often missed when working with big buildings, since the focus of work 
is only considering the average U-value of the facade which can result in 
an underdimensioned heating system [Jensen, 2015]. In relation to this Ole 
Teisen states that the glass facade is included “.. as a part of the indoor-
controlled system and therefore one must take it in oath, because there are 
so terrible loads of watt in it, if it suddenly goes crazy” [Jensen, 2015: 48.20-
50.00]. Therefore the glass facades can be very expensive in the long run, if 
they are not designed properly to avoid the heat load to enter, and if it is not 
integrated in the total indoor-controlled system of the building to efficient 
get rid of the heat. But if the decision has been made it is important to be 
aware of the resulting challenges [Jensen, 2015].
STATICS
Another reason for the great use of glass can also be explained by the 
advantageous material properties, since glass almost does not change during 
the years and the maintenance is minimal. The only change over the years is 
the scratches, which will occur in the surface over time, and thereby reduce 
the strength and transparency [Nielsen, 2015]. As Jens Henrik Nielsen states, 
“... structural wise the paramount disadvantage is that it is a brittle material, 
which means high risk of a breach having catastrophic consequences, if 
the design is not done properly. Because a small mistake in the surface can 
reduce the strength a lot since it is such a brittle material and it is not possible 
to avoid mistakes in the material” [Nielsen, 2015: 03.45-05.10]. Even though 
there are both pros and cons for glass as building material, the unique quality 
of transparency and the robustness towards external impacts will keep it in 
the building industry in the future as well [Jensen, 2015].
COOPERATION
The interviews prove that the general attitude towards the cooperation 
between engineers and architects are positive, and both parts show interest 
and respect for each professional field. Accompanied with the common 
interest in the project, a good dialogue and an integrated design process 
will occur and the final results will be optimised. This improvement of the 
cooperation between engineers and architects have progressed in the recent 
==PAGE:48==
40
3. LITERATURE STUDY
years in parallel to the Architectural Engineering field has grown in Denmark, a 
profession with focus on the teamwork and how the engineers can challenge 
the solutions of the architects [Teisen, 2015]. As Jonas Vendel Jensen says 
“That is among other things what Architectural Engineering is about, to see 
the possibilities and see what we can do instead of just shoot the ideas down” 
[Jensen, 2015: 28.58-30.28]. In general it is mainly about communication, 
whether the engineers get to be heard as Michael Jørgensen says: “Well 
it is very important, that we as engineers communicate on the architect’s 
premises (…) if you present it so they understand, at the receivers conditions, 
they can easily understand it but also take it into account in their design” 
[Jørgensen, 2015: 33.18-34.06]. In general it requires about 20 % of the time 
for a task to do the communicative part, where as the remaining 80 % is 
time used for the task in itself [Jørgensen, 2015]. A good foundation for an 
improved communication is also the architects intention of function-based 
design, where the close relation to the engineering field is very important 
to achieve a holistic solution [Jensen, 2015]. As Ole Teisen says, “When 
Architectural Engineering is going well, the solutions achieved have an inner 
beauty because the function in itself is beautiful” [Teisen, 2015: 27.58-28.58]. 
After all the architects do the shape and design and the engineers accomplish 
with the calculations and ideas for optimisations, and as Ole Teisen says: “The 
happiness is that some architects can sell the client some dreams, because 
we can’t” [Teisen, 2015: 38.24-38.42]. 
Even though the cooperation is in progress there are still examples of the 
classical gap between architects and engineers, where architects design on 
their own premises, and then expect the engineers to solve the technical 
parts afterwards, or engineers who only deliver the usual calculations without 
looking open minded at the possibilities. In relation to the engineers there 
are a tendency in looking at maximum work done to the minimum time, 
which minimises their focus of communicating the calculations and thereby 
limits their possibilities to get as much influence in the early phases of the 
design [Jørgensen, 2015]. As for the architects they just design and expect 
the engineers to annul the law of gravity to be able to solve the potential 
problems related to the chosen design [Teisen, 2015].
In some cases the miscommunication is not among the architects and 
engineers, but in relation to the suppliers, who claim to do the best, and in 
the end they can not do it, as Jonas Vendel Jensen says “.. there are some, who 
are pirates” [Jensen, 2015: 31.30-32.31]. Meaning they promise something 
they know they cannot keep. Luckily not all suppliers are like pirates and are 
willing to cooperate with the architects and engineers to optimise the future 
buildings [Jensen, 2015].
To meet the complications related to the cooperation between architects and 
engineers, different tools have to be implemented. As a tool to improve the 
dialogue between the parties in the beginning of the design phase, where 
the concept are set and thereby the functions are optimised regarding the 
climate-study, Michael Jørgensen developed a graph as a communication 
tool. The graph showed the needed climate-system in relation to the 
people density, percentage floor area and percentage window area. Hereby 
discussions can be taken up-front, whether the expensive systems are the 
way to solve the design related issues for instance. It’s a static relation with 
==PAGE:49==
41
3. LITERATURE STUDY
assumptions about the solar radiation on the facade, external solar shading, 
people load and equipment load. It shows a relation between a high people 
load in a south oriented room as more expensive, which requires more 
complicated solutions [Jørgensen, 2015].
At Henning Larsen Architects a new department in sustainability has been 
developed during the recent years, which makes it possible for the architects 
to be up-front with their design proposals, when taking the first dialogues with 
the engineers. They do daylight simulations and energy frame calculations in 
some projects, which can be a bit of a challenge as well, as it is more difficult 
as an engineer to change the setpoints and values in the calculations to be 
verified [Jørgensen, 2015].
TECHNICAL POINTS
During the interviews with the engineers several technical aspects related to 
glasshouses came up, among the general main topics were the pros and cons 
of solar shading including the costs. 
As described earlier the glass facades accommodate a high risk of 
overheating, and to avoid this, external solar shading is a typical solution. 
According to studies performed, this results in 50 % use in the occupant 
hours from May to August, which influences the view out, but limits the risk 
of glare [Jørgensen, 2015]. Mainly three types of solar shading was discussed 
in the interviews: the fixed solar shading, the mechanical blinds and the 
screens. The fixed blinds only consider the direct sun from specific angles, 
whereas the mechanical blinds can be angled according to the sun and be 
more efficient in the long run. To avoid the direct sun by using mechanical 
blinds, glare and view out are completely closed off, external screens are 
used instead. The critical feature with the screens is the fragility towards 
wind. They are expensive, and as Ole Teisen says “ you don’t have a reference 
year for how windy it is, and you don’t have any, even though you could get 
a number from DMI for when it will be windy and the sun will shine at the 
same time, so it’s not even related it’s just guessing” [Teisen, 2015: 22.21-
26.32]. If a reference year indication for wind was available, more accurate 
simulations could be made. At the moment the screens are working due to 
local measurements of wind speed on the roof, which defines when the wind 
speed is too high, and the screens have to get off. This is not an optimal 
solution, as the measured wind speed is measured at the roof, but it is not 
the same wind speed occurring on the facade, due to smaller turbulence in 
the air around the building facade [Teisen, 2015].
All interviewed concluded that using glass facades would result in high 
expenses compared to the more traditional types of facades. So if this 
type of facade is wanted, it has to be prioritised in the budget from the 
very beginning. Total economy has been a requirement in buildings since 
1997, but now the facade is added as a section in the building regulations to 
accommodate unexpected costs due to the design late in the process. Glass 
facades can cost around 25 % of the total economy of the project [Jensen, 
2015]. Where the total economy of the project is the sum of the total building 
costs and the operating costs [Teisen, 2015].
==PAGE:50==
42
3. LITERATURE STUDY
SUM UP FOR INTERVIEWS WITH ENGINEERS
To sum the interviews with the engineers up, they expect glasshouses have 
come to stay due to the qualities related to the material properties regarding 
transparency and robustness. The quality of having a view out and a relation 
to the exterior urban environment has a big influence on the working 
environment and the indoor comfort. As the engineers underline, the only 
benefit glass facades accommodate, are the increased possibilities for 
daylight, otherwise it is both indoor climate and energy-wise not considered 
as an advantageous solution. 
Related issues that should be further investigated and integrated in the 
work with glasshouses is first and foremost the quality of the daylight and 
therefore the UDI should be more used compared to the DF. As a result of 
overheating there is a higher risk of draft due to increased use of cooling, 
which is a critical discomfort for the working environment. Another critical 
parameter is the risk of local thermal discomfort near the facade. During 
winter there is a risk of cold down draft and during summer there is a risk 
of increased heat radiation from the facade, defined as radian asymmetry. 
Therefore a bigger focus when designing new buildings should be at the 
smaller scale and not only at the total building scale. In relation to this, the 
communication with the producers has to be improved to make sure that the 
adequate products are available and in the needed qualities. 
When looking at the cooperation between engineers and architects, the 
engineering point of view is in general positive as long as both parts have a 
common interest and curiosity for a common optimised result. To bridge the 
two professions the architectural engineers are playing an important role by 
seeing possibilities instead of limitations from both point of view. 
Overall the glasshouse has a lot of challenges in the field of engineering, 
which makes it a less prefered typology even though there are important 
qualities as well and the cooperation between the parties is improving.
The following list gives an overview of main points for further analysis:
	
Daylight  - To get an overall evaluation of the daylight conditions in 
	
the building it could be an idea to calculate the Usefull Daylight 
	
Illuminance as an addition to the Daylight Factor.
	
Solar shading - The solar shading has some limitations when 
	
considereing the user behaviour and the mechanical control, as the 
	
behaviuor of the users are difficult to predict, but has a great deal 		
	
to say energy-wise.
	
Thermal discomfort - Glass facades acommodate thermal 
	
discomfort in terms of overheating and local discomfort caused by 
	
radiant asymmetry.
	
==PAGE:51==
43
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.5.3 SUM UP - INTERVIEWS
A brief sub-conclusion for all the interviews is made to give an overview of 
the differences and similarities related to the questions about glasshouses 
and cooperation. 
In general the interviews showed a common understanding from both 
the architects and engineers that glass has an architectural value due to 
the transparent material properties, which provides fine possibilities for 
daylight and view out. Regarding the daylight both parts see it as a quality, 
even though it is often accompanied by risk of glare and high contrasts of 
illuminance level. To avoid the glare and high contrasts coatings and solar 
shading are often used, and this also gives some limitations, as it also has 
an impact on the qualities of the light transmitted and the view out. Both 
architects and engineers are aware of the limitations, but for the architects it 
is considered a bigger limitation.
When discussing the indoor climate in relation to the glass facades the 
engineers had the focus on all the related problems; overheating, draft from 
increased ventilation and downdraft from the windows. The architects were 
aware of the problems as well, but only briefly mentioned them. For the 
energy both parts see a mis-match between the daylight requirements and 
the new energy requirements, as the requirements doesn’t take into account 
the quality of the light only the quantity. 
The architects points out a wish for improving the cooperation with the 
suppliers and see this as a problem, since it accommodates an unutilized 
potential for more optimised solutions. The engineers indirectly indicate 
the same issue. The engineers mainly see this issue, when they need more 
specific information of products e.g. regarding the U-value of the facades, as 
the product information in general are dacumented for the facade in total in 
stead of the local U-values.
There is a common opinion for all participants in the interviews, that the 
cooperation between the architects and the engineers is good, if both parts 
have understanding and shows interest in each other and the common 
project. From the engineers point of view this cooperation is challenged 
by, at one hand some architects, who expect that everything can be solved, 
and on the other hand some engineers, who are unable to communicate on 
behalf of the receiver, so the architects understand. The engineers have a 
tendency to seem negative, which is related to the responsibility they have 
to face when the client call them later on. 
Something doesn’t work. From the architects point of view the cooperation 
fails because some engineers have a negative attitude and do not even want 
to try to calculate and consider on the new ideas.  Besides this, there can be 
a tendency for each profession to ensure a big safety margin in the project 
solving, in order to be sure on their side, which limits the challenging designs. 
Despites the issues related to the communication none of the interviewed 
persons had any ideas of specific measures for improvement. 
Even though the cooperation between architects and engineers is improving, 
and better integrated architecture is accomplished, the cooperation will 
always be complicated due to the specific responsibilities within each 
working field, which are basically the apperance (architects) vs. the technic 
and function (engineers).
==PAGE:52==
44
3. LITERATURE STUDY
3.6 SUB-CONCLUSION
Through the literature studies and interview study the glasshouse has been 
discussed concerning problems and qualities. 
The literature study gives an overall picture of the history of glass, and how 
it has been developing in use and quality through the past decades. The 
history of the glasshouse also gives an understanding of the background for 
design and use of glasshouses today. Through variuos articles, challenges 
and qualities, when designing and using glass facades have been presented. 
In general the problems mentioned are the risks of thermal and visual 
discomfort as well as the purpose of privacy and comfort next to the big 
glazed facades. The litterature study indicates that glass buildings are mainly 
designed for having a commercial and econnomical value rather than for 
having a good working environment.
The interviews with both architects and engineers have given an indication 
of the problems and qualities in the glasshouses as it is today. The interviews 
showed an overall understanding from both the architects and engineers that 
glass has an architectural value due to the transparent material properties, 
which are advantageous regarding daylight and view out.
Regarding the thermal climate there is however high risks of overheating, 
down draft from the windows, draft from increased use of mechanical 
ventilation, risk of limited view out due to the need of solar shading, etc. Even 
though several problems have to be taken into consideration when building 
glasshouses, the overall architectural quality of glashouses are valued so 
high that the glasshouse has come to stay in the building design world wide. 
As the typology has come to stay both architects and engineers constantly 
aims to optimize the building and thereby limit the related problems. 
The past years the cooperation between architects and engineers has been 
improved, according to the person interviewed. The improved coorporation 
has resulted in glasshouses of higher quality regarding regarding the indoor 
climate and with reduced energy consumption. The development of the 
cooporation hasn’t been easy, as there always will be different responsibilities 
among the parts, which results in a mis-match of preferred solutions. 
Another important factor for the coorporation within the building industry 
is the relationship to the suppliers, as they have the products to be used and 
therefore the power of how to develop the products, which based on the 
interviews also have some challenges. 
From the litterature study a list of problems to be further integrated in the 
report has been developed and listed below: 
	
Facade design
	
Daylight 
	
Solar shading
	
Thermal discomfort
==PAGE:53==
45
3. LITERATURE STUDY
==PAGE:54==
Source: [David Leventi Photography]
==PAGE:55==
4. PROCESS IN PRAXIS
==PAGE:56==
48
4. PROCESS
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The thesis follows the process of T30 but also has its own agenda. The 
reason for following the process of T30 is to accommodate the qualities and 
problems related to glasshouses/glass buildings in praxis. The close relation 
between the architects and engineers at the early stages of the process has 
a big influence on the final design and the performance of the building when 
in use. By following the process the outcome of this thesis can give more 
specific and detailed inputs during the process than might be possible to get 
from the engineers due to limitation of time. The thesis can embrace the 
related issues and identified challenges within the project, and at the same 
time be an independent study to support the thesis with further and more 
detailed investigations. 
In the report the process has been illustrated by the following figure 4.1, 
illustrating the process of T30 and the process of the thesis. The process of 
T30 is illustrated by the dates of project meetings with the architects and the 
engineering company. This chapter of the thesis focus on the design process 
in praxis, which is highlighted on the figure, but the figure also shows the 
relation to the thesis and the interaction among these. 
20/1
16/2
5/3
19/3
9/4
Introduction
Basic modelling
Detailed
Litt. study
Method
Interview
21/5
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the interaction between the process of T30 and the thesis.
This chapter covers the process of an actual project through project meetings 
with the architectural firm Lundgaard & Tranberg and the engineering firm 
Steensen Varming. Relevant issues and problems discussed on the meetings 
will be described as well as, how these have influenced the work of the 
thesis. Focus is on the technical investigations, which the engineers and we 
contribute with, and how they are received and further integrated in the 
project by the architets.  
Prior to the description of the process, the case of T30 will be desribed from 
the architectural concept to plan drawings and specific information. 
==PAGE:57==
49
4. PROCESS
4.2 THE CASE T30 IN PROCESS
4.2.1 THE CASE T30
WHO
Architects: Lundgaard & Tranberg
Engineers: Steensen Varming 
WHAT 
The project T30 is a new glasshouse/glass building in Stockholm for 
accomodation of a city centre containing mixed functions, mainly offices but 
also retail stores and restaurants. The architects and engineers work closely 
together in the beginning of the project to optimize the building envelope.
The building contains 12 storeys in total, with retail stores and restaurants on 
the 3 first levels and offices on the rest of the levels. The building is rectangular 
with two large atriums making the main building shaped as a comb around 
the atriums. The atriums are as high as the building and approximately half 
the building width. The atriums are facing the main street. 
From the beginning the slogan from the developer has been ‘Urban Escape’, 
which relates to the wish for a recreative space next to and in relation to 
the existing urban and dynamic cityscape. The architectural concept of the 
building is a floating landscape, which makes it acceptable to differentiate 
from the urban surroundings. It has to be a living building when seen from 
outside, and from inside, it has to relate to the exterior. The employees have 
to get a feeling of working in the treetops, where the building is built on tree 
trunks and the closed partitions in the facades are the treetops. To intensify 
this concept, the size of 3 top levels reduces gradually for each level. The 
concept of the building is illustrated by a sketch drawing, shown on figure 
4.2. 
Figure 4.2: Sketch drawing of the concept of T30.
Towards the atriums a big transparency imitate the light openings in the 
wood. The transparency in the facade will connect the urban dynamic city 
and the new building. The atriums will function as ‘winter gardens’ and be 
the urban escape of an interior outdoor space, by being a recreative area 
with visual contact to both the interior office landscape and the exterior 
urban cityscape. 
The developer has a goal of achieving LEED-platinum certificate for the 
==PAGE:58==
50
4. PROCESS
project, this led to some concern in the beginning of the building because of 
fear that it might compromise the design to have to fulfill this goal. During 
the project this goal was deprioritised and is now only a small part of the 
project. 
The concept of the interior is to create an open and flexible space and 
therefore it is designed to have open plan offices. All the desks are placed 
along the facade to optimise the daylight conditions and further away from 
the facade, some meeting rooms are placed. The total area for all 12 storeys 
is 30155m2. The interior plan for one of the floors can be seen on figure 4.4. 
As described the relation to the surroundings is important, as the building 
is placed in a very urban area, and therefore it is a wish that the building 
provides quality to the surroundings through the design, the atriums and the 
retail, which makes the building accessible for the public. On the following 
figure 4.3 the overall design of the building can be seen in 3D view. 
Figure 4.3: 3d-view of the building. 
HOW
The architects and engineers participated in the competition together 
last fall and won the project. The architects make the design of the entire 
building in prephase and main phase, while the Danish engineers make the 
basic energy simulations to optimise the planning and design of the building. 
When the overall design is made, Swedish engineers will finish the project 
in cooperation with the architects. The switch between the two groups of 
engineers will happen in the late spring, which makes the project deadline 
well suited for the thesis deadline. 
4.2.2 THE CASE IN PROCESS
In the following section, all project meetings are listed and described through 
main points from the meetings. The description of the content of the 
meetings is divided into 3 main sections: Entry, Reflection and Reaction. In 
the section of “Entry” the prerequisites for the meeting are described along 
with the preparations made. The section of “Reflection” covers a description 
==PAGE:59==
51
4. PROCESS
Figure 4.4: Plan drawing of 10th floor 
from the architects. 
1:500
==PAGE:60==
52
4. PROCESS
of issues discussed at the meeting, decisions made and response to the 
prepared material. The last section is “Reaction”, which covers the actions/
reactions the meeting has caused. 
The meetings have identified several issues to be investigated through our 
thesis. The most relevant and urgent investigations have been performed 
during the process and presented at the meetings, and these are desribed 
in the minutes of the meetings, but the meetings have also identified more 
comprehensive and time-consuming issues to be investigated, some pointed 
out by the architects and engineers and others identified by us during the 
process. Due to the extent of some of these investigations, they have not 
been investigated during the process of T30 but afterwards. The interesting 
and comprehensive issues for further investigation, which will be performed 
in chapter “5. Technical Investigations”, are listed in the green boxes in order 
of occurrence after each project meeting. 
For all project meetings the attendees are mentioned only by profession, as 
the project is anonymised due to request from the developer of the project. 
FIRST PROJECT MEETING 20/1-15
Attendees: Four architects, one landscape architect, two engineers and the 
two of us.
Entry: 
The meeting was the first meeting of the project in the new year and the first 
possibility to introduce the thesis for the architects. At this stage it was not 
yet decided, whether the project should be combined with our thesis. 
Reflection: 
At the meeting the architects explained the state-of-the-art of the project for 
all participants. The architects also stated that they wanted a “glasshouse”, 
and by that statement everybody knew the basic idea of the building and 
what to aim for. 
Figure 4.5: Rendering from the architects, shows the office with direct acces to the terrace in the atrium.
This led to a brief discussion about the problems regarding the light related 
==PAGE:61==
53
4. PROCESS
to the big glazed facades. When discussing the glasshouse the atriums were 
the main topic regarding the indoor climate, because it is not only important 
for the architectural value but also for the engineering investigations and the 
plants to be selected by the landscape architect. Not all plants can endure 
frost but some need rather cold nights. The atriums are in the architectural 
term a winter garden as seen in figure 4.6. The architectural concept of the 
winter gardens is a high transparency to the surrounding urban environment, 
and the architects therefore suggest having a 1-layered glass facade between 
the atrium and the exterior. The engineers only see the solution with 1-layer 
glass as a possibility, when having an unheated winter garden, and at the 
same time they underline the high risk of condensation on the internal side 
of the glass. Due to the risk of condensation, which is not wanted by either 
engineers or architects, the idea of only 1-layer glass is put aside until later 
investigations have been performed.
At the end of the meeting the engineers bring up the developer’s aim for 
achieving a LEED-platinum certificate for the building to attract more renters. 
From the developers point of view, it’s desirable to get as many squaremeters 
to rent out as possible, and therefore the developer is questioning the sizes 
of the atriums. Consequently the architects are interested in getting some 
daylight investigations, so they can use this as a reason for not reducing the 
sizes of the atriums further. 
Reaction: 
For the next meeting the architects have to send updated drawings and 
models to the engineers, so they can do some daylight investigations of the 
daylight at the critical office levels. Both engineers and architects have to 
investigate the requirements for achieving a LEED-platinum certificate.
PROJECT MEETING 16/2-15
Attendees: Four architects, two engineers and the two of us.
Entry: 
Prior to this meeting the case T30 was selected as subject for the thesis, and 
now the real work began. The first step was to build a very simplified IESVE 
model of the atriums with the offices as adjacent rooms and without any 
kind of ventilation etc. in order to investigate the temperatures in the atrium 
on the coldest and warmest days, as well as the yearly temperatures related 
to the outdoor temperatures. The results were brought to the meeting to 
show the architects and to start the technical discussions. 
Figure 4.7 shows the simplified model of T30 from IESVE, with the atriums 
and the adjacent rooms. 
For this meeting the engineers had prepared some simple daylight 
investigations for the most critical floors.
Figure 4.6: Rendering from the archi­
tects, shows the concept of the winter 
garden.
==PAGE:62==
54
4. PROCESS
Figure 4.7: Simple 3D model from IESVE showing the atriums and the offices as adjacent rooms.
Reflection: 
At the meeting the architects pointed out that the first priority was to optimise 
the soft values of the building to achieve a good design, and then later the 
concerns of achieving LEED-platinum certificate could be considered. 
Furthermore the architectural idea of the atriums, or as described by the 
architects, the winter gardens, were discussed concerning their use, the 
climate, and the visual and physical connection to the urban context.  
This was the first meeting, where the supervisor of our thesis attended in the 
case, and he showed and explained our output from the IESVE simulations, 
which led to new discussions of the winter gardens, and a discussion about 
the type of glass needed to accommodate both the architectural ideas and 
the engineers’ requests. 
In IESVE the building is divided into different climate zones to be able to 
distinguish the thermal conditions. In the simple model, the atrium has 
been divided into zones for each level, which is indicated by the transparent 
squares on figure 4.7. The offices are modelled as adjacent zones indicated 
by the blue/purple area on figure 4.7.  Level 3  and 4 are connecting the two 
atriums, and therefore they are divided into three zones; south, middle and 
north. In figure 4.8 the northern atrium is evaluated, as it is the most critical 
when looking at the max. and min. temperatures in the results.  
From the results in IESVE, seen in figure 4.8, the temperatures could be very 
low during winter times, which the architects found too low, and therefore 
they discussed having heating in the atriums as well. The entire concept of 
the atriums were up for discussion, whether it should be a place, where it’s 
warm all year and people didn’t need their jackets, or a colder and more 
natural ventilated environment, where jackets still could be needed in some 
periods of the year. The architects didn’t seem to be clarified about this yet, 
so no final conclusions were made at this meeting. 
==PAGE:63==
55
4. PROCESS
Figure 4.8: Shows the percentage temperature division in the atrium. Where:
“Level 10N” =  The zone placed on level 10 for the northern atrium.
“Level 6N” = The zone placed on level 6 for the northern atrium.
“Level 3M” = The middle zone placed on level 3 between the northern and southern atrium.
“Level 3N” = The zone placed on level 3 for the northern atrium.
The architectural idea is to have high transparency in the atriums to avoid 
sleepy and dimmed light, which energy efficient glazing can cause. The 
main concerns from the engineering point of view are the U-value and 
g-value of the glass. During this discussion it was considered whether to use 
1-/2-/3-layers of glass, and if low-iron glass should be used to increase the 
transparency and decrease the tint of green colour in the glass, and thereby 
achieve an outdoor feeling in the winter gardens. 
The engineers explained their concern for the high amount of glass in the 
facade, and the architects stated their love for the glasshouse. The architects 
try to accomodate the engineering point of view by considering the facade 
design, and whether to have vertical massive sections between the glazed 
sections or having parapets in the facade. The architects see both pros and 
cons for using parapets.The employees sitting next to the facade can feel 
exposed to the urban context, if there is glass from floor to ceiling, but at the 
same time they are concerned if the view from workingstations in row 2 or 
3 will be too limited. Furthermore it should be considered, how the window 
design appears from the outside to preserve the architectural concept of 
treetops. For the facades related to the offices it is discussed, how many 
rows of workstations can be achieved depending on the type of glazing and 
the placement of the glass in the facade.  
Reaction: 
Prior to the next meeting the architects had to ask the developer whether 
we were allowed to use the case T30 as a part of the thesis. Secondly the 
architects had to send the drawing material to the engineers, so they could 
make further investigations of the daylight conditions of level 5 and 8. 
The architects have to concider the concept of the winter gardens, wether it 
will be unheated or heated. Parallel to that consideration the engineers have 
to investigate the  indoor climate in the atriums, with the temperatures and 
[%]
[0C]
==PAGE:64==
56
4. PROCESS
glass types as the main factors. 
To make analysis concerning the needed glass types, the online program 
Spectrum Pilkington was used. It was decided that the IESVE simulations 
have to be improved by adding natural ventilation and heating. 
Subjects for further investigations: 
	
Temperatures in atrium - Investigations of the expected indoor 
	
climate in the atriums depending on type of glazing in the outer 
	
facade, roof and the inner walls towards the offices as well as the 
	
setpoint for heating in the atriums. 
	
	
Ventilation in atrium - The atriums have no cooling system to save 	
	
energy and instead natural ventilation is used. This is another 
	
subject for study to find the most optimal places for the openings, 
	
and how many openings are necessary. The natural ventilation can 
	
be investigated from temperatures and air velocity in the atrium. 
PROJECT MEETING 05/3-15
Attendees: Three architects, one engineer (our supervisor) and the two of us.
Entry:
At this meeting we had a lot of material to present to the group. At the previous 
meeting it was decided to have some sort of heating in the atriums to secure 
it can be used the entire year. To avoid a too high energy consumption, a 
temperature of 15 0C as a minimum during the day was considered, and 
planned to be investigated. Outputs showing warmest and coldest day, as 
well as the yearly energy consumption were shown. The simulations were 
based upon the defined window types from Spectrum Pilkington for both 1-, 
2- and 3-layer glass [Appendix B - Pilkington Spectrum]. Natural ventilation 
was assigned in the model in the facade of level 1 and 3 in the atriums and 
in the roof at level 9 and 10. Figure 3.9 shows the percentage temperature 
division for the glass combination 2.2+2.2.
Figure 4.9: Percentage temperature division in the atrium for type 2.2+2.2. Level 10N, 6N and 3N are 
the zones in the northern atrium at the given level and L3M is the zone in between the two atriums at 
level 3.
[%]
[0C]
==PAGE:65==
57
4. PROCESS
Reflection:
Our outputs from the IESVE simulations were well received by both engineers 
and architects. Suddenly we were more a part of the project, even though 
we hadn’t received any approval from the developer. The investigations led 
to a discussion about other combinations of glass types and consideration 
about the minimum temperature in the atrium. 
Three solutions for minimum temperature were discussed: 9, 15 and 
20 0C. At first mainly 9 0C was considered, as this would be considered as 
unheated space according to the Swedish building regulations, below 10 0C, 
which does not count when calculating the total energy consumption of the 
building. Due to the low temperatures showed in the results from the IESVE 
simulations the architects became more interested in a higher temperature 
in the atriums. This debate was leading back to discussing the basic concept 
of the atriums, whether they should function as an outdoor and recreational 
space or a more suitable indoor space, which could also be used for meeting 
rooms. 
The window types were discussed in relation to energy and daylight. The 
window type for the offices had been pretty fixed on a 3-layered window, 
while the discussion had been a bit back and forth in relation to the window 
type in the atriums, both towards the street and internally towards the 
offices. The architects desired as high transparency as possible towards the 
street to reduce the barriere between inside and outside, but a 1-layered 
window would give condensation problems and was also unwise in relation 
to energy, if heating up the atriums to 20 0C was decided. A 3-layered window 
was more or less not an option, since this would make the transparency too 
low, and also reduce the quality of the daylight. The options came down to 
2-layered windows, where one type had a low content of iron (2.2) and the 
other type was “regular” (2.3) both having the same U-value of 1.1 W/m2K. 
The choice fell on 2.2 since this would provide the best quality of daylight. 
The internal glazing towards the offices was chosen to be 2.2 as well to let in 
as much daylight as possible, and as the atriums were a kind of ‘buffer zone’, 
this was considered a good solution in relation to energy as well.  
Reaction:
For the next meeting we decided to investigate the influence of the three 
different temperatures in the atriums, at 9, 15 or 20 0C, energywise, based 
on the 2.2+2.2 glass type combination. 
Subjects for further investigations: 
	
Temperature in atrium - Further investigation of the heating 
	
set-points in the atrium, how it influences the offices and the total 
	
energy consumption of the building.
	
	
Glass distribution - Investigate how to distribute the glass on the 
	
facades depending on the horizontal angle from the surrounding 
	
buildings. 
	
Glass types - Further investigation of the glasstypes selected by 
	
the architects and how i affects the temperatures. 
	
==PAGE:66==
58
4. PROCESS
PROJECT MEETING 19/3-15
Attendee: Two architects, one engineer (our supervisor) and the two of us.
Entry: 
Our supervisor at Steensen Varming was making the building in detail in IES, 
and therefore main responsible for simulations. We had made the model 
as well in IES, with some simplifications. We assisted with some energy 
calculations to see how much the different heating set points influenced the 
energy consumption.
Figure 4.10: New IESVE-model, simplified T30
Reflection: 
In relation to defining the window area on the detailed model in IES, the 
window area was brought up for discussion, since it hadn’t been discussed 
in detail. The architects expressed their desire to keep as much window area 
as possible, but it was necessary to discuss their thoughts and figure out the 
distribution. The architects had a wish for an average glazed area of 50-60% 
of the facades, with most window area on the first levels, and decreasing 
upwards, because there are no surrounding buildings to shadow. Taking 
into regard the retail and the limited amount of daylighton the first levels, a 
glazing area of 100% would be optimal, gradually decreasing level by level. 
Figure 4.11 shows the graduation of glazed area proposed by the architects 
as a start. 
The building design is quite special with a lot of offset levels, which will 
complicate the construction and increase the transmission area, so the 
discussion came up, why the design was made so complex. The architects 
explained that it was a matter of architectural value. Having a unique, 
interesting design makes the building attractive, which can’t be measured 
directly against the extra cost of construction and loss of heat,  because it’s 
unmeasurable but never the less important. So the architecture brings value 
to the building. This can also be transferred to the companies resident in the 
building. Firstly the building doesn’t need the same level of marketing, and 
secondly it’s beneficial for the image of the companies.  
Our supervisor presented how he had built up the model in IESVE, and the 
energy simulations of the heating set points were discussed. The difference 
in the energy consumption between heating to 9 0C and 15 0C was quite 
Level 12
Level 11
Level 10
Level 9
Level 8
Level 7
Level 6
Level 5
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
100 %
100 %
100 %
85 %
85 %
70 %
70 %
55 %
55 %
40 %
40 %
40 %
Figure 4.11: Graduation of 
glazed areas, defined by the 
architects
==PAGE:67==
59
4. PROCESS
small, while it increased some more for heating to 20 0C.
At this stage of detail it’s difficult to evaluate the true impact of this extra 
consumption, seen in relation to the big picture and it was considered to 
be acceptable. Also taking into consideration that the architects were more 
clarified in concern to the usage of the atriums and the required indoor 
climate, which wouldn’t work satisfyingly with a colder climate in the winter, 
and besides this wasn’t what the developer wanted. 
Until this point the concept of the atriums had been focused on the 150C, also 
because the architects had valued the concept of having different climates, 
so the feeling of being outside was more pronounced but in praxis it wouldn’t 
work. Therefore they wished to see the same simulations shown for the other 
heating set points, which showed the temperature for max. temperature 
and minimum temperature as well as equinox and the distribution of hours 
within different temperature ranges. 
Knowing the window types the architects also wished to see some new 
daylight simulations, to see how the windows would affect the daylight 
distribution. 
Reaction:
We were going to make the simulations showing the temperatures in 
the atriums with a heating set point of 20 0C and make updated daylight 
simulations illustrated on the plan drawings. 
Subjects for further investigations: 
	
Daylight - There are several problem areas in relation to obtaining 
	
satisfying daylight conditions according to Danish guidelines. In 
	
order to optimise the daylight conditions, a lot of parameters can 
	
be investigated further, both in relation to the facade and the 
	
atriums. Design of the windows can have a big impact on the 
	
daylight, type of glazing, materials used in relation to reflections, 
	
smaller changes in the geometry of the atriums etc.  
	
Solar shading - Investigation of the need for solar shading as well 
	
as the accompanying effects on the indoor climate and energy 
	
consumption. 	 
	
Radiant asymmetry - Investigations of the thermal comfort next to 
	
the glass facade.
PROJECT MEETING 09/4-15
Attendee: Two architects, one engineer (our supervisor) and the two of us.
Entry: 
We had performed different simulations concerning daylight investigations in 
Velux Daylight Visualizer. Both regarding the exact design as well as different 
parameter studies in concern to reflectances and window design. 
The week after this meeting one of the architects was going to a meeting 
with the developer, and wanted our supervisor to participate in the meeting 
as well. The developer had been a bit sceptic in concern to the environment 
==PAGE:68==
60
4. PROCESS
in the atriums, and the architect wanted our supervisor to participate 
to convince the developer and his team, that it was realistic to create the 
requested environment, based on the simulations performed. 
Reflection:
Our supervisor started to present what he had been doing since the last 
meeting. The detailed IES model was almost completed, and he described 
how he had come up with a plan for the decreasing in glazing area level by 
level. He had made a solar analysis on the facades in IESVE to see, how much 
light was reaching the facade on each level. Based on this he had made a 
proposal for the distribution of the glazing area on each floor.  Figure 4.12 is 
showing the levels of graduation of glazed areas. 
We presented the investigations, we had performed and described that we 
to a great extent had used the same approach as our supervisor to decide 
the glazing area. Our  approach was, however, a bit different. We had taken 
our starting point in a method developed in the “Design Guide - Daylighting 
Design for Urban Master Planners!” [Wille, 2008]. Here we had defined 
the desired penetration lengths of daylight in relation to workstations and 
then we could find the horizontal angles from the surrounding buildings. By 
using these two parameters the actual penetration length for graphs with 
specific glazing areas could be found. For further explanation see section 
“5.2.5 Daylight Study - Design of Facades”.  Figure 4.13 is showing the levels 
of graduation of glazed areas, found by this investigation. 
The architects were positive towards this approach as well, and were positive 
towards the final daylight simulation. We saw some issues in concern to 
reaching an adequate daylight level for the 3 rows of workstations but the 
architects’ focus were not on the daylight, probably because Sweden doesn’t 
have the same daylight requirements as Denmark. We showed a plan of the 
daylight distribution, which was combined with a plan drawing of the interior, 
so it was easier visually to relate to the results, and the architects found this 
very illustrative. 
Figure 3.14: Daylight factor of furnished level 8 in T30. 
The meeting was affected by the coming meeting with the developer, and 
the architects and our supervisor decided a strategy for the meeting. In this 
Level 12 
Level 11
Level 10
Level 9
Level 8
Level 7
Level 6
Level 5
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
100 %
100 %
100 %
70 %
70 %
70 %
65 %
55 %
45 %
40 %
35 %
35 %
Figure 4.12: Graduation of 
glazed areas, defined by the 
engineers.
Level 12
Level 11
Level 10
Level 9
Level 8
Level 7
Level 6
Level 5
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
100 %
100 %
75 %
70 %
60 %
60 %
60 %
55 %
55 %
55 %
50 %
50 %
Figure 4.13: Graduation of 
glazed areas, defined by us 
in the thesis
==PAGE:69==
61
4. PROCESS
connection there was a concern that the average U-value couldn’t live up 
to the requirements, so this was discussed, and our supervisor would make 
some calculations on this subject.  
Reaction:
Our supervisor and the architects wanted to bring some of the results, we 
had found, to the meeting with the developer, so these were sent to our 
supervisor, who included them in his presentation for the meeting.  
Subjects for further investigations:
	
Solar irradiation - Investigation of the solar irradiation on the 
	
building in relation to the distribution of glazing in the facade. 
	
Energy consumption - Investigate whether the building fulfill the 
	
building requirements. 	
FINAL PROJECT MEETING 21/5-15
Attendee: Two architects, one engineer (our supervisor) and the two of us.
Entry:
The outcome of the meeting with the developer in Stockholm was good. There 
had been some discussions about U-values and the general differences in the 
energy requirements in Denmark and Sweden etc., which was explained to 
us by our supervisor after the meeting. The period from the previous project 
meeting and today’s meeting had been long, and the project had progressed 
a lot. The architects had developed the entire facade in details, and various 
detailed investigations and calculations of the common U-value of the entire 
thermal envelope were made prior to this meeting. The latest elevation of 
the east facade of T30 is showed in figure 4.15.
We brought our daylight investigations to the meeting in case the architects 
and our supervisor wanted a closer look.
Figure 4.15: The latest elevation of the east facade of T30 from the architects. 
==PAGE:70==
62
4. PROCESS
Reflection:
The architects showed an updated elevation of the facade to illustrate the 
concept for the thermal envelope as a glasshouse. The facade cladding are 
supposed to be glass with closed insulated parties between the glass parties 
to create a spotted impression from outside at the same time as the glass 
facade gives a uniform surface. The three top levels, level 10-12, were now 
designed with a parapet, reducing the glazing area.
During the meeting the discussions included many simulations made by the 
Swedish engineers, since the project will be handed over from the Danish 
engineers. The main discussion of the meeting was concerning the facade 
design and the related U-values. In general the Swedish engineers have a big 
risk margin compared to the Danish engineers, and this can be explained by 
the difference in achieving final approval for the building in Sweden. In Sweden 
the building has to be tested when in use, to document the performance is 
as defined, whereas in Denmark the building only has to be documented 
before it’s built and no following measurements will be required. Therefore 
the U-values suggested by the Swedish engineers are in general higher. The 
Swedish engineers had come up with an U-value for the insulated parties in 
the facade of 0.24 W/m2K, which our supervisor found high, and assumed a 
value of 0.15 W/m2K was possible to reach. After having a closer look at the 
details for the chosen system for the insulated parties a better understanding 
for the high U-values was reached. Our supervisor, however, still expressed 
that there were room for improvement. 
For the next simulations they will consider an U-value at 0.2 W/m2K, when 
having a module span at 1.2 m. 
To improve the U-value for the closed parties, the size of the windows 
could be increased to 2.4 m instead of 1.2 m, hereby the line losses would 
decrease, but this would have a big influence of the architectural impression, 
so the architects will have to test it in the facade before deciding. To keep 
the architectural impression, fake mullions could be used on the middle of 
the window to keep the visual grid at 1.2 m. To limit the heat transmission 
through the frames, the architects and our supervisor suggested to use 
wooden profiles or fiberglass instead of the more regular aluminium profiles, 
but this is still being considered until next phase of the project. The glass 
itself has a U-value at 0.6 W/m2K and including frames it is approximately 0.9 
W/m2K.
The selected facade system had been used before by the architects, but 
they had never previously had to fulfill such high energy requirements, to 
fulfill at the same time. The developer aims for a yearly energy consumption 
of 50 kWh/m2, and currently it is approximately 60 kWh/m2 based on 
IESVE simulations, which means that optimization is needed. The DHW 
and ventilation can not be decreased, but for artificial lighting the energy 
consumption will be decreased in praxis, since no dimming profile according 
to illuminance level are included in the simulations. In total the energy 
consumption for all equipment is 40-50 W/m2. The overall U-value for the 
closed facade parts will be increased from 0.15 W/m2K to approximately 0.2 
W/m2K. At this time no solar shading is added in the simulations, except for 
the coating in the glazing. At the meeting the architects and our supervisor 
agreed that at least some sort of internal curtain was needed. 
==PAGE:71==
63
4. PROCESS
Another important factor is the people load in the offices. At the moment 
it has been calculated to 12 m2 per person, since this was the aim from the 
developer. It was discussed at the meeting to increase the squaremeters per 
person, since this was assumed to be more normal. For Denmark you usually 
have 20 or 25 m2 per person.
At the end of the meeting the entire concept of building a glasshouse was 
questioned. Will it be possible to build a glasshouse today with so many strict 
requirements to indoor climate and energy? The task of designing a glass 
house is way much more difficult for the architects today than 100 years 
ago, but the architectural values are big, so the architects aim to keep the 
typology. To make the glasshouse a realistic building concept in the future, 
will require more focus on human values and to be able to measure the values 
to scale it. The aim of achieving a LEED-platinum certificate for the building 
can have many limitations for the design and the human values but gives 
the technical parameters a high value. When using LEED, focus is more the 
economical purpose of renting out expensive square meters than ensuring 
a sustainable building with a good working environment. For instance there 
are only very few points to achieve in LEED for good daylight conditions and 
view out for the employees, which are very important factors for a good 
working environment. This led the discussion to the daylight condition in 
the building. We explained our daylight investigations with focus on the two 
different facade and window designs, and for the effect of having a parapet 
in the atrium as well as changing the internal reflectances of the parapet. 
Our investigations were very well received, and the architects saw a potential 
of introducing the investigations to the Swedish engineers.
Basic model    		
Vertical division	
Parapets
Level 4		
	
Level 4		
	
Level 4
Average DF 6.3%     Average DF 6.1%         Average DF 6.3%	  
Figure 4.16: Daylight conditions in level 4, with different facade designs
==PAGE:72==
64
4. PROCESS
Reaction:
During the following couple of weeks, the project will be handed over to the 
Swedish engineers, and therefore our supervisor has to make a report with 
the state of the art of the technical part of the project. The Danish engineers 
will still be used at a limited level, and as support for further achitectural 
ideas until the project is introduced to the Swedish engineers, as they are 
less flexible and openminded towards new ideas from the architects. In this 
process the Danish engineers will then be a link between the architects and 
the more classical sweedish engineers. 
The architects asked us for letting them use our daylight investigations in 
their further work, and it will be included in the common technical report. 
From the final meeting the following parameters will be further investigated: 
Subjects for further investigations:
	
Solar shading - Further investigations of the influence of solar 
	
shading at the energy consumption. 
	
Glare - Investigate if there is high risk of visual discomfort related to 
	
glare at the workstations. This also has an influence of the need for 
	
solar shading. 
	
Percentage of glazing - Investigation of the glasshouse with solar 
	
shading compared with the building with less glass in the facade.	
==PAGE:73==
65
4. PROCESS
4.3 SUB-CONCLUSION
The process and the project of T30 has developed a lot during the past four 
months, when following it in close relation to the thesis. It developed from a 
very conceptual building designed by the architects, through several phases 
considering the concept of the indoor climate in the atriums, geometry, 
materials and not at least facade and window design. In close cooperation 
with the engineers it finally ended up with fixed geometry, a strategy for 
the indoor climate in the atriums and offices and very detailed deesign 
concepts for the facade. At the start of the process it was the architects 
having a project, but soon the engineers and we got involved in the process 
work, and it became a common project. Based on our thesis we were able to 
contribute and make some additional and more detailed investigations, than 
possible for the engineers, which at times pulled the discussion further both 
regarding conceptual and technical issues. 
OUR CONTRIBUTIONS 
FACADE DESIGN OF THE OFFICES 
We mainly pushed to the idea of when it is a glasshouse and when it is no 
longer a glasshouse, which gradually forced the architects to decide the 
concepts of the glass facades. Mainly focusing upon the windows and the 
insulated parts.
In this discussion we did some additional studies of the facade design and 
how the placement of the used glazing influenced the daylight conditions, 
the overall indoor climate and the energy consumption of the building.
DAYLIGHT IN ATRIUMS
Throughout the process we made daylight studies of the project, considering 
the different types of glazing for both the atriums and the offices. These 
studies were well received from both architects and engineers and used for 
the selection of glazing types. 
The architects used our daylight investigations as to document the existing 
sizes of the atriums, as the developer aimed for smaller atriums to achiece 
more squaremeters for offices. Our contribution had also an influence on 
the project and the discussions between the architects and the developer. 
Furthermore some of our outputs from the simulations were brought to 
meetings in Sweden with the developer and were used in the final report 
submitted to the Swedish engineers and the developer. 
CILMATE IN ATRIUMS
Several simulations were done in IESVE by us through the process as well. 
Through these simulations we investigated the connection between the 
type of glazing and the indoor climate as well as energy consumption. These 
studies resulted in some qualified solutions for the heating set point, the 
degree of natural ventilation and the type of glazing in the atrium. 
By introducing these studies to the architects, they were challenged to 
reconsider the concept for the thermal conditions within the atrium; if it 
should be a winter garden, referring to a climate similar to outdoor, or if it 
rather should be a heated atrium with indoor conditions.  	
==PAGE:74==
Source: [Sculman, 1960]
==PAGE:75==
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
==PAGE:76==
68
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter the analysed outputs of the previous chapters, process and 
literature studies will be confirmed and possibly clarified into technical 
investigations. This is illustrated by figure 5.1. 
20/1
16/2
5/3
19/3
9/4
Introduction
Basic modelling
Detailed
Litt. study
Method
Interview
21/5
Figure 5.1: The green process is in focus, symbolising the technical investigations. 
The figure illustrates the interaction between the yellow chapter “3. Literature 
Studies” and the blue chapter “4. Process in praxis” and how output from 
both chapters forms the basis and clarifies the subjects to be contained in 
the technical investigations, symbolised by the green colour. 
The clarified issues for further investigations, have overall been divided into 
two sections. The first section is concerned with investigations of daylight 
while the other section concerns investigations of daylight, while the other 
section conserns investigations of the indoor environment and the energy 
consumption. 
Investigations of the daylight conditions was a continuous subject through 
the process of T30. During the process there was a need to get an overall 
exposition of the daylight conditions, but optimisation of this wasn’t top 
priority at this stage of the project. The investigations performed during the 
process and additional relevant investigations to get into depth with the 
subject and clarify the possible optimisation areas will be described. 
One of the general issues expressed by the interviewees about building 
in glass was the related contrasts of the light. In extension to the daylight 
investigations the problem areas for glare issues will also be investigated. 
The method of analysing the daylight based on the Daylight Factor have 
certain limitations, especially when evaluating a glass building where the 
daylight is an essential parameter. During the interviews the method of UDI 
was mentioned for being a more useful method, and therefore this method 
has been used to investigate the daylight conditions as well for certain 
relevant designs. 
The section of indoor environment and energy consumptions is concerns 
investigations in relation to the configuration of the building envelope. Glass 
types and facade designs are investigated to see, how the indoor climate and 
energy consumption are affected. During the process of T30 there was a lot 
of reflections concerning glass types for the atrium and the facade, which 
==PAGE:77==
69
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
were not investigated into details at the time. For the facade a couple of 
designs were discussed, but the effects of these were not investigated at 
the time either. The discussions about glass types and facade design, will be 
further investigated to clarify these issues by using the dynamic simulation 
tool IESVE. 
Additional investigations concerned optimisation of solar shading. This is 
an essential subject when working with glass buildings, and also a subject 
discussed at the interviews. It is a big subject to cover, but optimisation in 
relation to investigations in IESVE will be performed to optimise the model. 
Furthermore the glazing areas of a glassbuilding will be investigated. The 
qualities and issues of glassbuildings have been a subject for debate from 
the start of the thesis and investigations are made to see how and how much 
the overall indoor environment and energy consumption are affected, when 
decreasing the glazing areas step by step. 
Another subject of issue from the interviews was the concern for radiant 
temperature asymmetry, when having big glazed areas, and this matter will 
also be investigated. 
Having glass buildings often include atriums or other big entrance areas of 
glass. The T30 project has two big atriums, and a great deal of concern has 
been directed towards the possible indoor environment, due to the wish to 
decrease the energy consumption. In stead of cooling, natural ventilation 
has been the used strategy, and simple investigations in relation to the most 
optimal openings and air velocities in the atriums have been performed. 
To complete this chapter investigations combining the results of the most 
optimal solutions will be performed and evaluated. 
In the next section we will introduce to the model, which has been used for 
the performed investigations.
5.1.1 INTRODUCTION TO MODEL 
The technical investigations, which will be described through this chapter, 
are based on models with identical geometry. 
The original geometry and design of T30 is complex and adjusted to this 
project, especially in the atriums, which have offset levels all the way up.  In 
order to make the model more general, the geometry is simplified so it could 
bear resemblance with similar buildings. Thereby the results can be used 
generally, and parameter variations can more easily be performed.
The geometry in the atriums is simplified, so the offset levels are equaled 
out creating plane facades in the atriums and a rectangular shape. At some 
places the outer facades had some small offset levels, which are also equaled 
out, so the outer facades are completely plane, see figure 5.2. 
==PAGE:78==
70
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 5.2: 3d view of the model in IESVE. 
The building contains more functions. Level 1-3 have shopping facilities and 
restaurants, while level 4-12 are for offices. On level 1-2 the atriums are more 
slim, because they are entryways containing escalators. On level 3 the area 
between the atriums is removed so they are connected. Level 4 have a small 
passage between the two atriums facing the eastern facade, but otherwise 
level 4-10 have the same plan layout, while the two last levels are reduced 
in size, as seen on figure 5.2. The investigations in this project are focused 
on the use of offices, and therefore the 3 lowest floors will be disregarded. 3 
levels are chosen for further investigations. These are level 4, which are the 
lowest placed office level, level 6, more or less in the middle of the building 
and in the same height as the surrounding buildings on the eastern facade, 
and level 9, which is the highest placed level still having the “regular” plan 
layout, and totally free of the surrounding buildings.
On the following figure the plan layout is shown for level 1-2, and the 
“regular” plan for level 4-10, they can be seen on figure 5.3. 
                     
	
        Plan for level 1-2.	
         	
         Plan for level 4-10.
                           Figure 5.3: Plan layout of the levels. 
==PAGE:79==
71
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Longitudinal section of the building and the surroundings.
Figure 5.4: Sections of the building and the surrounding. 
Cross section of the building and the surroundings. 
==PAGE:80==
72
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.2 DAYLIGHT INVESTIGATIONS
To evaluate the indoor climate and consider the placing of workstations in 
T30, the daylight factor is an important factor to take into consideration, as 
the daylight can contribute to better working environment and health for the 
employees. In Denmark the demand for light at a workplace is defined as a 
minimum daylight factor of 2%, which will be the guideline for the daylight 
studies of T30 [SBi 230]. The studies are based on simulations performed in 
Velux Daylight Visualizer (VDV), with imported models from SketchUp. 
In the following the selected settings for reflectances and transmittances etc. 
will be described. 
REFLECTANCES
All reflections of the surfaces have to be defined in VDV. Some of these 
reflections are general for all the simulations, and some will be varied during 
the process. The guideline [SBi 230] has some general guidelines for some 
reflectances but these are quite strict and not corresponding to the case of 
T30, and therefore some have been changed as listed in the table 5.1 below.
[SBi 230, Table 11]
T30
Floor
0.05 (old)
0.25 (new)
0.2
Ceiling
0.7
0.6
Parapets
0.7-0.9 (new)
0.4 (old)
0.4, 0.6 and 0.8
Columns
0.1-0.35 (dark grey)
0.2
Terrain
0.1
Surrounding buildings
0.25-0.35
0.3 and 0.6
Table 5.1: Overview of the used reflectances.
LIGHT TRANSMITTANCES FOR WINDOWS
As a prior study for the daylight investigations, different types of glazing have 
been investigated to see the differences in relation to the demands from the 
architects and the engineers. The investigation is a way to see how the two 
different disciplinary approaches can meet. The architects stated that high 
light transmittance and a high transparency in the atrium would be preferred 
as an architectural quality in the project, whereas the glazings for the offices 
only had to fulfill a high light transmittance to accomplish a good working 
environment and reach the amount of workstations, which the developer 
aims for. The engineers are in general interested in a low U-value and a rather 
low g-value. To accomplish these different requirements, the online glass-
program Pilkington Spectrum [NSG group, Pilkington] is used to combine and 
determine some optimal solutions for T30. The wanted types of glass panes, 
coatings and gas is defined in the program, and then it calculates the total 
values for the final solution for the glass. A good parameter for this program 
is, that only possible combinations are available. From this study four types 
of glass were selected, which can be seen in table 5.2, as well as the selected 
glass panes and coatings. 
==PAGE:81==
73
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Glass type
Thickness
[mm]
Ug-value
[W/m2K]
g-value
[-]
LT-value
[%]
1.1
1 layer
Low-iron glass
8
5.6
0.9
91
2.2
2 layer energy 
low-iron glass
1 Low E coating
6/16 Argon/6*
1.1
0.65
82
2.3
2 layer energy regular
Clear float glass
1 Low E coating
6/16 Argon/6*
1.1
0.59
77
3.1
3 layer energy regular
Clear float glass
1 low E coating
6/16 Ar­
gon/4/16 
Argon/6*
0.9
0.54
70
Table 5.2: Overview of the values for the used glass types.
In the following daylight investigations type 1.1, 2.2 and 3.1 are investigated 
for the atrium with different combinations, and type 2.2, 2.3 and 3.1 are 
investigated for the external facades of the building. The daylight analysis 
is based on simplified models, with no thickness of the walls and no frames 
around the windows and thereby no resulting shading of the window. This 
will of course have an impact on the daylight in the building but since all the 
investigations are performed with the same level of detail, it won’t influence 
on the results from the different investigations.
In VDV the only factor to vary for the glazing in these simulations is the light 
transmittance.
LOCATION
VDV is dependent on the weather data from the specific location, the chosen 
location for all simulations are therefore set as Stockholm, Bromma. This 
location is the closest possible location to Stockholm city.
CAMERA SETTINGS
For all simulations in plan view the camera settings will be 850 mm above 
floor level, which corresponds to the surface of a desktop. The daylight 
simulation will be investigated for level 4, 6 and 9, as they all represent the 
office space in T30, level 4 has the most limited daylight conditions due to 
the surrounding buildings, level 6 is just at level with the top levels of the 
surrounding buildings, and level 9 has the same plan-layout but is free of 
the surrounding buildings. All three levels are interesting to investigate for 
critical daylight conditions. For the three investigated levels, the height of the 
camera setting from ground level are listed to get an idea of the dimensions, 
they can be seen in the following table 5.3.
Level 4
Level 6
Level 9
Camera Settings
16550 mm
23950 mm
35050 mm
Table 5.3: Height of the camera.
SIMULATIONS
In order to distinguish between the different glass types in relation to the 
associated daylight conditions, the first simulations are investigating this 
==PAGE:82==
74
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
aspect. Based on the simulations, glazing types for a ‘Basic Model’ will be 
found, which will lay the foundation for the following parameter simulations 
of daylight conditions. 
Each simulation has been performed for 3 levels in the building, level 4, 
level 6 and level 9 illustrated by figures with the distribution of the daylight 
factor. All the results can be seen in “Appendix D.1 - Daylight study of T30”. 
In the results of the simulations, with closely related parameter variations 
the illustrations of the daylight distribution will only be shown for level 4 and 
to see the relation to the starting point, level 4 from the basic model will be 
shown and indicated with a green frame. 
The working stations are placed next to the facades, with a distance of 0.6 
m to the external facade, as the guideline for the occupied zone states [DS 
469], so the further in the daylight reaches the better. On the plan drawings 3 
working stations are placed next to each other in most areas, which equals a 
depth of approximately 5 meters. On the illustrations, columns are indicated, 
which are placed with a distance of 6 meters. This gives an easy overview of 
the dimensions. 
It is difficult to see the small changes in the penetration length of the 
daylight from simulation to simulation, and  therefore the dimension of the 
penetration length are measured to the limit of a daylight factor of 2% and 
indicated on the figures as well. There are four measurement points for the 
simulations concerning the facades, one for each facade, placed in the middle 
of the facade lenght. Three measurement points are selected for the atriums, 
one for each side, and the smallest atrium are chosen to give the worst case 
scenario. On figure 5.5 and 5.6 the placement of the measurement points 
are indicated. 
The illustrations of the results from the simulations will be followed by a 
table where the average daylight factor measured for the whole floor for all 
3 levels is listed for each simulation and for the basic model. 
For the single parameter investigations the illustrations from all three levels 
will be shown along with a marking of the average Daylight Factor from the 
basic model, marked with a green frame. 
5.2.1 DAYLIGHT STUDY - GLASS TYPES
GLASS TYPES FOR FACADE
In the following investigations the model is assumed to have a 100% glazing 
area in the facades and between the atrium and the offices. This is not 
realistic as the glazing area always will be reduced due to framing of the 
windows, but since the requisite are the same for all the simulations the 
assumption is acceptable. 
In relation to energy perspectives it seems most reasonable to choose 
a 3-layered window in the facades. In this invistigation it is however also 
examined how the daylight conditions will be, if windows with only 2 layers 
are used. 
The investigated window types are 2.2, 2.3 and 3.1. The light transmittances 
for these are described in the previous section “Light transmittances for 
windows”. In the simulations it’s only the value for the light transmittance for 
the glazing types of the facade, which are changed, the light transmittance 
for the glazing in the atriums are unchanged, both from the atriums towards 
Figure 5.5: The placements of the 
measurement points for the facade. 
Figure 5.6: The placements of the 
measure points for the atriums.  
==PAGE:83==
75
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
the street and internally from the atriums towards the offices. 
On the following figure 5.7 the simulations for the different glass types are 
shown for level 4. 
Window type 2.2:	
            Window type 2.3:	
          Window type 3.1:
Average DF 6.5%	
            Average DF 6.4%	
           Average DF 6.3%
Figure 5.7: Daylight conditions show for level 4 for the different window types.
3.5m
1.1m
1.5m
1.1m
1.4m
3.4m
1m
3.5m
3.5m
3.5m
1.3m
3.3m
Type 2.2 [%]
Type 2.3 [%]
Type 3.1 [%]
Level 6
6.5
6.4
6.3
Level 8
7.7
7.6
7.4
Level 11
10.7
10.7
10.3
Table 5.4: Average daylight factors for the entire levels for the various window types. 
The results from the simulations don’t reveal big differences. The average 
Daylight Factors are decreasing a bit for each simulation, while the 
simulation with window type 3.1 has the smallest penetration lengths for 
the measurement points. On the lowest level there is not big differences 
in the average Daylight Factor, whereas the differences are bigger on the 
highest level, when changing from the 2-layered window types to the 
3-layered, probably because there is more daylight available and therefore 
the 3-layered window block out more light, where more light on the lower 
levels are reflected light and not direct. The results for the upper levels can 
be seen in “Appendix D.1 - Daylight study of T30”. 
GLASS TYPES FOR ATRIUMS
The atriums are important to channel more light further into the building 
and improve the working conditions. The light, however, has to reach the 
office through two glass facades, which reduce the light. The following 
investigation examines the daylight conditions in relation to the different 
types of glass and the placement of the glass in relation to the external facade 
==PAGE:84==
76
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
of the atriums as well as for the internal facade. The following study consists 
of three combinations of glass types: 2.2+2.2, 3.1+1.1 and 1.1+3.1 according 
to the definitions in the previous section. The glass type mentioned first is 
placed in the external facade and the glass type mentioned secondly is placed 
in the internal facade. Hereby the daylight is investigated and how/if it will 
change depending on the placement of the glass types. 2.2+2.2 have the 
same reflectance and light transmittance for both glazing and are considered 
as a very likely glass combination from discussions at the project meetings. 
1.1+3.1 have energy glass between the atrium and offices and 1-layered low-
iron glass between atrium and outdoor. By having a heated room with only 
1-layer glass facing outdoor there will be a high risk of condensation of the 
internal side of the glass. Furthermore the use of 3-layered glass towards the 
atrium indicates a clear distinction between the two zones, which should be 
considered in relation to the wanted temperatures and energy consumption. 
For 3.1+1.1 it is the opposite siuation, where the office-zone and atrium-
zone will be more dependent on each other due to the thin barrier of only 
1-layer glass. On figure 5.8 the results from the simulation are shown. 
Window type 2.2+2.2:	         Window type 3.1+1.1:         Windowtype 1.1+3.1:
Average DF 6.3%	
           Average DF 5.7%	
          Average DF 6.8%
Figure 5.8: Daylight conditions for level 4 with different glass types in the atrium. 
1.7m
2.3m
1.7m
1.6m
1.6m
2.2m
1.7m
1.7m
2.3m
Types 2.2+2.2 [%]
Types 3.1+1.1 [%] Types 1.1+3.1 [%]
Level 4
6.3
5.7
6.8
Level 6
7.4
6.7
7.9
Level 9
10.4
9.2
11.1
Table 5.5: Average daylight factors for the entire levels for the different window types in the atriums. 
From the simulations it can be seen that the best type of glass combination 
in the atrium will be 1.1+3.1 and as the second best the 2.2+2.2, when 
considering the average Daylight Factor. 
==PAGE:85==
77
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Type 3.1+1.1 has lower daylight factors than type 1.1+3.1, which is a bit 
strange since the daylight has to penetrate through the same layers of glass in 
total. An explanation might be that the daylight is reduced when penetrating 
through the 3-layered glass, furthermore the 1-layered glass doesn’t reflect 
the light as much as the 3-layered and therefore the daylight is alltogether 
reduced compared to 1.1+3.1.
On the highest levels the biggest differences in the average daylight factor 
is seen but here the daylight levels are so high, that it doesn’t have the 
major impact. Taken into consideration the high risk of condensation with 
the 1.1+3.1 combination, the selected glass combination will most likely be 
2.2+2.2, which anyway have good average daylight factors and at the same 
time also have the best penetration lengths .
BASIC MODEL A
The Basic Model A, which will form the basis for the following parameter 
studies, is chosen to be with the glass type 3.1 in the external facades, as 
this type gives pretty good daylight conditions and is most optimal from an 
energy perspective. For the atriums the glass type is chosen to be 2.2 for 
both the external and internal glazing towards the offices. This type reduces 
the risk of condensation and still gives good daylight conditions. 
Figure 5.9 shows the results of the daylight simulation of the Basic Model A. 
In order to display the difference between the following parameter 
simulations and the Basic Model A, level 4 from the Basic Model A will be 
shown with a green frame for all the following simulations. 
Level 4:              	
	
Level 6:	
	
	
Level 9:
Average DF 6.3%	
            Average DF 7.4%	
           Average DF 10.4%
Figure 5.9: Daylight conditions for the Basic Model A. 
1m
3.5m
1.3m
3.3m
2.1m
4m
1.7m 4.3m
4.7m
4.1m
3.8m
4.4m
From the simulations it is clear to see that the distribution of daylight is 
critical at the western facade, compared to the eastern facade. This tendency 
is clear on the lowest levels and decreases floor by floor. A building is placed 
==PAGE:86==
78
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
very close to the western facade, see the cross section and longitudinal 
section of the building and the surroundings in section “5.1.1 Introduction to 
Model”, which causes the bad daylight distribution. Consequently this means 
that not as many working people can be placed next to each other at the 
western facade and have satisfying daylight as at the eastern facade.
5.2.2 DAYLIGHT STUDY - REFLECTANCES
Reflectances of surroundings can have an impact on the daylight conditions. 
Dark materials/surfaces doesn’t reflect the light as well as light materials 
and surfaces. Therefore light materials with a high reflectance improve the 
daylight. The following simulations investigate how the daylight is affected, 
if the reflectances of the surroundings are changed. Since glazing does not 
reflect the light as well as light coloured surfaces, the first simulation tests 
how the daylight changes, if a parapet was made in the atrium and secondly 
the reflectances of the surrounding buildings are changed to see the impact 
of this.  
REFLECTANCE OF PARAPET IN ATRIUMS
A parapet with a height of 700 mm is investigated. A parapet with a height 
of 700 mm has been discussed at the project meetings as an architectural 
strategy, see figure 5.10 for a visual illustration of the parapet in the atriums. 
The edges of the decks in the atriums have been simulated with a reflectance 
of 0.2 so far, but are now simulated with the same reflectance as the parapet. 
The reflectance is increased from 0.2 to 0.4, which equals the reflectance 
of an internal wall. Furthermore the effect of increasing the reflectance to 
0.6 and 0.8 approximately corresponding to white paint are also tested. On 
figure 5.11 the results from the simulations can be seen. 
Basic model A:             	  Reflectance 0.4:	
   Reflectance 0.6:	
   Reflectance 0.8:
Average DF 6.3%	
    Average DF 6.6%	
    Average DF 6.7%          Average DF 6.8%
Figure 5.11: Results from simulations of model with parapet and different reflectances of this. 
1.9m
2.3m
2.3m
2.3m
1.7m
2.3m
1.7m
2m
2m
1.9m
2m
2.1m
Figure 5.10: Illustration of the parapets 
in the atriums. 
==PAGE:87==
79
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Basic Model [%] Reflec. 0.4 [%] Reflec. 0.6 [%] Reflec. 0.8 [%]
Level 4
6.3
6.6
6.7
6.8
Level 6
7.4
7.7
7.8
8
Level 9
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
Table 5.6: Average daylight factors for the entire levels for the different reflectances of the parapet. 
The average Daylight Factor is increased at all three levels despites the 
decrease of amount of glass. Since the daylight factor is measured in the 
height of 850 mm above floor level, it can be discussed if the glass below this 
height is ‘necessary’. The glazing areas below 850 mm, so the window goes 
from floor to ceiling are however often preferred in glass buildings due to 
better view and thereby visual contact to the surroundings, especially when 
it’s a dense urban context, as the architects also stated during the interviews 
[Schmidt, 2015].
The simulations state that having light surfaces compared to glazing increases 
the daylight conditions, because more light is being reflected. The daylight 
conditions increase a bit, when the reflectance increases but the biggest 
effect is seen, when going from 100% glazing area to having light parapets. 
Especially on the lowest levels where there is less light available and where 
the reflections therefore have an impact.
Further investigations, where the reflectance of the flooring were increased 
as well, have been carried out and can be seen in “Appendix D1 - Daylight 
Investigations of T30”. This investigation did not really have an influence, but 
it has to be taken into consideration, that the lowest investigated level is 
level 4, so the effect will probably only be seen for the lowest levels, because 
the reflections from the flooring only really have an impact for these. 
REFLECTANCE OF NEIGHBOURING BUILDINGS
If the reflectance of the neighbouring buildings were increased, it could be 
interesting to see, if this would affect the Daylight Factor in the offices, as 
well as the results shoved with the parapet in the atriums. The reflectance of 
the neighbouring buildings is increased from 0.3 to 0.6.
The results from the simulation can be seen on figure 5.12. 
==PAGE:88==
80
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Basic model A:             	        Reflectance 0.6:	   
Average DF 6.3%	
        Average DF 6.5%	     
Figure 5.12: Daylight conditions when the reflectance of the neighbouring buldings are improved from 
0.3 for the Basic Model to 0.6.
1m
3.5m
1.3m
3.3m
1.1m
3.7m
1.5m
3.5m
Basic Model A [%]
Reflectance 0.6 [%]
Level 4
6.3
6.5
Level 6
7.4
7.6
Level 9
10.4
10.5
Table 5.7: Average daylight factors for the entire levels for the different reflectances of the flooring. 
The results show a small improvement in the average daylight factors for 
all floors and the penetration lengths, so the surfaces of the surrounding 
buildings have an influence, though it’s small. Therefore new buildings, 
should also consider how they affect the surrounding buildings, when 
choosing materials, especially when building in a dense context, where the 
daylight is minimal.  
5.2.3 DAYLIGHT STUDY - GEOMETRY OF ATRIUMS
The first study to be made, is how changes of the geometry of the atriums 
influence the daylight conditions in the offices around the atriums. 
Workstations are placed around the atriums because the value of the 
building increases for the developer the more workstations and therefore it 
is important to optimize the conditions. 
This issue is a general discussion in projects with an integrated atrium and 
therefore three simple geometries have been developed and investigated, to 
optimise the daylight conditions.
For this analysis the glass types used are type 3.1 for all external facades and 
for atrium type 2.2 for both the internal and external facade and rooflight. 
To improve the penetration length of the daylight, the geometry of a converse 
Figure 5.13: Elevation for 
concept B1 and B3. 
Figure 5.14: Elevation for 
concept B2. 
==PAGE:89==
81
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
pyramid is tested. In the first model, B1, only the northen and southern sides 
of the atrium are sloped 50. The focal point for the slope is level 3, where 
the levels with offices start, which causes the ground area of the levels to 
be decreased a bit. An elevation showing the concept can be seen on figure 
5.13. The dotted lines indicates the original geometry. 
In the second model B2, the focal point for the slope is the middle of the 
building height and therefore the total ground area for the levels should 
remain the same, which is important for the developer. This mean that the 
pyramid is more slim, and therefore might not improve the daylight so much. 
An elevation showing the concept can be seen on figure 5.14.
The third model have all 3 sides sloped, resulting in a decreased floorplan  as 
for B1. On figure 5.15 the results can be seen. 
Basic Model A [%] Model B1 [%] Model B2 [%] Model B3 [%]
Level 6
6.3
6.6
6.1
7.1
Level 8
7.4
8.3
7.6
9.0
Level 11 10.4
12.2
11.5
13.2
Table 5.8: Average daylight factors for the entire levels for the different geometries of the atriums.  
The results show an overall improvement in the average Daylight Factors. 
Only at one place the average Daylight Factor for design B2 on level 4 
decreases, which is caused by the smaller dimensions for the pyramid in 
order to maintain the same ground area for all levels. Therefore the pyramid 
is more slim at the lower levels, which causes the lower daylight level. The 
penetration lenghts is more or less the same on the Basic Model A as for 
model B1-B2, while they are improving for model B3, because all 3 sides in 
the pyramid are sloped. 
Basic model A:            	Model B1  	
             Model B2	
	
 Model B3   
Average DF 6.3%	
 Average DF 6.6%          Average DF 6.1%     Average DF 7.1%	    
Figure 5.15: Daylight conditions with the different atrium concepts.
2.3m
1.7m
1.7m
1.7m
1.5m
2m
1.7m
1.7m
2.3m
1.9m
2.4m
1.8m
==PAGE:90==
82
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The geometry of a pyramid can be used to improve the daylight, but the 
effect is very dependent on the dimensions, and therefore it also has to be 
taken into consideration that it might be at the expense of useful square 
meters.
Several studies have now been performed to optimise  and investigate the 
daylight conditions around the atriums. In order to verify the existence of the 
atriums the last simulation will test the conditions if the atriums were to be 
removed, so the offices had an external facade all the way around. 
The results can be seen on figure 5.16. 
Basic Model A: 	
       Without atriums:
Figure 5.16:  Daylight conditions with and without the atriums. 
2.3m
1.7m
1.7m
2.3m
1.7m
1.7m
As the building area have been reduced by removing the atriums, a 
measurement of the average Daylight Factor would give a wrong impression, 
so this parameter can’t be used to compare the two simulations. From the 
figure it can, however, be seen that the daylight conditions more or less are 
the same and so are the penetration lenghts as well. A difference between 
the two scenarios, which can’t be seen from the results, could be that having 
the atriums might soften the daylight entering the offices, because the light 
have already passed one glazed facade so the light is more diffuse. 
The presence of the atriums can be verified, because they bring architectural 
quality to the building. In later investigations the existence of the atriums  will 
be evaluated in relation to energy consumption, see chapter “5.3.2 Facade 
Design”. 
5.2.4 DAYLIGHT STUDY - DESIGN OF FACADES
A facade with 100% glass area can cause problems due to overheating, and 
therefore an increase in the energy consumption for cooling. Furthermore 
==PAGE:91==
83
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
problems are also seen in relation to the solar radiation, which causes 
thermal discomfort. These are some of the major problems connected to 
glass facades. The simulations of the daylight distribution show that the 
amount of daylight increases with the floors, because surrounding buildings 
don’t shield the light as much as on the lower floors. Therefore the upper 
levels don’t need the same amount of glass, and it could be a wise solution 
to decrease the glass area level by level.
The challenge is to decide the percentage of the reduction of the glass area 
level by level in order to obtain acceptable daylight distribution at all levels.
 
The architects have a desire to keep the lowest floors with 100% glass area 
and then decrease the glass area to approximately 30-50% on the top, level 
12. The exact design isn’t decided yet at this stage of the design process, 
but the architects have imagined the glass to reach from floor to ceiling and 
therefore vertical glass design is investigated at first.
The interior plans for the levels show that it is planned to have 3 workstations 
next to each other. According to the plans, see figure 5.17, this equals a 
length of 5 m. This length will be the point of reference for the penetration 
length of the daylight.
A guideline for the length of the daylight penetration, still having sufficient 
daylight conditions on the working desk, is according to [SBi 230, 2014] that 
the penetration lenght approximately can be calculated by the following: 
	
((2.5 · Upper edge of the window glass - height of table) + height of 
	
glass beneath table) · light transmittance
Using rough measurements with windows from floor to ceiling, the 
penetration length will be as follows:
	
((2.5 · (2.7 - 0.85) + 0.8) · 0.70 = 3.79 m 
This result is based on the window with the lowest transmittance and it is a 
bit from the 5 m, which was the goal, so this goal might be a bit optimistic. In 
the following investigations it will be investigated if it can be achieved.
A parameter influencing on the daylight penetration is the surrounding 
buildings. This is described by the horizon angle, which is defined by the 
angle between a horizontal plane from the middle of a window and the top 
of the opposite building.
Knowing the horizon angle and the room depth of the building for the 
daylight penetration, an estimation of the window area can be found. This 
can be done by using graphs developed in the “Design Guide – Daylighting 
Design for Urban Master Planners” [Wille, 2008]. 
The graphs, from the report show a correlation between room depth and 
the horizon angle where a daylight factor of 2% is reached. The lines from 
the x and y-axis respectively representing the horizon angle and the room 
depth have to be under the graph when they meet in order for the daylight 
factor of 2% to be reached, see figure 5.19 for an example of the graph. 
Each graph is represented by a percentage of Window to Wall Ratio  (WWR), 
which describes the window area and therefore an estimation can be found 
for the levels. 
Figure 5.17: Dimension for  having 3 
working stations next to each other.
==PAGE:92==
84
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
This method will be performed in the following for the eastern facade to find 
an approximation of the glazing area. The investigated levels is 4, 6 and 9. 
On figure 5.18, the horizontal angles are shown for the levels on the eastern 
side. 
      Figure 5.18: The horizon angles for the eastern facade. 
As seen on the figure, it is the lowest levels which are affected by the 
surrounding buildings and therefore they should have the highest glazing 
area The graph with the highest WWR of 90% is investigated to find out how 
much the glazing area can be decreased, while having an acceptable daylight 
distribution. This can be seen on figure 5.19, where the horizon angles for 
the 3 lowest levels are indicated. 
               
            Figure 5.19: Graph showing relation between room depth, horizon angle and WWR. 
            The horizon angles for the 3 lowest floors are indicated by the yellow, purple and green line. 
As seen on figure 5.19 it is not possible to reach a daylight penetration of 5 
meters on the lowest level, level 1, where the horizon angle is 450 (the yellow 
line). It is seen that it is not possible until level 3 (the green line), where the 
horizon angle is 290, to reach a daylight distribution of 2% with a glazing area 
of 90%.
The same is investigated when the glazing area is decreased to 75%. This 
==PAGE:93==
85
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
situation is seen on figure 5.20.
               
              Figure 5.20: Graph showing the relation between horizon angle and room depth
             for 75% WWR. The horizon angle for the third lowest floor are indicated by the green line.  
Figure 5.20 illustrates that it is actually just possible to decrease the glazing 
area to 75% and keep the daylight penetration of 5 meters and the daylight 
factor of 2% for level 5, where the horizon angle is 29 degrees.
On the next level, level 4, the horizon angle is decreased to 21 degrees, and 
it is investigated, if the glazing area can be further decreased to 60%, this is 
shown on figure 5.21.
                 
            Figure 5.21: Graph showing the relation between horizon angles and room depth for 60% WWR.
Figure 5.21 illustrates that it is not possible to decrease the glazing area to 
60% on level 4 (the pink line). Level 5 (the dark blue line), has a horizon angle 
of 12 degrees and therefore it is possible to decrease the glazing area to 60%.
The next glazing area is 45%, shown on figure 5.22, where it can be seen that 
it is not possible to obtain a daylight factor of 2% in a depth of 5 m, no matter 
of the horizon angle. 
==PAGE:94==
86
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
                 
          Figure 5.22: Graph showing the relation between horizon angles and room depth for 45% WWR. 
SUM UP
On the two lowest levels, level 1 and 2, it wasn’t possible to decrease the 
glazing area not even with 10%, and therefore these two levels will have 
100% glazing area. On level 3 the glazing area shouldn’t be below 75%, 
possibly it should be in the range of 75-80%. For level 4, the glazing area was 
possible to decrease from 75%, but it was not possible to decrease it to 60%. 
The glazing area for this level should be in the range of 65-70%. For the rest 
of the levels, level 5-12 it is possible to decrease the glazing area to 60%, 
while 45% is too little to obtain the Daylight Factor of 2% in a depth of 5 m. 
Therefore the glazing area for level 5-12 should be in the range of 50-60%. 
Table 5.10 shows an overview of the estimated glazing areas.
Level
1-2
3
4
5-12
Glazing area 
[%]
100
75-80
65-70
50-60
Table 5.10: Overview of the ranges of possible glazing areas for the different levels. 
To create continuity in the architectural expression of the facade a systematic 
decreasing in the glass area from level to level is developed. The glazing area 
for each level can be seen in table 5.11 below.
Level
1-2
3
4
5-7
8-10
11-12
Glazing area [%]
100
75
70
60
55
50
Table 5.11: Overview of the chosen glazing areas for each levels.
DAYLIGHT ANALYSIS FOR VERTICAL WINDOW DESIGN
For each level the solid area are decided in correspondence with the glazing 
area outlined in table 5.11 above. The solid area is placed in squares with 
a width of 1 m and in the total height of the levels, from floor to ceiling. 
The distances between the squares are then adjusted for each level, so it 
matches the glazing areas. The reflectance of the insulated parts, the walls 
from inside is set to 0.6. 
The daylight distribution for level 4, 6 and 9 is investigated. The distances 
between the squares are respectively 2.333 m, 1.5 m and 1.22 m. An elevation 
of the facade can be seen on figure 5.23.
Figure 5.23: Elevation of facade with 
vertical window design.
==PAGE:95==
87
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The results from the simulations can be seen on figure 5.24. 
Level 4  	
               	
Level 6 	
                        Level 9  
Average DF 6.1%                     Average DF 7.1%                     Average DF 9.4%	 
 Average DF 6.3%                      Average DF 7.4%                   Average DF 10.4%
Figure 5.24: Daylight conditions with vertical window design. Values for basic Model A is seen in the 
green box.
   
0.9m
1.3m
1.6m
2.8m
1.8m
2.8m
3.3m
3.9m
4.1m
3.5m
3.2m
4.7m
A decrease in the daylight distribution in relation to the design with 100% 
glass can be seen, and is unavoidable when reducing the glazing area. This 
said, the decreasing in the average Daylight Factor for level 4 and 6 is 0.2% 
and 0.3% respectively, which is a quite small, also taking into consideration 
that the glazing areas for these levels have been decreased with 30% and 
40% respectively, which is quite a bit. 
The decrease for level 9 is 1%, but this is acceptable since the amount of 
daylight at this level is high.
DAYLIGHT ANALYSIS FOR HORIZONTAL WINDOW DESIGN
Window mass placed high in the facade lets the daylight penetrate further 
into the room. Therefore it can be discussed that having windows from floor 
to ceiling isn’t the best way to make good use of the window areas potential, 
since window area below desk height doesn’t really improve the daylight 
for working conditions. It will be investigated how much the daylight will 
improve if the window area below desk height is divided on the top part of 
the facade instead.
The architects have also discussed this option, because they are aware that 
the daylight distribution will improve. Due to some architectural reflections 
they prefer that the height of the parapet doesn’t exceed 0.7 m. The facade 
design of the following simulations have been performed according to the 
investigated optimal glazing areas and thereby the massive area. The massive 
area have been spread out in a parapet of 0.7 m height and the remaining 
Figure 5.25: Elevation of facade with 
horizontal window design. 
==PAGE:96==
88
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
area are spread between the windows with a width of 1.5m and height from 
the parapet to the ceiling. An elevation of the facade design can be seen on 
figure 5.25 and the associated simulations below on figure 5.26.
Level 4  	
         	             Level 6 	                                     Level 9  
Average DF 6.3%                     Average DF 7.2%                      Average DF 9.9%
Average DF 6.3%                     Average DF 7.4%                      Average DF 10.4%  
Figure 5.26: Daylight conditions with horizontal window design. Values for basic Model A is seen in the 
green box.
1.3m
2m
3.1m
3.3m
3.9m
4.1m
1m
1.9m
3.5m
3.5m
3.2m
4.7m
An increase in the average daylight factor can be seen for level 4 and 6 with 
0.2% and 0.1% respectively. For level 9 the increase is bigger and reaches 
an increase of 0.5%. The analysis illustrates that the design and thereby 
placement of the window area have an effect. The effect is quite small on 
level 4 and 6, but it has an effect and indicates that it is worth thinking about 
the design in order to optimise the daylight distribution.
WESTERN FACADE
The daylight distribution has biggest difficulties from the western facade as 
seen on all the previous simulations. Until now the eastern facade has been 
the starting point to decide the percentage of glazing area and then the same 
percentage area have been used for all orientations. This doesn’t create the 
most optimal daylight conditions because the horizon angles can be very 
different for each orientation, and therefore every orientation should be 
adjusted to this accordingly. On figure 5.27 the horizon angles are illustrated, 
and it can be seen that the surrounding buildings are shadowing the daylight 
more on this side.Therefore the same procedure is used for the western 
facade to find the most optimal glazing areas as found for the eastern facade. 
In table 5.12 the most optimal glazing areas for the western facade is given 
and used in the following simulations. 
==PAGE:97==
89
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
          
              Figure 5.27: Horizon angles for the western facade. 
Level
1-4
5
6
7
8-12
Glazing area 
[%]
100
90-95
70
60
55
Table 5.12: Overview of the chosen glazing areas for each level of the western facade.
As the previous simulations showed the best result for the design with the 
parapet, this design is used for the simulations. The results can be seen 
below in figure 5.28.
Level 4  	
               	
Level 6 	
                        Level 9  
Average DF 6.3%                      Average DF 7.2%                      Average DF 9.9%
 Average DF 6.3%                      Average DF 7.4%                    Average DF 10.4% 
Figure 5.28: Daylight conditions with adjustment for the western facade. Values for basic Model A is 
seen in the green box.
3.1m
4.1m
3.5m 4.7m
1m
1.9m
1.3m
2m
3.3m
3.9m
3.5m
3.2m
==PAGE:98==
90
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The simulations show more or less no change in the daylight distribution. For 
level 4 the average Daylight Factor doesn’t change even though the glazing 
area for the western facade has been increased to 100% compared to 70% 
before. It’s quite a difference in glazing area which should make a difference, 
but when it doesn’t, it must be partly because the opposing building is placed 
so close, which reduces the amount of daylight and partly because most of 
the removed massive area was placed in a parapet and therefore doesn’t 
have influence on the penetration depth of the daylight.  
The daylight distribution for level 6 doesn’t show any change in the average 
Daylight Factor either, even though the glazing area on the western facade 
also has been increased from 60% to 70%, and the removed area has been 
taken from the massive rectangles from the parapet to the ceiling between 
the windows. It can be concluded that 10% isn’t enough to make a difference 
in the average Daylight Factor. The same glazing area has been used for level 
9, so this remain unchanged. 
==PAGE:99==
91
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.2.5 SUM UP - DAYLIGHT INVESTIGATIONS
According to the simplified daylight studies in Velux Daylight Visualizer for 
the atriums the most optimal solution for a high average Daylight Factor will 
be to use the glass combination 2.2+2.2, with parapets of high reflectance at 
0.8. If considering the shape and dimensions of the atriums this can improve 
the daylight conditions as well. If the building is high, the atrium has to have 
certain dimensions in order for the lower levels to get enough light, so it’s a 
balance between not ‘wasting’ to many squaremeters in the atriums and still 
have sufficient daylight. The tranvers pyramid shape is worth considering in 
improving the daylight, especially on the lower levels, but again it has to have 
certain dimensions to have an effect.  
If there’s no desire to have a heated atrium but instead using it as a winter 
garden a good solution regarding the daylight will be the 1.1+3.1, which 
was found to give the best daylight conditions, though problems regarding 
condensation have to be considered. This solution will be investigated later 
in relation to energy consumption in chapter “5.3.1 Glass Types”. 
Taking into consideration that the building is quite deep the atriums are 
necessary to increase daylight conditions and create a light and useful 
environment in the middle area of the building. 
The design of the facades are also an important factor to optimise the useful 
area next to the facades. The investigations show that 100% glass area is not 
necessarily equal to the best daylight conditions. In the atriums the daylight 
improves if the glass area is reduced and replaced by a reflecting surface. 
Investigations of the facade show that it’s more or less possible to reduce 
the glazing area and reach the same daylight conditions as for 100 % glazing 
area, if the glazing is placed wisely. Glazing area placed in the top of the 
facade lets the light penetrate further in, making glass in the lower part of 
the facade towards the floor redundant. 
The question is how much it’s possible to reduce the glazing area, and here 
the method of deciding the glazing area using horizon angles and depth of 
penetration showed to be a good indicator of the possible areas. It was found 
that it was possible to reduce the glazing area significantly at certain levels 
without compromising the amount of daylight, when taking the surroundings 
into consideration. 
==PAGE:100==
92
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.2.6 INVESTIGATION OF SOLAR IRRADIATION
In the previous section the glazing areas were chosen based on the 
penetration length and the horizontal angles from surrounding buildings. In 
IESVE a simple SunCast simulation of the solar irradiation on the facades was 
performed to see how it influenced the division of the glazing areas of each 
level. On figure 5.29 below, the result from a yearly based simulation can be 
seen. 
Figure 5.29: Solar irradiation on the facades.
For solar irradiation on the facade it is generally known that the highest 
irradiation for the southern oriented facade is during spring and fall due to 
the low angle of the sun at the sky. Opposite for the eastern  and western 
facade, the solar irradiation is highest during summer [SBi 219, 2008]. The 
analysis indicates high solar irradiation on the facades at the levels, which 
are situated above the surrounding neighbouring buildings. The increase of 
solar irradiation from ground level and upwards correlates very well with 
the previous investigations of the daylight analysis of the facade design in 
chapter “5.2. Daylight investigations”.
Both studies indicate the big influence of the height of the surrounding 
buildings, as well as the distance between the facades, when looking at the 
solar radiation on the facades and the daylight in the buildings. The analysis 
is made on a yearly basis, which shows that level 9-12 will never be shaded 
by the surrounding buildings, and the lowest levels on the western, eastern 
and parts of the southern facade will almost always be shaded from the sun 
by the surrounding buildings.
The analysis can be used as basis for graduating the glazing in the facades by 
defining a maximum and minimum percentage for the measured values of 
solar irradiation. The highest percentage of glazing is 100% relating to 220 
kWh/m2, and the lowest percentage of glazing is 35% relating to 851 kWh/
m2 as seen in figure 5.30. 
To give a better idea of the values, the values are recalculated to W/m2, which 
gives a range of 25.2 W/m2 to 97.2 W/m2. The graduation will result in a 
graduation similar to the version the engineers did for the T30 case, as seen in 
chapter “4.2.2 The case in process”, where the division of glazing can be seen 
Level 12 
Level 11
Level 10
Level 9
Level 8
Level 7
Level 6
Level 5
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
100 %
100 %
100 %
70 %
70 %
70 %
65 %
55 %
45 %
40 %
35 %
35 %
Figure 5.30: Graduation of 
glazed areas, defined by the 
engineers.
==PAGE:101==
93
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
in figure 5.30. This analysis is more flexible compared to the previous study 
in chapter “5.2. Daylight investigations”, since it is not a specific method used 
but more an estimation based on engineering experience of building with 
glass and discussions with the architects. An advantage of this simulation 
is the good visual output, as seen in figure 5.29, which is a good tool when 
communicating with both engineers and architects. As previous interviews 
indicate in chapter “3.5 Interviews”, it is important to communicate on behalf 
of the receiver, to make sure the important parameters are understood and 
taken into consideration of the other parts in the design process. Therefore 
both methods of analysing the facades in relation to the graduation of glazing 
can be used to supplement each other. The analysis of the solar irradiation 
on the facades can also be further detailed by looking at specific times of day 
and year. The 21st of March, 21st of June and of 21st December are simulated 
in SunCast in IESVE as indications for the middle, longest and shortest day of 
the year, and the simulation can be seen in figure 5.31.
Figure 5.31: Solar irradiation on the facades, during occupied hours from 8am to 5pm
South West - 21st December
North East - 21st December
South West - 21st March
North East - 21st March
South West - 21st June
North East - 21st June
==PAGE:102==
94
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
From figure 5.37 it is seen that the solar irradiation on the facades on the 
21st of December is very low, having the highest value at the facades of 0.05 
kWh/m2 which equals to 5.6 W/m2.
For March the irradiation on the facade is highest for the top levels facing 
south of 4.24 kWh/m2 which equals to 471 W/m2. The highest irradiation at 
level 6-12 of the eastern facade and at level 11-12 of the western facade is 
approximately 1.88 kWh/m2 which equals to 209 W/m2. 
For June the irradiation on the top three levels of the western facade, the 
unshaded levels of the southern facade and the 6-12th level for the eastern 
facade are more or less the same. The irradiation is 2.82 kWh/m2 which 
equals to 313 W/m2.
As seen on figure 5.37 the irradiation is highly dependent on the surrounding 
buildings, due to their blocking the direct light for big parts of the facade. It 
is clear to see the difference in the distance between the buildings, when 
comparing the eastern and western facade as well as looking at the partly 
shaded southern facade. Due to the high correlation among the neighbouring 
buildings it might have crucial effects on the T30 building if the surroundings 
change during time, if an extension upward occurs etc. A further analysis 
will not be carried out here, but it is important to design in relation to the 
surroundings and the planning of the are. 
==PAGE:103==
95
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.2.7 GLARE STUDY AT THE WORKPLACES
Glare is an important factor when considering visual comfort at workstations, 
as mentioned in the interviews in chapter “3.5 Interviews”, since it can 
cause visual disorder and headache and thereby limit the performance of 
the employees. High amount of glare results in an increased use of solar 
shading, which limits the daylight and view out. It is important to investigate 
the risk of glare to optimize the prior energy simulations of the building, and 
the quality of the indoor environment [SBi 219, 2008]. When analysing glass 
facades the importance of investigating the glare conditions are therefore 
very vital. For further descriptions of the different types of glare reference 
is made to chapter “3.4 General Knowledge”.  In this section the risk of glare 
in T30 will be investigated depending on the two following main parameters 
[van Ooyen et al., 1987] [SBi 219, 2008]:
	
Contrasts of luminance in the field of view at a ratio of 10:4
	
Illuminance level in the face of the employees at maximum 2000 lux
The glare analysis is done in Velux Daylight Visualizer (VDV). The workstations 
are analysed in the 3D model having added both the person, desk and PC. The 
height of the head is 1.2 m above floor level, and the height of the desktop 
is 0.85 m above floor level, which leads to the following view heights of the 
three investigated levels:
	
Level 4: 16900 mm
	
Level 6: 24300 mm
	
Level 9: 35400 mm
The locations investigated are the assumed most critical spots for glare, 
scenario 1 and 2. The camera settings in VDV for the analysis of contrasts levels 
are ‘perspective’, to get an illustrative analysis of the contrast investigations, 
with render specifications, measuring the luminance at a sunny day. The 
analysis was made on the 21st of March, 21st of June and 21st of December 
at 9 am and 12 pm to give an overall idea of the risk of glare. There are two 
scenarios for the analysis of contrasts and risk of glare:
	
Scenario 1 - At 1st row from the eastern facade
	
Scenario 2 - At 1st row from the facade in the southern atrium
SCENARIO 1
Workstation first row from the facade in the center of the eastern facade 
at level 4 and 9. Level 4 and 9 are investigated as they are considered as 
representative for the levels in between, and as level 9 most likely will be 
worst case of glare and level 4 is investigated to find out to what degree 
there will be glare here as well. The location and orientation of the workspace 
considered are as seen in figure 5.32.
This scenario is interesting due to the high amount of workstations next to 
the facade and the high amount of glazed area in the facade. The study is 
done for two of the three final facade designs of the daylight investigation in 
chapter “5.2 Daylight investigations”: 
Figure 5.32: Camera 
settings for scenario 1.
==PAGE:104==
96
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Basic Model A		
100% glass in the facade 
Facade design C 	
Horizontal parapets at 700 mm including vertical 
	
	
	
insulated parts. 
These two designs are investigated, to see if there is a difference of the risk 
of glare, when having a parapet or not. It is considered that the design B will 
have similar issues like the other designs. 
The results of the simulations done for Basic Model A regarding luminance 
levels and contrast ratios in the field of view are shown in table 5.13. All 
related figures are seen in the “Appendix E - Glare investigations”.
Level 4
Level 9
21st March 
9 am
(Lt) = 94.9 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 702 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:7.4 (too 
high)
(Lt) = 166.1 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 883 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:5.3 (too high)
21st March 
12 pm
(Lt) = 41.8 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 49.4 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.2 (fine)
(Lt) = 111.9 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 152.5 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.4 (fine)
21st June 
9 am
(Lt) = 93.7 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 145.1 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.5 (fine)
(Lt) = 450.6 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 2888.4 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:6.4 (too high)
21st June 
12 pm
(Lt) = 82.3 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 95.2 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.2 (fine)
(Lt) = 179.3 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 260.9 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.5 (fine)
Table 5.13: Glare investigations of basic model A. The italic values are above the preferred level. 
Overall the simulations indicate the biggest risk of glare at level 4 at 9 am in 
the morning due to direct light from the sun, which results in high luminance 
levels at the work plane. As seen in table 5.13 level 9 has the biggest risk 
of glare. At 9 am there are both glare due to too high luminance levels at 
screens and workstations as well as too high contrast ratios, at 12 pm the 
glare is mainly caused by the high luminance levels. 
Table 5.14 shows the related illuminance levels in the face of the employees.
9 am
12 pm
Level 4 - 21st March
750-1000 lux - no glare
250-750 lux - no glare
Level 9 - 21st March
> 2000 lux - glare
1000-1750 lux - no glare
Level 9 - 21st June
> 2000 lux - glare
1000-1750 lux - no glare
Table 5.14: Illuminance level in the face of the employee in model A. 
Figure 5.39 shows the luminance level in the field of view at the most critical 
scenario at level 9 on the 21st of March at 12 pm. An investigation of the 
illuminance level in the face of an employee is done for the same scenario, 
as seen in figure 5.33. The analysis of illuminance levels show a value above 
the prefered level at 2000 lux, which indicates glare. 
At the figure 4.34 two faces are visible, which shows high glare problems for 
the two first rows of workspaces from the window.
==PAGE:105==
97
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
  
Figure 5.33: Luminance level in the field of view, level 9, 21st of March at 9 am.
The results of the simulations done for model C regarding luminance levels 
and contrast ratios in the field of view are shown in table 5.15. All related 
figures are seen in the “Appendix  E - Glare investigations”.
Level 4
Level 9
21st March 
9 am
(Lt) = 88.4 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 702 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:7.9 (too 
high)
(Lt) = 141.4 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 864.6 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:6.1 (too high)
21st March 
12 pm
(Lt) = 36.7 cd/m2
(Lw) (ceiling) = 61.6 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.7 (fine)
(Lt) = 89.5 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 142.6 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.5 (fine)
21st June 
9 am
(Lt) = 80.9 cd/m2
(Lw) (floor) = 969.1 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:12 (too 
high)
(Lt) = 505 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 2828,9 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:5.6 (too high)
21st June 
12 pm
(Lt) = 66.9 cd/m2
(Lw) (ceiling) = 155 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:2.3 (fine)
(Lt) = 204.7 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 233 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1.1 (fine)
Table 5.15: Glare investigations of design C. The italic values are above the preferred level. 
The risk of glare is more or less the same for design C as for Basic Model A. 
Some values might be a bit lower for model C due to the high location of the 
sun on the sky in June compared to March. Again there is no risk of glare 
in December. The illuminance level is tested as well, but no critical glare is 
found as seen in the related figures in the “Appendix E - Glare investigations”.
SCENARIO 2
Workspace first row from the facade in the southern atrium at level 6. Level 6 
Figure 5.34: Illuminance level in the face 
of the employee, level 9, 21st of March 
at 9 am.
==PAGE:106==
98
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
is considered as representative since it is in the middle of the building mass. 
This scenario is interesting due to the high number of workstations around 
the atrium, which should be considered as good, due to the location next 
to the facade. The study is done for Basic Model A including parapets with 
a reflectance of 0.6 in the atriums and for design C  for the facade, with 
no parapets in the atrium. The analysis of the atrium with and without 
parapet is related to the previous studies of daylight in chapter “5.2 Daylight 
investigations” where the reflectances of the parapets facing the atrium are 
increased to improve the daylight in the adjacent offices by reflecting the 
light further into the levels. In this section it is investigated, whether the high 
reflectance of the parapet will result in glare problems for the employees 
and therefore the location and orientation for scenario 2 are as seen in figure 
5.35. 
The results of the simulations done for model A regarding luminance levels 
and contrast ratios in the field of view are shown in table 5.16. All simulations 
are done at level 6, and the related figures are seen in the “Appendix E - Glare 
investigations”.
9 am
12 pm
21st of 
March
(Lt) = 1524.5 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 693.1 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 2.2:1 (too high)
(Lw) (parapet) = 210.6 cd/m2
Contrast ratio:7.2:1 (too high)
(Lt) = 49.4 cd/m2
(Lwp) = 29 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1.7:1 (fine)
(Lw) (parapet) = 108.8 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:2.2 (fine)
21st of 
June
(Lt) = 157.9 cd/m2
(Lw) (parapet) = 853.9 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:5.4 (too high)
(Lwp) = 151.4 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:1 (fine)
(Lt) = 93.5 cd/m2
(Lw) (parapet) = 217.4 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:2.3 (fine)
(Lwp) = 59.9 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1.5:1 (fine)
Table 5.16: Glare investigations of model A. The italic values are above the preferred level.
For the results in the atrium, table 5.16, it is found that there are no risk of 
glare at 12 pm due to the self shade of the building, but high risk occur in the 
morning at 9 am. The glare is both related to too high luminance levels at the 
screen, the work plane and the parapet in the atrium, which is in the field of 
view, as well as contrast ratio between the screen and the bright surfaces. 
Figure 5.36 shows the luminance level on the 21st of March at 9 am, where 
the risk of glare is critical. In March at 9 am, there is risk of glare due to high 
illuminance level in the face of the employee, as seen in figure 5.37, but this 
is only a risk when the employee is facing east. The related figures are seen 
in the “Appendix  E - Glare investigations”.
Figure 5.35: Camera 
settings for scenario 2.
==PAGE:107==
99
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 5.36: Luminance level in the field of view next to the atrium, level 6, 21st of March at 9 am.
The results of the simulations done for design C regarding luminance levels 
and contrast ratios in the field of view are shown in table 5.17, the related 
figures are also seen in the “Appendix E - Glare investigations”.
9 am
12 pm
21st of 
March
(Lt) = 1554.4 cd/m2
(Lw) (parapet) = 93.2 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 16.7:1 (too 
high)
(Lwp) = 698.2 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 2.2:1 (fine)
(Lt) = 52.2 cd/m2
(Lw) (parapet) = 37.4 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1.4:1 (fine)
(Lwp) = 26.1 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 2:1 (fine)
21st of 
June
(Lt) = 159.4 cd/m2
(Lw) (deck) = 1018 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:6.4 (too high)
(Lwp) = 612.9 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1:3.8 (fine)
(Lt) = 83 cd/m2
(Lw) (deck) = 73.4 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1.1:1 (fine)
(Lwp) = 49.6 cd/m2
Contrast ratio: 1.7:1 (fine)
Table 5.17: Glare investigations of design C next to the atrium. The italic values are above the preferred 
level.
As seen in the results in table 5.17, the risk of glare for model C is very 
similar to Basic Model A, where only the morning hours at 9 am are critical 
concerning glare, when seated in the middle/back of the atrium. Table 5.18 
below shows the illuminance levels simulated, which underlines the limited 
risk of glare in Basic Model A in the morning at 9 am.
21st of March
21st of June
9 am - model A
1250-2000 lux - glare
1000-1500 lux - no glare
9 am - model C
1000-1250 lux - no glare
1000-1500 - no glare
Table 5.18: Illuminance level in the face of the employee in model C next to the atrium.
Figure 5.37: Illuminance level in the face 
of the employee next to the atrium, level 
6, 21st of March at 9 am.
==PAGE:108==
100
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
SUM UP
Velux Daylight Visualizer has been an efficient and uncomplicated tool to 
simulate the risk of glare for different scenarios in the building. The analysis 
indicates the high risk of glare at 9 am and 12 pm for the most of the 
year both in spring, summer and fall, which equals to spring, for different 
scenarios. The simulations have only been considered for the eastern facade 
since it’s assumed to be the critical orientation due to the big distance to the 
surrounding buildings. For the western facade it is considered to be similar, 
but the risk of glare will be present during the hours in the afternoon, but 
for the lower levels the glare risks will be low due to dense urban context. 
The southern facade will just as the eastern and western facade have a risk 
of glare. Since there will be risk of glare for all three orientations at different 
times a day, the parameter study for east clarifies the glare problems and 
the overall need for shading to ensure a good working environment. For the 
east facade the simulations showed critical glare problems for both model 
A and C at level 9. The glare was both caused by high luminance levels at 
the surfaces in the field of view, too big contrast ratio between the screen 
and the surrounding bright surfaces, as well as too high illuminance level 
directly in the face of the employee. In the morning only some high values 
for the work plane or floor will occur and result in risk of glare, which could 
be expected due to the shade from the deck above.  
The simulations have only been considered for the southern atrium, since it 
is assumed to be less critical than the northern atrium and if glare occur in 
the southern atrium, it will definitely occur in the northern atrium as well, 
which makes it a more general parameter study and therefore representative 
for both.
For the southern atrium, the most critical time of the day was in the morning 
due to the position of the sun on the sky, which will be covered in the atrium 
by the building itself in the middle of the day. In March the risk of contrast 
glare was mainly due to the ratio between the screen and the table, whereas 
in June the main reason was the contrast ratio between the screen and the 
parapet and deck edge in the atrium. The risk of glare in the face of the 
employees is considered limited, when sitting next to the atrium compared 
to sitting next to the facade. 
For the atrium the high reflective parapet can influence the risk of glare, 
but it is limited compared to direct sunlight on the desktop and the screen. 
Therefore the parapet is evaluated to have a bigger quality, when reflecting 
the light further into the office space and increase the diffuse light than 
the risk of glare in shorter periods of the day. Overall it is seen that glare 
reduction is needed in the building during most of the year. 
==PAGE:109==
101
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.2.8 DAYLIGHT ANALYSIS IN DAYSIM
As earlier described in litterature study chapter “3.3 Literature study” and 
“3.5 Interviews” the Daylight Factor (DF) gives a quite limited indication of 
the daylight conditions of the building and therefore a further investigation 
is performed in the simulation program DaySim. By using DaySim the DF, 
Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI) and Daylight Autonomy (DA) is found 
as a supplement to the daylight investigations in Velux Daylight Visualizer 
(VDV) to investigate the useful light in the building and the related energy 
consumption for the artificial light. 
The models used for the analysis have some simplifications compared to 
the daylight investigations in Velux Daylight Visualizer (VDV). The models 
are simplified to only consist of the selected level, the atrium, surrounding 
neighbouring buildings and the terrain. Due to limitations in the program, 
it was not possible to do the simulations with the structural columns and 
therefore all the columns are removed. All components are assigned to the 
correct material on both sides, and the layers and materials are named. It’s 
important to simplify the model as described to decrease the simulation time 
in DaySim, and the risk of errors in the model, which can stop the simulations. 
The model is exported from SketchUp and imported to DaySim through the 
plugin su2ds. In DaySim a few factors have to be specified, such as illuminance 
level. The method is further explained in “Appendix F - DaySim”. The results 
are imported back to SketchUp to be visualised in the plan, which can be 
seen in the appendix. The three models investigated are as follows:
	
Basic Model A: 100% glass
	
Facade design B: Vertical windows
	
Facade design C: Horizontal windows
For facade design A, B and C the simulations have been done for level 4 and 
level 9 and all results are gathered in “Appendix F - DaySim”. Only the most 
important results are added to the report in this chapter and gathered in table 
5.19. The three main points considered when simulating in DaySim is the DF, 
the UDI to evaluate the quality of the daylight, and finally the DA, which 
measures the need for artificial light, when the daylight is not sufficient. 
DF 
[%]
UDI <100 
[%]
UDI 100-2000 
[%]
UDI >2000 
[%]
DA 
[%]
DAmax 
[%]
DAcont 
[%]
A: Level 4 2.3
43.9
49.7
6.4
59
6.4
41.1
A: Level 9 3.8
29.7
57.3
13
71.3 13
57.1
B: Level 4 2.1
46.1
48.4
5.5
57.2 5.5
38.9
B: Level 9 3.2
32.4
56.8
10.8
68.8 10.8
53.2
C: Level 4 2.2
45.4
48.4
6.2
57.8 6.2
39.7
C: Level 9 3.5
31.6
56.6
11.8
69.6 11.8
54.3
Table 5.19: Daylight condition for Basic Model A and design B and C. 
DAYLIGHT FACTOR
The Daylight Factor (DF) is best for the Basic Model A, as seen in table 5.19, 
==PAGE:110==
102
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
which makes good sense since the facade is 100% glass. Considering the two 
more detailed designs B and C, of the facade, the best solution is for C, which 
is expected due to the wide window openings 0.7 m above floor and only 
very slim vertical insolated parts in the height.
USEFUL DAYLIGHT ILLUMINANCE
The Useful Daylight Illuminance (UDI) is found to be a very important 
parameter to evaluate the useful daylight in a building combined with the 
evaluation of the Daylight Factor (DF), as the DF is very limited and does not 
consider overexposure or under exposure of light, as described in section 
“3.4.3 Daylight”. This importance was as well highlighted in some of the 
interviews with both architects and engineers and in the literature study 
in the empirical section “3.5 Interviews”. The table 5.19 shows the average 
percentage of the UDI, where the middle section of 100-2000 lux indicates 
the useful daylight spectra. It is seen that Basic Model A has a bit higher 
percentage of hours exceeding the 2000 lux, which will result in glare and 
visual discomfort, and design C has the lowest percentage and is therefore 
the preferred model in this concern. The percentage of too high illuminances 
at level 9 corresponds very well with the investigations done in Velux Daylight 
Visualizer in chapter “5.2.4 Daylight study - Design of Facades”. 
For the UDI below 100 lux, design C has the highest values, and Basic Model 
A the lowest, which makes good sense due to the glass percentage in the 
facade. A high percentage of UDI below 100 will result in a higher energy 
consumption for artificial light in the offices. The UDI is therefore a good 
indicator of the actual useful light in the building, as seen on the illustration 
in figure 5.38 for design C and for the other designs in “Appendix F - DaySim”. 
From figure 5.38 it is easy to locate the specific areas of dark spots, which 
is the red areas for UDI < 100 lux, the areas with best conditions for useful 
daylight illuminance are the yellow areas in the diagram for UDI 100-2000 
lux and for UDI > 2000 lux, the areas of overexposure are seen closest to the 
facade.
UDI < 100
UDI 100 - 2000
UDI > 2000
Figure 5.38: UDI of level 4, design C.
==PAGE:111==
103
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
DAYLIGHT AUTONOMY
The Daylight Autonomy (DA) has a preferred level between 50-70%. A level 
below 50% is too low and above 70% is too high [Reinhart, 2012]. Further 
description is done in previous chapter “3.4.3 Daylight”. The Maximum 
Daylight Autonomy (DAmax) indicates the risk of too high illuminance level, 
which in this case is 200 lux on the work plane, which gives a DAmax at 2000 
lux, similar to the definition of UDI. Therefore the DAmax is not further used 
here. The two factors are simulated to evaluate the energy consumption for 
artificial light in relation to the daylight in the building. From table 4.19 it 
is seen that C has the best conditions for daylight by the highest DA factor 
within the preferred interval, A just exceeds the max limit for level 9 and is 
therefore not the best solution. The high DA factor also results in a high DAcont 
of daylight possible, when adding a dimming profile, which underline the 
preferred facade design C.
ENERGY USE FOR ELECTRICAL LIGHTING
Table 5.20 shows the different related values for electrical lighting. The table 
shows that the need for electrical lighting is lowest for C compared to A and 
B. Despite the short time of activated electrical light for C, the results in table 
5.20 show the highest predicted annual electrical lighting energy use and the 
total annual lighting energy use at level 9. This is also  a bit strange compared 
to the quality of daylight as described earlier. Overall the energy consumption 
for electrical light is best for A, due to the high amount of daylight at and 
above 200 lux. The second best solution is evaluated to be design C, as level 4 
is representative for more levels in the building compared to level 9, because 
level 9 is above the surrounding building height, and therefore design C is 
evaluated to be better than design B.
A
Level 4
A
Level 9
B
Level 4
B
Level 9
C
Level 4
C
Level 9
Predicted annual electri­
cal lighting energy use 
[kWh/m2]
13.5
11.1
14
11.6
13.7
12.2
Total annual lighting 
energy use [kWh]
50184.8
41255.4
52296.7
43255.3
51163.7
45589.7
Electric lighting is 
activated [h/y]
2512.4
2355.8
2512.4
2481.7
2463.6
2379.1
Table 5.20: Energy consumption for electrical lighting, design C. 
DAYSIM VS VELUX DAYLIGHT VISUALIZER
The results from simulations of the Daylight Factor for level 4 and 9 in both 
VDV and DaySim are shown in figure 5.39. The outputs shows different 
quality of layout and also quite big differences in the average Daylight Factor. 
The difference in the outputs could be caused by the sensor settings, which 
are predefined in VDV and added manually in DaySim. Another reason for 
the difference in the outputs could to some extend be the shade by the 
columns in the building, which are only included in the VDV-model and not 
in DaySim.  Despite the different outputs, both programmes are considered 
equally reliable. The advantage of DaySim compared to VDV is the possibility 
for simulating the UDI and DA for the building, which gives more detailed 
indications of the qualities of the daylight and the related energy consumption 
==PAGE:112==
104
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
for the artificial lighting in the building, as described in previous sections. 
Only considering the DF it is evaluated that VDV is the best tool for illustrating 
purposes, as the outputs look more professional compared to the outputs 
from DaySim. No further analysis of the differences of the two programmes 
are done, as this is not a part of the thesis.
Level 4: 
DF = 6.3%
Level 9: 
DF = 9.9%
Level 4: 
DF = 7.4%
Level 9: 
DF = 12%
Figure 5.39: Daylight factor distribution for model A, from VDV (left) and DaySim (right). 
FURTHER DETAILED ANALYSIS
The best solution according to daylight and energy consumption for artificial 
light is evaluated to be design C. Design C is chosen prior to the Basic Model 
A due to the high percentage of hours above 2000 lux in A, since it is known 
that this as well as visual discomfort will accommodate thermal discomfort 
as unwanted heat gain. For the selected design C a further analysis is done 
to optimize the energy consumption for artificial light. For this purpose the 
building is divided into three zones, the edge-zone, the atrium edge-zone 
and the center-zone. The minimum lux level is now differentiated between 
the zones, from 200 lux in all zones to having 200 lux in the edge-zone and 
atrium edge-zone and 100 lux in the center-zone. The depth of the zones 
from the facades is 5 m corresponding to the area for workplaces in T30. 
On the back of the atrium the depth of the zone is only 2 m since only few 
workplaces are planned here. The three zones are as seen in figure 5.40.
In DaySim the predicted annual electrical lighting energy use and the total 
annual lighting energy use are found for each zone at level 4 and 9, as seen in 
table 5.21, further details can be seen in “Appendix F - DaySim”.
Level 4
Edge-zone
Atrium-zone
Center-zone
Figure 5.40: Zone division of level 4, 
which is the same for level 9.
==PAGE:113==
105
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Edge-zone
Atrium-zone
Center-
zone
Total
One 
zone
Savings
Level 4
Lighting zone 
size [m2]
1260
386
2037
3683
Total annual 
lighting energy 
use [kWh/m2]
9.8
10.7
12.9
11.6
13.7
2.3
Level 9
Lighting zone 
size [m2]
1260
406
2063
3729
Total annual 
lighting energy 
use [kWh/m2]
6.2
7.8
10.2
8.6
12.2
3.6
Table 5.21: Energy consumption for electrical lighting for model C divided into zones.
The results, seen in table 5.21, show a higher annual lighting energy use for 
level 4 compared to level 9, which makes good sense in relation to the level 
in the building and the impact of the surrounding neighbouring buildings. 
For the predicted annual electrical lighting energy consumption it is seen 
that the edge-zone has a lower energy consumption per square meter 
compared to the atrium-zone, and again the center-zone has the highest 
energy consumption, which is as expected due to the previous studies of 
the daylight conditions. To do a proper comparison, the savings for the total 
annual lighting energy use is calculated as it appears in table 5.21. For level 
4 the savings will be 2.3 kWh/m2 per year, which corresponds to a yearly 
saving at 19.5%. For level 9 the savings will be 3.6 kWh/m2 per year, which 
corresponds to a yearly saving at 42.4%. To optimize the electrical lighting 
in the building even more, the edge-zones could be divided further into two 
parts depending on the previous daylight study, which indicates an optimal 
zone for daylight up till 2 meters from the facade. 
A simple second version for level 4 has been made with an edge-zone and 
atrium-zone at 3.5 m, which gives a total annual lighting energy use at 
41951.2 kWh, and a yearly saving of 9212.5 kWh, corresponding to 22%. 
Further details are available in “Appendix F - DaySim”. For this simulation it 
has to be mentioned that the 200 lux are only considered in the 3.5 m from 
the facades and the rest is 100 lux. Therefore it does not fulfill the needs set 
by the developer concerning workplaces. It is interesting to compare  this 
simulation with the other simulations, because it indicates that big energy 
savings are possible by dividing the zones. 
To take the analysis of energy consumption for artificial light a step further, 
it is interesting to see the energy consumption for level 9 when adding solar 
shading. In DaySim the selected solar shading used is the “dynamic shading 
device model (simple)”. This simple shading device model calculates the 
effects of generic venetian blinds on a yearly basis, considering all light 
available. DaySim assumes that the shading system is activated due to direct 
glare. For this “dynamic shading device model (simple)” the specific type 
of shading device is still unknown and overall for this model it is assumed 
that the entire building, in this case level 9 including atriums, has added the 
==PAGE:114==
106
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
generic venetian blind system and that they will be activated simultaneously. 
Furthermore the blinds are assumed to have an angle of 45 0 downward, 
when fully activated and at this point it blocks all direct sunlight and transmits 
only 25% of the diffuse daylight [Reinhart, 2015]. At this stage of the process 
this simple shading device is considered sufficient to give an indication of 
how this will influence the energy consumption for the artificial lighting. 
Again the three different zones are analysed for level 9, but as seen in table 
5.22, the edge-zone is divided into 6 smaller sections. The reason for the 
division of the edge-zone is due to repeated error messages from DaySim 
that could not simulate it as one file. Several tests with the simulation was 
done to accommodate the error and it finally indicated a programme issue 
where it found the geometry of the sensor mesh too complex. DaySim is 
originally a tool for education as described earlier in chapter “2.2.3 DaySim”. 
Nobody earns money on the program and some limitations will be found in 
the program as it is not continously maintained and developed. 
Lighting zone 
size [m2]
Predicted annual 
electrical light­
ing energy use 
[kWh/m2]
Total annual 
lighting energy 
use [kWh]
Center-zone
2063
14
28884.9
Atrium-zone
406
11.7
4753.8
Edge-zone EM
115
6.7
772.6
Edge-zone ES
150
7
1055.2
Edge-zone EN
140
6.7
934.5
Edge-zone W
570
10.1
5751.9
Edge-zone S
142.5
7.4
1050.9
Edge-zone N
142.5
5.8
829.1
Total
3729
12.8
44032.9
Increase
12028.8
Table 5.22: Energy consumption for electrical lighting for design C level 9, with “dynamic shading device 
model (simple)”.
As seen in the results from the simulations with an added solar shading, the 
energy consumption increases with 12028.8 kWh per year. The type of solar 
shading for the individual windows of T30 is not optimised according to the 
orientation, the level or the shades caused by the surrounding buildings. 
Therefore this is only an estimation to see how much the energy consumption 
for artificial light is affected by the use of solar shading. 
SUM UP
During this investigation of the quality of daylight for the three types of facade 
designs it is evaluated that facade design C has the best conditions. For design 
C the main percentage at 56% of the light is within the preferred level of a 
UDI 100-2000 lux, but still big parts of the building have both areas below 
and above the preferred level. This division is not necessarily a big problem 
since the dark center of the building will be used for other purposes, such 
==PAGE:115==
107
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
as technical cores and passage areas etc. For the values above the preferred 
level solar shading could decrease the visual discomfort.
When evaluating the energy consumption for artificial light, remarkable 
decreases are seen, when subdividing the level into zones related to the 
daylight conditions and functions. For the working zones it is very important 
with good daylight conditions and 200 lux is kept as a minimum, whereas 
the center-zone has suficcient light conditions when having 100 lux as a 
minimum. As more detailed and specific design of the artificial light done as 
more energy saved and better light conditions in the room, which is important 
for the quality of the working environment for the employees. The savings 
for dividing the zone into three zones is found to be 2.3 kWh/ m2 per year for 
level 4 and 3.6 kWh/m2 per year for level 9, which is quite a deal. 
For level 9 it is considered that solar shading is crucial to have, when looking 
at the previous analysis of the UDI > 2000, and therefore simulations have 
been done for the different zones. The further analysis with solar shading 
shows an energy consumption for the artificial light at 44032.9 kWh, which 
gives an increase of 12028.8 kWh. This increase of total annual lighting 
energy use is a lot when adding shading, which is not completely reliable, 
since the shading system can be optimised a lot. The solar shading used 
is only a generic venetian blinds, which in more optimal conditions can be 
designed due to orientation, level and external shades from neighbouring 
buildings. Further more the blinds can be optimized due to the use and the 
user behavior is a big factor to take into account. 
In the building requirement the Daylight Factor (DF) is used, when indicating 
the recommended values for daylight. The past years the DF has been up 
for discussion as not found sufficient enough when evaluating the daylight 
conditions in buildings and as the reason for limiting the possibility for 
building energy efficient buildings. As an addition to the DF the Useful 
Daylight Illuminance (UDI) has been used increasingly during the past years, 
and it has been discussed, whether it should completely changed to only 
evaluate the UDI instead of the DF [Rasmussen et al., 2015]. 
From the investigations performed here, it is evaluated that a mixed use of the 
two methods and programmes are preferrable. The first simple evaluations 
of the daylight conditions in a building the Daylight Factor is considered 
sufficient to give an overview. As the project progress more specific values 
for the daylight are preferred to be able to adjust the useful daylight in the 
specific zones. Hereby the daylight conditions can be optimized to the specific 
functions by evaluating the UDI and the energy consumption for artificial 
light can be further optimized by evaluating the DA.  
==PAGE:116==
108
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.3 IESVE INVESTIGATIONS
In the following section, issues related to energy consumption and indoor 
climate will be investigated. 
From the beginning of the project, one of the subjects, which was up for 
discussion several times at the project metings, was the different glazing 
types. It was especially a concern in relation to choosing glazing types for the 
atrium in the external and internal facade. Studies concerning glass types for 
the building, will be the first subject to be investigated further to see how the 
indoor environment is affected. 
Solar shading is essential for glass buildings. Optimisations of the solar 
shading in IESVE will be performed for an all glazed facade. 
Furthermore the facade design has been processed with the architects, 
where concerns in relation to a vertical versus horizontal window design 
have been discussed. The next study will investigate the influence of the 
facade designs, to see the possible influence on the indoor environment and 
the energy consumption. 
The glazing areas of the facade, have so far been decided in combination 
with daylight investigations and the design concept from the architects. It 
will be investigated how the indoor environment and energy consumption 
will be affected, if the distribution of the glass area is changed.
Furthermore investigations of the effect when the glazing area is decreased 
will be made. Reducing the glazing area is often considered as a direct method 
for reducing the energy consumption and obtain more equal temperatures 
throughout the year. It will be investigated exactly how big an effect is seen 
when reducing the area step by step. 
Radiant temperature asymmetry has been an issue pointed out by all the 
professionals during the interviews as one of the possible issues related to 
big glass areas, and this aspect will also be studied. 
The building have two big atriums, for which the concept is to minimise 
the energy consumption by using natural ventilation in the summer. Simple 
studies of this subject will be carried out to find the most optimal sizes of 
openings and placement and make sure the air velocity is not too high. 
Final studies will be made, where essential outputs from the investigations 
will be combined to see the effects from the studies. 
The investigations will be evaluated and studied based on a zone level and 
a building level. Parameters for evaluation of the zone level are heating and 
cooling loads, and the heat gains and losses leading to these. Furthermore 
the distribution of temperatures will be studied. 
Evaluation on a building level includes the energy consumption. 
The building envelope has to protect the inside from the outside weather, 
creating an indoor environment. Over the years more strict requirements 
for the indoor climate have been developed in order to satisfy as many 
occupants as possible, and it can be a challenge to meet the requirements. 
Indoor thermal comfort is a subjective parameter, so it can be perceived very 
==PAGE:117==
109
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
differently from person to person, and this is difficult to take into account 
when channelling the indoor environment to meet specific demands. 
The results of the different investigations will be evaluated in relation to the 
requirements for indoor climate and energy consumption, these are listed 
below:
Thermal comfort:
	
In wintertime the operative temperature should be in the range of 	
	
20-24 0C, while in summer 23-26 0C [DS 469] . 
	
	
The hours above 26 0C shouldn’t exceed 100 hours in the occupied 	
	
hours during cooling season and not more than 25 hours above 27 0C. 
	
	
The mean air velocity when heating shouldn’t exceed 0.15 m/s and 	
	
0.22 m/s when having mechanical cooling. 
	
	
The radiant temperature asymmetry from windows or other cold 	 	
	
vertical surfaces must not exceed 10 0C [DS 474].
Energy consumption [BR2010]: 
	
2010: (71.3 + 1650/A) KWh/m2 pr year
	
	
2015: (41 + 1000/A) KWh/m2 pr year 
	
2020: 25 KWh/m2 pr year
Where A is the heated area, which for this building is 30155 m2. 
In the following the model and the important assumptions for the systems 
and heat gains and losses will be desribed shortly. This model will form the 
basis for the following investigations. 
BUILDING THE MODEL IN IESVE
A detailed procedure for building the model in IESVE step by step and 
explanations for all the input prameters can be found in “Appendix G.1 - 
Creation of IESVE model”. A short sum up of the model and important inputs 
and assumptions will be described below. 
The model is built in IESVE with the geometry described and showed in 
section “5.1.1 Introduction to Model”. The 3 levels, 4, 6 and 9 are chosen to 
be the representative floors for further investigations. In IESVE the measured 
parameters are taken as an average of the modelled zone therefore the 
chosen levels for further investigations are modeled more detailed. 
Originally the building has open plan offices more or less all over each 
floor, but because of the calculation method of average values it would be 
impossible to see the differences, which would appear locally caused by 
orientation and so on. Therefore the chosen floors are divided into several 
rooms, which represents the thermal zones on the floor given by geometry 
and interior arrangement. The building is divided in the middle of the short 
sides and then divided into several zones. On figure 5.41 the division of the 
==PAGE:118==
110
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
levels into zones can be seen. 
    
Figure 5.41: The division of zones on the detailed levels.
The atriums have their own thermal environment, which is different from 
the rest of the building, and they are therefore built up by separate zones. 
A zone is made for each level in order to be able to get data and investigate 
the conditions, wherever wanted in the atriums. In order for the program 
to simulate the atrium as one big zone, the top and bottom of each zone is 
assigned a hole, covering the surface 100%. The same has been done for the 
internal surfaces of the zones at the levels, so it is simulated as one big room, 
while being able to get results within each zone. 
CONSTRUCTION
In table 5.23 the used U-values for the different building parts as well as the 
U-value for the windows, including frame are listed.
Line losses have an impact on the transmission loss, but are not defined in 
IESVE. One way to take this into consideration is to adjust the U-values. Since 
this project hasn’t gone into detail with the construction, it has been chosen 
to model the external dimensions, so the area for transmission loss is bigger 
and in that way adjustments have been made to make up for the line losses.
The U-values are in accordance with the requirements from BR10 [SBi 230].
HEATING/COOLING
As the atriums and the offices do not have the same thermal environment, 
different templates are made and assigned to the different zones. The inputs 
for heating and cooling for the offices can be seen in table 5.24.
Heating [0C]
Cooling [0C]
00.00 - 07.00
18
28
07.00 - 18.00
22
24.5
18.00 - 24.00
18
28
Table 5.24: Heating and cooling set points for the offices. 
During the simulations different heating set points for the atriums will be 
investigated to find the most optimal solution. The investigated possible 
heating profiles are listed below in table 5.25.
Construction 
Part
U-value 
[W/m2K]
Roof
0.11
Outer wall
0.14
Exposed floor
0.19
Internal deck
0.23
Windows 
Type 1.1
4.5
Type 2.2
1.4
Type 3.1
1.2
Type 3.2
1.0
Table 5.23: The used U-values in IESVE 
for the different building parts.
==PAGE:119==
111
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Profile 1 [0C]
Profile 2 [0C]
Profile 3 [0C]
00.00 - 07.00
15
10
5
07.00 - 18.00
20
15
9
18.00 - 24.00
15
10
5
Table 5.25: Heating set points for different heating concepts in the atriums.
There are not requirements in the same way for the indoor environment 
in the atriums as for the offices. To keep the energy consumption at its 
lowest and take advantage of the possible alternative solutions, which the 
atrium provides, natural ventilation are defined for the atriums instead of 
mechanical cooling in the plugin MacroFlo in IESVE, for further information 
see “Appendix G.1 - Creation of IESVE model”.
The natural ventilation will be investigated further, see chapter “5.3.5 
Natural ventilation”  but for the basic model the openings are defined for 
level 1 and 3 in the facade of the atrium, and for the roof light on level 9 and 
10. The openings constitute 20% of the surface area. A function is assigned 
the openings, which makes the window open gradually, starting when the 
temperature reaches 23 0C and being fully open when the temperature 
reaches 27 0C.
INTERNAL GAINS
Internal gains are also to be taken into consideration, and they are therefore 
defined for the building. These are different for the offices and the atriums. 
For the offices the internal gains are from people, equipment and lighting. 
For the atriums the internal gains come from people and lighting. In table 
5.26 below, internal gains for the offices and atriums are defined for the time 
profiles. Afterwards the maximum sensible gain for each load is given.  
OFFICES
Weekdays
People [%]
Equipment [%]
Lighting
Dimming
00.00 - 07.00
0
10
10
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
07.00 - 08.00
30
30
40
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
08.00 - 17.00
80
80
80
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
17.00 - 18.00
30
30
40
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
18.00 - 24.00
0
10
10
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
Weekends
00.00 - 08.00
0
10
10
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
08.00 - 17.00
30
30
30
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
17.00 - 24.00
0
10
10
ramp(e1,0,1,500,.4)
Max. Sensible 
gain
146.7 W/p
7 W/m2
6 W/m2
ATRIUMS
Weekdays
00.00 - 07.00
0
0
07.00 - 09.00
0-35
100
(e1<100)
09.00 - 10.00
35
100
(e1<100)
10.00 - 12.00
20
100 
(e1<100)
==PAGE:120==
112
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
12.00 - 13.00
35
100
(e1<100)
13.00 - 15.00
20
100
(e1<100)
15.00 - 16.00
35
100
(e1<100)
16.00 - 18.00
35-0
100
(e1<100)
18.00 - 24.00
0
0
Weekends
00.00 - 08.00
0
0
08.00 - 17.00
5
50
(e1<100)
17.00 - 24.00
0
0
Max sensible 
gain
146.7
6 W/m2
Table 5.26: Overview of the defined internal gains in the atriums and offices. 
RADIANCEIES
RadianceIES is used to calculate a more realistic consumption for artificial 
light. A dimming profile is defined for the lighting gain, which can be seen 
in table 5.26. The dimming profile adjusts the lighting between full power 
when the illuminance is zero and when the illuminance reasches 500 lux, the 
power goes down to 40 % because the light is needed at a lower capacity. 
The profile is linked to sensors defined in RadianceIES. A sensor is placed for 
each zone. On the detailed levels, the sensor is placed in the middle of the 
facade width, 3 m from the facade. This distance is chosen, because it is seen 
from the daylight investigations, that this distance is approximately the limit 
for 200 lux. The sensors are defined for the workplane. 
In RadianceIES the direct dimensions are taken from the windows as drawn 
in ModelIt. In ModelIt the framing is, however, defined (in this case 30%) 
to be included in the window, whereas it is not in RadianceIES. RadianceIES 
use the dimensions as being all glazed. To adjust this the transmittance 
have to be adjusted accordingly. This have, however, not been done, since 
all the daylight investigations also have been performed without drawing 
the framing so to compare the results from Daysim with IESVE the same 
approach have been taken. 
Another issue related to the definitions of transmittances for the glazings 
in RadianceIES is the fact, that it is only possible to define one value for 
respectively external and internal glazing and the roof light, which means 
that it is not possible to disginguish between the external glazing of the 
facade and the external glazing of the atiums. Therefore the external glazing 
have been defined for the transmittance of the 3-layered glazing type as well 
as the roof light, and then the transmittance of the internal glazing can be 
changed when necessary. This is however an issue in relation to get the most 
realistic results, but the overall output of the results won’t be different so it 
is considered to be acceptable.  
5.3.1 GLASS TYPES
Glass affects several parameters of the thermal comfort and energy 
consumption. Some of the benefits which glass provides, as a high amount 
of daylight, which reduces energy consumption for electrical lighting, can 
also be disadvantages, because problems relating to glare and overheating 
==PAGE:121==
113
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
can occur. The different glazing types, 1-, 2- or 3-layered, including possible 
coatings affect the size of the heat gain and heat loss, temperatures, energy 
etc. The impacts of the different glazing types will be investigated for the 
atriums and the external facades. 
The starting point of our investigations is a basic version of the building in 
T30. The facades are completely glazed, and the framing is assumed to be 
constituting 30% of the window area [Schultz, 2002].
Shading is added, since the energy consumption for cooling would be really 
high, if having an all glazed building. It would also not be realistic in relation 
to glare problems, with workstations near the windows. In order to make a 
more “realistic” basic version, a standard shading is added. 
The shading is defined to be external louvres. The incident radiation to lower 
device is specified to 150 W/m2 and for raising the device 100 W/m2, as it 
gives the best results in relation to energy. 
GLASS TYPES ATRIUM
The two large atriums in the project are special, because the function is 
different. They provide possibility for longer stays and as they are not working 
area, they are not assigned to the same strict requirements for the indoor 
climate as the offices. They function as a passage area in the middle-zone, 
and since they are covering a large part of the facade of the offices, they have 
an impact on the nearest office space. 
Several concepts for the heating of the atriums have been discussed, from 
being an unheated space to heating set points of 9 0C, 15 0C  and 20 0C. In the 
following table 5.27 the values for different set points are listed. 
Case 1 [0C]
Case 2 [0C]
Case 3 [0C]
00.00-07.00
15
10
5
07.00-18.00
20
15
9
18.00-24.00
15
10
5
Figure 5.27: Heating set points for the investigated solutions. 
The effect of the different concepts and glazing types will be investigated in 
the following. The different glazing types and the properties for these are 
listed in table 5.28 below.
Glazing
Thickness 
[mm]
U-value
[W/m2K]
g-value
LT-value
1.1
1 layer
Low-iron glass
8
5.6
0.9
91
2.2
2 layer energy 
low-iron glass
1 Low E coating
6/16 Ar­
gon/6*
1.1
0.65
82
3.1
3 layer energy regular
Clear float glass
1 low E coating
6/16 Ar­
gon/4/16 
Argon/6*
0.9
0.54
70
Figure 5.28: The investigated glazing types and their properties.
==PAGE:122==
114
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Overall 3 strategies have been investigated, trying to optimise the energy 
and indoor climate, while respecting the desire to keep the atriums as 
transparent as possible:
(1.1 + 3.1) unheated: 
In the external facade of the atrium the 1-layered glazing type, with the 
low content of iron, will be used and the 3-layered glazing type with a low 
emission coating will be used in the internal facade towards the atriums. The 
placement of these glazing types entails an unheated space in order not to 
waste energy. 
(3.1 + 1.1) heated (case 1): 
This strategy is the opposite of the first one. The 3-layered glass is placed in 
the external facade, and the 1-layered in the internal facade, leaving it most 
wisely to have the atrium heated, since the two zones will influence each 
other, when only having a 1-layered glass separating them, and therefore 
only the heating set points for case 1 of 20 0C are investigated. 
(2.2 + 2.2) Heated(case 1, 2, 3 and unheated): 
The 2-layered glazing type is placed in the external as well as the internal 
facade of the atriums. Heating set points of 20 0C, 15 0C and 9 0C will be 
investigated as well as an unheated situation.
Two zones are chosen for evaluating the indoor climate, a zone in the 
northern atrium and an office zone, adjacent to the atrium. The northern 
atrium is chosen to be representative for the atriums, since the biggest 
temperature variations are seen for this, and this atrium is therefore more 
critical. Furthermore level 4 is chosen to be the representative level for this 
simulation. The placement of the chosen zones can be seen from figure 5.41. 
The energy balance for a room is made up by heat gains and heat losses. 
Heat gains are transferred to the room by external heat gains and internal 
heat gains. Some of the internal heat gains will be the same for the different 
solutions, as they are a result of the impact of the electrical equipment and 
people load which are the same for all the solutions. External heat gain is the 
solar gain, which is affected by the glazing type and the ability to keep the 
heat out. The glazing area and placement also affect the need for electrical 
lighting and hereby the internal heat gain from this. 
Heat is lost by the transmission loss, which the glazing type also affects as 
well as the infiltration. 
Altogether the heat losses and gains affect the heating and cooling load for 
the room, and these are also investigated in the following for the different 
solutions of glazing and combinations. 
On figure 5.42 the heating load for the atrium can be seen. Two of the 
solutions are unheated and therefore do not have any heating load. 
Figure 5.41: Placement of the selected 
zones of level 4 in the northern atrium.
Atrium
zone
Office
zone
==PAGE:123==
115
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
           
Figure 5.42: The heating loads for the different heating set points in the atriums.
Looking at the solutions with heating from 9-20 0C, the heating load for the 
atrium zone varies with the set point temperature as expected. The highest 
load appears for combination 2.2+2.2 with heating set point of 200C. The 
second highest load is for the solution with the same heating set point, but 
with the combination of 3.1+1.1. This combination reduces the heat loss, 
because of the 3-layered glazing in the external facade, and benefit from the 
heat loss from the heated offices through the 1-layered glazing seperating 
the zones. An almost unnoticeable heating load is seen for the glazing 
combination 2.2+2.2 with heating set point of 9 0C, and for the same glazing 
combination an increase is seen for the solution with heating set point of 15 
0C. Compared to the temperature differences from the heating set points 
of  9 0C and 15 0C the increase in the heating load for the solutions with 
heating set points of 20 0C is remarkable. This indicates that the solar gain is 
quite sufficient, to a great extend, for the lowest heating set points, while the 
heating load increases significantly to get the temperature to 20 0C, because 
the solar gain is farther from being sufficient.   
On figure 5.43 the heating and cooling load for the office zone can be seen 
for the different solutions.
         
             
Figure 5.43: The heating and cooling loads for the office zone for the different glazing combinations 
and heating set points. 
==PAGE:124==
116
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
From the graphs, it can be seen that the heating loads are significantly higher 
for the office zone, since higher temperatures have to be obtained all year to 
maintain an acceptable working environment. 
The heating load for the office increases almost equally, the lower the heating 
set point for the atriums is, which makes good sense since the heat loss 
from the office to the atrium increases with the temperature difference, and 
therefore a bigger heating load is needed, when there is a bigger temperature 
difference between the zones. 
The glazing combination, which really sticks out, is the unheated combination 
of 1.1+3.1, where the external glazing is the 1-layered glazing type. This 
combination has the far highest heating load and cooling load, also compared 
to the other unheated combination of 2.2+2.2, which is quite interesting. 
The 1-layered glazing type increases the heat loss to the outside from the 
atrium, which results in lower temperatures in the atrium. This must be 
the reason for the higher heating load, because there is a higher heat loss 
from the office because of the higher temperature difference between the 
zones, even though the 3-layered glazing type has a better U-value than the 
2-layered glazing, and one would not expect that the difference would be 
that noticeable. 
All the different concepts for heating for the combination of 2.2+2.2 have 
the same cooling load. The cooling load is only influenced by the glazing 
combinations and the amount of solar radiation, which gets in and affects the 
temperatures in the atrium, and therefore the cooling load varies depending 
on the 3 different glazing combinations. 
The combinations of 3.1+1.1 have a higher cooling load and even higher the 
combination of 1.1+3.1. The higher cooling load of 3.1+1.1 is again caused 
by the low U-value of the glazing, which “seals” the heat inside the atrium, 
and therefore increases the temperature, which then increases the cooling 
demand for the office. Especially because the two zones only are separated 
by 1-layered glazing, so the heat exchange is increased. The higher cooling 
load for the combination 1.1+3.1 is related to the high U-value, and the 
related high solar heat transmittance of the 1-layered glazing in the external 
facade. This causes high temperatures in the atrium, which affects the cooling 
demand for the office. 
To evaluate the influence the different combinations and heating set points 
have on the indoor climate, the dry resultant temperatures are investigated 
as a parameter. The dry resultant temperature is the mean of the room air 
and mean radiant temperature. The temperatures are investigated for the 
occupied hours only, i.e. from 8 am to 5 pm. 
The atrium has the biggest temperature span, especially for the unheated 
solutions. The percentage of hours within a certain temperature range 
through out the year is investigated in the following. The percentage of hours 
in the different temperature ranges for the atrium appears in the figure 5.44. 
==PAGE:125==
117
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
     
Figure 5.44: Percentages of hours within the different temperature ranges in the atrium. 
The solution with the biggest temperature span in the atrium is the 
combination of 1.1+3.1, which is unheated. This solution has the lowest 
and highest temperatures, because the 1-layered glazing with the highest 
U-value, is placed in the external facade. The solution, which has the smallest 
temperature span divided in the most desired temperatures in the atrium, 
is the combination of 2.2+2.2 with a heating set point temperature of 20 0C. 
Even though the combination of 3.1+1.1 has the same set point temperature, 
this solution has a wider temperature span with temperatures between 
30-40 0C. The only other solution, which has this high temperatures, is the 
unheated combination of 1.1+3.1. The reason for the high temperatures of 
the low U-value and the glazing, which has a low E coating, so when the heat 
gets in, it is difficult for the heat to get out again. 
On the figure 5.45 the distribution of temperatures for the office can be seen.
 
      
Figure 5.45: Percentages of hours within the different temperature ranges in the office.
==PAGE:126==
118
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The heating for the offices have a set point temperature of 22 0C, so no hours 
below this temperature is seen. The minimum and maximum percentages 
within the temperatures are seen for the two combinations with 1-layer 
and 3-layer glazing. The solutions with the combination of 2.2+2.2 have the 
lowest percentages of hours with a temperature of 22 0C, while having the 
biggest percentages in the higher ranges.
The combinations with 3 - and 1 layer glazing have more hours with the lowest 
temperature and in total more hours with the highest temperature, since 
these combinations have some hours above 25 0C. The wide temperature 
span is caused by the glazing types. The unheated combination of 1.1+3.1, 
with the 1-layered glazing in the external facade of the atrium, causes low 
temperatures in the winter, leading to more colder hours for the office. In the 
summer the 1-layer glazing resists the heat badly, and solar radiation from 
outside and the atrium heats up and affects the office to have warmer hours. 
For the combination of 3.1+1.1, the atrium and office zone affects each other 
more, because only the 1-layered glazing is separating them. This causes a 
heat loss from the office zone in winter, which results in more cold hours 
and a heat gain in the summer, when the atrium gets warm due to warmer 
temperatures for the office. For the office the cooling set point is specified 
to 24.5 0C, so when temperatures above this set point occurs, it must be 
because the cooling system can not provide sufficient cooling. 
According to the guidelines for the indoor environment, the hours with a 
temperature above 26 0C in the cooling season shouldn’t exceed 100 hours 
[DS 469]. Since there is no hours with temperatures above 25 0C, this is 
fulfilled.  
From all the graphs it can be seen that the solutions of the combination 
2.2+2.2 in general have the middle values in relation to temperatures and 
cooling and heating load. The 1- and 3-layered glazings have more “extreme” 
properties in relation to U-value and solar energy transmittance coefficient, 
which causes the combinations to have the more “extreme” results. 
In order to evaluate the solutions from an energy perspective, the cooling 
and heating loads for the atrium and office are added up numerically. This 
is done as an indicator, which can point in the direction of which glazing 
combination creates the highest total load for the investigated zones only. It 
must not be confused with the loads and energy demand on building basis. 
The total heating and cooling load for each combination for both zones, the 
atrium and office zone can be seen in the table 5.29 below. 
[kWh/m2/
year]
2.2+2.2 
(200C)
2.2+2.2 
(150C)
2.2+2.2 
(90C)
2.2+2.2 
(unhea.)
3.1+1.1 
(200C)
1.1+3.1 
(unhea)
Heating 
(atrium)
3.78
0.56
0.01
0
2.21
0
Heating 
(office) 
2.26
2.74
3
3.03
2.57
4.43
Cooling 
(office)
2.46
2.46
2.46
2.46
2.92
3.07
Total load 
8.5
5.76
5.48
5.5
7.7
7.51
Table 5.29: Heating and cooling loads added numerically for the different glazing combinations and 
heating set points. All the loads are specified in the unit [kWh/m2/year].
==PAGE:127==
119
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The highest demand is seen for the combination of 2.2+2.2 with a set point 
temperature of 20 0C, followed by the two combinations with 1- and 3-layered 
glazing. The two combinations with set point temperature of 20 0C have the 
highest demand, as expected, but it is a bit interesting that the unheated 
combination of 1.1+3.1 almost have the same demand. This combination 
clearly shows that these two zones have influence on each other, which are 
important to consider to find the best solution. The combination of 2.2+2.2 
with set points of 15 0C and 9 0C and the unheated solution have very similar 
demands, so the solution with heating of 15 0C might be the overall best 
solution. In this case there is an recognisable decrease in the demand for 
cooling/heating, while acceptable temperatures in the atrium are maintained. 
A smaller demand is seen for a heating set point of 9 0C, but it is very small in 
comparison to the relatively big difference in the temperatures and therefore 
environment in winter time. 
ENERGY CONSUMPTION 
The heating and cooling loads give an idea of the most optimal glazing 
combinations and heating set points, but the solutions will be evaluated in 
relation to the energy consumtion, to see how big an influence the different 
solutions have. 
The energy consumption is  supposed to be divided with the heated floor area 
to get the energy consumption described in KWh/m2. Therefore the area of 
the atriums for the unheated solutions should in principle not be included in 
the calculation. All the energy consumptions will, however, be based on the 
same area, in order to get the same relation between the consumptions. The 
used area is 30155 m2, which is the total for the offices and atriums.
The total energy consumption is calculated by the following equation for 
building class 2015:
Etot = (System electricity + lights electricity) · 2.5 + boilers energy · 0.8
The energy factors for building class 2015 can be seen from table 5.29A [SBi 
230, Appendix 6]. System electricity covers chillers energy and energy for 
fans and pumps. Boilers energy includes the hot water consumption.
The energy consumptions can be seen from table 5.30 below. 
[KWh/m2/
year]
2.2+2.2 
(200C)
2.2+2.2 
(150C)
2.2+2.2 
(90C)
2.2+2.2 
(unhea.)
3.1+1.1 
(200C)
1.1+3.1 
(unhea)
System 
electricity
10
10
10
10
10.3
10.2
Lights elec­
tricity
15.2
15.2
15.2
15.2
15.2
15.2
Boilers 
energy
27.8
25.6
25.1
25
27.4
28.1
ETotal (2015)
 85.2
83.4
83
82.9
85.4
85.9
Table 5.30: The energy consumption for the different glazing combinations and heating set points. All 
the consumptions are specified in the unit [KWh/m2/year].
 
The highest energy consumption is seen for the unheated combination of 
1.1+3.1, and thereafter the combinations of 3.1+1.1 with heating set point 
of 20 0C. The highest heating and cooling load was seen for combination 
2015
Electricity
2.5
District heating
0.8
Table 5.29A: Energy factors for building 
class 2015. 
==PAGE:128==
120
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
2.2+2.2 with heating set point of 20 0C, but this solution “only” has the third 
highest energy consumption, while the other solutions of combination with 
2.2+2.2 have energy consumptions, which are very close.
The consumptions for electrical light are the same. According to the daylight 
investigations, see section “5.2.1 Daylight Study - Glass Types”, a noticeable 
difference in the average daylight factor is, however, seen for the different 
glazing combinations, but this isn’t reflected in the energy consumptions for 
the electrical light. As described earlier, it is only the transmittance for the 
internal glazing of the atriums which is changed in RadianceIES, and this is 
apparently not enough to influence the daylight in RadianceIES. 
It can be concluded that the right glazing combination combined with the 
right heating concept have an impact. 
One would think that the unheated solutions would give the lowest energy 
consumption, and it does, if the right glazing types are used as well, otherwise 
the energy consumption is increased. 
It is furthermore concluded that combination 2.2+2.2 with a heating set 
point of 15 0C is the overall best solution. 
As an extension to the investigations concerning the energy consumptions 
for the different heating set points, it could be interesting to see how the 
consumption is influenced if there were no atriums. The internal glazing 
from the offices towards the atriums are replaced with the 3-layered glazing 
3.1 with solar shading.  The lowest energy consumptions were seen for the 
combinations of 2.2+2.2 so the consumptions for these are listed as well in 
the table. The consumptions are divided with the same floor area. In table 
5.31 below, the energy consumptions are listed. 
[KWh/m2/year]
2.2+2.2 
(200C)
2.2+2.2 
(150C)
2.2+2.2 
(90C)
2.2+2.2 
(unhea.)
(-atriums)
System electricity
10
10
10
10
9.2
Lights electricity
15.2
15.2
15.2
15.2
14.7
Boilers energy
27.8
25.6
25.1
25
28.5
ETotal (2015)
 85.2
83.4
83
82.9
82.5
Table 5.31: The energy consumption for the glazing combination of 2.2+2.2 with different heating set 
points and for a version without the atriums. All the consumptions are specified in the unit [KWh/m2/
year].
 
The lowest consumption is actually seen for the version without atriums. 
Savings are seen for the electrical light, because the daylight isn’t reduced 
through more layers of glass and the system electricity, because the cooling 
load has decreased a bit. An increase is seen for the heating load, because the 
heat loss has increased, for the area which was covered by the atriums. The 
increase is in principle bigger than the reduction, but because of the energy 
factors the increase have lower effect than the reduction. The consumptions 
are, however, very close, when having a lower heating set point than 20 0C so 
the difference is not essential. 
GLASS TYPES FACADE
Buildings with a big percentage of glass are very sensitive towards the 
==PAGE:129==
121
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
outdoor environment, and one of the benefits is that they can take advantage 
of the solar gain and natural daylight. There is, however, a very fine balance 
between making it a benefit and not a disadvantage. In summer times it is 
problematic with big glazing areas, as the solar gain causes an overheated 
indoor environment and a bigger demand for cooling, while in wintertime 
the heat from the solar gain is desired in relation to reduce the demand for 
heating. Especially also seen in relation to the fact that glazing often has a 
higher U-value than “normal” walls, and therefore increases the heat loss. 
The energy consumption and the indoor environment are important and 
complex aspects to consider when choosing the right glazing type.  
Two 3-layered glazings are investigated for the facade to see the influence 
on the energy consumption and the indoor environment. One glazing have 
one Low E coating and the other have two, which reduces the heat loss even 
further. The properties of the glazings can be seen in table 5.32. 
Glazing
Thickness 
[mm]
U-value
[W/m2K]
g-value
LT-value
3.1
3 layer energy regular
Clear float glass
1 low E coating
6/16 Ar­
gon/4/16 
Argon/6*
0.9
0.54
70
3.2
3 layer energy 
regular 
Clear float glass
2 low E coatin
6*/16 
Argon/4/16 
Argon/6*
0.6
0.48
69
Table 5.32: The construction of the window and related properties.
It has been chosen, to investigate only two 3-layered glazings, because these 
have the most realistic properties in relation to a low U-value for reducing the 
heat loss and save energy. The question is, however, how the environment 
and the heating and cooling demand are influenced in relation to having one 
or two Low E coatings. 
To evaluate the effect of the glazing types, two zones with the same geometry, 
but different orientations have been chosen to see the temperature 
distribution and heating and cooling loads for the two glazing types. The 
zones are placed on level 9 with external walls turning south and east for the 
first orientation and north and east for the second orientation. 
On figure 5.46 the placement of the two zones can be seen.
Level 9 is chosen, because it is considered to be the worst case scenario, 
where the difference in relation to solar gain for the different glazing types 
and the impact of this, will be most pronounced. Furthermore the two 
orientations are chosen, because they have the most different conditions in 
relation to the solar gain, and therefore the difference in the influence of the 
glazing could be interesting to investigate. 
The zones are placed towards external facade area, and are therefore directly 
influenced by heat losses through the facades and infiltration, and heat gain 
from the solar radiation, which are factors affecting the cooling and heating 
demand. On figure 5.47 the cooling and heating demand are shown for the 
two orientations and the two glazing types.
Figure 5.46: Placement of the selected 
zones, level 9 for evaluation of 
results. 
Northern 
Zone
Southern 
Zone
==PAGE:130==
122
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
    
Figure 5.47: Heating and cooling load for the two glazing types and orientations. 
The northern orientation has a higher heating and cooling load. The higher 
heating demand is caused by the lack of solar gain. It is, however, interesting 
that the north orientated zone has a higher cooling demand, because there 
is a lack of solar gain, and therefore the south should have the highest 
cooling demand. An influencing factor on this must be the solar shading. 
The solar shading is lowered, when the incident radiation reaches 150 W/
m2 and raised when it is 100 W/m2. Therefore it will be relatively often that 
the solar shading is lowered for the southern facade, while not very often for 
the northern facade. Evidently in the summer time this decreases the solar 
gain so much that the northern orientation have a higher cooling demand. 
Running the simulation one more time without the solar shading confirms 
the assumption. The cooling demand is higher for the south oriented zone. 
Glazing 3.1 has the highest heating demand for the northern orientation, 
because the solar gain is lower than for the southern orientation during 
winter time. For the southern orientation glazing 3.1 also causes a higher 
heating demand, so it can be concluded that the extra low emissivity coating 
has an effect in minimising the heat loss. The cooling load is, however, seen 
to be biggest for glazing 3.2, exactly because the glazing reduces the heat 
loss. 
As the next issue, the influence on the temperatures is investigated, where 
the percentage of the occupied hours within certain temperatures is 
investigated. The result can be seen on figure 5.48.
==PAGE:131==
123
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
       
Figure 5.48: The percentages of hours distributed on temperatures for the two glazing types and 
orientations. 
According to [DS 469] the hours of temperature above 26 0C in the cooling 
season shouldn not exceed 100, which is fulfilled. 
The biggest percentage of hours is seen with a temperature of 22 0C for both 
glazings and orientations.
Secondly the highest percentage of hours is seen for temperatures from 
24 0C to 25 0C. Glazing 3.1 for both orientations has higher percentages of 
hours of the lowest temperature 22 0C, while it has the lowest percentage of 
hours for the higher temperatures. This is because glazing 3.2 decreases the 
heat loss, so the temperatures increase and result in more warm hours than 
glazing for 3.1. 
It is interesting that the northern orientation has a bit more warm hours 
of 24 0C to 25 0C than the southern orientation. This must be because of 
the solar shading, which reduces the solar radiation in the summer time, so 
much that the northern orientation has more warm hours. 
The distribution of the temperatures is close for the two glazings and 
orientations, so this factor should not be the main concern when choosing 
the glazing type. Differences are, however, seen for the heating and cooling 
demand, which influence the energy consumption. In table 5.33 the total 
heating and cooling demand are added together numerically.
3.1 (south) 
[MWh/year]
3.2 (south) 
[MWh/year]
3.1 (north) 
[MWh/year]
3.2 (north) 
[MWh/year]
13.03
11.08
13.97
12.14
Table 5.33: Heating and cooling load added together for the two different glazing types and orientations. 
The table show, that glazing 3.2 has the lowest demand for both orientations. 
This glazing has more warm hours, but since the temperature does not 
exceed 24 0C, this glazing is considered to be the best, all parameters taken 
into consideration. 
The daylight investigations have only been performed for 3.1, but since there 
is only 0.01 % difference in the transmittance between 3.1 and 3.2, this is 
==PAGE:132==
124
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
concluded not to make a difference. 
The energy consumption is evaluated as well, to see the specific enegy 
savings. The consumptions can be seen in table 5.34. 
[KWh/m2/year]
Glazing 3.1
Glazing 3.2
System electricity
10
10.4
Lights electricity
15.2
15.2
Boilers energy
25.6
22
ETotal (2015)
83.4
81.7
Table 5.34: The energy consumption for glazing 3.1 and 3.2. The consumptions are described in the 
unit [KWh/m2/year].
A reduction is seen for the boilers energy, because the heat loss is reduced 
due to the extra low emissivity coating, as described earlier. 
5.3.2 FACADE DESIGN
The design of the facades and glazing areas have been discussed during 
the process. The amount of glazing and placement of this affects as earlier 
mentioned the indoor environment and energy consumption. Having a lot 
of glass improves the daylight and reduces the need for heating, but can 
also lead to problems with glare and an increased need for cooling in the 
summer as well as a big transmission loss. An efficient solar shading can help 
preventing some of these issues as well as decreasing the glazing area during 
replacing some of the insulated  parts. 
The glazing area has been discussed from the beginning of the project T30, but 
there has, however, also from the beginning been a mutual understanding, 
that an all glazed building was not realistic. In the following 3 different design 
approaches will be investigated. At first an all glazed facade, with framing 
constituting 30 %, will be investigated in relation to optimisation of solar 
shading. 
Secondly a facade, where the glazing is decreased and combined with 
insulated parts. For this approach, two concepts for the facades have been 
discussed from the beginning of the project. Design B, with a vertical window 
design, with windows from floor to ceiling and Design C, with a parapet of 700 
mm and windows from the parapet to the ceiling. In section “5.2.5 Daylight 
Study - Design of Facades” a distribution of the glazing areas, decreasing 
upwards for each floor was found, which was used for the two designs and 
daylight investigations for the designs were performed. 
In the last approach a facade will be investigated, where the same glazing 
areas, as used in the second approach will be distributed equally on each level. 
This might be preferable in relation to mass production of the components 
and to shorten the construction period. 
Evaluating the approaches might lead to combinations of these for the most 
optimal designs, and this will be investigated in the end. 
The approaches will be investigated on a zone level with temperature 
distribution and heating and cooling loads and on a building level, where the 
energy consumption will also be investigated. 
==PAGE:133==
125
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
OPTIMISATION OF FACADE WITH SOLAR SHADING
Solar shading can have two purposes: to reduce the glare and to avoid 
overheating, where it either is one common shading or it can be divided 
into two. For this investigation it will be analysed as one shading device. 
Solar shading is a simple and cheap solution for preventing overheating, 
compared to the alternative, which will be solving it through the technical 
installations alone. Overheating can be avoided by solar shading, but it has 
to be controlled for the purpose, since various combinations are possible. 
Solar shading can prevent the big temperature differences in a room, which 
can be caused by solar radiation on sunny days. When blocking the daylight 
it can lead to an increase of the energy consumption used for artificial light 
instead [Littlefair, 2006].
There are two predefined types of solar shading devices in IESVE, louvres and 
shutters, which are not different in terms of performance. Either a predefined 
device is selected as active or not active. For the predefined solar shadings 
there are a few parameters to vary when optimising the shading device for 
the specific building:
	
“Percentage profile group”
	
“Incident radiation to lower device”
	
“Incident radiation to raise device”
	
“Transmission factors at 150 increments”
In the “Percentage profile group”, the timing of the operation of the shading 
device is defined. If the values are greater than 50% the shading device is 
considered in use, which means it is down. When the shading device is below 
50% or set to none, the shading device will only be controlled by the incident 
solar radiation. 
The “Incident radiation to lower device” and the “Incident radiation to raise 
device” gives the time for starting to respectively lowering and raising the 
shading device, which is defined by a level of radiation on the facade. The 
two factors are only in function, when the function in the “Percentage profile 
group” is off as previous described. 
The “Transmission factors at 150 increments” defines the solar altitude at 
a vertical plane, which is perpendicular to the glazed facade, both of these 
factors are both in use when controlling by a profile and the incident radiation 
[Virtual Environment, IES].
Due to the equal performance of the two types of solar shading, as described 
above, louvres are used through the investigations. The analysis will focus at 
the southern zone at level 9, due to high exposure to the sun and thereby it 
will be clear to see the effects of the different types of shading. 
The total energy consumption is calculated by the following equation for 
building class 2015:
Etot = (System electricity + lights electricity) · 2.5 + boilers energy · 0.8
The analysis is divided into steps, taken one by one to see the effects of each 
parameter change.
==PAGE:134==
126
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
STEP 1: INCIDENT RADIATION TO LOWER AND RAISE THE SHADING
Controlling from the incident radiation on the facade, also expressed by the 
irradiation on the facade is the first strategy for solar shading devices to 
be investigated. The solar shading will be activated and therefore lowered, 
when the irradiation exceeds this value, and then again be raised when the 
irradiation is lower than a certain value. According to [SBi 2011-15, 2011] 
the range for closing the shading is 50-800 W/m2, where the standard value 
is 150 W/m2 and for raising the shading the range is 20-500 W/m2, having a 
standard value at 80 W/m2 [SBi 2011-15, 2011].
Solar irradiation on a facade is the sum of the direct solar radiation, the 
diffuse radiation from the sky and the reflected radiation from the external 
surrounding surfaces [Beck et al., 2010]. The illuminance level and light effect 
for direct and diffuse radiation are listed in table 5.35, where the resulting 
solar irradiation is found as well. The diffuse radiation is divided into clear 
sky and overcast sky, where the radiation from clear sky is twice as high, and 
therefore it can be important to distinguish between the two types of diffuse 
radiation when analysing the irradiation.
Illuminance level, 
lux [lm/m2]
Light effect
[lm/W]
Solar irradiation
[W/m2]
Direct sunlight
88000
103
854.4
Diffuse - Clear Sky
30000
146
205.5
Diffuse - Overcast sky
12000
121
99.2
Table 5.35: The illuminance level and light effect are from [SBi 219, 2008] and the solar irradiation is 
calculated. 
The ‘Basic-Louvres’ have the basic settings as used in the previous IESVE 
investigations. These basic-settings for the transmission factors are 0.65 
percent for an angle of 00, 0.40 for an angle of 150, and 0.2 for an angle of 
300, which is common settings for a simple shading device [Shading Device, 
IES: Table 9]. 
The first step is to test different values for the incident radiation to lower and 
raise the solar shading, to be able to evaluate the preferred combination. 
The combinations for lowering and raising the shading are seen in table 
5.35. Some references of common shading strategies are used for the ‘Basic 
- Louvres’ and ‘Test 5’, when testing the range of irradiation. These values 
are based on the diffuse irradiation, as previously described. Looking at 
the building scale the total energy consumption is calculated for building 
regulations of 2015, using the equation previously described. The total 
energy consumption is based on the heating, cooling, system electricity 
and lights electricity. To further see the relation to the solar shading device 
the southern zone at level 9 has been investigated for the sensible heating, 
sensible cooling, solar gain and lighting gain and listed in table 5.36 as well.
==PAGE:135==
127
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Basic - 
Louvres
Test 1
Test 2 Test 3 Test 4 Test 5 Test 6
Lower [W/m2]
>150
>200
>100
>150
>200
>200
>50
Raise [W/m2]
<100
<100
<100
<150
<150
<200
<50
Room scale - South, level 9
Heating plant 
sensible load
[MWh/y]
8.73
8.56
8.90
8.63
8.49
8.41
9.30
Cooling plant 
sensible load
[MWh/y]
2.62
2.91
2.40
2.92
3.21
3.52
2.08
Solar gain
[MWh/y]
8.60
9.50
6.32
9.35
10.18 10.86 6.19
Lighting gain
[MWh/y]
6.32
6.32
7.88
6.32
6.32
6.32
6.32
Building scale
Etot [kWh/m2]
81.6
82.6
80.8
82.3
83.2
83.8
79.9
Table 5.36: The results for the combinations of lowering and raising the shading, where Basic - Lou­
vres [Heiselberg] and Test 5 [Beck et al., 2010].
As seen in table 5.36 the preferred combinations of lowering and raising 
the solar shading is the basic-louvres, test 2 and test 6, with the lowest 
energy consumption. When looking at the room scale the three preferred 
combinations are the basic-louvres, test 1 and test 3, as they have high solar 
gain without increasing the need for cooling or lighting gain. The analysis for 
when to lower and raise the solar shading results in a preferred combination 
‘basic-louvres’ for the case of T30. 
When comparing these analysis to the previous study of the solar irradiation 
on the facades of T30 in chapter “5.2.6 Investigation of solar irradiation” it 
corresponds very well with the need for shading. Since the previous studies 
shows an irradiation on the 21st of March at parts of south at 471 W/m2 and 
parts of east and west at 209 W/m2. On 21st of June parts of the facades for 
east, south and west have a maximum irradiation of 313 W/m2.
STEP 2: TRANSMISSION FACTORS
The next step in developing the solar shading is to investigate the difference 
of the transmission factors for the shading. This is done by changing the 
transmission factors at 150 increments. 
The height of the sun on the sky in Denmark is during the year in the range 
from 120 to 580 for a south oriented facade. For east and west, the solar 
angle is in the range from 00 to 280 [SBi 219, 2008]. The basic settings for 
the transmission factors of the solar shading can therefore be neglected for 
the highest inclinations of the sun. In table 5.37 the selected transmission 
factors at 150 increments are defined. The investigated transmission factors 
are mainly found as preferred values in references to investigate the most 
optimal values. The references are listed in the as well. The best combination 
of raising and lowering the solar shading just found is used.
==PAGE:136==
128
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
00
150
300
450
600
750 900
Basic Louvres - 
Standard Koolshade
[Shading Device, IES: Table 9]
0.65 0.40
0.20
0
0
0
0
Test 1: Low-Sun Angle Koolshade
[Shading Device, IES: Table 9]
0.5
0.2
0
0
0
0
0
Test 2:
0.30 0.30
0.30
0.30 0.30 0
0
Test 3: Middel 
[SBi 2011-15, 2011]
0.45 0.45
0.45
0.45 0.45 0
0
Test 4: Closed 
[SBi 2011-15, 2011]
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Test 5: Open [SBi 2011-15, 2011] 0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.9
0
0
Table 5.37: Transmission factors and related references.
Again to evaluate the effect of the solar shading in building scale, the total 
energy consumption is calculated as seen in table 5.37. Furthermore the 
sensible heating, sensible cooling, lighting gain and solar gain are evaluated 
at zone scale for the south oriented zone at level 9, as seen in table 5.38 as 
well.
Basic - 
Louvres
Test 1 Test 2 Test 3
Test 4 Test 5
Room scale - South, level 9
Heating plant sensible 
load [MWh/y]
8.73
9.33
8.70
8.33
9.91
7.67
Cooling plant sensible 
load [MWh/y]
2.62
2.14
4.04
5.48
1.81
10.57
Solar gain [MWh/y]
8.60
6.38
11.37 14.64
4.84
24.44
Lighting gain [MWh/y]
6.36
6.31
6.31
6.32
6.32
6.32
Building scale
Energy total [KWh/m2]
81.6
80.9
83.0
79.7
80.4
90.1
Table 5.38: The results for the combinations of lowering and raising the shading.
Looking at lowest total energy consumption in building scale, the three 
preferred angle combinations for the lamellas are ‘basic-louvres’, test 1 and 
test 4. When focussing on the smaller zone scale it is seen that test 4 has 
a very low solar gain caused by the shading, and this will most likely result 
in lack of daylight and view out. For test 1 it is evaluated to have a relative 
low solar gain compared to the ‘basic-louvres’, without gaining very much 
energywise, and therefore the most optimal combination for the case of T30 
is the basic-louvres.
STEP 3: PERCENTAGE PROFILE
The control profile for the solar shading has a great impact, when evaluating 
the efficiency of the solar shading. To give the profile for temperature in 
the room an extra dimension is added to the control system. The room 
temperature can be an indicator of a high amount of solar gain through the 
windows due to overexposure from direct solar irradiation on the facade. The 
==PAGE:137==
129
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
solar shading can therefore be activated by a maximum heating set point for 
the indoor air temperature, where the shading will be lowered to block off 
the unwanted solar radiation. The temperature in the room will therefore be 
a crucial parameter to control the shading device. The modulating profile can 
activate the shading device as an addition to the settings for the irradiation 
on the facade. 
Another parameter to control the solar shading is the illuminance level in 
the room, where the risk of glare from direct sunlight or high lux-levels at the 
work plane or at surfaces within the field of view will be the controlling factor 
for lowering and raising the shading device.
IESVE has some program related limitations, when having a temperature-
depending profile for the entire building, which is a too complex simulation. 
Therefore each zone has to have a defined profile, which makes it more 
complex to define solar shading at bigger models.  At the moment in IESVE this 
would mean that an analysis for each room would have to be done, instead 
of being able to combine it in one common profile. Further improvements 
in the program could be preferred when doing detailed analysis for solar 
shading. 
For these simulations the temperature profiles are simplified to base the 
simulation upon the southern zone for level 9, to be able to compare it 
with the other simulations. The temperature in the room is affected by the 
solar radiation on the facade, and some studies show that the preferred 
temperature in a room is 22 0C as a maximum [Huizenga et al., 2006]. The 
likelihood of high temperatures indoors can be divided into four temperature 
ranges [Littlefair, 2006]:
Not significant: 	
T < 20.50C
Slightly significant: 	
20.5 ≤ T < 22.00C
Medium significant:	 22 ≤  T < 23.50C
Highly significant: 	
T ≥ 23.50C
The temperature controlling profiles are defined by the set point of the 
maximum temperature in the room, which will activate the solar shading. 
Due to the maximum preferred temperatures, as listed above, the profiles 
are tested for shading to be activated, when the temperature is above 220C, 
230C and 240C, as seen in the table 5.39.
Basic - Louvres
ta(32)>22
ta(32)>23
ta(32)>24
Heating plant sensible 
load [MWh/y]
8.73
8.82
8.76
8.74
Cooling plant sensible 
load [MWh/y]
2.62
2.00
2.07
2.19
Solar gain
[MWh/y]
8.60
7.09
7.58
7.95
Lighting gain
[MWh/y]
6.36
6.32
6.32
6.32
Table 5.39: Loads and gains for the temperature profile for the southern zone at level 9. 
==PAGE:138==
130
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
From the results in table 5.39 it is evaluated that the profile, which will 
activate the solar shading at 220C is preferred. This result is based on an 
decreased solar gain, with only a limited increase of the heating load and 
decrease of cooling load. In general for the values of lighting gain, it seems 
like there are some inconsistencies with the relation between the solar gain 
and lighting gain, when using RadianceIES.
CONTROLLING ILLUMINANCE LEVEL PROFILE
The other control profile for solar shading is dependent on the illuminance 
in the room, preferred at 200 lux in the sensor point in 3 meters depth of 
the room. For this analysis a similar simulation was tested, where the sensor 
point (e1) in same southern zone at level 9 (32) was considered giving a 
profile as follows, ta(32)>(e1,200). Again the complexity of the simulation 
was too much for IESVE, and no simulations were possible. In general it 
would have been a good parameter to investigate due to high risk of glare at 
the workspaces, which would activate the solar shading different from the 
temperature controlled profile.
SUM UP
During the investigation it is seen how big an impact the different solutions 
for solar shading has, when evaluating the energy efficiency of the building. 
The three parameters investigated in steps for controlling the solar shading as 
optimal as possible for the case of T30 gave one preferred combination. This 
combination has an incident radiation to lower the shading device at 150 W/
m2 and an incident radiation to raise the shading device again at 100 W/m2, 
with a transmission factor of 0.65 for increment at 00, 0.40 for increment at 
150 and 0.20 for increment at 300. Finally the controlling temperature profile 
is activating the shading device for temperatures above 220C, which has to 
be specified for each room. Would have been desirable if it could be made 
for the entire building.
FACADE DESIGN B AND C
Two designs for the facade have been in play, as have been described in 
chapter “4. Process in Praxis”. From the beginning the architects have desired 
a design with vertical windows and insulated parts. This division has been 
interesting, as the architects have wanted to interrupt the horizontal lines 
from the front edges of the decks. The concept with a vertical division for a 
facade design, which will be investigated, will be called “B”. 
During the project meetings the architects have, however, expressed their 
concern in relation to the design, because the vertical division does not 
take advantage of the full potential of the glazing areas in relation to the 
distribution of daylight, where a horizontal division, with the same glazing 
area would provide a better daylight distribution, as seen in the chapter 
“5.2.4 Daylight Study - Facade design”. Considering a horizontal division with 
a parapet, however, needed to have a height of 700 mm in order to match in 
aesthetically with the visual dimensions of the construction. A parapet with 
a height of 700 mm and spare unglazed area divided between the windows, 
which have a width of 1500 mm, will be the concept for design ‘C’, which will 
be the second investigated design. 
Concerning the specific glazing areas, the architects desired a continuous 
decreasing  of the glazing areas from the bottom floors to the upper floors. 
==PAGE:139==
131
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
This will be the concept for the two facade designs based on the specific 
distribution of glazing areas found in the section of “5.2.4 Daylight Study - 
Facade design”, where the surrounding buildings and the wanted penetration 
length of the daylight were taking into consideration. In table 5.40 the specific 
glazing areas for each floor is listed. 
The specific facade design for design “B” and “C” and the different levels can 
be seen on figure 5.49.
Facade design B	
	
	
	
	
Facade design C
Figure 5.49: The investigated facade designs. 
The different facade designs affect the heating balance for the zones, because 
the placement of the windows affects especially the solar gain and lighting 
gain, which will be investigated further. 
Figure 5.50 shows how the lighting and solar gain are affected by the different 
window designs. 
       
          
Figure 5.50: The lighting and solar gains for the two facade designs on level 4 and 9 and with the north 
and south orientation. Each level has its own colour, with a light shade for the south orientation and 
a dark shade for the north orientation. Blue and green represents facade B, while red and purples 
represents facade C.
Level
Glazing area 
[%]
4
70
5-7
60
8-10
55
11-12
50
Table 5.40: The investigated glazing 
area, distributed on each level. 
==PAGE:140==
132
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
A small increase in the lighting gain for all zones is  seen for facade B compared 
to C. This is in accordance with the designs, where parts of the glazing areas 
are placed in the upper part of the facade, increasing the daylight distribution. 
The lighting gain is highest for level 4 for the zone oriented towards south, 
which is a bit unusual, but this is due to the opposing building, which is placed 
very close and blocks out the daylight. On level 9 the situation is the opposite, 
because the surrounding buildings are not shadowing, so in this case the 
south oriented zone has a lower lighting gain than the north oriented zone.
The heating and cooling loads can indirectly be derived from the lighting gain, 
because the zones with high lighting gains will be the zones with a high need 
for heating, and the zones with low lighting gain have a higher solar gain, and 
they will therefore have a higher cooling load. The heating and cooling loads 
can be seen on figure 5.51.
     
Figure 5.51: Heating and cooling load for the two facade designs B and C for the northern and southern 
oriented zones for level 4 and 9. 
The heating loads do not show much difference between design B and C. 
The loads for facade C is a little bit higher. Level 9 with the northern oriented 
zones has the highest heating loads. Partly because the northern orientated 
zones lack the solar gain, and level 9 has a higher heat loss through external 
facades, because the zone has some external roof. 
The second highest heating loads are seen for the southern oriented zone on 
level 4, because the opposing building are placed so close to the facade that 
it blocks out the sun. 
The lowest heating loads are seen for level 9 with southern oriented zones, 
because they have a high solar gain.
The difference between the two facade designs B and C is quite small for the 
cooling loads as well, whereas facade B has a bit higher load. The highest 
loads are seen for the south oriented zones, with level 9 having the highest 
load, because the solar gain is bigger. For the northern zones the load values 
are very close, but the load is a little bit bigger for level 9. 
==PAGE:141==
133
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
      
Figure 5.52: The percentages of hours within the temperature ranges for the two facade designs B and 
C for the southern and northern oriented zones on level 4 and 9. 
The results show a quite similar distribution of temperatures between the 
two types of facade designs. 
The south oriented zones on level 9 have the highest amount of hours with a 
temperature above 25 0C, and also the lowest amount of hours of the lowest 
temperature at 22 0C, this is because these zones have the biggest solar gain 
and therefore more warm hours, while the highest amount of cold hours is 
due to the lack of solar gain, as well as an increased heat loss, because this 
level have some external roof. 
For the lowest level, the difference between north and south oriented zones 
is not that big, while the difference increases for level 9. The conditions for 
the two zones on level 4 are very similar, because the opposite building of 
he southern facade is placed very close, and therefore is shadowing. This 
explains why more cold hours are seen for the southern oriented zone on 
level 4 than for the northern oriented zone. 
The results show very similar conditions for the two investigated designs. 
Design B has a higher lighting gain, because the window area is not exploited 
to its full potential, because of the windows from floor to ceiling. On the 
other hand this makes the solar gain a bit higher for design C. In regard to the 
heating and cooling load, design B has the highest cooling load, and design 
C has the highest heating load which is a bit strange since the design of the 
windows increase the solar gain, and therefore the heating load should be 
smaller. The difference in the heating load is not big, but it is there, and must 
be caused by some influence of the design. The floor to ceiling windows 
might spread the heat more in the room, whereas design C directs the heat 
more concentrated further into the room. 
In table 5.41 the heating and cooling load are added up numerically to see 
which design has the highest load.
As seen in the table 5.41 the total heating and cooling load for the two designs, 
B and C, are very close, design B is just 0.22 MWh higher. The difference 
between the designs is more or less non existing, but so far the designs have 
only been evaluated based on the heat balance of certain rooms. Looking at 
the energy consumption for the building will bring a bigger perspective, and 
the various differences might be more pronounced. 
Load [MWh]
B.4S
11.26
B.4N
10.17
B.9S
12.83
B.9N
10.96
Btotal
45.22
C.4S
11.58
C.4N
10.13
C.9S
12.72
C.9N
10.99
CTotal
45.44
Table 5.41: Heating and cooling loads 
added together numerically for each 
zone and then added up as total for the 
design B and C. 
==PAGE:142==
134
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The energy consumption is calculated by:
Etotal = (System electricity + lights electricity) · 2.5 + (boilers energy ) · 0.8
[KWh/m2/year]
Design B 
Design C 
System electricity
12.7
12.7
Lights electricity
16
15.5
Boilers energy
17
17.1
ETotal (2015)
85.3
84 
Table 5.42: The energy consumption for design B and C. The consumptions are described in the unit 
[KWh/m2year].
As is appears from the energy calculation, design C has a lower consumption 
as seen in table 5.42. This is mainly due to a lower consumption for electrical 
light, which is caused by the placement of all the window area in the upper 
part of the facade. Therefore it is concluded that design C provides the most 
optimal conditions. 
DISTRIBUTION OF GLAZING AREA
The previous investigations for the facade design have taken its starting 
point in the glazing areas, found in the daylight investigations, where it from 
a daylight point of view, was most optimal, if the glazing area decreased 
upwards. A situation, where the glazing areas have the same distribution for 
every level will now be investigated, to see if there is any clear differences. 
The average glazing area for the building with design C has been calculated 
to 57.22 %, which will be the glazing area for every level for the “new” design 
called “D”. The glazing area is placed in windows above a parapet, with the 
same height of 700 mm as for design C. The windows have a width of 1.5 m 
and are placed with a distance of 420 mm. An elevation of the facade can be 
seen on figure 5.53. The same levels and zones as previous investigations will 
be evaluated. With design D, the biggest differences will probably be seen for 
the lowest levels, which had a higher glazing area with design C. Figure 5.54 
shows how the heating and cooling load are affected.
     
Figure 5.54: Heating and cooling load for the two facade designs C and D for the northern and southern 
oriented zones for level 4 and 9. 
Figure 5.53: Elevation of facade design 
D.
==PAGE:143==
135
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Level 4 has a lower heating load for design D for both orientations, which 
is a bit unexpected since the glazing area is reduced from 70% to 57.22%, 
and therefore the solar gain is reduced. Reducing the glazing area, however, 
decreases the heat loss through the external facades, which must be the 
explanation, together with the fact that the effect from the solar gain for the 
southern orientation, is quite limited, as the opposing building is placed so 
close, blocking for the sun. 
The heating load has increased for design D for the northern and southern 
orientation on level 9, which must be caused by a small increase in the glazing 
area from 55% to 57.22%, increasing the heat loss. It is a very small increase 
in the glazing area, but must be the reason for the higher heating load. 
The cooling load has decreased for level 4 for both orientations for design 
D, because the glazing area is reduced and thereby the heat from the solar 
radiation. For level 9 the cooling load has increased for design D for both 
orientations. This might be caused by a small increase in the glazing area 
from 55% to 57.22%.
The loads are added up numerically in table 5.43, where it can be seen that 
the total loads are highest for design C.
The division of hours on temperatures can be seen on figure 5.55
      
Figure 5.55: The percentages of hours within the temperature ranges for the two facade designs C and 
D for the southern and northern oriented zones on level 4 and 9. 
The differences between the distribution of the temperatures for the two 
designs are very small. 
An increase in warm hours above 25 0C is seen for the southern orientation, 
level 9 for design D, which must be caused by the small increase in glazing 
area. For the same temperature a decrease is seen for the southern 
orientation for level 4, which is caused by the reduced glazing area from 70 % 
to 57.2%. Even though the neighbouring building for the southern facade is 
placed very close shadowing the facade, some of the external facade for the 
zone is turning towards east and west, and especially for the eastern facade 
there is a lot of solar radiation on the facade, for further detail, see section 
“5.3.2 Facade design”.
The very small differences in temperatures between the two facades 
indicates that the re-ordering of the glazing area, have not provided basis for 
the big changes.  The two designs are also very close related, with the same 
Load [MWh]
C.4S
11.58
C.4N
10.13
C.9S
12.72
C.9N
10.99
Ctotal
45.44
D.4S
10.37
D.4N
9.35
D.9S
13.52
D.9N
11.64
DTotal
44.88
Table 5.43: Heating and cooling loads 
added together numerically for each 
zone and then added up as total for the 
design C and D.  
==PAGE:144==
136
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
glazing dimensions, only changes in the distribution of the glazing areas for 
the levels were made.
The energy consumption is calculated to get a specific indicator of the most 
energy optimated design. The consumption is seen in table 5.44.
[KWh/m2/year]
Design C
Design D
System electricity
12.7
12.9
Lights electricity
15.5
15.2
Boilers energy
17.1
17.3
ETotal (2015)
84
84.2
Table 5.44: The energy consumption for design C and D. The consumptions are described in the unit 
[KWh/m2/year]. 
It can be seen that the energy consumption for lighting is lower for design D. 
This is noticeable, since the design for design C is developed from a daylight 
optimisation point of view. It is not a logic outcome, that when decreasing 
the glazing areas on the lowest floors, where the daylight is more limited, 
that the overall consumption for electrical light should be lower. Even though 
reducing the glazing areas on the lowest floors means that the glazing area 
also have been increased on the upper floors to have the same total glazing 
area, the consumption shouldn’t be decreased, because the upper floors 
have more than enough daylight already, compared to the lower floors, as 
seen in section “5.2 Daylight Investigations”.  It is assumed that the reason 
for the difference lies within the plugin af Radiance. How the calculation 
method exactly is done in Radiance, is not known, but there must be some 
issues causing this difference. 
A higher consumption is seen for the system electricity as well as for the 
boilers for design D, which is interesting since this design had overall lower 
heating and cooling loads. 
Design D, has a 0.2 KWh/m2 higher energy consumption, which is such a small 
difference that it can be discarded. The further investigations will, however, 
be based on design C, since this design is based on the desired concept from 
the architects.   
EVALUATION
It’s difficult to simulate complex solar shading systems in IESVE. The most 
optimal solution was however found to be louvres, which is controlled by the 
irradiation on the facade.
For the investigations of the facade design, the concept of having a horizontal 
distribution of the glass area, design C proved to give the best result. The 
glazing areas for this facade are decreasing floor by floor upwards, and when 
this concept was compared to having an equal glass area for each floor, no 
real differences were seen. 
In the following the optimal solution for solar shading and design C will be 
combined to see, if this might reduce the cooling load and thereby energy 
consumption. 
The heating an cooling loads for design C and design C with solar shading, 
called CS can be seen on figure 5.56.
==PAGE:145==
137
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
         
Figure 5.56: The heating and cooling loads for design C and C with solar shading, design CS.
The heating loads have increased for CS because the solar gain is reduced 
due to the solar shading. The increase in the heating load is, however, 
minor compared to the reduction in the cooling load. The cooling load was 
especially really high for the southern oriented zone on level 9, and when the 
solar shading is added, the load is the lowest. 
The temperature distribution is seen on figure 5.57 for design C and CS.
Figure 5.57: The percentage of hours with the certain temperatures. 
The temperatures have decreased, so there is no hours above 25 0C and 
more hours with the other temperatures. More hours are also seen with 
temperatures of 22 0C, because the solar gain is reduced. Furthermore the 
differences between north and south orientated zones are reduced, so the 
conditions are more uniform for all zones. This is because the solar shading is 
used more often for the south orientations, decreasing the solar gain. 
Table 5.45, shows the energy consumptions for design C and CS. 
==PAGE:146==
138
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
[KWh/m2/year]
Design C
Design CS
System electricity
12.7
10.1
Lights electricity
15.5
15.5
Boilers energy
17.1
17.6
ETotal (2015)
84
78
Table 5.45: The energy consumption for design C and D. The consumptions are described in the unit 
[KWh/m2/year].
A significant reduction is seen for the system electricity, which also counts 
for the cooling system. An increase is seen for the boilers energy, because 
the solar gain is reduced. The electricity for light is the same, which is a bit 
strange. The solar shading is in use because of the reduction in cooling load, 
and this should affect the need for having more electrical light turned on.
It is concluded that there is some inconsistensies with the simulation output 
from Radiance, so this might be the reason. Otherwise it is because the 
solar shading is only on when there is so much daylight, so even though the 
illuminace level is reduced it is not enough to increase the need for electrical 
light.
A noticeable reduction is seen in the energy consumption when solar shading 
is added.  
Investigating the heating set points and the glazing combination for the 
atriums, it was also investigated how the energy consumptions were 
affected if not having the atriums. A small reduction were seen, so it could 
be interesting to see if the reduction would be more pronounced with the 
facade design C with solar shading. The glazing from the offices towards 
the atriums is replaced by the 3-layered glazing 3.2 with solar shading. The 
same area have been used to calculate the consumptions based on the same 
relation. The energy consumption can be seen in table 5.46 below. 
[KWh/m2/year]
 Design CS
Design CS
 (-atriums)
System electricity
10.1
9.2
Lights electricity
15.5
14.8
Boilers energy
17.6
17.5
ETotal (2015) 
78
74
Table 5.46: The energy consumption for the building with or without the atriums. The consumptions 
are described in [KWh/m2/year]. 
A reduction in the energy consumption is seen for the system electricity, 
because less energy is used for cooling, caused by the reduction in the heat 
gain from the atriums during summer. Furthermore the consumption for light 
is reduced because the daylight is increased for the area around the atriums 
because the light is not reduced through several glazing facades. 
Altogether an reduction of 4 KWh/m2 is seen. It is difficult to conclude, which 
solution is the best. If the desire is to reduce energy consumption, then the 
atriums should be reconsidered, but if the aim is to create a more dynamic 
environment the increase is not crucial, other steps as producing more energy 
by solar cells etc. just have to be taken in order to fulfill the requirements for 
the energy consumption. 
==PAGE:147==
139
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.3.3 REDUCTION OF GLAZING AREA
The investigated designs have so far been based on glazing areas found 
from daylight investigations, see section “5.2.4 Daylight study - Design of 
Facades”, with a concept of decreasing glazing areas upwards floor by floor. 
From the previous investigation it was seen that there was not any significant 
difference in any aspect of either indoor climate or energy consumption 
between the concept of decreasing glazing areas or equal glazing areas. In 
the following it will be investigated, how the indoor environment and energy 
consumption will be affected when reducing the glazing area by 10% step. 
The percentage of glazing in a glass building is a continuous discussion with 
no precise answer, but now it will be investigated how much change is seen 
in the indoor climate and energy consumption when reducing the glass area 
in steps of 10% from 57.2 %.
To investigate the effect of a lower glazing area, the glazing area of design C is 
reduced 10% on all levels, called design C10. The glazing areas for each floor 
can be seen from table 5.47. The heating and cooling load, can be seen on 
figure 5.58 for design C and C10. 
               
Figure 5.58: Heating and cooling load for the two facade designs C and C10  for the northern and 
southern oriented zones for level 4 and 9. 
As expected the heating and cooling loads have decreased for design C10 for 
all investigated zones. 
The heating loads have decreased, because the heat loss through the external 
facade is reduced. A similar reduction is seen for all the zones, except for the 
southern oriented zone on level 9, which is the zone wiht the lowest heat 
load for design C. When the ‘same’ reduction in the heating load, is not seen 
for this zone it has to be seen in relation to the fact, that this floor benefits 
from the solar gain, so therefore the effect is not as distinct as for the other 
zones, because the reduced solar gain almost equals the reduced heat loss.  
The cooling loads have decreased equally, because the solar gain is reduced. 
The effect on the temperatures from reducing the glazing area can be seen 
on figure 5.59.
Level
Glazing area 
[%] (C10)
4
60
5-7
50
8-10
45
11-12
40
Table 5.47: The glazing areas for each 
floor with a 10 % reduction. 
==PAGE:148==
140
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
               
Figure 5.59: The percentages of hours within the temperature ranges for the two facade designs C and 
C10 for the southern and northern oriented zones on level 4 and 9. 
Not many changes are seen for the distribution of temperatures. A small 
increase is seen for all zones for hours with temperatures of 22 0C, because 
the solar gain is reduced. This also causes the number of the warmest hours 
above 25 0C  to be decreased for the southern orientations and increased a 
bit for the temperatures of 24-25 0C. 
From the figures it can be concluded that design C10 reduces the loads 
for both heating and cooling, but since the glazing area is reduced the 
consumption for electrical light must increase as well.
A reduction in the glazing area of 20 % (design C20) is investigated as well, 
so the glazing area is reduced to 37.2 % for the entire building. The design 
is adjusted to the lower glazing area by increasing the height of the parapet 
from 700 mm to 850 mm and then adjusting the distances between the 
windows accordingly to match the glazing area. 
As the lowest possible glazing area, an investigation have been made, where 
the glazing area has been reduced to 30 % for each floor. The building 
regulation [SBi 230, 2014] states that the glazing area should constitute 10 % 
of the floor area, which is still fulfilled, when considering the glazing between 
the offices and atriums as seen in table 5.48. 
The results from the investigations of C20 and C30 in regards to heating and 
cooling load and temperatures is, however, not shown here, since the same 
tendencies are seen as when reducing 10 %. The results can, however, be 
seen in “Appendix G.3 - Results from IESVE”. 
The energy consumption for a reduction of 10 % and 20 %  and a total glazing 
area of 30 % can be seen in table 5.49.
[KWh/m2/year]
Design C 
Design C10 
Design C20
Design C30 
System electricity
12.7
12.2
11.6
11.4
Lights electricity
15.5
15.8
15.8
16.1
Boilers energy
17.1
16.2
15.4
14.8
ETotal (2015) 
84
82.8 
81 
80.6
Table 5.49: The energy consumption for design C , C10, C20 and C30. The consumptions are described 
in the unit [KWh/m2/year]. 
Level
Glazing 
area [%]
(C20)
Glazing 
area [%]
(C30)
4
50
30
5-7
40
30
8-10
35
30
11-12
30
30
Table 5.48: The glazing areas for each 
floor with a 20 % reduction down to a 
total area of 30%. 
==PAGE:149==
141
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The total energy consumption is reduced with 1.2 KWh/m2, when the glazing 
area is reduced with 10 % from 57.2 % to 47.2 %. When reducing the glazing 
area with further 10 % from 47.2 % to 37.2 % additional 1.8 KWh/m2 can be 
saved. Having a glazing area on each floor of 30 %, the consumption is only 
reduced with 0.4 KWh/m2. 
It can be seen that energy is saved for the heating and cooling systems, but 
some of these savings are equalized by the higher consumption for electrical 
light, to obtain sufficient daylight for working conditions. 
5.3.4 RADIANT TEMPERATURE ASYMMETRY
Glass can get warm in the summer and cold in the winter depending on the 
outside temperature. Due to the long wave radiation between surfaces this 
can lead to discomfort for the occupant sitting by the windows, because there 
is differences in the distribution of heat gain and losses on each side of the 
body. This  situation can be described by the radiant temperature asymmetry, 
for further detail see chapter “3.4.2 Solar Radiation”. Investigations show, 
that occupants are less tolerable towards 
cold thermal radiation from a vertical window than warm thermal radiation. 
The radiant temperature asymmetry from cold vertical surfaces will now be 
investigated. According to [DS 474] the radiant temperature asymmetry from 
cold vertical surfaces must not exceed 10 0C. 
In order to find the radiant temperature asymmetry the temperature of the 
glass inside has to be found. This can be done by finding the temperature 
distribution throughout the construction. 
When calculating the temperature through the construction, the thermal 
conductivity is needed for every layer. This value is not known for the cavity 
of argon, between the glass layers. Knowing the total U-value for the window 
the equivalent thermal conductivity for the argon and low emissivity coating 
can be found. This calculation is based on the 3-layered glazing type 3.2 with 
an U-value of 0.6 W/m2K.
In the following table the layers, their thicknesses and thermal conductivities 
are listed. 
Using the following equations the resistance, temperature difference and 
temperatures can be found for each layer:
==PAGE:150==
142
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
                                          
An inside temperature of 22 0C and an outside temperature of -12 0C is 
assumed. Tabel 5.49A shows the temperature through the layers of the 
window.
Material
Thickness, 
d [m]
Thermal 
conductiv­
ity, λ [W/
mK]
Resistance, 
R=d/λ 
[m2K/W]
Tempera­
ture differ­
ence, ∆t 
[K]
Tempera­
ture, t [0C]
Outside 
isolans
0.04
0.82
-12
Glass
0.006
0.8
0.0075
0.15
-11.18
Argon + 
Low E
0.016
0.022
0.73
15.06
-11.03
Glass
0.004
0.8
0.005
0.1
4.03
Argon + 
Low E
0.016
0.022
0.0075
15.06
4.13
Glass
0.006
0.8
0.0075
0.15
19.19
Inside 
isolans
0.13
2.66
19.34
ΣR
1.66
Table 5.49A: The temperature throughout the window construction.
The inside surface temperature of the window will be 19.34 0C. 
Having found the inside surface temperature, the radiant temperature 
asymmetry can also be found. 
The radiant asymmetry will be calculated for the worst case scenario. The 
worst case scenario will be the vertical facade design with windows from 
floor to ceiling. Caused by the division of the glazing area, where the area is 
decreasing upwards, the widest window will be seen for level 4 with a width 
of approximately 2.3 meters.  The radiant asymmetry will be caulculated for 
a person placed at the center of the window with a distance of 0.6 meters. 
This distance is a guideline for the distance to the occupied zone, when sitting 
next to a big window, according to [DS 469]. 
The angle factors for the surrounding surfaces to the person have to be 
calculated. This is done by using the graphs for angle relation between 
surfaces [Danvak].
The person is assumed to be a plane with the dimensions of height = 1.1m 
and width = 0.6m. The first step is to calculate the angle factor between 
the person and the window. The window is therefore divided in 4 sections, 
rectangles to be able to use one of the graphs. The division and dimensions 
can be seen on figure 5.60. 
Figure 5.60: The rectangles and dimen­
sions, used to find the angle factors. 
==PAGE:151==
143
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The rectangels of 1 + 2 and 3 + 4 are the same, just mirrored so the angle 
factor is the same for these. In the following the angle factor are found for 
the 2 rectangles.
Rectangle 1 = 2 : 
a = 1.15	
	
b = 2.15	
	
c = 0.6
b/c = 2.15/0.6 = 3.58	 	
	
a/c = 1.15/0.6 = 1.92
F = 0.215
Rectangle 3 = 4:
a = 1.15	
	
b = 0.55	
	
c = 0.6
b/c = 0.55/0.6 = 0.92	 	
	
a/c = 1.15/0.6 = 1.92
F = 0.158
Fwindow = 2 · 0.215 + 2 · 0.158 = 0.746
The angle factor is the relation between the amount of energy radiated from 
one surface to another and the total amount of energy radiated towards a 
hemisphere [Rode et al., 2010]. Therefore the anglefactors on the right side 
of the person have to be 1 added up, so the angle factor can be calculated for 
the remaining part of the right side:
Fremaining = Ftotal - Fwindow = 1 - 0.746 = 0.254
It is open plan offices and therefore the working space isn’t limited by 
surrounding walls. The interior are assumed to be 22 0C, because the heating 
set point are defined for this. The inside temperature of the outer wall 
(insulated parts) are assumed to have the same temperature, even though 
this is a bit optimistic.
The emissivity of a human being is found to approximately 0.9.
The emissivity for the window is 0.94 [Rode et al., 2010]. 
It is difficult to determine the emissivity for the interior, because it is an open 
plan office so the persons are not surrounded by walls. An emissivity of the 
surroundings is assumed to be 0.9, which is the approximately emissivity for 
building materials. 
Then the mean radiant temperature can be found for the external side of the 
person. 
It is assumed the person has a temperature of 30 0C [Rode et al., 2010].
==PAGE:152==
144
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Since the surroundings on the interior side of the person is assumed to be 22 
0C, this is the mean radiant temperature.
The radiant temperature asymmetry:
∆tpr = 22 0C - 20.023 0C = 1.98 0C
According to [DS 474] the radiant asymmetry by windows and other cold 
vertical surfaces in relation to a small vertical surface 0.6 m above floor can 
not exceed 10 0C , which is fulfilled. The radiant asymmetry is very low, so 
there is no risk of discomfort from high radiant asymmetry. The optimistic 
assumption of the external wall, the insulated parts, having the same surface 
temperature as the inside can be concluded to be acceptable, because even 
though the surface temperature was decreased a few degrees, it would not 
change the radiant asymmetry much, and there would still not be any risk of 
discomfort. 
Using the same approach table 5.50 below lists the radiant asymmetry for 
the other 3-layered glazing, with only one low emissivity coating as well as 
the 2-layered glazing used in the atriums. The lowest temperature occurring 
in the atrium with the heating set point of 15 0C in the occupied hours and 
10 0C outside the occupied hours is 10 0C, so this situation is investigated. 
Furthermore the situation where the 2-layered glazing is used in the external 
facade, is investigated as well. 
Glass type
Outside temper­
ature [0C]
Surface tempera­
ture of glass [0C]
Radiant asym­
metry, ∆tpr [0C]
3.1
-12
18.03
2.95
2.2
-12
17.15
3.6
2.2
10
20.73
1.27
Table 5.50: Radiant assymmetry.
It can be seen that there is no problem with too high radiant asymmetry for 
either of the situations. 
==PAGE:153==
145
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.3.5 NATURAL VENTILATION IN ATRIUM
In this section the openings in the atrium, which are used for natural 
ventilation, will be investigated. The purpose for the investigation is to find 
the preferred combination of openings by variating the opening area, opening 
angle of the window and the degree of opening (modulated profile) as the 
only parameters. For analysing the investigations the first parameter to be 
evaluated is the operative temperature, in IESVE defined as the dry resultant 
temperature, for level 4, 6 and 9. It is tried to accomplish a temperature span 
of 200C - 250C, when only investigating the occupied hours 8 am - 5 pm on 
weekdays. 
The investigations for the openings in the atrium are based on the “basic 
model A”, completely glazed, with framing area at 30%, which leads to a 70% 
glazed area. The heating set point in the atrium is 150C, the glazing type in 
the atrium is type 2.2+2.2, and for the office it is type 3.2 including louvres, 
as found in the previous chapter “5.3.2 Facade design”. For the louvres the 
temperature controlled modulated profile is not added due to limitations of 
IESVE, as previous described. 
The settings for the natural ventilation is a 20% opening area with an opening 
angle at 250 and a “degree of opening (modulated profile)” at 250C with 
opening in the range of 40, and therefore they start opening at 230C and fully 
open at 270C. In figure 5.61 the basic model for the atrium is illustrated by 
the percentage of hours within the specified temperature ranges, which will 
be the starting point for the investigations of the openings in the atrium.
Figure 5.61: Percentage of hours within the different temperature ranges in atrium north for the basic 
model at level 4, 6 and 9.
Figure 5.61 shows more than 25 % hours in the temperature range 25 - 
300C, which is indicator for overheating, and will need to be decreased. To 
decrease the overheating hours, the investigations will be divided into the 
three following combination types:
==PAGE:154==
146
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Type 1: 	
Openings in top and bottom in the facade (level 1+3) and in 
	
	
the roof (level 9+10)
Type 2: 	
Openings in every second level in the facade (1+3+5+7) and in 
	
	
the roof (9+10)
Type 3: 	
Openings in all levels in the facade (1-10) and in the roof 
	
	
(9+10)
For all three combination types the changing factors are the opening area 
in the facade and roof, the opening angle of the windows and the degree 
of opening by a modulated profile. The three combination types will be 
investigated and further optimized separately, by at first finding the optimal 
opening area and then look further at the two other parameters. 
TYPE 1
The first parameter to optimize for the type 1 is the opening area of the 
facade. The opening principle for type 1 is illustrated in figure 5.62. The 
openings in both facade and roof have been tested for an opening area of 
20%, 25% and 30%. In this investigation 30% is seen as the maximal possible, 
since it is considered as a big area. As a further test the percentage opening 
area for the facade and roof is differentiated to respectively 10% facade and 
20% roof, 10% facade and 30% roof as well as 20% facade and 30% roof. The 
heating set point in the atrium is 150C, and therefore there is no temperatures 
below 100C, and the percentage of temperatures between 100C and 150C 
more or less only occurs at level 9. Increasing the opening area results in 
more hours in the range of 250C - 300C than in 300C - 350C, so the overheated 
hours are reduced. The two types as seen in table 5.51, which will be further 
investigated, are the basic model (a) with 20% for both facade and roof, and 
the combination (b) with 20% for the facade and 30% for the roof, as they 
have a higher percentage hours of temperatures in the range from 150C - 
300C for level 4 and 6 compared to tests with other opening combinations. 
To further improve the two solutions from type 1 the opening percentage of 
the windows is investigated with an opening angle at 150 and 200 for both 
(a) and (b) and with a modulating profile at 200C and 220C. When minimizing 
the opening angle the percentage of overheated hours increased with a few 
percent, and when lowering the set point for the modulating profile, the 
percentage of overheated hours was decreased significantly. Further results 
are available in “Appendix G.2 - Natural ventilation”.
For type 1 the preferred combination, called (a.2), has more temperatures in 
the range 150C - 200C compared to 250C - 300C, accomplished by an opening 
at 20%, an opening angle at 250 and a modulating profile at 200C with a 
opening span at 40C, and thereby starts opening at 180C and is fully open at 
22 0C. The solution can be seen in the figure 5.65 for all three types. 
TYPE 2
The opening principle for type 2 is illustrated in figure 5.63. For type 2 there 
are two selected combinations (c) and (d), when first investigating the 
optimal opening area. (c) has 30% opening area in both facade and roof, 
where (d) has 30% open in the facade and 20% in the roof. The two selected 
combinations have the highest percentage of hours within the temperature 
range from 150C - 250C, compared to the other combinations and they were 
therefore further investigated. The opening angle and the modulating profile 
Figure 5.62: Type 1 - Strategy of natural 
ventilation in the atrium, with inlets at 
level 1 and 3 and outlets in the roof of 
level 9 and 10.
Opening 
facade [%]
Opening 
roof [%]
(a)
20
20
(b)
20
30
Table 5.51: Type 1 first two selections. 
Figure 5.63: Type 2 - Strategy of natural 
ventilation in the atrium, with inlets at 
every second level, 1, 3, 5 and 7 and 
outlets in the roof of level 9 and 10.
==PAGE:155==
147
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
were again tested for an opening angle at respectively 200 and 150 and the 
modulating profile at 220C and 200C. It is seen that having a modulating profile 
at 200C, with an opening range at 40C results in a decreased temperature 
range between 100C and 150C, which can be caused by the opening of the 
windows will start at 180C and therefore most likely will be open some cold 
sunny days as well, where the solar radiation will heat up the atrium despites 
the cold outdoor temperature. When decreasing the opening angle of the 
windows is seen, as for type 1, an increase of the hours in the temperature 
range of 250C - 350C is seen. Further results are available in “Appendix G.2 - 
Natural ventilation”.
The two best combinations for type 2 are therefore evaluated to be (c.2) and 
(d.2), which both have a modulating profile at 22 0C. For this combination a 
higher percentage of temperatures in the range of 15 0C - 25 0C is seen, and 
the overheating hours are very limited. (c.2) has a minor decrease of the 
overheated hours and is therefore seen as the best solution, which can be 
seen in figure 5.65 for all three types.
TYPE 3
The opening principle for type 3 is illustrated in figure 5.64. For type 3 
different opning areas are tested again, and the two selected solutions (e) 
and (f), where (e) has 20% openings in both the facade and the roof and (f) 
has 20% openings in the facade and 30% openings in the roof. These two 
combinations have the highest percentage of hours within the temperature 
range of 150C - 250C, compared to the other tests. As previous for Type 1 and 
Type 2, there has been made a further investigation of the opening angle and 
the modulating profile, by changing the opening angle to respectively 200 
and 150 and the modulating profile to 220C and 200C. The best combinations 
are (e.2) and (f.2), both with a modulate profile at 220C with an opening span 
at 40C and thereby having a temperature range mainly between 150C and 
250C. The best solution is evaluated as (e.2), since there is less overheating 
due to the percentage of hours in the temperature range 250C - 350C. The 
solution can as well be seen in the common figure?? for all three types.
The graph in the following figure 5.65 shows the preferred combinations 
for openings in the atrium for all three types at level 4, 6 and 9. Type 1 is 
illustrated in green, type 2 is illustrated in blue and type 3 is illustrated as 
violet. Showing the percentage of hours in the given temperature ranges. 
Opening 
facade [%]
Opening 
roof [%]
(c)
30
30
(d)
30
20
Table5.52: Type 2 first two selections. 
Figure 5.64: Type 3 - Strategy of natural 
ventilation in the atrium, with inlets at 
all levels, 1-10 and outlets in the roof of 
level 9 and 10.
Opening 
facade [%]
Opening 
roof [%]
(e)
20
20
(f)
20
30
Table 5.53: Type 3 first two selections. 
==PAGE:156==
148
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 5.65: Percentage of hours within the different temperature ranges in atrium north for the three 
best solutions for Type 1 (green), Type 2 (blue) and Type 3 (violet) at level 4, 6 and 9.
From the graph in figure 5.65 the combination (2.e) is evaluated as the best 
due to minimal overheating hours in the temperature range 300C - 350C, but 
the temperature range is not the only thing to determine, which is the best 
solution. Since the air velocity is also a significant factor, when designing the 
facade openings in the atrium. Therefore some very simple calculations have 
been made to give an indication, whether there will be risk of very high air 
velocity.
NATURAL VENTILATION
The overall purpose of ventilation in wintertimes is to have good indoor air 
quality, but at the same time avoid discomfort related to draft, and in the 
summertimes the ventilation is mainly used to avoid overheating. For natural 
ventilation the purpose is the same. Different types of natural ventilation is 
used in office buildings; night cooling or in daytimes by natural ventilation. 
There are three overall strategies for natural ventilation; one-side ventilation, 
cross ventilation and buoyancy ventilation [Jensen, 2005]. The buoyancy is 
caused by the density of the external air and internal air, which primarily 
is caused by temperature differences, and thereby the difference in air 
pressure and external wind conditions force the air through the openings in 
the thermal envelope.  In the case of T30 it is mainly the strategy of buoyancy 
ventilation used but the concept of one-side ventilation might influence the 
conditions in the atrium as well.
The maximum air velocity for open space offices is 0.25 m/s for category C, 
which is a moderate expected level [DS/CEN/CR 1752, 2001]. The atrium is 
considered as a recreative area having a higher activity level, and therefore 
higher air velocities can be accepted. The maximum air velocity in the atrium 
is therefore accepted at 0.50 m/s for the purpose of this project.  
As a simple estimation of the differences of air velocities in the atrium an 
average air velocity in level 4, 6 and 9 is calculated from the measured volume 
air flow out in IESVE and the area of the zone. For level 4 and 6 the area is 400 
m2 and for level 9 the atrium area is 160 m2 and the rooflight is 240 m2. The 
==PAGE:157==
149
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
average air velocities out of the zones for level 4, 6 and 9 are listed in table 
5.54 for the selected combinations for type 1, 2 and 3.
Level 4
[m/s]
Level 6
[m/s]
Level 9 (hole)
[m/s]
Level 9 (window)
[m/s]
Type 1
0.06
0.09
0.10
0.09
Type 2
0.09
0.09
0.15
0.15
Type 3
0.07
0.08
0.12
0.20
Table 5.54: Average air velocity [m/s] out of the zone for level 4, 6 and 9.
This calculation is very rough and does not say anything about the air 
conditions next to the inlet, or in the center of the atrium. They are therefore 
considered as very low average air velocities of the atrium compared to the 
maximum value at 0.50 m/s, as described earlier. 
Another simplified way to give an indication of the air velocities in the atrium 
is by calculating the central air speed in a certain distance from the opening 
,as well as the penetration length. The central air velocity is defined as the 
center of the inlet air flow in a straight horizontal line from the inlet. The 
central air velocity is given by the following equation [Jensen, 2005]:
vx 	
central air velocity in the distance x from the opening (m/s)
vo 	
air velocity in the opening (m/s), found in IESVE
Kp 	
the factor is 3.6 for rectangular openings
h 	
height of the opening
x 	
distance from the opening
The distances (x) investigated are the center of the atrium, which is 10 m from 
the opening in the facade, and in the back of the atrium at 20 m from the 
opening in the facade. These two distances from the facade are investigated 
due to the architectural concept of utilizing the zones next to the internal 
facades for recreative areas such as terrasses. If the air velocities in these 
zones are too high, the terrasses will in all probability not be used.
The penetration length xm for a non-isothermal free air flow is calculated by 
the following formula [Jensen, 2005]:
Ao 	
opening area
To 	
outdoor temperature 261K (-12C)
Ti 	
indoor temperature 288K (15C)
vo 	
air velocity in the opening
Ksa	
is 1.55, by interpolation [Jensen, 2005]
Ka	
is 7.25,  by interpolation [Jensen, 2005]
The central air speed in a certain distance from the opening and the 
==PAGE:158==
150
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
penetration length are calculated and listed in the following table 5.55.
Ao
[%]
Ao
[m2]
Max. vol. 
flow [l/s]
vo
[m/s]
h
[m]
v10
[m/s]
v20
[m/s]
xm
[m]
Type 1 (a.2) 
Level 1
20
14.3
9923.81
0.69
0.715 0.47
0.33
2.9
Type 1 (a.2) 
Level 3
20
11.96 7853.45
0.66
0.598 0.41
0.29
2.65
Type 2 (c.2) 
Level 1
30
21.45 11367.94
0.52
1.07
0.43
0.31
2.4
Type 2 (c.2) 
Level 3
30
17.94 8259.93
0.46
2.99
0.64
0.45
2.05
Type 2 (c.2) 
Level 5
30
22.2
8511.93
0.38
3.7
0.59
0.42
1.78
Type 2 (c.2) 
Level 7
30
22.2
6023.59
0.27
3.7
0.42
0.30
1.27
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 1
20
14.3
7071.4
0.49
0.715 0.33
0.24
2.06
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 2
20
11.96 5408.5
0.45
0.598 0.28
0.20
1.81
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 3
20
11.96 4923.78
0.41
0.598 0.26
0.18
1.65
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 4
20
14.8
5472.41
0.37
0.74
0.26
0.18
1.57
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 5
20
14.8
4539.74
0.31
0.74
0.21
0.15
1.31
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 6
20
14.8
3507.13
0.24
0.74
0.17
0.12
1.02
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 7
20
14.8
2385.05
0.16
0.74
0.11
0.08
0.68
Type 3 (e.2) 
Level 8
20
14.8
1628.24
0.11
0.74
0.08
0.05
0.47
Table 5.55: Calculation of the airvelocity in the center of atrium north (x=10m) and in the back of 
atrium north (x=20m) and the penetration length for all inlets in the three selected types. The max. 
volume flow is given from the results in VistaPro in IESVE. 
The calculations of the air velocity in the center of the atrium, 10 m from 
the inlet, and in the back of the atrium, 20 m from the inlet, shows that the 
velocities complies with the max limit of 0.5 m/s. Only for type 2 at level 3 
and 5 there will be too high air velocities in the center of the atrium.
SUM UP
Based on the previous investigations for both percentage of hours within 
different temperature ranges, and the simple calculations of air velocities in 
the atrium, the preferred solution for the design of openings in the facade 
is type 3 (e.2). Here there is mainly temperatures in the preferred range 
of 150C - 250C and a limited percentage of hours in the range 250C - 350C, 
which range it will be characterized as overheating. For further investigations 
==PAGE:159==
151
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
of the air velocities in the atrium it was only considered as a bit too high 
for type 2 at level 5 and 7, the preferred combination for openings in the 
atrium, is still type 3 (e.2). Again it is important to underline the simplicity 
of these calculations, and they are therefore a limited indication of the exact 
conditions in the atrium. There is a lack of further parameters, such as the 
total impact from several inlets and the related turbulence and mix of air, 
the buoyancy created by the temperature differences in the atrium, and the 
outlets in the roof as well as the external impacts from wind and orientation. 
The simple calculations are only made to give an indication, if there is a risk of 
draft and high air velocities in the atrium. For further detailed investigations 
a CFD analysis would be needed, which is not a part of this thesis. Therefore 
the final solution might not be completely realistic, but it gives an explanation 
and an idea of the concept for the natural ventilation.
5.3.6 FINAL MODEL EVALUATION
Some of the results from the previous investigations have been implemented 
investigation by investigation, but not all. 
A sum up of the outcome of the results will be described in the following, 
and then combined in a final model. 
The most significant results of the models during the investigations will be 
put in relation to the final model, to see the effect on the energy consumption 
for the different approaches. 
The most optimal glazing combination in the atrium was the combination 
of 2.2+2.2. In regard to the heating set point, the best solution was chosen 
to be 15 0C, but having 9 0C or unheated, all had energy consumptions very 
close. 
For the external facade, the best solution was seen for the glazing type 3.2 
with 2 low emissivity coatings. This type reduced the heating load quite a lot, 
while only increasing the cooling load a bit.  
For solar shading, the best solution was seen for louvres with transmission 
factors of 0.65 for 0 degrees increment, 0.4 for 15 degrees increment and 0.2 
for 30 degrees increment. The louvres are controlled by the irradition on the 
surface, and will be lowered at 150 W/m2 and raised at 100 W/m2. 
The facade design of C was seen to be the best solution overall, and savings 
were seen when combining this solution with the solar shading. 
The best conditions in the atriums were seen for having openings on each 
level, with an area of 20 %. Furthermore the openings are attached to a 
profile, so they start to open when the temperature reaches 20 0C and are 
fully opened at 24 0C. 
In the following table 5.56 the difference between the most significant results 
are seen in relation to each other. 
The “starting point” is the 100 % glazed building with solar shading. 
The next results are from the model with facade design C, and then with 
==PAGE:160==
152
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
reductions of 10 % and 20 % and the model where the glazing area have 
been decreased to 30 %. At last the final model, with the previous listed 
optimisations. For all the models the same glazings have been used, glazing 
3.2 with 2 low emissivity coatings for the external facade and the combination 
of 2.2+2.2 and heating set point of 15 0C for the atriums. The framing has 
been defined to constitute 30 % of the glazing areas. 
The difference in the energy consumptions in relation to the model, which is 
the “starting point”, will be described. The percentage of glazing area is listed 
for each model in brackets.
[KWh/m2/year]
Glazing 3.2 
(100%)
Solar 
shading
Design C
(57.2%)
C10
(47.2%)
C20
(37%)
C30
(20%)
CS: Final 
model
(57.2%)
Solar 
shading
System 
electricity
10.4
12.7
12.2
11.6
11.4
9.8
Lights electricity
15.2
15.5
15.8
15.8
16.1
15.5
Boilers energy
22
17.1
16.2
15.4
14.8
17.8
ETotal (2015)
81.7
84
82.8
81
80.6
77.4
ETotal Difference
[KWh/m2/year]
0
+2.3
+1.1
-0.7
-1.1
-4.3
Table 5.56: Consumptions and differences in consumption between different investigated models. All 
the consumptions are specified in the unit [KWh/m2/year].
 
It is interesting to see the differences listed in relation to the all glazed model. 
At first it is noticeable that the differences are not bigger, and secondly that 
solar shading reduces the energy more than decreasing the glazing area from 
100 % to 57.2 %. If wanting to obtain the same energy consumption as for the 
100 % glazed facade with solar shading, the glazing area has to be decreased 
to approximately 40 %. 
The table shows more or less no difference in the consumption for light 
for the models, which is strange, and indicates that the simulation method 
is not sufficient to provide a realistic picture of the aspect. Model C, with 
and without solar shading, has as well been modelled in DaySim for the 
electrical consumption for light for level 4 and 9 in the model without solar 
shading. Only level 9 has been modelled with the solar shading due to some 
difficulties in the program. In DaySim it is possible to divide the levels into 
different zones, thereby taking into account the differences in the amount of 
daylight different places on the respective levels. In the following table 5.57 
the consumptions for the specific levels and models for the two programs 
are listed. The total energy consumption is calculated as well to see the 
influence, when only changing the consumption for electrical light according 
to DaySim and IESVE.
[KWh/m2/year]
DaySim
IESVE
Model C (- shading)
level 4 (light)
11.6
15.5
level 9 (light)
8.6
14
==PAGE:161==
153
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Weighed average (light)
10.6
15.5
System electricity
12.7
12.7
Boilers energy
17.1
17.1
ETotal (2015)
72
84
Model C (+ shading)
level 9 (light)
12.8
14.1
System electricity
9.8
9.8
Boilers energy
17.8
17.8
ETotal (2015)
70.7
74.7
Table 5.57: Consumptions for electrical light from DaySim and IESVE. All the consumptions are specified 
in the unit [KWh/m2/year].
The table show significant differences between the total energy consumption 
for the results in IESVE, and when using the electrical light consumption as 
found in IESVE. When calculating the total energy consumption for model 
C without solar shading (the biggest difference is seen for this situation) a 
reduction of 12 KWh/m2/year is seen, and thereby the requirements from 
Building Class 2010 is fulfilled. 
Glass is a complex material. As table 5.57 indicates, approaches which 
benefit in one aspect, is a disadvantage in another aspect. The most efficient 
mean for reducing the heating load is to reduce the glazing area, which 
increases the electricity consumption for light. One mean for reducing the 
cooling load is to decrease the glazing area as well, but it can be seen that it is 
more efficient if using solar shading, while combining these two reduces the 
cooling further, but then has the disadvantage of increasing the heating load.
There is different adjustable approaches for reducing the energy consumption, 
but common for all is that the difference is not that pronounced, and that 
other steps have to be taken in order to fulfill any energy performance 
framework. The final model, CS, is still approximately 6 KWh/m2 too high 
according to Building Class 2010. This points in the direction that the amount 
of glass is not the essential factor, if still taking precautious steps as having 
an efficient solar shading and a low U-value for the glass, but that it is more 
important that steps are taken towards energy saving- or energy producing 
actions as solar cells or to improve the efficiency of the building systems. 
The type of glazing also has to be considered, since it also has a direct effect 
on the comfort of the occupants. Radiant temperature asymmetry can be a 
problem with big glazed areas, but as long as the properties of the glazing is 
considered, this problem can be avoided. Having 3-layered glazing types, no 
problems at all were seen in relation to cold temperature asymmetry from 
the windows. 
==PAGE:162==
154
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
5.4 SUB-CONCLUSION
Problematic aspects relating to glass buildings have been investigated within 
daylight, indoor environment and energy consumption. 
During the investigations experiences have been made concerning the 
limitations and possibilities within the different used programs. An important 
factor when building with glass is the increased daylight distribution, and how 
the energy consumption can benefit from this. The consumption for electrical 
light stands for a great share of the total energy consumption. Therefore it is 
not insignificant, how it is simulated, and whether this is in accordance with 
the reality, or to the extent to which this is possible to predict. The energy 
consumption for electrical light has been calculated in DaySim and IESVE, and 
significant differences were seen. In DaySim the levels can be divided into 
zones with different requirements for the level of illuminance and thereby 
the program can simulate a more realistic situation. In IESVE the levels can as 
well be divided into zones, each having a sensor for the level of illuminance, 
but there is a conflict of interest between the wanted division of zones in 
relation to electrical light and in relation to evaluation of indoor environment 
and energy perspectives, because it is only possible to make one common 
division. To accommodate this, programs have to be combined or several 
models in the same program investigating each their aspect have to be made. 
So it’s important to know the limitations and possibilities within the wide 
range of programs to use. In IESVE the plugin Radiance was used to simulate 
the daylight and lighting more precisely but only very small differences were 
seen in the ligting consumption, when the glazing area was changed and 
solar shading added, compared to the differences in the consumption from 
DaySim. Even though the division wasn’t optimal in IESVE it’s still strange 
that no differences are really seen for example for design C with or without 
solar shading. It is important that the program is chosen with focus on the 
subject for the investigation.
The daylight distribution has been evaluated with two programs, and by the 
methods of DF and UDI. DF was investigated in both of the programs Velux 
Daylight Visualizer (VDV) and DaySim, and some inconsistencies were seen 
between the results, but it is difficult to say what the reason for this is. DF 
in VDV is a easy method to get an idea of the daylight conditions and is also 
a good tool to use in the designing phase, while DaySim and UDI provide 
more detailed results. DF is only described for the overcast sky condition, 
and therefore doesn’t describe the daylight conditions for other situations. It 
is kind of a method to be on the safe side, if 2 % Daylight Factor is obtained, 
then lower daylight distributions won’t occur. The disadvantage of the 
method is, that situations with too much light isn’t described, and this causes 
visual discomfort. UDI describes how much time within the useful range (not 
too low or too high) of daylight there is.  
==PAGE:163==
155
5. TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS
==PAGE:164==
Source [Jerzier, 2012]
==PAGE:165==
6. CONCLUSION
==PAGE:166==
158
6.1 CONCLUSION
Throughout the thesis several aspects of building envelopes with glass have 
been investigated. Glass is an antagonistic material, where the qualities of 
glass also can cause disadvantages. To clarify the problematics and qualities 
when building with glass, interviews were made with the two relevant 
professions of architects and engineers. Through this process as well as 
following a process in praxis a holistic perspective have been acquired. 
It is the transparency of glass, which makes it a desired and attractive material. 
It adds another dimension of space, from room basis, to building basis and 
further to the surrounding context. This bring quality to the building, but 
only if the design is conducted with an eye for the problematic aspects, glass 
can cause. 
Glass in building design is often related to higher energy consumption and 
problematic indoor environment, due to high heating and cooling loads. The 
assumption is often that the more glass, the more these issues are pronounced 
and to a certain extent, the critique is appropriate. Investigations, however, 
show that the effect of reducing the glazing area is not that effective as one 
would expect. 
Another approach for reducing the heating and cooling load is solar shading, 
and in the running between these two approaches the solar shading actually 
seems to have the biggest effect. To have the same influence on the energy 
consumption as an effective solar shading have on an all glazed building, the 
glazing area has to be decreased to approximately 40 %. 
Glass increases the amount of daylight, but more daylight is not necessarily 
equal to better indoor conditions, because it can cause visual discomfort. 
Precautions have to be taken to avoid glare and too big contrasts in the field 
of view. 
Decreasing the glazing area, is one method to reduce the daylight, but a 
more optimal method towards these issues is the use of solar shading, which 
reduces the daylight more equal. 
As seen in IESVE, the use of solar shading proved to be efficient towards the 
energy consumption as well. The disadvantage concerning solar shading is 
just that it jeopardise the quality of the glass, by limiting the transparency 
and the view out. If it is necessary to have solar shading covering the glazing 
most of the time, then what is the point of the glass? So it is a balance 
between maintaining the desired qualities, without jeopardising the indoor 
environment and energy consumption.
The solar shading proved to be efficient in IESVE, but it has to be considered that 
the conditions for the shading isn’t really clarified in IESVE. It is not specified, 
how much of the time the solar shading is in use, which is very relevant for 
evaluation of the effect. Furthermore the development of solar shading in 
IESVE is quite limited, so it is only possible to simulate simple controlling 
systems. Several programs have been in use during the investigations, and 
the limitations and possibilities within these are important to consider in 
relation to the subject of investigation and the outcome. 
==PAGE:167==
159
Investigations have been carried out in relation to glazing types and overall 
concepts for facade designs, and as described, different glazing areas and 
solar shading. Within these parameters it is possible to optimise the solutions, 
which is important to obtain the best solutions. When adding solar shading 
further improvements were seen, but still it was not enough for obtaining 
any energy performance framework, which fulfilled any building class.
 
The consumption for electrical light was investigated in both DaySim and 
IESVE, and with the possibility to detail different lighting zones in DaySim, 
it was possible to calculate a more realistic consumption, which reduced 
the total energy consumption quite a bit. This indicates that it is quite 
important, how the different systems are modelled to get the “right” result 
and consideration and knowledge should be put into this. 
With the different optimisation steps, an energy performance framework 
fulfilling building class 2010 was possible, but there is quite a way to fulfilling 
the building class 2015. More extensive steps towards energy production 
by solar cells or optimisations in the building systems to really save energy 
have to be taken to move the energy consumption further. The study shows, 
that when reasonable precautions are taken as choosing the energy effcient 
glazing type, and using some type of solar shading system, then the glazing 
area is not crucial, and there is a range of freedom in the design of the 
facade. The freedom in the design extends, the more optimised the building 
systems are executed, and here lies the potential for architectural quality, 
which might be compromised in favour of rational energy efficient buildings. 
In extension to this the cooperation between the architects and the engineers 
is of great importance for the final result. The cooperation between the 
architects and engineers in the process of the early stage of T30 was an 
example of a beneficial cooperation. Investigations were made, which 
influenced and adjusted the design accordingly. This aspect is difficult to 
control and measure and make guidelines for but it is important to optimise 
solutions especially for a complex project as glass buildings are. 
==PAGE:168==
160
REFERENCES
BOOKS
[Eekhout, 1990]                	
EEKHOUT, M. (1990) Product Development in Glass Structures. Uitgeverij 
	
	
	
	
010 Publishers.
 
[Weller et al., 2009]          	
WELLER, B., HÄRTH, K., TASCHE, S. and Unnewehr, S. (2009) 
	
	
	
	
Detail Practice, Glass in Building, Principles, Applications, Examples. Birkhäuser.
[Kohlmaier et al., 1991]   	
KOHLMAIER, G. and SARTORY, B. Von. (1991) Houses of Glass, A Nineteenth-	
	
	
	
	
Century Building type. The MIT Press Cambridge, Massachusetts London, 		
	
	
	
	
England.
[Richards, 2006]	
	
RICHARDS, B. (2006) New Glass Architecture, Laurence King Publishing.
[Ruck, 2000]	 	
	
RUCK, N. International Energy Agency. (July 2000) Daylight in Buildings, A 		
	
	
	
	
source book on daylighting systems and components, Lawrence Berkeley 	 	
	
	
	
	
National Laboratory.
[Read et al., 1933] 	
	
READ, A. B. and Walsh, J. W. T. (1933) Electric lighting of buildings. I.E.E. 
	
	
	
	
Journal Vol. 72, No. 434, February.
[van Ooyen et al., 1987] 	
VAN OOYEN, M.H.F., VAN DE WEIJGERT, J.A.C. and BEGEMANN S.H.C., (1987) 	
	
	
	
	
Preferred Luminances in Offices, Journal of the Illuminating Engineering 
	
	
	
	
Society, Vol 16, No 2, pp 152-156.
[Beck et al., 2010] 	
	
BECK, W., DOLMANS, D., DUTOO, G., HALL, A., SEPPÄNEN, O. (2010) 
	
	
	
	
Solar Shading - How to integrate solar shading in sustainable buildings, REHVA.
STANDARDS
[SBi 318, 1999]	
	
CHRISTOFFERSEN, J., PETERSEN, E., JOHNSEN, K., VALBJØRN, O. and 	
	
	
	
	
	
HYGGE, S.  (1999) SBi- rapport 318, Vinduer og dagslys - en feltundersøgelse i 	
	
	
	
	
kontorbygninger, Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut. 
[SBi 192, 1999] 	
	
LORENTZEN, C. A.  (1999) SBi-anvisning 192: Glas i byggeriet, 
	
	
	
	
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut. 
[SBi 219, 2008] 	
	
JOHNSEN, K. and CHRISTOFFERSEN, J. (2008) SBi 219, Dagslys i rum og 
	
	
	
	
bygninger. 1. udgave. Statens Byggeforskningsinsitut. 
[DS EN 572-1, 2012] 	 	
DS EN 572-1 (2012) Glass in building - Basic sosa lime silicate glass products - 	
	
	
	
	
Part 1: Definitions and general physical and mechanical properties, 3. edition, 	
	
	
	
	
Danish Standards Foundation.
[SBi 2013:20] 	 	
	
IVERSEN, A., ROY, N., HVASS, M., JØRGENSEN, N., CHRISTOFFERSEN, J., 	
	
	
	
	
	
OSTERHAUS, W. and JOHNSEN, K. (2013) SBi 2013:20, Dagslysberegninger 	
	
	
	
	
i praksis - En undersøgelse af ni beregningsprogrammer med udgangspunkt i 	
	
	
	
	
fem typiske rum. Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut
==PAGE:169==
161
[DS 469]    	
	
	
DS 469 (2013) Varme- og køleanlæg i bygninger, Dansk Standard. 2 udgave. 
	
	
	
	
2013-02-06.
[DS 474]	
	
	
DS 474 Norm for specifikation af termisk indeklima. Dansk Standard. 
	
	
	
	
1 udgave. 1993-08-17.
[Danvak]	
	
	
HANSEN, H. E., KJERULF-JENSEN, P. and STAMPE, O. B. Grundbog, Varme - og 	
	
	
	
	
klimateknik, 3. Udgave, Danvak.	
[SBi 2011-15, 2011]	
	
JOHNSEN, K., CHRISTOFFERSEN, J., SØRENSEN, H. and JESSEN, G. 
	
	
	
	
(2011) 	Integreret regulering af solafskærmning, dagslys og kunstlys, 
	
	
	
	
1. udgave. Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut. 
[DS/CEN/CR,1998]	
	
DS/CEN/CR (2001) Ventilation i bygninger - Projekteringskriterier for 
	
	
	
	
indeklimaet, DS, 1. udgave
ARTICLES
[Nabil et al., 2006] 	
	
NABIL, A. and MARDALJEVIC, J. (2006) Useful daylight illuminances: A 
	
	
	
	
replacement for daylight factors, Institute of Energy and Sustainable 	
	
	
	
	
	
Development, De Montfort University, Science Direct.
[Bessoudo et al., 2010] 	
BESSOUDO, M., TZEMPELIKOS, A., ATHIENITIS, A.K. and 
	
	
	
	
ZMEUREANU, R. (2010) Indoor thermal environmental conditions near 	
	
	
	
	
	
glazed facades with shading devises - Part 1: Experiments and building 
	
	
	
	
thermal model, Building and 	Environment, Elsevier
[Fontoynont et al., 2004] 	
FONTOYNONT, M., TSANGRASSOULIS, A. and SYNNEFA, A. (2004) SynthLight 
	
	
	
	
Handbook - Chapter 2: Daylighting, SynthLight
REPORTS
[Urban Green, 2013] 	 	
Urban Green (2013) Seduced by the view: A closer look at all-glass buildings, 
	
	
	
	
U. S. Green Building Council.
[Wille, 2008] 	 	
	
Wille, L. F. (2008) Daylighting Design for Urban Master Planners, 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
DTU Civil Engineering (BYG DTU)
[Huizenga et al., 2006] 	
Center for Built Environment: HUIZENGA, C., ZHANG, H., MATTELAER, P., 
	
	
	
	
YU, T., ARENS, E. Arup: LYONS, P. (2006) Window Performance for Human 		
	
	
	
	
Thermal Comfort, February. Center for the Built Environment, University of 	
	
	
	
	
Califrnia, Berkeley. 
[Poirazis, 2008]	
	
POIRAZIS, H. (2008) ‘Single and Double Skin Glazed Office Buildings, 
	
	
	
	
Analysis of Energy Use and Indoor Climate, Division of Energy and Building 	
	
	
	
	
Design, Department of Architecture and Built Environment, Lund University, 	
	
	
	
	
Faculty of Engineering LTH. 
[Stampe, 2001]	
	
STAMPE, C. (2001) Glasfacder i kontorbyggeri, Specialkursus ved IBE, DTU. 
[Hoffmann et al., 2012]	
HOFFMANN, S., JEDEK, C., ARENS, E. (2012) Assessing thermal comfort near 	
==PAGE:170==
162
	
	
	
	
glass facades with new tools, April. Center for the Built Environment, 
	
	
	
	
UC Berkeley.
[Schultz, 2002]        	
	
Schultz, Jørgen M. ‘Vinduer med smal ramme/karmkonstruktion og stort lys- 
	
	
	
	
og solindfald’. 2002, Department of Civil Engineering, DTU.
INTERNET
[Alter, 2014] 	 	
	
ALTER, L. (2014) Can an All-Glass Office Building Really Be Considered Green?, 	
	
	
	
	
Tree Hugger, [Online], Available: http://www.treehugger.com/sustainable-	
	
	
	
	
product-design/can-an-all-glass-office-building-really-be-considered-green.	
	
	
	
	
html [Accessed: 13. May 2015]
[AGC]	 	
	
	
AGC Glass Europe, All About Glass, [Online], Available: www.yourglass.com/	
	
	
	
	
agc-glass-europe/pl/pl/toolbox/pocket/2/All-about-glass.pdf [Accessed: 19. 
	
	
	
	
June 2015] 
[Pilkington, 2014]	
	
Pilkington (2014) Glasfakta 2015 - Et praktisk hjælpemiddel for valg af 	
	
	
	
	
bygningsglas, [Online], Available: https://www.pilkington.com/da/dk/
	
	
	
	
architects/glasfakta-2015 ,Pilkington, NSG Group [Accessed: 19. June 2015]
[NSG group, Pilkington]	
NSG group, Pilkington Spectrum On-line, [Online programme] Available: http://
	
	
	
	
spectrum.pilkington.com/, [Accessed: 25. June 2015]
[Glass Education Center] 	
Glass Education Center, Glass Topics, How Low-E Glass works, (??) [Online], 	
	
	
	
	
Avaliable: http://educationcenter.ppg.com/glasstopics/how_lowe_works.aspx  	
	
	
	
	
[Accessed: 10. May 2015]
[SBi 230, 2014]	
	
Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut (2010) SBi 230, [Online], Avaliable: http://		
	
	
	
	
bygningsreglementet.dk/forside/0/2  [Accessed: 5. May 2015]
[Reinhart, 2012] 	
	
REINHART, C (2012) [Radiance-daysim] Daylight Autonomy Benchmarks, 
	
	
	
	
[Online], Available:  http://www.radiance-online.org/pipermail/radiance-
	
	
	
	
daysim/2012-October/000023.html, [Acessed: 1. May 2015]
[Velux] 	
	
	
Velux, Daylight Visualizer [Online], Avaliable: http://viz.velux.com/ 	
	
	
	
	
	
[Accessed: 6. May 2015]
[IES, ApacheSim] 	
	
Integrated Environmental Solutions Limited (year???) ApacheSim Calculation 	
	
	
	
	
Methods, IES Virtual Environment 6.5, Apache, [Online], Avaliable:  
	
	
	
	
http://www.iesve.com/downloads/help/Thermal/Reference/	
	
	
	
	
	
	
ApacheSimCalculationMethods.pdf [Accessed: 6. May 2015]
[IES, ModelIT] 		
	
Integrated Environmental Solutions Limited (year???), IES Tutorial 
	
	
	
	
ModelIT (Version 5.8), [Online], Available: http://www.iesve.com/content/	
	
	
	
	
mediaassets/pdf/ModelIT%20Tutorial%20Ver%205_8%20Rev1.pdf 
	
	
	
	
[Accessed: 7. May 2015]
[IES, Suncast] 	 	
	
IES Technical Support (year???) FAQ - How do I use the Solar Analysis tool 		
	
	
	
	
in Suncast?, [Online], Available: http://www.iesve.com/website/var/assets/	
	
	
	
	
support/faq/pdf/004-solar-analysis-faq_1.pdf [Accessed: 7. May 2015]
==PAGE:171==
163
[IES, Macroflo] 	
	
Integrated Environmental Solutions Limited (year???) MacroFlo Calculation 	
	
	
	
	
Methods 6.0, [Online], Available: 
	
	
	
	
http://www.iesve.com/downloads/help/Thermal/Reference/	
	
	
	
	
	
	
MacroFloCalculationMethods.pdf [Accessed: 6. May 2015]
[IES, RadianceIES] 	
	
IES Technical Support (year???) IES Tutorial RadianceIES (Version 6.0), 
	
	
	
	
[Online], Available: http://www.iesve.com/content/mediaassets/pdf/	
	
	
	
	
	
Radiance%20tutorial%20Ver%206_0%20Rev1.pdf [Accessed: 7. May 2015]
[IES, Vista] 	
	
	
IES Technical Support (year???) IES Tutorial Vista (Version 5.8), [Online], 	 	
	
	
	
	
Available: http://www.iesve.com/content/mediaassets/pdf/Vista%20Ver%20	
	
	
	
	
5_8%20tutorial%20Rev1.pdf [Accessed: 7. May 2015]
[Reinhart, 2015] 	
	
Reinhart, C. (2015) DaySim - Advanced Daylight Simulation Software, [Online], 	
	
	
	
	
Available: http://daysim.ning.com/ [Accessed: 8. May 2015]
[MicroShade, 2013] 	 	
MicroShade (2013) MicroShade - Guideline to daylight simulations in DaySim, 	
	
	
	
	
[Online], Available: http://www.photosolar.dk/userfiles/file/Dokumenter/		
	
	
	
	
Guideline%20to%20daylight%20calculation_2013.pdf [Accessed: 8. May 2015]
[Virtual Environment, IES] 	
Virtual Environment, IES, Constructions Database User Guide no. 5.9, 
	
	
	
	
[Online], Available: http://www.iesve.com/downloads/help/Thermal/	
	
	
	
	
	
ConstructionsDatabase.pdf, [Accessed 17. June 2015]
[Littlefair, 2006] 	
	
LITTLEFAIR, P. (2006) Design for improved solar shading control, [Online] 
	
	
	
	
Available: http://www.cibse.org/Knowledge/CIBSE-TM-(1)/TM37-Design-for-	
	
	
	
	
Improved-Solar-Shading-Control, [Accessed 15. June 2015]
[Heiselberg] 	 	
	
HEISELBERG, P. (not given) Overophedning, brug af køling og aktiv 		
	
	
	
	
	
solafskærmning, Aalborg University, [Online] Available from:  
	
	
	
	
http://www.danskebyggematerialer.dk/files/DanskeByggematerialer/Vindue_	
	
	
	
	
glas_og_facadedag/2015/Per%20Heiselberg.pdf,  [Accessed 16. June 2015]
[Rasmussen et al., 2015]	
Rasmussen, H.F. and Vangeloglou, E. (2015) Forældet dagslyskriterie spærrer 
	
	
	
	
for bæredygtigt byggeri, [Online] Available: http://ing.dk/artikel/kronik-
	
	
	
	
foraeldet-dagslyskriterie-spaerrer-baeredygtigt-byggeri-175259, [Accessed 21. 
	
	
	
	
June 2015]
[Shading Device, IES]	 	
IES, Shading Device, Documentation – Constructions, [Online], Available: 
	
	
	
	
http://www.iesve.com/content/mediaassets/pdf/KBASE_CDB_Shading
	
	
	
	
Devices.pdf [Accessed: 25.06.15]
STUDY MATERIAL
[Reinhart, 2010] 	
	
REINHART, C.F. (2010) [Lecture notes] Tutorial on the Use of Daysim Simulations 
	
	
	
	
for Sustainable Design, Harvard Design School
[Jensen, 2005] 	
	
Jensen, H.T. (2005) [Lecture notes] Naturlig Ventilation, Undervisningsnotat,  	
	
	
	
	
Byg.DTU U-058
==PAGE:172==
164
[Rode et al., 2010]	
	
RODE, C., VEJ-HANSEN, C. (2010) [Lecture notes] Varmetransmission ved 
	
	
	
	
ledning, konvektion og stråling, Forelæsningsnotat, DTU Byg.
[Madsen, 1998]	
	
MADSEN, T. L. (1998) [Lecture notes]  Det termiske indeklima, forelæsningsnotat, 
	
	
	
	
Insitut for Bygninger og Energi, DTU. 
INTERVIEWS
[Schmidt, 2015]	
	
Schmidt, Henrik. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and Mathilde 	 	
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 19th of March. Appendix A.1.
[Janson, 2015]		
	
Janson, Robert. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and  Mathilde 	 	
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 19th of March. Appendix A.2.
[Mikkelsen, 2015]	
	
Mikkelsen, Stig. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and  Mathilde 	 	
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 13th of April. Appendix A.4.
[Hørmann, 2015]	
	
Hørmann, Philip. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and Mathilde 	 	
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 13th of April.  Appendix A.4.
[Nielsen, 2015]	
	
Nielsen, Jens Henrik. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and  Mathilde 	
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 26th of March. Appendix A.7.
[Jørgensen, 2015]	
	
Jørgensen, Michael. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and  Mathilde 	
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 17th of April. Appendix A.5.
[Jensen, 2015]		
	
Jensen, Jonas Vendel. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and  Mathilde 	
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 23th of April. Appendix A.6.
[Teisen, 2015]		
	
Teisen, Ole. (2015) Interviewed by: Christina Erikshøj, and  Mathilde 
	
	
	
	
Landgren, 23th of April. Appendix A.6.
ILLUSTRATIONS
[thest, 2013]	 	
	
thest, (2013) The Broadgate Tower, [Online] Available: https://instagram.
	
	
	
	
com/p/PXIoRnPTxI/ [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[turbosquid]	 	
	
turbosquid, glass window architecture, [Online] Available: http://www.
	
	
	
	
turbosquid.com/FullPreview/Index.cfm/ID/785729 [Accessed: 23rd June 
	
	
	
	
2015]
[wisegeek] 	
	
	
wisegeek, Energy-efficient tinted glass is also a design feature of many 
	
	
	
	
modern office buildings, [Online], Available: http://www.wisegeek.org/what-
	
	
	
	
is-tinted-glass.htm#office-building-with-tinted-glass-windrows [Accessed: 
	
	
	
	
23rd June 2015]
[Dunlap, 2012]	
	
Dunlap, D.W., (2012) A new Look at the Ford Foundation Building, [Online], 
	
	
	
	
Available: http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/20/an-architect-
	
	
	
	
returns-to-his-first-triumph/?_r=0 [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[Ingenhoven]	 	
	
Ingenhoven, C., European Investment Bank, [Online], Available: http://
==PAGE:173==
165
	
	
	
	
openbuildings.com/buildings/european-investment-bank-profile-
	
	
	
	
3941#!buildings-media/3 [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[Optimedia, 2014]	
	
Optimedia (2014] Curtain Walling, [Online], Available: http://www.optimedia.
	
	
	
	
com.ro/pereti-cortina/?lang=en [Accessed: 23.06.15]
[lesliecreasey, 1851]	 	
leasliecreasy (1851) The inside of the Crystal Palace, [Online], Available: http://
	
	
	
	
lesliecreasey.blogspot.dk/2012/06/new-glass-architecture-something-to-see.
	
	
	
	
html [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[nfartchitecture]	
	
nfartchitecture, (2014) Willis Faber & Duman Headquaters, [Online], Available:
	
	
	
	
http://nfartchitecture.tumblr.com/post/72869604441/title-willis-faber-
	
	
	
	
dumas-headquarters [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[photographersdirect]	
Photographersdirect, london rooftop & curtain wall elevation tall office block 
	
	
	
	
sun blinds lowered varying amounts creating random abstract pattern, [Online], 
	
	
	
	
Available: http://www.photographersdirect.com/buyers/stockphoto.asp?
	
	
	
	
imageid=1970238 [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[Byggnadsglas]	
	
Byggnadsglas, [Online], Available: http://www.borlangeglas.se/byggnadsglas/
	
	
	
	
[Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[Elite Art Glass]	
	
Elite Art Glass, Timbered broken glass, [Online], Available: http://www.elite-
	
	
	
	
artglass.com/assets/images/tempered-glass-thumb7762298.jpg 
	
	
	
	
[Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[Batterixlcom, 2015]	 	
Batterixlcom, (2015) Solar spectrum, [Online] Available: http://photovoltaicell.
	
	
	
	
com/photovoltaic-cell-spectrum/ [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[David Leventi Photography]	 David Leventi Photography, Ford Foundation, 320 East 43rd street New York, 
	
	
	
	
[Online], Available: http://www.davidleventi.com/portfolio/new-york/34/, 
	
	
	
	
[Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[Sculman, 1960]	
	
Sculman, J. (1960) Portlan Memorial Coliseum, [Online], Available: 
	
	
	
	
http://buildipedia.com/aec-pros/featured-architecture/playing-over-the-years
	
	
	
	
-chronicling-americas-historic-sports-venues [Accessed: 23rd June 2015]
[Jezier, 2012]	 	
	
Jezier, I. (2012) Modern Glass Facade, [Online], Available: http://fineartamerica.
	
	
	
	
com/featured/modern-glass-facade-ingo-jezierski.html [Accessed: 23rd June 
	
	
	
	
2015]
==PAGE:174==
==PAGE:175==
==PAGE:176==
