==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brynjar Örn Jensson  
s121065 
Modelling Viscoelastic 
Properties of Tendons 
Master’s thesis 
Supervisors: 
Marie Sand Traberg 
Tine Alkjær 
==PAGE:2==
 
==PAGE:3==
i
Abstract
Mathematical modelling of the mechanical behavior of ligaments and tendons can be
considered an eﬀective approach in acquiring more knowledge about these types of con-
nective tissues. Ligaments and tendons have been shown to undergo volume loss when
displaced in the direction of their ﬁbers which is indicated by large Poisson’s ratios mea-
sured during tensile tests.
Most constitutive models representing tendon or ligament
behavior presented in the literature to date generally assume the tissue to be incom-
pressible thereby neglecting any possible change in volume. In this thesis, a hyperelastic
constitutive model is introduced that assumes the tissue to be compressible and therefore
capable of changes in volume. This constitutive model incorporates a volumetric term
that describes the volumetric material behavior of ligaments and tendons under uniaxial
tension. The constitutive model was implemented into COMSOL Multiphysics and the
results from a uniaxial tension test were examined. Experimental data obtained from the
human patellar tendon were then used to obtain the parameters of the constitutive model
in order to describe the stress-stretch behavior of the human patellar tendon seen in vivo.
The results obtained indicated successful implementation of the constitutive model which
displayed the expected stress-stretch behavior of the ligament sample. A relationship for
the behavior of the volumetric strain energy was presented which described the volumetric
material behavior of a ligament as it is displaced in the direction of its ﬁbers. Further-
more, an expression for the Cauchy stress tensor σ was presented which was shown to
be capable of describing the stress-stretch behavior of the human patellar tendon when
combined with the appropriate parameters.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
ii
List of Figures
iii
List of Tables
iv
1
Introduction
3
2
Background
7
2.1
Anatomy of the tendon
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Mechanical properties of tendons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Continuum mechanics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Data section
23
3.1
Description of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Presentation of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Data ﬁtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Modelling
31
4.1
A hyperelastic constitutive model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Implementation into COMSOL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Parameter estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Discussion
65
Bibliography
69
Appendix
72
ii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
iii
A Matlab script
73
List of Figures
2.1
The hierarchical structure of the tendon[41]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Experimental setup to test for the mechanical properties of tendons[44]. . . . . .
9
2.3
A tendon stress-strain curve[41].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Simpliﬁed schematic of the AFM setup used for mechanically testing single collagen
ﬁbrils [35]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Visualization of hysteresis, where the hysteresis is represented by the grey area.
When the tendon is loaded and unloaded, the unloaded curve does not follow the
loading curve. The energy is lost as heat [32]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Stress-relaxation test. Predeﬁned strain is applied and the corresponding stress is
followed as a function of time [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Creep test. Constant stress is applied to the tissue and the corresponding strain
is measured as a function of time[17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8
Three mechanical models of viscoelastic material.
(a) Maxwell, (b) Voigt, (c)
Kelvin. F = Force, µ = spring constant, η = viscosity coeﬃcient and x = distance
[17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.9
The reference and current conﬁguration of a solid, position vectors and displace-
ment ﬁeld[45]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
Graphical visualization of the relationship between force applied to the tendon
and the subsequent elongation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
The stress-strain relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Fitting of the experimental data. Slow loading rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Fitting of the experimental data. Medium loading rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Fitting of the experimental data. Fast loading rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Fitting of the experimental data with an exponential equation for the slow loading
rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Rectangular structure created in COMSOL as a representation of a ligament sam-
ple. The numerical values on the axes are in [mm]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
The expressions of the terms in the strain energy function . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Simple extension of a structure in the direction of the x1-axis[37]. . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
The variables that were deﬁned for the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
The eﬀect of the parameter κ on the Wvol term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.6
The eﬀect of the parameter m on the Wvol term
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.7
The eﬀect of the parameter ν0 on the Wvol term
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.8
The Prescribed Displacement node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:6==
4.9
The Parametric Sweep node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.10 The pre-determined point selected for the point evaluation. The numerical values
on the axes are in [mm]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.11 The Point Evaluation node
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.12 The y-component of the stress tensor in the material model when the structure
has been displaced 1.3 mm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.13 The stress-strain relationship of the model implemented into COMSOL
. . . . .
48
4.14 Stress-strain relationship presented by Swedberg et al. [36]
. . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.15 The stress-stretch relationship of the model implemented into COMSOL . . . . .
49
4.16 The behavior of the volumetric term Wvol obtained from COMSOL as a function
of displacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.17 The calculated volumetric term Wvol as a function of stretch
. . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.18 The volumetric term Wvol obtained from COMSOL as a function of stretch . . .
51
4.19 The calculated isochoric term Wiso as a function of stretch
. . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.20 The isochoric term Wiso obtained from COMSOL as a function of stretch . . . .
52
4.21 The calculated total strain energy W as a function of stretch . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.22 The total strain energy W obtained from COMSOL as a function of stretch . . .
53
4.23 The y-component of the Cauchy stress σ.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.24 The y-component of the Cauchy stress σ ﬁtted with the stress-stretch relationship
displayed by the human patellar tendon when using ν0 = 8.5. . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.25 The y-component of the Cauchy stress σ ﬁtted with the stress-stretch relationship
displayed by the human patellar tendon when using ν0 = 9.5. . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.26 The apparent Poisson’s ratio presented by Swedberg et al. [36] . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.27 The apparent Poisson’s ratio for the present model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
List of Tables
4.1
The parameters in the strain energy function, W. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Parameters presented by Swedberg et al.[36] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
The κ parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
The m parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
The ν0 parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6
The parameters of the constitutive model obtained from the optimization . . . .
58
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Marie Sand Traberg and Tine
Alkjær for all their help and advice during the process of this thesis. No matter what kind
of questions or problems I had, they were always more than happy to help. Their assistance
was an essential part of the work done in this thesis.
I would also like to thank Olivier
Seynnes and Kirsten Albracht for the experimental data of the human patellar tendon as well
as interesting conversations related to the topic of this thesis.
1
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Tendons are an interesting part of the human body to examine and many questions remain
unanswered regarding the tissue.
In vitro studies of connective tissue have demonstrated
that stress and strain rate inﬂuence the mechanical properties of the tissue [41]. The direct
mechanisms remain unknown, but are believed to be attributable to the relative viscosity of
these tissues [13]. The central problem is to determine the viscous component of the tendon.
Furthermore, the exact mechanisms giving rise to the viscoelastic behavior of tendons remain
unclear. Identifying the source of this behavior is then again complicated by the multilevel
structural organization of the tendon and the possible interplay between the structural levels.
It has been suggested that the viscoelastic behavior can arise from the ﬂuid ﬂow inside the
tissue, from the viscoelasticity of the solid phase or from viscous interactions between the
solid and ﬂuid phase of the tissue [22]. A possible way to come closer to understanding the
mechanical behavior of tendons could be to apply a modelling approach.
Modelling of the tendon’s mechanical behavior can be considered as an interesting ap-
proach in acquiring more knowledge about the tissue.
Reliable modelling allows for the
understanding and prediction of the tendon behavior under certain loading conditions which
can prove useful in various clinical applications.
There is a vast amount of literature on
modelling the viscoelastic behavior of both ligaments and tendons but there is still a certain
mismatch between what is seen in vivo and what has been modelled in the literature.
The present thesis aims at presenting a hyperelastic constitutive model that can describe
the viscoelastic behavior of tendons seen experimentally. Most constitutive models represent-
ing tendon or ligament behavior that have been presented in the literature to date generally
assume incompressibilty [42] thereby neglecting any possible volume change of the tissue. It
has been presented that ligaments and tendons undergo volume loss when stretched along
the ﬁber axis [36] and since these tissues are composed of approximately 60-70% water by
weight [17] the volume loss under tensile loading suggests that ﬂuid is being exuded from the
tissue. This volume loss is indicated by experimental measurements of the Poisson’s ratio
in tendon and ligament tissue which greatly exceeds the isotropic limit of 0.5 and has been
reported in several studies [29, 21, 12]. The microstructural origin of the ratio is unknown
but it has been hypothesized that a helical organization of ﬁbrils within a ﬁber unit might
result in a large Poisson’s ratio. The previously mentioned facts highlight the importance
of assuming volume loss of the tendon or ligament when modelling these types of tissues.
3
==PAGE:10==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Therefore, in the present thesis, a modelling approach that assumes ligaments and tendons
to be compressible was applied and aimed at describing the volumetric material behavior of
ligaments and tendons.
The present thesis introduces a hyperelastic constitutive model that assumes that the
overall stress in the tissue is based on the stress contribution from three diﬀerent terms. A
term describing the behavior of the collagen ﬁbers, a term representing the behavior of the
extraﬁbrillar matrix and ﬁnally a term describing the volumetric deformation of the tissue.
In Chapter 4 of this thesis, the implementation of the hyperelastic constitutive model into
the program COMSOL is presented. The constitutive model used for the implementation was
presented by Swedberg et al. [36] in 2014. Their model describes the behavior of an adult
rabbit medial collateral ligament (MCL) and they presented a Cauchy stress relationship for
a compressible transversely isotropic material that has not been previously presented in the
literature. Their results demonstrated that the viscoelastic behavior of ligaments and ten-
dons can be predicted by modelling the movement of ﬂuid in the tissue when combined with
a large Poisson’s ratio. Based on these results presented by Swedberg et al., the decision of
implementing this particular constitutive model into COMSOL was made.
The aim of this thesis was to successfully implement this constitutive model for a compress-
ible transversely isotropic material presented in [36] into COMSOL and perform a uniaxial
tension test. The features of the program were used to simulate the uniaxial tension test
of a ligament sample where the sample is pulled along the direction of the collagen ﬁbers.
The results were then analyzed and the contributions of diﬀerent factors to the stress in the
ligament sample were examined.
For the purpose of the analysis in this thesis, in vivo experimental data of the human
patellar tendon were acquired in order to test the ability of the constitutive model presented
by Swedberg et al. to describe the mechanical behavior of tendons in vivo. A customized
program developed in Matlab was used to obtain the parameters of the constitutive model
by estimating the value of the parameters from the experimental data. The parameters es-
timated by Matlab were then incorporated into the constitutive model. That enabled for
the comparison of the viscoelastic behavior of the human patellar tendon seen experimentally
and the predicted behavior of the patellar tendon using the aformentioned constitutive model.
As discussed above, the objectives of the research conducted in this thesis were to:
• Successfully implement the hyperelastic constitutive model presented by Swedberg et
al. into COMSOL and acquire adequate results from a uniaxial tension test.
• Use experimental data obtained from the human patellar tendon to ﬁnd the parameters
of the aforementioned constitutive model in order to describe the stress-stretch behavior
of the patelar tendon seen in vivo.
• Apply modelling methods to obtain and describe the volumetric behavior of ligaments
and tendons.
Based on the previous discussion and existing knowledge from the literature, this thesis
starts by describing the anatomical structure of the tendon as it essentially contributes to its
==PAGE:11==
5
mechanical properties. Additionally, a section is presented that will review tendon mechanical
properties and how they can be examined and obtained experimentally. Then a certain foun-
dation for the upcoming modelling analysis is established by reviewing the existing literature
on how tendon mechanical properties can be simulated by means of mathematical modelling.
Finally, Chapter 4 presents a continuum based constitutive model that assumes the tissue to
be compressible and analyzes the stress-stretch behavior of such a model.
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter aims at establishing a relevant foundation for the work done in this thesis. The
anatomy and structure of the tendon is presented as a good understanding of the tendon
structure is essential in order to understand the mechanical properties of tendons, which are
then covered in the following section. In that section, important characteristics of the tendon
tissue are examined as well as how these properties are obtained with experimental testing.
Furthermore, the chapter contains an overview of the mathematical models that have been
presented in the existing literature and have been used to describe the mechanical behavior
of tendons. Finally, the relevant mathematical formulations for modelling tendon tissue are
introduced.
2.1
Anatomy of the tendon
Tendons are essential in human locomotion as they are responsible for transmitting muscle
forces to bone.
The principal component of tendons is the ﬁbrous protein collagen, with
other components of the tendon being proteoglycans, glycoproteins, water and cells. The
most abundant tendon component is type I collagen, which constitutes about 60% of the dry
mass of the tendon and about 95% of the total collagen[41]. Collagen serves as the main load
carrying element in the tendon. The tendon, that functions primarily to transmit tension,
has a parallel-ﬁber structure where the ﬁber bundles appear wavy in unloaded condition but
under tension they straighten out [10]. When the tensile force is released, the tendon resumes
its normal wavy appearance [16].
The structure of the tendon is a multi-unit hierarchical structure composed of collagen
molecules, ﬁbrils, ﬁber bundles, fascicles and tendon units that run parallel to the tendon’s
long axis [41]. This hierarchical structure is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
The ﬁbril is the smallest functional unit of the tendon and consists of collagen molecules
that are aligned end-to-end. The next level in the tendon hierarchy is composed of collagen
ﬁbers. The collagen ﬁbers are made up of collagen ﬁbrils and are bound together by en-
dotenons, which is a thin layer of connective tissue that contains blood vessels, lymphatic’s
and nerves [41]. The collagen ﬁbers make up the basic unit of the tendon [16]. These ﬁber
bundles then form fascicles, and bundles of fascicles are then enclosed by the epitenon, making
up the tendon unit and thereby completing the hierarchical structure of the tendon [41].
7
==PAGE:14==
8
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.1: The hierarchical structure of the tendon[41].
The three-dimensional ultrastructure of tendon ﬁbers and ﬁber bundles is highly com-
plex. Within one collagen ﬁber, the ﬁbrils are not only orientated longitudinally but also
transversely and horizontally. Furthermore, the longitudinal ﬁbers do not only run in paral-
lel but also cross each other, forming spirals [16]. The hierarchical assembly of the collagen
ﬁbers leads to a large variety of mechanical properties. Understanding the hierarchical struc-
ture of the tendon is therefore a key to the understanding of their mechanical properties [8].
The basic function of the tendon is to transmit forces created by the muscles to the bone,
thereby making joint movement possible. The complex macro- and microstructure of tendons
and tendon ﬁbers described above make this possible. Additionally, the internal structure of
the ﬁbers forms a protective mechanism against forces of various directions, which prevents
damage and disconnection of the ﬁbers [16].
2.2
Mechanical properties of tendons
Tendons are soft connective tissue exhibiting nonlinear viscoelastic properties [4] as they are a
biphasic tissue having ﬂuid and solid phases. The ﬂuid phase constitutes 60-70% of the total
weight of the tendon and the solid phase, which consists of the highly organized collagen
ﬁbril network discussed above, constitutes over 15% of the wet weight [17]. The viscoelastic-
ity of tendons is thought to be a function of the main mechanical component, collagen [6].
The viscoelastic behavior is thought to result from collagen, water, and the interactions be-
tween collagenous proteins and non-collagenous proteins, e.g. proteoglycans [41]. Viscoelastic
==PAGE:15==
2.2. MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF TENDONS
9
materials have the properties of both viscous and elastic materials and can be modeled by
combining elements that represent these characteristics [4]. The material properties of ten-
dons depend, in part, on the rate at which the tendon is loaded and most studies ﬁnd higher
failure stresses and failure strains at faster strain rates [44] as well as that the stiﬀness of the
tendon increases with increasing loading rate [18].
Because tendons are viscoelastic, they both possess elastic and viscous mechanical prop-
erties and possess time-dependent mechanical behavior. This produces some important me-
chanical consequences for tendons. The viscoelastic behavior of tendons is thought to play
an important role in the normal function of the tissue. The viscoelastic properties dissipate
energy and are therefore believed to play a role in protecting the tissue from damage [30].
The major characteristics of a viscoelastic material such as tendons are hysteresis, stress-
relaxation, and creep. Additionally, diﬀerent strain rates aﬀect their mechanical properties
as well. These characteristics will be deﬁned in the following subsections as well as how the
mechanical properties of tendons are obtained with experimental testing.
2.2.1
Experimental testing
The mechanical properties of isolated tendons are normally determined via tensile tests [3]
where the outcome of such a test can be analyzed with a stress-strain curve.
In tensile
testing, a tissue sample is ﬁxed with two ends, e.g. by using metallic clamps and the sample
is then stretch to a predeﬁned stress or strain [17]. An example of this experimental setup is
illustrated in Figure 2.2 and then a typical non-linear tendon stress-strain curve can be seen
below in Figure 2.3
Figure 2.2: Experimental setup to test for the mechanical properties of tendons[44].
The initial region of the curve in Figure 2.3 is the so called toe region, where the tendon
is strained up to 2% [41]. This toe region is believed to be due to structural change in ﬁbril
organization from a crimped or wavy pattern to a more straightened, parallel arrangement
[3]. Next region on the curve is the linear region, where the tendon is stretched less than 4%
and collagen ﬁbers lose their crimp-pattern[41] and are more parallel in arrangement [3]. This
linear region represents the response of collagenous tissue to further elongation and the slope
of the region is referred to as the Young’s modulus of the tendon. The Young’s modulus is
==PAGE:16==
10
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.3: A tendon stress-strain curve[41].
a measure of the stiﬀness of the tendon. The higher the value of the Young’s modulus, the
higher the degree of stiﬀness. If the tendon is stretched over 4%, microscopic tearing of the
tendon ﬁbers occurs, and if the strain goes beyond 8-10%, macroscopic failure occurs [41]. As
Figure 2.3 depicts, further stretch will cause rupture of the tendon.
In order to give the reader a sense of the magnitude of the tensile strength of at least
one type of tendon, a study by Johnson et al.[15] can be referred. The tensile strength value
describes how much stress the tendon can withstand before it ruptures. In that study they
found that the ultimate tensile strength of the human patellar tendon for younger donors
(29-50 yrs.) was 64.7 ± 15.0 MPa, whereas it was 53.6 ± 10.0 MPa for older donors (64-93
yrs.). These values coincide with another study by Wren et al.[44] where they reported that
failure stresses are in the range of 50-125 MPa.
Alternative methods to test for mechanical properties of tendons are e.g. by using ultra-
sonography and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). The methods have a fundamental diﬀerence
as the measurements from ultrasonography are obtained in vivo while AFM experiments are
performed in vitro. Furthermore, ultrasonography gives mechanical properties of the tendon
as a whole while AFM allows for the investigation of sub-level tendon structures such as the
collagen ﬁbrils.
Many studies have used ultrasound to examine the mechanical properties of tendons.
Fukashiro et al. successfully used ultrasound to test the characteristics of human tendon in
vivo [9] as well as Hansen et al.[11], where they assessed mechanical properties of the human
patellar tendon. This was done by placing and securing an ultrasound probe on the relevant
area of the knee. By measuring both the tibial and patellar movement by ultrasonography to-
gether with aquiring the patellar tendon force, mechanical properties could be obtained. The
cross-sectional area (CSA) of the patellar tendon was determined by the ultrasound images
as well as the deformation of the patellar tendon as it was deﬁned as the change in length
between the patella and the tibia. The tendon force was calculated by dividing the estimated
total knee extension moment by the moment arm which was estimated from measured femur
lengths. With this information, tendon stress could be obtained by dividing tendon force by
==PAGE:17==
2.2. MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF TENDONS
11
tendon CSA.
Atomic force microscopy can be used to explore the mechanical properties of single collagen
ﬁbrils as done by Svensson et al.[35] where they mechanically tested individual collagen ﬁbrils
by the methods of AFM. To explain the method brieﬂy, after obtaining the collagen ﬁbrils
they are attached to a AFM cantilever and a glue patch on a piezo scanner like shown in
Figure 2.4. Collagen ﬁbril testing is then performed by extending and retracting the piezo
scanner to strain the the ﬁbril while measuring the force by the cantilever bending. The
collagen ﬁbril is suspended between the cantilever and the sample on the piezo by epoxy glue.
The AFM relies on the forces between the tip of the cantilever and the sample. The force is
not measured directly, but calculated by measuring the deﬂection of the cantilever, knowing
its stiﬀness, through Hooke’s law:
F = −kx
(2.1)
where F is force, k is the stiﬀness factor of the cantilever and x is the displacement. As the
sample deforms by moving the cantilever, the lasers are also deﬂected and that deﬂection is
picked up by the position detector enabling measurement of the deformation that the sample
undergoes.
Figure 2.4: Simpliﬁed schematic of the AFM setup used for mechanically testing single colla-
gen ﬁbrils [35].
It is important to note that biomechanical data on tendon properties obtained in vitro is
most likely biased by treatments such as freezing or clamping. In case of clamping, stresses
in the tendon may be distributed diﬀerently than in vivo. Additionally, the extraction of the
tendon could aﬀect the amount and distribution of the aqueous extracellular matrix [34]. This
illustrates the importance of acquiring biomechanical measurements in vivo. The most widely
applied method to measure mechanical properties of tendons in vivo is ultrasonography like
mentioned above.
The following subsections present and discuss the viscoelastic characteristics of tendons.
==PAGE:18==
12
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.2.2
Hysteresis
During a hysteresis test, the force is monitored while the specimen is elongated to a peak
strain and returned to the starting length at a constant displacement rate [3]. Hysteresis is
represented as the loop that the loading and unloading curves produce during cyclic tensile
test of tendon structures and represents the amount of energy (usually heat), that is dissipated
from the tissue during deformation. The hysteresis can be deﬁned as the area between the
loading and the unloading curve and can be expressed as a percentage as presented in Equation
2.2:
Hysteresis = (L −UnL)
L
∗100
(2.2)
where L equals the area under the loading curve and UnL equals the area under the
unloading curve [31]. Hysteresis values have been reported in the range of 3-38%, based on
tensile testing of isolated specimens [19]. Hysteresis is present because the tendon structures
are viscoelastic materials and therefore return slowly to their original shape when deformed
[8]. The area within the loop represents the energy lost as heat due to internal damping,
while the area under the unload curve is the energy recovered in elastic recoil [19]. In simple
terms: the larger the area within the loop, the larger the hysteresis.
Figure 2.5: Visualization of hysteresis, where the hysteresis is represented by the grey area.
When the tendon is loaded and unloaded, the unloaded curve does not follow the loading
curve. The energy is lost as heat [32].
2.2.3
Strain rates
Because of their viscoelasticity, tendons are more deformable at low strain rates. Therefore,
the tendons absorb more energy, but are less eﬀective in transferring loads at lower strain
rates. At higher strain rates, tendons become less deformable with a high degree of stiﬀness
and are more eﬀective in transferring large loads [41]. This arises as more and more of the
collagen is straightened out, the stiﬀness increases, making the tendon less deformable.
2.2.4
Stress relaxation
To measure stress relaxation eﬀects, the tissue is stretched at a rapid rate until a peak strain
is reached. Once the peak strain is reached, the tissue is maintained at a ﬁxed length and the
==PAGE:19==
2.2. MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF TENDONS
13
drop in force is measured over time. This is illustrated below in Figure 2.6. The strain rate
that is used to stretch the tissue will aﬀect the resulting force relaxation response. In general,
the more rapid the strain rate is, the larger its peak force and subsequently the resulting
relaxation will be greater [3].
Figure 2.6: Stress-relaxation test. Predeﬁned strain is applied and the corresponding stress
is followed as a function of time [17].
2.2.5
Creep
Creep is a time dependent elongation of the tendon when subjected to a constant stress. A
creep test is performed by applying a constant force to the tissue specimen. This constant
force then causes the tissue to lengthen over time [3]. An example of the typical force-time
and displacement-time curves for a creep test on a connective tissue is shown in Figure 2.7.
During the test constant stress is applied to the tendon and the corresponding strain (or
deformation of the tissue) is measured as a function of time.
==PAGE:20==
14
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.7: Creep test. Constant stress is applied to the tissue and the corresponding strain
is measured as a function of time[17].
2.3
Literature review
This section reviews what has been presented in the literature in terms of modelling connective
tissue. Diﬀerent models and approaches have been published and the main ﬁndings are listed
in this section. This section limits the model review to models that are relevant to the project,
such as viscoleastic models, biphasic models and hyperelastic models. In addition to their
relevance to the project, the models are the most common applications used in the literature
when modelling connective tissue such as tendons.
2.3.1
Maxwell, Voigt and Kelvin models
Y.C. Fung presents three mechanical models that describe the viscoelastic behavior of mate-
rials [10]. These models are the Maxwell model, the Voigt model and the Kelvin model and
can be seen in Figure 2.8.
These models are composed of combinations of purely elastic linear springs with spring
constant µ, and purely viscous dashpots with a viscosity coeﬃcient η. The linear spring is
supposed to produce a instantaneous deformation proportional to the load at any instant
and the dashpot is supposed to produce a velocity proportional to the load at any instant
[10]. For the Maxwell model, the dashpot and the spring are connected in series while for the
Voigt model they are connected in parallel. The Kelvin model is diﬀerent, where we have two
systems in parallel, with one system composed of a spring and dashpot connected in series
and the other composed only of a spring as can be seen in Figure 2.8 c).
The Maxwell, Voigt and Kelvin models have a time-dependent component that allows
for the modelling of creep, stress-relaxation and hysteresis. The following section aims at
describing the diﬀerence between these viscoelastic models. All equations are from [17].
==PAGE:21==
2.3. LITERATURE REVIEW
15
Figure 2.8: Three mechanical models of viscoelastic material. (a) Maxwell, (b) Voigt, (c)
Kelvin. F = Force, µ = spring constant, η = viscosity coeﬃcient and x = distance [17].
The viscoelastic models are composed of elastic and viscous components.
The elastic
component is presented as follows:
σ = Eϵ
(2.3)
where σ is stress, ϵ is strain, and E is the Young’s modulus.
The above equation is
also known as Hooke’s linear elastic model. On the other hand, the viscous component (the
dashpot) is velocity dependent and is presented as:
F = ηdx
dt
(2.4)
where η is the damping coeﬃcient, F is force and x is the deformation or elongation. It
should be noted that F and x can be replaced with stress (σ) and strain (ϵ) and the spring
constant µ can be replaced by the Young’s modulus, E. This also applies for the equations
presented below.
The Maxwell model consists of a linear spring connected in series with a linear dashpot.
Because these components are linear, the force in the spring is related linearly to its extension
and the force in the dashpot is related linearly to its rate of extension [38]. In the Maxwell
model, both the spring and dashpot experience the same force, while their deformation and
velocity is diﬀerent. In terms of stress and strain, the stress on each element is the same and
equal to the imposed stress on the model, while the total strain of the system is the sum of
the strain in each element. The total velocity becomes:
==PAGE:22==
16
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
dx
dt = 1
µ
dF
dt + F
η
(2.5)
This equation describes the force, strain, and their rates of change with respect to time
in the Maxwell model. In the Voigt model, the forces of the spring and dashpot elements are
diﬀerent, but their deformation is the same. Thus the total force is the sum of forces acting
on the spring and dashpot:
F = µx + ηdx
dt
(2.6)
In the Kelvin model, the combination of two springs and one dashpot complicates the
equation of motion.
The same principles, as with the Maxwell and Voigt models can be
applied, i.e.
that the elements that are side by side undergo the same deformation but
diﬀerent force, while those that are arranged consecutively, experience the same force but
diﬀerent deformation. The equation of motion becomes:
F + τϵ
dF
dt = ER(x + τσ
dx
dt )
(2.7)
where
τϵ = η
µ1
, τσ = η
µ2
(1 + µ2
µ1
), ER = µ2
(2.8)
The constants τϵ and τσ represent the relaxation time for constant strain and the relaxation
time for constant stress, respectively. µ1 and µ2 represent the spring constants for the two
seperate springs in the Kelvin model as seen in Figure 2.8 c).
2.3.2
The Quasi-Linear Viscoelastic (QLV) model
The QLV model was ﬁrst proposed by Fung in 1967. Fung introduced the QLV model because
linear viscoelasticity did not adequately model the observed nonlinear tissue behavior. The
QLV model was supposed to capture the nonlinear stress-strain relationship of living tissues.
The model was seen as a constitutive model that was simple enough to rather straightforward
and fast solution methods and still able to include enough detail to capture the most impor-
tant physical properties of the relevant materials [27]. The model is quasi-linear in the sense
that the dependence of response on loading history can be obtained from a linear convolution
integral and nonlinearity then enters the linear constitutive law by replacing strain with a
nonlinear function of strain. The QLV model has been used extensively to quantify relaxation
behavior in a variety of tissues such as tendons, ligaments and cartilage.
Fung’s QLV model assumes that the viscous relaxation rate is independent of the instan-
taneous local strain. The QLV model describes the stress response of a material as a function
of history and time. In the QLV model, stress is deﬁned as the convolution of the time-
dependent reduced relaxation function G(t) with the time derivative of the instantaneous
elastic stress function (σe) [33] and can be expressed as:
σ(λ, t) = G(t)σe(λ)
(2.9)
==PAGE:23==
2.3. LITERATURE REVIEW
17
where G(t) is a function of time, t, called the reduced relaxation function, λ is the stretch
ratio, and σe(λ) is the time-independent elastic response. The function σe(λ) plays the role
assumed by the strain ϵ in the conventional theory of viscoelasticity, and is by deﬁnition the
tensile stress instantaneously generated in the tissue when a step function of stretching λ is
imposed on the specimen [10]. The stress at time t is then given by:
σ(λ, t) =
Z t
−∞
G(t −τ)δσe
δλ
δλ
δτ dτ
(2.10)
The relaxation function G(t) can be written as:
G(t) =
1 + C[E( t
τ2 −E( t
τ1 )]
1 + C ln(τ2
τ1 )
(2.11)
where:
E(y1) =
Z ∞
y1
e−y
y dy,
y1 = t
τ1
, y = t
τ
(2.12)
The above expression can be simpliﬁed further if τ1 and τ2 diﬀer suﬃciently so that τ1«
t « τ2. The expression of the relaxed function G(t) can then be written as:
G(t) ≈
1 −Cγ −C ∗ln( t
τ2 )
1 + C ∗ln(τ2
τ1 )
(2.13)
where γ is the Euler constant, τ is time and C is the integral constant. This formulation
has been used to model the canine medial collateral ligament (MCL) as well as to ﬁt data
obtained from incremental stress-relaxation experiments [7]. The above formulations can be
found in [43].
A certain drawback to the QLVmodel is that the ﬁtting of QLV constitutive models to
experimental data often involves complex numerical convolution and is therefore quite com-
putationally complicated [26].
2.3.3
Biphasic models
Although mostly used for modelling cartilage, the biphasic theory has also been applied when
modelling tendons and ligaments [30, 20]. Mow et al. [24] successfully described the me-
chanical behavior of articular cartilage in 1980. The biphasic model considers the tissue as
a mixture of two phases: a solid matrix and a interstitial ﬂuid. In its essence, this model
quantiﬁes viscoelasticity as due to ﬂuid ﬂow and frictional losses due to the relative motion
between the solid and ﬂuid phases of the connective tissue [20]. This deﬁnition is in line with
the theory of the hyperelastic constitutive model presented in Section 4.1.
In the biphasic theory presented by Mow et al., the stress-strain relations for the solid
matrix, the interstitial ﬂuid and the total stress are given, respectively, by
σs = −φspI + σE,
(2.14)
σf = −φfpI,
(2.15)
==PAGE:24==
18
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
σt = σs + σf = −pI + σE,
(2.16)
where p is the pressure, σs and σf are the volume fractions for the solid and ﬂuid phases,
respectively, and σE is the elastic stress tensor of the solid matrix.
It has been suggested that the biphasic theory may explain the viscoelastic behavior of
single tendon fascicles. According to the biphasic theory, the viscoelasticity is a result of
energy dissipated from ﬂuid ﬂux through a porous solid phase.
This ﬂuid ﬂux is driven
by volumetric strain, governed by the Poisson’s eﬀect of elastic solid phase. During stress
relaxation, biphasic theory predicts a time dependent lateral contraction, which could be
manifested experimentally as a time dependent Poisson’s ratio[30].
As previously mentioned, the underlying mechanism for the viscoelastic behavior of both
tendon and ligament tissue is poorly understood. It has been suggested that both a ﬂow-
dependent and ﬂow-independent mechanism may contribute at diﬀerent structural levels. In
2013, Reese and Weiss [30] hypothesized that the stress relaxation response of a single tendon
fascicle would be consistent with the ﬂow-dependent mechanism described by the biphasic
theory. They measured force, lateral strain and the Poisson’s ratio as a function of time
during stress relaxation testing using rat tail tendon fascicles. Their results showed that as
predicted by the biphasic theory, the lateral strain and Poisson’s ratio were time-dependent, a
large estimated volume loss was seen at equilibrium and there was a linear correlation between
the force and Poisson’s ratio during stress relaxation. With these results they concluded that
the ﬂuid dependent mechanism described by the biphasic theory may explain some or all
of the apparent viscoelastic behavior of single tendon fasciscles. This supports the idea of
ﬂuid movement and volume change playing a signiﬁcant role in the mechanical behavior of
ligaments and tendons.
In the literature, the biphasic model is considered to have an advantage over the QLV
model as it is formulated from fundamental principles, such as continuity and momentum,
which provides a quantitative formulation of ﬂuid ﬂow as a mechanism for viscoelastic be-
havior [20]. For the purpose of the analysis in this thesis, the biphasic theory, and the model
it presents, can be seen as the most relevant model to this thesis out of the models that
have been reviewed in the above discussion. The main reason for the applicability being the
approach of incorporating the eﬀect of ﬂuid ﬂow when modelling connnective tissue.
This section has reviewed the most common mathematical models that have been pre-
sented in the literature of biomechanical modelling. Although the previously presented models
are not directly applied in the present thesis they were presented to give a certain overview
of the existing mathematical models. Furthermore, looking into the models presented was a
part of the thorough literature review conducted in the beginning stages of the project. The
model presented in this thesis is a hyperelastic constitutive model and therefore a certain
mathematical foundation must be established. The following section presents the necessary
formulations.
==PAGE:25==
2.4. CONTINUUM MECHANICS
19
2.4
Continuum mechanics
This section will present the relevant mathematical formulations for the work done in this
thesis. The basics of continuum mechanics are presented as well as some formulations that
describe hyperelastic materials.
2.4.1
Basics of continuum mechanics
In this thesis, modelling of the tendon will be carried out within the framework of non-linear
solid mechanics and in this section some basic facts from the theory are presented. The fol-
lowing description is based on an article by Zhurov et al.[45]
The main notions required for describing the motion and deformation of a solid are the
reference conﬁguration and the current conﬁguration of the body. The reference conﬁguration
is the region occupied by the body in three-dimensional space at an initial time, t = 0, in a
selected reference frame. The current conﬁguration is the region occupied by the same body
at a current time, t > 0, after a motion or deformation of the body has taken place.
The position of a particle in the body is deﬁned by the vector X = (X1, X2, X3)T in the
reference conﬁguration and vector x = (x1, x2, x3)T in the current conﬁguration as depicted
in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: The reference and current conﬁguration of a solid, position vectors and displace-
ment ﬁeld[45].
The coordinates Xi and xi are also called the material and spatial coordinates, respec-
tively. Accordingly, the description in terms of the material variables is called the material
description, and the one in terms of spatial variables is called the spatial description.
The displacement of the particle in the reference and current conﬁgurations are expressed
as U(X, t) = x(X, t) −X and u(x, t) = x −X(x, t), with U = u.
The primary measure of deformation in non-linear continuum mechanics is the deformation
gradient F . It is deﬁned as:
==PAGE:26==
20
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
F (X, t) = ∂x
∂X ;
x = x(X, t).
(2.17)
The deformation gradient is a second-order tensor and can be expressed as in Equation
2.18. The deformation gradient tensor essentially describes how an inﬁnitesimal piece of a
material (such as a tendon) is stretched and rotated as the body moves from the reference to
the deformed conﬁguration. Its determinant is conventionally denoted as J = det F .
[F ] =


∂x1
∂X1
∂x1
∂X2
∂x1
∂X3
∂x2
∂X1
∂x2
∂X2
∂x2
∂X3
∂x3
∂X1
∂x3
∂X2
∂x3
∂X3


(2.18)
Other measures of deformation are deﬁned in terms of the deformation gradient. Only
two of them will be used for the constitutive modelling performed in this project. These are
the right and left Cauchy-Green tensors,
C = F T F
and
B = F F T .
(2.19)
They are both symmetric,
C = CT ,
B = BT
(2.20)
and positive deﬁnite so that for any non-zero vector w:
w · Cw > 0
and
w · Bw > 0
(2.21)
and their determinant is expressed by:
det C = det B = (det F )2 = J2 > 0.
(2.22)
2.4.2
Hyperelasticity and the strain energy function
In Section 4.1, a hyperelastic constitutive model presented by Swedberg et al.[36] is intro-
duced. This subsection will therefore present the basic concepts of hyperelasticity and the
relevant mathematical formulations.
A hyperelastic material is an elastic material for which the stress is derivable from a scalar
potential called a strain energy function [5]. Weiss et al.[42] developed a constitutive model for
a transversely isotropic, hyperelastic soft tissue which coincides well with the model introduced
in Chapter 4 which also considers the material to be transversely isotropic. Isotropy is based
on the physical idea that the respone of the material to any deformation is the same in
all directions. In the study published by Weiss et al. the tissue was represented as a ﬁber-
reinforced composite with transversely isotropic material symmetry using a hyperelastic strain
energy. The strain energy function was assumed to depend only upon the second-order tensor
C and unit vector a0, which was aligned with the local direction of the collagen ﬁbers and
therefore, the strain energy function W, can be represented as
W = W(C, a0).
(2.23)
==PAGE:27==
2.4. CONTINUUM MECHANICS
21
Equation 2.23 essentially states that the strain energy function depends on the right
Cauchy-Green tensor C, which is derived from the deformation gradient F , and the direction
of the collagen ﬁbers represented by a0. For a transversely isotropic material, the strain
energy function of tensor C and unit vector a0 can be generated using the following strain
invariants:
{I1, I2, I3, I4, I5}.
(2.24)
In Equation 2.24, I1, I2, I3 are the isotropic invariants of C and I4, I5 are the joint isotropic
invariants of C and a0 and describe the properties of the collagen ﬁbers. The strain invariants
are deﬁned in the following way:
I1 = tr C, I2 = 1
2(I2
1 −tr C2), I3 = det C, I4 = a0 · C · a0, I5 = a0 · C2 · a0
(2.25)
Therefore we can write the relation in 2.23 as:
W = W(I1, I2, I3, I4, I5)
(2.26)
Given a deﬁned energy function W for a certain material, the derivative of the strain
energy function deﬁnes the stress in the material. The 2nd Piola-Kirchoﬀstress S can be
derived using the right Cauchy-Green tensor C through the relationship shown below:
S = 2∂W
∂C
(2.27)
The Cauchy stress σ can then be found by the following relation:
σ = 1
J F SF T .
(2.28)
which by using Equation 2.27 can be written as:
σ = 2
J F ∂W
∂C F T .
(2.29)
Equation 2.29 presents how the Cauchy stress can be obtained from the strain energy
function W. In Section 4.3, the Cauchy stress tensor σ, expressed in Equation 2.29, is derived
using the strain energy function presented in Chapter 4 and the deformation gradient tensor
F .
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Data section
This chapter presents experimental data that were acquired during the process of the thesis.
The purpose of obtaining the data was to make a comparison between the stress-stretch
relationship seen in vivo and the stress-stretch relationship described by the constitutive
model presented in Section 4.1. The data were gathered by a research group that is e.g.
investigating the inﬂuence of loading rate on the mechanical properties of the patellar tendon.
The description of the data below is based on a description from Kirsten Albracht and Olivier
Seynnes [1] who are a part of the research group. The following sections describe the data
and how they were obtained as well as presenting diﬀerent versions of the data in a graphical
manner.
3.1
Description of the data
The experiment conducted, gathered the data in vivo and the data includes cyclic defor-
mations of the patellar tendon at speciﬁc loading rates. The data obtained are from one
test subject and a graphical visualizaton of the data can be seen in Figure 3.1. The force-
elongation properties were tested at three diﬀerent constant loading rates: slow [684 N/s],
medium [1368 N/s] and fast [6840 N/s]. The reason for gathering these experimental data at
three diﬀerent loading rates is to investigate rate-dependent diﬀerences in tendon mechanical
properties.
The subjects that took part in the experiment were tested to determine mechanical proper-
ties of the patellar tendon at constant loading rates and at constant strain rates. The subjects
were asked to perform isometric muscle contractions while following a visual feedback on a
monitor. Isometric torque of the knee extensor muscles was measured while the subjects were
in a seated position by using a custom made dynamometer. A strain gauge force sensor was
installed between the ﬁxation on the lower limb of the subject and the device. In order to
determine the external knee joint moment, two reﬂective markers were put on the force sensor
so the position and direction of the force applied could be obtained. To control for antagonis-
tic muscle activation, surface electrodes were placed on relevant areas of the subjects’ thigh
muscles. Tendon force was then obtained by dividing the extension torque, which had been
corrected for antagonist co-activation, by the tendon moment arm length of the quadriceps
muscle. This value was estimated from values presented in the existing literature. To obtain
the elongation of the patellar tendon an ultrasound transducer was placed over the patellar
23
==PAGE:30==
24
CHAPTER 3. DATA SECTION
tendon. The elongation was then measured as the displacement of the apex of the patella
relative to the edge of the tibial plateau.
3.2
Presentation of the data
This section presents plots of the experimental data where both the force-elongation rela-
tionship as well as the stress-strain relationship for the three diﬀerent loading rates is shown
graphically.
Figure 3.1: Graphical visualization of the relationship between force applied to the tendon
and the subsequent elongation
Figure 3.1 shows the relationship between the force applied to the tendon and the subse-
quent elongation. It can be seen from the ﬁgure that the stiﬀness of the tendon increases with
increasing loading rate. For a unit change in the force applied, the subsequent elongation will
be greater at slow loading rate compared to that of the fast loading rate. By inspection of
Figure 3.1 it can be seen that increasing the force from 1000 to 2000 N results in an elongation
of ∼0.4 mm for the fast loading rate but an elongation of ∼0.8 mm for the slow loading
rate. That suggests that the tendon is softer when loaded at a slow rate. This agrees with
other results in the literature [18].
==PAGE:31==
3.2. PRESENTATION OF THE DATA
25
Figure 3.2: The stress-strain relationship
Figure 3.2 shows the stress-strain relationship of the tendon. The values presented in the
ﬁgure were acquired by converting the force applied to stress and the elongation to strain.
The stress and force are related through the following relationship:
Stress =
Force
Cross Sectional Area ⇒σ = F
A
(3.1)
The cross-sectional area (CSA) of the patellar tendon was not available for the particular
subject in the data acquired. The CSA of the tendon can be hard to obtain as it requires
methods such as ultrasonography which was discussed in Section 2.2.1. In order to calculate
the stress, a mean value of 97 mm2 was used for the CSA of the patellar tendon. This value has
been reported in the literature [18] and can therefore be considered a valid approximation [34].
The strain was acquired from the relationship presented in equation 3.2.
Strain = Change in length
Original length
⇒ϵ = ∆L
L
(3.2)
The original length of the tendon, L, was 51.4 mm and the change in length, ∆L, varied
from 0 −2.5 mm.
==PAGE:32==
26
CHAPTER 3. DATA SECTION
For the hyperelastic modelling presented in Chapter 4, it is necessary to convert the
elongation data presented above to stretch as the constitutive model is a function of the ﬁber
stretch denoted by λ. The stretch ratio is deﬁned as the ratio between the new length of the
tendon divided by its original length as presented in Equation 3.3, where the new length is
the original length of the tendon plus the displacement:
Stretch =
New length
Original length ⇒λ = L + ∆L
L
(3.3)
3.3
Data ﬁtting
The force-elongation data was ﬁtted in Matlab by using a built in curve ﬁtting tool, cftool.
This tool is interactive in the sense that you can select diﬀerent ﬁts, whether that is a
polynomial, exponential or a customized function. The tool allows you to manually select the
data you want to ﬁt and the relevant mathematical function as well as providing information
on the goodness-of-ﬁt statistics. For the experimental data at hand, a good ﬁt was acquired
by ﬁtting a second order polynomial, ax2 + bx + c, to the three diﬀerent loading rates. The
ﬁtted curves can be seen in Figures 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5. The coeﬃcients of determination, R2,
for the slow, medium and fast loading rates were 0.98, 0.99 and 0.99, respectively.
Figure 3.3: Fitting of the experimental data. Slow loading rate
==PAGE:33==
3.3. DATA FITTING
27
Figure 3.4: Fitting of the experimental data. Medium loading rate
Figure 3.5: Fitting of the experimental data. Fast loading rate
==PAGE:34==
28
CHAPTER 3. DATA SECTION
Closer inspection of the ﬁtted curve for the slow loading rate in Figure 3.3 revealed that
there was a poor ﬁt at the beginning of the curve as well as in the middle of the curve
between the elongation interval of 1 −2 mm. Therefore a new ﬁt for the slow loading rate
was introduced.
The curve ﬁtting tool in Matlab allows the user to select from a list of
ﬁts as well as using a customized mathematical expression. For the slow loading rate an
exponential equation was chosen to ﬁt the data. An exponential function with one term did
not adequately ﬁt the curve so another exponential term was added. After the addition of
the second term, the ﬁt was as presented in Figure 3.6 and can be seen as an improvement
from the earlier ﬁt. The exponential function has the following form:
a ∗ebx + c ∗edx
(3.4)
Figure 3.6 shows that the ﬁt is much better at the beginning of the curve as well as at
the middle. The goodness-of-ﬁt statistics also conﬁrm a better ﬁt with an R2 value of 0.99.
Figure 3.6: Fitting of the experimental data with an exponential equation for the slow loading
rate
The curve ﬁtting tool in Matlab provides the coeﬃcients of the functions used to ﬁt
the experimental data. The coeﬃcents of the second-order polynomial used to ﬁt the slow,
medium and fast loading rates are presented in Equations 3.5, 3.6 and 3.7, respectively and
the coeﬃcients for the improved exponential ﬁt are presented in Equation 3.8.
699.8x2 −367.4x + 263.1
(3.5)
766.6x2 −116.8x + 99.44
(3.6)
==PAGE:35==
3.3. DATA FITTING
29
632.2x2 −482x −69.7
(3.7)
1674 ∗e0.69x −29.1 ∗e−1.01x
(3.8)
These equations have been presented in order to see an estimate of the mathematical
expression of the force-elongation relationship of the human patellar tendon. The equations
can be seen as an estimation of how the force behaves as a function of elongation for this
certain set of data. In the modelling chapter of this thesis, a mathematical expression for the
hyperelastic constitutive model is presented which can then be used to derive an expression
for the behavior of stress in the material as a function of ﬁber stretch.
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Modelling
This chapter will cover the modelling done during the process of this thesis. A continuum
based hyperelastic model is introduced and then later implmented into COMSOL Multi-
physics. COMSOL is a ﬁnite element analysis software and can be used for various engineering
applications. It is a general-purpose software platform, based on advanced numerical meth-
ods, for modelling and simulating physics-based problems [25]. To begin with, the modelling
will be focusing on a ligament from an adult rabbit as that was the procedure in the article
that introduced the present constitutive model. Later on, the parameters of the constitutive
model will be determined by using the experimental data discussed in Chapter 3. That will
allow for the comparison of the constitutive model to experimental data obtained from the
human patellar tendon.
4.1
A hyperelastic constitutive model
Swedberg et al.[36] have presented a continuum based hyperelastic constitutive model that
can describe the stress-strain relationship of tendons and ligaments under tensile loading.
Their model describes the behavior of an adult rabbit mediate collateral ligament (MCL) and
in their study, they presented a Cauchy stress relationship for a compressible transversely
isotropic material that has not been previously presented in the literature. A compressible
material is a material which can undergo changes of volume when deformed. The compress-
ibility is accounted for by adding a strain energy term, Wvol to the strain energy equation.
This volumetric term describes the purely volumetric elastic response [14]. The results pre-
sented by Swedberg et al.
demonstrated that the viscoelastic behavior of ligaments and
tendons can be predicted by modelling the movement of ﬂuid in the tissue when combined
with a large Poisson’s ratio. The presentation of these results opens up for the opportunity to
further investigate the viscoelastic behavior of connective tissue using this constitutive model.
To describe volumetric behavior of ligaments and tendons, Swedberg et al. developed
a strain energy function that could describe the volume loss in ligaments due to transverse
retraction during uniaxial tension. This transverse retraction is related to the deformation
via the Poisson’s ratio ν. For uniaxial tensile loading in linear elasticity the Poisson’s ratio is
deﬁned as the negative ratio of transverse strain to longitudinal or axial strain [40] and can
be expressed as
31
==PAGE:38==
32
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
ν = −ϵt
ϵl
(4.1)
where ϵt is the transverse strain and ϵl is the longitudinal or axial strain. Swedberg et al.
presented an expression for the transverse stretch α in terms of the ﬁber stretch λ and the
parameters of the function describing the Poisson’s ratio that is valid for ﬁnite deformation:
α = λm−ν0e−m(λ−1)
(4.2)
Swedberg et al. used the deﬁnition in Equation 4.2 to derive a strain energy term Wvol
describing the volumetric deformation of a material. This volumetric term is presented in
Equation 4.9. For a transversely isotropic material stretched homogenously along the ﬁber
direction by λ, the change in cross-sectional area in the transverse plane is related to the
transverse ﬁber stretch as:
da
dA = α2 = λ2(m−ν0)e−2m(λ−1)
(4.3)
where dA and da represent the incremental cross-sectional area of the material normal to
the direction of loading in the undeformed and deformed conﬁgurations, respectively. Squar-
ing both sides yields:
 da
dA
2
= λ4(m−ν0)e−4m(λ−1)
(4.4)
An alternative equation relating the squared area ratio in the above equation can be
expressed as:
 da
dA
2
= I5 −I1I4 + I2
(4.5)
where I1 −I5 are the strain invariants presented in Equation 2.25. Swedberg et al. pre-
sented a detailed derivitation of the relationship in Equation 4.5 in the appendix of their
article [36]. The relationship in Equation 4.4 describes the deformation prescribed by the
parameters for the Poisson’s ratio while Equation 4.5 describes the deformation experienced
by the material. The connection between the two relations is described in more detail below
when covering the volumetric term Wvol.
The constitutive model presented by Swedberg et al. is a strain energy function with three
diﬀerent terms and can be represented as follows:
W = Wfiber + Wmatrix + Wvol
(4.6)
where:
Wfiber = 1
2
c1
c2
(ec2(λ−1)2 −1)
(4.7)
Wmatrix = µ
2 (I1 −3) −µ ln(
p
I3)
(4.8)
Wvol = κ
2
 
ln
 
I5 −I1I4 + I2
I2(m−ν0)
4
e−4m(λ−1)
!!2
(4.9)
==PAGE:39==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
33
Here, Wfiber represents the behavior of the collagen ﬁbers in the tendon or ligament,
Wmatrix represents the isotropic behavior of the extraﬁbrillar matrix and Wvol is a volumetric
term describing outward ﬂuid ﬂux of the tendon or ligament. The terms representing the
ﬁbers and the matrix have been presented in the literature [28, 2] while the deﬁnition of the
volumetric term was ﬁrst presented by Swedberg et al. in their recent study.
The parameters c1, c2 and µ were found by ﬁtting the stress-strain behavior to experi-
mental data for human medial collateral ligament (MCL) presented in [28]. The parameters
m and ν0 were chosen by ﬁtting Equation 4.10 to data of an adult rabbit MCL under uniaxial
tension and are denoted as the parameters describing the Poisson’s ratio. They relate to the
Poisson’s ratio through the following equation:
νapp = −α −1
λ −1
= −λm−ν0e−m(λ−1) −1
λ −1
(4.10)
Equation 4.10 is an expression for the apparent Poisson’s ratio of the model presented by
Swedberg et al. and is the small strain deﬁnition of the Poisson’s ratio calculated using the
engineering strain which is a small strain measure. The relationship presented in Equation
4.10 is further discussed at the end of Section 4.3.2.
The κ in Equation 4.9 is a penalty parameter used to enforce the constraint represented
by the parameters for the Poisson’s ratio. Furthermore, the variables I1 −I5 are the strain
invariants for a transversely isotropic material deﬁned in Section 2.4.2 and λ denotes the ﬁber
stretch. The logarithmic form of the volumetric term in Equation 4.9 is a common choice for a
penalty function. It makes sure that the volumetric term is minimized when the deformation
in the material (the numerator) is equal to the deformation prescribed by the parameters for
the Poisson’s function (the denominator). When this occurs, the ratio between the numerator
and the denominator is equal to 1 and the natural logarithm is zero. On the other hand, any
diﬀerence between the numerator and the denominator will make the volumetric term non-
zero and the κ parameter will enforce the volumetric deformation by moving the volumetric
term further from its minimum value.
Now that the hyperelastic constitutive model has been presented and explained the im-
plementation of the model into COMSOL can be conducted. The next section covers the
process of the implementation.
4.2
Implementation into COMSOL
This section covers the implementation of the constitutive model presented in the previous
section into COMSOL. The process aimed at implementing the model as it was presented
by Swedberg et al in 2014. For that reason it was initially assumed that the structure was
a ligament and the parameters used in the model consequently described ligament behavior.
The implementation into COMSOL required a substantial amount of preparation and certain
factors had to be taken into account. The following subsections describe and discuss the steps
==PAGE:40==
34
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
taken during the process of the implementation. To begin with, a rectangular structure was
created as a simpliﬁcation of the ligament structure and then the mathematical expressions
needed for the implementation were obtained. The process of implementing these expres-
sions into COMSOL is then discussed before the application of a prescribed displacement is
presented. Finally, the results obtained from the displacement are presented.
4.2.1
Building the structure and applying boundary conditions
In order to test the strain energy function presented in Equation 4.6, implementation into
the COMSOL software was conducted. A simple 2D rectangular structure was created in
COMSOL which was meant to be a simpliﬁed version of a ligament structure, as the model
presented by Swedberg et al. was used to model a ligament in an adult rabbit. The structure
can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Rectangular structure created in COMSOL as a representation of a ligament
sample. The numerical values on the axes are in [mm].
The width and length of the structure in Figure 4.1 were based on values for the medial
collateral ligament of an adult rabbit in order to coincide with the experimental data used
by Swedberg et al. [36]. The width of the structure was 4 mm while the height was 22 mm
[23]. The bottom part of the structure was kept ﬁxed while the sides of the structure were
set to be free to move without any ﬁxation. The structure was then put under a prescribed
displacement in the y-direction. This displacement is explained in more detail in Section 4.2.4.
After creating the structure the relevant material model to be applied to the structure
was selected. For the current analysis a hyperelastic material model was applied. COMSOL
==PAGE:41==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
35
allows the user to either select from a list of pre-deﬁned hyperelastic material models such
as Neo-Hookean and a Mooney-Rivlin material model or to insert a user deﬁned model. In
order to implement the model presented in Equation 4.6 the user deﬁned option was selected
as that allows for the manual expression of the strain energy function to be applied to the
structure. An important option oﬀered by COMSOL for the upcoming analysis is the ability
to select the material model as "nearly incompressible material".
This gives the user the
opportunity to break up the strain energy function into an isochoric (constant volume) term
and a volumetric term and give diﬀerent mathematical descriptions for those terms. This
opens up for the investigation of a possible volumetric change in the material model. Figure
4.2 shows the expressions that were inserted into COMSOL.
Figure 4.2: The expressions of the terms in the strain energy function
The isochoric term of the strain energy Wsiso, was deﬁned as the sum of the term repre-
senting the collagen ﬁbers Wf, and the term respresenting the extraﬁbrillar matrix Wm, as
can be seen in Figure 4.2. The expressions in Equations 4.7 and 4.8 were deﬁned as seperate
variables and inserted into COMSOL. Their expressions can be seen in Figure 4.4. The vol-
umetric term of the strain energy Wsvol was given the expression as presented in Equation
4.9 where the ﬁber stretch λ was expressed as the square root of I4 as can be seen in Figure 4.2.
In order to implement the material model into COMSOL mathematical expressions for
all the variables had to be calculated. The next section presents the relevant calculations for
the expressions needed for the upcoming analysis.
4.2.2
Obtaining relevant mathematical expressions
As Equations 4.7-4.9 show, the expression for the strain invariants presented in Equation 2.25
must be calculated so that they can be inserted into COMSOL. The expressions of the strain
invariants indicate that we must obtain an expression for the right Cauchy-Green tensor C
and as Equation 2.19 presents, the expression for the deformation gradient tensor F is needed
as well. Before these expressions are calculated the nature of the upcoming analysis must be
kept in mind. The following analysis of the hyperelastic material model involved a simple
extension of the structure in Figure 4.1 and the calculations were based on the nature of this
deformation.
==PAGE:42==
36
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
A simple extension of a structure with uniform cross-section in the direction of the x1-axis
up to the stretch λ = 1 + α can be described as seen in Figure 4.3:
Figure 4.3: Simple extension of a structure in the direction of the x1-axis[37].
It should be noted the extension seen in Figure 4.3 is denoted in the x1 direction but the
extension performed in COMSOL for this project was deﬁned in the y-direction. The ﬁgure
was seen as an opportunity to graphically visualize the simple extension of a structure. Since
the deformation of the structure created in COMSOL was deﬁned in the y-direction, all the
mathematical formulations presented below were based on that assumption. The deformation
mapping for a simple extension in the direction of the y-axis is described as
χ( ⃗X) = X1ˆe1 + (1 + α)X2ˆe2 + X3ˆe3
(4.11)
where ˆe1−3 are unit vectors in the current conﬁguration.
By representing the ﬁber stretch in our structure as λ, we can write equation 4.11 as
χ( ⃗X) = X1ˆe1 + λX2ˆe2 + X3ˆe3
(4.12)
From Equation 4.12 the deformation gradient tensor F can be derived by the means of
the following deﬁnition:
[F ] =


∂x1
∂X1
∂x1
∂X2
∂x1
∂X3
∂x2
∂X1
∂x2
∂X2
∂x2
∂X3
∂x3
∂X1
∂x3
∂X2
∂x3
∂X3


(4.13)
and is presented as:
[F ] =


1
0
0
0
λ
0
0
0
1


(4.14)
Since the deformation gradient is symmetric we can write: F = F T and as Equation 2.19
shows we can now ﬁnd the right Cauchy-Green tensor, C:
[C] =


1
0
0
0
λ
0
0
0
1

·


1
0
0
0
λ
0
0
0
1

=


1
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
1


(4.15)
==PAGE:43==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
37
The unit vector in the direction of the ﬁbers (the y-direction), a0, is represented as in
Equation 4.16:
a0 =



0
1
0



(4.16)
Now that the right Cauchy-Green tensor C and the unit vector a0 have been formulated
the strain invariants introduced in Equation 2.25 can be expressed:
I1 = tr C = C11 + C22 + C33 = 1 + λ2 + 1 = λ2 + 2
(4.17)
I2 = 1
2(I2
1 −tr C2)
= 1
2(I2
1 −C2
11 −2C2
12 −2C2
13 −C2
22 −2C2
23 −C2
33)
= 1
2((λ2 + 2)2 −1 −λ4 −1)
= 2λ2 + 1
(4.18)
I3 = det C = C11(C22C33 −C23C32) = 1(λ2 −0) = λ2
(4.19)
I4 = a0 · C · a0
=



0
1
0


·

0
λ2
0

=


0
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
0


Taking the scalar out we obtain λ2
(4.20)
I5 = a0 · C2 · a0
=



0
1
0


·

0
λ4
0

=


0
0
0
0
λ4
0
0
0
0


Taking the scalar out we obtain λ4
(4.21)
As the mathematical expressions of the strain invariants have been obtained, we can now
implement these expressions into COMSOL. The deﬁned variables used for the model can be
seen in Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:44==
38
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.4: The variables that were deﬁned for the model
The strain invariants were expressed as presented above. The fact that the C22 component
equals λ2 was used to deﬁne the strain invariants I4 and I5. A tool in COMSOL called "Point
Evaluation" (discussed in more detail in Section 4.2.4) was used to conﬁrm that the values for
the C22 component in COMSOL were in fact equal to λ2. Figure 4.4 also presents how the
strain energies Wfiber and Wmatrix are expressed in COMSOL. The ﬁber stretch λ is expressed
in the strain energy equations as the square root of the strain invariant I4. Furthermore, the
parameters presented by Swedberg et al. were implemented into COMSOL. These parameters
are presented in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: The parameters in the strain energy function, W.
Parameter
Value
c1
90 [MPa]
c2
160
µ
0.025 [MPa]
κ
1.55 [MPa]
m
-100
ν0
5.85
Now that the strain invariants and the necessary variables and parameters had been
presented, the implementation of the strain energy function could be conducted. The following
section covers the process of this implementation.
4.2.3
Implementation of the mathematical model
At early stages of the implementation, problems arose. The volumetric term Wvol in the
strain energy function proved to be a source of error for the hyperelastic model implemented
in COMSOL. Some parts of the term did not agree with the way COMSOL approached the
hyperelasticity and therefore the model was unable to run without errors and no adequate re-
sults could be obtained. Following the discovery of this problem it was decided to investigate
the volumetric term further and as a part of that process a parametric study was performed
==PAGE:45==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
39
on the volumetric term. As can be seen in Equation 4.9, the volumetric term contains four
parameters: κ, m, ν0 and λ. Swedberg et al. used a range of 1.00 −1.05 for the ﬁber stretch
λ in their study. Based on this range of values a value of λ = 1.02 was chosen for the ﬁber
stretch, thereby enabling the calculation of the strain invariants as scalars using Equations
4.17-4.21.
The parametric study was conducted in the way that the value of one parameter was
changed while other parameters were ﬁxed. This allowed for examination of the contribution
of each parameter to the Wvol term. The values of the parameters presented by Swedberg
et al. were used as a starting point and then the values were decreased and increased and
the change in the volumetric term examined. The values chosen for the parameters do not
have any real meaning to the term, but were chosen rather randomly to see the behavior of
the volumetric term. If decreasing the parameter more and more resulted in a subsequent
decrease of the volumetric term, no further parameter values were investigated. That is, if
the behavior of the volumetric term was obvious or predictable, the values already chosen
were seen as a good enough indicator of the behavior.
Table 4.2: Parameters presented by Swedberg et al.[36]
Parameter
Value
κ [MPa]
1.55
m
-100
ν0
5.85
With the parameters presented in Table 4.2 the value of Wvol is 1.11 ∗105 Pa The ﬁrst
parameter chosen for the parameter study was the penalty parameter κ. The κ values were
changed from the value presented in Table 4.2 as the following table presents:
Table 4.3: The κ parameter
κ [MPa]
Wvol [MPa]
-100
-7.214
0.55
0.0396
1.55
0.111
2.55
0.1839
100
7.214
As can be seen in Table 4.3, when the κ value is decreased, Wvol decreases in value and
as the κ value is increased, Wvol increases. In Equation 4.9, the numerator represents the
deformation experienced by the material and the denominator represents the deformation
prescribed by the parameters for the Poisson’s function [36]. When these values are equal,
the ratio between them is equal to one and the natural logarithm is zero. That ensures that
the strain energy of the function is minimized when this occurs. Any discrepancy between
the numerator and the denominator will therefore cause the strain energy to be non-zero. In-
creasing the value of κ will amplify the eﬀect of any discrepancy, further increasing the strain
energy from its minimum value. A graphical visualisation of the relationship between κ and
Wvol can be seen in Figure 4.5. It can be seen that there is an expected linear relationship
between the two factors. As you increase the value of κ the value of the volumetric term
==PAGE:46==
40
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
increases accordingly.
Figure 4.5: The eﬀect of the parameter κ on the Wvol term
Next parameter to be investigated was the parameter m. Table 4.4 presents the values
chosen for m and the resulting value of Wvol.
Table 4.4: The m parameter
m
Wvol [Pa]
-1200
1.72 ∗105
-900
4.44 ∗104
-600
82.4
-500
3.8 ∗103
-300
3.92 ∗104
−100
1.11 ∗105
0
1.62 ∗105
100
2.21 ∗105
900
1.03 ∗106
1200
1.48 ∗106
As seen in Table 4.4, giving m a bigger negative value than −100 results in a decrease in
Wvol until a minimum is reached at m = −600. Larger negative values than −600 result in
increasing values for the volumetric term. Furthermore, giving m a positive value results in
increasing values for Wvol. The relationship between m and Wvol is plotted in Figure 4.6. The
==PAGE:47==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
41
ﬁgure indicates that a positive value for the m parameter might be suitable to avoid having
a zero value for the Wvol.
Figure 4.6: The eﬀect of the parameter m on the Wvol term
Table 4.5: The ν0 parameter
ν0
Wvol [Pa]
-100
48.6 ∗107
-50
1.24 ∗107
-1
1.92 ∗104
0
4.8 ∗103
5.85
1.11 ∗105
10
3.85 ∗105
50
1.14 ∗107
200
1.9 ∗108
When investigating the eﬀect of ν0 on the volumetric term it can be seen that the term
reaches its minimum value when the ν0 parameter is equal to zero as Table 4.5 presents.
Decreasing and increasing the ν0 value results in a larger value for the volumetric term as can
be seen in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:48==
42
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.7: The eﬀect of the parameter ν0 on the Wvol term
After conducting the parameter study diﬀerent values for the three parameters were in-
serted into COMSOL and the resulting eﬀects to the volumetric term were observed. The
parameters that gave relatively high values for the Wvol term were chosen in order to try and
obtain a value for the term as far away from its minimum value as possible. When running
the model in COMSOL no obvious changes were observed and the problem persisted as the
volumetric term was still a source of error. These results lead to the conclusion that the
parameters in the volumetric term might not be the real reason for the error.
As a part of looking more closely into the volumetric term Wvol, the way that COMSOL
handles the calculations associated with the term was investigated. It turned out that both
the pressure value and the value of the bulk modulus for the model were equal to 0. Since this
cannot be the case the deﬁnitions that COMSOL assumes for the pressure and bulk modulus
were investigated. COMSOL deﬁnes the pressure as the negative derivative of the volumetric
term Wvol with respect to the volume ratio J as presented in Equation 4.22:
P = −dWvol
dJ
(4.22)
This enables for the manual calculation of the pressure by taking the derivate of the
volumetric term with respect to the volume ratio where J is represented as the determinant
of the deformation gradient, det(F ) = λ. Taking the derivative of the volumetric term as
it is deﬁned in Equation 4.9 with respect to the volume ratio J = λ, yields the following
expression:
==PAGE:49==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
43
P = −dWvol
dλ
= −4κm ln(I2(ν0−m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 + I5 −I1I4))
(4.23)
COMSOL then deﬁnes the bulk modulus as the negative derivative of the pressure with
respect to the volume ratio J as presented in equation 4.24.
K = −dP
dJ
(4.24)
The bulk modulus is essentially a material property that characterizes how easy (or diﬃ-
cult) it is for a unit of the material volume to be changed when changing the pressure working
on it. It is a measure of the resistance of the material when it is put under pressure. The
higher the value of the bulk modulus for a certain material the higher pressure required to
compress it. The bulk modulus has a unit of pascal [Pa]. Since we now have an expression
for the pressure we can use Equations 4.23 and 4.24 to obtain an expression for the bulk
modulus of the ligament sample in the constitutive model. Taking the negative derivative of
the pressure with respect to the volume ratio gives:
K = −dP
dλ
= 16κm2
(4.25)
An alternative way to ﬁnd a value for the bulk modulus is to use the relationship between
the Poisson’s ratio (ν), Young’s modulus (E) and the bulk modulus (K). The relationship
can be written as:
K =
E
3(1 −2ν)
(4.26)
As Equation 4.26 indicates, for K to be greater than 0, the Poisson’s ratio must be < 0.5.
That does not apply to the present investigation as the value for Poisson’s ratio ν is estimated
to greatly exceed the isotropic limit of 0.5. Since the deﬁnition presented in Equation 4.25 is
derived from the expression of the pressure in the model it can be considered more applicable
to the purpose of this analysis and was therefore chosen as the input value for the COMSOL
model.
COMSOL allows for the user to insert a manual expression for both the pressure and the
bulk modulus so the expressions in Equations 4.23 and 4.25 were inserted into the model.
That enabled the model to run and therefore enabled for the prescribed displacement to
take place. The displacement, along with the results and further analysis, is described and
presented in the following subsection.
4.2.4
Applying the prescribed displacement
To test how the stress values in the model reacted to the change in displacement a prescribed
displacement was applied to the model structure. In that way an actual experimental test
as discussed in Section 2.2.1 could be simulated to acquire the mechanical behavior of the
==PAGE:50==
44
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
ligament explained by the constitutive model previously introduced. In the study by Swedberg
et al, they presented results where they strained their material structure up to 6% strain.
Therefore the prescribed displacement for the hyperelastic model presented here was set to
go from 0 −6% strain. Using the strain relation presented in Equation 3.2 and the original
length of the structure, 22 mm, we get that displacing the structure to 6% strain equals a
displacement of 1.3 mm as shown below:
6% Strain =
∆L
22 mm ⇒∆L = 0.06 · 22 mm = 1.3 mm
(4.27)
To implement this displacement in COMSOL a parameter called "dis" was created and
used as the value of displacement prescribed in the y-direction as seen in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: The Prescribed Displacement node
This parameter "dis" was then assigned values from 0 −1.3 mm using a function in
COMSOL called Parametric Sweep. This enabled to explore the eﬀect of varying the "dis"
parameter when running a simulation. The user interface for the parametric sweep performed
in this simulation can be seen in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: The Parametric Sweep node
Like mentioned earlier, the displacement that took place went from 0−1.3 mm. The value
seen in between 0 and 1.3 in Figure 4.9 denotes the step between two consecutive displacement
values. Setting the step as 0.01 mm creates 131 data points for the displacement which could
then be plotted against any values of interest, e.g. the stress in the material. Those results,
along with others, are presented in Section 4.2.5.
COMSOL oﬀers the option to obtain values from the material model in a speciﬁc point.
Thereby the user can obtain values for diﬀerent properties in a pre-determined point. This
point evaluation was performed for this project. Using this evaluation together with the "dis"
parameter going from 0 −1.3 mm we can see how a speciﬁc value in that pre-determined
==PAGE:51==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
45
point changes as a function of the displacement. The point selected for the current analysis
was (2, 12) and can be seen in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: The pre-determined point selected for the point evaluation. The numerical values
on the axes are in [mm].
As Figure 4.10 shows, the point is situated in the middle of the structure. The reason for
selecting this point to use in the analysis was to avoid that the values obtained from the point
were aﬀected by the boundary conditions, i.e. the ﬁxation at the bottom of the structure and
then the eﬀect of the displacement the y-direction of the structure. This made sure that the
value chosen for inspection represented the response in the material due to the displacement
it experiences and that the value wasn’t aﬀected by external forces caused by the boundary
conditions.
The point evaluation option was e.g. used to obtain the values of the y component in the
stress tensor σ and the results are presented in Section 4.2.5. The user interface of the point
evaluation node can be seen below in Figure 4.11.
==PAGE:52==
46
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.11: The Point Evaluation node
As can be seen in Figure 4.11, the data set that is used for the evaluation comes from
the pre-determined point in the structure called "Cut Point 2D 1" which refers to the point
presented in Figure 4.10.
In this particular case we have extracted the values of the y-
component of the stress tensor σ, expressed as "solid.sy". Figure 4.11 also depicts that the
parameter that we are comparing the stress values to is the parameter "dis" which has values
going from 0 −0.13 mm as mentioned before. Performing this evaluation yields the stress
values at point (2, 12) for the aforementioned displacement value range. This allows for the
investigation of how the stress values in that particular point change as a function of the
displacement. The results obtained from this investigation are presented in the next section.
4.2.5
Results from the COMSOL simulation
This section presents the results obtained from the simulated experimental test conducted
in COMSOL. Like mentioned in the previous section the data points for the displacement
acquired from the parametric sweep can be plotted against any particular value of interest like
the stress experienced in the structure. Additionally, COMSOL allows for the investigation
of how this certain value changes within the structure. Below, in Figure 4.12, the values of
the y component of the stress tensor throughout the structure when the displacement is equal
to 1.3 mm are presented:
==PAGE:53==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
47
Figure 4.12: The y-component of the stress tensor in the material model when the structure
has been displaced 1.3 mm
From Figure 4.12 it can be seen that the highest values of stress (the red areas) are at the
bottom of the structure. This is most likely the result of the ﬁxed constraint at the bottom.
This again highlights the importance of obtaining values at a point that is in a considerable
distance from these boundary conditions. The stress values distributed throughout the struc-
ture in Figure 4.12 (∼13 MPa) coincide well with the stress values presented by Swedberg et
al. in [36].
Using the point evaluation discussed above, the stress values at point (2, 12) were acquired
and plotted as a function of the change in displacement. That enabled for the graphical vi-
sualization of how the stress in the structure changes as a function of displacement. The
corresponding relationship is presented in Figure 4.13. As can be seen the stress-strain rela-
tionship is nonlinear as expected for the stress behavior of a ligament as discussed in Section
2.2.1.
==PAGE:54==
48
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.13: The stress-strain relationship of the model implemented into COMSOL
In order to test the credibility of the results obtained and presented in Figure 4.13, com-
parison between those results and the results presented by Swedberg was conducted. In their
article, they presented the relationship between the Cauchy stress and the ﬁber strain as
seen in Figure 4.14. Comparing the two ﬁgures indicates that the implementation can be
considered successful as the resulting stress values coincide. The stress value for 6% strain in
the results by Swedberg et al. is around 13 MPa which is almost identical to the stress value
at 6% strain in Figure 4.13. Furthermore, the shape of the curves are identical indicating
similar nonlinear stress-strain relationship. This fact again indicates that the implementation
of the strain energy function into COMSOL is successful and displays expected and adequate
results.
Figure 4.14: Stress-strain relationship presented by Swedberg et al. [36]
As we are interested in seeing how the constitutive model behaves as a function of the
==PAGE:55==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
49
ﬁber stretch λ, the displacement values going from 0 −1.3 mm were converted to stretch
values using the relationship between the displacement and stretch presented in Equation
3.3.
That allowed for the investigation of how the stress, derived from the strain energy
function, changes as a function of the ﬁber stretch. The shape of the curve ofcourse stays the
same but the values for the stretch are diﬀerent from the strain values. The relationship is
plotted in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: The stress-stretch relationship of the model implemented into COMSOL
Now that we have seen that the stress behavior obtained from the COMSOL implemen-
tation is as expected we can analyze other aspects of the results such as the behavior of
the volumetric term Wvol. COMSOL oﬀers an easy way of obtaining the behavior of the
volumetric term as a function of the displacement by using the previously mentioned point
evaluation. The relationship is displayed in Figure 4.16.
==PAGE:56==
50
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.16: The behavior of the volumetric term Wvol obtained from COMSOL as a function
of displacement
The behavior presented in Figure 4.16 can be considered an interesting result for the
analysis in the present thesis. The ﬁgure indicates that the structure experiences a change in
volume as it is put under a certain displacement. Furthermore, the shape of the curve indi-
cates a certain degree of saturation as the displacement approaches its maximum value. That
indicates that only a certain amount of energy within a displaced structure can be attributed
to the volume change meaning that displacing the structure beyond a certain displacement
value does not result in further volume change. The reason for the saturation is unclear.
Perhaps the ﬂuid, that is capable of moving under displacement within the tissue, has been
exuded from the tissue and the increase in stress beyond this point can only be attributable
to the isochoric part of the tissue.
As Figure 4.16 depicts, the value of the volumetric strain energy is quite low with a
maximum value of around 9.5 Pa. This result lead to the investigation of the contribution of
each of the terms that make up the strain energy function. For this analysis, the contribution
of the strain energies representing the collagen ﬁbers Wfib, and the extraﬁbrillar matrix Wmat,
were combined under the isochoric strain energy Wiso. The analysis below presents the strain
energy functions as a function of ﬁber stretch. The strain energy relationships obtained from
COMSOL were compared to manually calculated versions of the strain energy functions.
Ideally, the two versions that are compared below should be identical. In Figures 4.17 and
4.18 the two versions of the volumetric term are presented. Next, a comparison between
the two isochoric strain energy functions was made in Figures 4.19 and 4.20 and ﬁnally the
behavior of the total strain energy Wtot of the two versions was compared in Figures 4.21 and
4.22.
==PAGE:57==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
51
Figure 4.17: The calculated volumetric term Wvol as a function of stretch
Figure 4.18: The volumetric term Wvol obtained from COMSOL as a function of stretch
==PAGE:58==
52
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.19: The calculated isochoric term Wiso as a function of stretch
Figure 4.20: The isochoric term Wiso obtained from COMSOL as a function of stretch
==PAGE:59==
4.2. IMPLEMENTATION INTO COMSOL
53
Figure 4.21: The calculated total strain energy W as a function of stretch
Figure 4.22: The total strain energy W obtained from COMSOL as a function of stretch
==PAGE:60==
54
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
As Figures 4.17 and 4.18 present, the values of the two volumetric terms are quite diﬀerent
as the values for volumetric term obtained from COMSOL are 4 orders of magnitude smaller
compared to the term calculated manually.
The expression for the volumetric term was
introduced in the beginning of this chapter and is presented again in Equation 4.28.
Wvol = κ
2
 
ln
 
I5 −I1I4 + I2
I2(m−ν0)
4
e−4m(λ−1)
!!2
(4.28)
Looking at the expression in Equation 4.28 and noting that the value of the parameter κ
is in megapascals (1.55 [MPa]) the values of the manually calculated volumetric term make
good sense. The question is why COMSOL presents values for the volumetric term in [Pa] as
the same value of κ and the same expression for the volumetric term are incorporated into the
program. The κ parameter is used to enforce the prescribed volumetric deformation, so high
values of κ should result in great volumetric deformation. A possible explanation could be
that COMSOL applies some kind of restriction on the possible deformation of the structure.
As seen in Figure 4.12, the lateral contraction of the structure is not substantial which can be
related to the low values of the volumetric term. If the values for the volumetric strain energy
would be greater in COMSOL we would probably see greater lateral contraction in Figure
4.12. Despite the diﬀerence in values for the volumetric strain energy density, the shape of
the curves are identical and both present the aforementioned saturation eﬀect. The identical
shape of the curves is an important result as it gives a clear indication of how the volumetric
term behaves as a function of displacement although the values between the two versions diﬀer.
As Figures 4.19 and 4.20 show, the manually calculated isochoric term and the isochoric
term presented by COMSOL are identical. Both the shape of the curves and the values for
the isochoric strain energy coincide. The total strain energy presented in Figures 4.21 and
4.22 is then again aﬀected by the diﬀerent values obtained for the two diﬀerent volumetric
terms. As the volumetric term is the dominant term in the manual calculations, the shape of
the total strain energy curve takes aim of the curve for the volumetric term as seen in Figure
4.21. For the total strain energy obtained from COMSOL, the shape of the curve is similar
to the curve of the isochoric term as a result of the isochoric term being dominant in the
COMSOL interpretation.
Next section covers the parameter estimation that was performed in order to ﬁnd suitable
parameters for the constitutive model so it can be used describe the in vivo stress-stretch
behavior of the human patellar tendon.
4.3
Parameter estimation
In the previous section, results from the implementation of the contitutive model by Swedberg
et al. were presented. For the analysis conducted, the parameters of the model presented
in their article were used. Those parameters were obtained e.g. from the mediate collateral
ligament of an adult rabbit. That would mean that previous analysis might not completely
describe the behavior seen in human tendons in vivo. In order to test if the constitutive model
presented in Equation 4.6 was able to describe the mechanical behavior of human tendons the
model parameters had to be determined based on experimental data from a human tendon.
As described in Chapter 3, experimental data from a human patellar tendon were obtained.
==PAGE:61==
4.3. PARAMETER ESTIMATION
55
These data were then used to obtain the relevant parameters of the constitutive model. To
obtain these parameters a customized Matlab program was used and the program is described
in further detail in Section 4.3.2. The ﬁrst step in determining the parameters was to obtain
an expression for the Cauchy stress σ which can be derived from the strain energy function
deﬁned in Equation 4.6. The calculations for the Cauchy stress are presented in Section 4.3.1.
4.3.1
Deﬁning the stress components of the Cauchy stress σ
The stress tensor for a hyperelastic material is deﬁned as:
σ = J−1F SF T
(4.29)
where J denotes the volume ratio and is equal to λ, F is the deformation gradient tensor
and S is the second Piola-Kirchoﬀstress and is derived from the strain energy in the following
way:
S = 2∂W
∂C
(4.30)
where W is the strain energy function and C is the right Cauchy-Green tensor.
In a simple tension test in the direction of the y-axis like conducted in this project the
Cauchy stress tensor σ becomes diagonal with σyy = σ and σxx = σzz = 0 and can be
expressed as:
σ =


0
0
0
0
σyy
0
0
0
0


(4.31)
Using the deﬁnitions described above, the Cauchy stress component σyy can therefore be
obtained from the following relation:
σ = J−1F 2∂W
∂C F T
(4.32)
The derivative of the strain energy function W with respect to the right Cauchy-Green
tensor C is obtained using the chain rule like shown in Equation 4.33:
∂W
∂C = ∂W
∂I1
∂I1
∂C + ... + ∂W
∂I5
∂I5
∂C
(4.33)
So to determine the Cauchy stress we need to derive the derivative of the strain energy
function W with respect to each of the strain invariants I1 −I5 as well as the derivative of the
strain invariants with respect to the Cauchy-Green tensor C. We start out by deriving the
derivatives for each of the strain invariants by using derivative relationships presented e.g. in
[14].
∂I1
∂C = 1 =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1


(4.34)
==PAGE:62==
56
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
∂I2
∂C = I21 −C =


I2
0
0
0
I2
0
0
0
I2

−


1
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
1

=


I2 −1
0
0
0
I2 −λ2
0
0
0
I2 −1


(4.35)
∂I3
∂C = I3C−1 = I3 ·


1
0
0
0
1
λ2
0
0
0
1

=


I3
0
0
0
I3
λ2
0
0
0
I3


(4.36)
∂I4
∂C = ⃗a0 ⊗⃗a0 =


0
1
0

·
h
0
1
0
i
=


0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0


(4.37)
∂I5
∂C = ⃗a0 ⊗C · ⃗a0 + ⃗a0 · C ⊗⃗a0
=
h
0
1
0
i
·


0
λ2
0

+
h
0
1
0
i
·


0
λ2
0


=


0
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
0

+


0
0
0
0
λ2
0
0
0
0


=


0
0
0
0
2λ2
0
0
0
0


(4.38)
Next the derivates of the strain energy function with respect to each of the strain invariants
were deﬁned. The following derivatives were obtained with Matlab by taking the derivative
of each term of the strain energy function with respect to the relevant strain invariant as seen
in Equation 4.39:
∂W
∂Iα
= ∂Wfiber
∂Iα
+ ∂Wmatrix
∂Iα
+ ∂Wvol
∂Iα
(4.39)
where α represents the number of the relevant invariant. The expressions for the deriva-
tives are as follows:
∂W
∂I1
= µ
2 −I4κ log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
I2 −I1I4 + I5
= µ(I2 −I1I4 + I5) −2I4κ log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
2(I2 −I1I4 + I5)
(4.40)
∂W
∂I2
= κ log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
I2 −I1I4 + I5
(4.41)
∂W
∂I3
= −µ
2I3
(4.42)
==PAGE:63==
4.3. PARAMETER ESTIMATION
57
∂W
∂I4
= c1ec2(√I4−1)2(√I4 −1)
2√I4
−
I(2m−2ν0)
4
κ e−4m(λ−1) log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
(I1I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)) + I(2ν0−2m−1)
4
e4m(λ−1)(2m −2ν0)(I2 −I1I4 + I5)
I2 −I1I4 + I5
(4.43)
∂W
∂I5
= κ log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
I2 −I1I4 + I5
(4.44)
Now the derivatives of the strain energy function W with respect to each of the strain
invariants I1−I5 as well as the derivatives of the strain invariants with respect to the Cauchy-
Green tensor C have been presented. Therefore, using Equation 4.32 and the expressions for
the J, F and F T , a value for the y-component of the Cauchy stress tensor, σyy could be
obtained. Inserting the relevant relations into the equation yields the expression in Equation
4.45. The full expression for the derivative of the strain energy ∂W
∂C is not shown for simplicity.
σ = 2
λ


1
0
0
0
λ
0
0
0
1


∂W
∂I1
∂I1
∂C + ... + ∂W
∂I5
∂I5
∂C



1
0
0
0
λ
0
0
0
1


(4.45)
We want to obtain the expression for σyy and therefore, starting from the right hand side
of Equation 4.45, we multiply the yy component of the F T to each of the terms representing
the derivative of the strain energy function, ∂W
∂C . The term 2
λ, on the left hand side then
cancels out the λ value in the yy component of the deformation gradient tensor F so the
terms for the strain energy derivitation are just multiplied with 2. The relationship obtained
for the σyy component is expressed in Equation 4.46:
σyy = λ(µ(I2 −I1I4 + I5) −2I4κ log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5)))
(I2 −I1I4 + I5)
+ 2λκ(I2 −λ2) log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
(I2 −I1I4 + I5)
−µ
λ
+ λc1ec2(√I4−1)2(√I4 −1)
√I4
−
2λ(I(2m−2ν0)
4
κ e−4m(λ−1) log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
(I1I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)) + I(2ν0−2m−1)
4
e4m(λ−1)(2m −2ν0)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
(I2 −I1I4 + I5)
+ 4λ3κ(log(I(2ν0−2m)
4
e4m(λ−1)(I2 −I1I4 + I5))
(I2 −I1I4 + I5)
(4.46)
Having acquired the relationship for the σyy component, the expression could be inserted
into the customized Matlab program to obtain its parameters. Section 4.3.2 covers the im-
plementation and its process.
==PAGE:64==
58
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
4.3.2
Conducting the parameter estimation
This section discusses the optimization problem conducted in Matlab in order to ﬁnd the
parameters of the constitutive model and presents the results obtained. The Matlab script
used for the parameter estimation can be seen in Appendix A. The script includes a nonlinear
regression for parameter estimation of the constitutive model applied to in vivo data of the
human patellar tendon. The program conducts nonlinear least-squares ﬁtting to ﬁnd the val-
ues of the parameters that give the best ﬁt of the user-deﬁned equation to the experimental
data. The user-deﬁned equation in this case is the σyy component expressed in Equation
4.46. This enabled for the estimation of the parameters presented in Table 4.1. The basic
idea behind the program is to acquire these parameters based on tendon experimental data
in order to use the constitutive model to describe the stress-stretch relationship of the hu-
man patellar tendon. The stretch data set representing the slow loading rate was chosen for
the analysis. The program was fed with the mathematical expression of the σyy component
deﬁned in Equation 4.46 and then the program determines the parameters of the mathemati-
cal expression that make the best ﬁt to the relationship represented by the experimental data.
To begin with, the vector, that ultimately contains the estimated parameter values, was
given random values to be used as an initial guess of the parameters. That allows the program
to obtain a starting point for the search it then carries out. To restrict the search space in
which the program looks for the parameter values, a set of lower and upper bounds was
deﬁned. The lower and upper bounds were chosen according to the order of magnitude of
the parameter values presented in Table 4.1. Running the parameter optimization gave the
values presented in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: The parameters of the constitutive model obtained from the optimization
Parameter
Value
c1
1 [MPa]
c2
300
µ
1 [MPa]
κ
100 [MPa]
m
−3.14
ν0
2.2 ∗10−14
The values of the parameters were considered acceptable with the exception of the value
obtained for the ν0 parameter. Since the value of ν0, which denotes the Poisson’s ratio, can
be considered far from the expected result it was replaced by the value of the Poisson’s ratio
given by Swedberg et al., ν0 = 5.85. This was done as the obtained result was far from
the Poisson’s ratio seen in ligaments and tendons experimentally, where it has been found to
greatly exceed 0.5 [29]. Furthermore, Swedberg et al. used experimental data that contained
the measured apparent Poisson’s ratio in a rabbit ligament as a function of ﬁber stretch to ﬁnd
the parameter ν0. Therefore can their result be considered more accurate as the experimental
data used in the present thesis was a stress-stretch relationship and thereby perhaps not as
suitable to predict the relevant parameter for ν0. When using the values obtained in the
parameter estimation for the other parameters and the ν0 value presented by Swedberg et al.,
the following ﬁt was obtained:
==PAGE:65==
4.3. PARAMETER ESTIMATION
59
Figure 4.23: The y-component of the Cauchy stress σ.
As Figure 4.23 shows the ﬁt obtained with the previous mentioned parameters cannot
be considered adequate.
The shape of the curve though displayed an expected nonlinear
relationship. Based on inspection of the ﬁgure the decision was made to try and increase the
value of the Poisson’s ratio ν0. Changing the value from 5.85 to 8.5 resulted in the following
ﬁt presented in Figure 4.24:
==PAGE:66==
60
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.24: The y-component of the Cauchy stress σ ﬁtted with the stress-stretch relationship
displayed by the human patellar tendon when using ν0 = 8.5.
The ﬁt presented in Figure 4.24 shows an improvement in relation to the earlier ﬁt but is
still not satisfactory. The fact that the change in the parameter denoting the Poisson’s ratio
proved to make a better ﬁt in comparison to the one in Figure 4.23 lead to the conclusion that
the increase in the ν0 parameter improved the ability of the constitutive relation to describe
the in vivo behavior. Therefore another increase in the value was tested. Figure 4.25 below
presents the stress-stretch relationship with a Poisson’s ratio of 9.5.
==PAGE:67==
4.3. PARAMETER ESTIMATION
61
Figure 4.25: The y-component of the Cauchy stress σ ﬁtted with the stress-stretch relationship
displayed by the human patellar tendon when using ν0 = 9.5.
As Figure 4.25 depicts, the ﬁt of the σyy component to the experimental data can be
considered fairly acceptable with a R2 value of 0.98. The results presented in Figure 4.25 show
that the expression for the σyy component presented in Equation 4.46 can quite adequately
describe the stress-stretch behavior of the human patellar tendon when combined with the
parameters previously mentioned. Furthermore, this coincides well with the results presented
in [36]. In their article, Swedberg et al. reported results which showed that the viscoelastic
behavior of ligaments and tendons could be predicted by modelling ﬂuid movement when
combined with a large Poisson’s ratio. Similar results have been presented here as the ability
of the constitutive model to predict the behavior of the human patellar tendon in vivo has
been proven.
Equation 4.10 presents the expression for the apparent Poisson’s ratio and allows for
the investigation of how the apparent Poisson’s ratio changes as a function of ﬁber stretch.
Swedberg et al. used the measured apparent Poisson’s ratio from a medial collateral ligament
in a rabbit to obtain the parameters m and ν0 by ﬁtting Equation 4.10 to the data set. As
previously presented they obtained the parameters m = −100 and ν0 = 5.85. Using Equation
4.10 and the values for m and ν0 they plotted the behavior of the apparent Poisson’s ratio as
a function of ﬁber strain as seen in Figure 4.26.
==PAGE:68==
62
CHAPTER 4. MODELLING
Figure 4.26: The apparent Poisson’s ratio presented by Swedberg et al. [36]
Figure 4.26 shows that the apparent Poisson’s ratio presented by Swedberg et al. goes
from the initial value for the Poisson’s ratio of 5.85 to a value of around 3. They concluded
that these results demonstrated that the constitutive model could predict the large Poisson’s
ratio seen experimentally. A similar relationship can be obtained for the results presented in
this thesis. Using Equation 4.10 and the values m = −3.14 and ν0 = 9.5 yields the relationship
presented in Figure 4.27.
Figure 4.27: The apparent Poisson’s ratio for the present model
Figure 4.27 shows that the relationship of the apparent Poisson’s ratio as a function of
ﬁber stretch is in line with the one presented by Swedberg et al in Figure 4.26. Swedberg et
al. were able to compare their relationship to experimental data of the apparent Poisson’s
ratio seen in a rabbit MCL and found that the model could predict the large Poisson’s ratio
seen experimentally. To test the credibility of the results presented in Figure 4.27 similar
experimental data measured from the human patellar tendon would need to be acquired. A
==PAGE:69==
4.3. PARAMETER ESTIMATION
63
comparison could then be performed in order to check if the Poisson’s ratio values presented
here coincide with the experimental data. If these data were available, a very reliable Poisson’s
ratio could be obtained.
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The results presented in this thesis showed that the constitutive model implemented into
COMSOL was able to reproduce the expected nonlinear stress-strain behavior of a hyper-
elastic material as presented in Figure 4.13. These results therefore indicate that the im-
plementation of the constitutive model presented in Equation 4.6 and described in Section
4.2 was successful. The shape of the stress-strain curve in Figure 4.13 was identical to the
shape of the curve obtained by Swedberg et al. presented in [36]. Furthermore, the maximum
stress values obtained for 6% strain and presented in this thesis, coincided with the stress
values obtained by Swedberg et al. That again suggests successful a implementation of the
hyperelastic constitutive model.
In their article, Swedberg et al. reported results which showed that viscoelastic behavior
of the medial collateral ligament could be predicted by modelling ﬂuid movement when com-
bined with a large Poisson’s ratio. An expression capable of describing the stress behavior
of the human pataller tendon was introduced in the present thesis. Figure 4.25 shows that
the stress relationship presented in Equation 4.46 can predict the viscoelastic behavior of the
human patellar tendon when combined with a large Poisson’s ratio. These results suggest that
a constitutive model, that was developed to describe rabbit ligament behavior, can be used
to describe the in vivo stress behavior seen in the human patellar tendon. For the previously
mentioned analysis, the parameter representing the Poisson’s ratio, ν0, had a value of 9.5 and
the relationship for the apparent Poisson’s ratio as a function of ﬁber stretch was presented
in Figure 4.27. In that ﬁgure the Poisson’s ratio was shown to decrease from 9.39 to 7.38
with increasing ﬁber stretch. These values are considerably higher than the ones presented
by Swedberg et al. where they had a value of ν0 = 5.85 and an apparent Poisson’s ratio
going from 5.79 to 2.57. Those values coincided with the apparent Poisson’s ratio values seen
experimentally in the medial collateral ligament of rabbits [36]. Since these kind of experi-
mental data for the human patellar tendon were not available for the research conducted in
the present thesis, similar comparison could not be conducted. This certain type of exper-
imental data for human tendons does not exist in the literature to the author’s knowledge.
If the data existed, Equation 4.10 could be ﬁtted to the data and perhaps more applicable
parameter values for m and ν0 could be obtained. For the analysis in this thesis, the values
presented by Swedberg et al. for the m and ν0 were used as reference and ultimately the
parameters chosen gave adequate results as presented in Figure 4.25.
65
==PAGE:72==
66
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
The work done in the present thesis assumed that the tendon structure was compressible
and therefore capable of volumetric deformation. The volumetric term in the strain energy
function presented in Equation 4.9 describes the volumetric deformation that the tissue un-
dergoes during displacement of the tissue. The response of the volumetric term as a function
of displacement was presented in Figure 4.16. The ﬁgure indicates that the tissue deﬁnitely
experiences a change in volume when displaced which then again suggests that ﬂuid is being
exuded from the tissue. Furthermore, the volumetric term seems to reach a certain point of
saturation, meaning that the tissue reaches its maximal volumetric change when deformed
beyond 6% strain. Figure 4.16 and Figure 2.3, which presents the stress-strain relationship
of the tendon, can be seen to have certain similarities. As seen in Figure 2.3, the stress-strain
curve starts to reach a certain maximum shortly after 6% strain and if the strain goes beyond
8 −10% the tendon will rupture. This might explain the behavior seen in Figure 4.16 as the
tissue is only capable of a certain volumetric change before it ruptures. The results presented
in Figure 4.16 give a clear indication of how the volumetric strain energy behaves as a func-
tion of displacement and can thereby be used to describe the volumetric material behavior of
ligaments and tendons under uniaxial tension.
In Figures 4.17 and 4.18, a comparison between the volumetric term obtained by manual
calculations and the volumetric term obtained from COMSOL was made. The value for the
strain energy density obtained from COMSOL was considerably lower than for the manually
calculated term. The reason for this discrepency is diﬃcult to explain. Perhaps COMSOL
automatically intervenes and places a restriction on how much the structure can deform re-
sulting in lower values for the volumetric strain energy than expected. The most important
conclusion that can be drawn from the two ﬁgures is that the shape of the curves is identical,
indicating the same response to the displacement although presenting diﬀerent values for the
volumetric strain energy. From Figure 4.16 it can be concluded that the change in volume
saturates as the displacement goes beyond 6% strain. That again suggests that the tissue is
only capable of a certain change in volume and increasing the displacement has no further
eﬀect on the volumetric change.
There are some limitations of the approach presented in this thesis. Firstly, the Cauchy
stress component σyy was parameterized using only the stress-stretch relationship from the
patellar tendon while Swedberg et al. used experimental data of the stress-strain relation-
ship as well as experimental data of the Poisson’s ratio in rabbit ligaments. The Poisson’s
ratio ν0 presented in this thesis had a relatively higher value than presented in the article by
Swedberg et al. [36] as well as in other studies [29, 21, 12]. Experimental data that measures
the apparent Poisson’s ratio as a function of ﬁber stretch in human tendons would enable
for more precise estimation of the parameters of the Poisson’s ratio and a better comparison
of the value presented for the Poisson’s ratio in this thesis. Additionally, the experimental
data used to ﬁt the Cauchy stress component only contained measurements from one subject
where using larger data sets might improve the results obtained. In the end, it must be taken
into account that a constitutive model for a complex nonlinear materials like tendons and
ligmaents will always have certain limitations.
The present thesis has successfully implemented a hyperelastic constitutive model that al-
lowed for the analysis of the stress-stretch relationship of ligaments and tendons. Furthermore,
the present work presented a relationship for the volumetric material behavior of tendons and
==PAGE:73==
67
ligaments by incorporating a volumetric term into the aforementioned constitutive model.
That allowed for results, that have not been presented in studies that assume the tissue to
be incompressible, to be presented. Finally, an expression obtained through the strain energy
equation and capable of describing the stress-stretch behavior in the human patellar tendon,
was presented. The results obtained from the expression showed that a constitutive model,
that was developed to describe rabbit ligament behavior, can be used to describe the in vivo
stress behavior seen in the human patellar tendon.
Modelling connective tissues such as ligaments and tendons is an interesting part of the
research conducted within the ﬁeld of biomechanics. Diﬀerent approaches have been presented
and consequently the results vary. Modelling is though an eﬀective way to learn more about
the mechanical behavior of these tissues. This thesis has presented results that allow for
the investigation of volume change and ﬂuid ﬂow within ligaments and tendons when put
under uniaxial tension. There is still plenty of room for improvements, and further research
is needed in order to keep acquiring more knowledge in terms of modelling the mechanical
behavior of ligaments and tendons.
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Kirsten Albracht and Olivier Seynnes. private communication, 2015.
[2]
J. Bonet and R. Wood. Nonlinear Continuum Mechanics for Finite Element Analysis.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1997.
[3]
David L. Butler, Edward S. Grood, Frank R. Noeys, and Ronald F. Zernicke. Biome-
chanics of ligaments and tendons. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 6:125–182, 1978.
[4]
John Clemmer, Juan Liao, Debbie Davis, Mark F. Horstemeyer, and Lakiesha N.
Williams. A mechanistic study for strain rate sensitivity of rabbit patellar tendon. Jour-
nal of Biomechanics, 43:2785–2791, 2010.
[5]
Stephen C. Cowin and Stephen B. Doty. Tissue Mechanics. Springer, New York, USA,
2007.
[6]
S.E. Duenwald, R. Vanderby Jr., and R.S. Lakes. Viscoelastic relaxation and recovery
of tendon. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 37:1131–1140, 2009.
[7]
D. M. Elliott, P. S. Robinson, J. A. Gimbel, J. J. Sarver, J. A. Abboud, R. V. Iozzo, and
L. J. Soslowsky. Eﬀect of altered matrix proteins on quasilinear viscoelastic properties
in transgenic mouse tail tendons. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 31:599–605, 2003.
[8]
P. Fratzl. Collagen: Structure and mechanics, an introduction. In P. Fratzl, editor,
Collagen: Structure and Mechanics. Springer, 233 Spring Street, New York, USA, 2008.
[9]
S. Fukashiro, M. Itoh, Y. Ichinose, Y. Kawakami, and T. Fukunaga. Ultrasonography
gives directly but uninvasively elastic characteristics of human tendon in vivo. European
Journal of Applied Physiology, 71:555–557, 1995.
[10] Y. C. Fung. Biomechanics. Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues. Springer-Verlag,
New York, USA, 1993.
[11] P. Hansen, J. Bojsen-Moller, P. Aagaard, M. Kjaer, and S. P. Magnusson. Mechanical
properties of the human patellar tendon, in vivo. Clinical Biomechanics, 21:54–58, 2005.
[12] J. Hewitt, F. Guilak, R. Glisson, and T. P. Vail. Regional material properties of the
human hip joint capsule ligaments. Journal of Orthopaedic Research, 19:359–364, 2001.
[13] A.H. Hoﬀmann, D.R. Robichaud, J.J. Duquette, and P. Grigg. Determining the eﬀect
of tissue hydration upon the properties of ligaments. Journal of Biomechanics, 38:1636–
1642, 2005.
69
==PAGE:76==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[14] G.A. Holzapfel. Nonlinear Solid Mechanics. A Continuum Approach for Engineering.
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex, England, 2000.
[15] G.A. Johnson, D. M. Tramaglini, R. M. Levine, K. Ohno, N.Y. Choi, and S.L. Woo.
Tensile and viscoelastic properties of human patellar tendon. Journal of Orthopaedic
Research, 12:796–803, 1994.
[16] P. Kannus. Structure of the tendon connective tissue. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine
and Sports, 10:312–320, 2000.
[17] Rami K. Korhonen and Simo Saarakkala. Biomechanics and modeling of skeletal soft
tissue. In Vaclav Klika, editor, Theoretical Biomechanics. InTech, 2011.
[18] A. Kösters, Wiesinger, H. P. Bojsen-Møller, and O. R. Seynnes. Inﬂuence of loading rate
on patellar tendon mechanical properties in vivo. Clinical Biomechanics, 29:323–329,
2014.
[19] K. Kubo, Y. Kawakami, H. Kaneisha, and T. Fukunaga. Measurement of viscoelastic
properties of tendon structures in vivo. Scandanavian Journal of Medicine and Science
in Sports, 12:3–8, 2001.
[20] Yin Luzhong and D. M. Elliott. A biphasic and transversely isotropic mechanical model
for tendon: application to mouse tail fasciscles in uniaxial tension. Journal of Biome-
chanics, 37:907–916, 2004.
[21] H. A. Lynch, W. Johannessen, J.P. Wu, A. Jawa, and D.M. Elliott.
Eﬀect of ﬁber
orientation and strain rate on the nonlinear uniaxial tensile material properties of tendon.
Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 125:726–731, 2003.
[22] A.F. Mak. The apparent viscoelastic behavior of articular cartilage-the contributions
from the intrinsic matrix viscoelasticity and interstitial ﬂuid ﬂows. Journal of Biome-
chanical Engineering, 108:123–130, 1986.
[23] J. Middleton, M.L. Jones, and G.N. Pande. Computer Methods in Biomechanics and
Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 1. Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, The Netherlands,
1993.
[24] V. C. Mow, S. C. Kuei, W. M. Lai, and C.G. Armstrong. Biphasic creep and stress
relaxation of articular cartilage in compression: Theory and experiments. Journal of
Biomechanical Engineering, 102:73–84, 1980.
[25] COMSOL Multiphysics. http://www.comsol.com/comsol-multiphysics, 2015.
[26] A. Nekouzadeh, K.M. Pryse, E.L. Elson, and G.M. Genin. A simpliﬁed approach to
quasi-linear viscoelastic modeling. Journal of Biomechanics, 40:3070–3078, 2007.
[27] R.D. Pascalis, I.D. Abrahams, and W.J. Parnell. On nonlinear viscoelastic deformations:
a reappraisal of fung’s quasi-linear viscoelastic model. Proceedings of the Royal Society
A, 470:20140058, 2014.
[28] K.M. Quapp and J.A. Weiss. Material characterization of human medial collateral liga-
ment. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 120:757–763, 1998.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
[29] Shawn P. Reese, Steve A. Maas, and Jeﬀrey A. Weiss. Micromechanical models of helical
superstructures in ligament and tendon ﬁbers predict large poisson’s ratios. Journal of
Biomechanical Engineering, 43:1394–1400, 2010.
[30] Shawn P. Reese and Jeﬀrey A. Weiss. Tendon fascicles exhibit a linear correlation between
poisson’s ratio and force during uniaxial stress relaxation.
Journal of Biomechanical
Engineering, 135:034501(1–4), 2013.
[31] N.D. Reeves, M.V. Narici, and C.N. Maganaris. Viscoelastic relaxation and recovery of
tendon. Muscle and Nerve, 28:74–81, 2003.
[32] Kelc Robi, Naranda Jakob, Kuhta Matevz, and Vogrin Matjaz. The physiology of sports
injuries and repair processes. In Michael Hamlin, Nick Draper, and Yaso Kathiravel,
editors, Current Issues in Sports and Exercise Medicine. InTech, 2013.
[33] Joseph J. Sarver, Paul S. Robinson, and Dawn M. Elliott.
Methods for quasi-linear
viscoelastic modeling of soft tissue: Application to incremental stress-relaxation experi-
ments. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 125:754–758, 2003.
[34] Olivier Seynnes. private communication, 2014.
[35] R.B. Svensson, P. Hansen, T. Hassenkam, and P. Magnusson.
Viscoelastic behavior
of discrete human collagen ﬁbrils. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical
Materials, 3:112–115, 2010.
[36] Aaron M. Swedberg, Shawn P. Reese, Steve A. Maas, Benjamin J. Ellis, and Jeﬀrey A.
Weiss. Continuum description of the poisson’s ratio of ligament and tendon under ﬁnite
deformation. Journal of Biomechanics, 47:3201–3209, 2014.
[37] M. S. Traberg. Lecture 5: Deformation analysis. University lecture in Tissue Biome-
chanics, 2012.
[38] M. S. Traberg. Lecture 11: Viscoelastic materials. University lecture in Tissue Biome-
chanics, 2013.
[39] M.S. Traberg. private communication, 2014.
[40] C. Vergari, P. Pourcelet, L. Holden, B. Ravary-Plumioen, G. Gerard, P. Laugier, D. Mit-
ton, and N. Crevier-Denoix. True stress and poisson’s ratio of tendons during loading.
Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 44:719–724, 2011.
[41] J. H.-C. Wang.
Mechanobiology of tendon.
Journal of Biomechanics, 39:1563–1582,
2006.
[42] Jeﬀrey A. Weiss, Bradley N. Maker, and Sanjay Govindjee. Finite element implemen-
tation of incompressible, transversely isotropic hyperelasticity.
Computer methods in
applied mechanics and engineering, 135:107–128, 1996.
[43] S. L-Y. Woo, G. A. Johnson, and B. A. Smith. Mathematical modeling of ligaments and
tendons. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 115:468–473, 1993.
==PAGE:78==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[44] Tishya A. L. Wren, Scott A. Yerby, S. Beaupre, Gary, and Dennis R. Carter. Mechanical
properties of the human achilles tendon. Clinical Biomechanics, 16:245–251, 2000.
[45] Alexei I. Zhurov, Georges Limbert, Daniel P. Aeschlimann, and John Middleton.
A
constitutive model for the periodontal ligament as a compressible transversely isotropic
visco-hyperelastic tissue. Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineer-
ing, 10:223–235, 2007.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
Matlab script
Following is the Matlab script used for the parameter estimation. The script was obtained
from Marie Sand Traberg [39] and was then modiﬁed to ﬁt the purpose of the analysis in the
thesis.
% Loading the experimental data
filename = 'stress.xlsx';
stress = xlsread(filename);
filename = 'slowstretch.xlsx';
slowstretch = xlsread(filename);
% Start off by guessing the vector x (which collects the model parameters)
% by using a vector with random numbers in a specific range
x0 = [rand rand rand rand rand rand]*10;
% Restrict the search space by defining a set of lower and upper bounds on
% the parameters in vector x
lb = [1e+6 1e+2 1e+6 1e+6 −2e+2 0];
ub = [1e+9 3e+2 1e+9 1e+9 0 10];
% Start the minimization of the objective function
options = optimset('MaxFunEvals', 16000, 'MaxIter', 16000, 'TolFun', 1e−10, 'TolX', 1e−8);
x = lsqnonlin(@strainenergy, x0, lb, ub, options);
t22 = strainenergy(x);
% Calculating the goodness−of−fit
r_sq = 1−sum(t22.^2)/sum((stress −mean(stress)).^2);
73
==PAGE:80==
74
APPENDIX A. MATLAB SCRIPT
Below is the Matlab ﬁle that contained the function "strainenergy" where the σ22 compo-
nent is expressed as "t22".
% This file includes the strain energy equation used in the parameter
% estimation by using experimental data.
% Nomenclature: u(1) = c1
%
u(2) = c2
%
u(3) = mu
%
u(4) = kappa
%
u(5) = m
%
u(6) = v0
function [t22] = strainenergy(u)
filename = 'slowstretch.xlsx';
slowstretch = xlsread(filename);
% Identifying the variable 'h' as lambda which denotes the fiber stretch.
% This data set for the fiber stretch, 'slowstretch', was created by converting
% the elongation data obtained from the experiment on the patellar tendon
% to stretch data.
h = slowstretch;
% Defining the strain invariants as manually calculated
i1 = h.^2+2;
i2 = 2*h.^2+1;
i3 = h.^2;
i4 = h.^2;
i5 = h.^4;
% Defining the stress component as derived from the strain energy function
t22 = h.*(u(3).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5)−2*i4.*u(4).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1))
.*(i2−i1.*i4+i5)))./(i2−i1.*i4+i5)
+ 2.*h.*u(4).*(i2−h.^2).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5))
./(i2−i1.*i4+i5)
−(u(3)./h)
+ ((h.*u(1).*exp(u(2).*(h−1).^2).*(h−1))./h)−(2*h.*(i4.^(2*u(5)−2*u(6)).*u(4)
.*exp(−4*u(5).*(h−1)).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1))
.*(i2−i1.*i4+i5)).*(i1.*i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)))+i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)−1)
.*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)).*(2*u(5)−2*u(6)).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5))./(i2−i1.*i4+i5))
+ 4*h.^3.*u(4).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5))./(i2−i1.*i4+i5)
end
==PAGE:81==
75
The following Matlab script was used to plot the stress-stretch relationships.
filename = 'stress.xlsx';
stress = xlsread(filename);
filename = 'slowstretch.xlsx';
slowstretch = xlsread(filename);
h = slowstretch;
i1 = h.^2+2;
i2 = 2*h.^2+1;
i3 = h.^2;
i4 = h.^2;
i5 = h.^4;
u(1)= 1000000;
u(2)= 300;
u(3)= 1000000;
u(4)= 100000000;
u(5)= −3.14;
u(6)= 9.5;
sigma_tendon = h.*(u(3).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5)−2*i4.*u(4).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1))
.*(i2−i1.*i4+i5)))./(i2−i1.*i4+i5)
+ 2.*h.*u(4).*(i2−h.^2).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5))
./(i2−i1.*i4+i5)
−(u(3)./h)
+ ((h.*u(1).*exp(u(2).*(h−1).^2).*(h−1))./h)−(2*h.*(i4.^(2*u(5)−2*u(6)).*u(4)
.*exp(−4*u(5).*(h−1)).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1))
.*(i2−i1.*i4+i5)).*(i1.*i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)))+i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)−1)
.*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)).*(2*u(5)−2*u(6)).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5))./(i2−i1.*i4+i5))
+ 4*h.^3.*u(4).*log(i4.^(2*u(6)−2*u(5)).*exp(4*u(5)*(h−1)).*(i2−i1.*i4+i5))./(i2−i1.*i4+i5)
figure(1)
plot(h,sigma_tendon);
title('Cauchy stress as a function of stretch');
xlabel('Stretch');
ylabel('Stress [Pa]');
figure (2)
plot(h,sigma_tendon, 'r');
hold on
scatter(h,stress,'.b');
title('Sigma22 component fitted with experimental data');
xlabel('Stretch');
ylabel('Stress [Pa]');
legend('Sigma22 component','Experimental data');
==PAGE:82==
 
www.elektro.dtu.dk 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Biomedical Engineering Group 
Technical University of Denmark 
Ørsteds Plads 
Building 348 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00 
Fax: (+45) 45 93 16 34 
Email: info@elektro.dtu.dk 
