==PAGE:1==
Shape Reconstruction from Truss
Topologies
Jonas Nielsen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Jonas Nielsen, s104098,
Phone +45 30 28 89 12
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
The goal of the thesis is to create good looking joints between two bars in a
truss. In order to create the joints the truss structure needs to be deﬁned. This
is done using the code from [Pau15], which sets up an optimization problem
which can be solved using linear programming. The code from [Pau15] can be
extended such that the optimization problem gets solved for multiple load cases.
Robustness can be applied to the structure by changing the linear objective
function to a non-linear objective function. The multiple load cases and increase
in robustness was capable of producing two bridges one resembeling a deck
truss bridge and one a through truss bridge. Using the information from the
optimization problem a mesh can be created of the truss, focusing on the joints
between two bars. The truss gets constructed using the polar annular mesh
framework from [JAB]. The reconstruction is created by adding one bar at the
time, and when two bar either intersect or have the same end destination a joint
is created between them. The joints are created by adding a bar to an already
existing bar, and placing the vertices of the rib loops between the two bars. The
algorithm was capable of constructing the Lotte Tower in South Korea, which
consisted of 208 bars, 52098 vertices and 53420 faces. Other results showed that
the placement of the vertices, which are part of a joint, can still be improved
and so can the matching of the vertice valency of two bars.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstrakt (Dansk)
Målet for denne afhandling er at konstruere pæne samlinger mellem to stænger
i en bygningsskeletstruktur. For at kunne konstruere samlingerne er det nød-
vendigt at have deﬁneret skeletstrukturen. Dette er gjort ved hjælp af koden
fra [Pau15], som deﬁnere et optimerings problem, der kan løses med lineær pro-
grammering. Koden fra [Pau15] kan udvides således, at den kan håndtere ﬂere
belastninger samtidig. Ved at ændre på objektiv funktionen fra lineær til ikke
lineær, kan skeletstukturen gøres mere robust. Flere belastningsscenarier og for-
øgelse i robusthed var i stand til at konstruere to broer, en hvor skeletstrukturen
er under broen, og en hvor vejen går igennem skeletstrukturen. Med informa-
tionen fra optimeringen kan der dannes et mesh, hvor fokus er på samlingerne
mellem to stænger. Skeletstrukturen kan rekonstrueres ved hjælp af "polar an-
nular mesh" strukturen fra [JAB]. Meshet bliver dannet ved at tilføje en stang
ad gangen, og hvis to stænger enten slutter/starter samme sted eller krydser
hinanden, laves der en samling. Samlingerne laves ved at tilføje en stang til en
anden bar, hvor punkterne i rib kredsløbet mellem de to stænger, bliver placeret
således at det ligner en rigtig samling. Algoritmen var i stand til at konstruere
Lotte Tårnet i Sydkorea, hvilket bestod af 208 stænger, 52098 punkter og 53420
faces. Andre resultater viste at placeringen af punkterne i samlingerne kan for-
bedres og når to barer sættes sammen skal de have lige mange punkter is rib
kredsløbene.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with construction of trusses, with focus on creating nice looking
joints between two bars.
The thesis consists of an introduction, solving the optimization problem deﬁning
the truss with regards to multiple load cases and robustness, constructing the
truss into a mesh with focus on the joints, intersection between bars and post
processing the mesh, and an discussion, conclusion and future work chapter.
Lyngby, 24-January-2016
Jonas Nielsen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my two supervisors Jakob Andreas Bærentzen and Boyan
Stefanov Lazarov, for guiding me and keeping my spirits high throughout the
thesis. The previous work by Jakob Andreas Bærentzen et. al ([JAB]) helped
when creating the mesh. Also I would like to show my gratitude to DTU Com-
pute and DTU Mechanical Engineering for making this thesis possible.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstrakt (Dansk)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Truss Topology Optimization
3
2.1
GRAND3 - Ground structure based topology optimization for
arbitrary 3D domains using MATLAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Mathematical Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Multi-load truss topology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Robustness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.1
The penalization function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Hessian and Gradient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.5
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.5.1
Deck Truss Bridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.5.2
Through Truss Bridge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3
Shape Reconstruction
41
3.1
Geometric Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.1.1
Polar-Annular Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.1.2
Smoothing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2
Truss PAM Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.3
The Bar creation method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3.1
Creating the bars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.2
Node joints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.3.3
Intersections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.4
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.5
The Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.6
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.7
Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.7.1
Cantilever . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.7.2
Crane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.7.3
Diamond
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
3.7.4
The Lotte Tower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4
Discussion, Conclusion & Future work
75
4.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A The "separate document"
81
A.1 Original project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.2 Self evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Tubes can be found everywhere in today’s world, whether it is the truss structure
of a building or pipes transporting water or gas. When two tubes intersect a
joint has to be created, this is a diﬃcult and time consuming task. Designing
one joint such that it can withstand loads can be complicated, see [Mar74],
[ABP77] and [Vis75]. Even more complicated when having to design hundreds
for the same structure.
For truss structures there exist plenty of ways for creating the trusses, such as
[JS], [Slu11] and [ZW10], but there are none which have generated an algorithm
for the joints, either it is not completely clear, or the joints are created manually.
In computer graphics elements can be visualized as meshes, that is an element
which can be made of a set of vertices, edges and faces, forming the shape of a
given element. Given that a mesh can take any shape, and is easy to manipulate,
this thesis proposes an algorithm for turning truss structures into 3D meshes,
where the joints can be molded.
In order to represent the joints as a mesh, a tubular structure needs to be
created. There already exist a lot of work on truss structures, which will be the
tubular structure used in this thesis. The truss structure generation is based on
the matlab code from [Pau15]. It is possible to represent a set of nodes, points
in 3d space, and possible bars, tubes between two nodes, as a mathematical
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
optimization problem, and by solving this problem an optimal truss can be
created. The work by [Pau15] only deals with the single load case, that is each
node can only receive a load from one direction. In order to make it possible
for the nodes to get eﬀected from more than one direction, the already existing
code will be expanded such that each node can receive multiple load scenarios.
In order to create a robust truss, the cross-sectional areas of the bars cannot be
too small, this can be avoided by setting the bars cross-sectional area to either
zero or a minimum.
Once the truss structure is created, it has to be visualized as a mesh. A circle
can be approximated as a polygon, the more sides the better representation, and
a tube is more or less a connection between to circles. A good representation
of the bars is with quadrilaterals connecting the sides of the two polygons,
therefore the mesh creation is based on the polar annular mesh framework by
[JAB]. Thus creating the bars and connecting them should be easy, however
making the connection resemble joints still has to be made. The bars start at
one node and end at another, hence it is possible for two bars to intersect each
other, the optimization problem does not take this into account, but the mesh
should create joints when two bars intersect. In order to manipulate the mesh
with mesh operations, which can be used to inspect the truss and the joints,
the mesh should be capable of handling mesh operation without changing the
skeleton of the mesh.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Truss Topology Optimization
A truss is a structure of crossbars which assembled make an whole object. Each
crossbar (or bar) can only eﬀect the structure in two places, at the ends (nodes).
The bars can eﬀect each node in two ways, either by compression, a force applied
to the nodes in the direction of the center of the bar (away from the nodes), or
by tension, a force applied to the nodes away from the center of the bar (towards
the node). The nodes is where the bars meet each other and get connected, the
connection of two bars is called a joint. When all the bars are connected at
the nodes they form an whole object. Examples of the use of trusses can be
to support a roof, or used as the framework of a bridge, an example of a well
known structure composed of trusses is the Eiﬀel Tower.
These trusses can be expressed mathematically and solved using computer power,
which is traditionally solved by using the Finite Element Method or Multi Body
Dynamics. Usually there are some physical properties the trusses have to com-
ply with, these properties can be expressed in terms of equations, as an equality
equation or inequality equation, g(x, y) and h(x, y) in (2.1), these are called the
constraints. An example of a constraint can be to ensure stability of the truss.
The constraints can usually be solved with more than one answer, thus there is
a wish to minimize or maximize the result with respect to a condition, such as
maximizing the proﬁt. This can also be expressed as an equation and is called
the objective function, f(x, y) in (2.1). Examples of the objective function can
be minimizing the material used. Minimizing/maximizing the objective function
==PAGE:16==
4
Truss Topology Optimization
and at the same time fulﬁlling the constraints is called an optimization problem,
see (2.1).
minimize
f(x, y)
s.t.
g(x, y) = 0
(2.1)
h(x, y) ≥0
There exists multiple ways for solving optimization problems, it all depends on
the structure of the optimization problem. If the objective function and con-
straints are expressed in terms of linear equations, the problem can be solved
with linear programming. If the objective function and/or the constraints are
non-linear there exists multiple algorithms developed for optimizing the prob-
lem, such as sequential quadratic programming algorithms or interior point al-
gorithms. The reader is referred to [Wri06] for further details on solving opti-
mization problems. Structural optimization can be divided into three classes,
depending on the geometric feature. From [Kla09] these are the following.
• Sizing Optimization: This is when the mathematical formulation, (2.1),
aims to optimize the structural thickness, i.e. the cross sectional area of
truss members or the thickness of a sheet. An example is shown in ﬁgure
2.1.
• Shape Optimization: The aim is to ﬁnd the optimal shape of the struc-
ture. An example can be a solid body which state is described by partial
diﬀerential equations, then the Optimization consists of choosing the in-
tegration domain of the diﬀerential equations. An example is shown in
ﬁgure 2.2.
• Topology Optimization: Topology optimization tries to ﬁnd the best solu-
tion for a predeﬁned set of possibilities. That is for a discrete case, such
as a truss, it is achieved by taking the cross sectional areas of the truss
members and determining whether the member is in the truss (non-zero
area) or whether it is not (zero area), for the optimal solution. An example
is shown in ﬁgure 2.3.
Topology optimization aims at ﬁnding the optimal distribution of material/truss
bars which minimizes weight and fulﬁlls the equilibrium constraints. This thesis
==PAGE:17==
5
F
Initial design
F
Optimized design
Figure 2.1: A sizing optimization where the optimal cross-sectional area of the
members is found.
F
x
η(x)
Figure 2.2: A shape optimization where the function η(x) describes the shape
of the beam like structure.
F
Initial design
F
Optimized design
Figure 2.3: A topology optimization where it is determined which members
are part of the optimal solution.
==PAGE:18==
6
Truss Topology Optimization
uses topology optimization for creating the trusses, for further detail on sizing
optimization and shape optimization the reader is referred to [Kla09].
2.1
GRAND3 - Ground structure based topol-
ogy optimization for arbitrary 3D domains
using MATLAB
GRAND3 is code developed for optimization of truss topology, by minimizing
the total volume of all the members, developed by Zegard and Paulino [Pau15].
This is done by generating a base mesh, the possible bars, where computer
graphic ray-tracing is used, and solving the optimization problem (2.7).
In order to create the ground structure the program needs a base mesh. The
mesh consists of the nodes available to be used by the truss, an example is
presented in ﬁgure 2.4. In the base mesh the load points (the nodal force f) is
also given as well as the ﬁxed points.
From this base mesh all the members or bars, which are to be used in the
optimization problem, are created, see ﬁgure 2.5. This is done through so called
connectivity levels, which are deﬁned by the user, each level of connectivity
increases the amount of bars, by connecting nodes further and further apart as
the level increases. More speciﬁcally the connectivity is as follows:
• Level 1 connectivity will generate members between all neighboring nodes.
• Level 2 connectivity will generate members up to the neighbors of the
neighbors
• Level 3 connectivity will generate members up to the neighbors of the
neighbors of the neighbors.
This is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.6.
This procedure results in generation of a large number of bars and unneces-
sary bars too, such as bars having the same direction and overlap. In order to
prevent stability issues a collinearity check is performed. The collinearity check
eliminates new members whose directional cosines, compared to other bars from
==PAGE:19==
2.1 GRAND3 - Ground structure based topology optimization for arbitrary
3D domains using MATLAB
7
Figure 2.4: The base mesh for a rectangle with a force applied on top (pink
triangles and red arrow), and has ﬁxed points at the bottom (blue
triangles)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.5: 2.5b is an example of all the possible bars between the nodes in
a cube and 2.5c is the bars used from solving the optimization
problem 2.5a with a load illustrated as the red arrow and the blue
triangles illustrating ﬁxed points in 2.5b.
==PAGE:20==
8
Truss Topology Optimization
(a) Level 1 connectivity (b) Level 2 connectivity
Figure 2.6: 2.6a illustrates level 1 connectivity, all nodes are only connected
to its neighbors. Figure 2.6b illustrates level 2 connectivity, the
dashed lines are from level 1, and the the solids are the new bars
added in the level 2 connectivity. Figures 2.6a and 2.6b are taken
from [Pau15]
the same node, are above a given tolerance. This is because the dot product
between two members will be zero if they are perpendicular and 1 if parallel.
The example from earlier 2.4 with level 3 connectivity canbe seen in ﬁgure 2.7
When creating truss it can be of the users interest to have bar free zones, a
restriction zone, e.g if a truss bridge is created a ship has to be capable of
sailing under it or it has to capable for vehicles to drive through the truss.
The restriction zones can be created by using 3D objects, such as triangles,
planes and spheres. When ﬁnding out which bars should be available for the
optimization, the bars passing through the restriction zones should not be part
of them. This is where ray-tracing from computer graphics is used. Ray-tracing
and collision testing is used to ﬁnd out if a given bar enters the restriction zone.
The reader is referred to [Pau15] for a deeper description of how to generate the
restriction zones and how the collision test are performed.
Given the rectangle from earlier (2.4) a restriction zone has been added (2.8a
in the one corner and this changes the truss topology as seen in ﬁgure 2.8b.
Instead of having four sides with 3 supporting legs as in 2.7 the restriction zone
changes the topology such that two of the sides has 1 supporting leg and the
other two 3 supporting legs.
2.1.1
Examples
Several results from GRAND3 are shown to illustrate how the program works.
The examples are taken from [Pau15]. One of them is the edge-supported can-
==PAGE:21==
2.1 GRAND3 - Ground structure based topology optimization for arbitrary
3D domains using MATLAB
9
Figure 2.7: GRAND3’s result using the base mesh from 2.4.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.8: Rectangle mesh with restriction zone and the GRAND3 topology
optimization.
==PAGE:22==
10
Truss Topology Optimization
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.9: Mesh used for the cantilever beam and the result using GRAND3
tilever beam. It is generated using a box 2.9a and is ﬁxed in one side and has
load on the other. The result is seen in ﬁgure 2.9b and conﬁrms the ﬂat can-
tilever hypothesis, and has an optimal volume of V = 14.27.
A base mesh with a disc in the middle as restriction zone has been created in
ﬁgure 2.10. The result gives a diamond, with a strong ring in the middle, which
shifts the orientation of the members. The diamond problem shows GRAND3’s
capability of ﬁnding optimal solutions for problems which includes discontinu-
ities, imperfections or barriers in their structure.
2.2
Mathematical Formulation
In this section the optimization problem, to be solved, for the truss will be
derived. This section is based on and uses parts of [Pau15] and [Pau14]. Michell
[Mic04] derived the necessary conditions for a minimum truss subjected to stress
constraints, given stress limits in tension σC > 0 and compression σC > 0 and
the average stress σ0 = σC+σT
2
. The optimal volume for the truss is then given
if
1. The truss is in equilibrium.
2. The stress is equal to either σT or σC for all members.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Mathematical Formulation
11
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.10: A cylindrical domain ﬁxed at the bottom and load at the top
with a disc restriction zone in the middle. The result resembles
a diamond with a ring in the middle.
3. There exists a compatible deformation ﬁeld such that the strains are equal
to ϵt =
σ0ϵ0
σT
and ϵC =
σ0ϵ0
σC
for members in tension and compression,
respectively.
Unfortunately Michells solutions to this problem contains inﬁnitely dense mem-
bers, however using a large ﬁnite number of members within the given domain
a good approximation of the solutions can be obtained.
The minimal volume optimization problem for a rigid truss, with supports pre-
venting rigid body motions, was formulated by Ohsaki [Ohs10] as (2.2).
min
V = lT a
s.t.
Ku = f
(2.2)
−σC ≤σi ≤σT
if
ai > 0
ai ≥0
i = 1, 2 . . . Nb
Where f is the nodal forces, V is the truss’ volume, ai the cross-sectional area,
li the length and σi the stress of the i’th truss member. K is the global stiﬀness
matrix and u is the nodal displacements. If a member does not have a cross-
sectional area (a = 0) it is removed from the truss.
The formulation (2.2)
is known as the Elastic formulation, because it considers the equilibrium and
compatibility conditions. Instead of a Elastic formulation a Plastic formulation,
==PAGE:24==
12
Truss Topology Optimization
where the equilibrium is required to be fulﬁlled for each node, is considered
(2.3).
min
V = lT a
s.t.
BT n = f
(2.3)
−σCai ≤ni ≤σT ai
i = 1, 2 . . . Nb
Where the matrix BT is the nodal equilibrium matrix, built from the directional
cosines of the members, and n is a vector with the internal (axial) force for all
members in the ground structure.
For the plastic formulation all the active
members must either be in tension or compression at the optimum. This can
be proven by considering the internal force ni, if the i’th member has ni < σT ai
and ni > σCai then ai can be reduced and hence the volume can be reduced.
In order to get an easier problem to solve, (2.3) (which is a nonlinear program)
can be turned into a linear program by introducing slack variables. The slack
variables s+ and s−are incorporated into the stress constraints, as seen in
(2.4).
ni + 2 σ0
σC
s−
i = σT ai
−ni + 2 σ0
σT
s+
i = σCai
(2.4)
Where the coeﬃcients in front of the slack variable simplify the resulting ex-
pressions for the cross-sectional area (2.5), axial forces (2.5) and the rewritten
optimization problem.
ai = s+
i
σT
+ s−
i
σC
ni = s+
i −s−
i
(2.5)
Inserting (2.5) into (2.3) gives a new formulation (2.6)
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Mathematical Formulation
13
min
V = lT ( s+
σT
+ s−
σC
)
s.t
BT (s+ −s−) = f
(2.6)
s+
i , s−
i ≥0
For the active members either s+
i or s−
i is non-zero. The bar is in compression
if s−
i
> 0 and tension if s+
i
> 0.
Given that the truss is stable and there
are no overlapping or repeated members, then the rank of BT is equal to the
number of degrees of freedom for the structure (Ndof), hence the solution lies
on a corner of the feasible domain. The solution to (2.6) gives at most Ndof
non-zero basic variables, with the remainder non-basic variables absent from
the optimal structure (ai = 0). This results in the structure being statically
determinate and hence the solution is also globally optimal.
Deﬁning the stress limit ratio as κ = σT
σC the optimization problem (2.6) can be
formulated as in (2.7).
min
V ∗= V
σT
=

lT
κ · lT  s+
s−

s.t.

BT
−BT  
s+
s−

= f
(2.7)
s+
i , s−
i ≥0
The optimization problem (2.7) can be solved using an interior point algorithm.
Unlike the examples in GRAND3, the focus here will be on bridge construction.
A dummy mesh has been created to test how well the current implementation
works. As seen in 2.11 the result is an unstable structure, which is only capable
of supporting load in the z-direction.
Instead of considering load in the z-direction, the y- and x-direction could be
considered instead, which results in the trusses seen in 2.12.
==PAGE:26==
14
Truss Topology Optimization
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.11: The base mesh (2.11a, of the dummy mesh, and its corresponding
optimal structure (2.11b.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.12: The base meshes and the optimal structures with loads in the x-
and y-direction. 2.12c is the truss for the base mesh 2.12a and
2.12d is the truss for the base mesh 2.12b.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Multi-load truss topology
15
2.3
Multi-load truss topology
The current formulation for truss topology only deals with one case of apply-
ing load on the topology, and thus the topology will only be optimized for
one scenario. In order to optimize the truss topology for multiple cases a new
formulation is needed. The plastic formulation (2.3) is considered once again,
but another aspect is added to it, multiple loads.
This section is based on
[Roz13].
min
V = LT A
s.t.
BT Nl = Fl
−AσC ≤Nl ≤AσT
(2.8)
for
l = 1, 2, . . . , nlc
For the multiple load case (2.8), L is still the matrix with the length of the bars,
A is a matrix containing the cross-sectional area, B is the nodal equilibrium
matrix, σC and σT the stress limits for compression and tension respectively.
Nl is a matrix with the internal axial forces for every member in a given load
case l and Fl is the nodal force in case l. nlc is the number of load conditions.
According to [Roz13] the formulation (2.8) has a very slow convergence rate
when using the interior point algorithm, thus splitting the internal force N into
Tension T and compression C gives a more applicable form.
min
V = LT A
s.t.
BT Tl −BT Cl = NL
σT A −Tl ≥0
σCA −Cl ≥0
(2.9)
A ≥0,
Tl ≥0,
Cl ≥0
for
l = 1, 2, . . . , nlc
Although the problem (2.9) is almost two times greater than (2.8) all the design
variable are non-negative, hence signiﬁcantly improving the convergence of the
interior point algorithm and reducing computation time. The design variables
==PAGE:28==
16
Truss Topology Optimization
can be arranged in the order: {A, Tl, Cl, . . . , Tnlc, Cnlc}, making it possible to
express the coeﬃcients of the problem (2.9) as in (2.10).
H =


F
G
0
. . .
0
F
0
G
. . .
0
...
...
...
...
0
F
0
0
. . .
G


F =


0
σT I
σCI

,
G =


BT
−BT
−I
0
0
−I


(2.10)
In order to see how well the formulation (2.9) works, it has been tested on
the dummy mesh. The mesh has been constructed with loads in the x,y and
z-direction and is illustrated in the ﬁgure 2.13, together with each single load
case.
While the single load cases 2.13f and 2.13d clearly lack stability, case 2.13e does
not. The multiple load case 2.13g resembles case 2.13e the most, however its
bars are thicker and the middle cross is tilted. The multiple load case truss gets
its basic design from the 2.13e case, while the 2.13d and 2.13f cases forces the
bars to be thicker.
2.4
Robustness
The current formulation (2.9) makes it possible for the cross sectional area to
take any given value. This results in very small cross-sectional areas which are
not manufacturable and expecting bars to be constructed the exact area is not
realistic. Instead a formulation using a lower and upper bound for the bars can
be constructed. This is done using the two new variables
• Ae - A eroded, which is the minimal size a bar is allowed to have.
• Ad - A dilated which is the maximum size a bar is allowed to have.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Robustness
17
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 2.13: The top row illustrates the loads and base meshes of the three
cases, the middle row is the corresponding optimal load for each
case, and the bottom row is the multiple case, that is the optimal
truss for the three cases in the top row by optimizing the problem
(2.9).
==PAGE:30==
18
Truss Topology Optimization
Using Ae and Ad a robust design can be formulated, for which the actual con-
structed cross-sectional area of the bars have to lie within the eroded and dilated
areas. Firstly the truss has to be stable and capable of supporting the loads
with the lower boundary, which allows introducing Ae in the constraints, and
gives the formulation (2.11).
min
V = LT Ae
s.t.
BT Tl −BT Cl = NL
σT Ae −Tl ≥0
σCAe + Cl ≥0
(2.11)
Ae ≥0,
Tl ≥0,
Cl ≥0
for
l = 1, 2, . . . , nlc
While the truss makes it possible to support loads with cross-sectional areas
of Ae, the formulation should still minimize the maximal volume of the truss.
That is the upper bound should be as low as possible, which is done by trying
to minimize Ad in the objective function, as seen in (2.12).
min
V = LT Ad
s.t.
BT Tl −BT Cl = NL
σT Ae −Tl ≥0
σCAe + Cl ≥0
(2.12)
Ae ≥0,
Tl ≥0,
Cl ≥0
for
l = 1, 2, . . . , nlc
Formulation (2.12) does not have any connection between the objective function
and the constraints, which will lead to Ad = 0, so instead of using Ad as a
variable, using Ad as a function of Ae will give the objective function (2.13),
and once again the objective function will seek to satisfy the constraints.
min
V = LT Ad(Ae)
(2.13)
==PAGE:31==
2.4 Robustness
19
2.4.1
The penalization function
2.4.1.1
Using tanh
The penelization function Ad has to fulﬁll two conditions in order to work as
intended. If Ae is set to zero, so does Ad, because when Ae is set to zero it is
not part of the solution, and thus it shall not be constructed nor should it eﬀect
the objective function. Secondly should Ad always be greater or equal to Ae, if
Ad is less then Ae it would reward the objective function instead of punishing
it. These two criteria can be formulated mathematically:
• Ad(0) = 0
• Ad(Ae) ≥Ae
The aim of the penelization function is to remove small values of Ae, instead
of making Ae small it should be set to zero. To achieve this the hyperbolic
tangent function is used and a suggested penelization function can be seen at
(2.14).
Ad(Ae) = tanh(β · Ae) · A + Ae
(2.14)
tanh(beta · Ae) converges towards 1 as Ae increases, and β increases, thus pun-
ishing small values of Ae. As seen in ﬁgure 2.14 small values gets punished
worse as β increases, by solving the optimization problem starting of with a
low β value a good initial guess can be made and then by slowly increasing
β, using the previous solution as a new initial guess, a better solution can be
found.
By setting A = 1 in (2.14) and applying the penelization function to the
dummy mesh, the result (2.15) is the same as without the penelization function
(2.13g).
However 2.15 only covers one case of the penelization function, when A = 1.
The ﬁgure 2.16 shows how the dummy mesh varies as A is increased. The base
structure stays the same, but the thickness increases. This is of course because
of the minimum thickness if the dilated area is increased (A). So the parameter
==PAGE:32==
20
Truss Topology Optimization
Figure 2.14: The penelization function for varying beta values.
Figure 2.15: The result of the dummy mesh, using a penelization function in
the objective function
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Robustness
21
Figure 2.16: The result of the dummy mesh with varying A.
A does not have any inﬂuence on which bars are chosen, which makes sense. A
is just a factor and has the same aﬀect on all of the Areas.
Inspection of the cross-sectional areas, show that without the penelization func-
tion there are no values set to zero, although they are very close, in fact they
are either above 0.5 or below 10−8. When using the penelization function the
small values become even smaller, that is the resulting cross-sectional areas are
either 0, below 10−29 or the eroded cross-sectional area is 0.5 or above.
2.4.1.2
Using Even power
Another approach for avoiding small and irrelevant cross-sectional areas can be
achieved by either setting the bar size to zero, if it is not in optimal solution,
or set the bar to a given size (A), if it is in the optimal solution. This can be
achieved by changing the objective function from linear to non-linear. When
the cross-sectional areas are either zero or a certain size A, it will be rewarded
by having a small value in the objective function, and when the cross-sectional
areas are in between 0 and A it will be punished.
In order to simulate the
pre-described behavior the function presented in (2.15) is used as the objective
function.
V = L · (−h · (σ · (A −c))β + h)
(2.15)
==PAGE:34==
22
Truss Topology Optimization
Figure 2.17: The penelization function with diﬀerent values of β for c = 1,
h = 1 and σ = 1
All depending on how much (2.15) is to penalize the objective function h can
vary, thus a small h punishes the objective function little and a large h a lot.
Varying σ and c will change the interval for which the function (2.15) is supposed
to penalize, thus by increasing c and σ will increase the size cross sectional area
A. Just as for the earlier penelization function β is used to increase the slope at
the ends of the interval. An illustration of how this new penelization function
behaves is shown in ﬁgure 2.17, with h = 1, sigma = 1 and c = 1.
Using the penelization function (2.15) as objective function with the values
given before, creates the ground structure for the dummy mesh as seen in ﬁgure
??.
The new construction for the dummy mesh reminds a lot of the earlier con-
structions 2.15, but the new construction 2.18 does not have vertical supporting
bars from (0, 0, 0) to (0, 0, 1) and (0, 1, 0) to (0, 1, 1). Of course this is only one
instance of the equation, all depending on the variables c, h and σ values the
resulting structure can change.
By changing the degree of which the intermediate values between 0 and A are
punished does not change the ﬁnal structure, as seen in ﬁgure 2.19.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Robustness
23
Figure 2.18: The construction of the dummy mesh using the objective function
(2.15)
Figure 2.19: The ﬁnal structure for the dummy mesh with diﬀerent values of
h.
==PAGE:36==
24
Truss Topology Optimization
Figure 2.20: The ﬁnal structure for the dummy mesh with diﬀerent values of
c and σ, the size A increases.
Method
Computation time (s)
Linear
0.41
Penalization function 1 (tanh)
11
Penalization function 2 (Even power)
8.5
Table 2.1: Computation times of the to methods using a penelization function
and a linear approach.
As seen in ﬁgure 2.20, when the minimum size of an accepted bars is increased
the resulting structure goes from having two vertical bars at (0, 0, 0) and (0, 1, 0),
to not having two vertical bars.
2.4.2
Hessian and Gradient
Even though using a penelization function can improve the ﬁnal structure, it
requires signiﬁcant more computation time. Of course when using the peneliza-
tion function the β value is increased 10 times, and each time a new optimization
is performed using the old result as new starting point. Therefore the time it
takes for 10 iterations of the linear program (2.9) is compared to when using
penelization functions (2.15) and (2.14).
As seen in table 2.1 the penelization functions are more than a factor 20 slower
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Robustness
25
than the linear program. However the computation time can be reduced by using
the analytical gradient and Hessian of the penelization functions, it should be
noted that the matlab algorithm is switched from sqp to interior-point because
sqp does not support having the analytical Hessian as input. The sqp algorithm
uses quasi-Newton approximation of the Hessian. The gradient (g) and Hessian
(H) is calculated as the derivative and double derivative of the objective function
V, as seen in (2.16).
g = ∇V =


∂V
∂A1
...
∂V
∂Ai


H = ∇g =


∂2V
∂2A1
. . .
∂2V
∂A1∂Ai
...
...
...
∂2V
∂Ai∂A1
. . .
∂2V
∂A2
i


(2.16)
In (2.16) i denotes the members of the structure.
For the two penelization
functions the Hessian and gradient looks as seen in (2.17) and (2.18).
g =


L1(βA + 1 −βA tanh2(βAe
1))
...
Li(βA + 1 −βA tanh2(βAe
i))


H =


L1(−2β2A(1 −tanh2(βAe
1)) tanh(βAe
1))
0
...
0
Li(−2β2A(1 −tanh2(βAe
i)) tanh(βAe
i))


(2.17)
==PAGE:38==
26
Truss Topology Optimization
Method
Quasi-Newton approximation
gradient
Hessian
Linear
0.41
Penalization function 1 (tanh)
11
11
4.2
Penalization function 2 (Even power)
8.5
7.2
2.3
Table 2.2: Computation times (in seconds) of the dummy mesh, using the only
gradient, gradient & Hessian, and using a quasi-Newton approxi-
mation of the Hessian.
g =


−L1hσβ(σ(Ae
1 −c))β−1
...
−Lihσβ(σ(Ae
i −c))β−1


H =


−L1hσβ(β −1)(σ(Ae
1 −c))β−2
0
...
0
−Lihσβ(β −1)(σ(Ae
i −c))β−2


(2.18)
Using the gradient and Hessian from (2.17) and (2.18) gives faster computation
times, as seen in 2.2 the computation times using a quasi-Newton approximation
of the Hessian, using only the gradient and using the hessian and gradient are
compared.
From table 2.2 it is clear that using only the gradient does not improve the
computation time signiﬁcantly. For the ﬁrst penelization function there is no
improvement, while the other is only improved by a factor 8.5
7.2 = 1.18. When
also using the Hessian the computation times, for the two penelization func-
tions, are improved. They are improved by
11
4.2 = 2.61 and 8.5
2.3 = 3.70. From
the computation times the second penelization function would be the preferred
function to use, but by inspecting the results it turns out the ﬁrst penelization
function is the preferred of the two, due to the structure being less complex
(lower amount of bars). The results of using the gradient and Hessian can be
seen in ﬁgures 2.21 and 2.22.
Examining the results for the second penelization function (even power), see
ﬁgure ??, indicates that there is a problem when solving with the analytical
Hessian. Compared to the case where only the analytical gradient is used, the
amount of bars used for the dummy mesh when using the analytical Hessian
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Robustness
27
(a) Using only the gradient.
(b) Using the gradient and hessian.
Figure 2.21: The result of the dummy mesh with the ﬁrst penelization function
(tanh) by using the gradient and hessian
(a) Using only the gradient.
(b) Using the gradient and hessian.
Figure 2.22: The result of the dummy mesh with the second penelization func-
tion (even power) by using the gradient and hessian
==PAGE:40==
28
Truss Topology Optimization
is far greater. When scaling to larger problems, i.e. problems whith a larger
amount of nodes and bar possibilitys, it was not possible to get a feasible solution
when using the even power penelization function. So despite of it being faster
than the tanh penelization function it does not work as well.
2.5
Examples
In order to demonstrate that the methods used for topology optimization works,
besides of on the dummy mesh, other examples have been created, primarily
examples illustrating truss bridges.
2.5.1
Deck Truss Bridge
One type of truss bridges which truss topology can be used onk is deck truss
bridges. Today there exists plenty of deck truss bridges, such as the Charles
Anderson Memorial Bridge or the Highland Park Bridge, which can be found
on [Brib]. These types are called arch types of truss bridges, [Cri], because of
the arch the truss forms under the deck. This example will not focus on shaping
the deck truss as an arch. In ﬁgure 2.23 all the nodes can be seen together with
how the load is applied and where the ﬁxed points are.
Optimizing the truss topology for each of the separate cases, as shown in ﬁgure
2.23, gives the deck truss as presented in ﬁgure 2.24.
The illustration of the optimized deck truss in ﬁgure 2.24, clearly shows the
lack of stability for 2.24b in the y-direction while 2.24c and 2.24d would not
be capable of withstanding the weight of a truck if it was placed on a bridge
with their given trusses. However when the three cases gets combined and is
optimized simultaneously the result is a much more stable, as seen in ﬁgure
2.25.
By inspecting ﬁgure 2.25 it can be seen that the multiple load case use all three
single load cases and combines them into one. The multiple load case mainly
uses 2.24a and 2.24c and combines them into a stable truss. It does also use
??, but mainly at the "corners" as as a connection all the way through at the
bottom and top of the deck in 2.25c and on each side in 2.25d.
==PAGE:41==
2.5 Examples
29
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.23: The load on the deck of the truss bridge. Case 1, 2.23a, the load
is in the z-direction, for case 2 2.23b it is in the x-direction and
case 3 2.23c it is in the y-direction.
==PAGE:42==
30
Truss Topology Optimization
(a) Optimization of case 1
(b) Optimization of case 1
(c) Optimization of case 2
(d) optimization of case 3
Figure 2.24: The optimization of the three cases, as seen in ﬁgure 2.23 using
linear programming
==PAGE:43==
2.5 Examples
31
(a)
(b) As seen from the end.
(c) As seen from the side.
(d) As seen from the top.
Figure 2.25: The result of optimizing the three cases in 2.23 as one. As seen
from diﬀerent angles.
==PAGE:44==
32
Truss Topology Optimization
(a)
(b) As seen from the end.
(c) As seen from the side.
(d) As seen from the top.
Figure 2.26: The result of optimizing with robustness.
==PAGE:45==
2.5 Examples
33
(a) Histogram of the cross-section area
of the deck truss bridge 2.25 (non
robust)
(b) Histogram of the cross-sectional
area
of
the
deck
truss
bridge
2.26(robust)
Figure 2.27
Comparing the deck truss bridge using the robust method, see ﬁgure 2.26, to the
deck truss bridge using the non-robust method reveals that there is no visible
diﬀerence between the to methods. The histograms in 2.27 also show that the
2 methods both have approximately the same distribution of cross-sectional
areas. By taking a deeper inspection, the cross-sectional area reveals that the
bars have the same cross-sectional areas, e.g a bar from node 181 to 189 has a
cross-sectional area of 4.911 for the non-robust method, and 4.915 for the robust
method. So the deck truss bridge structure is not changed and it takes a factor
of 4926.64
138.225 = 35.642 longer time to compute.
As illustrated in the histograms(2.27), a lot of the bars have cross-sectional
area of greater than 0.785, which is going to make it hard to construct the
actual truss bridge. The distance between each node is at the smallest 1, so
in in order for there to be two bars next to each other the radius of a bar can
at maximum be 0.5, which mean the cross-sectional area can at maximum be
A = πr2 = π(0.52) ≈0.785. Using this as an upper bound for the cross-sectional
area the deck truss bridge for both the robust and non-robust method has been
recomputed and can be seen in ﬁgure 2.28.
The histogram of the cross-sectional areas after recomputation for the non-
robust and the robust method can be seen in 2.29. Once again the two methods
give very similar bridges, but by analyzing the histograms, see ﬁgure 2.29, it
can be seen that the robust method has fewer intermediate values between 0
and 0.785. The robust method does not have as many small values, instead it
sets them to small values (values< 0.1). The robust method attempts to set
the cross-sectional to the extreme values (the boundary values). In ﬁgure 2.30
==PAGE:46==
34
Truss Topology Optimization
(a) The optimized deck truss bridge
with an upper bound for the non-
robust method.
(b) The optimized deck truss bridge
with an upper bound for the ro-
bust method.
Figure 2.28
it can be seen how the histogram of the cross-sectional areas changes for each
iteration using the penelization function. The change of cross-sectional areas
happens slow and steady, one iteration at the time. Once again however the
robust method takes much longer than the non-robust method, in fact it is by
a factor of 31098
10
= 3109.8.
2.5.2
Through Truss Bridge
The second example is a through truss bridge, as described in [How]. Unlike
a deck truss bridge, the through truss bridge has the truss on the deck. The
truss is on top of the deck and carries the deck, thus it surrounds the vehicles
when they drive across the bridge. Examples of through truss bridge is the Steel
Parker through truss, [CHT], which can also be seen at [Bria]. The base mesh
for creating a through truss bridge with three diﬀerent load cases can be seen
in ﬁgure 2.31.
As it appears from ﬁgure 2.31 there is a restriction zone for the base mesh all
the way through the middle, that means no truss bars can be in this area, since
this is where the vehicles should drive through. Optimizing for each of the three
separate cases in 2.31, gives the trusses shown in ﬁgure 2.32.
From the illustration in ﬁgure 2.32, it can be seen that the individual cases lack
stability. Case 2.32b does not have the necessary stability in the z-direction, case
==PAGE:47==
2.5 Examples
35
(a) Histogram of the cross-section area
of the deck truss bridge of the non-
robust method.
(b) Histogram of the cross-sectional
area of the deck truss bridge of the
robust method.
Figure 2.29
Figure 2.30: Histogram of the cross-sectional areas after each iteration, where
β increases, using the penelization function.
==PAGE:48==
36
Truss Topology Optimization
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.31: The load on the deck of the through truss bridge. Case 1, 2.31a,
the load is in the z-direction, for case 2 2.31b it is in the x-
direction and case 3 2.31c it is in the y-direction.
==PAGE:49==
2.5 Examples
37
(a) The optimization of case 2.31a
(b) The optimization of case 2.31b
(c) The optimization of case 2.31c
Figure 2.32: The optimization for the three load cases in 2.31.
==PAGE:50==
38
Truss Topology Optimization
(a)
(b) Seen from the front.
(c) Seen from the side.
(d) Seen from the top.
Figure 2.33: The Multiple load case optimization
2.32b is doubtful in the x- and z-direction. Case 2.31a is more stable, although
it is missing some stability for the trusses in the y-direction. Combining the
three single load cases into a multiple load case, results in the through truss
bridge in ﬁgure 2.33.
From ﬁgure 2.33 it can be seen how the three single cases in ﬁgure 2.32 have been
combined into one stable truss. The through deck bridge in ﬁgure 2.33, uses
the base of 2.32a and has added stability in the x-direction by adding crosses as
demonstrated in 2.32b, while it has also added crosses in the y-direction along
the vertical trusses on the side, similar as 2.32c.
Comparing the robust optimization, ﬁgure 2.34, to the non-robust optimization,
ﬁgure 2.33, it appears that fewer bars are needed for the robust method. The
robust methods has an extra cross at the top, making the top more stable. Also
the robust methods truss has an extra crossing at the top. On the other side
the non-robust method has more crosses along both the x- and y-direction. The
robust model still takes longer time than the non-robust model, by a factor
==PAGE:51==
2.5 Examples
39
(a)
(b) Seen from the front.
(c) Seen from the side.
(d) Seen from the top.
Figure 2.34: Optimization using the robust method.
==PAGE:52==
40
Truss Topology Optimization
5865.31
6
= 978.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 3
Shape Reconstruction
Currently there does not exist many automatic and quick ways to convert the
truss topology to a visual representation. The methods currently used are man-
ual, time consuming or do not create the joints connecting the bars. All the
previous representation in this paper are created in matlab and do not model
the joints of the bars, as seen in ﬁgure 3.1a. The joints are simply a sphere,
with center at the node, and bars which have end points at the node. The same
goes for when there is an intersection between two bars, which do not meet at
a node. For them it is simply the bars crossing each other, see ﬁgure 3.1b. This
method creates a decent visual representation, but however it is not possible to
represent the joints in a way such that the truss can be produced.
There does exist ways for creating joints which can be produced but these require
in most cases manual work. One example of this is autodesk Maya which has
been used in [JS]. Maya is an animation program which can be used to create
3d models, but it is all to be done manually in the program. Another example is
[Slu11], where they create trusses manually with their designer, but there is no
design of the joints. There does exist software which aims to make the creation
of joint automated, e.g [ZW10]. This thesis proposes a method/algorithm to be
used for constructing an entire truss, given as a csv ﬁle, such that all the joints
are properly designed and the bars are correctly connected, which can be used
==PAGE:54==
42
Shape Reconstruction
(a) Representation of node joint.
(b) Representation of intersection.
Figure 3.1: Matlab visualization of the connections between bars.
for construction of the truss. This is to be done by using 3D meshes and the
methods proposed in [JAB].
3.1
Geometric Modeling
3.1.1
Polar-Annular Mesh
In order to construct an automated method for truss topology and joints, the
polar annular mesh (PAM) is used, [JAB]. This section about PAMs is extracted
from [JAB]. The deﬁnition of a PAM is as follows
• A polar-annular mesh is a polygonal mesh that consists exclusively of
triangles and/or quadrilaterals such that (i) each quadrilateral belongs to
a single ring of quadrilaterals denoted an annular region, (ii) each triangle
belongs to a single fan of triangles denoted a polar region, and (iii) the
faces incident on a vertex form a region homeomorphic to a disc, and
vertices may not be incident on edges (i.e. t-junctions are not allowed).
In order to continue some terminology needs to be place ﬁrst.
• A rib edge is an edge which bounds a polar annular region.
• A spine edge is an edge in the generator direction of a polar or annular
==PAGE:55==
3.1 Geometric Modeling
43
Figure 3.2: Left: Three PAMs where rib edges are shown blue and spine
edges are red. Right: This PAM contains a junction where three
branches meet.
Note how the rib edges (blue) form a complex
loop at the junction in (d). Contracting the rib edges (almost to
the barycenter), we obtain a shape close to the line skeleton. The
image is taken from [JAB].
region.
• A pole is the apex of a polar region.
PAM meshes exists everywhere, some simple examples of them can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.2. The simplest example of a PAM with both a polar and annular region
is a ring of quadrilaterals with a ring of triangle at both ends (ﬁgure 3.2b). Some
meshes can be ambiguous, e.g ﬁgure 3.2a, where the rib edges form the loop
around the minor radius of the torus and the spine edges form the ring around
the greater radius, but it might as well have been the other way around. For
ﬁgure 3.2c the rib and spine edges could also have been constructed diﬀerently,
for the current case the poles are the left-most and right-most vertices, but it
could as well have been the top-bottom pair or the front-back pair.
PAM meshes are constructed by gluing regions together.
Rib edges, of the
regions being stitched, need to be identiﬁed since t-junctions are not allowed.
It is also possible to branch, that is ad a pole to the existing mesh, as seen in
ﬁgure 3.2d. Note that a vertex on the boundary, of either a polar or annular
region, has 2 rib edges and 1 spine edge attached to it. Also a non-pole vertex
has alternately rib edges and spine edges attached to it, while an pole only has
spine edges. Using these two properties all edges can be labeled using a graph
traversal starting at one labeled edge. As long as a mesh contains both annular
and polar regions ambiguity will not be possible.
From a PAM mesh a skeleton line can be created, this is done by contracting
all the nodes along a loop of rib edges into a single point. A skeletal node is the
set of vertices belonging to a connected loop of rib edges. Two skeletal nodes
are connected if there exists a spine edge connecting an vertex from one ring to
the a vertex on the other ring. Figure 3.2e illustrates an almost fully contracted
==PAGE:56==
44
Shape Reconstruction
Figure 3.3: Primitive PAM operations: the contraction and splitting of a re-
gion (light blue)(a), the contraction and splitting of a co-region
(light red)(b), PAM features added and removed (c).
The ribs
being cut to add feature in (c) are shown using fat light green
lines.
The added faces are also light green.The image is taken
from [JAB].
ﬁgure 3.2e, such that it almost represents its skeleton.
3.1.1.1
Primitive operations
In order to describe some of the primitive operation possible for the PAMs the
introduction of two terminology’s is necessary.
• A region is a contiguous set of faces bounded by rib loops, see ﬁgure 3.3a
middle.
• A co-region is a contiguous set of faces bounded by spine edges. These
end in a triangular face incident on a pole, see ﬁgure 3.3b middle.
Reﬁnement and Simpliﬁcation.
It is possible to reﬁne a PAM mesh by
inserting vertex on all the edges, within a region or co-region, and then splitting
the faces by connecting these vertices with an edge. This way a new region
or co-region has been created, see ﬁgure 3.3 a and b middle to bottom for an
illustration of the reﬁnement.
It is also possible to remove regions and co-
regions, instead of adding a new region/co-region, the region gets retracted, see
ﬁgure 3.3 a and b, middle to top.
==PAGE:57==
3.2 Truss PAM Creation
45
Adding and removing PAM features. Reﬁnement and simpliﬁcation does
not change the skeletal structure of the PAMs. However by removing and adding
PAM regions it is possible to change the skeletal structure. This is done by
cutting the PAM open, and creating a loop of rib edges, and thus creating a
boundary. There are two ways for cutting the PAM, one is to split a sequence
of rib edges, as seen in ﬁgure 3.3c middle, and thus creating a hole. This creates
a new loop of rib edges consisting of 2n edges, if n edges are cut, in ﬁgure 3.3c 2
edges are cut and hence 4 new rib edges are created in a loop. A new PAM can
thus be attached to the boundary. In ﬁgure 3.3c a PAM consisting of a polar
and annular region has been attached to the cut. Of course it is also possible to
cut an entire rib loop split the model into two. It should be noted that as long
as the PAM is open and has a boundary loop it is not technically a PAM, ﬁrst
when the boundary gets attached to another PAM feature the mesh becomes a
PAM again. Also when attaching two PAMs the boundary’s should contain the
same amount of rib edges along the boundaries.
3.1.2
Smoothing
When creating a mesh, from a point cloud or in an other fashion, there usually
occurs noise in the mesh. In order to remove the noise from the mesh, the mesh
can be smoothed. Smoothing of meshes is like smoothing in signal processing. It
is possible to have a signal with white noise, see ﬁgure 3.4a, and smoothing the
signal will ﬁlter away the noise, see ﬁgure 3.4b. When smoothing, each vertex
get eﬀected by its neighboring vertices, so the smoothing operation for each
vertex is local. It is not only the noise that gets reduced, the mesh itself looses its
features. To avoid loosing the features of the mesh, but at the same time ﬁltering
out the noise, diﬀerent smoothing operations exists e.g laplacian smoothing and
taubin smoothing. For further details on smoothing and smoothing operations
see [JAB12].
3.2
Truss PAM Creation
Currently the truss is given as a set of nodes, bars and cross-sectional areas.
Turning this information into a polar annular mesh can be done by 2 methods,
a node approach or a bar approach. The node approach creates the PAM by
creating one node at a time, which means that it creates a complete joint at
every node, and then creates the bars, by connecting the joints created at each
==PAGE:58==
46
Shape Reconstruction
f(x)
x
(a)
g(x) = Filtered
f(x)
x
(b)
Figure 3.4: 3.4a illustrates a signal with noise, and 3.4b is the smoothing of
the signal.
end for the bars. The bar approach creates one bar at the time, thus connecting
the bars as each bar gets created.
Node creation. Creating the truss by completing one joint at the time and
then connecting the joints, i.e. adding the bars. Before the design of an ac-
tual node should start all the nodes in the truss need to be given, of course all
the nodes for which the truss was optimized for are given, but there are also
the nodes where the bars intersect each other. The data for the truss needs
to preprocessed, such that no bars are intersecting, if there is an intersection
there needs to be a node created and the bars needs to be divided e.g instead of
having two bars intersecting each other there will be four bars and an additional
node. The next step would be creating a joint, the segment created at the node
would need a branch pointing in the direction of each bar ending/starting at this
node. Some of the challenges which could arise would be placing the branches
correctly, such that none of them overlap, i.e.the bars at the node will intersect,
making sure the vertices of the PAM are placed as a joint between two truss
bars, and once all the nodes are created connecting the correct branches between
the nodes. In order to manipulate with the PAM, such that it still resembles
the truss, post-processing would need to be done. This could be adding rib
loops around the joints, such that when smoothing the joints and bars would
not eﬀect each other tremendously. Of course if it is possible to create all the
possible joints correctly at every node and connecting the nodes, then applying
the method to any input which consists of nodes, bars, and cross-sectional area
would be possible.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 The Bar creation method
47
Bar creation. The bar creation method focuses on the bars, thus creating
one bar at the time, and when the bars intersect each other, either in a node
or in the open, a joint is created. Unlike the node creation method, it is not
necessary to do any pre-processing, because the intersection points are found
as the bars are created. The challenges which can arise, remind a lot of the
ones for the Node creation, placing the bar intersection points correctly on the
bars, placing the vertices of the PAM correctly, but for this method there also is
the intersection which needs to be taken into account when creating every bar.
Once the truss has been created the mesh also needs post-processing, actually
most likely the same, because the end result after adding all the bars should
be similar to the node creation method. Once again if implemented correctly it
should be applicable to any truss with the same input.
The diﬀerence between the two methods comes down to either pre-processing
the data and ﬁnding all the intersections before hand, or ﬁnding the intersections
along the way as the truss gets created. In this thesis the bar creation method
has been chosen, because it gives more visible help while building the truss as
going along. The bars can be seen as they get created, and the problems can be
found, while for the node creation only a joint is created at a time and it might
be harder to see where the error will eventually be, because it is only the joints
which are visible.
3.3
The Bar creation method
In order to create the PAM, the data from the matlab solution needs to be read
by the mesh editor program. There are three possible ways for doing this, the
ﬁrst is to run the matlab code using C + +, see [CMaa] and [CMab], this would
enable using the truss optimization code already created in matlab. This would
make it possible to test new trusses straight away and create the mesh after the
optimization, however it would increase the time it takes for testing the C + +
code, because the matlab code would have to be run every time before creating
the PAM. The second method would be translating the matlab code to C + +,
thus increasing the computation speed of the truss optimization, however this
will take a lot of time and once again the optimization would have to be run
before testing the PAM creation. The third way would be reading a ﬁle with
the data. Under this method the optimization only has to be saved to a ﬁle and
the PAM creation can be tested faster.
The matlab ﬁles gets saved as an comma separated value (csv) ﬁle, containing
the nodes, bars and cross-sectional area, as seen in ﬁgure 3.5. The ﬁle is read and
==PAGE:60==
48
Shape Reconstruction
Figure 3.5: An example of the input ﬁle, in this case it is part of the previously
mentioned dummy mesh.
the data is divided into vectors containing the nodes, bars and cross-sectional
area.
3.3.1
Creating the bars
Since PAMs consist of quadrilaterals and triangles, it is not possible to create
perfectly cylindrical bars, instead they can be approximated by polygons. By
increasing the degree of the polygons the better an approximation towards a
cylinder will be. A bar is in principal a ring of quadrilaterals with triangles at
each end, as seen in ﬁgure 3.2b, so in order to create a bar PAM each end of
triangles will be created, glued together, and once both ends are created the
polar region will be bridged by a ring of quadrilaterals, creating an annular
region.
Given the node point at each end of the bar the triangle polar regions needs
to be created, assuming that the node point will be used as the pole of the
polar regions the remaining vertices for the triangles can be found by ﬁnding
the circumradius of the polygon and rotating around the pole. Given the cross-
sectional area A of a given bar, the circumradius is given as in 3.1.
a =
s
4A
n · cot( π
n)
R = a
2csc(π
n)
(3.1)
Where a is the side length of a polygon and n is the shape. The vertices should be
placed such that the polygon approximates a tube around the direction vector
of the bars, so the edges from the pole to the vertices around it should be
==PAGE:61==
3.3 The Bar creation method
49
perpendicular to the direction vector(d). So the vector(v) from the pole to a
given vertice connected to the pole can be found as in 3.2.
v =


a
b
c


d =


d1
d2
d3


a = −d2b −d2c
d1
(3.2)
b, c ∈ℜ
Once the vector v is found it should be added to the pole to ﬁnd the vertex. This
method can only be used once, because the placement of the vertices compared
to each other is unknown, all that is known is the that vertices are placed
in the plane with the direction vector(d) of the bar as normal and they have
the radius R(3.1). Instead the remaining vertices are created by rotating the
vertex v around the pole in the plane with normal d. Rotating a point around
an arbitrary axis in 3d is given as 3.3. For the mathematical derivation see
[Mur13].
f(x, y, z, a, b, c, u, v, w, θ) =


(a(v2+w2)−u(bv+cw−ux−vy−wz))(1−cos θ)+Lx cos θ+
√
L(−cv+bw−wy+vz) sin θ
L
(b(u2+w2)−v(au+cw−ux−vy−wz))(1−cos θ)+Ly cos θ+
√
L(cu−aw+wx−uz) sin θ
L
(c(u2+v2)−w(au+bv−ux−vy−wz))(1−cos θ)+Lz cos θ+
√
L(−bu+av−vx+uy) sin θ
L

(3.3)
Where L = u2 + v2 + w2, and the point being rotated is [x, y, z]t around the
point [u, v, w]t with direction vector [a, b, c]t, the degrees being rotated is θ,
which depends on the shape of the polygon. Once all the vertices are found the
triangle of the polar region can be created, glued together and the two polar
regions can be bridged. The resulting bar can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6. In ﬁgure
3.7 the dummy mesh can be seen where all the bars are PAMs.
==PAGE:62==
50
Shape Reconstruction
Figure 3.6: A bar with 16 quadrilaterals.
Figure 3.7: The dummy mesh with the bars created as PAMS
3.3.2
Node joints
Currently the bars are not attached to each other, as seen in ﬁgure 3.8, which
makes the current visualization no better than the matlab visualization.
So if there already exists a bar at a given node, every new bar, which end at
the same node, should be attached to the ﬁrst bar. When a bar is to be created
it must ﬁnd out whether or not there exists other bars already ending at the
nodes, such that it can be attached to these, or simply be created as the ﬁrst
Figure 3.8: A node of the dummy mesh. It can be seen that the bars are not
connected, it is simply the end point of the bars.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 The Bar creation method
51
bar at these nodes. This leaves three options for creating a bar.
• None of the node have been visited.
• One of the nodes has been visited.
• Both of the nodes have been visited.
If none of the nodes have been visited a bar should be created, as previously
described. If one of the nodes has been visited that end should be attached
to the existing bar, and if both ends have been visited a bar attached to both
ends should be created.
When attaching two bars to each other, it changes
those PAMs skeletal structures, instead of the skeletal structure being one line
it becomes the two skeletal glued together. The skeletal structure of a PAM
can be changed by the primitive operation 3.3c, an incision needs to be made
on the existing bar. An incision can only be made on a rib loop, and there are
only two rib loops on a bar, so the incision would have to be at the rib loop
between the polar and annular region. This can become very messy given that
in theory there could be a bar to all of its neighbors, of which there are 26.
Creating a new rib loop for every bar getting attached to the ﬁrst one avoids
the messiness.
When creating the joints there is also challenges on a more in-depth level, mainly
in the placement of the vertices of the new branch such that it resembles a
tubular joint, as in [Mar74], [ABP77] and [Vis75]. Adding a rib loop to the
existing bar, is a simple reﬁnement operation (3.3a) done by adding a vertices
on the edges and splitting the faces with edges between the newly added vertices,
see 3.9a. In order to make the incision it is necessary to ﬁnd which vertices to
cut, since it is an addition to the already existing bar the entire rib loop should
not be cut. The vertices in the incision, should only be the ones in the direction
of the new bar. Whether or not a vertice is in the direction of the new bar is
determined by, if a vector v, from the center of the rib loop to the vertice, forms
an angle of less then 90 degrees with the direction vector. Since the plane, the
rib loop lies in, and the direction vector are not in the same plane, the angle
between v and the direction vector will be eﬀected. To avoid this the other end
node of the bar is projected into the rib loops plane, and the angle between v
and the direction towards the projected point is found. The projection node is
projected into the plane as seen in 3.4.
==PAGE:64==
52
Shape Reconstruction
p = node −c
dist = p · n
projected_point = node −dist · n
(3.4)
Where c is the center of the rib loop, n is the normal to the plane (direction
vector of the existing bar).
Once the vertices are found the incision can be
made, and a branch (a polar region) , can be added, see 3.9b. Next the vertices
of the rib loop of the joint have to be placed such that the connection resembles
a joint between the two tubes. The vertices have to be placed on their edges, on
the ﬁrst bar, where the corresponding edges on the new polygon/bar intersects
the edge. This is done by creating a polygon at the center of the rib loop with
the direction of the new bar, and projecting the corresponding vertices on to the
correct edges, see ﬁgure 3.9c and 3.9e. If the new bar only needs to be attached
to one bar all that remains is creating the bar, this is done by extruding the
branch. The pole is moved to the end node and the polar region is reﬁned. The
new vertices are placed correctly around the pole and the new branch is created,
3.9d. If the new bar is between to existing bars, the polar regions gets bridged,
3.9f.
In ﬁgure 3.10 it can be seen how the dummy mesh bars now have joints at the
nodes. At each node the joints connect the bars meeting there.
3.3.3
Intersections
Most of the joints in a truss are now created, the only missing is when the
bars intersect in the open, as seen in ﬁgure 3.11. The methods for creating the
actual joints of the intersection is the same, but the PAM needs to know where
to create the joint.
In order to ﬁnd out if the bar, about to be created, intersects with another
bar a collision detection is performed.
The PAMs consists of triangles and
quadrilaterals so it is collision tests against these types of objects which are
performed. Each face of the PAM can be considered as part of a plane, and
each bar segment can be considered as part of a line. The collision test ﬁnds the
intersection between the plane and line. It is checked whether the intersection
lies within the bar segment of the line, and if so whether the plane intersection
==PAGE:65==
3.3 The Bar creation method
53
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3.9: Creating joints, between two bars.
==PAGE:66==
54
Shape Reconstruction
Figure 3.10: The dummy mesh with joints at the nodes.
Figure 3.11: Two bars intersecting in the open.
==PAGE:67==
3.3 The Bar creation method
55
A
B
C
startNode
endNode
W
Figure 3.12: Collision test with triangle.
is within the deﬁned plane (the triangle or quadrilateral). Given the setup from
ﬁgure 3.12 the collision test can be made. The directional vector of the bar is
given as d = endNode −startNode and any point on this segment is deﬁned as
x = startNode + t · d, where 0 ≤t ≤1. Given the plane normal n = ⃗
AB × ⃗
AC
the intersection point W can be found as W = startNode + tW d where tW is
deﬁned as in 3.5.
tw =
⃗
startNodeA · n
d · n
(3.5)
If tW lies within the bar segment of the line, the next step is to ﬁnd out if the
intersection point is within the triangle. The intersection point lies within the
triangle if it is located to the same side of all the edges. That is if the triangle
is counterclockwise (iterating counterclockwies around the vertices), then the
intersection point W is inside the triangle if it is located to the left of all the
edges. From [Eri04] the point is on the same side if the three triple products
3.6 have the same sign.
V1 =
h
d
⃗
startNodeC
⃗
startNodeB
i
V2 =
h
d
⃗
startNodeA
⃗
startNodeC
i
V3 =
h
d
⃗
startNodeB
⃗
startNodeA
i
(3.6)
==PAGE:68==
56
Shape Reconstruction
A
B1
C
B2
startNode
endNode
W
Figure 3.13: Collision test for quadrilateral
Where the triple product is calculated as in 3.7.
A
B
C
= A · (B × C)
(3.7)
So the directional vector intersects a triangle face if 0 ≤tW ≤1 and sign(V1) =
sign(V2) = sign(V3). The quadrilateral case is similar to the triangle case. The
quadrilateral can be divided into two triangles (AB1C and AB2C), see ﬁgure
3.13, where it is assumed the quadrilateral is ﬂat.
Deﬁning the direction vector and normal vector as before the intersection point
(tw) can be found in the same way as 3.5. From [Eri04] the triple products can
be calculated as 3.8.
Va =
h
d
⃗
startNodeC
⃗
startNodeB1
i
Vb =
h
d
⃗
startNodeC
⃗
startNodeB2
i
V2 =
h
d
⃗
startNodeC
⃗
startNodeA
i
(3.8)
3.8 is used to decide which side of the center line the intersection point lies
on.
Thus selecting the correct triangle the remaining triple product can be
==PAGE:69==
3.3 The Bar creation method
57
Figure 3.14: Joints at two intersecting bars
calculated, see 3.9.
V3 =



h
d
⃗
startNodeB1
⃗
startNodeA
i
if
sign(Va) = sign(V2)
h
d
⃗
startNodeB2
⃗
startNodeA
i
if
sign(Vb) = sign(V2)
(3.9)
If the remaining triple product is equal to the previous, sign(V2) = sign(V3),
the intersection point lies on the quadrilateral. When applying this there can
still be some complications, e.g. if there already exists a bar at a given node,
the node will be encapsulated by the bar, and hence the faces surrounding the
node will intersect the direction vector. To avoid this the distance tw’s interval
is changed to 0.25 ≤tw ≤0.75. The interval given assumes the trusses are of
level 1 connectivity, thus the intersections should be at the middle of the truss
bars.
Once an intersection has be found, the same methods as earlier will be used to
create the joints. First the bar will be reﬁned with a rib loop at the intersection,
then a branch will be added in the correct direction, and if there does not exist
a bar at the nodes the branch will get extruded or if there does exist a bar at
the node the branches will be bridged.
A joint, between two intersecting bars, being created can be seen in ﬁgure 3.14.
The dummy mesh with joints at the intersection can be seen in ﬁgure 3.15.
==PAGE:70==
58
Shape Reconstruction
Figure 3.15: The dummy mesh with joints at intersections.
3.4
Post-processing
Manipulating the mesh, with standard mesh operations, will have a great impact
on the PAM and the joints and bars. A simple smoothing operation will result
in the joints being deformed and the bars too, as seen in ﬁgure 3.16.
The deformation of the truss structure happens because the vertices are eﬀected
by the neighboring vertices. The joints’ neighboring vertices are on the opposite
end of the bar, therefore, they will get moved towards the other end and hence
the deformation. If however rib loops around the joints gets added the joints
vertices will not be eﬀected as much, and the deformation will be smaller. The
deformations only happen when the neighboring vertice is at separate ends,
so it is only necessary to place the rib loops between the ends. This way the
smoothing stays in its local area, because the vertices acting upon each other
are closer.
When implementing it is necessary to ﬁnd the correct region to reﬁne, this is
simple when there is no intersections, simply ﬁnd the faces at the middle of
the bar, when there is an intersection though, the middle of the bar is also
a joint. Therefore remembering which joints have an intersection is required,
because they also need reﬁnement. The same way as the middle of a bar with
no intersection is reﬁned each half of a bar with intersection should be reﬁned.
==PAGE:71==
3.5 The Algorithm
59
Figure 3.16: The dummy mesh after laplacian smoothing.
In ﬁgure 3.17 the dummy mesh with additional rib loops around the joints can
be seen and the same mesh after laplacian smoothing.
From ﬁgure 3.17 it is clear that the smoothing of the truss is prettier than in
ﬁgure 3.16, and the joints and bars still resemble joints and bars.
With each joint placed on their own rib loop, there is a risk of the faces over-
lapping each other. This is avoided by contracting the regions between each
rib loop, as in ﬁgure3.3a. The contraction of the region is a simple primitive
PAM operation, the diﬃculty is not to contract the actual bar, but only regions
around the joints. This is performed by contracting each region, starting at the
ﬁrst rib loop at a node and then moving down the bar until hitting a rib loop
without a branch, which should be one of the additional added rib loops, used
for reﬁning the bars. A rib loop containing a branch is recognized by iterating
through the vertices edgesl. At some point there will be a vertices containing
three rib edges and one spine edge, see ﬁgure 3.2d. The result can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.18, it is seen that the nodes are no longer part of a bar, but it is a
node.
3.5
The Algorithm
To get a better understanding of how the truss PAM is created, an illustration
of the algorithm can be seen in ﬁgure 3.19. The algorithm in ﬁgure 3.19 takes
approximately 1.8 seconds, to create the dummy mesh, which contains 2224
faces, 8762 half edges and 2137 vertices.
==PAGE:72==
60
Shape Reconstruction
(a) The dummy mesh with additional rib loops around the
joints.
(b) The dummy mesh (3.17a), after laplacian smoothing.
Figure 3.17
==PAGE:73==
3.6 Implementation
61
Figure 3.18: The dummy mesh after contracting regions around the nodes.
3.6
Implementation
Listing 3.1: Code for loading csv ﬁle
void
console_load_csv_file ( MeshEditor∗me,
const
std : : vector<std : : string > & args )
{
i f
( wantshelp ( args ))
{
me−>p r i n t f ( " usage : ␣load ␣<f i l e >␣<amount␣of ␣rows␣in ␣f i l e >" ) ;
me−>p r i n t f ( " (Re) loads ␣the ␣current ␣f i l e ␣i f ␣no␣argument␣i s ␣given , " ) ;
me−>p r i n t f ( " ␣but␣i f ␣an␣argument␣i s ␣given ,
␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣␣then␣that ␣becomes␣the ␣current ␣f i l e " ) ;
return ;
}
me−>save_active_mesh ( ) ;
Manifold& m = me−>active_mesh ( ) ;
i f
( args . s i z e () < 2
| |
! load_csv_file (m, args ))
me−>p r i n t f ( " f a i l e d ␣to ␣load " ) ;
me−>r e f i t ( ) ;
return ;
}
The algorithm was implemented in Visual Studio, C++. It was created using
the GEL framework from DTU, maintained by Andreas Bærentzen, and can
be found at [GEL]. The code is to be implemented in a user interface capa-
==PAGE:74==
62
Shape Reconstruction
Load
csv ﬁle
Select bar
Check if
nodes have
been visited
One node visited
Both nodes visited
No nodes visited
see ﬁgure 3.20
see ﬁgure 3.21
see ﬁgure 3.22
Check for
remaining
bars
No remaining bars
Reﬁne bars
Contract
regions
Remaining bars
Figure 3.19: The algorithm used for creating the truss PAM
==PAGE:75==
3.6 Implementation
63
Check if bar
interesects
existing bar
No intersection
Intersection
Create
new bar
Create
joints on
intersect-
ing bar
Extrude
joints
Mark
nodes as
visited
Figure 3.20: Creation of a bar without having visited any of the nodes.
==PAGE:76==
64
Shape Reconstruction
Check if bar
intersects
existing bar
No intersection
Intersection
Create
joint at
visited
nodes
Extrude
joint
Create
joints at
nodes
& inter-
section
Bridge &
extrude
joints
Mark
unvisited
node as
visited
Figure 3.21: Creation of a bar where one node has already been visited.
==PAGE:77==
3.6 Implementation
65
Check if bar
intersects
existing bar
No intersection
Intersection
Create
joints at
nodes
Bridge
joints
Create
joints at
nodes
& inter-
section
Bridge
joints
Figure 3.22: Creation of a bar where both node have already been visited.
==PAGE:78==
66
Shape Reconstruction
Figure 3.23: User interface
ble of viewing meshes, if the GEL demos are downloaded this would be the
meshviewer. The function in listing 3.1 should be added to the console func-
tions, and added as a console call under the name load_csv_ﬁle.
Loading a csv ﬁle and constructing the truss is one command. The ﬁle is loaded
by typing load_csv_ﬁle <ﬁle name.csv> <rows>, see ﬁgure 3.23. The ﬁle which
is to be loaded should be placed in the folder where the user interface searches
for ﬁles. The amount of rows loaded from the ﬁle is a bit tricky, because the
user does not need all the bars, some might have cross-sectional area of 10(−10)
which are not relevant. To make sure all the bars are constructable the user
must make sure all the nodes are loaded from the csv ﬁle, thus the amount of
rows should be the largest of either the amount of bars or the amount of nodes.
Once the code starts creating the truss, it runs one bar at the time in a for-loop,
so if the amount of nodes is greater than the amount of bars, the for-loop should
be adjusted to the amount of bars. An example is if the user wishes to create
14 bars from a ﬁle with 20 nodes, he types in the 20 in the user interface and
14 iterations of the for-loop.
The user also has to manually adjust a global variable called barLength, it
should be set to the average length of the bars. The variable is used for placing
the joints. The cross-sectional area also varies from ﬁle to ﬁle, so the reﬁnement
should adjusted accordingly. The reﬁnement equation can be seen in (3.10).
Where A is the cross-sectional area and x determines the reﬁnement.
r =
r
(A
π )
O = 2 · r · π
Shape = O
x
(3.10)
==PAGE:79==
3.7 Examples
67
The GEL framework is used for mesh representation, manipulating and iterat-
ing through the, vertices, half edges and faces and simple mesh operation (not
stated as PAM features). The structs available at GEL is used e.g VertexAt-
tributeVector and Vec3f, and the mathematical operation, such as the length of
a vector, dot product and cosine function.
The meshes were computed on an acer with an 2.2GHz Intel core proces-
sor.
3.7
Examples
Unfortunately, it was not possible to recreate the deck truss bridge or the
through truss bridge, however it was possible to construct other trusses. These
trusses are from the GRAND3 method, [Pau15].
3.7.1
Cantilever
The cantilever in ﬁgure 3.24a, deals with some diﬀerent problems than the
dummy mesh. The cantilever has bars in extension of each other, which the
dummy mesh did not, so the polar region at the end of each bar have to be
connected. This can lead to problems if the bars in extension do not have the
same cross-sectional area. If a bar between two bars has to be created, and these
two do not have the same cross-sectional area, and hence not the same amount
of vertices problems can arise. In this case the cantilevers cross-sectional area
are the same and the problem does not arise. The result of the reconstruction
of the cantilever can be seen in ﬁgure 3.24b, it consists of 20 bars, 6272 vertices
and 6380 faces, and took 4.42 seconds.
Examining the node at the end, shows that there are still issues with the algo-
rithm, see ﬁgure 3.25. One of the joints is not placed correctly and the top two
bars are connected at a point where they should not be.
==PAGE:80==
68
Shape Reconstruction
(a) The cantilever truss with level 1
connectivity.
(b) Reconstruction of the cantilever
truss.
Figure 3.24
Figure 3.25: A close up of the joints at the end of the cantilever.
==PAGE:81==
3.7 Examples
69
(a) A crane truss.
(b) Reconstruction
of
the
crane truss.
(c) Close up of the deformation.
Figure 3.26
3.7.2
Crane
The crane in ﬁgure 3.26a, can also be reconstructed. As seen in ﬁgure 3.26b
there is a problem in the reconstruction, one of the joints at the top is completely
deformed, besides the one deformation the crane looks nice. The diagonal bar
which is to be connected to the top bar sticks through the top bar. A close
up of the deformation can be seen in ﬁgure 3.26c, and indicates that there is a
problem with placing the joint.
However this deformation can be avoided by coarsening the PAM, which can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.27. Unfortunately as mentioned earlier, when the bars vary
in size, problems with keeping the same amount of vertices in the connecting
branches arise, see ﬁgure 3.28.
This results in the mesh not being a PAM,
and problems with adding the extra rib loops and merging the rib loops at the
joints (Post processing). The coarse crane is made of 45 bars, consisting of 1656
==PAGE:82==
70
Shape Reconstruction
Figure 3.27: A coarse crane
vertices and 1793 faces, and took 8.05 seconds, without post processing.
3.7.3
Diamond
The diamond in ﬁgure 3.29a, has also been reconstructed. The results of the
reconstruction of the diamond can be seen in ﬁgures 3.29b and 3.29c. Generally
the diamond reconstruction looks good, there are no clear visible error, and the
reconstruction resembles the matlab illustration greatly.
Zooming in on the top node, reveals that there is still work to be done with the
placement of the joints. Figure 3.30 shows that the joints "merge" into one bar,
and it is impossible to see the actual joints. The diamond mesh also has prob-
lems with the pre-processing, indicating that the same problem as for the crane
happen for the diamond. The diamond mesh consists of 112 bars, 4595 vertices
and 4897 faces and took 60.99 seconds, without any pre-processing.
==PAGE:83==
3.7 Examples
71
Figure 3.28: A bar with diﬀerent amount of vertices at each end.
3.7.4
The Lotte Tower
The last example is an approximation of the truss for the Lotte Tower in Seoul,
South Korea, from [Pau15]. The truss can be seen in ﬁgure 3.31a. The Lotte
Tower starts as an square at the bottom and turns into a circle at the top. The
reconstruction of the Lotte Tower can be seen in ﬁgure 3.31b. From observing
ﬁgure 3.31b, the mesh looks good, although the bars seem to be very thin, this is
because of the height of the Lotte tower is a lot greater than the cross-sectional
area of the bars.
However ﬁgure 3.32, shows that the bars are not thin.
Once again there is
problems with the post processing. The Lotte tower truss consists of 208 bars,
52098 vertices and 53420 faces, and takes 631.95 seconds.
==PAGE:84==
72
Shape Reconstruction
(a) Diamond truss
(b) Reconstruction of the diamond
truss.
(c) Reconstruction
of
the
diamond
truss.
Figure 3.29
Figure 3.30: A close up of the top node of the Diamond mesh.
==PAGE:85==
3.7 Examples
73
(a) Matlab representation of the truss
for the Lotte tower.
(b) The
Lotte
tower
reconstructed
into a mesh.
Figure 3.31
Figure 3.32: A close up of a joint on the Lotte tower.
==PAGE:86==
74
Shape Reconstruction
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 4
Discussion, Conclusion &
Future work
4.1
Discussion
Increasing the robustness of truss optimization has been done, using penaliza-
tion functions. Two diﬀerent functions, see 2.14 and 2.15, have been used to
penalize the objective function, in order to either set a bars cross-sectional area
to zero or a minimum value. Implementing a penalization function, changes
the optimization problems objective function from linear to non-linear. This
increases the computation time signiﬁcantly, actually by a factor of more than
20 for the dummy mesh. However an improved truss, which is more stable and
capable of withstanding greater loads is beneﬁcial. Given that the linear ob-
jective function is much faster, it is better to use the linear objective function
at the beginning, that is when shaping the base mesh for the truss, see ﬁgure
2.4. Using the approach the user can easily shape the boundaries for the truss
and once the general truss structure is in place the penalization function can be
used to strengthen it.
The two penalization functions used show varying results One is faster (2.15),
but it is necessary to have an upper bound, while the other(2.14) is a bit slower
but does not need an upper bound. Even though 2.14 is slower it is easier to
==PAGE:88==
76
Discussion, Conclusion & Future work
work with, and it is possible to start with no upper boundary and from those
results the upper limit can be adjusted. For 2.15 it is harder, because the op-
timization will try to set the bars cross-sectional area to either 0 or the upper
boundary, even though the linear objective function can be used initially, a lot
of upper boundaries would have to be tried. Unlike for the tanh penalization,
the even power cannot work its way down for the upper bound, but would have
to test for both higher and lower, upper boundaries. When applying the Hessian
and gradient for the matlab solvers the tanh penalization function also proves
to be more robust. When scaling the truss from the dummy mesh to larger
problems, such as the deck truss bridge and through truss bridge, 2.15 is not
capable of solving the problem while 2.14 is capable of providing a solution.
When scaling from the dummy mesh to the deck truss bridge and through truss
bridge the computation time goes from 4.2 seconds, when using the analytical
hessian, to 4926.64 seconds, which is an increase of 4926.64
4.2
= 1173 in speed.
The amount of nodes increases from 12 to 343, and the amount of possible
bars increases from 50 to 2802. The amount of bars is increased by a factor
of 2802
50
= 56 and the nodes are increased by a factor of 343
12 = 28.5. For the
through truss bridge the bars are increased by a factor of 1800
50
= 36 and the
nodes by 240
50 = 20, while the time is increased by a factor 5865.31
4.2
= 1396.5. So
the increase in time is not linear compared to the increase in nodes and bars,but
rather sub linear.
The shape reconstruction is capable of creating a 208 bar large truss of the Lotte
Tower in South Korea, but however by the lack of the Lotte Tower not being
capable of being post processed indicates that the tower is not an PAM. The
largest truss which was capable of post processing was the cantilever, which
consisted of only 21 bars.
The cantilever was also created without it being
possible of the bars to intersect.
This is because there are no intersections,
and the angle between the bars is so small that the direction vector ends up
intersecting one of the existing bars between 0.25 and 0.75 of the bar length.
This can be avoided by implementing pre-processing, as described earlier for
creating the truss mesh with a node approach, such that there is no need to
check for intersections while creating the mesh.
The mesh examples vary a lot and show, that even though not perfected yet, the
algorithm is capable of turning the truss into meshes regardless of the challenges
thrown at it. By adjusting some of the parameters in the code the crane is
capable of turning a ugly joint into a nice one, even though this is not the
preferred method, and indicates that there is work to be done with placing the
joints.
The time it takes to create the diﬀerent meshes can be hard to compare, due
to varying cross-sectional areas of the bars and varying ratio between vertices
per cross-sectional area.
Some general marks can however be observed.
An
increase in bars increases the computation time. A cantilever with 21 bars took
==PAGE:89==
4.2 Conclusion
77
4.42 seconds to compute, the coarse crane with 46 bars took 9.05 seconds to
compute. The diamond with 113 bars took 60.99 seconds to compute and lastly
the Lotte Tower with 208 bars took 631.95 seconds to compute. Also an increase
in reﬁnement of the bars increases time, that is the increase in vertices/faces
per cross-sectional area. The ﬁne crane has 2551 vertices and 2754 faces and
took 10.02 seconds to compute, while the coarse had 1656 vertices and 1793
faces took 8.05 seconds to compute. Although the cantilever has more vertices
and faces than the crane and diamond it is faster. This is due to the cantilever
being post processed, which adds a lot of extra vertices and faces when reﬁning
the bars, and the diamond and crane were not post processed. Increasing the
amount of bars is computationally heavier than increasing the reﬁnement of the
bars. Almost doubling the vertices and faces for the crane only took 10.02
8.05 = 1.24
times longer, while doubling the bars from the cantilever to the crane took twice
as long. More than doubling the bars from the crane to the diamond took more
than 6 times longer, and less than doubling the bars from the diamond to the
Lotte Tower took more than 10 times as long.
4.2
Conclusion
It was possible to take the already established code from [Pau15] and extend it
to include multiple load cases. The multiple load cases showed that the cross-
sectional area of the trusses take all size, which can be a problem for when
the cross-sectional area get small, but still inﬂuence the truss. To improve the
robustness of the truss, penalization function were introduced to the objective
function. This made it possible to penalize small values for cross-sectional area
more then larger cross-sectional areas. Two methods were used for this, one
where the function tanh was used, see 2.14, and one where a the even power poly-
nomial was used, see 2.15. Both were capable of ﬁnding solutions for the dummy
mesh, with good results, but with slow computation times. The computation
times where improved by calculating the gradient and Hessian analytically, in-
stead of using the BFGS approximation. This improved the computation time
for the tanh function with 2.61 and the even power polynomial method with
3.7 times. However when inspecting the dummy mesh the even power showed
a larger volume versus the tanh function. Also when scaling to larger prob-
lems it was not possible to ﬁnd a feasible solution when using the even power
polynomial method as penalization function. The tanh penalization function
was used on two larger problems, one resembling a deck truss bridge, and the
other resembling a through truss bridge. The results showed that the deck truss
bridge improved its robustness by instead of having small cross-sectional areas
it either set them to zero or increased them, see ﬁgure 2.29.
==PAGE:90==
78
Discussion, Conclusion & Future work
The truss can be reconstructed into a mesh using the already existing code from
[JAB]. Two methods were possible to use, a node ﬁrst approach and a bar ﬁrst
approach. The bar ﬁrst approach was selected, because it is easier to see the
result as going along. The bar creation method approximates the bars of the
truss with polygons. Once each bar has been created at a node every new bar
at the node creates a joint between the existing bar and the new one. Further
a bar checks for intersecting bars using collision test from computer graphics,
see [Eri04]. Once the PAM has been created in order to manipulate the mesh
better each bar gets reﬁned. Also each bar is on its own rib loop at the nodes,
which can result in a messy mesh. This is cleaned up by collapsing regions. The
algorithm resulted in a pretty dummy mesh, see ﬁgure 3.18, but when scaling to
bigger trusses the algorithm showed some weaknesses. It was capable of dealing
with diﬀerent types of trusses, but placing the joints proved diﬃcult and was not
completely ﬂawless. Connecting bars of diﬀerent sizes proved to be a challenge,
and the algorithm was not capable of keeping the meshes polar-annular and
therefore post processing was not possible. The crane example showed that the
computation time was eﬀected more by an increase in bars, than an increase in
reﬁnement of the bars. The algorithm was capable of reconstructing the Lotte
tower, which consists of 208 bars, 52098 vertices and 53420 faces, and took
631.95 seconds.
4.3
Future work
The truss optimization part works the way it should. The optimization problem
can be solved in regards of robustness and multiple loads.
The robustness
does take a long time to compute and applying parallel computing, that is
multiple threads and multiple processors, to the optimization could improve
the computation speed.
The truss construction part, which is the new and
innovative part, is where there is still work to be done in improving the algorithm
short term, medium term and long term.
• Short term: Placing of the joints properly needs to be improved. Also
matching the amount of vertices when connecting two branches needs to be
improved. Placement of the rings, from where the branches are created,
should also depend on the angle of the existing bar and the bar being
added, such that the joints do not join together at the same place. All
this should lead to an algorithm capable of taking on any truss and creating
a good looking PAM without any geometric problems.
==PAGE:91==
4.3 Future work
79
• On the medium term pre-processing could be implemented, such that
there is no need to search for intersections when adding the bars. Improv-
ing the speed of the algorithm should also be a concern. There are time
consuming operations which can be improved.
• In the long term the joints have to fulﬁll the requirements for joints such
that the truss can withstand the loads. The physical equations, such as
those mentioned in [Mar74], [ABP77] or [Vis75], need to be implemented
so the user can see how much each joint can withstand.
If the above improvements can be implemented the algorithm can be used for
constructing trusses, especially truss joints, and creating trusses will be a simple
procedure.
==PAGE:92==
80
Discussion, Conclusion & Future work
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A
The "separate document"
A.1
Original project plan
A buildings structure can be created through a variaty of ways, one of these
is known as Topology Optimization. Topology optimization can be solved by
setting up a linear optimization problem and solving it with numerical solvers,
as done in GRAND3 by Zegard and Paulino.
Building on the basis set by
Zegard and Paulino, multiple-load cases and Robustness Optimization can be
introduced.
Constructing a truss’ topology is fairly easy and there exists multiple approaches
for doing so, such as described in GRAND3 by Zegard and Paulino. However
constructing and designing the tubular joints is a much more tedious and diﬃcult
task. In order to help making the process of designing the joints easier computer
graphics can be used. The truss topology can be represented using an Polar
Anual Mesh, as described in Interactive Shape Modelling using a Skeleton-Mesh
Co-Representation by Bærentzen, Abrashitov and Singh. This thesis creates the
truss represented as a mesh, with simple tubular joints, which can be further
improved such that it fulﬁlls the requirements for tubular joints.
==PAGE:94==
82
The "separate document"
A.2
Self evaluation
Applying multiple loads cases for truss worked well, and it was possible to create
objective functions which penelized small cross-sectional areas, although with
varying results when scaling to bigger problems. The reconstruction of the truss
to a mesh worked well for the dummy mesh, where it was possible to change
reﬁnement of the bars, but when scaling to bigger problems the algortihm was
capable of reproducing the truss, but not without ﬂaws. It was possible to create
a general ramework which can be used to create truss and tubular joints if further
improved. Generally more research on meshes and geometrically creating joints,
could probably have helper improving the results.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[ABP77] R. D. Leick & J. L. Kahlich A. B. Potvin, J. G. Kuang.
Stress-
concentration in tubular joints. Society of Petroleum Engineers Jour-
naæ - Volume 17, Issue 4, pp. 287-299, 1977.
[Bria]
Bridgehunter. http://bridgehunter.com/story/1114/. Ac-
cessed 4 January 2016.
[Brib]
Bridgemapper.
http://www.bridgemapper.com/index.php.
Accessed 3 January 2016.
[CHT]
Connecticut’s
historic
metal
truss
bridges.
http://www.
past-inc.org/historic-bridges/metal-507.html.
Ac-
cessed 4 January 2016.
[CMaa]
Mathworks.
http://se.mathworks.com/videos/
getting-started-cc-applications-using-matlab-compiler-sdk-10009
html. Accessed 7 January 2016.
[CMab]
Mathworks.
http://se.mathworks.
com/help/matlab/matlab_external/
calling-matlab-software-from-a-c-application.html.
Accessed 7 January 2016.
==PAGE:96==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Cri]
Bruce S. Cridlebaugh. Bridges & tunnels of allegheny county & pitts-
burgh, pa. http://pghbridges.com/basics.htm. Accessed 3
January 2016.
[Eri04]
C. Ericson. Real-time collition detection. 2004.
[GEL]
Gel
framework
and
demos.
http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/
projects/GEL//.
[Hø13]
S. Krenk & J. Højbjerg. Statics and Mechanics of Structures. 2013.
[How]
Howstuﬀworks.
http://science.howstuffworks.com/
engineering/civil/bridge4.htm. Accessed 4 January 2016.
[JAB]
Rinat Abdrashitov & Karan Singh J. Andreas Bærentzen. Interactive
shape modeling using a skeleton-mesh co-representation.
[JAB12] Francois
Anton
&
Henrik
Aasnæs
Jakob
Andreas
Bærentzen,
Jens Gravesen. Guide to Computational Geometry Processing. 2012.
[JS]
Irving Oppenhein & Andre Witkin Jeﬀrey Smith, Jessica Hodgins.
Creating models of truss structures with optimization.
[Kla09]
Peter W. Christensen & Anders Klarbring. An Introduction to Struc-
tural Optimization. Springer, 2009.
[Mar74]
P. W. Marshall. Basis for tubular joint design. Welding Journal -
Volume 53, Issue5, pp. S192-S201, 1974.
[Mic04]
Anthony G. M. Michell.
The limits of economy of material in
framestructures. 1904.
[Mur13] Glenn Murray.
Rotation about an arbitrary axis in 3 dimen-
sions.
2013.
http://inside.mines.edu/fs_home/gmurray/
ArbitraryAxisRotation/.
[Ohs10]
Makoto Ohsaki. Optimization of ﬁnite dimensional structures. 2010.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[Pau14]
Tomas Zegard & Glaucio H. Paulino. Grand - ground structure based
topology optimization for arbitary 2d domains using matlab. 2014.
[Pau15]
Tomas Zegard & Glaucio H. Paulino. Grand3 - ground structure based
topology optimization for arbitary 3d domains using matlab. 2015.
[Roz13]
T. Sokol & G. I. N. Rozvany. On the adaptive ground structure ap-
proach for multi-load truss topology optimization. 2013.
[Slu11]
Grazyna Slusarczyk. Visual language and graph-based structures in
conceptual design. 2011.
[Vis75]
W. Visser. Structural design of tubular joints. Journal of Engineering
for Industry-transactions of the Asme - Volume 97, Issue 2, pp. 391-
399, 1975.
[Wri06]
Jorge Nocedal & Stephen Wright. Numerical Optimization. 2006.
[ZW10]
Jiangmin Hu & Zonglin Yang Zhongquan Wang, Xiaoqun Luo. Inte-
grated cad/cam software for steel tubular truss structures. 2010.
