==PAGE:1==
Comparison of Real-time Formant
Shifting Systems
Rodrigo Saragga
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical Engineering
Orsteds Plads, Building 352,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 39 50
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.hea.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis concerns with the comparison of two real-time formant perturba-
tion systems in terms of their accuracy in shifting formants as well as to their
temporal properties regarding the latency of the real-time processing. The for-
mant shifting systems analyzed throughout this project are a LabView based
system (Purcell and Munhall, 2006) as well as the Audapter system (Cai et al.
2008). The importance of the appropriate selection of the model order for the
two systems is also considered throughout this investigation.
Through a systematic and statistical investigation utilizing seven diﬀerent syn-
thetic vowels, with one hundred iterations each, it was determined that the
LabView system is the more accurate of two systems in terms of shifting for-
mants. However, it was also found that both systems have problems in correct
formant allocation when dealing with back vowels such as (/O/ and /u/) due to
the close proximity in frequency between F1 and F2. Furthermore, close vowels
such as /i/ and /u/ were also deemed problematic for both systems when nega-
tive F1 shifts are applied as such a shift may place the formant in a region where
no spectral energy is present (a requirement for a successful formant shift). The
average mean square error (MSE) methodology utilized in the formant accuracy
analysis also yielded that both systems are more accurate when shifting a single
formant than when shifting two formants simultaneously.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Additionally, an investigation was also conducted in terms of analyzing the
importance of the proper selection of the model order of the Linear Predictive
Coding (LPC) model utilized by both formant shifting systems. For this purpose
real speaker recordings were obtained so as to create a statistical signiﬁcant
result. Essentially, it was found that the model order should be selected on
a per word per speaker basis as an individual speaker may have a varied best
model order across diﬀerent words.
Lastly, the thesis analyzed the temporal performance of the two real-time for-
mant shifting systems. It was found that, although Audapter allows for a similar
latency than the LabView system when its delay parameter is adjusted to a min-
imum, the LabView is the faster of the two systems if shifting accuracy is also
considered (selecting minimum delay in Audapter leads to an unstable formant
tracking). The delay of the LabView system was found to be 6.2 ms.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Elektro within the Hearing Systems Group
in fulﬁllment of the 30 ECTS requirement for acquiring an M.Sc. in Electrical
Engineering.
The thesis deals with the analysis of two real-time formant shifting systems in
terms of characterizing their shifting accuracy and processing latency.
The thesis consists of the main report as well as ﬁve appendixes of which one
is a digital folder containing all the produced WAV ﬁles throughout this inves-
tigation.
It is further acknowledged that all the work contained within this thesis is
authentic by this author.
Lyngby, 18 of September 2015
Rodrigo Saragga
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Ewen MacDonald for the constant availabil-
ity and valuable insights into auditory feedback research throughout the course
of this investigation. Furthermore, I would like to thank my colleague Lukas
Gossmann for the various discussions in regards to the optimization of the signal
processing algorithms developed for this project. On a last note I would like to
thank my girlfriend Neuza Nunes for the valuable moral support provided.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
List of Figures
1
List of Tables
1
1
Introduction
4
2
Background
6
2.1
Voiced Speech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Vowel Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Auditory Feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Alterations of Formants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Formant Prediction Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Source-Filter Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Linear Predictive Coding (LPC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Errors in Formant Estimation by Peak Picking . . . . . .
13
2.3.4
Model Order and its Importance in LPC . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Real Time Formant Shifting Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Audapter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
LabView . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methodology
18
3.1
Vowel Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Generating Synthetic Vowels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
3.1.2
Automating Vowel Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.3
"Step" Vowel Synthesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Formant Estimation in Praat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Formant Estimation Script 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
Formant Estimation Script 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Formant Shifting in Audapter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Some Additional Notes on Running Audapter . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Formant Shifting in LabView . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.1
Additional Notes on Running the LabView Formant Shift-
ing System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
/hVd/ Vowel Recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Formant Shifting Test Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6.1
Formant Estimation Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6.2
Importance of Model Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6.3
Temporal Latency Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results and Discussion
32
4.1
Praat Formant Estimation Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Formant Shifting Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.1
/æ/ Shifting and Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.2
/I/ Shifting and Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.3
/e/ Shifting and Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.4
/E/ Shifting and Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.5
/i/ Shifting and Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.6
/O/ Shifting and Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2.7
/u/ Shifting and Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.8
Summary of Formant Shifting Accuracy . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Model Order
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Summary of Model Order Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.5
Temporal Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.1
Summary of Temporal Latency Results
. . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Conclusions
54
A Appendix A
56
B Appendix B
59
C Appendix C
62
D Appendix D
67
E Appendix F
71
Bibliography
72
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Illustration of the steps involved in speech production
. . . . . .
7
2.2
A typical vowel space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
A typical methodological arrangement for auditory feedback per-
turbation experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
An illustration highlighting the diﬀerence of selecting diﬀerent
model orders in linear predictive coding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Illustration of perturbation ﬁeld utilized in Audapter . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Illustration of spectral splatter when a perfect step is selected . .
21
3.2
Illustration of the removal of spectral splatter by introducing a
gradual step change
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Developed GUI for the LabView system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1
Temporal formant tracking comparison of step-signal 1 . . . . . .
51
4.2
Temporal formant tracking comparison of step-signal 2 . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
2.1
Average pitch, duration and formant contours from literature . .
9
2.2
Table showing relation between phase and formant shift for Au-
dapter system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Mean and standard deviations for seven vowels of female talkers
from literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Pitch and formant contours of step signal 1 . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Pitch and formant contours of step signal 2 . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
Table containing the Formant estimation error of Praat for F1
and F2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /æ/
. . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /æ/ . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /I/ . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /I/
. . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6
Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /e/ . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:11==
LIST OF TABLES
3
4.7
Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /e/ . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.8
Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /E/ . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.9
Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /E/ . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.10 Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /i/ . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.11 Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /i/
. . . . . . . . . .
41
4.12 Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /O/ . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.13 Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /O/ . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.14 Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /u/ . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.15 Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /u/ . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.16 Shifting accuracy summary of LabView
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.17 Shifting accuracy summary of LabView
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.18 Average MSE methodology results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.19 Best model order per word and per speaker for Audapter
. . . .
48
4.20 Best model order per word and per speaker for LabView . . . . .
49
4.21 Temporal latency table of step signal 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.22 Temporal latency table of step signal 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Real-time auditory feedback perturbation experiments have become an impor-
tant area in speech-motor control research. Recently, the investigation of per-
turbing auditory feedback in terms of altering the frequencies of formants has
gained wide research interest. Subjects whose auditory feedback is manipulated,
in regards to the shifting of their formants, have shown compensatory behavior
in the opposite direction of the shift. However, characterizing the magnitude of
this compensation has been diﬃcult due to errors in the formant estimation and
the actual accuracy of the formant shifting systems. Often the desired frequency
shift is not fully achieved due to a degraded shifting accuracy.
This investigation thus focuses on establishing a systematic and statistical in-
vestigation of two real-time formant shifting systems in terms of their accuracy
in shifting formants. The two systems considered here are a LabView based
algorithm developed by Purcell and Munhall (2006) and the Audapter system
(Cai et al. 2008). To achieve a statistical signiﬁcance in the results, one hundred
iterations of seven synthetic vowels are generated and run through both systems.
A methodological framework is developed throughout this investigation so as to
compare the two systems in terms of their accuracy in shifting formants by an
average mean square error method that aggregates the wide range of results
obtained in this investigation.
==PAGE:13==
5
Another aspect of the real-time formant shifting systems considered in this in-
vestigation is the selection of the order of the Linear Predictive Coding (LPC)
model utilized by both real-time systems so as to produce the actual formant
shifting. To investigate the importance of this variable parameter in an LPC
model, recordings from thirty-three speakers were obtained. Essentially, a set of
ten iterations for seven diﬀerent /hVd/ words was recorded for each speaker that
is used throughout the investigation to characterize the importance of selecting
the appropriate model order per diﬀerent word and speaker.
As the perturbed auditory feedback presented to subjects in auditory feedback
manipulation experiments should ideally be close to instantaneous, the temporal
processing of these systems is also analyzed so as to determine their processing
latency.
Essentially, the aims of this investigation into the characteristics of real-time
formant shifting systems is three-fold namely:
1. the determination of the formant shifting accuracy of the systems through
a systematic and statistical analysis of shifting known formants of syn-
thetically generated vowels,
2. an investigation on the eﬀect of changing the model order on the formant
shifting accuracy of real /hVd/ recordings of diﬀerent talkers,
3. and the establishment of the temporal latency of the formant shifting
systems.
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Background
Chapter 2 is a background section whereby the theoretical material of this in-
vestigation is covered. It thus commences with an outline on what actually con-
stitutes voiced speech. As vowels are an integral component of voiced speech,
and of this investigation, a description is made on how to characterize vowels in
terms of the vowel space and its parameters. This is then followed by a descrip-
tion of what constitutes auditory feedback, as the real-time formant shifting
systems considered throughout this investigation are utilized primarily for au-
ditory feedback research. Having covered what auditory feedback is and what
types of auditory perturbations are common, the report moves to describe the
process of formant estimation and shifting by Linear Predictive Coding (LPC).
The LPC model is the integral component of how the real-time formant shift-
ing systems perform the formant shifting and is thus described in terms of how
the formant estimation process is done as well as to how the formant shifting
is executed. A description of one of the conﬁgurable parameters of the LPC
model, namely the model order, is also described in terms of its importance in
real-time formant shifting algorithms. Lastly, the Background chapter gives a
short introduction on the two real-time formant shifting systems considered in
this investigation namely the Audapter system and a LabView based program.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Voiced Speech
7
2.1
Voiced Speech
Speech can be broadly categorized into two parts namely of the voiced and
unvoiced sort. Voiced speech includes vowels such as /i/ and /æ/ but also some
consonants such as /z/ and /j/. Essentially, voiced speech is the result of an
excitation, produced by air emerging from the lungs that is forced through the
glottis in the larynx (commonly referred to as the vocal folds) setting these into
oscillatory motion. The glottal excitation acts as a source which is then ﬁltered
by the various resonances in the vocal tract depending on its conﬁguration.
A radiation impedance with a low-pass characteristic is then applied on the
source-ﬁltered sound as it leaves the oral cavity giving rise to voiced speech.
Figure 2.1: An illustration of the diﬀerent steps involved in speech production.
The source is either relatively periodic glottal pulses or turbulent
air ﬂow (noise) for voiced and unvoiced speech respectively.
A
transfer function is then applied in the vocal tract. Lastly, a ra-
diation impedance with low-pass characteristic is applied to the
source-ﬁltered signal resulting in speech. (Figure adapted from
[1])
Unvoiced speech is outside the scope of this report and thus the only important
note to highlight is that it diﬀers from voiced speech in terms of the source term.
Rather than periodic glottal pulses acting as the source the turbulent air ﬂow
is commonly modeled as Gaussian noise.
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Voiced Speech
8
2.1.1
Vowel Space
Vowels are an important part of speech and are fundamentally the result of the
various transfer function applied depending on the conﬁguration of the vocal
tract. These resonances of the vocal tract give rise to the characteristic speech
formant spectrum. Depending on the conﬁguration of the vocal tract diﬀerent
vowels can be produced. A vowel space chart is thus often utilized to describe
the location of the resonances in the vocal tract. The vowel space is divided
into front/back and open/closed varieties. The vowel /u/ for example is a closed
and back vowel whereas the vowel /a/ is a front and open vowel. Figure 2.2
illustrates a typical vowel space chart.
Figure 2.2: A typical vowel space chart that describes the location of the res-
onances in the vocal tract depending on the vowel produced.
The diﬀerent locations in the vocal tract can be further described in terms of
the frequency of the ﬁrst two formants (f1 and f2). Essentially, the frequency
of the ﬁrst formant is given by the open/closed range and is sometimes referred
to as the vowel height. The second formant is related to the front/back position
and is therefore referred to as the vowel place.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Auditory Feedback
9
Table 2.1 shows the average duration, pitch and formant contours of seven vow-
els recorded from 45 males in a study conducted by Hillenbrand and collegues
(1995). From these results it is possible to see that front vowels such as /i/ and
/e / result in a larger separation in terms of frequency between formants F1
and F1 than back vowels such as /u/ and /O/. It is thus possible to highlight
the importance of the vowel place in terms of frequency separation between the
ﬁrst two formants.
/i/
/e /
/I/
/E/
/æ/
/u/
/O/
Duration [ms]
243
267
192
189
278
237
283
F0 [Hz]
138
129
135
127
123
143
121
F1 [Hz]
342
476
427
580
588
378
652
F2 [Hz]
2322
2089
2034
1799
1952
997
997
F3 [Hz]
3000
2691
2684
2605
2601
2343
2538
F4 [Hz]
3657
3649
3618
3677
3624
3357
3486
Table 2.1: Table containing average duration, pitch and formant contours of
seven vowels recorded from 45 males in a study conducted by Hil-
lenbrand et al. (1995).
2.2
Auditory Feedback
Human vocalizations have been found to be substantially inﬂuenced by the au-
ditory response elicited through their own speech production. This auditory
feedback mechanism is an essential component in speech-motor control. If the
auditory response is manipulated, meaning that the auditory feedback is altered,
a compensation may occur. If this compensation happens as a result of auto-
matic reﬂex or through a conscious response is still under debate (Munhall et al.,
2009). However, a distinction between the two cases has been proposed, with
rapid automatic compensation occurring for responses evoked under < 200 ms
and more voluntary responses occurring 300 to 700ms after stimulus onset (Hain
et al., 2000). Nonetheless, the manner in which the auditory feedback is manip-
ulated has a profound eﬀect on the magnitude of the compensation. Essentially,
compensation to altered auditory feedback was shown to be more pronounced
when alterations are made gradually within a 500 ms window than by compar-
ison to more abrupt alterations of the feedback (Larson et al., 2000). Munhall
and colleagues (2009) suggested that due to the more noticeable change in audi-
tory feedback from sudden manipulations an increased conscious response strat-
egy may take hold. However, uncovering how exactly the speech motor-control
operates is an extremely diﬃcult task especially considering the idiosyncrasies
involved in human perception.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Auditory Feedback
10
Many investigators have suggested the existence of "internal-models" that gov-
ern motor control by being actively sensitive to sensory feedback so as to com-
pensate and forecast future body motion (Miall and Wolpert, 1996). The exis-
tence of such internal models in speech production has also gained a wide popu-
larity, most importantly due to the variability of speech naturally occurring due
to diﬀering morphological arrangements in diﬀerent individuals. Essentially, an
internal model that governs speech production would be able to learn their own
natural speech parameters that are dependent on morphology such as diﬀerent
vocal tract lengths and arrangements. Furthermore, such acoustic-articulatory
models suggest the importance of acoustic feedback in three primary roles. The
ﬁrst of these role for acoustic feedback would be its characterization as an inher-
ent vehicle for language learning in terms of allowing the perception of a target
sound. Secondly, acoustic feedback allows for ﬁne-motor control of speech artic-
ulation. Lastly, the proposed models suggest that there is an ongoing calibration
of the internal models of speech control through adaptation that depend directly
on the vocal acoustics (Jones and Munhall, 2000).
A common methodological arrangement for the investigation of the role of au-
ditory feedback in speech-motor control involves the perturbation of the au-
ditory feedback presented to the subjects. More speciﬁcally, a subjects voice
is recorded and then altered by signal processing and presented binaurally in
relative real-time. Figure 2.3 shows a typical methodological arrangement for
auditory feedback perturbation experiments.
Figure 2.3: A typical methodological arrangement for auditory feedback per-
turbation experiments (Adapted from: Jones and Munhall, 2000)
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Auditory Feedback
11
Alterations to the auditory feedback of subjects in terms of perturbation of
their fundamental frequency (pitch) have shown compensatory and adaptive
behaviour. By introducing gradual shifts of the fundamental frequency in the
auditory feedback presented to the subjects Jones and Munhall (2000) found
that a compensatory behaviour in the opposite direction of the shift occurred.
Moreover, the authors found that this compensatory action persisted after the
feedback was returned to normal, essentially suggesting an adaptive trait.
2.2.1
Alterations of Formants
Another type auditory feedback manipulation is the shifting of formant frequen-
cies and is the main subject of this investigation. It was found that subjects
whose formant frequencies are altered in real-time by manipulation of the audi-
tory feedback have been shown to compensate for the frequency shift of the pro-
duced formants in the opposite direction of the alteration (Purcell and Munhall,
2006) similarly to the compensation occurring when shifting the fundamental
frequency.
MacDonald and colleagues (2010) conducted an investigation on manipulations
of the vowel /ϵ/ with two diﬀerent experimental setups that conﬁrmed the results
previously attained by other researchers in regards to compensation occurring
in the opposite direction of the perturbation. The ﬁrst experiment shifted the
ﬁrst formant (F1) upwards and the second formant downwards simultaneously
in step-changes whereas the second experiment introduced the perturbations
more gradually.
The results MacDonald and colleagues found was the com-
pensation was indeed occurring in the opposite direction of the perturbation.
Moreover, they found that compensation was approximately 25−30% of the shift
applied with a maximum occurring at shifts of 200 and 250 Hz for F1 and F2
respectively suggesting that the compensatory behaviour is incomplete. More
importantly, however, they discovered that compensation reaches a maximum
at these frequency shifts and then plateaus. Furthermore, when even larger fre-
quency shits are applied the compensation decreases. They further noted that
the compensatory behavior in formant frequency shifts is more dependent on
the perturbation magnitude rather than the rate at which the formant shifts
occur.
Compensatory behavior to formant frequency shifts has shown three consistent
characteristics across diﬀerent investigations (MacDonald et al., 2010).
The
ﬁrst is that compensatory behaviour occurs only after a certain threshold has
been reached suggesting that some minimum variation on acoustic feedback is
allowed by an internal model of speech-motor control before compensation oc-
curs. Furthermore, compensatory behaviour requires a learning curve meaning
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Formant Prediction Algorithms
12
that a consistent perturbation is required for some time before compensatory
behavior occurs. Arguably, one could say that an eventual internal model of
speech-motor control has a certain learned stability before it begins to adapt to
changes. The third and last consistent trait in formant perturbation compensa-
tion is that compensation is smaller in average than the shift applied.
2.3
Formant Prediction Algorithms
2.3.1
Source-Filter Model
Fant (1960) hypothesized that speech is the result of the interaction of a source
and a time varying ﬁlter that represents the vocal tract resonances in its various
conﬁgurations. The source for voiced speech is modeled as a series of impulses
with a fundamental f0 that is commonly described as the pitch of the voice. A
formant ﬁlter is then applied on the source by convolution. Most commonly,
including in the Praat Source-Filter model of synthesis, the radiation impedance
is added to this formant ﬁlter by default.
2.3.2
Linear Predictive Coding (LPC)
Linear predictive coding (LPC) is a widely utilized tool in speech analysis espe-
cially in terms of formant estimation. It is based on the source-ﬁlter model with
respect to the segregation of speech into two independent components namely
of the source and ﬁlter terms. Equation 2.1 is an expression of the source-ﬁlter
model to describe a speech sound.
s(n) =
p
X
k=1
aks(n −k) + e(n)
(2.1)
It follows that the current speech sample s(n) is composed of the sum of the
product of the linear predictor coeﬃcients of pth order with the previous speech
sample as well as the addition of a residual term e(n). Essentially, Equation
2.1 is an auto-regressive model whereby the model output depends linearly on
its previous value as well as a stochastic term. By rearranging and converting
the expression into the Z-domain it is possible to obtain the transfer function of
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Formant Prediction Algorithms
13
the vocal tract H(z). The transfer function H(z) can be viewed as a smoothed
version of the spectrum of the speech signal S(z).
S(z)
E(z) =
1
1 −Pp
k=1 akz−k =
1
A(z) = H(z)
(2.2)
To obtain the exact values of the speech parameters, such as the formant fre-
quencies, either a peak picking algorithm on the transfer function is used to ﬁnd
the location of maximum energy or the roots of the polynomial Equation 2.2
are found by solving for H(z) = 0 in z [11]. However, either method has its
limitations.
Solving for the roots of the pth order polynomial results in the obtainment of
some or none real poles with the remainder of the roots being complex pole pairs
which may or may not be formants. From the entire pole pool one would then
have to select which of these are formants on the basis of frequency location,
bandwidth and some sort of continuity criterion [12]. Alternatively, one can
ﬁnd the formant frequencies by a peak-picking algorithm on the spectrum of
H(z). Most commonly such an algorithm operates by selecting up to the ﬁrst
four peaks in the spectrum as the formants. Such an algorithm involves the
important assumption that a pole strong enough to be a peak in the spectrum
does indeed correspond to a formant.
Nonetheless, this assumption is often
problematic in practical terms.
2.3.3
Errors in Formant Estimation by Peak Picking
Peak picking algorithms often have certain limitations in terms of accurately
attributing the correct formants. One such case is when two poles are close
enough together in frequency that they will show up as a single peak in the
spectrum of H(z) with the result that only one formant is attributed when
actually two are present, essentially resulting in a peak merger. This problem is
then further compounded by the fact that the following formant is mislabeled
as the former. The opposite may sometimes also be the case meaning that due
to frequency shaping peaks will show in the spectrum with the result that a
formant is allocated to a non-existent formant, a phenomena referred to as a
spurious peak. Again a spurious peak will further compound the problem of
formant allocation by mistakenly enumerating latter formants. [12] [11]
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Formant Prediction Algorithms
14
2.3.4
Model Order and its Importance in LPC
One of the conﬁgurable parameters in linear predictive coding is the selection
of the model order. Essentially, the model order is the number of coeﬃcients
utilized in the polynomial of the algorithm. It is sometimes referred to as the
pth order linear predictor in direct reference to Equation 2.1. As the polynomial
is directly responsible for the determined ﬁlter output of the analyzed speech
signal the number of coeﬃcients has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the formant estima-
tion performed. Figure 2.4 highlights the diﬀerence of utilizing diﬀerent model
orders.
Figure 2.4: An illustration highlighting the diﬀerence of selecting diﬀerent
model orders in linear predictive coding (Adapted from [13]). It
can be seen that selecting a high model order preserves a more
detailed spectrum as opposed to a low model order.
From the above ﬁgure it is possible to determine that the higher the model order
is the more detail is preserved in the spectrum. However, for the determination
of formants the model order must be carefully selected as a too high model order
(high spectral resolution) leads to the conservation of peaks in the spectrum that
are not actually formant peaks. This then leads to the phenomena previously
mentioned namely that of miss-allocation of formants due to a spurious peak.
The contrary is also possible meaning that if a too low model order is selected
an important formant peak may not be represented in the output ﬁlter and thus
a peak merger occurs. Therefore, the selection of the appropriate model order
is an important component in extracting correct formant estimations.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Real Time Formant Shifting Systems
15
2.4
Real Time Formant Shifting Systems
Real time formant shifting systems form an important part of speech-motor con-
trol research by allowing investigations in terms of the contribution of auditory
feedback for articulatory compensation in speech production. The two systems
that are analyzed throughout this investigation are Audapter and a LabView
based formant shifting algorithm.
2.4.1
Audapter
Audapter is a conﬁgurable and open-source software package that allows for
real-time manipulation of acoustic parameters of speech.
The software has
been developed at the Speech Communication Group, Research Laboratory of
Electronics (RLE), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) as well as the
Speech Laboratory of Boston University. The code for Audapter has been writ-
ten in C++ and implemented MEX interface for use in MATLAB. It has a wide
variety of applications including the perturbation of the fundamental frequency
and global auditory feedback delay. More importantly for this investigation,
however, is that the Audapter package allows for the perturbation of the ﬁrst
and second formants (F1 and F2 ) in a static and time varying manner.
Formant manipulation in Audapter is performed on a so-called Formant Per-
turbation Field ()F1xF2). This perturbation ﬁeld is essentially a vector ﬁeld
and allows the perturbation of both F1 and F2 respectively. The magnitude of
the perturbation is speciﬁed as either a relative or absolute shift in frequency in
either Mel or hertz by a vector array called pertAmp. The direction of the per-
turbation and whether F1 and F2 are both perturbed simultaneously in the same
or opposite direction is determined by a vector array named pertPhi. Figure 2.5
illustrates the formant perturbation ﬁeld on a Mel scale.
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Real Time Formant Shifting Systems
16
Figure 2.5: An example of the formant perturbation ﬁeld utilized in Audapter
for formant manipulation (Adapted from the Audapter Manual
[2])
The perturbation ﬁeld is essentially operating in a similar manner to the complex
plane with the magnitude and phase vectors being both functions of F2. To
solely perturb F1 in a static manner one would set all the 257 elements of
the array pertAmp to the desired amount of shift and set the direction of the
perturbation by inputting into the pertPhi all zeroes for a positive shift or all
π for a negative shift. If one wants to perturb F1 upwards and F2 downwards
in frequency the pertPhi array has to be altered to all elements being 7π
4 . The
following Table for the value of the array pertPhi determine the direction of the
shifts of F1 and F2 respectively:
pertPhi
F1
F2
0
Positive
No Shift
π
4
Positive
Positive
π
2
No Shift
Positive
3π
4
Negative
Positive
π
Negative
No Shift
5π
4
Negative
Negative
3π
2
No Shift
Negative
7π
4
Positive
Negative
Table 2.2: Table showing the phase value to introduce into all the elements of
the array pertPhi to produce the required direction of shift for F1
and F2.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Real Time Formant Shifting Systems
17
Audapter oﬀers numerous options and conﬁgurations for auditory feedback ex-
periments. However, only the most important for the current work undergone
here are covered in this report. For more information on the conﬁgurations of
Audapter please refer to the detailed and elaborate manual of Audapter [2]. Sec-
tion 3.3 describes in more detail how the Audapter system is actually operated
in this investigation.
2.4.2
LabView
The second system of real-time formant shifting utilized throughout this in-
vestigation is a LabView based formant shifting algorithm ﬁrstly described in
Purcell and Munhall (2006).
Later additions to the software program were
added by MacDonald and colleagues (2009 and 2010). The LabView algorithm
is developed to run as a real-time formant shifting system. This is done by the
utilization of external National Instruments hardware that run the algorithm
with minimal latency. For processing and conﬁguration purposes the real-time
system integrates with a desktop computer on which the formant settings are
selected so as to then deploy these to the external hardware. Essentially, the
LabView based algorithms perform formant estimates by an iterative Burg al-
gorithm that is used to calculate the transfer function H(z) of the vocal tract.
Having obtained these ﬁlter coeﬃcients a pair of spectral zeroes is then placed
at the location of a desired formant so as to reduce the spectral energy in that
frequency region. A pair of spectral poles is then placed at a new frequency
loci so as to increase the spectral energy in the desired frequency region. This
process of zeroing formants and essentially synthesizing new formants by pole
re-placement results in formant shifting. [4]
A more detailed explanation of how the LabView system is conﬁgured and
operated is given later in the methodological section (Section 3.4).
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3
Methodology
The methodological chapter of this report commences by outlining how synthetic
vowels are generated. It is then followed by how the Audpater and LabView
systems were conﬁgured and operated throughout the study. Furthermore, an
outline of how the real speaker recordings were obtained is also described in
this chapter. Lastly, the methodological chapter covers how all the ﬁles were
processed so as to address the aims of the project postulated above in Section
1.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Vowel Synthesis
19
3.1
Vowel Synthesis
One integral part of this investigation consisted of the analysis of the formant
shifting systems in terms of their accuracy in shifting formants. For this purpose
the supplied signals had to be fully determined in terms of their parameters.
Therefore, the signals utilized were generated synthetically in the Praat software
environment so that the vowel parameters including duration, pitch and formant
contours (F1 up to F4) were fully determined before any sort of formant estima-
tion. For a statistical signiﬁcance of the analysis a set of one hundred variations
was created per vowel for a maximum number of seven vowels.
The vowels
selected were the following: /i/, /e/, /I/, /E/, /æ/, /u/ and /O/. The reason
for selecting these vowels is their major utilization in the English language as
well as their formant distribution occupying a broad range of the vowel space in
terms of the vowel height and place. All the signals synthesized throughout this
project are done so in the Praat software. Every signal generated has the ﬁrst
and last 50 ms of the signal removed so as to avoid spectral splatter (click-like
noise), as a result the duration of all the signals is extended by 100 ms.
3.1.1
Generating Synthetic Vowels
The static vowels synthesized in this project utilize the source-ﬁlter method in
Praat, where the ﬁrst step involves the generation of the source. To generate the
source a PitchTier object is required. Within the PitchTier it is then possible
to select the frequency of the fundamental, including any change in the contour
of F0 if so desired. The static vowels, however, are stationary in time and thus
the fundamental is selected as a constant throughout each vowel. When the
PitchTier is created the next step is to generate a PointProcess. A PointProcess
is essentially a temporal version of the PitchTier, where it is possible to remove
certain sections of the signal so as to make these voiceless (this stage is when the
ﬁrst and last 50 ms of the signal are removed to avoid any click-like artifacts).
Having modiﬁed the PointProcess the source can be generated by selecting To
Sound: (phonation).
Having generated the source the next step involves the creation of the ﬁlter
object. To generate a ﬁlter, a FormantGrid object is required. The FormantGrid
is similar as the PitchTier with the diﬀerence that it allows for more than
one input contour.
The static-vowels generated throughout this project are
created with four formant contours as a result the FormantGrids are created
with four formants. When the FormantGrid is ﬁnalized with the desired formant
frequencies the ﬁlter object can be convoluted with the previously generated
PointProcess sound.
The result of this procedure is a synthetic vowel with
known duration, pitch and formant frequencies. For a more detailed explanation
of utilizing Praat for manually generating sounds utilizing the source-ﬁlter model
refer to the Praat manual where a detailed and quite helpful tutorial is given
on speech synthesis [14].
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Vowel Synthesis
20
3.1.2
Automating Vowel Synthesis
To simulate the idiosyncrasies involved in human speech a set of one hundred
vowels was created for each of the seven vowels. For this purpose Praat scripts
were developed to automate the process. Essentially, each of the seven scripts
creates one hundred iterations for each of the seven vowels that have the dura-
tion, F0, F1 and F2 randomly selected within a Gaussian distribution about a
mean with a maximal of one standard deviation. Due to the absence of standard
deviations from the results of Hillenbrand and colleagues (1995) the standard
deviations were extrapolated from the data of female speakers of MacDonald
and colleagues (2013) . Essentially, the extrapolation was performed by scaling
the standard deviation of female talkers to that of male talkers. This was done
by calculating the scalar of the data between female and male talkers which
was then utilized for multiplication with the female data giving the male stan-
dard deviations. It is therefore important to highlight an important assumption
made during the generation of the male vowels, which is that the idiosyncrasies
between female and male talkers are assumed to be similar. Table 3.1 shows
the female mean and standard deviations for the duration of seven static vowels
as well as the calculated scalability factor and male standard deviations. These
calculations were then repeated for determining the standard deviation of males
for F0, F1 and F2.
/i/
/e /
/I/
/E/
/æ/
/u/
/O/
µFdur [ms]
235
264
178
193
269
251
290
σFdur [ms]
27.1
24.5
17.2
20.7
24.3
23.2
23.6
µMdur [ms]
243
267
192
189
278
237
282
Sdur
 µMdur
µFdur

1.03
1.01
1.08
0.98
1.03
0.94
0.97
σMdur [ms] (Sdur ∗σFdur )
28.0
24.8
18.6
20.3
25.1
21.9
22.9
Table 3.1: Table containing the durations of the mean and standard deviations
for seven vowels of female talkers in MacDonald and colleagues
(2013) as well as the mean of durations for the same vowels for
male talkers from Hillenbrand and colleagues (1995). Also included
in the table are the scalability factors calculated for the obtainment
of the male standard deviations.
As the MacDonald and colleagues (2013) study did not include any information
for F3 and F4 only the duration, F0, F1 and F2 were randomized meaning that
F3 and F4 were held constant at the average value given in Hillenbrand et al.
(1995). The developed Praat script for the vowel /i/ is attached as Appendix B
(the scripts for the other vowels diﬀer only in the utilized values for duration,
pitch and formants).
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Vowel Synthesis
21
3.1.3
"Step" Vowel Synthesis
The next set of signals generated were the "Step" vowels with the intention of
these step-changing vowels being the testing of the real-time formant shifting
systems in terms of their latency in formant tracking. Thus the signals created
change from one vowel to another in a step manner. Praat allows for the formant
and pitch contour to change in a step manner. However, by experimentation it
was found that doing such a step resulted in audible spectral splatter. Figure
3.1 illustrates how a perfect step leads to spectral splatter in the step region.
Figure 3.1: Spectrogram of Step 1 illustrating the spectral splatter when a
perfect step between changing vowels is utilized. The spectrogram
has a time step of 512 samples and 256 samples overlap.
So as to avoid spectral splatter the step interval was increased to 5 ms, meaning
that during that period, there is a gradual change from one vowel to the other.
The two step signals are 1.1 sec long with the vowel shift starting at 0.55 ms
and ending at 0.555 ms. As can be seen in Figure 3.2 the spectral splatter is no
longer detectable on the spectrogram of step signal 1 with the introduction of a
gradual change in vowels.
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Vowel Synthesis
22
Figure 3.2: Spectrogram of Step 1 that has a gradual vowel change during a
period of 5 ms. The spectrogram has a time step of 512 samples
and 256 samples overlap.
The vowels selected for each step signal were so that step 1 results in the largest
shift (259.05%) and step 2 in a medium shift (104.64%). The percentage shift
was found by summing the absolute change for the pitch and the formant con-
tours. Tables outlining the pitch and formant contours as well as the individual
percentage diﬀerence between the two parts of each of the two "Step" signals
generated are given below.
Formant
/i/ [Hz]
/O/ [Hz]
∆f [Hz]
∆f [%]
F0
138
121
17
-12.39
F1
342
652
310
90.64
F2
2322
997
1345
132.90
F3
3000
2538
462
-18.20
F4
3657
3486
171
-4.91
Absolute Sum
n/a
n/a
n/a
259.05
Table 3.2: Table 3.2 shows the pitch and formant contours of step signal 1
as well as the individual frequency changes in pitch and formants
as a frequency change and percentage diﬀerence. The Step 1 signal
changes formants from vowel /i/ to /O/ at 0.55 ms during an interval
of 5 ms.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Formant Estimation in Praat
23
Formant
/e/ [Hz]
/u/ [Hz]
∆f [Hz]
∆f [%]
F0
129
143
14
10.85
F1
476
378
98
-20.59
F2
2089
997
1092
-52.27
F3
2691
2343
348
-12.93
F4
3649
3357
292
-8.00
Absolute Sum
n/a
n/a
n/a
104.64
Table 3.3: Table 3.3 shows the pitch and formant contours of step signal 1 as
well as the individual frequency changes in pitch and formants as a
frequency change and percentage diﬀerence. Step 2 signal changes
formants from /e/ to /u/ at 0.55 ms during an interval of 5 ms.
3.2
Formant Estimation in Praat
Formant estimation forms an important part of this project and therefore a sys-
tem was developed to allow for an equal basis comparison between the two for-
mant shifting systems. Therefore, all the formant estimations realized through-
out this project utilized the same settings for all analyzed signals. Essentially,
Praat allows the setting of a maximum frequency range for analysis with a
maximal number of formants. As suggested in the Praat manual the maximum
frequency range was selected at 5000 Hz as the pitch and formant contours fol-
low a male voice (i.e. lower pitch for male than for female voices). Furthermore,
as the signals were created with four formants the maximum formant number
was selected to be four. The analysis window was set at 0.05 sec and an average
of the estimation was taken over period of 100 ms. Lastly, the dynamic range
setting was selected at 30 dB (standard setting given in Praat). Overall two
diﬀerent Praat scripts were utilized and developed for formant estimation.
3.2.1
Formant Estimation Script 1
The ﬁrst of these Praat formant estimations scripts (Attached as Appendix B)
is a modiﬁed formant estimation script that allows for the estimation of all
the ﬁles contained within a folder. What the algorithm of this Praat scripts
does is take the mean of all the individual formant estimations points of each
vowel iteration on a per ﬁle basis. Therefore, running the script on a folder
containing one hundred ﬁles leads to a text document that contains one hundred
formant estimation values per formant number, each of which corresponds to
their respective vowel iteration ﬁle.
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Formant Shifting in Audapter
24
3.2.2
Formant Estimation Script 2
The second Praat formant estimation script is the FormantPro script developed
at University College London by Yi Xu that allows for the extraction of the entire
formant track as well the corresponding time vectors. The script is open-source
and made available for modiﬁcation (See [16]). Although, the script oﬀers many
features only the formant extraction algorithm is utilized. Essentially, when
formant estimation is performed in Praat, a formant estimate point is calculated
in regularly deﬁned short-time intervals. The FormantPro script allows for the
retrieval of the entire set of formant points as well the corresponding time vector.
Therefore, this script forms the basis for formant estimation for the temporal
latency analysis performed throughout this project as the immediate short-time
formant estimates are retrievable as a text document.
3.3
Formant Shifting in Audapter
The Audapter system was developed to perform real-time formant shifting as
a result the introduction of synthetic vowels into the system required a slight
modiﬁcation of the normal operating conditions of Audapter. Essentially, as
suggested in the Audapter manual the system operates by the processing of
single frames which under normal operating conditions are obtained through
the recordings of a microphone. However, as the system was to be triggered by
synthetic vowels the frames had to be introduced manually.
For the manual introduction of the frames of vowels into the Audapter system,
a MATLAB script was developed to automate the process. The script operates
in a three-step manner whereby the ﬁrst is responsible for importing and sege-
menting the data. The second part of the script is running individuals frames
through the Audapter system and storing the shifted WAV data. The third and
ﬁnal step is responsble for reconstructing the data into WAV ﬁles for posterior
analysis in Praat. The entire script is attached as Appendix D and the outline
of the operations of the script is given below:
Part 1 - Importing and Segmentation of Individual WAV Files into
Frames (Buﬀers)
1. Creation and pre-allocation of some string information of the WAV ﬁles
into a cell array in MATLAB for all WAV ﬁles contained within a folder.
2. Re-arrange the sorting of the WAV ﬁles into a natural order (from 1 to
100).
3. Read the WAV data into MATLAB according to the sorting of the previous
step and stores the data into the cell array.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Formant Shifting in Audapter
25
4. Re-samples all the ﬁles from 10 kHz to 16 kHz sampling rate to ensure
normal operation conditions of Audapter.
5. Segmentation of each WAV ﬁle into the maximum number of buﬀers pos-
sible that are 192 samples in length.
6. Creates a fade-in and fade-out in the ﬁrst and last buﬀer of each WAV
ﬁles respectively to avoid spectral splatter.
Part 2 - Running Audapter and Retrieving Shifted WAV Information
1. Initialization of the Audapter routine.
2. Resetting all temporary data of Audapter.
3. Retrieve system parameters from the parameter script (including formant
shifting and model order).
4. Initializes a loop to run all the frames of one WAV ﬁle through Audapter
one at a time.
5. Retrieves the shifted WAV data and performs an anti-clipping procedure
on each frame (sometimes the shifting procedure produces clipped data).
6. Consolidation of the individual data frames into a new cell array that
combines all the frames of each WAV ﬁle.
7. Loops and commences at step 1.
8. Part 2 ﬁnishes when all the frames of each WAV ﬁle contained within a
folder are processed.
Part 3 - Generation of the Shifted WAV ﬁles
1. Creates the processed WAV ﬁles with the initial string plus some additional
information.
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Formant Shifting in LabView
26
3.3.1
Some Additional Notes on Running Audapter
Even though the Audapter system is quite complex and allows for a variety of
customization it must be noted that it has been optimized for direct use through
a microphone input. The Audapter manual suggests that for debugging pur-
poses the system may be operated on the RunFrame routine which was the only
way found by the author of this investigation to run the system in an oﬄine
manner with manual WAV ﬁle inputs. However, when the system is run in this
mode normal operating procedures such as direct input of parameters through
the Audapter(’parameter”value’) command does not work as the RunFrame al-
ways calls the Default Parameter script through the internal MEX programming
routine. Therefore, parameter alterations were performed by changing this De-
fault Parameter script. Furthermore, it was found that although the Audapter
manual says that the system is capable of handling ﬁles at other sampling rates
than 16kHz it was discovered through experimentation that this is not the case.
In essence the Audapter system was found to always upsample by a factor of
three and only operated within normal expectancy when the initial input was
16kHz sampling rate that was eventually processed at 48kHz.
3.4
Formant Shifting in LabView
Formant shifting in LabView was performed based on the code ﬁrstly developed
by Purcell and Munhall (2006). Essentially, the code was altered so that the
input of the system was changed from a real-time microphone input to an oﬄine
folder based input. For this purpose a new GUI was programmed to facilitate
the input of the shifting parameters. The parameters included into the GUI
include the formant alteration of F1 and F2 as well as the model order.
In
essence the program takes all the WAV ﬁles in a folder and processes these with
the parameters established in the developed GUI. The result of this process
is a formant shifted WAV ﬁles that not only take the initial name string over
but also append the formant shift parameters. Figure 3.3 shows the developed
interface for utilizing the LabView based formant shifting system.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Formant Shifting in LabView
27
Figure 3.3: An illustration of the developed GUI for the LabView based for-
mant shifting system.
3.4.1
Additional Notes on Running the LabView Formant
Shifting System
The LabView based formant shifting system is developed as a real-time project
within the LabView programming environment. It thus requires external hard-
ware to be run. The system thus runs on National Instruments (NI) hardware.
The main components responsible for the real-time processing is the PXIe-8840
which is an Intel Core i5-4400E processor-based embedded controller. The data
acquisition is done through a BNC-2110 connector block which is connected
to the chassis (PXIe-1071) through the data acquisition card PXIe-6341. The
data acquisition card is contained in the same chassis as the real-time processor
PXIe-8840. Essentially, the WAV ﬁles are sent out of a windows based per-
sonal computer through a RME FireFace UCX audio interface that connects to
the input in the connector block BNC-2110. After the external processing the
shifted WAV data is sent back through the output of the connector block and
into an input on the audio interface. For more information on running real-time
projects through a National Instruments setup please refer to the online system
manual where a quite helpful description is given on operating LabView based
real-time projects [17].
==PAGE:36==
3.5 /hVd/ Vowel Recordings
28
3.5
/hVd/ Vowel Recordings
Throughout this study of real-time formant shifting systems thirty-three sub-
jects were asked to record a set of seven /hVd/ words with ten repetitions
for each word. Of these thirty-three subjects twenty were male and thirteen
were female. All recordings were performed in booth number one of the Psy-
chophysics Laboratory of the Hearing Systems Group of DTU. These booths
provide a double-walled sound insulated acoustic environment. All recordings
were performed via a B&K Omnidirectional Microphone of Model 4191 and sent
through a Nexus signal conditioner. The signal was then routed through a RME
FireFace UCX audio interface that was connected to a MacBook Pro running
the recording software Audacity.
Each participant was given a table containing the words to be recorded in a
column format whereby the ﬁrst column represented the ten iterations of the
ﬁrst word, the second column the iterations of the second word and so forth. To
avoid speech fatigue during the recording of the seventy words per participant,
the recording session was separated into seven sets. Essentially, one recording
consisted of ten iterations of one /hVd/ word and each participant had a total
of seven recordings.
After all recordings were conducted the ﬁles were manually segmented into sep-
arate ﬁles so that there is a total of seventy WAV ﬁles per participant. Having
segmented the recordings the WAV ﬁles were then normalized with a Praat
script so as to avoid no trigger conditions in the formant shifting systems due
to low ﬁle volume.
==PAGE:37==
3.6 Formant Shifting Test Methodology
29
3.6
Formant Shifting Test Methodology
3.6.1
Formant Estimation Accuracy
To estimate the formant estimation error of the Audapter and LabView systems
a methodology was developed whereby the systems are tested systematically
with one hundred variations of each synthetic vowel. Essentially, the systems
are tested with nine diﬀerent formant shifting settings. These are the following:
1. No shift condition
2. F1 + 200 Hz
3. F1 −200 Hz
4. F2 + 200 Hz
5. F2 −200 Hz
6. F1 and F2 + 200 Hz
7. F1 and F2 −200 Hz
8. F1 −200 Hz and F2 + 200 Hz
9. F1 + 200 Hz and F2 −200 Hz
Having processed all one hundred variations of each of the seven vowels for nine
diﬀerent test conditions results in a total of 6300 WAV ﬁles which are attached
as part of the Media Appendix F. All the ﬁles are then post-processed by the
Praat Formant Estimation Script 1 so as to obtain a formant estimate for F1
and F2. These formant estimates are then aggregated so that a single mean
and standard deviation value is obtained per vowel per formant (F1 and F2) per
shift condition.
To determine which of the two real-time formant shifting systems is most accu-
rate in shifting formants two diﬀerent tests were developed. The ﬁrst of these
tests aggregates the results accross the diﬀerent vowels by taking the average
per shift conditions. The test then is to subtract the actual shift from each
of the average per shift condition. The system that yields the most elements
closest to zero is then considered the most accurate formant shifting system.
==PAGE:38==
3.6 Formant Shifting Test Methodology
30
The second of these tests compares the two systems in a more analytical manner
by utilizing an average mean square error (MSE) methodology. Essentially, the
idea behind the test is to compare the two systems in terms of how well they shift
a single formant and two formants simultaneously. For this purpose an MSE
is calculated for each formant per shift condition per vowel by the following
equation:
MSE = σ2
n .
(3.1)
Having calculated an MSE for each formant for every shift condition an average
is taken across non-problematic vowels. The result of this test allows for the
determination of the accuracy of the formant shifting system in terms of how
well they shift single formants as opposed to two formants simultaneously as
well as which system does which best. In essence the system that yields the
smallest average mean square error is deemed the most accurate.
3.6.2
Importance of Model Order
To determine the importance of the model order in obtaining better formant
estimates the real speaker recordings are utilized. These are processed with one
formant shift condition namely of an upward shift of +200 Hz for F1 and F2
respectively. The model order of both formant shifting systems are altered from
model order 8 through 12. The aim of this part of the project is to determine
the best model order per diﬀerent talker. For this purpose a methodology was
developed that takes an average of the standard deviation calculated from ten
iterations of each word per talker for each of the ﬁve considered model orders.
Then the model order that yields the smallest average of the standard deviation
is deemed the most suited for that particular word on a per speaker basis. A
developed algorithm in MATLAB is then utilized that picks the most occuring
model order on a per talker basis so as to give the best model order per talker.
Thus, the result of this methodology yields the most suited model order on a
per word and per talker format.
Processing all ten iterations of each of the seven words recorded for the thirty-
three talkers with ﬁve model orders results in a total of 11550 WAV ﬁles which
are attached in the Media Appendix F.
==PAGE:39==
3.6 Formant Shifting Test Methodology
31
3.6.3
Temporal Latency Measurements
To test the temporal latency of the formant shifting systems the step changing
signals are utilized. Essentially, the temporal latency is determined by graphical
means whereby the known formant track is introduced onto a plot of formant
frequency against time. The formant tracks of the processed version is then
extracted utilizing the Formant Estimation Script 2 which is superimposed on
the known formant track. A temporal reading is taken when the formant shift is
halfway across the step change. The diﬀerence in time is then calculated between
the known formant track and the shifted versions.
This temporal diﬀerence
between processed and known formant track is considered the latency of the
formant shifting systems.
As Audapter oﬀers a conﬁgurable latency parameter three diﬀerent settings
are tested for the Audapter system namely n = 1, n = 7 and n = 10. The
Audapter manual refers to the nDelay parameter being responsible for: "the
feedback latency of the formant shifter" where nDelay is the "processing delay
in number of frames"[18]. A processing frame in Audapter is composed of 64
samples. Therefore, if the operating sampling frequency of Audapter is 16 kHz
the latency should increase 4 ms per increase of one in the variable n.
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
The Results and Discussion chapter begins with a section that establishes the
estimation error for the Praat formant estimation algorithm. It is then followed
by the synthetic vowel analysis of the formant shifting accuracy of the Audapter
and LabView systems. This section covers the results of the formant shifting of
the one hundred iterations of each of the seven vowels in terms of their accuracy
by means of a diﬀerence average method and its variance. At the end of the
section a summary of the results is done where an agglomeration of the various
analyzed vowels is done so as to have a result per shift condition, that includes
all of the seven vowels analyzed. The following section in this chapter presents
the results of the investigation of the model order for real speakers where the
best model order is found per word per speaker and then per speaker. Finally,
the results of the temporal latency analysis are covered in the last section of
this chapter.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Praat Formant Estimation Error
33
4.1
Praat Formant Estimation Error
The ﬁrst analysis performed before testing the formant shifting systems was the
determination of the accuracy of the actual formant estimation algorithm. The
system utilized throughout this study was the Praat formant estimation tool
that utilizes a Burg algorithm for formant estimation. To determine the error
of the Praat formant estimation the formants F1 and F2 were calculated for
each of the one hundred iterations of each of the seven vowels. These estimates
were then subtracted from the known synthetically generated values. From the
diﬀerence between the known formant input and the estimation an average was
calculated as well as its standard deviation. The results are presented below.
Vowel
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2
σ F2 [Hz]
/æ/
13.01
38.44
-124.48
89.75
/I/
13.38
11.89
-156.06
30.33
/e /
13.35
10.19
-126.41
24.89
/E/
11.57
10.65
-151.04
38.97
/i/
8.63
9.86
-123.30
23.72
/O/
-44.02
19.83
-1414.23
581.59
/u/
-68.09
23.34
-1754.60
451.48
Table 4.1: Table containing the Formant estimation error of Praat for F1 and
F2.
Each mean and standard deviation value is calculated from
one hundred variations of each vowel. The formant estimation was
performed in Praat utilizing the Burg algorithm with the following
settings: Max Number of Formants is 3, Max Formant Frequency
is 5000 Hz, Window Length is 0.025 s, N. of normalized times per
interval is 20 and Smoothing Window Length is 0.10 s.
From Table 4.1 it is possible to determine that the F2 estimation is always
overestimated as the average diﬀerence is always negative. Furthermore, the
overestimation is greater than 100 Hz for all of the vowels expect /O/ and /u/.
For these two vowels a wrong formant allocation occurred. More, speciﬁcally
due to the large diﬀerence between the known values and the estimation (greater
than 1400 Hz) it can be argued that a so-called peak-merger occurred between
F1 and F2. Essentially, due to the close proximity between the known formant
values of F1 and F2 the Praat estimation algorithm considered them as a single
peak and thus allocated F2 to the third formant F3.
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
34
In regards to the formant estimation of F1 it is possible to see that the estimation
is performed relatively well will the average being oﬀby a maximum of 15 Hz
for the ﬁrst ﬁve vowels and somewhat larger for the wrongly F2 allocated vowels
of /O/ and /u/. Furthermore, it is possible to see that the estimation of F1 is
relatively stable with standard deviation values in the range of 9 Hz to 45 Hz.
It can thus be established that formant estimation in Praat is done relatively
well for the vowels /i/, /e/, /I/, /E/, /æ/. However, back vowels such as /u/
and /O/ that have F1 and F2 in close proximity, leads to peak-merging which
results in F3 being considered as F2 by the Praat formant estimation algorithm.
4.2
Formant Shifting Accuracy
Having established the benchmark error of the Praat formant estimation error,
which was found to be considerable for back vowels, a decision was made to
include the Praat estimation error within the formant shifting accuracy analysis
of this section. That is, instead of comparing the known formant inputs against
the shifted versions, the estimates are utilized instead. The reason for this is that
it avoids a compounding problem of segregation between the Praat estimations
and the formant shifting accuracy of the systems.
By utilizing the formant
estimates before a formant shift is processed and comparing that against the
formant estimation after the shift, allows for the assumption that the Praat
estimation error is included in both estimates.
Essentially, by utilizing the
estimates rather than the known inputs, allows for the formant shifting accuracy
to be better represented as the Praat estimation error is included throughout
all the analysis. Therefore, it can be argued that the formant shifting accuracy
analysis is more uniform by avoiding the segregation between formant shifting
accuracy and estimate error.
The results are organized into two tables per analyzed vowel with the ﬁrst of
the tables representing the results of the Audapter system and the second of
the LabView system. Each table contains nine rows of results that represent
the nine shift conditions analyzed. An average and standard deviation value is
given for F1 and F2 for each of the nine shift conditions. Each average value is
obtained by subtracting the non-processed estimate from the processed values
and then taking an average of the diﬀerence.
A standard deviation value is
then obtained for each mean calculation. Therefore, each mean value presented
is the average of the diﬀerence of one hundred diﬀerence calculations between
estimate and processed values. The ﬁrst column of each table highlights the
shift condition applied per row. Essentially, if the ﬁrst element of the second
row reads a F1 +200 Hz shift the corresponding F1 mean element should the-
oretically read a +200 Hz value with a 0 standard deviation if the shift was
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
35
completely ideal. Therefore, any diﬀerence between the desired target shift and
the obtained value in terms of the mean result is considered as a non-ideal shift
and is therefore representative of the systems accuracy in shifting formants.
The standard deviation values are considered in terms of the distribution of the
results. Essentially, the higher the standard deviation obtained the more the
values vary between the average taken and thus the less stable the accuracy of
the shifting is.
4.2.1
/æ/ Shifting and Estimation
The following table is the results of the Audapter system for the shifting of the
vowel /æ/. A ﬁrst observation is made in terms of how a non-shift condition
still results in a certain deviation, meaning that some processing is still done by
the Audapter system even though a no shift condition was selected. Secondly, it
is possible to see that when only one formant is shifted the results are closer to
the expected than by comparison against cases with two shift conditions. More
speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that for the F1 shift conditions of + and - 200 Hz the results
fall within the 200 Hz range if the standard deviation of 14.20 and 12.75 Hz for
shift case 2 and 3 are taken into account. By comparison, when two formants
are shifted in the same direction (case 6 and 7) the mean is oﬀby more than
50 Hz with a relatively stable result (standard deviations of less than 10 Hz for
F1). A 50 Hz shifting accuracy error is quite substantial when the target was
200 Hz and represents a 25% shifting accuracy error.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-10.62
40.04
-22.36
35.05
F1 +200Hz
189.12
14.20
-61.76
63.95
F1 -200Hz
-209.75
12.75
2.63
42.51
F2 +200Hz
-10.15
39.12
191.83
43.03
F2 -200Hz
-6.21
43.42
-159.70
36.01
F1 & F2 +200Hz
132.16
9.62
81.29
65.12
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-147.06
9.06
-101.50
45.15
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-147.52
10.20
132.57
48.31
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
132.11
9.33
-155.38
69.41
Table 4.2: Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /æ/. Nine diﬀerent
shift conditions are considered in terms of formant number one and
two.
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
36
From the LabView results of the shifting of vowel /æ/ (Table 4.3) it is possible to
determine that the shifts are closer to the desired target than for the Audapter
case. More speciﬁcally, the error of the no-shift condition is substantial less
than for the Audapter case (less than 5 Hz rather than less than 20 Hz for F2).
Moreover, when the shift of F1 is considered it is possible to see that all the
mean values are in the desired target shift range when the standard deviation
is accounted for expect for case 6 that falls short by around −6 Hz after the
standard deviation is added to the mean. In regards to the F2 shifting the mean
of the results is consistently less than the target shifts. On a last note it is also
possible to see that when two formants are shifted simultaneously the results are
much closer to the target than for the Audapter system. The only case that the
shift was oﬀby more than 25% is case 6 where the mean for F2 is −138.17 Hz.
However, the standard deviation for this result is also substantially higher at
66.40 Hz.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-1.29
1.55
3.92
28.64
F1 +200Hz
180.98
15.66
-16.86
24.56
F1 -200Hz
-195.52
12.02
26.18
45.49
F2 +200Hz
-2.80
1.54
164.79
26.11
F2 -200Hz
2.41
1.89
-165.85
42.39
F1 & F2 +200Hz
177.28
16.89
154.96
23.40
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-193.79
11.66
-138.17
66.40
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-196.39
12.03
172.81
29.87
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
189.45
14.19
-207.18
33.51
Table 4.3: Estimation errors of LabView for the vowel /æ/.
4.2.2
/I/ Shifting and Estimation
The following table presents the results of the shifting analysis of the Audapter
system for vowel /I/. Similarly, as for vowel /æ/ we ﬁnd a substantial accuracy
error when a no shift condition is set.
When just one formant is shifted at
the time (cases 2 through 5) we ﬁnd that the shifting accuracy is relatively
good with all the results except for one reaching the target shift of 200 Hz if
the standard deviation is taken into account. However, when two formants are
shifted simultaneously the accuracy degrades substantially. More speciﬁcally,
we ﬁnd that for cases 6 and 7 (shifts in the same direction) leads to an error
that is greater than 50% for F2, although the standard deviation is relatively
high with values greater than 50 Hz.
Therefore, it is possible to determine
from these results that the Audapter system is capable of obtaining quite good
results when only one formant is shifted.
However, when two formants are
shifted simultaneously the accuracy of the shifting degrades substantially.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
37
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-11.55
4.77
-50.73
31.60
F1 +200Hz
196.64
11.28
-68.01
52.49
F1 -200Hz
-178.59
7.53
-6.46
48.74
F2 +200Hz
-11.28
4.52
171.63
41.42
F2 -200Hz
-10.61
4.99
-188.22
31.24
F1 & F2 +200Hz
138.91
8.26
74.45
73.77
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-136.33
8.31
-90.88
51.17
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-136.47
8.30
125.35
48.94
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
139.13
7.43
-178.65
71.04
Table 4.4: Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /I/. Nine diﬀerent shift
conditions are considered in terms of formant number one and two.
Table 4.5 shows the analysis results of the LabView based formant shifting
system for the vowel /I/. One evident observation about the results is that when
a no-shift condition is applied no formant shifting has occured as opposed to
the Audapter system. However, in regards to the shifts it is possible to see that
for the vowel /I/ the accuracy of the shifting has decreased. More speciﬁcally,
when just one formant is shifted (case 2 to 5), non of the results reaches the
intended shift of 200 Hz even when the standard deviation is taken into account.
Moreover, when just one formant is shifted the second formant is also slightly
modiﬁed for the cases of shifting just F1 (case 2 and 3). However, the opposite
is not the case meaning that if just F2 is shifted F1 remains relatively unaltered
which would be the expected behavior.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
F1 +200Hz
176.98
10.00
-38.48
28.69
F1 -200Hz
-161.11
18.99
14.98
47.85
F2 +200Hz
-0.77
0.38
135.70
21.78
F2 -200Hz
1.99
0.59
-152.14
40.85
F1 & F2 +200Hz
175.20
10.37
124.40
27.17
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-158.23
32.79
-58.32
99.67
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-159.07
17.99
141.03
35.55
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
180.63
9.76
-213.02
45.20
Table 4.5: Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /I/.
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
38
4.2.3
/e/ Shifting and Estimation
The following results analyzed are of the Audapter system for the vowel /e/.
From Table 4.6 it is possible to determine that the Audapter system does again
generate a slight formant shift for the no-shift condition. However, similar as
before the single formant shifting (cases 2 through 5) create satisfactory shifting
with all the results falling within the target shift range of 200 Hz. However, for
case 2 of an upward 200 Hz shift of F1 there is negative mean diﬀerence for F2 of
−53.30 Hz which is quite substantial when it should ideally be zero. Nonethe-
less, the variance of this result is relatively high with a standard deviation of
63.09 Hz. Overall, the results are similar to the previous two vowels consid-
ered in terms of the accuracy being greater when a single formant is shifted
rather than two simultaneously. More speciﬁcally, the two cases with the worst
accuracy of shifting is case 6 and 7 (simultaneous upward and downward shift
respectively). These two cases are also when there is a largest distribution of
the results with the highest standard deviation occurring for F2 of case 6 with
a value of 72.31 Hz .
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-12.91
19.43
-28.76
29.70
F1 +200 Hz
192.13
14.26
-53.30
63.09
F1 -200 Hz
-197.15
20.38
5.18
49.95
F2 +200 Hz
-12.62
19.29
191.59
39.90
F2 -200 Hz
-11.77
19.48
-182.11
33.77
F1 & F2 +200 Hz
133.84
11.77
98.25
72.31
F1 & F2 -200 Hz
-140.80
8.01
-102.83
56.86
F1 -200 Hz F2 +200 Hz
-140.84
8.43
143.88
49.63
F1 +200 Hz F2 -200 Hz
134.42
11.76
-166.38
67.15
Table 4.6: Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /e/.
In regards to the LabView results of vowel /e/ we ﬁnd that for single for-
mant shifting conditions it is slightly less accurate than the Audapter system.
Speciﬁcally, for case 4 and 5 where the mean diﬀerence for F2 is 150.17 and
−160.47 Hz respectively. By comparison the mean diﬀerence of Audapter for
these cases was 191.59 and −182.11 Hz, thus slightly more accurate. However,
when two formants are shifted simultaneously the accuracy of the LabView sys-
tem is substantially higher than that of the Audapter system.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
39
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
F1 +200 Hz
175.20
16.53
-19.91
22.50
F1 -200 Hz
-181.47
20.37
21.33
43.46
F2 +200 Hz
-0.68
0.43
150.17
20.76
F2 -200 Hz
2.10
0.67
-160.47
34.47
F1 & F2 +200 Hz
173.11
17.18
145.11
20.91
F1 & F2 -200 Hz
-181.45
19.85
-87.03
62.66
F1 -200 Hz F2 +200 Hz
-181.15
20.70
155.29
30.81
F1 +200 Hz F2 -200 Hz
179.36
16.01
-199.83
42.94
Table 4.7: Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /e/.
4.2.4
/E/ Shifting and Estimation
The following table presents the results of the Audapter system for the shifting
of vowel /E/. As before we ﬁnd a substantial shift occurring when a no-shift
condition is applied. For a single formant shift (cases 2 through 5) the accuracy
is fairly good with all results falling within the desired target except for case
number 4. When two formants are shifted simultaneously the accuracy of the
shift degrades substantially with only formant two of case 9 falling within the
desired target.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-13.34
13.86
-62.49
40.46
F1 +200Hz
189.50
13.01
-96.86
65.44
F1 -200Hz
-213.00
12.03
-34.59
46.46
F2 +200Hz
-12.73
13.76
141.82
46.28
F2 -200Hz
-5.58
31.20
-194.14
40.30
F1 & F2 +200Hz
132.25
9.63
34.35
69.61
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-149.05
11.71
-123.55
63.44
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-149.89
12.63
78.24
55.71
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
133.24
9.68
-191.36
73.26
Table 4.8: Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /E/.
Table 4.9 presents the results of the shifting of vowel /E/ for the LabView
system. Again we see that a no shift condition has indeed created no formant
shift as opposed to the Audapter system. Moreover, a similar behavior as for
the previous LabView results is seen. Firstly, when only one formant is selected
to be shifted the second formant is also slightly modiﬁed. Secondly, when two
formants are shifted in conjunction in the same direction, the accuracy of the
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
40
shift of the second formant degrades. However, it is also possible to see that
the LabView system does indeed shift two formants simultaneously with more
accuracy than the Audapter system for the case of vowel /E/.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.02
F1 +200Hz
183.25
15.04
-39.67
30.51
F1 -200Hz
-195.17
11.77
27.35
50.66
F2 +200Hz
-2.89
0.87
166.18
43.94
F2 -200Hz
5.86
2.17
-160.82
48.64
F1 & F2 +200Hz
177.21
16.53
143.95
37.65
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-191.97
11.59
-119.30
56.16
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-196.64
11.88
179.83
46.89
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
196.48
13.93
-225.27
42.89
Table 4.9: Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /E/.
4.2.5
/i/ Shifting and Estimation
The following results considered are for the shifting of vowel /i/ by the Audapter
system. Essentially, the results are very similar to the previous considered vowels
meaning that single formant shift is performed more accurately than the shifting
of two formants. However, this time for the four cases of single formant shifting
it is possible to see that two of these fail to accurately shift the formant to
the desired target range namely case 2 and 4.
In regards to the shifting of
two formants we see a similar result again in regards to the fact that opposite
direction shifts are performed more accurately than when the simultaneous shift
is performed in the same direction (case 6 and 7 have lower mean diﬀerences
than cases 8 and 9).
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-9.33
7.43
-55.42
30.68
F1 +200Hz
192.03
13.50
-56.06
44.53
F1 -200Hz
-167.22
17.88
0.01
42.67
F2 +200Hz
-9.44
7.30
210.50
37.86
F2 -200Hz
-9.44
7.31
-251.05
38.93
F1 & F2 +200Hz
134.44
10.00
119.22
53.32
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-116.93
22.08
-144.04
53.90
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-116.93
22.21
153.33
44.81
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
134.46
9.89
-194.02
50.94
Table 4.10: Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /i/.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
41
In regards to the LabView results of vowel /i/ a worsening of the shifting accu-
racy is evident. More speciﬁcally, for case 3 of a downward F1 shift of 200 Hz,
the accuracy of the shifting of F1 degrades substantially. This is further high-
lighted by the high standard deviation obtained, which with a value of 145.13 Hz
is the highest obtained so far. A similar behavior is seen in case number 7 where
a simultaneous downward shift of 200 Hz was selected and almost no shift was
produced for F1 for the mean diﬀerence. Essentially, one could argue that a
downward shift of 200 Hz of F1 that has an initial average value of 342 Hz (see
Hillenbrand and collegues (1995) formant average Table 2.1) may produce a sub
100 Hz formant if the randomized Gaussian distribution process of vowel gener-
ation is in the negative range. In this frequency range is where the fundamental
of a male voice lies and thus the shifting algorithm may have problems detecting
the low frequency formant of vowel /i/.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.02
F1 +200Hz
159.33
11.63
-23.84
27.92
F1 -200Hz
-89.55
145.13
64.75
125.73
F2 +200Hz
0.04
0.17
160.22
20.64
F2 -200Hz
0.62
0.21
-145.60
33.82
F1 & F2 +200Hz
158.81
11.75
158.53
26.55
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-12.36
209.05
50.61
179.01
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
160.71
11.56
-198.93
37.23
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
-95.94
138.33
193.21
96.49
Table 4.11: Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /i/.
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
42
4.2.6
/O/ Shifting and Estimation
During the Praat Estimation Error discussion (Section 4.1) it was shown that
the Praat algorithm created peak-merging and thus allocated the F2 to the
third formant. Therefore, it is acknowledged that the source of peak-merging or
spurious peak detection, may be the result of the Praat algorithm rather than
that of the formant systems. Table 4.12 shows the results for the Audapter
system for the vowel /O/.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-22.21
33.21
-1300.65
580.11
F1 +200Hz
150.56
37.95
-1300.85
556.81
F1 -200Hz
-240.11
37.53
-1235.12
535.68
F2 +200Hz
-2.01
35.17
-1125.69
592.71
F2 -200Hz
-56.00
37.58
-1396.48
558.92
F1 & F2 +200Hz
112.17
29.43
-1182.60
581.21
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-172.46
29.46
-1286.66
575.46
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-174.74
34.97
-1181.10
589.23
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
57.76
37.12
-1397.46
554.78
Table 4.12: Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /O/. From these re-
sults it is possible to visualize that the F2 has created a miss-
allocation of the second formant.
From the previous table it is evident that a the second formant has been wrongly
allocated and thus created a substantial error in the shifting accuracy. However,
it is also evident that due to the high standard deviations in the results, the
formant location of F2 was in a rather large frequency range showing that the
frequency loci of the formant changes considerably throughout the one hundred
iterations of the vowel. Nonetheless, for F1 the results are relatively satisfactory
except when a simultaneous shift is produced in case 9 where the F1 formant
shifting accuracy has an error that is approximately 76%.
For the LabView results (Table 4.13) we see a similar behavior as in the Aud-
pater results in the sense that the F2 are extremely oﬀfrom the expected shift
target. However, the range of results of the mean diﬀerence for the shifted F2
is between −800 and +550 Hz, which is considerably better than the Audapter
results that were always greater than −1100 Hz. A curious observation about
the Labview results is that when a positive 200 Hz shift is performed on F2
created a spurious peak phenomena whereas when a negative shift of 200 Hz
was selected a peak-merging occurred between F1 and F2.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
43
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-0.53
5.01
-2.95
27.02
F1 +200Hz
187.14
29.49
-65.93
467.65
F1 -200Hz
-174.30
30.30
124.45
575.68
F2 +200Hz
-7.68
18.27
-785.08
549.35
F2 -200Hz
-27.32
19.95
427.83
644.84
F1 & F2 +200Hz
211.64
19.70
-636.11
523.43
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-189.64
23.60
550.71
636.32
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-205.82
30.66
-658.16
551.92
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
116.30
45.59
325.15
504.96
Table 4.13: Estimation errors of LabView for the vowel /O/. It is possible to
see that when a positive 200 Hz shift is applied on F2 a spurious
peak phenomena occurred, whereas when a negative shift of 200 Hz
was selected a peak-merging between F1 and F2 occurred.
4.2.7
/u/ Shifting and Estimation
The vowel /u/ has created very similar results than the vowel /O/. Essentially,
it is possible to see from the Audapter results that the F2 has been consistently
miss-allocated and thus created extremely large discrepancies between the target
and the shifted results. Table 4.14 shows the processed Audapter results.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-44.37
22.48
-1595.18
457.78
F1 +200Hz
167.15
31.73
-1601.76
439.66
F1 -200Hz
-240.84
39.26
-1453.23
448.00
F2 +200Hz
-47.34
37.18
-1414.33
458.63
F2 -200Hz
-34.97
22.37
-1701.35
463.83
F1 & F2 +200Hz
102.47
27.87
-1475.86
443.81
F1 & F2 -200Hz
-173.95
20.93
-1540.70
500.88
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
-186.35
20.91
-1408.10
430.65
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
98.17
24.79
-1688.53
444.04
Table 4.14: Shifting accuracy of Audapter for the vowel /u/.
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
44
In regards to the LabView results (Table 4.15) we see an identical behavior as
before with the vowel /O/ in regards to the miss-allocation of the second formant.
However, for the ﬁrst formant it is possible to see that the shifting accuracy has
degraded substantially as well.
More speciﬁcally, when a downward shift of
200 Hz is selected the ﬁrst formant would be placed in a frequency range where
the male fundamental frequency lies (essentially a similar result as for the vowel
/i/).
It is thus possible to state that when close vowels are utilized in the
formant shifting leads to problems in regards to the formant estimation of F1.
µ ∆F1 [Hz]
σ F1 [Hz]
µ ∆F2 [Hz]
σ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-0.04
0.42
-0.10
0.96
F1 +200Hz
175.65
40.93
-737.01
557.78
F1 -200Hz
193.50
497.90
376.76
414.22
F2 +200Hz
-34.44
18.00
-848.10
443.40
F2 -200Hz
6.00
22.23
356.55
373.44
F1 & F2 +200Hz
141.56
43.11
-1244.18
434.16
F1 & F2 -200Hz
38.11
398.25
379.14
444.32
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
291.80
681.67
181.73
592.81
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
159.82
47.20
65.13
508.19
Table 4.15: Shifting accuracy of LabView for the vowel /u/.
4.2.8
Summary of Formant Shifting Accuracy
Having analyzed all the seven vowels certain observations about formant shifting
become evident, namely:
1. single formant shifting leads to a more accurate shift than when two for-
mants are shifted simultaneously,
2. back vowels (/O/ and /u/) due to the close proximity in frequency between
F1 and F2 create problems in terms of peak merging leading to the miss-
allocation of F2,
3. close vowels (/i/ and /u/) due to the low frequency of the ﬁrst formant cre-
ate problems when a downward shift is applied as that places the formant
in a region that is typically reserved for the fundamental frequency.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
45
The following two tables are Test 1 explained previously in Section 3.6.1. These
tables attempt to aggregate the results of the LabView and Audapter system so
as to determine which of the systems is best suited for a multi-purpose formant
shifting paradigm.
Essentially, an average is taken across the results of the
diﬀerent vowels per shift condition that excludes the vowels of /O/ and /u/.
The reason for excluding these two vowels in the average is that both lead to
signiﬁcant problems in terms of correctly allocating F2. From the average of the
results per shift condition the actual shift is added or subtracted from the result
so that a value close to zero represents an ideal formant shifter. The system
that yields the most elements closest to zero is deemed the better multi-purpose
formant shifting system.
µ F1 [Hz]
µ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-11.55
-43.95
F1 +200Hz
-8.12
-67.20
F1 -200Hz
6.86
-6.65
F2 +200Hz
-11.24
-18.53
F2 -200Hz
-8.72
4.96
F1 & F2 +200Hz
-65.68
-118.49
F1 & F2 -200Hz
61.97
87.44
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
61.67
-73.33
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
-65.33
22.84
Table 4.16: Shifting accuracy summary of Audapter.
µ F1 [Hz]
µ F2 [Hz]
No Shift
-0.26
0.78
F1 +200Hz
-24.85
-27.75
F1 -200Hz
35.44
30.92
F2 +200Hz
-1.42
-74.76
F2 -200Hz
2.60
43.02
F1 & F2 +200Hz
-27.68
-54.61
F1 & F2 -200Hz
52.44
129.56
F1 -200Hz F2 +200Hz
85.49
-109.99
F1 +200Hz F2 -200Hz
-70.00
69.58
Table 4.17: Shifting accuracy summary of LabView.
Of the eighteen elements available it was determined that each of the systems
has nine of them closest to zero and are thus deemed equally well suited for
shifting formants utilizing the nine shifting conditions used throughout this
investigation.
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Formant Shifting Accuracy
46
Test number 2 is the average mean square error methodology developed in
Section 3.6.1 above. In short summary the test consists of an average MSE
methodology that aggregates the results per formant and per shift condition
across vowels. Essentially, the MSE was calculated for each formant estimate
for each shift condition. Therefore, each of these MSE values is calculated from
a sample of one hundred iterations of each vowel. An average of these MSE cal-
culations was then taken across four diﬀerent vowels that were considered to be
non-problematic in the sense of a too close F1 and F2 (in the case of vowels /O/
and /u/) and in that a shift may place the ﬁrst formant below the fundamental
F0 (vowel /i/). The results are divided into four rows namely:
1. representing the average of when only F1 is shifted (shift conditions 2 and
3),
2. being the average of when only F1 is shifted (conditions 4 and 5),
3. represents the average of the MSE of F1 when two formants are shifted
simultaneously (conditions 6 through 9),
4. is the average of the MSE of F2 when two formants are shifted simultane-
ously (conditions 6 through 9).
The results of Test 2 are presented below with the second column being the
Audapter results and the third being those of the LabView system.
Audapter Average MSE [Hz]
LabView Average MSE [Hz]
Single Shift (F1)
1.94
2.38
Single Shift (F2)
15.42
13.17
Dual Shift (F1)
0.95
2.80
Dual Shift (F2)
38.38
22.95
Sum of Average MSE
56.7007
41.3021
Table 4.18: Average MSE methodology to determine the most accurate for-
mant shifting system. It is possible to see that when only a single
formant is shifted both systems have a lower average MSE values
compared to when two formants are shifted simultaneously. Fur-
thermore, the LabView system has a lower sum of average MSE
and is thus considered the more accurate formant shifting system.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Model Order
47
From the previous results various conclusions about the formant shifting accu-
racy of the two systems can be made. Firstly, when a single formant is shifted
the average MSE values are all lower than when two formants are shifted si-
multaneously except for the Audapter F1 result. The meaning of this is that
both systems are more accurate when shifting a single formant than when shift-
ing two formants simultaneously. Furthermore, when shifting two formants the
accuracy of shifting F2 is more compromised than that of F1 where the aver-
age MSE values vary much less than for F2. However, the Audapter system is
more accurate in shifting the ﬁrst formant whereas the LabView system is more
accurate with the second formant. Overall, if the sum of the average MSE is
calculated the LabView system is considered the more accurate system as its
sum of average MSE is 15 Hz lower than that of the Audapter system.
4.3
Model Order
The aim of the Model Order section of the project is to determine the best model
order per diﬀerent talker. To achieve this aim a methodology was developed
in Section 3.6.2.
Essentially, the method developed takes an average of the
standard deviation calculated from the ten iterations of each word per talker for
each of the ﬁve analyzed model orders (8 through 12). The average standard
deviation is calculated by taking the mean of the standard deviation of the F1
estimate and of the F2 estimate for the ten iterations, per word, for each talker.
The model order is then selected on a per word per talker basis by picking the
model order that yields the smallest average of the standard deviation. This
model order is then deemed the most suited for that particular word on a per
speaker basis.
Essentially, the developed algorithm in MATLAB picks the model order that
results in the lowest average of the standard deviation of the ten iterations on
a per word per talker format. The result of the developed MATLAB algorithm
is that the model order is given in a numeric format meaning that each model
order has a corresponding numeric value as follows: Model Order 8 = 1, Model
Order 9 = 2, Model Order 10 = 3, Model Order 11 = 4 and Model Order 12 =
5.
Moreover, a best model order is also given per talker on the last column of each
of the two following tables. This was found by determining the model order that
was deemed the most suitable for the most words for each talker. Essentially, the
developed methodology picks the most occurring model order for each speaker
and outputs this in the last column. Lastly, the same method was utilized to
ﬁnd the best model order for all speakers by ﬁnding the most occurring element
in the column of the best model order per speaker. The results are shown in the
following two tables with Table 4.19 being the results for the Audapter system
and Table 4.20 for the Labview system.
==PAGE:56==
4.3 Model Order
48
Heed
Hayed
Hid
Head
Had
Who’d
Hawed
Best Model Order
P1
5
1
5
4
5
5
5
5
P2
2
5
5
3
4
5
1
5
P3
5
2
4
3
5
5
1
5
P4
2
1
2
2
5
5
5
2
P5
1
5
5
2
5
3
5
5
P6
2
1
5
4
2
4
4
4
P7
3
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
P8
3
5
1
2
1
2
1
1
P9
1
4
5
3
1
5
5
5
P10
5
2
4
4
4
5
1
4
P11
5
5
2
2
5
5
2
5
P12
5
3
5
1
5
1
5
5
P13
5
4
5
2
2
2
5
2
P14
2
3
3
1
1
2
2
2
P15
2
2
1
5
5
3
1
1
P16
1
1
5
5
4
5
3
5
P17
4
3
2
5
3
1
4
3
P18
1
5
5
4
4
5
5
5
P19
3
1
3
5
3
1
5
3
P20
4
1
1
1
1
5
2
1
P21
1
3
5
1
5
5
2
5
P22
2
2
5
1
5
2
5
2
P23
5
5
4
4
4
4
5
4
P24
4
5
4
1
4
5
1
4
P25
2
5
4
2
5
3
3
2
P26
5
2
3
5
3
1
1
1
P27
1
1
2
5
5
1
5
1
P28
5
2
2
4
4
4
5
4
P29
5
4
5
5
4
4
5
5
P30
1
4
2
5
2
2
4
2
P31
5
1
2
4
4
2
4
4
P32
3
5
4
4
3
5
5
5
P33
1
3
5
5
2
3
3
3
Overall
5
Table 4.19: Best model order per word and per speaker for Audapter. It fol-
lows that: Model Order 8 = 1, Model Order 9 = 2, Model Order
10 = 3, Model Order 11 = 4 and Model Order 12 = 5. Therefore,
best overall model order for Audapter across speakers is numeric
value 5 thus model order 12.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Model Order
49
Heed
Hayed
Hid
Head
Had
Who’d
Hawed
Best Model Order
P1
4
5
5
5
3
2
1
5
P2
1
5
4
4
2
2
3
2
P3
5
3
5
4
1
5
5
5
P4
5
5
2
3
2
3
2
2
P5
1
4
5
5
1
4
3
1
P6
4
5
4
2
5
2
5
5
P7
4
3
1
2
2
2
1
2
P8
2
5
3
3
4
2
1
2
P9
3
1
3
5
4
2
1
1
P10
1
3
3
2
4
5
5
3
P11
2
5
2
2
4
2
1
2
P12
1
5
5
4
3
2
3
3
P13
3
4
5
5
3
3
4
3
P14
1
5
3
3
4
1
1
1
P15
2
3
1
3
4
5
4
3
P16
1
1
5
3
1
4
4
1
P17
3
1
4
4
4
2
2
4
P18
5
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
P19
2
3
5
4
3
2
3
3
P20
5
3
2
2
2
2
3
2
P21
2
3
1
2
5
3
5
2
P22
2
1
5
1
2
3
3
1
P23
4
1
2
1
4
1
1
1
P24
5
3
3
3
5
2
5
3
P25
3
1
2
5
5
5
1
5
P26
4
1
1
5
2
3
5
1
P27
5
5
5
4
1
1
2
5
P28
3
3
5
5
1
5
4
5
P29
3
4
2
1
2
2
2
2
P30
5
4
3
4
3
1
4
4
P31
5
1
1
1
4
2
3
1
P32
4
3
2
3
4
3
1
3
P33
5
3
2
3
5
1
1
1
Overall
1
Table 4.20: Best model order per word and per speaker for LabView. It follows
that: Model Order 8 = 1, Model Order 9 = 2, Model Order 10
= 3, Model Order 11 = 4 and Model Order 12 = 5. Therefore,
best overall model order for LabView across all talkers is numeric
value 1 thus model order 1.
==PAGE:58==
4.4 Summary of Model Order Results
50
4.4
Summary of Model Order Results
One of the most evident results from the above results is that it is actually not
suﬃcient to utilize a single model order per talker if various words are considered
for that speaker. Essentially, there will be a best model order per diﬀerent word
per diﬀerent speaker. An assumption may later be made so as to utilize the
model order that is most occurring across words per speaker. However, it is evi-
dent from certain speakers that the best model order varies considerably across
diﬀerent words whereas for other speakers it is quite consistent.
Therefore,
if auditory perturbation experiments are conducted whereby the same speaker
must utter diﬀerent words the model order should change accordingly and not
be constant throughout diﬀerent words.
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Temporal Results
51
4.5
Temporal Results
The following section presents the results of the temporal latency measurements
conducted in this project. As discussed previously in Section 3.6.3 the latency
of the systems was calculated by ﬁnding the midpoint between in frequency
between the two frequencies, that is the center frequency between the frequencies
before and after the step change. At this point the temporal value was taken and
compared against the other signals. Figure 4.1 and Table 4.21 are the results
obtained with step signal 1.
Figure 4.1: Temporal formant tracking comparison of step-signal 1.
Signal
Latency [ms]
Original
n/a
AU n=1
6.2
AU n=7
24.9
AU n=10
37.4
LabView
6.2
Table 4.21: Temporal latency table of step signal 1.
It is possible to observe in Figure 4.1 that when the Audapter delay parameter
is set to n = 1 the formant shifting is much less stable as the formant track
becomes jittery (green line).
==PAGE:60==
4.5 Temporal Results
52
In regards to the results of step signal 2 we see that the LabView system had
problems in allocating the formants correctly. Before the step change the Lab-
View system had the correct formant track although with decreased accuracy.
However, after the shift the formant track moves upwards where it should really
move downwards as is the case with the original signal.
Figure 4.2: Temporal formant tracking comparison of step-signal 2.
Signal
Latency [ms]
Original
n/a
AU n=1
5.8
AU n=7
19.0
AU n=10
24.5
LabView
21.3
Table 4.22: Temporal latency table of step signal 2.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Temporal Results
53
4.5.1
Summary of Temporal Latency Results
Overall it is possible to determine that step signal 2 is perhaps not the most
appropriate for measuring the latency of the system as the LabView system
wrongly followed the supposed formant track. Therefore, only the results of
step signal 1 are considered as accurate and representative of the systems per-
formance. It can thus be said that the LabView system is the faster of the two
systems with a latency of 6.2 ms if accuracy is also considered. The reason for
this is that the Audapter latency measurement did also yield a 6.2 ms delay but
as could be seen in its formant track when n = 1 the tracking became jittery.
As a result the nDelay parameter of the Audapter system should always greater
than 1 so as to yield more stable formant tracking. Thus increasing n beyond
one adds 4 ms each increase and thus deems the Audapter system slower.
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
Throughout this investigation three major attributes of real-time formant shift-
ing system were analyzed for two diﬀerent systems of which the ﬁrst was how
well the Audapter and the LabView based systems performed formant shifting
in terms of accuracy. For this purpose a systematic approach was developed
that aimed at giving the result a statistical signiﬁcance. It was found that both
systems had problems in regards to the shifting of back vowels (/O/ and /u/) as
the close proximity in frequency between F1 and F2 created problems related to
peak merging that lead to the miss-allocation of F2. Furthermore, it was found
that close vowels (/i/ and /u/) are also problematic when shifting downwards
in frequency due to the frequency of the ﬁrst formant being placed below that
of the fundamental frequency, meaning that no energy is present in that region
of the spectrum to accurately produce a formant shift as required by the LPC
models.
In terms of distinguishing the accuracy of the two systems an average MSE
methodology was developed that deemed the LabView system the more accu-
rate of the two systems. However, the average MSE methodology also yielded
that both systems are more accurate when shifting a single formant than when
shifting two formants simultaneously. Moreover, when shifting two formants the
accuracy of shifting F2 is more compromised than that of F1. Nonetheless, it
was found that the Audapter system is more accurate in shifting the ﬁrst for-
mant whereas the LabView system is more accurate with the second formant.
==PAGE:63==
55
In the end, however, the LabView system was selected as the most successful of
the two systems in terms of formant shifting accuracy as the sum of the average
MSE methodology resulted in a diﬀerence of 15 Hz less for the LabView system
than for the Audapter system.
In regards to the investigation of the model order it was found that it is actually
not suﬃcient to utilize a single model order per talker if various words are con-
sidered for that speaker as most speakers have a diﬀerent best model order on a
per words basis. Essentially, there will be a best model order per diﬀerent word
per diﬀerent speaker. Therefore, if auditory perturbation experiments are con-
ducted whereby the same speaker must utter diﬀerent words a recommendation
is hereby made to change the model order on a per word per talker basis.
In regards to the temporal latency of the two systems it was found that the
LabView system is the faster of the two systems with a latency of 6.2 ms if the
accuracy of the shifting is also taken into account. The reason for mentioning
the accuracy of the shifting, is that the Audapter system is indeed capable of a
similar latency if the nDelay parameter is adjusted to a minimum of 1. However,
selecting 1 for the nDelay parameter results in an unstable formant tracking.
==PAGE:64==
Appendix A
Appendix A
Appendix A is the Praat script to generate synthetic vowels. It creates one
hundred iterations of the vowel /i/. Other vowels are created with the same
script with the modiﬁcations of the vowels parameters in terms of pitch, formants
and durations as well as the distribution of the formants (standard deviations).
==PAGE:65==
; vowel i
table = Create Table with column names: "i_formant_def", 0, "Index F0 F1 
F2"
for i from 1 to 100
dur = randomGauss (0.243, 0.028)+0.1
 ; Add duration in min and 
standard deviation
Create PitchTier: "f0", 0.00, dur
f0 = round(randomGauss (138, 7.9))
Add point: 0.00, f0
To PointProcess
Remove points between: 0.00, 0.05
Remove points between: dur-0.05, dur
To Sound (phonation): 44100, 1.0, 0.05, 0.7, 0.03, 3.0, 4.0
plusObject: "Sound f0"
Rename: "source"
    f1_locus = round (randomGauss (342, 23.9))  
; add f1 and stadnard 
deviation
    f2_locus = round (randomGauss (2322, 45.3)) 
; add f2 and stadnard 
deviation
    f3_locus = 3000
    f4_locus = 3657 
    Create FormantGrid: "filter", 0.0, dur, 4, 800, 1000, 60, 80
    Remove formant points between: 1, 0.0, dur
    Remove formant points between: 2, 0.0, dur
    Remove formant points between: 3, 0.0, dur
    Remove formant points between: 4, 0.0, dur
    Add formant point: 1, 0.05, f1_locus
    Add formant point: 2, 0.05, f2_locus
    Add formant point: 3, 0.05, f3_locus
    Add formant point: 4, 0.05, f4_locus
    plusObject: "Sound source"
    Filter
    Rename: "i" + string$ (i) + "___f0_" + string$ (f0) + "___f1_" + string$ 
(f1_locus) + "___f2_" + string$ (f2_locus) + "___f3_" + string$ (f3_locus) + 
"___f4_" + string$ (f4_locus)
==PAGE:66==
    removeObject: "PitchTier f0"
    removeObject: "PointProcess f0"
    removeObject: "FormantGrid filter"
    removeObject: "Sound source"
    Save as WAV file: "/Users/AcousticsWork/Desktop/MSc Acoustics (Last 
Semester 2015)/MSc Thesis/Results/Synthetic Vowels/Voice Files/i/100/"+ 
"i_" + string$ (i) + ".wav"
selectObject(table)
Append row
current_row = Get number of rows
Set string value: current_row, "Index", string$ (i)
Set string value: current_row, "F0", string$ (f0)
Set string value: current_row, "F1", string$ (f1_locus) 
Set string value: current_row, "F2", string$ (f2_locus) 
endfor
selectObject(table)
Save as tab-separated file: "/Users/AcousticsWork/Desktop/MSc Acoustics 
(Last Semester 2015)/MSc Thesis/Results/Synthetic Vowels/Voice Files/i/
100/"+"i_formant_def"+".txt"
==PAGE:67==
Appendix B
Appendix B
Appendix B is the formant estimation script 1. It outputs a .tex containing the
mean for three formants per every ﬁle included in the directory that the script
is appointed too.
==PAGE:68==
# Formant Estimation Script 1 
form Analyze formant values from labeled segments in files
comment Directory of sound files
text sound_directory /Users/AcousticsWork/Desktop/MSc Acoustics 
(Last Semester 2015)/MSc Thesis/Results/Synthetic Vowels/Voice Files/
Model Order/11/Synthetic Vowels/ae/AU/ae_AU_7/
sentence Sound_file_extension .wav
comment Full path of the resulting text file:
text resultfile /Users/AcousticsWork/Desktop/MSc Acoustics (Last 
Semester 2015)/MSc Thesis/Results/Synthetic Vowels/Voice Files/Model 
Order/Praat Estimations/Synthetic Vowels/ae_M11_AU_7.txt
comment Formant analysis parameters
positive Time_step 0.01
integer Maximum_number_of_formants 3
positive Maximum_formant_(Hz) 5000_(=adult female)
positive Window_length_(s) 0.025
real Preemphasis_from_(Hz) 50
endform
Create Strings as file list... list 'sound_directory$'*'sound_file_extension$'
numberOfFiles = Get number of strings
if fileReadable (resultfile$)
pause The result file 'resultfile$' already exists! Do you want to 
overwrite it?
filedelete 'resultfile$'
endif
titleline$ = "Filename
F1 (Hz)
F2 (Hz)
F3 (Hz)'newline$'"
fileappend "'resultfile$'" 'titleline$'
for ifile to numberOfFiles
filename$ = Get string... ifile
Read from file... 'sound_directory$''filename$'
soundname$ = selected$ ("Sound", 1)
To Formant (burg)... time_step maximum_number_of_formants 
maximum_formant window_length preemphasis_from
# get the formant values at that interval
select Formant 'soundname$'
f1 = Get mean... 1 0 0 Hertz
f2 = Get mean... 2 0 0 Hertz
f3 = Get mean... 3 0 0 Hertz
# Save result to text file:
==PAGE:69==
resultline$ = "'soundname$' 'f1'
'f2'
'f3''newline$'"
fileappend "'resultfile$'" 'resultline$'
select Sound 'soundname$'
plus Formant 'soundname$'
Remove
select Strings list
endfor
Remove
==PAGE:70==
Appendix C
Appendix C
Appendix C is the Audapter function that was modiﬁed throughout the project.
The reason for including it as an Appendix is that it forms an integral part of
running Audapter in an oﬄine manner. The default MEX installation of Au-
dapter always picks the parameters for processing from this function getAudap-
terDefaultParams(sex,varargin).
==PAGE:71==
%% Audapter Function was Modified According to Need
function p = getAudapterDefaultParams(sex,varargin)
switch sex
    case 'male'       
        p.nLPC          = 12;
        p.fn1           = 550;
        p.fn2           = 1214;
    case 'female'
        p.nLPC          = 7; %SC-Mod(2008/02/08) Used to be 9
        p.fn1           = 675;
        p.fn2           = 1392;
    otherwise,
        error('specify sex (male / female');
end
p.nFB           = 1;
p.aFact         = 1;
p.bFact         = 0.8;
p.gFact         = 1;
p.downFact      = 3;
p.frameLen      = 64 ;%/p.downFact; % must be a valid DMA Buffer size (64 
128 256 ..)
% if ~isempty(fsic(varargin,'downFact'))
%     p.downfact=varargin{fsic(varargin,'downFact')+1};
% end
p.closedLoopGain= 15;    % dB
if ~isempty(findStringInCell(varargin,'closedLoopGain'))
    p.closedLoopGain=varargin{findStringInCell(varargin,'closedLoopGain')
+1};
end
p.dScale        = 1;
p.preempFact    = 0.98;% preemp factor
p.sr            = 16000 ; %/p.downFact;
if ~isempty(fsic(varargin,'sr'))
    p.sr=varargin{fsic(varargin,'sr')+1};
end
%p.nLPC = round((p.nLPC / 16e3 * p.sr / 2 - 0.5)) * 2 ;
==PAGE:72==
% Frame structure
p.nWin          = 1;% 1 2 4  8 16 32 64 (max=p.framLen) Number of windows 
per frame  !!
if ~isempty(fsic(varargin,'frameLen'))
    p.frameLen=varargin{fsic(varargin,'frameLen')+1};
end
p.nDelay        = 7;% the total process delay is: p.frameLen*p.nDelay/p.sr
p.frameShift    = p.frameLen/p.nWin;% 
p.bufLen        = (2*p.nDelay-1)*p.frameLen;
p.anaLen        = p.frameShift+2*(p.nDelay-1)*p.frameLen;
p.avgLen      = 8;    %ceil(p.sr/(f0*p.frameShift));
p.bCepsLift     = 0;
p.minVowelLen   = 60;
if (isequal(sex,'male'))
    p.cepsWinWidth  = 50;
elseif (isequal(sex,'female'))
    p.cepsWinWidth  = 30;    
end
% Formant tracking 
p.nFmts         = 2;
p.nTracks       = 4;
p.bTrack        = 1;
p.bWeight       = 0; % weigthing (short time rms) of moving average formant 
estimate o
% RMS calculation
if ~isempty(findStringInCell(varargin,'closedLoopGain'))
    p.mouthMicDist=varargin{findStringInCell(varargin,'closedLoopGain')+1};
else
    p.mouthMicDist=10;
end
p.rmsThresh     = 0.032*10^((getSPLTarg(p.mouthMicDist)-85)/20); % 
Before: 0.04*10^((getSPLTarg('prod')-85)/20); % 2009/11/27, changed from 
0.04* to 0.032*
p.rmsRatioThresh= 0;% threshold for sibilant / vowel detection
p.rmsMeanPeak   = 6*p.rmsThresh;
p.rmsForgFact   = 0.95;% forgetting factor for rms computation
% Vowel detection
==PAGE:73==
p.bDetect       = 1;
%p.fmtsForgFact  = 0.97;% formants forgetting factor [1 2 .. nFmts]
p.dFmtsForgFact = 0.93;% formants forgetting factor for derivate calculation
% Shifting
p.bShift        = 1;
p.bRatioShift   = 0;
p.bMelShift     = 0;    % Use mel as the unit
p.gainAdapt     =0;
% Trial-related
p.fb=1; % Voice only;
p.trialLen = 0; %SC(2008/06/22) % 0 corresponds to no length limit (circular)
if ~isempty(findStringInCell(varargin,'trialLen'))
    p.trialLen=varargin{findStringInCell(varargin,'trialLen')+1};
end
p.rampLen = 0.25; %SC(2008/06/22) % 0 corresponds to no ramp
% SC(2009/02/06) RMS clipping protection
p.bRMSClip = 0;
% p.rmsClipThresh=1.0;
load('micRMS_100dBA.mat');
p.rmsClipThresh=micRMS_100dBA / (10^((100-100)/20));
% 100 dB maximum input level
p.bPitchShift = 0;
if ~isempty(fsic(varargin, 'bPitchShift'))
    p.bPitchShift = varargin{fsic(varargin, 'bPitchShift') + 1};
end
p.bBypassFmt = 0;
%% 
p.fb3Gain = dBSPL2WaveAmp(-Inf);
p.fb4GainDB = 10;
p.rmsFF_fb = [0.8, 0.99, 0.1, 0.1];
%% Perturbation-related variables: these are for the mel (bMelShift=1) or Hz 
(bMelShift=0) frequency space
p.F2Min=0;
p.F2Max=5000;
==PAGE:74==
p.F1Min=0;
p.F1Max=5000;
p.LBb=0;
p.LBk=0;
vecA = zeros(1,257); % PertAmp
vecA(:)= 200 ;
vecB = zeros(1,257);
vecB(:) = pi/4 ;
vecC = linspace(0,5000,257);
p.pertFieldN=257;
p.pertF2=vecC;
p.pertAmp=vecA;
p.pertPhi=vecB;
%% Pitch shift and delay related
p.delayFrames = 0;
p.bPitchShift = 0;
p.pitchShiftRatio = 1;
p.pvocFrameLen = 256;
p.pvocHop = 64;
p.bDownSampFilt = 1;
if ~isempty(fsic(varargin, 'pvocFrameLen'))
    p.pvocFrameLen = varargin{fsic(varargin, 'pvocFrameLen') + 1};
end
if ~isempty(fsic(varargin, 'pvocHop'))
    p.pvocHop = varargin{fsic(varargin, 'pvocHop') + 1};
end
%%
p.bPitchShift = 0;
%%
p.stereoMode = 1; % Left-right audio identical
return
==PAGE:75==
Appendix D
Appendix D
Appendix D is the developed MATLAB script that runs Audapter in an oﬄine
manner by the runFrame command through the segmentation of WAV ﬁles into
processing frames.
==PAGE:76==
% Audapter MATLAB Script
%% Wav Read
clear all;clc;close all;
path = 'C:\Users\s131193\Desktop\Voice Files\cVc Arranged\cVc 10kHz 
ALL\7. Hawed\';
% path = 'C:\Users\s131193\Desktop\Voice Files\ae\100_10kHz\';
% Pre-allocate a cell array to store some per-file information
    filelist = dir(fullfile(path,'*.wav'));
% Sorting
    [cs,b] = sort_nat({filelist.name});
    filelist=filelist(b);
clearvars b cs;
 % Read the data of the WAV file and store it.
for index = 1 : length(filelist)
   [y{index} fs(index)] = audioread([path filelist(index).name]);
end
% Find Shortest .wav
    shortest_wav = min(cellfun('length',y));
% Resample from 10 to 48khz
for i = 1:length(y)
y{i} = resample(y{i},24,5);
end
% Buffer Variables
    upsample_factor = 24/5 ;
    down_fact = 3 ;
    tot_nbr_samps = cellfun('length',y(1,:)) ;%round(1632*upsample_factor) ;
    BufferLength = round(64*down_fact) ;
% Segment .wav into Buffers
 for index = 1:length(y)
     vowel = y{index};
==PAGE:77==
     startpos = 1  ;        
     % Remove -1 if matrix exceed dimension
 for i = 1: round(tot_nbr_samps(index)/BufferLength)-1   
    frameIn{index,i} = vowel(startpos:startpos+(BufferLength-1),1);
    startpos = startpos+(BufferLength-1);
 end
 end
% Fade Arrays
fade_in = linspace(0,1,BufferLength);
fade_out = linspace(1,0,BufferLength);
% Remove -1 if matrix exceed dimension
numberofbuffers =round(tot_nbr_samps/BufferLength)-1;
% Fade
frameIn(:,1) = cellfun(@(x) x.*fade_in',frameIn(:,1),'un',0);
for i = 1:length(y)
frameIn(i,numberofbuffers(i)) = cellfun(@(x) 
x.*fade_out',frameIn(i,numberofbuffers(i)),'un',0);
end
clearvars down_fact upsample_factor tot_nbr_samps BufferLength i index 
startpos vowel fade_in fade_out shortest_wav path ;
clear index_empty;
%% Running Audapter 
cds('audapter_matlab');
Audapter('reset')
Audapter('ost', '', 0)
Audapter('pcf', '', 0)
para=getAudapterDefaultParams('male');
AudapterIO('init', para)
Audapter('reset')
for l = 1:size(frameIn,1)
    for n = 1 : numberofbuffers(l)
        Audapter(5,  frameIn{l,n});
    end
    data1 = AudapterIO('getData');
==PAGE:78==
    avr_F1(l) = mean(data1.fmts(:, 1),1);
    avr_F2(l) = mean(data1.fmts(:, 2),1);
    wav_out{l}= data1.signalOut()./max(abs(data1.signalOut())+0.01);
    AudapterIO('init', para)
    Audapter('reset')
end
clearvars l n ;
%% Create Shifted AU .wav
fs =16000; 
for i =1:length(wav_out)
   wavwrite(cell2mat(wav_out(i)), fs, [filelist(i).name(1:end-4), '_MO_12']); 
end
clear ii i fs; 
==PAGE:79==
Appendix E
Appendix F
Appendix F is a digital folder containing the following three folders:
1. hVd Recordings
2. Synthetic Vowels
3. Step
The ﬁrst of these are the real speaker recordings. The folder includes the original
recordings as well as the segmented recordings in a 10kHz sampling rate version.
This ﬁrst folder also includes all the shifted real speaker recordings with ﬁve
diﬀerent models orders for Audapter and LabView respectively.
The second folder is the Synthetic Vowel folder that includes the one hundred
iterations of each of the seven vowels that were generated by a randomized
Gaussian process. It also includes 10kHz versions of all the ﬁles as well as the
Praat scripts for generating synthetic vowels.
The third folder is the step vowels with their respectively processed conditions.
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
[1] D. Ellis, “Figure from lecture 6: Linear prediction (lpc) lectures notes from
columbia university for e4896 music signal processing,” Sept. 2015.
[2] S. Cai, “A Manual of Audapter,” no. February, pp. 1–36, 2014.
[3] J. Hillenbrand, L. A. Getty, M. J. Clark, and K. Wheeler, “Acoustic char-
acteristics of american english vowels,” Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, J. Acoust. Soc. Am, J Acoust Soc Amer, J Acoust Soc Am, J
Acoust So, Acoustical Society of America Journal, Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 97, no. 5, p. 3099, 1995.
[4] K. G. Munhall, E. N. MacDonald, S. K. Byrne, and I. Johnsrude, “Talkers
alter vowel production in response to real-time formant perturbation even
when instructed not to compensate.,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, vol. 125, pp. 384–390, 2009.
[5] T. C. Hain, “Instructing subjects to make a voluntary response reveals the
presence of two components to the audio-vocal reﬂex,” Experimental Brain
Research, vol. 130, no. 2, pp. 133 – 141, 2000.
[6] C. R. Larson, T. a. Burnett, S. Kiran, and T. C. Hain, “Eﬀects of pitch-
shift velocity on voice Fo responses.,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 559–564, 2000.
[7] R. Miall and D. Wolpert, “Forward models for physiological motor control,”
Neural Networks, Neural Netw, Neural Netw, Neural Networks, vol. 9, no. 7,
pp. 1265–1279, 1996.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[8] J. A. Jones and K. G. Munhall, “Perceptual calibration of f0 production:
Evidence from feedback perturbation,” The Journal of the Acoustical Soci-
ety of America, vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 1246–1251, 2000.
[9] D. W. Purcell and K. G. Munhall, “Compensation following real-time ma-
nipulation of formants in isolated vowels.,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 119, no. January 2006, pp. 2288–2297, 2006.
[10] E. N. MacDonald, R. Goldberg, and K. G. Munhall, “Compensations in
response to real-time formant perturbations of diﬀerent magnitudes.,” The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 127, pp. 1059–68, Feb.
2010.
[11] R. C. Snell and F. Milinazzo, “Formant location from LPC analysis data,”
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 129–
134, 1993.
[12] S. McCandless, “An algorithm for automatic formant extraction using linear
prediction spectra,” IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing, vol. 22, no. 2, 1974.
[13] L. Rabiner, “Figure from lecture 13: Digital speech processing from univer-
sity of california santa barbara,” Sept. 2015.
[14] B. Paul, “Praat, a system for doing phonetics by computer,” Glot Interna-
tional, vol. 5:9/10, pp. 341–345, 2001.
[15] E. N. MacDonald, D. W. Purcell, and K. G. Munhall, “Probing the inde-
pendence of formant control using altered auditory feedback.,” The Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 129, pp. 955–65, Feb. 2011.
[16] Y. Xu, “FormantPro.praat,” Glot International, pp. 341–345, 2007-2015.
[17] N. Instruments, “Getting Started with the LabVIEW Real-Time Module,”
National Instruments Corporation, pp. 1–27, 2003-2005.
[18] G. S. G. F. P. J. Cai S, Boucek M, “A system for online dynamic perturba-
tion of formant frequencies and results from perturbation of the Mandarin
triphthong /iau/,” In Proceedings of the 8th Intl. Seminar on Speech Pro-
duction, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 65–68, 2008.
