==PAGE:1==
Assessing Environmental Impacts of using Humidification-
Disinfection Technology in Food Supply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MSc. Thesis by Serena Fabbri 
Student no.: s131402 
26th June 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
Master of Science in Environmental Engineering 
Supervisors: Mikolaj Owsianiak and Stig Irving Olsen  
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Preface 
This report is a Master thesis project work conducted by Serena Fabbri at the Technical University 
of Denmark (DTU) to obtain the higher education title “Master of Science in Environmental 
Engineering”. The thesis is a 30 ECTS project, focusing on the environmental life cycle assessment 
(LCA) of an emerging humidification-disinfection technology for the preservation of fruits and 
vegetables along the supply chain.   
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my supervisor, Mikolaj Owsianiak, Researcher at DTU Management 
Engineering Department, for the indispensable help and guidance given me during all these months 
of intense work. Thanks also for the patience in answering my, sometimes obscure, questions and 
for reading through my long unrevised thesis sections. 
Thanks to my official supervisor Stig Irving Olsen, Associate Professor at DTU Management 
Engineering Department, for the sharp remarks. 
Thanks to Alexis Laurent, Assistant Professor at DTU Management, for the precious suggestions 
regarding the modelling part. 
A special thanks goes to my boyfriend Enrico, who never missed to support me and to be patient 
with me. Thanks to my family and to my sister’s little Caterina pictures, which were always there to 
make me smile. And finally, but not less importantly, thanks to the music, the music that I love and 
which really kept me hanging on! 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Summary 
The reduction of food losses occurring during the production and the post-harvest stages of supply 
chains has become an issue of global importance, as food losses are source of environmental, 
economic and ethic impacts. The humidification-disinfection technology is one of the emerging 
appliances that can contribute to reduce fruits and vegetables post-harvest losses, by releasing a fine 
mist in the air that can enhance the shelf life of the produce. The goal of this study is to assess the 
environmental impacts derived from the introduction of the humidification-disinfection technology 
in the post-harvest stages of lettuce supply chain and compare them with the environmental impacts 
from using conventional cooling technologies. The technology works in combination with 
conventional cooling systems and does not replace them. The purpose is to assess whether and to 
which extent the technology has the potential to minimize the overall impacts, by preventing food 
losses (and therefore by decreasing upstream lettuce production) and also by providing energy 
savings during the use stage. This is to be done by considering the increased burdens associated 
with higher demand of materials, energy and water of the technology, so that the overall trade-offs 
can be assessed. The humidification technology provider, which is the commissioner of the study, 
will use the results of the analysis as a tool to demonstrate the potential benefits or drawbacks of the 
technology. 
The report follows the ILCD’s recommended structure for conducting a Life Cycle Assessment 
(LCA), divided in five phases: Goal definition, Scope definition, Life Cycle Inventory Analysis, 
Life Cycle Impact Assessment and Interpretation. The production of lettuce in Apulia region (South 
Italy), further exported to reach Danish supermarket displays, is chosen as reference case study. The 
functional unit is defined as “1 kg of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) sold at the retailer”, provided that 
lettuce appears fresh and appealing with no visible signs of deterioration. The supply chain is 
studied by dividing the life cycle of lettuce in four main stages: production, processing, storage-
distribution and retailing. As the efficiency of the technology in reducing fresh produce losses is 
still under study, four possible losses reduction scenarios are made, which will enable to identify 
how much efficiency is expected for bringing environmental improvements to the supply chain.  
The ILCD’s recommended methods are used as impact assessment methodology, focusing at 
midpoint level and normalisation factors based on based on domestic inventory for the EU 27 
(reference year 2010) are also used to ease communication of results. Modelling is carried out with 
the software SimaPro 8. Data regarding the modelled lettuce life cycle stages are collected through 
literature review or, when missing, calculated or assumed. Specific data about the humidification-
disinfection technology are retrieved from documentation provided by the provider. A sensitivity 
analysis is included to test the importance of the impacts most contributing parameters and 
humidifiers performance relevant parameters.   
The results indicate that the technology could reduce the environmental impacts of lettuce supply 
chain when also reductions in food losses are provided. This is a result of the fact that the main 
drivers of environmental impacts in the chain are found to be lettuce production, processing and 
transport processes, as confirmed by the sensitivity analysis. When compared to the conventional 
supply chain, the impacts are reduced on average by 2.6, 6.0 and 7.4% when the total losses of the 
supply chain are decreased by 2, 5 and 6%, respectively (corresponding to low, medium and high 
efficiency of the technology). These reductions are always proportional to the relative decreases in 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
food losses, in the sense that the higher the loss reduction, the higher also the impact reduction. The 
extent of the improvements is relatively small, because also the total possible reduction in losses 
over the whole supply chain is limited. The only case in which impacts are increased is observed for 
mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion category (with low and medium technology 
efficiency only), which is found to be more influenced by the humidifiers production and disposal 
stages than the other categories. By testing two different production options it is found that attention 
should be paid when choosing the various components of the humidification equipment, as they 
could increase the burden on mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion. It is expected that 
overcoming the limitations of the study, related to humidifiers production data uncertainty and 
assumptions made in the model, will not significantly change the main findings of the study.  
In addition, the technology could potentially decrease the overall energy consumption during 
refrigerated storage and transport stages. Nevertheless, potential decrease or even increase in the 
energy consumption of the humidifiers does not significantly affect the total impacts, as long as 
food losses are lowered, and the water requirements do not represent a substantial environmental 
burden. 
To conclude, the study highlights that the technology has the potential to improve the 
environmental performance of lettuce supply chain and also to decrease energy consumption during 
use, as long as food losses are reduced at the same time. The benefits from decreasing these losses 
well counterbalance by the burdens associated with the demand for raw materials, water and energy 
of the technology. However, further studies should be done before providing recommendations to 
policy level and considering the observed benefits applicable to all kinds of fruits and vegetables 
supply chains. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
Table of contents 
Preface .................................................................................................................................................. 3 
Summary .............................................................................................................................................. 4 
1. 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 8 
1.2 
Food loss and waste ............................................................................................................... 8 
1.2 
Measures to minimize loss and waste in the supply chain of fruit and vegetables ............... 9 
1.3 
Supply chain and the example of lettuce ............................................................................. 12 
1.3.1      Production technique .................................................................................................... 13 
1.3.2 
Role of disinfection ...................................................................................................... 13 
1.3.3 
Role of refrigeration and the cold chain ....................................................................... 14 
1.4 
Humidification-disinfection technology .............................................................................. 17 
2. 
Objectives................................................................................................................................... 21 
3. 
Methodology .............................................................................................................................. 22 
3.1 
Environmental life cycle assessment ................................................................................... 23 
3.1.1   Goal definition ................................................................................................................ 23 
3.1.2   Scope definition .............................................................................................................. 25 
3.1.3   Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) ............................................................................................. 34 
3.2     Sensitivity analysis ............................................................................................................... 56 
4.      Results ....................................................................................................................................... 58 
4.1     Environmental impacts of the conventional lettuce supply chain........................................ 58 
4.1.1   Process contribution analysis: understanding the drivers of the impacts ........................ 60 
4.2     Environmental impacts of the humidification-based lettuce supply chain .......................... 62 
4.2.1   Influence of humidifier production alternatives .............................................................. 65 
5.     Interpretation and discussion ..................................................................................................... 68 
5.1    Sensitivity analysis ................................................................................................................ 68 
5.2    Is the new technology improving the environmental performance of the supply chain? ..... 70 
5.3    Discussion on the baseline system ........................................................................................ 71 
5.3    Discussion on the humidification system.............................................................................. 74 
5.4    Consistency check ................................................................................................................. 76 
6.     Conclusion ................................................................................................................................. 77 
7.     Recommendations ...................................................................................................................... 79 
References .......................................................................................................................................... 81 
APPENDIX A .................................................................................................................................... 88 
APPENDIX B .................................................................................................................................. 109 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
1. 
Introduction  
Food losses and waste along the food supply chain are one of the topics of most interest in many 
developed and developing countries and their reduction and avoidance has become a global priority 
(Caronna, 2011). There are several valid reasons that drive countries to take initiatives in prevention 
of food losses and waste. Food is a valuable resource whose production requires significative 
investment of other natural scarce resources (e.g. land, fresh water, energy), which should be 
utilized in a considerately and efficient manner. Various environmental impacts are associated with 
the entire life cycle of food products, stemming from the agricultural production to food 
consumption and handling of relative waste streams. Examples of such impacts are freshwater 
ecotoxicity due to emissions of pesticides, aquatic eutrophication caused by emissions of fertilizers, 
or climate change impacts due to greenhouse gas emissions resulting from long distance transport 
and food processing (Beretta et al., 2013). Environmental concerns are also related to the disposal 
of food waste, which can be highly problematic and source of unwanted emissions (e.g. ammonia, 
methane, nitrous oxide and other greenhouse gasses), especially in the case of landfilling 
(Christensen, 2010). Reducing food losses and waste would imply a better use of resources and a 
decrease of the related impacts per unit of population fed.  
In addition to the environmental benefits, reducing food losses saves economic costs and this is 
particularly important in the efforts of combating hunger and guarantee food security in both 
developing and developed countries (Beretta et al., 2013). In this context, also ethical issues 
increase the importance of an action, as food is a basic human need and the right to food claims that 
all human beings should be free from hunger, malnutrition and should have access to nutritionally 
adequate and safe food (United Nations, 1976). “We simply cannot allow one-third of all the food 
we produce to go to waste, when 870 million people go hungry every day”, as claimed the FAO 
Director-General, underlying also the moral responsibility of affluent countries (UNEP, 2013). 
 
1.2 Food loss and waste  
Understood the importance of minimizing such waste, attempts have been made to quantify how 
much food is lost and wasted in the world, with the intent to seek for strategies of prevention. 
According to the utilized terminology, food loss and waste refer to the mass of edible food intended 
for human consumption that, for different reasons, is not ultimately consumed by people (Lipinski 
et al., 2013). Commonly, a distinction is made between food loss and waste, according to where the 
losses occur in the supply chain:  
 ‘Food loss’ refers to food that does not reach the consumers, because it spills, spoils or 
bruises during the production, processing, storage and transport stages. 
 ‘Food waste’ occurs at retailer and consumer level, when good quality food, still suitable for 
human consumption, is discarded or thrown away, due to either negligence or conscious 
decision. 
Globally, almost one-third of the food produced for human consumption (animal or vegetal origin) 
is lost or wasted every year, amounting to about 1.3 billion tons yearly (Gustavsson et al., 2011). 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has estimated that in the 
major developed countries (Europe, North America and industrialized Asia) it ranges between 240 – 
300 kg/capita/year, with figures down to 120 kg/capita/year for less industrialized or developing 
countries (Asia, Africa and Latin America) (Gustavsson et al., 2011). In every case, more than 60% 
of what is lost and wasted occurs from the production to the retailing and the remaining at 
consumers’ level. Narrowing down the focus, fruit and vegetables are the second commodities 
where the highest loss and waste occur, after the category of roots and tubers.  
Nevertheless, it is difficult to obtain more precise data about how much is lost and wasted during 
each step. In the same FAO report, it has been roughly estimated that, during production and 
consumption of fruit and vegetables in European countries, there is a total weight loss and waste of 
almost 40%: 20% of what is initially produced is lost during the whole production process and 19% 
of what reaches the consumer is wasted (see Figure 1). Another 5% occurs during post-harvest 
handling and storage operations, including transport; 2% derives from the food processing and 
packaging and a further 10% takes place at the supermarket retail.  
 
Figure 1: Weight percentages of fruits and vegetables loss and waste in Europe (percentage of what enters each 
stage) (from Gustavsson et al., 2011).  
 
1.2 Measures to minimize loss and waste in the supply chain of fruit 
and vegetables 
To identify the potentials for minimization, it is important to understand what are the causes of 
these losses and waste. In each step of the supply chain multiple reasons can be identified. As the 
focus of the study will be only on fruits and vegetables, the following list is provided to give an 
overview of the most common causes according to the specific process of the supply chain of this 
category (Jedermann et al., 2014) (Lipinski et al., 2013) (Aulakh et al., 2013) (Winkworth-Smith et 
al., 2014) (Monier et al., 2010): 
 Production and harvesting: 
 Selection for not meeting quality or aesthetic standards set by retailers 
 Bruises during picking 
 Abandonment in fields due to poor mechanical harvesting or sharp drops in prices 
20%
5%
2%
10%
19%
Production
Post-harvest handling and
storage
Processing and packaging
Retailing
Consumption
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
 Farmers overproduction 
 Processing, storage and distribution: 
 Deterioration and spoilage due to poor temperature management or breaks in the 
cold chain  
 Spills 
 Transport losses due to long transportation times 
 Retailing: 
 Overstocked displays 
 Poor stock management due to e.g. low cost of discarding food  
 Further rejection due to cosmetic defects 
 Spillage or damaging in market 
 Breaks in the cold chain 
 Consumption: 
 Overbought products 
 Selection due to quality/appearance 
 Discard according to personal preferences and attitudes 
 Negligence or lack of awareness on the consequences of wasting food (e.g. food 
wasted because expired or as leftover) 
As can be seen, the causes of the losses and waste are very different in nature and this points out 
that achieving a minimization would require the combined efforts and contributions of the different 
players in the chain. The list encompasses global causes applicable to worldwide markets of fruits 
and vegetables, however the extent of some problems is greater in some areas of the world 
compared to others. For instance, in medium/high income countries the causes are mainly 
associated with consumer behaviour and irresponsible management between the different actors of 
the supply chain. On the contrary, in low income countries a mix of financial, managerial and 
technological limitations leads the causes, with very little attributed to the consumer level. 
Regardless the involved country, some of the losses and waste could potentially be reduced, yet a 
certain amount is essentially unavoidable: for instance, unintentional damages or bruises caused 
during picking and harvesting, accidental spills from means of transport or during retailing 
operations, etc. Even at consumer level, no matter how much people is educated and organized in 
the management of their daily meals, there will always be wastage to some extent due to e.g. 
negligence or involuntary spills. Despite that, there are multiple effective ways in which food can 
be saved and some strategies are already in place. In general, three levels of action can be 
identified: better management, behavioural changes and technology improvements. Figure 2 
provides some examples of the initiatives that can minimize food losses and waste, divided by level. 
 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
 
Figure 2: Examples of measures to reduce food losses and waste (adapted from (Gustavsson et al., 2011) 
(Lipinski et al., 2013) (Winkworth-Smith et al., 2014) (Jedermann et al., 2014)). 
 
Better management encompasses measures that improve the overall administration and handling of 
food and related operations. For example, overproduction could be reduced if better communication 
and cooperation was achieved among farmers, so that the surplus of one farm compensates the 
shortage of another (Gustavsson et al., 2011). The development of new markets for sub-standard 
products, instead, have the potential to decrease losses in more stages of the supply chain. Indeed, 
donation of unmarketable crops to commercial or charity organizations can reduce production 
losses, but the same can be done with the amounts of produce that remains unsold at supermarkets, 
restaurants and caterers (Lipinski et al., 2013). Accurate ordering and better forecasting from 
retailers could reduce the occurrence of overstocked displays and help achieving a better stock 
management. 
Behavioural changes involve mainly actions to shift consumers’ habits to more responsible ones 
and avoid misconceptions. Consumers have the power to influence the strict aesthetic and quality 
standards set by retailers, therefore public awareness campaigns on different media and educational 
programmes could contribute to convince that ‘ugly’ food is not necessarily inedible. Improved 
education could also be targeted to influence the household habits. For example, some of the largest 
grocery retailers in the United Kingdom have recently adopted waste reduction campaigns, in which 
tips to correctly store and lengthen shelf life of fruit and vegetables are diffused (Lipinski et al., 
2013).  
Technological improvements are needed to make processes more efficient and ensure the use of the 
best available technology. They could concern all the supply chain stages, especially in the so-
called cold chain. The cold chain of fruit and vegetables can be defined as the network of all the 
facilities, technologies and practices needed to ensure the keeping of a constant cooled temperature 
of the product, from the point where it is produced to the point where it is consumed (Bharti, 2014). 
The maintenance of a constant temperature along the cold chain of products is of crucial importance 
to preserve their freshness, especially when long transport distances and several logistic transfers 
are involved (Evans, 2012). For this reason, both improvements of the existing systems and 
research and development of innovative technologies can contribute to achieve a better 
performance. Infrastructures, such as storage facilities, roads, electricity and water supplies, need 
regular maintenance and ameliorations. Investments in providing cold storage facilities and cooling 
technologies are needed where the cold chain is missing, poor or presents breaks (Lipinski et al., 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
2013). Finally, innovative packaging, fruit and vegetable coatings, alternative refrigeration systems 
and other techniques can play a role in extending the shelf life of perishable products (Rodrigue et 
al., 2013).  
Overall, the greatest potentials for saving losses and waste would be at production and consumer 
level because it is here that the greatest losses occur. However, these are also stages where it is 
mostly difficult to bring changes, as production losses are mainly caused by the demanding quality 
standards requested by retailers, which, in turn, are governed by consumers’ preferences and 
attitudes. On the contrary, it is easier to operate at the technological, managerial and logistic levels, 
by increasing the efficiency of the processes that bring the food from farm to fork. The extent of the 
post-harvest losses in Europe (before consumption) indicates that there is room for improvement at 
this level and the measures that can be taken are several.  
 
1.3 Supply chain and the example of lettuce 
In Europe, but also in many other areas of the world, the fruits and vegetables supply chain is 
characterized by a strong interdependence between countries, with large amounts of processed and 
fresh products traded every year. In fact, it is not a rare phenomenon that fruits or vegetables 
produced in a certain area (e.g. Southern European countries) are destined to enter foreign markets 
and be distributed far away from the place of origin (e.g. Scandinavia). In this context, the 
complexity of the system increases significantly compared to a local supply chain (where 
consumers are close to producers), as the produce has to be transported over long distances and 
longer periods of time elapse between production and consumption. Therefore, measures, such as 
the cold chain, are needed to maintain the freshness of the products along this articulated system. 
The length and the degree of complexity of the European supply chain varies depending on the 
specific product and the market characteristics (European Commission, 2015). However, there are 
some typical stages that pool all traded fruits and vegetables, and which are core elements of the 
food supply chain concept. These are: agricultural production, processing, storage, distribution, 
retailing and consumption. A typical supply chain of lettuce produced in Italy and sold at Danish 
supermarkets can be taken as an example. 
Italy is the second major producer of lettuce in Europe, followed by Spain (FAOSTAT, 2013). 
Cultivation of horticultural products in Italy is largely diffused and developed both for national and 
foreign markets. Apulia, located in the South of Italy, is the region with the highest horticultural 
production of the country. Roughly 5,000 ha are used to produce lettuce in open land representing 
more than 27% of the national production of this kind of vegetables (ISTAT, 2011). A description 
of the production technique is found in section 1.3.1. Either lettuce is destined to foreign markets or 
internal markets, after harvest it is transported to a local processing centre, where it can undergo to 
different handlings. An articulated processing line is necessary for those products that are cut, 
washed, dried, packed and sold ready to be consumed, without any further processing for the 
consumer. However, for head lettuce less operations are required, which can consist of just 
washing, pre-cooling and packaging. A disinfection process may be applied during washing, as 
further discussed in section 1.3.2. In many cases, lettuce heads produced in Italy are placed into 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
plastic or cardboard boxes and directly sent to the pre-cooling step without washing (Pimpini et al., 
2005). After pre-cooling, further packaging can be applied and for this several options are available: 
e.g. group packaging in wooden or plastic boxes, individual packaging in perforated plastic bags, 
plastic films, modified atmosphere packaging, etc (Colelli, 2011). For some of the options, the 
processing facility may be required to be equipped with specific automatized machineries. The 
chosen solution depends on the diverse market demands. Once the lettuce has been processed, it is 
ready to be distributed on the market, while it is kept at its optimal storage temperature through the 
cold chain. The distribution involves various refrigerated transport steps and refrigerated storage 
periods, which can vary depending on the specific product distribution chain. Refrigerated storage 
can be done at processing centres, distribution centres, wholesalers and retailers. Refrigerated 
transport is used every time lettuce is delivered from one facility to another. See section 1.3.3 for a 
description of pre-cooling and refrigeration technologies. 
 
1.3.1 Production technique  
In Apulia region, practically all the production is done in open land, with negligible space reserved 
to greenhouses (ISTAT, 2011). Cultivation is carried out applying modern techniques which can 
vary from farm to farm and depending on whether conventional or organic farming are adopted. 
Despite the recent development of organic farming, conventional techniques are still the mostly 
applied in the region (Pugliese et al., 2008). The producers purchase the seedlings from specialized 
nurseries, which grow the young plants in small pots filled with a compost mainly constituted by 
peat (Magnifico and Parente, 2011). In Europe, peat is mostly found in Baltic states (e.g. Sweden, 
Finland), Ireland, Poland and Germany (Montanarella et al., 2006). At nurseries, precision 
machineries are used for the placement of the seeds in the pots, which are then stored at controlled 
temperature in climatic chambers until germination (Magnifico and Parente, 2011). Before 
transplantation, the ground is prepared to receive the seedlings and generally treated with herbicides 
and fertilizers. Various types on pesticides can also be applied to combat diseases and parasites 
(Antonelli and Gengotti, 2004). The harvest is generally done manually with the aid of bearing 
mechanic arms placed in the rear of a tractor. A first selection of the product is done directly on the 
field to remove possible external damaged or yellowed leaves (Colelli, 2011). 
 
1.3.2 Role of disinfection 
In the cases where lettuce is washed before being pre-cooled, the use of disinfectants in the washing 
water can be applied as part of a sanitation and safety programme. Washing of fruits and vegetables 
usually involves flumes, water dump tanks, spray washers or hydrocoolers, in which in many cases 
the water is recirculated through the system. Since dirt, organic matter and disease-causing 
pathogens can accumulate in the process water, disinfection is used to inactivate pathogenic 
bacteria, fungi, viruses and other microorganisms and to reduce the load of spoilage microbes  
(Suslow, 1997) (Casteel et al., 2008). Therefore, the purpose of disinfection is both to obtain a 
microbiologically safe product for human consumption and to reduce the risk of spoilage, allowing 
a longer shelf life (Sapers, 2005) (Hurst, 1995). 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
Disinfection is one of the most important steps in the processing line of fresh-cut produce, that are 
any fruit or vegetables that are trimmed, peeled, washed, cut and packed (Ölmez and Kretzschmar, 
2009) (IFPA, 1999). Chlorine is the most widely used compound, which can be added to the 
washing water in the form of gaseous Cl2 or, more commonly, as sodium or calcium hypochlorite 
(Ölmez and Kretzschmar, 2009) (Sapers, 2005). However, it is also cause of health and 
environmental concerns. In fact, the reaction with natural organic matter forms carcinogenic 
halogenated by-products, such as trihalomethanes (THMs) or haloacetic acids (HAAs) (Ölmez and 
Kretzschmar, 2009). Moreover, the process generates large amounts of wastewater containing free 
or unused chlorine which is hazardous to aquatic life and has to be removed (Gupta and Ali, 2013). 
For these reasons, other treatment substances (e.g. ozone, organic acids, hydrogen peroxide) or 
treatment methods (e.g. ultraviolet radiation) are gaining interest as alternatives to chlorination 
(Ölmez and Kretzschmar, 2009) (Gil et al., 2009).   
 
1.3.3 Role of refrigeration and the cold chain 
As biological materials, all fruits and vegetables are subjected to natural deterioration over time. 
Respiration is the process that allows the oxidation of sugars to produce carbon dioxide, water and 
heat. After harvest sugars are not provided anymore, therefore respiration starts using the stored 
starch or sugars until depletion and the produce consequently ages and decay (Burden and Wills, 
1989). Moisture loss due to the transpiration process is also cause of dehydration and deterioration. 
Moreover, fresh produce can spoil or become unsafe due the activity of microorganisms, infestation 
of insects or other animals. Although subjected to individual quality perceptions, spoilage can be 
defined as “when the numbers and/or activity of pathogenic microorganisms make food unsafe to 
eat and may cause illness or even death, or when deterioration of one or more nutrients means that a 
food no longer has its declared nutritional value” (Fellows, 2009). The period of time taken to reach 
one of these conditions is identified as the shelf life of the product.  
Lowering the temperature of fresh produce, such as lettuce, reduces the rate of physiological 
processes (like respiration, enzymatic reactions or water loss) and slows microbial activity (da 
Costa and Clemente, 2012). For this reason, the role of refrigeration is to retard the processes 
responsible of the deterioration of the product, extending in this way its shelf life. Ensuring a 
continuous unbroken cold chain allows to reduce to a minimum the occurrence of temperature 
increases promoting the spoilage processes and this is why the cold chain is so important. It is 
reported that the recommended storage temperature of lettuce ranges between 0 and 5°C. If 
constantly kept at 0°C the expected shelf-life is around 21-28 days, whereas at 5°C it halves to 
around 14 days (Cantwell and Suslow, 2013).  
The cold chain of lettuce starts when the product is cooled for the first time (pre-cooling step) and 
ideally ends when it is used for consumption. In the following sections, a description of the cooling 
technologies involved in the cold chain (i.e. pre-cooling, refrigerated storage and refrigerated 
transport) is presented. The consumption stage is not discussed. 
1.3.3.1 Pre-cooling technology 
Pre-cooling is the rapid removal of the so-called field heat from the produce, that is, lowering the 
temperature to near the storage optimum (Gast and Flores, 1991). Field heat is responsible for 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
causing the rapid deterioration of many horticultural products, hence pre-cooling is used in order to 
remove this heat as quick as possible. There are several methods available which have different 
working principles. The most applied for leaf vegetables are forced air cooling, hydro cooling and 
vacuum cooling systems, as briefly described in the following:   
 Forced-air cooling: With this technique the produce is placed in a cold-storage room where 
cooled air is forced to move through the containers (Gast and Flores, 1991). 
 Hydro cooling: Chilled or cold water is used to decrease the temperature of the produce, 
which can be sprayed, immersed or flooded in/with the water. Among the three systems it is 
the less suited for leaf vegetables, as the residues of water on the produce can lead to rapid 
deterioration and make the handling more difficult (Brosnan and Sun, 2001). 
 Vacuum cooling: The cooling effect is obtained by evaporation of the moisture under 
vacuum conditions (McDonald and Sun, 2000).  
The last method, vacuum cooling, is further explained as it is found to be the most diffused and 
suited system in Italy for lettuce (Colelli, 2011). The products to be cooled are loaded and pelletized 
in a vacuum chamber, where the pressure is reduced by vacuum pumps. This reduces the water 
vapour pressure in the produce itself, causing the evaporation of moisture and consequently the 
reduction of the produce’s temperature: “the energy required to evaporate the water is furnished by 
the product itself in the form of latent heat of evaporation” (McDonald and Sun, 2000). The 
pressure in the chamber is decreased until the product reaches the desired temperature or until there 
is no more water available for evaporation.  
The formed vapour must be removed to prevent saturation of the air and therefore allow further 
evaporation. This is done in different ways depending on the design: in mechanical vacuum cooling, 
the vapour is condensed and drained away by passing over refrigerated coils; in the case of steam 
jet vacuum coolers, barometric condensers are used to liquefy some of the vapour, which is finally 
expelled to the atmosphere (McDonald and Sun, 2000). 
1.3.3.2 Refrigerated storage technology 
There are a number of alternative refrigeration technologies for the storage at the facilities, e.g. 
adsorption/absorption refrigerators, tri-generation, thermoelectric refrigeration, etc., however some 
of these are just emerging technologies or have a limited diffusion. The vapour compression system 
is instead the most diffused and well established technology (Tassou et al., 2009). In this system a 
liquid refrigerant at low temperature and low pressure absorbs the heat from the body where the 
heat has to be absorbed (e.g. the cold store of a warehouse), by passing through a heat exchanger 
(evaporator). In this process the liquid evaporates and when the evaporation is completed no more 
heat can be removed from the body. Therefore, the evaporated liquid is brought back to the liquid 
phase firstly by passing through a compressor, for rising the pressure, and then through a second 
heat exchanger (condenser), where heat is released to the surroundings and complete condensation 
occurs. To enable a closed cycle, the liquid pressure and the temperature are lowered down to the 
initial levels through an expansion device (Sun, 2005). Although the layout of the technology can 
vary depending on the type of installation (single refrigerator, refrigerated chamber, supermarket 
display, etc.), the basic components are the thus refrigerant liquid, the compressor, the evaporator, 
the condenser and the expansion device. Typical historical refrigerants were clorofluorocarons 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
(CFCs) and hydroclorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), but since their ban, hydrofluorocarbons (HFC), 
such as HFC-404A and HFC-134a, are today common compounds in European equipment (Mota-
Babiloni et al., 2015). 
 
1.3.3.3 Refrigerated transport 
According to (Tassou et al., 2009) the most diffused type of vehicle used for refrigerated transport 
is constituted by semi-trailer insulated rigid boxes. They are normally made of expanded insulation 
foam enveloped in two layers of “plywood covered with a glass reinforced polyester, steel or 
aluminium skin”. The insulation foams are typically expanded polyurethane (PU) with cyclopentane 
as blowing agent and extruded polystyrene. Side walls insulation thickness can be maximum 45-50 
mm. 
The refrigeration system applied on this type of semi-trailers is the vapour compression system, 
which has already been described above. However, different options for the compressor drive 
method exist, depending on the size of the vehicle. The following two will be considered in this 
study: 
 Auxiliary diesel unit: can be found on the vast majority of medium to large vehicles and, as 
the name suggests, it uses an auxiliary diesel engine to run the refrigeration unit. 
 Direct belt drive: is more common in van size vehicles and uses a belt connected to the main 
engine to run the compressor of the refrigerated unit. 
To keep the inside temperature of the trailer as much homogeneous as possible, top air distribution 
systems are predominately used. The fans of the refrigeration unit allow circulation of air from the 
top to the floor of the vehicle until the cooling coil, removing the heat infiltrated from the roof, 
walls, floor and doors. To promote cooling of fruit and vegetables cargoes and capture heat of 
respiration loads, it is important to create horizontal channels between the rows of cartons where the 
air can circulate (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3: Air circulation in a diesel engine driven refrigeration system of a semi-trailer (from Tassou et al., 2009). 
 
To accommodate the diverse storage temperature needs of the different commodities delivered to 
retailers, multi-compartment semi-trailers are often used by supermarket chains. In these vehicles 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
the refrigerated space is divided in several compartments kept at independent temperatures. This is 
achieved by implementing an additional evaporator coil in each compartment (Figure 4).   
 
Figure 4: Multi-compartment semi-trailer (Tassou et al., 2009). 
 
1.4  Humidification-disinfection technology 
One of the emerging technologies in the preservation of fruits and vegetables is based on the 
humidification principle. Moisture loss from fresh produce can cause deterioration and loss of 
sealable product if no adequate relative humidity (RH) is present in the surrounding air. 
Humidification systems increase the amount of water in the air and reduce the difference of water 
vapour pressure at the surface of the produce and in the air, which is responsible for the evaporation 
process that causes dry-out of fruits and vegetables (Brown et al., 2007). Humidification is based on 
the generation of an aerosol of small water droplets which, in addition to the increase in RH, 
provide also adiabatic cooling as a result of the evaporation of the droplets into the unsaturated air, 
without exchange with the environment (called adiabatic cooling effect) (Fresh-Demo, 2015).   
A European engineering company has developed a new humidification-disinfection technology that 
can contribute to preserve the quality and enhance the shelf-life of fresh produce, by providing a 
cool and humid environment along the supply chain. The prototype technology consists of 
ultrasonic humidifier units that generate the aerosol (mist) (Figure 5). Demineralised water, 
obtained through a filter system based on reverse osmosis, is used to produce the micro-droplets 
(ca. 1-10 µm) by means of ultrasonic waves. These waves are produced at piezoelectric transducer 
units able to convert the electrical energy supplied into mechanical energy at high frequencies. The 
ultrasonic vibrations exert a constant compression-decompression of the water column, forming 
intersecting capillary waves at the interface water-air, from which the small water droplets separate. 
The droplets are then collected into a storage tank and ejected in the surrounding environment (e.g. 
storage room) by means of compressed air.  
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
 
Figure 5: Two humidification units with different treatment capacities (lower on the left and higher on the right).  
In addition to the humidification and cooling effect, natural sanitizers are added to the 
demineralised water and sprayed on the fresh produce to limit the growth of microorganisms 
(disinfection). The precise formulation of these natural sanitizers is still under development, 
however it will probably consist of Citrus aurantium extract mixed with fruit organic acids, such as 
citric acid. In any case, the idea is to obtain a product 100% derived from natural ingredients that 
have been shown to be anti-pathogenic and do not present the same environmental and health 
concerns related to the use of chlorinated compounds.  
The humidifier units are developed to work in combination with conventional vapour compression 
or adsorption cooling devices during refrigerated storage and transport. The conventional systems 
provide basic cooling at a level of about 10 – 15°C and the humidifier units are added to further 
adjust the temperature with the provided mist. Therefore, as a consequence of the adiabatic cooling 
effect, the technology is also expected to provide benefits in terms of decreased energy 
consumption of the conventional refrigerators along the supply chain. A PLC (Programmable Logic 
Controller) module is used to integrate the temperature and humidity data received from properly 
placed sensors with the management of the baseline cooling unit, the humidifier unit, the 
compressed air suppliers and the blowers distributing the mist in storage rooms, truck trailers or 
over the shelves in supermarkets (Figure 6).  
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
 
Figure 6: Sketch of the different component units needed for the operation of the humidification-disinfection technology 
(Fresh-Demo, 2015). 
Even though the technology is still a prototype, some characteristic components and features are 
identified. The humidification unit envelope is made of chemically polished stainless steel to 
prevent rusting and accumulation of bacteria. Major inside components are (Figure 7): 
 The piezoelectric transducer, which can be made of different materials. The most common 
are made of a specific titanium alloy (TiAlV64) or aluminium alloy (AlCuMg2) (ZVEI, 
1980).  
 One fan that enables the circulation of the aerosol in the surroundings. 
 A voltage transformer, used to convert the electrical energy in the appropriate voltage. 
 A motherboard, or printed circuit board. 
 A battery, only for the units aimed to be installed on trailer trucks. 
 Other small electric and mechanical components, such as wires, temperature sensors or 
valves. 
Auxiliary external parts include a control unit, which functions as hygrostat, thermostat and control 
panel, and an air humidity-temperature sensor. The osmosis unit, necessary to supply demineralised 
and filtered water to the humidification units, is principally composed of four reverse osmosis 
membranes, three water filtration units (carbon and sediment pre-filters), a booster pump and other 
minor components (Figure 7). 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
 
Figure 7: Main internal components of a humidification unit (transducer, voltage transformer, fan, motherboard) and 
additional external units (osmosis unit, control unit and sensor). 
The producing company aims at initiating a dissemination of the technology along the entire post-
harvest chain at European level, which includes processing, storage, transport, distribution and 
retailing sectors. Up to now, only few small-scale implementations in some supermarket displays 
have been carried out and very little is known about the overall performance of the system. Given 
that the technology is still at prototype level and precise materials, components and setting up are in 
phase of development (or, in some cases, unknown), no studies assessing the benefits and impacts 
of the technology exist and no life cycle assessments have ever been conducted. For these reasons, a 
comparison between the new humidification-disinfection system and the currently applied 
refrigeration technologies is carried out, by analysing the supply chain of lettuce from the 
production to the retailing.  
 
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
2. 
Objectives 
 
The following objectives of the thesis can be identified: 
 Carry out a comparative LCA between conventional cooling technologies and the new 
humidification-disinfection technologies for storage and preservation of head lettuce 
produced in Italy and distributed to Danish retailers. The comparison will be against four 
possible lettuce losses reduction scenarios provided by the humidifiers, as the efficiency of 
the technology in reducing fresh produce losses is not known and still under study. This 
comparison will enable to identify to which extent the lettuce losses have to be reduced in 
order to obtain an overall potential environmental benefit, with respect to the baseline 
system. Therefore, the result will provide how much efficiency is expected from the 
humidification-disinfection technology, to be considered a viable technological solution to 
minimize lettuce losses in post-harvest steps of the supply chain.  
 Evaluate the trade-off between the reduction of environmental impacts due to decreased 
food losses (in terms of decreased upstream lettuce production) and the increased impacts 
associated with higher demand of materials, energy and water required by the new 
humidification-disinfection technology. 
 Provide information to the humidification-disinfection technology provider and the 
stakeholders interested in the technology on the related advantages and disadvantages of 
using humidification-disinfection in food supply from an environmental perspective. 
 Provide recommendations to the humidifier producer for improving the environmental 
performance during the use stage and greening the manufacturing process of the 
humidifiers.   
The focus of this study is on food loss, where the term food loss is used to indicate the depletion 
during the production and post-harvest stages, i.e. processing, storage, transport, distribution, but 
also retailing (e.g. storage and display in supermarkets). Food waste, that refers to what is discarded 
by consumers, is outside the scope if this study. In particular, the supply chain of head lettuce is 
chosen as an example, therefore the food losses concern only lettuce losses. Head lettuce is 
considered a relevant example to perform the assessment for three reasons: (1) lettuce is not a niche 
product in the European market, but is a common commodity with large quantities produced and 
traded every year; (2) lettuce is well suited for comparisons between different preservation 
technologies, because it is highly and visibly perishable; (3) considering head lettuce rather than 
fresh-cut lettuce allows the application of the humidification-disinfection technology, as no 
incompatible handling steps are adopted (e.g. sealed packaging). Finally, the study will deal with 
the technologies that allow the temperature-controlled storage and distribution activities in the cold 
chain of head lettuce. Therefore, it will only concern those losses that occur due to inefficiencies of 
the related technologies.  
 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
3. 
Methodology 
Figure 8 gives a simplified of the various steps of the methodology applied in this study, including 
the interactions between them. In the first step literature research is done to gather information 
about food losses, food supply chains in Europe and the humidification-disinfection technology. 
Search for scientific articles is carried out mainly on ISI Web of Knowledge, DTU Findit, Google 
Scholar, Science Direct, CRCnetBASE; whereas more general information is retrieved from the 
documentation available on official websites of international organizations, such as the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the European Commission. After 
defining the objectives of the thesis, the environmental life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology is 
applied, in accordance with the requirements of the International Reference Life Cycle Data System 
(ILCD) Handbook, developed by the European Commission Joint Research Centre (JRC) (JRC, 
2010), and the ISO standard (ISO 14044). 
 
Figure 8: Simplified illustration of the methodology steps followed in this study. 
 
According to the recommended LCA structure, the assessment is divided in 4 phases:  
 Goal and Scope definition: The purpose, the target audience and the specific object of the 
study are identified. A functional unit, basis of the comparison between the systems, is 
defined together with the specific level of detail required for the whole study and data 
collection.  
 Life Cycle Inventory Analysis (LCI): Collection of the data (done through further literature 
research, calculations or assumptions) and system modeling are carried out to obtain the 
input and output elementary flows (e.g. input resources and emissions) of the system.  
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
 Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA): Elementary flows are translated into impacts on the 
environment and human health. A comparison of the results for the two systems is 
performed.    
 Life cycle interpretation: Possible issues, limitations and needs for improving the study are 
identified. Robust conclusions on the results and the overall reliability of the assessment are 
drawn with recommendations.  
LCA is an iterative process, therefore after the interpretation of the first results, at least two 
iterations are carried out to address issues, refine the model and the overall results. 
Life cycle inventory data are collected from the database Ecoinvent 3 (Ecoinvent centre, 
Switzerland), but also from specific literature research. Detailed information is found in Section 
3.1.3.1. The majority of the data regarding the humidification-disinfection technology is collected 
from the official website of the manufacturing company, not publicly available documentation and 
through personal communication with the company, which, for confidentiality reasons, will remain 
anonymous throughout the report. 
Modelling of the product systems is carried out by using the software SimaPro 8 developed by the 
LCA tool developing company Prè Consultants, Netherlands.  
 
3.1 Environmental life cycle assessment 
 
3.1.1 Goal definition 
3.1.1.1 Intended applications 
The goal of this LCA study is to assess the environmental impacts derived from the implementation 
of humidification-disinfection technology in the post-harvest stages of lettuce supply chain and 
compare them with the environmental impacts derived from using current conventional cooling 
technologies. Therefore, the LCA is intended to be a comparative study conducted to benchmark the 
new humidification-disinfection technology against the common existing technology. The results of 
the study will serve as decision supporting tool for greening the food supply chain of lettuce. The 
project will develop from a realistic case study of lettuce produced in Apulia region (South Italy) 
and further exported to reach Danish supermarket displays. Therefore, all the relevant ‘cradle to 
gate’ life cycle stages of lettuce will be considered.  
The implementation of the technology is expected to reduce the environmental burden associated 
with the supply chain of fruit and vegetables in Europe. Prevention of food loss is expected to 
reduce toxic impacts from the avoided use of pesticides, reduce climate change impacts from 
greenhouse gas emissions through avoided operation of tractors, packaging and transportation 
needs. However, the production, installation, operation, maintenance and disposal of the new 
equipment for humidification systems are expected to increase environmental burden, e.g. from the 
increased demand for raw materials and energy. It is therefore the scope of the project to identify if 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
and to what extent these two effects counterbalance and make the technology an environmentally 
sound solution for reducing food losses and overall impacts. 
3.1.1.2 Method, assumption and impact limitations 
The study focuses on lettuce supply chain only and on a specific case study in Europe, therefore the 
applicability of the results is limited to similar lettuce or leafy vegetables supply chains.   
Assumptions-related limitations mainly concern the modelling of the humidification-disinfection 
technology, the disposal of lettuce biowaste and energy consumption of the conventional cooling 
technologies. 
The results of this LCA study depend on the adopted impact assessment methodology, i.e. the way 
in which each single elementary flow is translated into an impact is characteristic of the chosen 
method. If other methods are utilized, different results might be obtained.  
Limitations concern also the type of considered impact categories, which provide information only 
at midpoint level and are not exhaustive of all potential environmental impacts. Indeed, terrestrial 
and marine ecotoxicity and ionizing radiation (impact on ecosystems) are not considered in the 
study (see Section 3.1.2.7). 
In addition, the study is affected by database-related constraints, for which it was not always 
possible to apply the chosen LCI modelling principle. The issue is thoroughly explained in Section 
3.1.2.6. 
3.1.1.3 Reasons for carrying out the study and decision context 
The manufacturing company of the humidification technology aims at promoting itself in the 
European market as a provider of more sustainable cooling solutions. Therefore, the company 
expects that the results of this LCA will deliver the necessary knowledge in the demonstration of 
the potential benefits and/or drawbacks of the technology.  
Decision context 
According to the ILCD guidelines, the decision context is to be identified in the goal. The decision 
is between three situations A, B and C, which relate to whether the study is intended as a decision-
support tool and to the kind of interactions/consequences expected on the background system or 
other external systems. This LCA is meant to be used for decision making in the context of a 
possible introduction of the new humidification technology in one or more post-harvest stages of 
fruits and vegetables. Furthermore, the changes due to the decision will probably have only limited 
consequences outside the decision context, e.g. there will not be changes in the market of lettuce at 
European level. This is especially true in the first stages of implementation of the technology 
because the introduction and diffusion will be gradual, producing only local effects (e.g. at the 
interested retailing points). For these reasons, the decision context could be indentified with 
situation A, micro-level decision support.  
 
On the contrary, in a future scenario where the technology is replacing the European conventional 
system in all the post-harvest stages (processing, transport, distribution, retailing), there could be 
consequences at a greater level (e.g. changes in the market of conventional refrigerated trucks). In 
this case, the decision context B, meso-macro-level decision support would be more appropriate to 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
consider. However, since such changes are not expected in the immediate future, the decision 
context of this study is identified with situation A, as mentioned above. 
3.1.1.4 Target audience 
The target audience of this LCA is constituted by all the stakeholders potentially interested in the 
outcomes of the study:  
 The administration, marketing and engineering departments at the company providing the 
technology as being the commissioner of the study. 
 The research and development departments at European private companies or organizations 
involved in the food processing and distribution industry could potentially be audience of 
the study. This applies to transport companies, distribution centres, wholesalers, retailers, 
supermarket chains and other stakeholders interested in implementing more sustainable 
solutions and reducing costs. They might find the study useful in shaping their decisions 
regarding new technology options, as it provides insight on the potentials of the technology. 
3.1.1.5 Comparisons intended to be disclosed to the public 
The results of the study are not intended to be disclosed to the public. 
3.1.1.6 Commissioner of the study 
The study is commissioned by the company that manufactures the humidification technology and is 
the subject of a master thesis conducted in cooperation with the Department of Management 
Engineering at the technical University of Denmark.  
 
3.1.2 Scope definition 
3.1.2.1 Type of deliverables 
The deliverables of the present study are the results of a comparative assertion LCA, comprehensive 
of impact assessment and interpretation. 
3.1.2.2 Function 
The comparison between systems with different refrigeration technologies is based on the fact that 
lettuce should maintain its main function in both cases: provide nourishment for human nutrition. 
To fulfil this function the lettuce should not be deteriorated, rotten or infected by diseases or 
parasites. Table 1 illustrates the obligatory and the positioning properties that lettuce might have to 
be more attractive to the consumer. 
Table 1: Obligatory and positioning properties of lettuce. 
Obligatory properties 
Positioning properties 
Provide nourishment for human nutrition 
Have a green appealing colour 
 
Be crispy 
 
Type of packaging (at supermarket) 
 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
3.1.2.3 Functional unit 
The functional unit is defined as “1 kg of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) sold at the retailer”. To be sold 
the produce must have some qualitative and aesthetic characteristics which may vary according to 
the consumers’ preference, but in general they can be summarized as follows: 
 Appear fresh and turgid with an appealing/standard colour 
 No visible signs of deterioration, contamination, spoilage 
It is assumed that the different cooling technologies do not affect the nutritional value of the 
product, so 1 kg of lettuce stored with conventional cooling has the same nutritional value of 1 kg 
of lettuce stored with humidification technology. 
3.1.2.4 System boundaries and cut-off criteria 
The studied system reflects the life cycle of lettuce from cradle to gate, i.e. from the production 
farming activities until reaching the retailing point ready to be sold. Figure 9 illustrates the main life 
cycle stages of the product, the processes included for each stage and the elementary flows of the 
system that are considered in the assessment. Raw materials and resources (e.g. peat, water, steel, 
etc.) derive from the natural environment (ecosphere) and enter the ‘man-made environment’ 
(technosphere), where they are transformed to obtain saleable lettuce. Elementary flows include 
also the final emissions to the environment released by the activities present in the technosphere. 
Upstream processes account for the production of seedlings, fertilizers and pesticides, which in turn 
consider further upstream processes like the extraction of raw materials, such as peat or crude oil, 
and their transport to the location of use. For the production of seedlings, processes like irrigation, 
fertilizing or anti-parasitic treatments are not considered. The production of lettuce is considered to 
take place in Italy (Apulia region) and includes the following main activities needed to obtain a 
product ready to be processed and traded:  
 Use of fertilizers and pesticides on the field 
 Irrigation and water consumption 
 Farm machinery used for planting, fertilizer and pesticide application, tillage and harvesting 
After harvesting, the processing stage consists of a washing, disinfection, pre-cooling and 
packaging step carried out at a processing centre. During processing the production of the 
disinfectant and the plastic material used for packaging are considered, together with the water and 
energy consumption for washing and pre-cooling. In addition, a brief refrigerated storage period 
occurs at the processing centre. Refrigerated storage takes place also at the distribution centre and 
the wholesaler as well as during all transport steps from the processing centre to the retailer. Here 
the energy needs of the utilized transport and refrigeration technologies are modelled. The 
distribution centre, which is assumed to be in Italy, is an intermediate infrastructure specialized in 
the import-export of fruit and vegetables that optimizes logistics and transport services (e.g. passage 
from national to international means of transport), including refrigerated storage. From this centre, 
the lettuce is transported to Denmark, where it undergoes further chilled storage at the wholesaler, 
which handles the product before it is finally transported to the affiliate supermarkets and retailing 
stores. This is considered a fair assumption as it was found that food products in Denmark are 
mainly distributed by retailing organizations, such as Coop Danmark and Dansk supermarked 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
(Aragrande et al., 2005). Indeed, the two companies are functioning as wholesalers for some of the 
largest and most diffused supermarket chains of the country, being responsible for the storage and 
the distribution of goods (Stenmarck et al., 2011a). Transport is divided into regular transport 
without cooling (from the field to the processing centre) and refrigerated transport (from the 
processing centre to the retailer), provided with additional units for refrigerated storage. Non-
refrigerated transport is assumed to take place within Apulia region (and not from Apulia to farther 
regions), as lettuce is a perishable commodity, therefore non-refrigerated travelling times are 
wanted to be kept to a minimum. Furthermore, a number of processing centres receiving 
horticultural products from within and outside the region are present in Apulia. The final stage at 
the retailing point (in this case a supermarket) includes only storage of the product in refrigerated 
displays and other kinds of storage (e.g. in the supermarket stockroom) are not considered. Losses 
of product along the entire life cycle are taken into account, therefore the specific disposal treatment 
of this organic material is included in the study boundaries, from the production to the retailing 
stage. According to the type of disposal method, energy recovery, in terms of electricity and/or heat 
production, and the consequent avoided production are also accounted. 
 
==PAGE:28==
 
Figure 9: Boundaries of the studied lettuce supply chain system. 
 
==PAGE:29==
3.1.2.5 Compared humidification systems 
From now on, the term ‘baseline system’ will be used to identify the conventional lettuce supply 
chain for the considered case study. In the same way, ‘humidification system’ is used to refer to the 
system where humidification technology is introduced. The two systems compared differ only in the 
type of cooling technology applied during the storage, distribution and retailing stages. The 
humidification system develops from the baseline system, as the introduction of the humidifiers 
consists of just adding the new technology to the conventional cooling, i.e. the humidifiers do not 
replace the refrigerators. Indeed, the basic cooling to 10 – 15°C is provided by the conventional 
systems and the humidifiers are added to further decrease the temperature to the optimal level 
(around 5°C). The new technology is added in every refrigerated storage step, i.e. at the processing, 
distribution, wholesale and retailing centres and in all refrigerated transport activities. Water and 
disinfectant (natural sanitizer) requirements together with energy consumption and/or savings will 
be again considered. In the humidification system disinfection does not occur during lettuce 
washing, but it is applied during humidification and therefore in every refrigeration stage. In 
addition, the production and disposal of the humidifiers are here considered. 
The humidifier unit prototypes intended to be applied are expected to be close to the following two 
types: Type 1 and Type 2. The two models differ in the energy and water consumptions, as well as 
in the provided cooling energy due to adiabatic cooling effect. Technical specifications are found in 
Table 2.  
Table 2: Technical characteristics of humidifiers units Type 1 and 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*measure of hourly water consumption   
**Cooling energy produced by the humidifier due to adiabatic cooling effect  
The osmosis and the control unit have an additional an energy consumption of 250 and 5 W 
respectively. The equipment meant to be installed on truck trailers includes the humidification unit, 
a water tank, a small pump and a battery for the energy supply, whereas at cold stores and 
supermarkets the osmosis unit, the control unit and the humidity-temperature sensor are added.  
The efficiency of the technology in reducing lettuce losses is still not defined. The manufacturing 
company claims that there is potential for 50% reduction in the stages of application of the 
technology, however no studies that demonstrate this are publically available. Therefore, four 
possible reduction scenarios are made accounting also for the possibility that the technology is not 
as efficient as expected (Table 3). The best scenario corresponds to 50% losses reduction (highest 
Specification 
Type 1  
Type 2  
Energy consumption 
(W) 
250 
1300 
Maximum capacity* 
(kg/h) 
0 – 3 
0 – 18 
Energy savings** (W 
per 1h) 
2000 
12000 
Weight (kg) 
11.5 
43 
Applicability 
Used for displays of 3 
meters length or in 
cold stores of 750 m3 
Used for displays of 18 
meters length or in 
cold stores of 4500 m3 
Lifetime (years) 
15 
15 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
efficiency) and no reductions corresponds to the worst case (no efficiency). The reductions 
consistently apply only at the stages where the humidifiers are introduced, i.e. during storage, 
distribution and retailing. Scenario 0 (no efficiency) is probably an unrealistic scenario, however it 
is made to understand how the introduction of the new technology affects the system, without 
considering the effects of a reduction in food losses. Scenario 3 (highest efficiency) has an implicit 
assumption on its basis: it is in fact unknown how much technological improvements can affect the 
reduction in food losses during the considered stages, as the causes of the losses are different (see 
section 1.2). Therefore, it is assumed that around a half of the losses always remains, because they 
do not depend on preservation issues, in agreement with the expectations of the manufacturing 
company. It follows that in the best option humidifiers can only bring down the losses by maximum 
3% and 5% of what enters the storage/distribution and retailing stages respectively. Scenario 1 
(lowest efficiency) and 2 (medium efficiency) represent likely losses reductions. 
 
Table 3: Lettuce losses applied in the four humidification scenarios considered (in percentage of what enters each step).  
* The total percentage indicated in the table is equally distributed between the different storage and distribution stages 
In addition, for each considered scenario, two likely alternatives regarding material composition and 
type of manufacturing process for the humidifier components are also tested. The choice of the 
different materials or production methods is based on realistic alternatives and on what is found 
available in the ecoinvent database. The purpose is to valuate opportunities for improving the 
environmental performance of the humidifiers production process. Data on materials or production 
types currently used by the humidifiers supplying company is not available, therefore the suggested 
options are made to provide recommendations on which alternatives could be considered. In option 
1 it is assumed that steel is made out of virgin raw materials, the piezoelectric transducers are made 
of titanium and the motherboard contains lead. In option 2, steel is obtained from steel scraps, the 
transducers are aluminium-based and the motherboard is Pb-free (data are summarized in Table 4). 
Two production options are compared for steel, because it is one of the most abundant materials in a 
humidifier, constituting around 50% of the mass. Two different materials are instead suggested for 
the piezoelectric transducer and the motherboard. The reason of the choice here is simply related to 
the availability of suitable processes in ecoinvent database, as they are the only components 
(besides steel) for which options are found. Further details are found in Table A16, Appendix A.  
Table 4: Tested parameters in the two humidifier production options. 
Tested parameter 
Option 1  
Option 2 
Steel production 
From virgin raw materials 
From steel scraps 
Material of the transducers 
Titanium 
Aluminium  
Type of motherboard 
Containing lead  
Lead-free 
  
Life stage 
Scenario 0 
(no efficiency) 
Scenario 1 
(lowest efficiency) 
Scenario 2 
(medium efficiency) 
Scenario 3 
(highest efficiency) 
Storage and 
distribution* 
5% (no changes) 
4% 
2.5% 
2% 
Retailing 
10% (no changes) 
8% 
6% 
5% 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
3.1.2.6 Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) modelling framework and handling of multifunctional 
processes 
As the decision context is identified with situation A, the attributional principle is chosen as the LCI 
modelling principle. The attributional model, in fact, is purely descriptive in the sense that it depicts 
both the existing and the forecasted system as they are, without prospecting any changes of the 
background processes. This means that average existing data, such as actual lettuce production 
methods in Italy or Danish/Italian electricity and heat mixes, are used. In cases of processes with 
more than one functionality (i.e. delivering one or more by-products), system expansion is 
performed. This applies, for example, to energy cogeneration processes (e.g. cogeneration from 
natural gas plant or municipal solid waste incineration), where combined production of heat and 
electricity are credited, or to organic waste composting and treatment of electronic equipment, 
where credits are given for avoided primary production of fertilizers and recovery of iron scraps.   
Despite the fact that attributional principle is the preferred method in the modelling framework, in 
some cases it was not possible to apply, due to database structure constraints. Two types of 
processes exist in the utilized version of ecoinvent database: allocation and consequential based. In 
the first, allocation is adopted to handle multifunctionality, using average data, whereas in the 
second system expansion is employed, using marginal data. To comply with ISO and ILCD 
guidelines, system expansion is always preferred over allocation, meaning that the consequential 
database was always used. This required to modify several energy mixes (electricity and heat mixes 
for Denmark, Italy and all the countries supplying imports) in the consequential database from 
marginal to average, in order to consistently apply the attributional principle. However, it was not 
possible to do this modification for the whole model, therefore in the rest of the cases marginal 
datasets were used instead of average.  
In a few other cases, instead, it was not possible to apply system expansion because the 
corresponding process was not available in the database, so the allocation based process was used. 
This applies to a few electricity and heat production processes that are part of the modelled average 
mix (e.g. electricity production from wood chips cogeneration plant).   
3.1.2.7 Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) methods 
The ILCD’s recommended impact assessment methodologies at midpoint level are used in this 
study (JRC, 2011). In Table 5 the complete list of methods is found for each of the covered impact 
categories. The categories for which no method is recommended are not considered (i.e. ionizing 
radiation – ecosystems, terrestrial and marine ecotoxicity). Impacts from long terms emissions are 
omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
Table 5: LCIA methods and normalization factors for the impact categories considered in this study. LCIA methods are 
ILCD’ recommended methods (JRC, 2011). Normalisation factors are for EU 27 (2010) as recommended in (European 
Commission, 2014) 
Impact 
category 
Indicator 
Unit 
Model reference 
Normalization 
factor 
[Unit/person/year] 
Climate change 
Radiative forcing as 
Global Warming 
Potential, 100 years 
horizon (GWP100) 
kg CO2 eq 
Baseline model of 100 years of the 
IPCC 
9.10E+03 
Ozone 
depletion 
Ozone Depletion 
Potential (ODP) 
kg CC-11 eq 
Steady-state ODPs 1999 as in 
WMO1 assessment 
2.16E-02 
Human 
toxicity, cancer 
effects 
Comparative Toxic 
Unit for humans 
CTUh 
USEtox model (Rosenbaum et al., 
2008) 
3.68E-05 
Human 
toxicity, non-
cancer effects 
Comparative Toxic 
Unit for humans 
CTUh 
USEtox model (Rosenbaum et al, 
2008) 
5.32E-04 
Particulate 
matter 
Intake fraction for fine 
particles 
kg PM2.5 eq 
RiskPoll model (Rabl and Spadaro, 
2004) and (Greco et al., 2007) 
4.82E+00 
Ionizing 
radiation 
(human health) 
Human exposure 
efficiency 
relative to U235 
kg U235 eq 
Human health effect model as 
developed by (Dreicer et al., 1995) 
(Frischknecht et al., 2000) 
1.13E+03 
Photochemical 
ozone 
formation 
Tropospheric ozone 
concentration increase 
 
kg NMVOC 
eq 
LOTOS-EUROS (Van Zelm et al., 
2008) as applied in ReCiPe 
3.18E+01 
Acidification 
Accumulated 
Exceedance 
mol H+ eq 
Accumulated Exceedance (Seppälä 
et al., 2006) (Posch et al., 2008) 
4.72E+01 
Terrestrial 
eutrophication 
Accumulated 
Exceedance 
molc N eq 
Accumulated Exceedance (Seppälä 
et al. 2006, Posch et al, 2008) 
1.74E+02 
Freshwater 
eutrophication 
Residence time of 
nutrients in freshwater 
and compartment (P) 
kg P eq 
EUTREND model (Struijs et al., 
2009) as implemented in ReCiPe 
1.48E+00 
Marine 
eutrophication 
Residence time of 
nutrients in marine 
and compartment (N) 
kg N eq 
EUTREND model (Struijs et al, 
2009) as implemented in ReCiPe 
1.68E+01 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
Comparative Toxic 
Unit for ecosystems 
CTUe 
USEtox model, (Rosenbaum et al, 
2008) 
8.71E+03 
Land use 
Soil Organic Matter 
kg C deficit 
Model based on Soil Organic 
Matter (SOM) (Milà i Canals et al., 
2007) 
6.30E+05 
Water resource 
depletion 
Water use related to 
local scarcity of water 
kg water eq 
Model for water consumption as in 
Swiss Ecoscarcity (Frischknecht et 
al., 2006) 
7.89E+01 
Mineral fossil 
and renewable 
resource 
depletion 
Scarcity 
 
kg Sb eq 
CML 2002 (Guinée et al., 2002) 
1.00E-01 
1: World Meteorological Organization 
In comparative studies characterization of the impact scores is normally sufficient to perform the 
comparison between systems, however, to ease communication of the results, normalization is also 
carried out. The normalization references are based on domestic inventory calculations for the EU 
27 in the reference year 2010, as provided in the European Commission Environmental Footprint 
Pilot Guidance document (European Commission, 2014) (see Table 5).  
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
3.1.2.8 LCI data quality requirements 
 
Technological representativeness 
The technology to be modelled for the production of lettuce is the conventional open land farming 
typically applied in Italy, whereas for the pre-cooling of the product vacuum cooling is considered 
the representative technology. For the cold chain (from pre-cooling to retailing), facilities, means of 
transport and refrigeration techniques should reflect the most diffused technologies in the European 
context. In particular, the conventional vapour compressor system is to be considered for both 
refrigerated storage and transport. Ideally, figures should be representative of refrigerated storage of 
lettuce in cold stores at the temperature of 1°C (for refrigeration at processing centre, distribution 
centre and wholesaler), and in refrigerated supermarket displays at temperatures not higher than 
5°C. During transport the temperature should also not exceed 5°C, which is the threshold for 
optimal storage of lettuce (Section 1.3.3). The technology for upstream processes (e.g. 
manufacturing of fertilizers, or packaging plastic) should resemble European or global average. The 
same applies for manufacturing process of humidification-disinfection technology.   
Geographical representativeness 
The assessment has to be valid for a supply chain that starts from Apulia region in the South of Italy 
and terminates with the provision of the product at Danish supermarkets. Table 6 illustrates the 
selected geographical scope for each process of the life cycle. Basically, representativeness is 
reached if LCI data derive from the country (or region) where the process takes place, with some 
exceptions. Data regarding production and processing stages of lettuce should be representative of 
Apulia region in Italy, whereas national Italian average is considered for refrigerated storage at 
processing and distribution centres. For further storage, Denmark is the reference. Transport should 
reflect the average trend of the country that makes use of the service.  
Table 6: Geographical scope per specific stage or process. 
Stage 
Process 
Geographical scope 
Production 
- 
Apulia  
Processing 
- 
Apulia 
Storage and distribution 
Refrigerated storage at processing centre 
Italy 
Refrigerated transport from processing to distribution centre 
Italy 
Refrigerated storage at distribution centre 
Italy 
Refrigerated transport from distribution centre to wholesaler 
Italy 
Refrigerated storage at wholesaler 
Denmark 
Refrigerated transport from wholesaler to retailer 
Denmark 
Retailing 
Refrigerated storage 
Denmark 
Organic waste treatment 
Disposal at production farm and processing centre 
Apulia 
Disposal at distribution centre 
North Italy 
Disposal at wholesaler and retailer 
Denmark 
Disposal of transport losses 
Destination country/region 
 
Temporal representativeness 
The production of lettuce is expected to take up to 4 months considering upstream processes, 
seedling production, ground preparation and cropping cycle. After harvesting, the shelf-life is not 
longer than one month, therefore the data for the whole life cycle should be representative for year 
2014. The end of life processes should ideally be representative for 15 years. 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
3.1.3 Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) 
3.1.3.1 Data collection 
 
Data regarding current lettuce losses along the supply chain are taken from FAO’s 2011 report 
on global food losses and waste (Gustavsson et al., 2011) (data presented in Section 1.1). Extensive 
research has been done to find more accurate estimations, however the document seems to be the 
most exhaustive and the most cited reference among the reviewed literature on the topic (Beretta et 
al., 2013)(Lipinski et al., 2013)(Winkworth-Smith et al., 2014)(Kummu et al., 2012)(Jedermann et 
al., 2014)(CFS, 2013). The estimations represents weight percentages of fruit and vegetables losses 
in European supply chains, therefore they can be considered applicable to the case study of lettuce. 
The data from Gustavsson et al. are used as shown in Table 7. 
Table 7: Lettuce losses during each life cycle stage used in the baseline system. Additional information on amounts of lettuce 
treated and wasted in each stage is found in Table A1, Appendix A. 
Stage 
Lettuce loss (in % of what enters 
each step) 
Production 
20 
Processing 
2 
Storage and distribution* 
5 
Retailing 
10 
*Losses are equally distributed between storage stages (at processing centre, distribution centre, supermarket) and refrigerated 
transport (transport processing centre-distribution centre, transport distribution centre-wholesaler, transport wholesaler supermarket). 
These figures mean that per 1 kg of lettuce sold roughly 1.5 kg need to be produced, as the total 
losses amount to about 33%. As can be seen the largest potential for humidification technology to 
decrease losses is at retail step, followed by storage and distribution. In addition, no losses are 
assumed to occur during the regular transport without cooling, from the farm to the processing 
centre. This is considered a fair assumption as the transport period in this stage is short and lettuce 
is still relatively fresh. For the humidification system scenarios, lettuce losses during storage, 
distribution and retailing stages are modified starting from these values, as explained in Section 
3.1.2.5.  
Data regarding lettuce production are retrieved mainly from Italian national or regional sources 
and, when available, from Apulia region sources. The data are extracted from articles of national 
magazines on lettuce farming best and common practices and subsequently complemented with 
reports from the ‘Veneto Region Agency’, a government agency responsible for the agricultural, 
forestry and agro-food sectors in Veneto region (north Italy). When Italian sources were lacking 
information, data on open land lettuce production in Switzerland are used, from Stoessel et al., 
2012. This applies only to data regarding fertilizer application rates and machinery use in the farm. 
Data regarding lettuce processing was firstly searched from local fruit and vegetables processing 
centres present in Apulia, to obtain region-specific information (mainly search through official 
websites). However, such specific information was not found, neither for Apulia nor for national 
processing centres. Hence, more general sources were searched with scientific papers and 
publications search engines (ISI Web of Knowledge, Google Scholar, Science Direct, 
CRCnetBASE). Data regarding vacuum cooling are retrieved from (Sanjuán et al., 2014), which 
provides a method for calculating the energy consumption of the process. Amounts of washing 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
water and conventional disinfectant are retrieved from Swiss and U.S. common practices, 
respectively (Stoessel et al., 2012) (Suslow, 2005).   
Data collection on energy consumption during refrigerated storage, distribution and retailing 
required extensive research, as considerable variability in the reported electricity consumption 
figures is found in the literature. Values were often not comparable or representative, because 
referring to different commodities or different refrigeration methods or temperatures. Moreover, in 
many cases, data was not specific but generic, i.e. storage temperature or refrigerated product were 
not reported. In Table 8 below are reported the most accurate studies and figures found for 
refrigeration at cold stores and at supermarkets.  
As can be seen from the table, no data was found specifically on refrigeration of lettuce or other 
leafy vegetables. Since the study of Stoessel et al., 2012 is the most recent one that does not contain 
unknown parameters (i.e. both the product and temperature are specified) it is considered the most 
accurate and representative, therefore data for refrigeration in cold stores and during transport are 
used (the latter because it is the only data source retrieved). Energy consumption at the supermarket 
is found to be significantly higher than at cold stores, and this seems reasonable due to the fact that 
refrigerated displays are open and constantly releasing cool air in a heated indoor environment 
(typically 20°C). The study conducted by Carlsson-Kanyama and Faist, 2000 confirms this trend. 
Since the reviewed studies were too generic, for the supermarket it is decided to consider the 
consumption of a specific refrigerated display size and use the data in (Fricke and Becker, 2010), 
which provides the electricity consumption per meter (meters of display length) of typical displays 
in U.S. supermarkets. No similar studies were found for supermarkets in Europe.  
Table 8: Most accurate reviewed studies reporting data on energy consumption during refrigeration at cold stores, 
supermarket and during transport. 
Reference 
Energy consumption 
(Wh/kg*day) 
Refrigerated 
product 
Storage 
temperature (°C) 
At cold store 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
1.5 
Apples 
1 
Carlsson-Kanyama and Faist, 
2000 
(0.47-0.25) 
Apples 
Not reported 
Evans et al., 2014 (citation) 
(0.1-0.29) 
Potatoes 
Not reported 
Evans et al., 2014 
1.09 
Not reported 
Not reported 
LCA food, 2000 
4.19* 
Milk 
5°C 
At supermarket 
LCA food, 2000 
4.4* 
Milk 
Not reported 
Weidema et al., 1996 
118.37 
Not reported 
Not reported 
Carlsson-Kanyama and Faist, 
2000 
213 
Not reported 
Not reported 
During transport 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
8.64 
Not reported 
Not reported 
* Not specified if the value is per day 
An alternative option that can be considered is the calculation of refrigerated storage energy 
demand from the model contained in (Sanjuán et al., 2014), whenever precise information on the 
refrigeration technology is available. The study explains the equations that can be used for the 
estimation, however it is not used in this study due to the high level of detailed information that is 
needed for the calculation and that is instead not available (e.g. thickness and thermal conductivity 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
of the cold chamber insulating materials, power consumption of motor fans, number of air changes 
per day, etc.).  
Data regarding biowaste disposal in Italy and Denmark is mostly assumed, especially regarding 
the Italian case, due to difficulties in finding information on treatment of biowaste from commercial 
activities. For Italy it is assumed that 80% of the biowaste is landfilled and the remaining is treated 
in a composting facility. For the Danish case, according to a survey made by (Stenmarck et al., 
2011b), the majority of the food waste from Danish supermarkets and wholesalers is not sorted and 
sent to incineration. Since the share is not provided it is assumed that 50% is incinerated and the 
rest is composted, taking a more optimistic scenario. Data regarding the treatment methods is based 
on ecoinvent inventories. The uncertainties related to these choices could be successively handled 
with a sensitivity analysis, depending on the contribution of biowaste disposal processes on the 
overall environmental impacts.   
Data regarding Danish and Italian electricity mix is taken from ecoinvent 3 database, which 
refers to IEA/OECD statistics from year 2008. This applies also to all the other countries for which 
average electricity mix is modelled.  
Data regarding Danish heat mix is obtained via personal communication with the company owing 
the Danish electricity and gas transmission system, Energynet, which provided an estimation of the 
heat supply for the year 2015.  
Data on energy recovery efficiencies of the Danish municipal solid waste incineration process are 
taken from the same company (Energynet, 2012). 
Data regarding humidifiers humidification-disinfection technology (e.g. energy/water 
consumption, provided energy savings, etc.) is mainly retrieved from the official website of the 
manufacturing company and the rest from personal communication by the company (i.e. 
arrangement of the equipment at in the different storage locations and lifetime of certain 
components). Few details about the nature of the natural sanitizer is also provided through personal 
communication with the company that supplies and produces the substance. Modelling the 
manufacturing of the technology requires a detailed level of information regarding the composition 
(i.e. type of components), the materials and the quantities of the different components constituting 
the modelled equipment unit. When this kind of information is poor or missing from the company’s 
website documentation it is then retrieved from the partner companies supplying the specific 
component (through their websites). This applies to data on the voltage transformer of the 
humidification unit (data from Amplimo, Netherlands) and the reverse osmosis membranes of the 
osmosis unit (data from DOW Chemicals, Michigan). Furthermore, in the cases where the specific 
supplier is not known, data is taken by investigating typical products currently available on the 
market or retrieved from ecoinvent database. This concerns, in particular, average weight, 
constituting material and average lifetime of components such as the piezoelectric transducer, the 
motherboard or the battery of the humidification unit.  
Data regarding specific unit processes of the model is taken from Ecoinvent 3 database 
(Ecoinvent centre, Switzerland). 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
3.1.3.2 Baseline system modelling 
In the following a description of the modelling choices for each life cycle stage of the baseline 
system model is provided. Table 9 provides more detailed information and specific calculations 
regarding the model parameters, whereas Table A2 in Appendix A illustrates the utilized unit 
processes. They both should be used in support of the description below. 
 
3.1.3.2.1 Lettuce production 
The way in which lettuce production is modelled develops from the existing process found in 
ecoinvent for lettuce production in Switzerland, based on Stoessel et al. 2012. The process is then 
modified to simulate lettuce production in the south of Italy, by replacing the parameters figures 
with the values representative for Italy. The specific model parameters changes are illustrated in 
Table A3, Appendix A. The following sub-processes are considered: 
Seedling production 
It is modelled just in terms of peat needed to grow the seedlings in small pots, therefore only peat 
extraction from Nordic countries and subsequent transport to the south of Italy constitute the dataset 
for seedling production. The original process contained only the amount of peat (as natural 
resource, without considering extraction) and the heat consumption at the heated greenhouses, 
which were replaced with the abovementioned peat extraction and transport (greenhouses in Apulia 
are not heated). Information on transport distance is found in Table A4, Appendix A dedicated to 
transport processes. 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
Table 9: Model parameters considered in the baseline system. If not indicated the values are per kg of lettuce (and not per functional unit). 
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Note 
Source 
Production of lettuce  
Occupied land 
0.306 
m2a 
- The value is calculated by multiplying the occupied land per kg lettuce (0.459 m2/kg) by the 
total cropping period in a year (8 months). The occupied land per kg lettuce derives from 
average yields of lettuce of 2.18 kg/m2. 
- Geographical coverage: Apulia region 
Calculated based on: Pimpini et al., 
2005, Ferrante, 2011 (for average 
yield), Pimpini et al., 2005 (for annual 
cropping period) 
Peat 
0.098 
kg 
- Calculated using: 
 
𝑃𝑒𝑎𝑡= 𝑃∗𝑔∗𝑂𝐿∗𝑊 
 
where P=8 (pots/m2), g=germination rate=0.75, OL=occupied land=0.459(m2/kg), W=pot 
weight=0.02(kg/pot) 
- Geographical coverage: Apulia region 
Calculated based on: Magnifico and 
Parente, 2011 (for no. pots per m2), 
Pasotti et al., 2002 and Pimpini et al., 
2005 (for germination rate), Stoessel et 
al., 2012 (for pot weight) 
Transport of peat 
0.203 
tkm 
Transport from Nordic countries to south of Italy. See Table A4, Appendix A on transport 
distances 
Calculated 
Energy (in biomass) 
1.137 
MJ 
Input of natural resources from nature in terms of energy 
Ecoinvent 3  
Phosphate fertilizer 
6.9E-04 
Kg 
Geographical coverage: Switzerland 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
Ammonium fertilizer 
0.00372 
Kg 
Geographical coverage: Switzerland 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
Potassium fertilizer 
0.00519 
Kg 
Geographical coverage: Switzerland 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
Pesticide Glyphosate 
0.0001 
Kg 
- Average application amounts in kg/ha are multiplied with occupied land per kg lettuce (0.459 
m2/kg). From literature, application amounts are found to range between 1.5 and 3 kg/ha.  
- Geographical coverage: Italy 
Antonelli and Gengotti, 2004 
Water for irrigation 
0.0803 
m3 
- The value is calculated by multiplying average water requirements with average yield (2.18 
kg/m2). Literature data report water requirements of 1500-3000 m3/ha per cropping cycle. An 
average of 1750 m3/ha is considered. 
- Geographical coverage: Italy 
Calculated based on Antonelli and 
Gengotti, 2004, Ferrante, 2011  
Machinery use 
0.0022 
ha 
Hectares of land treated per kg of lettuce. According to the source, the value accounts for all 
machinery activities used in agricultural production. Precise information about how the figure is 
calculated is found in the source. 
Geographical coverage: Switzerland 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
Emissions from pesticide 
application 
(glyphosate) 
0.0001 
kg 
The emitted amount is assumed equal to the applied one (so no drift or chemical 
transformations are taken into account) and is assigned only to the soil compartment. This is the 
common practice done in Ecoinvent 3 inventory for pesticide emissions and is recognized as a 
limitation of the inventory. 
Assumed based on (Blonk Consultants, 
2014) 
Transport field-processing centre 
Regular transport with 
lorry 
0.125 
tkm 
See Table A4, Appendix A on transport distances 
Calculated  
Processing at processing centre 
Electricity use for vacuum 
cooling 
14.89 
Wh 
Calculated based on specific formula. See Section 3.1.3.2.2 
 
Calculated based on Sanjuán et al., 
2014 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
Amount of plastic (HDPE) 
needed for packaging 
0.202 
kg 
Calculation based on capacity (51 L) and weight (1.45 kg) of a typical plastic crate for 
vegetables found on the market and the specific volume (7.1 L/kg) of lettuce from (Milà I 
Canals and Mclaren, 2007). The crates are assumed to be used only once. 
Calculated  
Amount of HDPE to be 
produced 
0.203 
kg 
During the injection moulding process there are some losses of plastic, therefore the amount of 
granulates to be produced is higher. The value is calculated by multiplying the input of plastic 
needed in the moulding process to get 1 kg of product (1.0057kg from Ecoinvent 3 manual) by 
the amount of plastic needed per 1 kg of lettuce (0.203 kg). 
Calculated from Ecoinvent 3 manual 
(Hischier, 2007) 
Washing water 
0.400 
L 
 
Assumed according to Stoessel et al. 
2012 
Sodium hypochlorite 
(disinfectant) 
5.0E-05 
 
kg 
100-150 microg/mL (average 0.000125 kg/L) of compound are used for butterhead lettuce in 
0.4 L of water per kg of lettuce needed for washing  
Calculated based on Suslow, 2005 (for 
disinfectant rates) and Stoessel et al., 
2012 (for washing water) 
Refrigeration at processing centre 
Electricity use for 
refrigeration 
1.5 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   
- The value refers to electricity consumption of cold storage (no supermarket) of apples at 1°C.  
- Geographical coverage: Germany 
- Reference year: 2005 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
Transport processing centre-distribution centre  
Transport with lorry 
0.794 
tkm 
See Table A4, Appendix A on transport distances 
Calculated  
Electricity use during 
transport 
10.037 
Wh/kg  
lettuce*transport 
time 
Calculated by multiplying power consumption with the transport time. Average power 
consumption of a refrigerated container with average load of 10 tons is assumed to be 3.6 
kW/h/10 t = 0.00036 kW/h/kg. It is assumed that the container contains only lettuce (10 t). The 
transportation time is calculated considering and average velocity of 50 km/h plus 12h are 
added to account for waiting time (e.g. during loading and unloading, stops, etc.). 
Calculated based on Stoessel et al., 
2012 (for power consumption of 
refrigerated container and average truck 
velocity) 
Refrigeration at distribution centre 
Electricity use for 
refrigeration 
1.5 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   
- The value refers to electricity consumption for cold storage (no supermarket) of apples at 1°C.  
- Geographical coverage: Germany 
- Reference year: 2005 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
Transport distribution centre-wholesaler 
Transport with lorry 
1.507 
tkm 
See Table A4, Appendix A on transport distances 
Calculated  
Electricity use during 
transport 
19.49 
Wh/kg  
lettuce*transport 
time 
Calculated by multiplying power consumption by the transport time. Average power 
consumption of a refrigerated container with average load of 10 tons is assumed to be 3.6 
kW/h/10 t = 0.00036 kW/h/kg. It is assumed that the container contains only lettuce (10 t). The 
transportation time is calculated considering and average velocity of 50 km/h plus 24h are 
added to account for waiting time (e.g. during loading and unloading, stops, etc.). 
Calculated based on Stoessel et al., 
2012 (for power consumption of 
refrigerated container and average truck 
velocity) 
Refrigeration at wholesaler  
Electricity use for 
refrigeration 
1.5 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   
- The value refers to electricity consumption for cold storage (no supermarket) of apples at 1°C.  
- Geographical coverage: Germany 
- Reference year: 2005 
Stoessel et al., 2012 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket 
 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
Transport with lorry 
0.07 
tkm 
See Table A4, Appendix A on transport distances 
 Calculated 
Electricity use during 
transport 
0.864 
Wh/kg 
lettuce*transport 
time 
Calculated by multiplying power consumption by the transport time. Average power 
consumption of a refrigerated container with average load of 10 tons is assumed to be 3.6 
kW/h/10 t = 0.00036 kW/h/kg. It is assumed that the container contains only lettuce (10 t). The 
transportation time is calculated considering and average velocity of 50 km/h plus 1h is added 
to account for waiting time (e.g. during loading and unloading). 
Calculated based on Stoessel et al., 
2012 (for power consumption of 
refrigerated container and average truck 
velocity) 
Refrigeration at supermarket 
Electricity use for 
refrigeration 
48.76 
 
Wh/kg lettuce*day  
The value is calculated based on the energy consumption of an open display case of 7250 
Wh/day 
per 
meter 
length 
found 
in 
the 
literature. 
A 
display 
of 
size 
(length*depth*height)=(3*0.8*2.2)m is considered, with an average volume utilization of 60% 
(assuming that the display contains only lettuce). Lettuce density is 140.8 kg/m3. 
Calculated based on (Fricke and 
Becker, 2010)  
Heat consumption for store 
heating 
26.40 
Wh/kg lettuce*day  
- The value refers to heat consumption to keep warm a small Swedish supermarket during 
wintertime (Total area (incl. Storage room) = 700m2. Exposure area= 400m2). The original 
value refers to kg of milk refrigerated at the store.  
- Geographical coverage: Sweden 
- Reference year: 2000 
(LCA food, 2000) 
Disposal of biowaste DK (figures are per functional unit) 
Total amount disposed in 
DK 
0.14 
kg 
See Table A1, Appendix A on food losses 
Calculated based on Gustavsson et al. 
2011 
Amount sent to 
incineration 
0.07 
kg 
50% is incinerated 
Assumed 
Amount sent to 
composting 
0.07 
kg 
50% is composted 
Assumed 
Disposal of biowaste IT (figures are per functional unit) 
Total amount disposed in 
IT 
0.35 
kg 
See Table A1, Appendix A on food losses 
Calculated based on Gustavsson et al. 
2011 
Amount sent to landfilling 
0.28 
kg 
80% is landfilled 
Assumed 
Amount sent to 
composting 
0.07 
kg 
20% is composted 
Assumed 
Avoided products from biowaste composting  
Ammonium fertilizer 
 
0.0029 
kg/kg treated 
biowaste 
Average potential amount of N fertilizer replaceable by use of compost (range 0.0005-0.0052 
kg/kg treated biowaste) 
(Boldrin et al., 2009) 
Potassium fertilizer 
 
0.0013 
kg/kg treated 
biowaste 
Average potential amount of K fertilizer replaceable by use of compost (range 0.0006-0.0019 
kg/kg treated biowaste) 
(Boldrin et al., 2009) 
Phosphate fertilizer 
 
0.0039 
kg/kg treated 
biowaste 
Average potential amount of P fertilizer replaceable by use of compost (range 0.0024-0.0054 
kg/kg treated biowaste) 
(Boldrin et al., 2009) 
Avoided electricity and heat production from biowaste incineration 
Electricity 
0.41 
MJ/kg biowaste 
Energy recovery efficiency 
Ecoinvent 3 
Heat 
1 
MJ/kg biowaste 
Energy recovery efficiency 
Ecoinvent 3 
==PAGE:41==
Occupation of land 
The original parameter is replaced with a more representative one, but the same unit process is kept. 
Since lettuce farming is very diffused in Apulia region it is assumed that no changes of land use are 
required and arable land is utilized.  
Energy in biomass (gross calorific value) 
This parameter was already present in the original process for lettuce production and represents the 
input of natural resources from nature in terms of energy.  
Fertilizers production and relative emissions from application 
The considered fertilizers are phosphate, ammonium and potassium based. The application amounts 
from Italian literature sources (Antonelli and Gengotti, 2004) are found to be very close (same order 
of magnitude) to the values used by Stoessel et al. and present in the ecoinvent process. Therefore it 
is decided to use the values already existing in the dataset for which the relative emissions to the 
environment are also already calculated and used. This is considered a fair assumption, as the 
difference with the Italian production figures is so minimal that the changes in fertilizer production 
requirements and emissions are not expected to be significant for the impact scores (Table A3, 
Appendix A). The emissions to the air derive totally from the nitrogen fertilizer (in the forms of 
nitrogen oxides and ammonia). Emissions to water include phosphate and nitrate to the groundwater 
compartment and phosphorous to river water. Finally, emissions to the soil are constituted by the 
heavy metals that are contained in the three fertilizers. The dataset excludes emissions of mercury 
due to lack of data. The main reference for the calculation of these emissions is contained in the 
Agri-footprint report v1.0 (Blonk Consultants, 2014), however it appears that the dataset contains 
also modifications from Stoessel et al. 2012. In the end, it remains unclear how these estimations 
have been calculated exactly.  
Pesticide production and relative emissions from application  
Several different substances can be used as pesticide, according to the retrieved source (Antonelli 
and Gengotti, 2004). Glyphosate, an herbicide commonly used for lettuce, is chosen according to 
availability of relative production process in ecoinvent. The original dataset contains the compound 
Diazole, which is replaced because not found to be used. The total amount applied in the field is 
emitted to the soil compartment (modelled as Glyphosate substance-emissions to soil), according to 
the common practice done in ecoinvent inventory for pesticide emissions and is recognized as a 
limitation of the inventory (Blonk Consultants, 2014). 
Irrigation 
Since the geographical coverage of the original process is global, it contains water consumption for 
irrigation form all countries of the world. A modification is done so that water consumption refers 
only to Italy. However, even though ecoinvent database contains inventories for production and 
supply of freshwater for agricultural irrigation for most countries of the world, the inventory for 
Italy is not present. Therefore it is assumed that data for Spain can be utilized, based on the fact that 
production conditions in the south of Italy (e.g. climate, availability of freshwater, etc.) are probably 
similar to the Spanish ones. This applies only to the utilized unit process, because data on the water 
requirements of lettuce farming are based on Italian references (Antonelli and Gengotti, 2004) 
(Ferrante, 2011). 
 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
Farm machinery use 
To model farm machinery use it is necessary to know the specific hours of machine work per kg of 
lettuce produced, where machine work includes activities like tillage, planting, fertilizer and 
pesticide application, harvesting. However, this information was not found in the reviewed sources 
for Italian production and it is decided to keep the value in ecoinvent, calculated from Stoessel et 
al., 2012 (which refers to Swiss data). The model parameter is expressed in hectares of treated land 
per kg of lettuce. The unit process ‘fertilizing by broadcaster’ is used to model all sorts of 
machinery used during lettuce farming. 
 
Additional modifications 
In the original dataset, also energy consumption for refrigerated storage at the farm and water use 
for washing are included, however they are deleted, as not considered in this stage (but considered 
in the next life stages).   
 
3.1.3.2.2 Lettuce processing 
Vacuum cooling 
For this process only electricity consumption of the cooling process is considered. The value is 
calculated using the equation from (Sanjuán et al., 2014): 
𝐸= 𝑀∗𝑐𝑝∗(𝑇𝑖−𝑇𝑓)
𝐸𝐶∗𝑐
 
where E is the electricity consumption of the vacuum cooler, M is the mass of lettuce to be cooled, 
cp is the specific heat of lettuce above freezing, Ti the initial temperature of lettuce, Tf the final 
temperature, EC the efficiency coefficient of vacuum cooling and c is the conversion factor between 
kWh and MJ. The utilized values are presented in Table 9. 
Table 9: Parameters used in the calculation of energy consumption of vacuum cooling process. 
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Source 
cp 
4.02 
kJ*kg-1*K-1 
(Kleinstreuer, 2009) 
Ti  
24 
°C 
(McDonald and Sun, 2000) 
Tf 
1 
°C 
(McDonald and Sun, 2000) 
EC 
1.8 
kJ/kJ 
(Sanjuán et al., 2014) 
c 
3600 
kJ/kWh 
- 
 
Data from literature  report values of 0.56 Wh/kg lettuce to reduce the temperature of 1°C, which 
corresponds quite well to the value calculated with the equation for a difference of 1°C (0.631 
Wh/kg) (Wang and Sun, 2001).  
Packaging 
The considered process in this step is the production of the plastic material for packaging. Different 
packaging options exist and it is here assumed that simple open plastic crates are used, instead of 
other sealed options. This type of packaging is relevant for the humidification system, as lettuce 
remains exposed to the mist provided by the humidifiers. Plastic crates can be made of HDPE or PP 
(Schuur, 1988) and HDPE is chosen arbitrarily. To model the production of HDPE plastic crates 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
two types of processes are used: the production of HDPE granulates starting from raw materials 
extraction and the injection moulding process to shape the granulates into crates.  
Washing and disinfection 
The washing step is modelled just in terms of amount of water consumed, without considering any 
prospective energy consumption deriving from the machinery used in the facility (e.g. conveyor 
belts to transport lettuce). Due to lack of available inventory for Italian tap water supply in 
ecoinvent, the dataset for Switzerland is used and assumed to be representative for Italian tap water 
supply. The production of the disinfectant added to the washing water is included for the 
disinfection step. The treatment of the washing wastewater containing the disinfectant and thus the 
relative impacts are not modelled. Sodium hypochlorite is chosen as disinfectant because it is one of 
the most common substances used and a representative process is found in the database.  
3.1.3.2.3 Refrigerated storage, distribution and retailing 
Refrigerated storage at processing centre, distribution centre and wholesaler are modelled by 
considering only the electricity consumption of the cold store. Refrigeration during transport is 
accounted by adding extra diesel consumption related to the additional refrigeration unit on the 
truck. The same method is applied in Stoessel et al., 2012. Moreover, it is assumed that the trucks 
are loaded only with lettuce. At the supermarket, besides electricity consumption of the display, it is 
accounted also for heat consumption for heating the store. A description of the dataset created to 
simulate average heat production mix in Denmark is found in Section 3.1.3.2.8.  
To model refrigerated storage it is also necessary to set the period of refrigeration, i.e. how long 
lettuce is stored in total, during each storage and distribution stage. Figures are assigned based on 
the fact that shelf life of lettuce is estimated to be maximum 21-28 days when stored at 1°C and 
halves when stored at 5°C. Considering that storage temperature can vary during all stages, the total 
storage period is set around 12 days, in order to model average conditions (Table 10). Refrigeration 
periods during transport correspond to the needed transport time and more detailed values can be 
found in the Section 3.1.3.2.4. 
Table 10: Days of refrigerated lettuce storage at the different storage locations, including transport stages.  
Storage location/process 
Storage period (days) 
Processing centre 
0.5 
Distribution centre 
1 
Wholesaler  
2 
Supermarket 
5 
Transport (total)  
3.7 
 
3.1.3.2.4 Transport processes 
The size of the trucks in the different transport stages is chosen according to the covered distance: 
for regional and national distances, trucks with cargo weights 7.5-16 tons and 16-32 tons are used; 
for international transport tonnage >32 is considered. Transport distances and times can be found in 
Table A4, Appendix A. National inventory for transport processes is not present in ecoinvent, 
therefore European datasets are used and considered representative also for regional transports. 
 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
3.1.3.2.5 Biowaste disposal in Italy 
The lettuce waste disposed in Italy is produced at the processing centre, distribution centre and 
during the transport step between the two. Of all the produced waste 80% is sent to landfilling and 
20% to a compost facility, however the collection service of is not modelled. For landfilling, no 
representative process for biowaste is found in ecoinvent, but only municipal solid waste landfilling 
is present. Moreover, there is no inventory for Italian process, so the process for municipal solid 
waste landfilling in Switzerland is used as the closest option. Also for the composting process the 
closest alternative in the database is composting of general biowaste of unknown composition in 
Switzerland. The dataset is then modified to account for the avoided production of nitrogen-, 
potassium- and phosphate-based fertilizers derived from the application of the compost on the 
fields. It is assumed that all the produced compost is used in the country to substitute fertilizer 
application. Information on kg of fertilizer replaceable by the use of compost per kg of treated 
waste is found in Boldrin et al., 2009. 
 
3.1.3.2.6 Biowaste disposal in Denmark 
Lettuce disposed in Denmark is generated during the transport from Italy, at the wholesaler and 
supermarket. Half of this is incinerated and half is composted, however here also the collection of 
the waste is not modelled. No country specific biowaste incineration process is found in the 
database and a global dataset is used, which refers to incineration of average biowaste, including 
garden and food/kitchen waste. Crediting for avoided electricity and heat production is carried out. 
Here the energy recovery efficiencies of the incineration process (needed to credit for avoided 
products) are not modified with the updated values used to create ‘heat mix DK’ dataset, because 
the process refers to incineration of biowaste (and not municipal waste) and the figures might not be 
representative in this case. Efficiencies are 0.41 and 1 MJ per kg of biowaste for electricity and heat 
respectively, as found in ecoinvent. Avoided by-products (electricity and heat) are adjusted so they 
reflect the average Danish electricity and heat mix created (next sections). Avoided electricity 
production from biowaste incineration is credited even though it is not considered in the created 
electricity mix. For the composting, the same process (Swiss inventory) and modifications 
(crediting for avoided products) applied to the Italian biowaste disposal are used (described in the 
previous section).   
3.1.3.2.7 Electricity mix Denmark 
As stated in the scope definition, the consequential-based processes in ecoinvent for electricity 
production are used to avoid allocation and are successively modified to model the average country 
electricity mix production, instead of the marginal mixed as originally represented in the 
consequential database. As the reference for the average dataset is the corresponding allocation-
based process in ecoinvent, the same type of unit processes (i.e. the electricity production plants) 
and the related shares found in ecoinvent are used, as shown in Table A5, Appendix A. The dataset 
contains imports from Germany, Sweden and Norway, whose electricity production mixes should 
also be modified to average. To do this the average data contained in the allocation-based process 
are used for each country. However, the imports of these countries are neglected and the share of 
electricity sources is adjusted accordingly, to avoid endless looping. This is considered a fair 
assumption as the imports of each country are generally lower than 10% (6% for Germany, 3% for 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
Norway and 8% for Sweden). Unit processes and shares can be found in Table A6, A7 and A8 in 
Appendix A, for the three countries.  
The average electricity mix is mainly composed of 36% coal, 14% natural gas and 28% are imports. 
The remaining 22% is divided between wind power, oil, biogas, wood and hydropower. This 
created electricity mix is then used in all the processes that consume electricity occurring in 
Denmark. These are: refrigeration at the wholesaler, refrigeration at the supermarket, energy 
consumption of the composting facility and electricity needs of the various heat production plants 
(see next section). The process is also used when crediting for avoided electricity production from 
biowaste incineration. 
3.1.3.2.8 Heat mix Denmark 
As there is no heat mix for Denmark available in Ecoinvent, the process ‘Heat mix DK’ is created 
to model the average heat mix production, based on updated data (from Energynet, 2015). The 
utilized shares of the different energy sources and the relative unit processes are illustrated in Table 
A9, Appendix A. Different types of plant produce heat starting from the same source (e.g. 
centralised or decentralised heat and power cogeneration plants), but only one type is modelled per 
source according to largest contribution in the total production and availability of specific processes 
in ecoinvent. In most cases, the datasets are representative of other countries or have European or 
global coverage, however in every case inputs of electricity have been substituted with the created 
average electricity mix. Heat from ‘electric boilers’ is not modelled because of missing 
representative process in ecoinvent and ‘excess heat’ is not considered as well, hence the shares are 
adjusted accordingly. Since detailed information about the typical types of plants present in 
Denmark for heat supply is not retrieved, the processes in ecoinvent database are chosen based on 
availability of data (e.g. in the case only one type of plant exist for a certain energy source) and on 
the availability of processes resembling average technology, in the case more options exist for one 
energy source (i.e. state-of-the-art plants are excluded, as they are representative of marginal 
technology). 
Regarding heat from municipal solid waste incineration, a modification of the process found in 
ecoinvent is done to account for updated energy recovery efficiencies. In fact, the original inventory 
assumes efficiencies of 12% and 24% for electricity and heat, respectively, whereas new 
efficiencies are 24% and 74% respectively, according to (Energynet, 2012). The process is also 
adapted to link to the considered electricity and heat mixes for Denmark. In the case of electricity 
this is done even though electricity mix production does not account from contributions from waste 
incineration (previous section). In order to account for these modifications, first the process Heat 
from waste incineration, DK is created in order to scale the output of the incineration process to 1 
MJ of heat (instead of kg of waste incinerated). The amount of waste to incinerate to get 1 MJ of 
heat is calculated knowing the low heating value of municipal solid waste (MSW) in Denmark and 
the energy recovery efficiencies of a typical Danish incineration plant (see Table 11). Secondly, the 
process Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | Conseq, U-copy is modified to 
account for the updated energy recovery efficiencies. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
Table 11. Background information on municipal solid waste incineration process 
Parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Source 
Low heating value 
(MSW) DK 
11.7 
MJ/kg 
Ecoinvent 3 
Thermal efficiency 
0.74 
% 
(Energynet, 2012) 
Electric efficiency 
0.24 
% 
(Energynet, 2012) 
Heat produced per kg 
waste 
8.658 
MJ/kg 
- 
Electricity produced per 
kg waste 
0.78 
kWh/kg 
- 
Waste incinerated per 
MJ heat produced 
0.116 
kg/MJ 
- 
 
3.1.3.2.9 Electricity mix Italy 
As for the Danish electricity mix, the consequential based process is modified to model the average 
country electricity mix production taken from the allocation based dataset. Again, the same type of 
unit processes (i.e. the electricity production plants) and the related shares found in ecoinvent are 
used, as shown in Table A10, Appendix A. The dataset contains imports from 5 different countries, 
whose electricity production is modified to average, as in the Danish case. It means that the relative 
imports of these countries are neglected, even though this time their contribution can be 
considerable and up to 30% of the total supply (24% for Austria, 20% for Switzerland, 2% for 
France, 13% for Greece and 30% for Slovenia). Unit processes and shares can be found from Table 
A11 to A15 in Appendix A, for the five countries.  
The average electricity mix is mainly composed of 47% natural gas, 12% coal and 9% oil. The 
remaining 32% is divided between the imported energy, wind power, biogas, wood, geothermal 
hydropower and other gaseous by-products. The created electricity mix is then used in all the 
processes that consume electricity occurring in Italy. These are: energy use of lettuce irrigation and 
vacuum cooling, refrigeration at the processing and distribution centres, energy consumption of the 
composting and landfilling facilities.  
 
3.1.3.3 Humidification system modelling 
The following sections provide a description of the humidification system, focusing on how the 
baseline system is modified to account for the introduction of the humidification-disinfection 
technology. The differences with respect to the baseline are found only at the storage, distribution 
and retailing stages of the supply chain. Therefore, each stage is discussed in separate sections. 
Moreover, modelling of the production and disposal stages of the humidification technology is 
explained. 
Table 12 provides detailed information and specific calculations regarding the model parameters, 
whereas Table A16, Appendix A illustrates the utilized unit processes and both should be used in 
support of the description below.  
 
 
==PAGE:47==
Table 12: Model parameters considered in all humidification system scenarios. Only the life cycle stages that were modified from the baseline system are shown. 
Parameter 
 
Value  
Unit 
Note  
Source 
Refrigeration at processing centre 
 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration  
0.642 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by humidification unit 
0.0929 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by osmosis unit 
0.0179 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by control unit 
3.57E-04 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Water for humidifier 
6.43E-04 
kg/kg lettuce*day 
See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Disinfectant amount 
4.02E-08 
kg/kg lettuce 
The same dosage of disinfectant as for the chlorinated compound used in the 
baseline system is assumed (0.000125 kg/L). This amount is diluted in the 
amount of water per kg lettuce needed in this step.  
Assumed 
Transport processing centre-distribution centre 
 
Transport with lorry 
0.799 
tkm 
For every kg of lettuce transported the relative amount of additional load to be 
transported per kg of lettuce (water and humidifier = 1.0E-03 kg) is added. 
Additional loads of water and humidifier are calculated by dividing the water 
required during the transport period and the humidifier weight with the amount 
of lettuce transported. See baseline system for transport distances. 
Calculated  
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
5.02 
Wh/kg 
lettuce*transport 
time 
It is assumed that electricity consumption of conventional refrigeration is 
halved. 
Assumed 
Electricity use by humidification unit 
0.905 
Wh/kg 
lettuce*transport 
time 
See Section 3.1.3.3.3 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Disinfectant amount 
6.79E-07 
kg/kg lettuce 
The same dosage of disinfectant as for the chlorinated compound used in the 
baseline system is assumed (0.000125 kg/L). This amount is diluted in the 
amount of water per kg lettuce needed in this step.  
Assumed 
Water for humidifier (water 
requirement) 
0.00543 
kg/kg lettuce 
The value represents the actual amount of water needed per kg lettuce during the 
transport period. This amount is included as an input to the transport process. 
For calculation see section 3.1.3.3.3 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Refrigeration at distribution centre 
 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration  
0.642 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by humidification unit 
0.0929 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
Electricity use by osmosis unit 
0.0179 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by control unit 
3.57E-04 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Water for humidifier 
6.43E-04 
kg/kg lettuce*day 
See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Disinfectant amount 
8.04E-08 
kg/kg lettuce 
The same dosage of disinfectant as for the chlorinated compound used in the 
baseline system is assumed (0.000125 kg/L). This amount is diluted in the 
amount of water per kg lettuce needed in this step.  
Assumed 
Transport distribution centre-wholesaler 
 
Transport with lorry 
1.52 
tkm 
For every kg of lettuce transported the relative amount of additional load to be 
transported per kg of lettuce (water and humidifier = 1.0E-03 kg) is added. 
Additional loads of water and humidifier are calculated by dividing the water 
required during the transport period and the humidifier weight with the amount 
of lettuce transported. See baseline system for transport distances. 
Calculated 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
9.75 
Wh/kg 
lettuce*transport 
time 
It is assumed that electricity consumption of conventional refrigeration is 
halved. 
Assumed 
Electricity use by humidification unit 
1.32 
Wh/kg 
lettuce*transport 
time 
See Section 3.1.3.3.3 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Disinfectant amount 
9.89E-07 
kg/kg lettuce 
The same dosage of disinfectant as for the chlorinated compound used in the 
baseline system is assumed (0.000125 kg/L). This amount is diluted in the 
amount of water per kg lettuce needed in this step.  
Assumed 
Water for humidifier (water 
requirement) 
0.00791 
kg/kg lettuce 
The value represents the actual amount of water needed per kg lettuce during the 
transport period. This amount is included as an input to the transport process. 
For calculation see Section 3.1.3.3.3 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Refrigeration at wholesaler 
 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration  
0.642 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by humidification unit 
0.0929 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by osmosis unit 
0.0179 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by control unit 
3.57E-04 
Wh/kg lettuce*day   See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Water for humidifier 
6.43E-04 
kg/kg lettuce*day 
See Section 3.1.3.3.2 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
Disinfectant amount 
1.61E-07 
kg/kg lettuce 
The same dosage of disinfectant as for the chlorinated compound used in the 
baseline system is assumed (0.000125 kg/L). This amount is diluted in the 
amount of water per kg lettuce needed in this step.  
Assumed 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket 
 
Transport with lorry 
0.0703 
tkm 
For every kg of lettuce transported the relative amount of additional load to be 
transported per kg of lettuce (water and humidifier = 1.0E-03 kg) is added. 
Additional loads of water and humidifier are calculated by dividing the water 
required during the transport period and the humidifier weight with the amount 
of lettuce transported. See baseline system for transport distances. 
Calculated 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
0.432 
Wh/kg 
lettuce*transport 
time 
It is assumed that electricity consumption of conventional refrigeration is 
halved. 
Assumed 
Electricity use by humidification unit 
0.159 
Wh/kg 
lettuce*transport 
time 
See Section 3.1.3.3.3 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Disinfectant amount 
1.19E-07 
kg/kg lettuce 
The same dosage of disinfectant as for the chlorinated compound used in the 
baseline system is assumed (0.000125 kg/L). This amount is diluted in the 
amount of water per kg lettuce needed in this step.  
Assumed 
Water for humidifier (water 
requirement) 
9.55E-04 
kg/kg lettuce 
The value represents the actual amount of water needed per kg lettuce during the 
transport period. This amount is included as an input to the transport process. 
For calculation see Section 3.1.3.3.3 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Refrigeration at supermarket 
 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
24.4 
Wh/kg lettuce*day  
It is assumed that electricity consumption of conventional refrigeration is 
halved. 
Assumed 
Heat consumption for store heating 
26.4 
Wh/kg lettuce*day  
See baseline system 
Calculated 
Electricity use by humidification unit 
13.5 
Wh/kg lettuce*day  
See section 3.1.3.3.4 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by osmosis unit 
13.5 
Wh/kg lettuce*day  
See section 3.1.3.3.4 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Electricity use by control unit 
0.269 
Wh/kg lettuce*day  
See section 3.1.3.3.4 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Water for humidifier 
0.0807 
kg/kg lettuce*day 
See section 3.1.3.3.4 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company 
Disinfectant amount 
4.02E-07 
kg/kg lettuce 
The same dosage of disinfectant as for the chlorinated compound used in the 
baseline system is assumed (0.000125 kg/L). This amount is diluted in the 
amount of water per kg lettuce needed in this step.  
Assumed 
Production of equipment with humidifier Type 1 
 
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
Stainless steel 
6.65 
kg 
Calculated from the given size of  the humidification unit: 
(Length*Width*Height*Thickness) = (0.325*0.256*0.215*0.002)m. Thickness 
was not given but assumed. Steel density: 7990 kg/m3 (AK Steel Corporation, 
2007). 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company.  
 
Transducer  
1.20 
kg 
Various suppliers on the market report piezoelectric transducer (sonotrode) 
weight ranging between 0.3-0.5 kg. An average of 0.4 kg is assumed for 1 
humidifier. It is taken into account that in 15 years of the humidifier lifetime the 
transducer is changed twice (from personal communication by the company), so 
3 transducers are needed for 1 humidifier. 
Assumed 
Motherboard 
1.81 
kg 
Various suppliers report PC motherboard weight ranging from 1-4 pounds. 
Average 2 pounds = 0.907 kg is taken. During 15 years motherboard is replaced 
once (from personal communication by the company). 
Assumed 
Fan 
1.00 
kg 
Assumed based on the size of the fan utilized by the company. Same lifetime as 
the humidifier is assumed. 
Assumed 
Transformer 
2.30 
kg 
Actual weight of the transducer utilized by the company. Same lifetime as the 
humidifier is assumed. 
Data retrieved from the company that supplies 
the transducers (Amplimo, Netherlands) 
Battery (only for transport processes) 
1.18 
kg 
One battery is assumed to weight 0.591 kg (data taken from Ecoinvent 3) and 
have a lifetime of 6 years (assumed from models on the market). 
Assumed 
Reverse osmosis membrane (not 
included in transport processes) 
105.00 
m2 
The value represents the total active membrane surface present in the osmosis 
unit (composed of 4 separate membrane modules). It is assumed that the active 
surface of 4 membranes of indicative size 0.5 m length and 0.1 m diameter can 
be approximated with the active surface of a seawater reverse osmosis 
membrane 1m length and 0.2m diameter . This corresponds to 35 m2 active 
surface (DOW, 2013). Lifetime of each membrane is 5 years (DOW, 2014). 
Assumed based on data retrieved from the 
company that supplies the osmosis membranes 
(DOW Chemicals, Michigan) 
Booster pump (not included in transport 
processes) 
1.00 
p 
The value is given in pieces as the relative process in Ecoinvent 3 is scaled to 
pieces of equipment and not to kg. One pump is needed per humidifier during 15 
years. 
Provided by humidifier manufacturing company 
Control unit (not included in transport 
processes) 
0.591 
kg 
It is assumed that the control unit has the same weight as the battery and same 
lifetime as humidifier. 
Assumed 
Production of equipment with humidifier Type 2 (only data that are different from the previous model are listed) 
Stainless steel 
37.4 
kg 
Calculated from the given size of the humidification unit 
(Length*Width*Height*Thickness) = (0.660*0.425*0.290*0.002)m. Thickness 
was not given but assumed. Steel density: 7990 kg/m3 (AK Steel Corporation, 
2007). An additional amount of steel (18 kg) is added to reach the actual weight 
of 43 kg. 
Calculated based on data provided by the 
humidifier manufacturing company.  
Fan 
2.00 
kg 
Assumed based on the size of the fan utilized by the company. Same lifetime as 
the humidifier is assumed. 
Assumed 
Disposal  
Total amount of humidifiers to dispose 
2.81E-5 
Kg/kg lettuce 
The value express the amount of humidification unit to be disposed per kg of 
lettuce sold in 15 years. It is calculated from the total number of humidifier unit 
pieces needed in 15 years (see section 3.1.3.3.7) 
Calculated 
==PAGE:51==
3.1.3.3.1 Technology modelling overview 
Four humidification scenarios are made, however they differ only in the amount of food losses 
considered per stage. Therefore the model description found in this section is valid for all scenarios. 
Specific information on amounts of lettuce treated and wasted in each stage is found in Table A17 
Appendix A. 
Two types of equipment are modelled, depending on the application stage: at cold stores (i.e. at the 
processing centre, distribution centre and wholesaler) and at the supermarket the whole equipment 
consists of a humidification unit, an osmosis unit (which includes a booster pump) and a control 
unit. This is in agreement with information provided by the manufacturing company, except for the 
humidity-temperature sensor, which is excluded as assumed to be of minor importance. Each of the 
considered devices consumes energy, so the total energy consumption of the technology at these 
storage facilities is calculated based on the abovementioned three units and is modelled as 
consumption of Danish/Italian electricity mixes. On the contrary, during transport processes only 
the humidification unit is considered, whereas the water tank and the small pump that constitute the 
full equipment, are not modelled. This is due to lack of data, especially regarding the pump unit. 
Furthermore, a battery is also included, however the energy consumption at this stage is modelled 
as diesel consumption for electricity production, as is done for the energy needs of the conventional 
refrigeration unit. Table 13 gives an overview of the equipment components for each stage. 
Table 13: Summary of the components constituting the technology equipment considered in this study for the 
various stages. The term cold store is used to indicate the processing centre, distribution centre and wholesaler. 
Stage/location 
Humidification unit 
Osmosis unit 
Control unit 
Battery 
Type 1  
Type 2  
Cold store 
 
X 
X 
X 
- 
Supermarket 
X 
 
X 
X 
- 
During transport 
X 
 
- 
- 
X 
  
From the table it can be seen that two different types of humidification units are used in the model: 
Type 1 and Type 2 of greater capacity (data specifications are found in Table 2). Type 1 is used on 
truck trailers for refrigerated transport and in the refrigerated displays at supermarket; Type 2 is 
used in cold stores, i.e. at the wholesaler, distribution and processing centres. This choice is based 
on the reference volume (or space) of applicability provided in the technical specifications of the 
technology, which seems appropriate for application in supermarket displays and truck trailers 
(Table 2). The same explanation is valid for considering Type 2 at cold stores.  
In general, in each of the three stages of application of the technology the following parameters are 
considered:  
 Energy consumption of the humidification equipment 
 Water consumption of the humidification equipment 
 Provided energy savings, which are subtracted to the energy consumption of the 
conventional cooling system 
 Disinfectant consumption 
 Additional weight to be transported, only in the case of transport processes (weight of 
humidifiers and the required water) 
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
Regarding disinfection procedures, the conventional disinfection step carried out during the 
processing stage is not considered anymore and the amount of natural sanitizer is here added 
together with the humidification technology. Since the dosage to be applied is not known (as still in 
phase of development), it is assumed to be the same utilized for the conventional chlorinated 
disinfectant (1.25E-04 kg/L), which is then diluted in the amount of water required for the mist 
during the each stage of application. Moreover, citric acid is chosen as the only substance 
constituting the natural sanitizer (which will probably consist of a mixture of organic acids, 
including citric acid), as no other representative substance is found in the database.  
Since data on energy and water consumption and related energy savings of the technology are given 
only per equipment unit (see Section 3.1.2.5), modelling required the calculation of the reference 
amount of lettuce treated by each humidification unit, in order to scale the parameters to 1 kg of 
lettuce. Calculations can be found in the next sections. 
3.1.3.3.2 Calculation of energy and water consumption during storage at cold stores  
Data specifications for the humidification unit Type 2 (considered for cold stores) report 
applicability for cold stores volumes of 4500 m3 or for displays of 18 m length. Calculation of 
energy and water consumption at cold stores is based on the volume of applicability of the 
technology, as lettuce is stored in cold rooms and not in displays. In a cold room not all the volume 
can be filled with fresh produce, as empty spaces between the rows and the pellets of products 
should be accounted. Since no specific information regarding the percentage of utilization of cold 
store rooms could be found, an average volume utilization of 53% is assumed, based on the figure 
reported for the refrigerated truck trailers in (Tassou et al., 2009). By considering a lettuce density 
of 140.8 kg/ m3 (Milà I Canals and Mclaren, 2007) and assuming that the room contains only 
lettuce, the amount of lettuce present in the room, and therefore treated by one humidification unit, 
can be obtained (335808 kg). In this way the energy, water consumption and energy savings of the 
humidification, osmosis and control units can be calculated per kg of lettuce (Table 12).  
3.1.3.3.3 Calculation of energy and water consumption during transport processes  
In the case of refrigerated transport processes, the humidification unit Type 1 is considered, which 
reports applicability for cold stores volumes of 750 m3 or for displays of 3 m length. This time the 
calculation is based on the actual utilized volume (or effective volume) of the truck trailer retrieved 
from the size of each type of truck. This is considered to be a more realistic approach rather than 
referring to the provided application volume in cold stores, as it directly refers to the actual volume 
of interest. The effective volume is obtained by knowing that 1 metric ton = 4.3m3 (Salin, 2010) and 
assuming an average utilization ratio of 53% (Tassou et al., 2010). Once the effective volume is 
obtained, the amount of lettuce contained in that volume is calculated, considering lettuce density 
and assuming again that only lettuce is transported (Table 14).   
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
Table 14: Data for calculation of quantity of lettuce treated by the humidifier on each type of truck, i.e. each transport 
process. 
Transport 
process 
Lorry type (metric ton) 
Average 
volume (m3) 
Average 
volume 
utilization (%) 
Effective 
volume 
(m3) 
Quantity of 
lettuce per 
truck (kg) 
min 
max 
average 
Process. centre 
to distrib. centre 
16 
32 
24 
103.2 
0.53 
54.7 
7701 
 
Distrib. centre 
to wholesaler 
>32 
- 
32 
137.6 
0.53 
72.9 
10268 
Wholesaler to 
supermarket 
7.5 
16 
11.75 
50.5 
0.53 
26.8 
 
3770 
 
The reference amount of lettuce per truck is then used to obtain energy and water consumption of 
the technology (Table 12), however the energy savings could not be calculated in the same way. In 
fact, by using the provided data on the produced cooling energy of the humidifier, the energy 
savings per kg of lettuce resulted to be higher than the actual energy consumption of the 
conventional refrigeration system, meaning that the humidifiers provide more cooling energy than 
required. This is probably a result of the assumptions that have been made to calculate the treated 
amount of lettuce, but also of the inaccurate provided data on the produced cooling energy of the 
technology. Therefore, since at the cold stores the energy consumption of conventional cooling is 
found to be almost halved (by using the provided data), it is decided to assume that also here the 
energy savings are just enough to halve the energy consumption of the conventional refrigeration 
unit of the truck.  
3.1.3.3.4 Calculation of energy and water consumption during retailing  
For storage at refrigerated supermarket displays, the calculation is based on the length of the display 
to which humidifier Type 1 can be applied (3 meters). The effective volume of the display is 
calculated by assuming reasonable width (0.8 m), height (2.2 m) and volume utilization (60%), 
based on display models currently available on the market. The obtained quantity of lettuce per 
display is around 446 kg. In Table 12 the energy and water consumption per kg of lettuce can be 
found. Regarding energy savings, it is assumed that they amount to half of the conventional cooling 
energy consumption, for the same reasons explained in previous section about transport processes. 
3.1.3.3.5 Total energy consumption modelled 
Table 15 below is used to illustrate the difference in the total electricity consumption modelled in 
the different stages, between the baseline and the humidification system (applicable to all 
humidification 
scenarios). 
Considering 
the 
additional 
electricity 
consumption 
of 
the 
humidification/disinfection technology and the provided energy savings, a net increase is observed 
only at the supermarket, whereas in the rest of the stages the new technology allows to save energy 
compared to the baseline system. In fact, consumption per kg of lettuce is always reduced almost by 
half the original figure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
Table 15: Comparison between total electricity consumptions per kg of lettuce for the baseline and the humidification system, 
during different refrigerated storage and distribution stages. 
Location/process 
Electricity consumption (Wh/kg lettuce) 
Baseline system 
Humidification system 
Processing centre 
0.75 
0.38 
Distribution centre 
1.5 
0.75 
Wholesaler 
3.0 
1.5 
Supermarket 
243.8 
257.8 
Transport (total) 
30.4 
17.6 
 
3.1.3.3.6 Humidification technology production and disposal 
Based on the information provided on the humidification technology (see Section 1.4), the 
production of the components illustrated in Table 16 is modelled. The reason why some 
components are excluded from the model is related to lack of specific data (e.g. number of pieces) 
or lack of representative production process in ecoinvent (e.g. for the carbon/sediment filters). 
Precise data on the model parameters and unit processes considered for the production and disposal 
of the technology can be found in Table 12. 
Table 16: Components considered in the model per type of equipment unit. 
Equipment unit 
Considered components 
Not modelled components 
Humidification unit  
(Type 1 and 2) 
 
Steel for the casing 
 
Piezoelectric transducer 
 
Motherboard 
 
Fan 
 
Voltage transformer 
 
Battery (only for transport processes) 
 
Undefined number of small parts, 
such as wires, temperature 
sensors, valves, etc. 
Osmosis unit 
 
Reverse osmosis membrane 
 
Booster pump 
 
Carbon/sediment filters 
 
Undefined number of small parts 
such as hoses, valves, water 
detection sensor, etc. 
Control unit 
Entire unit considered 
- 
 
For each of the components the relative quantity to be produced per equipment unit is calculated 
and the closest representative option is chosen from the database processes. This required a number 
of assumptions to be made, due to the fact that specific data about the production process and 
components of the technology is not known. The most important assumptions can be summarized as 
described below: 
 Only the production of the single components is modelled, whereas the assembling process 
into the final equipment arrangement (i.e. a humidification or osmosis unit) is not 
considered. 
 For the humidification units, only the components with weight larger than 0.5 kg and the 
steel casing, retrieved from the information provided, are considered. For the humidifier 
Type 1 accounting for these components is enough to reach the actual weight of the 
machine, without accounting for smaller parts. This is probably due to the fact that their 
actual weight is not available and has to be assumed based on typical technologies on the 
market, which might not correspond to the ones actually used. On the contrary, for 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
humidifier Type 2 around 18 kg of unknown composition remain after accounting for the 
main components. Hence, in order to reach the actual weight of the humidifier, it is assumed 
that the remaining kilograms are composed of steel. 
 Weight of the transducer, motherboard, fan, battery and control unit is assumed based on 
available products on the market.  
 Data on reverse osmosis membrane is based on data on seawater reverse osmosis membrane 
(both regarding the quantity calculation and the chosen production process in ecoinvent) 
 The transducer production process is assumed to be represented only by the production of 
the most important constituting material (either titanium or aluminium alloy). Furthermore, 
the chosen process for titanium and aluminium alloys might not mirror the actual material 
utilized in the transducer. This is especially for the titanium option, as the actual alloy is 
made of titanium aluminium and vanadium (TiAlV64), whereas the process represent 
titanium zinc plate production.  
 The disposal of the humidification and control unit is assumed to be modelled by a global 
process for the mechanical treatment of WEEE (waste electrical and electronic equipment), 
which considers also crediting for the recovered iron scraps.  
 It is not accounted for possible component replacements due to malfunctioning or breaking 
before expected end of life   
Finally, only in the case of steel, the material for the transducers and the motherboard more than 
one option is found in the database, therefore it is decided to test the environmental performance 
when considering these alternatives. The two modelled options are already discussed in Section 
3.1.2.5 and details about the utilized process inventories are found in Table A16, Appendix A. 
3.1.3.3.7 Calculation of total amount of elements to be produced and disposed per functional  
unit 
After modelling a single piece of equipment, the total amount (in pieces) of equipment to be 
produced per kg of lettuce sold is calculated. This amount is given by the sum of the pieces required 
for each refrigerated storage or distribution stage, which is obtained with the following equation: 
𝑝𝑖= 1
𝑞𝑖
∗𝑡𝑖
𝐿𝑇 
where pi is the number of pieces during the life stage i, qi is the quantity (kg) of lettuce refrigerated 
in life stage i, ti is the duration (in days) of the refrigerated storage/distribution i and LT is the 
lifetime of the humidifier (365 
𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠
𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟∗15 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠= 5475 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 ). The results of the calculation are 
found in Table 17, which also illustrates the calculated total amount of equipment to be disposed in 
15 years per functional unit. This is obtained by taking into account the weight of the 
humidification and control units and the different parts that have to be replaced during 15 years 
(transducer, motherboard and battery). The disposal of the osmosis unit is not accounted. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
Table 17: Amount of technology elements to be produced and disposed.   
Storage/distribution stage 
Quantity of lettuce 
refrigerated (qi) (kg) 
Duration of 
storage/distribution 
stage (ti) (days) 
No. of pieces 
(pi) 
Amount of 
equipment to be 
disposed (kg) 
Processing centre 
335808 
0.5 
2.72E-10 
1.22E-08 
Distribution centre 
335808 
1 
5.58E-10 
2.49E-08 
Wholesaler 
335808 
2 
1.12E-09 
4.99E-08 
Supermarket 
446 
5 
2.05E-06 
2.70E-05 
Total transport processes 
21740 
3.5 
7.26E-08 
1.00E-06 
Total 
- 
- 
2.12E-06 
2.81E-05 
 
3.2 Sensitivity analysis 
As inherent characteristic of every LCA study, also the results of this study are affected by 
uncertainties, which derive mainly from the assumptions made and the method applied. One of the 
steps in the process of uncertainty estimation is the sensitivity analysis of the model. A sensitivity 
analysis on the uncertain (because assumed) or variable model parameters enables to test the 
sensitivity of the results, in response to a perturbation of the chosen parameter. The identification of 
the important parameters gives an estimation of the robustness of the results and helps in the 
identification for better data quality needs. Normalized sensitivity ratios (SR) are calculated 
according to the following equation (Cohen et al., 2014): 
𝑆𝑅=
𝛥𝐼𝑆
𝐼𝑆0 𝛥𝑃
𝑃0
⁄     
where P0 is the initial model parameter, IS0 is the impact score obtained for P0, ΔP is the difference 
between the initial and the perturbed model parameter and ΔIS is the difference between IS0 and 
the impact score obtained with the perturbed model parameter. The importance of the tested 
parameter is based on the extent of the ratio: if the |SR| ≥ 0.3, then sensitivity is considered medium, 
and when |SR| ≥ 0.5, sensitivity is large (Cohen et al., 2014). For lower values the parameter is not 
considered important. In this study, seven parameters are tested and perturbed by ±25%. Details on 
the choice of the parameters are found in Section 5.1. 
Seven parameters are tested in the analysis based on the following three criteria: (i) relevance of the 
parameter on the total impacts observed from the contribution analysis, (ii) relevance of the 
parameter from a humidifiers manufacturing company perspective and (iii) uncertainty of the 
modelled parameter. All parameters are perturbed by ± 25% and modifications are made in the 
humidification scenario 1, with production option 1. The parameters and the respective choice 
criteria are illustrated in Table 18. Further explanations are found in the discussion section. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
Table 18: Parameters tested in the sensitivity analysis and relative criteria followed for the choice. 
Parameter 
Unit (per kg of lettuce) 
Choice criteria 
1 
Farm machinery use 
Hectares of area treated  
(i), (iii) 
2 
Amount of plastic for packaging 
Kg of HDPE plastic crates 
(i) 
3 
Electricity consumption of 
conventional refrigeration at the 
supermarket 
Wh*5 days 
(ii), (iii) 
4 
Total electricity consumption of the 
humidifiers* 
Wh*total storage time 
(ii), (iii) 
5 
Total energy savings from 
humidifiers* 
Wh electricity *total storage time 
(ii), (iii) 
6 
Total water needs of humidifiers* 
Kg water 
(ii), (iii) 
7 
Total amount of transducer 
Kg of titanium alloy per humidifier 
(ii), (iii) 
* During storage, distribution and retailing stages 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
4. Results  
In this section, the environmental impacts of the conventional supply chain are firstly presented in 
order to understand where and in which terms there is potential for the new technology to bring 
improvements. Subsequently, the environmental impacts of the humidification-based supply chain 
are presented and compared with the baseline system. Abbreviations will be used in all the graphs 
to indicate the different impact categories, which are represented in Table 19. 
Table 19: Impact category abbreviations 
Abbreviation Impact category 
CC 
Climate change 
OD 
Ozone depletion 
HT-C 
Human toxicity, cancer effects 
HT-NC 
Human toxicity, non-cancer effects 
PM 
Particulate matter 
IR 
Ionizing radiation (human health) 
PO 
Photochemical ozone formation 
A 
Acidification 
TE 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
FE 
Freshwater eutrophication 
ME 
Marine eutrophication 
FEc 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
LU 
Land use 
WD 
Water resource depletion 
RD 
Mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion 
 
4.1 Environmental impacts of the conventional lettuce supply chain 
The ‘cradle to gate’ impacts of lettuce supply for the baseline system (starting from the production 
and including the post-harvest stages until the supermarket) are presented in this section. Figure 10 
and 11 show the normalized impact scores at midpoint level (in Person-Equivalent, PE) and the 
process contribution for all the considered impact categories respectively, according to the ILCD’s 
recommended impact assessment methods. The main processes of the storage, distribution and 
retailing stages of lettuce supply chain have been classified into two groups: Refrigeration 
processes and Transport. The first group identifies all the refrigeration stages (from the processing 
centre to the supermarket) and the second group all the transport stages (from the field to the 
supermarket). 
==PAGE:59==
59 
 
 
Figure 10: Normalized impact scores at midpoint level in Person Equivalent (PE), using EU 27 (2010) normalization factors 
(European Commission, 2014). The complete set of values for the characterized and normalized impact scores is found in 
Table B1 (Appendix B). 
 
Figure 11: Relative contribution of the different life cycle stages to the total impacts. 
From Figure 10, it can be seen that the majority of impact scores ranges between 1.20E-05 PE (for 
land use) and 5.50E-04 PE (for human toxicity, non-cancer effects). The only exception is for water 
resource depletion, which dominates the impacts being almost 10 times higher than human toxicity, 
non-cancer effects (2.52E-03 PE). The contribution analysis in Figure 11 reveals that these high 
water depletion impacts are almost completely caused by Lettuce production, being responsible for 
more than 99%. The following impacts showing higher scores are human toxicity, non-cancer 
effects, mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion and human toxicity - cancer effects, in a 
decreasing order. Besides water depletion, Lettuce production is largely responsible for human 
toxicity, non-cancer effects (66%) and mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion (61%), as 
well as marine eutrophication (57%) and land use (69%). On the other hand, human toxicity - 
cancer effects impacts are mainly caused by the processing of lettuce (highest share 46%), which is 
also an important contributing process regarding climate change (47% share) and ozone depletion 
(62%) impacts. Finally, transport processes are the third group of processes with the highest 
0.0E+00
5.0E-04
1.0E-03
1.5E-03
2.0E-03
2.5E-03
PE EU 27, 2010
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Relative contribution (%)
Refrigeration processes
Transport
Lettuce processing
Lettuce production
Biowaste disposal DK
Biowaste disposal IT
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
contributions, resulting to have the largest share in freshwater ecotoxicity impacts (65%) and 
ionizing radiation, HH (39%).  
Refrigeration processes have overall contributions not larger than 20% per impact category. The 
highest figure is seen for ionizing radiation HH, with around roughly 20% contribution, followed 
by freshwater eutrophication (15%) and particulate matter (11%).  
Finally, Biowaste disposal processes have relatively low effects on the overall impacts (less than 
10%). The Italian waste scenario is generating more impacts than the Danish one, especially 
regarding Marine eutrophication, Human toxicity - cancer effects and Climate change. This is 
probably due to the fact that a larger amount of lettuce is disposed of in Italy compared to Denmark, 
but it is also related to the type of treatment of the biowaste (landfilling as opposed to incineration). 
The disposal processes are also the only ones contributing negatively to the impact scores, meaning 
that they contribute by decreasing the overall impacts. From Figure B1 in Appendix B, it can be 
seen that waste disposal in Denmark exerts negative contributions to half of the categories (5 of 
which are not visible from the figure, because of negligible contribution), especially regarding 
Mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion. Also waste disposal in Italy contributes 
negatively to this category, but not in any of the others.    
4.1.1 Process contribution analysis: understanding the drivers of the impacts 
Process contribution is analysed more in detail, by investigating which sub-categories of process are 
contributing to the impacts caused by the macro-categories Lettuce production, Lettuce processing, 
Refrigeration processes, Transport, and Biowaste disposal. Figure 12 collects the relative process 
contributions for all the considered categories. 
Regarding Lettuce production (Figure 12a), machinery use (indicated with Fertilizing, by 
broadcaster) seems to be a key process in almost all impact categories, except for marine 
eutrophication, land use and water resource depletion. Marine eutrophication impacts are caused 
mainly by the nitrate emissions to water derived from nitrogen fertilizer applications. Freshwater 
eutrophication is not affected in the same way by fertilizer applications because the indicator for 
this impact category is based on releases of phosphorous (P) in the water (phosphate and 
phosphorous forms), which are approximately 3 orders of magnitude lower compared to nitrogen 
(N) emissions (nitrate form). Reasonably, land use impacts are caused mainly by the occupation of 
land required for cropping and water resource depletion is related to the amount of river and in 
ground water required for the irrigation of lettuce. Machinery use has the largest effects on two of 
the principal impact categories of the whole supply chain: Human toxicity, non-cancer effects, 
which is the second highest impact, is mainly affected by the air emissions (e.g. HC, NOx, SOx) 
from combustion activities related to the machinery use during cropping. Mineral, fossil and 
renewable resource depletion, the third highest impact, is largely caused by metal extraction 
operations (in this case, zinc) required to build the shed and infrastructure attributed to broadcast 
fertilization activities.  The contributions from peat extraction, fertilizers and pesticides production 
are not larger than 30% per each process, where 100% is the total contribution of lettuce production 
to the supply chain impacts. 
 
==PAGE:61==
61 
 
Figure 12: Process contribution analysis for all life cycle stages. (a) Relative contribution [%] of the lettuce production sub-
categories of processes to the impacts. (b) Relative contribution [%] of the lettuce processing sub-categories of processes to the 
impacts. (c) Relative contribution [%] of the different refrigeration processes to the impacts. Notice that the scale of the 
vertical axis starts from 93%. (d) Relative contribution [%] of the different Transport steps to the impacts. (e) Relative 
contribution [%] of the Italian biowaste composting and landfilling processes to the impacts. Effect of long term emissions is 
omitted. (f) Relative contribution [%] of the Danish biowaste composting and incineration processes to the impacts. Effect of 
long term emissions is omitted. For all graphs, 100% refers to the total impacts caused by lettuce production, lettuce 
processing, Refrigeration processes, Transport, Italian and Danish biowaste disposal processes, respectively. 
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
The relative contribution of processes to Lettuce processing is quite straightforward, as can be seen 
from Figure 12b. Indeed, it is evident that plastic manufacturing related processes needed for lettuce 
packaging dominate in all the impact categories. On the other hand, the electricity consumption 
from vacuum cooling, water consumption for washing and production of the chlorinated 
disinfectant cause almost negligible impacts.   
Contribution analysis on the Refrigeration processes shows that all the impacts are dominated by 
the refrigeration at supermarket (see Figure 12c), with contributions higher than 95%. The result is 
justified by the fact that at the supermarket the electricity consumption per kg of lettuce is higher 
compared to the other refrigerated storage steps. In addition, also the modelled refrigeration time is 
longer. 
By analysing the contributions of the various transport steps to the overall impacts from the 
transport stage, it is seen that the transport from the processing centre to the distribution centre and 
the subsequent transport to the wholesaler are the most important processes (Figure 12d). This 
result is somehow expected since these are the two longest transport distances of the scenario. If 
analysed more in detail, the results reveal that for both transport steps the exhaust and non-exhaust 
emissions (i.e. tire, break and road wear) during the transport have the highest weight on all the 
impact categories, whereas the additional diesel consumption related to the refrigeration during the 
transport is of secondary importance (data not shown).   
When moving to the Biowaste disposal in Italy, it is seen that the landfilling process exerts only 
burdens to all impact categories. Some burdens are seen also from the composting activity and are 
mainly related to the energy requirements of the composting facility. The benefits derive (negative 
impacts in sign) only from the avoided fertilizers production that is possible by utilizing the 
produced compost from the biowaste (Figure 12e). These benefits affect mainly mineral, fossil and 
renewable resource depletion, water resource depletion and freshwater eutrophication.  
More complex is instead the relative contribution of the biowaste disposal in Denmark, in which 
both biowaste incineration and composting produce both negative and positive impacts (Figure 
12f). As the composting process modelled here is the same as it was for the Italian case, the same 
benefits and impacts to the above mentioned categories are found. However, also the incineration 
process contributes to the reduction of impacts, especially regarding ionizing radiation, land use, 
particulate matter and ozone depletion. These benefits are related to the avoided electricity or heat 
production (depending on the impact category) which are provided by the incineration process. For 
instance, land use impacts decrease because of the avoided heat production from straw, which 
requires land for the cultivation of rye; whereas ionizing radiation is affected by avoided imports of 
electricity from Sweden, derived from nuclear power. 
 
4.2 Environmental impacts of the humidification-based lettuce supply 
chain 
Figure 13 shows the relative percentage change of the normalized impact scores of the four 
humidification scenarios with respect to the baseline system. For each scenario the differences 
==PAGE:63==
63 
 
between the two proposed production options are also shown. Characterized and normalized scores 
for each scenario are found in Table B2 and B3 (Appendix B) for production option 1 and 2, 
respectively.  
 
Figure 13: Comparison between the four humidification scenarios and the baseline system. Results are given in relative 
change (in %) of the normalized impact scores with respect to the baseline scores. The comparison between production 
options 1 and 2 for each scenario is also shown.  
The first noticeable result is that in the majority of the cases the humidification scenarios brings 
reduction of the impacts. The only cases in which the humidification system performance is worse 
are observed with scenario 0, in 9 impact categories, and scenario 1 and 2 (production option 1) in 
the category mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion. In addition, the extent of the impact 
reductions is generally larger compared to the cases in which the impacts are worsened,  meaning 
that the reductions can be up to -10% (average around 5%), whereas the impact increases are not 
larger than 7% (average around 1%). The second important result is that all the changes, either 
reductions or increments, are relatively small and never greater than 10% compared to the baseline 
system. A third observation is that for all impact categories, except mineral, fossil and renewable 
resource depletion, there is virtually no difference between the humidifier design options 1 and 2. 
This last point will be thoroughly discussed in the separate subsection 4.2.1. 
Scenario 0, which does not include the reduction of lettuce losses potentially brought by the 
humidifiers, is used to illustrate only the effects of adding the new technology to the system. Here, 
the impact scores of 9 categories out of 15, with both production options, are slightly higher than in 
the baseline (with average relative change of around +1.1 in percentage). This means that for these 
categories (e.g. human toxicity, cancer and non-cancer effects or freshwater eutrophication) the 
addition of the humidification technology only increases the impacts, if no reduction in lettuce 
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
CC
OD
HT-C HT-NC
PM
IR
PO
A
TE
FE
ME
FEc
LU
WD
RD
Relative change from baseline scenario [%]
Scenario 0 - option 1
Scenario 0 - option 2
Scenario 1 - option 1
Scenario 1 - option 2
Scenario 2 - option 1
Scenario 2 - option 2
Scenario 3 - option 1
Scenario 3 - option 2
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
losses occurs at the same time. The specific reason for the observed slight worsening varies 
depending on the impact category in question, but in general it is always related to (i) the increased 
electricity consumption at the supermarket, due to the additional energy requirements of the 
humidifier (Table 15), (ii) the humidifier needs for water and disinfectant during every refrigerated 
transport stage and (iii) the production and disposal of the humidification technology. For all 
categories except one, this worsened trend was observed also when the scenario was analysed 
without accounting for the production and disposal of the humidifiers, suggesting that the energy, 
water and disinfectant requirements are responsible for the increased impact here (data not shown). 
A different situation is seen for mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion, where the 
increased impact is almost totally caused by the humidifier production and disposal processes (see 
Figure B2, Appendix B). On the contrary, for the rest of the categories a little improvement is seen 
even with no changes in losses (especially for marine and terrestrial eutrophication). By excluding 
again the humidifiers production and disposal from the model, it was possible to verify that these 
impact reductions are all driven by the lower consumption of electricity during refrigerated 
transport (data not shown). These results demonstrate that the technology alone, without any 
reduction in food loss, brings improvements to around one third of the considered impacts and 
deterioration in the remaining two thirds of the cases.  
When reduction of food losses are included in the model (from scenario 1 to 3) the results are not 
only affected by the above mentioned trade-offs in electricity consumption, but also by the 
decreased amount of lettuce that flows through the system. In fact, with decreasing lettuce losses 
the impacts are generally decreasing as well, for all impact categories. Average reductions, with 
respect to the baseline system, are found to be in the order of -2.6, -6.0 and -7.4%, for scenario 1, 2 
and 3 respectively. These reductions are always proportional to the relative decreases in food losses, 
in the sense that the higher the loss reduction, the higher also the impact reduction. The low 
magnitude of the improvements is should not surprise, as the changes are driven by the 
corresponding total reductions in lettuce losses, which are 2, 5 and 6% respectively.  
A comparison with the baseline system shows that the process contribution of all the investigated 
humidification scenarios is very similar, with no or negligible changes (Figure B3 Appendix B). 
This means that the relative process contributions in each scenario are almost the same found in the 
baseline system: lettuce production, processes and transport processes are still the most 
contributing, whereas refrigeration and waste disposal processes remain of secondary importance, 
as was found in the baseline system contribution analysis. When analysing the difference in the 
contribution of each process and each category (Figure B4, Appendix B), it is found that the total 
impact reductions are reasonably driven by the lower amount of lettuce to be produced (reduction of 
lettuce production impacts), processed (reduction of lettuce processing impacts), transported 
(reduction of transport impacts) and disposed (reduction of biowaste disposal impacts). It is 
surprisingly observed that the highest difference in impact scores between baseline and 
humidification scenarios is for the disposal of biowaste in Denmark, (i.e. incineration and 
composting) and the reason for this is not completely understood. Nevertheless the result should 
only be interpreted in the light of the process contribution of each specific impact category (Figure 
B3, Appendix B). For example, terrestrial eutrophication is the category mostly affected by 
biowaste disposal DK among all the categories (around 2% for every scenario) and for this reason it 
benefits the most for the reduction in impacts (for each scenario the category has the largest impact 
==PAGE:65==
65 
 
reductions). However, lettuce production and transport processes are still the most contributing 
processes, therefore they also remain the main responsible for the lowered impacts. 
The only difference in the contribution analysis is found for mineral, fossil and renewable resource 
depletion impact category, where the humidifier production and disposal stage also play a role. In 
fact, while for the majority of the categories the contribution of this stage is negligible, for the 
resources depletion category it contributes to around 3 to 6% (depending on the production option) 
of the total impact, for all the scenarios (Figure B3, Appendix B). This in fact explains why, with 
the addition of the humidifiers, the impacts on this category increase to a higher extent compared to 
the others (also considering what was observed for scenario 0). The beneficial effect of a reduction 
in losses is less noticed in this category because the humidifier production process is more 
influential.  
4.2.1 Influence of humidifier production alternatives 
Another important result shown in Figure 13 is that for every scenario, negligible changes are seen 
between production option 1 and 2, meaning that the different materials or production methods 
investigated with the two alternatives do not change significantly the impacts. This applies to all 
impact categories, except for mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion, where the choice 
between option 1 and 2 seems to be determinant. Figure 14 illustrates that with option 2 the impact 
on mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion is always reduced regardless the scenario. For 
scenario 0 and 1 impacts are still slightly higher than the baseline system, from around 0.9 to 6.6% 
higher (impact score for the baseline system is indicated by the black line). However, when lettuce 
losses are reduced as in scenario 2, the performance is improved only with option 2. In the last 
scenario, impacts are reduced with both options, though the best results are seen with option 2 
(about 3.6% impact reduction).   
 
 
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
 
Figure 14: Comparison of the four humidification scenarios normalized impact scores on mineral, fossil and renewable 
resource depletion, between each other and between the two production options. Contribution of the humidifier production on 
the total score is also shown. The black line indicate the impact score on the same category for the baseline scenario.  
In order to understand why the contribution of option 2 is always lower than option 1, a process 
contribution analysis of the humidifier production stage is necessary. When the impacts on mineral, 
fossil and renewable resource depletion of production option 1 are compared with option 2 (Figure 
15), it is seen that what makes the difference is the process representing the production of the 
transducer, essential component of the humidifiers. If this component is made of titanium, as in 
option 1, the overall impact from the production of the humidifiers is increased, as it contributes to 
around 45% of the impact. This is mainly due to the depletion of zinc that is used in the chosen 
process for titanium alloy production. Instead, if the transducer is made of aluminium alloy, as in 
option 2, the contribution is less than 1% (in fact it is not visible from Figure 15) and the impact 
decreases. This is possible also because the contribution of the all remaining components remains 
the almost same in both alternatives, especially regarding the modified processes for the 
motherboard and steel. In fact, inappreciable differences (less than 3%) are observed regarding the 
type of motherboard utilized, meaning that using a product containing lead (tested in option 1) or 
lead-free (tested in option 2) does not significantly change the impacts. Similarly, producing steel 
from virgin raw materials (option 1) or from steel scraps (option 2) produces virtually no 
differences. In conclusion, option 2 performs better than option 1 because aluminium is used as 
material for the transducers instead of titanium. 
==PAGE:67==
67 
 
 
Figure 15: Normalized impact scores on mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion caused only by the humidifier 
production stage for the two options (all other life cycle stages are excluded). Process contribution of the different 
components is shown.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.0E+00
5.0E-06
1.0E-05
1.5E-05
2.0E-05
2.5E-05
3.0E-05
Option 1
Option 2
PE EU 27,2010
Printed wiring board production
Aluminium alloy production (for option 2)
Titanium zinc plate production (for option 1)
Remaning components
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
5. Interpretation and discussion 
In this section, first the results of the sensitivity analysis are presented and discussed. Afterwards, 
the overall performance of the humidification technology will be summarized. The major findings 
from the baseline system assessment will be then discussed to give an idea of the robustness of the 
baseline model, on which the humidification system is built. Finally, a discussion on the 
humidification system is found, together with the completeness, representativeness and consistency 
checks. 
 
5.1 Sensitivity analysis 
As anticipated in the methodology the parameters tested in the sensitivity analysis are: 
1. Farm machinery use 
2. Amount of plastic for packaging 
3. Electricity consumption of conventional refrigeration at the supermarket 
4. Total electricity consumption of the humidifiers 
5. Total energy savings from humidifiers 
6. Total water needs of humidifiers 
7. Total amount of transducer 
Farm machinery use and amount of plastic for packaging were observed to be two important 
contributors within the production and the processing stages of lettuce, respectively. Moreover, the 
modelled parameter for machinery use was uncertain, because based on Swiss production data. The 
rest of the parameters (from 3 to 7), is chosen because they can provide relevant information to the 
manufacturing company regarding the contribution of the energy performance of conventional 
cooling and humidifiers. The amount of transducer, in terms of mass of material per humidifier, is 
tested because it was found relevant when comparing production options of the humidifiers. 
Uncertainty also affects this last set of parameters, especially regarding the assumptions made to 
calculate the energy/water consumption and energy savings of the humidifiers (see Section 3.1.3.3). 
Sensitivity analysis on uncertain parameters related to biowaste disposal processes is not carried out 
(as anticipated in Section 3.1.3.1), due to the low contribution of these processes on the 
environmental impacts. 
Figure 16 shows the sensitivity ratios results of the seven parameters for four selected impact 
categories. For the majority of the impact categories, a ranking of the sensitivity ratios gives similar 
results as shown for climate change and terrestrial eutrophication categories (Figure 16a and 16c), 
where the parameter that affects the most the results is the amount of plastic for packaging, 
followed by the others in scattered order. For a few categories, instead, machinery use is the most 
important parameter as shown for mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion (Figure 16b). 
Figure for ionizing radiation HH impacts is shown to highlight that the model here seems slightly 
more sensitive to all parameters perturbations compared to the other impact categories (Figure 16d). 
In general, all alterations show (i) linear effects, i.e. the extent of the alteration remains the same 
when parameters are either increased or decreased by 25% and (ii) direct proportionality with 
impacts, i.e. when parameters are increased the impact increases as well and vice versa. The only 
==PAGE:69==
69 
 
exception is for energy savings from humidifiers, because when the parameters is increased the 
impact (reasonably) drops, and vice versa. 
The results of the sensitivity analysis confirmed what was already observed in the contribution 
analysis: farm machinery use and the amount of plastic for packaging are found to be relevant 
parameters for a group (not all) of impact categories. In particular, the model shows the greatest 
sensitivity when packaging plastic requirements are modified, with |SR| ≥ 0.3 in 7 out of 15 impact 
categories (Table B4 Appendix B). At the same time, machinery use is also quite influential, with 
high sensitivity ratios in two impact categories (Table B4 Appendix B). On the other hand, all 
parameters related to the humidifiers (4 to 7) and conventional cooling energy consumption do not 
seem important, when considering the overall effects on the supply chain. In fact, sensitivity ratios 
were found all below 0.3, especially regarding the water and the transducer amount parameters. The 
latter is observed also for the mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion impact category, 
which was found to be more influenced by the humidifier production process. This is in agreement 
to the low contribution of the refrigeration and humidifier manufacturing processes observed in the 
contribution analysis of the scenario (Section 4.2). 
Figure 16: Sensitivity rations for climate change (a), mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion (b), terrestrial 
eutrophication (c) and ionizing radiation HH (d) impact categories.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
70 
 
The following conclusions can be drawn from the sensitivity analysis: 
 The importance of the amount of plastic for packaging suggests that the environmental 
performance can potentially be improved if the packaging needs are lowered, e.g. in the case 
the plastic crates are reused several times. 
 Improvements can derive also from reduced machinery use during farming, however this 
parameter is much more difficult to control. 
 An increase or a decrease in the energy consumption of the humidifiers does not 
significantly affect the total impacts, as long as food losses are lowered, suggesting that the 
focus should not be on these parameters for improving the environmental performance of 
the system, but rather on reducing the losses. 
 The water requirements of the technology and the transducer material do not represent a 
substantial environmental burden, as the dominant process causing water use impacts stem 
from the agricultural activity rather than humidifier use. 
 
5.2 Is the new technology improving the environmental performance 
of the supply chain? 
An interpretation of the baseline system results allows to identify what are the potentials for 
reducing the environmental impacts of the conventional lettuce supply chain. From the obtained 
baseline results it is found that the three most important drivers of the environmental impacts are the 
production of lettuce, the packaging requirements during processing and the emissions from 
transport activities during distribution (emissions from additional refrigeration unit are excluded). 
On the other hand, refrigeration at the various storage centres and the biowaste disposal processes 
have shown to be of secondary importance. This means that the system is mainly affected by the 
first three processes and the sensitivity analysis further highlights that a perturbation of two of the 
parameters related to them (farm machinery use and the amount of packaging plastic) will probably 
have major effects on the final environmental impacts. From this, it follows that the greatest 
potential for the humidification/disinfection technology to bring down the environmental impacts 
relies principally on the ability of the technology to reduce lettuce losses, during storage, 
distribution and retailing stages. Less losses will lower the amount of lettuce to be produced and 
decrease packaging and transport requirements. Accordingly, also the impacts from the treatment of 
the organic waste, in particular landfilling, will decrease, yet the benefits will be less significant. On 
the contrary, due to the relatively low contribution of refrigeration processes, a possible reduction of 
the energy consumption provided by the humidification technology might not be significant enough 
to considerably reduce the impacts. This likely applies also in the case the energy consumption 
increases due to the introduction of the humidifiers, provided that food losses are reduced at the 
same time.  
The potential improvements derived from the technology depend also on the extent of the food 
losses occurring during storage, distribution and retailing stages, in relation to the total losses 
during the supply chain. When assuming FAO’s estimations (see Section 1.1), the total reduction 
potential during all life cycle stages corresponds to about 33%, meaning that currently 33% of the 
==PAGE:71==
71 
 
produced food is lost. However, the technology can only prevent losses during post-harvest stages 
and even here not all of the potential can be captured by improving the food preservation 
technology (as already explained in Section 1.2), thus an assumption has to be made regarding its 
contribution. Since the contribution was assumed to be on around a half of the losses (with respect 
to what enters each post-harvest step), the maximum reduction potential provided by the new 
technology is 6% of the total losses. In other words, in the best of the hypotheses, the humidifiers 
can avoid 6% of the total losses occurring from production to retailing, as total losses are decreased 
from 33 to 27%. 
When comparing the baseline results with the humidification scenarios, it is found that the 
humidification technology has the potential to improve the environmental performance of lettuce 
supply chain as long as it can provide a reduction in food losses. The increased burdens associated 
with the additional demand for energy and resources are well counterbalanced by the benefits from 
the decreased lettuce production in all categories except for mineral, fossil and renewable resource 
depletion, where reduction in food losses has to be more substantial to have an improvement. If 
losses are not lowered, then the energy and resources requirements will slightly increase the burden 
on certain environmental impacts, and the provided energy savings will bring improvements on 
other impacts, leading to a basically unchanged situation. 
According to the obtained results, to have a reduction of all environmental impacts (i.e. considering 
all impact categories), the total losses from the production to retailing stages have to be reduced by 
at least 5%, which corresponds to the technology medium efficiency. At the same time, the 
humidifier production option 2 has to be used, otherwise the impacts on mineral, fossil and 
renewable resource depletion will not be reduced. Alternatively, to have a reduction of the majority 
of the impacts (i.e. excluding impacts on mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion), it is 
sufficient that the total losses are reduced by 2%, with either production option 1 or 2 
(corresponding to scenario 1). In qualitative terms, in order to bring down the environmental 
impacts of the supply chain, the technology efficiency can also be lower than the expected 
maximum possible (scenario 3, i.e. 6% total losses reduction). On the contrary, in the case option 1 
is strictly used, the efficiency should be maximum to have improvements also in mineral, fossil and 
renewable resource depletion category. 
When using the current information on humidifiers, it is seen that there is potential for reducing the 
energy consumptions at cold stores and during refrigerated transport, including long distance 
transport (up to 2 days). When applied at supermarket refrigerated displays humidifiers operation 
could increase energy consumption. 
 
5.3 Discussion on the baseline system  
In order to give a correct interpretation of the baseline system results, a comparison of the obtained 
impact assessment scores with other similar studies would be necessary. Unfortunately thorough 
research for comparing the results was not carried out in this study, due to difficulties in finding 
representative comparable LCA on lettuce supply chain. However, a few studies were found. 
(Canals et al., 2008), which conducted LCA on lettuce produced in Spain and consumed in the UK, 
==PAGE:72==
72 
 
shows that characterized impact scores for climate change impact category are around the same 
order of magnitude (approximately 1 kg CO2 eq/kg lettuce on plate) with the ones obtained in this 
study (1.6 kg CO2 eq/kg lettuce sold). Comparison of the climate change impact scores is possible 
as the same impact assessment method is used (Global Warming Potential, 100 years horizon), 
whereas for the other impact categories the method differs compared to this study. (Payen et al., 
2014) obtained slightly lower results on climate change impacts (0.55 kg CO2 eq) for tomato 
produced in Morocco and transported to France. Even though many factors hinder a fair 
comparison, e.g. different boundaries of the studied systems (e.g. in Canals et al. also the impacts 
from the consumption of lettuce are considered), different geographical scope or different 
commodity, the similarities found with the two studies shows at least that the result obtained for this 
climate change sound reasonable.  
The remarkably higher normalized impact scores (compared to the other impact categories) 
obtained for water depletion is worth to be further discussed. The result depends on three factors: (i) 
the water consumption from lettuce production utilized to build the inventory, (ii) the 
characterization factor of the impact assessment method and (iii) the normalization reference. 
Stoessel et al. 2012 reports comparable figures for water consumption per kg of lettuce produced in 
Switzerland (values are in the same order of magnitude to the ones utilized in this study), 
supporting the idea that the adopted inventory value is reasonable. The method utilized to obtain 
characterized water depletion impact scores, accounts for freshwater use in relation to the local 
scarcity of water, which is based on the ratio between water consumption and availability of the 
resource of a specific country (Frischknecht et al., 2006). Despite the fact that in the model the 
utilized process for lettuce irrigation was representative for Spain, meaning that characterized factor 
for Spain was utilized, representativeness is still kept because Italy and Spain are classified within 
the same water scarcity category, according to the method. This means that the same 
characterization factor for water depletion in Spain is applicable also for Italy. This excludes the 
possibility that the observed high water depletion impacts are related to the use of non-
representative characterization factors. In conclusion, if assuming that the normalization references 
are accurate, water depletion impacts are considered to be associated to the freshwater requirements 
of the cropping activities. An analysis of the accuracy of the characterization factors and 
normalization references requires the comparison with other methods, which was not carried out as 
considered out of the scope of this study. 
When looking at the contribution analysis, another similarity is found with Canals et al. 2008 and 
(Payen et al., 2014) regarding the fact that the production stage is one of the most contributing 
stages for most of the impact categories, especially water and land use. In fact, this seems a 
reasonable result as the production stage of fruit and vegetables supply chain is generally associated 
with high environmental burdens (Webb et al., 2013). On the other hand, it is a bit surprising that 
fertilizers and pesticides emissions are significant contributors only for marine eutrophication, and 
not so important for acidification, freshwater ecotoxicity, terrestrial and freshwater eutrophication. 
This may be due to underestimated or inaccurate emissions estimations to the different 
environmental compartments. For instance, the heavy metals emissions associated with fertilizer 
application are entirely assigned to the soil compartment, neglecting potential penetration into the 
freshwater compartment. This could explain the low contribution of fertilizer emissions to 
freshwater ecotoxicity. Moreover, the impacts from these emissions to soil might not be adequately 
==PAGE:73==
73 
 
captured by the considered impact categories, which might be if terrestrial ecotoxicity was included 
as impact category. Similarly, modelling of pesticide emissions is also affected by limitations as no 
drift or chemical transformations are considered and soil compartment is the only sink for the 
substance. More accurate estimations could be obtained when accounting for the partition of the 
substance into the air, surface water and groundwater compartments.  
The majority of the data utilized to model the production of lettuce are representative of 
conventional open land farming in Italy and in some case in Apulia region, with the exception of 
machinery, water use and fertilizer application rates data. Average national values are acceptably 
representative. If more complete data (e.g. include data on seedling production) or more 
representative data (e.g. accurate fertilizer and pesticide emission estimation, inventory for 
machinery and water use suitable for Italy) are utilized, the results will probably confirm even more 
the importance of this stage and so the importance of reducing food losses. Hence, the data issues 
related to this stage are not considered to be crucial.  
Regarding energy consumption during lettuce processing, even though data on pre-cooling step are 
not specifically from Apulia processing centres, the values are representative of vacuum cooling 
technology and the calculation of energy consumption is documented and reliable.  
Another remarkable result is the dominance of the HDPE crates production for the packaging of 
lettuce, among the processing activities. The packaging step shows variable contributions according 
to different studies. For instance, in (Webb et al., 2013) it is found to be one of the main 
contributors of GWP (Global Warming Potential) impacts for tomatoes and strawberries, whereas it 
has relatively low importance in Stoessel et al. 2012 for a variety of vegetables. In this study, this 
parameter is quite influential for the model and also the sensitivity analysis demonstrates this 
(Section 5.1). The main issue here is related to the probably unrealistic assumption that was made 
about the fact that the plastic crates are used only once, which leads to high amounts of plastic 
being produced per kg of lettuce. This fact is indeed confirmed by a supplementary analysis that 
was done in a second moment. Considering that a plastic crate could be reused approximately 150 
times (Rapusas and Rolle, 2009), the amount of plastic decreases from 0.2 kg to around 0.0013 kg 
per kg of lettuce. Consequently the contribution of the processing stage to the overall impacts 
decreases significantly and is never higher than 3% for each impact category, as shown in see 
Figure 17.  
==PAGE:74==
74 
 
 
Figure 17: Relative contribution of the life cycle stages to the total impacts of the supply chain, when considering reusable 
plastic crates for lettuce packaging. 
In addition to this, two other important omissions were done in the model, as end-of-life of this 
plastic and wastewater treatment from washing and disinfection steps are not included in the model. 
For instance, assuming that the material is recycled or incinerated, the contribution of the 
processing stage illustrated in Figure 17, could be further influenced, leading, in any case, to an 
overall reduction compared to the first observed results. This is likely to be observed also 
considering the impacts from wastewater treatment. However, it is also seen that when the 
importance of lettuce processing is low, lettuce production and transport processes become even 
more contributing to the impacts for all categories, whereas refrigeration processes remain almost 
the same (slight increase from 7 to 10% on average). This demonstrates that the main results of the 
comparison will not change, even if more appropriate modelling choices are made regarding the 
packaging step. The largest potential for the technology to improve the environmental performance 
will still depend on how much the lettuce production and transport processes can be avoided, 
therefore on how much food losses can be avoided. 
The importance of transport processes depends entirely on the long distances covered which are not 
considered to be affected by significant uncertainty issues. Representativeness of transport process 
is considered acceptable also if referring to European average. 
 
5.3 Discussion on the humidification system 
For the goals of this study, the correct modelling of the refrigerated storage, distribution and 
retailing stages has a particular importance, as it is here that the interaction with the humidification-
disinfection technology occur. Retrieved data are applicable to the European context (except for the 
supermarket case), but do not specify if representative of the conventional vapour compressor 
system. The energy consumption figures utilized in the model in these stages are subjected to 
significant uncertainty because they can vary considerably depending on many factors, such as the 
type of facility, the type and efficiency of conventional cooling technology, the common practices 
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Relative contribution (%)
Refrigerated processes
Transport
Lettuce processing
Lettuce production
Biowaste disposal DK
Biowaste disposal IT
==PAGE:75==
75 
 
adopted at the supermarket, etc. However, the sensitivity analysis supports the finding that 
refrigerated stages do not contribute notably to the environmental impacts (at least regarding the 
supermarket consumption).  
All the energy and water consumptions as well as energy savings per kg of lettuce of the 
humidifiers used in the model are strongly dependent on the assumptions made to obtain the 
reference amount of lettuce treated by one machine. The technology data specifications provided by 
the company are not clear regarding the reference volume treated by one humidifier, as for one 
machine two alternative volumes are indicated (Table 2). These can contain very different amounts 
of lettuce, leading to very different figures for energy consumption and savings. Therefore a choice 
was made between the two according to what was more appropriate to the environment of 
application. However, this later forced to assume that the energy savings are equal to half of the 
energy consumption of the conventional cooling and disregard the (perhaps overestimated) energy 
saving values provided, as the calculation was returning higher savings than conventional 
consumptions. All this emphasizes that the quality of the data here is lower compared to the one 
used for the conventional cooling, for which the data retrieved were already scaled per kg of 
product. If better data are used, the comparison might reveal that the energy performance of the 
technology is worse during refrigerated transport or at the cold stores, or it might be better when 
applied at the supermarket. Regarding the environmental performance, the sensitivity analysis 
suggests that it is unlikely that a change in the energy and water requirements will lead to 
appreciable alterations.  
The modelling of the production and disposal of the technology is meant to be an attempt to account 
for these stages, even though specific data about the production process and components of the 
technology is not known and several assumptions were made as a consequence. Here in fact is 
where completeness and representativeness of the processes are mostly doubtful and this affects the 
whole dataset. Several aspects were neglected due to lack of data, such as assembling process of the 
technology units or the production of the carbon/sediment filters of the osmosis unit. The closest 
possible option was chosen for the production of the single components, which sometimes was of 
poor or uncertain representativeness (for example, in the case of the osmosis membranes, the fan, 
the transducer material, the disposal of electronic equipment, etc.). The result is that, probably as a 
consequence of the low amount of technology that is required to be produced and disposed per 
functional unit, these stages are found to be negligible for almost all impact categories. 
Nevertheless, this does not exclude the possibility that, considering every single component and 
using more appropriate process inventories, the overall contribution of production and disposal 
stages would be modified, at least in some of the categories of impact (e.g. in the case small 
components contain harmful chemicals or scarce metals). This concerns especially the transducer 
material. In fact, it could be that the titanium based transducer performs worse only because of the 
specific (and non representative) process chosen in ecoinvent, and not because a titanium based 
transducer is actually worse than an aluminium one. Especially considering that the impact is 
correlated to zinc depletion more than titanium. If this is the case, it could be, for instance, that there 
is no difference between option 1 and 2, modifying anyway the performance of the technology with 
respect to this impact category. 
==PAGE:76==
76 
 
Even though the type of material used for the transducer in the humidification unit is found to be 
responsible for worsening the impacts on mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion, the 
sensitivity analysis has revealed that it is not an important parameter. However, this result from the 
sensitivity analysis does not mean that the effect caused by the parameter perturbation is not enough 
to cause a higher impact compared to the baseline system. Indeed, the difference between the 
compared systems is so small that even a change of 1% is sufficient to exceed the baseline impacts. 
Therefore the sensitivity analysis result is interpreted in this way: even if there is an increase (or a 
decrease) compared to the baseline impact, this will be unappreciable.      
Also the representativeness of the considered lettuce disposal processes is questionable, especially 
regarding the share of waste sent to different treatments, the modelled composition of the disposed 
biowaste and the affinity of the chosen technology with the actual one. Availability of better data 
and modelling with dedicated software (such as EASETECH (Christensen et al., 2013)), would 
allow to obtain more representative results. Nevertheless, this is not considered a priority in the 
study, since the contribution of these processes is found to be low though the model is rather 
conservative (i.e. impacts from landfilling or incineration are probably overestimated as municipal 
solid waste or general biowaste are considered instead of just lettuce). 
 
5.4 Consistency check 
As anticipated in Section 3.1.2.6 the application of the attributional principle could not be done 
completely for the entire model, due to limitations of the database structure. However, the principle 
has been consistently applied in the electricity mixes for Italy and Denmark, which are considered 
quite important for the performance comparison (especially regarding the energy requirements of 
the cooling and humidification technologies).  
The application of the impact assessment method has been done consistently between the compared 
systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
77 
 
6. Conclusion  
In this study, a life cycle assessment is carried out to compare the environmental impacts derived 
from post-harvest application of humidification-disinfection technology with the conventional 
lettuce supply chain impacts. The trade-offs between the reduced food losses benefits and the 
burdens associated with the technology demand for materials, water and energy are assessed. The 
following conclusions can be drawn: 
 The three most important drivers of the environmental impacts of the considered lettuce 
supply chain are: lettuce production, packaging and the emissions derived from all the 
transport stages together, including transport from Italy to Denmark, but excluding the 
emissions from refrigeration during transport. The sensitivity analysis also indicates that the 
machinery use during agricultural production and the amount of plastic to be produced for 
packaging are important parameters that can alter the impacts.  
 Refrigerated storage, distribution and retailing stages together with biowaste disposal stages 
have relatively low contributions on the considered impacts. 
 These results from the baseline system already indicate that the greatest potential for the 
humidification-disinfection technology, to improve the environmental performance of the 
supply chain, is by affecting the quantity of lettuce to be produced, packed and transported, 
therefore by reducing lettuce losses. The study recognizes that the results related to 
importance of the packaging step are probably overestimated, due to an unrealistic 
assumption made in the modelling (single use plastic creates). However, it is also verified 
that the major finding regarding the importance of reducing lettuce losses would not change, 
even considering more fair assumptions.   
 The comparison between the baseline and the four humidification system scenarios clearly 
demonstrated that the technology has the potential to improve the performance of the supply 
chain, as long as it can provide a reduction in food losses. An increase or a decrease in the 
energy consumption of the humidifiers does not significantly affect the total impacts, as long 
as food losses are lowered, and the water requirements do not represent a substantial 
environmental burden. These results indicate that the benefits from decreasing the losses are 
well counterbalanced by the burdens associated to the demand for raw materials, water and 
energy. On the contrary, when reduction in losses is missing, these burdens lead to a 
deterioration of the majority of the impact categories. In the rest of the cases, a little 
improvement is seen as the adiabatic cooling effect provided by the humidifiers can reduce 
the energy consumption during refrigerated storage and distribution stages (retailing 
excluded), thus improving the energy performance. Although there are uncertainties related 
to the calculations of energy consumption and savings of the humidifiers, there is the 
potential to reduce the overall energy consumption, at least in some of the stages.   
 According to the obtained results, the efficiency of the technology does not have to be the 
maximum possible to be beneficial. In particular, when the technology has a low efficiency, 
i.e. can reduce total losses from lettuce production to retailing by 2%, all impacts, except 
mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion, show average reductions of 2.6% 
compared to the baseline system. When efficiency is medium or maximum, i.e. 5% or 6% 
total losses reduction, all impacts could be decreased on average by 6 and 7.4% respectively. 
==PAGE:78==
78 
 
In any case, the extent of the improvements is relatively small, as it is related to the provided 
decrease in lettuce losses. 
 In general the humidifier production and disposal stages have unappreciable contributions 
(lower that 0.7%) to the impacts and the production option does not influence the 
environmental performance, apart from mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion 
impacts. The category is found to be more affected by humidifiers production and disposal 
stages than others (around 6%). This implies that if the efficiency of the technology is 
medium, only in the case the piezoelectric transducer (constituting the humidification unit) 
is made of aluminium alloy, also impacts on this category can be reduced. If efficiency is 
maximum, improvements on the category are seen with both transducer materials. In every 
case, it appears that using an aluminium based transducer is better than a titanium based one. 
However, when considering that the representativeness of these processes is doubtful, this 
should not be interpreted as an absolute result, but as a warning when choosing the type of 
transducer material.  
 
 
==PAGE:79==
79 
 
7. Recommendations 
Based on the conclusions drawn from the study, the following recommendations are identified: 
Recommendations to the humidifiers producer 
Given that the ability of the technology to reduce the environmental impacts is found to rely mostly 
on the extent of the food losses reductions, the focus should be on ensuring this losses reduction, 
when aiming to improve the environmental performance of the supply chain. This could mean, for 
instance, conducting more studies on the efficiency of the technology when applied at supermarket 
refrigerated displays, but also at cold stores and on truck trailers. This should be done making sure 
that more representative data are taken compared to this study, especially regarding the 
conventional cooling energy consumption at the supermarket. Based on this, it is also suggested to 
provide thorough guidelines and best practices to the possible stakeholders (e.g. supermarket 
chains, fresh produce transport companies, etc.) on how to best operate the equipment and 
guarantee the maximum efficiency.  
On the contrary, reducing energy consumption of humidifiers or providing more energy savings 
should not be priority issues, as they are not expected to bring significant improvements, even 
considering the limitations of the study. It follows that even higher energy consumptions are 
allowed, provided that the food losses are reduced. Despite that, it is anyway highly recommended 
to provide more accurate data regarding the range of applicability of the technology and the related 
energy savings. In particular, it would be relevant to have a precise indication of the quantity of 
product that can be treated per type of humidification unit, or at least to have an unequivocal 
reference to the treated volume. In addition, it might be that the cooling energy figures provided by 
the technology are overestimated or not rigorous enough, thus better estimations are recommended. 
This would allow to avoid making several assumptions in the calculation of energy consumption, 
energy savings and water needs of the technology and bring down the overall uncertainties. In turn, 
this would allow for more accurate and fair comparisons on the humidifiers environmental 
performance.   
Regarding suggestions for greening the humidifiers manufacturing process, it is highlighted that the 
type piezoelectric transducer, or better its constituting material, could potentially create burdens 
regarding mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion impacts only. Due to uncertainties 
associated to representativeness of the involved processes, it is not possible to guarantee that an 
aluminium based transducer should be preferred to a titanium based one. However it is 
recommended to be careful when choosing this type of component, as it could affect the 
environmental performance regarding resources depletion. Furthermore, even in this case it would 
also be relevant to have more precise data regarding the specific components of the various units, 
such as type and weight of the transducers, the fan, the battery or the active surface of the reverse 
osmosis membrane and details on small components possibly containing harmful substances or 
scarce metals. Again, this would allow to carry out a more representative assessment and, most 
importantly, to be able to provide more comprehensive and robust recommendations regarding the 
environmental performance of the technology manufacturing process.   
 
==PAGE:80==
80 
 
Recommendations to stakeholders 
The installation of the technology at cold stores or on refrigerated truck trailers can potentially 
reduce the energy consumption and therefore the related costs. Moreover it is expected that also 
food losses are reduced and this would bring down the costs for disposal of waste. However, this 
can vary depending on the specific energy consumption and practices of the different facilities, 
therefore it is suggested to ascertain that energy savings are achieved at the specific locations of 
application. This may also be applicable for installation in supermarkets refrigerated display. Even 
if these energy savings cannot provide substantial improvements in the environmental impacts of 
the supply chain, they cannot add further burdens.  
In order to obtain the maximum efficiency from the technology, it is necessary, and so 
recommended, to properly operate the equipment and follow the guidelines for best practices 
provided by the humidifiers provider. Ensuring the maximum efficiency from the technology allows 
to reduce food losses and therefore the overall environmental impacts of the supply chain. 
Recommendations for further studies 
Besides filling the data gaps discussed in the Recommendations to the humidifiers provider, the 
following is recommended to further improve the quality of this LCA study: 
 The efficiency of the technology on a larger scale should be tested before providing 
recommendations at policy level. Indeed, the technology shows potential in this specific 
case study of lettuce supply chain, however the results could vary significantly when 
considering, for instance, vegetables with higher shelf-life (e.g. carrots), different level of 
complexity of the supply chain (e.g. shorter transport distances) or even different types of 
farming (e.g. organic farming). 
 Considering the more realistic scenario in which plastic crates for lettuce packaging are 
reused several times and include the final disposal. This is expected to overall decrease the 
contribution of the packaging stage to the environmental impacts, reassessing in a more 
appropriate way the importance of the processing stage.   
 More accurate modelling of the production stage of lettuce and the various farming activities 
is recommended, considering the relevance that the process shows on the overall 
environmental impacts. The model considered in this study could be improved by avoiding 
the cut-offs related to seedling production or refining the emissions from fertilizers and 
pesticide application.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
81 
 
References 
AK Steel Corporation, 2007. Stainless steel 316 316L Data Sheet. West Chester. Available at: 
http://www.aksteel.com/ 
Antonelli, M., Gengotti, S., 2004. Lattuga. Il Divulgatore, 28–35. (Newspaper article). Available at: 
http://www.ildivulgatore.it/pdf/2004/01-art3-1LATTUGA.pdf 
Aragrande, M., Segré, A., Gentile, E., Malorgio, G., Giraud Heraud, E., Robles, E., Halicka, E., 
Loi, A., Bruni, M., 2005. National report — Denmark - Quick scan of the food supply chain 
dynamics, labelling and certification schemes and policies, rules and regulations in the selected 
EU country, European Commission, JRC.  
Aulakh, J., Regmi, A., Fulton, J., Alexander, C., 2013. Estimating Post-Harvest Food losses: 
Developing a Consistent Global Estimation Framework, in: Agriculture & Applied Economics 
Association’s AAEA & CAES Joint Annual Meeting. Washington, DC. 
Beretta, C., Stoessel, F., Baier, U., Hellweg, S., 2013. Quantifying food losses and the potential for 
reduction in Switzerland. Waste Manag. 33, 764–773.  
Bharti, A., 2014. Examining market challenges pertaining to cold chain in the frozen food industry 
in Indian retail sector. J. Manag. Sci. Technol. 2, 33–40. 
Blonk Consultants, 2014. Agri-footprint. Description of data. V1.0.  
Boldrin, A., Andersen, J.K., Møller, J., Christensen, T.H., Favoino, E., 2009. Composting and 
compost utilization: accounting of greenhouse gases and global warming contributions. Waste 
Manag. Res. 27, 800–812.  
Brosnan, T., Sun, D., 2001. Precooling techniques and applications for horticultural products Ð a 
review Â re Â frige Â ration et applications pour les Techniques de pre Â es en revue produits 
horticoles passe 24, 154–170. 
Brown, T., Corry, J.E.L., Evans, J. a., 2007. Humidification of unwrapped chilled meat on retail 
display using an ultrasonic fogging system. Meat Sci. 77, 670–677.  
Burden, J., Wills, R.B.H., 1989. Prevention of post-harvest food losses fruits, vegetables and root 
crops a training manual. Food and Agriculture Ogranization of the United Nations. Rome. 
Available at: http://www.fao.org/docrep/t0073e/T0073E00.htm#Contents 
Canals, L.M.I., Muñoz, I., Hospido, A., Plassmann, K., McLaren, S., 2008. Life Cycle Assessment 
(LCA) of domestic vs. imported vegetables. Case studies on broccoli, salad crops and green 
beans, Rural Economy and Land Use (RELU) programme.Working paper, available at: 
http://www2.surrey.ac.uk/ces/files/pdf/0108_CES_WP_RELU_Integ_LCA_local_vs_global_v
egs.pdf 
Cantwell, M., Suslow, T., 2013. Lettuce, Crisphead: Recommendations for Maintaining Postharvest 
Quality [WWW Document]. URL 
http://postharvest.ucdavis.edu/pfvegetable/LettuceCrisphead/ (accessed 2.20.15). 
==PAGE:82==
82 
 
Carlsson-Kanyama, A., Faist, M., 2000. Energy use in the food sector: a data survey, Stockholm 
University and Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH Zurich). AFR report. 
Caronna, S., 2011. Report on how to avoid food wastage strategies for a more efficient food chain 
in the EU. European parliament. Available at: 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+REPORT+A7-2011-
0430+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN 
Casteel, M.J., Schmidt, C.E., Sobsey, M.D., 2008. Chlorine disinfection of produce to inactivate 
hepatitis A virus and coliphage MS2. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 125, 267–273.  
CFS, 2013. Food losses and waste in the context of sustainable food systems. Committee on World 
Food Security (CFS). Available at: 
http://www.un.org/en/zerohunger/pdfs/HLPE_FLW_Report-8_EN.pdf  
Christensen, T.H. (Ed.), 2010. Solid Waste Technology & Management. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 
Chichester, UK. doi:10.1002/9780470666883 
Christensen, T.H., Astrup, T.F., Damgaard, A., Butera, S., 2013. EASETECH - A Dedicated Waste 
Management LCA-Model, in: Proceedings Sardinia - 14th International Waste Management 
and Landfill Simposium. CISA Publisher. 
Cohen, J., West, S.G., Aiken, L.S., 2014. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the 
Behavioral Sciences, T. Fransis, 2nd edition. 
Colelli, G., 2011. Le insalate - Post-raccolta e qualità, in: ART Servizi Editoriali, Angelini Renzo, 
p. 5894. Available at: http://www.colturaecultura.it/insalate 
Da Costa, C.J.M.C., Clemente, E., 2012. Advances in Fruit Processing Technologies. Rodrigues, S., 
Fernandes, F. A. N. Editors. CRC Press, Boca Raton. 
DOW, 2013. FILMTEC membranes - product information [WWW Document]. URL 
http://www.dowwaterandprocess.com/en/products/reverse_osmosis_and_nanofiltration/sea_wa
ter_elements (accessed 6.15.15). 
DOW, 2014. FILMTEC membranes lifetime [WWW Document]. DOW Chem. Co. URL 
http://dowwater.custhelp.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/267 (accessed 6.15.15). 
Dreicer, M., Tort, V., Manen, P., 1995. ExternE, Externalities of Energy, Vol. 5 Nuclear, Centr 
d’étude sur l'Evaluation de la Protection dans le domaine nucléaire (CEPN), edited by the 
European Commission DGXII, Science, Research and development JOULE, Luxembourg. 
Energynet, 2012. Technology data for energy plants - Generation of Electricity and District heating, 
Energy storage and electricity carrier generation and conversion. doi:ISBN: 978-87-7844-940-
5 
European Commission, 2014. Environmental Footprint Pilot Guidance Document, - Guidance for 
the implementation of the EU Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) during the 
Environmental Footprint (EF) pilot phase, v. 4.0. 
==PAGE:83==
83 
 
European Commission, 2015. Background on the EU food supply chain: an important economic 
sector [WWW Document]. URL 
http://ec.europa.eu/competition/sectors/agriculture/overview_en.html (accessed 3.29.15). 
Evans, J., 2012. Food Refrigeration Innovations for Safety, Consumers’ Benefit, Environmental 
Impact and Energy Optimisation Along the Cold Chain in Europe. Available at: 
http://www.frisbee-project.eu/about.html 
Evans, J. a., Foster, a. M., Huet, J.M., Reinholdt, L., Fikiin, K., Zilio, C., Houska, M., Landfeld, a., 
Bond, C., Scheurs, M., Van Sambeeck, T.W.M., 2014. Specific energy consumption values for 
various refrigerated food cold stores. Energy Build. 74, 141–151.  
FAOSTAT, 2013. Browse data - Production [WWW Document]. URL 
http://faostat3.fao.org/browse/Q/*/E (accessed 4.2.15). 
Fellows, P.J., 2009. Food Processing Technology: Principles and Practice, Third. ed. Woodhead 
publishing. 
Ferrante, A., 2011. Le insalate - Concimazione e irrigazione, in: ART Servizi Editoriali. Angelini 
Renzo, p. 5894.Available at: http://www.colturaecultura.it/insalate  
Fresh-Demo, 2015. Innovative humidification/disinfection technology to reduce waste and prolong 
the shelf-life of fruits and vegetables (FRESH-DEMO project). (Documentation not publicly 
available). 
Fricke, B., Becker, B., 2010. Energy Use of Doored and Open Vertical Refrigerated Display Cases, 
in: International Refrigeration And Air Conditioning Conference. Conference proceedings. 
Purdue Univeristy. 
Frischknecht, R., Braunschweig, A., P., H., Suter, P., 2000. Modelling human health effects of 
radioactive releases in Life Cycle Impact Assessment. Environ. Impact Assess. Rev. 20, 159–
189. 
Frischknecht, R., Steiner, R., Jungbluth, N., 2006. The Ecological Scarcity Method - Eco- Factors: 
A method for impact assessment in LCA. 2009, Federal Office for the Environment FOEN: 
Zürich und Bern [WWW Document]. URL 
www.bafu.admin.ch/publikationen/publikation/01031/index.html?lang=en 
Gast, K.L.B., Flores, R., 1991. Precooling produce. Cooperative Extension Service - Kansas State 
University.Available at: http://university.uog.edu/cals/people/pubs/posthar/precool.pdf 
Gil, M.I., Selma, M. V., López-Gálvez, F., Allende, A., 2009. Fresh-cut product sanitation and 
wash water disinfection: Problems and solutions. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 134, 37–45.  
Greco, S.L., Wilson, A.M., Spengler, J.D., Levy, J.I., 2007. Spatial patterns of mobile source 
particulate matter emissions-to-exposure relationships across the United States. Atmos. 
Environ. 41, 1011–1025. 
Guinée, J.B., Gorrée, M., Heijungs, R., Huppes, G., Kleijn, R., de Koning, A., Van Oers, L., 
Wegener Sleeswijk, A., Suh, S., Udo de Haes, H.., De Bruijn, J.A., R., V.D., Huijbregts, 
M.A.J., 2002. Handbook on Life Cycle Assessment: Operational Guide to the ISO Standards. 
==PAGE:84==
84 
 
Series: Eco-efficiency in industry and science. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Dordrecht 
(Hardbound, ISBN 1-4020-0228-9; Paperback, ISBN 1-4020-0557-1). 
Gupta, V.K., Ali, I., 2013. Environmental Water - Advances in Treatment, Remediation and 
Recycling, First. ed, Environmental Water. Elsevier B.V., Amsterdam. doi:10.1016/B978-0-
444-59399-3.00003-9 
Gustavsson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonesson, U., van Otterdijk, R., Meybeck, A., 2011. Global food 
losses and food waste - Extent, causes and prevention. Food and Agriculture Ogranization of 
the United Nations. Rome. Available at: http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/mb060e/mb060e.pdf 
Hischier, R., 2007. Life cycle inventories of packaging and graphical papers, ecoinvent-report no. 
11. Dubendorf. 
Hurst, W.C., 1995. Sanitation of Lightly Processed Fruits and Vegetables. Hortoscience 30, 22–24. 
IFPA, 1999. Iternational Fresh-cut Produce Association [WWW Document]. Offer. Glob. Expert. 
Fresh-cut Prod. URL http://www.creativew.com/sites/ifpa/about.html (accessed 4.3.15). 
ISTAT, 2011. Stima delle superfici e produzioni delle coltivazioni agrarie, floricole e delle piante 
intere da vaso [WWW Document]. URL 
http://dati.istat.it/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=DCSP_COLTIVAZ&Lang=# (accessed 1.1.15). 
Jedermann, R., Nicometo, M., Uysal, I., Lang, W., 2014. Reducing food losses by intelligent food 
logistics. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society, 372. doi:10.1098/rsta.2013.0302 
JRC, 2010. International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook -- General guide for 
Life Cycle Assessment -- Detailed guidance. European Commission -- Joint Research Centre -- 
Institute for Environment and Sustainability, Ispra. doi:10.2788/38479 
JRC, 2011. ILCD Handbook: Recommendations for Life Cycle Impact Assessment in the European 
context, European Commission, First edition, Luxembourg. doi:10.278/33030 
Kleinstreuer, C., 2009. Modern Fluid Dynamics: Basic Theory and Selected Applications in Macro- 
and Micro-Fluidics. Springer Science & Business Media. 
Kummu, M., de Moel, H., Porkka, M., Siebert, S., Varis, O., Ward, P.J., 2012. Lost food, wasted 
resources: Global food supply chain losses and their impacts on freshwater, cropland, and 
fertiliser use. Sci. Total Environ. 438, 477–489. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.08.092 
LCA food, 2000. Cool and frozen storage in wholesale and retail [WWW Document]. URL 
http://www.lcafood.dk/ (accessed 6.11.15). 
Lipinski, B., Hanson, C., Lomax, J., Kitinoja, L., Waite, R., Searchinger, T., 2013. Reducing Food 
Loss and Waste - Installment 2 of “Creating a Sustainable Food Future.” World Resources 
Institute working paper, Washington, DC. 
Magnifico, V., Parente, A., 2011. Le insalate - Le insalate in Puglia, in: ART Servizi Editoriali 
Angelini Renzo, p. 5894. Available at: http://www.colturaecultura.it/insalate 
==PAGE:85==
85 
 
McDonald, K., Sun, D.-W., 2000. Vacuum cooling technology for the food processing industry: a 
review. J. Food Eng. 45, 55–65.  
Milà I Canals, L., Mclaren, S., 2007. LCA Methodology and Modelling Considerations for 
Vegetable production and Consumption. Working paper, Centre for Environmental Strategy, 
University of Surrey, UK. 
Milà i Canals, L., Romanyà, J., Cowell, S., 2007. Method for assessing impacts on life support 
functions (LSF) related to the use of “fertile land” in Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). J. Clean. 
Prod. 15, 1426–1440. 
Monier, V., Mudgal, S., Escalon, V., O’Connor, C., Gibon, T., Anderson, G., Montoux, H., 
Reisinger, H., Dolley, P., Ogilvie, S., Morton, G., 2010. Preparatory study on food waste 
across EU 27, European Commision (DG ENV). Available at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/eussd/pdf/bio_foodwaste_report.pdf 
Montanarella, L., Jones, R.J. a., Hiederer, R., 2006. The distribution of peatland in Europe. Mires 
Peat 1, 1–10. Available at: http://hdl.handle.net/1826/3415 
Mota-Babiloni, A., Navarro-Esbrí, J., Barragán-Cervera, Á., Molés, F., Peris, B., 2015. Analysis 
based on EU Regulation No 517/2014 of new HFC/HFO mixtures as alternatives of high GWP 
refrigerants in refrigeration and HVAC systems. Int. J. Refrig. 52, 21–31.  
Ölmez, H., Kretzschmar, U., 2009. Potential alternative disinfection methods for organic fresh-cut 
industry for minimizing water consumption and environmental impact. LWT - Food Sci. 
Technol. 42, 686–693.  
Pasotti, P.P., Trentini, L., Landini, V., 2002. Il processo di produzione. Il Divulgatore 6–12. 
(Newspaper article). Available at: http://www.ildivulgatore.it/pdf/2002/06-art4.PDF 
Payen, S., Basset-Mens, C., Perret, S., 2014. LCA of local and imported tomato: an energy and 
water trade-off. J. Clean. Prod. 87, 139–148.  
Pimpini, F., Giannini, M., Lazzarin, R., 2005. Ortaggi da foglia da taglio. Legnaro (PD). Available 
at: http://www.venetoagricoltura.org/upload/pubblicazioni/E51.pdf 
Posch, M., Seppälä, J., Hettelingh, J.P., Johansson, M., M., M., Jolliet, O., 2008. The role of 
atmospheric dispersion models and ecosystem sensitivity in the determination of 
characterisation factors for acidifying and eutrophying emissions in LCIA. Int. J. Life Cycle 
Assess. 13, 477–486. 
Pugliese, P., Cardone, G., Pellegrino, G., 2008. L’ agricoltura biologica in Puglia. Bari. Available 
at: http://www.biologicopuglia.it/images/stories/pdf/3 annuario.pdf 
Rabl, A., Spadaro, J.V., 2004. The RiskPoll software, version is 1.051 (dated August 2004) [WWW 
Document]. URL www.arirabl.com 
Rapusas, R.S., Rolle, R.S., 2009. Management of reusable plastic crates in fresh produce supply 
chains - A technical guide, RAP Publication. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
nations (FAO). Bangkok. 
==PAGE:86==
86 
 
Rodrigue, J.-P., Comtois, C., Slack, B., 2013. The Geography of Transport Systems, Third. ed. 
Routledge. 
Rosenbaum, R.K., Bachmann, T.M., Gold, L.S., Huijbregts, M.A.J., Jolliet, O., Juraske, R., Köhler, 
A., Larsen, H.F., MacLeod, M., Margni, M., McKone, T.E., Payet, J., Schuhmacher, M., van 
de Meent, D., Hauschild, M.Z., 2008. USEtox - The UNEPSETAC toxicity model: 
recommended characterisation factors for human toxicity and freshwater ecotoxicity in Life 
Cycle Impact Assessment. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. Int. J. Life Cycle 
Assess. 13, 532–546. 
Salin, V., 2010. Global Cold Storage Capacity Report. International association of Refrigerated 
Warehouses. Available at: http://www.gcca.org/resources/publications/white-papers-
reports/global-cold-storage-capacity/ 
Sanjuán, N., Stoessel, F., Hellweg, S., 2014. Closing data gaps for LCA of food products: 
Estimating the energy demand of food processing. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 1132–1140.  
Sapers, G.M., 2005. Washing and Sanitizing Treatments for Fruits and Vegetables, in: Gorny, J., 
Yousef, A.E.., Sapers, G.M.. (Eds.), Microbiology of Fruits and Vegetables. CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, pp. 375–400. 
Schuur, C.C.., 1988. Packaging for fruits, vegetables and root crops. Food and Agriculture 
organization of the United nations, Bridgetown, Barbados. Available at: 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/x5016e/X5016E00.htm#Contents 
Seppälä, J., Posch, M., Johansson, M., Hettelingh, J.P., 2006. Country-dependent Characterisation 
Factors for Acidification and Terrestrial Eutrophication Based on Accumulated Exceedance as 
an Impact Category Indicator. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 11, 403–416. 
Stenmarck, Å., Hanssen, O.J., Silvennoinen, K., Katajajuuri, J.-M., Werge, M., 2011a. Initiatives on 
Prevention of Food Waste in the Retail and Wholesale Trades. Nordic Council of Ministers. 
Stenmarck, Å., Hanssen, O.J., Silvennoinen, K., Katajajuuri, J.-M., Werge, M., 2011b. Initiatives 
on prevention of food waste in the retail and wholesale trades. Swedish Environmental 
Research Institute, Stockholm. Available at: 
http://www.ivl.se/download/18.7df4c4e812d2da6a416800089028/B1988.pdf 
Stoessel, F., Juraske, R., Pfister, S., Hellweg, S., 2012. Life cycle inventory and carbon and water 
footprint of fruits and vegetables: application to a Swiss retailer. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 
3253–3262. 
Struijs, J., Beusen, A., van Jaarsveld, H., and Huijbregts, M.A.J., 2009. ReCiPe 2008 A life cycle 
impact assessment method which comprises harmonised category indicators at the midpoint 
and the endpoint level. Report I: Characterisation factors, first edition. 
Sun, D., 2005. Handbook of Frozen Food Processing and Packaging. CRC Press, Boca Raton. 
Suslow, T., 1997. Postharvest Chlorination. Oakland. Available at: 
http://anrcatalog.ucdavis.edu/pdf/8003.pdf 
==PAGE:87==
87 
 
Suslow, T., 2005. Chlorination in the production and post-harvest handling of fresh fruits and 
vegetables, University of California, Davis. Available at: 
http://www.siphidaho.org/env/pdf/Chlorination_of_fruits_and_veggies.PDF 
Tassou, S. a., De-Lille, G., Ge, Y.T., 2009. Food transport refrigeration - Approaches to reduce 
energy consumption and environmental impacts of road transport. Appl. Therm. Eng. 29, 
1467–1477.  
Tassou, S. a., Lewis, J.S., Ge, Y.T., Hadawey, a., Chaer, I., 2010. A review of emerging 
technologies for food refrigeration applications. Appl. Therm. Eng. 30, 263–276.  
UNEP, 2013. Food waste harms climate, water, land and biodiversity - new FAO report. UNEP 
News Cent. Available at: 
http://www.unep.org/newscentre/Default.aspx?DocumentID=2726&ArticleID=9611 
United Nations, 1976. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Treaty 
Series. Available at: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx 
Van Zelm, R., Huijbregts, M.A.J., Den Hollander, H.A., Van Jaarsveld, H.A., Sauter, F.J., Struijs, 
J., Van Wijnen, H.J., Van de Meent, D., 2008. European characterization factors for human 
health damage of PM10 and ozone in life cycle impact assessment. Atmos. Environ. 42, 441–
453. 
Wang, L., Sun, D., 2001. Rapid cooling of porous and moisture foods by using vacuum cooling 
technology. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 12, 174–184. 
Webb, J., Williams, A.G., Hope, E., Evans, D., Moorhouse, E., 2013. Do foods imported into the 
UK have a greater environmental impact than the same foods produced within the UK? Int. J. 
Life Cycle Assess. 18, 1325–1343. 
Weidema, B.P., Pedersen, R.., Drivsholm, T.S., 1996. Lifecycle screening of food products – two 
examples and some methodological proposals. Danish Academy of Technical Sciences (ATV) 
Winkworth-Smith, C.G., Morgan, W., Foster, T.J., 2014. The impact of food losses in the globa 
cold chain - Preliminary Report. University of Nottingham. Available at: 
http://naturalleader.com/wp-
content/themes/natlead/images/UoN%20Food%20Loss%20Preliminary%20Report.pdf 
ZVEI, 1980. Ultrasonic assembly of thermoplastic mouldings and semi-finished products - 
Recommendations on methods, construction and applications. German Electrical 
Manufacturers Association (ZVEI), Frankfurt. Available at: 
http://www.powerultrasonics.com/content/sonotrode-materials-shapes-parameters 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX A 
 
Table A1: Food losses and relative amount of lettuce treated and wasted in each life cycle stage, for the baseline system. 
Stage 
Food loss (%) 
Amount of lettuce 
entering each stage (kg) 
Amount of lettuce biowaste 
in each stage (kg) 
Production 
0.20 
1.49 
0.30 
Regular non-refrigerated transport 
0 
1.19 
0 
Processing 
0.02 
1.19 
0.02 
Storage and 
distribution 
Storage processing centre 
0.008 
1.17 
0.01 
Transport processing c.-distribution c.  
0.008 
1.16 
0.01 
Storage distribution centre 
0.008 
1.15 
0.01 
Transport distribution c.-wholesaler 
0.008 
1.14 
0.01 
Storage wholesaler 
0.008 
1.13 
0.01 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket 
0.008 
1.12 
0.01 
Retailing 
0.10 
1.11 
0.11 
Lettuce sold 
- 
1 
- 
Total biowaste disposed in Italy 
- 
- 
0.351 
Total biowaste disposed in Denmark 
- 
- 
0.139 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Table A2: Unit processes considered in the baseline system. Emissions from fertilizers are not shown for lettuce production because they are simple substances emitted to the environment and not 
specific unit processes. The reference year ranges indicate that the data are extrapolated and representative of the indicated time interval. The comments in quotation marks are explanations of the 
processes taken from Ecoinvent 3. 
Process 
Process name 
Geographical 
coverage 
Year 
Source 
Comment 
Production of lettuce ( the original process ‘Lettuce {GLO}| 361 production | Conseq, U’ is modified as follows) 
Land occupation 
Occupation, arable, irrigated, intensive 
- 
- 
Ecoinvent 3 
Resource input from nature 
Peat extraction 
Peat {NORDEL}| production | Conseq, U 
Scandinavia 
1994-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
“The module quantifies the directly affected area, 
electricity requirements and some diesel for mining 
operation and the extraction of groundwater”. 
Transport of peat 
Transport, freight, lorry >32 metric ton, 
EURO4 {RER}| transport, freight, lorry >32 
metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2013-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Tonnage of the lorry is based on Stoessel et al., 2012 
Energy, in biomass 
Energy, gross calorific value, in biomass 
- 
- 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Resource input from nature 
Phosphate fertilizer production 
Phosphate fertiliser, as P2O5 {GLO}| 
market for | Conseq, U 
Global 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Includes upstream processes like production and 
transport 
Ammonium fertilizer production 
Ammonium nitrate, as N {GLO}| market for 
| Conseq, U 
Global 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Includes upstream processes like production and 
transport 
Potassium fertilizer production 
Potassium sulfate, as K2O {GLO}| market 
for | Conseq, U 
Global 
2011-2015 
Ecoinvent 3 
Includes upstream processes like production and 
transport 
Pesticide Glyphosate production 
Glyphosate {RER}| market for | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2010-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Includes input materials for the production, energy uses, 
infrastructure and emission (from the production) 
Irrigation 
Irrigation {ES}| market for | Conseq, U 
Spain 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Includes the processes of “water extraction from the 
environment - pumping, machine infrastructure and a 
shed for machine sheltering”. Consumption of electricity 
is linked to the Italian average electricity mix. 
Machinery use 
Fertilising, by broadcaster {CH}| processing 
| Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2002-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
The dataset, representing a typical fertilizing process, is 
taken to model all sorts of machinery use during 
agricultural production (not only for fertilising). “The 
dataset includes the diesel fuel consumption and the 
amount of agricultural machinery and of the shed 
attributed to broadcast fertilization. It was also taken 
into consideration the amount of emissions to the air 
from combustion and the emission to the soil from tyre 
abrasion during the work process. The following 
activities where considered part of the work process: 
==PAGE:90==
90 
 
preliminary work at the farm, such as attaching the 
adequate machine to the tractor; driving to field (with an 
assumed distance of 1 km); field work (for a parcel of 
land of 1 ha surface); driving to farm and concluding 
work, like uncoupling the machine. The overlapping 
during the field work is considered. The dataset doesn't 
include the amount of sprayed plant protection products, 
dust other than from combustion and noise”. 
Emissions from pesticide 
Glyphosate  
- 
- 
Ecoinvent 3 
Added as substance emitted to soil 
Transport field-processing centre (own process) 
Regular non-refrigerated transport 
with lorry 
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, 
EURO4 {RER}| transport, freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2013-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 
Processing at processing centre (own process) 
  
Electricity use for vacuum cooling 
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market 
for | Conseq, U- copy 
Italy 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Italian average electricity 
mix 
Plastic (HDPE) granulates 
production for packaging 
Polyethylene, 
high 
density, 
granulate 
{RER}| production | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2001-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of granulates from raw materials (extraction 
included) 
Plastic (HDPE) granulates 
moulding for packaging 
Injection moulding {RER}| processing | 
Conseq, U 
Europe 
1997-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Conversion of plastic granulates into moulded plastic 
Washing water 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Supply of tap water from the water treatment plant to 
the distribution network. Switzerland is assumed 
representative  
Sodium hypochlorite 
(disinfectant)  
Sodium hypochlorite, without water, in 15% 
solution state {GLO}| market for | Conseq, 
U 
Global 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
“The dataset includes all precursor compounds except 
for chlorine, which is treated as process air emissions, 
transports and infrastructure” 
Refrigeration at processing centre (own process) 
Electricity for refrigeration  
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market 
for | Conseq, U- copy 
Italy 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Italian average electricity 
mix 
Transport processing centre-distribution centre (own process) 
==PAGE:91==
91 
 
Lorry 
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, 
EURO4 {RER}| transport, freight, lorry 16-
32 metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2013-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 
Refrigeration during transport 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric generating 
set {GLO}| processing | Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Refrigeration at distribution centre (own process) 
Electricity for refrigeration  
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market 
for | Conseq, U- copy 
Italy 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Italian average electricity 
mix 
Transport distribution centre-wholesaler (own process) 
Lorry 
Transport, freight, lorry >32 metric ton, 
EURO4 {RER}| transport, freight, lorry >32 
metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
 
Ecoinvent 3 
 
Refrigeration during transport 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric generating 
set {GLO}| processing | Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Refrigeration at wholesaler (own process) 
Electricity for refrigeration  
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| market 
for | Conseq, U-copy 
Denmark 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Danish average electricity 
mix 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket (own process) 
Lorry 
Transport, freight, lorry 7.5-16 metric ton, 
EURO5 {RER}| transport, freight, lorry 7.5-
16 metric ton, EURO5 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2013-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 
Refrigeration during transport 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric generating 
set {GLO}| processing | Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Refrigeration at supermarket (own process) 
Electricity for refrigeration  
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| market 
for | Conseq, U-copy 
Denmark 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Danish average electricity 
mix 
Heat for store heating 
Heat mix DK 
Denmark 
2012 
Own 
The process is created to simulate average sources of 
heat in Denmark. 
Disposal of biowaste DK (own process) 
==PAGE:92==
92 
 
Incineration 
Biowaste {GLO}| treatment of biowaste, 
municipal incineration | Conseq, U 
Global 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Biowaste incineration in municipal solid waste 
incineration (technology mix encountered in 
Switzerland 2010). Short-term emissions to water from 
leachate included. Crediting for avoided average 
electricity and heat mixes is carried out. 
Composting 
Biowaste {CH}| treatment of, composting | 
Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
1999-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Open plant compost production. Crediting for avoided 
chemical N,P,K fertilizers production is carried out. 
Disposal of biowaste IT (own process) 
Landfilling 
Municipal solid waste {CH}| treatment of, 
sanitary landfill | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2000-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Landfilling of municipal solid waste with landfill gas 
and leachate collection systems. Short-term emissions to 
air include incineration of landfill gas. Short-term 
burdens to wastewater treatment plant for treatment of 
leachate included.  
Composting 
Biowaste {CH}| treatment of, composting | 
Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
1999-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Open plant compost production. Crediting for avoided 
chemical N,P,K fertilizers production is carried out. 
==PAGE:93==
93 
 
Table A3: Original model parameter of the lettuce production process from Ecoinvent database, in comparison with values used in this study. Numbers in bold indicate that the same figures are used. 
Parameter  
 
Value in original 
process 
Value used in 
this study 
Unit 
Occupied land 
7.26E-02 
3.06E-01 
m2a 
Peat 
6.19E-02 
9.79E-02 
kg 
Transport of peat 
- 
2.02E-01 
tkm 
Energy, in biomass 
1.14E+00 
1.14E+00 
MJ 
Phosphate fertilizer 
6.97E-04 
6.97E-04 
Kg 
Ammonium fertilizer 
3.72E-03 
3.72E-03 
Kg 
Potassium fertilizer 
5.19E-03 
5.19E-03 
Kg 
Pesticide  
3.87E-05 
1.03E-04 
Kg 
Water for irrigation 
2.32E-02 
8.03E-02 
m3 
Machinery use 
2.18E-03 
2.18E-03 
ha 
Emissions from pesticide 
3.87E-05 
1.03E-04 
kg 
Energy consumption for 
storage 
1.50E-02 
- 
kWh 
Heat  
1.77E-01 
- 
MJ 
Water for washing 
4.00E-01 
- 
kg 
Emissions to air 
Nitrogen oxides 
1.53E-05 
1.53E-05 
kg 
Ammonia 
9.03E-05 
9.03E-05 
kg 
Water/m3 
1.37E-02 
1.37E-02 
m3 
Dinitrogen monoxide 
7.28E-05 
7.28E-05 
kg 
Emissions to water 
Phosphate 
5.08E-07 
5.08E-07 
kg 
Nitrate 
4.94E-03 
4.94E-03 
kg 
Water, GLO 
7.67E-03 
7.67E-03 
m3 
Water, GLO 
1.92E-03 
1.92E-03 
m3 
Phosphorus 
1.78E-06 
1.78E-06 
kg 
Emissions to soil 
Zinc 
1.92E-07 
1.92E-07 
kg 
Cadmium 
3.21E-08 
3.21E-08 
kg 
Chromium 
5.61E-08 
5.61E-08 
kg 
Lead 
1.03E-04 
1.03E-04 
kg 
Nickel 
3.74E-07 
3.74E-07 
kg 
Copper 
1.31E-07 
1.31E-07 
kg 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
94 
 
Table A4: Transport distances and times for every refrigerated transport stage of lettuce, including transport of peat used for modelling of seedling production. 
 Transport stage 
Transport distance 
(km) 
Transport time (h) 
Note 
Transport field-processing centre 
125 
- 
Average distance in Apulia region. Retrieved from Google maps. 
Transport processing centre-
distribution centre 
794 
27.88 
Distance Bari (Apulia, Italy) - Trvenzuolo (North Italy). Retrieved from Google maps. The 
transportation time is calculated considering and average velocity of 50 km/h plus 12h are 
added to account for waiting time (e.g. during loading and unloading, stops, etc.). 
Transport distribution centre-
wholesaler 
1507 
54.14 
Distance Trevenzuolo (Italy) - Vejle (Denmark). Retrieved from Google maps The 
transportation time is calculated considering and average velocity of 50 km/h plus 24h are 
added to account for waiting time (e.g. during loading and unloading, stops, etc.). 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket 
70 
2.4 
Transport distance can vary, an arbitrary value is assumed The transportation time is 
calculated considering and average velocity of 50 km/h plus 1h is added to account for waiting 
time (e.g. during loading and unloading). 
Transport of peat 
2069 
 - 
Distance Stralsund (Germany)-Bari (Apulia, Italy), retrieved from Google maps. Gathering 
the information from some peat retailers present in Italy and the European Soil Portal, it is 
assumed that peat comes from the North of Germany (Stralsund as indicative city). The 
retailers reported (on their websites) Baltic regions as places of origin of their on sale peat and 
the European Soil Portal indicates that in the North of Germany peatlands are diffused 
(Montanarella et al., 2006). 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
95 
 
Table A5. Modelled electricity mix for Denmark (reference period 2008-2014). Original source of the mix share is Ecoinvent 3. Notice that for electricity from biogas and wood chips 
the consequential-based process was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. The imports processes are indicated with ‘copy’ as 
they have been modified to average electricity mixes, as shown in Tables A6, A7 and A8 for Germany, Norway and Sweden respectively. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
36.03% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
0.06% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
7.67% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
1.37% 
Wind offshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, offshore | Conseq, U 
3.32% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
2.63% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
14.29% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
2.33% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.51% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc Def, U 
3.72% 
Imports from Germany 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| import from DE | Conseq, U-copy 
2.99% 
Imports from Norway 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| import from NO | Conseq, U-copy 
10.54% 
Imports from Sweden 
Electricity, high voltage {DK}| import from SE | Conseq, U-copy 
14.53% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
96 
 
Table A6: Modelled electricity mix for Germany (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from biogas, wood chips and gas by-products the consequential-based 
process was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Geothermal 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, geothermal | Conseq, U 
0.003% 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
19.94% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | Conseq, U 
1.01% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, non-alpine region | Conseq, U 
0.56% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
2.86% 
Lignite 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, lignite | Conseq, U 
24.62% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
1.15% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.62% 
Wind offshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, offshore | Conseq, U 
0.01% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
5.31% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, natural gas, 10MW | Conseq, U 
0.00% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
13.46% 
Nuclear power 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, nuclear, boiling water reactor | Conseq, U 
5.18% 
Nuclear power 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, nuclear, pressure water reactor | Conseq, U 
19.13% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
1.47% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
1.74% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc Def, U 
1.43% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| treatment of blast furnace gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
1.18% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {DE}| treatment of coal gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.34% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
97 
 
Table A7: Modelled electricity mix for Norway (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from biogas, wood chips and gas by-products the consequential-based process 
was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
0.05% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | Conseq, U 
0.68% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, alpine region | Conseq, U 
97.86% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.01% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.27% 
Wind offshore 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, offshore | Conseq, U 
0.003% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.46% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
0.33% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {NL}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
0.01% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.005% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc Def, U 
0.25% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {NO}| treatment of blast furnace gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.07% 
 
Table A8: Modelled electricity mix for Sweden (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from wood, biogas, wood chips and gas by-products the consequential-based 
process was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
0.34% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | Conseq, U 
0.10% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, non-alpine region | Conseq, U 
9.50% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
37.99% 
Nuclear 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, nuclear, boiling water reactor | Conseq, U 
32.92% 
Nuclear 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, nuclear, pressure water reactor | Conseq, U 
9.42% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.29% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.003% 
Wind offshore 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, offshore | Conseq, U 
0.11% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
1.00% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
0.41% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
0.59% 
Peat 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| electricity production, peat | Conseq, U 
0.42% 
Wood 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| ethanol production from wood | Alloc Def, U 
0.0004% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.09% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc Def, U 
6.06% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| treatment of blast furnace gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.70% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {SE}| treatment of coal gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.05% 
==PAGE:98==
98 
 
Table A9: Modelled heat mix in Denmark (Energynet, 2015) All processes are modified so that the electricity input is from the created Danish average mix. Notice that for heat from 
straw and biogas the consequential-based process was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based one is considered instead. * Process modified to account for 
updated energy recovery efficiencies  
Process  
Share (%) 
Process name 
Geographical 
coverage 
Year 
Source 
Heat from wood pellet 
9.80% 
Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas {CH}| heat production, wood pellet, at furnace 
25kW | Conseq, U-copy 
Switzerland 
2001-2014 
Own 
Heat from wood chips 
12.57% 
Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas {CH}| heat production, wood chips from industry, 
at furnace 50kW | Conseq, U-copy 
Switzerland 
2007 
Own 
Heat from straw 
7.70% 
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas {GLO}| heat production, straw, at furnace 300kW | 
Alloc Def, U-copy 
Global 
1983-2014 
Own 
Heat from oil 
2.35% 
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas {Europe without Switzerland}| heat production, 
heavy fuel oil, at industrial furnace 1MW | Conseq, U-copy 
Europe 
2001-2014 
Own 
Heat from natural gas 
24.51% 
Heat, district or industrial, natural gas {Europe without Switzerland}| heat and power co-generation, 
natural gas, 1MW electrical, lean burn | Conseq, U-copy 
Europe 
2000-2014 
Own 
Heat from coal 
23.44% 
Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas {Europe without Switzerland}| heat production, 
hard coal briquette, stove 5-15kW | Conseq, U-copy 
Europe 
1992-2014 
Own 
Heat from waste* 
17.30% 
Municipal solid waste {DK}| treatment of, incineration | Conseq, U-copy 
- 
- 
Own 
Heat from biogas 
1.95% 
Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas {DK}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas 
engine | Alloc Def, U 
Denmark 
2007 
Own 
Heat pumps 
0.05% 
Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas {Europe without Switzerland}| heat production, at 
heat pump 30kW, allocation exergy | Conseq, U-copy 
Europe 
2000-2014 
Own 
Solar power 
0.33% 
Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas {CH}| operation, solar collector system, Cu flat 
plate collector, one-family house, for hot water | Conseq, U-copy 
Switzerland 
2002-2014 
Own 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
99 
 
Table A10. Modelled electricity mix for Italy (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from biogas and wood chips and gas by-products the consequential-based 
process was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. The imports processes are indicated with ‘copy’ as they have been modified to 
average electricity mixes, as shown from Table A11 to A15.  
Energy source/plant type 
 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Geothermal 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, geothermal | Conseq, U 
1.60 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
11.72 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | Conseq, U 
1.64 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, alpine region | Conseq, U 
7.79 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
4.38 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.50 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.09 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.86 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
47.06 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
8.58 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.45 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc 
Def, U 
0.75 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| treatment of blast furnace gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
1.06 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| treatment of coal gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.45 
Imports from Austria 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| import from AT | Conseq, U-copy 
0.41 
Imports from Switzerland 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| import from CH | Conseq, U-copy 
7.28 
Imports from France 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| import from FR | Conseq, U-copy 
3.91 
Imports from Greece 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| import from GR | Conseq, U-copy 
0.05 
Imports from Slovenia 
Electricity, high voltage {IT}| import from SI | Conseq, U-copy 
1.42 
 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
100 
 
Table A11: Modelled electricity mix for Austria (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from biogas, wood chips and gas-by-products the consequential-based 
process was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Geothermal 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, geothermal | Conseq, U 
0.003% 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
7.63% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | Conseq, U 
4.31% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, alpine region | Conseq, U 
14.97% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
44.91% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.19% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
2.98% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
15.48% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
1.72% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
1.39% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc Def, U 
4.50% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| treatment of blast furnace gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
1.58% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {AT}| treatment of coal gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.32% 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
101 
 
Table A12: Modelled electricity mix for Switzerland (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for several plant types the consequential process was not available in the database, 
therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. Imports are here considered as they refer to specific production processes and not to the electricity mix of the country. 
Energy source/plant type 
 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, alpine region | Conseq, U 
16.14% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
14.63% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.003% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.02% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| electricity production, natural gas, 10MW | Conseq, U 
6.60E-11 
Nuclear 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| electricity production, nuclear, boiling water reactor | Conseq, U 
22.76% 
Nuclear 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| electricity production, nuclear, pressure water reactor | Conseq, U 
20.39% 
Hydro power (import from France) 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| hydro, reservoir, import from France | Conseq, U 
1.13% 
Hydro power (import from France) 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| hydro, run-of-river, import from France | Conseq, U 
5.94% 
Natural gas (import from Germany) 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| natural gas, import from Germany | Conseq, U 
1.82% 
Nuclear (import from France) 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| nuclear, import from France | Conseq, U 
15.09% 
Wind (import from Germany) 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| wind power, import from Germany | Conseq, U 
0.12% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.20% 
Diesel 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, diesel, 200kW electrical, SCR-NOx reduction | Alloc 
Def, U 
0.07% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, natural gas, 1MW electrical, lean burn | Alloc Def, U 
0.29% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, natural gas, 200kW electrical, lean burn | Alloc Def, U 
0.28% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, natural gas, 500kW electrical, lean burn | Alloc Def, U 
0.17% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 2000 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc 
Def, U 
0.06% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 2000 kW | Alloc Def, U 
0.01% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc 
Def, U 
0.30% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW | Alloc Def, U 
0.07% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| petroleum refinery operation | Alloc Def, U 
0.50% 
Ethanol 
Electricity, high voltage {CH}| ethanol production from wood | Alloc Def, U 
0.0001% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
102 
 
Table A13: Modelled electricity mix for France (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from biogas, wood chips and gas-by-products the consequential-based 
process was not available in the database, therefore the allocation-based ones are considered instead. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
4.15% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | Conseq, U 
0.89% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, hydro, reservoir, alpine region | Conseq, U 
1.65% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
8.66% 
Nuclear 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, nuclear, pressure water reactor | Conseq, U 
77.53% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.09% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
0.02% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
1.01% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
3.90% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
1.04% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.12% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc Def, U 
0.26% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| treatment of blast furnace gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.52% 
Gas by-products 
Electricity, high voltage {FR}| treatment of coal gas, in power plant | Alloc Def, U 
0.17% 
 
Table A14: Modelled electricity mix for Greece (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from biogas the consequential-based process was not available in the 
database, therefore the allocation-based one is considered instead. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, hydro, pumped storage | Conseq, U 
1.47% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
5.81% 
Lignite 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, lignite | Conseq, U 
54.65% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, wind, <1MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
1.04% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, wind, >3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
1.96% 
Wind onshore 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, wind, 1-3MW turbine, onshore | Conseq, U 
1.36% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
16.16% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
17.23% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {GR}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.33% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
103 
 
Table A15: Modelled electricity mix for Slovenia (reference period 2008-2014). Notice that for electricity from biogas and wood chips the consequential-based process was not 
available in the database, therefore the allocation-based one is considered instead. 
Energy source/plant 
type 
Process name 
Share [%] 
Coal 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| electricity production, hard coal | Conseq, U 
3.09% 
Hydro power 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| electricity production, hydro, run-of-river | Conseq, U 
24.89% 
Lignite 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| electricity production, lignite | Conseq, U 
28.56% 
Nuclear 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| electricity production, nuclear, pressure water reactor | Conseq, U 
38.37% 
Natural gas 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| electricity production, natural gas, at conventional power plant | Conseq, U 
3.11% 
Oil 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| electricity production, oil | Conseq, U 
0.11% 
Biogas 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| heat and power co-generation, biogas, gas engine | Alloc Def, U 
0.39% 
Wood chips 
Electricity, high voltage {SI}| heat and power co-generation, wood chips, 6667 kW, state-of-the-art 2014 | Alloc Def, U 
1.50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:104==
104 
 
Table A16: Unit processes considered in the humidification systems. Only the life cycle stages that were modified from the baseline system are shown. 
Process/component 
Process name 
Geographical 
coverage 
Year 
Source 
Comment 
Refrigeration at processing centre (own process) 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market 
for | Conseq, U- copy 
Italy 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Italian average electricity mix 
Electricity use by humidifier, 
osmosis and control unit 
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market 
for | Conseq, U- copy 
Italy 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Italian average electricity mix 
Water for humidifier 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Switzerland is assumed representative as no inventory per 
Italy is found in Ecoinvent 3 
Disinfectant 
Citric acid {RER}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of citric acid trough fermentation process 
Transport processing centre-distribution centre (own process) 
Lorry 
Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric 
ton, EURO4 {RER}| transport, freight, 
lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2013-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric 
generating set {GLO}| processing | 
Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Electricity use by humidifier 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric 
generating set {GLO}| processing | 
Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2015 
Ecoinvent 3 
Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Water for humidifier 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Switzerland is assumed representative as no inventory per 
Italy is found in Ecoinvent 3 
Disinfectant 
Citric acid {RER}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of citric acid trough fermentation process 
Refrigeration at distribution centre (own process) 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market 
for | Conseq, U- copy 
Italy 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Italian average electricity mix 
Electricity use by humidifier, 
osmosis and control unit 
Electricity, medium voltage {IT}| market 
for | Conseq, U- copy 
Italy 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Italian average electricity mix 
Water for humidifier 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Switzerland is assumed representative as no inventory per 
Italy is found in Ecoinvent 3 
==PAGE:105==
105 
 
Disinfectant 
Citric acid {RER}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of citric acid trough fermentation process 
Transport distribution centre-wholesaler (own process) 
 
Lorry 
Transport, freight, lorry >32 metric ton, 
EURO4 {RER}| transport, freight, lorry 
>32 metric ton, EURO4 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
 
Ecoinvent 3 
 
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric 
generating set {GLO}| processing | 
Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Electricity use by humidifier 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric 
generating set {GLO}| processing | 
Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2015 
Ecoinvent 3 
Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Water for humidifier 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Switzerland is assumed representative as no inventory per 
Italy is found in Ecoinvent 3 
Disinfectant 
Citric acid {RER}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of citric acid trough fermentation process 
Refrigeration at wholesaler (own process) 
  
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| 
market for | Conseq, U-copy 
Denmark 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Danish average electricity mix 
Electricity use by humidifier, 
osmosis and control unit 
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| 
market for | Conseq, U-copy 
Denmark 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Danish average electricity mix 
Water for humidifier 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Switzerland is assumed representative as no inventory per 
Denmark is found in Ecoinvent 3 
Disinfectant 
Citric acid {RER}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Production of citric acid trough fermentation process 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket (own process) 
 
Lorry 
Transport, freight, lorry 7.5-16 metric 
ton, EURO5 {RER}| transport, freight, 
lorry 7.5-16 metric ton, EURO5 | 
Conseq, U 
Europe 
2013-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
  
Electricity use for conventional 
refrigeration 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric 
generating set {GLO}| processing | 
Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
==PAGE:106==
106 
 
Electricity use by humidifier 
Diesel, burned in diesel-electric 
generating set {GLO}| processing | 
Conseq, U 
Global 
2000-2015 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Generation of electricity in diesel motor generator. 
Estimation of emissions is included 
Water for humidifier 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Switzerland is assumed representative as no inventory per 
Denmark is found in Ecoinvent 3 
Disinfectant 
Citric acid {RER}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Production of citric acid trough fermentation process 
Refrigeration at supermarket (own process) 
 
Electricity for conventional 
refrigeration  
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| 
market for | Conseq, U-copy 
Denmark 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Danish average electricity mix 
Heat for store heating 
Heat mix DK 
Denmark 
2012 
Own 
The process is modelled to simulate average sources of 
heat in Denmark. 
Electricity use by humidifier, 
osmosis and control unit 
Electricity, medium voltage {DK}| 
market for | Conseq, U-copy 
Denmark 
2008-2014 
Own 
The original process is taken from Ecoinvent 3 and 
modified so it accounts for Danish average electricity mix 
Water for humidifier 
Tap water {CH}| market for | Conseq, U 
Switzerland 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Switzerland is assumed representative as no inventory per 
Denmark is found in Ecoinvent 3 
Disinfectant 
Citric acid {RER}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Europe 
2011-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
 Production of citric acid trough fermentation process 
Production of equipment (for both humidification unit types) 
  
Stainless steel production 
Option 1: Steel, chromium steel 18/8 
{RER}| steel production, converter, 
chromium steel 18/8 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2001-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Primary steel production (from virgin raw materials) 
Option 2: Steel, chromium steel 18/8 
{RER}| steel production, electric, 
chromium steel 18/8 | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2001-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Secondary steel production (from iron scraps) 
Transducer production 
Option 1: Titanium zinc plate, without 
pre-weathering {DE}| production | 
Conseq, U 
Germany 
2002-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of a titanium zinc plate.  
Option 2: Aluminium alloy, AlMg3 
{RER}| production | Conseq, U 
Europe 
1998-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of aluminium-magnesium alloy from primary 
metals 
Motherboard 
Option 1: Printed wiring board, mounted 
motherboard, desktop computer, Pb 
containing {GLO}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Global 
2005-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of desktop PC motherboard, with Pb 
Option 2: Printed wiring board, mounted 
motherboard, desktop computer, Pb free 
Global 
2005-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of desktop PC motherboard, Pb free 
==PAGE:107==
107 
 
{GLO}| production | Conseq, U 
Fan 
Fan, for power supply unit, desktop 
computer {GLO}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Global 
2005-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production and assembly of a fan for power supply unit 
of a desktop PC 
Transformer 
Transformer, low voltage use {GLO}| 
production | Conseq, U 
Global 
2007-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of a low voltage transformer for electronic 
modules 
Battery 
Battery, NiMH, rechargeable, prismatic 
{GLO}| production | Conseq, U 
Global 
2006-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of a NiMH battery for laptop applications 
Reverse osmosis membrane 
Seawater reverse osmosis module 
{GLO}| seawater reverse osmosis 
module production, 8-inch spiral wound, 
baseline | Conseq, U 
Global 
2012-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of a seawater reverse osmosis membrane 
module 
Booster pump 
Pump, 40W {CH}| production | Conseq, 
U 
Switzerland 
1994-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production and disposal of a water pump with a capacity 
of 40W (used in solar collector systems) 
Control unit 
Electronics, for control units {RER}| 
production | Conseq, U 
Europe 
2005-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Production of a typical control unit for devices in the 
industry 
Disposal 
 
Disposal  
Used industrial electronic device {GLO}| 
treatment of, mechanical treatment | 
Conseq, U 
Global 
2005-2014 
Ecoinvent 3 
Mechanical treatment of WEEE (waste electrical and 
electronic equipment) consisting of manual dismantling 
and mechanical treatment (shredder) of the remaining 
parts. Crediting for the recovered iron scraps (avoided 
steel production) is done. It is uncertain whether disposal 
of batteries is included.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
108 
 
Table A17: Food losses and relative amount of lettuce treated and wasted in each life cycle stage, for scenarios 1, 2 and 3 of the humidification system. For scenario 0, figures ar the 
same as in the baseline system (see Table A1). 
Stage 
Food loss (%) 
Amount of lettuce 
entering each stage (kg) 
Amount of lettuce biowaste 
in each stage (kg) 
Scenario 1 
Production 
0.20 
1.443 
0.289 
Regular non-refrigerated transport 
0 
1.155 
0.000 
Processing 
0.02 
1.155 
0.023 
Storage and 
distribution 
Storage processing centre 
0.00667 
1.131 
0.008 
Transport processing c.-distribution c.  
0.00667 
1.124 
0.007 
Storage distribution centre 
0.00667 
1.116 
0.007 
Transport distribution c.-wholesaler 
0.00667 
1.109 
0.007 
Storage wholesaler 
0.00667 
1.102 
0.007 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket 
0.00667 
1.094 
0.007 
Retailing 
0.08 
1.087 
0.087 
Lettuce sold 
- 
1 
- 
Total biowaste disposed in Italy 
- 
- 
0.334 
Total biowaste disposed in Denmark 
- 
- 
0.109 
Scenario 2 
Production 
0.20 
1.391 
0.278 
Regular non-refrigerated transport 
0 
1.113 
0.000 
Processing 
0.02 
1.113 
0.022 
Storage and 
distribution 
Storage processing centre 
0.0042 
1.091 
0.005 
Transport processing c.-distribution c.  
0.0042 
1.086 
0.005 
Storage distribution centre 
0.0042 
1.082 
0.005 
Transport distribution c.-wholesaler 
0.0042 
1.077 
0.004 
Storage wholesaler 
0.0042 
1.073 
0.004 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket 
0.0042 
1.068 
0.004 
Retailing 
0.06 
1.064 
0.064 
Lettuce sold 
- 
1 
- 
Total biowaste disposed in Italy 
- 
- 
0.314 
Total biowaste disposed in Denmark 
- 
- 
0.077 
Scenario 3 
Production 
0.20 
1.370 
0.274 
Regular non-refrigerated transport 
0 
1.096 
0.000 
Processing 
0.02 
1.096 
0.022 
Storage and 
distribution 
Storage processing centre 
0.0033 
1.074 
0.004 
Transport processing c.-distribution c.  
0.0033 
1.070 
0.004 
Storage distribution centre 
0.0033 
1.067 
0.004 
Transport distribution c.-wholesaler 
0.0033 
1.063 
0.004 
==PAGE:109==
109 
 
Storage wholesaler 
0.0033 
1.060 
0.004 
Transport wholesaler-supermarket 
0.0033 
1.056 
0.004 
Retailing 
0.05 
1.053 
0.053 
Lettuce sold 
- 
1 
- 
Total biowaste disposed in Italy 
- 
- 
0.307 
Total biowaste disposed in Denmark 
- 
- 
0.063 
 
 
APPENDIX B  
 
Table B1: Characterized and normalized impact scores for the baseline system, obtained with ILCD’s recommended methods (JRC, 2011) and EU 27 (2010) normalization factors respectively 
(European Commission, 2014). 
Impact category 
Unit 
Characterized 
impact score 
Normalized impact score in 
Person Equivalents (PE) 
Climate change 
kg CO2 eq 
1.64E+00 
1.81E-04 
Ozone depletion 
kg CC-11 eq 
2.82E-07 
1.31E-05 
Human toxicity, cancer effects 
CTUh 
1.26E-08 
3.41E-04 
Human toxicity, non-cancer effects 
CTUh 
2.93E-07 
5.50E-04 
Particulate matter 
kg PM2.5 eq 
7.69E-04 
1.59E-04 
Ionizing radiation (human health) 
kg U235 eq 
5.28E-02 
4.68E-05 
Photochemical ozone formation 
kg NMVOC eq 
3.80E-07 
2.02E-04 
Acidification 
mol H+ eq 
6.43E-03 
1.68E-04 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
molc N eq 
7.91E-03 
1.25E-04 
Freshwater eutrophication 
kg P eq 
2.17E-02 
3.29E-05 
Marine eutrophication 
kg N eq 
4.87E-05 
2.20E-04 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
CTUe 
3.70E-03 
2.12E-04 
Land use 
kg C deficit 
1.84E+00 
1.20E-05 
Water resource depletion 
kg water eq 
7.54E+00 
2.52E-03 
Mineral fossil and renewable 
resource depletion 
kg Sb eq 
1.98E-01 
3.89E-04 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
110 
 
Figure B1: Relative contribution of biowaste disposal processes to the total impacts. 
  
 
 
 
-100%
-80%
-60%
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Relative contribution (%)
Biowaste disposal DK
Biowaste disposal IT
==PAGE:111==
111 
 
Table B2: Characterized and normalized impact scores for all humidification scenarios with production option 1, obtained with ILCD’s recommended methods (JRC, 2011) and EU 27 (2010) 
normalization factors respectively (European Commission, 2014).  
Impact category 
Unit 
Characterized impact score 
Normalized impact score in Person Equivalents (PE) 
 
 
Scenario 0 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 0 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Climate change 
kg CO2 eq 
1.65E+00 
1.60E+00 
1.54E+00 
1.52E+00 
1.81E-04 
1.76E-04 
1.69E-04 
1.67E-04 
Ozone depletion 
kg CC-11 eq 
2.82E-07 
2.74E-07 
2.65E-07 
2.61E-07 
1.31E-05 
1.27E-05 
1.22E-05 
1.21E-05 
Human toxicity, cancer effects 
CTUh 
1.27E-08 
1.22E-08 
1.18E-08 
1.16E-08 
3.44E-04 
3.33E-04 
3.20E-04 
3.15E-04 
Human toxicity, non-cancer effects 
CTUh 
2.94E-07 
2.85E-07 
2.75E-07 
2.71E-07 
5.52E-04 
5.35E-04 
5.16E-04 
5.09E-04 
Particulate matter 
kg PM2.5 eq 
7.67E-04 
7.45E-04 
7.22E-04 
7.12E-04 
1.59E-04 
1.54E-04 
1.49E-04 
1.47E-04 
Ionizing radiation (human health) 
kg U235 eq 
5.32E-02 
5.18E-02 
5.02E-02 
4.95E-02 
4.71E-05 
4.58E-05 
4.44E-05 
4.38E-05 
Photochemical ozone formation 
kg NMVOC eq 
6.37E-03 
6.18E-03 
5.96E-03 
5.87E-03 
2.00E-04 
1.94E-04 
1.87E-04 
1.84E-04 
Acidification 
mol H+ eq 
7.86E-03 
7.61E-03 
7.33E-03 
7.22E-03 
1.67E-04 
1.61E-04 
1.55E-04 
1.53E-04 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
molc N eq 
2.15E-02 
2.07E-02 
1.99E-02 
1.96E-02 
1.23E-04 
1.19E-04 
1.14E-04 
1.12E-04 
Freshwater eutrophication 
kg P eq 
4.94E-05 
4.81E-05 
4.67E-05 
4.61E-05 
3.34E-05 
3.25E-05 
3.16E-05 
3.12E-05 
Marine eutrophication 
kg N eq 
3.68E-03 
3.56E-03 
3.43E-03 
3.37E-03 
2.19E-04 
2.12E-04 
2.04E-04 
2.01E-04 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
CTUe 
1.86E+00 
1.80E+00 
1.74E+00 
1.72E+00 
2.13E-04 
2.07E-04 
2.00E-04 
1.97E-04 
Land use 
kg C deficit 
7.54E+00 
7.32E+00 
7.07E+00 
6.97E+00 
1.20E-05 
1.16E-05 
1.12E-05 
1.11E-05 
Water resource depletion 
kg water eq 
1.98E-01 
1.92E-01 
1.85E-01 
1.82E-01 
2.52E-03 
2.44E-03 
2.35E-03 
2.32E-03 
Mineral fossil and renewable 
resource depletion 
kg Sb eq 
4.15E-05 
4.04E-05 
3.92E-05 
3.87E-05 
4.15E-04 
4.04E-04 
3.92E-04 
3.87E-04 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
112 
 
Table B3: Characterized and normalized impact scores for all humidification scenarios with production option 2, obtained with ILCD’s recommended methods (JRC, 2011) and EU 27 (2010) 
normalization factors respectively (European Commission, 2014). 
Impact category 
Unit 
Characterized impact score 
Normalized impact score in Person Equivalents (PE) 
 
 
Scenario 0 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Scenario 0 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Climate change 
kg CO2 eq 
1.65E+00 
1.60E+00 
1.54E+00 
1.52E+00 
1.81E-04 
1.76E-04 
1.69E-04 
1.67E-04 
Ozone depletion 
kg CC-11 eq 
2.82E-07 
2.74E-07 
2.65E-07 
2.61E-07 
1.31E-05 
1.27E-05 
1.22E-05 
1.21E-05 
Human toxicity, cancer effects 
CTUh 
1.27E-08 
1.23E-08 
1.18E-08 
1.16E-08 
3.44E-04 
3.33E-04 
3.21E-04 
3.15E-04 
Human toxicity, non-cancer effects 
CTUh 
2.94E-07 
2.84E-07 
2.74E-07 
2.70E-07 
5.52E-04 
5.35E-04 
5.16E-04 
5.08E-04 
Particulate matter 
kg PM2.5 eq 
7.67E-04 
7.45E-04 
7.22E-04 
7.12E-04 
1.59E-04 
1.54E-04 
1.49E-04 
1.47E-04 
Ionizing radiation (human health) 
kg U235 eq 
5.32E-02 
5.18E-02 
5.02E-02 
4.95E-02 
4.71E-05 
4.58E-05 
4.44E-05 
4.38E-05 
Photochemical ozone formation 
kg NMVOC eq 
6.37E-03 
6.18E-03 
5.96E-03 
5.87E-03 
2.00E-04 
1.94E-04 
1.87E-04 
1.84E-04 
Acidification 
mol H+ eq 
7.86E-03 
7.61E-03 
7.33E-03 
7.22E-03 
1.67E-04 
1.61E-04 
1.55E-04 
1.53E-04 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
molc N eq 
2.15E-02 
2.07E-02 
1.99E-02 
1.96E-02 
1.23E-04 
1.19E-04 
1.14E-04 
1.12E-04 
Freshwater eutrophication 
kg P eq 
4.94E-05 
4.81E-05 
4.67E-05 
4.61E-05 
3.34E-05 
3.25E-05 
3.16E-05 
3.12E-05 
Marine eutrophication 
kg N eq 
3.68E-03 
3.56E-03 
3.43E-03 
3.37E-03 
2.19E-04 
2.12E-04 
2.04E-04 
2.01E-04 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
CTUe 
1.86E+00 
1.80E+00 
1.74E+00 
1.72E+00 
2.13E-04 
2.07E-04 
2.00E-04 
1.97E-04 
Land use 
kg C deficit 
7.55E+00 
7.32E+00 
7.07E+00 
6.97E+00 
1.20E-05 
1.16E-05 
1.12E-05 
1.11E-05 
Water resource depletion 
kg water eq 
1.98E-01 
1.92E-01 
1.85E-01 
1.82E-01 
2.52E-03 
2.44E-03 
2.35E-03 
2.32E-03 
Mineral fossil and renewable 
resource depletion 
kg Sb eq 
4.04E-05 
3.93E-05 
3.80E-05 
3.76E-05 
4.04E-04 
3.93E-04 
3.80E-04 
3.76E-04 
 
 
 
==PAGE:113==
113 
 
Figure B2: Comparison of normalized impact scores on mineral, fossil and renewable resource depletion obtained for scenario 0 (with and without humidifier production and disposal stages) with 
respect to the baseline system. Notice that only when considering the humidifier production and disposal stages the impacts are higher compared to the baseline. 
 
 
 
 
3.8E-04
3.8E-04
3.9E-04
3.9E-04
4.0E-04
4.0E-04
4.1E-04
4.1E-04
4.2E-04
Baseline
Scenario 0
excluding
humidifier
production and
disposal
Scenario 0
option 1
Scenario 0
option 2
PE EU 27, 2010
==PAGE:114==
114 
 
Figure B3: Relative contributions to the total impacts of the various life cycle stages for (a) scenario 1 production option 1 and (b) 
scenario 1 production option 2 in comparison with the baseline system (c). The relative contributions of scenario 2 and 3 are basically 
identical to scenario 1 here represented. 
==PAGE:115==
Figure B4: Relative change in normalized impact scores between scenario 1 and the baseline system, for every life cycle stage. Analogous figure is observed for scenario 2 and 3. 
 
 
 
-25%
-20%
-15%
-10%
-5%
0%
5%
10%
CC
OD
HT-C
HT-NC
PM
IR
PO
A
TE
FE
ME
FEc
LU
WD
RD
Relative change from baseline scenario (%)
Refrigeration processes
Transport
Lettuce processing
Lettuce production
Biowaste disposal DK
Biowaste disposal IT
Production option 1
==PAGE:116==
116 
 
 
Table B4: Sensitivity ratios calculated when varying the tested parameters by ±25% (indicated with min and max respectively). Numbers in bold indicate important parameters (|SR| > 0.3). 
Impact category 
Plastic amount 
Machinery use 
Electricity 
humidifiers 
Electricity 
supermarket 
Water humidifiers 
Transducer  
Energy savings 
 
Min 
Max 
Min 
Max 
Min 
Max 
Min 
Max 
Min 
Max 
Min 
Max 
Min 
Max 
Climate change 
0.4589 
0.4565 
0.0499 
0.0499 
0.0473 
0.0474 
0.0418 
0.0418 
0.00006 
0.00006 
9.81E-06 
9.81E-06 
-0.0462 
-0.0462 
Ozone depletion 
0.6202 
0.6169 
0.0502 
0.0503 
0.0142 
0.0142 
0.0121 
0.0121 
0.00003 
0.00003 
3.16E-06 
3.16E-06 
-0.0164 
-0.0164 
Human toxicity, cancer effects 
0.4567 
0.4543 
0.0732 
0.0733 
0.0212 
0.0212 
0.0188 
0.0188 
0.00130 
0.00129 
2.29E-05 
2.29E-05 
-0.0200 
-0.0200 
Human toxicity, non-cancer effects 
0.0503 
0.0507 
0.4587 
0.4594 
0.0072 
0.0073 
0.0064 
0.0064 
0.00019 
0.00018 
5.25E-04 
5.25E-04 
-0.0073 
-0.0073 
Particulate matter 
0.3865 
0.3845 
0.0909 
0.0910 
0.0220 
0.0220 
0.0186 
0.0186 
0.00011 
0.00011 
3.17E-05 
3.17E-05 
-0.0264 
-0.0264 
Ionizing radiation (human health) 
0.2376 
0.2364 
0.0785 
0.0786 
0.1150 
0.1154 
0.1021 
0.1020 
0.00005 
0.00005 
1.83E-06 
1.83E-06 
-0.1108 
-0.1108 
Photochemical ozone formation 
0.3908 
0.3889 
0.1563 
0.1565 
0.0187 
0.0188 
0.0146 
0.0146 
0.00007 
0.00007 
1.61E-05 
1.61E-05 
-0.0306 
-0.0306 
Acidification 
0.3851 
0.3832 
0.1105 
0.1106 
0.0343 
0.0344 
0.0293 
0.0292 
0.00007 
0.00007 
3.05E-05 
3.05E-05 
-0.0404 
-0.0404 
Terrestrial eutrophication 
0.2330 
0.2320 
0.1699 
0.1701 
0.0213 
0.0213 
0.0165 
0.0165 
0.00005 
0.00005 
2.01E-05 
2.01E-05 
-0.0350 
-0.0350 
Freshwater eutrophication 
0.3860 
0.3841 
0.0936 
0.0938 
0.0740 
0.0742 
0.0662 
0.0661 
0.00012 
0.00012 
1.68E-04 
1.68E-04 
-0.0681 
-0.0682 
Marine eutrophication 
0.1226 
0.1220 
0.0893 
0.0894 
0.0108 
0.0109 
0.0084 
0.0084 
0.00003 
0.00003 
8.73E-06 
8.73E-06 
-0.0182 
-0.0182 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
0.1666 
0.1658 
0.0503 
0.0504 
0.0053 
0.0053 
0.0047 
0.0047 
0.00011 
0.00011 
8.63E-05 
8.63E-05 
-0.0053 
-0.0053 
Land use 
0.0463 
0.0461 
0.0463 
0.0464 
0.0110 
0.0111 
0.0096 
0.0096 
0.00002 
0.00002 
3.69E-06 
3.69E-06 
-0.0119 
-0.0119 
Water resource depletion 
0.0063 
0.0063 
0.0003 
0.0003 
0.0002 
0.0002 
0.0002 
0.0002 
0.00009 
0.00009 
2.61E-07 
2.61E-07 
-0.0002 
-0.0002 
Mineral fossil and renewable resource 
depletion 
0.1883 
0.1878 
0.3554 
0.3559 
0.0041 
0.0041 
0.0036 
0.0036 
0.00050 
0.00049 
0.03 
0.03 
-0.0040 
-0.0040 
 
