==PAGE:1==
Hardware accelerators for the
T-CREST multi-core platform
Istv´an Sz˝onyi
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of the thesis to investigates the possibility to integrate stateful hard-
ware accelerators into the T-CREST/RTEMP platform preserving the time pre-
dictability of the system.
The T-CREST project created a time-predictable
multi-processor platform for real-time embedded systems and it is was funded
by the European Union’s 7th Framework Programme. The RTEMP project cur-
rently is developing a hard real-time Embedded multiprocessor platform which
simpliﬁes the worst-case-execution-time analysys. The project is funded by the
The Danish Council for Independent Research. The multiprocessor platform
will be implemented in FPGA technology and one or more of the use-cases
provided by the project partner Danfoss will be ported to this platform for a
quantitative performance analysis. Our technique allows to perform real-time
signal processing tasks with the T-CREST platform by integrating an FPGA
based Fast-Fourier-Transform IP core in form of a time predictable hardware
accelerator with internal states. The implementation can facilitate to evaluate
the adoption of some use cases to the T-CREST platform.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was carried out at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science (DTU Compute) at the Technical University of Denmark,
in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc in Computer Science and
Engineering.
The thesis deals with the integration of stateful hardware accelerators in the
T-CREST platform. At ﬁrst, we present an overview of the related ﬁelds and
related works.
Then we analyse the requirements based on what we deﬁne
a design speciﬁcation. Then we present its implementation on the T-CREST
platfor describing in details the developed architecture. Afterwards, we perform
a theoretical analysis, and we present the functional veriﬁcarion of the design.
Finally, we present the obtained design and discuss the diﬀerent aspects of the
presented architecture and its implementation.
Lyngby, 24-January-2016
Istv´an Sz˝onyi
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Jens Sparsø, for all the motivation and the
guidance that I have received during the project.
Special thanks should be addressed to my co-supervisor Luca Pezzarossa who
was always available to share his vast insight to the T-CREST platform and
to help me out with conﬁguration issues of the tool-chain used by the palt-
form. Also, I would like to thank Rasmus Bo Sørensen for his time on tehcnical
discussions related to the RTEMP project.
I would like to thank my parents, Ildik´o and Istv´an for their endless support.
Finally, I would like to thank Csilla for the encouragement received during the
good and bad times.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Multi-core System-on-Chip
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Hard Real Time Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Hardware accelerators in multi-core embedded systems . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
The T-CREST platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Patmos CPU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Argo NoC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Fast-Fourier-Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
General overview on FFT algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Real-time signal processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
FFT in hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Hardware accelerators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Classiﬁcation of Hardware Accelerators
. . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Performance metrics of a HwA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.3
Integration techniques of HwAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Related Work
21
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Requirements and Speciﬁcation
23
4.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Speciﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.1
Requirements analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.2
Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Integration in T-CREST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Design
31
5.1
Input interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Circular buﬀer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Dual Port RAM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.2
Write and Read Pointer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.3
Clock Domain Crossing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
FFT controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.1
Avalon-ST Interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.2
FSM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
OCP I/F and Output Buﬀer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Theoretical analysis
47
6.1
Latency estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
WCET estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Throughput estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Veriﬁcation
51
7.1
Test Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.2
Test Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.3
Test Case 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8
Results
57
8.1
Implementation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.2
Benchmark Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9
Discussions
61
9.1
Reducing WCET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
9.2
Multi-channel operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
10 Conclusions
67
A Apendix A
69
B Apendix B
99
C Apendix C
105
Bibliography
111
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Multi-core System-on-Chip
The well-known, now 50 years old, Moore’s Law [1] is one of the golden rules
and springboard for research and development in the semiconductor industry.
The direct translation of the rule resulted ib the chip providers to aim for more
transistors on the same die, which has also redounded a performance increase
of the single core processors. Entering the 21st century it became more and
more challenging and expensive to achieve the anticipated goals set by the rule,
especially on the performance and power consumption scale where the clock
speed and the logic had a direct inﬂuence on those parameters. In 2004, Intel
cancelled it’s Tejas project, which was supposed to be the successor of their Pen-
tium 4 processors and instead started to focus on a multi-core solution for their
next generation processors. This seemed to be more feasible both economically
and technically, following them soon all chip vendors had multi-core processor
strategies [2]. In the meantime the convergence to meet the high-computational
demands in desktops, servers and embedded systems resulted in today’s systems
which have a complex multi-core System-on-Chip architecture consisting from
the interconnection of multiple processors and IP blocks on the same silicon.[3].
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
1.2
Hard Real Time Systems
Many embedded systems are used in safety critical applications where failure
to respond in time can result to fatal consequences thus, those systems have
to react to stimulus from the environment within a deadline. Systems which
are operating under such conditions are called Hard-real time systems. Usually,
they are applied in the medical, automotive, defence and avionics applications.
Real-time systems can be further classiﬁed upon their interaction with the envi-
ronment, those which are in constant conjugation are called Reactive real-time
systems. These are systems systems which used to respond to conditions mea-
sured and quantiﬁed from sensors and actuators, typically applied to control
specialised hardware.
The hard timing constraint upon a task has to be executed is deﬁned by the
Worst case Execution Time(WCET). The Real-Time systems must be designed
to meet these times thus, both the hardware and software architecture have
to support that. As today’s embedded systems has to serve several tasks and
actuators they are also built on multi-core architectures where several processors
and IP blocks are interconnected. Scheduling tasks with hard timing constraints
in multi-core systems are becoming very complex and makes the WCET analysis
challenging.
DTU Compute is the technical leader of the EU FP7 project, T-CREST[4] which
is also involved in the RTEMP[5] program. The aim of the two projects is to
provide Hard Real-Time Embedded Multi-core Platform especially developed
for real-time embedded systems, where WCET requirements are a ﬁrst order
design factor.
In the rest of the Thesis we address this platform as the T-
CREST platform.
1.3
Hardware accelerators in multi-core embed-
ded systems
Generally, a multi-core system on chip (SoC) is built from a set of homogeneous
and heterogeneous cores as described in [6].
Homogeneous cores are deﬁned
as being exactly the same, these are for example processor cores which have
the same architecture, instruction set, functions etc. For this type of SoCs it
is much easier to exploit, introduce and maintain parallelism techniques. An
example of a homogeneous multi-core SoC is Tile64 [7], which is constructed
from 64 identical processor cores interconnected with an on-chip network. On
the other hand, a heterogeneous SoC is built from diﬀerent type of cores which
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Thesis outline
3
increase the complexity of the system but can oﬀer better performances for
special applications and they are more customizable.
A heterogeneous SoC can contain several identical CPUs alongside other IP
blocks which serve the acceleration of diﬀerent high-computational tasks. These
type of blocks are also known as Hardware Accelerators. These accelerators are
used when the architecture of the system is not optimized for the algorithmic
functions of the given application or when fast input/output (I/O) operations
have to process in real-time. Depending on the algorithm and its implementation
a hardware accelerator can have internal states or can operate in a state-less
manner where every task is related only to the information provided at the
beginning of the task [8].
Many embedded systems have to perform digital signal processing for diﬀerent
reasons and depending on the application those tasks has to be executed in real
time. In these cases some of the general purpose processors in the SoC can not
met the required processing time and they need specialised hardware. Attaching
a hardware accelerator to a SoC can be approached from many aspects which
usually depends on the architecture of the system and the available intercon-
nection techniques, whether it is a network-on-chip (NoC) or shared bus. For
real-time systems it may also a requirement to preserve the time-predictability
of the platform or even, to conserve the homogeneity of the multi-core system.
1.4
Thesis outline
The previous sections were a brief introduction of the topic and environment
of this Thesis. In the coming chapters we analyse in more details some of the
fundamental deﬁnitions and characteristics of the environment, the presented
ﬁeld and the platform. Afterwards, we present the practical part of the thesis
which was to integrate a hardware accelerator with an internal state to the time
predictable T-CREST platform. The upcoming chapters are as follows:
Chapter 2 explains the targeted platform, T-CREST, the theory of some sig-
nal processing algorithm used in embedded systems, and the key classes
and terms related to hardware accelerators.
Chapter 3 presents related works in the topic of hardware accelerators for the
T-CREST platform.
Chapter 4 deﬁnes the requirements and speciﬁcations for the targeted hard-
ware accelerator and specify the integration technique into the T-CREST
platform.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Chapter 5 describes the design of the resulted architecture from the speciﬁca-
tion, describing each functional block from the accelerator.
Chapter 6 performs theoretical analysts on the design and provides formulas
for the total latency and the worst-case execution time.
Chapter 7 veriﬁes the design with three diﬀerent test cases
Chapter 8 shows the obtained implementation results and compares perfor-
mance results obtained for small benchmark applications.
Chapter 9 discusses the drawbacks and possible improvements to the design.
Chapter 10 concludes the thesis.
Appendix A contains the VHDL source code for the design.
Appendix B contains the VHDL and C source code for the veriﬁcation of the
design.
Appendix C contains the C source code for the benchmark application.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter presents the theoretical background of the terms and environment
to which the thesis work is related.
It is divided into three sections.
The
ﬁrst sections provide an overview of the T-CREST platform and highlights the
parts which are used in the later chapters. The second chapter gives a general
overview on algorithms used in digital signal processing accelerators, such as the
Fast Fourier Transform(FFT) and its variations. The third section speciﬁes the
common terms used to describe and analyse hardware accelerators in multi-core
systems.
2.1
The T-CREST platform
The T-CREST platform is an open source research project with a focus on
the development of general purpose time-predictable multi-processor platform
for embedded hard real-time applications. The intellectual property(IP) of the
platform is a time predictable, statically scheduled, dual-issue RISC processor
codenamed Patmos. The interconnection fabric is realized by the TDM based
network-on-chip, codenamed Argo that provides time-predictable communica-
tion channels between the cores. Due to the fact that all the components of the
system are independently time-predictable, the platform reduces the complex-
ity of Worst Case Execution Time (WCET) analysis in multi-core platforms.
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Figure 2.1 shows a full 2-by-2 platform with the high- level architecture of an
IP. The IP of the T-CREST platform is presented on the left part of Figure 2.1.
R
R
R
R
IP
IP
IP
IP
SPM
NI
R
M
M
S
M
S
S
I
IM
DM
Patmos CPU
cp
dp
Figure 2.1: Conceptual overview of a 2-by-2 T-CREST platform. ”IP” stands
for intellectual property, ”NI” for network interface, ”R” for
routers, ”SPM” for scratch-pad memory.
”IM” and ”DM” for
instructions and data caches, while ”M” and ”S” stands for the
master and slave ports of an OCP interface, ”cp” and ”dp” stands
for the conﬁguration and data port.
It is composed of the Patmos CPU described in [9], with its own instruction
and data caches described in [10] and with a true dual port RAM named as the
Scratch Pad Memory (SPM). The SPM is used to implement the message pass-
ing mechanism between the interconnected IPs and its accessed by the CPU and
the NI. The NI uses Direct Memory Accesses (DMA) to transfer blocks of data,
it is interfaced with the local SPM through a data port (dp). The processor
sets up the DMA through the conﬁguration port (cp) of the NI and the DMA
will initiate a transfer from the local SPM to the remote nodes SPM. The NI
and the router (R) is part of the message passing NoC called Argo described
in[11]. The T-CREST platform is organized as a Globally Asynchronous Locally
Synchronous (GALS) model where the IPs are synchronous and they can have
their own clock, the network interfaces are mesochronous, and the routers are
asynchronous. In the next two subsections we present brieﬂy some of the key
aspects of the Patmos processor and the Argo NoC.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The T-CREST platform
7
2.1.1
Patmos CPU
Patmos is a static scheduled, dual-issue RISC processor, which is intended as
a processor for real-time embedded systems to reduce the complexity of the
WCET analysis. This is achieved by the visibility of all instruction delays at
the instruction set architecture (ISA). In this subsection we only describe the
processors interface, more details about its architecture and implementation can
be found in [9].
The conﬁguration port shown in Figure 2.1 employs the Open Core Protocol
(OCP) [12]. The protocol was created to facilitate ”plug-and-play” of IP com-
ponents in SoC designs. In the T-CREST platform is mainly used to perform
read/write operations between the processor and the NI. As we depicted, the
processor stands as a master entity (M) and the NI as a slave entity (S). The
OCP core read/write operation is shown in ﬁgure 2.2. The master entity issues
Figure 2.2: Patmos OCPcore timing diagram.
a command to the slave entity through the MCmd and waits for a response.
In the case of a write command the data is also provided on the MData port.
When the command is performed by the slave, it responds to the master with
the conformation code on the SResp port . If the requested command from the
master is a read the slave provides also the requested data via the SData port.
Patmos implies two address spaces, a local address and a global address space.
The local address space is used to access the local SPM, I/O devices, and every-
thing which is accessed through local loads and stores. Memories used by the
caches are mapped to the global address space. Due to the two address spaces,
there are two address mappings. For this thesis we used the local address space,
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
as we considered the possibility to attaching hardware accelerators to Patmos
as an I/O device. the local address space is shown in Table;
Table 2.1: Address mapping for local address space
Address
Memory area
0x00000000 - 0x0000FFFF
Data Scratch Pad Memory
0x00010000 - 0x0001FFFF
Instruction Scratch Pad Memory
0xE0000000 - 0xE7FFFFFF
NoC interface conﬁguration registers
0xE8000000 - 0xEFFFFFFF
MoC communication memory
0xF0000000 - 0xFFFFFFFF
I/O Devices
2.1.2
Argo NoC
In this Thesis we do not use directly the NoC in the T-CREST platform, thus
this subsections covers only some of the fundamental information. More details
about the Argo NoC can be found in [13] and [14]
Argo is a time-predictable NOC designed to be used in hard real-time multi-
core platforms. As a component of the T-CREST platform, it complies with
the time-predictability of the platform by providing time-predictable core-to-
core communication in the form of message passing. The message passing is
realized with the use of point-to-point communication channels with a time-
division-multiplexing (TDM) method. The information exchange between the
cores are realized in the form of packet transfers. The packet switching net-
work is composed from routers, links and network interfaces where the router
is directing the stream of packets that are injected from the network interface
through the network according to the static TDM scheduler described in [15].
In the T-CREST platform a packet is constructed from three 35-bit ﬂits. Each
ﬂit contains 3 control bits, these specify if a ﬂit is valid, the header ﬂit, and nd
the last ﬂit of the packet. The ﬁrst ﬂit is the header of the packet which deﬁnes
the destination address and the route. The other two ﬂits contains the 64-bit
payload, 32-32 bits in each payload ﬂit.
2.2
Fast-Fourier-Transform
In this section, we present the basics and application of the well-known method
to eﬃciently compute Discrete Fourier Transforms (DFT), the Fast Fourier
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Fast-Fourier-Transform
9
Transform(FFT). The section is divided into three subsections. The ﬁrst sub-
section gives a general overview on the FFT algorithm and its variations. The
second subsections present some of the challenges when digital signal processing
has to be applied in real-time systems, while in the last subsection we mention
some current implementations of the FFT algorithm in digital hardware.
2.2.1
General overview on FFT algorithms
The FFT algorithm described in [16] is widely used in many applications such as
spectrum analysis, fast convolution, compressions, etc. These type of applica-
tions represents important tasks in many ﬁelds where reactive real-time systems
are involved, such as controlling applications [17] or vibration monitoring[18].
The computation of a DFT is performed by arithmetic operations and the com-
plexity of these operations are scaling-up with the transform length, and with
the actual algorithm to compute the FFT.
The most common FFT algorithm is the Cooley–Tukey algorithm described in
[16]. The algorithm is well documented in the scientiﬁc literature and it has
many variants, one of them is the “decimation-in-time” (DIT) algorithm for
sequences whose length is a power of two.
A Radix-2 DIT FFT recursively
partitions a DFT of size N into two interleaved DFTs of size N/2. The two
partitions are created as one for the sum of the even-indexed-inputs and one
for the odd-indexed inputs, then the combined result of the two provides the
DFT of the input sequence. This method signiﬁcantly reduces the computation
time of the DFT sequence. Based on this algorithm there are many variations
which can reduce further the computation times, such as the radix-4 algorithm
descibed in [19]
Increasing the radices are not the only way to optimize a DFT computation.
Real-time applications may require to analyze a signal with a ﬁxed length sliding
window. In 2.1 x(n) deﬁnes a window frame composed by N samples at the time
instant n as:
x(n) = {x(n −N + 1),
x(n −N + 2),
. . . ,
x(n −1),
x(n)}
(2.1)
Applying an N-point FFT operation with the radix-2 algortihm on x(n) will
result in the DFT sequence X(n), as presented in 2.2
X(n) = {X0,
X1,
. . .
XN−1}
(2.2)
With the mentioned FFT algorithm all the N values of X(n) are computed at
relatively fast period.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
Real-time applications for spectral analysis do not need all the results, they only
rely on speciﬁc Xk element of X(n). For this type of applications there is an
algorithm called the Sliding DFT described in [20]. This algorithm relies on
the similarity of two successive window frames as stating that x(n-1) and x(n)
contains identical elements. The algorithm introduces further optimizations for
the computation complexity.
A comparison on the number of computations
performed in the mentioned algorithms is presented in the Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Comparison of the number of computations performed in the tra-
ditional DFT, radix-2 DIT FFT and Sliding DFT algorithms. ”L”
stands for the sliding window size, quantiﬁed in samples
Algorithm
Nr. of complex additions
Nr. of complex multiplication
DFT
N ∗(N −1)
N ∗N
FFT radix-2
N ∗log2 N
N/2 ∗log2 N
Sliding DFT (L=1)
2 ∗(N −1)
N −1
The concept of the sliding DFT relies on the buttery structure presented in Fig-
ure 2.3 b. To update this structure with a window which slides one sample over
time, only the black dotted butterﬂies need to be calculated. the calculations
related to the rest of the butterﬂies are already available because they are the
delayed samples of those above them. The complexity of the computations relies
on the window size L and the transform length N when the window size is a
signiﬁcant portion of the transform length more butterﬂies has to be calculated.
2.2.2
Real-time signal processing
There are two basic methods of processing information, oﬀ-line processing and
on-line processing. Oﬀ-line processing consists of ﬁrst acquiring all the data
samples, then at a later instance of the time processing it. In real-time process-
ing, the output signal is produced at the same time that the input signal is being
acquired. To perform an FFT, we must have access to a certain number of the
most recent samples from the input. In a modern real-time system, the data
producer provides data with a certain periodicity while the consumer process
the data with a diﬀerent rate. In DSP processors, the storage of streamed data
are done with a circular buﬀer as described in [21]. A circular buﬀer is a data
structure that uses a ﬁxed-size memory regions as if it were connected end-to-
end where the last memory location is followed by the ﬁrst memory location.
The write and the read operations are managed by two sets of pointers accord-
ing to the required step at which successive memory locations are accessed. an
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Fast-Fourier-Transform
11
a. Radix-2 FFT Butterfly
b. Sliding FFT Butterfly
x(15)
x(14)
x(13)
x(12)
x(11)
x(10)
x(9)
x(8)
x(7)
x(6)
x(5)
x(4)
x(3)
x(2)
x(1)
x(0)
x(0)
x(8)
x(4)
x(12)
x(2)
x(10)
x(6)
x(14)
x(1)
x(9)
X(5)
X(13)
X(3)
X(11
X(7)
X(15
Figure 2.3: Butterﬂy structures for the radix-2 FFT and the Sliding DFT for
N=16
illustration of that buﬀer is shown in Figure 2.4.
0x0001
0x0002
0x0003
0x0004
0x0005
0x0006
0x0007
1st access
2nd access
5th access
3rd access
4th access
0x0000
0x0004
0x0008
0x000C
0x0010
0x0014
0x0018
0x0008
0x0009
0x000A
0x000B
0x001C
0x0020
0x0024
0x0028
Address
Write direction
Read acceses
Figure 2.4: Example of read data access order in a circular buﬀer with a size of
11 memory locations and with a read out frame equal to 4 elements
Many real-time DSP applications use only real data in the time domain, however
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
the FFT algorithm is based on the complex DFT, which is using complex and
real numbers to represent the data. In Figure 2.5 a comparison of the complex
DFT and real DFT is presented, where the complex DFT takes two N point
time domain signals and creates two N point frequency domain signals, while
the real DFT takes N point time domain signal and creates two N/2+1 point
frequency domain signals.
Complex DFT
0
N-1
N-1
0
N-1
0
0
N-1
N/2
N/2
Real DFT
0
N-1
0
0
N/2
N/2
Time domain
Time domain
Frequency domain
Frequency domain
Real part
Imaginary part
Imaginary part
Real part
Real part
Real part
Imaginary part
Figure 2.5: Example of read data access order in a circular buﬀer with a size of
11 memory locations and with a read out frame equal to 4 elements
It can be observed that a simple solution to operate only with real numbers is
to zero pad the imaginary input of the complex DFT and move the N point
input to the real part as described in [21] Chapter 12.
The computation of
the complex DFT will result in a real and an imaginary signal in the frequency
domain, each composed of N points. the ﬁrst N/2+1 samples of these signals
correspond to the real DFT’s spectrum.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Fast-Fourier-Transform
13
2.2.3
FFT in hardware
The algorithm of an FFT relies on the butterﬂy arrangement of computations.
This structure is extremely parallelizable which is widely explored by the semi-
conductor companies. Texas Instruments oﬀers hardware acceleration for many
DSP related algorithms in form of co-processors such as the one described in
[22].
Field programmable gate array(FPGA) vendors also provide hardware
accelerated solutions for FFT computations in form of IP cores those can be
implemented on their devices. In this Thesis we concentrate on the FFT core
provided by Altera desctibed in [23]. this FFT core is highly conﬁgurable, some
of the supported modes and parameters are:
• the transform length must be power of two and can vary between 8 points
to 262144 points (for the version 14.1). and it can support ﬁxed or variable
transform sizes
• it supports ﬁxed point and single precision ﬂoating point data representa-
tions
• implements diﬀerent types of FFT algorithms such as radix-2, radix22,
radix-4
• supports wide ranges for data precision and twiddle factor.
• supports diﬀerent modes for the order of the input and output as natural
or bit-reverse ordering.
• diﬀerent I/O data-ﬂow modes: streaming and variable streaming for con-
tinuous input output data-ﬂows without interruptions or buﬀered and
burst modes for oﬀ-line processing.
Due to the large number of the conﬁgurable parameters the resource utilization
and performance of certain implementations varies on a wide scale. In Table
2.3 we show the resource utilization and the computation time for a streaming
I/O data ﬂow with 16 bits data and twiddle precision for diﬀerent transform
length. It can be observed that computation time is linearly increasing with the
transform length while logic elements slightly increase. The memory usage and
the DSP blocj usage is increasing within the ranges of the FFT size.
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
Table 2.3: Resource and computation time for diﬀeernt transform lengthm
”LE” stands for logic elements
FFT length
Computation cycles
LE
Memeory bits
DSP blocks
64
64
3170
90112
6
128
128
3584
90112
6
256
256
3741
90112
6
512
512
4135
90112
6
1024
1024
4712
156648
6
2048
2048
5930
311296
12
4096
4096
6331
622592
12
2.3
Hardware accelerators
Hardware accelerators are designed to oﬄoad and speed-up speciﬁc tasks from
general purpose processors [24]. These tasks usually are high-complexity com-
putational functions whose algorithm can not be eﬃciently mapped to the CPU,
or simply by that the CPU does not posses enough computational resources to
complete the task at a high rate. Moreover, many algorithms posses high par-
allelism which can not be explored eﬃciently at the software level. Instead,
specialised hardware with optimized and dedicated architecture can perform
faster the task than the software running on a processor[25]. The remaining
part of this section is divided into three subsections. In the ﬁrst subsection,
we deﬁne two classes of HwAs. In the second section, we provide some of the
fundamental performance metrics related to the HwAs, and in the third subsec-
tion, we present the most common integration techniques of HwAs in multi-core
systems.
2.3.1
Classiﬁcation of Hardware Accelerators
The use of HwAs in multi-core platforms leads to increase of the complexity
of the system from both software and hardware perspectives. When a HwA
is shared with other entities in the platform, scheduling algorithms has to be
applied at the software level to handle the information ﬂow between the cores.
From the hardware point of view the challenge is to choose the right method to
integrate the HwA in the system, as explained in [26]. In multi-core systems the
HwAs can be dedicated to only one processor or to multiple processors through
the system bus as shown in Figure 2.6.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Hardware accelerators
15
HwA
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
MEM
System bus
HwA
HwA
System bus
HwA
HwA
CPU
CPU
CPU
MEM
a, Dedicated HwAs
b, Shared HwAs
Figure 2.6: HwAs in multi-core systems
Another classiﬁcation can be done based on the internal architecture of the
HwA. As described in [27] at Chapter 4.2 there are two main classes:
Stateless HwAs where every task is related only to the information provided
in the input at the beginning of the task.
HwAs with internal state where every task is related by the information
provided in the input at the beginning of the task and by the current
state or from information acquired during a previous state/instance of
time of the HwA.
Usually stateless HwAs are those which work with a small amount of data such
as arithmetic operations for ﬂoating pint units, while DSP algorithms for real-
time applications such as a sliding window FFT are more feasible for HwAs with
internal state. In this Thesis we address the HwAs with internal state and we
explore the possibility to integrate it as a dedicated or shared resource in the
T-CREST platform.
2.3.2
Performance metrics of a HwA
The parameters listed above are used to evaluate the HwA in an integrated
platform.
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
Latency The latency is a very important metric, since this deﬁnes the WCET
of a task. Latency is measured in units of time or clock periods. It is
deﬁned as the time interval between the instant of starting the execution
of a task to the instant when the processed data is available at its output
interface.
The maximum value of the latency in the HwA deﬁnes the
WCET of a task.
This latency is not to be confused with the set-up
latency which is a property of the system where the HwA is integrated,
and refer to the time which needed to control/setup the HwA.
Throughput The throughput is the number of such actions executed or results
produced per unit of time, the amount of data accepted at input and
provided at output.
Speed-up Measures the gain earned by the use of HwA in terms of speed to
execute a task instead of using the software routine. It is expressed as the
ratio between the execution time of the same task by the software, and
the obtained execution time with the HwA.
Granularity The granularity reﬂects the complexity of the task executed by
the HwA. this can be measured by the number of computations performed
by the algorithm or function implemented by the HwA. If we compare some
arithmetic functions/operations than an FFT computation has a higher
granularity than a ﬂoating-point unit (FPU) but a lower granularity if
compared to an applied cryptology algorithm.
Data Footprint this parameter deﬁnes the size of the set of data which the
HwA works on during an entire execution of a task. This can vary from
many factors, in the case of an FFT operation, this directly scales from a
small to large with the increase of transform length and the data precision.
There are other parameters as well to evaluate a HwA from diﬀerent perspec-
tives, such as the power consumption, but in this Thesis we do not consider this
aspect.
2.3.3
Integration techniques of HwAs
One of the most important factors on choosing the right integration technique
for a HwA is how the HwA acquires the data upon which executes the desired
task. We can distinguish between three methods:
• The the data is generated and provided directly by the CPU to the HwA.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Hardware accelerators
17
• The CPU provides the pointers to the HwA where the data is stored in
a shared memory, upon that the HwA can access the data independently.
In this case shared memory access protocols must be applied to avoid
conﬂicts when other resources want to access the same memory locations.
• The data is generated by an external device which is interfaced directly
by the HwA.
In this Thesis, we address the third method where the HwA acquires the data
from an external device. In principles this is very similar to the ﬁrst method,
since the same interaction is required with the CPU for end-of-task signalling or
initialization requests. In Figure 2.7 we present several methods for integrating
HwA’s in multi-processor platforms. As a general rule, the latency to initiate
a task execution must be shorter than the actual execution time of the task on
the HwA. We present four integration techniques which are:
Integrated into the CPU This method is used when very low set-up laten-
cies are needed and the HwA operates on a small data footprint and has a
ﬁne grain granularity. This method does not ﬁt well with multi-core plat-
forms since it is more related to the design of the internal architecture of
the processor and can not be shared with other entities from the platform.
Attached to the CPU This is another method which has a very low set-up
latency because it is connected directly to the CPU through an external
port or through the CPU bus. The set-up latency is deﬁned by the com-
munication protocol of the CPU bus or the interface of the CPU. the HwA
can act as an I/O device or can also share the cache memory with the CPU.
ﬁne and medium granularity HwAs can target this type of integration.
Attached through a NoC When a HwA is integrated to an inter-processor
NoC it becomes a peer of the other IPs. The attachment is realised through
the network interface and if the HwAs interface is matching with the one
used in the NI this becomes a ”plug and play” component. The set-up
latency is higher due to the routing mechanism which transfers the infor-
mation in packets between the source and the destination cores. Medium
or coarse grain HwA whose task execution time is high are preferred to
use this method.
Attached through a Dedicated bus In this method the HwA is connected
to a set of CPUs from a NoC through a dedicated bus.
This method
is suitable for those medium and coarse grain HwAs whose have a low
latency on the task execution, lower than the set-up latency inside the
NoC . This method is also preferable when the homogeneity of the SoC
should be conserved. However, it increases the complexity of the system
and results in extra resource utilization to implement the dedicated bus.
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
Basically, the HwA can interface an external device in any of the mentioned
attachment methods, except when the HwA resides inside the CPU. In this
Thesis we investigate the possibility to integrate a ﬁne/medium grain HwA with
internal state in the T-CREST platform thus, we consider the second method
where the HwA is attached to the CPU with a view to extend the integration
to support a dedicated bus which can be accessed by a set of IPs from the
T-CREST platform.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Hardware accelerators
19
CPU
CPU bus
Cache
HwA
a, HwA attached to the CPU bus
HwA
CPU bus
CPU
Cache
b, HwA inside the CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
HwA
HwA
HwA
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
HwA
HwA
HwA
Dedicated bus
c, HwAs attached through a NoC
d, HwAs attached through a 
dedicated bus
EXT
EXT
EXT
Figure 2.7: Integration techniques for HwAs
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Related Work
In this chapter, we brieﬂy present some of the closely related works to the topic
of this Thesis. First we present an integration technique of stateless hardware
accelerators in the T-CREST platform, afterwards we present a method applied
for Altera speciﬁc FPGAs, which can increase the speed of an FFT computa-
tion, and ﬁnally we mention a hardware implementation of the Sliding DFT
algorithm.
In [8] the author described an integration technique for stateless hardware accel-
erators into time-predictable multi-core platforms based on time-division multi-
plexing networks-on-chip. The conﬁguration of the T-CREST platform used by
Pezzarossa is a 2x2 bi-torus NOC consisting of 3 Patmos CPU and a hardware
accelerator. The HWA is a double-precision-ﬂoating-point-unit which supports
addition subtraction and multiplication in a pipelined architecture. In theory,
this allows the FPU to take a new instruction at every clock cycle. In order
to execute an arithmetic operation, the FPU needs to receive the two operands
the operation code, and the write-back address. When the HWA accelerator is
used in the T-CREST platform, the operands from the CPU are sent in separate
packets due to the the message passing architecture of the TDM based NoC. A
packet consists of three 35-bit wide ﬂits as described in Chapter 2.1, therefore,
one operand is sent in 3 clock cycles, this means that the FPU can do an op-
eration at every 12th clock cycle, after receiving the two operand, the identiﬁer
of the arithmetic operation and a write-back address for the result. The imple-
==PAGE:32==
22
Related Work
mentation was carried out on the Altera Cyclone IV FPGA (EP4CE115) on the
Terasic DE2-115 evelopment board. The evaluatin of the design was performed
with an FFT computation, ﬁrst on software than using the double precision
ﬂoating point unit in the HwA. According to the reported results reported the
design shows a speed-up from 7.8 for a 256-points FFT to 10.1 for 4096 point.
As we already mentioned the platform contains only one HwA, but it would
interesting to see the speedup with two or more HwA cores which can compute
some sections of the FFT algorithm in parallel.
In [28] an eﬃcient usage of Alteras FFT IP core is presented.
The authors
state that they can improve the processing time of an N-point transform by
combining more cores together based on the radix-2 algorithm for DFT. They
compute an N-point FFT using two N/2-point FFT cores where the input is
separated by parity, one N/2 core for the odd-indexed inputs an one N/2 core
for the even indexed inputs, then the obtained results has to pass one more
butterﬂy stage, which is implemented with two adders, one multiplier and one
numerically controlled oscillator (NCO) for the complex exponent. The results
shows the processing time is approximately halved compared to a full N-point
core. However, the method requires having access to even and odd samples of
the input sequence simultaneously. Also the resource ultiziation is increased and
not just by the separate core instances but by the additional NCO and adders.
In [29] a hardware implementation of the Sliding Window DFT algorithm men-
tioned in Chapter 2.2, is presneted. They highlighting the fact that existing IP
cores do not have an option for performing sliding window DFT as they operate
on block data ﬂow. To overcome this the authors designed their own DFT but-
terﬂy structure for an 8-point transform length and a mechasnism to access and
modify the twiddle factors. Unfortunately, the architecture and implementation
details are not presented and the performance analsys is also deﬁcient.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 4
Requirements and
Speciﬁcation
This chapter describes the architecture of the FFT accelerator which is devel-
oped based on the requirements and the speciﬁcations. It is divided into two
sections. The ﬁrst section presents the initial requirements, the second section
provides the high-level speciﬁcations with the resulted architecture for the FFT
accelerator.
4.1
Requirements
This section presents a list of requirements that the FFT accelerator must fulﬁl.
These are imposed by the T-CREST platform and by the Hard Real-Time Em-
bedded Multiprocessor Platform (RTEMP) project. Some of the requirements
were deﬁned at technical meetings with the collaborators of the RTEMP project.
Requirement imposed by the T-CREST platform [4] :
Requirement 1 The FFT accelerator has to be completely time-predictable
and its integration has to maintain the time-predictability of the platform.
==PAGE:34==
24
Requirements and Speciﬁcation
Requirement 2 The FFT accelerator has to operate in the same clock-domain
with the Patmos CPU from the T-CREST platform.
Requirement 3 The FFT accelerator has to incorporate an OCP slave port,
in order to communicate with the T-CREST platform.
Requirements deﬁned by the RTEMP project [5] are:
Requirement 4 The FFT accelerator has to be implemented on an FPGA
technology.
Requirement 5 The FFT accelerator has to handle a continuous data-ﬂow
and calculate the FFT transform in real-time. It has to support a Sliding
Window FFT technique, where the window size is a ﬁxed portion of the
transform length.
Requirement 6 The FFT accelerator has to be able to support various trans-
form length from 64-point to 2048 and has to support a real-to-real trans-
form.
Requirement 7 The data producer has a sampling rate of 16 KHz and each
sample has a precision of 16 bits at least. The producer is directly con-
nected to the FFT accelerator and provides data, clock, and valid signals
to the FFT accelerator.
4.2
Speciﬁcation
This section presents a high-level functional speciﬁcation for the the proposed
architecture of the FFT accelerator.The speciﬁcations are derived from the re-
quirements, data sheets of the available resources and theoretical calculations. It
is divided into three subsections, the ﬁrst subsection presents the Requirements
analysis, the second provides the high-level architecture of the FFT accelerator,
and the third presents the suggested integration techniqe into the T-CREST
platform.
4.2.1
Requirements analysis
Inspecting the list of requirements, one of the most important resolution is
that we are designing a system with multiple clock domains.
According to
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Speciﬁcation
25
Requirement 2, we designed the FFT accelerator to operate on the same clock
as the Patmos CPU from the T-CREST platform. According to the Patmos
handbook [9] the fmax of Patmos on the Altera DE2-115 FPGA board is 80
MHz.
This frequency is provided by a clock signal from the internal clock-
tree of the FPGA. This clock is used to calculate the FFT transform based on
data samples acquired from the producer. However, the producer is a directly
connected I/O device to the FFT accelerator and provides data samples coming
with an external clock, as speciﬁed in Requirement 7. In practicality, this
means that the data arrives from one clock-domain and it is processed in another
clock domain. Hence, the ﬂow of data to and from the FFT accelerator has to
traverse clock domain borders, and this needs to be handled by Clock-domain-
crossing (CDC) techniques which synchronize the data with the destination
clock domain to avoid metastability issues. The results of the processed data
are provided to the T-CREST platform within the global clock domain, thus,
we don’t need to handle a third clock-domain crossing. This leaves us with two
unrelated clocks in terms of phase and frequency, a 16KHz sampling clock and
an 80 MHz global clock.
The FFT accelerator includes an FFT IP core and manages its use. Since the
T-CREST platform can be implemented on the DE2-115 Altera FPGA develop-
ment board, the same implementation target is chosen for the FFT accelerator.
This limits the possible FFT engines that can be used by the FFT accelerator.
For simplicity and reduced overhead we use the FFT IP core provided by Al-
tera. Alteras FFT IP core has a radix-4 implementation as descrived in [23],
and can be customized to satisfy Requirement 6. Naturally it supports single-
precision ﬂoating-point and ﬁxed-point representations for complex-to-complex
transforms, however, a real-to-real transform can be also achieved by providing
valid data only for the real-part, as mentioned in 2.2.2.
According to Requirement 5 the data processing has to happen real-time in a
Sliding FFT fashion. In real-time processing, the output signal is produced at
the same time that the input signal is being acquired. To calculate the output
sample, we must have access to a certain number of the most recent samples
from the input.
For example, to perform a 64-point transform with Alteras
FFT IP core, the FFT accelerator has to receive a frame of 64 samples. These
samples must be stored in a buﬀer which is continually updated as new samples
are acquired. The formula to calculate the time needed to fulﬁl such a buﬀer,
Tﬁll buﬀer is shown in 4.1 .It depends on the sampling rate of the input, FSR,
and the transform length, TRANSlength, which deﬁnes the number of samples
required to calculate one FFT. The FFT IP core uses the Avalon-ST interface.
Tfill buffer = FSR ∗TRANSlength
(4.1)
==PAGE:36==
26
Requirements and Speciﬁcation
The Sliding Window DFT algorithm would require only a snippet of the sam-
ples, the number of the required samples are deﬁned by the size of the sliding
window as presented in 2.2.1.
As shown in 4.2, Tﬁll buﬀer swin, this method
have the advantage to start an FFT computation much earlier, then the tradi-
tional radix-4 algorithm, because the number of samples that are required for
an FFT computation are deﬁned by the WINsize which is usually lower than
the TRANSlength,
Tfill buffer swin = FSR ∗WINsize
(4.2)
However, the Sliding Window DFT algorithm requires a diﬀerent butterﬂy im-
plementation from the traditional radix-4 used in Alteras FFT IP core and that
can not be modiﬁed. The suggested solution to overcome this limitation is to
apply a sliding window with a circular buﬀer for the FFT core. The end of this
buﬀer is connected to its beginning and will always have to hold N number of
samples which is equal to the TRANSlength, and these are overwritten with M,
number of newly acquired samples, which are equal to WINsize. When a new
sample is acquired, it replaces the oldest sample in the buﬀer, After acquiring
M new samples, the content of the buﬀer can be provided to the FFT core to
start processing the data.
The results of the FFT have to be stored in an output buﬀer. This buﬀer is
written by the FFT core and read by the connected consumer. The consumer
is the T-CREST platform. The platform should conﬁgure the FFT accelerator
with the proper parameters, eg: window size and transform length. This should
be set-up by a register write. The consumer has the responsibility to initiate
and terminate any task for the FFT accelerator, which is always available for
the consumer. The FFT accelerator should signal the availability of new results
for the consumer, which has to read-out the output buﬀer through the OCP
port, before the next result arrives unless the data in the buﬀer is overwritten.
4.2.2
Architecture
The FFT accelerator includes the FFT IP core from Altera and manages its use.
It is connected to the T-CREST platform through the Patmos CPU. The OCP
Slave interface of the FFT accelerator makes possible to dedicate it only to a
single Patmos CPU, or it can be shared between diﬀerent CPUs. Scheduling
protocols oriented to multi-processor platforms has to be applied at Software
level to manage it as shared resources.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Speciﬁcation
27
The steps needed to perform a task by the FFT accelerator are shown in the
list below:
1. The consumer initiates the execution of the FFT task by writing a start
command in the conﬁguration register of the FFT accelerator.
2. The FFT accelerator initiate the input buﬀer with N number of samples
from the producer, deﬁned by the transform length. Afterwards, fetches
M number of new samples, deﬁned by the sliding window and overwrites
the oldest values in the buﬀer.
3. The FFT accelerator checks if the FFT core is ready to receive data.
4. The FFT accelerator sends a start of frame command, followed by the N
number of data-points, and ﬁnished with the end of frame command, in
accordance to the Avalon ST protocol.
5. The FFT core performs the calculations and signals the FFT accelerator
when the N number of results are ready.
6. The FFT accelerator stores the results in an output buﬀer and updates its
status register signalling the availability of valid results to the consumer.
7. The consumer constantly polls the status register of the FFT accelerator.
When this is set to 1, the consumer clears the status register and reads
out the output buﬀer by providing the reading address and read command
through the OCP interface.
8. The consumer terminates the execution of the FFT task by writing a stop
command in the conﬁguration resister of the FFT accelerator.
9. The FFT accelerator goes into an IDLE state, waiting for a start com-
mand.
The block diagram of the FFT accelerator is shown in 4.1, and consists of six
blocks: the Input interface (I/F), the Circular Buﬀer, the FFT controller(FFT CTRL),
the FFT IP core from Altera, the Output Buﬀer, and the OCP interface (I/F).
The functionality of each block is described below.
Input I/F The Input Interface has the role to connect with the data producer
and decode the data samples from the incoming bus.
Circular buﬀer block The circular buﬀer collects the incoming samples from
the Input I/F, and provides them to the FFT IP core when there is enough valid
data in the buﬀer for performing a computation. It contains an asynchronous
==PAGE:38==
28
Requirements and Speciﬁcation
Altera 
FFT
IP Core
FFT_CTRL
Circular
Buffer
Input
I/F
OCP
I/F
Output
Buffer
External BUS
OCP BUS
Sink I/F
Source 
I/F
Output 
Data 
Channel
Input
Data
Channel
Control 
signals
Internal
Registers
Configuration
Control 
signals
Data Out
Data In
Config In
Data Producer clock-domain
Data Consummer clock-domain
FFT accelerator
Figure 4.1: High-level block diagram of the FFT accelerator. The clock do-
mains are delimited with the red and the green dotted lines. Ar-
rows presenting the Data-ﬂow direction and the conﬁg informa-
tions.
dual port memory to synchronize the data from the Producers clock domain
to the Consumers clock domain. The memory is written by the data producer
and is read by the FFT CTRL. It also contains logic which manages the read
and write addresses pointers of the memory, to implement a sliding window
mechanism. The pointers are initialized by the FFT CTRL according to settings
in the internal registers.
FFT CTRL block The FFT CTRL manages the ﬂow of data between the
circular buﬀer, the FFT IP core, and the output buﬀer. It setups the circular
buﬀer according to the commands received from the Consumer, it is interfacing
the FFT IP core, setups the write address for the Output buﬀer, and updates
the status register. The status register is updated when the last result from the
actual FFT computation is written in the output buﬀer.
Output buﬀer The output buﬀer is a synchronous dual port memory and
stores the results of the FFT computations. It is written by the FFT CTRL
with the results from the FFT IP core and is read by the Producer through the
OCP interface.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Speciﬁcation
29
OCP interface The OCP interface decodes the incoming address and command
from the OCP bus and provides the reply according to the OCP protocol. It is
an OCP slave interface. Thus, it has to be connected to an OCP master.
4.2.3
Integration in T-CREST
The aim of the presented FFT accelerator is to accelerate application speciﬁc
task, however, T-CREST is a general purpose platform. One of the main charac-
teristics of the FFT accelerator is that it is directly connected to an I/O device.
This device provides the data, upon the task, the FFT, will be executed. The
main integration techniques of HwA are discussed in 2.3.3. In all of the pre-
sented cases the HwA is attached in a system where it does not have a direct
connection to an external I/O device, and the data-set upon the hardware ac-
celerated task has to be performed, are sent through a dedicated CPU bus or
through a message passing NoC. Taking in consideration this attribute of our
FFT accelerator, the suggested integration technique in the T-CREST platform
is shown in Figure 4.2, and it is based on the Attached to the CPU and the
Attached through a Dedicated bus techniques. The FFT accelerator is connected
to the Patmos CPU through the OCP port. The accelerator acts as an I/O
subsystem, and it can be addressed from the local address space of Patmos.
We choose this integration technique for several reasons. At ﬁrst, the real-time
nature of the application requires to perform the task as-soon-as possible and to
minimize the set-up and data transfer latencies. The medium-grain character
of the FFT accelerator would suggest an integration into a NoC, however, the a
message-passing NoC in the T-CREST platform, Argo, has a high latency due
to the TDM style data-packet transfer between the interconnected IPs. The
footprint of the accelerator can increase with the transform length, in our case,
this can increase from a small footprint to a medium size one, which still favours
the suggested integration technique.
The proposed architecture provides an interface that is ﬂexible and scalable, and
its integration can be easily extended to support multiple IPs of the T-CREST
platform, by using a dedicated OCP bus.
==PAGE:40==
30
Requirements and Speciﬁcation
R
R
R
R
Patmos
CPU
OCP port M
Patmos
CPU
OCP port M
IP
Patmos
CPU
OCP port M
FFT
Accelerator
Input I/F
OCP port S
Dedicated OCP Bus
I/O device
Output I/F
Figure 4.2: Integration to the T-CREST platform. The FFT accelerator is
directly attached to the Patmos CPU through the OCP protocol.
Ocp Port S stands for OCP slave, while OCP port M stands for
OCP master. The FFT accelerator can be shared with multiple
CPUs by using a dedicated OCP bus.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Design
This chapter describes in detail the design and the functionality of the architec-
ture of the FFT accelerator that we have developed based on the Speciﬁcation.
It is divided into four sections. The ﬁrst section presents the Input interface,
the second describes the circular buﬀer, the third section presents the FFT
controller and the fourth section shows the Output interface with the output
buﬀer.
The RTL source code for the implemented design are in the Appendix A.
5.1
Input interface
The external I/O device, provides a slow clock, a M -bit wide data bus and a
valid signal. These signals are asynchronous to the T-CREST platform and the
FFT accelerator. Depending on the integration of the external device driver,
diﬀerent approaches can be taken to handle its signals.
As we consider the
FPGAs as an implementation target, we connect the data sample clock to the
clock-tree, and we apply a two-stage registering on the data signals to avoid
metastability issues.
The block diagram of the Input interface is shown in
Figure5.1. The output of the interface block will provide the write clock, input
data and valid signals for the circular buﬀer.
==PAGE:42==
32
Design
SLOW
Data
Valid
CLK
M
M
wr_clock
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
data_out
wr_en
RST
Input I/F
External
I/O device 
driver
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
Circular
Buffer
Interface
Figure 5.1: Block diagram of the input interface with the external I/O device
5.2
Circular buﬀer
The circular buﬀers main functionality is to collect a number of required sam-
ples deﬁned by the transform length, N and by the size of the sliding win-
dow W, then provide those to the FFT core upon request from the FFT con-
troller(FFT CTRL). The block diagram and the interface of the circular buﬀer
are shown in Figure 5.2.
Circular Buffer
CDC Fast-to-Slow
CDC Slow-to-Fast
1
2
3
4
N*2
Dual-Port RAM
W
R
P
O
R
T
R
D
P
O
R
T
Read_pointer
rd_addr
rd_done
rd_init
Write_pointer
wr_addr
wr_en
wr_init_done
wr_wind_done
wr_init
wr_clock
data_in
data_valid
rd_clock
data_out
reset
rd_init
init_buffer
rd_done
init_done
wind_done
fast clock
slow clock
rd_en
Input I/F
FFT_CTRL
interface
Figure 5.2: Block diagram and interface of the circular buﬀer
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Circular buﬀer
33
The interface of the block consists of:
• Common signals
wr clock : Input. Clock provided by the data producer. It is used by
the write port of the dual port memory, write pointer module and
the CDC blocks.
rd clock : Input. Global clock used by read port of the dual port mem-
ory, read pointer module and the CDC blocks.
reset : Input. The block reset signal.
• Signals from Input interface:
data in : Input. Data bus from the data producer.
valid : Input. Data valid signal provided by the data producer.
• FFT controller signals.
rd en : Input. requests a read-out of the memory.
rd init : Input. starts the ﬁrst read of the dual port memory.
rd done : Output. Signals when N number of samples are read out form
the dual port memory.
init buﬀer : Input. Starts the initialization of the dual port memory
with N number of samples. It is generated in the global clock domain
and it is used in the write clock domain.
init done : Output. Signals when N number of samples are written in
the dual port memory. It is generated in the write clock domain and
it is used in the global clock domain.
data out : Output. Data bus from the dual port memory.
The Circular buﬀer is composed of ﬁve sub-blocks, the Dual Port RAM, the
Read pointer, the Write pointer and two CDC blocks. The main functionality
of each sub-block, and the interaction between them is described below.
Dual Port RAM The Dual-Port RAM stores the data frame for an FFT task.
It supports asynchronous reads and writes, because the data producer and data
consumer are asynchronous to each other. The read and write transactions are
managed by the Read Pointer and Write Pointer modules.
Write Pointer and Read Pointer These modules has the responsibility to
provide the proper read and the write addresses together with the read and
write enable command. They are conﬁgured by the FFT CTRL module.
==PAGE:44==
34
Design
CDC A fast-to-slow CDC module is synchronizing the signals from the FFT CTRL
to the Write Pointers clock domain, while a slow-to-fast CDC module is syn-
chronizing the signals from the Write Pointer to the FFT CTRL clock-domain.
5.2.1
Dual Port RAM
The memory element to store the incoming data frame is a dual port RAM,
operating with a separate read and write clocks. In the targeted FPGA device
this called as a Simple dual-port RAM conﬁgured to the Read/Write clock mode.
According to the speciﬁcation[30], a separate clock is available for each read(RD)
and write(WR) port, the read clock controls the data-output, read-address, and
read-enable registers while a write clock controls the data-input, write-address,
write-enable registers. The width of the data input/output is deﬁned by the
data-precision, while the depth deﬁned by the transform length(N). While we
can directly apply the width for the data input/output, the memory depth is not
that trivial for multiple reasons. First, as we stated earlier the read and write
operations are asynchronous to each other, we have to consider the possibility
of a read-during-write(RDW) operation. The RDW occurs when one port reads
and another port writes to the same address location. The behaviour of such
an event is dependent by the target device. In our case, RDW operation for
RAMs in the Cyclone IV devices are supported only when the read and the
write operation are running from the same clock. [30, page 3-17]. This is not
the case in our design, since the two clocks, read and write, are unrelated to
each other. The second aspect is that we using a circular addressing mode where
the last memory location is followed by the ﬁrst memory location, and when we
ﬁnished writing in the last location, we have to read out imminently the content
of the buﬀer to provide valid data for the FFT core. As an example, Figure 5.3
presents a case where the depth of the dual port ram is equal to the transform
length N = 8, and as in our case, the write clock is much slower than the read
clock.
Once we initialize the buﬀer with 8 data samples we have to read out the results
before overwriting the next location with the new data sample. The read init
command is sent and the read pointer start to addresses the memory locations,
when the read clock period is at least 8 times shorter than the write clocks
period than both pointers will direct to the same location, therefore an illegal
RDW operation occurs. In this case the RAM can not provide a valid data
output. The solution for the RDW issue in our case, is to increase the RAM
depth at least to N+1, and to handle the extra location in the read and write
pointers.
Memory elements in FPGA devices are composed by ﬁxed size embedded mem-
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Circular buﬀer
35
init_buffer :  1 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  0 
init_done :  0 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
wp
rp
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
wp
rp
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
wp
rp
init_buffer :  1 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  0 
init_done :  1 
init_buffer :  0 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  1 
rd_done :  1 
wr_clk
rd_clk
wr_en
wr
addr
8
FF
data
in
rd
addr
x x x 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
rd_en
data
out
x
x
x
x
x
x
F
F
E
F
A
A
D
D
C
C
E
E
D
D ?
a
b
c
x x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Figure 5.3: Read During Writing case for N=8, (a) initialization of the buﬀer,
(b) initialization ﬁnished, (c) reading out the buﬀer.
ory blocks, such as the M9K block in the Cyclone IV device[31]. The size of
these blocks are always power of two. The number of resources used to imple-
ment a desired memory depends on the data port width, the memory depth and
the memory type. In our case, if N=64 then the desired RAM depth is N +
1 words and this will result in a RAM with a depth of 128 words, as shown in
equation 5.1. Thus we simply deﬁne the depth of our buﬀer as 2*N of words.
RAM DEPTH = 2log2(N)+1
(5.1)
5.2.2
Write and Read Pointer
The write pointer generates the write address for the write port of the dual-port
RAM. The read pointer generates the read address and read enable for the read
port of the dual port RAM. The interface of the block consists of:
• Signals of the Rd Pointer module:
rd clock : Input. Global clock.
reset : Input. The block reset signal.
rd init : Input. Requests the ﬁrst read-out of the dual port memory.
rd done : Output. Raised when N locations were read-out.
rd en : Output. Read enable signal for the dual port RAM.
rd addr : Output. Read address location for the dual port RAM.
• Signals of the Wr pointer module:
==PAGE:46==
36
Design
wr clock : Input. Clock from the data producer.
reset : Input. The block reset signal.
wr init : Input. Requests the initialization the dual port memory with
T+1 of new data samples.
wr init done : Output. Raised when T+1 of new data samples were
written in the buﬀer.
wr wind done : Output. Raised when W of new data samples were
written in the buﬀer.
wr en : Input. Write enable signal for the dual port RAM.
wr addr : Output. Write address location for the dual port RAM
The blocks are generating the addresses in a circular approach, respecting the
transform length (N) and the sliding window size (W ), as shown in Figure 5.4.
For a better representation we choose W = 2. The steps described in the ﬁgures
are the followings:
a : Request received to initialize the buﬀer, WP starts to generate the addresses.
b : Initialization of the buﬀer is done with N + 1 data samples, RP starts
generating the addresses for the ﬁrst read-out of the buﬀer, a total of N
read requests.
c : First read-out ﬁnished.
d : RP resets the address oﬀset to the next location, according to W. Meanwhile
WP generates the next address to store the new data sample.
e : WP ﬁnished the writing W number of new data. RP receives request to
read-out the buﬀer.
f : RP ﬁnished the read-out. Steps d and e are repeated until the consumer
decides to stop the operation.
The last three step g, h, i are the same with the d, e and f steps, it’s presents
the case when WP arrived to the end of the buﬀer, resets its oﬀset, and starts
overwriting the oldest data. The major components of the blocks are two coun-
ters, whose produce the address and keeps track the oﬀsets after each read and
write operation. The write counter advances one position after the FFT CTRL
requested an initialization and when the wr en signal is asserted at the rising
edge of the wr clock. The read counter advances one position when the rd init
or rd en signal is asserted at the rising edge of the rd clock. The time period
consumed to write in the circular buﬀer is shown in 5.2, TWCB INIT stands for
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Circular buﬀer
37
init_buffer :  1 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  0 
init_done :  0 
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
init_buffer :  0 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  1 
init_done :  1 
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
rd_init:  1 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  1 
rd_done :  1 
rd_init:  0 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  0 
rd_done :  0 
1
2
3
4
N
N+!
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  1 
rd_done :  1 
wind_done :  0 
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  0 
rd_done :  0 
wind_done :  0 
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  1 
rd_done :  0 
wind_done :  1 
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
1
2
3
4
N
N+1
wp
rp
N+2
N+3
N*2-1
N*2
a
b
d
c
e
f
h
g
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  1 
rd_done :  1 
wind_done :  0 
i
wr_en :  1'
rd_en  :  1 
rd_done :  0 
wind_done :  1 
Legend
empty location
write operation
first read-out
second read-out
TL/W-1 th read-out
read-out 
direction
wp: write pointer
rp: read pointer
N: transform length
W: window size
N
W
write 
direction
N
N
Figure 5.4: Write and Read pointers addressing the RAM locations in a cir-
cular and sliding window approach.
==PAGE:48==
38
Design
the time taken to fulﬁl the buﬀer at the initialization, while TWCB INIT is the
time consumed to write a window frame in the buﬀer.
TW CB INIT =
1
fwr clk
∗N + 1
TW CB W IND =
1
fwr clk
∗W
(5.2)
The time taking to read out the circular buﬀer is shown in 5.3.
TRCB =
1
frd clk
∗N(A)
(5.3)
5.2.3
Clock Domain Crossing
The circular buﬀer that we have developed are driven by two independent clocks,
a slow, wr clock and a fast, rd clock. As we mentioned before the role of the
buﬀer is to transfer data between two subsystems, namely between the external
data producer (slow domain) and the FFT IP core (fast domain). The data is
passed through a dual port ram. The read pointer module gets request from the
FFT controller which is running in the same clock domain, the fast one, thus
there is nothing to synchronize here. The write pointer controls the write port
of the dual port RAM, thus it is running in the slow domain, however it also
exchanges control signals with the FFT controller, thus we have to synchronize
to prevent the two modules from entering the metastable state. There are three
signals from the write pointer which are crossing the boundary of the two clock
domain:
wr init : Asserted by the FFT controller when the consumer is ready to use
the FFT accelerator. It stays asserted until the initialization of the buﬀer
is ﬁnished.
wr init done : Asserted by the write pointer when the initialization of the
buﬀer is ﬁnished with N + 1 samples.
wr wind done : Asserted by the write pointer when the writing of a window-
frame of the buﬀer is ﬁnished with W samples.
The FFT controller manages the read pointer according to the information
received from the write pointer through the above mentioned signals. The syn-
chronization of these signals are done with well known CDC methods described
in [32], chapter 16.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Circular buﬀer
39
The wr init signal has to be synchronised from the fast domain to the slow
domain. For this signal we apply a simple two-stage re-synchronization method,
similar to the one shown in 5.1 for the valid signal. The remaining two signals,
wr init done and wr wind done has to be synchronised from the slow domain to
the fast domain. These signals are one pulse long and since its generated from
the slow clock domain, its duration can last for several clock cycles in the fast
domain where it can appear as a very wide pulse. Therefore, a re-generation of
the signals are needed to shorten their pulse. The RTL diagram of the slow-to-
fast CDC is shown in Figure 5.5. The CDC block is composed from a T ﬂip
CDC
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
RST
D
Q
CLK
EN
valid_in
valid_out
wr_clock
rd_clock
reset
Figure 5.5: CDC for signals from the slow domain to the fast domain.
ﬂop, a two-stage pre-synchronizer and an edge detector, When the valid-in is
asserted, T toggles its output which passed to the fast domain pre-synchroniser
registers, D1 and D2. The edge detection circuit performs an xor operation over
the current input value and the previous value of D3, if there was a change then
valid-out is asserted for one clock cycle in the fast domain. The timing diagram
of the synchronizer is shown in Figure 5.6
wr_clock
rd_clock
valid_in
D1
T
D2
D3
valid_out
Figure 5.6: Timing diagram of slow-to-fast CDC
==PAGE:50==
40
Design
5.3
FFT controller
The FFT controller (FFT CTRL) main function is to handle the data transfer
to and from the FFT core. It’s interfacing the circular buﬀer as we presented
in Section 5.2.2 and the FFT core. In the ﬁrst subsection we present the inter-
face between the (FFT CTRL) and the FFT core, while the second subsection
presents the main state machine of the (FFT CTRL) which handles the Avalon-
ST Interface protocol. The block diagram is shown in Figure 5.7, it’s interface
and components described in the following subsections.
FFT CTRL
Altera FFT IP Core
O
B
U
F
clk
reset
clk
reset_n
init_done
rd_done
wind_done
combinational 
logic 
state
reg
I
N
P
U
T
O
U
T
P
U
T
init_buffer
rd_init
/rd_en
data_out
wr_addr
wr_en
data_in
S
I
N
K
S
O
U
R
C
E
ready
ready
Circular 
buffer 
interface
Output 
buffer 
interface
start_cmd
stop_cmd
results_ready
OCP
Slave
I/F
   A
   V
   A
   L
   O
   N
   ST
   I/F
S
O
U
R
C
E
S
I
N
K
FSM
Circular 
buffer 
interface
Figure 5.7: The FFT CTRL block with its interface to the FFT IP Core,
Circular Buﬀer and Output Buﬀer
5.3.1
Avalon-ST Interface
The Avalon Interface[33] is used in Altera speciﬁc FPGAs to interconnect em-
bedded components such as IP cores. It is a set of multiple standards, for data
streaming, reading and writing memory, and controlling oﬀ-chip devices. The
FFT IP core is using the Avalon Streaming(ST) interface standard.
The Avalon-ST interfaces deﬁne a standard for data transfers from a source
interface to a sink interface. The sink side stands for the input interface, while
the source side presents the output interface. The interfaces support ﬂow control
implemented as back-pressure, where a sink can signal to a source to stop sending
==PAGE:51==
5.3 FFT controller
41
data. This typically happens when the sink wants to inform the source to stop
the ﬂow of data, because its buﬀers are full. The short description of the interface
signals are presented below, for more detailed information can be found in [23],
Chapter 3-17.
• Common signals:
clk : Input. Global clock.
reset n : Input. Active low asynchronous reset.
• Sink interface:
sink sop : Input. Indicates the start of an N sample long incoming data
frame.
sink eop : Input. Indicates the end of the incoming frame.
sink valid : Input.
Indicates the validity of the incoming data.
The
data transfer only takes place when the sink valid and sink ready are
asserted.
sink imag : Input. Presents the imaginary part of the incoming data
sample.
sink real : Input. Presents the real part of the incoming data sample.
sink ready : Output. Asserted by the FFT core when it can accept data.
sink error : Output. Indicates an error when the Avalon-ST protocol is
violated.
• Source Interface:
source sop : Output. Indicates the start of outgoing data frame from
the FFT core containing the N number of reults.
source eop : Otuput. Indicates the end of the outgoing frame.
source valid : Output. Indicates the validity of the outgoing data frame.
It is asserted by the FFT core.
source imag : Output.
Presents the imaginary part of the incoming
data sample.
source real : Output. Presents the real part of the incoming data sam-
ple.
source ready : Input. Asserted by the FFT CTRL when it can accept
data from the FFT core.
source error : Output. Asserted by the FFT core if there was any error
during the computation.
==PAGE:52==
42
Design
clk
reset_n
sink_ready
sink_valid
sink_sop
sink_real
sink_img
source_ready
source_valid
source_sop
source_real
sink_img
r1
r2
i1
i2
iTL
rTL
sink_eop
source_eop
r1
i1
i2
r2
iTL
iTL
B
C
From FFT CTRL
To  FFT CTRL
To FFT CTRL
A
T RCB
T FFT
T WOB
Figure 5.8: Timing
diagram
of
the
Avalon-ST
interface
between
the
FFT CTRL and the FFT core during an FFT operation
A continuous data processing of the FFT Core is presented In Figure 5.8, with
the sink and the source portson the FFT-cores side. After the reset is de-asserted
the FFT core is ready to accept incoming data frames. The FFT CTRL asserts
sink valid to indicate to the FFT core that valid data is available for input
and also asserts sink sop for the ﬁrst data sample from the frame. When the
last data sample arrives(A), the FFT CTRL de-asserts sink valid and asserts
sink eop to signal the end of the frame. After the last data sample is sent from
the data frame, the FFT CTRL asserts source ready to indicate that it’s ready
to handle the results when these are available.
At this point the FFT core
starts the computations (B) on the received data frame. After TFFT period the
FFT core starts to produce the results by asserting the source valid and the
source sop for the ﬁrst result. When arrives to the last result (C) the FFT Core
de-asserts the source valid and asserts source eop to indicate the last data from
the results. The time taking from a sink sop to source eop is calculated by the
equation in 5.4, where TFFT is the time consumed by the FFT core to do the
computations. This time depends on the conﬁguration of the FFT IP core (S),
such as the selected streaming mode, type and I/O ordering. Once the results
are available, the FFT outputs the results sample-by-sample which is directly
written in the output buﬀer, TFFT is discussed in the chapter XXXX.
TF F T COMP = TRCB + TF F T + TW OB
(5.4)
==PAGE:53==
5.3 FFT controller
43
The formula for the TFFT is shown in 5.5.
TF F T =
1
fclk
∗S ∗N, S ∈[1, 2]
(5.5)
5.3.2
FSM
The FSM receives request from the CPU through the OCP-port. Once a start
command is received it starts the operation to setup the circular buﬀer and
handle the avalon ST-Interface. The operation is performed by a seven states
Mealy’s Finite State Machine, where the outputs are dependent on the current
input and the current state. The state diagram of the FSM block is shown in
Figure 5.9. The operations performed by the state machine in each state are:
IDLE : The FSM stays inactive until the CPU requests to start an opera-
tion. This can be done by setting the start cmd register through the OCP
interface. Once it set, the FSM progress to the next state which is the
INIT CB. Upon any reset event the state machine sets itself back to the
IDLE state.
INIT CB : The FSM requests the initialization of the circular buﬀer by assert-
ing the init buﬀer signal. This signal stays high until the next state tran-
sition. When the circular buﬀer asserts the init done and the FFT core
is ready (sink ready = 1), the FSM progress to the next state, RD INIT.
READ INIT : The FSM requests a read operation from the circular buﬀer,
to provide the initial content of the RAM to the FFT Core. This is done
by asserting the rd init. during the read-out process the FSM also sets its
source valid and souece sop signals to inform the FFT Core that a valid
data-frame is available. When the read-out is ﬁnished the circular buﬀer
asserts rd done and the FSM imidiately sets the source eop, to inform the
FFT core about the last valid data from the frame. A state transition also
happens to, READY, where source valid will be deasserted.
READY :
The FSM sets source ready high to inform the FFT core that
it’s ready to accept the results.
Once the FFT core ﬁnished the com-
putation, asserts sink valid and sink sop to mark the start of the data
frame with the computed results. This also triggers the state transition
to GET RESULTS.
==PAGE:54==
44
Design
GET RESULTS : The FSM checks if there was a stop command written into
the stop cmd register by the CPU, and in case terminates the operation by
going directly to the IDLE state. If there was no request for interrupting
the process the proceeds to write the results sent by the FFT Core into
the output buﬀer by asserting wr en and the appropriate address for the
buﬀer. When sink eop and sink valid asserted the state transition takes
place to the WAIT WINDOW state.
WAIT WINDOW : The FSM waits in this state until the circular buﬀer
aquires W number of new samples. When wind done is set and sink ready
= 1 the FSM goes to the next state to read out a new N number of sam-
ples fromt the circular buﬀer.
READD CB : The FSM asserted the rd en, source valid and souece sop sig-
nals at the state transition. When the read-out is ﬁnished the circular
buﬀer asserts rd done and the FSM immediately sets the source eop, sim-
ilarly to the RD INIT state. Then it goes back to the READY state.
At each state transition from GET RESULTS to WAIT WINDOW the FSM
set the internal status register to sign the availability of the FFT results to the
CPU. This is done by asserting the results ready signal.
5.4
OCP I/F and Output Buﬀer
The output buﬀer stores the results from the most recent FFT computation and
pass it to the OCP Slave Interface (I/F) upon a read request. A block diagram
og the output buﬀer and the OCP slave Interface is shown in the Figure 5.10.
The output e buﬀer is a simple dual port RAM with common clocks for the
read and the write port. The buﬀer has to store N number of samples, thus the
size of this RAM is N words. The write port is controlled by the FFT CTRL
module, described in the previous chapter, while the read port is controlled by
the OCP Slave Interface. Since the read and write ports are using the same
clock the time to fulﬁl (TWOB) the buﬀer is equal to time to read-out the buﬀer
TROB, as shown in 5.6.
TW OB = TROB =
1
fclk
∗N
(5.6)
==PAGE:55==
5.4 OCP I/F and Output Buﬀer
45
IDLE
INIT
init_buffer <= 1
READ_INIT
rd_init <= 1
source_sop <=1
source_valid <= 1
READ_CB
rd_en <= 1
source_sop <=1
source_valid <= 1
WAIT_WINDOW
READY
source_ready <= 1
GET_RESULTS
source_ready <= 1
obuf_wr_en <= 1
reset = 1
start_cmd = 1
!start_cmd
init_done = 1
&
sink_ready = 1
rd_done = 1
sink_valid = 1
&
sink_sop = 1
sink_valid = 1
&
sink_eop = 1
stop_cmd = 1
rd_done = 1
wind_done = 1
&
sink_ready = 1
Figure 5.9: FSM state diagram
==PAGE:56==
46
Design
The OCP slave interface decodes the incoming MAddr, MCmd, and provides
the SResp and SData according to the OCP standard. The internal address
space is shown in Table 5.1. According to the requirements the maximum value
for the transform length can not exceed 2048, this deﬁnes the number of words
(7FF in hex) that needs to be accessed from the output buﬀer. The last three
addresses are for the control and the status signals, while the reserved section is
for further extensions. The start cmd and stop cmd registers are set through the
OCP interface , while the stop re is set by the FFT CTRL and cleared by the
CPU through the OCP interface. Each write to the control and status registers
are one clock cycle long.
Table 5.1: Internal Adress space of the FFT accelerator
Address
output buﬀer
0x000 - 0X7FF
reserved
0x800 - 0x3FFC
status reg
0x3FFD
start cmd reg
0x3FFE
stop cmd reg
0x3FFF
Output Buffer
1
2
3
4
N
Dual-Port RAM
R
D
P
O
R
T
W
R
P
O
R
T
rd_clock
reset
data_in
wr_en
wr_addr
OCP Slave I/F
stop_cmd
status
clr
start_cmd
decoder
rd_addr
rd_en
data_out
SResp
MAddr
SData
MCmd
MData
start_cmd
stop_cmd
results_ready
ck
reset
Patmos
OCP-
Master I/F
FFT_CTRL
I/F
Figure 5.10: Output buﬀer and OCP Slave Interface
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Theoretical analysis
This chapter provides a theoretical estimation for the most important metrics
related to the WCET and to the evaluation of a hardware accelerator. It is
divided into three sections. The ﬁrst section gives an overview of the latencies
in the design and the estimation of the total latency. The second section deﬁnes
the worst case execution time based on the latency estimation, and the third
chapter provides the formula for the throughput calculations.
6.1
Latency estimation
Before calculating the worst-case execution time(WCET) of the FFT accelerator
ﬁrst we need to deﬁne the total latency, TTL of the accelerator. We deﬁne the
total latency the time from the moment when the data consumer (ex: Patmos
CPU) requests the execution of a task from the accelerator to the moment when
the FFT accelerator makes available the results for the data consumer. Under
the task we consider the acquisition of the data from the external device and the
FFT computation for one data frame, while under the availability of the results
to the data consumer we consider the event when the FFT accelerator sets its
internal status register to the corresponding value. Based on this assumption
the total latency is determined by the following steps (GCC stands for the global
==PAGE:58==
48
Theoretical analysis
clock cycles, the clock in the fast domain, while ECC stands for the external
clock cycles, the clock from the slow domain):
Step1 Trigger on the start command
The time required to register the start command coming through the OCP
port which will trigger the transition from the IDLE mode of the acceler-
ator. This time is deﬁned as TOCP CMD = 1 [GCC]
Step2 Writing to the circular buﬀer
The time required to fulﬁll the buﬀer with N samples is TWCB INIT = N
[ECC], while the time to write a window frame to the buﬀer is TWCB WIND
= W [ECC]. There is also a latency element involved with control signals
passing the clock domains from the fast to the slow which is deﬁned as
TCDC FS = 2 [ECC].
Step3 Reading of the circular buﬀer
The time required to pass the the N number of data samples from the
circular buﬀer to the FFT core. This deﬁned by the delay from the clock-
domain-crossing of the status signals from the slow to the fast domain,
and the read-out of N samples from the circular buﬀer. TCDC SF + TRCB
, whereTCDC SF = 1 [ECC] + 3 [GCC] and TRCB = N [GCC] .
Step4 Computation time
The time required for the FFT core to do the computations on the provided
data frame. TFFT = N * S [GCC], where S depends on the settings and
the operation mode of the FFT core.
Step4 Write to the output buﬀer and the status register
The time required to write the results provided by the FFT core to the
output buﬀer and update the status register to signal the availability of
the results. TWOB + Tstatus = N + 1 [GCC] .
Note, that the parameters N, W and S can not change during the execution of
a task. Furthermore we did not consider to list, in Step 4 the time needed to
read out the output buﬀer. This beacuse it depends on the data consumer when
it reads out. The latency to read-out the output buﬀer is: TROB + Tstatus = N
+ 1 [GCC]
6.2
WCET estimation
Summing together all the latency variables from the previously deﬁned steps
would result in the worst case execution time.
However, there are multiple
==PAGE:59==
6.2 WCET estimation
49
cases which involves diﬀerent latency elements. The diﬀerent cases are due to
the functionality of the circular buﬀer. There are three diﬀerent cases:
Case1 Initialization of the circular buﬀer
When the start command is sent by the data consumer the buﬀer is empty
therefore it has to acquire N samples, before it can be read-out. this means that
Step2 is deﬁned as TWCB INIT + TCDC FS thus the total latency for this case
becomes:
TT LC1 = TOCP CMD + TCDC F S + TW CB INIT + TCDC SF + TRCB + TF F T
+ TW OB + Tstatus[CC]
(6.1)
Case2 After Initialization of the circular buﬀer
When the circular buﬀer ﬁnished it’s initialization sends out the init done signal
to the FFT CTRL module, which triggers a state transition to read-out the
buﬀer, sets the circular buﬀer to aquire W number of samples instead of N, and
de-asserts the init buﬀer signal. The new, de-asserted value of the init buﬀer
still has to pass the fast to slow CDC block, thus Step2 now is deﬁned as
TCDC FS + TWCB WIND while the total latency for this case becomes:
TT LC2 = TOCP CMD + TCDC F S + TW CB W IND + TCDC SF + TRCB + TF F T
+ TW OB + Tstatus[CC]
(6.2)
We assume W always less then N thus, TWCB INIT ¿ TWCB WIND and this
results in:
TT LC2 < TT LC1
(6.3)
Case3 From the third operation until the stop command or reset.
When all the initialization phase is over init done stays de-asserted until a
new task initiation from the data producer arrives, therefore we can dissregard
TCDC FS. In this case the total latency is:
TT LC3 = TOCP CMD + TW CB W IND + TCDC SF + TRCB + TF F T + TW OB
+ Tstatus[CC]
(6.4)
As we removed TCDC FS from 6.4 TTLC3 ¡ TTLC2 which together with 6.3 results
the deﬁnition for the worst case execution time, TWCET in 6.5 :
TT LC3 < TT LC2 < TT LC1 =⇒TW CET = TT LC1
(6.5)
==PAGE:60==
50
Theoretical analysis
6.3
Throughput estimation
As for the throughput estimation we deﬁne an input throughput Cin and an
output throughput Cout as deﬁned in 6.6
Cin = Data in
CC
[
words
clock cycles]
,
Cout = Data out
CC
[
words
clock cycles]
(6.6)
As it was the case for the WCET estimation, here we also have the two cases due
to the need initialization for the circular buﬀer. For the very ﬁrst computaion
of the FFT accelerator the throughput is deﬁned in 6.7
Cin init =
N
TW CB INIT
,
Cout Init =
N
TRCB + TF F T + TW OB
(6.7)
After the initialization the throughput of the input is changed 6.8, while the
throughput for the output is unchanged because the FFT produces the results
based on previously acquired data.
Cin wind =
W
TW CB W IND
,
Cout wind = Cout int =
N
TRCB + TF F T + TW OB
(6.8)
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Veriﬁcation
This chapter presents the veriﬁcation of the design.
It is divided into three
sections.
The ﬁrst section is dedicated to the functional veriﬁcation of the
standalone FFT accelerator with basic stimuli. The second section presents a
system-level test where we simulate the integrated design with the T-CREST
platform against the speciﬁcation. The third section presents the board bring-
up process, where we test the integrated design on the target device.
The
Functional veriﬁcation and the System-level test were carried out by using the
ModelSim simulation environmental, while the Board bring-up test is based on
manual inspection of the systems console.
The VHDL and C source code for the test-cases are is in the Appendix B.
7.1
Test Case 1
This section presents the behavioural simulations at register-transfer level (RTL)
of the standalone FFT accelerator.
The testbench architecture is shown in
Figure 7.1. The OCP interface is omitted in this test case. The role of this test-
case is to simulate the core functionality of the accelerator, which is in the the
FSM CTRL block and the circular buﬀer blocks. The testbench contains the
basic stimuli which asserts the start cmd and the stop cmd. The data samples
==PAGE:62==
52
Veriﬁcation
FFT
Accelerator
Input I/F
Test I/F
data_in
80 MHz
16 KHz
Testbench
Samples.
txt
start_cmd
stop_cmd
data_out
#
#
Figure 7.1: Testbench for the system level veriﬁcation
are stored in a text ﬁle, while the global(read) clock and the write clock is
generated by two separate process. When the start cmd is asserted, the data
samples from the text ﬁle are fed to the Input I/F. The FFT core is generated
with the settings from Table 7.1. Here we used two basic test vectors, where
all the samples had the minimum value, 0, and where all the samples set to the
maximum value, 65535.
Table 7.1:
FFT core settings for the simulation
FFT core settingss
Transform length
64
Data input precision
16 bits
Data output precision
16 bits
I/O data ﬂow
variable streaming
I/O order
Natural/Natural order
Data representation
Fixed Point
Clock frequency
80 MHz
Circular buﬀer settings
Write clock frequency
16 KHz
Sliding window size
4 samples
The simulation results produced the expected behaviour of the circular buﬀer,
as shown in the Figure 7.2 the write pointer signals the end of the initialization
when writes in the address 63, and switches to the next location. In the mean-
time the read pointer starts to read-out the buﬀer and calculates the starting
address for the next read out. In the zoom-out snapshot we can see the sec-
ond read-out operation when it starts from address 4 and reads-out the buﬀer
ﬁnishing in the address 69, and updates the next starting address to 8.
==PAGE:63==
7.1 Test Case 1
53
Figure 7.2: signals of the read and write pointer modules of the circular buﬀer
A snapshot of the simulation waveform from clock domain crosser is shown in
Figure 7.3, once the valid in is asserted the T ﬂip ﬂop toggles its output and
D1, D2, D3 registers are updated consecutively. The waveform is in accordance
with Figure 5.6. As we expected 3 rd clock cycles are consumed to produce the
valid output.
Figure 7.3: Signals of the slow-to-fast CDC block
==PAGE:64==
54
Veriﬁcation
The communication bewteen the FFT CTRL and the FFT core is shown in
the waveform from the Figure 7.4. The control signals from the sink and the
source ports are in accordance with Avalon-ST standard which was shown on
the Figure 5.8. Applying the values from Table 7.1 to the equation 5.4 we get
T RCB
T FFT
T WOB
Figure 7.4: Testbench
the following values, presented in 7.1. The variable streamaing setting for the
FFT core, produce a latency of 2 * N for the TFFT. The values are according
to the time measured on the simulation waveform.
TRCB = 12.5 ∗64 = 800(ns)
TF F T = 12.5 ∗2 ∗64 = 1600(ns)
TW OB = 12.5 ∗64 = 800(ns)
(7.1)
7.2
Test Case 2
In this test case, we perform a system-level simulation of the integrated accel-
erator into the T-CREST platform. Under the ”integration” term we consider
the direct attachment of the FFT accelerator to the Patmos CPU through the
OCP port. We emulate the external device with a read-only-memory which
stores a predeﬁned test vector in the form of a memory conﬁguration ﬁle. The
emulator also posses a small logic which starts generating the the read enable
and read address for the ROM when it triggers a start command towards the
FFT accelerator on the OCP bus. The tool-chain of the T-CREST platform
makes possible to generate at RTL a Patmos which loads a compiled c-program
on its on-chip memory together with the bootloader. This allows us to perform
==PAGE:65==
7.3 Test Case 3
55
a a system level simulation where we compile a test program which handles out
FFT accelerator. the C program can be ﬁnd in Appendix B.
FFT
Accelerator
Input I/F
OCP port S
Output I/F
Patmos
CPU
OCP port M
data_in
OCP bus
80 MHz
16 KHz
ROM
External I/O Device 
Emulator
test.c
Testbench
Figure 7.5: Testbench for the system level veriﬁcation with the FFT accelera-
tor connected to the Patmos CPU through the OCP port, and to
the external device emulator through the Input I/F
Based on the fact that the Fourier transform of an impulse at the origin is a
constant in the transform domain, we used a test vector described in Table 7.2
with the expected output and the recorded results .
Table 7.2: FFT core settings for the simulation
nr.
Input value
Output value
Expected value
0
64
8
8
1-63
0
8
8
64-127
0
0
0
Inspecting the resulted waveform from the simulation we can conclude that the
OCP Slave interface are handling the incoming and outgoing signals according
to the standard presented in Figure 2.2.
7.3
Test Case 3
In this test-case, we perform a system-level veriﬁcation on the target device.
The top level of the implemented design on the FPGA is equivalent to the one
presented in Figure 7.5, except that the compiled c program is loaded to the
CPU through the serial interface of the development board, and the the ROM
==PAGE:66==
56
Veriﬁcation
stores a diﬀerent test vector from the one used in the second test case. The
FFT core settings are also changed, a shorter transform length, 16, was selected
to ease the debugging. The role of this test-case is to verify the functionality
of the accelerator, the integration and the correctness fo the computed results.
The test vector and the recorded results are presented in the Table 7.3. The
results are shown for the ﬁrst three compunctions, Out FR1 is the output of
the ﬁrst computation applied for the input samples from nr. 1 to nr. 16, Out
FR2 is the output of the second computation of input samples from nr. 5 to
nr. 20, and Out FR3 is the output for the input samples from nr. 9 to nr. 24.
the results were recorded from the console of the Patmos CPU. All the values
are represented in an unsigned form. The symmetry of the output results are
due to the complex DFT’s frequency spectrum described in [21] Chapter 10.
Table 7.3: The test vector applied for the third test-case with the recorded
and expected results
nr,
Input
Out FR1
Exp FR1
Out FR2
Exp FR2
Out FR3
EXP FR3
1
1234
2382
2382
•
•
•
•
2
6785
65073
65073
•
•
•
•
3
5789
107
107
•
•
•
•
4
3242
65352
65252
•
•
•
•
5
986
65296
65296
2733
2733
•
•
6
567
65438
65438
60
60
•
•
7
10678
236
236
65377
65377
•
•
8
6783
65205
65202
64478
64478
•
•
9
9834
175
175
65369
65369
2605
2605
10
2567
65205
65202
137
137
65451
65451
11
4370
236
236
65142
65142
65320
65320
12
8764
65438
65438
140
140
264
264
13
4578
65296
65296
95
95
245
245
14
6543
65352
65352
141
141
83
83
15
3456
107
107
65142
65142
272
272
16
67
65072
65072
137
137
394
394
17
4563
•
•
65369
65369
388
388
18
9030
•
•
64749
64749
394
394
19
6785
•
•
65377
65377
272
272
20
7890
•
•
60
60
83
83
21
8905
•
•
•
•
245
245
22
56
•
•
•
•
265
265
23
5433
•
•
•
•
65320
65320
24
567
•
•
•
•
65452
65452
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 8
Results
This chapter presents the obtained results from the implementation and bench-
marking of the FFT accelerator. The chapter is divided into two sections. The
ﬁrst section presents the implementation results of the design on an FPGA
device, and the second chapter shows some benchmarking results of the FFT
accelerator in the T-CREST platform.
The source code of the C applications used for the benchmark is in the Appendix
C.
8.1
Implementation Results
The design was implemented on the DE2-115 FPGA Development Board, which
has a Cyclone IV FPGA from Altera. The resource utilization and the achiev-
able maximum frequency after the synthesis of the standalone FFT accelerator
is shown in Table 8.3. The report was generated for multiple conﬁgurations.
The ﬁrst three results were obtained using an FFT core with the settings pre-
sented in 7.1. The last two results were obtained with an FFT engine set to
a 2048 -point, variable streaming FFT. the resource utilization of the the FFT
cores itself is presented in Table 8.3. the results shows that most of the re-
sources are used for the FFT core itself, which is scaling with the increase of
==PAGE:68==
58
Results
the transform length. When we increase the transform length, we also increase
the size of the circular buﬀer and the output buﬀer, which is reﬂected from the
increase of the M9K blocks. The set of these blocks are used to implement the
memory functions in the design, such as the dual port RAM. The logic elements
(LE) usage is also increased, since the logic in the write and read pointers has
to address more location in the memory. The maximum frequency is decreasing
with the increase of the transform length, this due to the increased complexity
in the arithmetic logic of the FFT core which results in a longer critical path.
Table 8.1: Resource utilization of the FFT accelerator with diﬀerent design
settings
N
LE
Block memory
M9K
DSP
Fmax
W
16
2170
147456
16
40
225.33 MHz
4
32
2284
147456
16
40
224.91 MHz
4
64
2388
147456
16
40
224.48 MHz
4
1024
4703
304128
33
80
215.66 MHz
64
2048
5948
377856
41
90
202.94 MHz
128
Table 8.2: Resource utilization of the FFT cores used in the FFT accelerator
FFT engine of N
LE
Memory bits
M9K
DSP
64
1858
92160
0
24
2048
4447
163926
0
72
8.2
Benchmark Results
A small benchmark in a form of C code has been developed to measure the
speed-up of the FFT accelerator in the T-CREST platform. The C code can be
found in the Appendix C. The benchmark consist of running a single-precision
complex-to-complex FFT of a ﬁxed transform length on the Patmos CPU where
the execution time of the computation task is measured and compared with the
execution time of an FFT task with the same transform length using the FFT
accelerator. The recorded execution time of the FFT accelerator is the one after
the initialization of the circular buﬀer deﬁned in 6.4 , TTLC3. the results are
shown in Table. The CC term represent the clock cycles of the global 80 MHz
clock.
==PAGE:69==
8.2 Benchmark Results
59
Table 8.3: Results from the benchmark running for diﬀerent conﬁgurationsr
Transform length
FFT accelerator
Patmos CPU
Speed-up
16
19786 CC
136644CC
6.85
32
19834 CC
219388 CC
11.06
64
19930 CC
388787 CC
19.50
128
20124 CC
728891 CC
36.21
The result indicates a high speed-up ratio, however we need to mention that the
benchmark application on the Patmos CPU does not emulate the data acquisi-
tion process from an external device. The data values for the FFT task on the
CPU are taken from the on-chip memory, while in the case of the FFT accelera-
tor are taken from the external device emulator, which has a slower data-transfer
rate. We also need to point out the fact that Patmos is a processor optimized
for WCET and not for computationally intensive tasks. In general, DSP related
hardware accelerators are expected to provide a speed-up in the range of 10x to
100x as described in [34].
==PAGE:70==
60
Results
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 9
Discussions
In this chapter we discuss diﬀerent aspects of the developed architecture related
to the obtained results.
It is divided into two sections.
In the ﬁrst section
we discuss about the possibility to reduce the obtained worst-case execution
time while in the second section we reﬂect on the obtained results and suggest
possible extensions of its functionality..
9.1
Reducing WCET
As we presented in 6.2 there are three formula for the total latency, depending
on diﬀerent cases. All the three formula represents the execution time of the
same task at diﬀerent iteration level. Lets assume the real-case scenario where
the external clock ECC is 16 KHz, TECC = 62500 ns, the global clock, GCC is
80 MHz,TGCC = 12.5 ns, and we want to perform a 64-pt FFT with a sliding
window of 4 samples. The main diﬀerence between the 6.1 and 6.2 is the latency
deﬁned to write in the circular buﬀer, TWCB INIT and TWCB WIND. Quantifying
the diﬀerences we got the followings:
1GCC = 1CC,
1ECC = TECC
TGCC
= 5000
GCC
TW CB INIT −TW CB W IND = N −W = 60ECC = 300000
CC
(9.1)
==PAGE:72==
62
Discussions
Equation 9.1 deﬁnes how much latency is added to the normal task execution
when we have to initialize the circular buﬀer. Equation 9.2 shows how much
time is spent to do the actual 64-pt transform when the data is available at the
circular buﬀer:
TRCB = 64GCC,
TF F T = 128GCC,
TW OB = 64
GCC
Tget initdata = TW CB INIT = 64ECC = 320000
CC
Tget windata = TW CB W IND = 4ECC = 20000
CC
Tget results = TRCB + TF F T + TW OBTROB = 320
CC
(9.2)
As we can see, the diﬀerence is high between the actual execution time of a 64
point- FFT (Tget result), and the time spent to collect the initial (Tget initdata).
Because of this diﬀerence the WCET is not reﬂecting the speed-up capabilities
of the FFT accelerator. A solution to this bottleneck would be a small modiﬁ-
cations to the functionality of the circular buﬀer.
Currently the initialization of the buﬀer is triggered by the data consumer, which
means that nothing is written into the buﬀer until a start command is received
through the OCP interface. By de-attaching the buﬀer from this condition, we
can deﬁne it as a free-ruing buﬀer. Similar techniques are used in the logic
analyser circuits [35], where a circular buﬀer acquires continuously the data
samples until a trigger tells the acquisition to stop. For our case this would
mean the buﬀer will always store the valid data samples, even when the FFT
accelerator is not triggered to execute a task. The FFT accelerator would appear
unavailable until the buﬀer fetches the minimum number of samples required
for an N-ppint FFT, where it sets itself available for the data consumer. Once
the data consumer requests an execution of the task the FFT accelerator can
immediately start the computation phase, this removing the TWCB INIT from
all latency equations. After the ﬁrst computed N-point FFT, the accelerator
will have to fetch a new number of samples deﬁned by the window size thus,
TWCB WIND can not be excluded from the equations. With this modiﬁcation
the WCET would became TTLC3 deﬁned in 6.4.
9.2
Multi-channel operation
The FFT accelerator is designed to handle one data producer. We derived from
the requirements that the producers clock is slower than the consumers clock.
The ratio between the two clocks has a major impact on the utilization of the
FFT core inside the FFT accelerator. In Figure 9.1 we show the execution of a
task where the FFT accelerator operating in a continuous mode. As we shown
in 9.2 writing a window frame into the buﬀer TWCB WIND is a longer period
==PAGE:73==
9.2 Multi-channel operation
63
w1
r1
r2
r3
rz
w2
w3
wZ
T WCB_WIND
T get_results
T IDLE
execution time
Internal operations in the FFT accelerator
Legend
w
r
Acquiring a window frame
Computing and providing a results frame
Figure 9.1: Continuous operation mode of the FFT accelerator
than doing the actual computation and providing the results Tget results. We
deﬁne TIDLE 9.3 as the time from the point when the results from the latest
FFT computation are written into the output buﬀer to the time when the next
window frame is written in the circular buﬀer.
TIDLE = TW CB −Tresults = TECC
TGCC
∗W −Thet results
[CC]
(9.3)
In this time period TIDLE the FFT core is in idle mode, where it is waiting
for new data frame at it’s sink port.
We can quickly observe from 9.3 the
ratio between the two clocks has an impact on the period of the idle time. For
our case we have a ratio of 5000 GCC in one ECC with a window frame of 4
samples. This means that we would be able to compute 62 FFT of 64-point in
one ECC. This would make possible to extend a design to handle data samples
form multiple sources, channels. A similar approach is shown in the application
ote [36], where the SmartFusion system-on-chip is customized to compute the
FFT from multiple data producers using one FFT IP core. They implemented a
buﬀer for each input channel and a multiplexing scheme which fetches the data
from the input buﬀers to the FFT core and when the computations are done
the results are stored in the allocated output buﬀer of the respective channel.
Our FFT accelerator can be extended to handle multi-channel input data by
applying small modiﬁcations to the design. A suggested extension of the archi-
tecture is shown in Figure 9.2, where we propose to extend the circular buﬀer
with multiple dual-port RAMs for each channel and with additional multiplex-
ing logic for the read-pointer. The output buﬀer should be also multiplied or
==PAGE:74==
64
Discussions
extended according to the number of channels.
Altera 
FFT
IP Core
FFT_CTRL
Input
I/F
OCP
I/F
Sink I/F
Source 
I/F
Output 
Data 
Channel
Input
Data
Channel
Control 
signals
Internal
Registers
Configuration
Config In
Data Producer clock-domain
Data Consummer clock-domain
FFT accelerator
ch2
chx
wp
rp
Output
Buffer
Output
Buffer
Output
Buffer 
chx
ch1-r
ch2-r
chx-r
ch1
Figure 9.2: Block diagram of the suggested architecture for multi-channel FFT
computations
An illustration on how the suggested additions would operate is shown in Figure
9.3.
ch1 - w1
ch2 - w1
chx - w1
T WCB_WIND
Tget_results
r1
execution time
Internal operations in the FFT accelerator
Legend
w
r
Acquiring a window frame
Computing and providing a results frame
ch1 - w2
ch2 - w2
ch1
ch2
chx
chx – w2
ch1
ch2
chx
ch1 – w3
ch2 – w3
chx – w3
ch1
ch2
chx
r2
r3
ch
Data Channel
Figure 9.3: continous operation mode of the suggested multi-channel FFT ac-
celerator.
==PAGE:75==
9.2 Multi-channel operation
65
The theoretical number of channels that the FFT accelerator can handle is
calculated by the formula in 9.4. Note that this formula does not cover any clock-
domain-crossing related delays, which has to be considered once the architecture
is re-designed.
Nr of channels =
W ∗TECC
TGCC
Tget results
(9.4)
Extending the current architecture to handle data from multiple sources is a fea-
sible feature and would improve the capabilities of the whole system in which is
integrated. The extension would increase the resource utilization due to the ad-
ditional storage elements needed by the buﬀers but would increase the through-
put and the utilization of the FFT accelerator which is a favourable trade-oﬀ
considering today’s 20-nm chip technologies.
==PAGE:76==
66
Discussions
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 10
Conclusions
The purpose of this thesis has been to investigate the possibility to integrate
stateful hardware accelerators into the T-CREST platform within the conﬁnes
of the RTEMP project.
Some default requirements were deﬁned by the time-predictable property of the
T-CREST platform thus, any attached or integrated entity to the platform has
to preserve the time-predictability of the system. This is a De jure standard
set by the purpose of the T-CREST platform.
From this point of view, we
designed a hardware accelerator which has a full compliance with the standard,
by deﬁning the worst-case execution time for its operation.
The second part of the requirements were set by the RTEMP project. Those
were deﬁned with the purpose to enhance the possibility of porting use-cases
from the project partner for quantitative performance analysis including quan-
titative comparison with some existing design. This was the main reason why
we choose to design an FFT accelerator, which also complies with the term of
stateful hardware accelerators.
The following points describe the steps that we have pursued during the thesis
project with the results that we have achieved:
• We acquired knowledge regarding hardware acceleration for DSP related
==PAGE:78==
68
Conclusions
tasks in real-time embedded systems.
• We explored the existing hardware accelerator for the T-CREST platform,
and presented current solutions to accelerate FFT computation with ﬁeld-
programmable gate arrays.
• We created a design speciﬁcation based on the given requirements. After-
wards we designed a ﬂexible architecture for a stateful hardware accelera-
tor which allows to further extend its functionality and to easily adopt for
certain FFT related use cases. We also deﬁned an integration method into
the T-CREST platform for the resulted architecture, which diﬀers from
the one presented in the related works.
• We carried out theoretical analysts to reﬂect on the latencies in the archi-
tecture and their contribution to the worst case execution time.
• We implemented the design on one of the prototyping environment used by
the T-CREST platform and the RTEMP project. We created initial appli-
cations for functional veriﬁcation and for performance analysts, where we
underlined the validity of the FFT accelerator by interpreting the obtained
results.
• At the end, we have discussed prospects of reducing the worst case execu-
tion time, and presented a feasible feature extension by performing FFT
computations for multiple channels.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
Apendix A
VHDL source code for the design
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
FPGA TOP FILE
:
patmos . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
7 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
8 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
9
10 e n t i t y
patmos top
i s
11 port (
12
clk
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
13
oLedsPins led
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (8
downto
0) ;
14
iKeysPins key
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
15
oUartPins txd
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
16
iUartPins rxd
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
17
oSRAM A
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (19
downto
0) ;
18
SRAM DQ
:
inout
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
19
oSRAM CE N
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
20
oSRAM OE N
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
21
oSRAM WE N
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
22
oSRAM LB N
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
23
oSRAM UB N
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
24
r s t n
:
out
s t d l o g i c
25
) ;
26 end
e n t i t y
patmos top ;
==PAGE:80==
70
Apendix A
27
28 a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
patmos top
i s
29
component Patmos
i s
30
port (
31
clk
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
32
r e s e t
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
33
34
io comConf M Cmd
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
35
io comConf M Addr
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
36
io comConf M Data
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
37
io comConf M ByteEn
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
38
io comConf M RespAccept
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
39
io comConf S Resp
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
40
io comConf S Data
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
41
io comConf S CmdAccept
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
42
43
io comSpm M Cmd
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
44
io comSpm M Addr
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
45
io comSpm M Data
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
46
io comSpm M ByteEn
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
47
io comSpm S Resp
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
48
io comSpm S Data
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
49
50
i o c p u I n f o P i n s i d
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
51
i o c p u I n f o P i n s c n t
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
52
i o l e d s P i n s l e d
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (8
downto
0) ;
53
io keysPins key
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
54
i o u a r t P i n s t x
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
55
i o u a r t P i n s r x
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
56
57
io fftPins MCmd
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
58
io fftPins MAddr
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
59
io fftPins MData
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
60
io fftPins MByteEn
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
61
i o f f t P i n s S R e s p
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
62
i o f f t P i n s S D a t a
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
63
64
io sramCtrlPins ramOut addr
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (19
downto
0) ;
65
io sramCtrlPins ramOut doutEna
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
66
io sramCtrlPins ramIn din
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
67
io sramCtrlPins ramOut dout
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
68
io sramCtrlPins ramOut nce
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
69
io sramCtrlPins ramOut noe
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
70
io sramCtrlPins ramOut nwe
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
71
io sramCtrlPins ramOut nlb
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
72
io sramCtrlPins ramOut nub
:
out
s t d l o g i c
73
) ;
74
end component ;
75
76
component
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p
i s
77
port (
78
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
==PAGE:81==
71
79
r s t
i :
in
s t d l o g i c ;
80
−−data
stream
i n t e r f a c e
81
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
82
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
83
c h 0 d ata i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
84
−−OCP IN ( s l a v e )
f o r
Patmos
85
MCmd
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
86
MAddr
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
87
MData
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
88
MByteEn
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
89
SResp
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
90
SData
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0)
91
) ;
92
93
end component ;
94
95
component sp rom
IS
96
PORT
97
(
98
address
:
IN STD LOGIC VECTOR (6 DOWNTO 0) ;
99
clock
:
IN STD LOGIC
:=
’ 1 ’ ;
100
rden
:
IN STD LOGIC
:=
’ 1 ’ ;
101
q
: OUT STD LOGIC VECTOR (15 DOWNTO 0)
102
) ;
103
end component ;
104
105
−−DE2−70: 50 MHz clock => 80 MHz
106
−−BeMicro :
16 MHz clock => 25.6 MHz
107
constant
p l l i n f r e q
:
r e a l
:=
5 0 . 0 ;
108
constant
p ll mu lt
:
natural
:=
8;
109
constant
p l l d i v
:
natural
:=
5 ;
110
111
s i g n a l
c l k i n t
:
s t d l o g i c ;
112
113
−−OCP IN ( s l a v e )
f o r
Patmos
114
s i g n a l
MCmd int
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
115
s i g n a l
MAddr int
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
116
s i g n a l
MData int
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
117
s i g n a l
MByteEn int
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
118
s i g n a l
SResp int
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
119
s i g n a l
SData int
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
120
121
−−f o r
generation
of
i n t e r n a l
r e s e t
122
s i g n a l
i n t r e s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
123
s i g n a l
res reg1 ,
r e s r e g 2
:
s t d l o g i c ;
124
s i g n a l
r e s c n t
:
unsigned (2
downto
0) := ”000” ; −−f o r
the
simulation
125
126
−−sram
s i g n a l s
f o r
t r i s t a t e
inout
127
s i g n a l
sram out dout ena
:
s t d l o g i c ;
128
s i g n a l
sram out dout
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
129
130
−−frequency
d i v i d e r
and IO device
emulation
131
s i g n a l
temp
:
s t d l o g i c ;
132
s i g n a l
cnt 16k
:
i n t e g e r
range 0
to
2499 :=
0 ;
==PAGE:82==
72
Apendix A
133
s i g n a l
wr clk s ,
wr s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
134
s i g n a l
a d d r e s s s i g
:
unsigned (6
downto
0) ;
135
s i g n a l
start cmd s ,
start cmd r
:
s t d l o g i c ;
136
s i g n a l
i o r d e n s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
137
s i g n a l
m1 samples s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
138
139
a t t r i b u t e
a l t e r a a t t r i b u t e
:
s t r i n g ;
140
a t t r i b u t e
a l t e r a a t t r i b u t e
of
r e s c n t
:
s i g n a l
i s
”POWER UP LEVEL
=LOW” ;
141
142 begin
143
mdio pad io <= md pad o int when ( md padoe o int =
’1 ’)
e l s e
’Z ’ ;
144
r s t n
<= not
i n t r e s ;
145
146
p l l i n s t
:
e n t i t y
work . p l l
g e n e r i c map(
147
i n p u t f r e q
=> p l l i n f r e q ,
148
multiply by => pll mult ,
149
divide by
=> p l l d i v
150
)
151
port map(
152
i n c l k 0 => clk ,
153
c0
=> c l k i n t
154
) ;
155
−−we use a PLL
156
−−c l k i n t <= clk ;
157
158
−−
159
−−
i n t e r n a l
r e s e t
generation
160
−−
should
include
the PLL lock
s i g n a l
161
−−
162
process ( c l k i n t )
163
begin
164
i f
r i s i n g e d g e ( c l k i n t )
then
165
i f
( r e s c n t /= ”111” )
then
166
r e s c n t <= r e s c n t + 1;
167
end
i f ;
168
r e s r e g 1 <= not
r e s c n t (0)
or
not
r e s c n t (1)
or
not
r e s c n t
(2) ;
169
r e s r e g 2 <= r e s r e g 1 ;
170
i n t r e s
<= r e s r e g 2 ;
171
end
i f ;
172
end
process ;
173
174
−−t r i s t a t e
output
to
ssram
175
process ( sram out dout ena ,
sram out dout )
176
begin
177
i f
sram out dout ena =
’1 ’
then
178
SRAM DQ <= sram out dout ;
179
e l s e
180
SRAM DQ <= ( others => ’Z ’ ) ;
181
end
i f ;
182
end
process ;
183
184
comp
:
Patmos
185
port map(
==PAGE:83==
73
186
c l k i n t ,
187
i n t r e s ,
188
open ,
open ,
open ,
open ,
open ,
189
( others =>
’0 ’) ,
( others =>
’0 ’) ,
’0 ’ ,
190
open ,
open ,
open ,
open ,
191
( others =>
’0 ’) ,
( others =>
’0 ’) ,
192
X” 00000000 ” ,
193
X” 00000001 ” ,
194
oLedsPins led ,
195
iKeysPins key ,
196
oUartPins txd ,
197
iUartPins rxd ,
198
MCmd int ,
199
MAddr int ,
200
MData int ,
201
MByteEn int ,
202
SResp int ,
203
SData int ,
204
oSRAM A,
205
sram out dout ena ,
206
SRAM DQ,
207
sram out dout ,
208
oSRAM CE N,
209
oSRAM OE N,
210
oSRAM WE N,
211
oSRAM LB N,
212
oSRAM UB N) ;
213
214
215
216 FFT HW ACCELERATOR INST :
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p
217
port map(
218
r d c l k i => c l k i n t ,
219
w r c l k i => wr clk s ,
220
r s t
i => i n t r e s ,
221
wr i => wr s ,
222
c h 0 d ata i => m1 samples s ,
223
MCmd => MCmd int ,
224
MAddr => MAddr int ,
225
MData => MData int ,
226
MByteEn => MByteEn int ,
227
SResp => SResp int ,
228
SData => SData int
229
) ;
230
231 −−f r e q u e n c y d i v i d e r
232 f r e q u e n c y d i v i d e r :
process
( i n t r e s ,
c l k i n t )
233 begin
234
i f
( i n t r e s =
’1 ’)
then
235
temp <=
’ 0 ’ ;
236
cnt 16k <= 0;
237
e l s i f
r i s i n g e d g e ( c l k i n t )
then
238
i f
( counter = 2499)
then
239
temp <= NOT(temp) ;
240
cnt 16k <= 0;
==PAGE:84==
74
Apendix A
241
e l s e
242
cnt 16k <= cnt 16k + 1;
243
end
i f ;
244 end
i f ;
245 end
process ;
246
247 w r c l k s <= temp ;
248
249 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
250 −−I /O DEVICE EMULATOR−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
251 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
252
253
254 IO DEVICE INST
:
sp rom PORT MAP (
255
address
=> s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( a d d r e s s s i g ) ,
256
clock
=> wr clk s ,
257
rden
=> i o r d e n s ,
258
q
=> m1 samples s
259
) ;
260
261 start cmd s <=
’1 ’ when ( MAddr int = X”FFFE” and MCmd int = ”001” )
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
262
263
process ( c l k i n t ,
i n t r e s )
264
begin
265
i f
( i n t r e s =
’1 ’)
then
266
start cmd r <=
’ 0 ’ ;
267
e l s i f ( wr clk s ’ event
and
w r c l k s
= ’1 ’)
then
268
i f
( start cmd s =
’1 ’)
then
269
start cmd r <=
’ 1 ’ ;
270
e l s e
271
start cmd r <= start cmd r ;
272
end
i f ;
273
end
i f ;
274
end
process ;
275
276
process ( wr clk s ,
i n t r e s ,
start cmd r )
277
begin
278
i f
( i n t r e s =
’1 ’)
then
279
a d d r e s s s i g <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
280
i o r d e n s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
281
e l s i f ( wr clk s ’ event
and
w r c l k s
= ’1 ’)
then
282
i f
( start cmd r =
’1 ’)
then
283
a d d r e s s s i g <= a d d r e s s s i g + 1;
284
i o r d e n s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
285
end
i f ;
286
end
i f ;
287
end
process ;
288
289
process ( wr clk s ,
i n t r e s ,
i o r d e n s )
290
begin
291
i f
( i n t r e s =
’1 ’)
then
292
wr s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
293
e l s i f ( wr clk s ’ event
and
w r c l k s
= ’1 ’)
then
294
wr s <= i o r d e n s ;
==PAGE:85==
75
295
end
i f ;
296
end
process ;
297
298
299 end
a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
FFT a c c e l e r a t o r
:
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
6 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
7 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
8
9
10 e n t i t y
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p
i s
11 port (
12
13
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
14
r s t
i :
in
s t d l o g i c ;
15
16 −−data
stream
i n t e r f a c e
17
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
18
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
19
c h 0 d a t a i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
20
21 −−OCP IN ( s l a v e )
f o r
Patmos
22
23
MCmd
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
24
MAddr
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
25
MData
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
26
MByteEn
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
27
SResp
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
28
SData
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0)
29
30
) ;
31
32
end
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p ;
33
34
a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p
i s
35
36
−−INPUT BUFFER
37
constant ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
7;
38
constant NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
128;
39
40
−−OUTPUT BUFFER
41
constant ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
6 ;
42
constant NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
43
44
−−CB BUFFER CTRL
45
constant WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4 ;
46
constant WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
47
constant TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
48
49
component
f f t c o n t r o l l e r t o p
i s
==PAGE:86==
76
Apendix A
50
g e n e r i c
(
51
−−INPUT BUFFER
52
ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
5;
53
NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
32;
54
55
−−OUTPUT BUFFER
56
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
4 ;
57
NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
16;
58
59
−−CB BUFFER CTRL
60
WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4;
61
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
62
TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:= 16
63
) ;
64
port (
65
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
66
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
67
r s t
i :
in
s t d l o g i c ;
68
s t a r t c m d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
69
stop cmd i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
70
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
71
r d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
72
r d a d d r i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1
downto
0) ;
73
r e s u l t o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r
(15
downto
0) ;
74
r e s u l t r e a d y o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
75
m1 samples i :
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0)
76
77
) ;
78
end component ;
79
80
component
o c p s l a v e c t r l
i s
81
g e n e r i c
(
82
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=4
83
) ;
84
port (
85
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
86
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
87
88
−−OCP IN ( s l a v e )
f o r
Patmos
89
MCmd i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
90
MAddr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
91
MData i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
92
MByteEn i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
93
SResp o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
94
SData o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
95
96
−−f f t c o n t r o l l e r
97
start cmd o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
98
stop cmd o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
99
r e s u l t r e a d y f f t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
100
o b u f d a t a i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
101
obuf rd en o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
102
obuf rd addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0)
==PAGE:87==
77
103
104
) ;
105
106
end component ;
107
108
109
110
s i g n a l
start cmd s ,
stop cmd s ,
r e s u l t r e a d y f f t s ,
r d r e s u l t s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
111
s i g n a l
r e s u l t s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
112
s i g n a l
r d r e s u l t a d d r s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r
(
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0) ;
113
114
115 begin
116
117
f f t
c t r l
i n s t
:
f f t c o n t r o l l e r t o p
118
g e n e r i c map (
119
−−INPUT BUFFER
120
ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER => ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER,
121
NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER => NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER,
122
123
−−OUTPUT BUFFER
124
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER => ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER,
125
NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER => NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER,
126
127
−−CB BUFFER CTRL
128
WINDOW SIZE => WINDOW SIZE,
129
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
=> WINDOW CNT WIDTH,
130
TRANSFORM LENGTH => TRANSFORM LENGTH
131
)
132
port map(
133
r d c l k i => r d c l k i ,
134
w r c l k i => w r c l k i ,
135
r s t
i => r s t i ,
136
s t a r t c m d i => start cmd s ,
137
stop cmd i => stop cmd s ,
138
wr i => wr i ,
139
r d i => r d r e s u l t s ,
140
r d a d d r i => r d r e s u l t a d d r s ,
141
r e s u l t o => r e s u l t s ,
142
r e s u l t r e a d y o => r e s u l t r e a d y f f t s ,
143
m1 samples i => c h0 d ata i
144
) ;
145
146
o c p s l a v e c t r l i n s t
:
o c p s l a v e c t r l
147
g e n e r i c map (
148
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER => ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER
149
)
150
port map(
151
r d c l k i
=> r d c l k i ,
152
r s t
i
=> r s t i ,
153
MCmd i
=> MCmd,
154
MAddr i
=> MAddr,
155
MData i
=> MData,
==PAGE:88==
78
Apendix A
156
MByteEn i
=> MByteEn ,
157
SResp o
=> SResp ,
158
SData o
=> SData ,
159
start cmd o => start cmd s ,
160
stop cmd o
=> stop cmd s ,
161
r e s u l t r e a d y f f t i => r e s u l t r e a d y f f t s ,
162
o b u f d a t a i => r e s u l t s ,
163
obuf rd en o => r d r e s u l t s ,
164
obuf rd addr o => r d r e s u l t a d d r s
165
) ;
166
167
168
169
170 end
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
FFT a c c e l e r a t o r
:
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
6 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
7 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
8
9
10 e n t i t y
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p
i s
11 port (
12
13
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
14
r s t
i :
in
s t d l o g i c ;
15
16 −−data
stream
i n t e r f a c e
17
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
18
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
19
c h 0 d a t a i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
20
21 −−OCP IN ( s l a v e )
f o r
Patmos
22
23
MCmd
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
24
MAddr
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
25
MData
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
26
MByteEn
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
27
SResp
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
28
SData
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0)
29
30
) ;
31
32
end
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p ;
33
34
a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
f f t h w a c c e l e r a t o r t o p
i s
35
36
−−INPUT BUFFER
37
constant ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
7;
38
constant NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
128;
39
==PAGE:89==
79
40
−−OUTPUT BUFFER
41
constant ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
6 ;
42
constant NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
43
44
−−CB BUFFER CTRL
45
constant WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4 ;
46
constant WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
47
constant TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
48
49
component
f f t c o n t r o l l e r t o p
i s
50
g e n e r i c
(
51
−−INPUT BUFFER
52
ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
5;
53
NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
32;
54
55
−−OUTPUT BUFFER
56
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
4 ;
57
NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=
16;
58
59
−−CB BUFFER CTRL
60
WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4;
61
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
62
TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:= 16
63
) ;
64
port (
65
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
66
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
67
r s t
i :
in
s t d l o g i c ;
68
s t a r t c m d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
69
stop cmd i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
70
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
71
r d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
72
r d a d d r i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1
downto
0) ;
73
r e s u l t o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r
(15
downto
0) ;
74
r e s u l t r e a d y o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
75
m1 samples i :
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0)
76
77
) ;
78
end component ;
79
80
component
o c p s l a v e c t r l
i s
81
g e n e r i c
(
82
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:=4
83
) ;
84
port (
85
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
86
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
87
88
−−OCP IN ( s l a v e )
f o r
Patmos
89
MCmd i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
90
MAddr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
91
MData i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
92
MByteEn i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
93
SResp o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
==PAGE:90==
80
Apendix A
94
SData o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
95
96
−−f f t c o n t r o l l e r
97
start cmd o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
98
stop cmd o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
99
r e s u l t r e a d y f f t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
100
o b u f d a t a i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
101
obuf rd en o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
102
obuf rd addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0)
103
104
) ;
105
106
end component ;
107
108
109
110
s i g n a l
start cmd s ,
stop cmd s ,
r e s u l t r e a d y f f t s ,
r d r e s u l t s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
111
s i g n a l
r e s u l t s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
112
s i g n a l
r d r e s u l t a d d r s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r
(
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0) ;
113
114
115 begin
116
117
f f t
c t r l
i n s t
:
f f t c o n t r o l l e r t o p
118
g e n e r i c map (
119
−−INPUT BUFFER
120
ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER => ADDR WIDTH INPUT BUFFER,
121
NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER => NR OF WORDS INPUT BUFFER,
122
123
−−OUTPUT BUFFER
124
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER => ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER,
125
NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER => NR OF WORDS OUTPUT BUFFER,
126
127
−−CB BUFFER CTRL
128
WINDOW SIZE => WINDOW SIZE,
129
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
=> WINDOW CNT WIDTH,
130
TRANSFORM LENGTH => TRANSFORM LENGTH
131
)
132
port map(
133
r d c l k i => r d c l k i ,
134
w r c l k i => w r c l k i ,
135
r s t
i => r s t i ,
136
s t a r t c m d i => start cmd s ,
137
stop cmd i => stop cmd s ,
138
wr i => wr i ,
139
r d i => r d r e s u l t s ,
140
r d a d d r i => r d r e s u l t a d d r s ,
141
r e s u l t o => r e s u l t s ,
142
r e s u l t r e a d y o => r e s u l t r e a d y f f t s ,
143
m1 samples i => c h0 da ta i
144
) ;
145
==PAGE:91==
81
146
o c p s l a v e c t r l i n s t
:
o c p s l a v e c t r l
147
g e n e r i c map (
148
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER => ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER
149
)
150
port map(
151
r d c l k i
=> r d c l k i ,
152
r s t
i
=> r s t i ,
153
MCmd i
=> MCmd,
154
MAddr i
=> MAddr,
155
MData i
=> MData,
156
MByteEn i
=> MByteEn ,
157
SResp o
=> SResp ,
158
SData o
=> SData ,
159
start cmd o => start cmd s ,
160
stop cmd o
=> stop cmd s ,
161
r e s u l t r e a d y f f t i => r e s u l t r e a d y f f t s ,
162
o b u f d a t a i => r e s u l t s ,
163
obuf rd en o => r d r e s u l t s ,
164
obuf rd addr o => r d r e s u l t a d d r s
165
) ;
166
167
168
169
170 end
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
OCP SLAVE I /F :
o c p s l a v e i f . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
6 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
7 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
8
9 e n t i t y
o c p s l a v e c t r l
i s
10 g e n e r i c
(
11 ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:= 4
12 ) ;
13 port (
14
15
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
16
r s t
i :
in
s t d l o g i c ;
17
18 −−OCP IN ( s l a v e )
f o r
Patmos
19
MCmd i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (2
downto
0) ;
20
MAddr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
21
MData i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
22
MByteEn i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (3
downto
0) ;
23
SResp o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
24
SData o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
25
26 −−f f t c o n t r o l l e r
27
start cmd o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
28
stop cmd o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
29
r e s u l t r e a d y f f t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
==PAGE:92==
82
Apendix A
30
o b u f d a t a i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
31
obuf rd en o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
32
obuf rd addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0)
33
34
) ;
35
36 end
o c p s l a v e c t r l ;
37
38 a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
o c p s l a v e c t r l
i s
39
40
s i g n a l
c l r s t a t u s r ,
c l r s t a t u s d ,
c l r s t a t u s d d
:
s t d l o g i c ;
41
s i g n a l
r e s u l t r e a d y r
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
42
s i g n a l
next SResp
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (1
downto
0) ;
43
s i g n a l
next SData ,
next SData d
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (31
downto
0) ;
44
s i g n a l
zero pad
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) := ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
45
s i g n a l
sres mux sel ,
sres mux sel d
:
s t d l o g i c ;
46
47
48 begin
49
50
51
−−Register
52
process ( r d c l k i ,
r s t
i )
53
begin
54
i f
r s t
i =
’1 ’
then
55
SResp o <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
56
next SData d <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
57
c l r s t a t u s d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
58
c l r s t a t u s d d
<= ’0 ’;
59
sr es mu x sel d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
60
e l s i f
r i s i n g e d g e ( r d c l k i )
then
61
sr es mu x sel d <= sres mux sel ;
62
c l r s t a t u s d <= c l r s t a t u s r ;
63
c l r s t a t u s d d <= c l r s t a t u s d ;
64
SResp o <= next SResp ;
65
next SData d <= next SData ;
66
end
i f ;
67
end
process ;
68
69 SData o <= zero pad & o b u f d a t a i
when ( sre s mu x se l d =
’1 ’)
e l s e
next SData d ;
70
71
72 process
( r d c l k i ,
MCmd i ,
MAddr i ,
MData i ,
obuf data i ,
r e s u l t r e a d y r )
73 begin
74
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
75
next SResp <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
76
c l r s t a t u s r <=
’ 0 ’ ;
77
obuf rd en o <=
’ 0 ’ ;
78
obuf rd addr o <= MAddr i (ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER+1 downto
2) ;
79
start cmd o
<= ’0 ’;
80
stop cmd o <=
’ 0 ’ ;
==PAGE:93==
83
81
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
82
case ( MAddr i (15
downto
2) )
i s
83
−−STATUS REGISTER
84
when ” 11111111111101 ” =>
85
case (MCmd i)
i s
86
when ”001” => −−write
87
c l r s t a t u s r <=
’ 1 ’ ;
88
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
89
next SResp <= ”01” ;
90
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
91
when ”010” => −−read
92
c l r s t a t u s r <=
’ 0 ’ ;
93
next SData <= r e s u l t r e a d y r ;
94
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
95
next SResp <= ”01” ;
96
when
others =>
97
c l r s t a t u s r <=
’ 0 ’ ;
98
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
99
next SResp <= ”00” ;
100
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
101
end
case ;
102
−−START COMMAND
103
when ” 11111111111110 ” =>
104
case (MCmd i)
i s
105
when ”001” => −−write
106
start cmd o <=
’ 1 ’ ;
107
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
108
next SResp <= ”01” ;
109
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
110
when
others =>
111
start cmd o <=
’ 0 ’ ;
112
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
113
next SResp <= ”00” ;
114
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
115
end
case ;
116
−−STOP COMMAND
117
when ” 11111111111111 ” =>
118
case (MCmd i)
i s
119
when ”001” => −−write
120
stop cmd o <=
’ 1 ’ ;
121
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
122
next SResp <= ”01” ;
123
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
124
when
others =>
125
stop cmd o <=
’ 0 ’ ;
126
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
127
next SResp <= ”00” ;
128
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
129
end
case ;
130
−−OTHER ADDRESS IS RESERVED FOR BUFFER
131
when
others =>
−−s t a r t
command
132
case (MCmd i)
i s
133
when ”010” => −−read
134
next SData <= s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( r e s i z e ( unsigned (
o b u f d a t a i ) ,
SData o ’ length ) ) ;
==PAGE:94==
84
Apendix A
135
next SResp <= ”01” ;
136
sres mux sel <=
’ 1 ’ ;
137
obuf rd en o <=
’ 1 ’ ;
138
obuf rd addr o <= MAddr i (ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER
+1 downto
2) ;
139
when
others =>
140
next SData <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
141
next SResp <= ”00” ;
142
sres mux sel <=
’ 0 ’ ;
143
obuf rd en o <=
’ 0 ’ ;
144
obuf rd addr o <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
145
end
case ;
146
end
case ;
147 end
process ;
148
149
150
151
152
153
s t a t u s r e g i s t e r
:
process ( r d c l k i ,
r s t
i )
154
begin
155
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
156
r e s u l t r e a d y r <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
157
e l s i f ( r d c l k i ’ event
and
r d c l k i =
’1 ’)
then
158
i f
( c l r s t a t u s r =
’1 ’)
then
159
r e s u l t r e a d y r <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
160
e l s i f
( r e s u l t r e a d y f f t i =
’1 ’)
then
161
r e s u l t r e a d y r <= x” 00000001 ” ;
162
e l s e
163
r e s u l t r e a d y r <= r e s u l t r e a d y r ;
164
end
i f ;
165
end
i f ;
166
end
process ;
167
168
169
170
171
172
173 end
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
FFT C o n t r olle r
: FFT CTRL.VHD
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6
7 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
8 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
9 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
10
11 e n t i t y
f f t
c t r l
i s
12 g e n e r i c
(
13 ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER :
i n t e g e r
:= 4
14 ) ;
==PAGE:95==
85
15
16
port (
17
c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
18
r s t
i
:
in STD LOGIC;
19
s t a r t c m d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
20
stop cmd i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
21
s i n k v a l i d
:
IN STD LOGIC;
22
sink sop
:
IN STD LOGIC;
23
sink eop
:
IN STD LOGIC;
24
source ready
:
out STD LOGIC;
25
sink ready
:
in STD LOGIC;
26
source sop
: OUT STD LOGIC;
27
source eop
: OUT STD LOGIC;
28
s o u r c e v a l i d
: OUT STD LOGIC;
29
rd o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
30
w r i n i t o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
31
r d i n i t o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
32
w r i n i t d o n e i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
33
wr window done i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
34
rd samples done i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
35
r e s u l t w r e n o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
36
r e s u l t r e a d y o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
37
r e s u l t w r a d d r o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r
(
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0)
38
39
) ;
40 end
f f t
c t r l ;
41
42 a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
f f t
c t r l
i s
43
44 type
s t a t e t y p e
i s
( S0 IDLE ,
45
S1 INIT ,
46
S2 SEND INIT PACKET ,
47
S1 WAIT FOR SAMPLES,
48
S2 SEND PACKET,
49
S3 SOURCE READY,
50
S4 GET RESULTS) ;
51
52 s i g n a l
state ,
n e x t s t a t e
:
s t a t e t y p e ;
53 s i g n a l
r e s ult wr addr reg ,
r e s u l t w r a d d r n e x t
:
unsigned (
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0) ;
54 s i g n a l
r e s u l t w r e n r e g ,
s 4 s t a t e t r ,
s 4 s t a t e t r d
:
s t d l o g i c ;
55 s i g n a l
wr init done d ,
wr window done d
:
s t d l o g i c ;
56 s i g n a l
s o u r c e v a l i d s ,
source sop s ,
s o u r c e e o p s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
57
58 begin
59
60 process ( c l k i ,
r s t
i )
61 begin
62
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
63
wr init done d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
64
wr window done d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
65
e l s i f
( c l k i ’ event
and
c l k i
= ’1 ’)
then
66
wr init done d <= w r i n i t d o n e i ;
67
wr window done d <= wr window done i ;
==PAGE:96==
86
Apendix A
68
end
i f ;
69 end
process ;
70
71 −−Main
s t a t e
machine
combinatorial
l o g i c
f o r
s t a t e
t r a n s i t i o n s
72 CL:
process ( c l k i ,
state ,
start cmd i ,
stop cmd i ,
wr init done d ,
w r i n i t d o n e i ,
wr window done i ,
wr window done d ,
rd samples done i ,
s i n k v a l i d ,
sink ready ,
sink sop ,
sink eop )
73 begin
74
−−d e f a u l t
output
values
75
n e x t s t a t e <= s t a t e ;
76
s 4 s t a t e t r <=
’ 0 ’ ;
77
78 case ( s t a t e )
i s
79
80
when S0 IDLE =>
81
i f
( s t a r t c m d i
= ’1 ’)
then
82
n e x t s t a t e <= S1 INIT ;
83
e l s e
84
n e x t s t a t e <= S0 IDLE ;
85
end
i f ;
86
87
when S1 INIT =>
88
i f
( w r i n i t d o n e i =
’1 ’
and
sink ready
= ’1 ’)
then
89
n e x t s t a t e <= S2 SEND INIT PACKET ;
90
e l s e
91
n e x t s t a t e <= S1 INIT ;
92
end
i f ;
93
94
when S2 SEND INIT PACKET =>
95
i f
( rd samples done i =
’1 ’)
then
96
n e x t s t a t e <= S3 SOURCE READY;
97
e l s e
98
n e x t s t a t e <= S2 SEND INIT PACKET ;
99
end
i f ;
100
101
when S1 WAIT FOR SAMPLES =>
102
i f
( wr window done i =
’1 ’
and
sink ready
= ’1 ’)
then
103
n e x t s t a t e <= S2 SEND PACKET;
104
e l s e
105
n e x t s t a t e <= S1 WAIT FOR SAMPLES;
106
end
i f ;
107
108
when S2 SEND PACKET =>
109
i f
( rd samples done i =
’1 ’)
then
110
n e x t s t a t e <= S3 SOURCE READY;
111
e l s e
112
n e x t s t a t e <= S2 SEND PACKET;
113
end
i f ;
114
115
when S3 SOURCE READY =>
116
i f
( s i n k v a l i d =
’1 ’
and
sink sop = ’1 ’)
then
117
n e x t s t a t e <= S4 GET RESULTS ;
118
e l s e
119
n e x t s t a t e <= S3 SOURCE READY;
120
end
i f ;
==PAGE:97==
87
121
when S4 GET RESULTS =>
122
i f
( s i n k v a l i d = ’1 ’ and
sink eop
= ’1 ’)
then
123
i f
( stop cmd i =
’1 ’)
then
124
n e x t s t a t e <= S0 IDLE ;
125
s 4 s t a t e t r <=
’ 1 ’ ;
126
e l s e
127
n e x t s t a t e <= S1 WAIT FOR SAMPLES;
128
s 4 s t a t e t r <=
’ 1 ’ ;
129
end
i f ;
130
e l s e
131
n e x t s t a t e <= S4 GET RESULTS ;
132
s 4 s t a t e t r <=
’ 0 ’ ;
133
end
i f ;
134
when OTHERS =>
135
n e x t s t a t e <= S0 IDLE ;
136
137 end
case ;
138
139 end
process ;
140
141
142 −−OUTPUT assigments
143 process ( c l k i ,
r s t
i )
144 begin
145
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
146
s o u r c e v a l i d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
147
source sop <=
’ 0 ’ ;
148
source eop <=
’ 0 ’ ;
149
e l s i f
( c l k i ’ event
and
c l k i =
’1 ’)
then
150
s o u r c e v a l i d <= s o u r c e v a l i d s ;
151
source sop <=
s o u r c e s o p s ;
152
source eop <=
s o u r c e e o p s ;
153
end
i f ;
154 end
process ;
155
156
157
158 −−input
b u f f e r
c t r l
s i g n a l s
159 rd o <=
’1 ’ when ( s t a t e = S2 SEND INIT PACKET or
s t a t e =
S2 SEND PACKET)
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
160
r d i n i t o <=
’1 ’ when ( s t a t e = S2 SEND INIT PACKET)
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
161 w r i n i t o <=
’1 ’ when ( s t a t e = S1 INIT )
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
162
163
164 −−Avalon IF
output
s i g n a l s
165 s o u r c e v a l i d s <=
’1 ’ when
(( s t a t e =
S2 SEND INIT PACKET and
wr init done d =
’1 ’)
166
or
s t a t e = S2 SEND INIT PACKET or
( s t a t e =
S2 SEND PACKET
167
and wr window done d =
’1 ’)
or
s t a t e =
S2 SEND PACKET)
168
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
169
170 s o u r c e s o p s <=
’1 ’ when
(( s t a t e =
S2 SEND INIT PACKET and
wr init done d =
’1 ’)
==PAGE:98==
88
Apendix A
171
or
( s t a t e = S2 SEND PACKET and wr window done d =
’1 ’) )
172
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
173
174 s o u r c e e o p s <=
’1 ’ when
(( s t a t e = S2 SEND INIT PACKET and
rd samples done i =
’1 ’)
175
or
( s t a t e = S2 SEND PACKET and
rd samples done i =
’1 ’) )
176
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
177
178 source ready <=
’1 ’ when ( s t a t e = S3 SOURCE READY or
s t a t e =
S4 GET RESULTS)
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
179
180
181 −−otuput
b u f f e r
c t r l
s i g n a l s
182 r e s u l t w r e n o <=
’1 ’ when ( s t a t e = S4 GET RESULTS or
s 4 s t a t e t r d
=
’1 ’)
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
183
184 r e s u l t w r a d d r o <= s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( r e s u l t w r a d d r r e g (
ADDR WIDTH OUTPUT BUFFER−1 downto
0) ) ;
185
186 r e s u l t r e a d y o <=
’1 ’ when ( s 4 s t a t e t r d =
’1 ’)
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
187
188 r e s u l t
:
process ( c l k i ,
r s t
i )
189 begin
190
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
191
r e s u l t w r a d d r r e g <=
( others =>
’0 ’) ;
192
e l s i f
( c l k i ’ event
and
c l k i =
’1 ’)
then
193
i f
( r e s u l t w r a d d r r e g = ” 111111 ” )
then
194
r e s u l t w r a d d r r e g <=
( others =>
’0 ’) ;
195
e l s i f
( s t a t e = S4 GET RESULTS)
then
196
r e s u l t w r a d d r r e g <= r e s u l t w r a d d r r e g + 1 ;
197
end
i f ;
198
end
i f ;
199 end
process ;
200
201
202 SEQ :
process ( c l k i ,
r s t
i )
203 begin
204
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
205
s t a t e <= S0 IDLE ;
206
s 4 s t a t e t r d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
207
e l s i f
( c l k i ’ event
and
c l k i =
’1 ’)
then
208
i f
( stop cmd i =
’1 ’)
then
209
s t a t e <= S0 IDLE ;
210
s 4 s t a t e t r d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
211
e l s e
212
s t a t e <= n e x t s t a t e ;
213
s 4 s t a t e t r d <= s 4 s t a t e t r ;
214
end
i f ;
215
end
i f ;
216 end
process ;
217
218 end
r t l ;
==PAGE:99==
89
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
DUAL PORT RAM :
dp ram . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 LIBRARY i e e e ;
7 USE i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 .ALL;
8 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
9
10
11 ENTITY dp ram
IS
12
g e n e r i c
(
13
ADDR WIDTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
6;
14
NR OF WORDS :
i n t e g e r
:= 64
15
) ;
16
PORT
17
(
18
rdclock
:
IN
s t d l o g i c ;
19
wrclock
:
IN
s t d l o g i c ;
20
data
:
IN
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
21
wraddress :
IN
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
22
rdaddress :
IN
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
23
wren
:
IN
s t d l o g i c ;
24
rden
:
IN
s t d l o g i c ;
25
q
: OUT
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0)
26
) ;
27 END dp ram ;
28
29 ARCHITECTURE r t l OF dp ram
IS
30
type RAM i s
array
(0
to NR OF WORDS−1)
of
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
31
s i g n a l
ram block
: RAM;
32
33 BEGIN
34
PROCESS ( wrclock )
35
BEGIN
36
IF
( wrclock ’ event AND wrclock =
’1 ’) THEN
37
IF
( wren =
’1 ’) THEN
38
ram block ( t o i n t e g e r ( unsigned ( wraddress ) ) ) <= data ;
39
END IF ;
40
END IF ;
41
END PROCESS;
42
43
PROCESS ( rdclock )
44
BEGIN
45
IF
( rdclock ’ event AND rdclock =
’1 ’) THEN
46
IF
( rden =
’1 ’) THEN
47
q <= ram block ( t o i n t e g e r ( unsigned ( rdaddress ) ) ) ;
48
END IF ;
49
END IF ;
50
END PROCESS;
51
52 END r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
==PAGE:100==
90
Apendix A
2 −−Circular
Buffer
:
c b c t r l . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
7 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
8 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
9
10
11 e n t i t y
c b c t r l
i s
12
g e n e r i c
(
13
WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4;
14
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
15
TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
16
ADDR WIDTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
6
17
) ;
18
port (
19
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
20
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
21
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
22
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
23
r d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
24
r d i n i t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
25
w r i n i t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
26
wr addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
27
rd addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
28
w r i n i t d o n e o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
29
wr window done o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
30
rd samples done o
:
out
s t d l o g i c
31
32
) ;
33
34 end
c b c t r l ;
35
36 a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
c b c t r l
i s
37
38
39
40 s i g n a l
w r i n i t done s ,
w r i n i t d o n e f e d ,
wr init done dd
:
s t d l o g i c ;
41 s i g n a l
w r i n i t d o n e f e ,
wr init done d
:
s t d l o g i c ;
42
43
44
component
wr ptr
i s
45
g e n e r i c
(
46
WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4;
47
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
48
TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
49
ADDR WIDTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
6
50
) ;
51
port (
52
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
53
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
54
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
55
w r i n i t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
==PAGE:101==
91
56
wr addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
57
w r i n i t d o n e o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
58
wr window done o
:
out
s t d l o g i c
59
) ;
60
end component ;
61
62
component
rd ptr
i s
63
g e n e r i c
(
64
WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4;
65
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
66
TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
67
ADDR WIDTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
6
68
) ;
69
port (
70
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
71
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
72
r d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
73
r d i n i t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
74
rd addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
75
rd samples done o
:
out
s t d l o g i c
76
) ;
77
end component ;
78
79
80
component CDC i s
81
port (
82
c l k a
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
83
clk b
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
84
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
85
v a l i d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
86
v a l i d o
:
out
s t d l o g i c
87
) ;
88
end component ;
89
90 s i g n a l
wr init d2 ,
wr init d1 ,
wr init done sync ,
wr window done sync
:
s t d l o g i c ;
91
92
begin
93
94 w r p t r i n s t
:
wr ptr
95 g e n e r i c map (
96
WINDOW SIZE => WINDOW SIZE,
97
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
=> WINDOW CNT WIDTH,
98
TRANSFORM LENGTH => TRANSFORM LENGTH,
99
ADDR WIDTH => ADDR WIDTH
100
)
101 port map(
102
w r c l k i => w r c l k i ,
103
r s t
i => r s t i ,
104
wr i => wr i ,
105
w r i n i t i => wr init d2 ,
106
wr addr o => wr addr o ,
107
w r i n i t d o n e o => wr init done sync ,
108
wr window done o => wr window done sync
109 ) ;
==PAGE:102==
92
Apendix A
110
111 r d p t r i n s t
:
rd ptr
112 g e n e r i c map (
113
WINDOW SIZE => WINDOW SIZE,
114
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
=> WINDOW CNT WIDTH,
115
TRANSFORM LENGTH => TRANSFORM LENGTH,
116
ADDR WIDTH => ADDR WIDTH
117
)
118 port map(
119
r d c l k i => r d c l k i ,
120
r s t
i => r s t i ,
121
r d i => rd i ,
122
r d i n i t i => r d i n i t i ,
123
rd addr o => rd addr o ,
124
rd samples done o => rd samples done o
125 ) ;
126
127 −−CLOCK DOMAIN CROSSING
128
129 w r i n i t d o n e c dc
: CDC
130 port map(
131
c l k a => w r c l k i ,
132
clk b => r d c l k i ,
133
r s t
i => r s t i ,
134
v a l i d i => wr init done sync ,
135
v a l i d o => w r i n i t d o n e o
136 ) ;
137
138 wr window done cdc
: CDC
139 port map(
140
c l k a => w r c l k i ,
141
clk b => r d c l k i ,
142
r s t
i => r s t i ,
143
v a l i d i => wr window done sync ,
144
v a l i d o => wr window done o
145 ) ;
146
147 −−w r i n i t i c d c
: CDC
148 −−port map(
149 −−
c l k a => r d c l k i ,
150 −−
clk b => w r c l k i ,
151 −−
r s t
i => r s t i ,
152 −−
v a l i d i => w r i n i t i ,
153 −−
v a l i d o => w r i n i t s
154 −−) ;
155
156
w r i n i t i c d c
:
process ( w r c l k i ,
r s t
i )
157 begin
158
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
159
w r i n i t d 1 <=
’ 0 ’ ;
160
w r i n i t d 2 <=
’ 0 ’ ;
161
e l s i f
( w r c l k i ’ event
and
w r c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
162
w r i n i t d 1 <= w r i n i t i ;
163
w r i n i t d 2 <= w r i n i t d 1 ;
164
end
i f ;
==PAGE:103==
93
165 end
process ;
166
167
168 end
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
READ POINTER :
rd ptr . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
7 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
8 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
9
10
11 e n t i t y
rd ptr
i s
12
g e n e r i c
(
13
WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4;
14
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
15
TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
16
ADDR WIDTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
6
17
) ;
18
port (
19
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
20
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
21
r d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
22
r d i n i t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
23
rd addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
24
rd samples done o
:
out
s t d l o g i c
25
) ;
26 end
rd ptr ;
27
28 a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
rd ptr
i s
29
30
s i g n a l
rd ptr reg ,
rd ptr next
:
unsigned (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
31
s i g n a l
rd addr reg
:
unsigned (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
32
s i g n a l
rd samples done s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
33
s i g n a l
window cnt
:
unsigned (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
34
35 begin
36
37
38
−−read
done
s i g n a l i n g
39 process
( window cnt )
40 begin
41
i f
( window cnt = x”1” )
then
42
rd samples done s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
43
e l s e
44
rd samples done s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
45
end
i f ;
46 end
process ;
47
48 window counter
:
process
( r d c l k i ,
r s t
i )
49 begin
50
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
==PAGE:104==
94
Apendix A
51
window cnt <= to unsigned (TRANSFORM LENGTH, ADDR WIDTH) ;
52
e l s i f
( r d c l k i ’ event
and
r d c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
53
i f
( rd samples done s
= ’1 ’)
then
54
window cnt <= to unsigned (TRANSFORM LENGTH, ADDR WIDTH) ;
55
e l s i f
( window cnt > x”0” and
r d i =
’1 ’
)
then
56
window cnt <= window cnt −1;
57
end
i f ;
58
end
i f ;
59 end
process ;
60
61 −−RD PTR ADDER
62 rd ptr next <= r d p t r r e g + to unsigned (WINDOW SIZE, ADDR WIDTH)
63
when ( rd addr reg = to unsigned (TRANSFORM LENGTH−1, ADDR WIDTH)
)
64
e l s e
r d p t r r e g ;
65
66
r d p t r r e g i s t e r
:
process
( r d c l k i ,
r s t
i )
67 begin
68
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
69
r d p t r r e g <= ( others =>’0’) ;
70
e l s i f
( r d c l k i ’ event
and
r d c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
71
r d p t r r e g <= rd ptr next ;
72
end
i f ;
73
end
process ;
74
75 −−incrementing
read
address
76 rd addr cnt
:
process
( r d c l k i ,
r s t
i )
77 begin
78
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
79
rd addr reg <= ( others =>’0’) ;
80
e l s i f
( r d c l k i ’ event
and
r d c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
81
i f
( rd samples done s =
’1 ’)
then
82
rd addr reg <= ( others =>’0’) ;
83
e l s i f
( r d i =
’1 ’)
then
84
rd addr reg <= rd addr reg + 1;
85
end
i f ;
86
end
i f ;
87 end
process ;
88
89
90 rd addr o <= s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( rd addr reg (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) +
91
r d p t r r e g (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ) when ( r d
i n i t i =
’0 ’
and
r d i
= ’1 ’)
92
e l s e
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( rd addr reg (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ) ;
93
94 rd samples done o <= rd samples done s ;
95 end
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
WRITE POINTER :
wr ptr . vhd
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
6 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
==PAGE:105==
95
7 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
8
9
10 e n t i t y
wr ptr
i s
11
g e n e r i c
(
12
WINDOW SIZE :
i n t e g e r
:=
4;
13
WINDOW CNT WIDTH
:
i n t e g e r
:=
3;
14
TRANSFORM LENGTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
64;
15
ADDR WIDTH :
i n t e g e r
:=
6
16
) ;
17
port (
18
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
19
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
20
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
21
w r i n i t i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
22
wr addr o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
23
w r i n i t d o n e o
:
out
s t d l o g i c ;
24
wr window done o
:
out
s t d l o g i c
25
) ;
26 end
wr ptr ;
27
28 a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
wr ptr
i s
29
30
s i g n a l
wr ptr reg ,
wr ptr next
:
unsigned (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
31
s i g n a l
wr addr reg
:
unsigned (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
32
s i g n a l
wr window reg
:
s t d l o g i c ;
33
s i g n a l
wr addr s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
34
s i g n a l
wr init done s ,
w r i n i t d o n e f e d ,
wr init done dd
:
s t d l o g i c ;
35
s i g n a l
w r i n i t d o n e f e ,
wr init done d
:
s t d l o g i c ;
36
s i g n a l
window cnt
:
unsigned (WINDOW CNT WIDTH−1 downto
0) ;
37
38
39
begin
40
41 −−incrementing
write
p o i n t e r s
42 wr ptr adder :
process
( window cnt ,
wr ptr reg )
43 begin
44
i f
( window cnt = x”1” )
then
45
wr window reg <=
’ 1 ’ ;
46
e l s e
47
wr window reg <=
’ 0 ’ ;
48
end
i f ;
49 end
process ;
50
51 window counter
:
process
( w r c l k i ,
r s t
i )
52 begin
53
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
54
window cnt <= ( others =>’0’) ;
55
e l s i f
( w r c l k i ’ event
and
w r c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
56
i f
( w r i n i t d o n e f e =
’1 ’
or
wr window reg =
’1 ’)
then
57
window cnt <= to unsigned (WINDOW SIZE, WINDOW CNT WIDTH) ;
58
e l s i f
( window cnt > x”0” and
wr i =
’1 ’
)
then
59
window cnt <= window cnt −1;
60
end
i f ;
==PAGE:106==
96
Apendix A
61
end
i f ;
62 end
process ;
63
64
65 wr addr counter
:
process
( w r c l k i ,
r s t
i )
66 begin
67
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
68
wr addr reg <= ( others =>’0’) ;
69
e l s i f
( w r c l k i ’ event
and
w r c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
70
i f
( wr i =
’1 ’)
then
71
wr addr reg <= wr addr reg + 1;
72
end
i f ;
73
end
i f ;
74 end
process ;
75
76 w r i n i t d o n e r e g
:
process
( w r c l k i ,
r s t
i )
77 begin
78
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
79
wr init done d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
80
e l s i f
( w r c l k i ’ event
and
w r c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
81
wr init done d <= w r i n i t d o n e s ;
82
end
i f ;
83 end
process ;
84
85
86 process
( w r c l k i ,
r s t
i )
87 begin
88
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
89
w r i n i t d o n e f e d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
90
e l s i f
( w r c l k i ’ event
and
w r c l k i = ’1 ’)
then
91
i f
( w r i n i t d o n e f e =
’1 ’)
then
92
w r i n i t d o n e f e d <=
’ 1 ’ ;
93
e l s e
94
w r i n i t d o n e f e d <= w r i n i t d o n e f e d ;
95
end
i f ;
96
end
i f ;
97 end
process ;
98
99
100 w r i n i t d o n e f e <=
’1 ’ when ( w r i n i t d o n e s =
’0 ’
and
wr init done d =
’1 ’)
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
101 wr addr s <= s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( wr addr reg (ADDR WIDTH−1 downto
0) ) ;
102
103 w r i n i t d o n e s <=
’1 ’ when ( wr addr s = s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (
to unsigned (TRANSFORM LENGTH−1, ADDR WIDTH) )
104
and
w r i n i t i =
’1 ’)
e l s e
’ 0 ’ ;
105
106 w r i n i t d o n e o <= w r i n i t d o n e s ;
107 wr window done o <= wr window reg ;
108 wr addr o <= wr addr s ;
109
110 end
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
CDC block
:
cdc . vhd
==PAGE:107==
97
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
7 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
8 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
9
10
11 e n t i t y CDC i s
12
port (
13
c l k a
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
14
clk b
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
15
r s t
i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
16
v a l i d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
17
v a l i d o
:
out
s t d l o g i c
18
) ;
19 end CDC;
20
21
22 a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of CDC i s
23
24 s i g n a l
r e g t c l k a
:
s t d l o g i c ;
25 s i g n a l
reg d1 clk b ,
reg d2 clk b ,
r e g d 3 c l k b
:
s t d l o g i c ;
26 s i g n a l
v a l i d s ,
v a l i d d
:
s t d l o g i c ;
27
28 begin
29
30 −−input T−r e g i s t e r
c l k a
31 process ( clk a ,
r s t
i )
32 begin
33
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
34
r e g t c l k a <=
’ 0 ’ ;
35
e l s i f ( clk a ’ event
and
c l k a =
’1 ’)
then
36
i f
( v a l i d i =
’1 ’)
then
37
r e g t c l k a <= not
r e g t c l k a ;
38
end
i f ;
39
end
i f ;
40 end
process ;
41
42 −−3
stage
synchronizer
43 process ( clk b ,
r s t
i )
44 begin
45
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
46
r e g d 1 c l k b <=
’ 0 ’ ;
47
r e g d 2 c l k b <=
’ 0 ’ ;
48
r e g d 3 c l k b <=
’ 0 ’ ;
49
v a l i d d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
50
e l s i f ( clk b ’ event
and
clk b =
’1 ’)
then
51
r e g d 1 c l k b <= r e g t c l k a ;
52
r e g d 2 c l k b <= r e g d 1 c l k b ;
53
r e g d 3 c l k b <= r e g d 2 c l k b ;
54
v a l i d d <= v a l i d s ;
55
end
i f ;
56 end
process ;
57
==PAGE:108==
98
Apendix A
58 v a l i d s <= r e g d 2 c l k b
xor
r e g d 3 c l k b ;
59 v a l i d o <= v a l i d d ;
60
61
62 end
r t l ;
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
3 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
4 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
5 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
6 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
7
8 e n t i t y
i n p u t b u f f e r d e l a y
i s
9
port (
10
c l k i
:
IN
s t d l o g i c ;
11
r s t
i
:
IN
s t d l o g i c ;
12
wr i
:
IN STD LOGIC;
13
d a t a i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
14
wr o
: OUT STD LOGIC;
15
data o
: OUT s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0)
16
) ;
17
18 end
i n p u t b u f f e r d e l a y ;
19
20
a r c h i t e c t u r e
r t l
of
i n p u t b u f f e r d e l a y
i s
21
22
s i g n a l
wr d ,
wr dd
:
s t d l o g i c ;
23
s i g n a l
data d ,
data dd
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
24
25
begin
26
27
two stage delay
:
process ( c l k i ,
r s t
i )
begin
28
i f
( r s t
i =
’1 ’)
then
29
wr d <=
’ 0 ’ ;
30
wr dd <=
’ 0 ’ ;
31
data d <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
32
data dd <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
33
e l s i f
( c l k i ’ event
and
c l k i =
’1 ’)
then
34
wr d <= wr i ;
35
wr dd <= wr d ;
36
data d <= d a t a i ;
37
data dd <= data d ;
38
end
i f ;
39
end
process ;
40
41
wr o <= wr dd ;
42
data o <= data dd ;
43
44 end
r t l ;
==PAGE:109==
Appendix B
Apendix B
Source code for the TEST CASEs
1 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 −−
TB f o r
t e s t
Case 1
3 −−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 l i b r a r y
i e e e ;
7 use
i e e e . s t d l o g i c 1 1 6 4 . a l l ;
8 use
i e e e . numeric std . a l l ;
9 use
std . t e x t i o . a l l ;
10
11
12 e n t i t y
t b f f t c o n t r o l l e r
i s
13 end
t b f f t c o n t r o l l e r ;
14
15
16
17 a r c h i t e c t u r e
testbench
of
t b f f t c o n t r o l l e r
i s
18
19
component
f f t c o n t r o l l e r t o p
i s
20
port (
21
r d c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
22
w r c l k i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
23
r s t
i :
in
s t d l o g i c ;
24
s t a r t c m d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
25
stop cmd i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
26
wr i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
==PAGE:110==
100
Apendix B
27
r d i
:
in
s t d l o g i c ;
28
r d a d d r i
:
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (5
downto
0) ;
29
r e s u l t o
:
out
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r
(15
downto
0) ;
30
m1 samples i :
in
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0)
31
) ;
32
end component ;
33
34 s i g n a l
r d c l k s ,
wr clk s ,
r s t s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
35 s i g n a l
start cmd s ,
stop cmd s ,
wr s ,
rd s
:
s t d l o g i c ;
36 s i g n a l
m1 samples s ,
r e s u l t s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r (15
downto
0) ;
37 s i g n a l
rd addr s
:
s t d l o g i c v e c t o r
(5
downto
0) ;
38
39 begin
40
41 DUT :
f f t c o n t r o l l e r t o p
42 port map(
43
r d c l k i => r d c l k s ,
44
w r c l k i => wr clk s ,
45
r s t
i => r s t s ,
46
s t a r t c m d i => start cmd s ,
47
stop cmd i => stop cmd s ,
48
wr i => wr s ,
49
r d i => rd s ,
50
r d a d d r i => rd addr s ,
51
r e s u l t o => r e s u l t s ,
52
m1 samples i => m1 samples s
53 ) ;
54
55
56
57 sl ow c l o ck
: process
58 begin
59
w r c l k s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
60
wait
f o r
6250
ns ;
61
w r c l k s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
62
wait
f o r
6250
ns ;
63 end
process
s l ow clock ;
64
65
f a s t c l o c k
: process
66 begin
67
r d c l k s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
68
wait
f o r
1 ns ;
69
r d c l k s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
70
wait
f o r
1 ns ;
71 end
process
f a s t c l o c k ;
72
73 −−process ( w r c l k s )
begin
74 −−
i f
start cmd s =
’1 ’
then
75 −−
f o r
i
in
0
to
1024
loop
76 −−
wr s
<= ’1 ’;
77 −−
m1 samples s
<=”1111111111111111”;
78 −−
end
loop ;
79 −−
end
i f ;
80 −−end
process ;
81
==PAGE:111==
101
82 s t i m u l i
:
process
83 begin
84
85
r s t s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
86 rd s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
87 start cmd s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
88 stop cmd s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
89 rd addr s <= ( others =>
’0 ’) ;
90
91 wait
f o r
12500 ns ;
92
r s t s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
93
94
wait
f o r
12500 ns ;
95
r s t s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
96
97
wait
f o r
100 ns ;
98 start cmd s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
99 −−wr s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
100 −−m1 samples s
<=”0000111100001111”;
101
102
wait
f o r
2ms ;
103 start cmd s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
104 stop cmd s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
105
end
process ;
106
107
108
−−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
109 −−Read input
data
from
f i l e s
110 −−
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
111 input samples
:
process ( w r c l k s )
i s
112
f i l e
r
f i l e
:
text
open read mode
i s
” f f t 6 4 r e a l i n p u t . txt ” ;
113
v a r i a b l e
data r
:
i n t e g e r ;
114
v a r i a b l e
rdata
:
l i n e ;
115 begin
116
i f ( r s t s =
’1 ’)
then
117
m1 samples s
<= s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( t o s i g n e d (0 ,
16) ) ;
118 −−
wr s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
119
e l s i f
r i s i n g e d g e ( w r c l k s )
then
120
−−send
in NUM FRAMES c of
data
or
u n t i l
the
end
of
the
f i l e
121
i f
not
e n d f i l e ( r
f i l e )
and
( stop cmd s =
’0 ’)
then
122
i f ( start cmd s =
’1 ’)
then
123
r e a d l i n e ( r f i l e ,
rdata ) ;
124
read ( rdata ,
data r ) ;
125
m1 samples s
<= s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( t o s i g n e d ( data r ,
16) ) ;
126 −−
wr s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
127
e l s e
128
m1 samples s
<= m1 samples s ;
129 −−
wr s <= wr s ;
130
end
i f ;
131
e l s e
132
m1 samples s <= s t d l o g i c v e c t o r ( t o s i g n e d (0 ,
16) ) ;
==PAGE:112==
102
Apendix B
133 −−
wr s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
134
end
i f ;
135
end
i f ;
136
137 end
process
input samples ;
138
139 w r i t e e n a b l e
:
process ( w r c l k s )
140 begin
141
i f ( r s t s =
’1 ’)
then
142
wr s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
143
e l s i f
f a l l i n g e d g e ( w r c l k s )
then
144
i f
stop cmd s =
’0 ’
then
145
i f
start cmd s =
’1 ’
then
146
wr s <=
’ 1 ’ ;
147
e l s e
148
wr s <= wr s ;
149
end
i f ;
150
e l s e
151
wr s <=
’ 0 ’ ;
152
end
i f ;
153
end
i f ;
154 end
process
w rit e en abl e ;
155
156
157 end
testbench ;
1 //−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 //−−
C a p p l i c a t i o n
f o r
Test
Case 2
3 //−−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 //−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 #include
” include / patio . h”
7 #include
” include / bootable . h”
8 #include
” l i b c o r e t h r e a d / corethread . h”
9 #include
” libmp/mp. h”
10 #include <machine/patmos . h>
11
12
13
14 //
Pointers
to
the
base
addresses ,
15 // a l l
the
addressing
( addr
as
arguments )
i
16 // in
the
l i b r a r y
are
an
o f f s e t
on
these
addresses
17
18 #d e f i n e FFT BASE (
(
v o l a t i l e
IODEV unsigned
∗
)
0xF00B0000
)
19
20
21 // Write
to
f f t
a c c e l e r a t o r
22 void
f f t i o w r ( unsigned
addr , unsigned
data )
{
23
∗(FFT BASE+(addr>>2)) = data ;
24
return ;
25 }
26
27 // Read
f f t
a c c e l e r a t o r
28 unsigned
f f t i o r d ( unsigned
addr )
{
29
return
∗(FFT BASE+(addr>>2)) ;
==PAGE:113==
103
30 }
31
32
33 i n t
main ( ) {
34
35
s t a t i c
unsigned
i n t
f f t
r e s [ 4 ] [ 3 2 ] ;
36
s t a t i c
unsigned
i n t
addr buffer = 0;
37
s t a t i c
unsigned
i n t
runtime = 0;
38
39 long
long
unsigned
i n t
t1 ,
t2 ;
40
41 //number
of
computations
that we want to
perform
42
runtime = 4;
43
44 // s t a r t
f f t
computation
45
f f t i o w r (0xFFF8 ,
0x00000001 ) ;
46
47 // run
t i l
10
computations
are
done
48
f o r
( ; runtime > 0;
runtime=runtime −1) {
49
t1 = g e t c p u c y c l e s () ;
50
while
(( f f t i o r d (0XFFF4) ) == 0) {;
51
}
52
f f t i o w r (0xFFF4 ,
0x00000001 ) ;
53
f o r
( i n t
j = 0;
j < 32;
j=j +1) {
54
f f t
r e s [ runtime ] [ j ] = f f t i o r d ( addr buffer ) ;
55
addr buffer = addr buffer +4;
56
57
}
58
59
t2 = g e t c p u c y c l e s () ;
60
}
61
62 //
63
f f t i o w r (0xFFFF,
0x00000001 ) ;
64
65
66
return
0;
67 }
==PAGE:114==
104
Apendix B
==PAGE:115==
Appendix C
Apendix C
Source code for the C application for the benchmark and the conﬁguration ﬁle
to deﬁne the FFT accelerator as a memory I/O device to PAtmos.
1 //−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 //−−
C a p p l i c a t i o n
to
computing FFT on Patmos
in SW
3 //−−
Modified by
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 //−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6 #include
” include / bootable . h”
7 #include
” l i b c o r e t h r e a d / corethread . h”
8 #include
” libmp/mp. h”
9 #include <machine/patmos . h>
10 #include <math . h>
11
12
13 void
random array ( f l o a t
x [ 1 2 8 ] ,
f l o a t
y [ 1 2 8 ] )
14 {
15
//x [ 0 ] = 64;
16
//y [ 0 ] = 0;
17
f o r
( i n t
i =1;
i <128;
i++) {
18
x [ i ] = (( f l o a t )
rand () ) /1000000 −1000;
19
y [ i ] = (( f l o a t )
rand () ) /1000000 −1000;
20
}
21 }
22
23
24 void FFT( short
i n t
dir , long m,
long n ,
f l o a t
∗x ,
f l o a t
∗y )
25 {
==PAGE:116==
106
Apendix C
26
long
long
i n t
i ,
i1 ,
j ,
k ,
i2 ,
l ,
l1 ,
l 2 ;
27
f l o a t
c1 ,
c2 ,
tx ,
ty ,
t1 ,
t2 ,
u1 ,
u2 ,
z ;
28
29
/∗Do the
b i t
r e v e r s a l
∗/
30
i 2 = n >> 1;
31
j = 0;
32
f o r
( i =0; i<n−1; i++) {
33
i f
( i < j )
{
34
tx = x [ i ] ;
35
ty = y [ i ] ;
36
x [ i ] = x [ j ] ;
37
y [ i ] = y [ j ] ;
38
x [ j ] = tx ;
39
y [ j ] = ty ;
40
}
41
k = i 2 ;
42
while
( k <= j )
{
43
j −= k ;
44
k >>= 1;
45
}
46
j += k ;
47
}
48
49
/∗Compute the FFT ∗/
50
c1 = −1.0;
51
c2 = 0 . 0 ;
52
l 2 = 1;
53
f o r
( l =0; l<m; l++) {
54
l 1 = l2 ;
55
l 2 <<= 1;
56
u1 = 1 . 0 ;
57
u2 = 0 . 0 ;
58
f o r
( j =0; j<l1 ; j++) {
59
f o r
( i=j ; i<n ; i+=l2 )
{
60
i 1 = i + l1 ;
61
t1 = u1 ∗x [ i1 ] −u2 ∗y [ i1 ] ;
62
t2 = u1 ∗y [ i1 ] + u2 ∗x [ i1 ] ;
63
x [ i 1 ] = x [ i ] −t1 ;
64
y [ i 1 ] = y [ i ] −t2 ;
65
x [ i ] += t1 ;
66
y [ i ] += t2 ;
67
}
68
z = u1 ∗c1 −u2 ∗c2 ;
69
u2 = u1 ∗c2 + u2 ∗c1 ;
70
u1 = z ;
71
}
72
c2 = M SQRT1 2 ∗
sqrt ( 1 . 0 −c1 ) ;
73
i f
( d i r == 1)
74
c2 = −c2 ;
75
c1 = M SQRT1 2 ∗
sqrt ( 1 . 0 + c1 ) ;
76
}
77
78
/∗
Scaling
f o r
forward
transform
∗/
79
i f
( d i r == 1)
{
80
f o r
( i =0; i<n ; i++) {
==PAGE:117==
107
81
x [ i ] /= n ;
82
y [ i ] /= n ;
83
}
84
}
85
86
return ;
87 }
88
89
90 void
p r i n t a r r a y ( f l o a t
∗x ,
f l o a t
∗y )
91 {
92
p r i n t f ( ” Index \ t \ tReal
part \ t \ tImaginary
part \n” ) ;
93
f o r
( i n t
i = 0;
i <128;
i++)
94
p r i n t f ( ”%d\ t \ t %.9 f \ t \ t %.9 f \n” , i , x [ i ] , y [ i ] ) ;
95 }
96
97 i n t
main ( )
{
98
99
f l o a t
x [ 1 2 8 ] ;
100
101
f l o a t
y [ 1 2 8 ] ;
102
103 long
long
unsigned
i n t m = 7;
104 long
long
unsigned
i n t
n ;
105 long
long
unsigned
i n t
t1 ,
t2 ,
t t o t ;
106
107
108 n = 1 ;
109 f o r
( i n t
i = 0;
i < m;
i++) {
110
n ∗= 2 ;
111 }
112
113 random array (x ,
y ) ;
114 p r i n t a r r a y (x ,
y) ;
115 t1 = g e t c p u c y c l e s () ;
116 FFT(1 , m,
n ,
x ,
y) ;
117 t2 = g e t c p u c y c l e s () ;
118 p r i n t f ( ”\nThe
r e s u l t
i s : \ n” ) ;
119 p r i n t a r r a y (x ,
y) ;
120 p r i n t f ( ”\nClock
c y c l e s
f o r
the FFT: %l l u c c \n” ,
t2 −t1 −2) ;
121 //FFT(−1, m,
n ,
x ,
y ) ;
122 // p r i n t a r r a y (x ,
y) ;
123
124 return
0;
125 }
1 //−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
2 //−−
C a p p l i c a t i o n
to
computing FFT on Patmos
in HW
3 //−−
Author
:
Istvan
Szonyi
( s131153@student . dtu . dk )
4 //−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
5
6
7 #include <s t d i o . h>
8 #include <s t d l i b . h>
9 #include <machine/patmos . h>
==PAGE:118==
108
Apendix C
10 #include
” f f t l i b / f f t p a t m o s i o . h”
11 #include
” l i b c o r e t h r e a d / corethread . h”
12 #include
” libmp/mp. h”
13 #include <math . h>
14
15
16 // Write
to
f f t
a c c e l e r a t o r
17 void
f f t i o w r ( unsigned
addr , unsigned
data )
{
18
∗(FFT BASE+(addr>>2)) = data ;
19
return ;
20 }
21
22 // Read
f f t
a c c e l e r a t o r
23 unsigned
f f t i o r d ( unsigned
addr )
{
24
return
∗(FFT BASE+(addr>>2)) ;
25 }
26
27
28
29 i n t
main ( ) {
30
31
s t a t i c
signed
i n t
f f t
r e s [ 4 ] [ 6 4 ] ;
32
s t a t i c
unsigned
i n t
addr buffer = 0;
33
s t a t i c
unsigned
i n t
runtime = 0;
34
35
long
long
unsigned
i n t
t1 [ 4 ] ,
t2 [ 4 ] ;
36
37 //number
of
computations
that we want to
perform
38
runtime = 4;
39
40 // s t a r t
f f t
computation
41
f f t i o w r (0xFFF8 ,
0x00000001 ) ;
42
43 // run
t i l
10
computations
are
done
44
45
f o r
( ; runtime > 0;
runtime=runtime −1) {
46
t1 [ runtime ] = g e t c p u c y c l e s () ;
47
while
(( f f t i o r d (0XFFF4) ) == 0) {;
48
}
49
f f t i o w r (0xFFF4 ,
0x00000001 ) ;
50
f o r
( i n t
j = 0;
j < 64;
j=j +1) {
51
f f t
r e s [ runtime ] [ j ] = f f t i o r d ( addr buffer ) ;
52
addr buffer = addr buffer +4;
53
54
}
55
t2 [ runtime ] = g e t c p u c y c l e s ( ) ;
56
}
57
58 // print
r e s u l t s
59
f o r
( i n t
k = 1;
k < 5
;
k=k+1 )
{
60
61
f o r
( i n t
l = 0;
l < 64;
l++ )
{
62
p r i n t f ( ” Result [%d][%d ] = %d\n” ,k ,
l ,
f f t
r e s [ k ] [ l ] ) ;
63
}
64
==PAGE:119==
109
65
}
66
67 f o r
( i n t
z = 4;
z > 0
;
z=z−1 )
{
68
p r i n t f ( ”\nClock
c y c l e s
f o r
the [%d ] th
computation : %l l u c c \n” , z ,
t2 [ z ] −t1 [ z ] −2) ;
69 }
70 //
stop FFT
71
72
f f t i o w r (0xFFFF,
0x00000001 ) ;
73
74
75
76
77
78
return
0;
79 }
1
<!−−
2
Patmos
c o n f i g u r a t i o n
f i l e .
Edited by
Istvan
Szonyi
3
−−>
4
5 <patmos
d e f a u l t=” d e f a u l t . xml”>
6
<d e s c r i p t i o n>d e f a u l t
c o n f i g u r a t i o n
f o r DE2−115 board</ d e s c r i p t i o n
>
7
8
<frequency Hz=” 80000000 ”/>
9
<p i p e l i n e
dual=” f a l s e ” />
10
11
<ExtMem s i z e=”2M” DevTypeRef=”Ssram16” />
12
13
<IOs>
14
<IO DevTypeRef=”Uart”
o f f s e t=”8”/>
15
<IO DevTypeRef=”Leds”
o f f s e t=”9”/>
16
<IO DevTypeRef=”Keys”
o f f s e t=”10”
i n t r s=” 2 ,3 ,4 ,5 ”/>
17
<IO DevTypeRef=” Fft ”
o f f s e t=”11”/>
18
</IOs>
19
20
<Devs>
21
<Dev DevType=”Uart”
e n t i t y=”Uart”
i f a c e=”OcpCore”>
22
<params>
23
<param name=”baudRate”
value=” 115200 ”/>
24
<param name=” fifoDepth ”
value=”16”/>
25
</params>
26
</Dev>
27
<Dev DevType=”Leds”
e n t i t y=”Leds”
i f a c e=”OcpCore”>
28
<params>
29
<param name=” ledCount ”
value=”9”/>
30
</params>
31
</Dev>
32
<Dev DevType=”Keys”
e n t i t y=”Keys”
i f a c e=”OcpCore”>
33
<params>
34
<param name=”keyCount”
value=”4”/>
35
</params>
36
</Dev>
37
<Dev DevType=”Ssram16”
e n t i t y=”SRamCtrl”
i f a c e=”OcpBurst”>
==PAGE:120==
110
Apendix C
38
<params>
39
<param name=”ocpAddrWidth”
value=”21” />
40
<param name=”sramAddrWidth”
value=”20” />
41
<param name=”sramDataWidth”
value=”16” />
42
</params>
43
</Dev>
44
<Dev DevType=” Fft ”
e n t i t y=” Fft ”
i f a c e=”OcpCore”>
45
<params>
46
<param name=”extAddrWidth”
value=”16” />
47
<param name=”dataWidth”
value=”32” />
48
</params>
49
</Dev>
50
</Devs>
51 </patmos>
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
[1] Intel.
50
years
of
moore’s
law.
Available
online
at:
http:
//www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/silicon-innovations/
moores-law-technology.html, 2015.
[2] Edward Correia. Sorry, moore’s law multicore is the new game in town.
Available online at: http://www.crn.com, 2012.
[3] Markus Levy Thomas and M. Conte. Embedded multicore processors and
systems. IEEE Computer Society, 0272-1732/09, 2009.
[4] T-CREST project. T-crest project. time-predictable multi-core architecture
for embedded systems.
Project webpage: http://t-crest.org, 2007-2014.
Founded by EU FP7-ICT -STREP. Partners: The Open Group, DTU In-
formatics, U. of York, T.U. Eindhoven, T.U. Vienna, AbsInt GMBH, GMV,
Intecs S.p.a.
[5] RTEMP Project.
Hard real-time embedded multiprocessor platform.
Project webpage: http://rtemp.compute.dtu.dk/, 2013-2016.
[6] Abderazek B. Abdallah.
Multicore Systems On-Chip:
Practical Soft-
ware/Hardware Design. Atlantis Press, 2002.
[7] John Amann Shane Bell, Bruce Edwards. Tile64 - processor: A 64-core
soc with mesh interconnect. 2008 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits
Conference, 2008.
[8] Luca Pezzarossa, Rasmus Bo Sorensen, Martin Schoeberl, and Jens Sparso.
Interfacing hardware accelerators to a time-division multiplexing network-
on-chip. Nordic Circuits and Systems Conference, NORCHIP and Interna-
tional Symposium on System-on-Chip, 2015.
==PAGE:122==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Martin Schoeberl, Florian Brandner, Stefan Hepp, Wolfgang Puﬃtsch, and
Daniel Prokesch. Patmos reference handbook. Available online at: http:
//patmos.compute.dtu.dk/patmos_handbook.pdf, 2015.
[10] Sahar Abbaspourseyedi Florian Brandner and Martin Schoeberl.
A
timepredictable stack cache.
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Soft-
ware Technologies for Embedded and Ubiquitous Systems, 2013.
[11] Jens Spars, Evangelia Kasapaki, and Martin Schoeberl. An area-eﬃcient
network interface for a tdm-based network-on-chip. Design, Automation
and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, 2013.
[12] Accelera. Open core protocol speciﬁcation website. Available online at:
http://accellera.org/downloads/standards/ocp/, 2016.
[13] Evangelia Kasapaki and Rasmus Bo Sorensen. Argo programming guide.
Available online at: http://accellera.org/downloads/standards/ocp/,
2014.
[14] Jens Sparso Evangelia Kasapaki.
Argo:
A time-elastic time-division-
multiplexed noc using asynchronous routers. 20th IEEE International Sym-
posium on Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, 2014.
[15] Rasmus Bo Sorensen, Jens Sparso, Mark Ruvald Pedersen, and Jaspur Hoj-
gaard. A metaheuristic scheduler for time division multiplexed networks-on-
chip. IEEE 17th International Symposium on Object/Component-Oriented
Real-Time Distributed Computing, 2014.
[16] E. Brigham. The Fast Fourier Transform and Its Applications. Prenctice
Hall, 1988.
[17] Jingtao H Qianxiang Li. High accuracy ﬀt algorithm for induction motor
sensor-less speed estimation. International Conference on Electrical Ma-
chines and Systems, 2008.
[18] Bob
Drexel.
Intelligent
vibration
monitoring
for
wind
plants.
Available
online
at:
http://www.windpowerengineering.
com/maintenance/condition-monitoring-maintenance/
intelligent-vibration-monitoring-for-wind-plants/, 2010.
[19] Victor DeBrunner Soumak Mookherjee, Linda DeBrunner. A high through-
put and low power radix-4 ﬀt architecture. 48th Asilomar Conference on
Signals, Systems and Computers, 2014.
[20] Richard Lyons Eric Jacobsen. A high throughput and low power radix-4
ﬀt architecture. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2004.
==PAGE:123==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
113
[21] Steven W. Smith. The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal
Processing. California Technical Pub, 2002.
[22] Texas Instruments. Fft implementation on the tms320vc5505. Application
Report SPRABB6B, 2013.
[23] Altera.
Fft
ip
core
user
guide.
Available
online
at:https:
//www.altera.com/content/dam/alterawww/global/en_US/pdfs/
literature/ug/ug_fft.pdf, 2015.
[24] Yosinori Watanabe Bryon Moyer. eal World Multicore Embedded Systems.
Elsevier, 2013.
[25] Paulo Possa David Schaillie Carlos Valderrama. Fpga-based hardware ac-
celeration a cpu/accelerator interface exploration. 18th IEEE International
Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems, 2011.
[26] Ron Wilson. Attaching accelerators in multicore systems. Available online
at:
https://www.altera.com/solutions/technology/system-design/
articles/_2014/article-accelerators.html, 2014.
[27] Luca Pezzarossa. Hardware accelerators in network-on-chip based multi-
core platforms. Masters Thesis at DTU Compute, 2015.
[28] J´erˆome Lecl`ere, Cyril Botteron, and Pierre-Andr´e Farine. Implementing
super-eﬃcient ﬀts in altera fpgas. EE Times Programmable Logic Design-
line, 2015.
[29] Chandrakanth V., Devendranath Ch, and Shamnar A. Vlsi implementation
of sliding window dft. International Conference on Signal Processing, Image
Processing and Pattern Recognition, 2013.
[30] Altera
Corporation.
Embedded
memory
(ram:
1-port,
ram:2-
port,
rom:
1-port,
and rom:
2-port) user guide.
Available on-
line at:
https://www.altera.com/content/dam/altera-www/global/
en_US/pdfs/literature/ug/ug_ram_rom.pdf, 2014.
[31] Altera Corporation.
Memory blocks in cyclone iv devices.
Avail-
able online at: https://www.altera.com/en_US/pdfs/literature/hb/
cyclone-iv/cyiv-51003.pdf, 2013.
[32] Pong P. Chu. RTL Hardware Design Using VHDL: Coding for Eﬃciency,
Portability, and Scalability. Wiley, 2006.
[33] Altera Corporation.
Avalon interface speciﬁcation.
Available on-
line at:
https://www.altera.com/content/dam/altera-www/global/
en_US/pdfs/literature/manual/mnl_avalon_spec.pdf, 2015.
==PAGE:124==
114
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[34] Ed F. Bhattacharyya, Shuvra S. Deprettere. Handbook of Signal Processing
Systems. Springer, 2010.
[35] Altera.
Signaltap embedded logic analyzer megafunction.
Avail-
able online at:
https://www.altera.co.jp/ja_JP/pdfs/literature/
ds/dssignal.pdf, 2001.
[36] Microsemi.
Smartfusion
csoc:
Multi-channel
ﬀt
co-
processor
using
fpga
fabric.
Available
online
at:
http://www.microsemi.com/document-portal/doc_view/
129826-ac381-smartfusion-csoc-multi-channel-fft-co-processor-using-fpga-fabric-a
2012.
