==PAGE:1==
The Dynamically-Loaded
Hardware Library (HLL)
Technology Approach to
FPGA Acceleration
Federico Maria Pandol
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The aim of this project is the implementation of hardware accelerators for FPGA
platforms.
The innovative feature of these accelerators is the on-the-y reconguration
of the hardware. The design to be developed, in fact, takes advantage of the
latest technologies and techniques in terms of FPGA's partial reconguration to
dynamically adapt the accelerator's functionalities to the current CPU workload,
allowing the full exploitation of the SoC in terms of performance and exibility.
The realization of the accelerators requires also the development of an application-
specic IP-cores library to allow the FPGA to adapt itself to the CPU workload.
The whole work will be developed focusing at rst on professional audio appli-
cations.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in partial fullment of the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis work was carried out in collaboration with DTU and Università degli
Studi di Roma "Tor Vergata", under the supervision of Alberto Nannarelli,
Marco Re and Leonardo Di Carlo.
Lyngby, October-2015
Federico Maria Pandol
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
There are few but very important people that I would like to thank from the
bottom of my heart for having helped and supported me during the development
of this thesis work and during the time I spent abroad.
First of all a huge thank you goes to my family: my mother Carla, my father
Alberto and my brother Tommaso. They were my main source of support, both
in the psychological and in the economical aspect. They were always caring and
supportive and my words cannot express my gratitude towards them. The same
can be said for my girlfriend, Giulia, whose patience and support went beyond
any expectation; it's dicult to nd a person like her nowadays and I'm so glad
to have her by my side.
From the academic and professional side many many thanks go to my supervi-
sors: Prof. Marco Re and Prof. Alberto Nannarelli. They made this fantastic
experience possible and they helped me a lot to improve my technical knowl-
edge and my skills and to become a better engineer. I would also like to thank
Leonardo Di Carlo for his valuable technical support.
Finally, I would also like to thank all my buddies from Container D. There I
met so many wonderful people from all around the world who have enriched this
experience with unforgettable moments.
Thank you all,
Federico
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC series
. . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
The Processing System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
PS-PL interfaces and AXI Standard . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
The Programmable Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.4
The ZedBoard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Design Methodology
19
3.1
Tool partitioning and design workow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Hardware development and testing . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Software development and testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Vivado HLS (High Level Synthesis) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
HLS basics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
HLS workow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Preliminary designs and implementations
33
4.1
NEON SW acceleration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.1
NEON operations' theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.2
BLAS and NEON intrinsics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.3
Implementation of SGEMM function in the PL . . . . . .
59
4.2
Architecture of HW accelerators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.1
Stereo Filters accelerator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.2.2
Stereo Filters accelerator results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5
Dynamic Convolution design and results
81
5.1
The application: case study on the Dynamic Convolution algorithm 82
5.2
Dynamic Convolution accelerator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.2.1
HLS Dynamic Convolution IP core . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.2.2
Software application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.3
Dynamic Convolution accelerator experimental results . . . . . .
92
6
Conclusions
97
6.1
Future Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Bibliography
100
A Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
103
A.1 SDOT implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A.2 SAXPY implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A.3 SGEMM implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
A.4 HW SGEMM parallelism 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
A.5 HW SGEMM parallelism 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
A.6 HW SGEMM parallelism 32 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Nowadays the IT and embedded systems market is always craving for more
powerful and faster machines, capable of processing a huge amount of data in
the shortest time possible. This need for computing power can be related both
to the increase of signal-processing algorithms' complexity and to the growth of
the amount of data to process.
Numerous solutions addressing this problem have been presented during the
years and in many cases a hardware acceleration approach has been the pre-
ferred option. In this approach the critical parts of the algorithms, usually the
ones related to data processing that require many clock cycles to be accom-
plished (e.g. oating point operations and/or DSP instructions), are performed
in hardware by dedicated architectures. This is done in order to make the most
out of the high parallelism achievable with dedicated hardware structures and
to ooad the CPU from the heavy computational burden that is related to the
execution of these operation in a serial fashion by using an ALU.
Hardware acceleration can be accomplished in dierent ways. A typical hard-
ware accelerator that can be found on graphic cards or motherboards of almost
all PCs and laptops is the GPU (Graphics Processing Unit). This is a hardware
unit specialized in graphics and image processing that is capable of processing
large blocks of data in parallel. In recent years much eort has been made in
order to allow generic data processing on GPUs, targeting applications where
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
high computing power was needed (GPGPU, General-Purpose computing on
Graphics Processing Unit).
A slightly dierent solution consist in the development of dedicated ASIC (Ap-
plication Specic Integrated Circuits) circuits. As the name suggest, these are a
type of integrated circuits that are designed and developed to address a specic
application and thus are not intended for a general purpose use. The advan-
tage of this solution is that is possible to achieve the highest performances with
benets also in power consumption and in area utilization.
Both the approaches mentioned above present some limitations. The main one
is that they both lack of exibility because of their xed architecture, which
is tailored for the application for which they were conceived. This means that
they cannot be used for dierent typologies of processing (with the exception
of GPGPUs that mask the instructions to be compatible with the hardware).
Moreover, in the ASIC case, developing an ASIC design requires a lot of time
and money and hence in most cases they are not a suitable option for small
production volumes.
In this scenario a fundamental role is played by FPGAs (Field Programmable
Gate Arrays). This typology of ICs makes exibility and reprogrammability its
distinctive features. In fact, they are designed in a way that allows the user
to recongure the FPGA's fabric in order to full the application requirements,
making the whole design workow fast and exible. Although in many cases the
top performances are not as good as their ASIC counterpart, FPGAs represent a
good trade-o between power consumption, cost, exibility and time-to-market
without sacricing results.
In recent years, the FPGA technology kept growing and newer and more ad-
vanced solutions hit the market. Some of them redened the possibilities of
embedded systems by further developing the concept of exible platform and
by combining the best of both worlds: software with high performance CPUs and
hardware with the programmable logic FPGAs. In other words, Xilinx® rst
introduced a new platform (ZynqTM-7000 Extensible Processing Platform) that
combines a dual ARM® Cortex A9 processing system (including hardened mem-
ory controllers and peripherals) along with their latest 7 series programmable
logic fabric on a unique state-of-the-art System On Chip (SOC).
The benets of this kind of platforms for hardware acceleration purposes are
huge and the aim of this MSc project is indeed the implementation of hardware
accelerators for FPGA platforms, in particular for their SoC version.
Before the development of hardware accelerators, though, a series of in-depth
tests will be performed on the Processing System in order to understand which
==PAGE:13==
3
are the boundaries of the ARM CPUs in conjunction with their NEON Media
Processing Engines. These tests will draw a line useful to separate what can be
accomplished with the CPUs and what is worthy implementing with dedicated
hardware accelerators.
One of the innovative features of the accelerators to be developed is the on-the-
y reconguration of the hardware. The design methodology, in fact, will take
advantage of the latest technologies and techniques in terms of FPGA's Dynamic
Partial Reconguration to dynamically adapt the accelerator's functionalities to
the current CPU workload, allowing the full exploitation of the SoC in terms of
performance and exibility.
The realization of the accelerators requires also the development of an application-
specic IP-cores library to allow the FPGA to adapt itself to the CPU workload.
We decided to rename this library as Hardware Link Library (HLL) because the
principle is similar to the Dynamic Link Library but it targets actual hardware
modules of the design instead of software modules. The principles of linking only
necessary libraries at run time and sharing them among dierent applications
are common to both techniques.
The whole work will be developed focusing at rst on professional audio appli-
cations and the key application that will be presented and discussed in this MSc
thesis work is the Dynamic Convolution. This is a widely used algorithm capa-
ble of emulating the behaviour of a non-linear system by using dierent Impulse
Responses (IRs) according to the magnitude of the input signal. In practice, the
Dynamic Convolution algorithm can be implemented with a high-order (in the
range of thousands of taps) FIR lter whose coecients are updated on-the-y
depending on the dynamic range of the input signal. For more details about the
Dynamic convolution please refer to Chapter 5.
Regarding the structure of this dissertation, in Chapter 2 the target ZynqTM
SoC platform will be discussed in-depth, while Chapter 3 will describe the tools
and the design workow necessary to work with it, along with a focus on the
new High-Level Synthesis tool.
In chapter 4 and 5 will be presented the various designs implemented (including
in-depth tests on dedicated CPU units for Single Instruction Multiple Data
processing, known as the NEON units) and the experimental results achieved,
while Chapter 6 will be dedicated to the nal thoughts and future developments.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter we will focus our attention on the preliminary information that
is needed by the reader to understand the context in which this MSc thesis work
takes place and the aim of the work itself.
To be more specic, in this chapter we will introduce the reader to the platform
that has been used in this thesis work in order to implement both the preliminary
and the nal designs (i.e. the ZynqTM 7000 SoC).
2.1
The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC
series
When Xilinx® released the rst All Programmable SoC back in 2011, it com-
pletely redened the possibilities for embedded systems. By mixing together an
industry-standard dual-core ARM® Cortex A9-based processing system with
the latest Xilinx® 28nm programmable logic, the company created de facto
a processor-centric Extensible Processing Platform for powerful, exible and
cost-ecient embedded designs. The ZynqTM-7000 architecture enables the im-
plementation of custom logic in the FPGA fabric and custom software in the
processing system and the integration between the two sides allows levels of
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
performance that two-chip solutions cannot match. Moreover, this kind of plat-
form allows to reduce costs through HW and SW design reuse by targeting a
common platform for multiple products/designs. It is no wonder that, dealing
with hardware accelerators, the Xilinx® ZynqTM 7000 family was the perfect
platform for this MSc thesis work.
As mentioned before and as can be seen in Figure 2.1, the architecture of the
ZynqTM comprises two dierent sections: the Processing System (PS) and the
Programmable Logic (PL). These two sections are independent (they also have
distinct power domains) and can be used separately or in conjunction. This
gives the highest exibility during the design-partitioning phase (see Chapter 3)
and allows software developers and hardware designers to start the development
simultaneously. The gure below is a schematic representation of what is inside
the ZynqTM-7000 SoC where the boundaries between the two regions are clearly
visible. The whole architecture will be reviewed in detail in the next sections.
Figure 2.1: The ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC as reprented in Vivado IDE®
2.1.1
The Processing System
The PS is the rst part to boot when powering-up the device and represent
the real innovation over the previous FPGAs. The whole design approach has
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC series
7
become more software-centric and also the PL conguration is managed by the
software running on the CPU.
The heart of this side is the 'hard-processor', the dual-core ARM® Cortex-A9
MPCore whose maximum operating frequencies span from 667MHz up to 1GHz,
depending on the speed grade of the device. The Cortex-A9 processor imple-
ments the ARMv7-A (RISC) architecture and runs 32-bit ARM instructions
along with 16-bit and 32-bit Thumb instructions. The inclusion of an applica-
tion processor enables also high-level operating system support, e.g. Linux.
The PS also include a set of processing resources that, together with the Cortex-
A9, form the Application Processing Unit (APU) of the ZynqTM. The APU is
composed by:
• 2 Cortex-A9 processors
• 2 NEON MPE/FPU units, one for each core
• 1 Memory Management Unit (MMU)
• 2x32 KB L1 (for instructions and data, one for each core) and 1x512 KB
L2 (for instructions and data, shared) caches
• 1x256 KB On Chip Memory (OCM) dual-ported RAM
• 1 Snoop Control Unit (SCU)
• 8-channel DMA, with 4 channels dedicated to PL and 64-bit AXI interface
• A comprehensive set of Interrupts and Timers:
 General interrupt controller (GIC)
 Three watch dog timers (WDT) (one per CPU and one system WDT)
 Two triple timers/counters (TTC)
The Figure 2.2 on the next page shows in more details how the elements men-
tioned above are arranged within the APU.
2.1.1.1
Snoop Control Unit, SCU
When it comes to memory (and caches in particular) an important role is played
by the Snoop Control Unit. The SCU undertakes several tasks related to inter-
facing between the processors and Level 1 and 2 cache memories and managing
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
Figure 2.2: The ZynqTM Application Processing Unit
the consistency of data across shared cache resources. This unit is responsible
for:
• maintaining coherency among L1 data caches
• initiating and controlling access to the Level 2 cache, moderating between
requests from the two cores where necessary
• arbitrate Accelerator Coherency Port (ACP) coherency operations in PS-
PL communications
• routing transactions on Cortex-A9 MPCore AXI master interfaces
• Cortex-A9 uniprocessor accesses to private memory regions
2.1.1.2
NEON MPE/FPU Units
Another very important and useful units when it comes to algorithms accelera-
tion are the NEON MPE/FPU units, which extends the Cortex-A9 functionality
to provide support for the ARM v7 Advanced Single Instruction Multiple Data
(SIMD) and Vector Floating-Point v3 (VFPv3) instruction sets.
To be more specic, while NEON and FPU share the same thirty-two 64-bit
registers in hardware, the NEON Media Processing Engine (MPE) is the SIMD
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC series
9
engine and hence deals with SIMD tasks, providing support for signed/unsigned
integer and oating-point vector operations. These operations include:
• addition and subtraction
• multiplication with optional accumulation
• maximum or minimum value driven lane selection operations
• inverse square-root approximation and comprehensive data-structure load
instructions, including register-bank-resident table lookup
This unit is usually employed to accelerate the performance of multimedia ap-
plications such as 3-D graphics and image processing, although can be used
whenever an algorithm can benet from vector parallelization.
By contrast, when the Advanced SIMD extensions are not needed, it is possi-
ble to use the ARMv7 VFPv3 with the Floating-Point Unit (FPU). This unit
provides low-cost high performance oating-point computation and is optimized
for scalar operation (although the word "vector" is present in VFPv3 for legacy
reasons).
The FPU fully supports single-precision and double-precision add,
subtract, multiply, divide, multiply and accumulate, and square root opera-
tions.
It also provides conversions between oating-point data formats and
ARM integer word format, with special operations to perform the conversion in
round-towards-zero mode for high-level language support.
The key dierences between NEON and FPU are that NEON only works on
vectors, but FPU does not. Moreover, for oating-point operation, FPU can
support both single-precision and double-precision, whereas NEON only sup-
ports single-precision. Finally, FPU can also support more complex functions,
such as square roots, division, and others, but NEON cannot.
NEON units, their architecture and practical utilization will be thoroughly dis-
cussed in chapter 4, where a case study on software acceleration with compre-
hensive tests will be presented.
2.1.1.3
PS interfaces and I/O
The APU is the core of the whole PS but it's not the only functional unit of
this section. Indeed, a wide variety of interfaces and I/O peripherals are also
available within the PS.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
With regards to memory interfaces, the memory interface unit includes a dy-
namic memory controller and static memory interface modules. The dynamic
memory controller supports DDR3 (with speed up to 1333 Mb/s), DDR3L,
DDR2, and LPDDR2 memories and is connected to external DDR via dedi-
cated pins, while the static memory controllers support a NAND ash interface,
a Quad-SPI ash interface, a parallel data bus (8-bit SRAM data bus, up to 64
MB), a parallel NOR ash (8 bit, up to 64MB) interface and is routed using
Multiplexed IO (MIO).
The multi-protocol DDR memory controller can be congured to provide 16-bit
or 32-bit-wide accesses to a 1 GB address space and is multi-ported, enabling
the processing system and the programmable logic to have shared access to a
common memory. The DDR controller features four AXI slave ports, each with
a dierent purpose:
• 1x64-bit port is dedicated for the ARM CPU(s) via the L2 cache controller
and can be congured for low latency
• 2x64-bit ports are dedicated for PL access
• 1x64-bit AXI port is shared by all other AXI masters via the central
interconnect
The static memory controllers and the I/O peripherals (IOP) use 54 dedicated
Multiplexed I/O (MIO) pins to provide software-congurable interconnections
to external devices. If additional I/O pins beyond the 54 are required, it is
possible to route these through the PL to the I/O associated with the PL. This
feature is referred to as Extendable Multiplexed I/O (EMIO). Port mappings
can appear in multiple locations (e.g. there are up to 12 possible port mappings
for CAN pins) and the PS Conguration Wizard (PCW) tool should be used
for peripheral and static memory pin mapping.
A list of the available IOPs and their connections through MIO/EMIO is shown
in Figure 2.3 . For further details please refer to the ZynqTM-7000 Technical
Reference Manual (TRM) or to the Zynq-7000 All Programmable SoC Overview.
2.1.2
PS-PL interfaces and AXI Standard
Until now we only discussed about the interconnection between the PS and
external peripherals. A fundamental aspect of the whole SoC, though, is the
interconnection between the PS and the PL, which is of utmost importance
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC series
11
Figure 2.3: MIO Module Block Diagram
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
to form a state-of-the-art integrated system.
In fact, the two sides have to
communicate eciently in order to work properly within the SoC. Although also
other interfaces between PS and PL are available (e.g. four PS clock outputs to
the PL, DMA and interrupt signals) the link between the two parts is primarily
represented by the AMBA® AXI bus and its interconnects and interfaces.
AXI stands for Advanced eXtensible Interface and the current version is AXI4,
which is part of the ARM AMBA® 3.0 open standard.
This standard was
originally developed by ARM for use in microcontrollers in 1996 but, since then,
has been revised several times and adopted by many third-party manufacturers
and developers, becoming the standard for on-chip communications.
AXI buses can be used exibly, and are usually employed to connect the proces-
sor(s) and other IP blocks in an embedded system. In the case of the ZynqTM
SoC, the APU, memory interface unit, and the IOP are all connected to each
other and to the PL through a multilayered AXI interconnect. This interconnect
is non-blocking and supports multiple simultaneous transactions.
The whole standard is based on a Master-Slave approach and comes in dierent
avours, depending on the the desired properties of the connection:
• AXI4: the AXI4 targets memory-mapped links and is used to achieve the
highest performances. It supports burst transfers up to 256 data words,
allowing high throughput communications
• AXI4-Lite: is the simplied version of AXI4.
It's more lightweight in
terms of resources but doesn't support burst transfers. Its main use is to
transfer single words of data
• AXI4-Stream: is the only point-to-point version of the standard. It sup-
ports limitless burst transactions, allowing high speed and high through-
put communications. It's not memory mapped and thus doesn't require
addressing but the output of an AXI-stream interface cannot be directly
connected to a normal interconnect and an extra module is required, typ-
ically an AXI Data Mover or an AXI DMA
The terms interconnect and interface have already been used several times in
this essay but they actually require some more focus on the denitions. The
interface is the point-to-point connection for passing data, addresses, and hand-
shaking signals between master and slave clients, while the interconnect is the
switching matrix that manages and directs trac between multiple AXI inter-
faces. Up to nine dierent AXI interfaces are available to connect the PS to the
PL and viceversa (the Master/Slave notation is referred to the PL side):
==PAGE:23==
2.1 The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC series
13
• 4x 32-bit General Purpose AXI interfaces (2 Masters and 2 Slaves): they
are suitable for low and medium rate communications between the PL and
PS. The interface is direct and does not include buering
• 4x 64-bit/32-bit (congurable) High-Performance (HP) AXI Ports (all
Slaves): these FIFO buered AXI Slave interfaces have direct access to
DDR memory and OCM. This kind of interface is one of two highest
performance AXI ports and are used for high throughput data transfer
between the PS and the PL
• 1x 64-bit Accelerator Coherency Port (ACP) AXI interface (Slave): is
similar to the HP Ports but is used when hardware coherent access to
the CPU memory is required and is useful to connect the APU with a
potential accelerator IP in the PL. The ACP, in fact, directly connects the
PL to the Snoop Control Unit (SCU) of the ARM Cortex-A9 processors,
enabling cache-coherent access to L1 and L2 caches data and providing a
low latency path between the PS and the PL-based accelerator
Figure 2.4 quickly outline the AXI interfaces described above.
Figure 2.4: PS-PL AXI Interfaces
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
2.1.3
The Programmable Logic
Figure 2.5: The Programmable Logic fabric
The other main portion of the ZynqTM-7000 SoC is the Programmable Logic.
This general purpose 28nm FPGA fabric is based either on the latest Artix®-7 or
on the Kintex®-7 FPGAs, depending on the Zynq model. The key components
of the fabric are:
• Congurable Logic Blocks (CLBs): they are the main building blocks of
the fabric and are arranged in a two-dimensional array over the whole
FPGA. They integrate smaller basic logic elements for implementing com-
binational and sequential logic circuits and are connected to other similar
resources via programmable interconnects. Each CLB is positioned next
to a switch matrix and contains two sub-units called logic slices. Each
slice, in turn, contains:
 4x 6 inputs LUTs for random logic implementation or distributed
memory (memory LUTs are congurable either as 64x1 or 32x2 bit
RAM or shift register)
 8x Flip-ops
 1x 4-bit cascadeable adders for arithmetic functions
==PAGE:25==
2.1 The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC series
15
Figure 2.6: A Congurable Logic Block
• Switch Matrix: is the recongurable routing facility that connects CLBs
and other resources on the FPGA
• Block RAM: these dual-ported 36Kb RAMs are dedicated memory re-
sources and are arranged in columns near the DSP48E slices to full even
the more demanding storage and computation needs. Each Block RAM
may be congured either as one 36Kb RAM, or two independent 18Kb
RAMs. The default word size is 18 bits and, in this conguration, each
RAM comprises 2048 memory elements. The RAM can also be reshaped
to contain more smaller elements or fewer longer elements. Anyway, the
maximum word size is 36 bits.
• DSP48E: they are dedicated silicon resources for DSP and high-speed
arithmetics. Each block has a pre-adder/subtractor, a 25x18 two's-complement
multiplier and a post-adder/subtractor with logic unit for multiply and ac-
cumulate and pattern detection operations. They support dynamic alter-
ation of the computation (i.e. the function can be changed on a cycle-by-
cycle basis as required) and SIMD processing (like NEON units) and the
various computations are selected via an OPMODE input that congures
the internal multiplexers. The wordlengths are suitable for Floating-Point
arithmetics and can be extended, when needed, by combining multiple
DSP48Es
• Programmable I/O Blocks (with support for common I/O standards in-
cluding LVCMOS, LVDS, and SSTL)
• 2x12-bit Analog-to-Digital Converters (XADC)
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
Figure 2.7: A DSP48E Slice
2.1.4
The ZedBoard
During this MSc Thesis work, in order to work with and exploit the full capabil-
ities of the ZynqTM SoC, a development board, comprehensive of the SoC itself
and a proper set of I/O interfaces, was needed and the ZedBoard (by Digilent®)
was the preferred option.
The name "Zed" stands for Zynq Evaluation and Development and the Zed-
Board is a low-cost, community-based board which features a XC7Z020 Zynq
device. This particular model is one of the smallest versions of the whole Zynq-
7000 Family; it is based on the Artix-7 PL fabric and features 85K Logic Cells,
53200 LUTs and 106,400 FFs, 220 DSP48E1s (with peak DSP performance of
276 GMACs), and 140 BlockRAMs. Because of its low-cost and of its potential,
the Z-7020 device represents the perfect candidate to be used in price competi-
tive audio devices. This is one of the reasons why, during this work, we put so
much eort in the characterisation of its performance.
Speaking about peripherals, the ZedBoard enables the PL computing capabili-
ties by using 512MB (2x 128Mbitx16) DDR3 memory, 256Mbit Quad-SPI Flash
memory, SD and USB ports, Gigabit Ethernet, general purpose I/O, JTAG and
UART modules. The board also includes Xilinx XADC, FMC (FPGA Mezza-
nine Card), and Digilent PmodTM compatible expansion headers, plus an audio
codec (Analog Devices ADAU1761, supporting line in, line out, microphone (in),
and headphone (out)) and other video interfaces.
A layout of the ZedBoard with the complete list of interfaces can be found in
gure 2.8.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 The Platform: Xilinx® ZynqTM-7000 AP SoC series
17
Figure 2.8: ZedBoard layout and peripherals
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Design Methodology
This chapter will focus on the practical aspects of working with the tools and
will give a hint about the workow to follow when using Xilinx®'s software to
develop ZynqTM-based designs.
The dissertation is divided into two sections. In the rst one it will be presented
the partitioning scheme of tools and the way the workow should be as intended
by Xilinx®, while the second one will focus on the High Level Synthesis (HLS)
tool, a new software in the Vivado suite that has been used extensively in this
thesis work.
3.1
Tool partitioning and design workow
When designing for ZynqTM-based devices the reference tools to use are included
in the Vivado Design Suite, a new IP and system-centric design environment
that was introduced in 2012 and that is intended to replace the older ISE Design
Suite of tools.
ISE and EDK, in fact, do not support the new 7-series and
UltraScaleTM devices but they'll continue to be used for previous generations of
FPGAs.
==PAGE:30==
20
Design Methodology
The two most important tools within the suite are Vivado IDE (Integrated
Design Environment, the GUI of the suite, although every action available in
this tool can be performed using TCL scripts from the command line) and SDK.
The aims of the two tools are:
• Vivado IDE targets the hardware part of the SoC design, the one that will
be implemented on the FPGA. Compared to the ISE tool, the approach
has become more IP-centric (although the traditional RTL-to-bitstream
FPGA design ow is still supported) and the designs can be developed
using IPs (Intellectual Properties) as functional building blocks. A library
of Plug-and-Play IPs by Xilinx® is available in every version of Vivado
IDE but this library can, of course, be extended with third-party and cus-
tom IPs. This approach oers unquestionable benets in terms of system
(rmware) updating, upgradeability and design reuse
• SDK, on the other hand, is used to develop the applications that will run
on the ARM® CPUs in the PS side. This tool is based on the famous and
widely used Eclipse platform and include support for all the Xilinx®'s IPs
and GCC support for ARM® and NEON MPE extensions, as well as a
proper subset of tools for proling and debugging
Those were the main tools but they are not the only ones provided by Xilinx®in
the Vivado Design Suite. Being an IP-oriented development environment, a set
of dedicated extra tools are available for creating, testing and managing IPs
for Vivado. Namely, these tools are Vivado High Level Synthesis (HLS) and
System Generator for DSP. Vivado HLS will be discussed in depth in the next
section, while System Generator for DSP is a block-based tool which is used
in conjunction with MATLAB/Simulink by MathWorks to create and simulate
DSP designs.
The design ow, as intended by Xilinx®, is quite articulated and requires some
knowledge and practice to be fully mastered. A schematic of the workow for
ZynqTM-based devices can be seen in gure 3.1.
It all starts with the specications of the system to be designed based on the
project requirements. At this stage it's important to outline properly which
device is going to be used, the functionalities of the design, its interfaces and
the target performances.
Once the preliminary phase is completed, the project starts with the system de-
sign stage. The Vivado ow emphasizes very much the importance of this stage
as devices like the ZynqTM-7000 family allow software and hardware designs to
be done in parallel, maximizing the eciency of the design process. System
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Tool partitioning and design workow
21
Figure 3.1: Workow for ZynqTM-7000 SoCs
==PAGE:32==
22
Design Methodology
architects are encouraged to use a top-down approach during the system design
phase, outlining rst the the system interfaces and parameters and then den-
ing the various subsystems, the interactions between them and the expected
performances of the single blocks. These procedures are of utmost importance
in order to partition the design properly into hardware and software tasks. The
general guidelines to follow during the partitioning phase are the following:
• Software on the PS is more suited to implement general purpose sequential
processing tasks as well as running operating systems and user applica-
tions.
In general is better to implement on the PS all the tasks that
monitor and control the system
• Hardware on the PL is used to implement the computationally intensive
dataow parts of the design and, in general, algorithms with parallel tasks
An in-depth knowledge of the target device by the system architect is crucial at
this stage in order to make the most out of the SoC special resources like the
NEON units in the PS and the DSP48E and BlockRAM slices in the PL. This
was one of the main reasons why, during this thesis work, a great amount of time
was spent in the characterisation of the NEON units and in the comparison with
the hardware approach for the same tasks in order to investigate the limitations
of both.
The workow now splits in two separate and parallel branches: the hardware
and software development and testing.
3.1.1
Hardware development and testing
This section deals with the design of the IP blocks to be implemented in the
PL and their interconnections. Peripheral blocks and connections with external
devices have to be designed at this stage as well.
The reference tool for these tasks is the Vivado IDE and in particular its IP
integrator which allows to place, congure and connect the IPs selected from
the IP library in a graphic fashion with the same top-down approach used in
the system design phase. As mentioned, the reference library includes many
Xilinx® IPs spanning many dierent application elds. Third party IPs and
custom made IPs can be easily integrated as well and the design itself can then
be packaged as an IP and placed in the Vivado IP catalog for later reuse. To
create new IPs and integrate them properly in the library or just to add third-
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Tool partitioning and design workow
23
party IPs, the IP Packager utility is used and the whole process is represented
in gure 3.2
Figure 3.2: Vivado IP ow
To test the functionalities of the design and debug eventual problems, Vivado
IDE oers many dierent tools and solutions, among which we can nd :
• Vivado Simulator, for HDL testing and debugging
• Several Design Rule Checkers (DRCs). A DRC is performed for every step
of the design, namely synthesis, implementation and bitstream generation
• An Integrated Logic Analyzer (ILA) IP, to be used in conjunction with
the Vivado Logic Analyzer tool
• Hardware co-simulation and co-debug functionalities, to verify custom
logic implemented on ZynqTM devices or in a logic simulation environ-
ment while applications execute on the PS side of ZynqTM
It is worthy to refrain that the hardware and software developments should be
carried out simultaneously in order to enable accurate testing and debugging
for the whole design.
3.1.2
Software development and testing
This section deals with the application that run on the PS and the software stack
necessary to use the custom hardware implemented on the PL. The software
system, in fact, can be thought of as a stack composed by multiple layers:
• The lowest layer is the hardware base system or hardware platform and is
the result of the project exported from the Vivado IDE. This is basically a
==PAGE:34==
24
Design Methodology
representation of the actual hardware that will be targeted by the software
application
• The layer just above is the Board Support Package (BSP). It is gener-
ated by SDK and is required before the development of any application.
It basically is responsible for the interactions between the hardware layer
and the Operating System (OS) and includes hardware parameters, de-
vice drivers and low level functions. This layer is strictly related to the
hardware as it reects IPs enabled in the PS, including Multiplexed I/O
(MIO) conguration, and custom logic in the PL and, therefore, must be
updated every time the hardware conguration is modied in the Vivado
IDE
• The third layer is the OS layer itself. A great variety of OSs can be chosen
for this layer, including:
 Linux
 Android
 Real-Time Operating System (RTOS)
 Standalone/Bare-metal (i.e a software system without an operating
system)
being Linux and Standalone/Bare-metal the most popular options. The
Bare-metal solution is typically used when the software system does not
need many features (such as networking) that are provided by an operat-
ing system and the complexity introduced by an operating system is not
desired/required
• The last layer is the application layer, the one with the highest level of
abstraction where the developed applications run
Figures 3.3a and 3.3b show the ow for both Linux and Bare-metal application
development and give a hint about how to work with the software stack in both
cases.
Like Vivado IDE, also SDK oers various tools for testing and debugging the
code, namely JTAG debugger, Xilinx Microprocessor Debugger (XMD) and
System Debbugger (TCF). These utilities allow to test and debug the software
application while it is physically running on the platform. Moreover, SDK also
oer a proling utility to test the application and spot the bottlenecks and the
computationally intensive parts of the code.
Once the two branches are completed, two dierent les are output: an Exe-
cutable Linkable Format (.elf) le and a Bitstream (.bit) le. These les are
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Tool partitioning and design workow
25
(a) Linux application development owchart
(b) Bare-metal application development owchart
Figure 3.3: Application development owchart comparison
==PAGE:36==
26
Design Methodology
essential to congure the whole SoC as the former programs the PS while the
latter congure the PL. With these two les is now possible to test the whole
system and check if the individually tested HW and SW counterparts work well
together. Whether this would not be the case and the hardware is the mal-
functioning part, it is possible to modify it, export it again to SDK, update the
BSP, rebuild the application and check again. If the problem is software related,
viceversa, is only necessary to modify the code and rebuild the .elf le.
One solution for debugging the whole system consists in the use of the embedded
co-debug with HW-SW cross-triggers. In this scenario, the Integrated Logic
Analyzer debug core in the PL is used in conjunction with the Fabric Trace
Module (FTM) in the PS via a pair of trigger signals for cross-triggering. This
enables the user to set HW-SW breakpoints in order to halt the opposite side
of the system and check its state during key tasks execution.
Until now it has been described the standard workow as intended by Xilinx®.
A similar but slightly dierent approach can be used whenever the design to
be developed is more software-centric and/or it is necessary to investigate the
code's bottlenecks and improve its performances.
In this case the software application is built rst and then, using the proling
utilities or the available PS timers, an estimation of the computational burden
is done for every task or for a subset of them in order to spot the bottlenecks.
If the computational-heavy functions can benet from a higher degree of par-
allelism then partitioning these functionalities in hardware could result in a
signicant overall speed-up. In doing this partitioning, care must be taken to
the overhead introduced by the AXI communications between PS and PL and
to the fact that these transactions are carried out using the slowest clock i.e.
the PL clock. In fact, if the overhead is too high, the benets of hardware accel-
eration are lost and the resulting solution can be even slower than the original
one.
All the designs in this thesis work were implemented using the original workow,
with the exception of the NEON/BLAS Application Development Environment
(ADE). In this case, in fact, the software environment was built rst and several
performance tests were made in order to evaluate the ARM+NEON units capa-
bilities. Only later a custom hardware implementation (on the PL) of the NEON
operations was created to check if this approach could remove some bottlenecks
and oer some benets compared to the ARM+NEON one.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Vivado HLS (High Level Synthesis)
27
3.2
Vivado HLS (High Level Synthesis)
During the development of the IP blocks implemented in this thesis work for
the various designs, there is one tool in the Vivado Design Suite that has been
used extensively and that is the High Level Synthesis (HLS) tool. This tool is
a new addition in the Xilinx® development ecosystem and Xilinx® itself has
encouraged its use since the rst release of the Vivado Design Suite.
HLS tool basically transforms a high-level description of an algorithm (written
in C/C++) into a register transfer level (RTL) implementation of the corre-
sponding functionalities (that can be synthesized on an FPGA) and performs
the functional simulation in the same high-level language instead of HDL. This is
intended to accelerate the whole design implementation and verication process
while still delivering quality results.
The trend in embedded systems, in fact, is to decrease the development time
and, therefore, the time-to-market, without compromising verication and per-
formances. This can be done by ensuring less design eort for the hardware
designer using strategies like design reuse or raising the abstraction level.
Typical FPGA designs described using HDL language have dierent level of
abstraction:
• Structural: it is typically the lowest one where HW elements in FPGA
fabric are directly congured and connected
• RTL: this level deals with registers and the operations between them.
Synthesis tools usually work at this level
• Behavioural: is the highest level of abstraction for HDL and focuses on
the global behaviour of the algorithm rather than on the single operations
between registers
The HLS sits on top of these levels as it works on the algorithmic level as
the behavioural model but it does without using HDL description, coding with
a high-level language. The verication is done using a high-level language as
well, providing a quicker validation than the traditional process and allowing to
separately validate both the algorithm (written in C/C++) and the actual RTL
implementation.
This approach, moreover, ease the partitioning phase of the design workow as
a single programming language can be used to design both sides of the SoC
device.
==PAGE:38==
28
Design Methodology
In the HLS methodology the designed functionalities and the hardware imple-
mentation are kept separate and this gives to the designer a higher degree of
exibility. The synthesis phase can be directed by the designer himself through
optimization directives and constraints and is possible to obtain multiple imple-
mentation solutions from the same source code.
3.2.1
HLS basics
To understand the synthesis process it is useful to know its phases and the way
the synthesizer interprets the code. According to [Xil15c] the HLS performs the
synthesis following three main stages:
• Scheduling: determines which operations occur during each clock cycle
based on the clock frequency, the time it takes for each operation to com-
plete (as dened by the target device) and the user-specied optimization
directives. If the clock period is longer or a faster FPGA is targeted, more
operations are completed within a single clock cycle, and all operations
might complete in one clock cycle. Conversely, if the clock period is shorter
or a slower FPGA is targeted, high-level synthesis automatically schedules
the operations over more clock cycles, and some operations might need to
be implemented as multicycle resources
• Binding: in this phase the scheduled operations are assigned to physical
hardware resources.
The tool uses the device informations specied in
the constraints to implement the best solution and to exploit the special
resources, such as DSP blocks and BlockRAMs, available on the device.
The scheduling and binding are closely related and work in conjunction
with each other
• Control logic extraction: this phase interprets the code and create the
nite state machine that sequences the operation in the RTL
The C code must be written in a certain way to ensure that the RTL and its
interfaces are implemented properly. The HLS infers the RTL basing on the
following guidelines:
• The code must be written as a series of functions with only one top-
level main function that has to be specied either in the beginning (when
importing source les) or at least before synthesis
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Vivado HLS (High Level Synthesis)
29
• The top-level function arguments synthesize into RTL I/O ports.
Ad-
ditional control ports are created by default by the HLS to drive and
check the IP state either from the PS or by other IPs in the PL. The I/O
ports can be modied or grouped together using optimization directives
to match the IP requirements
• RTL hierarchy reects C functions' hierarchy. If the C code includes a
hierarchy of sub-functions, the nal RTL design includes a hierarchy of
modules or entities that have a one-to-one correspondence with the original
C function hierarchy
• Loops in the C functions are kept rolled by default. When loops are rolled,
synthesis creates the logic for one iteration of the loop, and the RTL de-
sign executes this logic for each iteration of the loop in sequence. It is
possible to unroll the loop completely or partially by using the optimiza-
tion directives and/or unrolling manually the code in order to increase the
parallelism of the architecture. In almost all the HLS projects in this the-
sis work the loops have been unrolled manually. The Pipeline directive is
also very useful as it automatically pipelines the loops in order to increase
the throughput of the loop and of the algorithm
• Arrays in the C code are synthesized into BlockRAM or into LUTRAM in
the nal FPGA design. If the array is on the top-level function interface,
high-level synthesis implements the array as ports to access a block RAM
outside the design. It is possible to specify the typology of RAM as well as
remapping/partitioning RAM resources using the optimization directives
in order to improve throughput or RAM access.
Once the synthesis is completed the HLS outputs a detailed report to illus-
trate the implementation details and the intended scheduling. By changing the
directives it is possible to match these specications to the design needs.
3.2.2
HLS workow
In this section it will be presented briey the workow to follow when using the
HLS tool. Figure 3.4 shows a schematic diagram of the whole workow and can
be used as reference during this description.
The whole workow starts with the C/C++ input les where the algorithm and
the interfaces (manually or automatically) are specied. A C/C++ testbench
and possibly a golden reference for testing purposes have to be included as well.
Constraints related to the target device and clock period have to be specied
==PAGE:40==
30
Design Methodology
Figure 3.4: The HLS workow
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Vivado HLS (High Level Synthesis)
31
at this stage (and later in case of multiple solutions) while directives can be
modied later.
To check the integrity and the correctness of the algorithm before the synthesis
phase, a functional verication can be performed by applying the testbench only
to the code and checking if the results match the (optional) golden reference.
The next step is the RTL synthesis itself driven by the constraints and directives
for the active solution. Now is when the operations described in the previous
section are performed. To determine if the design meets the requirements, a
synthesis report is generated by HLS. This report contains information on the
following implementation metrics:
• Area: shows the amount of hardware resources required to implement the
design compared to resources available in the FPGA
• Latency: represent the number of clock cycles elapsing between the appli-
cation of an input and the corresponding output
• Initiation interval (II): is the minimum number of clock cycles before the
function can accept new input data
• Loop related metrics (optional, available only if the function contains
loops):
 Loop iteration latency: is the number of clock cycles it takes to com-
plete one iteration of the loop
 Loop initiation interval: is the number of clock cycle before the next
iteration of the loop starts to process data
 Loop latency: is the number of cycles to execute all iterations of the
loop
• I/O ports and signals
If the results are not satisfying it is possible to dene a new solution with dier-
ent directives and constraints and re-synthesize the RTL. Vivado HLS support
techniques to remove performance bottlenecks such as loops manipulations and
array partitioning/reshaping. By iterating this step it is possible to compare
various hardware implementations to nd the best solution or, if the criteria
still don't match, it is possible to modify directly the source code.
Once the RTL is synthesized it is possible to check its functionality using the
same testbench provided for the code verication. This step is called C/RTL
==PAGE:42==
32
Design Methodology
cosimulation and it removes the need for a HDL testbench (more time consum-
ing).
The nal step consist in the export of the RTL either in the RTL HDL code
format or using the IP packager utility to integrate the corresponding IP into
the IP library of the Vivado IDE. The IP packager utility also provides all the
necessary drivers useful to control the IP in SDK projects.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Preliminary designs and
implementations
This Chapter describes the various preliminary designs implemented during this
thesis work along with the various architectural considerations that led to the
nal implementations.
In the rst section, we explain in detail the tests that have been conducted in
order to quantify the NEON software acceleration capabilities. In this section,
we also explain how we realized the hardware architectures that were imple-
mented to compare the performance of the two dierent approaches (hardware
and software) and to nd the pros and cons of each approach. Experimental
results will follow the tests' description.
After having characterized the NEON units and spotted the strengths and lim-
itations of the two approaches, in the second section, we shift the attention on
hardware accelerators for the nal application. It will be presented the architec-
ture of a Stereo Filters accelerator that was implemented before the nal design
in order to test the audio loopback, gain experience with the Zedboard audio
codec and realize an example of a FIR lter using Vivado HLS. After the design
description the proling results obtained during the execution of the application
on the Zedboard will be presented.
The next Chapter will deal with the nal design.
==PAGE:44==
34
Preliminary designs and implementations
4.1
NEON SW acceleration
In order to exploit the full potential of the ZynqTM SoC device when it comes to
hardware acceleration, it is of paramount importance to have a comprehensive
knowledge of the Processing System (PS) architecture, of its capabilities and
limitations.
As mentioned in Chapter 2, within the PS' APU there are dedicated architec-
tures that allow Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) operations and hence
oer a certain amount of parallelism, with some benets over the standard CPU
approach. Under normal conditions, in fact, a CPU executes instructions and
processes data one-by-one, in a serial fashion, while the SIMD technique allows
multiple data to be processed in one, or just a few, CPU cycles. These architec-
tures are known as NEON Media Processing Engine (MPE) units and are the
SIMD implementation for ARM v7A processors.
There are four dierent ways to boost software performance with NEON units:
1. Using NEON optimized libraries. NEON technology has been around
for some years and many open source software libraries have been opti-
mized for NEON, such as:
• Project Ne10: for vector, matrix and DSP functions
• OpenMAX DL (Development Layer): for audio, video and imaging
functions and codec algorithms
• FFmpeg: for audio/video recording, conversion and streaming
• x254: for encoding video streams into the H.264/MPEG-4 AVC com-
pression format
Other NEON non-open source libraries are provided by third-party brands
like Skype, Dolby, Adobe and CoreCodec to ensure compatibility with
their products
2. Using automatic vectorization. It is the fastest and easiest way to
optimize code for NEON units. The GCC compiler tries to interpret the
code, spot parallel computation possibilities and generate NEON instruc-
tions.
There are four main optimization levels that can be set in the compiler
option to use the automatic vectorization:
• -O0: no optimization is performed and each line from the source code
is mapped directly to the corresponding instruction in the executable
le
==PAGE:45==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
35
• -O1: enables the most common forms of optimization (such as com-
bining increments or decrements of addresses with memory accesses,
using decrement and branch instructions on a count register. . . ) re-
sulting in a slightly faster executable
• -O2: enables further optimizations such as instruction scheduling
• -O3: is the most aggressive optimization level and typically increases
speed at expense of code size.
This option enables the -ftree-
vectorize ag, forcing the compiler to attempt to automatically
generate NEON code. In practice, though, this level cannot always
produce binaries faster than -O2
Along with these levels, a set of ags are available to drive the compiler
when generating NEON instructions. The most important ones are: -mcpu
=cortex-a9 (to determine the target processor), -mfpu=neon (to specify
the oating point unit available on the target CPU) and -mvectorize-
with-neon-quad (to vectorize with quad-words instead of dual-words)
3. Using NEON intrinsics. It is one of the most advanced ways to optimize
code for NEON units as it also adds NEON instructions that do not have
a C/C++ equivalent
NEON intrinsics basically mask assembler instructions with a high-level
format (C) and require the inclusion of a dedicated header le (arm_neon
.h) to interpret those instructions. In this way the code is easier to main-
tain and to debug compared to the assembler but it still retains the ne-
granularity control of NEON instructions. The dedicated header also in-
cludes new data type denitions that are tailored for the NEON registers
and thus allow to map C variables directly into those registers.
The NEON programmer's guide by ARM® provides all the necessary in-
formation to understand well NEON operations, the data structures and
the available instructions and their syntax.
The main benet over writing assembler code is that, while low-level access
to NEON instructions is still provided, the compiler does some of the hard
work normally associated with writing assembly language, such as:
• Register allocation
• Code scheduling or re-ordering instructions to achieve the highest
performance (by specifying the target processor the compiler can re-
order code to ensure the CPU pipeline is running in an optimized
way)
The main disadvantage with intrinsics is that the compiler may not output
exactly the desired code. In this case the use of assembler for ne-tuning
is necessary
==PAGE:46==
36
Preliminary designs and implementations
4. Optimizing NEON assembler code manually. Is the hardest but the
most ecient way to use NEON units. In this way, everything is under de-
veloper's control and this is the best way to achieve optimal performance.
This methodology should be used only if the compiler is not able to gen-
erate the fastest binary possible as requires hand-written assembler code.
It must be noted that in, in this way, the code is harder to write and
maintain and requires an in-depth knowledge of the target architecture as
the NEON optimization is highly processor-dependent. This means that
a sequence of instructions optimized for a specic processor might have
dierent timing characteristics on a dierent processor, even if the NEON
instruction cycle timings are identical.
In addition to the previous considerations, Xilinx® and ARM® also recommend
to improve memory access eciency in order to fully exploit NEON capabilities.
Data and instructions should be on the L1 cache to keep up with the CPU
speed and the algorithm computation order should be changed to avoid cache
trashing and improve cache eciency. Pending memory accesses (such as data
loads/store instructions and instruction fetches) that miss in the cache can have
a negative impact over performance as instructions that are dependent on them
can wait for tens of cycles. In some cases the latency can increase up to hundreds
of cycles if the caching is not managed properly.
4.1.1
NEON operations' theory
There are three main ways in which CPUs process data:
• Single Instruction Single Data (SISD)
• Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) in vector mode (such as for VFP
extension)
• Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) in packed data mode (as in the
NEON units)
In SISD architectures, each operation species the single data source to process
and, in order to process multiple data items, multiple instructions are required.
This method is inherently slow and, to improve performance, media processing
is often o-loaded to dedicated processors such as a Graphics Processing Unit
(GPU) or Media Processing Unit which can process more than one data value
with a single instruction.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
37
In the SIMD vector mode case an operation can specify that the same processing
occurs for multiple data sources. For example, if the length (LEN) value is 4 in
the control register, the single vector instruction performs the same operation
four times (sequentially) on the specied elements. In ARM terminology this
is called Vector Floating Point (VFP) extension and was introduced in the
ARMv5 architecture to speed up oating point operations by executing short
vector instructions. The source and destination registers could be either single
registers for scalar operations or a sequence of two to eight registers for vector
operations.
Because SIMD operations in packed data mode perform vector calculation more
eciently than VFP operations (the multiple operations are performed in par-
allel rather than sequentially), vector mode operation was deprecated from the
introduction of ARMv7, and replaced with NEON technology.
VFP unit, though, can still be used as FPU for ARMv7 implementations in
scalar mode because it can support both single-precision and double-precision
oating-point scalar operations while packed data mode cannot handle double
oating-point data-types.
Hence, the NEON unit does not fully replace VFP and there are some specialized
instructions that VFP oers which have no equivalent implementations in the
NEON instruction set. Both units, however, share the same registers and the
processor resources for integer operations, loop control, and caching.
The basic concept behind NEON's SIMD technique is that the data to be pro-
cessed is packed into special wide registers that can hold multiple smaller words.
In this way, by specifying a single operation over these registers, many data val-
ues are processed in parallel using just a single instruction. In other words,
SIMD enables a single instruction to treat a register value as multiple data el-
ements and to perform multiple, identical operations on those elements. This
is far more ecient than repeating many times the same instruction in a Single
Instruction Single Data (SISD) architecture. An example of NEON operation
can be found in gure 4.1.
The potential of this methodology is fully exploited when simple and repeated
operations have to be performed on large data sets made of elements that have
small word-lengths (up to 32 bits).
NEON units, in fact, can handle both
oating-point and signed/unsigned integer data types. This is often the case
for digital signal processing or multimedia algorithms (where 8-16-24-32 bit
words are very common) and that's why NEON units are also known as Media
Processing Engine (MPE).
==PAGE:48==
38
Preliminary designs and implementations
Figure 4.1: An example of NEON SIMD addition
Having a dedicated unit capable of easily process these small word-lengths el-
ements is even more important if we consider that, on ARM 32-bit micropro-
cessors (such as the Cortex-A series processors) it is relatively inecient to run
large numbers of 8-bit or 16-bit operations. The processor ALU, registers, and
datapath, in fact, are designed for 32-bit calculations and if they are used for
8/16-bit operations, additional instructions are needed to handle overow.
The components of the NEON unit are:
• NEON register le
• NEON integer execute pipeline
• NEON single-precision oating-point execute pipeline
• NEON load/store and permute pipeline
The contents of the NEON registers are vectors of elements of the same data
type. A vector is divided into lanes and each lane contains a data value called
an element. Usually each NEON instruction results in n operations occurring
in parallel, where n is the number of lanes that the input vectors are divided
into. Each operation is contained within the lane and there cannot be a carry
or overow from one lane to another. The number of lanes in a NEON vector
==PAGE:49==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
39
depends on the size of the vector (NEON architecture allows for 64-bit or 128-bit
parallelism) and the data elements in the vector:
• 64-bit NEON vectors can contain:
 8x8-bit elements
 4x16-bit elements
 2x32-bit elements
 1x64-bit element
• 128-bit NEON vectors can contain:
 16x8-bit elements
 8x16-bit elements
 4x32-bit elements
 2x64-bit elements
The register le can be viewed as either 16x128-bit registers (Q0-Q15) or as
32x64-bit registers (D0-D31). Each of the Q0-Q15 registers maps to a pair of D
registers, as represented in Figure 4.2.
Regarding the data types of the elements in a vector, the following table sum-
marize the available types with the corresponding specier to be used in NEON
instructions:
8-bit
16-bit
32-bit
64-bit
Unsigned integer
U8
U16
U32
U64
Signed integer
S8
S16
S32
S64
Integer of unspec. type
I8
I16
I32
I64
Floating-point
not available
F16
F32
not available
Polynomial over 0,1
P8
P16
not available
not available
4.1.2
BLAS and NEON intrinsics
In this thesis work we decided to test NEON units' performance using both the
automatic vectorization and the intrinsics methodology. The tests were carried
out targeting some of the operations specied in the BLAS routines.
==PAGE:50==
40
Preliminary designs and implementations
Figure 4.2: NEON and VFP register le
Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms (BLAS) are low-level routines that represent
a standard for basic vector, matrix and linear algebra operations in general.
The original 38 BLAS were released in 1979 as a Fortran library by an ACM-
SIGNUM committee.
BLAS routines are divided into three levels of operations:
• Level 1 BLAS (released in 1979) address scalar, vector and vector-vector
operations
==PAGE:51==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
41
• Level 2 BLAS (developed between 1984 and 1986) perform matrix-vector
operations
• Level 3 BLAS (developed between 1987 and 1988) is dedicated to matrix-
matrix operations
BLAS implementations are often optimized for speed on a particular machine
either by the vendor itself or by open-source projects (see OpenBLAS) and can
take advantage of special oating-point hardware such as vector registers and
SIMD architectures, as in the case of NEON units.
Some routines are also used to measure performance. For example, the LIN-
PACK Benchmark, which is a common measure of a system's oating-point
performance, relies heavily on the GEMM (a Level 3 BLAS) routine.
For this reason, in this work, we translated in C two functions from the Level
1 (SAXPY and SDOT) and one from the Level 3 (SGEMM) from the original
Fortran source code and then we optimized for the NEON units using NEON
intrinsics to perform comprehensive tests about NEON capabilities.
In order to perform these tests, an Application Development Environment (ADE)
was created. This allowed to link pre-compiled libraries (BLAS, CBLAS and
OpenBLAS) as well as to dene new custom implementations for each BLAS
routine and to choose between the dierent options just by changing some ags,
making the whole development and testing ow quicker and more versatile.
Moreover, the ADE allowed to instantiate, manage and congure structured
variables and their parameters for each BLAS level.
As already mentioned, the routines implemented were SDOT, SAXPY and
SGEMM. The sux "S" before the name of the functions indicates that the
operations will be performed using vectors containing oating-point elements.
Although the BLAS routines support multiple data-formats, we decided to use
oating-point numbers because it is the most complex data format that the
NEON units are capable of handling and also because benchmarking tests are
usually referred to oating-point operations.
4.1.2.1
SDOT function
Regarding the SDOT function, it produces the dot (scalar) product of two vec-
tors:
==PAGE:52==
42
Preliminary designs and implementations
FUNCTION SDOT(N, X, INCX, Y, INCY)
dot ←−xT y
(4.1)
An excerpt of the C translation of the original Fortran code dened in the BLAS
library is the following:
1
static
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
sdot_custom_gp2 (ADE_INT32_T N,
2
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *SX ,ADE_INT32_T INCX ,
3
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * SY ,ADE_INT32_T
INCY)
4
{
5
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
stemp =0.0, sdot =0.0;
6
ADE_INT32_T i,ix ,iy ,m,mp1;
7
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T tmp1 ,tmp2 ,tmp3 ,tmp4;
20
m=N%4;
21
if (m!=0)
22
{
23
for (i=0;i<m;i++)
24
{
25
stemp=stemp+SX[i]*SY[i];
26
}
27
if (N<4)
28
{
29
sdot=stemp;
30
return
sdot;
31
}
32
}
33
mp1 = m;
34
35
for (i=mp1;i<N;i+=4)
36
{
37
tmp1=SX[i]*SY[i];
38
tmp2=SX[i+1]* SY[i+1];
39
tmp3=SX[i+2]* SY[i+2];
40
tmp4=SX[i+3]* SY[i+3];
41
stemp = stemp + tmp1 + tmp2 +tmp3+tmp4;
42
}
In this code a few minor modications were made to visualize better the parts
of the algorithm that will be optimized by the compiler using the automatic
vectorization. As written in the Application Note XAPP1206 from Xilinx® this
is not strictly necessary in order to help the compiler during the vectorization,
==PAGE:53==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
43
but it was done in order to have the original code as close as possible to the
optimized NEON code for a better comparison.
Since we are using 32-bit words for oating-point elements of the vector, the
maximum parallelism achievable is 4 if we use the 128-bit Q registers. This
is reected in the code as one of the rst instructions is the modulo 4 of the
length of the vector. If the length is not a multiple of four, in fact, a number
of elements corresponding to the result of the modulo operation are processed
singularly, while the rest of the vector is processed in blocks of 4 elements.
The target operations in this case are basically multiplications and accumula-
tions. In order to perform these with NEON units, the best solution was the
use of the VMLA instruction which multiplies corresponding elements in two vec-
tors and adds the results to the corresponding element of the destination vector
according to the gure 4.3 (Q instead of D registers were used).
Figure 4.3: VMLA instruction
Before performing the Multiply-Add operation the vectors are lled up using
the VLD1 instruction. After the VMLA the four lanes of the resulting accumula-
tor vector are then split into 2 temporary D registers whose contents are then
summed together using the VPADD intrinsic. A snippet of the code can be found
in the following box:
1
static
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
sdot_NEON_intrinsic2 (ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict SX ,ADE_INT32_T INCX ,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict SY ,ADE_INT32_T
INCY)
2
{
3
float32x4_t
vec1_q , vec2_q;
4
float32x4_t
stemp_q ={0.0 , 0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
5
float32x2_t
tmp [2];
==PAGE:54==
44
Preliminary designs and implementations
6
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
sdot =0.0;
7
ADE_INT32_T
i,ix ,iy ,m,Ntemp;
18
m=N%4;
19
if (m!=0)
20
{
21
for (i=0;i<m;i++)
22
{
23
sdot=sdot+SX[i]*SY[i];
24
}
25
if (N<4)
26
{
27
return
sdot;
28
}
29
}
30
Ntemp = N - m;
31
32
for (i=0;i<( Ntemp & ~3);i+=4)
33
{
34
vec1_q=vld1q_f32 (&SX[i+m]);
35
vec2_q=vld1q_f32 (&SY[i+m]);
36
37
stemp_q = vmlaq_f32(stemp_q , vec1_q , vec2_q );
38
}
39
tmp [0] = vget_high_f32(stemp_q);
40
tmp [1] = vget_low_f32 (stemp_q);
41
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [1]);
42
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [0]);
43
sdot = sdot + vget_lane_f32 (tmp[0], 0);
44
return
sdot;
We point out that the code presents some modications that are useful to opti-
mize the vectorization procedure. These optimizations are:
• The number of main loop iterations is always known and a multiple of 4
(and, hence, a power of 2). This allows to mask the lower 2 bits during
the loop counter check, ensuring that the loop always executes a multiple
of four times. The compiler can then safely vectorize and does not need
to add code for runtime checks on the index or to add code to deal with
over-hanging iterations
• The restrict keyword is used when declaring the pointer arguments of the
function (i.e. the input vectors). This is done to inform the compiler that
the location accessed through a specic pointer is not accessed through
any other pointer within the current scope. In this way, the compiler can
==PAGE:55==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
45
ignore the possibility of aliasing or loop-carried dependency and safely
vectorize the sequence.
4.1.2.2
SDOT experimental results
To test the performance of the NEON acceleration for the SDOT function and,
in general, for each of the three routines implemented, we used the following
procedure.
Each routine was tested in both the custom Fortran translation and in the
NEON intrinsic version using ve dierent optimization options:
1. First the custom Fortran translation was tested as-is, without any com-
piler optimization, by setting the Optimization Level option in the GCC
compiler settings to -O0
2. The second test still targets the custom Fortran translation but this time
the code was optimized by the compiler using the automatic vectorization
option. This was possible by setting the Optimization Level to -O1
3. Same as point 2 but with an Optimization Level of -O2
4. Same as point 2 but with an Optimization Level of -O3
5. The nal option targets the NEON intrinsic version of the code with an
Optimization Level of -O3. This conguration is the fastest and represent
the most optimized solution developed
In each of the previous cases the following ags were also specied in the GCC
compiler options: -mcpu=cortex-a9, -mfpu=neon and -mvectorize-with-neon-quad
.
The SCU Timer, available in the Application Processing Unit (APU) of the
Processing System (PS), was used to measure the execution time of each sub-
routine. This timer runs at half the CPU clock frequency and has clock period
of 3 ns. Therefore, the execution time was calculated as follows:
Execution time (in ns) = N. clock cycles · 3 ns
(4.2)
An application, within the ADE, was then developed to perform the following
tasks:
==PAGE:56==
46
Preliminary designs and implementations
1. Initialize the variables needed for the test according to the test type
(SDOT, SAXPY and SGEMM, each routine needs a dierent set of vari-
ables)
2. Initialize and calibrate the timer
3. Allocate the memory needed for the test vectors
4. Initialize and congure the proper BLAS object for the target function
5. For the SDOT and SAXPY functions initialize the input (and output for
SAXPY) test vectors with random numbers. We decided to iterate the
test 50 times using vectors with dierent dimensions, ranging from 1 to
49001, incremented with a step of 1000
6. For each dimension dened in the previous step the function was called
10 times and, for each time, the SCU Timer measured the number of
cycles needed to complete the computation (taking into account also the
calibration error)
7. Average the number of clock cycles by the number of trials (10) and print
the results
8. Release the allocated memory space
The typology of BLAS implementation to test (custom or NEON intrinsics) as
well as the function to test (SDOT, SAXPY or SGEMM) were selected by two
dierent #define in the header le of the application.
All the testing procedure was performed both enabling and disabling the L1-
L2 caches in order to evaluate the impact of cache optimization over execution
time.
The results were then exported in a CSV format and imported into Excel. The
following graphs were then plotted (the -O1 Optimization Level curve has been
truncated because, especially in the Cache disabled test, it was way above the
other curves, making the whole graph hard to read):
==PAGE:57==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
47
(a) Cache enabled
(b) Cache disabled
Figure 4.4: SDOT tests
==PAGE:58==
48
Preliminary designs and implementations
In these gures the -O2 and -O3 curves overlap as the execution times are almost
the same.
It is worth noting that there is a considerable speed-up factor between the
non-optimized custom version and the version optimized with automatic vec-
torization. This gap is even bigger if we consider the version of the function
optimized with NEON intrinsic. There is not a big dierence, instead, between
the various Optimization Levels.
The following table shows the average speed-up factors for the various optimiza-
tions compared to the non-optimized solution in the case of cache enabled:
Optimization Level
Speed-up factor
-O1 (custom)
∼3, 35×
-O2 (custom)
∼3, 48×
-O3 (custom)
∼3, 51×
-O3 (NEON intrinsic)
∼6, 63×
Table 4.1: SDOT Optimization Levels vs. speed-up factors
As we can see from the table, the speed-up factor with the automatic vectoriza-
tion from the compiler is almost four, reecting the parallelism specied with
the ag -mvectorize-with-neon-quad. The speed-up obtained with the NEON
intrinsic solution almost doubles that value, demonstrating that an additional
improvement can be achieved using a code tailored to the NEON architecture.
Regarding cache, we can clearly see that disabling the cache greatly aects the
non-optimized solution performance while the other optimization level remain
almost untouched. This may be an index that the higher Optimization Level
could optimize in some way DDR memory access during the execution of the
application.
Another interesting thing related to cache, that will be even more noticeable in
the SAXPY charts, is the knee in the curves, in particular in NEON intrinsic
one.
This knee is placed in correspondence to arrays length of 8000.
If we
consider that the size of an array lled with 8000 oating-point values is equal
to:
8000 × 32 bit = 32 KB
(4.3)
which is the L1 data cache size, one possible explanation may be that, being the
L1 and L2 cache non-inclusive, at this point the L1 hit-rate decrease abruptly
==PAGE:59==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
49
and the CPU starts retrieving data from the slower L2 cache. Proper caching
may, therefore, be a solution to avoid this performance drop.
4.1.2.3
SAXPY function
The second routine implemented was the SAXPY function, whose functionality
is specied by the formula:
FUNCTION SAXPY(N, ALPHA, X, INCX, Y, INCY)
y ←−αx + y
(4.4)
Since the basic structure and operations of the SAXPY function are very similar
to the SDOT ones (except for the nal sum of the SDOT which is not present
in SAXPY), we skip the details of its implementation.
The considerations made for the SDOT, though, are still valid for the SAXPY.
The full source code of this function in the two versions (the custom Fortran
translation and the NEON intrinsics one) can be found in Appendix A.
4.1.2.4
SAXPY experimental results
The testing methodology for the SAXPY is basically the same as the SDOT
one (with the exception of the additional "α" variable) and the results are quite
similar as it can be seen in Figures 4.5a and 4.5b.
==PAGE:60==
50
Preliminary designs and implementations
(a) Cache enabled
(b) Cache disabled
Figure 4.5: SAXPY tests
==PAGE:61==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
51
Also in these tests (as we already saw in the SDOT case) the Optimization
Level -O3 did not provide a signicant decrease of the execution times over the
Optimization Level -O2 and the two curves overlap again.
As reported in the table below, in this case, the speed-up factors are not as im-
pressive as the SDOT case. This is mainly because the SAXPY performs simpler
operations (there is no nal sum as in the SDOT case and the operations are
basically just multiply-add) and, therefore, there is less room for improvements.
Optimization Level
Speed-up factor
-O1 (custom)
∼2, 01×
-O2 (custom)
∼2, 10×
-O3 (custom)
∼2, 11×
-O3 (NEON intrinsic)
∼3, 63×
Table 4.2: SAXPY Optimization Levels vs. speed-up factors
One thing that is consistent in both SAXPY and SDOT tests, though, is that
the speed-up obtained with the NEON intrinsic approach is still almost twice
as high as the other methodologies.
We want also to underline that the considerations made about caching and the
NEON curve knee here are even more noticeable (see Figure 4.5a).
4.1.2.5
SGEMM function
The third and most challenging routine implemented was the SGEMM function.
This is a comprehensive function for matrix multiplication and accumulation
that provides options to use the transposed versions of the input matrices. We
paid particular attention to the implementation of this routine because, as al-
ready mentioned, it is a standard function for benchmarking tests. The routine
is dened as follows in the BLAS library:
FUNCTION SGEMM(TRANSA, TRANSB, M, N, K, ALPHA, A, LDA, B, LDB, BETA, C, LDC
)
C ←−α · op(A) · op(B) + βC
(4.5)
==PAGE:62==
52
Preliminary designs and implementations
where op(X) can be:
op(X) = X, XT , XH
(4.6)
according to the TRANSA/TRANSB parameters and op(A) is a m × k matrix, op(B)
a k × n matrix and C a m × n matrix.
As it only served for benchmarking purposes, only the version with direct ma-
trices has been implemented for NEON. The full code is quite long and can be
found in the Appendix A. Here we show just an excerpt for reference:
1
static
ADE_API_RET_T
sgemm_custom_gp (ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSA ,
ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSB ,ADE_INT32_T M,ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_INT32_T K, ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
ALPHA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *
A, ADE_INT32_T LDA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *B,ADE_INT32_T LDB ,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T BETA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * C,ADE_INT32_T
LDC)
2
{
3
ADE_INT32_T i,info ,j,l,ncola ,nrowa ,nrowb ,lin_idx ,
lin_idx2;
4
ADE_BOOL_T
nota ,notb;
5
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
temp;
84
else if(BETA !=1.0)
85
{
86
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
87
{
88
lin_idx = i*N+j;
89
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
90
}
91
}
92
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
93
{
94
lin_idx = l*N+j;
95
if (B[lin_idx ]!=0.0)
96
{
97
temp = ALPHA*B[lin_idx ];
98
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
99
{
100
lin_idx=i*N+j;
101
lin_idx2=i*K+l;
102
C[lin_idx] = C[lin_idx] + temp* A[lin_idx2 ];
103
}
104
}
==PAGE:63==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
53
105
}
In this code, we adapted the one-based indexing of Fortran but the Column-
major order was left as it was and handled by changing matrix order and/or
transpose parameter the same way as cblas interface. This has been modied in
the NEON implementation to t best the Row-major ordering of the matrices
in the main memory. This allowed to use just a single VLD1 instruction to ll-in
a Q register with 4 consecutive elements of a row of op(A) matrix instead of
lling the single lanes separately (as it had to be done for op(B) matrix).
The main instructions used are similar to the SDOT ones as the core of the
algorithm is the dot-product between the rows of op(A) and the columns of
op(B).
The considerations regarding loop improvements and the use of the
restrict keyword were applied as well.
In this case, though, also the VMUL instruction was used to perform the βC
operation and the VLD1Q_LANE instruction was adopted to ll a vector with the
elements of the columns of op(B) (which were not consecutive because of the
Row-major ordering and thus didn't allow the VLD1 operation).
An excerpt of the nal code that represent the NEON intrinsics version of the
previous code is the following:
1
static
ADE_API_RET_T
sgemm_NEON_intrinsic (ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSA ,
ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSB , ADE_INT32_T M, ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_INT32_T K, ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
ALPHA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
* __restrict A, ADE_INT32_T LDA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *
__restrict B, ADE_INT32_T LDB , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T BETA ,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict C, ADE_INT32_T
LDC)
2
{
3
float32x4_t
mata_q , matb_q , matc_q;
4
float32x4_t
vecalpha_q ={ALPHA , ALPHA , ALPHA , ALPHA };
5
float32x4_t
vecbeta_q ={BETA , BETA , BETA , BETA };
6
float32x4_t
stemp_q = {0.0 , 0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
7
float32x2_t
tmp [2];
8
ADE_INT32_T mM , mN , mK , Mtemp , Ntemp , Ktemp;
9
ADE_INT32_T
lin_idx3_temp1 , lin_idx3_temp2 ,
lin_idx3_temp3 ;
55
mK = K%4;
56
Ktemp = K - mK;
132
else if(BETA !=1.0)
==PAGE:64==
54
Preliminary designs and implementations
133
{
134
if (mN !=0)
135
{
136
for (j=0;j<mN;j++)
137
{
138
lin_idx = i*N+j;
139
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
140
}
141
}
142
for (j=0;j<( Ntemp & ~3);j+=4)
143
{
144
lin_idx = i*N+j+mN;
145
146
matc_q = vld1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx ]);
147
matc_q = vmulq_f32(matc_q , vecbeta_q);
148
vst1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx], matc_q);
149
}
150
}
151
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
152
{
153
lin_idx = i*N+j;
154
dot_prod = 0;
155
stemp_q = vld1q_dup_f32 (& zero);
156
157
if (mK !=0)
158
{
159
for (l=0;l<mK;l++)
160
{
161
lin_idx2 = i*K+l;
162
lin_idx3 = l*N+j;
163
dot_prod = dot_prod + A[lin_idx2] * B[lin_idx3 ];
164
}
165
}
166
for (l=0;l<( Ktemp & ~3);l+=4)
167
{
168
lin_idx2 = i*K+l+mK;
169
lin_idx3 = (l+mK)*N+j;
170
lin_idx3_temp1 = (l+mK+1)*N+j;
171
lin_idx3_temp2 = (l+mK+2)*N+j;
172
lin_idx3_temp3 = (l+mK+3)*N+j;
173
174
matb_q= vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[lin_idx3],matb_q ,0);
175
matb_q= vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[ lin_idx3_temp1 ],matb_q ,1);
176
matb_q= vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[ lin_idx3_temp2 ],matb_q ,2);
177
matb_q= vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[ lin_idx3_temp3 ],matb_q ,3);
178
mata_q = vld1q_f32 (&A[lin_idx2 ]);
179
==PAGE:65==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
55
180
stemp_q = vmlaq_f32(stemp_q , mata_q , matb_q);
181
}
182
tmp [0] = vget_high_f32(stemp_q);
183
tmp [1] = vget_low_f32 (stemp_q);
184
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [1]);
185
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [0]);
186
dot_prod = dot_prod + vget_lane_f32 (tmp[0], 0);
187
C[lin_idx] =
C[lin_idx] + ALPHA * dot_prod;
188
}
4.1.2.6
SGEMM experimental results
Regarding the testing methodology of the SGEMM function, the procedure is
the same as the previous SDOT and SAXPY functions, although minor changes
were applied in order to target a Level 3 function:
• The α and β parameters were set to an integer value dierent from 0 or 1
to test the performance of the function in its full functionality
• The input operands (op(A) and op(B)) are now square matrices with dif-
ferent dimensions. In this case we decided to iterate the test 30 times with
matrices whose size span from 2 × 2 to 700 × 700
• The number of trials was set to 2 for each test
Apart from these modications all the details and considerations about opti-
mization options, use of the timer and caches are still valid for this test.
The results obtained using the described procedure can be found in the following
pages. In these gures, the three Optimization Levels -O1, -O2 and -O3 are not
distinguishable as we got almost the same timing results for each case. As a
consequence of this, the three curves overlap and only the -O3 curve is visible.
==PAGE:66==
56
Preliminary designs and implementations
Figure 4.6: SGEMM tests with cache enabled. Opt. Level -O1, Opt. Level
-O2 and Opt. Level -O3 curves overlap.
==PAGE:67==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
57
Figure 4.7: SGEMM tests with cache disabled. Opt. Level -O1, Opt. Level
-O2 and Opt. Level -O3 curves overlap.
==PAGE:68==
58
Preliminary designs and implementations
Some interesting things can be seen in Figure 4.6. First, there is a discontinuity
in the trend of the curves for matrices dimensions of 350×350. This is reected
by some extent also in the speed-up factors as it can be seen in the next table:
Optimization Level
Speed-up factor
(before 350 × 350)
Speed-up factor
(after 350 × 350)
-O1 (custom)
∼3, 42×
∼2, 66×
-O2 (custom)
∼3, 44×
∼2, 67×
-O3 (custom)
∼3, 45×
∼2, 67×
-O3 (NEON intrinsic)
∼6, 35×
∼7, 85×
Table 4.3: SGEMM Optimization Levels vs. speed-up factors
This can be a cache ineciency issue since the amount of memory needed to
store a matrix of single precision oating-point elements with dimensions of
350 × 350 is:
350 × 350 × 32 bits = 490 KB
(4.7)
Since the L1 (32 KB) and L2 (512 KB) caches in the Processing System of
the ZynqTM are non-inclusive they can store in total up to 544 KB of data.
Matrices with dimensions greater than 350 × 350 exceed that capacity, meaning
that the data caches hit-rate in those cases may abruptly decrease if memory
access is not handled properly, making the whole process more DDR dependent
and, hence, slower.
This may explain why the trends are more regular before 350×350 and suddenly
become more jagged after that dimension and also why we don't see disconti-
nuities in the cache-disabled test in which DDR is used all the time (it must be
noted, though, that the execution times are, by contrast, much higher).
The tests also show that the speed-up factors obtained for SGEMM function
are similar to the SDOT one and that the NEON intrinsic solution is still way
faster than the others and that the various optimization levels lead to almost
the same results, with minimal dierences.
==PAGE:69==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
59
4.1.3
Implementation of SGEMM function in the PL
Since the aim of this work is the implementation of hardware accelerators, we
decided to implement on the Programmable Logic (PL) an architecture that
resembled the instructions executed by the NEON units in the SGEMM case to
see how the two approaches performed compared to each other.
In doing this we took in consideration just the basic A × B multiplication, with
α = 1 and β = 0 and without transposing the matrices. The architecture to
be implemented had to perform the operations that were done for every single
element of the resulting matrix C in the same fashion as the NEON units.
The architectures to be implemented had to execute the following tasks:
• Retrieve the input matrices using an AXI DMA and a 32-bit AXI Stream
interface
• For every element of matrix C perform the dot-products between the rows
of matrix A and columns of matrix B using dierent levels of parallelism
• Output the resulting matrix using the same DMA but with a dierent
AXI Stream interface
In order to get timing and resource estimation reports from the HLS tool, the C
matrix dimensions were xed to 32×32. The input matrices were square matrices
with the same dimensions of C. The dimensions 32 × 32 were chosen because
in this way each matrix has 1024 oating-point elements. AXI DMA transfers
with more than 1024 words cannot be sent with just one transaction and thus
require to be split in multiple transfers, increasing the whole communication
overhead.
Moreover, even with 32×32 matrices, to implement a fully parallel architecture
(parallelism = 32) the number of resources required was a considerable percent-
age of the available resources of the Z-7020 ZynqTM device on the Zedboard and
the nal design would occupy almost the entire FPGA (if we take into account
the resources needed by the AXI DMA and the interconnections).
Three dierent solutions were developed to measure the impact of the degree of
parallelism of the PL over the achievable performance. The parallelism values
chosen for the three solutions were respectively: 4 (the same parallelism of the
NEON architecture), 16 and 32 (the maximum parallelism directly achievable
with 32x32 matrices).
==PAGE:70==
60
Preliminary designs and implementations
In the parallelism 32 case, all the possible optimizations explained in the various
HLS application notes and user guides have been used in order to obtain a
pipelined architecture capable of maximizing the performance of the hardware
accelerator.
Experimental results of the three implementations (as shown in the Vivado HLS
synthesis report), compared to the results obtained with the software approach,
can be found in the following tables and gures. The tables show both the num-
ber of clock cycles needed to perform the operations and the actual execution
time while the gures show a graphic representation of these execution times.
The benchmarks presented cover the following cases:
• Non-optimized custom Fortran translation (SW -O0)
• Custom Fortran translation with Optimization Level set to -O1 (SW -O1)
• Custom Fortran translation with Optimization Level set to -O2 (SW -O2)
• Custom Fortran translation with Optimization Level set to -O3 (SW -O3)
• NEON intrinsic version of the code with an Optimization Level of -O3 (SW
NEON)
• Custom hardware IP core realized in Vivado HLS with the specied par-
allelism (HW (HLS))
In the software (SW) cases the number of clock cycles were measured using the
same application developed for the SGEMM tests. Since the timer frequency
runs at half the CPU frequency, to obtain the actual number of clock cycles
employed by the CPU, we multiplied by two the timer values. In the hardware
(HW) case, instead, the Vivado HLS tool output directly the precise latency
interval of the developed IP core, as well as the resources estimation and the
scheduling details.
Regarding the execution time, to nd the values in nanoseconds we multiplied
the previous numbers of clock cycles by the corresponding clock period of the
PS/PL. In the SW cases the clock period is 1.5 ns, corresponding to a frequency
of 667 MHz, while in the HW case the target clock frequency is 100 MHz
equivalent to a clock period of 10 ns.
==PAGE:71==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
61
N. of clock
cycles per
execution
Clock
period
(ns)
Execution
time
(ns)
SW (custom, No Optimization)
1301184
1,5
1951776
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O1)
340830
1,5
511245
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O2)
339392
1,5
509088
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O3)
337138
1,5
505707
SW (NEON intrinsic, Opt. Level -O3)
206746
1,5
310119
HW (HLS hardware IP core)
110663
10
1106630
Table 4.4: Software vs. hardware IP (with parallelism of 4) N. of clock cycles
and execution times for SGEMM function
Figure 4.8: Software vs. hardware IP (with parallelism of 4) execution times
for SGEMM function
==PAGE:72==
62
Preliminary designs and implementations
N. of clock
cycles per
execution
Clock
period
(ns)
Execution
time
(ns)
SW (custom, No Optimization)
1301184
1,5
1951776
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O1)
340830
1,5
511245
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O2)
339392
1,5
509088
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O3)
337138
1,5
505707
SW (NEON intrinsic, Opt. Level -O3)
206746
1,5
310119
HW (HLS hardware IP core)
53319
10
533190
Table 4.5: Software vs. hardware IP (with parallelism of 16) N. of clock cycles
and execution times for SGEMM function
Figure 4.9: Software vs. hardware IP (with parallelism of 16) execution times
for SGEMM function
==PAGE:73==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
63
N. of clock
cycles per
execution
Clock
period
(ns)
Execution
time
(ns)
SW (custom, No Optimization)
1301184
1,5
1951776
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O1)
340830
1,5
511245
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O2)
339392
1,5
509088
SW (custom, Opt. Level -O3)
337138
1,5
505707
SW (NEON intrinsic, Opt. Level -O3)
206746
1,5
310119
HW (HLS hardware IP core)
4274
10
42740
Table 4.6: Software vs. hardware IP (with parallelism of 32) N. of clock cycles
and execution times for SGEMM function
Figure 4.10: Software vs. hardware IP (with parallelism of 32) execution times
for SGEMM function
==PAGE:74==
64
Preliminary designs and implementations
As we can see from the tables and histograms, having the same parallelism on
both the PS and PL does not lead to the same results. This is because, even if
the number of clock cycles employed by the custom IP core to output the results
is almost half compared to the most optimized NEON intrinsic case and almost
one third of the automatic vectorizations cases, the clock in the FPGA is much
slower than the CPU's one. Therefore, the execution time is much higher in the
PL than in the PS.
With a parallelism of 16 in the custom IP core we get almost the same execution
time than in the compiler-optimized cases but this solution is still slow when
compared to the NEON intrinsic one.
We estimated that, in order to have the same execution time on both the NEON
intrinsic case and in the hardware IP case, a parallelism of at least 26 is needed
for the hardware implementation. We based this assumption on the following
formula:
PS
clock
frequency
×
NEON
parallelism
=
PL
clock
frequency
×
IP
core
parallelism
(4.8)
Once the parallelism of the hardware IP core exceeds this theoretical cross-
point the hardware architecture starts being faster than the PS implementation.
This is reected by Figure 4.10 which shows the performance of the hardware
accelerator with a parallelism of 32.
The speed-up factors for the three dierent hardware implementations are sum-
marized in the table below (these factors are calculated in relation to the NEON
intrinsic case):
Hardware accelerator
parallelism
Speed-up
factor
4
∼0, 28×
16
∼0, 58×
32
∼7, 26×
Table 4.7: HW accelerator parallelism vs. speed-up factors
Unfortunately, this performance boost comes with a price. The number of re-
sources needed to implement the parallelism 32 solution is indeed very high. The
following gure shows the estimated resources utilization report from Vivado
HLS for this latest hardware IP solution. Please consider that the additional
resources needed to implement the AXI DMA are not included in this gure.
==PAGE:75==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
65
Figure 4.11: HLS Matrix Multiplication with parallelism 32 estimated re-
sources utilization
To implement a single oating-point multiplier 3 DSP48E blocks are needed
while to implement a single oating-point adder additional 2 DSP48E block are
employed. If we take that into account we can gure out that implementing
oating-point operations on the Programmable Logic is not a good solution,
also considering that, to match the NEON units performance, a high degree of
parallelism is required. This statement is even more important if we target the
smaller 7-series ZynqTM devices like Z-7010 or Z-7020 (as we did in this work)
which have a limited amount of resources.
In our case we managed to t in the PL an accelerator faster than the NEON
units without eort. This may not always be the case for more complex designs
to be implemented on the Z-7010 or Z-7020 and, during the partitioning phase
of the project, the use of NEON units for oating-point operations instead of
an hardware accelerator in the PL is a design choice to consider.
We will also show later in this work that, while the PL is not particularly
suited for oating-point operations, it is very convenient for integer data-types
computations, especially because:
• It allows to work with custom-length word sizes and, hence, to tailor the
hardware architecture to specic needs
• The DSP48E blocks can be used to their full potential with operands
whose word-lengths do not exceed the 25 × 18 dimensions of the inner
==PAGE:76==
66
Preliminary designs and implementations
multiplier
• Less resources are required to achieve good performance
After testing the speed performance of the two approaches we performed also
some power measurements to evaluate the power consumption of the ZynqTM
in both cases.
To measure the power consumption we used the current-sense (J21) pin-headers
available on the Zedboard. The J21 headers straddle a 10 mΩ, 1 %, 1 W cur-
rent sense SMD resistor which is placed in series with the 12 V power supply,
specically to measure the power consumption of the entire board. The power
can be calculated, in fact, using the following formula:
P =
Vm
10 mΩ· 12 V
[W]
(4.9)
where Vm is the voltage drop (in millivolt) across the SMD resistor. A 6-digits
Agilent multimeter was used to measure Vm. The actual setup conguration
can be found in Figure 4.12 below.
Figure 4.12: Power measurements setup
The tests were performed targeting three dierent designs:
• PS + NEON units with intrinsics optimization (without any IP core in-
stantiated in the PL)
• PS + HW IP core with parallelism=4
• PS + HW IP core with parallelism=32
==PAGE:77==
4.1 NEON SW acceleration
67
For each design we measured the power consumption of the board during ve
dierent stages:
1. When powering the board
2. During the conguration phase
3. After the conguration phase
4. During the execution of the application (thousands of matrix multiplica-
tions were executed in order to have enough time to perform the measure-
ments correctly)
5. After the execution of the application
The results obtained are shown in the following table:
PS+NEON
no PL
(W)
PS+PL
parallelism 4
(W)
PS+PL
parallelism 32
(W)
Power-on
2,349
2,345
2,324
During conguration
2,365
2,358
2,342
After conguration
2,255
2,255
2,240
Application running
3,472
3,467
3,501
After run
3,382
3,432
3,469
Table 4.8: Power consumption
As it can be seen from the table, the power consumption for the three designs
is almost the same. This means that the FPGA (and the ZynqTM device in
general) has a low impact on the overall power consumption and so it is for the
dierent parallelism architectures. Thus, in this case, to compare the dierent
designs, it makes more sense to evaluate the impact on energy consumption
rather than on power consumption and the execution time becomes again a
crucial factor.
The shaded areas in Figure 4.13 represent the energy consumption of the tested
solutions. It can be noted that, the faster is the implementation, the lower is
the execution time and more energy can be saved. In other words, the fastest
implementation is also the most power ecient one and this opens up a new
frequency trade-o to take into account: raising the operating frequency may
slightly increase the overall power consumption but will decrease the execution
time, improving power eciency. This aspect is very important especially in
==PAGE:78==
68
Preliminary designs and implementations
those cases where many accelerators are employed simultaneously (e.g. data
centers) because the energy that can be saved from a single accelerator is mul-
tiplied by a consistent factor.
Figure 4.13: Energy consumption of the tested designs
A nal word has to be said about DRAM power consumption. It can be noted
that power consumption for the two subsequent idle states (before and after the
execution of the application) changes signicantly. As it will be demonstrated
in the next section with the Stereo Filters design, this is related to the DRAM
usage as these memories are responsible for almost 1
3 of the total run-time and
after-run power consumption. All the designs tested, as a matter of facts, use
the DDRs available on-board of the Zedboard. These memories are activated
and congured when launching the application and remain active even after the
application is executed.
Unfortunately, at this moment, it seems not to be possible to dynamically de-
activate the DRAM when it is not needed, the only way to do it is to disable it
from the beginning, when designing the system within Vivado IDE. This is very
inecient from an energy consumption point of view as almost one third of the
total application run and after run power dissipation is related to the DRAM
memory usage.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Architecture of HW accelerators
69
4.2
Architecture of HW accelerators
After the characterization phase of the NEON units, the next step was the
implementation of the hardware accelerator for the nal application.
As the nal design had to be a fully working real-time audio accelerator, a design
that used the ADAU1761 audio codec available on the Zedboard was needed in
order to check the audio loopback architecture before implementing the nal
architecture.
A stereo lters accelerator was then implemented on the Zedboard as an interme-
diate step before the realization of the nal design. The whole project develop-
ment process contained some procedural key-points that would have been useful
for the realization of a dynamically recongurable audio acceleration platform.
The main technical abilities acquired after the completion of this design in-
cluded:
• The knowledge necessary to prole a software application (as well as an
application that has a HW accelerator) and spot the possible bottlenecks
that will have to be sped up by the HW accelerator
• The knowledge necessary to setup, use and integrate into a working design
the ADAU1761 audio codec by Analog Devices
• The ability to implement and optimize FIR Filters in Vivado HLS
• The ability to work with streamed data in a real-time processing environ-
ment
4.2.1
Stereo Filters accelerator
The design chosen to test the audio loopback is based on the one implemented
in the last lab of the workshop System Design Flow on Zynq using Vivado
by Xilinx®, available as part of the material of the Xilinx University Program
(XUP).
The system itself represents a fully working real-time audio accelerator that uses
the codec available on the Zedboard Development Board to capture and convert
(using a 16-bit Bit Depth and a sample rate of 48 kHz for simplicity purposes)
the sound from an external source, process the streamed data with two (stereo)
==PAGE:80==
70
Preliminary designs and implementations
FIR Filters and outputs the result using the same codec. A block diagram of
the design is shown in gure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Stereo Filters accelerator Block Diagram
The main dierence between this project and the one targeted by the workshop
involve the setup and conguration of the ADAU1761 codec.
In the original design of the workshop, in fact, the FPGA fed the internal PLL
of the ADAU1761 with a 10 MHz clock through the AB2 pin (connected to pin
2 of ADAU1761). This conguration did not work at rst because the PLL did
not lock correctly. Moreover, as explained in the ADAU1761 datasheet and later
in this report, even if the conguration had worked, it would have not made the
most of the audio codec in terms of maximum amount of DSP instructions as
only certain clock frequencies can be used to achieve top performances. This, of
course, would not have been an issue for our purposes (because we use the codec
just as A/D and D/A converter and audio data streamer) but it is always useful
to consider for future development of more complex designs that may require
some kind of processing from the ADAU.
We made the choice of FIR lters for the processing section of the architecture
because the nal design will act like a huge 1024-taps FIR lter with dynamic
coecients. In this intermediate step, though, the FIR lters are simple 59 taps
(static coecients) notch lters centered around the frequency of 4kHz with the
following characteristics:
• fpass1 = 2
kHz
==PAGE:81==
4.2 Architecture of HW accelerators
71
• fstop1 = 3, 8
kHz
• fstop2 = 4, 2
kHz
• fpass2 = 6
kHz
• Attenuation = 60 dB
While the two identical (for stereo processing) FIR lters perform the actual
ltering, the Processing System (PS) is used to perform the following tasks:
• Initialize and congure the whole system (including the ADAU1761)
• Provide the clock to the Programmable Logic (PL)
• Manage the data coming to and from the audio controller
• Check the status of the switches and switch between the various operative
modes accordingly
The Zed Audio Controller is the beta version of an IP released by Xilinx-Digilent
whose purpose is to convert the serial (i.e.
I2S, Integrated Interchip Sound
standard) data coming to and from the audio codec to an AXI-compliant format
in order to be easily accessible by the PS and the other IP blocks.
Finally, the GPIO block is connected on one side to 2 of the 8 physical switches
of the Zedboard and, on the other interface, to the address pin of the I2C
interface of the ADAU1761. The connection with the switches is used by the
PS to retrieve their status and select one of the following operative modes:
• Switch SW0: choose whether a sample has to be bypassed or sent to the
lter
• Switch SW1: choose whether to prole HW/SW performances or free run
the application/lters
All the AXI interfaces in this design were implemented using the Lite version
of the protocol.
The clock used by the audio codec (by its PLL to be precise) was generated by
the Processing System and routed to an external pin of the chip through the
Programmable Logic fabric. As mentioned before, this clock has a frequency of
12MHz.
==PAGE:82==
72
Preliminary designs and implementations
The interrupt outputs of the FIR Filters (created automatically by the HLS tool)
were left oating as they weren't needed (i.e. polling-mode was the preferred
option). The driver of the two custom IPs provided all the tools necessary to
check the status of the two lters.
4.2.1.1
HLS FIR Filters
The HLS tool allowed us to implement the IP and the required AXI-Lite inter-
face very quickly and awlessly and allowed us to place a 1 stage pipeline inside
the accumulation loop.
The pair of stereo lters were implemented using the following specications:
• The input data bit depth is 16 bits
• The coecient are 16 bits as well and are loaded in an array of LUT
memory
• The accumulator register must be at least twice as wide as the input data.
Since the algorithm iterates (multiply and accumulate) over 59 taps, there
is a possibility of bit growth of 6 bits and hence the register is 38 bits wide
• The FIR lter was realized using a "direct form" architecture in a serial
fashion. This allowed to use just one DSP48E block per IP for the main
loop
• The input, output and the control registers for the driver of the IP are
address-mapped and bundled together in the fir_io AXI-Lite interface
with the RESOURCE pragma to be accessed easily via software. Alter-
natively, they could have been implemented as separate ports of the IP
but, in this case, another GPIO block would have been necessary. The
registers (or ports) added by default by HLS are the following:
 ap_start: controls when the IP block can start processing data
 ap_ready: indicates when the IP block is ready to accept new inputs
 ap_idle: indicates when the IP block is in idle state
 ap_done: indicates the completion of an operation by the IP block
4.2.1.2
ADAU1761 audio codec
A fundamental block in the design described above is the audio codec placed on-
board of the Zedboard. This is a low-power stereo audio codec with integrated
==PAGE:83==
4.2 Architecture of HW accelerators
73
DSP (SigmaDSP, 28/56 bit, 50 MIPS) and stereo ADCs/DACs (high quality
24 bits sigma-delta converters that operate at 64x or 128x oversampling ratio)
that support up to 96 kHz sample rate.
The record path includes an integrated microphone bias circuit and six inputs,
each one with an integrated programmable gain amplier. The inputs can be
mixed and muxed before the ADC, or they can be congured to bypass the
ADC. The ADAU1761 includes also a stereo digital microphone input and ve
high power output drivers (two dierential and three single-ended), supporting
stereo headphones, an earpiece, or other output transducer.
In our design we used the line-in and headphones out of the Zedboard (which
are connected to these ports) to connect the sound source and the loudspeakers.
The functional block diagram is depicted in the gure below.
Figure 4.15: The ADAU1761 audio codec
The constraints related to the connection between the ZynqTM SoC and the
ADAU1761 pin can be found in the Zedboard Hardware User's Guide and are
shown in the table below for reference:
The unit can be congured and controlled either using the SPI or I2C interface.
In our case, I2C was used to write inside the registers and setup the chip. The
control port is capable of full read/write operation for all addressable registers.
The ADAU1761 must have a valid master clock in order to write to all registers,
==PAGE:84==
74
Preliminary designs and implementations
Figure 4.16: The ADAU1761 pin constraints
except for Register R0 (Address 0x4000) and Register R1 (Address 0x4002),
that are the registers used to setup the internal PLL that will be used by the
whole system. These registers have to be set up rst.
On power-up, the ADAU1761 must be congured with a clocking scheme and
then loaded with register settings. The registers in the ADAU1761 are one byte
wide with the exception of the PLL control register, which is six bytes wide.
After the codec signal path is set up, the DSP core can be programmed but
in this design it was bypassed because all the processing was performed by the
lters implemented inside the FPGA.
Regarding the clocking scheme, the ADAU1761 uses a exible clocking scheme
that enables the use of many dierent input clock rates. All the internal clocks
(for the converter, the serial ports and the DSP) are derived from the core
clock, which, in turn, can be derived directly from the Master Clock (MCLK)
or generated by the internal PLL.
As mentioned before, to use the maximum amount of DSP instructions, the core
clock should run at a specic frequency, precisely at a rate of 1024× base sam-
pling frequency (fs) (although also 256×, 512× and 768× rates are selectable).
This is necessary to ensure that the DSP perform 1024 instruction cycles per
audio sample, which is the top performance achievable by the IC.
Two base sample frequencies are selectable: 48 kHz and 44.1 kHz. The ADCs,
DACs and serial ports can, of course, use higher or lower sampling rates derived
by these base frequencies by using a divider with a proper scaling factor (0.5, 1,
1.5, 2, 3, 4, 6 scaling factors are selectable).
==PAGE:85==
4.2 Architecture of HW accelerators
75
In our design we decided to use the higher base frequency (e.g. 48 kHz) because
it is the one from which it is possible to obtain the highest sampling frequency
(e.g. 96 kHz). The MCLK was chosen using the following gure (4.17) in which
are listed the PLL lock times for selected frequencies.
Figure 4.17: The ADAU1761 PLL lock times
The MLCK was provided by the Processing System (PS) of the Zynq but had to
be routed through the Programmable Logic (PL) fabric in order to be accessible
from the correct output pin (i.e. the pin connected to the MCLK input pin of
the ADAU1761). In order to have a low impact over power consumption, only
the lower suggested frequencies were taken in consideration. The criteria that
led to choose 12 MHz as MCLK frequencies were the following:
• It had to be among the lowest perfectly synthesizable frequencies (12.288,
13 and 14.4 MHz, although showed a lower lock time, weren't exactly
synthesizable by the Zynq PLL and the actual frequency presented a small
oset compared to the desired one)
• It had to be as fast as possible to lock
Once we had both the PLL input and output frequencies (MCLK = 12 MHz, fs
= 48 kHz, Core Clock = 49.152 MHz = 1024 × fs), the control register related
to the PLL multiplier/divider had to be set appropriately. The complete clock
tree diagram is the following:
4.2.1.3
Software application
An application to run on the PS was needed in order to prole the software
ltering, identify the possible bottlenecks and, later, make the whole system
work properly. As mentioned in the previous chapter, the application had to:
==PAGE:86==
76
Preliminary designs and implementations
Figure 4.18: The ADAU1761 clock tree diagram
• Prole the SW (and HW) ltering
• Initialize and congure the whole system (including the ADAU1761)
• Manage the data coming from and to the audio controller
• Check the status of the switches and switch between the various operative
modes accordingly
To be more specic, the software performs the following tasks:
1. Congure the I2C interface
2. Congure the Audio Codec's PLL (by writing the appropriate registers
and waiting until the PLL is locked)
3. Congure the line in and headphones out ports
4. Check the status of SW1:
• If the switch is on perform HW/SW proling (depending on which
one is selected by a dedicated Symbol in the compiling option)
• If the switch is o run the real ltering
(a) Check the status of SW0:
 If the switch is on pass the audio sample through the lter
 If the switch is o bypass the lter and send the input sample
directly to the output
==PAGE:87==
4.2 Architecture of HW accelerators
77
4.2.2
Stereo Filters accelerator results
After the implementation of the Stereo Filters accelerator we decided to test
the implemented design by running the exact same FIR ltering operations on
both the hardware IP core and the software application and prole the two
executions. In this way, we can estimate the performance boost obtained with
the hardware accelerator compared to the software approach and we can also
check what are the most time-consuming parts of the application.
During the tests 68 dummy samples were sent either to the software ltering
function (fir_software) or to the hardware accelerator (filter_hw_accel_input)
and the application was executed on the ZynqTM device with all the proling
options enabled.
In this preliminary test the GCC compiler did not perform any automatic opti-
mization as the Optimization Level was set to -O0. The code was then executed
as-is.
Figures 4.19a and 4.19b on the next page show the two proling results as
displayed in SDK by the gprof proling tool. As we can see from the highlighted
rows, the performance boost is remarkable as we jumped from an execution time
per call of 6, 823 µs for the software function to an execution time per call of
1, 867 µs for the hardware accelerator, obtaining a speed-up factor of 3, 65×.
These values can clearly be improved by increasing the parallelism of the hard-
ware IP. This, though, was not the aim of this intermediate design as it primarily
served to test the audio loopback, learn how to use the ADAU1761 and learn
how to implement a FIR Filter using Vivado HLS.
An optimized architecture for audio processing will be presented in the next
Chapter, where the nal implementation will be discussed.
==PAGE:88==
78
Preliminary designs and implementations
(a) Software proling results
(b) Hardware proling results
Figure 4.19: Software vs. hardware proling results for Stereo Filters acceler-
ator
==PAGE:89==
4.2 Architecture of HW accelerators
79
After the proling tests, we decided to perform some power measurements as we
did for the HW implementation of the SGEMM function. This time, though,
the aim of the measurements was to check the impact of DRAM memories on
the overall power consumption instead of comparing the HW and SW approach.
The Stereo Filters design was the perfect candidate for the task as it requires
only a small amount of memory, allowing to use only the 256 KB on-chip (OCM)
RAM.
First we tried to run the design targeting the OCM in the linker script settings
of the application within SDK. A linker script, in fact, is used to control where
dierent sections of an executable are placed in memory. We specically required
to place in the OCM both the data segments, the instruction segments, the
heap and the stack. Unfortunately, with these settings, we found similar power
consumption values to the ones obtained in the previous section. A possible
explanation of this could be that the DDR is still congured and initialized
during the application launch, even if it is not used by the application itself.
To tackle this problem, we decided to go back to Vivado IDE and disable the
DDR by changing the settings of the ZynqTM Processing System. A new synthe-
sis and implementation of the whole design was then required and the bit-stream
was re-generated.
After performing the power measurements again we obtained the following re-
sults:
Stereo Filters
DDR disabled
(W)
Power-on
2,322
During conguration
2,340
After conguration
2,233
Application running
2,564
After run
2,551
Table 4.9: Stereo Filters power consumption
As it can be seen comparing these results to the results found in the previous
section, the DDR is responsible for a great share of the total power consumption
(approximatively 1W) both during and after the execution of the application.
We can also notice that now the after conguration and after run values are
much closer.
==PAGE:90==
80
Preliminary designs and implementations
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 5
Dynamic Convolution
design and results
In this chapter we will describe in details the nal Dynamic Convolution design
and how it was implemented.
The main part of this design consist of a Dynamic Convolution IP Core capable
of working in real-time with 24 bit 96 kHz audio signals streams, using Impulse
Responses of 1024 samples that are dynamically loaded for each input sample.
Before the description of the design, though, in the rst section we will focus on
the Dynamic Convolution algorithm and we will explain in details how it works
and the concepts behind the algorithm.
The second section will deal with the description of the general design and the
specic functions of its IP blocks. Particular attention will be paid to the HLS
Dynamic Convolution IP and its implementation since, as already mentioned,
this is the key part of the design.
Finally, in the third section, the experimental results related to this design,
including the HLS utilization estimates, the Implementation results and the
proling results, will be presented and discussed.
==PAGE:92==
82
Dynamic Convolution design and results
5.1
The application: case study on the Dynamic
Convolution algorithm
The benets provided by hardware accelerators are numerous and can be ap-
preciated every time heavy computational eort, low power consumption and
real-time processing is required. Although the real-world applications of hard-
ware accelerators are virtually unlimited and can be applied to a huge variety of
elds, we decided to focus our attention primarily on the high-end audio eld.
This market, in fact, has always been in constant growth and is always demand-
ing for new products with better performances. Audio engineers, musicians and
producers are always looking for the best equipment to achieve a particular
sound and through the years they have developed a great sensitivity and have
become really aware and concerned about the algorithms used in their tools,
especially in their "plug-ins" (i.e. an additional software component that, used
within an audio/video production software allows the user to add audio eects
to already existing sound tracks or to synthesize new sounds from scratch).
As the software algorithms become more complex or demanding, the hardware
must be able to keep up with the performances required both in terms of process-
ing power and data transfer rates. Despite the fact that the CPUs performances
are improving every year at an incredible rate, this is not always sucient for
Digital Audio Workstations (DAWs) to guarantee real-time processing on audio
streams. This is when the hardware acceleration technology comes in.
In recent years, a great piece of audio processing algorithms deal with the em-
ulation of non-linear devices by means of impulse responses (IRs) convolution
techniques. The aim of these algorithms is to carefully reproduce all the tonal
characteristics of the emulated analog hardware using digital devices. This is
done because sometimes the "distortions" introduced by non-linear devices are
pleasing to the ear and sometimes they mimic the non-linear behaviour of the
ear at high levels resulting in distortions that sound loud.
As the name suggests, the traditional linear convolution technique cannot be di-
rectly applied in this case to obtain the processed sound. In fact, this technique
produces good results only when the system to emulate is Linear Time-Invariant
and therefore is completely characterised by a single impulse response. Convolv-
ing this impulse response with an input stream it is possible to reproduce the
linear characteristics of the system with a precision limited on by the length of
the convolution and the accuracy/precision of the impulse response.
In the case of the Dynamic Convolution algorithm, the base concept is similar
==PAGE:93==
5.1 The application: case study on the Dynamic Convolution algorithm
83
to the linear convolution but involves multiple input responses. As a matter of
fact, a non-linear system can be approximated with a linear one only if the input
signal's amplitude falls within the approximation validity range. Thus, the non-
linear process can be modelled by a linear summation of responses to impulses
that are appropriate to the magnitude of each individual input sample. If we
accept this statement it becomes obvious that to characterise the non-linearities
of the process only two things are needed:
• to obtain the frequency and phase response (including absolute gain) at
any particular signal level (or within certain ranges)
• to track the change in these characteristics with variation in signal level
The assumption made can be invalidated wherever a system abruptly change
its response after any particular input, as in the case of dynamic processors
like limiters and compressors. However in the original document by Michael
J. Kemp "Analysis and Simulation of Non-Linear Audio Processes using Finite
Impulse Responses Derived at Multiple Impulse Amplitudes" is assured that in
typical situations this assumption holds suciently to achieve good results.
The impulse responses are not calculated for every input value, otherwise a huge
amount of memory would be required (e.g. for 24 bits 224 = 16.777.216 dierent
IRs) and the whole algorithm would end up being too inecient and resource
hungry. It has to be considered as well that under a certain level below the peak
most devices enter in their linear region and thus can be approximated with a
single response. In practice, few hundreds of IRs are sucient to guarantee good
results.
To obtain the IRs, a sequence of impulses at dierent levels are applied to the
Device Under Test (DUT). In (ref.Sintefex) is hinted to perform impulse tests
at linearly spaced impulse amplitudes between the maximum permissible (full
scale value) and (non-inclusively) zero. The spacing between two consecutive
responses is related to the number of responses chosen. The resulting impulse
responses have also to be normalised in level in respect to the corresponding
input signal's amplitude, thus the mth response (corresponding to an amplitude
of fs −m · d, with fs being the full scale value) must be scaled by:
fs
fs −m · d
(5.1)
A step input signal is preferred over a mere impulse when measuring the IRs
because it retains more energy in the lower frequencies than the latter. The
==PAGE:94==
84
Dynamic Convolution design and results
obtained IRs can still be converted to "unit" responses by rst order diering
the response signal:
y[n] = x[n] −x[n −1]
(5.2)
Once the set of impulse responses (here noted as h1, . . . , hM with hM being the
response to the peak value and h1 the one to the lowest impulse) is available,
the Dynamic Convolution algorithms can be implemented using the following
formula:
y[n] =
L−1
X
k=0
x[n −k] · hS(x[n−k])[k]
(5.3)
where:
S(x[n]) = 1 +
$
|x[n]|
fs
M
%
(5.4)
is the impulse selection function and M is the number of equally spaced re-
sponses.
If the number of responses is too low and/or the discontinuous switch between
two dierent responses is too audible is possible to handle gracefully the switch
by determining an interpolation between adjacent responses.
As it can be gured out, the most resources and time consuming parts of the
algorithm are the coecient loading and the multiply-accumulate operations.
This is the main cause of plugins latency issues and a possible solution about
how to address these problems will be presented in the next section, where we
will go back to the actual implementation of the Dynamic Convolution on the
ZynqTM device.
==PAGE:95==
5.2 Dynamic Convolution accelerator
85
5.2
Dynamic Convolution accelerator
After testing the audio loopback design with positive results, the development
of the Dynamic Convolution accelerator began. This nal design shares many
features with the Stereo Filters accelerator as both use the same audio codec,
the same audio codec controller and GPIOs and almost the same audio data
path. The dierences, however, reside in the presence of an AXI DMA and in a
completely redesigned IP lter, as it can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: The Dynamic Convolution accelerator's block diagram
The AXI Direct Memory Access was needed in order to transfer the 1024 coef-
cient of the proper impulse response for every input sample. As it will be ex-
plained later when discussing the HLS Dynamic Convolution accelerator, those
coecients are signed integers with a bit depth of 16-bits.
To maximize the throughput of the data exchange between the PS and PL the
coecients were packed in blocks of four and transferred via the ACP port using
a data width of 64-bit. This allowed to decimate by a factor of four the total
transfer time that would have been needed to transfer the coecients one at a
time using a non-optimized 32-bit interface.
Both the memory mapped and the stream interfaces of the AXI DMA are con-
gured with a 64-bit data width.
Only the read channel has been enabled
because the transactions are uni-directional (the coecients are only sent from
the PS/Memory to the IP). The maximum burst size of the DMA has been set
==PAGE:96==
86
Dynamic Convolution design and results
to 256 in order to complete a full transaction with a single burst, reducing the
handshaking overhead.
5.2.1
HLS Dynamic Convolution IP core
The main part of the nal system was the Dynamic Convolution IP. The hard-
ware implementation of the algorithm requires a variable-coecients FIR lter.
The specications that had to be matched by the IP were the following:
1. The audio samples word-length is xed to 24 bits in the numeric format
of 1.23, as specied in the ADAU1761 datasheet
2. The sample rates supported have to include 48 kHz and 96 kHz (the max-
imum sample rate for the ADAU1761) and possibly allow both mono and
stereo processing
3. To be suciently accurate the Impulse Responses (IRs) have to be 1024
samples long (even if in many cases most of the information resides in the
rst several hundreds of samples)
4. The IP has to work with a clock frequency of 100 MHz (this is the same
operating frequency of the Zedboard audio controller)
5.2.1.1
Filter parallelism
The second specication, along with the last one, dene the maximum number
of clock cycles available for the computation:
fsamples = 96 kHz
⇔
Tsamples ≈10 416 ns
fIP = 100 MHz
⇔
TIP = 10 ns
Transfer time =
Ncoefficients
Nwords in 64 bits
= 1024
4
= 256 cycles
Available clock cycles = Tsamples
TIP
−Transfer time ≈1041 −256 ≈785 cycles
==PAGE:97==
5.2 Dynamic Convolution accelerator
87
This means that, in order to work with 96 kHz mono audio stream, the lter
must have at least a parallelism of 2. This limit, though, is not realistic as a bit
of time margin have to be left for the CPU to select the proper IR and to pack
the coecients into 64-bit words.
In practice, we saw that a parallelism of 16 was a good balance between perfor-
mance and area occupation. With just 342 clock cycles needed to complete the
convolution (including the transfer time) it also allowed, theoretically, 96 kHz
stereo processing. The design implemented, though, work with 48 kHz samples
because the Zedboard audio controller IP is currently limited to that sample
rate.
5.2.1.2
FIR lter structure
One of the rst choices that had to be made during the implementation was
the typology of the FIR lter: direct form or transposed form (see gures 5.2a
and 5.2b). Usually transposed form FIR lters are more suitable for an FPGA
(a) Direct form
(b) Parallel (transposed) form
Figure 5.2: FIR lter structures
==PAGE:98==
88
Dynamic Convolution design and results
implementation, especially if the lters are really large as in this case. This is
due to the adder tree before the output of the lter in the direct form, whose
stages increase logarithmically with the parallelism of the lter and thus require
extra pipeline registers between the adders to reduce the delay.
Unfortunately, the transposed approach could not be used as the coecients
are variable and thus require a shift-register on the input samples delay line
rather than having registers between adders. In the transposed case, in fact,
is not possible to multiply the delayed samples by the new impulse responses
coecients (which, in the worst case, are modied every input sample) as the
multiplications occurs in parallel for each input and previous input samples are
not stored.
A schematic representation of the implemented architecture can be found in the
following gure:
Figure 5.3: The Dynamic Convolution IP architecture
In this gure each of the 16 columns represent a single DSP Block, including
the accumulation registers. The inputs of each DSP Block are selected using
a tree of multiplexers and are retrieved either from the long shift-register, that
contains the previous inputs, or from the BlockRAMs, where the coecients are
stored.
==PAGE:99==
5.2 Dynamic Convolution accelerator
89
5.2.1.3
Coecients word-length
Since the IP has to work with 24 bit audio samples coming from the ADAU1761,
in order to fully exploit the 25 × 18 multipliers of the DSP48E blocks, the
coecients word-length have to be bounded to 18 bit.
This number, however, is not very practical to use as it is not a power of two and,
in this way, the coecients cannot be packed eciently during AXI transactions.
For this reason, the coecients were chosen to have a data width of 16 bit,
allowing to pack 4 of them in a single 64-bit word during AXI transfers, lowering
signicantly the eective transfer time.
5.2.1.4
Accumulation registers word-length
A very important design choice was the word-length of the accumulation regis-
ters inside the FIR lter. The width of accumulation registers is very important
as it also determines the number of bit shifts needed to accommodate the re-
sulting sum into the output word. If this operation is not done carefully, poor
approximations or ineciencies can be the results.
In order to t the nal convolution sum without truncation or approximation,
for a FIR lter with N taps, L-bit data values and M-bit coecients the accu-
mulation registers should have a number of bits equal to:
L + M + ⌈log2 N⌉= L + M + G =⇒G = ⌈log2 N⌉
(5.5)
The quantity G = ⌈log2 N⌉is sometimes referred to as bit growth.
In our case, having L=24 bit, M=16 bit and N=1024, the theoretical word-
length for the accumulation registers should have been 50 bit. This represents
the worst case scenario, as in the real world the bit growth is strictly related to
the coecients of the lter and to the nature of the input signal. Very often
the accumulation registers with this theoretical number of bits are quite far
from being completely lled and a register with lower bit width can be chosen.
Moreover, the DSP48E slices have just a 48 bit accumulator thus, for a better
resources utilisation, the number of bits should not exceed that value.
In practice, our design was tested using only two Impulse Responses of two
dierent low-pass lters obtained with MATLAB's fdatool. This tool estimated
that the accumulation register should have been 43 bit wide in one case and 42
==PAGE:100==
90
Dynamic Convolution design and results
bit wide in the other, so we decided to set the word-length of the accumulator
registers to 43 bits with a nal shift of 19 bits in order to get only the most
signicant 24 bits as output sample.
As a nal consideration, the right word-length of the accumulation registers
should be chosen accordingly to a statistical evaluation of Impulse Responses'
samples. If this is not possible then the width of the accumulation register inside
the DSP48E slices (48 bits) would be the best option.
5.2.2
Software application
On the Processing System (PS) side a custom application was developed in
Xilinx SDK to perform the tasks enumerated below. One of the two switches
of the design (SW1) has been used for multiple purposes: if it is on when
the application starts then the application proling is performed, otherwise the
application is run normally and SW1 is used to select one of the two impulse
responses. We did that to optimize the use of switches as, otherwise, the proling
switch would have been left unused most of the time.
It must be noted that, since the application tests only two Impulse Responses,
in this case the selection of the proper impulse response has been performed
with the use of a switch. If a complete set of IRs is available, a proper selection
function has to be implemented. In practice, if the number of the IRs of the
set is a power of two, the amplitude evaluation and the selection function can
be performed using just a look-up-table that reads the corresponding n most
signicant bits of the input sample (where 2n is the number of IRs) and outputs
the address of the corresponding impulse response of the set.
1. Load each set of coecients
2. Congure the I2C interface
3. Congure the Audio Codec's PLL
4. Congure the line in and headphones out ports
5. Initialize the 256 × 64bit coecient vectors to be sent from 16 bit coe-
cients
6. FIRST check of the status of the switch SW1:
• If SW1 is on, perform HW/SW proling (depending on which one is
selected by a dedicated Symbol in the GCC compiling option) and
end the execution
==PAGE:101==
5.2 Dynamic Convolution accelerator
91
• If SW1 is o, run the real ltering:
(a) Check the status of the switch SW0:
 If SW0 is on, pass the audio sample through the lter
i. SECOND check of the status of SW1:
∗If SW1 is on, send the rst IR and perform the ltering
∗If SW1 is o, send the second IR and perform the lter-
ing
 If SW0 is o, bypass the lter and send the input sample
directly to the output
==PAGE:102==
92
Dynamic Convolution design and results
5.3
Dynamic Convolution accelerator experimen-
tal results
The nal design was tested in a similar fashion to the Stereo Filters accelerator.
In both cases we proled the FIR ltering operations in Xilinx® SDK targeting
both the actual hardware accelerator implemented on the Programmable Logic
(PL) and an equivalent software function that was executed in the Processing
System (PS).
This time, though, we decided to make a third test where we applied the au-
tomatic vectorization for the software application by selecting an Optimization
Level of -O1 along with the ags -mcpu=cortex-a9, -mfpu=neon and -mvectorize-
with-neon-quad. In this way, we were able to see if the implemented IP was able
to keep up with NEON units performance for applications that did not require
oating-point processing.
During the test application, which was executed on the ZynqTM device with
all the proling options enabled, we sent 1033 dummy samples either to the
software ltering function (fir_software) or to the hardware accelerator IP core
(filter_hw_accel_input). The gprof tool proled the application and output the
results that can be seen in gures 5.4a, 5.4b and 5.4c. From these results we
were able to retrieve information like the number of times each function was
called, the actual time per call and the percentage of the total execution time
dedicated to each function.
The following table summarizes the key results of this proling operation:
Test Target
Time/Call
% Total Time
Speed-up factor
Software proling (-O0)
112, 985 µs
89,99%

Software proling (-O1)
36, 674 µs
74,15%
∼3, 08×
Hardware proling
3, 424 µs
17,78%
∼33×
Table 5.1: Proling results and speed-up factors
As we can see from the table the results were quite good, with the hardware
solution being much faster than the non-optimized software one (about 33 times
faster) but also than the compiler-optimized solution with the NEON units
(almost 10, 71 times faster!). The speed-up factor between the Optimization
Level -O0 and -O1, instead, is in line with the previous experimental results of
Chapter 4 (∼3, 08×).
==PAGE:103==
5.3 Dynamic Convolution accelerator experimental results
93
(a) Software proling results with Opt. Level -O0
(b) Software proling results with Opt. Level -O1
(c) Hardware proling results
Figure 5.4: Software vs. hardware proling results for Dynamic Convolution
accelerator
==PAGE:104==
94
Dynamic Convolution design and results
The main reason that explains why the hardware implementation for this design
is more ecient than the NEON approach (even with a parallelism of 16) and
why, in this case, equation 4.8 cannot be applied is related to the long shift
register (1024 elements) that is part of the FIR lter. The speed-up, in fact,
is calculated as a ratio between execution times. These execution times com-
prise not only the multiply-accumulate operations but also the shift operations
required by the shift-register. These shift operations (which were not present in
the matrix multiplication case) are performed very quickly in hardware where
the data is already available in the registers, while they take a long time in the
software case because the data is in the memory and, thus, a lot of load/store
operations are required.
Moreover, this time, the considerable performance boost by the hardware accel-
erator did not come with a high price tag in terms of resources, as in the case
of the SGEMM function. It can be seen from the Utilization Estimates for the
Dynamic Convolution IP core (gure 5.5), that the amount of FPGA resources
employed by the IP is quite small when compared to the performance boost
achieved. This is because the FPGA can work with custom word-lengths and is
possible to build the hardware in such a way that it makes the most out of the
available FPGA resources.
Figure 5.5: HLS Dynamic Convolution IP with parallelism 16 estimated re-
sources utilization
In this case, for example, a single DSP48E block was used for each multiply-add
operation on integers with word-lengths of 24 and 16 bits, requiring only 16 DSP
blocks to implement an architecture with parallelism 16. This was not possible
in the SGEMM case because the data type was oating-point and, to implement
an architecture with parallelism 32, 162 DSP blocks were required. On the other
==PAGE:105==
5.3 Dynamic Convolution accelerator experimental results
95
hand, using a 32-bit CPU, such as the Cortex-A9 in the ZynqTM, to perform
operations between 24-bit and 16-bit variables can lead to ineciencies as we
proved with this test.
To end this section, in gure 5.6 we show the implementation results for this
design as reported in Vivado IDE. Even if the design is quite elaborated we
managed to ll just a bit more than half of the FPGA resources of the Z-
7020 ZynqTM device.
This demonstrates that even the smaller and cheaper
devices of the ZynqTM 7000 SoC family can be suited for high performance
audio processing designs.
Figure 5.6: Dynamic Convolution design implementation results as reported
in Vivado IDE
==PAGE:106==
96
Dynamic Convolution design and results
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
During this thesis work we dealt with hardware accelerators and their use within
the new SoC platforms, which, in recent years, revolutionized the FPGA's world
and completely redened the possibilities of embedded systems. We put a lot of
eort in learning the new tools and design methodologies available for this new
kind of devices in order to make the most out of the available platform. Chapters
2 and 3 summarize these preliminary studies and reect our understanding about
these methodologies and workows.
As we emphasized from the beginning, our aim was to implement accelerators
that could be dynamically recongured to adapt their functionalities to the
CPU's workload in order to oer the most exible solution and relieve the CPU
from the heavy computational burden, while taking the full advantage over the
FPGA's capabilities.
We focused our attention on audio real-time applications because we believe
that this is an application area that can greatly benet from these new plat-
forms. The characterization of the performance of the smallest devices of the
ZynqTM-7000 SoC family was crucial for this purpose because we wanted to be
sure that even cheaper devices are powerful enough to guarantee the required
performance. We succeeded in that by implementing a exible Dynamic Con-
volution IP core.
==PAGE:108==
98
Conclusions
While we were implementing the various designs, we understood that the re-
quirements to be traded-o when designing hardware accelerators for SoC de-
vices are:
• Data formats in use (oating-point, xed point or integers with variable
wordlengths)
• Processing speed in the accelerator
• Resources requirements
• Power requirements
• Partial reconguration requirements
In this thesis work we analysed in detail mainly the rst four items, while the
partial reconguration aspect was left for future developments.
During the characterization experiments with the NEON units and during the
implementation of the nal design we learned few things about the design parti-
tioning between Processing System and Programmable Logic that can be useful
for future designs. In particular, the experimental results obtained during these
phases show that, for oating-point operations and low levels of parallelism in
the PL, the NEON approach is more convenient. Increasing the level of paral-
lelism in the PL allows to achieve better performance, both in terms of speed
and energy, and also allows to exceed the NEON one. This result, however,
is achieved at a great expense of the available hardware resources, leaving less
space for the rest of the design.
The Programmable Logic (PL) is, in fact,
less ecient because it does not have dedicated architectures for this type of
processing and multiple DSP48E blocks have to be arranged to implement it.
These considerations are of utmost importance for small ZynqTM devices, that
have a limited amount of resources. In these cases sometimes a NEON-optimized
software approach may be more convenient.
The PL is also better than the PS in those applications which rely on spe-
cic hardware structures (such as shift-registers) or where operations between
non-standard number systems (decimal, cryptography) or custom word-length
integer data types are performed, as it was demonstrated with the Dynamic Con-
volution design. This is because the PL resources are intrinsically optimized for
this type of processing and, generally, good performance can be achieved with
reasonable resources utilization.
==PAGE:109==
6.1 Future Developments
99
Regarding power and energy, one of the main reasons to use hardware acceler-
ation is to improve energy consumption and power eciency. During our tests
we found out that, since the power dissipation values are very similar for the
various designs implemented and static power is responsible for the majority
of the total power consumption, the fastest implementation is usually also the
most power ecient one as it requires less energy to complete the execution.
Particular attention has to be paid to DRAM usage as it has a great impact
over power consumption and, at the moment, seems not to be possible to disable
DDR at run-time when is not needed or after the execution.
6.1
Future Developments
There are few things that can be done to carry on the project started with this
thesis work and that are presented in this section as future developments.
First of all, regarding the Dynamic Convolution IP, although it is fully working,
it needs to be tested with real impulse responses obtained by proling real analog
audio equipment.
For what it concerns the audio loopback design, the Zedboard audio controller
IP has to be adapted to work with 96 kHz audio samples. This should not be
too hard as all it is required is to modify a counter (frequency divider) within
the IP core.
Regarding the Partial Reconguration aspect, other IP cores need to be devel-
oped and added to the existing library. Once the IP library is lled up with an
adequate number of working IPs, Partial Reconguration techniques will have
to be studied and applied properly to dynamically recongure dierent portions
of the PL with the IPs required in a specic moment by the application running
on the PS. Hopefully, in the meanwhile, the partial reconguration procedures
will be better integrated in the future versions of the Vivado Design Suite.
==PAGE:110==
100
Bibliography
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[ARM10]
ARM. Cortex-A9 Floating-Point Unit, version r2p2, 2010.
[ARM11]
ARM.
Cortex-A9 NEON Media Processing Engine, version r3p0,
2011.
[ARM12]
ARM. Cortex-A9 Technical Reference Manual, version r4p1, 2012.
[ARM13]
ARM. NEON Programmer's Guide, version 1.0, 2013.
[BLA]
Netlib BLAS, http://www.netlib.org/blas
[BNV13]
D. Bagni, J. Noguera, and F. M. Vallina. XAPP1170 - Zynq-7000
All Programmable SoC accelerator for oating-point matrix multipli-
cation using Vivado HLS, version 1.1, 2013.
[CEES14] L. H. Crockett, R. A. Elliot, M. A. Enderwitz, and R. W. Stewart.
The Zynq Book: Embedded Processing with the ARM Cortex-A9 on
the Xilinx Zynq-7000 All Programmable SoC. Strathclyde Academic
Media, rst edition, 2014.
[Fei]
Tom
Feist.
WP416
-
Vivado
Design
Suite,
version
1.1,
2012,
http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/white_
papers/wp416-Vivado-Design-Suite.pdf.
[Kem99]
Michael J. Kemp. Analysis and simulation of non-linear audio pro-
cesses using nite impulse responses derived at multiple impulse am-
plitudes. In Audio Engineering Society Convention 106, May 1999.
==PAGE:112==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[LHKK79] C. L. Lawson, R. J. Hanson, D. R. Kincaid, and F.T. Krogh. Basic
Linear Algebra Subprograms for FORTRAN usage. ACM Transac-
tions on Mathematical Software, vol. 5, number 3, pages 308323,
1979.
[PMC01]
V. Pasham, A. Miller, and K. Chapman.
XAPP219 - Trans-
posed form FIR lters, version 1.2, 2001, http://www.xilinx.com/
support/documentation/application_notes/xapp219.pdf.
[Qin14]
Haoliang
Qin.
XAPP1206
-
Boost
software
performance
on
zynq-7000
AP
SoC
with
NEON,
version
1.1,
2014,
http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/application_
notes/xapp1206-boost-sw-performance-zynq7soc-w-neon.pdf.
[Xil14]
Xilinx. DS190 - Zynq-7000 All Programmable SoC Overview, ver-
sion 1.7, 2014, http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/
data_sheets/ds190-Zynq-7000-Overview.pdf.
[Xil15a]
Xilinx. UG821 - Zynq-7000 All Programmable SoC Software Devel-
opers Guide, version 11.0, 2015, http://www.xilinx.com/support/
documentation/user_guides/ug821-zynq-7000-swdev.pdf.
[Xil15b]
Xilinx.
UG892 - Vivado Design Suite User Guide - Design
Flows
Overview,
version
2015.2,
2015,
http://www.xilinx.
com/support/documentation/sw_manuals/xilinx2015_2/
ug892-vivado-design-flows-overview.pdf.
[Xil15c]
Xilinx.
UG902 - Vivado Design Suite User Guide - High-
Level
Synthesis,
version
2015.1,
2015,
http://www.xilinx.
com/support/documentation/sw_manuals/xilinx2015_1/
ug902-vivado-high-level-synthesis.pdf.
[Xil15d]
Xilinx.
UG910 - Vivado Design Suite User Guide - Get-
ting
Started,
version
2015.2,
2015,
http://www.xilinx.
com/support/documentation/sw_manuals/xilinx2015_2/
ug910-vivado-getting-started.pdf.
[Yat10]
Randy Yates.
Practical considerations in xed-point FIR lter
implementations, Technical Reference, Digital Signal Labs, 2010,
http://www.digitalsignallabs.com.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix A
Appendix A : NEON BLAS
source code
A.1
SDOT implementation
1
/* **************
SDOT
IMPLEMENTATIONS
******************* */
2
/* *******
CUSTOM
GENERAL
PURPOSE
IMPLEMENTATIONS
******** */
3
/* a bare
fortran
translation
from
original
sdot.f fortran
source v 3.4.0 */
4
static
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
sdot_custom_gp2 (ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *SX ,ADE_INT32_T INCX , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *
SY ,ADE_INT32_T
INCY)
5
{
6
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
stemp =0.0, sdot =0.0;
7
ADE_INT32_T i,ix ,iy ,m,mp1;
8
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T tmp1 ,tmp2 ,tmp3 ,tmp4;
9
10
if (N <=0)
11
{
12
return;
13
}
14
if (INCX ==1 && INCY ==1)
15
{
16
m=N%4;
==PAGE:114==
104
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
17
if (m!=0)
18
{
19
for (i=0;i<m;i++)
20
{
21
stemp=stemp+SX[i]*SY[i];
22
}
23
if (N<4)
24
{
25
sdot=stemp;
26
return
sdot;
27
}
28
}
29
mp1 = m;
30
31
for (i=mp1;i<N;i+=4)
32
{
33
tmp1=SX[i]*SY[i];
34
tmp2=SX[i+1]* SY[i+1];
35
tmp3=SX[i+2]* SY[i+2];
36
tmp4=SX[i+3]* SY[i+3];
37
stemp = stemp + tmp1 + tmp2 +tmp3+tmp4;
38
}
39
}
40
else
41
{
42
ix=0;
43
iy=0;
44
if (INCX <0)
45
{
46
ix = (-N+1) * INCX;
47
}
48
if (INCY <0)
49
{
50
iy = (-N+1) * INCY;
51
}
52
53
for (i=0;i<N;i++)
54
{
55
stemp=stemp+SX[ix]*SY[iy];
56
ix = ix + INCX;
57
iy = iy + INCY;
58
}
59
}
60
sdot=stemp;
61
return
sdot;
62
}
63
==PAGE:115==
SDOT implementation
105
64
/* *********
CUSTOM
NEON UNIT
IMPLEMENTATION
************* */
65
/* a translation of Fortran 's dot
product
suited for NEON
UNIT */
66
static
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
sdot_NEON_intrinsic2 (ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict SX ,ADE_INT32_T INCX ,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict SY ,ADE_INT32_T
INCY)
67
{
68
float32x4_t
vec1_q , vec2_q;
69
float32x4_t
stemp_q ={0.0 , 0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
70
float32x2_t
tmp [2];
71
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
sdot =0.0;
72
ADE_INT32_T i,ix ,iy ,m,Ntemp;
73
74
if (N <=0)
75
{
76
return
sdot;
77
}
78
if (INCX ==1 && INCY ==1)
79
{
80
m=N%4;
81
if (m!=0)
82
{
83
for (i=0;i<m;i++)
84
{
85
sdot=sdot+SX[i]*SY[i];
86
}
87
if (N<4)
88
{
89
return
sdot;
90
}
91
}
92
//mp1 = m;
93
Ntemp = N - m;
94
95
for (i=0;i<( Ntemp & ~3);i+=4)
96
{
97
vec1_q=vld1q_f32 (&SX[i+m]);
98
vec2_q=vld1q_f32 (&SY[i+m]);
99
100
stemp_q = vmlaq_f32(stemp_q , vec1_q , vec2_q );
101
}
102
103
tmp [0] = vget_high_f32(stemp_q);
104
tmp [1] = vget_low_f32 (stemp_q);
105
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [1]);
106
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [0]);
107
sdot = sdot + vget_lane_f32 (tmp[0], 0);
==PAGE:116==
106
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
108
return
sdot;
109
}
110
else
111
{
112
ix=0;
113
iy=0;
114
if (INCX <0)
115
{
116
ix = (-N+1) * INCX;
117
}
118
if (INCY <0)
119
{
120
iy = (-N+1) * INCY;
121
}
122
123
for (i=0;i<N;i++)
124
{
125
sdot=sdot+SX[ix]*SY[iy];
126
ix = ix + INCX;
127
iy = iy + INCY;
128
}
129
}
130
131
return
sdot;
132
}
A.2
SAXPY implementation
1
/* ***************
SAXPY
IMPLEMENTATIONS
****************** */
2
/* ********
CUSTOM
GENERAL
PURPOSE
IMPLEMENTATIONS
******** */
3
/* a bare
fortran
translation
from
original
saxpy.f fortran
source v 3.4.0 */
4
static
ADE_API_RET_T
saxpy_custom_gp (ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T SA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *SX , ADE_INT32_T
INCX , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * SY , ADE_INT32_T
INCY)
5
{
6
ADE_INT32_T IX = 0, IY = 0, M = 0; //MP1 = 0
7
ADE_UINT32_T i = 0;
8
9
if ( (INCX ==1) && (INCY ==1) )
10
{
11
M = N%4;
12
if (M!=0)
==PAGE:117==
SAXPY implementation
107
13
{
14
for(i=0;i<M;i++)
15
{
16
SY[i] = SY[i] + SA*SX[i];
17
}
18
19
}
20
21
if
(N<4)
22
{
23
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
24
}
25
26
//MP1 = M;
27
for (i = M; i<N; i=i+4)
28
{
29
SY[i]
= SY[i]
+ SA*SX[i];
30
SY[i+1] = SY[i+1] + SA*SX[i+1];
31
SY[i+2] = SY[i+2] + SA*SX[i+2];
32
SY[i+3] = SY[i+3] + SA*SX[i+3];
33
}
34
35
}
36
else
37
{
38
IX = 1;
39
IY = 1;
40
41
if
(INCX <0)
42
{
43
IX = (-N+1)*INCX;//IX = (-N+1)*INCX + 1; TO
CHECK
44
}
45
46
if
(INCY <0)
47
{
48
IY = (-N+1)*INCY;//IY = (-N+1)*INCY + 1; TO
CHECK
49
}
50
51
for
(i=0; i<N; i++)
52
{
53
SY[IY] = SY[IY] + SA*SX[IX];
54
IX = IX + INCX;
55
IY = IY + INCY;
56
}
57
}
==PAGE:118==
108
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
58
59
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
60
}
61
62
/* *********
CUSTOM
NEON UNIT
IMPLEMENTATION
************** */
63
static
ADE_API_RET_T
saxpy_NEON_intrinsic (ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T SA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict SX ,
ADE_INT32_T INCX , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict SY ,
ADE_INT32_T
INCY)
64
{
65
float32x4_t
vecx_q , vecy_q , vecmul_q;
66
float32x4_t
veca_q = {SA , SA , SA , SA};
67
ADE_INT32_T IX = 0, IY = 0, M = 0, N_temp; //MP1 = 0
68
ADE_UINT32_T i = 0;
69
70
if ( (INCX ==1) && (INCY ==1) )
71
{
72
M = N%4;
73
if (M!=0)
74
{
75
for(i=0;i<M;i++)
76
{
77
SY[i] = SY[i] + SA*SX[i];
78
}
79
80
}
81
82
if
(N<4)
83
{
84
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
85
}
86
87
//MP1 = M;
88
N_temp = N - M;
89
90
for (i = 0; i<( N_temp & ~3); i+=4)
91
{
92
vecx_q=vld1q_f32 (&SX[i+M]);
93
vecy_q=vld1q_f32 (&SY[i+M]);
94
95
vecy_q = vmlaq_f32(vecy_q , veca_q , vecx_q);
96
97
vst1q_f32 (&SY[i+M], vecy_q);
98
99
}
100
101
}
==PAGE:119==
SGEMM implementation
109
102
else
103
{
104
IX = 1;
105
IY = 1;
106
107
if
(INCX <0)
108
{
109
IX = (-N+1)*INCX;//IX = (-N+1)*INCX + 1; TO
CHECK
110
}
111
112
if
(INCY <0)
113
{
114
IY = (-N+1)*INCY;//IY = (-N+1)*INCY + 1; TO
CHECK
115
}
116
117
for
(i=0; i<N; i++)
118
{
119
SY[IY] = SY[IY] + SA*SX[IX];
120
IX = IX + INCX;
121
IY = IY + INCY;
122
}
123
}
124
125
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
126
}
A.3
SGEMM implementation
1
/* ********
CUSTOM
GENERAL
PURPOSE
IMPLEMENTATIONS
******** */
2
/* a bare
fortran
translation
from
original
sgemm.f fortran
source v 3.4.0
3
only 1 based
indexing is adapted , column
major
order is left
as it is and
handled by changing
matrix
order and/or
transpose
parameter
the same way as cblas
interface */
4
5
static
ADE_API_RET_T
sgemm_custom_gp (ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSA ,
ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSB ,ADE_INT32_T M,ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_INT32_T K, ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
ALPHA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *
A, ADE_INT32_T LDA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *B,ADE_INT32_T LDB ,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T BETA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * C,ADE_INT32_T
LDC)
==PAGE:120==
110
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
6
{
7
ADE_INT32_T i,info ,j,l,ncola ,nrowa ,nrowb ,lin_idx ,
lin_idx2;
8
ADE_BOOL_T
nota ,notb;
9
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
temp;
10
11
/* Set NOTA and NOTB as true if A and B respectively
are not
transposed
and set NROWA , NCOLA and NROWB as the number
of rows and
columns of A and the number of rows of B
respectively.*/
12
nota = ADE_FALSE;
13
if (TRANSA =='N' || TRANSA =='n')
14
{
15
nota=ADE_TRUE;
16
}
17
18
notb = ADE_FALSE;
19
if (TRANSB =='N' || TRANSB =='n')
20
{
21
notb=ADE_TRUE;
22
}
23
24
if (nota)
25
{
26
nrowa = M;
27
ncola = K;
28
}
29
else
30
{
31
nrowa = K;
32
ncola = M;
33
}
34
35
if (notb)
36
{
37
nrowb = K;
38
}
39
else
40
{
41
nrowb = N;
42
}
43
44
if ( (M==0) || (N==0) || ( ( (ALPHA ==0.0) || (K==0)) &&
(BETA ==1.0))) return
ADE_RET_WARNING ;
45
46
if (ALPHA ==0.0)
47
{
==PAGE:121==
SGEMM implementation
111
48
if (BETA ==0.0)
49
{
50
for (j=0 ; j<N;j++)
51
{
52
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
53
{
54
lin_idx = i*N+j;
55
C[lin_idx] = 0.0;
56
}
57
}
58
}
59
else
60
{
61
for (j=0 ; j<N;j++)
62
{
63
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
64
{
65
lin_idx = i*N+j;
66
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
67
}
68
}
69
}
70
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
71
}
72
73
if (notb)
74
{
75
if(nota)
76
{
77
/* Form C := alpha*A*B + beta*C. */
78
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
79
{
80
if (BETA ==0.0)
81
{
82
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
83
{
84
lin_idx = i*N+j;
85
C[lin_idx] = 0.0;
86
}
87
}
88
else if(BETA !=1.0)
89
{
90
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
91
{
92
lin_idx = i*N+j;
93
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
94
}
==PAGE:122==
112
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
95
}
96
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
97
{
98
lin_idx = l*N+j;
99
if (B[lin_idx ]!=0.0)
100
{
101
temp = ALPHA*B[lin_idx ];
102
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
103
{
104
lin_idx=i*N+j;
105
lin_idx2=i*K+l;
106
C[lin_idx] =
C[lin_idx] + temp* A[
lin_idx2 ];
107
}
108
}
109
}
110
}
111
}
112
else
113
{
114
/* Form C := alpha*A**T*B + beta*C */
115
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
116
{
117
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
118
{
119
temp = 0.0;
120
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
121
{
122
lin_idx=l*M+i;
123
lin_idx2=l*N+j;
124
temp = temp + A[lin_idx ]*B[lin_idx2
];
125
}
126
lin_idx=i*N+j;
127
if (BETA ==0.0)
128
{
129
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp;
130
}
131
else
132
{
133
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp + BETA*C[
lin_idx ];
134
}
135
}
136
}
137
}
138
}
==PAGE:123==
SGEMM implementation
113
139
else
140
{
141
if(nota)
142
{
143
/* Form C := alpha*A*B**T + beta*C*/
144
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
145
{
146
if(BETA ==0.0)
147
{
148
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
149
{
150
lin_idx = i*N+j;
151
C[lin_idx] = 0.0;
152
}
153
}
154
else if (BETA !=1.0)
155
{
156
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
157
{
158
lin_idx = i*N+j;
159
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
160
}
161
}
162
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
163
{
164
lin_idx = j*K+l;
165
if (B[lin_idx ]!=0.0)
166
{
167
temp = ALPHA*B[lin_idx ];
168
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
169
{
170
lin_idx=i*N+j;
171
lin_idx2=i*K+l;
172
C[lin_idx] = C[lin_idx] + temp*A
[lin_idx2 ];
173
}
174
}
175
}
176
}
177
}
178
else
179
{
180
/* Form C := alpha*A**T*B**T + beta*C */
181
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
182
{
183
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
184
{
==PAGE:124==
114
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
185
temp = 0.0;
186
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
187
{
188
lin_idx=l*M+i;
189
lin_idx2=j*K+l;
190
temp = temp + A[lin_idx ]*B[lin_idx2
];
191
}
192
lin_idx=i*N+j;
193
if (BETA ==0.0)
194
{
195
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp;
196
}
197
else
198
{
199
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp+ BETA*C[
lin_idx ];
200
}
201
}
202
}
203
}
204
}
205
206
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
207
208
}
209
210
/* **************
CUSTOM
NEON
IMPLEMENTATIONS
************* */
211
/* a fortran
translation
from
original
sgemm.f fortran
source v 3.4.0 for ARM NEON
units
212
1 based
indexing is adapted
and row major
order is used to
be more NEON
intrinsics
friendly */
213
214
static
ADE_API_RET_T
sgemm_NEON_intrinsic (ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSA ,
ADE_CHAR_T
TRANSB , ADE_INT32_T M, ADE_INT32_T N,
ADE_INT32_T K, ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
ALPHA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
* __restrict A, ADE_INT32_T LDA , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T *
__restrict B, ADE_INT32_T LDB , ADE_FLOATING_SP_T BETA ,
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T * __restrict C, ADE_INT32_T
LDC)
215
{
216
float32x4_t
mata_q , matb_q , matc_q;
217
float32x4_t
vecalpha_q ={ALPHA , ALPHA , ALPHA , ALPHA };
218
float32x4_t
vecbeta_q ={BETA , BETA , BETA , BETA };
219
float32x4_t
stemp_q = {0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
220
float32x2_t
tmp [2];
221
ADE_INT32_T mM , mN , mK , Mtemp , Ntemp , Ktemp;
==PAGE:125==
SGEMM implementation
115
222
ADE_INT32_T
lin_idx3_temp1 , lin_idx3_temp2 ,
lin_idx3_temp3 ;
223
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
*matb_temp [4];
224
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
*zero = NULL;
225
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
dot_prod = 0.0;
226
227
ADE_INT32_T
i,info ,j,l,ncola ,nrowa ,nrowb ,lin_idx ,
lin_idx2 ,lin_idx3;
228
ADE_BOOL_T
nota ,notb;
229
ADE_FLOATING_SP_T
temp;
230
231
/* Set NOTA and NOTB as true if A and B respectively
are
not
232
transposed
and set NROWA , NCOLA and NROWB as the number
of rows
233
and
columns of A and the number of rows of B
respectively.*/
234
nota = ADE_FALSE;
235
if (strcmp(TRANSA ,'N')==0 || strcmp(TRANSA ,'n')==0)
236
{
237
nota=ADE_TRUE;
238
}
239
240
notb = ADE_FALSE;
241
if (strcmp(TRANSB ,'N')==0 || strcmp(TRANSB ,'n')==0)
242
{
243
notb=ADE_TRUE;
244
}
245
246
if (nota)
247
{
248
nrowa = M;
249
ncola = K;
250
}
251
else
252
{
253
nrowa = K;
254
ncola = M;
255
}
256
257
if (notb)
258
{
259
nrowb = K;
260
}
261
else
262
{
263
nrowb = N;
==PAGE:126==
116
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
264
}
265
266
mM = M%4;
267
mN = M%4;
268
mK = K%4;
269
270
Mtemp = M - mM;
271
Ntemp = N - mN;
272
Ktemp = K - mK;
273
274
if ( (M==0) || (N==0) || ( ( (ALPHA ==0.0) || (K==0)) &&
(BETA ==1.0))) return
ADE_RET_WARNING ;
275
276
if (ALPHA ==0.0)
277
{
278
if (BETA ==0.0)
279
{
280
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
281
{
282
for (j=0; j<mN; j++)
283
{
284
lin_idx = i*N+j;
285
C[lin_idx] = 0.0;
286
}
287
288
for (j=0; j<( Ntemp & ~3); j+=4)
289
{
290
lin_idx = i*N+(j+mN);
291
292
vst1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx], vecbeta_q);
293
}
294
}
295
}
296
else
297
{
298
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
299
{
300
for (j=0; j<mN; j++)
301
{
302
lin_idx = i*N+j;
303
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
304
}
305
306
for (j=0; j<Ntemp; j+=4)
307
{
308
lin_idx = i*N+j+mN;
309
matc_q = vld1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx ]);
==PAGE:127==
SGEMM implementation
117
310
311
matc_q = vmulq_f32(matc_q , vecbeta_q);
312
313
vst1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx], matc_q);
314
}
315
}
316
}
317
318
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
319
}
320
321
if (notb)
322
{
323
if(nota)
324
{
325
/* Form C := alpha*A*B + beta*C. */
326
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
327
{
328
if (BETA ==0.0)
329
{
330
if (mN !=0)
331
{
332
for (j=0;j<mN;j++)
333
{
334
lin_idx = i*N+j;
335
C[lin_idx] = 0.0;
336
}
337
}
338
for (j=0;j<( Ntemp & ~3);j+=4)
339
{
340
lin_idx = i*N+j+mN;
341
342
vst1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx], vecbeta_q);
343
}
344
}
345
else if(BETA !=1.0)
346
{
347
if (mN !=0)
348
{
349
for (j=0;j<mN;j++)
350
{
351
lin_idx = i*N+j;
352
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
353
}
354
}
355
for (j=0;j<( Ntemp & ~3);j+=4)
356
{
==PAGE:128==
118
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
357
lin_idx = i*N+j+mN;
358
359
matc_q = vld1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx ]);
360
matc_q = vmulq_f32(matc_q , vecbeta_q
);
361
vst1q_f32 (&C[lin_idx], matc_q);
362
363
}
364
365
}
366
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
367
{
368
lin_idx = i*N+j;
369
370
dot_prod = 0;
371
stemp_q = vld1q_dup_f32 (& zero);
372
373
if (mK !=0)
374
{
375
for (l=0;l<mK;l++)
376
{
377
lin_idx2 = i*K+l;
378
lin_idx3 = l*N+j;
379
380
dot_prod =
dot_prod + A[
lin_idx2] * B[lin_idx3 ];
381
}
382
}
383
for (l=0;l<( Ktemp & ~3);l+=4)
384
{
385
lin_idx2 = i*K+l+mK;
386
lin_idx3 = (l+mK)*N+j;
387
lin_idx3_temp1 = (l+mK+1)*N+j;
388
lin_idx3_temp2 = (l+mK+2)*N+j;
389
lin_idx3_temp3 = (l+mK+3)*N+j;
390
391
matb_q = vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[lin_idx3
], matb_q , 0);
392
matb_q = vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[
lin_idx3_temp1 ], matb_q , 1);
393
matb_q = vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[
lin_idx3_temp2 ], matb_q , 2);
394
matb_q = vld1q_lane_f32 (&B[
lin_idx3_temp3 ], matb_q , 3);
395
396
mata_q = vld1q_f32 (&A[lin_idx2 ]);
397
==PAGE:129==
SGEMM implementation
119
398
stemp_q = vmlaq_f32(stemp_q , mata_q ,
matb_q);
399
}
400
401
tmp [0] = vget_high_f32 (stemp_q);
402
tmp [1] = vget_low_f32 (stemp_q);
403
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [1]);
404
tmp [0] = vpadd_f32(tmp[0], tmp [0]);
405
dot_prod = dot_prod + vget_lane_f32 (tmp
[0], 0);
406
407
C[lin_idx] =
C[lin_idx] + ALPHA *
dot_prod;
408
}
409
}
410
}
411
// Continue
from here
412
else
413
{
414
/* Form C := alpha*A**T*B + beta*C */
415
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
416
{
417
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
418
{
419
temp = 0.0;
420
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
421
{
422
lin_idx=l*M+i;
423
lin_idx2=l*N+j;
424
temp = temp + A[lin_idx ]*B[lin_idx2
];
425
}
426
lin_idx=i*N+j;
427
if (BETA ==0.0)
428
{
429
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp;
430
}
431
else
432
{
433
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp + BETA*C[
lin_idx ];
434
}
435
}
436
}
437
}
438
}
439
else
==PAGE:130==
120
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
440
{
441
if(nota)
442
{
443
/* Form C := alpha*A*B**T + beta*C*/
444
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
445
{
446
if(BETA ==0.0)
447
{
448
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
449
{
450
lin_idx = i*N+j;
451
C[lin_idx] = 0.0;
452
}
453
}
454
else if (BETA !=1.0)
455
{
456
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
457
{
458
lin_idx = i*N+j;
459
C[lin_idx] = BETA * C[lin_idx ];
460
}
461
}
462
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
463
{
464
lin_idx = j*K+l;
465
if (B[lin_idx ]!=0.0)
466
{
467
temp = ALPHA*B[lin_idx ];
468
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
469
{
470
lin_idx=i*N+j;
471
lin_idx2=i*K+l;
472
C[lin_idx] = C[lin_idx] + temp*A
[lin_idx2 ];
473
}
474
}
475
}
476
}
477
}
478
else
479
{
480
/* Form C := alpha*A**T*B**T + beta*C */
481
for (j=0;j<N;j++)
482
{
483
for (i=0;i<M;i++)
484
{
485
temp = 0.0;
==PAGE:131==
HW SGEMM parallelism 4
121
486
for (l=0;l<K;l++)
487
{
488
lin_idx=l*M+i;
489
lin_idx2=j*K+l;
490
temp = temp + A[lin_idx ]*B[lin_idx2
];
491
}
492
lin_idx=i*N+j;
493
if (BETA ==0.0)
494
{
495
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp;
496
}
497
else
498
{
499
C[lin_idx] = ALPHA*temp+ BETA*C[
lin_idx ];
500
}
501
}
502
}
503
}
504
}
505
506
return
ADE_RET_SUCCESS ;
507
508
}
A.4
HW SGEMM parallelism 4
1
#include " matrixmul_zynq_4_mod .h"
2
3
using
namespace
hls;
4
5
void
matrixmul(
6
mat_a_t a[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM],
7
mat_b_t b[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM],
8
result_t
res[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM ])
9
{
10
int const
FACTOR = MAT_DIM /2;
11
#pragma HLS INLINE off
12
#pragma HLS
array_partition
variable=a block
factor=FACTOR
dim=2
13
#pragma HLS
array_partition
variable=b block
factor=FACTOR
dim=1
==PAGE:132==
122
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
14
15
result_t
accum[PARALLELISM ];
16
result_t
dot_prod;
17
float
alpha = 1;
18
19
// Iterate
over the rows of the A matrix
20
Row: for(int i = 0; i < MAT_DIM; i++) {
21
// Iterate
over the
columns of the B matrix
22
Col: for(int j = 0; j < MAT_DIM; j++) {
23
// Do the inner
product of a row of A and col of B
24
25
accum [0] = 0;
26
accum [1] = 0;
27
accum [2] = 0;
28
accum [3] = 0;
29
dot_prod = 0;
30
31
res[i][j] = 0;
32
33
Prod: for(int k = 0; k < MAT_DIM; k+= PARALLELISM) {
34
35
Prod_int: for(int l=0; l<PARALLELISM; l++) {
36
#pragma HLS UNROLL
37
accum[l] += a[i][k+l] * b[k+l][j];
38
}
39
}
40
accum [0] += accum [1];
41
accum [2] += accum [3];
42
43
dot_prod = accum [0]+ accum [2];
44
res[i][j] += alpha * dot_prod;
45
}
46
}
47
}
48
49
//
--------------------------------------------------------
50
// main
accelerator
function , interfaces
with AXI -S channels
51
void
matrixmul_accel_core (
52
stream <AXI_VALUE > &in_stream ,
53
stream <AXI_VALUE > &out_stream)
54
{
55
56
// Map HLS ports to AXI
interfaces
57
#pragma HLS
RESOURCE
variable=in_stream
core=AXIS
metadata=
"-bus_bundle
INPUT_STREAM"
58
#pragma HLS
RESOURCE
variable=out_stream
core=AXIS
metadata=
"-bus_bundle
OUTPUT_STREAM"
==PAGE:133==
HW SGEMM parallelism 4
123
59
#pragma HLS
RESOURCE
variable=return
core=AXI4LiteS
metadata
="-bus_bundle
CONTROL_BUS"
60
61
62
mat_a_t
mat_a[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM ];
63
mat_b_t
mat_b[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM ];
64
result_t
mat_res[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM ];
65
AXI_VALUE
aValue;
66
int i, j;
67
68
// stream in first
matrix
69
read_a1: for(i=0; i< MAT_DIM; i++){
70
read_a2: for(j=0; j< MAT_DIM; j++){
71
#pragma HLS
PIPELINE
72
in_stream.read(aValue);
73
union { unsigned
int ival; mat_a_t
oval; }
converter;
74
converter.ival = aValue.data;
75
mat_a[i][j] = converter.oval;
76
}
77
}
78
79
// stream in second
matrix
80
read_b1: for(i=0; i< MAT_DIM; i++){
81
read_b2: for(j=0; j< MAT_DIM; j++){
82
#pragma HLS
PIPELINE
83
in_stream.read(aValue);
84
union { unsigned
int ival; mat_b_t
oval; }
converter;
85
converter.ival = aValue.data;
86
mat_b[i][j] = converter.oval;
87
}
88
}
89
90
// do Matrix
multiplication
91
matrixmul(mat_a , mat_b , mat_res);
92
93
// stream out result
matrix
94
write_res1: for(i=0; i< MAT_DIM; i++){
95
write_res2: for(j=0; j< MAT_DIM; j++){
96
#pragma HLS
PIPELINE
97
union { unsigned
int oval; result_t
ival; }
converter;
98
converter.ival = mat_res[i][j];;
99
aValue.data = converter.oval;
100
aValue.last = ((i== MAT_DIM -1) &&(j== MAT_DIM -1))?
1 : 0;
==PAGE:134==
124
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
101
aValue.strb =
-1;
102
aValue.keep = 15; //e.strb;
103
aValue.user = 0;
104
aValue.id = 0;
105
aValue.dest = 0;
106
out_stream.write(aValue);
107
}
108
}
109
}
A.5
HW SGEMM parallelism 16
1
#include " matrixmul_zynq_16_mod .h"
2
3
using
namespace
hls;
4
5
void
matrixmul(
6
mat_a_t a[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM],
7
mat_b_t b[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM],
8
result_t
res[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM ])
9
{
10
11
int const
FACTOR = MAT_DIM /2;
12
#pragma HLS INLINE off
13
#pragma HLS
array_partition
variable=a block
factor=FACTOR
dim=2
14
#pragma HLS
array_partition
variable=b block
factor=FACTOR
dim=1
15
16
result_t
accum[PARALLELISM ];
17
#pragma HLS
array_partition
variable=accum
complete -dim 1
18
result_t
dot_prod;
19
float
alpha = 1;
20
21
// Iterate
over the rows of the A matrix
22
Row: for(int i = 0; i < MAT_DIM; i++) {
23
// Iterate
over the
columns of the B matrix
24
Col: for(int j = 0; j < MAT_DIM; j++) {
25
// Do the inner
product of a row of A and col of B
26
27
Accum_init: for(int k=0; k<PARALLELISM; k++) {
28
#pragma HLS UNROLL
29
accum[k] = 0;
==PAGE:135==
HW SGEMM parallelism 32
125
30
}
31
32
dot_prod = 0;
33
res[i][j] = 0;
34
35
Prod: for(int k = 0; k < MAT_DIM; k+= PARALLELISM) {
36
37
Prod_int: for(int l=0; l<PARALLELISM; l++) {
38
#pragma HLS UNROLL
39
accum[l] += a[i][k+l] * b[k+l][j];
40
}
41
42
}
43
44
Sum1: for(int m=0; m<PARALLELISM; m+=2) {
45
#pragma HLS UNROLL
46
accum[m] += accum[m+1];
47
}
48
49
Sum2: for(int n=0; n<PARALLELISM; n+=4) {
50
#pragma HLS UNROLL
51
accum[n] += accum[n+2];
52
}
53
54
Sum3: for(int o=0; o<PARALLELISM; o+=8) {
55
#pragma HLS UNROLL
56
accum[o] += accum[o+4];
57
}
58
59
dot_prod = accum [0]+ accum [8];
60
res[i][j] += alpha * dot_prod;
61
}
62
}
63
}
A.6
HW SGEMM parallelism 32
1
#include " matrixmul_zynq_32_mod .h"
2
3
using
namespace
hls;
4
5
void
matrixmul(
6
mat_a_t a[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM],
==PAGE:136==
126
Appendix A : NEON BLAS source code
7
mat_b_t b[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM],
8
result_t
res[MAT_DIM ][ MAT_DIM ])
9
{
10
int const
FACTOR = MAT_DIM /2;
11
#pragma HLS INLINE off
12
#pragma HLS
array_partition
variable=a block
factor=FACTOR
dim=2
13
#pragma HLS
array_partition
variable=b block
factor=FACTOR
dim=1
14
15
result_t
accum;
16
result_t
dot_prod;
17
float
alpha = 1;
18
19
// Iterate
over the rows of the A matrix
20
Row: for(int i = 0; i < MAT_DIM; i++) {
21
// Iterate
over the
columns of the B matrix
22
Col: for(int j = 0; j < MAT_DIM; j++) {
23
// Do the inner
product of a row of A and col of B
24
#pragma HLS
PIPELINE II=1
25
accum = 0;
26
dot_prod = 0;
27
res[i][j] = 0;
28
29
Prod: for(int k = 0; k < MAT_DIM; k++) {
30
accum += a[i][k] * b[k][j];
31
}
32
dot_prod = accum;
33
res[i][j] += alpha * dot_prod;
34
}
35
}
36
}
