==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
Fisheries selectivity and 
balanced harvesting  
 
The influence of late-in-life density dependence 
 
 
 
Rob van Gemert 
 
Master Thesis in Marine Biology  
July 2015 
 
Centre for Ocean Life 
Institute for Aquatic Resources 
Technical University of Denmark 
& 
Wageningen University 
==PAGE:2==
ii 
 
Preface 
The present work is the result of 5 months of work at the Centre for Ocean Life and the 
Technical University of Denmark, as part of an Erasmus+ exchange programme together 
with Wageningen University. This master thesis represents 30 ECTS credits, and is a 
requirement for obtaining a degree as Master of Science, M. Sc., in Marine Biology. 
I would like to deeply thank my supervisors Ken Haste Andersen and Nis Sand Jacobsen 
for their continued support and enthusiasm during the course of my work. Their 
guidance has provided an invaluable learning experience, and the passion they have for 
their work is truly admirable. I would also like to thank Paul van Zwieten for taking the 
time to be my supervisor in Wageningen. Furthermore, I would like to express my 
sincere gratitude for the Erasmus+ programme, which allowed me to able to afford my 
stay in Denmark. Lastly I would like to thank Michelle Steenvoorden and my parents for 
always being there for me, I would not be where I am today were it not for them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rob van Gemert 
July 2015 
 
Student number s146101 
Technical University of Denmark 
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
& 
Student number 891025256030 
Wageningen University 
Wageningen, the Netherlands 
 
Supervisors: 
prof. dr. Ken Haste Andersen 
Nis Jacobsen 
ir. Paul van Zwieten 
 
==PAGE:3==
iii 
 
Table of Contents 
Preface ............................................................................................................................................................ ii 
Table of Contents ...................................................................................................................................... iii 
Summary ........................................................................................................................................................ 1 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 2 
Aim and research questions .............................................................................................................. 3 
Literary Review ........................................................................................................................................... 5 
Size selectivity ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Balanced harvesting .............................................................................................................................. 7 
Density dependence .............................................................................................................................. 9 
Model description ............................................................................................................................... 13 
Model output......................................................................................................................................... 18 
Model Results ............................................................................................................................................ 27 
Without late-in-life density-dependent regulation................................................................ 27 
With late-in-life density-dependent regulation ...................................................................... 30 
Model Validation: NEA Mackerel Case ............................................................................................. 35 
Discussion ................................................................................................................................................... 39 
Size-selective fishing versus balanced harvesting ................................................................. 39 
Density dependence and juvenile exploitation ....................................................................... 41 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................................. 43 
References .................................................................................................................................................. 44 
==PAGE:4==
1 
 
Summary 
Conventional size-selective fishing methods, where only large mature individuals are 
exploited by a fishery, have been shown to cause adverse effects to ecosystem size-
structure, disturb trophic interactions, and lead to fisheries-induced evolution. Balanced 
harvesting, where ecosystem components are exploited proportional to their 
productivity, has been proposed as an alternative fishing method that not only prevents 
these adverse effects but should also be able to result in a higher maximum sustainable 
yield (MSY). However, the influence that assumptions regarding density-dependent 
regulation have on the yield result has often been overlooked in studies regarding 
balanced harvesting and in fish stock assessments in general. In this study I first analyse 
how balanced harvesting compares to size-selective harvesting in terms of MSY in a 
single-species steady-state size-based model, with all density-dependent regulation 
taking place early-in-life according to the Beverton-Holt stock-recruitment relationship. 
With these assumptions, I show that balanced harvesting is not able to give a higher MSY 
than size-selective harvesting, and that fishing with a balanced selectivity curve will give 
the highest MSY when a large size-at-entry into the fishery is combined with a high 
fishing mortality. This is in conflict with other studies on balanced harvesting which 
show that highest MSY is obtained when fishing with a combination of small size-at-
entry and moderate fishing mortality. Furthermore, I show how including different 
strengths of late-in-life density-dependence can change the optimal fishing strategy for 
obtaining MSY. For both size-selective and balanced harvesting, an increase in the 
strength of late-in-life density-dependence results in the highest MSY being obtained for 
a smaller size-at-entry into the fishery combined with a lower fishing mortality. 
Empirical evidence on North East Atlantic mackerel shows data that also seem to 
support these results. I therefore conclude that setting the correct size-at-entry into the 
fishery and combining this with the right fishing mortality can be far more important for 
obtaining the MSY out of a stock than choosing between a size-selective or balanced 
harvesting method. Furthermore, I provide evidence against the long-held believe in 
fisheries management that small fish should be protected from fishing mortality, and 
that only large individuals should be fished. I illustrate the importance of clearly 
specifying model assumptions with regards to any form of density-dependent 
regulation, and how very clear arguments should be given for choosing to disregard 
density-dependent processes in fisheries models and stock assessments. 
 
==PAGE:5==
2 
 
Introduction 
One of the aims of a fishery generally is to fish with the highest possible yield. To be able 
to consistently obtain high yields from the same fish stocks without risking fish stock 
collapse, fisheries should aim to sustainably exploit their fish stocks. This means fishing 
with the highest yield possible without negatively influencing the ability of their fish 
stock to regenerate. In this way, the same yield can be attained year after year. This is 
called fishing at the maximum sustainable yield (MSY). 
The conventional method for fishing at MSY is to only fish for the large and mature 
individuals of a stock. This method follows from basic Beverton-Holt theory, which takes 
its name from the authors of one of the most widely referenced works on fisheries 
exploitation theory (Beverton & Holt, 1957). Only harvesting the bigger mature fish 
ensures the survival of the younger spawning adults, so there is always a reproducing 
stock to ensure the survival of the fish stock. This size-selective fishing method is 
achieved by using size-selective fishing gear, where a predetermined mesh size of the 
nets allows smaller individuals to escape whilst retaining the larger individuals. 
However, in recent years size-selective fishing has been challenged due to the lower 
fecundity of younger adults (Bobko & Berkeley, 2004), its disruption of ecosystem size-
structure and dynamics (Shackell et al., 2010; Audzijonyte et al., 2014), and because 
selection for large individuals appears to be causing a genetic shift toward smaller adult 
fish size (Law, 2007). New fishing methods have been suggested which call for a change 
in the selectivity of fisheries. One of these suggested methods is balanced harvesting, 
which proposes to harvest all ecosystem components proportional to their productivity 
(Zhou et al., 2010). This makes balanced harvesting highly unselective, and it is 
theorised that this will leave ecosystem size-structure and dynamics largely undisturbed 
whilst at the same time resulting in higher fisheries yields (Jacobsen et al., 2014; Law et 
al., 2015). Since smaller fish have a higher productivity than larger fish, switching to 
balanced harvesting would mean a large increase in catch of juveniles and of species 
with a low trophic level. This goes against the principles of size-selective fishing and no 
longer ensures the survival of a young spawning stock. Furthermore, none of the above 
studies have examined balanced harvesting for a simple single-species Beverton-Holt 
model, which is often used for fish stock assessments. Nevertheless, a proof-of-concept 
for balanced harvesting can already be observed in African in-lake fisheries, where 
multi-species multi-gear fisheries are able to preserve the natural structure and 
dynamics of the local ecosystem even when applying a high fishing mortality (Jul-Larsen, 
2003; van Zwieten et al., 2012). 
When vital rates of an individual change as a result of a change in its own population 
size, this is referred to as density-dependent regulation. In almost all past and present 
fish stock assessments, density-dependent regulation is only assumed to play a role 
during the larval stage (Rochet, 2000; Brodziak et al., 2011). However, an increasing 
amount of studies point out that density-dependent regulation can also play a significant 
role in determining fish vital rates late-in-life (e.g. Jenkins Jr et al., 1999; Post et al., 
==PAGE:6==
3 
 
1999; Svedang & Hornborg, 2014). Because fishing changes stock size, it can be assumed 
that fishing will change vital rates for any population that experiences some form of late-
in-life density-dependent regulation. This means that the optimal fishing strategy for 
obtaining MSY may change depending on the degree of late-in-life density-dependent 
regulation that a fish stock is subjected to. It is therefore important to know how a 
combination of fisheries exploitation and late-in-life density-dependent regulation can 
influence the structure and dynamics of the exploited stock. This may also yield new 
insights for the debate on balanced harvesting and new insights for optimal fisheries 
exploitation in general.  
 
Aim and research questions 
Switching from a size-selective to a balanced fishing method is currently a hotly debated 
topic in fisheries science, but so far no studies on balanced harvesting have used 
standard Beverton-Holt theory with only early-in-life density dependence. Furthermore, 
we know that fish stocks can also experience late-in-life density-dependent regulation, 
which may influence the optimal fishing strategy. With this study I aim to increase our 
understanding of how different fishing selectivity patterns affect fish stock dynamics, 
and to assess the importance of late-in-life density-dependent regulation therein, using 
standard Beverton-Holt theory. This knowledge can greatly benefit the optimal 
sustainable management of fish stocks, ensuring the maximisation of MSY. Furthermore, 
it can give new insights with regards to the theory of balanced harvesting. In this study I 
will therefore investigate the following research questions: 
1. Between size-selective and balanced harvesting, which fishing method with 
which size-selectivity can obtain the highest MSY from a stock with no late-in-life 
density-dependent regulation? 
2. Between size-selective and balanced harvesting, which fishing method with 
which size-selectivity can obtain the highest MSY from a stock with late-in-life 
density-dependent regulation, and how does this change for different strengths 
of late-in-life density dependent regulation? 
3. How do the modelled stock dynamics for late-in-life density-dependent 
regulation compare to empirical data? 
To answer these questions, I will construct a single-species steady-state size-based 
model based on Andersen and Beyer (2015) where stock dynamics and yield can be 
analysed for different fishing methods and for different size-selectivities. This will allow 
me to test the theory of balanced harvesting using standard Beverton-Holt theory and 
without late-in-life density dependence. I will show that balanced harvesting does not 
give a higher MSY than size-selective harvesting when using this model, and that 
harvesting a species proportional to its productivity will still give the highest yields for a 
high size-at-entry into the fishery combined with a high fishing mortality. Furthermore, 
by adding a set of density dependence equations of my own design into the model, I will 
also analyse the importance of varying strengths of late-in-life density-dependent 
==PAGE:7==
4 
 
regulation. With this, I will show how a difference in strength of the late-in-life density-
dependent regulation of a fish stock can significantly change the fishing strategy that 
results in MSY, and how setting the correct size-at-entry into the fishery combined with 
the right fishing mortality is far more important for obtaining MSY than choosing 
between size-selective or balanced harvesting. To validate my model results, I will relate 
them to empirical data obtained on the North East Atlantic mackerel (Scomber 
scombrus) by Jansen & Burns (2015). 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
5 
 
Literary Review 
This review aims to give an overview of the most important literature on fisheries 
selectivity, focussing on size-selective harvesting and balanced harvesting. Furthermore, 
this review also aims to describe the current scientific knowledge regarding density 
dependence in exploited fish stocks. 
 
Size selectivity 
The theory behind size-selective fishing appears to be simple. In order to avoid fish 
stock collapse, a year class must be given at least one chance to spawn before being 
exposed to the risk of capture, thereby ensuring the continued survival of the fish stock 
(Clark et al., 1973). This means that the size-selectivity of the fishing gear should be set 
to a size larger than the average size at which the harvested species reaches sexual 
maturity, as most fishing gear is size selective.  The optimal size-at-entry into a size-
selective fishery depends on many factors, including the goals of the fishery (yield, 
revenue), fishing costs, species-specific characteristics, and ecological objectives (see e.g. 
Beverton & Holt, 1957; Clark et al., 1973; Skonhoft et al., 2012). Mean size-at-entry into 
the fishery can be regulated by changing mesh size in trawl, seine, and gillnet fisheries, 
and to some extent by changing hook and bait size in longline fisheries (Lokkeborg & 
Bjordal, 1992). Size-selectivity curves, describing the probability that a fish 
encountering the fishing gear will be caught, look different depending on the fishing 
method. For trawl and seine fishing, all fish above a certain size are generally retained in 
the fishing gear, and their size-selectivity curve increases sigmoidally from 0 to 1 around 
the targeted minimum size (Parrish, 1963). The reason that there is no knife-edge 
selection is mostly due to variations in girth for fish with the same body length, non-
uniform mesh size and shape across the net, and due to fish behaviour within the net 
(Parrish, 1963). Instead, gillnets and longlines generally show a bell-shaped size-
selectivity curve, as they will only retain fish within a size range that is limited on both 
sides (Millar, 1992). 
 
Fisheries-induced evolution 
Size-selective fishing introduces a selective mortality to harvested fish species. This 
selective mortality can act as an alternative form of natural selection, causing 
evolutionary changes in phenotypic variation that is genetically controlled. Life history 
characteristics such as size and age at sexual maturity, growth rate, and fecundity are at 
least partly genetically controlled, and subject to this evolutionary change (Law, 2000). 
Numerous studies have shown changes over time in the life history traits of exploited 
fish stocks (amongst others: Veen, 1976; Ricker, 1981; Rijnsdorp, 1993; Millner & 
Whiting, 1996), and often at least part of those changes cannot be explained by causes 
other than fishing pressure and selectivity. Size-selective fishing has been demonstrated 
to lead to slower growth and earlier maturation of harvested fish species in both 
==PAGE:9==
6 
 
theoretical models (Favro et al., 1979; Gardmark & Dieckmann, 2006) and harvesting 
experiments (Conover & Munch, 2002). The subsequently smaller adult body size can 
cause further changes to other associated life history traits. Smaller females are likely to 
produce smaller eggs (Hislop, 1988; Trippel, 1995) or fewer eggs (Heinimaa & 
Heinimaa, 2004), or have a reduced fecundity (Hislop, 1988; Bobko & Berkeley, 2004). 
Alternatively, the larvae of younger females can show lower growth and survival 
(Pitman, 1979; Berkeley et al., 2004). Furthermore, reduced age and size at maturity is 
accompanied with a higher survival cost of reproduction (Hutchings, 2005), resulting in 
a higher reproductive mortality. As a result, this fisheries-induced evolution will 
significantly reduce not only future fish stock size (and thus yield), but also the ability of 
a stock to recover from overfishing (Walsh et al., 2006).  
The rate at which fisheries-induced evolution occurs is not completely known yet, and is 
still discussed. Law (2007) estimated the effects of fisheries-induced evolution to be 
clearly observable on a decadal timescale. Andersen & Brander (2009) calculated its rate 
to be relatively slow (0.1–0.6% change per year). Devine et al. (2012) showed a more 
rapid rate of change in life-history characteristics of exploited fish stocks, and that this 
rate is slower for species with a high growth rate. A meta-analysis by Audzijonyte et al. 
(2013) showed that empirical studies observed rates of phenotypic change in exploited 
fish stocks that are about 4 times higher than evolutionary rates of change calculated by 
modelling studies on the subject. 
 
Ecosystem structure and functioning 
Regardless of whether the observed decrease in adult fish size and age of maturity is 
caused by fisheries-induced evolution or not, it is clear that the size-selective nature of 
fisheries causes a reduction in mean adult length. This reduction can induce a variety of 
changes in the exploited ecosystem, mostly by influencing predator-prey relations. 
Trophic cascades resulting from size-selective fishing can lead to shifts in ecosystem 
functioning. For instance, Shackell et al. (2010) showed that a reduction in average size 
of large predatory fish has resulted in a small trophic cascade towards a higher 
phytoplankton abundance in the western Scotian Shelf ecosystem in the Northwest 
Atlantic, as their removal led to an explosive increase in their zooplanktivorous prey. 
Furthermore, Hockey (1987) has suggested that size-selective harvesting of the limpet 
has led to the extinction of the Canarian black oystercatcher (Haematopus meadewaldoi) 
by depleting their food source. More generally, ecosystem modelling by Audzijonyte et 
al. (2014) indicated that reduced fish body size can result in changes in trophic 
interactions through dietary changes, which has similar consequences as, and is additive 
to, a moderate level of fishing.  
However, for single-species management, Froese et al. (2008) shows that fish stocks can 
be sustainably and size-selectively exploited by only harvesting cohorts that have 
reached their maximum growth rate and biomass. They argue that this increases stock 
biomass and retains their natural (unfished) size-structure, resulting in significantly less 
==PAGE:10==
7 
 
ecosystem disturbance. Furthermore, Cardinale & Hjelm (2012) show that this can 
result in significantly higher yields and revenues. This would mean greatly increasing 
the minimum size of harvested fish, allowing fish to spawn multiple times before being 
exposed to capture risk and avoiding changes in age structure and life history 
characteristics (Cardinale & Hjelm, 2012). However, there is an on-going discussion on 
the validity of the findings of Froese et al. (2008), with Svedang (2014) claiming it was 
based on wrong assumptions and Froese et al. (2015) refuting that criticism. 
 
Balanced harvesting 
The theory behind balanced harvesting appears to be straightforward: that which 
produces more can be harvested more. Thus, all ecosystem components should be 
harvested according to their productivity. Zhou et al. (2010) outline the negative effects 
of not just size-selective fishing, but other types of selective fishing (species, stock, sex, 
season and space) as well. They argue that any type of fishing that selectively removes 
part of an ecosystem component will change that ecosystem´s food web and structure, 
subsequently changing ecosystem functioning. They propose a system of balanced 
fishing, where each ecosystem component is exploited relative to its productivity. Garcia 
et al. (2012) further specified this as distributing “a moderate mortality from fishing 
across the widest possible range of species, stocks, and sizes in an ecosystem, in 
proportion to their natural productivity”. Mathematical modelling done by Law et al. 
(2015), using single-species dynamic size spectra models (as opposed to the Beverton & 
Holt yield-per-recruit model), showed that balanced harvesting results in a less 
damaged size-structure and reduced fluctuations in abundance within a fish stock when 
compared with size-selective harvesting. Furthermore, they also found that balanced 
harvesting leads to a higher MSY than size-selective harvesting, as the most productive 
components are harvested most. Subsequent studies have not only applied balanced 
harvesting to multispecies models, but have also looked at the different combinations of 
selective/unselective and balanced/unbalanced harvesting. Jacobsen et al. (2014) 
showed that unselective balanced harvesting results in the least disturbance to fish 
community and size structure whilst having a higher MSY than selective unbalanced 
harvesting, selective balanced harvesting, and unselective unbalanced harvesting. Law et 
al. (2014) reached the same conclusions when applying different combinations of 
selective/unselective and balanced/unbalanced harvesting to a dynamic size-spectrum 
model containing two interacting species with life histories similar to mackerel and cod.  
The advantages of balanced harvesting have not only been demonstrated in theoretical 
models, but have also been observed in the field. The impacts of two different fishing 
methods on the fish community of two sides of Lake Kariba in Africa have been 
examined by van Zwieten et al. (2012). They found that the Zambian side, which has no 
enforced regulations on fishing, has a higher exploitation level, higher yield, and reduced 
stock sizes when compared with the better-regulated Zimbabwean side, which has large 
un-fished areas. However, fish community and size structure remained intact on the 
==PAGE:11==
8 
 
Zambian side, demonstrating that an unselective balanced fishery can maintain a high 
level of exploitation without disrupting fish community and size structure. 
 
Problems and challenges 
However, the theory of balanced harvesting is still far from being universally accepted, 
and many factors remain unclear. The effects of balanced harvesting have only been 
theoretically demonstrated in a limited number of papers, for a limited number of 
situations. Furthermore, papers examining balanced harvesting have not always been 
consistent in their definition of productivity of ecosystem components. Garcia et al. 
(2012) used “the amount of new organic matter produced per biomass unit during a 
given period of time” as a definition for biological productivity, which has a dimension of 
time-1. Instead, Law et al. (2012; 2014; 2015) used “flow of biomass through the system, 
per unit volume, per unit time” as their definition for productivity, with dimensions 
mass volume-1 time-1.  
In the field, balanced harvesting has only been examined for several African in-lake 
fisheries. Conditions there are very different from those of marine fisheries, not only 
physically but also socio-economically. For instance, balanced harvesting will greatly 
increase the capture of what is currently, and especially in Western countries, seen as 
unusable by-catch. To maximize fishery sustainability and food security, waste of these 
catches should be minimized. Therefore, a change in consumer preference is needed to 
be able to make these fish marketable. This will enable maximum use efficiency of the 
harvested biomass, but will first require a change in consumer thinking and awareness. 
This may not always be easy to achieve, as demonstrated by Freon et al. (2014) who 
show how consumer demand for anchovy is low in Peru, in spite of low anchovy prices 
and even with malnutrition being a serious problem. 
Switching to balanced harvesting will not only require changes in consumer behaviour, 
but will also require major changes in the fishing industry itself. Western fisheries are 
highly selective, often employing a single fishing gear to target a single size-range of a 
single species in a single location during a particular time of year. If balanced harvesting 
is to be implemented in Western fisheries, major changes are needed in fisheries 
management and fishing gear to reduce selectiveness. Inspiration for this may be 
obtained from the African in-lake multi-species multi-gear fisheries. These have a wide 
and unselective catch range and a high fishing intensity, yet have stable yields and are 
highly adaptive to changing conditions (Jul-Larsen, 2003). However, there are many 
differences between lake ecosystems and marine ecosystems, not the least of which is 
their sheer difference in size. The scale at which to implement balanced harvesting 
remains unclear, with Burgess et al. (2015) hypothesising that switching to global 
balanced harvesting is not able to economically outperform not fishing at all, due to the 
lower market value of smaller fish and the increased fishing costs of switching to 
balanced harvesting. However, they suggest that balanced harvesting may be a more 
feasible strategy on a more regional level. 
==PAGE:12==
9 
 
Density dependence 
Population size can affect vital rates such as growth and mortality for individuals of that 
population. This is called density dependence. Density dependence can occur at all 
stages in life, and be one of the major forces shaping population dynamics. Therefore, 
any population model should incorporate density dependence in it, or have a proper 
reasoning for not doing so. The vital rates of mortality, reproduction, and growth can all 
be influenced by density dependence. 
 
Mortality 
Density-dependent mortality can be the result of several different mechanisms. The 
most straightforward of these is cannibalism, where a higher abundance of conspecifics 
increases an individual’s number of predators and thereby its risk of predation. This is 
one of the main assumptions made in the Ricker (1954) stock-recruitment relationship 
for instance. Additionally, an increase in population size can result in increased 
intraspecific competition for an essential and limited resource, increasing mortality rate 
through deprivation of said resource. This resource can be food, but also habitat for 
instance (Myers & Cadigan, 1993). Lastly, an increase in population size may result in 
increased predation risk by a mechanism known as ‘prey switching’, where a predator 
will exert a disproportionally high predation mortality on the most profitable food 
source. This is also known as a Type III functional response, and was first suggested by 
Holling (1959). Should an increase in population size lead to that species becoming a 
predator’s most profitable food source, the predator may choose to predate 
predominantly on that species, increasing predation rate. This has for instance been 
observed for molluscs and crabs in Chesapeake Bay, Virginia (Long & Hines, 2012). 
 
Growth 
Similar to mortality, growth is also influenced by density dependence when there is 
competition for limited resources. For growth, this limited resource is energy. If an 
increase in population density will increase intraspecific competition for the limited 
energy resource, mean individual growth rate will be reduced.  
The ratio between intraspecific and interspecific competition will determine the degree 
to which an individual’s growth is influenced by density dependence. To illustrate, 
consider an individual that experiences 99% of its total competition from 
heterospecifics. An increase in its own population size will increase the competition it 
experiences from conspecifics but will not greatly influence the total competition it 
experiences, as total competition is still largely determined by the competition it 
experiences from heterospecifics. Thus, in this scenario density-dependence will not 
significantly influence growth. On the other hand, when an individual experiences 99% 
of its total competition from conspecifics, an increase in its own population size (and so 
==PAGE:13==
10 
 
an increase in conspecifics) will result in a large increase of total competition, and will 
thus have a more significant influence on growth.  
The ratio between intraspecific and interspecific competition, and thus the effect of 
density dependence on growth, is not the same throughout an individual’s life. Instead, it 
changes with body size. In marine environments, the trophic position of the individual 
will generally vary throughout the individual’s life, increasing with body size. A fish larva 
for instance will generally predate on small organisms with a low trophic level. As the 
individual grows, so does the size and trophic position of its prey, and therefore the 
individual’s trophic level grows as well. This does not only apply to fish, but generally to 
all marine organisms (Shin et al., 2005; Andersen & Beyer, 2006), excluding large filter 
feeders such as baleen whales. As such, an individual of any species generally competes 
for food with individuals of all present species that are around the same size as itself. 
When looking at a marine ecosystem in terms of biomass, it can then be said that the 
ratio between intraspecific and interspecific competition for an individual of a certain 
size is roughly equal to the ratio between biomass of all conspecifics of that size and 
biomass of all heterospecifics of that size. In marine ecosystems, the biomass 
distribution is generally independent of body size, with total biomass in logarithmically 
distributed size groups being equal across the marine biomass spectrum (Sheldon et al., 
1972).  Thus, the ratio between biomass of all conspecifics of a given size and biomass of 
all heterospecifics of that size will be highest for body sizes around the peak of that 
species’ biomass spectrum. From this, it can be concluded that the negative influence of 
density dependence on growth will be highest when an individual has a body size that 
lies around the peak of that species’ biomass spectrum. This peak generally lies between 
size at maturation and asymptotic size (Beverton, 1992). 
 
Reproduction 
Reproduction is influenced by the same density-dependent processes as growth. Any 
process that reduces the energy available for growth will also reduce the energy 
available for reproduction, so long as that process also affects mature individuals 
(immature individuals do not reproduce). Thus, it can be assumed that the density-
dependent influence on reproduction also changes with individual body size, and is 
highest for body sizes around the species' biomass spectrum peak. Additionally, a high 
population density will reduce reproductive rate when there is a limit to the amount of 
suitable reproductive sites available (Dhondt et al., 1992). Furthermore, the proportion 
of females that reproduces for the first time, called first-year females, usually increases 
when population density increases. First-year females usually have a lower reproductive 
rate, either due to inexperience or due to their smaller size. Therefore, when the 
proportion of first-year females increases in a population as a result of an increase in 
population density, the average reproductive rate of the population is lowered (Rodel et 
al., 2004). 
 
==PAGE:14==
11 
 
Fish stock assessment models 
Fish stock assessment models make various assumptions regarding density-dependent 
survival, growth, and reproduction. Density-dependent survival at an early age is seen as 
an important contributor to the regulation of fish stocks, and is described in the so-
called stock-recruitment relationship. This is the relationship between spawning stock 
biomass (SSB) and number of recruits. Early density-dependent mortality is usually 
described with either a Beverton & Holt (1957) type relationship or a Ricker (1954) 
type relationship. The Beverton-Holt stock-recruitment relationship describes that the 
number of recruits remains constant above a certain SSB.  Thus, it describes that there is 
no relationship between SSB and number of recruits above a  
certain SSB value: 
  
 
        
(L1) 
 
Where   is recruitment,   is the SSB, and both    and    are parameters. Assuming no 
density-independent mortality between the egg and larval stage, the Beverton-Holt 
stock recruitment relationship can be rewritten (Andersen & Beyer, 2015): 
 
      
  
        
(L2) 
 
Where      is the maximum recruitment at high stock biomass, and   is egg production 
rate per biomass. The Ricker stock-recruitment relationship instead describes that there 
is always a relationship between SSB and number of recruits, whereby the number of 
recruits declines above a certain SSB due to the effects of cannibalism. The Ricker stock-
recruitment relationship can be described as: 
           
(L3) 
Where    and   are parameters. Even though the Beverton-Holt and Ricker stock-
recruitment relationships have been shown to be able to properly describe the observed 
relationships between SSB and recruitment in fish species, for most fish species little is 
still known about which exact density-dependent processes occur during this early stage 
in life (Myers, 2001; Ohlberger et al., 2014). 
Most stock assessments do not incorporate any other density-dependent regulations in 
their assessment except for the stock-recruitment relationship, assuming that mortality, 
growth, and reproduction rates are density-independent in the post-recruitment life 
stages (e.g. Reed, 1980; Rochet, 2000; Brodziak et al., 2011). However, there is ample 
evidence to suggest that density-dependent processes that occur later in life are also 
==PAGE:15==
12 
 
important factors in shaping marine fish population structures (e.g. Jenkins Jr et al., 
1999; Post et al., 1999; Svedang & Hornborg, 2014). Lorenzen & Enberg (2002) show 
how density-dependent growth can be an important regulatory mechanism in fish 
stocks, and explain how it is important to consider late density-dependent growth in fish 
stock assessments. When density-dependent growth is a significant regulatory 
mechanism in a fish stock, yield and stock size will not respond as strongly to changes in 
fishing mortality as when there is density-independent growth. Thus, “disregarding 
density-dependent growth would lead to conservative reference points for 
underexploited stocks, but would give rise to over-optimistic assessments of the 
effectiveness of conservation measures for overexploited stocks” (Lorenzen & Enberg, 
2002).
==PAGE:16==
13 
 
Material and Methods 
In order to model MSY for various fisheries selectivities and degrees of density-
dependent growth, a variation of the steady-state single-species size-based model of 
Andersen & Beyer (2015) is used. This model is able to calculate the effect of 
exploitation on the size spectrum and recruitment of a stock, with asymptotic size as its 
most important stock-specific input. The numerical solution of the model is used to 
analyse the differences between size-selective harvesting and balanced harvesting, with 
and without late-in-life density-dependent growth. This numerical solution divides the 
population of a single fish species in a given amount of weight classes, and uses the 
stock-specific asymptotic weight to calculate a variety of variables for each weight class, 
including size spectrum, recruitment, and yield. The model is slightly adjusted in this 
study to include balanced harvesting and density-dependent growth. The new model 
equations are given in Table 1, and a description of the equation symbols and units is 
given in Table 2. 
 
Model description 
The theory behind the model I use in this study is based on a combination of size 
spectrum theory (Beyer, 1989) and metabolic theory (Brown et al., 2004). Size spectrum 
theory describes population structure in terms of body size (weight), instead of age. This 
has the advantages that fish size is easier to determine than age, and that body size is 
more important than age for physiology (Winberg, 1956), predation mortality (Kerr, 
1974), fisheries selectivity, and market value. Metabolic theory goes further to state that 
metabolism scales with weight as     , resulting in vital rates such as growth, mortality, 
and reproduction following the same scaling with weight. Specific rates resulting from 
this, which are rates expressed per unit of weight, therefore scale with      . These will 
henceforth be referred to as metabolic scaling rules.  
 
Size spectrum and weight classes 
This model uses body size as the main structuring variable, and I will use individual 
weight   as a measure for size. To obtain a numerical solution, the model uses a size 
spectrum ranging from egg size      to asymptotic size   . This spectrum is divided in 
a number of different weight classes, distributed over a logarithmic scale. The number of 
weight classes is set equal to  , and index   is used to refer to a single weight class 
therein. Equation 1 sets the difference in weight between weight classes, and Equation 2 
describes the weight    of an individual in weight class  . For a proper model resolution, 
  should be set no lower than 1000. Using    and its ratio to asymptotic size    as 
inputs for growth, morality, and reproduction, the model can calculate the abundance 
spectrum and biomass spectrum of a stock. 
 
==PAGE:17==
14 
 
Growth  
Growth is the result of allocating a certain portion of available energy towards weight 
increase, as opposed to activity or reproduction. Conforming with metabolic scaling 
rules, available energy scales with individual weight as   
 , where       (West & 
Brown, 2005). This can be attributed to the fact that energy is absorbed through a fractal 
body surface, as absorption through a normal body surface would scale with an 
exponent of 2/3 (West et al., 1997). Multiplying   
    with the species-independent 
growth constant   gives the total available energy for an individual of weight   . 
Subtracting the weight-specific costs of activity and reproduction from this total 
available energy will result in the growth rate. Cost of activity is approximately 
proportional to weight (Ware, 1978), and governed by the non-dimensional parameter 
   which represents fraction of energy invested into activity and which is independent 
of   . Cost of reproduction depends on the individual’s maturity. It is assumed that for 
mature individuals, investment into reproduction is directly proportional to weight. This 
follows from the assumption that there is a fixed gonadosomatic index (ratio between 
gonad weight and total body weight) for mature individuals, independent of age or size. 
The transition to maturity is determined by Equation 3. Therein, an individual 
transitions from immaturity to maturity with a sigmoidal increase from 0 to 1 around 
the size at maturation     . A sigmoidal increase is used in favour of a knife-edge 
increase, to account for the fact that there is some variation in the precise weight at 
which an individual matures. Growth rate can now be described by Equation 5. As can be 
observed in this equation, the total available energy is multiplied by the density term 
     . This term varies from 0 to 1 as a function of weight class biomass, and influences 
growth by reducing total available energy.       is described in detail further below. 
The density-independent growth rate curve (      ) in Figure 1b clearly shows the 
decreases in growth rate when an individual becomes mature and when it starts to 
approach asymptotic size   . How this translates to growth over time can be seen in the 
associated weight-at-age curve in Figure 1c. 
 
Mortality 
Mortality can either be caused by natural causes or by fishing. Weight-specific natural 
mortality        is given in Equation 6.        follows metabolic scaling rules and is a 
decreasing function of size.        is further determined by the physiological level of 
predation    and by the growth constant  .     can be interpreted as the ratio between 
mortality and weight-specific available energy (Beyer, 1989), and is approximately 
equal to 0.35 (Andersen & Beyer, 2015). Natural mortality is also determined by the 
growth constant  , as it is assumed that higher consumption will result in a higher risk 
of predation. Fishing mortality        is described further below. 
To be able to construct an abundance and biomass spectrum further below, natural 
mortality and fishing mortality for each weight class are combined in a function for 
physiological mortality   , in Equation 7. Physiological mortality is defined as total 
==PAGE:18==
15 
 
mortality divided by specific growth, and can be interpreted as the ratio between mass 
lost due to mortality and mass gained due to growth.  
 
Population Structure 
Together, growth of a weight class and all preceding mortality determine the abundance 
of individuals    in each weight class (Equation 7), in terms of numbers per unit weight. 
To be able to obtain a numerical result out of this model that is universal and stock-
unspecific, abundance is scaled with recruitment   which is further defined below. For 
the first weight class, where        , no mortality has occurred yet. Thus, 
   
⁄
       
⁄
. To ensure that no individuals can remain in the population 
indefinitely,    
⁄
  . 
Spawning stock biomass   is calculated separately for each weight class in Equation 9 by 
multiplying the number of individuals in each weight class with their own weight and 
with the maturity curve        
⁄
 . Recruitment   (scaled with maximum recruitment 
    ) of this spawning stock is subsequently calculated in Equation 10 through a 
rewrite of the Beverton-Holt stock-recruitment relationship, as described in Andersen & 
Beyer (2015). Here I use a slightly different recruitment equation than Andersen & 
Beyer (2015), with SSB for the different weight classes being summed up in the 
recruitment function instead of in the SSB function. The reason for this is that energy 
available for recruitment is also assumed to be subjected to density-dependent 
regulation, described by       and explained below. It should be noted that throughout 
this text, recruitment does not refer to recruitment into the fishery but to recruitment 
into the population, so that weight at recruitment is equal to egg weight. It is possible to 
calculate a value for recruitment if the maximum recruitment of the population      is 
known, which is the highest possible recruitment at high stock biomass. However, for 
most fisheries maximum recruitment is unknown. Thus, variables requiring a value for 
  or      are instead scaled to them. 
Figure 1a shows the biomass spectrum for an unfished stock with        g, 
experiencing no density-dependent regulation beyond the larval stage (      ). 
Biomass is shown as 
 
      , and is calculated by multiplying the product of   
⁄  and 
     
⁄
 with   . Multiplication with    instead of just with   is necessary to obtain the 
correct value for biomass as   is expressed in dimensions of numbers per weight. The 
increase of the slope of the biomass spectrum that can be observed after weight-at-
maturity is reached is due to the decrease in growth rate at this point. This decreases the 
rate at which biomass flows through the weight classes and causes it to accumulate, 
which results in the increase of the biomass spectrum slope. This increase is gradually 
offset by mortality, causing the biomass spectrum to decrease again as it approaches   .  
 
 
==PAGE:19==
16 
 
Density dependence 
This model includes two different sources of density-dependent regulation. Firstly, the 
Beverton-Holt stock-recruitment relationship limits recruitment to      at high SSB. 
This is used to account for density-dependent processes occurring during the larval 
stage (Myers & Cadigan, 1993). Whenever mention is made in this study of early-in-life 
density-dependent regulation, it refers to the density-dependent regulation within the 
stock-recruitment relationship. Any density-dependent regulation beyond the larval 
stage is referred to as late-in-life density-dependent regulation. To include late-in-life 
density-dependent regulation, the aforementioned density term       is introduced 
into the model equations (Equation 4). The value of        varies between 0.01 and 1, 
and is used to reduce energy available for growth and reproduction by multiplying it 
with total available energy in Equations 5 and 10. A higher weight class biomass results 
in a lower value for      , and thus in a higher reduction of available energy for that 
weight class. The result of this is that the percentage reduction of available energy due 
to       is greatest for weight classes around the peak in the biomass spectrum (see 
Figure 1a). It is assumed that this is also the case in natural systems, as explained in the 
literary review section of this study. To obtain this result,       is described as  
         
  
    
        
(A1) 
Where    is a parameter with units g-1 yr-1 and    is a dimensionless parameter. The 
value of       cannot drop below 0.01, as this steady-state model assumes that there 
will always be some energy available. The value of       cannot exceed 1, as it is 
assumed that no positive density-dependent processes are present.    and    determine 
the strength of density-dependent regulation on available energy, with       decreasing 
for either an increase in    or   .    is fixed at a value of 0.2 in this study, so that various 
strengths of density-dependent control can be tested by only varying the value for   . 
  
      
  gives the biomass of a weight class scaled to maximum recruitment. When 
simulations for this model are started, no value for       
⁄
 is known yet. However, a 
value for       is needed to calculate growth and recruitment. Therefore, the model is 
first run with        . This will result in a value for       
⁄
 that can subsequently be 
used to calculate a new value for      . This new value of       is then used again to 
calculate a new value for       
⁄
. This process of iterating the result of       
⁄
 back 
into the equation for       leading to a new value for       
⁄
 is repeated until the 
value for       
⁄
 converges to a stable value. This usually takes no more than 100 
iterations. To aid convergence, and prevent erratic jumps in the values of       and 
      
⁄
 , the iteration process is ‘relaxed’ by iterating the value of       back into the 
model as                              . There,          is the value for       as 
calculated by the most recent iteration, and          is the value for       as calculated 
by the iteration before that. This ensures a smooth iteration process. A graphic 
representation of the iteration process, showing the changes of       and 
  
      
  with 
each subsequent iteration, can be seen in Figure 2. 
==PAGE:20==
17 
 
Figure 3 shows how different values for    influence     , biomass spectrum, growth 
rate, and weight-at-age for an unfished stock with        g. It shows how increasing 
the value of     will cause a broader range of weight classes to experience density-
dependent regulation through     , with the lowest value for       coinciding with the 
peak of the biomass spectrum. It also shows how increasing the value of    will decrease 
stock biomass, growth rate, and weight-at-age. 
 
Fishery performance  
The original model of Andersen & Beyer (2015) makes use of a trawl selectivity curve 
(Equation 10a) to distribute fishing mortality over the size spectrum of a fish stock for a 
system of size-selective harvesting. This curve varies from 0 for small fish to 1 for large 
fish. At a certain weight, the curve starts switching from 0 to 1 with a sigmoidal increase. 
The weight at which this happens is determined by   , which is the weight of 50% gear 
selection relative to asymptotic weight, and   , which determines the width of the 
sigmoidal increase. The value for    can thus be varied to change the size-at-entry into 
the fishery. Balanced harvesting is defined as fishing ecosystem components 
proportional to their productivity, with productivity being an allometric function of size. 
When testing for a system of balanced harvesting, Equation 10b is therefore used. This 
equation multiplies the trawl selectivity curve with an extra term:   
   . This term 
describes the weight-specific production   
  of a weight-class per unit weight (the 
productivity), and therefore makes the balanced selectivity curve proportional to 
productivity. Furthermore, the balanced selectivity curve still allows for the changing of 
the size-at-entry into the fishery through a change in   . An example of these two 
selectivity curves is displayed in Figure 4a. 
Equation 12 determines the fishing mortality        for each weight class by 
distributing the overall fishing mortality over the stock’s weight-classes according to the 
fishing selectivity curve. This function also features in the function for physiological 
mortality alongside the natural mortality in Equation 7. Thus, applying fishing mortality 
to a stock will increase total mortality and decrease stock biomass. This reduction in 
biomass differs depending on the type of selectivity curve and the fishing parameters 
applied. An example of this is displayed in Figure 4b. Finally, the yield of the fishery is 
given by Equation 13, and is calculated by integrating over the size distribution 
multiplied by the fisheries selectivity curve. Yield is scaled with maximum biomass flux 
of recruits. 
Applying fishing mortality to a stock will reduce stock biomass (Figure 5), thereby partly 
relieving it of density dependence by increasing the value of      . This will result in an 
increase of growth rate and weight-at-age compared to the unfished situation. This 
effect can be observed by comparing Figure 3 (unfished) and Figure 5 (fished with trawl 
and balanced selectivity curve) with each other. 
==PAGE:21==
18 
 
Model output 
Below I give a description for how the model outputs in the Results section of this study 
were obtained. For the model outputs below, parameter values were equal to their 
values in Table 2, unless specified otherwise.    equals 300 g unless specified 
otherwise. 
 
No late-in-life density-dependent regulation 
Size-selective and balanced fishing are compared with each other for a stock that does 
not experience density-dependent regulation past the larval stage (      ). The 
fishing strategy that results in highest MSY is determined for both size-selective and 
balanced harvesting. This is done by calculating the yields that result from different 
values for    and  .  For this,    values are distributed logarithmically from 0.001 to 1, 
and   values are distributed logarithmically from 0.01 and 1000 yr-1. Applying a value 
for   of 1000 yr-1  in a real-world fishery is outside the realms of feasibility, and should 
be taken to represent a hypothetical situations in which all individuals from the weight 
class subjected to this fishing mortality are removed through fishing. Yield is calculated 
for each combination of    and  . The fishing mortality that gives the highest yield for a 
given value of    is considered to be the so-called FMSY for that   , and its yield the MSY 
for that   . Thus, the term “highest MSY” refers to the MSY that is highest amongst all 
MSY values calculated for the different values of   . The results of the calculation of yield 
as a function of    and   are displayed in two heat maps, one for size-selective fishing 
and one for balanced fishing, which show for which combinations of    and   the 
obtained yield is highest. Contour lines are added to the heat maps for the sake of 
increasing readability.  
Thereafter, for each separate harvesting method, a graphic representation is given of the 
differences in MSY for different fishery sizes-at-entry. This is done, for both harvesting 
methods, by calculating the ratio between the MSY for a given value of    and the 
highest MSY amongst all values of   , and plotting this ratio against   . Furthermore, it 
is examined which of the two harvesting methods results in highest MSY for different 
fisheries sizes-at-entry. To this end, the MSYs given by balanced and size-selective 
harvesting for different values of    are compared by plotting their ratio against   . This 
MSY ratio is calculated by dividing the MSY obtained with a balanced selectivity curve 
(for a given value of   ) with the MSY obtained with a trawl selectivity curve (for the 
same    value). This is done for all values of   , creating the MSY ratio curve.  
 
Late-in-life density-dependent regulation 
To examine the role of density-dependence in fisheries selectivity, the above 
calculations are repeated with the value of       being determined according to 
Equation 4. To test for different intensities of density-dependent influence this is done 
with three different values of   : 1, 10, and 100 g-1 yr-1. These three values represent a 
==PAGE:22==
19 
 
small, intermediate, and high influence of density-dependence. The results are displayed 
in the same type of figures as described above, with the only difference being that the 
results for each method of harvesting, as well as for an unfished scenario, are now 
displayed three times in each plot: once for each value   .  
Furthermore, when growth of a fish stock is influenced by density-dependence, fishing 
will influence growth rate by relieving part of the stock from density dependence. 
Therefore, the analysis of the biomass spectra for size-selective and balanced harvesting, 
when fishing is performed at highest MSY, will also feature a plot with the growth curves 
and a plot with the weight-at-age curves that correspond to the respective biomass 
spectra. 
 
==PAGE:23==
20 
 
Table 1: Model equations, adapted from Andersen & Beyer (2015) to include a description of density-
dependent regulation of available energy (Equation 4). Index   refers to weight class number, where   is the 
total amount of weight classes. 
 
Weight classes 
 
 
Spacing between 
logarithmic weight classes 
  ln     ln(    )
   
 
Eq. 1 
Weight class construction 
       [  (    )        ] 
Eq. 2 
Growth and mortality 
 
 
Maturation function 
       
⁄
  [  (
  
    
)
   
]
  
 
Eq. 3 
Density function 
         〈   {   
  
    
         }      〉 
Eq. 4 
Growth rate 
function 
               [  (   
  
)
   
(                
⁄
 )] 
Eq. 5 
Natural mortality 
               
Eq. 6 
Physiological mortality 
                
     
   
Eq. 7 
Population structure 
 
 
Abundance per recruit 
(for each weight class) 
  
  
 
        [  ∑    
 
   
]      for         
  
  
 
                
    
Eq. 8 
Spawning stock biomass 
per recruit (for each weight 
class) 
  
         
⁄
   
             
Eq. 9 
Relative recruitment 
 
    
   
 
∑
[                
 
  
   
    ]
   
   
 
Eq. 10 
Fishery performance 
 
 
Trawl selectivity curve 
       
⁄
  [  (   
    
)
   
]
  
 
Eq. 11a 
Balanced selectivity curve 
       
⁄
  [  (   
    
)
   
]
  
      
Eq. 11b 
Weight class fishing 
mortality 
               
⁄
  
Eq. 12 
Yield 
(scaled 
with 
maximum biomass flux 
of recruits) 
 
        
  
 
        
∑[       
⁄
   
            ]
   
   
 
Eq. 13 
==PAGE:24==
21 
 
Table 2: Model symbols, descriptions, values, and units. Value fields that are blank are either calculated 
through model equations, or represent unique model inputs (i.e.   ,   , and  ).  Adapted from Andersen & 
Beyer (2015) to include description of density-dependent regulation of available energy. The # sign is given 
as a unit for numbers. 
 
 
 
 
 
Symbol 
Description 
Value 
Unit 
Body size 
 
  
  
Individual weight 
 g 
   
Asymptotic size (weight) 
 g 
     
Egg weight 
0.001 g 
  
Number of weight classes 
 - 
Growth and mortality 
 
  
  
Growth constant 
4.5 g1-nyr-1 
  
Exponent for consumption 
3/4 - 
      
⁄
  
Maturation curve 
 - 
   
Size at maturation rel. to    
0.25 - 
   
Width of switching function 
10 - 
   
Natural (predation) mortality 
 yr-1 
   
Physiological level of predation 
0.35 - 
  
Physiological mortality 
 - 
     
Growth rate 
 g yr-1 
   
Fraction of energy for activity 
0.8 - 
Density dependence 
 
  
     
Density dependence function 
 - 
   
Density dependence parameter 1 
 g-1 yr-1 
   
Density dependence parameter 2 
0.2 - 
Population structure 
 
  
  
Abundance 
 # g-1 
  
Recruitment 
 # yr-1 
     
Maximum recruitment 
 # yr-1 
  
Spawning stock biomass 
 g 
   
Recruitment efficiency 
0.1 - 
Fishery performance 
 
 - 
      
⁄
  
Fisheries selectivity curve 
 - 
   
Start of fishing relative to    
 - 
   
Width of switching function 
10 - 
  
Fishing mortality 
 yr-1 
      
Size-based fishing mortality 
 yr-1 
  
Yield 
 g yr-1 
==PAGE:25==
22 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 1: Biomass spectrum (a), growth rate (b), and weight-at-age curve (c) for an unfished stock with
𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g, with no density-dependent influence on available energy past the larval stage (𝑫 𝒘  𝟏).
The biomass spectrum is shown as 𝒘𝟐𝑵 𝒘 , and is scaled with maximum recruitment 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙. Biomass
spectrum and growth rate are shown as a function of weight divided by asymptotic weight. The weight-at-
age curve shows individual weight as a function of time. 
==PAGE:26==
23 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2: Graphical representation of the iteration process for 𝑫 𝒘  (a) and the associated
biomass spectrum (b), for 𝒅𝟏 𝟏𝟎 g-1 yr-1 and 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. The biomass spectrum is shown as
𝒘𝟐𝑵 𝒘 , and is scaled with maximum recruitment 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙. 𝑫 𝒘  𝟏 for the first iteration, and the
biomass spectrum that results from this is iterated back into the equation for  𝑫 𝒘  to give a new
result for 𝑫 𝒘  and the biomass spectrum. After 100 iterations the values for 𝑫 𝒘  and the
biomass spectrum have stabilised, and are used in subsequent model calculations. 
==PAGE:27==
24 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 3: 𝑫 𝒘  curves (a), biomass spectra (b), growth rates
(c), and weight-at-age curves (d) for unfished stocks with a 
value for 𝒅𝟏 of 1, 10 and 100 g-1 yr-1 (thin, medium, and thick
solid lines) and 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. Dashed reference lines for a stock
without density-dependent influence on available energy
(𝑫 𝒘  𝟏) are also shown. The biomass spectra are shown as
𝒘𝟐𝑵 𝒘 , and are scaled with maximum recruitment 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙.
Biomass spectra and growth rates are shown as a function of
weight divided by asymptotic weight. The weight-at-age curves
show individual weight as a function of time. 
==PAGE:28==
25 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4: Fishing selectivity curves (a) and biomass spectra (b) for an example of size-selective (dashed)
and balanced harvesting (solid), for a stock with no density-dependent influence on available energy past 
the larval stage (𝑫 𝒘  𝟏), and 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. A trawl selectivity curve is used to model size-selective
harvesting (Eq. 11a), with 𝜼𝑭 𝟎 𝟐𝟓 for this figure. A balanced selectivity curve is used to model balanced 
harvesting (Eq. 11b), with 𝜼𝑭 𝟎 𝟎𝟓 for this figure. The biomass spectra resulting from these selectivity 
curves are shown in (b) for 𝑭 𝟎 𝟕𝟓 yr-1, as well as the reference biomass spectrum of an unfished stock 
(dotted). The biomass spectra are shown as 𝒘𝟐𝑵 𝒘 , and are scaled with maximum recruitment 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙. The
selectivity curves and biomass spectra are shown as a function of weight divided by asymptotic weight.  
==PAGE:29==
26 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
Figure 5: Biomass spectra (a & d), growth rates (b & e), and weight-at-age curves (c & f) for stocks harvested with a size-
selective (a, b, c) and balanced (d, e, f) strategy. Shown for stocks with a 𝒅𝟏 of 1, 10, and 100 g-1 yr-1 (thin, medium, and thick
solid lines). Dashed reference lines for an unfished stock without density-dependent influence on available energy (𝑫 𝒘  𝟏)
are also shown. A trawl selectivity curve is used to model size-selective harvesting (Eq. 11a), with 𝜼𝑭 𝟎 𝟐𝟓 and 𝑭 𝟎 𝟕𝟓 yr-1
for this figure. A balanced selectivity curve is used to model balanced harvesting (Eq. 11b), with 𝜼𝑭 𝟎 𝟎𝟓 and 𝑭 𝟎 𝟕𝟓 yr-1 for
this figure. The biomass spectra are shown as 𝒘𝟐𝑵 𝒘 , and are scaled with maximum recruitment 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙. Biomass spectra and
growth rates are shown as a function of weight divided by asymptotic weight. The weight-at-age curves show individual weight
as a function of time. 
Trawl
Balanced
==PAGE:30==
27 
 
Model Results 
Without late-in-life density-dependent regulation 
Figure 6 shows yield as a function of    and  , for both size-selective and balanced 
fishing. It can be observed that for both size-selective and balanced fishing, the highest 
yields are achieved with a combination of high size-at-entry into the fishery and high 
fishing mortality. Table 3 shows what the highest MSY is for both fishing systems and at 
which value of    and   they are obtained. 
Figure 7 shows for which value of    the MSY of size-selective and balanced fishing is 
highest, by showing the ratio between the MSY for a given value of    and the highest 
MSY amongst all values of   . For both size-selective and balanced harvesting, it can be 
observed that MSY increases as    increases. MSY peaks around the same point where 
there is little difference between MSY for size-selective and balanced fishing (Figure 8), 
at a high value of   . The decrease as    approaches 1 is caused by setting the limit to   
at 1000 yr-1 instead of a higher value.   
The ratio between the MSY of size-selective and balanced harvesting, for different values 
of   , is shown in Figure 8. It can be observed that, for a value of    below 0.1, size-
selective harvesting will always give a higher MSY than balanced harvesting.  However, 
as    increases from 0.001 to 0.1, this difference decreases. Above an    of 0.1, the ratio 
approaches 1 and the MSYs for the two fishing systems are almost equal. The 
subsequent decrease in the ratio between the MSY of size-selective harvesting and 
balanced harvesting as    nears 1 is because the limit to   was set at 1000 yr-1. Had this 
limit been set higher, the MSY ratio would have continued to approach 1 as    nears 1. 
Figure 9 shows the biomass spectra for size-selective and balanced fishing at highest 
MSY, which is obtained by setting the values of    and   as described in Table 3. Little 
difference can be observed between the two biomass spectra, and they are both 
truncated for higher weight classes. 
Judging from these results, it appears that highest MSY is obtained when fishing with a 
combination of a high size-at-entry into the fishery and a high fishing mortality. This is 
true for both size-selective and balanced harvesting. Furthermore, under the 
assumptions that resulted in these results, balanced harvesting will never result in a 
higher MSY than size-selective harvesting. At best, balanced harvesting will be able to 
achieve an equal MSY when fishing is performed with a combination of a high size-at-
entry into the fishery and a high fishing mortality. For such a strategy, there is virtually 
no difference in stock weight-structure between size-selective and balanced harvesting. 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
28 
 
Table 3: The highest possible MSY when simulating the exploitation of a stock with a trawl selectivity curve 
and with a balanced selectivity curve for this model, and at which values of    and   these yields are obtained. 
Yield is scaled with maximum biomass flux of recruits         .        g. 
 
 
 
 
 
Highest MSY  
(g yr-1) 
   
 
   
( yr-1)  
Balanced 
414 
0.58 
1000 
Trawl 
415 
0.64 
970 
Figure 7: Ratio between the MSY for a given value of 𝜼𝑭 and the highest MSY amongst all values of 𝜼𝑭. Shown
for yields obtained with a trawl selectivity curve (dashed) and yields obtained with a balanced selectivity 
curve (solid). 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. Shown for a stock without density-dependent influence on available energy 
(𝑫 𝒘  𝟏). 
Figure 6: Yield as a function of 𝜼𝑭 and 𝑭. White contour lines are added for a yield of 0.5*highest
MSY, 0.75*highest MSY, and 0.95*highest MSY. Shown for a trawl selectivity curve (right) and a 
balanced selectivity curve (left). Yield is scaled with maximum biomass flux of recruits 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙𝒘𝒆𝒈𝒈.
𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. Shown for a stock without density-dependent influence on available energy (𝑫 𝒘  
𝟏). 
==PAGE:32==
29 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Ratio between MSY obtained with a balanced selectivity curve and with a trawl selectivity curve, as a
function of 𝜼𝑭. 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. Shown for a stock without density-dependent influence on available energy
(𝑫 𝒘  𝟏). 
Figure 9: Biomass spectrum for an unfished stock (solid), a stock exploited at highest MSY with a trawl selectivity curve
(dashed), and a stock exploited at highest MSY with a balanced selectivity curve (dotted). The biomass spectra are shown as
𝒘𝟐𝑵𝒊 for 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g, and are scaled with maximum recruitment 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙. Shown for stocks without density-dependent
influence on available energy (𝑫 𝒘  𝟏). 
==PAGE:33==
30 
 
With late-in-life density-dependent regulation 
Figure 10 shows how increasing the value of   , indicating higher density-dependent 
regulation of available energy, changes the fishing strategy for which the highest MSY is 
obtained, both for size-selective and balanced fishing. For a low density-dependent 
influence on available energy (     g-1 yr-1), the highest MSY is obtained for both size-
selective and balanced fishing by combining a very high fishing mortality with a high 
size-at-entry into the fishery. For an intermediate density-dependent influence on 
available energy (      g-1 yr-1), the highest MSY is obtained for both size-selective 
and balanced fishing by combining a lower fishing mortality with an intermediate size-
at-entry into the fishery. For a high density-dependent influence on available energy 
(       g-1 yr-1), the highest MSY is obtained for both size-selective and balanced 
fishing by combining a lower fishing mortality with a small size-at-entry into the fishery. 
The precise values of the above highest MSYs and their associated values of    and   are 
shown in Table 4. It is also clear from Figure 10 and Table 4 that the exploitation of 
stocks with a high    value results in a lower scaled yield when compared with the same 
exploitation of stocks with a low    value. The outer contour line in Figure 10c appears 
to be slightly distorted near the centre of the plot. This is a modelling artefact, caused by 
the failure of the biomass spectrum to converge during the density dependence 
iterations. 
Figure 11 shows how increasing the influence of density-dependence on a stock’s 
available energy results in the highest MSY being obtained at a lower size-at-entry into 
the fishery, for both size-selective and balanced fishing. Furthermore, it shows that the 
highest MSY is obtained for both size-selective and balanced harvesting around the same 
value for   , regardless of density-dependence, as can also be seen in Table 4. 
Figure 12 shows that balanced fishing will only result in a higher MSY, when compared 
with size-selective fishing, when the fished stock’s available energy is highly influenced 
by density-dependence (       g-1 yr-1). Even then, the MSYs that can be obtained 
from balanced harvesting are not that much higher than those obtained from size-
selective fishing. At the point where the difference in MSY is highest, the MSY obtained 
from balanced fishing is only around 5% higher than the MSY obtained from size-
selective fishing. Furthermore, at        g-1 yr-1, size-selective fishing will still give 
higher MSYs for very low sizes-at-entry into the fishery 
Figure 13 shows the biomass spectra, growth rates, and weight-at-age curves of stocks 
exposed to size-selective and balanced fishing at highest MSY, with the values for   ,    
and   as shown in Table 4. There is little difference between the biomass spectra of 
stocks exploited with size-selective and balanced fishing, and they nearly overlap for the 
same values of   . The exploited biomass spectra show less truncation at higher weight 
classes as    increases, which is associated with a decrease in size-at-entry into the 
fishery. As with the biomass spectra, the growth rates and weight-at-age curves of stocks 
exploited with size-selective and balanced fishing also closely overlap for the same 
values of   .  
==PAGE:34==
31 
 
The above results show that density-dependent regulation of available energy past the 
larval stage can have a significant effect on determining the optimal fishing strategy for 
obtaining highest MSY. Under the assumptions of this model, a higher influence of 
density dependence through an increase in the value of    will result in the highest MSY 
being obtained for a combination of a lower size-at-entry into the fishery and a lower 
fishing mortality. This is true for both size-selective and balanced fishing. This is true for 
both size-selective and balanced harvesting. Furthermore, balanced harvesting will 
rarely result in a higher MSY than size-selective harvesting, at best resulting in a 5% 
higher MSY for only a small range of    and only for a high value of   . When fishing at 
highest MSY, stock size-structure and growth patterns are nearly equal between size-
selective and balanced harvesting, for all strengths of density dependence. When the aim 
is to fish a stock, subjected to density-dependent regulation of available energy past the 
larval stage, for highest MSY, the results therefore suggest that it makes little matter 
whether this fishing is done according to a trawl or balanced selectivity curve. Instead, 
setting the correct size-at-entry and fishing mortality is far more important.  
 
 
Table 4: The highest possible MSYs when simulating the exploitation of three stock, each with a different    
value, with a trawl selectivity curve and with a balanced selectivity curve for this model, and at which values 
of    and   these yields are obtained. Yield is scaled with maximum biomass flux of recruits         . 
       g. 
 
    
(g-1 yr-1) 
Highest 
MSY (g yr-1) 
   
 
   
(yr-1) 
Balanced 
1 
414 
0.57 1000 
10 
253 
0.082 1.64 
100 
78 
0.019 0.82 
Trawl 
1 
415 
0.63 793 
10 
252 
0.078 0.55 
100 
76 
0.014 0.30 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
32 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Yield as a function of 𝜼𝑭 and 𝑭. White contour lines are added for a yield of 0.5*highest MSY,
0.75*highest MSY, and 0.95*highest MSY. Shown for a 𝒅𝟏 of 1, 10, and 100 g-1 yr-1 (a, b and c), as well as for a 
trawl selectivity curve (right) and a balanced selectivity curve (left). 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. Yield is scaled with 
maximum biomass flux of recruits 𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙𝒘𝒆𝒈𝒈.  
 
(c) 
(b) 
(a) 
==PAGE:36==
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Ratio between MSY for a given value of 𝜼𝑭, and highest MSY amongst all values of 𝜼𝑭. Shown for yields
obtained through exploitation with a trawl selectivity curve (grey) and with a balanced selectivity curve (black), 
and for stocks with a 𝒅𝟏 of 1, 10, and 100 g-1 yr-1 (thin, medium, and thick solid lines). Dashed reference lines are 
added for a stock without density-dependent influence on available energy (𝑫 𝒘  𝟏). 𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g. 
Figure 12: Ratio between MSY obtained with a balanced selectivity curve and with a trawl
selectivity curve, as a function of 𝜼𝑭. Shown for stocks with a 𝒅𝟏 of 1, 10, and 100 g-1 yr-1 (thin,
medium, and thick solid lines). A dashed reference line is added for a stock without density-
dependent influence on available energy (𝑫 𝒘  𝟏).  𝑾  𝟑𝟎𝟎 g.  
==PAGE:37==
34 
 
 
Figure 13: Biomass spectra (a & d), growth rates (b & e), and weight-at-age curves (c & f) for stocks harvested 
with a size-selective (a, b, c) and balanced (d, e, f) strategy at highest MSY (Table 4). Shown for stocks with a 𝒅𝟏
of 1, 10, and 100 g-1 yr-1 (thin, medium, and thick solid lines). Dashed reference lines for an unfished stock 
without density-dependent influence on available energy (𝑫 𝒘  𝟏) are also shown. A trawl selectivity curve is
used to model size-selective harvesting (Eq. 11a), and a balanced selectivity curve is used to model balanced
harvesting (Eq. 11b). The biomass spectra are shown as 𝒘𝟐𝑵 𝒘 , and are scaled with maximum recruitment
𝑹𝒎𝒂𝒙. Biomass spectra and growth rates are shown as a function of weight divided by asymptotic weight. The
weight-at-age curves show individual weight as a function of time. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
Trawl
Balanced
==PAGE:38==
35 
 
Model Validation: NEA Mackerel Case 
To test how the model used in this study compares to empirical evidence of late-in-life 
density dependence, a recent study by Jansen & Burns (2015) on North East Atlantic 
(NEA) mackerel (Scomber scombrus) is used. In their study they analyse empirical data 
on NEA mackerel length and age, obtained by Scottish bottom trawl surveys from 1998 
to 2012. Using linear regression models, they show how growth (in length) of NEA 
mackerel juveniles within a cohort is affected by the densities of their own cohort, the 
previous cohort, and the total NEA mackerel SSB. These relationships are shown in 
Figure 14, copied from Jansen & Burns (2015). The model I have formulated in my study 
is not age-structured, and thus examining the densities of different cohorts will be 
difficult. However, I can look at the relationship between growth and total SSB (Figure 
14 c and f). Jansen & Burns (2015) show that at age 0, mean length is 20 cm for an SSB of 
2 MT, and 19 cm for an SSB of 3.5 MT. At age 3, mean length is 32.5 cm for an SSB of 2 
MT, and 29.5 cm for an SSB of 3.5 MT. Using my model, I will obtain these same 
differences in SSB by changing the fishing mortality, and then compare the resulting 
length-at-age curves with the four length-at-age data points obtained from Jansen & 
Burns (2015). Changes in SSB can generally be attributed to a combination of 
Figure 14: “Examples of the effects of each model parameter (black lines) overlaid by observations (blue shapes). 
(a–c) Length at age 0 in Q4, (d–f) length at age 3 in Q4. (a, d) Predictor variable abundance of age 0 of the same 
cohort, (b, e) abundance of age 0 of the previous cohort, and (c, f) SSB. The observations are plotted as “violin 
plots” indicating the observed length distribution. The model parameter effects are calculated while fixing the 
other two parameters to the means of the respective observed ranges. (For interpretation of the references to 
colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)” Jansen & Burns (2015):
Figure 5. 
==PAGE:39==
36 
 
environmental factors and changes in fishing mortality. Here I disregard the effects of 
environmental factors as these do not feature in my model, and assume that changes in 
SSB are solely the result of differences in fishing mortality. NEA mackerel stock data 
(ICES, 2014) shows that SSB has equalled 2 MT for a fishing mortality of roughly 0.4 yr-1, 
and 3.5 MT for a fishing mortality of roughly 0.2 year-1. 
 
Parameterisation 
To be able to apply my model to the findings of Jansen & Burns (2015), it must first be 
parameterised for NEA mackerel. Because most data on NEA mackerel is formulated in 
length units, it is first necessary to find out how NEA mackerel’s length translates to 
weight. Coull et al. (1989) show that this relationship is                , where   is 
total length in centimetres. Asymptotic size is hard to define based on the literature as it 
can vary depending on what the largest fish caught in a survey is, which in itself can be 
influenced by different levels of fishing. Thus,    is derived from data on weight at 
maturity, which is more readily available and more reliable. For this, it is assumed that 
the general assumption of         also holds true for NEA mackerel. Dorel (1986) 
shows that total length at maturity is 30 cm. This translates to a weight at maturity of 
207.14 cm, and thus an asymptotic weight of 828.57 g, which will be simplified to 830 g. 
This in turn translates back to an asymptotic length of 46 cm. The mackerel trawl survey 
determined mackerel age by counting the amount of winter rings on the sagittal otoliths. 
Thus, a mackerel to be determined 0 years of age can actually be anywhere between 0 
and 1 years of age. Figure 14 shows mackerel of 0 and 3 years of age that were surveyed 
in the period October-December. Because mackerel spawn in spring, it is assumed that 
these individuals were actually 1 and 4 years of age. Mackerel show very fast growth, 
and to make the modelled length-at-age curves approach observed mackerel growth, the 
growth constant   was set to a value of 15 g1-nyr-1. The lowest minimum landing size for 
NEA mackerel is around 20 cm (ICES, 2005). Considering younger unreported catches in 
the form of by-catch and discards,    is set to 0.05. The best fit for the length-at-age 
curves were obtained for a    of 1000 g-1 yr-1. To achieve the observed ratio in SSB for 
different fishing mortalities,   was set to 0.2 and 0.5 yr-1. With these fishing mortalities, 
SSBs of 3.5 and 2 MT respectively are achieved for an      of 1.32e+13 yr-1.  
 
Results & Discussion 
The resulting length-at-age curves, along with the empirical data points obtained 
through Jansen & Burns (2015), are shown in Figure 15. The overlap of the length-at-age 
curves with the data points is not ideal. The length-at-age curves show a smaller length 
at age 1 but a higher length at age 4, when compared with the data points. Increasing the 
growth constant   would give a better fit at age 1, but would result in further 
overshooting the data points at age 4. This could be corrected by subsequently 
decreasing asymptotic size, but this may not be realistic for mackerel as asymptotic 
length would then end up between 30 and 35 cm. It is clear however that a different 
==PAGE:40==
37 
 
parameterisation is necessary to obtain a better fit, for instance a change in the 
percentage of available energy invested in reproduction when maturity is reached. 
Furthermore, environmental factors, not included in this model, may still play a role in 
the observed data points. However, time constraints prevent me from analysing this 
further. 
Nevertheless, the data points and the modelled length-at-age curves show the same 
effect of SSB on growth. A lower SSB will result in a higher length-at-age, and this 
difference in length will increase as the fish continues to grow. However, the distance 
between the two length-at-age curves for different fishing mortalities is not as large as 
would be expected, based on the previously displayed weight-at-age curves for balanced 
and size-selective fishing. It would be expected that the higher the value for    is, the 
higher the increase in growth rate is when fishing mortality is increased, as the stock is 
then relieved of more density-dependence. Here,    has been set to 1000 g-1 yr-1 
whereas above it was set no higher than 100 g-1 yr-1, so a larger increase in growth rate 
would be expected than what is observed in Figure 15. It is likely that increasing the 
growth constant   explains part of this, compensating for an increase in    by providing 
more energy for growth which reduces the negative influence of density-dependence on 
growth. The distance between the length-at-age curves for the two different fishing 
mortalities could be further increased by increasing the value for   ,  but increasing it 
above 1000 g-1 yr-1 will soon cause the model to no longer converge.  
 
Figure 15: Modelled length-at-age curves of NEA mackerel for an SSB of 2 and 3.5 MT (black and grey solid 
lines), as a result of a fishing mortality of 0.5 and 0.2 yr-1 respectively. The density-independent length-at-age
curve (dashed) is added as a reference. The four data points show mackerel growth at 1 and 4 years of age 
for SSBs of 2 and 3.5 MT based on empirical data (Jansen & Burns, 2015). 
==PAGE:41==
38 
 
Even though the fit of the length-at-age curves is not perfect, the fact that the pattern of 
increased growth as a result of increased fishing mortality predicted by my model is also 
observed in empirical studies supports its findings on the role of density-dependent 
growth in exploited fish stocks and aids in the validation of the model. However, it is 
clear that some difficulties remain in parameterising the model to be species-specific, 
which will need to be worked out in the future. Additionally, the relationship between 
the growth constant   and the density-dependent parameter    should be better 
defined, as an increase in   could offset the effects of an increase in   . This may require 
a partial rewrite of their respective equations in the future. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
39 
 
Discussion 
Size-selective fishing versus balanced harvesting 
Studies that look at the yields that can be obtained from balanced harvesting have 
mostly reported that balanced harvesting gives a higher MSY than conventional size-
selective fisheries. This higher yield ranges from just slightly above the yield obtained 
from size-selective fishing (Jacobsen et al., 2014), to twice as much (Garcia et al., 2012), 
depending on the type of model approach used. Nevertheless, so far nearly all modelling 
studies on balanced harvesting have reported an increase in MSY when compared to 
conventional size-selective fishing (see also Law et al., 2012; 2014; 2015) with a variety 
of model approaches. However, using a single-species steady-state size-based model for 
a stock with no late-in-life density-dependent regulation, I show that the highest MSY 
that can be obtained with balanced fishing does not exceed that of size-selective fishing. 
Instead, the highest MSYs for both fishing methods are nearly equal. Furthermore, 
balanced fishing obtains the highest MSY when a high size-at-entry into the fishery is 
combined with a high fishing mortality. This is no longer in accordance with the theory 
of balanced harvesting, which states that it is the smaller individuals that should be 
subjected to a higher fishing mortality because their productivity is higher. Therefore, in 
order to obtain MSY from a fish stock that only experiences early-in-life density-
dependent regulation, this model suggests to use a size-selective fishing method that 
combines a high size-at-entry into the fishery with a high fishing mortality. This is in 
accordance with Beverton-Holt theory, and with more recent research performed by 
Froese et al. (2008) and Vasilakopoulos et al. (2012). 
Late-in-life density-dependent regulation of available energy is often disregarded in 
fisheries management (Brodziak et al., 2011; Persson et al., 2014). However, the results 
of this study show that late-in-life density dependence can significantly influence which 
fishing strategy results in obtaining the highest MSY from a stock. For stocks with a low 
influence of late-in-life density dependence on available energy, the fishing strategy 
resulting in highest MSY is size-selective fishing that combines a high size-at-entry into 
the fishery with a very high fishing mortality. For stocks with a higher influence of late-
in-life density dependence on available energy, the fishing strategy resulting in highest 
MSY switches towards a smaller size-at-entry into the fishery and a lower fishing 
mortality. For this it makes little difference whether fishing is done according to a trawl 
selectivity curve or a balanced selectivity curve. At best, balanced fishing will be able to 
give an MSY roughly 5% larger than size-selective fishing, and only for stocks that are 
heavily influenced by late-in-life density dependence. Therefore, even when taking the 
influence of late-in-life density dependent regulation into account, there is still little to 
be gained in terms of yield by switching the exploitation of a single stock from size-
selective harvesting to balanced harvesting. Setting the correct size-at-entry into the 
fishery is far more important for obtaining the highest MSY out of a stock than choosing 
between a size-selective or balanced harvesting method. 
==PAGE:43==
40 
 
For this study I have used a single-species steady-state model, and its findings have 
differed significantly from studies on balanced harvesting that have used other types of 
models. This shows how different model assumptions can lead to very different results. 
Firstly, in this study I show how applying balanced harvesting in a model with the 
conventional assumption of only including early-in-life density-dependent regulation 
offers a stark contrast to the yield results obtained by other studies regarding balanced 
harvesting. This could be attributed to the fact that almost all of these studies have 
included some form of late-in-life density dependence, with Law et al. (2012, 2015) 
incorporating density-dependent mortality through cannibalism and Jacobsen et al. 
(2014) incorporating competition for resources within and amongst species. This 
illustrates the importance of clearly specifying model assumptions with regards to any 
form of density-dependent regulation, and to give very clear arguments for choosing to 
disregard density-dependent processes. When incorporating late-in-life density-
dependent regulation into the model, I have also found different yield results for 
balanced harvesting when compared with other balanced harvesting studies. Regarding 
single-species models, the higher yields for balanced harvesting found by Law et al. 
(2012, 2015) could be explained by their method of incorporating late-in-life density 
dependence and how they compare this to size-selective fishing. In their model, the only 
food source for large adult fish is smaller conspecifics. This highly density-dependent 
mortality on younger fish gives similar results as the model I have used gives for a high 
strength of late-in-life density dependence, in that it results in higher yields when size-
at-entry into the fishery is set to a small size. However, Law et al. then compare this yield 
to a yield obtained by size-selective fishing with a higher size-at-entry. The results I have 
found show that this will automatically result in a higher yield for balanced harvesting, 
and that size-at-entry for size-selective fishing should be set to the same value as 
balanced harvesting in order to make a more reliable yield comparison. The differences 
between my single-species model results and those found in multi-species models are 
also interesting. The multi-species model used by Jacobsen et al. (2014) is similar to the 
one I used in this study, aside from the inclusion of multiple species. It also includes food 
competition between similarly-sized individuals, including a form of late-in-life density 
dependence. They found that balanced harvesting can result in roughly 10% higher yield 
values than size-selective fishing. This is close to the value of 5% found in this study for 
a high degree of late-in-life density-dependent regulation. The difference may be 
attributed to the fact that Jacobsen et al. (2014) has fixed their    value at 0.05 for size-
selective harvesting. The results of this study suggest that they may be able to increase 
size-selective yield values by using a lower value for   . Furthermore, by using a single-
species approach, the model I used for this study is unable to simulate the predation 
release and subsequent higher biomass production experienced by smaller species 
when larger species are harvested. Jacobsen et al. (2014) does incorporate this in their 
calculations, which may also explain why they found higher yields for balanced 
harvesting. 
It is clear that balanced harvesting is not always the optimal fishing strategy when MSY 
is concerned, and is therefore not always a ‘miracle solution’ without drawbacks. Much 
==PAGE:44==
41 
 
still needs to be studied before any serious consideration can be given to implementing 
balanced harvesting. Burgess et al. (2015) clearly outline some of the questions that 
need to be answered for this. They argue for one clear definition of balanced harvesting, 
and a thorough analysis on the assumptions made in models on balanced harvesting, 
including examining their validity and relation to empirical evidence. Furthermore, they 
argue that the economics of balanced harvesting need to be studied better, a clear 
measure for ecological benefits derived from balanced harvesting needs to be 
developed, balanced harvesting needs to be compared to other fishing methods aimed at 
preserving ecosystem structure and functions, and the potential yield gains of balanced 
harvesting need to better assessed. The study I have performed helps to shed light on 
what the assumptions of including early-in-life and/or late-in-life density dependence 
mean for the yield benefits of balanced harvesting. 
 
Density dependence and juvenile exploitation 
Currently, only “a shrinking minority of fools” believe it to be a smart and sustainable 
idea to increase fishing pressure on juveniles, so says Carl Walters from the University of 
British Columbia (Borrell, 2013). However, in this study I provide evidence against this 
long-held believe in fisheries management that small fish should be protected from 
fishing mortality, and that only large individuals should be fished. Instead, I suggest that 
the heavier the density-dependent influence on the available energy of a stock is, the 
smaller the size-at-entry into the fishery should be. This follows from a combination of 
the fact that removing individuals from a stock will increase growth rate and 
recruitment by relieving the stock of density-dependence, and from the assumption that 
the negative density-dependent effect on available energy within a weight-class will 
increase with weight-class biomass. To illustrate, consider a stock with a very low 
influence of late-in-life density dependence on available energy. Here, only the weight 
classes around the peak in the biomass spectrum experience a reduction in available 
energy, and thus growth and reproduction, due to density dependence. Accordingly, only 
those weight classes experience an increase in growth and reproduction when relieved 
from density-dependence by being fished. This increase in growth and reproductive rate 
will subsequently reduce the impact of fishing mortality on the biomass of the weight 
class, allowing for a higher fishing mortality and thus a higher yield. Now consider a 
stock with a very high influence of late-in-life density-dependence on available energy. 
Here, weight classes within a far broader range of the biomass peak experience a 
reduction in growth and reproductive rate due to density dependence. Thus, a higher 
yield is obtained by setting the size-at-entry into the fishery smaller, since the smaller 
weight classes also experience an increase in growth and reproductive (if mature) rate 
when fished.  
Validation for my model assumptions with regards to density-dependent regulation is 
provided by empirical evidence from NEA mackerel (Jansen & Burns, 2015). However, 
for the case of NEA mackerel it is clear that the model findings do not yet properly 
==PAGE:45==
42 
 
overlap with empirical evidence. Considering the controversial findings of this study, it 
is therefore important to further study how density-dependent regulation affects fish 
stocks. It is becoming increasingly clear that most fish stocks experience some form of 
density-dependent regulation beyond the larval stage (Lorenzen & Enberg, 2002), and 
this study has shown that changes in growth and recruitment due to density dependence 
can influence the optimal fishing strategy for highest MSY. However, for this study I have 
only looked at late-in-life density dependence in a single-species context, while 
operating under the assumption that the degree to which an individual is subjected to 
density-dependent regulation depends on the biomass ratio between similarly-sized 
conspecifics and heterospecifics in its environment. Therefore, the next logical step 
would be to study late-in-life density-dependent regulation in a multi-species context. 
For this, the multi-species model used by Jacobsen et al. (2014) would be a good 
candidate, as it is based on the same assumptions as the model I used for this study and 
already incorporates elements of individual competition. Further research should help 
us to better understand density-dependent processes in fish stocks, identify what forms 
of density-dependent regulation different stocks are exposed to, and how this will affect 
the optimal fishing strategy. This knowledge will make a significant contribution to the 
maximum sustainable exploitation of fisheries, contributing to global food security while 
also maintaining marine ecosystem structure and functioning. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
43 
 
Conclusion 
Based on the results of this modelling study I conclude that, for obtaining the highest 
possible MSY out of a fish stock, it makes little difference how the fishing mortality is 
divided over the exploited part of the fish stock. What is far more important is setting 
the correct size-at-entry into the fishery combined with the right level of fishing 
mortality. Late-in-life density-dependent regulation of available energy can significantly 
influence the values of these two fisheries management tools. For stocks with weak late-
in-life density-dependent regulation, the optimal fishing strategy for obtaining MSY 
follows standard Beverton-Holt theory, combining a large size-at-entry into the fishery 
with a high fishing mortality. However, conflicting with conventional fisheries wisdom, 
for scenarios of strong late-in-life density-dependent regulation it is clear that MSY is 
obtained by applying moderate fishing mortality starting at the juvenile stage. This 
offers new and exciting insights into how late-in-life density-dependent regulation can 
shape optimal fisheries management. 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
44 
 
References 
Andersen, K. H., & Beyer, J. E. (2006). Asymptotic size determines species abundance in 
the marine size spectrum. American Naturalist, 168(1), 54-61. 
Andersen, K. H., & Beyer, J. E. (2015). Size structure, not metabolic scaling rules, 
determines fisheries reference points. Fish and Fisheries, 16(1), 1-22. 
Andersen, K. H., & Brander, K. (2009). Expected rate of fisheries-induced evolution is 
slow. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 106(28), 11657-11660. 
Audzijonyte, A., Kuparinen, A., & Fulton, E. A. (2013). How fast is fisheries-induced 
evolution? Quantitative analysis of modelling and empirical studies. Evolutionary 
Applications, 6(4), 585-595. 
Audzijonyte, A., Kuparinen, A., & Fulton, E. A. (2014). Ecosystem effects of contemporary 
life-history changes are comparable to those of fishing. Marine Ecology Progress 
Series, 495, 219-+. 
Berkeley, S. A., Chapman, C., & Sogard, S. M. (2004). Maternal age as a determinant of 
larval growth and survival in a marine fish, Sebastes melanops. Ecology, 85(5), 
1258-1264. 
Beverton, R. J. H. (1992). Patterns of Reproductive Strategy Parameters in Some Marine 
Teleost Fishes. Journal of Fish Biology, 41, 137-160. 
Beverton, R. J. H., & Holt, S. J. (1957). On the dynamics of exploited fish populations. 
London: H. M. Stationery Off. 
Beyer, J. E. (1989). Recruitment Stability and Survival - Simple Size-Specific Theory with 
Examples from the Early Life Dynamics of Marine Fish. Dana-a Journal of Fisheries 
and Marine Research, 7, 45-147. 
Bobko, S. J., & Berkeley, S. A. (2004). Maturity, ovarian cycle, fecundity, and age-specific 
parturition of black rockfish (Sebastes melanops). Fishery Bulletin, 102(3), 418-
429. 
Borrell, B. (2013). A big fight over little fish. Nature, 493(7434), 597-598. 
Brodziak, J., Ianelli, J., Lorenzen, K., & Methot Jr, R. (2011). Estimating natural mortality 
in stock assessment applications. NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-F/SPO, 
119, 38p. 
Brown, J. H., Gillooly, J. F., Allen, A. P., Savage, V. M., & West, G. B. (2004). Toward a 
metabolic theory of ecology. Ecology, 85(7), 1771-1789. 
Burgess, M. G., Diekert, F. K., Jacobsen, N. S., Andersen, K. H., & Gaines, S. D. (2015). 
Remaining questions in the case for balanced harvesting. Fish and Fisheries. 
Cardinale, M., & Hjelm, J. (2012). Size matters: Short term loss and long term gain in a 
size-selective fishery. Marine Policy, 36(4), 903-906. 
Clark, C., Edwards, G., & Friedlae.M. (1973). Beverton-Holt Model of a Commercial 
Fishery - Optimal Dynamics. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada, 
30(11), 1629-1640. 
Conover, D. O., & Munch, S. B. (2002). Sustaining fisheries yields over evolutionary time 
scales. Science, 297(5578), 94-96. 
Coull, K. A., Jermyn, A. S., Newton, A. W., Henderson, G. I., & Hall, W. B. (1989). 
Length/weight relationships for 88 species of fish encountered in the North East 
Atlantic: Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland. 
Devine, J. A., Wright, P. J., Pardoe, H. E., & Heino, M. (2012). Comparing rates of 
contemporary evolution in life-history traits for exploited fish stocks. Canadian 
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 69(6), 1105-1120. 
==PAGE:48==
45 
 
Dhondt, A. A., Kempenaers, B., & Adriaensen, F. (1992). Density-Dependent Clutch Size 
Caused by Habitat Heterogeneity. Journal of Animal Ecology, 61(3), 643-648. 
Dorel, D. (1986). Poissons de l'Atlantique Nord-Est. Relations taille/poids. Rapport 
Interne: DRV-86-001/RH/NANTES. 
Favro, L. D., Kuo, P. K., & Mcdonald, J. F. (1979). Population-Genetic Study of the Effects 
of Selective Fishing on the Growth-Rate of Trout. Journal of the Fisheries Research 
Board of Canada, 36(5), 552-561. 
Freon, P., Sueiro, J. C., Iriarte, F., Evar, O. F. M., Landa, Y., Mittaine, J. F., & Bouchon, M. 
(2014). Harvesting for food versus feed: a review of Peruvian fisheries in a global 
context. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 24(1), 381-398. 
Froese, R., Stern-Pirlot, A., Winker, H., & Gascuel, D. (2008). Size matters: How single-
species management can contribute to ecosystem-based fisheries management. 
Fisheries Research, 92(2-3), 231-241. 
Froese, R., Winker, H., & Gascuel, D. (2015). Size still matters. A response to Svedang 
(2013): Size matters: Ne quid nimis. Fisheries Research, 164, 329-330. 
Garcia, S. M., Kolding, J., Rice, J., Rochet, M. J., Zhou, S., Arimoto, T., . . . Smith, A. D. M. 
(2012). Reconsidering the Consequences of Selective Fisheries. Science, 
335(6072), 1045-1047. 
Gardmark, A., & Dieckmann, U. (2006). Disparate maturation adaptations to size-
dependent mortality. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences, 
273(1598), 2185-2192. 
Heinimaa, S., & Heinimaa, P. (2004). Effect of the female size on egg quality and fecundity 
of the wild Atlantic salmon in the sub-arctic River Teno. Boreal Environment 
Research, 9(1), 55-62. 
Hislop, J. R. G. (1988). The Influence of Maternal Length and Age on the Size and Weight 
of the Eggs and the Relative Fecundity of the Haddock, Melanogrammus-
Aeglefinus, in British Waters. Journal of Fish Biology, 32(6), 923-930. 
Hockey, P. A. R. (1987). The Influence of Coastal Utilization by Man on the Presumed 
Extinction of the Canarian Black Oystercatcher Haematopus-Meadewaldoi 
Bannerman. Biological Conservation, 39(1), 49-62. 
Holling, C. S. (1959). Some characteristics of simple types of predation and parasitism. 
The Canadian Entomologist, 91(07), 385-398. 
Hutchings, J. A. (2005). Life history consequences of overexploitation to population 
recovery in Northwest Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua). Canadian Journal of Fisheries 
and Aquatic Sciences, 62(4), 824-832. 
ICES (2005). ICES-FishMap, mackerel factsheet. ICES, Copenhagen. 
ICES (2014). Mackerel in the Northeast Atlantic (combined Southern, Western, and North 
Sea spawning components), advice September 2014. ICES, Copenhagen. 
Jacobsen, N. S., Gislason, H., & Andersen, K. H. (2014). The consequences of balanced 
harvesting of fish communities. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological 
Sciences, 281(1775). 
Jansen, T., & Burns, F. (2015). Density dependent growth changes through juvenile and 
early adult life of North East Atlantic Mackerel (Scomber scombrus). Fisheries 
Research, 169, 37-44. 
Jenkins Jr, T. M., Diehl, S., Kratz, K. W., & Cooper, S. D. (1999). Effects of population 
density on individual growth of brown trout in streams. Ecology, 80(3), 941-956. 
Jul-Larsen, E. (2003). Management, co-management or no management?: Major dilemmas 
in southern African freshwater fisheries. Case studies: Food & Agriculture Org. 
==PAGE:49==
46 
 
Kerr, S. R. (1974). Theory of Size Distribution in Ecological Communities. Journal of the 
Fisheries Research Board of Canada, 31(12), 1859-1862. 
Law, R. (2000). Fishing, selection, and phenotypic evolution. Ices Journal of Marine 
Science, 57(3), 659-668. 
Law, R. (2007). Fisheries-induced evolution: present status and future directions. Marine 
Ecology Progress Series, 335, 271-277. 
Law, R., Kolding, J., & Plank, M. J. (2015). Squaring the circle: reconciling fishing and 
conservation of aquatic ecosystems. Fish and Fisheries, 16(1), 160-174. 
Law, R., Plank, M. J., & Kolding, J. (2012). On balanced exploitation of marine ecosystems: 
results from dynamic size spectra. Ices Journal of Marine Science, 69(4), 602-614. 
Law, R., Plank, M. J., & Kolding, J. (2014). Balanced exploitation and coexistence of 
interacting, size‐structured, fish species. Fish and Fisheries. 
Lokkeborg, S., & Bjordal, A. (1992). Species and Size Selectivity in Longline Fishing - a 
Review. Fisheries Research, 13(3), 311-322. 
Long, W. C., & Hines, A. H. (2012). Scale and the guild functional response: Density-
dependent predation varies with plot size. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology 
and Ecology, 413, 50-55. 
Lorenzen, K., & Enberg, K. (2002). Density-dependent growth as a key mechanism in the 
regulation of fish populations: evidence from among-population comparisons. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences, 269(1486), 49-54. 
Millar, R. B. (1992). Estimating the Size-Selectivity of Fishing Gear by Conditioning on 
the Total Catch. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 87(420), 962-968. 
Millner, R. S., & Whiting, C. L. (1996). Long-term changes in growth and population 
abundance of sole in the North Sea from 1940 to the present. Ices Journal of 
Marine Science, 53(6), 1185-1195. 
Myers, R. A. (2001). Stock and recruitment: generalizations about maximum 
reproductive rate, density dependence, and variability using meta-analytic 
approaches. Ices Journal of Marine Science, 58(5), 937-951. 
Myers, R. A., & Cadigan, N. G. (1993). Density-Dependent Juvenile Mortality in Marine 
Demersal Fish. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 50(8), 1576-
1590. 
Ohlberger, J., Rogers, L. A., & Stenseth, N. C. (2014). Stochasticity and Determinism: How 
Density-Independent and Density-Dependent Processes Affect Population 
Variability. Plos One, 9(6). 
Parrish, B. (1963). Some remarks on selection processes in fishing operations. ICNAF 
Special Publication, 5, 166-170. 
Persson, L., Van Leeuwen, A., & De Roos, A. M. (2014). The ecological foundation for 
ecosystem-based management of fisheries: mechanistic linkages between the 
individual-, population-, and community-level dynamics. Ices Journal of Marine 
Science, 71(8), 2268-2280. 
Pitman, R. W. (1979). Effects of Female Age and Egg Size on Growth and Mortality in 
Rainbow-Trout. Progressive Fish-Culturist, 41(4), 202-204. 
Post, J. R., Parkinson, E. A., & Johnston, N. T. (1999). Density-dependent processes in 
structured fish populations: Interaction strengths in whole-lake experiments. 
Ecological Monographs, 69(2), 155-175. 
Reed, W. J. (1980). Optimum Age-Specific Harvesting in a Non-Linear Population-Model. 
Biometrics, 36(4), 579-593. 
Ricker, W. E. (1954). Stock and recruitment. Journal of the Fisheries Board of Canada, 
11(5), 559-623. 
==PAGE:50==
47 
 
Ricker, W. E. (1981). Changes in the Average Size and Average Age of Pacific Salmon. 
Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 38(12), 1636-1656. 
Rijnsdorp, A. D. (1993). Fisheries as a Large-Scale Experiment on Life-History Evolution 
- Disentangling Phenotypic and Genetic-Effects in Changes in Maturation and 
Reproduction of North-Sea Plaice, Pleuronectes-Platessa L. Oecologia, 96(3), 391-
401. 
Rochet, M. J. (2000). Does the concept of spawning per recruit make sense? Ices Journal 
of Marine Science, 57(4), 1160-1174. 
Rodel, H. G., Bora, A., Kaiser, J., Kaetzke, P., Khaschei, M., & von Holst, D. (2004). Density-
dependent reproduction in the European rabbit: a consequence of individual 
response and age-dependent reproductive performance. Oikos, 104(3), 529-539. 
Shackell, N. L., Frank, K. T., Fisher, J. A. D., Petrie, B., & Leggett, W. C. (2010). Decline in 
top predator body size and changing climate alter trophic structure in an oceanic 
ecosystem. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences, 277(1686), 
1353-1360. 
Sheldon, R. W., Prakash, A., & Sutcliffe, W. H. (1972). The size distribution of particles in 
the ocean. Limnology and Oceanography, 17(3), 327-340. 
Shin, Y. J., Rochet, M. J., Jennings, S., Field, J. G., & Gislason, H. (2005). Using size-based 
indicators to evaluate the ecosystem effects of fishing. Ices Journal of Marine 
Science, 62(3), 384-396. 
Skonhoft, A., Vestergaard, N., & Quaas, M. (2012). Optimal Harvest in an Age Structured 
Model with Different Fishing Selectivity. Environmental & Resource Economics, 
51(4), 525-544. 
Svedang, H. (2014). Comments to Froese et al. (2008): Size matters: Ne quid nimis. 
Fisheries Research, 149, 74-75. 
Svedang, H., & Hornborg, S. (2014). Selective fishing induces density-dependent growth. 
Nature Communications, 5. 
Trippel, E. A. (1995). Age at Maturity as a Stress Indicator in Fisheries. Bioscience, 
45(11), 759-771. 
van Zwieten, P., Nagelkerke, L., Kolding, J., Musando, B., & Songore, N. (2012). Lake 
Kariba–the evolution of a balanced fishery? Paper presented at the Book of 
Abstracts of the 6th World Fisheries Congress, 07-11 May 2012, Edinburgh, 
Scotland. 
Vasilakopoulos, P., O'Neill, F. G., & Marshall, C. T. (2012). Differential impacts of 
exploitation rate and juvenile exploitation on NE Atlantic fish stock dynamics 
over the past half century. Fisheries Research, 134, 21-28. 
Veen, J. F. D. (1976). Changes in Some Biological Parameters in North-Sea Sole (Solea-
Solea L). Journal Du Conseil, 37(1), 60-90. 
Walsh, M. R., Munch, S. B., Chiba, S., & Conover, D. O. (2006). Maladaptive changes in 
multiple traits caused by fishing: impediments to population recovery. Ecology 
Letters, 9(2), 142-148. 
Ware, D. M. (1978). Bioenergetics of Pelagic Fish - Theoretical Change in Swimming 
Speed and Ration with Body Size. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of 
Canada, 35(2), 220-228. 
West, G. B., & Brown, J. H. (2005). The origin of allometric scaling laws in biology from 
genomes to ecosystems: towards a quantitative unifying theory of biological 
structure and organization. Journal of Experimental Biology, 208(9), 1575-1592. 
West, G. B., Brown, J. H., & Enquist, B. J. (1997). A general model for the origin of 
allometric scaling laws in biology. Science, 276(5309), 122-126. 
==PAGE:51==
48 
 
Winberg, G. G. (1956). Rate of metabolism and food requirements of fishes. Fisheries 
Research Board of Canada, Translation Series, 194, 1-202. 
Zhou, S. J., Smith, A. D. M., Punt, A. E., Richardson, A. J., Gibbs, M., Fulton, E. A., . . . 
Sainsbury, K. (2010). Ecosystem-based fisheries management requires a change 
to the selective fishing philosophy. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 107(21), 9485-9489. 
 
 
