==PAGE:1==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem
solar cells for photocatalytic
water splitting
by
Martin Jesper Bækbo, s093001
Supervisor:
Peter C. K. Vesborg
Co-supervisor:
Bastian Timo Mei
M.Sc Thesis
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
January 23, 2015
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In this report I show how methylammounium (MA) lead halide per-
ovskites (MAPbX3 , X = I, Br, Cl) as well as NiO can be fabricated
using vacuum deposition with the aim of creating a photoelectrode for
photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. Initially an introduction to
basic photoelectrocatalysis is given in which the challenges of driving
a chemical reaction using light are outlined. Following this the require-
ments of a water splitting PEC device are described and the advantages
and drawbacks of using lead based perovskites are explained. I then dis-
cuss how the perovskite photoelectrode should be designed to obtain
a stable device with the highest possible eﬃciency. From here I move
on to describing the vacuum deposition set-up and explain how it was
used to prepare the various samples. The initial results presented are ob-
tained from MAPbI3 ﬁlms and indicate that sequential deposition is not
ideal and that higher evaporation temperatures than the ones reported
in literature must be used [1, 2]. This conclusion is further supported
by experiments with mixed halide perovskites (MAPbX(3−x)Yx Br =
Y and I = X) where evaporation temperatures of 235◦C and 320◦C
for the MABr and PbI2 precursors, respectively showed good results.
The obtained deposition parameters were subsequently used to prepare
MAPbI(3−x)Clx ﬁlms where the chamber pressure was used as gauge
for the MAI precursor deposition rate to increase the reproducibility.
The optimum results were here obtained using a chamber pressure of
2×10−4 mbar and a PbCl2 deposition rate of 0.052 nm
s . In succession to
this I show that evaporating Ni at a rate of 0.28 nm
s
in an atmosphere
of O2 can be used to prepare NiO though the protective qualities of the
ﬁlm are very poor. Following this I demonstrate that a layered photo-
voltaic device of perovskite and NiO can be prepared and report that
the obtained eﬃciencies are, unfortunately, very low. Finally I discuss
the shortcomings encountered (poor NiO ﬁlm quality and low device ef-
ﬁciency) and outline suggestions for how the results can be improved
through future work.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Basic concepts of photoelectrocatalysis
2
3
Water splitting devices
5
3.1
2-photon tandem device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Material properties of MAPbX3 and MAPbX(3−x)Yx perovskites . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Perovskite photoelectrodes
8
5
Vacuum deposition set-up
10
5.1
Load lock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.2
Deposition chamber
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6
Preparation of MAPbI3 ﬁlms
16
6.1
Sample preparation and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
7
MAPbI(3−x)Brx samples
21
7.1
Sequential deposition sample preparation and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7.2
Co-evaporation sample preparation and results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
7.2.1
MAPbI(3−x)Brx preparation parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7.2.2
Eﬀects of post annealing and substrate temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8
MAPbI(3−x)Clx ﬁlms
29
8.1
Co-evaporation sample preparation and results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8.1.1
Precursor characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.1.2
Perovskite preparation parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8.1.3
Eﬀects of post annealing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8.1.4
Eﬀects of substrate temperature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
9
NiO ﬁlms
45
9.1
Preparation of NiO ﬁlms by evaporation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
9.2
NiO as a protective layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
9.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:4==
10 Electrical properties of the MAPbI(3−x)Clx and NiO ﬁlms
51
10.1 Vacuum NiO samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10.1.1 Band structure characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
10.2 Spin coated NiO samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10.3 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
11 Discussion and outlook
57
12 Conclusion
59
A Additional vacuum chamber illustrations
I
B Band edge estimation spectra
III
C PbCl2 tooling factor determination
VIII
D Additional XRD patterns
XII
E Additional XPS spectra
XV
F NiO tooling factor
XVI
==PAGE:5==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1
Introduction
During the last 20 years the climate changes of the Earth, and especially the eﬀects of modern
human society here-on, have received increasing attention due to the large impact it has on
mankind as a whole. In recent years CO2, and other greenhouse gases, have been the main topic
of discussion as the increased emission causes the surface temperature of the Earth to increase
leading to more extreme weather [3]. If one couples this with the massive amount of CO2 being
produced by burning fossil fuels it is clear why such a large eﬀort is being put into creating new
and more environmentally friendly energy sources. One of the most promising strategies so far
is to use hydrogen in stead of fossil fuels [4–6]. Hydrogen oﬀers some very desirable properties as
it features a high energy density per kg while having a very clean post-process product namely
water. In addition to this the fact that hydrogen can be obtained by water splitting means that
the production and the consumption of hydrogen forms a cycle.
Many diﬀerent water splitting technologies have been proposed where the most strait forward is
to use an electrolyzer. Here two electrodes are submerged in water following which an appropriate
potential is applied to drive the water splitting reaction. The supplied potential can in principle
come from any power supply but by using sustainable energy sources one ensures that the method
is as environmentally friendly as possible. The advantage of this approach is its simplicity but
also the fact that it will work with any form of potential supply making it very diverse. On the
other hand the overall price of the system is increased due to the cost of the electrolyzer which
reduces the ability to compete with other water splitting techniques.
A substantial amount of work has gone into an alternative approach in which a photoelec-
trochemical (PEC) cell is utilized to drive the water splitting reaction [4,5,7–9]. The idea is to
use photo-excited carriers to run the reaction directly rather than separating the current gener-
ation and the electrochemical reaction. In addition to posing some interesting physical problems
this solution also eliminates the need for the electrolyzer which potentially lowers the price of
the system. The eﬃciency of such a system is naturally very dependent on how eﬀectively the
photo-absorber converts photons into carriers and in addition if the potential diﬀerence across
the device is suﬃcient to drive the water splitting reaction. To address these challenges, and
to be able to obtain high solar to hydrogen (STH) eﬃciencies, the device suggested employs a
2-photon tandem cell structure in which two photoelectrodes of diﬀerent band gap are placed
on top of each other. In this way the incident light can be eﬃciently absorbed because it is
split between a large band gap material sitting on top and a small band gap material at the
bottom [4,10,11]. In addition to the superior eﬃciency the tandem device has the clear advan-
tage over a single band gap device that the reduction and oxidation potentials can be supplied
by diﬀerent dedicated absorbers. In this way the need for a band gap which is larger than the
reaction energy vanishes resulting in a dramatic increase in the amount of absorber materials
available [4]. In case of the small band gap absorber Si has been proven to be an eﬀective and
relatively cheap solution that, if protected properly, has shown good stability for an extended
time [12,13]. Suitable materials for the large band gap absorber have, however, been harder to
ﬁnd. In terms of solar to hydrogen eﬃciency great results have been obtained by using various
III-V semiconductors where a conversion eﬃciency of 12.4% has been demonstrated [10]. Unfor-
tunately the cells were observed to degrade in the electrolyte which in addition to the fact that
III-V semiconductors devices are much more expensive than Si ones, reduces the attractiveness
of this solution. Using oxides as the absorbing material has been proposed as a cheap and stable
alternative but as the reported STH eﬃciencies were modest, 2 −3% this solution is not ideal
either [4,11].
In this project the main focus is to fabricate a large band gap absorber utilizing lead based
organic-inorganic perovskites. These so-called methylammonia lead halide perovskites, with the
chemical formulas CH3NH3PbX3 or MAPbX(3−x)Yx, have recently gained a signiﬁcant amount
of attention [1, 2, 14–19]. The X and Y here refers to the halogens used where Br, Cl or I
are the most common. These perovskites have excellent absorption in the visible range and
1
==PAGE:6==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
using them as photo-absorbers in photovoltaic cells have yielded power conversion eﬃciencies
of up to 19.3% [14]. Furthermore the band gap of the material can be tuned by varying the
halogen composition, meaning that one can engineer an absorber that provides exactly the
desired optical properties needed to also achieve high solar-to-hydrogen eﬃciencies in a 2-photon
PEC cell [20, 21]. In addition the price of the perovskite precursors, as well as the fabrication
process, is very low making it a very attractive material [22]. To fabricate the perovskite vacuum
deposition, will in this project, be utilized as it is expected to yield a higher crystallinity as
well as easing the layer-by-layer depositions [1]. A large amount of the work in this project is
therefore dedicated to ﬁnding the optimal deposition parameters so that high quality ﬁlms can be
produced. Though using perovskite has many advantages it also has a major drawback, namely
that it is very soluble in water. This means that even the water vapour present under normal
ambient conditions will dissolve the absorbing layer within a short time frame [23]. To solve this
problem a protective layer of NiO will be used to separate the perovskite ﬁlm from any source
of water, thereby ensuring a longer device life time. NiO is reported to perform excellent as a
protective layer in addition to act as catalyst for the water splitting reaction [24] and to gain
good homogeneous layers vacuum preparation will again be used. Due to the attractive qualities
of both the perovskite and the NiO it is expected that the combination of these two materials
could yield high eﬃciencies at a low price and thus be a good alternative to the more established
approaches to water splitting.
2
Basic concepts of photoelectrocatalysis
In order to properly be able to design a photoelectrochemical (PEC) device it is important to
understand how light can be used to drive a redox reaction like the one shown in equation (2.1).
Z + Ea →X + Y.
(2.1)
Here the precursor Z reacts to from the products X and Y while releasing or expending the
reaction energy Ea. In the former case the reaction is exothermic as all the involved reaction
steps create spices with a lower free energy. This means that the overall reaction energy becomes
negative with the consequence that the reaction will run spontaneously without any energy
supply needed. In the latter case the reaction is endothermic and, on the contrary, requires
energy to run as the products of the reaction have a higher free energy than the precursor.
A good example of an endothermic reaction is water splitting and much work has gone into
examining how to supply Ea. One such way is to use an electrochemical cell where the reaction
energy is supplied by applying a potential between two electrodes submerged into an electrolyte
containing Z.
The potential needed for the reaction to run can be split into two parts namely the equilibrium
potential, E0, and the overpotential, η. E0 is given by the thermodynamic conditions and is the
theoretical minimum potential between the anode and the cathode needed for the reaction to
run. In general the overpotential depends on the reaction path and is deﬁned as the additional
potential needed to make all the transitional reaction steps exothermic as shown by Rossmeisl
et al. [25]. To improve the reaction rate and to decrease the needed energy a suitable catalyst
is routinely applied. The catalyst works in the way that it opens a new reaction path which
features a lower η and in that way substantial increases in activity can be achieved [26]. Each
catalyst can, however, only be optimized for a single reaction and as a redox reaction involves
two, multiple catalysts are in general needed. Fortunately the oxidation and reduction of the
overall redox reaction take place at diﬀerent locations in the electrochemical cell. At the anode
Z is initially oxidized generating one of the product spices as well as positive ions and electrons.
The ions subsequently diﬀuse to the cathode where they, together with electrons, are reduced
into the second product. Due to this fact each electrode can be optimized for its speciﬁc reaction
and consequently increase the eﬃciency of the overall device.
2
==PAGE:7==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Though the electrochemical cell is a well proven concept one can, as explained in the previous
section, alternatively make use of a PEC cell. The PEC device works much in the same way
as a conventional PV cell where electron-hole pairs are generated in a semiconductor through
absorption of photons. In the PEC cell the holes and electrons are, however, not collected in
an external circuit but rather used to drive an oxidation and reduction reaction on the surface
of the device. Like with the electrochemical cell the overall reaction can be split into two half
reactions, namely the oxidation reaction
Z + Eox →X + Y n−+ ne−,
(2.2)
and the reduction reaction
Y n−+ ne−+ Ered →Y,
(2.3)
where n is the oxidation state, Eox is the oxidation potential and Ered is the reduction potential.
The reactions shown in equation (2.2) and (2.3) are general and in practice some variations will
occur as seen later. The basic PEC device features a singe band gap absorber functioning as
the potential supply as well as either the cathode or the anode. To complete the redox reaction
cycle a metallic counterelectrode is used on which the remaining reaction takes place as shown in
Figure 1. The ﬁrst thing that must be addressed when designing the absorber is to ensure that
the potential it produces is suﬃcient to run the reaction. The potential is, like in a normal PV,
deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the quasi Fermi levels of the photo-excited holes and electrons
that are established during illumination [1]. Under 1 sun illumination the quasi Fermi levels will
always be lower than the band gap and as shown by Seger et al. [9] one will lose at least 400
mV compared to the band gab voltage. From this it is clear the the band gap voltage needs to
be larger than the reaction potential by at least 400 mV but in practice the band gap needs to
be even higher to account for additional losses.
ħω
Photoelectrode
Electrolyte
Counterelectrode
E
qeEox 
qeEred 
(E0+η)qe
EF,e
EF,h
Figure 1: The band structure of the single band gap device in contact with the electrolyte
where qe is the electron charge, EF,e is the electron quasi Fermi level, EF,h is the hole quasi
Fermi level and E is energy. The band structure of the absorber itself is in Figure 1 simpliﬁed
considerably to ease the understanding of the charge carrier transport and will, as shown later,
in general be much more complex.
3
==PAGE:8==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
In addition to the size of the band gap the location of the device bands compared to the vacuum
level must also be considered. This is due to the fact that the quasi Fermi level for the electrons
needs to be located more cathodic than Ered while that of the holes must be more anodic than Eox
for the reactions to run. The ﬁnal thing that needs to be considered is a way to ensure that the
generated charge remains separated until it can react with the electrolyte. To gain more insight
into how this can be achieved in a PEC device in contact which an electrolyte one must look at the
overall electronic band structure. Separately the absorber and the redox couple in the electrolyte
will be in a equilibrium state with individually well deﬁned Fermi levels. Upon submerging the
device in the liquid, charge will ﬂow across the interface to re-equilibrate the system, resulting
in a single overall Fermi level and subsequent absorber band bending as seen in Figure 1 [27].
Though band bending can in principle be achieved using an intrinsic material a much better
result can be obtained if one uses a p-type or an n-type semiconductor instead [9, 27]. Under
illumination any electron-hole pairs generated near the interface will due to the band bending
be separated and can thus be used to drive a reaction. The choice of semiconductor naturally
depends on whether the photoelectrode is intended to act as a anode or cathode as the band
bending must be so that the correct carrier type is let towards the semiconductor electrolyte
interface. This means that an n-type material should be used as anode while a p-type material
is needed for the cathode. Examples of a single band PEC device under illumination with the
correct and incorrect band location are shown in Figure 1 and 2, respectively. In both the shown
ﬁgures the photoelectrode acts as anode meaning that an n-type material is used to ensure that
the holes diﬀuse towards the right surface.
ħω
Photoelectrode
Electrolyte
Counterelectrode
E
qeEox 
qeEred 
(E0+η)qe
Figure 2: The band structure of the single band gap device in contact with the electrolyte
where qe is the electron charge and E is energy. The band gap of the absorber is misaligned with
the reaction potential compared to the vacuum level meaning that the oxidation reaction cannot
run.
4
==PAGE:9==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
3
Water splitting devices
To split water one needs to drive the reaction
H2O + Ea →1
2O2 + H2,
(3.1)
where Ea is again the reaction energy needed for the reaction to run. The overall reaction can
be split into two half reactions namely the oxidation reaction
H2O + Eox →1
2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−,
(3.2)
and the reduction reaction
2H+ + 2e−+ Ered →H2.
(3.3)
For the overall water splitting reaction the water oxidation and subsequent oxygen evolution
requires the largest potentials by far with an E0 of 1.23 V and an η in the hundreds of mV
depending on the catalyst and pH of the electrolyte [25, 26]. The hydrogen reduction reaction
requires far less energy and by using a suitable catalyst one can all but eliminate the overpotential
[9]. This means that the reduction reaction will run at only a slightly negative potential versus
a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) especially if one uses an acidic electrolyte. The overall
reaction potential needed for the water splitting reaction therefore amounts to around 1.6 V
meaning that in a PEC device a semiconductor with a band gab of at least 2.0 eV is needed if
one takes into account the minimum loss of 400 mV. As mentioned earlier several other losses
are, however, present and it can be shown that one needs 2.3 eV for an optimal single photon
absorbing device [9]. This rather large band gap results in an absorption edge at 540 nm which
means that a large part of the light irradiated by the sun cannot be absorbed by the device,
consequently lowering its eﬃciency. In addition to the requirements to the band structure some
more practical demands are imposed on the absorbing material namely that it must be cheap,
abundant and relatively non-toxic. All these requirements severely limits the number of materials
available if one wants to drive the water splitting reaction using a single band gap absorber [28].
On top of this it can be shown that the maximum radiation to energy eﬃciency of single band
gap device is thermodynamically limited to 31% −32% which further reduces the attractiveness
of this approach [8,10].
3.1
2-photon tandem device
Due to the challenges using a single band gap PEC cell for water splitting a large amount of work
has instead gone into creating a diﬀerent kind of device, namely the 2-photon tandem device
where two photoelectrodes rather than one are used [4,5,9,10]. As mentioned earlier the major
advantage of using a tandem cell rather than a single band gap device is that each of the two half
reactions can be driven by separate photo-absorbers which on their own would not have been
able to facilitate the reaction. This means that a much larger range of materials become available
especially if one includes protective layers in the photoelectrode design [9]. A simpliﬁed band
structure of s tandem device under illumination and in contact with the electrolyte is illustrated
in Figure 3a.
5
==PAGE:10==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
ħω1
Photoeanode
Electrolyte
Photocathode
E
qeEox 
qeEred 
(E0+η)qe
ħω2
(a)
Photoeanode Photocathode
E
ħω
qeEox 
qeEred 
Electrolyte
Electrolyte
(b)
Figure 3: (a) The simpliﬁed band structure of the 2-photon tandem device in contact with the
electrolyte where qe is the electron charge and E is energy. (b) The simpliﬁed band structure
of the monolithic tandem device in contact with the electrolyte where qe is again the electron
charge and E is energy. The unused holes and electrons are allowed to recombine with each other
as neither have suﬃcient energy to run the reduction and oxidation reaction, respectively. The
advantage of the monolithic device compared to having two separate absorbers is the reduced
area required.
Apart from the beneﬁt of a larger material selection the fact that absorbers with a lower band
gap can now be employed means that one can utilize a larger part of the incident light and thus
increase the eﬃciency of the device. From calculations it can be shown that the optimal combined
band gap of a 2-photo tandem device amounts to 2.7 eV where 1.7 eV should come from the large
band gap absorber and the remaining 1.0 eV from the small [9]. In the cell envisioned the two
absorbers are, as shown in Figure 3b, placed on top of each other to reduce the device area needed
and subsequently increase the reaction product per area, ratio. As shown by Pinaud et al. [4]
one can in this way obtain a STH eﬃciency of 22.8% which is a clear improvement compared to
the 15.5% one can achieve by using the side by side conﬁguration shown in Figure 3a. Compared
to the single band gap device both tandem set-ups do, however, perform better as the maximum
eﬃciency obtained here is no more than 11.2% [4]. Placing the absorbers on top of each other
naturally means that one has to ensure that the top absorber does not absorb all the light as
the eﬀectiveness of the bottom one will otherwise be limited severely. This issue is addressed by
placing a large band gap material (LBG) on top of a smaller band gap (SBG) material eﬀectively
dividing the sunlight. The size of the two band gaps should be so that equal amounts of carriers
are generated in each of the absorbers when taking into account the non-uniform distribution of
the suns radiation. In this way one ensures that the two reactants are created in equal amounts
meaning that as few carriers as possible are wasted. If one, on the contrary, does not take this
into account one of the reactions will limit the overall rate causing a pile up of the charge in
the other absorber. This will, subsequently, lead to an increased recombination rate in which
the energy is lost as heat, and thereby reduce the overall device eﬃciency. This situation is
envisioned in Figure 4 where the J-V curves of both the anode and the cathode are shown. In
the dark no carriers are generated and an external bias would have to be applied to get the water
splitting reaction to run. Under illumination the J-V curves of the cathode and the anode are
shifted towards each other by their respective open circuit voltages VOC,C and VOC,A deﬁning the
device operating point, Jop, where the two curves intersect. In an optimal device the mismatch
between the current density of the cathode and anode, Jmm, is zero and Jop lays close to the
maximum power point of both photoelectrodes meaning that high ﬁll factors are needed.
6
==PAGE:11==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
J  [mA/cm2]
Potential3vs3RHE3[V]
0.0
ηC
ηA
0.5
1.0
-0.5
1.5
VOC,A
VOC,C
Ea3ideal331.233V3
Ea3in3reality3>31.63V3
Jop
Jmm
Figure 4: J-V curves of the photoanode and photocathode where ηA and ηC are there respective
overpotentials and Jmm is the mismatch between their saturation current densities.
In addition to the size of the SBG and the LBG the interface between the two must be
carefully engineered. This is due to the fact that the unused holes of the cathode are allowed
to recombine with the electrons of the anode, as neither have suﬃcient energy to carry out the
reduction or oxidation reaction. As the overall potential supplied by the device is equal to the
diﬀerence between the reaction carrier quasi Fermi levels these should naturally not be allowed to
transverse the interface. To prevent this one can employ a tunnelling barrier by forming heavily
doped n++ and p++ regions near the LBG and SBG interface [9]. In this way a thin depletion
layer is formed ensuring that cathode electrons and anode holes can not transverse the junction
and recombine.
In the same way as with the single band gap absorber stability and price are important
factors that must be taken into account when designing the device. In the case of the SBG good
results have been obtained using protected Si as photocathode [12, 13]. In addition to this Si
is a relatively cheap and abundant material further increasing its attractiveness. In the case of
the LBG several diﬀerent approaches have been suggested where none of them are, however, as
readily applicable as the Si photocathodes. A high STH eﬃciency has been reported by using
a combination of III-V semiconductors which on the down side degrades over time [10]. The
production cost of these devices is furthermore high, limiting their commercial application [11].
Brillet et al. [11] reported on an alternative low cost high stability approach in which various
oxides was used as the absorbing layer by which a STH eﬃciency of up to 3.1% was obtained.
As such low eﬃciencies are not viable either, the aim of this project is, as explained earlier,
to create a methylammonia lead halide perovskite absorber which, if properly protected, could
yield a cheap and eﬀective alternative as described in the following section.
3.2
Material properties of MAPbX3 and MAPbX(3−x)Yx perovskites
Photo-absorbers made from methylammonia (MA) lead halide perovskite
MAPbX3 or mixed halide perovskite MAPbX(3−x)Yx have been reported to yield solar to power
conversion eﬃciencies ranging from 10% to 19.3% depending on the device structure and incor-
porated halogen [1,2,14–19]. The most thoroughly studied materials are the pure iodide (X−−I)
version and a mixed halide conﬁguration, MAPbI(3−x)Clx where a trace amount of Cl is incor-
7
==PAGE:12==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
porated. These perovskites features high absorption coeﬃcients in the visible range [15] meaning
that a fairly thin ﬁlms, on the order of 300 nm, are suﬃcient for absorbing most of the incident
light. The MAPbI3 features a carrier diﬀusion length of around 100 nm meaning that some of
the photo generated electron-hole pairs will recombine before they can be collected [29]. By in-
cluding the trace amount of Cl the diﬀusion length, however, jumps to roughly 1 µm yielding a
signiﬁcant increase in device performance [29]. It is therefore clearly advantageous to include a
small amount of chlorine in absorbing layer. Another beneﬁt of including chlorine when forming
the perovskite layer is that it increases the exciton binding energy which is in the range of 37-50
meV and 35-75 meV for MAPbI3 and MAPbI(3−x)Clx, respectively [15, 30]. In both cases the
relatively high exciton energy increases absorption, especially at the absorption edge, partially
explaining why such thin layers of material are suﬃcient.
While the absorption coeﬃcient and the carrier diﬀusion length
of MAPbI(3−x)Clx are ideally suited for a tandem cell LBG material, the reported band gap of
1.50 eV - 1.58 eV is not suﬃcient, since a band gap of 1.7 eV is required for a highly eﬃcient
2-photon device [20,31]. Fortunately it has been shown that one is able to tune the band gap of
the perovskite between the 1.58 eV of MAPbI3 and the 2.28 eV of MAPbBr3 by including both
in the mixed halide structure [20, 21]. By varying the Br concentration in the MAPbI(3−x)Brx
compound Noh et al [20] obtained an empirical relationship between the concentration of Br,
x, and the size of the band gap of the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 composition in eV, shown in equation
(3.4).
Eg(x) = 1.57 + 0.39x + 0.33x2.
(3.4)
Due to the diﬀerent notation used by Noh et al. [20] x in equation (3.4) runs from 0 to 1
rather than 0 to 3 as used in MAPbI(3−x)Brx. From equation (3.4) it is easily seen that one
needs a Br concentration of no less then 0.81 to achieve the required band gap. Though the
optical and electronic properties of the perovskites make them excellent photoabsorbers they do,
as mentioned earlier, have a serious drawback namely their poor resistance to moisture. Both
Noh et al [20] and Habisreutinger et al. [23] showed that the performance of the iodine perovskite
device drops rapidly over the cause of only a couple of days due to the water vapour present
in the atmosphere degrading the perovskite layer. The stability can be improved somewhat by
incorporating Br into the structure which results in a stable performance for at least 20 days [20].
This naturally seems encouraging but as the results obtained by Noh et al. [20] were acquired
under ambient conditions at varying humidity it is sadly not expected to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect
if the cell is dipped in water. Fortunately the perovskite layer is much less sensitive to heat than
water and the decomposition temperature of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 have been reported to be
260◦C and 285◦C, respectively [31]. For the mixed halide perovskite MAPbI(3−x)Clx the decom-
position temperature is reported to be slightly lower than the pure iodine case as sublimation of
CH3NH3Cl is observed to occur at 250◦C [32].
4
Perovskite photoelectrodes
To achieve the solar to power eﬃciencies described in the previous section several diﬀerent cell
designs have been proposed in the literature. Though some variations are naturally present
the vast majority incorporates one of two basic designs. In the ﬁrst case the perovskite was
deposited on a nanoporous scaﬀold fabricated from diﬀerent oxides [16,19]. This approach had
the advantage that the carrier lifetime of the perovskite becomes less important as the carriers
are not required diﬀuse far, before they can be collected by the scaﬀold. In the second design a
planar heterojunction structure without any scaﬀolding was used [1,2,17]. Since the perovskite
does not have to diﬀuse into the scaﬀold the latter design is much more appropriate for vacuum
deposition and is thus what will be employed in this project.
As with all solar cells a major part of the challenge is to ensure that the photo-generated
carriers are collected before they recombine. In a regular solid state cell this is addressed by
8
==PAGE:13==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
incorporating a pn homojunction which eﬀectively separates the charge by creating a build in
electric ﬁeld. Though the pn homojunction is a well tested and eﬀective way of separating charge
it is ill-suited in the case at hand as it is, at best, very diﬃcult to create the diﬀerently doped
areas needed to form the junction. Instead the device proposed here uses the approach often used
with organic solar cells namely to form a p-i-n heterojunction by introducing hole and electron
selective contacts. The band placement of the contacts are so that only the photo-generated
electrons or holes can transverse the layer whereas the opposite carrier type is blocked. In the
case of photoelectrocatalysis there is the additional requirement that the band location of the
contacts relative to that of the catalyst layer must be so that current can ﬂow from the ﬁrst to
the latter. The band structure of the photo-absorber envisioned here is shown in Figure 5 and
uses the n-like TiO2 as the electron selective contact while the role of the hole transport layer will
be ﬁlled by the p-like NiO [9,33]. The purpose of the NiO layer is not only to serve as an electron
blocker but additionally as a protective layer for the perovskite as well as a catalyst for driving
the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). In this way one saves two layer depositions simplifying
the device fabrication as well as addressing the need for a protective layer and a suﬃciently
catalysing surface. In addition to its protective and catalytic abilities NiO comes with a band
gap of 3.7 eV meaning that a low light absorbance in the visible range is expected for thin ﬁlms
which agrees well with what has been observed [24]. This is naturally a very important feature
and serves to further underline NiO’s viability as the outermost layer of the device. As shown
by Mei et al [24] the catalytic abilities of the NiO can be further enhanced by treating it in a
Fe containing electrolyte, something that will, however, not be carried out in this project.
FTO 
TiO2
Perovskite
NiO
Au
-4.4 eV
-4.0 eV
-7.2 eV
-3.9 eV
-5.5 eV
-5.2 eV
-1.6 eV
-5.1 eV
Figure 5: The valance and conduction band location of the TiO2, perovskite and NiO together
with the work functions of Au and FTO relative to the vacuum level (0 V) as found in [15]
and [34]. When a photo-excited electron-hole pair is generated in the perovskite layer the carrier
selective contacts will block the propagation of either the holes or the electrons resulting in the
desired charge separation.
9
==PAGE:14==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
The TiO2 is selected as the size of its band gap (3.2 eV) means that no light from the visible
range is absorbed when it is incident from the ﬂuorine doped tin oxide (FTO) covered glass
side. In the full tandem cell device this would have naturally also been a concern as the light not
absorbed by the LBG would still have to make it to the SBG. In both the TiO2 and the NiO case
the thickness of the layer must be controlled carefully to ensure that they eﬀectively block the
holes and electrons, respectively. The layers cannot, on the other hand, be to thick as this will
introduce a high series resistance in the device consequently lowering the performance. In case
of the TiO2 a layer thickness of 30 nm have shown good results [16]. The thickness of the NiO
layer is a more complex matter as a certain thickness is needed for the layer to properly function
as a protective layer. A 50 nm thick (Fe-treated) NiO ﬁlm was shown to have good protective
abilities by Mei et al [24] and as this was, fortunately, also the maximum ﬁlm thickness reported
by Wang et al [34] to function without any optical losses one should in principle be able to
obtain the optimal device.
Glass
FTO
Perovskite
NiO
Au
TiO2
Figure 6: An overview of the layer structure of the device envisioned. The layer thickness shown
here are not to scale as both the FTO and perovskite layer are substantially thicker than the
TiO2 layer. The overlapping of the layers limits the shunting paths of the device thus improving
its performance.
When depositing the layers it is imperative to ensure that the individual layers does not have
electrical contact with other layers than their immediate neighbours as one will otherwise create
shunting paths. This will consequently reduce the amount of current that can be collected and
thus lower the eﬃciency of the device. In the worst case scenario the FTO and Au layer comes
in direct contact eﬀectively shorting the device and rendering it useless. The deposition scheme
shown in Figure 6 addresses the shunting challenge and ensures that a suﬃciently large region
of Au is present on which the external contact can be connected. Initially an alternative scheme,
where the width and length of every new layer was decreased going from the bottom to the top
(forming a pyramid), was used but as it turned out to be harder to contact, it was abandoned
for the one shown in Figure 6.
5
Vacuum deposition set-up
The motivation for using vacuum deposition, rather than the simpler solution based approach,
is the high ﬁlm quality that one can achieve while additionally avoiding water contamination.
As the ﬁlm quality is directly correlated to the performance of a solar cell through the mobility
of the carriers and the size of the shunt resistance, ensuring a high quality is paramount. In
order to achieve the high ﬁlm quality needed one has to control the conditions under which the
ﬁlm is deposited very accurately and in a consistent manner. Consequently vacuum deposition
chambers are fairly complex set-ups in which the cooperation of many components is required
for high performance. The chamber used in this project consisted of two sub-chambers, namely
10
==PAGE:15==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
a main deposition chamber and a smaller load lock connected by a manual gate valve. The
components of each sub-chamber are described in detail below.
5.1
Load lock
The purpose of the load lock was to enable the loading and extraction of samples in such a way
that it did not require venting the main chamber. To facilitate this the load lock incorporated
several diﬀerent valves, pumps and gauges as shown in Figure 7 and Figure A.1 in Appendix
A. The turbo pumps used were a Varian Turbo-V 550 MacroTorr, which incorporates a fan for
cooling, and a smaller, water cooled Varian Turbo-V 70LP MacroTorr. The system furthermore
used an Alcatel 2012A rotary pump to rough pump the turbo pumps as well as the load lock
itself.
PiraniWgauge
SubstrateWrackWmount
VarianWTurboW-WVW70LP
MainWgateWvalve
TransferWrodWcontrolWwheel
TransferWrod
IonWgauge
WobbleWstick
ViewWport
NeedleWventingWvalve
ChamberWroughingWvalve
PneumaticWvalve
VarianWTurboW-VW550WMacroTorr
PiraniWgauge
TurboWroughingWvalve
ConectionWtoW
depositionWchamber
AuWevaporatorW
Figure 7: Side view of the load lock and the various valves and pumps connected to it. Some
ﬂanges have been omitted in this ﬁgure as they were not used in the project and would therefore
only serve to complicate the ﬁgure. The Au evaporator is dashed as it is located in the opposite
side of the chamber (see Figure A.1 in Appendix A ).
To control which part of the system that was rough pumped a series of manual valves were
used to increase the operator control. As it was very important that the turbo pumps were not
rough pumped by the same pump being used for the initial evacuation of the load lock, a valve in
direct connection with the load lock as well as a valve on the back of each turbo pump were used.
In this way the same rotary pump could be used for both purposes as the turbo pumps could be
isolated from it when it was roughing the chamber. In addition to the manual valves pneumatic
isolation valves, mounted between the turbo pumps and the chamber, allowed the turbo pumps
to be kept running while venting. The pneumatic valves were initially controlled by a Mitsubishi
F1-20P-E electronic controller which allowed for easy operation of the valves through the use of
pressurized air. The controller did, however, include a series of interlocking mechanisms which,
depending on the readout of the various pressure gauges, allowed or restricted the operation of
the valves. The system was, unfortunately, depending on the original pirani and ion gauges used
in the chamber which were all but defective having the unfortunate consequence that the valves
11
==PAGE:16==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
would remain stuck in the closed position. To solve this issue the valves were ﬁtted with an
external power supply connected to a simple switch by which one could control their actuation.
As well as causing interlocking issues the lack of reliable pressure motoring complicated the
control of the venting and evacuation procedures of the load lock. To rectify this the load lock
was ﬁtted with two new pirani gauges as well as a new ion gauge. The ﬁrst pirani was placed
between the rotary pump and the large turbo pump to allow the operator to control the roughing
of the turbo. The second pirani and the ion gauge were placed inside the load lock allowing the
operator to determine when it was safe to open the gate valve to the deposition chamber.
In addition to the pressure-control related components the load lock was equipped with a
sample holder rack, holding up to ﬁve samples, a transfer rod to move the samples from the
load lock to the main chamber, a wobble stick, a Au evaporator and a 6MHz quartz crystal
microbalance (QCM) rate monitor. In order to be able to transfer the glass substrates around
inside the chambers they were mounted on special stainless steel disks which matched the sample
holder on the transfer rod as well as the one located in the deposition chamber. To easily mount
and mask the glass substrate a dedicated design of the steel disks as well as special masks shown
in Figure 8 and Figure A.3 -A.2 in Appendix A were developed.
Figure 8: The designed steel disk substrate holder assembly. The holder design and drawings
were created using SolidWorks and allowed for easy mounting of the FTO glass substrates. The
shadow masking of the assembly, sadly, proved to be less than ideal for the intended purpose
and was subsequently replaced by Teﬂon tape masking.
The reason for having two masks was to minimize the handling of the glass substrates them-
selves between the TiO2 and the perovskite deposition as the mask with the smaller openings
could be mounted on top of the one with the larger openings. Though the dedicated design eased
the mounting process considerably it became a concern that the shadow masking it utilized was
less than ideal for ensuring the desired layer overlap shown in Figure 6. As a consequence the
masking of the samples throughout most of the project was done by using simple Teﬂon tape.
To load the samples into the load lock the chamber was initially vented while ﬂushing with N2
to keep the water contamination to a minimum. Following this the sample holder rack could be
removed and placed in a special holder to ease the sample mounting process. The steel disks with
the masked samples were subsequently mounted on the sample holder rack, following which, the
rack was mounted in the load lock after its ﬂanges had been cleaned with isopropanol to remove
any contaminations. Once in the load lock the samples could be loaded onto the transferring
rod by using the wobble stick. To ease the transfer the hight of the rack could be adjusted by a
manual screw to ensure that the steel disks were placed in the optimum hight compared to the
12
==PAGE:17==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
wobble stick.
The gold evaporator in the load lock was used to fabricate the back contact of the devices
which in addition to closing the electrical circuit served as an additional protection layer for
the samples. To reduce the handling it was placed directly under the sample holder rack and
consisted of a crucible mounted between two electrodes which were connected to a power supply.
Initially the crucible was a simple tungsten boat which, in addition to holding the gold, served
as the resistor for the electrical heating. During the project it, however, became apparent that
this solution was not ideal as the boats became very brittle and broke after a couple of uses. In
an attempt to solve this problem the tungsten boats were replaced by a more sturdy tantalum
box heater in which a Al2O3 crucible could be placed. The box heater did, unfortunately, turn
out to have several drawbacks of it own. Due to its larger dimensions it did not ﬁt through the
ﬂange on which the electrical feed-through was mounted meaning that the mounting process was
substantially more cumbersome. In addition to this the box heater produced signiﬁcantly more
radiative heat during operation than the tungsten boats meaning that there was a fair risk of
thermally decomposing the perovskite during deposition. To address this challenge a makeshift
heat shield made from aluminium foil was inserted between the crucible and the sample which
to some degree reduced the heating. In the end the box heater also proved to break almost as
rapidly as the tungsten boats and as a consequence the original conﬁguration was used for the
rest of the project. To deposit the gold the sample was placed at the lowest slot in the sample
rack and the power going through the tungsten boat was increased until a suitable rate was
observed on the QCM. The fact that the evaporator was placed inside the chamber, as opposed
to having an external system, meant that the samples could be kept under vacuum throughout
the entire process reducing the risk of contamination.
5.2
Deposition chamber
The deposition chamber was the main chamber of the set-up in which all depositions took place
except for the Au evaporation as explained earlier. Like the load lock the deposition chamber was
ﬁtted with a series of valves, gauges and pumps to ensure that the chamber could be kept under
vacuum during the periods where it was isolated from the load lock. A detailed overview of the
chamber can be seen in Figure 9 and 10. The chamber was equipped with a IGC APD cryogenics
Inc. Marathon 8 cryo pump system attached to the main body of the chamber through bellows
to reduce vibrations. Though the cryo pump performed reasonably when running the compressor
driving the pump was not functioning properly. The consequence of this was that the compressor
He pressure had to be reduced below the normal operating value as it would otherwise overheat
and shut down, eﬀectively shutting down the pump. To improve the pumping stability a Pfeiﬀer
TPU 450 H turbo pump was envisioned to be mounted in the cryo pumps place which in addition
to being more stable would reduced the pump start up time as no regeneration procedure was
needed. Though this would be beneﬁcial the down time required for making the replacement
would be quite substantial and it was therefore decided to wait with the operation until after
the conclusion of this project. In addition to the high vacuum pumps the chamber incorporated
a second Alcatel 2012A rotary pump which was used to evacuate the chamber following a vent
as well as rough pumping the cryo pump.
To facilitate the layer deposition the chamber incorporated a DCA eﬀusion cell, a VG eﬀusion
cell and, initially, two electron gun evaporators (e-guns). Since the temperatures needed to
evaporate the perovskite precursors was well within the temperature range of the eﬀusion cells
they were used for the perovskite fabrication while the Ni was evaporated using one of the e-guns.
To ensure good reproducibility the VG cell was almost exclusively used for the MAX deposition
while the DCA cell was used for the PbX2. To enable and control the heating of the cells two
Eurotherm temperature controllers (model 903P and 905D) connected to separate power supplies
were used. To heat the cells a reasonable maximum power level was set on the power supplies
following which the desired temperature was set on the Eurothems using their autotune function.
In the case of the DCA cell this approach worked very well and a temperature ﬂuctuation of
13
==PAGE:18==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Nive-gun
VGveffusionvcell
DCAveffusionvcell
DCAvshutter
VGvshutter
E-gunvshutter
Samplevshutter
Connectionvtovloadvlock
Viewvport
Wobblevstick
E-gunvviewvport
Piarnivgauge
Ionvgauge
Feve-gunvQCM
Ionvgauge
O2vline
Samplevholdervthermalvcouple
Figure 9: Side view of the deposition chamber and the various valves and gauges connected to
it. Some ﬂanges have been omitted in this ﬁgure as they were not used in the project and would
therefore only serve to complicate the ﬁgure.
under 1◦C was achieved at the deposition temperatures. In the case of the VG cell the 903P
Eurotherm temperature control, however, proved to somewhat inferior yielding ﬂuctuations of
3◦C. The explanation to the performance issues was most likely the fact that the set-up was
originally intended for much higher deposition temperatures than the ones used in this project,
resulting in a poor regulation. To try and minimize the variations a fairly low maximum power
was used which, however, resulted in a slow temperature ramping. Consequently a substantial
amount of MAX was wasted before the desired operation temperature was reached. To address,
especially the latter problem, it was decided to accept the reduced temperature precision and
increase the power level to a point where the ramp would not take more than a couple of minutes.
In addition to the eﬀusion cell controllers a third Eurotherm (model 818) was used to control
the temperature of the sample holder on which the steal disks carrying the samples were placed.
In the same way as with the other temperature controllers one set the maximum power limit and
used the auto tune function to achieve the desired operation temperature. Like with the DCA
cell this worked very well as the temperature ﬂuctuations were limited to 0.1◦C. To increase the
homogeneity of the deposition the sample holder was, moreover, equipped with a motor allowing
it to rotate during deposition. To monitor the evaporation rates of the eﬀusion cells the chamber
14
==PAGE:19==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
CryoGpump
CryoGpumpGpneumaticGvalve
SampleGQCM
NiGe-gunGshutter
ConnectionGtoG
loadlock
E-gunGviewGport
NiGe-gunGshutter
SampleGshutter
ViewGport
DCAGshutter
VGGshutter
PiraniGgauge
FeGe-gunGQCM
O2Gline
NiGe-gunG
NiGe-gunGQCM
Figure 10: Top view of the deposition chamber and the various valves and gauges connected
to it. Some ﬂanges have been omitted in this ﬁgure as they were not used in the project.
was equipped with a water cooled 6MHz QCM placed in the immediate vicinity of the sample
holder on which the steel disks were placed. The QCM was connected to an Intellemetrics IL800
control box from which the diﬀerent material parameters were set and the rate monitored. The
displays on the Intellemetrics box were, however, of a very poor quality and consequently it was
decided that the readout of the rate was to be transferred to a computer for convenience. As it
was, in the mean time, not crucial for the control of the deposition it was in the end decided
to postpone it until this project had ﬁnished. In addition to the QCMs the chamber featured
a pneumatic shutter for each of the deposition sources as well as a sample shutter which could
screen the sample without obscuring the QCM. In this was the rate of each source could be
tuned to the desired value without risking any unwanted deposition on the sample.
The e-guns incorporated in the chamber were Advanced Products & Technologies GmbH single
hearth 270◦electron beam guns. As the name suggests the electron beam was arched 270◦from
the ﬁlament to the deposition target by using various magnets. In this way the ﬁlament was
shielded from the evaporating spices thus increasing its lifetime. Another useful feature was that
15
==PAGE:20==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
the deposition target was grounded while the ﬁlament was held at -8 kV meaning that any
ions created during deposition would not be accelerated towards the sample causing sputtering
damage. The evaporation material was placed inside a pyrolytic boron nitride crucible, which
in turn was placed inside a water cooled copper crucible to ensure a good heat distribution in
the deposition material without risking thermal damage to the rest of the e-gun. As mentioned
earlier the chamber initially featured two e-guns; one loaded with Fe and one with Ni. At some
point in the project it, however, became necessary to inspect the inner dimensions of the e-gun
ﬁtting as well as the e-guns themselves. Due to this, and since it was not going to be used in
the project, the Fe e-gun was removed from the system and replaced with a blinding ﬂange. The
Ni e-gun was controlled by a VG control panel connected to an 8 kV power supply. By using
the control panel and looking through the view port located on top of the chamber one could
adjust the x and y location of the beam sweep and in this way ensure that one only hit the Ni
target. To monitor the rate each e-gun originally featured its own QCM rate monitor connected
to separate Intellemetrics IL800 control boxes to allow for individual calibration of the rates
before initiating deposition. It, sadly, became apparent that the control boxes for the e-guns
were not functioning properly and were subsequently not able to provide any information about
the rates. To compensate for this the Ni rate was monitored by using the sample QCM which,
though it was not optimally positioned, yielded a usable result.
To enable the formation of oxides the chamber was ﬁtted with a O2 line connected via a ﬂow
controller and two needle valves. Before deposition the ﬂow controller was set to an appropriate
value by using an in-house made control panel after which the partial pressure of O2 in the
chamber was controlled by the needle valves. To set the pressure the ﬁrst and roughest needle
valve was initially opened completely. Following this the chamber pressure was calibrated by
using the innermost, very accurate, needle valve until a stable deposition pressure was obtained.
The chamber was, furthermore, equipped with cooling channels through which the chamber
could by cooled to 77 K by using liquid N2. Though this option allowed one to cool the sample it
was not used in this project as the heating of the sample during depositions in the main chamber
was not observed to thermally decompose the perovskite.
6
Preparation of MAPbI3 ﬁlms
Inspired by the fact that the majority of the literature describing the fabrication and properties
of methylammonium lead halide perovskite solar cells employs the MAPbI3 perovskite (either in
the neat conﬁguration or with a trace amount of Cl) the initial work performed in this project
had the aim of fabricating a layer of MAPbI3 [1, 2, 16]. Both Liu et al. [1] and Chen et al. [2]
report on the fabrication of perovskite layers using vacuum deposition and though PbCl2 was in
both cases used as a precursor (together with MAI) it was decided to use PbI2 instead to ensure
that any perovskite layer formed would be pure MAPbI3. In this way the issue of controlling the
amount of Cl in the MAPbI3 ﬁlm would initially be avoided allowing for easier establishment of
suitable deposition parameters and comparison with literature results.
Though both Liu et al. [1] and Chen et al. [2] obtain perovskite layers they employ fundamen-
tally diﬀerent fabrication methods as Chen et al. [2] uses sequential deposition, while Liu et al. [1]
uses co-evaporation. In the sequential deposition scheme a layer of PbI2 is initially deposited on
the substrate forming a wetting layer for the ﬁnal ﬁlm. Following this the MAI is evaporated
onto the sample forming the desired layer by reacting with the all-ready deposited precursor.
The advantage of this procedure is that the evaporation rates of each of the reactants does not
inﬂuence the composition of the ﬁnal ﬁlm meaning that very strict monitoring of the rates is
not required. The downside of the scheme is that one has to ensure that the reaction depth of
the MAI is suﬃcient for obtaining a complete conversion of the wetting layer. If this is not the
case one risks that a two layered structure is formed potentially leading to device failure. Chen
et al. [2] examined diﬀerent substrate temperatures and found that using 75◦C resulted in a full
conversion of a 150 nm PbCl2 ﬁlm. In the co-evaporation scheme both precursors are evaporated
simultaneously and react in ﬂight to form the desired chemical composition of the deposited
16
==PAGE:21==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
layer. The strength of this deposition procedure is that one precursor does not have to diﬀuse
through the ﬁlm being formed to reach the other precursor thus, in principle, ensuring that all
reactants are converted throughout the layer. The drawback is, however, that one has to monitor
the evaporation rates of both precursors very carefully to ensure that the right stoichiometric
relationship is obtained. As explained earlier only a single QCM rate monitor was available for
monitoring both the eﬀusion cells which meant that the individual deposition rates could not be
controlled during the preparation process. As a consequence the sequential deposition scheme
was selected for the initial sample preparation.
6.1
Sample preparation and results
The ﬁrst samples produced were pure PbI2 and MAI layers which were prepared to test the
performance of the eﬀusion cells as well as to ensure that a layer could in fact be produced. The
PbI2 used was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (99.999% purity) while the MAI was prepared
using the same recipe as Im et al. [35] in which ethylamine is reacted with HI. As neither PbI2
or MAI had previously been used in the set-up the appropriate deposition temperatures were not
known and consequently the evaporation temperatures were set to 360◦C or 320◦C for the PbI2
and 120◦C for the MAI, thus resembling the deposition temperatures used by Liu et al. [1]. As
the substrate QCM had at this point in the project not been restored to a functioning condition
the samples were produced by simply heating the eﬀusion cells to the operating temperature and
deposit for various durations. In this way PbI2 and MAI samples with a deposition time of 15,
30 and 60 minutes were prepared on quartz glass that had been cleaned in acetone prior to being
loaded into the chamber. In all cases a substrate temperature of 30◦C was used. To measure the
height of the produced ﬁlms a Dektak-8 Stylus proﬁlometer was used which for the PbI2 yielded
ﬁlm thicknesses between 20 nm and 250 nm. In the MAI case the ﬁlm thickness was below the
instrument detection limit meaning that very little or no material had been deposited.
The explanation to the lack of MAI ﬁlm was believed to be caused by a low sticking coeﬃcient
and to address this issue it was decided to proceed to the sequential preparation of MAPbI3
as it was known from initial solution prepared samples, and the work of Chen et al. [2], that
MAI reacted almost instantaneous upon coming in contact with PbI2. To prepare the samples
quartz glass slaps were initially rinsed in acetone and wiped dry using a piece of precision wipe
paper before being mounted on the steel disks and loaded into the chamber. Following this a
100 nm thick layer of PbI2 was deposited at 360◦C using a substrate temperature of 30◦C and a
deposition pressure in the 1 × 10−6 mbar range. To control the layer thickness the now repaired
QCM rate monitor was used. To properly measure the evaporation rate the QCM set-up needed
the density, ρ, and acoustic impedance, Z, of the reactant as well as the geometric tooling factor.
While the PbI2 density of 6.16
g
cm3 is a well known material parameter the acoustic impedance
is not. As it is, however, expected to give only a second order contribution Z was set to 10
g
cm2s
which was the default value of the Intellemetrics control box. The tooling factor of the set-up was
not measured for the PbI2 deposition but as the sample holder QCM was intended to gauge the
eﬀusion cell rates the error made by setting it to 1 was not expected to be substantial. From the
work of Chen et al. [2] it was known that the reaction depth of the MAI was very dependent on
the substrate temperature and subsequently samples were prepared using diﬀerent sample holder
temperatures as shown in Table 1. Furthermore various MAI deposition temperatures were used
in order to change the deposition rate. In all cases the deposition time was 120 minutes during
which no signiﬁcant pressure increase from the base pressure (1×10−6 mbar range) was observed.
In addition to heating the substrates during deposition one of the two samples prepared per ﬁlm
preparation was post annealed on a hot plate in air at 100◦C for 30 minutes to examine if any
additional crystallization could be achieved. To characterize the samples a Cary 1E UV visible
spectrophotometer (UV-Vis) was used to measure the transmission spectra of each of the samples
seen in Figure 11.
17
==PAGE:22==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Table 1: MAI deposition parameters where Tdep is the deposition temperature of the MAI
and Tsub is the substrate temperature. All samples were prepared with the sequential deposition
scheme using a layer of a 100 nm of PbI2. In all cases the deposition time was 2 hours throughout
which the chamber pressure remained in the 1 × 10−6 mbar range.
Sample No
Tsub [◦C]
Tdep [◦C]
1
75
135
2
85
135
3
85
150
4
30
135
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
9 0 0
9 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
M
A I / P b I 2   7 5  
o C ,  a n n e a l e d
M
A I / P b I 2  8 5  
o C  
M
A I / P b I 2   7 5  
o C
M
A I / P b I 2  3 0  
o C
P b I 2
M
A I / P b I 2   8 5  
o C ,  a n n e a l e d
T r a n s m i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  s e q u e n t i a l  d e p o s i t i o n  s a m p l e s
Figure 11: Transmission spectra of the sequential deposited sample 1,2 and 4 as well as the post
annealed samples and a pure PbI2 sample. The 85◦C post annealed spectra coincides completely
with that of the 30◦C one for the majority of the wavelength range. The increases in transmission
located around 550 nm are caused by interference phenomena.
From the spectra it is clear that the samples are very similar and features absorption edges
that diﬀers signiﬁcantly from what one would expect from MAPbI3 which, as mentioned, has a
band gap of around 1.56 eV. To gain more insight into the nature of the samples the band gap
energies were estimated from the spectra. To estimate the band gap energies of a semiconductor
a Tauc plot is normally used as described by Ferreira de Silva et al. [36] and Ghobadi [37]. Green
et al. [15] have, however, reported that the application of a Tauc plot is not appropriate for
18
==PAGE:23==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
perovskites due to the exciton eﬀects. The underestimation of the band gap size is not expected
to be large and indeed Dimesso et al. [31] employed the method for estimating band gap energies
of perovskites. Due to this a Tauc plot ﬁtting procedure was applied to estimate the band gaps
of the produced ﬁlms. As described by Ghobadi [37] this is done by plotting

Abs(λ)
λ
2
against 1
λ
where Abs(λ) is the absorbance of the ﬁlm and λ is the wavelength of the light. By extrapolating
the linear part of the plot to

Abs(λ)
λ
2
= 0 the direct transition absorption edge location, λg,
can be estimated. This can ﬁnally be converted into the band gap energy by applying
E(λ) = hc
λ ,
(6.1)
where E(λ) is the photon energy, h is Planck’s constant and c is the speed of light in vacuum.
By applying this procedure to the measured UV-vis spectra shown in Figure 11 the band gaps
summarized in Table 2 were found. The obtained band gap energies agrees well with what Ferreira
de Silva et al. [36] found for PbI2 suggesting that no or only a very thin layer of MAPbI3 has
been formed. As explained one would have expected a band gap energy of around 1.56 eV if the
prepared ﬁlms were perovskite in which case a sharp decrease in transmission should have been
observed around a wavelength of 800 nm [20,31].
Table 2:
The band gap energies obtained from the transmission spectra shown in Figure 11.
The Tauc plots used for the estimation are shown in Figure B.1 in Appendix B.
Sample
Eg [eV]
PbI2
2.44
30◦C
2.44
75◦C
2.43
75◦C annealed
2.44
85◦C
2.42
85◦C annealed
2.44
The increase in transmission observed for all spectra seen at approximately 550 nm is caused
by interference occurring when the light reﬂected at the interface between the thin ﬁlm and
the substrate is π
2 out of phase with that being reﬂected at the ﬁlm-air interface. At this phase
diﬀerence a large portion of the reﬂected light (depending on the size of the interface reﬂectivity)
is eliminated by destructive interference. The lack of drop in transmission could in principle be
explained by this phenomena but as the absorption coeﬃcient of MAPbI3 is very high in the
visible range the eﬀect should be negligible [15]. In addition the expected color change from the
yellow PbI2 to the dark brown perovskite was not observed which further supports the conclusion
that either a very thin or no perovskite layer was produced.
The post annealing process was from Figure 11 observed to increase the absorption in the
85◦C case but as the eﬀect is not very signiﬁcant and no positive eﬀect is observed in the 75◦C
case the explanation is most likely that there was a small diﬀerence in height variation between
the samples. This would naturally lead to the interference related transmission peak becoming
narrower for the more smooth sample, consequently decreasing the transmission in other areas of
the spectrum. From Figure 11 one can, however, conclude that post annealing seems to decrease
the produced layer roughness which could have a positive eﬀect on any perovskite layer produced.
In addition to UV-vis measurements, SEM images of two samples were taken using a Quanta
FEG 200 ESEM microscope to examine whether or not any partial perovskite layer formation
19
==PAGE:24==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
occurred. The ﬁlms were prepared on indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates using a substrate tem-
perature of 75◦C and 85◦C and otherwise similar deposition parameters as earlier. The ITO
covered substrates were used to counteract charge up during the SEM image acquisition. During
imaging charging eﬀects were, however, observed and as a consequence the samples were cov-
ered with a thin layer of Au by using a Cressington 200 Hr Au sputter coater to achieve higher
conductivity.
Figure 12: Proﬁle SEM image of the sample prepared on an ITO covered substrate using a
sample holder temperature of 75◦C yielding a layer thickness of 60 nm - 75 nm. The sample is
covered in a thin layer of Au to prevent charge up during imaging.
In Figure 12 and 13 proﬁle images of the two samples can be seen from which the thicknesses of
the samples are found to be 60 nm - 75 nm and 100 nm - 110 nm for the 75◦C and 85◦C sample,
respectively. From the images it is clear that if any partial perovskite layers were formed they
were extremely thin and well below the resolution of the microscope. If one couples this with
the results of Figure 11 it further supports the conclusion that no perovskite layer is formed and
that the deposited layers seen in Figure 12 and 13 are both the initial PbI2 layers. The thickness
diﬀerence between the deposited layers could be explained by perovskite formation which have
been reported to increase the layer thickness from that of the original PbI2 but bearing in mind
the results from the UV-vis measurements it is more likely that the diﬀerence is caused by a
discrepancy in deposition rate leading to diﬀerent PbI2 ﬁlm thicknesses [2]1.
Due to the lack of success a diﬀerent deposition scheme was used in the fabrication of the
remaining MAPbI3 samples. Rather than depositing the entire PbI2 layer at once 2 min of
co-evaporation of PbI2 and MAI followed by 18 min of pure MAI evaporation was used to in-
crease the MAI to PbI2 ratio. This procedure was repeated 9 times to produce a ﬁlm of suitable
1The result presented by Chen et al [2] were obtained using PbCl2 but a similar eﬀect was expected.
20
==PAGE:25==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure 13: Proﬁle SEM image of the sample prepared on an ITO covered substrate using a
sample holder temperature of 85◦C yielding a layer thickness of 100 nm - 110 nm. The sample
is covered in a thin layer of Au to prevent charge up during imaging.
thickness. Using this scheme two samples were created both using a substrate temperature of
75◦C together with a MAI evaporation temperature of 150◦C and 165◦C, respectively. Unfortu-
nately the UV-vis spectrometer was at this point in the project not working due to a defective
lamp which meant that the samples could not be properly characterized. The expected color
change was, however, not observed and consequently it was concluded that this approach was
not suitable either.
6.2
Conclusion
From the experiments it was clear that the sequential deposition method did not yield the desired
results. A reason for this could be that the MAI used was not stable as it was observed to turn
bright yellow if exposed to air for a extended period. The most likely reason was, however, that
the rate of MAI was insuﬃcient as no ﬁlm of the compound could be produced and consequently
higher evaporation temperatures were needed.
7
MAPbI(3−x)Brx samples
Due to the lack of success with the pure iodine precursors and since the ﬁnal device described
in Section 3 utilized the mixed halide perovskite, MAPbI(3−x)Brx, the MAI was replaced with
MABr. In addition to yielding a higher band gap material it was expected that the MABr was
more stable than the MAI as this had been observed to be the case with the Br-containing
perovskites [20]. The MABr was synthesised by reacting methylamine with HBr as described by
21
==PAGE:26==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Zhao et al. [18] but using additional cleaning steps to ensure a higher purity.
7.1
Sequential deposition sample preparation and results
The initial samples were prepared using the sequential deposition scheme. To increase the chance
of having a fully converted layer the thickness of PbI2 layer was decreased to 50 nm. The MABr
evaporation temperature was, moreover, increased substantially to yield a higher rate and sub-
sequently increase the chance of perovskite formation. Like with the MAPbI3 samples the quartz
glass substrates were cleaned using acetone prior to being loaded into the deposition chamber.
Initially the PbI2 layer was deposited onto the glass slaps using an evaporation temperature of
360◦C while keeping the sample holder temperature at either 75◦C or 85◦C. Following this the
MABr was evaporated onto the samples using the deposition conditions seen in Table 3 and a
deposition time of 2 hours except in the case of sample 4, where the deposition of MABr was
monitored using the QCM. A density of 1
g
cm3 and an acoustic impedance of 10
g
cm2s were used
as the exact MABr values were unknown. The same procedure had been employed by Liu et
al [1] who showed that the error is expected to be small.
Table 3: MABr deposition parameters where Tdep is the deposition temperature, Tsub is the
substrate temperature, Pi,dep is the initial deposition pressure and Pf,dep is the deposition pres-
sure at the end of deposition. All samples were prepared with the sequential deposition scheme
using a layer of a 50 nm of PbI2. In all cases, the deposition time was 2 hours except for sample
4 where 100 nm, as measured by the QCM, was deposited.
Sample No
Tdep [◦C]
Tsub [◦C]
Pi,dep [mbar]
Pf,dep [mbar]
1
200
75
2.1 × 10−6
6.0 × 10−6
2
220
75
6.1 × 10−6
1.4 × 10−5
3
220
85
9.9 × 10−6
2.5 × 10−5
4
220
95
1.8 × 10−5
3.2 × 10−5
The UV-vis equipment was at this point still not operational and consequently no spectroscopy
characterization was possible. In all cases the samples, however, remained yellowish in the same
way as the previously prepared samples and it was therefore concluded that no perovskite had
been formed. The sample preparation process did give some insight into the stability of the
MABr deposition rate during the fabrication process as the chamber pressure was in all cases
observed to increase substantially during the ﬁlm preparation. As no such pressure increase was
observed during the PbI2 depositions it was attributed to an increase in the partial pressure of
the MABr vapour suggesting that the rate was increasing during the deposition. In addition the
rate was observed to be very ﬂuctuating something that had also been reported previously by
Chen et al. [2]. They attributed the ﬂuctuations to the low molecular weight of MAI making it
diﬃcult to accumulate material on the crystal. The explanation for the lack of success with the
sequential deposition procedure is not immediately clear but the most likely cause was that the
rate of the MABr or the substrate temperature were not suﬃcient to promote the conversion
into perovskite.
7.2
Co-evaporation sample preparation and results
As the sequential deposition scheme had not proven to be successful, neither when using MABr
or MAI, it was decided to use the co-evaporation procedure described by Liu et al. [1] instead. To
achieve the desired rates the eﬀusion cells were heated to an initial deposition temperature and
held there for an extended period to allow the rate to stabilize. Following this the temperature
was adjusted and the rates again allowed to stabilize. By applying this procedure several times
22
==PAGE:27==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
a stable rate was achieved in the PbI2 case while the MABr rate was still ﬂuctuating though
not as much as earlier. The PbI2 and the MABr rates were calibrated separately starting with
the lead compound. The reason that the rates were set in this order was that an MABr rate
was detected even when the shutter was closed thus making the reverse order of calibration
impossible. Another reason for calibrating the PbI2 rate before that of MABr was that the rate
of the lead compound was much more stable during the deposition times used. Furthermore the
DCA cell could be properly sealed meaning that the observed MABr rate could be set without
being inﬂuenced by the PbI2.
Liu et al. [1] reported that a ratio of 3.5:1 of MAI:PbCl2 was needed for optimal perovskite
formation and to examine if a similar optimum could be found several diﬀerent samples with
diﬀerent halogen composition were prepared by varying the rate relationship and substrate tem-
perature as shown in Table 4.
Table 4: MAPbI(3−x)Brx deposition parameters where TMABr is the MABr deposition temper-
ature, TPbI2 is the PbI2 deposition temperature, RMABr is the MABr rate and RPbI2 is PbI2
rate. All samples had a total thickness of a 100 nm except for sample 3 which was only 70 nm.
All thicknesses were measured using the sample QCM. The substrate temperature was 75◦C for
samples 1-4 whereas a temperature of 30◦C was used for sample 5.
Sample No
TMABr [◦C]
TPbI2 [◦C]
RMABr [ nm
s ]
RPbI2 [ nm
s ]
1
220
350
0.019
0.019
2
220
330
0.016
0.009
3
235
320
0.015
0.005
4
325
402
0.45
0.12
5
375
372
0.37
0.11
The used temperatures were substantially higher than the ones reported in literature and were
chosen in order to get measurable MABr rates [1, 2]. All the samples had a total thickness of
100 nm (as determined by using the sample QCM) except for sample 3. In this case the eﬀusion
cell ran out of material which resulted in a rapid pressure decrease and due to this sample 3 was
only 70 nm thick. In all cases the actual thickness was, however, expected to diverge from the
measured as the tooling factor for the combined MABr-PbI2 deposition was not known. In an
eﬀort to keep the deposition pressure in the 1 × 10−5 mbar range the ﬁrst three samples were
fabricated using fairly low deposition rates. As especially the PbI2 rate of sample 3 was close to
the detection limit of the QCM, sample 4 and 5 were fabricated using substantially higher rates
which, however, also meant that the deposition pressure was pushed into the 1×10−4 mbar range.
In case of sample 4 the pressure, in the meantime, dropped down to 3.2 × 10−5 mbar during
deposition suggesting that the MABr rate decreased while preparing the ﬁlm. The substrate
temperature was in all cases 75◦C except for sample 5 where a temperature of 30◦C was used.
7.2.1
MAPbI(3−x)Brx preparation parameters
Some color change was observed with samples 1-4 but not with sample 5 and to gain a more
quantitative insight the now functional UV-vis spectrometer was used to measure the trans-
mission spectra of the samples. In all spectra a spectrometer induced transmission increase is
present at 350 nm.
In Figure 14 the obtained spectra of sample 1-3 are shown together with the PbI2 spectrum
measured earlier. From the spectra the band gap energies can be estimated to be 2.37 eV, 1.85
eV and 1.88 eV for sample 1, 2 and 3, respectively by using the Tauc plot procedure as shown
in Figure B.2. As explained earlier the band gap of MAPbI(3−x)Brx will be between 1.5 eV and
23
==PAGE:28==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
9 0 0
9 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
P b I 2
S a m p l e  1  
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 1
S a m p l e  3  
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3
S a m p l e  2  
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 2
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
T r a n s m i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  P b I 2 / M
A B r  c o - e v a p o r a t e d  s a m p l e s
Figure 14: Transmission spectra of the co-evaporated sample 1, 2 and 3 described in Table 4
as well as the PbI2 spectra from Figure 11. From the ﬁgure the band gap energies of sample 1,
2 and 3 can be estimated to be 2.43 eV, 2.39 eV and 1.85 eV, respectively as seen in Figure B.2.
2.28 eV depending on the fraction of Br included which strongly suggests that sample 1, with
the estimated band gap of 2.37 eV, is PbI2 rather than perovskite. In case of sample 2 and 3
there is a substantial diﬀerence between the band gap energies of the prepared ﬁlms and that
of PbI2 indicating that they are indeed perovskite containing Br. By applying equation (3.4)
the fraction of Br incorporated into the material was calculated yielding the results, x2 = 1.5
and x3 = 1.62, if the MAPbI(3−x)Brx notation is used. These results indicate that it is indeed
possible to produce MAPbI(3−x)Brx using the shown deposition parameters and depending on
the MABr - PbI2 ratio diﬀerent compositions can be obtained. The overall rate observed using
the QCM was, however, seen to ﬂuctuate substantially during evaporation making it very hard
to reproduce the deposition conditions. These ﬂuctuation were, as mentioned, caused by the
MABr suggesting that controlling its rate using the QCM was not optimal.
While the results obtained from the UV-vis spectra already suggested that the layers pro-
duced on sample 2 and 3 were MAPbI(3−x)Brx further investigation was needed to support this
conclusion. X-ray diﬀraction crystallography (XRD) was therefore used to further characterize
the crystal structure of the samples. Since the distance between the crystal layers of a solid is a
unique material parameter the XRD patterns serve as a ﬁngerprint for the material and by com-
paring measurement with literature one can use it to identify unknown compounds. To obtain
the patterns a PANalytical X’pert pro diﬀractometer XRD, using powder diﬀraction optics, was
utilized to perform the measurements yielding the results shown in Figure 15.
By comparing the measured patterns of sample 1-3 with the MAPbI2Br reference pattern
obtained from Zhao et al. [18] (all shown in Figure 15) several diﬀerences are apparent. As
observed the reference (220) peak located at 29.0◦and especially the (110) peak at 14.4◦are
shifted compared to the measured peaks. The shift can be explained with diﬀerences in the
XRD set-ups which would yield small discrepancies in the results. By shifting the measured
24
==PAGE:29==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
S a m p l e  1
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 1
T
s u b   =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  2
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 2
T
s u b   =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  3
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3
T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
L i t e r a t u r e  r e f e r e n c e
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  d i f f e r e n t  l a y e r  c o m p o s i t i o n  s a m p l e s  
Figure 15: XRD patterns of the co-evaporated sample 1-3 described in Table 4 together with a
reference spectra from [18]. The intensity have in all spectra been normalized to the largest peak
and baseline of sample 1, 2 and 3 have being shifted upwards by 0.3, 0.2 and 0.1, respectively.
The (110), (210) and (310) MAPbI2Br peaks from Ref [18] are located at 14.4◦, 29.0◦and 32.6◦,
respectively.
patterns by 0.7◦the two reference peaks are are seen to be well reproduced by sample 2 and 3.
The double peaks located at 27.3◦and 28.6◦are believed to be the iodine and bromine crystal
facets where the relative height of the peaks indicate the concentration of I and Br. If this is
the case it indicates that the concentration of Br is not homogeneously distributed throughout
the crystals or that the ﬁlms consists of separate MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 layers rather than a
mixed halide structure. The latter explanation is further supported by the presence of the peak
at 57.6◦which matches one of the MAPbI3 peaks observed by Liu et al. [1]. The peaks observed
at 11.6◦, 37.6◦and 51.5◦are seen to match with the PbI2 pattern shown in Figure D.2. These
peaks are by far the most intense in the pattern of sample 1 supporting the conclusion of the the
UV-vis measurements, namely that the ﬁlm is mostly PbI2. The perovskite reference peaks are,
however, also seen in the pattern suggesting that a very thin MAPbI(3−x)Brx ﬁlm is present.
To further examine the produced layers SEM images of sample 1 and 2 were acquired. By
comparing Figure 16a and 16b it is clear that the layer thicknesses are very diﬀerent, namely
555 nm and 154 nm for sample 1 and 2, respectively. Both samples are seen to be thicker
than what was estimated using the QCM especially in the case of sample 1. This suggests that
controlling the thickness of the ﬁlms by using the QCM and the combined rates of PbI2 and
MAI was not a viable solution as widely diﬀerent results were obtained.
25
==PAGE:30==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: (a) SEM image of sample 1 as described in Table 4. From the image the thickness
of the deposited layer is seem to be 555 nm. (b) SEM image of sample 2, as described in Table
4, from which the thickness of the deposited layer is seem to be 154 nm. The poor quality of the
image was due to charge up eﬀects.
7.2.2
Eﬀects of post annealing and substrate temperature
Like with the previous experiments one of the two samples prepared per deposition was post
annealed on a hotplate for 30 minutes at 100◦C to examine if any further crystallization of
the perovskite layer could be achieved. By fabricating two samples in deposition rather than
fabricating two separate samples using similar conditions a much higher sample similarity was
ensured. This was especially the case for the MAPbI(3−x)Brx samples as the rate control was
as poor as observed, meaning that obtaining similar deposition conditions would be exceedingly
diﬃcult. In Figure 17 the measured transmission spectra of sample 2 and 3 can be seen. From
these spectra the band gap energy of the post annealed and as-prepared ﬁlms can, as shown in
Figure B.3, be estimated to be to be 1.89 eV and 1.85 eV for sample 2 and 2.40 eV and 1.88 eV
for sample 3, respectively. For both samples the post annealing is observed to increase the band
gap which could indicate that Br is incorporated into the perovskite structure. In case sample 3
the band gap energy of the post annealed sample, however, strongly resembles that of PbI2 and
a more likely explanation is therefore that the post annealing is accelerating the decomposition
of the perovskite.
The eﬀect of the substrate temperature was further examined with sample 4 and 5 whose
transmission spectra can be seen in Figure 18. The band gap of sample 4 can from Figure
18 (as seen in Figure B.4 in Appendix B) be estimated to be 1.83 eV suggesting that the
ﬁlm is MAPbI(3−x)Brx with a Br fraction of x4 = 1.43. As seen from Figure 18 the substrate
temperature has a very pronounced eﬀect on the produced ﬁlm as no perovskite formation was
observed for sample 5 where a substrate temperature of 30◦C was used. The sample was post
annealed to examine if the precursors were present on the substrate in which case the added
thermal energy might have promoted their conversion into perovskite. The lack of perovskite
formation suggests that the MAPbI(3−x)Brx is not formed in ﬂight but rather on the substrate
where the MABr and PbI2 must have suﬃcient thermal energy to diﬀuse around before being
able to react.
26
==PAGE:31==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
9 0 0
9 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
C o m p a r i s o n  o f  a n n e a l e d  a n d  u n a n n e a l e d  s a m p l e s
S a m p l e  2  
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 2
A n n e a l e d
S a m p l e  2  
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 2
S a m p l e  3  
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3
S a m p l e  3  
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3
A n n e a l e d
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
Figure 17: Transmission spectra of the co-evaporated sample 2 and 3 described in Table 4
together with their corresponding post annealed samples. In both cases the band gap energy is
seen to increase while the transmission decreases. The band gaps of the samples are estimatedin
Figure B.3
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
9 0 0
9 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
S a m p l e  4
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3 . 5
T
s u b  =  7 5
o C  
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
S a m p l e  5
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3 . 5
T
s u b  =  3 0
o C ,  a n n e a l e d
E f f e c t  o f  s u b s t r a t e  t e m p e r a t u r e
Figure 18: Transmission spectra of the co-evaporated sample 4 and 5 described in Table 4
where the rate relationships shown are approximate values of the ones shown in Table 4. From
the ﬁgure the band gap energy of sample 4 can be estimated to be 1.83 eV (see Figure B.4).
27
==PAGE:32==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
In addition to the eﬀects of the substrate temperature it is from Figure 18 again clear that
the composition of the produced layer is very diﬃcult to control with the employed method
as one would have expected sample 4 to have a band gap above the 1.88 eV of sample 3. The
explanation is, in the same way as previously, that the MABr rate had dropped during deposition
which agrees well with the fact that the pressure decreased from the initial 4.2 × 10−4 mbar to
3.2 × 10−5 mbar during deposition. To further examine the eﬀects of the substrate temperature
XRD patterns of sample 4 and 5 were measured and are, along with the reference pattern found
by Zhao et al. [18], seen in Figure 19. Upon examining Figure 19 it is clear that the crystal
structures of the two samples are very diﬀerent. Sample 5, though very crystalline, does not
resemble the reference pattern, which coupled with the results of Figure 18, strongly indicates
that the layer produced was not perovskite. Upon comparison with the PbI2 reference pattern in
Figure D.2 it is, furthermore, evident that the peaks can not be attributed to PbI2 either. The
patten of sample 5 does, however, resemble the reference pattern of MAI obtained from Jeob et
al. [38] as seen in Figure D.4. This would strongly suggest that the ﬁlm is pure MAI or MABr
which is supported by the MAI transmission spectrum shown in a later section. The pattern of
sample 4 is, on the contrary, very similar with the reference further supporting the conclusion
that the sample is indeed MAPbI(3−x)Brx. Like in Figure 15 a double feature is observed at
28.3◦and 29.1◦which as with the previous patterns could be associated with separate Br and I
facets.
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
R e f e r e n c e  p a t t e r n
S a m p l e  4
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3 . 5
T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
S a m p l e  5
P b I 2 : M
A B r  r a t e  1 : 3 . 5
T
s u b  =  3 0
o C ,  a n n e a l e d
C o m p a r e s i o n  o f  d i f f e r e n t  s u b s t r a t e  t e m p e r a t u r e
Figure 19: XRD patterns of the co-evaporated sample 4 and 5 described in Table 4 together
with a reference spectra from [18]. The intensity have in all patterns been normalized to the
largest peak. The (110), (210) and (310) MAPbI2Br peaks from Ref [18] are located at 14.4◦,
29.0◦and 32.6◦, respectively.
7.3
Conclusion
From the above results one can conclude that it is indeed possible to produce MAPbI(3−x)Brx
using co-evaporation while the sequential deposition scheme was not observed to yield the desired
ﬁlms. It is furthermore clear, that controlling the MABr rate using the sample QCM is not ideal
28
==PAGE:33==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
as the observed rates were not stable during deposition. As the band gap of the desired photo
absorber should be 1.7 eV better control of the halogen composition is clearly needed before the
ﬁnished device can be produced. From Figure 18 and 19 one can also conclude that heating the
substrate during ﬁlm preparation is paramount if perovskite formation is to be achieved. Finally
post annealing is observed to increase the band gap of the produced ﬁlms which suggests that
prolonged heating accelerates the decomposition of the perovsite.
8
MAPbI(3−x)Clx ﬁlms
While a more suitable way of controlling the composition of the perovskite produced is deﬁnitely
required the results obtained form Figure 18 and 19 does show that it is possible to fabricate
MAPbI(3−x)Brx layers and in principle engineer the band gap to the desired value. The MABr
synthesis was, however, a time consuming process taking up to a week to complete. MAI could,
on the other hand, be purchased from Solaronix and the iodine compound was therefore used for
the MAPbI(3−x)Clx experiments in an eﬀort to save time. The PbI2 was, furthermore, replaced
with PbCl2 as both Liu et al. [1] and Chen et al. [2] had used this precursor rather than PbI2.
It was thus known that vacuum preparation of MAPbI(3−x)Clx ﬁlms was possible using the
chlorine compound and it was therefore expected to more readily yield results compared to the
neat iodine case. In addition to this the samples prepared using PbCl2 had the advantage that
both the precursors were now white meaning that any color change of the deposited layer could
only stem from the two compounds having reacted. The PbCl2 had a purity of 98% and was like
the PbI2 purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
To gain better control of the deposited layer thickness the tooling factor of the PbCl2 was
found by preparing samples with a thickness of 100 nm, 200 nm and 300 nm as measured by
the QCM. The samples were, in the same way as earlier, prepared on quartz glass slaps which
were initially cleaned with acetone. To measure the thicknesses of the samples the Quanta FEQ
ESEM set-up was used to acquire proﬁle images of the layers. Like with the previous imaging
the layers were covered with a thin layer of gold to prevent the sample from charging up. To
reduce the inﬂuence of any microscopic height variances, the layer thickness was assessed at 3
diﬀerent locations on each samples. The resulting images can be seen in Appendix C while the
obtained thicknesses are shown in Table 5.
Table 5: The actual layer thicknesses of the prepared samples acquired from SEM images shown
in Figure C.1 to C.9.
QCM [nm]
Site 1 [nm]
Site 2 [nm]
Site 3 [nm]
Mean [nm]
100
156
155
157
156
200
303
303
306
304
300
427
423
430
426
From the results of Table 5 the tooling factor, TF, deﬁned as
TF = tm
ti
,
(8.1)
where tm is the measured thickness and ti is the thickness indicated by the QCM, was found
to be 1.50 ± 0.07. The tooling factor of the MAI could not be determined as the pure MAI
ﬁlms produced were very inhomogeneous and as a result TF = 1 was used as with the previous
samples.
29
==PAGE:34==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
8.1
Co-evaporation sample preparation and results
Due to the success using the co-evaporation scheme observed during the
MAPbI(3−x)Brx experiments the vast majority of the MAPbI(3−x)Clx samples were prepared
using this method. As it during the characterization of the MAPbI(3−x)Brx samples became
apparent that it was very challenging to control the MABr/MAI rate using the QCM, an alter-
native method was employed. As suggested earlier the chamber pressure during deposition was
related to the MAI deposition rate and consequently the deposition pressure was used as a gauge
hereof. This approach had the clear advantage that the deposition pressure was observed not to
depend on the PbCl2 rate meaning that any change could be attributed to a change in MAI rate.
When preparing a sample the PbCl2 rate was initially set using the same procedure of heating
and stabilization utilized earlier. Following this the VG cell was heated to a temperature above
the actual deposition temperature to speed up the ramping from the base pressure to the desired
deposition pressure. The temperature was hereafter calibrated until a stable chamber pressure
was observed. During deposition the pressure would in almost all cases increase at which point
the temperature was decreased further to return the pressure, and subsequently the rate, to
its initial value. To control the thickness of the produced layer the rate of the PbCl2 was used
to calculate a deposition time as it was observed that the resulting layer thickness was closely
related to it. By employing this method several MAPbI(3−x)Clx samples, using the conditions
shown in Table 6 and 7, were prepared. All of the samples described in Table 6 and 7 were,
like in the previous cases, prepared on quartz glass which was cleaned in acetone prior to being
loaded into the chamber. From Table 6 it is clear that the PbCl2 evaporation temperatures used
were much higher than the 325◦C used by Liu et al. [1]. The explanation to this is most likely
that the temperature estimation of the eﬀusion cell was poor meaning that the ﬁlaments had to
be heated to higher temperatures to achieve the desired evaporation rates.
Table 6: MAPbI(3−x)Clx deposition parameters where TPbCl2 is the PbI2 deposition temper-
ature, RPbI2 is PbI2 rate, Tsub is the substrate temperature and t is the layer thickness from
which the deposition time was calculated.
Sample No
TPbCl2 [◦C]
RPbCl2 [ nm
s ]
Tsub [◦C]
t [nm]
1
460
0.078
75
150
2
462
0.078
75
150
3
463
0.074
75
150
4
460
0.074
75
150
5
460
0.078
30
150
6
460
0.078
75
300
7
465
0.078
75
150
In addition to the samples prepared on quartz glass a PbCl2, two MAI and a MAPbI(3−x)Clx
perovskite sample (sample 7) were prepared on FTO glass to be able to perform X-ray photo-
electron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. The perovskite sample is described in Table 6 and
7 while the deposition parameters of the MAI and PbCl2 samples can be seen in Table 8. Prior
to the deposition the FTO samples were cleaned by ultrasonicating them for 30 min, ﬁrst in
acetone and then in ethanol.
30
==PAGE:35==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Table 7: MAPbI(3−x)Clx deposition parameters where TMAI is the MAI deposition temperature
range, Pdep is the deposition pressure range and Rint is the initial rate of the MAI. For sample
1 and 4-6 the rate at the initial pressure was not recorded and is thus left blank.
Sample No
TMAI [◦C]
Pdep [mbar]
Rint [ nm
s ]
1
220
5.9 × 10−5 −6.5 × 10−5
-
2
225 - 240
1.3 × 10−4 −1.4 × 10−4
0.145
3
235 - 245
1.9 × 10−4 −2.1 × 10−4
0.150
4
225
8.3 × 10−5 −9.0 × 10−5
-
5
220
5.2 × 10−5 −5.8 × 10−5
-
6
215
5.8 × 10−5 −6.3 × 10−5
-
7
235 - 240
1.9 × 10−4 −2.1 × 10−4
0.180
Table 8: MAI and PbCl2, FTO sample deposition parameters where Tdep is the deposition
temperature, t is the layer thickness as measured by the QCM and Pdep is the deposition pressure.
Both MAI samples were prepared at 32◦C while the PbCl2 sample was prepared at 75◦C.
Sample
Tdep [◦C]
t [nm]
Pdep [mbar]
MAI 1
220
150
8.3 × 10−5 −8.7 × 10−5
MAI 2
215
225
8.2 × 10−5 −8.9 × 10−5
PbCl2
465 - 485
100
3.0 × 10−6 −2.6 × 10−6
8.1.1
Precursor characterization
As explained earlier any color change observed after deposition would be caused by the precur-
sors reacting as both the compounds were white. Though this fact was good for a ﬁrst glance
conformation that a reaction had taken place a more quantitative way of characterizing the
samples was needed and thus the precursors used in the depositions were investigated.
Initially the transmission spectra of the 150 nm and 450 nm PbCl2 samples, used for deter-
mining the tooling factor, were measured in order to observe whether or not a clear shift in band
gap energy occurred during the perovskite formation. From the results shown in Figure 20a, one
can estimate the band gap energy of the samples by again using the Tauc plot procedure as
seen in Figure B.5 found in Appendix B. By doing so one obtains the band gap energies 4.23
eV and 4.15 eV for the 150 nm and 450 nm sample, respectively. Examining Figure 20a one can
also observe the same interference phenomena observed with the MAPbI3 samples. Transmission
spectra were also measured for MAI sample 1 and 2 described in Table 8 yielding the results
seen in Figure 20b. From Figure 20b it is clear that the MAI has a negligible absorbance in the
visible range and no color change can thus be attributed to the presence of MAI.
31
==PAGE:36==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
2 5 0 3 0 0 3 5 0 4 0 0 4 5 0 5 0 0 5 5 0 6 0 0 6 5 0 7 0 0 7 5 0 8 0 0 8 5 0 9 0 0 9 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
P b C l 2  t  =  4 5 0  n m
 T s u b  3 2 o C
T r a n s m
i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m
]
P b C l 2  t  =  1 5 0  n m
 T s u b  3 2 o C
T r a n s m
i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  P b C l 2  s a m
p l e s  
(a)
1 5 0 2 0 0 2 5 0 3 0 0 3 5 0 4 0 0 4 5 0 5 0 0 5 5 0 6 0 0 6 5 0 7 0 0 7 5 0 8 0 0 8 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
M
A I  t  =  1 5 0  n m
T r a n s m
i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m
]
M
A I  t  =  1 0 0  n m
 T r a n s m
i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  M
A I  s a m
p l e s
(b)
Figure 20: (a) Transmission spectra of the 150 nm and 450 nm PbCl2 samples. From Figure B.5
in Appendix B the band edge location is found to be at 320 nm and 300 nm for the 150 nm and
450 nm sample, respectively. (b) Transmission spectra of the 100 nm and 150 nm MAI samples
From the ﬁgure it is clear the MAI features almost no absorbance in the visible wavelength
range.
To further characterize the PbCl2 an XRD pattern of the 450 nm sample was measured in
order to identify the diﬀraction peaks associated with this compound. Knowing the location of
the peaks would allow one to identify any residual PbCl2 present after deposition which could
indicate that the MAI rate was insuﬃcient compared to that of the PbCl2. The obtained pattern
can be seen in Figure 21 where a reference pattern from [39] is also shown. From Figure 21 it
is clear that the measured pattern is identical to that of the reference with the exception of the
broad peak located at 22◦. This originates from the quartz substrate and was thus expected.
32
==PAGE:37==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
N o r m a l i z e d  I n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
L i t t e r a t u r  r e f e r e n c e
P b C l 2  4 5 0  n m ,  T s u b  =  3 2
o
C
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  4 5 0  n m  P b C l 2  s a m p l e  a n d  r e f e r e n c e
Figure 21: XRD pattern of the 450 nm PbCl2 sample together with a reference pattern obtained
from [39]. t is again the layer thickness and Tsub is the substrate temperature.
Due to the good agreement between the measured sample and the reference one can conclude
that the deposited layer is indeed PbCl2 which suggests that the compound does not crack during
deposition. From the XRD spectrum no contaminants are observed as every peak coincides with
one in the reference spectrum. This, however, does not mean that no contaminants are present
as only crystalline spices can be detected by XRD. To investigate if any amorphous particles
or ﬁlms are formed during deposition XPS was used to probe the chemical composition of the
samples described in Table 8. The spectra would naturally only identify the species present on
the very surface of the samples but any unexpected elements located here could indicate a ﬁlm-
wide contamination. The obtained full spectrum sweep of the PbCl2 ﬁlm is shown in Figure 22
from which the iodine peaks located at 619 eV and 630 eV immediately sticks out. A peak, not
associated with either Pb or Cl, is also observed at 285 eV but as the targets were not sputtered
before measuring, this is most likely caused by carbon from organic spices contaminating the
surface. As the sample has to be transferred from the deposition chamber to the XPS equipment
one can not avoid this and some carbon contamination was thus expected. The presence of I
was, however, unexpected and would suggest that some PbI2 was deposited onto the sample.
The straightforward explanation to this would be that some residual PbI2 was still present in
the DCA crucible resulting in a co-evaporation of PbI2 and PbCl2. Another explanation is also
possible, namely that the crucible was contaminated with MAI. During deposition the MAI was
observed to go everywhere in the chamber rather than following the expected near ballistic path
from the evaporator to the sample. This fact made it possible to monitor the rates using the ion
gauge but also meant that some fraction most likely went into the PbCl2 crucible as well. Upon
heating the crucible this stray MAI could have reacted with the PbCl2 to form PbI2 which could
have then been deposited on the sample.
33
==PAGE:38==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
8 0 0
7 5 0
7 0 0
6 5 0
6 0 0
5 5 0
5 0 0
4 5 0
4 0 0
3 5 0
3 0 0
2 5 0
2 0 0
1 5 0
1 0 0
5 0
0
0
5 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
2 5 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
3 5 0 0 0
P b  6 s
P b  5 d
C l  2 p
C l  2 s
C  1 s
P b  4 f 7 / 2
P b  4 f 5 / 2
P b  4 d 5 / 2
P b  4 d 3 / 2
I  4 d 5 / 2
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
I  4 d 3 / 2
P b  4 p 3 / 2
X P S  s p e c t r a  o f  t h e  P b C l 2  s a m p l e
Figure 22: XPS spectrum of the PbCl2 sample described in Table 8. The Auger peaks of
the spectrum located at higher binding energies have been omitted as they yield no additional
information.
1 5 2
1 5 0
1 4 8
1 4 6
1 4 4
1 4 2
1 4 0
1 3 8
1 3 6
1 3 4
0
5 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
2 5 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
3 5 0 0 0
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
X P S  s p e c t r u m
 o f  t h e  P b  4 f   r e g i o n  o f  t h e   P b C l 2  s a m
p l e
(a)
5 3 8
5 3 7
5 3 6
5 3 5
5 3 4
5 3 3
5 3 2
5 3 1
5 3 0
5 2 9
5 2 8
5 2 7
5 2 6
6 2 0 0
6 3 0 0
6 4 0 0
6 5 0 0
6 6 0 0
6 7 0 0
6 8 0 0
6 9 0 0
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  E n e r g y  [ e V ]
X P S  s p e c t r u m
 o f  t h e  O  1 s  r e g i o n  o f  t h e  P b C l 2  s a m
p l e
(b)
Figure 23:
(a) Detailed XPS spectrum of the 4f Pb peaks. Peaks are seen to be located at
136.3 eV, 138.7 eV, 141.1 eV and 143.5 eV. (b) Detailed XPS spectrum of the O 1s region. A
peak is observed at 531.6 eV.
In addition to the full spectrum sweep of the PbCl2 sample a more detailed measurement
of the energy range around the Pb 4f peaks was carried out to further investigate what Pb
compounds made up the surface of the sample. The obtained spectrum is shown in Figure 23a
from which four distinct peaks are seen to be present. While the peaks at 138.7 eV and 143.5
34
==PAGE:39==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
eV are attributed to the 4f 7/2 and 4f 5/2 lines of PbCl2, respectively, the origin of the two
smaller peaks at 136.3 eV and 141.1 is unknown [40]. A possible explanation could be that they
originate from either PbO2 or PbO as a small oxygen peak is observed at 531.6 eV when doing
a more precise measurement in the area around the O 1s line (see Figure 23b).
While the peak at 531.6 eV agrees well with the O 1s peak of PbO reported by Wagner et
al. [41] to be located at 531.4 eV the Pb 4f 7/2 peaks do not match that of PbO located at 137.7
eV - 138.1 eV [42] [43]. The Pb 4f 7/2 peak is on the contrary seen to much better match that
of Pb located at 136.4 eV suggesting that the oxygen should be attributed to the contaminating
species rather than PbO [44]. The origin of the peaks does, however, remain unclear but as
the areas of the peaks are small compared to that of the PbCl2 no further eﬀort was put into
identifying the them. In addition to identifying the unknown species one can from the Pb 4f
spectrum estimate the stoichiometry of the ﬁlm by comparing it with the Cl 2p spectrum seen in
Figure E.2. By doing so one approximately gains a 1:2 Pb to Cl relationship in good agreement
with what one would expect.
9 5 0 9 0 0 8 5 0 8 0 0 7 5 0 7 0 0 6 5 0 6 0 0 5 5 0 5 0 0 4 5 0 4 0 0 3 5 0 3 0 0 2 5 0 2 0 0 1 5 0 1 0 0
5 0
0
0
5 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
2 5 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
S n  4 d  3 / 2  
S n  3 d  5 / 2
S n  3 d  3 / 2
S n  3 p  3 / 2
S n  3 p  1 / 2
O  1 s
N  1 s
C  1 s
I  4 d  
I  3 d  5 / 2
I  3 p  3 / 2
I  3 d  3 / 2
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
I  3 p  1 / 2
X P S  s p e c t r a  o f  t h e  1 5 0  n m  M
A I  s a m p l e
Figure 24: XPS spectrum of the 150 nm MAI sample described in Table 8. Like previously the
high energy part the spectrum is omitted as no interesting information could be obtained from
it.
Like with the PbCl2 sample a full range XPS scan was made of the MAI samples described in
Table 8 which for the 150 nm sample yields the result shown in Figure 24. From the spectrum it
is clear that the MAI ﬁlm covers the substrate very poorly as the FTO layer is clearly observed.
This is in good agreement with what was seen in the initial experiments and is thus not surprising.
Peaks assigned to N, C and I are fortunately also observed, strongly indicating that the MAI is
indeed present. To further examine the sample more detailed scans of the C 1s, I 3d, N 1s, O 1s,
and Sn 3d regions were carried out. The obtained peak values can be seen in Table 9 where the
C, I and N peaks all agree well with what was found by Ng et al. [45]. Like with the PbCl2 the
chemical composition of the ﬁlm can be estimated by comparing the detailed regional sweeps.
From this one gains a C:N:I relationship of 1:1:1 if the contamination carbon is neglected.
35
==PAGE:40==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Table 9: Peak locations obtained from the detailed scans of the C 1s, I 3d, N 1s, O 1s, and Sn
3d regions of the PbCl2 sample.
Peak
Binding energy [eV]
C 1s reacted
286.2
C 1s contamination
285
N 1s
401.9
O 1s
531.3
I 3d 3/2
630.3
I 3d 5/2
618.8
Sn 3d 3/2
495.8
Sn 3d 5/2
487.3
8.1.2
Perovskite preparation parameters
As both the precursors were now well characterized the next task at hand was to determine
suitable MAPbI(3−x)Clx deposition parameters as well as examine the eﬀect of varying the
halogen composition. To do so transmission spectra of sample 1, 2, 3 and 4 were measured yielding
the results shown in Figure 25. From these spectra the band gap energies can be estimated to
be Eg,1 = 2.44 eV, Eg,2 = 2.41 eV, Eg,3 = 1.59 eV and Eg,4 = 2.43 eV for sample 1, 2, 3 and 4,
respectively as shown in Figure B.6. Comparing these results with those of Figure 20a and 20b
it is for all of the samples clear that some reaction has occurred as the absorption edge has, in
all cases, been shifted towards higher wavelengths compared to PbCl2 and MAI.
From Figure 25 it is furthermore clear that the band gap energy decreases the smaller the
fraction of Cl included is. This is in good agreement with literature where MAPBCl3 is reported
to have a band gap energy of 2.94 eV from which one would expect the band gap energy of
MAPbI(3−x)Clx to lay between this value and the neat iodine perovskite value of 1.50 eV -
1.58 eV [20] [31]. Though the fraction of Cl included in the structure is in all cases unknown
the observed band gap energy of sample 3 strongly suggests that only a trace amount of Cl is
present as size of Eg,3 match well with the x ≈0 case. The Cl content of sample 1, 2 and 3
is much harder to quantify and by comparing the results with those of Figure 11 it can not be
ruled out that the layers deposited are PbI2 rather than perovskite. In the case of sample 2 the
interference induced transmission peak is lower which suggests that some absorption does occur
thus supporting the conclusion that sample 2 is MAPbI(3−x)Clx rather than PbI2. The eﬀect is,
however, not very convincing and consequently additional characterization was required before
any conclusion could be reached.
To further investigate the eﬀect that diﬀerent halogen composition the XRD patterns for sam-
ple 1, 3 and 4 were measured yielding the results plotted in Figure 262. In Figure 26 the principle
peaks of MAPbI3 and MAPbCl3 reference patterns (obtained from [1] and [31], respectively) are
additionally plotted. The reference pattern of the iodine perovskite includes a trace amount of
Cl and have the principle peaks located at 14.12◦, 28.44◦and 43.23◦in each case marked with
an *. In the chlorine case the perovskite peaks are marked with a # whereas the peaks marked
with a ! are related to MACl which is reported to form in addition to the MAPbCl3 [31]. From
Figure 26 it is clear the the layer deposited on sample 3 is indeed MAPbI(3−x)Clx, where x is
small, as its pattern match that of the reference very well. The other two patterns do, however,
2No XRD pattern was measured for sample 2 and it is thus not included
36
==PAGE:41==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
9 0 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
S a m p l e  4
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 4 9  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  8 . 3 e - 5  m b a r  -  9 . 0  e - 5  m b a r
 t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T s u b  =  7 5 o C  
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  2
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 3 e - 4  m b a r  -  1 . 4 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 9 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
T r a n s m i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e s  1 - 4
Figure 25: Transmission spectra of sample 1-4 described in Table 6 and 7 where t is the layer
thickness, Pdep is the deposition pressure and Tsub is the substrate temperature. From the ﬁgure
the band gap energy can be estimated to be 2.44 eV , 2.41 eV, 1.59 eV and 2.43 eV for sample
1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively.(see Figure B.6 in Appendix B).
feature some signiﬁcant dependencies seen most profoundly in the case of sample 1. By compar-
ison with the literature reference pattern of MAPbCl3 (see Figure D.1 in Appendix D for the
full spectrum) one sees that the patten of sample 1, resembles it though shifted towards lower
angles (roughly 1◦) and with fewer diﬀraction peaks. The shift can be explained by the fact that
if some I is included in the perovskite lattice it will, due to its larger atomic radius, increase the
inter-planar distance and consequently move the patterns towards lower angles. Another factor
that would inﬂuence the results is the diﬀerence in the XRD set-ups which could also cause a
shift in the patterns as explained earlier. The extra peaks in the reference pattern are caused by
the fact the it was obtained from a powder sample meaning that all crystal planes are present.
This is, however, not necessarily the case for the thin ﬁlm samples and fewer peaks are thus
expected. If these factors are taken into account the peaks located at 15.0◦, along with the small
peak located at 30.2◦can be attributed to MAPbCl3. The peaks located at 21.4◦and 34.0◦can
be attributed to both MAPbCl3 and MACl and their origins are not clear. The 28.5◦peak is
very close to the (110) peak of the MAPbI3 as well as a MACl peak meaning that it could in
principle be assigned to both compounds. The band gap energy of 2.44 eV observed for sample
1 does, however, support the conclusion that no perovskite with a high fraction of I is formed
and thus the peak at 28.5◦is attributed to MACl.
37
==PAGE:42==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
8 0
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
!
!
!
#
#
#
#
#
*
*
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  5 . 8 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r  
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,  T s u b  =  7 5 o C
S a m p l e  4
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 4 9  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  8 . 3 e - 5  m b a r  -  9 . 0  e - 5  m b a r
 t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T s u b  =  7 5 o C  
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e  0 . 0 4 9  n m / s
M
A I  P d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
 t  =  1 5 0  n m ,  T s u b  =  7 5 o C
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y  
2 θ [  
o  ]
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e  1 ,  3  a n d  4
*
#
!
Figure 26: XRD patterns of sample 1, 3 and 4 described in Table 6 and 7 as well as principle
peaks of reference patterns obtained from [1] and [31]. t, Pdep and Tsub are once more the layer
thickness, the deposition pressure and the substrate temperature, respectively. The principle
peaks of the MAPbI3, the MAPbCl3 and the MACl are marked with a *, a # and a !, respectively.
In addition the baseline of sample 1 have been shifted upwards by 0.1 while that of sample 4
have been shifted 0.2 to make the plots more distinguishable.
The peaks located at 12.9◦, 30.7◦, 39.3◦and 52.7◦are seen not to ﬁt with either of the
perovskite reference patterns and to further investigate their origins the pattern of sample 1 was
compared to that of PbCl2 and a reference pattern of PbI2 obtained from [46]. In Figure D.2
the three patterns are shown from which one can conclude that the 30.7◦peak is most likely
related to PbCl2 meaning that some of the PbCl2 is not converted. The 12.9◦and 52.7◦peaks
are, however, seen to coincide with those of PbI2 which suggests that a layer of PbI2 is formed
in addition to the perovskite and PbCl2. This is further supported by the presence of the MACl
peak as it indicates that the I and Cl atoms simply interchange places during deposition. The
shoulder at 38.8◦is most likely also connected to PbI2 while it is not immediately clear if the
peak located at 39.3◦is due to PbI2 or PbCl2.
Regarding the spectra of sample 4, also shown in Figure 26, one sees that it agrees well with
the above conclusions though some diﬀerences between sample 1 and 4 are observed. The most
striking of these is the absence of the 30.7◦peak from which one can conclude that all of the
PbCl2 is converted. In addition the peak at 39.3◦is seen to have all but disappeared strongly
suggesting that it should also be attributed to PbCl2 rather than PbI2. The presence of the
peaks at 12.9◦, 38.9◦and 52.7◦suggests that some of the PbCl2 is still converted into PbI2 while
the peaks at 15.0◦and 30.2◦indicate that perovskite with a high amount of Cl is also formed.
This is supported by the transmission spectra of sample 4 seen in Figure 25 which is seen to
feature a band gap energy similar to that of PbI2. Had any MAPbI(3−x)Clx with a small x been
formed one would expect that the observed band gap energy would be smaller, resembling that of
sample 3 more. As noted above the pattern of sample 3 is almost identical to that of the reference
strongly supporting the conclusion reached from Figure 25 namely that the produced sample is
38
==PAGE:43==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
MAPbI(3−x)Clx perovskite. In addition since none of the MAPbCl3 peaks are observed one can
conclude that the produced layer at most contains a trace amount of Cl in good agreement with
what was reported by Liu et al. [1]. A small peak is seen at 12.9◦which suggests that a small
amount of PbI2 is still produced but whether or not the fraction is large enough to cause any
reduced device performance is unclear.
9 0 0 8 5 0 8 0 0 7 5 0 7 0 0 6 5 0 6 0 0 5 5 0 5 0 0 4 5 0 4 0 0 3 5 0 3 0 0 2 5 0 2 0 0 1 5 0 1 0 0
5 0
0
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
I  4 p
N  1 s
C  1 s
O  1 s
P b  4 f  7 / 2
P b  4 f  5 / 2
P b  4 d  5 / 2
P b  3 p  1 / 2
P b  3 p  3 / 2
I  3 d  5 / 2
I  4 d
I  4 s
I  3 p  3 / 2
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
I  3 d  3 / 2
P b  4 d  3 / 2
X P S  s p e c t r u m  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e  7  
Figure 27: XPS elemental sweep of sample 7 described in Table 6 and 7. Like previously the
high energy part of the spectra has been omitted as no additional information could be gained
from it.
To further characterize the perovskite formed on sample 3 an XPS spectra was measured of
sample 7 which was prepared under similar conditions as described in Table 6 and 7. From the
full range sweep seen in Figure 27 one sees that all the components of MAPbI3 are present while
no Cl is detected in good agreement with the fact that only a trace amount should be present.
The peaks associated with C and N both appear to be relatively small, however, the spectra
closely resembles XPS spectra reported by Ng et al. [45]. Another distinct diﬀerence from the
MAI spectrum is the absence of any FTO related peaks implying that a much better coverage
of the substrate was achieved. As with the PbCl2 and MAI samples more precise scans of the
regions near the strongest peaks of each element was measured to investigate if more features
could be detected. In the case of the C 1s scan two merged peaks located at 285 eV and 286.5
eV were observed as seen in Figure E.1 in Appendix E. The former peak is, again, associated
with contamination carbon while the latter peak is assigned to the perovskite carbon-nitrogen
bond as it ﬁts well with what was reported by Ng et al. [45].
39
==PAGE:44==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 5 0 1 4 9 1 4 8 1 4 7 1 4 6 1 4 5 1 4 4 1 4 3 1 4 2 1 4 1 1 4 0 1 3 9 1 3 8 1 3 7 1 3 6 1 3 5
0
5 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
2 5 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
P b  
P b  
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
P b C l 2 / P b I 2  4 f  7 / 2
P b C l 2 / P b I 2  4 f  5 / 2
X P S  s p e c t r u m
 o f  t h e  P b  4 f  r e g i o n
(a)
5 4 0
5 3 8
5 3 6
5 3 4
5 3 2
5 3 0
5 2 8
5 2 6
5 2 4
5 1 5 0
5 2 0 0
5 2 5 0
5 3 0 0
5 3 5 0
5 4 0 0
5 4 5 0
5 5 0 0
5 5 5 0
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
X P S  s p e c t r u m
 o f  t h e  O  1 s  r e g i o n  
(b)
Figure 28:
(a) XPS spectrum of the Pb 4f region of sample 7 described in Table 6 and 7.
Four distinct peaks located at 137.1 eV, 138.7 eV, 141.9 eV and 143.6 eV are observed. (b) XPS
spectrum of the O 1s region of sample 7 described in Table 6 and 7. A feature and a small peak
are located at 527.7 eV and 532.9 eV, respectively.
In the same way as with PbCl2 four peaks are observed in the Pb 4f region located at 137.1
eV, 138.7 eV, 141.9 eV and 143.6 eV as shown in Figure 28a. The 138.7 eV and 143.6 eV peak are
attributed to the Pb 4f 7/2 and Pb 4f 5/2 peak of the perovskite, respectively as this agrees well
with what is observed by Chen et al. [47]. The remaining smaller doublet is, however, not featured
in the spectrum of Chen et al. [47] which would suggest that it should not be associated with the
perovskite. Like in the PbCl2 case the peaks could be associated with PbO2 for which the Pb
4f 7/5 peak is reported to have a binding energy in the range 137.0 eV - 137.5 eV [48] [43]. The
corresponding O 1s line is shown by Kim et al. [48] to be located at 527.7 eV but by examining
the detailed spectrum of O 1s shown in Figure 28b one can conclude that the feature at 527.7
eV is far less interns than what one would expected. If the Pb lead peaks indeed originated from
PbO2 the magnitude of the O 1s peak should be in the same range as those observed at 137.1
eV and 143.6 eV. A small peak is in the O 1s spectrum observed at 532.8 eV suggesting that
some oxygen is present on the surface. The origins of the O is, however, not clear but it could
stem from the carbon contaminating species in which case the Pb 4f peaks could be attributed
to metallic Pb as described earlier. This explanation would agree well with what was observed
by Ng et al. [45] who attributed the peak they found at 136.9 eV to Pb.
To investigate how well the crystal structure of ﬁlms fabricated using similar deposition pres-
sures, matched the diﬀraction pattern of sample 6 was measured and compared to that of sample
1. The results are shown in Figure 29 from which it is clear that the crystal structures of the
two samples are identical. This indicates that using the pressure as a gauge of the MAI rate is
indeed a viable strategy that yields reproducible results.
From this section it is clear that a certain MAI rate is needed to fully convert the precursors
into MAPbI(3−x)Clx where good results can be obtained using the deposition parameters of
sample 3. In addition Figure 29 strongly suggest that using similar deposition parameters yield
reproduceble results.
40
==PAGE:45==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
S a m p l e  6
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 8 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 4 e - 5  m b a r  
t  =  3 0 0  n m ,  T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 9 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r  
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,  T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e s  1  a n d  6
Figure 29: XRD patten of sample 1 and 6 described in Table 8 where t is the layer thickness,
Pdep is the deposition pressure and Tsub is the substrate temperature, as described earlier. The
baseline of sample 1 has been shifted upwards by 0.1 to make the plots more distinguishable.
8.1.3
Eﬀects of post annealing
In the MAPbI(3−x)Brx case post annealing the samples on a hotplate for 15 min at a 100◦C was
observed to increase the band gap energy of the ﬁlms. This shift suggests that the Br fraction
incorporated into the perovskite lattice was increased or that the decomposition was accelerated.
To examine if similar eﬀects can be observed with the MAPbI(3−x)Clx samples the transmission
spectra of sample 3 and 4 were compared to their corresponding post annealed samples. Like
previously the diﬀerence between the layers of the two samples produced per deposition was
expected to vanishing and any change in the transmission spectra can therefore be attributed to
the post annealing. The results obtained can be seen in Figure 30.
From Figure 30 the band gap energies of the post annealed samples are found to be 1.58 eV
and 2.26 eV while for the as-prepared samples the band gaps are 2.43 eV and 1.59 eV. Like
earlier the band gap energies were estimated by using the Tauc plot procedure as shown in
Figure B.7 included in Appendix B. In both cases one sees that the post annealing decreases
the band gap of the deposited materials which suggests that Cl atoms sitting in the perovskite
lattice are replaced with I atoms from unreacted MAI during the post annealing. The higher
fraction of I would, subsequently, result in a lower band gap moving the absorption edge towards
longer wavelengths.
41
==PAGE:46==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
3 0 0
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
S a m p l e  4
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  8 . 3 e - 5  m b a r  -  9 . 0 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b =  7 5
o C ,   A n n e a l e d  
S a m p l e  4
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  8 . 3 e - 5  m b a r  -  9 . 0 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b =  7 5
o C  
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m  ,  T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C ,   A n n e a l e d
T r a n s m i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e s  3  a n d  4
Figure 30: Transmission spectra of sample 3 and 4 described in Table 6 and 7 together with
their corresponding post annealed samples. t, Pdep and Tsub are again the layer thickness, the
deposition pressure and the substrate temperature, respectively.
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e  0 . 0 4 9  n m / s
M
A I  P d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
 t  =  1 5 0  n m ,  T s u b  =  7 5 o C  
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e  0 . 0 4 9  n m / s
M
A I  P d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
 t  =  1 5 0  n m ,  T s u b  =  7 5 o C  a n n e a l e d
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  s a m p l e  3  a s - p r e p a r e d  a n d  p o s t  a n n e a l e d
Figure 31: XRD patterns of sample 4 together with its post annealed counterpart. Like with
previous samples the post annealing was done on a hotplate kept at a 100◦C for 15 min. t, Pdep
and Tsub are again the layer thickness, the deposition pressure and the substrate temperature,
respectively.
42
==PAGE:47==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
To further examine if this was the case the XRD patterns of sample 3 and its post annealed
counterpart was measured yielding the result shown in Figure 31. From the ﬁgure both the peaks
at 14.1◦and 43.1◦are seen to increase implying that the post annealing increases the amount of
MAPbI(3−x)Clx formed. As the peaks are not moving towards higher angles the XRD pattern
suggests that it is I and not Cl that is included in the perovskite lattice which is also supported
by the transmission spectrum in Figure 30.
The results from this section suggest that a positive eﬀect can be achieved by post annealing
the substrates in contrast to what was observed with the MAPbI(3−x)Brx samples. The reason for
this is most likely that there is a larger amount of unreacted precursors present in the deposited
ﬁlms due to the higher evaporation rates used. In addition the MAPbI(3−x)Clx samples were
only annealed for 15 min rather than the 30 min used earlier which indicates that an optimum
annealing duration can be found.
8.1.4
Eﬀects of substrate temperature
The ﬁnal thing to be examined was the eﬀect of the substrate temperate during deposition which
was done by comparing the transmission spectra of sample 1 and 5 shown in Figure 32. From
Figure 32 it is clear that the same radical diﬀerence between the 75◦C and the 30◦C samples
seen in Figure 18 is not observed as the absorption edges are very similar. From the ﬁgure the
band gap energy of sample 5 is found to be at 2.45 eV, as seen in Figure B.8, which is very
similar to the 2.44 eV of sample 1. One can therefore not conclude whether or not the substrate
temperature has any eﬀect on the layer formation from the transmission spectra.
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
9 0 0
9 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  5 . 9 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T s u b  =  7 5 o C
S a m p l e  5
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  5 . 2 e - 5  m b a r  -  5 . 8 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T s u b  =  3 0 o C
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
T r a n s m i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  M
A I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e  1  a n d  5
Figure 32: Transmission spectra of sample 1 and 5 described in Table 6 and 7. t, Pdep and Tsub
are again the layer thickness, the deposition pressure and the substrate temperature, respectively.
To investigate further, the XRD patterns of sample 5 as well as its corresponding post annealed
sample were measured and compared with that of sample 1. The three patterns can be seen in
Figure 33 from which one can conclude that there are several discrepancies between the crystal
structure of the samples. The patterns of sample 5 completely lacks the peak at 28.5◦but features
the ones at 15.0◦, and 30.3◦suggesting that some MAPbI(3−x)Clx is formed. The size of x is, as
43
==PAGE:48==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
with sample 4, most likely closer to 3 than 0 due to the location of the 15.0◦peak as well as the
absorption edge location observed in Figure 32. Like with the pattern of sample 1 strong peaks
are observed at 30.7◦and 39.3◦indicating that a substantial fraction of PbCl2 is still present in
the sample. In addition to the perovskite and PbCl2 small peaks are observed at 12.9◦and 52.7◦
meaning that some PbI2 is also still present. This is supported by the transmission spectra seen
in Figure 30 where the absorption edge location is much more similar to that of PbI2 than PbCl2
or MAPbCl3. Like in the previous cases the post annealing of sample 5 was done on a hotplate
kept at 100◦C for 15 min and is observed to have a profound eﬀect of the measured pattern.
As seen in Figure 33 all of the PbCl2 associated peaks disappear while the MAPbCl3 peak at
15.0◦is seen to increase. This would suggest that the PbCl2 is converted into MAPbI(3−x)Clx,
indicating that post annealing is paramount if a low substrate temperature is used.
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
S a m p l e  5
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 2 e - 5  m b a r  -  5 . 8 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  3 0
o C ,  a n n e a l e d
S a m p l e  5
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 2 e - 5  m b a r  -  5 . 8 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  3 0
o C
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 9 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r  
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,  T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e  1  a n d  5
Figure 33: XRD patterns of sample 1 and 5 described in Table 6 and 7 as well as the post
annealed version of sample 5. t is the layer thickness, Pdep is the deposition pressure and Tsub
is the substrate temperature, as described earlier. The baseline of sample 1 and the as-prepared
sample 5 has been shifted upwards by 0.1 and 0.2, respectively once again to make the plots
more distinguishable.
8.2
Conclusion
From the results of Figure 29 one can conclude that the proposed deposition scheme yields
reproducible results and that using the pressure as a gauge for the MAI rate is possible. Fur-
thermore the results from Figure 32 and 33 suggests that the substrate temperature plays an
important role in the perovskite formation and that the best results are obtained when using a
temperature of 75◦C. In addition one can conclude that post annealing the samples at 100◦C
for 15 min further crystallizes the perovskite ﬁlms consequently yielding better results. Finally
one can from the spectra shown in Figure 26 conclude that a certain rate of MAI is needed to
fully convert all of the PbCl2 while an even higher rate is needed to promote the formation of
MAPbI3 rather than PbI2 and MAPbCl3. Using a deposition pressure of 2.0 × 10−4 mbar is
from the UV-vis measurements and XRD patterns seen to yield a MAPbI(3−x)Clx perovskite
containing only a trace amount of Cl in addition to some additional species as observed from the
44
==PAGE:49==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
XPS and XRD measurements. Though both the UV-vis and the XRD measurements of sample
3 are in good agreement with what has been reported in literature the deposition pressure is
substantially higher than what Liu et al. [1] used as they reported using a chamber pressure in
the 1 × 10−5 mbar range. It is, however, from the data shown in this section not clear if the
discrepancy in chamber pressure will give rise to device performance issues and further studies
will consequently have to be conducted.
9
NiO ﬁlms
As appropriate MAPbI(3−x)Clx deposition parameters had now been found the next step was
to examine how the NiO layer could be fabricated using vacuum deposition and investigate
its protective abilities. Vacuum deposition was chosen as the ﬁlm preparation method as it
meant that the perovskite ﬁlms could in principle be kept under vacuum until the protective
layer had been formed. The exposure to contaminations could thus be reduced considerably
meaning that a higher ﬁlm quality would be expected. Though the ﬁnal device would utilize
MAPbI(3−x)Brx rather than the Cl perovskite the easier access to precursors meant that the
latter compound was used to test the protective abilities of the NiO. As explained earlier the Br
perovskite was expected to have a higher resistance to moisture meaning any success protecting
the MAPbI(3−x)Clx was expected to increase when the Br was introduced.
9.1
Preparation of NiO ﬁlms by evaporation
As explained in Section 4 the reason for using NiO rather than a more commonly used hole
conductor like spiro-OMeTAD is the need for a protective layer that can simultaneously act as a
catalyst [1,16,24]. To fabricate the NiO, nickel was evaporated using the e-gun while maintaining
an atmosphere of O2 inside the chamber. The expectation was that the Ni would react with the
oxygen in-ﬂight forming NiO which would subsequently be deposited on the sample. Initially
pure oxygen was let into the chamber by using the O2 gas line. As explained earlier the partial
oxygen pressure was set by using an appropriate value on the ﬂow controller and opening the
outermost needle valve completely. Following this the inner needle valve was opened slightly
after which the chamber pressure was allowed to stabilize. Finally the pressure was calibrated
by adjusting the ﬁne needle valve and allowing the pressure to re-stabilize. By repeating this
procedure stable deposition pressures could be obtained. Following the calibration of the O2
partial pressure the Ni rate was set by using the sample QCM and adjusting the current of the
electron beam as well as the area it swept. In addition to controlling the rate of Ni the QCM
was also used to assess the thickness of the deposited ﬁlm by using the density, ρNi = 8.81
g
cm3 ,
and the acoustic impedance ,ZNi = 26.66
g
cm2s, of Ni and monitoring the measured thickness.
The actual thickness of the layers was, however, expected to diverge from the measured as the
tooling factor was initially unknown and therefore set to 1. Later on the tooling factor was found
to be 3.02 ± 0.09 by estimating the ﬁlm thicknesses from SEM images of NiO ﬁlms deposited
on perovskite layers as shown in Appendix F. By using this deposition method NiO ﬁlms were
prepared using the values reported in Table 10 in both cases on cleaned FTO substrates to allow
for XPS measurements.
The O2 pressure used with sample 1 was selected as it resembled that which Irwin et al. [33]
had reported to yield good results and additionally it was expected that formation of NiO was
favoured for high oxygen pressures. In case of sample 2 a lower pressure was selected to examine if
NiO could still be prepared if the oxygen atmosphere was more diluted. During the depositions
the chamber pressure was in both cases seen to be higher than the initial chamber pressure
obtained with O2. The increase was caused by the evaporated Ni and a similar pressure increase
was observed when operating the e-gun without any oxygen. For both O2 pressures the produced
ﬁlms were transparent in strong contrast to the metallic Ni that had been prepared during the
initial testing of the e-gun. This served as a ﬁrst indication for the successful deposition of NiO
but to further quantify the optical properties of the produced layers transmission spectra of both
samples were measured yielding the results shown in Figure 34.
45
==PAGE:50==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Table 10: The deposition parameters of the prepared NiO samples where PO2 is the initial
partial oxygen pressure, RNi is the Ni rate and t is the sample thickness after being corrected
using the correct tooling factor. The thickness as measured by the QCM was in both cases 100
nm.
Sample No
PO2 [mbar]
RNi [ nm
s ]
t [nm]
1
1.1 × 10−4
0.37 - 0.33
300
2
5.0 × 10−5
0.37 - 0.28
300
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
9 0 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
S a m p l e  1
N i  r a t e  0 . 3 3  n m / s
P O 2  1 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
S a m p l e  2
N i  r a t e  0 . 2 8  n m / s
P O 2  5 . 0 e - 5  m b a r
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
T r a n s m i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  N i O  s a m p l e  1  a n d  2
Figure 34: Transmission spectra NiO sample 1 and 2 described in Table 10. By using a Tauc
plot the absorption edge location can be estimated to be 339 nm and 358 nm for sample 1 and
2, respectively.
As no exciton eﬀect is present in NiO the band gap energies can be estimated by using a direct
band gap Tauc plot as shown in Figure B.9 [33]. By doing so one obtains the band gap energies
3.52 eV and 3.48 eV for sample 1 and 2, respectively. Comparing these results with literature
they are seen to agree well with what has been reported previously for NiO ﬁlms suggesting that
the preparation of the NiO ﬁlms was successful [24, 33]. From Figure 34 one can additionally
observe that between 10% and 30% of the light in the visible region is absorbed by the NiO which
again agrees well with what was reported by Wang et al. [34]. However, to further examine the
produced ﬁlm XRD was used to measure the diﬀraction pattern of the two NiO samples. The
results are shown in Figure 35 where a literature reference obtained from Rodic et al. [49], as
well as the pattern of an FTO slap, are also plotted. By examining the patterns one sees that
the peak at 43.3◦and the shoulder at 37.1◦coincides with that of the referencec pattern. The
small shoulder located at 62.8◦is also believed to be attributed to NiO as it does not originate
from the FTO. The remaining peaks are all from the FTO substrate, on which the NiO was
deposited, and the sample patterns therefore strongly supports that the produced ﬁlms are NiO.
46
==PAGE:51==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
S a m p l e  1
N i  r a t e  0 . 3 3  n m / s
P O 2  1 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
S a m p l e  2
N i  r a t e  0 . 2 8  n m / s
P O 2  5 . 0 e - 5  m b a r
N o r m a l i z e d  I n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
L i t e r a t u r e  r e f e r e n c e
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o n  N i O  s a m p l e  1  a n d  2
F T O  s l a p
Figure 35: XRD pattern of NiO sample 1 and 2 described in Table 10 together with a reference
pattern from [49]. All plots are normalized to the highest peak in addition to the baseline of
sample 1, 2 and the FTO slap being shifted upwards by 0.2, 0.3 and 0.1 respectively.
9.2
NiO as a protective layer
As described earlier a large part of the argument for using NiO as a hole transporter was its
reported protective abilities [24]. To examine how well the produced NiO layers were able to
protect the perovskite several samples were prepared on which a layer of MAPbI(3−x)Clx was
capped with a NiO ﬁlm. The perovskite had a thickness of 250 nm and was prepared using similar
co-deposition parameters as the ones found to yield a good result in Section 8. To investigate
the eﬀects of diﬀerent NiO ﬁlm thicknesses samples with 60 nm, 150 nm and 300 nm layers
were prepared on quartz glass substrates using the deposition parameters shown in Table 11.
Like in the previous experiments two samples were prepared per deposition to allow for further
characterization if one sample was destroyed.
Table 11: The deposition parameters of the prepared NiO samples where PO2 is the initial partial
oxygen pressure, RNi is the Ni rate and t is the sample thickness. The substrate temperature
was in all cases 75◦C.
Sample No
PO2 [mbar]
RNi [ nm
s ]
t [nm]
1
3.9 × 10−4
0.15 - 0.17
60
2
3.9 × 10−4
0.1 - 0.14
150
3
3.9 × 10−4
0.25 - 0.30
300
A slightly higher pressure was used in the preparation of the NiO ﬁlms compared to the
47
==PAGE:52==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
3 5 0
4 0 0
4 5 0
5 0 0
5 5 0
6 0 0
6 5 0
7 0 0
7 5 0
8 0 0
8 5 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
3 0 0  n m  N i O  
1 5 0  n m  N i O
T r a n s m i s s i o n  [ %
]
W
a v e l e n g t h  [ n m ]
6 0  n m  N i O
T r a n s m i s s i o n  s p e c t r a  o f  N i O  o n  p e r o v s k i t e  s a m p l e s
Figure 36: Transmission spectra of sample 1, 2 and 3 described in Table 11.
previous section as it was found that stabilizing the pressure at the shown values was much
easier than the ones used in Table 10. In addition it resembled the optimal pressure reported
by Irwin et al. [33], more. Before testing the protective abilities, transmission spectra and XRD
patterns of the three samples were measured to ensure that the layers formed on top of the
perovskite were indeed NiO. The transmission spectra are shown in Figure 36 from which it
can be observed that the 60 nm diverges from what was expected, namely that it should have
the highest overall transmission. In addition all of the spectra show a much higher transmission
loss than what was expected form Figure 34 suggesting that the ﬁlm deposited on top of the
perovskite contains some Ni in addition to NiO. The obtained XRD patterns can be seen in
Figure 37 where the peaks associated with the perovskite are marked with an ∗while the NiO
peaks are marked with a ¤. As seen from the ﬁgure the NiO signal is only detectable in the 300
nm case where it is very weak compared to the perovskite signal. The transmission spectra for
all the samples suggested that Ni as well as NiO had been formed but upon comparison with a
Ni reference pattern from [50] no crystalline Ni is observed to be present. The explanation to the
lack of NiO peaks in both the 60 nm and the 150 nm patterns could be that the thicknesses of
the samples are insuﬃcient when using the powder optics conﬁguration and that better results
could be obtained by using gracing incidence XRD. On top of yielding information about the
NiO ﬁlms the patterns seen in Figure 37 further validates the perovskite fabrication methods as
the MAPbI(3−x)Clx related peaks are seen to be very well reproduced.
While the obtained results are not suﬃcient to believe that the protective layers prepared are
really NiO thin ﬁlms and further measurements are certainly needed to evaluate the nature of
these layers the capabilities of the ﬁlms to serve as protective coatings were tested. To test the
protective abilities the edges of the three samples was covered with epoxy resin to ensure that
the water would have to go through the ﬁlms to reach the perovskite. Following this 400 µL
of the millipore water was drop-casted onto the samples. In all three cases the ﬁlms almost
instantaneously developed what appeared to be gas pockets which rapidly made the ﬁlms peal
oﬀ. Pictures were taken before, during and after the process which are shown in Figure 38. The
48
==PAGE:53==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
8 0
8 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
*
*
*
S a m p l e  2
1 5 0  n m  N i O  o n   
M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  p e r o v s k i t e
S a m p l e  3
3 0 0  n m  N i O  o n   
M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  p e r o v s k i t e
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
S a m p l e  1
6 0  n m  N i O  o n   
M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  p e r o v s k i t e
*
¤
N i O  c o v e r e d  p e r o v s k i t e  s a m p l e s
L i t e r a t u r e  r e f e r e n c e
Figure 37: XRD pattern of the layered perovskite - NiO samples described in Table 11 as well
as a Ni reference pattern from [50]. All plots are normalized to the highest peak in addition to
the baseline of sample 1, 2 and 3 being shifted upwards by 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3, respectively.
perovskite was, furthermore, observed to be completely dissolved from which one can conclude
that the protective abilities of the NiO ﬁlms were very limited.
In addition to the pealing, the color of sample 1 and 3 changed during the experiment. In case
of the 60 nm sample it went from the perovskite brown to being golden while the 300 nm sample
went from brown to metallic purple. This suggests that the ﬁlms remaining were more Ni like
but further investigation into the chemical composition of the ﬁlms was not conducted. From
the XRD patterns it was, however, clear that the ﬁlms were not pure Ni as no crystalline Ni
peaks where observed. An explanation to the unexpected result could be that the O2 pressure
during the deposition had dropped to a level where full conversion of the Ni was no longer
possible thus resulting in Ni impurities being embedded in the NiO ﬁlm. Due to the e-gun the
deposition pressure was, as explained earlier, not the same as PO2, meaning that any ﬂuctuations
in the oxygen pressure would not be observable during ﬁlm preparation. To investigate why the
protective abilities had been so poor SEM images of the remaining 3 samples were acquired. A
proﬁle view of the 150 nm sample can be seen in Figure 39 from which it seems that the NiO
is ﬁled with pores. These pores would naturally provide the water with an excellent pathway
through the NiO thus explaining the inarticulate performance of the protective layer. On a more
positive note the SEM images do suggest that the perovskite did not decompose as a consequence
of thermal exposure during the NiO ﬁlm preparation which means that vacuum deposition of
the NiO ﬁlm is a viable fabrication method.
49
==PAGE:54==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
(a) The 60 nm sample before
exposure to water.
(b) The 60 nm sample during
the experiment.
(c) The 60 nm sample after ex-
posure to water.
(d) The 150 nm sample before
exposure to water.
(e) The 150 nm sample during
the experiment.
(f) The 150 nm sample after
exposure to water.
(g) The 300 nm sample before
exposure to water.
(h) The 300 nm sample during
the experiment.
(i) The 300 nm sample after
exposure to water.
Figure 38: Pictures of the 60 nm, 150 nm, and 300 samples before, during and after the water
experiment.
50
==PAGE:55==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure 39: SEM image of the layered perovskite - NiO 150 nm sample described in Table 11.
Like previously the sample was covered with a thin layer of Au to prevent charge up eﬀects.
9.3
Conclusion
From this section one can conclude that it is possible to form a NiO ﬁlm by evaporating Ni
in an oxygen atmosphere where pressures down to 5.0 × 10−5 were seen to yield good results.
Furthermore it is seen that it is possible to deposit a ﬁlm of NiO onto a layer of perovskite
without thermally decomposing it. Finally it can be concluded that the protective abilities of
the produced NiO ﬁlms must be improved considerably if they are to be used in the ﬁnal device.
10
Electrical properties of the MAPbI(3−x)Clx and NiO
ﬁlms
Though more work was needed before the protection of the perovskite could be achieved it was
imperative that the electrical properties of the NiO and especially the perovskite could be as-
sessed. To do so the full stack of layers, described in Section 4, was prepared on multiple samples.
As the electrodes were still incompatible with water they were characterized by measuring the
I-V curves rather than doing cyclic voltammetry. Initially the FTO slaps were cleaned after
which they were pattered by etching the conductive layer using Zn powder and HCl which is a
well known procedure [1]. On top of the FTO the TiO2 layer was prepared either by sputtering,
in the same way as in [51] or by solution deposition and subsequent furnace annealing. The solu-
51
==PAGE:56==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
tion processed TiO2 layer was prepared by spin coating a solution of Ti isopropoxide, 2 M HCl
and isopropanol onto the substrates and furnace annealing them at 430◦C for 1 hour. Following
this the samples were loaded into the deposition chamber where a layer of MAPbI(3−x)Clx was
prepared using the deposition parameters shown in Table 12 and 13. The NiO layer was subse-
quently deposited using either vacuum deposition or spin coating as described in detail in the
following. In both cases 100 nm gold contacts were formed on top of the NiO completing the
device. In addition to the layered devices sample 7 was prepared to allow for UPS measurements
of the perovskite.
Table 12: MAPbI(3−x)Clx deposition parameters where TPbCl2 is the PbI2 deposition temper-
ature, RPbI2 is PbI2 rate, Tsub is the substrate temperature and t is the layer thickness from
which the deposition time was calculated.
Sample No
TPbCl2 [◦C]
RPbCl2 [ nm
s ]
Tsub [◦C]
t [nm]
1
452
0.056
75
250
2
440
0.053
75
250
3
435
0.049
75
250
4
435
0.049
75
250
5
452
0.052
75
150
6
452
0.052
75
150
7
430
0.052
75
250
Table 13: MAPbI(3−x)Clx deposition parameters where TMAI is the MAI deposition tempera-
ture range, Pdep is the deposition pressure range and Rint is the initial rate of the MAI.
Sample No
TMAI [◦C]
Pdep [mbar]
Rint [ nm
s ]
1
255 - 265
3.4 × 10−4 −3.7 × 10−4
0.088
2
240 - 250
2.0 × 10−4 −2.2 × 10−4
0.130
3
255 - 275
2.9 × 10−4 −3.4 × 10−4
0.150
4
255 - 275
2.9 × 10−4 −3.4 × 10−4
0.150
5
255- 270
2.0 × 10−4 −2.2 × 10−4
0.180
6
255- 270
2.0 × 10−4 −2.2 × 10−4
0.180
7
225- 255
2.0 × 10−4 −2.2 × 10−4
0.095
10.1
Vacuum NiO samples
The next step in the device preparation was to deposit the NiO layer which for sample 1 and
2 was done in the vacuum chamber using the parameters seen in Table 14. To ensure that the
deposited perovskite did not degrade during the deposition of NiO XRD patterns of sample 2
were measured before and after the NiO deposition. From the patterns no change was observed,
as can be seen in Figure D.3, conﬁrming the previous results.
To measure the I-V curve a Newport Xe lamp equipped with a 1.5 AM ﬁlter was used. To
match the irradiance of the sun the distance from the light source to the sample was initially
52
==PAGE:57==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Table 14: The deposition parameters of the prepared NiO samples where PO2 is the initial
partial oxygen pressure, RNi is the Ni rate, t is the sample thickness as measured by the QCM
and VNi is the volume of the spin coated NiO solution.
Sample No
PO2 [mbar]
RNi [ nm
s ]
t [nm]
1
3.6 × 10−4
0.057 - 0.28
300
2
3.9 × 10−4
0.15 - 0.17
60
calibrated using a Ocean optics USB4000 spectrometer. To connect the samples to the external
circuit a strip of Cu tape was attached to the bare FTO part of the substrate to which a
crocodile clip was, subsequently, attached. Forming the contact to the Au ﬁlm was considerably
harder as the layer was, mechanically, not very robust meaning that a crocodile clip could not
be attached to it. Instead a spring of thin Cu wire was made which, if pressed gently against
the stack, could be used to form the contact without destroying the Au layer completely. To
perform the measurements a BioLogic VSP potensiostat was used to vary the potential across
the cell. Initially a dark current measurement was performed using a potential range of -0.5 V
to 1 V. Following this the light was switched on and the potential again swept from -0.5 V to 1
V. To observe the stability of the current output the light was kept on for 15 min after which
a third measurement was performed. From the results it was for both samples, sadly, clear that
the cells were completely shorted as the I-V curves showed a linear relationship between the
potential and the current. The origin of the short circuits was not imminently clear but a likely
explanation is that the Au was somewhere in direct contact with the FTO. The contact could
have been formed during deposition through pinholes in the underlying layers though a more
likely explanation is that it had been formed by the Cu spring during the contacting.
10.1.1
Band structure characterization
In addition to the I-V curves the electronic band structure of the perovskite and NiO ﬁlms were
examined using ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). To do so the spectra of sample 7
described in Table 12 and 13 along with the 1.1 × 10−4 mbar NiO sample described in Table 10
were measured yielding the results shown in Figure 40 and 41a.
For both spectra the Fermi level is located at 21.2 eV while the work function is at 5.15 eV
and 6.3 eV for the NiO and perovskite, respectively. Furthermore the valance band of NiO is
located at 20.55 eV while that of the perovskite is found to be at 20.3 eV. The valance bands of
the two ﬁlms compared to the Fermi level is found by subtracting their measured energies from
21.2 eV thus yielding 0.65 eV and 0.9 eV for the NiO and perovskite, respectively. The small
shoulders located at a higher kinetic energy than the Fermi level are believed to be caused by
contaminant spices sitting on the surface. As explained earlier NiO has a band gap of 3.7 eV
which in the case of a valance band location of 0.65 eV compared to the Fermi level would make
the ﬁlm p-type as expected [9,24,33]. Irwin et al. [33] reports that the distance from the Fermi
level to the valance band should be 0.4 eV which also ﬁts decently with the obtained results.
The valance band location compared to vacuum is additionally found to be at -5.8 eV meaning
that it is slightly higher than the reported location of -5.2 - -5.4 eV [33,34].
53
==PAGE:58==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
1 4
1 6
1 8
2 0
2 2
0
5 0 0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0 0 0
I n t e n s i t y  [ C o u n t s ]  
K i n e t i c  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
U P S  s p e c t r u m  o f  t h e  1 . 1 e - 4  m b a r  N i O  s a m p l e  
Figure 40: UPS spectrum NiO sample 1 described in Table 10. The Fermi level is located at
21.2 eV while the valance band edge is found at 20.55 eV. The work function seen to be 5.15 eV.
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
1 4
1 6
1 8
2 0
2 2
0
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
3 0 0 0 0
4 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 0 0
6 0 0 0 0
7 0 0 0 0
8 0 0 0 0
9 0 0 0 0
I n t e n s i t y  [ C o u n t s ]
K i n e t i c  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
U P S  s p e c t r u m
 o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m
p l e
(a)
2 0
2 2
2 4
2 6
2 8
3 0
3 2
3 4
3 6
3 8
4 0
0
2 0 0 0
4 0 0 0
6 0 0 0
8 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 2 0 0 0
1 4 0 0 0
I n t e n s i t y  [ C o u n t s ]
K i n e t i c  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
U P S  H e - I I  s p e s t r u m
 o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m
p l e  
(b)
Figure 41:
(a) UPS spectrum of sample 7 described in Table 12 and 13. The Fermi level is
located at 21.2 eV while valance band is at 20.3 eV. The work function is found to be 6.3 eV.
(b) UPS He-II spectrum of sample 7 described in Table 12 and 13. The Fermi level is here at
40.8 eV while the valance band is at 39.75 eV.
In case of the perovskite the distance between the Fermi level and the valance band is 0.9 eV
which makes the perovskite intrinsic or slightly n-type if the band gap of 1.56 eV is taken into
account [20,31]. This agrees well with what was reported by Schulz et al. [52] though they found
that the Fermi level is only 0.4 eV from the conduction band. The location of the valance band
54
==PAGE:59==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
compared to vacuum is reported to be at -5.5 eV which is seen to be 0.8 eV higher than the -6.3
eV found from the measurements [15]. In addition to the He-I spectra shown in Figure 40 and
41a a He-II spectrum of the perovskite sample was also measured yielding the results shown in
Figure 41b. The Fermi level is in this case located at 40.8 eV while the valance band is at 39.75
eV or 1.05 eV compared to the Fermi level. This value is slightly higher than what was found
from the He-I suggesting that the actual value is somewhere in between.
The results obtained from the NiO and especially the perovskite spectra are seen to diverge
from what has been reported in literature. The NiO valance band location compared to vacuum
is in literature reported to be at -5.4 eV meaning that the discrepancy between it and the
measured value of -5.8 eV is relatively small [33]. The observed location of the valance band
does, however, mean that is would eﬀectively block the holes from the perovskite if its valance
band was at the reported -5.5 eV compared to vacuum [15]. The observed valance band location
of the perovskite at -6.3 eV is, however, so that this is not the case. On the down side it does
mean that the conduction band of the perovskite is lower than the conduction band of the TiO2
(located at -4.0 eV) which will consequently act as both an electron and hole blocker [15]. This
could explain the lack of results from the I-V experiments as a much lower eﬃciency would
be expected if this was the case. Further measurements are clearly needed to establish if the
band structure found here is general for the vacuum produced perovskites as a diﬀerent electron
conductor would in that case have to be found.
10.2
Spin coated NiO samples
Due to the lack of success with the vacuum deposited NiO samples the NiO layer was for sample
3-6 prepared using spin coating. The samples were initially heated to 75◦C before being mounted
on the spin coater. Following this 50 µL, 100 µL ,200 µL and 400 µL of nickel acetylacetonate
suspended in acetonitrile was spun onto the FTO - TiO2 - perovskite stack of sample 3-6,
respectively. To ensure a good distribution of the NiO solution an airbrush was used to deposit
the liquid onto the stack while it was spun at at 1500 RPM for 30 s.
To measure the I-V curves the samples were contacted in a similar manner as the vacuum
samples and the light source was calibrated. Like previously a dark current measurement was
initially preformed following which the illuminated measurement was carried out again using
a potential range of -0.5 V to 1 V. In case of the 400 µL and 100 µL samples the cells were
shorted in the same manner as the vacuum samples. In the remaining two samples a diode like
behaviour was, however, observed as shown in Figure 42 and 43 for sample 3 and 5, respectively.
In case of sample 3 the illuminated area was controlled by attaching a piece of Teﬂon tape with
a 0.196 cm2 hole in it on the back of the cell. As a consequence the results shown in Figure 42
is the current density, J, as a function of potential rather than an I-V plot.
55
==PAGE:60==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure 42: J-V curves of the 50 µL sample.
Figure 43: I-V curves of the 200 µL sample. The photoactive layer was not deﬁned and the
current is thus not per area.
The best open circuit voltage obtained for the two cells is 0.25 V and 0.5 V for the 50 µL and
the 200 µL, respectively. Both these values are much lower than the values reported in literature
where open circuit voltages of more than 1 V are obtained [2, 14]. The current generated is in
both cases, furthermore, very low compared to the 22.06 mA
cm2 reported by Huanping et al. [14].
Finally the curves are seen to be almost strait lines indicating a substantial presence of parasitic
56
==PAGE:61==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
resistances. From the curves in both ﬁgures it is additionally clear that the cells are performing
better during their initial run and degrades if illuminated for an extended amount of time. This
suggests that something in the cells is decomposing and since the perovskite was not entirely
covered by the NiO it is a likely candidate. In case of the 200 µL sample the reduced performance
can additionally be explained by the fact that the Cu spring was used to contact the cell multiple
times which could introduce more shunting paths.
(a) 300 nm NiO vacuum sample.
(b) 200 µL NiO spin coated sample.
Figure 44: SEM images of sample 1 and 5. Like previously the samples were covered with a
thins layer of Au to ensure good conductance.
To further examine the cells SEM images of sample 1 and 5 were acquired as seen in Figure
44. In the image shown in Figure 44a the NiO layer is clearly visible but in case of the spin
coated sample the layer is seen to be absent. The explanation to this could be that it is so thin
that it is below the detection limit of the SEM or, if the deposition failed, that it is simply not
there. The absence of the NiO layer would naturally decrease the performance of the device but
as reported by Shi et al. [53] one should be able to obtain an open circuit of up to 0.9 V using
a device without any hole conducting layer.
10.3
Conclusion
From this section one can conclude that it is possible to make a PV cell from the produced
perovskite though much work is still needed before a eﬃcient device can be fabricated. The
need for alternative way of forming the external contacts was especially clear as the mechanical
damage left by the spring was observed to be substantial. This indicated that the contacting
was forming a large amount of shunting paths which would naturally decrease the performance
of the device. In addition the electronic band structure found did not agree well with literature
and more work is thus needed to identify the origin of these discrepancies.
11
Discussion and outlook
From the results of Section 7 and 8 it is clear that both MAPbI(3−x)Brx and MAPbI(3−x)Clx
perovskite could be fabricated in the used vacuum chamber. Though the temperature control
of both evaporation cells was decent substantially higher evaporation temperatures were needed
for both the PbX2 and the MAX compounds compared with what was reported by both Liu et
al. [1] and Chen et al. [2]. This discrepancy could be explained by the fact that the thermocouple
57
==PAGE:62==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
of both evaporation cells measured the temperature at the bottom of the conical boron nitride
crucibles rather than at the top where the deposition took place. As the thermocouple was simply
a piece of wire bent into an arc it was furthermore not completely evident whether or not it was
in direct contact with the crucible during operation. In addition to the temperature issues the
conical shape of the crucibles meant that the temperature at which a certain deposition rate was
obtained would change from deposition to deposition.
A solution to both problems could be to redesign the crucible to have a cylindrical shape and
additionally place the thermocouple at the very top of the crucible. A more reliable temperature
measurement could furthermore be achieved if the thermocouple could be placed inside the
crucible though one would have to ensure that it did react with the precursors during deposition.
This approach has the advantage that it is relatively cheap and very customizable, as a lot of
the existing system could be used if modiﬁed. Reconﬁguring the existing cells would naturally
require a lot of design consideration and would thus be time consuming. Moreover some of the
parts would have to be custom made making it harder to acquire spare parts should anything
brake. Another option is to use a diﬀerent type of eﬀusion cell that is more suitable for low
temperature evaporations. An example of one such is where the crucible is submerged in liquid
which is subsequently heated. This solution oﬀers a very good heat distribution and would require
minimal in-house work as every component can be bought. On the down side this option would
undoubtedly be more expensive and harder to optimize meaning that one risks ending up with
a system that is not suﬃciently better than the existing. Though the results of Section 7 showed
good consistency with literature a suitable way of controlling the ratio of I and Br was not found.
As this is naturally very important if a ﬁlm with a band gap of 1.7 eV is to be produced the
correlation between the chamber pressure and the MABr rate will have to be examined further.
Moreover, the appearance of the two metallic lead peaks in the MAPbI(3−x)Clx XPS spectrum
suggests that unreacted Pb is present and the implications of this must be further investigated.
In addition to the perovskite the results of Section 9 suggests that it is also possible to prepare
NiO ﬁlm by vacuum deposition. The protective qualities of the layers were, however, seen to
be very poor as the perovskite on which the NiO was deposited dissolved very rapidly when
the sample was exposed to water. The presence of pores in the ﬁlms was suspected to be the
explanation for the insuﬃcient performance. To investigate if this was the case a NiO ﬁlm could
be prepared on a piece of Si using the same deposition parameters found earlier. By covering the
edges in epoxy and dipping the sample in acid any pin holes could be detected as the acid would
seep through them and etch holes into the Si. By keeping the sample submerged for a suitable
amount of time these holes would become so large that they could be detected on a SEM image
allowing one to estimate the integrity of the NiO ﬁlm.
To improve the quality of the ﬁlms several things can be investigated. Initially the result
of increasing the substrate temperature during deposition should be examined. From literature
describing the preparation of NiO ﬁlms by solution based methods or chemical vapour deposition,
it is known that a substrate temperature of up to 550◦C is needed to form a high quality layer
[54,55]. As mentioned earlier the perovskite thermally decomposes at around 260◦C and such high
temperatures would therefore destroy the perovskite instantaneously. The substrate temperature
used during the NiO preparation was, however, only 75◦C and thus some temperature increase
is still possible. In addition to the substrate temperature during deposition the eﬀects of post
annealing both in ambient and controlled atmospheric conditions were not examined and some
positive eﬀects could be achieved by doing so. Finally a thin wetting layer of Ni could be deposited
on the perovskite without the presence of O2 in the chamber. By subsequently letting in oxygen
the layer could be converted into NiO following which NiO deposition could commence as usual.
The ﬁnal goal of the work present here is an eﬃcient fully functioning photoelectrode but as
the results of Section 10 show much work is still needed. As explained a large part of the lack of
results was believed to be caused by the way the samples were contacted. As the ﬁlm stack was
very delicate the Cu spring would cause mechanical damage and subsequently create shunting
paths through the device. In order to avoid this a diﬀerent layer deposition and etching scheme
58
==PAGE:63==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
where both the external contacts are formed on the FTO could be used. An example of such a
cell design can be seen in Figure 45. This design does naturally not solve the performance issues
if they are instead caused by pin holes in the ﬁlm but as it is most likely a combination of the
two and an improvement to the overall result would be expected.
Glass
FTO
Perovskite
NiO
Au
TiO2
FTO
Figure 45: An overview of the layer structure of a device where both external contacts can be
formed on the FTO. The layer thickness shown are not to scale as both the FTO and perovskite
layer are substantially thicker than the TiO2 layer. The overlapping of the layers limits the
shunting paths of the device thus improving its performance.
Though the ﬁnal device would incorporate both the NiO and the perovskite layers the fact that
it is the performance of the entire stack that is examined when measuring an I-V curve meant
that it was diﬃcult to separate NiO and perovskite performance. In an eﬀort to do so a diﬀer-
ent well tested hole conductor such as 2,29,7,79-tetrakis- (N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)9,99-
spirobiﬂuorene (spiro-OMeTAD) could be used in stead of the NiO. In this way the performance
of the perovskite could be optimized allowing one to in turn establish a performance base line
when optimizing the NiO.
12
Conclusion
The application of photoelectrochemical water splitting devices has the potential to supply so-
ciety with a clean and abundant fuel source. In this project I have presented a part of such a
device namely a photoelectrode fabricated using methylammonium lead halide perovskites. Form
the results shown I can conclude that it is possible to produce MAPbI(3−x)Clx ﬁlms in the pre-
sented vacuum chamber by using co-evaporation and controlling the MAI rate using the chamber
pressure. To obtain the best result a deposition pressure of approximately 2.0 × 10−4 mbar was
used together with a PbCl2 evaporation rate of around 0.050 nm
s . Furthermore it was observed
that a substrate temperature of 75◦C was needed for proper conversion of the precursors. Post
annealing the prepared samples on a hotplate was, moreover, seen to help convert any unreacted
precursors left after preparation. In addition I have shown that MAPbI(3−x)Brx can be prepared
using similar depositions parameters as the Cl perovskite though more investigation is needed
to optimize the process.
In addition to the perovskite formation I can conclude that NiO can be prepared in the
vacuum set-up by evaporating Ni in an oxygen atmosphere. Using an O2 pressure of down to
5.0 × 10−5 mbar and a Ni rate of 0.3 nm
s
was observed to yield ﬁlms with optical properties
and crystal structure similar to those reported in literature. The deposition of these layers was
observed not to decompose the perovskite making it a viable ﬁlm preperation method. Sadly,
the ﬁlms were seen to be ﬁlled with pores resulting in a severe lack of protective abilities. As
proper protection of the perovskite is paramount further optimization is clearly needed before
the produced NiO can ﬁll the role as hole conductor and protective layer.
Finally I have shown that a fully functioning PV cell can be made from the vacuum deposited
perovskite though the eﬃciency leaves room for improvement. The cells are, furthermore, incom-
59
==PAGE:64==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
patible with water, prohibiting them from being used as originally intended. Should all of these
challenges, however, be solved the use of NiO protected perovskite photoelectrodes would oﬀer
a cheap and eﬀective alternative to the water splitting techniques used today.
60
==PAGE:65==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
References
[1] Mingzhen Liu, Michael B Johnston, and Henry J Snaith. Eﬃcient planar heterojunction
perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition. Nature, 501(7467):395–8, September 2013.
[2] CW Chen, HW Kang, and SY Hsiao. Eﬃcient and Uniform Planar-Type Perovskite Solar
Cells by Simple Sequential Vacuum Deposition.
Advanced Materials, 26(38):6647–6652,
October 2014.
[3] James Hansen, Makiko Sato, and Reto Ruedy. Perception of climate change. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(37):E2415–23,
September 2012.
[4] Blaise a. Pinaud, Jesse D. Benck, Linsey C. Seitz, Arnold J. Forman, Zhebo Chen, Todd G.
Deutsch, Brian D. James, Kevin N. Baum, George N. Baum, Shane Ardo, Heli Wang, Eric
Miller, and Thomas F. Jaramillo. Technical and economic feasibility of centralized facilities
for solar hydrogen production via photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry.
Energy &
Environmental Science, 6(7):1983, 2013.
[5] Sø ren Dahl and Ib Chorkendorﬀ. Solar-fuel generation: Towards practical implementation.
Nature materials, 11(2), February 2012.
[6] B Kroposki, J Levene, and K Harrison. Electrolysis : Information and Opportunities for
Electric Power Utilities Electrolysis. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2006.
[7] Nathan S. Lewis and Daniel G. Nocera. Powering the planet: Chemical challenges in solar
energy utilization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104(42), 2007.
[8] Nathan S Lewis. Solar Energy Use. Science, 315(5813):798–802, 2007.
[9] Brian Seger, Ivano E. Castelli, Peter C. K. Vesborg, Karsten W. Jacobsen, Ole Hansen, and
Ib Chorkendorﬀ. 2-Photon tandem device for water splitting: comparing photocathode ﬁrst
versus photoanode ﬁrst designs. Energy & Environmental Science, 7(8):2397, July 2014.
[10] Oscar Khaselev and John A Turner. A Monolithic Photovoltaic-Photoelectrochemical De-
vice for Hydrogen Production via Water Splitting. Science, 280(5362):425–427, 1998.
[11] Jeremie Brillet, Jun-Ho Yum, Maurin Cornuz, Takashi Hisatomi, Renata Solarska, Jan
Augustynski, Michael Graetzel, and Kevin Sivula.
Highly eﬃcient water splitting by a
dual-absorber tandem cell. Nature Photonics, 6(12):824–828, November 2012.
[12] B. Seger, K. Herbst, T. Pedersen, B. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, and I. Chork-
endorﬀ. Mo3S4 Clusters as an Eﬀective H2 Evolution Catalyst on Protected Si Photocath-
odes. Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 161(12):H722–H724, August 2014.
[13] Anders B Laursen, Thomas Pedersen, Paolo Malacrida, Brian Seger, Ole Hansen, Peter C K
Vesborg, and Ib Chorkendorﬀ. MoS2-an integrated protective and active layer on n(+)p-Si
for solar H2 evolution. Physical chemistry chemical physics : PCCP, 15(46), December 2013.
[14] Yang Yang Huanping Zhou, Qi Chen, Gang Li, Song Luo, Tze-bing Song, Hsin-Sheng Duan,
Ziruo Hong, Jingbi You, Yongsheng Liu. Interface engineering of highly eﬃcient perovskite
solar cells. Science, 345(6196):542–546, 2014.
[15] M.a. Green, A. Ho-Baillie, and H.J. Snaith. The emergence of perovskite solar cells. Nature
Photonics, 8(7):506–514, June 2014.
[16] Julian Burschka, Norman Pellet, Soo-Jin Moon, Robin Humphry-Baker, Peng Gao, Mo-
hammad K Nazeeruddin, and Michael Gr¨atzel. Sequential deposition as a route to high-
performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells. Nature, 499(7458):316–+, July 2013.
61
==PAGE:66==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
[17] Zhengguo Xiao, Cheng Bi, Yuchuan Shao, Qingfeng Dong, Qi Wang, Yongbo Yuan, Cheng-
gong Wang, Yongli Gao, and Jinsong Huang. Eﬃcient, high yield perovskite photovoltaic
devices grown by interdiﬀusion of solution-processed precursor stacking layers. Energy En-
viron. Sci., page Ahead of Print, 2014.
[18] Yixin Zhao and Kai Zhu. Eﬃcient Planar Perovskite Solar Cells Based on 1.8 eV Band
Gap CH3NH3PbI2Br Nanosheets via Thermal Decomposition. Journal of the American
Chemical Society, 136(35):12241 –12244, 2014.
[19] Dianyi Liu and Timothy L. Kelly. Perovskite solar cells with a planar heterojunction struc-
ture prepared using room-temperature solution processing techniques. Nature Photonics,
8(2):133–138, December 2013.
[20] JH Noh, SH Im, JH Heo, TN Mandal, and SI Seok.
Chemical management for color-
ful, eﬃcient, and stable inorganic–organic hybrid nanostructured solar cells. Nano letters,
13(4):1764–1769, 2013.
[21] Belen Suarez, Victoria Gonzalez-Pedro, Teresa S. Ripolles, Rafael S. Sanchez, Luis Otero,
and Ivan Mora-Sero. Recombination study of combined halides (Cl, Br, I) perovskite solar
cells. Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 5(10):1628–1635, 2014.
[22] Henry J Snaith. Perovskites : The Emergence of a New Era for Low-Cost , High-. Journal
of Physical Chemistry Letters, 4:3623–3630, 2013.
[23] Severin N Habisreutinger, Tomas Leijtens, Giles E Eperon, Samuel D Stranks, Robin J
Nicholas, and Henry J Snaith. Carbon nanotube/polymer composites as a highly stable
hole collection layer in perovskite solar cells. Nano letters, 14(10):5561–5568, October 2014.
[24] Bastian Mei, Anastasia A. Permyakova, Rasmus Frydendal, Dowon Bae, Thomas Pedersen,
Paolo Malacrida, Ole Hansen, Ifan E. L. Stephens, Peter C. K. Vesborg, Brian Seger and
Ib Chorkendorf.
Iron-treated NiO as a Highly Transparent p-type Protection Layer for
Eﬃcient Si-based Photoanodes. Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 5(20):3456–3461,
2014.
[25] J. Rossmeisl, Z.-W. Qu, H. Zhu, G.-J. Kroes, and J.K. Nø rskov. Electrolysis of water on
oxide surfaces. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 607(1-2):83–89, September 2007.
[26] Lena Trotochaud, James K Ranney, Kerisha N Williams, and Shannon W Boettcher.
Solution-cast metal oxide thin ﬁlm electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution. Journal of the
American Chemical Society, 134(41):17253–17261, October 2012.
[27] W Kautek, J Gobrecht, and H Gerischer. A Comparison between Theory and Experiment
for the Ferrous-Thionine Photogalvanic Cell The Applicability of Semiconducting Layered
Materials for Electrochemical Solar Energy Conversion. Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft f¨ur
physikalische Chemie, 84(10):1034–1040, 1980.
[28] T Bak, J Nowotny, M Rekas, and C C Sorrell. Photo-electrochemical hydrogen generation
from water using solar energy . Materials-related aspects. International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy, 27(2002):991–1022, 2010.
[29] Samuel D Stranks, Giles E Eperon, Giulia Grancini, Christopher Menelaou, Marcelo J P Al-
cocer, Tomas Leijtens, Laura M Herz, Annamaria Petrozza, and Henry J Snaith. Electron-
hole diﬀusion lengths exceeding 1 micrometer in an organometal trihalide perovskite ab-
sorber. Science (New York, N.Y.), 342(6156):341–4, October 2013.
[30] Valerio D’Innocenzo, Giulia Grancini, Marcelo J P Alcocer, Ajay Ram Srimath Kandada,
Samuel D Stranks, Michael M Lee, Guglielmo Lanzani, Henry J Snaith, and Annamaria
Petrozza. Excitons versus free charges in organo-lead tri-halide perovskites. Nature com-
munications, 5:3586, January 2014.
62
==PAGE:67==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
[31] L.Dimesso, M. Dimamay, M. Hamburger and W. Jaegermann. Properties of CH3NH3PbX3
(X= I, Br, Cl) powders as precursors for organic/inorganic solar cells. Chemistry of Mate-
rials, 3, 2014.
[32] Amalie Dualeh, Peng Gao, Sang Il Seok, Mohammad Khaja Nazeeruddin, and Michael
Gr¨atzel.
Thermal Behavior of Methylammonium Lead-trihalide Perovskite Photovoltaic
Light Harvesters. Chemistry of Materials, 26(21):6160–6164, August 2014.
[33] MD Irwin, Buchholz, DB, Alexander W. Hains, Robert P. H. Chang, and Tobin J. Marks.
p-Type semiconducting nickel oxide as an eﬃciency-enhancing anode interfacial layer in
polymer bulk-heterojunction solar cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sesciences
of the United States of Amarica, 105(8):2783–2787, 2008.
[34] CL Wang, Y Ling, X Lu, H Wang, F Qian, Y Tongb, and Y Li. Hybrid Interfacial Layer
Leads to Solid Performance Improvement of Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Envi-
ron. Sci, 2014.
[35] Jeong-Hyeok Im, Jaehoon Chung, Seung-Joo Kim, and Nam-Gyu Park. Synthesis, struc-
ture, and photovoltaic property of a nanocrystalline 2H perovskite-type novel sensitizer
(CH3CH2NH3)PbI3. Nanoscale research letters, 7(1):353, January 2012.
[36] A. Ferreira da Silva, N. Veissid, C. Y. An, I. Pepe, N. Barros de Oliveira, and a. V. Batista
da Silva. Optical determination of the direct bandgap energy of lead iodide crystals. Applied
Physics Letters, 69(13):1930, 1996.
[37] Nader Ghobadi.
Band gap determination using absorption spectrum ﬁtting procedure.
International Nano Letters 2013,, pages 2–5, 2013.
[38] Nam Joong Jeon, Jun Hong Noh, Young Chan Kim, Woon Seok Yang, Seungchan Ryu, and
Sang Il Seok. Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic-organic hybrid perovskite
solar cells. Nature materials, 13(September):1–7, 2014.
[39] M Lumbreras, J Protas, S Jebbari, G J Dirksen, and J Schoonman. STRUCTURE AND
IONIC CONDUCTIVITY OF MIXED LEAD HALIDES PbCl2x Br2 ( 1 -x )” II. SOLID
STATE IONICS, 20(4):295–304, 1986.
[40] L.R. Pederson. Two-dimensional chemical-state plot for lead using XPS. Journal of Electron
Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena, 28:203–209, 1982.
[41] C. D. Wagner, D. a. Zatko, and R. H. Raymond.
Use of the oxygen KLL Auger lines
in identiﬁcation of surface chemical states by electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis.
Analytical Chemistry, 52(9):1445–1451, August 1980.
[42] P. a. Bertrand and P. D. Fleischauer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study of the surface
adsorption of lead naphthenate. Journal of Vacuum Science and Technology, 17(6):1309,
November 1980.
[43] J. Ashley Taylor. An x-ray photoelectron and electron energy loss study of the oxidation of
lead. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films, 2(2):771,
1984.
[44] L. Ley, S. P. Kowalczyk, F. R. McFeely, R. Pollak and D. A. Shirley. X-Ray Photoemission
from Zinc: Evidence for Extra-Atomic Relaxation via Semilocalized Excitons. PHYSICAL
REVIEW B, 8(6), 1973.
[45] Tsz-wai Ng, Chiu-yee Chan, Ming-fai Lo, Qiang Guan, and Chun-sing Lee.
Formation
chemistry of perovskites with mixed iodide/chloride content and the implications on charge
transport properties. Journal of Materials Chemistry A: Materials for energy and sustain-
ability, 00:1–5, 2014.
63
==PAGE:68==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
[46] B Paloszt, W Steurer, and H Schulz. The structure of PbI2 , polytypes 2H and 4H : a study
of the 2H-4H transition. Journal of Physics-Condensed Matter, 2(24):5285–5295, 1990.
[47] Shi Chen, Teck Wee Goh, Dharani Sabba, Julianto Chua, Nripan Mathews, Cheng Hon Al-
fred Huan, and Tze Chien Sum.
Energy level alignment at the methylammonium lead
iodide/copper phthalocyanine interface. APL Materials, 2(8), August 2014.
[48] K. S. Kim, T. J. O’Leary, and Nicholas. Winograd. X-ray photoelectron spectra of lead
oxides. Analytical Chemistry, 45(13):2214–2218, November 1973.
[49] D Rodic, V Spasojevic, V Kusigerski, and R Tellgren. Magnetic Ordering in Polycrystalline
Nix Zn1- xO Solid Solutions. Physica status solidi (b), 527(2):527–536, 2000.
[50] Eric R. Jette and Frank Foote. Precision Determination of Lattice Constants. The Journal
of Chemical Physics, 3(10):605, 1935.
[51] Brian Seger, Thomas Pedersen, Anders Laursen, Peter Vesborg, Ole Hansen, and Ib Chork-
endorﬀ. Using TiO as a Conductive Protective Layer for Photocathodic H Evolution. Jour-
nal of the American Chemical Society, 135:1057–1064, 2013.
[52] Philip Schulz, Eran Edri, Saar Kirmayer, Gary Hodes, David Cahen, and Antoine Kahn.
Interface energetics in organo-metal halide perovskite-based photovoltaic cells. Energy &
Environmental Science, 7:1377, 2014.
[53] Jiangjian Shi, Juan Dong, Songtao Lv, Yuzhuan Xu, Lifeng Zhu, Junyan Xiao, Xin Xu,
Huijue Wu, Dongmei Li, Yanhong Luo, and Qingbo Meng. Hole-conductor-free perovskite
organic lead iodide heterojunction thin-ﬁlm solar cells: High eﬃciency and junction prop-
erty. Applied Physics Letters, 104(6):063901, February 2014.
[54] Woo-Jin An, Elijah Thimsen, and Pratim Biswas.
Aerosol-Chemical Vapor Deposition
Method For Synthesis of Nanostructured Metal Oxide Thin Films With Controlled Mor-
phology. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 1:249–253, 2010.
[55] Xuan-Hao Chan, James Robert Jennings, Md. Anower Hossain, Karen Koh Zhen Yu, and
Qing Wang. Characteristics of p-NiO Thin Films Prepared by Spray Pyrolysis and Their
Application in CdS-sensitized Photocathodes.
Journal of The Electrochemical Society,
158(7):H733, 2011.
64
==PAGE:69==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
A
Additional vacuum chamber illustrations
Figure A.1: Top view of the load lock and the various valves and pumps connected to it. Some
ﬂanges have been omitted in this ﬁgure as they were not used in the project and would therefore
only serve to complicate the ﬁgure.
Figure A.2: Dimensions of the steel disk substrate holder. The depth of the groves is 1.1 mm
to match the height of the FTO samples.
I
==PAGE:70==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure A.3: The dimensions of the bottom mask. The screw holes are matched to a standard
M2 screw.
Figure A.4: The dimensions of the top mask. The screw holes are matched to a standard M2
screw.
II
==PAGE:71==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
B
Band edge estimation spectra
2 . 0
2 . 1
2 . 2
2 . 3
2 . 4
2 . 5
2 . 6
2 . 7
2 . 8
2 . 9
3 . 0
3 . 1
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 6
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 8
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 6
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 8
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 2 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 2 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 2 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 2 6
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 2 8
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 3 0
( A b s / λ)
2  [ 1 / n m
2 ]
E ( λ)  [ e V ]
T a u c  p l o t  o f  M
A I / P b I 2  s a m p l e s  
M
A I / P b I 2   7 5  
o C ,  a n n e a l e d
M
A I / P b I 2  8 5  
o C  
M
A I / P b I 2   7 5  
o C
M
A I / P b I 2  3 0  
o C
P b I 2
M
A I / P b I 2   8 5  
o C ,  a n n e a l e d
Figure B.1: Tauc plot of sequential deposited sample 1,2 and 4 described in Table 1 as well as
the post annealed samples and a pure PbI2 sample. The band gap energies are found to be, 2.42
eV - 2.44 eV.
III
==PAGE:72==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure B.2: Tauc plot of the co-evaporated sample 1, 2 and 3 described in Table 4. From the
ﬁgure the Band gap energies can be estimated to be located at 2.37 eV, 1.85 eV and 1.88 eV for
sample 1, 2 and 3, respectively.
Figure B.3: Tauc plot of the co-evaporated sample 2 and 3 described in Table 4. From these
spectra the absorption edges of the post annealed and as-prepared ﬁlms are found to be located
at 1.89 eV and 1.85 eV for sample 2 and 2.4 eV and 1.88 eV for sample 3, respectively.
IV
==PAGE:73==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 . 7 0
1 . 7 5
1 . 8 0
1 . 8 5
1 . 9 0
1 . 9 5
2 . 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 3
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 5
T a u c  p l o t  o f  P b I 2 / M
A B r  c o - e v a p o r a t e d  s a m p l e  4
( A b s / λ)
2  [ 1 / n m
2 ]
E ( λ)  [ e V ]
Figure B.4: Tauc plot of the co-evaporated sample 4 and 5 described in Table 4. The band gap
of sample 4 is 1.83 eV.
3 . 6
3 . 8
4 . 0
4 . 2
4 . 4
4 . 6
4 . 8
5 . 0
5 . 2
5 . 4
5 . 6
5 . 8
6 . 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 6
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 8
0 . 0 0 0 0 1 0
T a u c  p l o t  o f  P b C l 2  s a m p l e s  
( A b s / λ)
2  [ 1 / n m
2 ]
E ( λ)  [ e V ]
P b C l 2  t  =  4 5 0  n m  T
s u b  3 2
o C
P b C l 2  t  =  1 5 0  n m  T
s u b  3 2
o C
Figure B.5: Tauc plot of the 150 nm and 450 nm PbCl2 samples where t is the layer thickness
and Tsub is the substrate temperature. From the spectra band gap energy is estimated to be
4.23 eV and 4.15 eV for the 150 nm and 450 nm sample, respectively. In both cases the samples
appeared almost transparent in good agreement with the high band gap observed.
V
==PAGE:74==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 . 4
1 . 5
1 . 6
1 . 7
1 . 8
1 . 9
2 . 0
2 . 1
2 . 2
2 . 3
2 . 4
2 . 5
2 . 6
2 . 7
2 . 8
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 3
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 5
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 6
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 7
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 8
( A b s / λ)
2  [ 1 / n m
2 ]
E ( λ)  [ e V ]
S a m p l e  4
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 4 9  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  8 . 3 e - 5  m b a r  -  9 . 0  e - 5  m b a r
 t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T s u b  =  7 5 o C  
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  2
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 3 e - 4  m b a r  -  1 . 4 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 9 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
T a u c  p l o t  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e s  1 - 4
1 . 5 0
1 . 5 5
1 . 6 0
1 . 6 5
1 . 7 0
0 . 0 0 E + 0 0 0
1 . 0 0 E - 0 0 8
2 . 0 0 E - 0 0 8
3 . 0 0 E - 0 0 8
4 . 0 0 E - 0 0 8
5 . 0 0 E - 0 0 8
( A b s / λ)
2  [ 1 / n m
2 ]
E ( λ)  [ e V ]
Figure B.6: Tauc plot of sample 1-4 described in Table 6 and 7 where t is the layer thickness,
Pdep is the deposition pressure and Tsub is the substrate temperature. From the ﬁgure band gap
energy can be estimated to be 2.44 eV , 2.41 eV, 1.59 eV and 2.43 eV for sample 1, 2, 3 and 4,
respectively.
1 . 5
1 . 6
1 . 7
1 . 8
1 . 9
2 . 0
2 . 1
2 . 2
2 . 3
2 . 4
2 . 5
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 3
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 4
( A b s / λ)
2  [ 1 / n m
2 ]
E ( λ)  [ e V ]
S a m p l e  4
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  8 . 3 e - 5  m b a r  -  9 . 0 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b =  7 5
o C ,   A n n e a l e d  
S a m p l e  4
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  8 . 3 e - 5  m b a r  -  9 . 0 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b =  7 5
o C  
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m  ,  T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
S a m p l e  3
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 4  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  1 . 9 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 1 e - 4  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T
s u b  =  7 5
o C ,   A n n e a l e d
T a u c  p l o t  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e s  3  a n d  4
Figure B.7: Tauc plot of sample 3 and 4 described in Table 6 and 7 where t is the layer
thickness, Pdep is the deposition pressure and Tsub is the substrate temperature. From the ﬁgure
the band gap energies of the post annealed samples are found to be 1.58 eV and 2.26 eV while
for the as-prepared samples absorption edges are located at 2.43 eV and 1.59 eV.
VI
==PAGE:75==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
2 . 0
2 . 1
2 . 2
2 . 3
2 . 4
2 . 5
2 . 6
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 6
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 0 8
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 2
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 4
0 . 0 0 0 0 0 1 6
T a u c  p l o t  o f  M
A I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e  1  a n d  5
( A b s / λ)
2  [ 1 / n m
2 ]
E ( λ)  [ e V ]
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  5 . 9 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T s u b  =  7 5 o C
S a m p l e  5
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P d e p  5 . 2 e - 5  m b a r  -  5 . 8 e - 5  m b a r
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,   T s u b  =  3 0 o C
Figure B.8: Tauc plot of sample 1 and 5 described in Table 6 and 7 where t is the layer thickness,
Pdep is the deposition pressure and Tsub is the substrate temperature. From the ﬁgure the band
gap energies can be estimated to be 2.44 eV and 2.45 eV for sample 1 and 5, respectively.
Figure B.9: Tauc plot of NiO samples 1 and 2 described in Table 10. The band gap energy can
be estimated to be 3.52 eV and 3.48 eV for sample 1 and 2, respectively
VII
==PAGE:76==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
C
PbCl2 tooling factor determination
Figure C.1: SEM image of the 100 nm layer (site 1) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
Figure C.2: SEM image of the 100 nm layer (site 2) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
VIII
==PAGE:77==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure C.3: SEM image of the 100 nm layer (site 3) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
Figure C.4: SEM image of the 200 nm layer (site 1) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
IX
==PAGE:78==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure C.5: SEM image of the 200 nm layer (site 2) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
Figure C.6: SEM image of the 200 nm layer (site 3) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
X
==PAGE:79==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure C.7: SEM image of the 300 nm layer (site 1) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
Figure C.8: SEM image of the 300 nm layer (site 2) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
XI
==PAGE:80==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure C.9: SEM image of the 300 nm layer (site 3) used for determining the PbCl2 tooling
factor.
D
Additional XRD patterns
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
8 0
- 0 . 1
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
1 . 1
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
*
 M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  l i t e r a t u r e  r e f e r e n c e
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
 M
A P b C l 3  l i t e r a t u r e  r e f e r e n c e
R e f e r e n c e  X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  a n d  M
A P b C l 3
*
*
#
!
Figure D.1: XRD spectra of the two reference spectra obtained from [31] and [1].
XII
==PAGE:81==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
S a m p l e  1
P b C l 2  r a t e :  0 . 0 7 8  n m / s  
M
A I  P
d e p  5 . 8 e - 5  m b a r  -  6 . 5 e - 5  m b a r  
t  =  1 5 0  n m ,  T
s u b  =  7 5
o C
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
4 5 0  n m  P b C l 2  f i l m
P b I 2  l i t t e r a t u r e  r e f e r e n c e
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  M
A P b I ( 3 - x ) C l x  s a m p l e  1 ,  P b I 2  a n d  P b C l 2  
Figure D.2: XRD patterns of the two reference patterns obtained from [46] as well as the
pattern of the 450 nm PbI2 sample. t, Pdep and Tsub are again the layer thickness, the deposition
pressure and the substrate temperature, respectively.
XIII
==PAGE:82==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
7 5
8 0
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
T i O 2  o n  F T O
P b C l 2  r a t e  0 . 0 5 3  n m / s
P
d e p  2 . 0 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 2 e - 4  m b a r
T
s u b  7 5
o C  t  =  2 5 0  n m  
T i O 2  o n  F T O
P b C l 2  r a t e  0 . 0 5 3  n m / s
P
d e p  2 . 0 e - 4  m b a r  -  2 . 2 e - 4  m b a r
T
s u b  7 5
o C  t  =  2 5 0  n m  
6 0  n m  o f  v a c u u m  N i O
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
F T O  s l a p
X R D  p a t t e r n s  o f  t h e  f u l l  d e v i c e
Figure D.3: The device XRD patten obtained before and after deposition of 60 nm NiO as well
as a pattern of an FTO slap.
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
0 . 6
0 . 7
0 . 8
0 . 9
1 . 0
N o r m a l i z e d  i n t e n s i t y
2 θ [  
o  ]
M
A I  r e f e r e n c e  p a t t e r n
Figure D.4: MAI reference pattern obtained from Jeob et al. [38].
XIV
==PAGE:83==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
E
Additional XPS spectra
2 9 2
2 9 1
2 9 0
2 8 9
2 8 8
2 8 7
2 8 6
2 8 5
2 8 4
2 8 3
2 8 2
2 8 1
2 8 0
4 0 0 0
4 1 0 0
4 2 0 0
4 3 0 0
4 4 0 0
4 5 0 0
4 6 0 0
4 7 0 0
R e a c t e d  c a r b o n
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
C o n t a m i n a t i o n
X P S  s p e c t r u m  o f  t h e  C  1 s  r e g i o n   
Figure E.1: XPS spectrum of the C 1s region of the PbCl2 sample described in Table 8. Two
merged peaks located at 285 eV and 286.5 eV are observed.
2 1 0
2 0 8
2 0 6
2 0 4
2 0 2
2 0 0
1 9 8
1 9 6
1 9 4
1 9 2
1 9 0
4 0 0 0
5 0 0 0
6 0 0 0
7 0 0 0
8 0 0 0
9 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 1 0 0 0
1 2 0 0 0
C o u n t s  p e r  s e c o n d  [ 1 / s ]
B i n d i n g  e n e r g y  [ e V ]
D e t a i l e d  s c a n  o f  t h e  C l  2 p  r e g i o n  o f  t h e  P b C l 2  s a m p l e
Figure E.2: XPS spectrum of the Cl 2p region of the PbCl2 sample described in Table 8. Two
merged peaks located at 199.4 eV and 197.9 eV are observed.
XV
==PAGE:84==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
F
NiO tooling factor
Figure F.1: SEM image of the 20 nm layer (site 1) used for determining the NiO tooling factor.
Figure F.2: SEM image of the 20 nm layer (site 2) used for determining the NiO tooling factor.
XVI
==PAGE:85==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure F.3: SEM image of the 20 nm layer (site 3) used for determining the NiO tooling factor.
Figure F.4: SEM image of the 50 nm layer (site 1) used for determining the NiO tooling factor.
XVII
==PAGE:86==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure F.5: SEM image of the 50 nm layer (site 2) used for determining the NiO tooling factor.
Figure F.6: SEM image of the 50 nm layer (site 3) used for determining the NiO tooling factor.
XVIII
==PAGE:87==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure F.7: SEM image of the 100 nm layer (site 1) used for determining the NiO tooling
factor.
Figure F.8: SEM image of the 100 nm layer (site 2) used for determining the NiO tooling
factor.
XIX
==PAGE:88==
Fabrication of perovskite tandem solar cells for photocatalytic water splitting
Figure F.9: SEM image of the 100 nm layer (site 3) used for determining the NiO tooling
factor.
XX
