==PAGE:1==
Distributed mesh data structures for
parallel simulations of physical systems
Søren Vinther Poulsen, Stud.M.Sc.
Kongens Lyngby 2015
DTU Compute
DTU Mechanical Engineering
M.Sc.2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 30 31
compute@compute.dtu.dk
http://www.compute.dtu.dk
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Phone (+45) 45 25 25 25
info@mek.dtu.dk
http://www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The aim of this project is to investigate and suggest eﬃcient data structures
for distributing mesh data necessary for parallelizing the solution of Partial
Diﬀerential Equations (PDE) using Finite Element (FEM) like methods, e.g.
[LA05, AL13]. The mesh will be provided in GMSH format [GR15] or Exodus II
format [SYL95]. The development will utilize Message Passing Interface (MPI).
Possible hybridization[RHJ09] of the problem by combining MPI and OpenMP
or C++ threads will be investigated as well.
==PAGE:4==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for dette projekt er at undersøge og foreslå egnede datastrukturer til
distribution af strukturdata som er nødvendig for at parallelisere løsningen
af Partielle Diﬀerentialligninger (eng. PDE) ved at anvendte Finite Element
(FEM)-lignende metoder, f.eks. [LA05, AL13]. Strukturdataen vil være givet i
GMSH-formatet[GR15]. I udviklingen af projektet vil Message Passing Inter-
face (MPI)[Pac98] blive anvendt. Anvendelse af hybridmetoder[RHJ09] til at
kombinere MPI og OpenMP eller C++-tråde vil også blive undersøgt.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been written as a joint project between the departments of DTU
Mechanical Engineering and DTU Compute (former department of Informat-
ics and Mathematical Modelling) at the Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.
Lyngby, in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer
Science and Engineering. The thesis deals with the investigation and imple-
mentation of parallel data structures for distributing mesh data necessary for
parallelization the solution of partial diﬀerential equations using ﬁnite element
methods.
The thesis consists of 3 major parts. Chapters 1 and 2 provides an introduc-
tion the problem at hand together with a brief description of background that
forms the basis of the project. Chapters 3, 4, and 5 describe the implemented
application in its major components, along with results and ﬁndings. Chapter
6 wraps up with conclusions based on the work done in this project.
Kgs. Lyngby, 22-April-2015
Søren Vinther Poulsen, Stud.M.Sc.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Boyan S. Lazarov, Ph.D. for providing such
ample assistance throughout the entire project. I would also like to thank my
co-supervisor Bernd Dammann, Ph.D. for helping me stay on track, and for
guiding me through the use of the DTU HPC computers.
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Previous Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Simulation of Physical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Finite Element Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Mesh Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
File Formats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
High-Performance Computing (HPC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Parallel/Concurrent Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
MPI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
OpenMP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.4
MPI/OpenMP Hybrid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.5
Memory Hierarchy & Caches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.6
Hardware Accelerators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.7
Bloom Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Pipeline
26
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
3.2.1
Implementation Language & Platforms
. . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Scripting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3
Performance Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Mesh Dual & Partitioning
30
4.0.4
Existing Solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Finite Element Mesh Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.2
Node Usage Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Element Connectivity Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.4
Graph Partitioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Communication Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Implementation Details
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.1
Graph Storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.2
Eﬃcient Repeated Bloom-Filter Queries . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.3
Message Packing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
MPI/OpenMP Hybrid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Results & Discussions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5.1
Fixed Workload
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5.2
Partition Optimizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Distributed Mesh Graph
44
5.1
Local Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.1.2
Construction Queue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.3
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Ghost Nodes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Global Unique Indexing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.4
Serialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.5
Physical Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.5.1
Storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.6
Results & Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.6.1
Distributed Mesh Graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.6.2
Pooled Linked Lists
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusions
65
Bibliography
67
Appendix A - Users Manual
70
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Simulations of physical system is an integral part of modern mechanical engi-
neering. Within several major industries such as the aerospace and automotive
industries, simulation of physical systems plays a key role in the optimization
of mechanical structures and materials. This allows engineers to reduce pro-
duction costs and material usage, while improving the ﬁnal performance of the
implemented systems. By repeatedly simulating the behavior of a system while
recording its reaction to change in design parameters, it is possible optimize
structures according to certain objectives. The ﬁeld of topological optimization
is integral to modern mechanical engineering.[BS00]
In order to achieve the ﬁne degree of accuracy necessary for engineering pur-
poses, the models which are used as basis for the simulation needs to be of
extremely high resolution.
By using high resolution simulation models, the
computational complexity is signiﬁcant and requires both computing power and
storage capability only available via compute clusters or supercomputers. The
algorithms and software implementations also needs to be capable of handling
large amounts of data while delivering results in a reasonable pace. Implement-
ing systems capable of performing accurate simulations of physical systems is not
a trivial task and requires signiﬁcant amount of man-hours in order to achieve
success.
In this project, a number of parallel algorithms and data structures are inves-
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Outline
2
tigated and implemented, for the purpose of supporting the construction of the
ﬁnite element equations used in the ﬁnite element method (FEM, see section
2.1.1). To facilitate large problem data sets, a focus is kept on parallel, scal-
able (by number of processes) solutions that will function in a cluster-based
computing environment.
1.1
Outline
Two major components are investigated and implemented in this project.
The ﬁrst is an application for eﬃciently computing the dual (section 2.1.2.2)
of a ﬁnite element mesh. This dual is used to produce a partition of the ﬁnite
element mesh, such that it may be distributed to the available machines. The
partitioning scheme is not implemented here; an existing partitioner is used.
The second component is an application for constructing a distributed graph
representation (section 2.1.2.3) of the ﬁnite element mesh. The dual which is
produced as part of the other application plays a signiﬁcant role within this
application as well. With the distributed mesh graph built, the user may add
degree-of-freedom tags to the graph node. Finally, the user may issue mesh
connectivity queries to the graph application, and use the collective responses
to built the element equations (matrix assembly) used in the ﬁnite element
method.
Both applications are implemented using several high-performance computing
techniques, including MPI (section 2.2.2) and OpenMP (section 2.2.3) such that
they perform on cluster-based systems.
1.2
Previous Work
The work presented here is loosely based on the techniques used in [KK09].
Here, a complex and powerful framework for working with ﬁnite element meshes
is introduced. Most notable, for this project, is the use of a graph to represent
the ﬁnite element mesh. This allows for some unique possibilities of determining
mesh connectivity which may be exploited by the user.
[SA11, SS06] and [KPSC06] introduces two libraries for working with distributed
ﬁnite element meshes. libMesh [KPSC06] is intended for adaptive mesh reﬁne-
ment/coarsening simulations running on MPI-enabled systems. The Flexible
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Previous Work
3
Mesh Database (FMDB), [SA11, SS06], is a large framework for working with
distributed ﬁnite elements, including partitioning.
In [LA05] is introduced some guidelines for implementing FEM-related material
using OOP techniques. This has been used as inspiration for the layout of some
of the data structures used within this project.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Simulation of Physical Systems
In multiple areas within engineering it is highly desirable to be able to accurately
make predictions on the behavior of physical systems before they are constructed
into real-world scenarios. Being able to do in-computer simulations of physical
systems may drastically the cut production costs while improving performance
of the ﬁnal system. For example, problem instances such as heat conduction,
mechanical stress, radio wave propagation may all be simulated with high levels
of accuracy.
2.1.1
Finite Element Method
The idea of solving general real problems by analytical methods is unreasonable,
as the number of variables would be too high, or because no analytical model of
the problem instance is now. Therefore it is necessary to approximate solutions
One well known and accepted method of simulating physical systems is by using
the ﬁnite element method. The ﬁnite element method is a powerful and widely
used numerical technique for solving problems which are described by partial
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Simulation of Physical Systems
5
(a) Surface geometry
(b) Meshed geometry
Figure 2.1: Discretization of the Stanford bunny
diﬀerential equations[Nik04]. The premise of the algorithm is not very compli-
cated, and may even be implemented very succinctly in few lines of code[Sig01].
However, the algorithm is powerful and may be extended to solve a vast amount
of diﬀerent problems.
The main idea from FEM is to reduce the problem into a series of diﬀerential
equations. This is done by discretizing, or meshing, the problem domain into
ﬁnite elements (see ﬁgure 2.1 for an example).
Now, the idea is to obtain
an approximate solution at each node within the ﬁnite element mesh. By only
approximating the solution at the node positions, some detail is lost. Some detail
can be recovered using interpolation methods, as shown in ﬁgure 2.2. Here, an
approximation ¯ui has been determined for node i. To get an approximation at
point x, we may chose some interpolation function φi for point i. In many cases
a polynomial interpolation function is chosen (in ﬁgure 2.2 the φi is a linear
function).
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Simulation of Physical Systems
6
Figure 2.2: FEM interpolation function in 1D
These diﬀerential equations are deﬁned by a matrix K, the stiﬀness matrix, and
some source term ¯U. The matrix K is constructed from many smaller matrices
K = P Ke, with some special rules for summation, in a process called matrix
assembly. The rules for summation is determined by the connectivity of the
elements. Once K is fully constructed, we may obtain a solution for all nodes
¯u via:
K¯u = ¯U
(2.1)
, where ¯U is some source term. In [SW98] the FEM method is summarized into
6 main steps to acquire the ﬁnal approximation. These are:
Idealization Here the real physical problem is idealized into something which
can be simulated. In this step the problem domain and boundary condi-
tions are also deﬁned.
Discretization In this step the problem domain is divided onto a number of
ﬁnite elements. This may also be referred to as meshing.
Element analysis In the third step the element stiﬀness matrix Ke is pro-
duced for every element in the discretized mesh.
Coupling Structure Analysis Here the element stiﬀness matrices are added
up into one large stiﬀness matrix K.
The rules for constructing K is
entirely dependent on the connectivity between elements. As such, it is
necessary to perform some analysis of the element coupling before this
step can be completed.
Post-processes At this point variables such as stresses are calculated, and the
residual error vector is obtained.
Control and interpretation In step 6 manual control and interpretation of
results are made.
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Simulation of Physical Systems
7
Once the FEM process is complete one may update either K or ¯U and restart,
until some objective for the residual error it met.
2.1.2
Mesh Representations
2.1.2.1
Finite Element Mesh
A ﬁnite element mesh is a geometric object (or a domain of interest, [Nik04])
deﬁned by a number of ﬁnite elements. Examples of diﬀerent types of ﬁnite
element types are triangles, quadrangles, tetrahedra and hexahedra. Figure 2.3
shows what a ﬁnite element mesh may look like. At the intersections between
elements are the edges (lines) and nodes.
Figure 2.3: 2-dimensional ﬁnite element mesh of the Stanford bunny
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Simulation of Physical Systems
8
2.1.2.2
Dual
With the ﬁnite element mesh in its standard form (e.g.
ﬁgure 2.3) we are
given the nodal connectivity information. That is, it is directly discerned which
nodes and elements some node is connected to. For some purposes, such as
for partitioning the mesh, it is useful to have the mesh in its dual form. The
dual form describes the element connectivity such that we may easily see which
elements are connected. The deﬁnition of a connection may be diﬀer for various
purposes, however, here two elements are considered connected iﬀthey have one
or more common nodes between them.
An example is given in ﬁgure 2.4, which displays the dual form of the mesh
found in ﬁgure 2.3. Every graph node corresponds to a mesh element while
every graph edge corresponds to a connection between two elements. The graph
nodes are placed roughly near the barycenter of the elements, however this is
merely for display purposes.
As one might deduce from ﬁgure 2.4 the graph quickly becomes dense even
for simple meshes. In order to reduce the graph complexity, one may instead
produce the dual where elements are connected via edges instead of nodes.
2.1.2.3
Graph Representation
In [KK09] is described, together with a novel and powerful programming frame-
work for supporting PDE algorithms named Sieve, a mesh graph representation
for ﬁnite element meshes. The structure of the graph representation is simple,
however it eﬀectively captures key information about the mesh, such as con-
nectivity between nodes and elements. Using simple operations, one may easily
determine the support1 or closure2 which may be useful in the matrix assembly
process.
Figure 2.5 shows the structure of the graph representation. Here, a small ﬁnite
element mesh is deﬁned (ﬁg. 2.5a) along with a numbering of elements and nodes
(note that edges have been omitted here for brevity), together with the graph
representation (ﬁg 2.5b).
In the example, the graph representation includes
edges with some arbitrary numbering that are not included in the ﬁnite element
mesh.
1Support meaning all higher-order elements in direct connection with a particular element
2Closure meaning all nodes and lower-order elements in direct connection with a particular
element
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Simulation of Physical Systems
9
Figure 2.4: Dual of a simple bunny mesh (see ﬁgure 2.3)
As one might deduce from ﬁgure 2.5, the graph is layered such that graph
nodes representing nodes, edges, sides, and elements are disconnected. In this
terminology, sides should be understood as 2D elements such as triangles and
quadrangles while elements are 3D ﬁnite elements such as tetrahedra and hexa-
hedra. Once graph nodes are inserted into the graph, the speciﬁc element type
of the node is discarded. As such, elements of diﬀerent types can co-exists within
the same layer.
Graph edges are inserted wherever there is a connection between nodes and/or
elements in the mesh, however graph edges will not traverse more than one layer.
If two tetrahedra are connected via an edge, there will not be a graph edge from
the tetrahedra to the edge. Instead there will an edge from the tetrahedra to
their sides (triangles), and from the sides there will be a connection to the edge.
In order to discern if two elements are connected, one may perform a graph
search to ﬁnd a possible path. Depending on the connection type, this search
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Simulation of Physical Systems
10
may have to extend all the way to the node-layer.
The graph representation is bidirectional as the ability to traverse between layers
is necessary for the support and closure operations.
(a) Simple 2D ﬁnite element mesh
(b) Corresponding mesh graph
Figure 2.5: Graph representation of simple 2D ﬁnite element mesh
2.1.3
File Formats
2.1.3.1
(D)CSR
In [KS13] is described a widely-used graph format named the compressed storage
format, CSR. With CSR at least two arrays are stored; one containing the start-
and end indices of the adjacency list (the name xadj is used), and another storing
the identiﬁers of the adjacent elements (named adjncy). Figure ﬁgure 2.6 shows
such an arrangement in a simple 2D graph. CSR may include such details as
vertex and/or edge weight in separate arrays.
In order to get the adjacent
elements of element i we can simply fetch the elements in the range xadj[i ]
to xadj[i + 1] in from adjncy array, assuming C-style zero-indexed arrays.
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Simulation of Physical Systems
11
xadj
=
[0, 2, 5, 8, 10, 13, 17, 21, 24, 26, 29, 32, 34]
adjncy
=
[1, 4, 0, 2, 5, 1, 3, 6, 2, 7, 0, 5, 8, 1, 4, 6, 9, 2, 5, 7, 10, 3, 6, 11, 4, 9, 8, 5, 10, 6, 9, 11, 7, 10]
Figure 2.6: A sample graph and its CSR format counterpart
The CSR format may also be used to describe a graph that is distributed over
multiple processes. This format is coined the distributed CSR format and adds
an additional array vtxdist that tells the distribution of the nodes for each
process similarly to the xadj array. For two processes the DCSR may take the
following form:
xadj
=
[0, 2, 5, 8, 10, 13, 17]
adjncy
=
[1, 4, 0, 2, 5, 1, 3, 6, 2, 7, 0, 5, 8, 1, 4, 6, 9]
vtxdist
=
[0, 6, 12]
for process 0, and
xadj
=
[0, 4, 7, 9, 12, 15, 17]
adjncy
=
[2, 4, 7, 10, 3, 6, 11, 4, 9, 5, 8, 10, 6, 9, 11, 7, 10]
vtxdist
=
[0, 6, 12]
for process 1. In this case nodes 0 through 5 (see ﬁgure 2.6) are taken by process
0 while the remaining nodes are taken by process 1. Note that the vtxdist array
is identical for all processes.
2.1.3.2
Gmsh
Gmsh is a ﬁnite element mesh generator [GR15] that have been used in this
project to generate meshes from surface objects.
It is also name of a ﬁnite
==PAGE:21==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
12
element mesh ﬁle format which in binary or ASCII format stores node and
element information for meshes. Gmsh supports an arbitrary number of tags
per element, which may be used to signify which partitions or physical ﬁelds the
element belongs to. Elements are stored together with an element type identiﬁer
which must be one of those predeﬁned in [GR15]. In order to store multiple
element types in the same ﬁle, element do also support a variable number of
node identiﬁers (e.g. 3 for triangles, 4 for tetrahedra and 8 for hexahedra).
Nodes are saved by an identiﬁer together with three spatial coordinates in the
following ASCII format:
node-number x-coord y-coord z-coord
, while elements are stored as:
elm-number elm-type number-of-tags <tag> . . . node-number-list
The binary format is nearly identical, except elements are grouped in an eﬀort
to save space and decrease seeking time. See [GR15] for a full description of the
Gmsh ﬁle format.
2.2
High-Performance Computing (HPC)
High-Performance Computing (HPC) refers to the concept of utilizing massive
amounts of computing power to solve problems of signiﬁcant size or in a very
short amount of time (or a combination of both). HPC is an immensely im-
portant part of modern computing technology that is used extensively within
academia, commerce and by the public.
With the use of high-performance computing techniques, engineers and com-
puter scientists may provide solutions for computationally hard problems such
as predicting the short-term behavior of weather patterns within is reasonably
short time frame. Some problems in HPC are inherently coupled with extremely
large data sets (e.g. providing a weather forecast) that requires a large amount
of processing power. In modern times, large-scale processing power is most of-
ten amassed by connecting many smaller computers together into clusters with
a powerful networking interconnect. The computers which are interconnected
==PAGE:22==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
13
may be specialized for supercomputing purposes or they may be ordinary con-
sumer computers which are cheaper to acquire. Diﬀerent terms that also fall
into this category of HPC are cloud computing or big data, both of which are
areas of computer science dealing with data sets of sizes requiring absolute vast
amounts of processing and storage capability.
Other types of HPC may deal with comparatively much smaller sets of data
but with a time-critical factor.
Within many areas of computer vision and
visualization the user will require that a result is produced at a consistent and
fast rate without too much deviation (e.g. [WP13]). For visualization purposes
a rate of 30 or 60 frames per second is often a strict requirement that requires
considerable eﬀort to meet. To achieve such rates of performance, the developer
will often use specialized, parallel hardware in order to reach target performance.
For the purpose of this particular project the former type of high-performance
computing techniques is used to build an application capable of dealing with
moderately large data sets (i.e. falling into the range of gigabytes) at very high
performance levels.
2.2.1
Parallel/Concurrent Computing
Writing software that eﬃciently utilizes available processing power and eﬀec-
tively handles communication and synchronization is a non-trivial task with
many pitfalls and considerations to be had. When considering HPC, parallel
computing is more often than not the crucial part of any application. That
is, having multiple computers all working together, in parallel, to solve a com-
mon task. This involves thinking out communication patterns, synchronization
schemes, data handling, etc..
In the following sections there will be an introduction to some common tools
and hardware that are often used to solve problems in parallel computing.
2.2.1.1
Common Terms
In this section some common terms and their meanings will be introduced brieﬂy.
Compute Node In this paper, a compute node will refer to any singular ma-
chine within an HPC cluster, each with a separate hard-drive/disk, RAM,
set of CPU(s) and a network interface.
==PAGE:23==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
14
Central Processing Unit (CPU) A CPU (or processor) is the chip that pro-
vides the processing power within a computing node. Multiple CPUs may
be housed within a single machine on individual CPU sockets.
CPU Core In modern times a CPU is often in a multi-core conﬁguration (e.g.
dual-, quad-, hexa-, or octo-core for 2, 4, 6, or 8 cores per CPU, respec-
tively). Each core is largely independent of other cores.
Process In Unix-like operating systems such as GNU/Linux, a process is an
instance of an executed program. A process may own (that is, take re-
sponsibility for) a number of resources such as memory, ﬁles, or access to
physical entities such as printers or scanners. The resources owned by a
process are by default private, meaning that other processes will not be
able to interfere unless speciﬁcally allowed. Processes may communicate
by the means of interprocess communication functions such as those found
within MPI or Boost.Interprocess .
Thread A thread is the basic unit of execution within the operating system.
Threads may be executed by a processor core, halted, and switched out
by the operating system thread handler. This allows for multi-processing
on single-core systems. Threads are owned by processes and may share
resources with other threads owned by the same process. All processes
owns at least one thread, which may be referred to as the master thread.
This thread is responsible for the execution of the process. Processes may
spawn several threads.
2.2.2
MPI
MPI (Message-Passing Interface) is a standard for interprocess communication,
initially released in the early 90’s. Many implementations are available if which
OpenMPI is perhaps the most well known. MPI is readily used in academia and
industry, for implementing parallel software running on any number of compute
nodes. MPI primarily functions by passing messages between processes, that do
not share access to the same sections of memory. It employs the SPMD (same
program, diﬀerent data) paradigm where binary executables are run by a number
of processes that each collects or produces an amount of data. The messages
that are sent and received using MPI may be considered nothing more than
blocks of memory. A message may encapsulate any number number primitive
datatypes, arrays, structs, etc., but it is up to the developer to interpret and
handle incoming and outgoing data3. [Pac98]
3Though MPI does provide help via the MPI_Type* functions and macros. [Pac98]
==PAGE:24==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
15
Figure 2.7: MPI processes on a single compute node
2.2.2.1
Process Mapping
Once an MPI-enabled application is run its processes is distributed, or mapped,
to the available cores. The method of distribution is highly signiﬁcant and can
be crucial in terms of the potential performance of the application instance.
The MPI standard allows a number of diﬀerent mapping methods using the
–map-by <foo> option. Here foo refers to an object such as a core, node, socket
or a number of other predeﬁned types. By default, the MPI standard will map
by socket meaning that the MPI processes are assigned to a socket until it is
saturated after which the next available socket is chosen. By saturation is meant
that the number of allocated processes is equivalent to the number of cores on
the CPU within that socket. This mapping selection is often optimal in cases
where the communication portion of the application is signiﬁcant, as the network
interconnect does not need to be involved on same-machine communications. In
other cases it may be a poor choice. For example, mapping multiple processes to
the same socket or machine in cases where a large amount of physical disk I/O
(which in many cases are unavoidably sequential/non-parallel) takes place may
prove fatal for performance. One may also map by node in which case processes
are assigned to the ﬁrst available core on each compute node in a round-robin
fashion. Mapping by node can perform well in cases with heavy disk or network
I/O.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
16
2.2.2.2
Group Communication Primitives
Data communication often occurs across all participating processes. For exam-
ple, one process might have a piece of data required by some or all of the other
processes, or processes might have some information that needs to be scattered
to the rest of the communicator. Fortunately MPI provides a number of group
communication primitives that readily and eﬃciently solves these problems. In
this section, a number of MPI group communications are described.
The underlying cluster network infrastructure may take advantage of the usage
of group communication primitives deﬁned within the MPI standard. Therefore
the developer should take care to use group communication primitives when
applicable.[Pac98]
All-to-all
One powerful group communication primitive is the MPI_Alltoall
function. This function takes a ﬁxed number of elements from the local send
buﬀer and distributes it to the other participating processes, as seen in ﬁgure
2.8. A common obstacle within MPI programming is sending a varying number
of messages to some or all other processes. Because the number of incoming
messages is unknown by the receiving process it may not be able to determine
the buﬀer space required to receive all messages. By using the MPI all-to-all
communication primitive, processes may quickly distribute the number of sent
messages to each other process such that buﬀer space can be allocated before
the actual messages are sent.
Figure 2.8: MPI all-to-all communication primitive for 3 processes
Allgather
The group communication primitive MPI_Allgather distributes
content such that the receiving buﬀers of all participating processes are identical
when the communication is complete (see ﬁgure 2.9). This primitive is useful
for scenarios where each process contain information that all other processes
must be made aware of.
==PAGE:26==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
17
Figure 2.9: MPI allgather communication primitive for 3 processes
2.2.3
OpenMP
OpenMP is a publicly available API (native C, C++ and Fortran support) that
supports multiprocessing on shared memory architectures. A software developer
may implement OpenMP into an application by the use of preprocessor direc-
tives, causing threads to be forked and joined a speciﬁed points. Unlike MPI,
only a single process is ever created and as such, all data within that process is
shared. As a user of OpenMP, one must take care not to cause race-conditions or
by other means corrupt the data in use by other threads. The API does provide
several data-sharing constructs which can be used to aid the developer.[MM]
2.2.4
MPI/OpenMP Hybrid
In many cases, it is possible to signiﬁcantly increase system performance by
mixing distributed and shared memory implementation techniques [RHJ09]. For
example, assume some implementation with multiple processes on the same
physical compute node doing complicated distributed memory synchronization
locally. Here it might be more eﬃcient to exchange the local processes with
a single process with multiple threads, having shared memory access.
This
will eﬀectively reduce the penalty on the network interconnect by reducing the
number of messages being sent within the system. However, the total amount
of data being communicated might not necessarily be reduced as message sizes
will get larger.
The situation is shown in ﬁgure 2.10. Here a single compute node with 4 phys-
ical cores is shown all sharing the same memory bank. The node runs only a
single MPI process, which in turn parents 1 MPI thread and 4 OpenMP threads.
Communication with remote processes will happen exclusively through the MPI
==PAGE:27==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
18
Figure 2.10: Hybrid MPI/OpenMP mode
thread (however this does not need to be the case, [Pac98]), while local commu-
nication is handled implicitly through shared memory.
2.2.5
Memory Hierarchy & Caches
While speed of CPUs has increased at a great pace, the speed at which the
physical speed/RAM operates at has not increased in the same manner. This
has lead to what is known as the Processor-Memory Performance Gap[Alb09],
terming the fact that memory management and access is now crucially important
for the performance of software applications. Accessing memory in a fashion that
does not conform to the various caches is now heavily penalized and may result
in decreased performance.
In order to mask some of the inherent latency in accessing oﬀ-chip memory (that
is, memory not residing on the CPU die) hardware manufactures have added
a hierarchy of memory caches between each individual CPU core and the main
memory (see ﬁgure . Each cache level stores a small, but increasing, amount
of data that has recently been, or is soon expected to be, accessed by the CPU
core. An Intel i7 CPU houses three levels of cache, the L1, L2 and L3, where
L1 L2 are private to each core within the CPU. The third level, L3, is shared
==PAGE:28==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
19
Figure 2.11: Dualsocket node with quadcore CPU cache hiearchy of 3 levels
between cores meaning that access to a segment of data is “cheap” in the case
that another core has caused the segment to be cached. This accentuates why
the mapping of MPI processes (section 2.2.2.1) is so signiﬁcant.[MP13]
Writing software that makes use of the cache hierarchy and takes steps to avoid
bad memory behavior (e.g. trashing the cache, a term for the practice of un-
intentionally causing the cache to ﬂush useful data in place of valueless data)
takes time and eﬀort but is likely to result in signiﬁcantly improved perfor-
mance. This has by some (e.g. [Alb09]) been coined data-oriented design, a
design philosophy where the developer prioritizes data access and management
over complicated abstractions and generalizations within the source code.
2.2.6
Hardware Accelerators
2.2.6.1
GPU
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have co-existed alongside CPU units since
the mid-1990s with the purpose of accelerating graphical user interfaces and
games graphics.
Starting in 2001, developers of GPUs made it possible for
software developers to re-program parts of the graphics pipeline to suit speciﬁc
==PAGE:29==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
20
needs. This trend of opening the graphics pipeline has since then continued to
a point where general-purpose GPU (GPGPU) computing is widespread and
essential within the ﬁeld of HPC.[TC11]
The architecture of GPU chips is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of CPUs. In-
stead of housing a a low number of high-frequency computing cores (e.g. an Intel
Core i7 having 4 physical cores operating at 3.50 GHz, launched ultimo 2014),
a modern (at the time of writing) GPU may house several thousand comput-
ing cores, operating at frequencies as low as 1 GHz. This allows a GPU to run
many thousand threads simultaneously, which brings signiﬁcant performance
boosts to many applications. For example, 3D computational ﬂuid dynamics
using Latttice-Boltzmann methods may bring up to 100× speedup compared to
a similar single-threaded application.[ND10]
One major limitation of GPU computing is the limited amount of physical mem-
ory available on most cards, as well as major performance penalties for poorly
executed memory management. Therefore applications are mostly limited to
those where the problem entire will ﬁt into GPU memory, or memory man-
agement can be implemented such that computations continue while device-
host/host-device data transfer takes place.
The use of GPU computing has been considered for this particular project, but
it has been deemed not suitable. With raw ﬁnite element meshes reaching into
the multi-gigabyte range, it is not plausible to be able to ﬁt the entire problem
onto a single GPU card. Furthermore, the matrix assembly process involves
a signiﬁcant amount of random memory walk along with a large amount of
unpredictable instruction branching. These are features that does not perform
well on GPGPU cards, and it therefore highly unlikely that any signiﬁcant
performance boost could be achieved from the use of GPU computing in this
project.
2.2.7
Bloom Filters
The Bloom ﬁlter is a convenient space-eﬃcient data structure used to determine
set membership of elements. That is, a Bloom ﬁlter may be used to represent a
very large set while only using a fraction of the memory of the actual set. First
introduced in 1970, Bloom ﬁlters have been used extensively for a number of
various applications. Because of their space-eﬃcient nature, Bloom ﬁlters have
often found use within distributed computing where the data structure can be
used to greatly reduce the number of messages sent within the network [TRL12].
It is a probabilistic data structure as it might return false positives (i.e. a query
==PAGE:30==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
21
might indicate that an element belongs to the set, even though the element is
not present in the set). However, queries will never return false negatives and
as such the data structure is convenient to quickly refute set membership. The
probability of false positives can be precisely controlled by altering the size of
the ﬁlter and the number of hash functions that is used.
2.2.7.1
Structure
At its core, the Bloom ﬁlter is an array of bits coupled with a number of hash
functions (introduced in section 2.2.7.3). Each hash function maps a value into
an index of the bit array. Ideally the hash functions maps to unique indices in
a uniform random distribution.
To insert values into the ﬁlter, every hash function is invoked to produce an
index into the ﬁlter. At these positions, the bit in the ﬁlter is set to 1 regardless
of the existing value. This is shown in ﬁgure 2.12.
To query a value for set membership, the value is hashed again by each of the
hash functions. If any of the bits in these positions is 0 it can immediately be
determined that the value does not belong to the set. Otherwise, if all bits are 1,
the value may be within the set. If certain determination of set membership is
required, some other methods must be used. In ﬁgure 2.13 the value y checked.
Because some bits are not set, the algorithm returns a negative answer.
False positives occur in the situation where all the bits are set for a speciﬁc
value query without having inserted the value prior. For example, one might
imagine that so many elements have been inserted that the entire Bloom ﬁlter
is set to 1, in which case all membership queries would return a positive, yet
probably false, response.
Figure 2.12: Inserting value x into a bloom ﬁlter where m = 16 and k = 4.
That is, the bit array size is 16 and 4 hash functions are used for
querying
==PAGE:31==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
22
Figure 2.13: Testing if value y is contained. Seeing that at least 1 bit is not
set, the query returns a negative answer
2.2.7.2
Properties
As mentioned earlier, one major appealing feature of the Bloom ﬁlter data
structure is its (often) extreme space-preserving nature.
That is, relatively
few bits can be used to represent large sets of elements. The trade-oﬀis the
probability of false positives which may result in some unnecessary expensive
operations to be made.
The probability p of false positives is a function of the bit array size m and the
number k of hash functions in use. The quality of the hash functions (that is,
their ability to produce indices that approximates a uniform distribution) is also
a major factor. Assuming ideal hash functions, the probability of false positives
is given by:
p =

1 −exp
−kn
m
k
(2.2)
Table 2.1 shows an example of the memory requirements when altering the
variables n (i.e. the number of inserted elements) and p (the probability of false
positives). The ﬁlter size m is determined by:
m = −n ln p
(ln 2)2
(2.3)
, while the optimal number k of hash functions is given by:
k = m
n ln 2
(2.4)
==PAGE:32==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
23
n
p = 0.01
p = 0.001
p = 0.0001
m
k
m
k
m
k
103
1.17KB
7
1.76KB
10
2.34KB
13
106
1.14MB
7
1.71MB
10
2.29MB
13
109
1.12GB
7
1.67GB
10
2.23GB
13
Table 2.1: Memory requirement example
As it can be seen in table 2.1, relatively low amounts of memory is required in
order to provide query answers with a reasonable false positive failure rate.
2.2.7.3
Hash Functions
An essential part of the Bloom ﬁlter data structure and related algorithms is
hashing. Hash functions are deterministic, one-way functions taking an input
value and producing a hash value.
These functions are widely used within
computing to implement essential data structures such as hash sets or hash
maps. The hash value is most often restricted to some ﬁnite universe. In hash
maps, the hash value would be restricted to integers [0, n[∈N where n is the
number of buckets within the hash map. Similarly, the hash value would be
restricted to integers [0, m[∈N when used in Bloom ﬁlters.
Hash functions need to be deterministic, meaning that for a ﬁxed input the hash
value must always remain the same. Using distributed Bloom ﬁlters, as is the
case in this project, the chosen hash function needs to remain deterministic for
all process instances. Some hash functions may be seeded which means that the
function itself is instantiated with some user-speciﬁed seed value. In this case,
two instances hash function are only deterministic given that they are seeded
with the same seed value.
Cryptographic Hash Functions
Hash functions may be used for crypto-
graphic purposes in which case they must adhere to additional requirements.
One requirement is that given the hash value (that is, the output) it must be
near impossible, or at least not feasible within a small time frame, to determine
the input used to generate the hash value. For example, cryptographic hash
values of highly sensitive user secrets, such as passwords, are often stored as
hash values in databases instead of the raw, un-hashed data. If the database is
exposed to unauthorized personnel there is little risk that the hashing process
can be reversed in order to obtain the user secrets.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
24
Selecting Hash Functions
The choice of the k diﬀerent hash functions is
crucial for the performance of the Bloom ﬁlters. Choosing the worst-case hash
functions which all hashes to the same value regardless of input completely
diminishes the use for that particular Bloom ﬁlter; the false positive rate would
be 100% regardless of the size of k.
In order to gain the most beneﬁt from the use of Bloom ﬁlters, one should ensure
that (1) the hash functions distributes the hashed values uniformly across the
entire range {0, m} (i.e. be as-close-to perfect hash functions as possible), and
(2), that the hash functions are somewhat eﬃcient. The hash functions need
not conform to cryptographic standards as it would only increase computational
complexity.
The choice of hash functions is commonly done by choosing one base hash
function f0 = h (x) (e.g. MurmurHash3, [App11]), and letting be remaining
hash functions be deﬁned as f1 = h (f0) , f2 = h (f1) , . . . , fk = h (fk−1). Now,
this requires that h (x) ̸= x, ∀x, i.e. that some waterfall eﬀect is taking place.
During implementation of this system it was found that some common imple-
mentations of general non-cryptographic hash functions (namely std::hash<>
in libstdc++ version 3.4.*, the default C++ Standard Library implementation
for newer versions of GNU/Linux (K)Ubuntu) provides directly-mapped hash
values for integers (i.e. h (x) = x for all integers). Using the approach just
mentioned together with a directly-mapping hash function would have caused
an explosion in false positives. Instead, the boost::hash<> functions within
the Boost C++ libraries, which are variants of the Fowler–Noll–Vo (FNV) hash
function, are used.
2.2.7.4
Hierarchical Bloom Filters
As the number of individual Bloom ﬁlters increase, it may be appropriate to
group multiple Bloom ﬁlters into single ﬁlters. For example, if the Bloom ﬁlters
are used as a distributed hash set (as is the case in this design), the number
of checks required increases proportionally as more distributed processes are
added.
We may arrange multiple Bloom ﬁlters into hierarchical Bloom ﬁlters (not equiv-
alent to the term used in [TRL12]) and thereby eﬀectively reducing the number
of checks required, in trade of increased memory requirements. If done in a
binary scheme, we may reduce the worst-case number of checks made to log n,
where n is the number of participating processes. In order to construct a hier-
archy of Bloom ﬁlter, it is necessary to introduce the notion of joining ﬁlters.
Seeing that the ﬁlters are essentially bit-strings of some length this operation
==PAGE:34==
2.2 High-Performance Computing (HPC)
25
is eﬀectively done using a binary OR-operation (i.e. a conjunction, ﬁgure 2.14)
over the entire string (see ﬁg. 2.15). With the hierarchy constructed, one may
perform the usual queries, but starting from the top-most node and transgress-
ing downwards similarly to searching within binary heaps.
Figure 2.14: Conjunction of Bloom ﬁlters (binary strings)
Figure 2.15: Hierarchy of Bloom ﬁlter ﬁngerprints for 4 processes
2.2.7.5
Approximate Membership Query (AMQ) Data Structures
Bloom ﬁlters belong to a group of data structures that have been termed Approx-
imate Membership Query (AMQ) data structures. These are all data structures
that may eﬃciently give an approximate answer to the membership query. The
reference [BFC12] introduces multiple other data structures, most of which are
variants of Bloom ﬁlters.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Pipeline
The applications that are implemented in this project makes up a pipeline that
transforms the ﬁnite element mesh into a distributed graph representation. Fig-
ure 3.1 gives an overview of this process. In this section an overview of the
pipeline is given, while the next two chapters deals with the details of the pipeline
components.
The pipeline consists of the process that takes input in the form of meshed
geometry (i.e. the ﬁnite element mesh) and converts it into a distributed graph
representation with assignable degrees of freedom. Once the graph is built, the
user may query the graph for nodal information, such as connectivity, pertaining
to certain physical ﬁelds. The queries are done in order to allow for the matrix
assembly and residual vector construction that represents the element equations
used in the ﬁnite element method.
3.1
Overview
The pipeline begins with the ﬁnite element mesh, provided in the Gmsh for-
mat described in section 2.1.3.2. The mesh may be generated using any avail-
able mesh generator. In the next step, the dual (i.e. the element-to-element
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Overview
27
Figure 3.1: Pipeline overview
connectivity graph) is produced by the means of distributed Bloom ﬁlter ﬁnger-
prints. With the dual available, a partition is obtained using a graph partitioenr,
METIS/ParMETIS. The mesh partition is then distributed among the partici-
pating processes, such that each process is aware of the entire partition result.
Along with the partition, also parts of the dual is communicated to the relevant
processes.
The next component produces a local graph representation of the part of the
mesh assigned to each the process. Once the local graphs have been completely
constructed, the processes synchronize identiﬁers such that mesh graph nodes
are uniquely identiﬁable. This step completes the mesh graph.
Once the graphs are produced and globally synchronized, the user may assign
any number of degree-of-freedom (DOF) ﬁelds to the nodes within the graph
representation.
A DOF added to a node needs to be uniquely identiﬁable,
which means that some global synchronization takes place at this point. After
the DOFs have been assigned, the user may query and navigate the global graph
in order to complete the coupling structure analysis. This step involves some
capability of navigating the graph using physical ﬁeld identiﬁers.
This step
concludes the pipeline steps.
Afterwards the user may begin the stiﬀness matrix assembly process, and ﬁnally
submit the matrix to any available diﬀerential equation solver, such as PETSc.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Tools
28
3.1.0.6
Pre-processing
Following the FEM recipe in section 2.1.1 there are some pre-processing steps
which are left completely out of the pipeline. Most importantly, the idealization
and discretization is left for the user to perform. The tool Gmsh may be used
for the discretization/meshing process.
3.1.0.7
Post-processing
As the pipeline steps completes, the user is left with a distributed mesh graph.
At this point the user may opt to add DOFs, if additional physics needs to be
modeled into the system.
Repartitioning
If the number of processes is changed after the mesh graph
has been built, it may be necessary to re-partition the graph such that the
number of partitions ﬁts the number of processes. As the mesh graph is stored
in the DCSR format, the METIS/ParMETIS may be used directly on the graph.
Seeing that all nodes have global identiﬁers, one would not have to perform any
additional bookkeeping besides redistribution the graph nodes.
In the case that the graph is reﬁned (i.e. more processes are added), the serial
METIS application could be used on each local process. Thereby, expensive (in
terms of performance) network communication could be avoided.
Note that neither process has been implemented.
3.2
Tools
3.2.1
Implementation Language & Platforms
The solution has been implemented using a combination of C++11 and Python
in a GNU/Linux environment. C++ has been chosen because of its excellent
performance and low-level capabilities. More recent editions of the C++ stan-
dard (such as C++11 and newer) provides the programmer with powerful control
mechanisms and for eﬃcient resource management without sacriﬁcing succinct-
ness or readability[Str14]. As an example, move semantics are used extensively
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Tools
29
throughout the implementation, together with several data structures and algo-
rithms introduced in the C++11 standard template library.
Python is used exclusively as a script “glue” that connects between applications
written in C++11, and for performance analysis using the Python Data Analysis
Library pandas.
The project consists of multiple binary executables that performs specialized
tasks corresponding to one or more steps in the pipeline. Each executable is
compiled and linked with MPI support, and must be run through the MPI
runtime.
3.2.2
Scripting
As mentioned, the project consists of a number of smaller binary executables
which are run through the MPI runtime. Each binary takes a number of param-
eters which are either given as command line arguments or through a speciﬁed
settings ﬁle. To ease the user from having to understand and specify settings for
each individual process, much of the input argument handling is taken care of
by intermediary scripts written in Python. These scripting tools are published
alongside the binary executables, and should be used exclusively by the user
rather than the raw binaries.1
3.2.3
Performance Analysis
Scripting through Python is also used for gathering and analyzing performance
data.
Each binary is geared to output extensive performance data such as
execution speeds and memory usage.
This data is output into process-local
performance data ﬁles, and then collected and combined used Python scripts.
For analysis and visualization the Python Data Analysis Library, pandas, is
used. This library provides a framework for dealing with statistical data analysis
much like the R programming language.
1More detailed information can be found in Appendix A.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Mesh Dual & Partitioning
The ﬁrst pipeline step involves taking the complete ﬁnite element mesh and
partition it into smaller partitions.
Partitioning is necessary such as the ﬁ-
nite element meshes used for simulation of physical systems are too large for
individual compute nodes to handle without depleting local memory.
The problem of partitioning a mesh may be reduced to a graph problem. That
is, one may convert the ﬁnite element mesh into an unstructured graph repre-
sentation (see section 2.1.2) and use generalized graph algorithms to perform
the partitioning. The choice of mesh-to-graph reduction scheme is not signiﬁ-
cant at this particular step in the pipeline, as the graph partitioners will be able
to perform regardless of the underlying information in the graph. For example,
one may construct a graph of element-element connectivity, node-node connec-
tivity, or some combination thereof. For the further purpose of constructing a
mesh-element graph (see section 2.1.2.3) it is desirable to have a partition on
an element basis. Therefore, the partitioning library will be provided with the
element-element dual graph as to avoid having to decide which partition some
element belongs to based on a node partition assignment. Figure 2.4 shows an
example of
The size of the interfaces between processes is crucial, as the number of ghost
nodes (see section 2.1.2.3) is directly aﬀected. Reducing the number of ghost
nodes is valuable, as it reduces both memory footprints and communication
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Method
31
overhead for each process in connection with a particular ghost node.
While the actual partitoning process is outside the scope of this project, the
process of generating the element-element dual graph necessary for partitioning
is implemented and described here.
4.0.4
Existing Solutions
Optimizing the partitioning of a graph such that the interface of each parti-
tion is minimized (or fulﬁlls some other objective) is a non-trivial, NP-complete
problem.
There have been an extensive amount of research on the problem
(e.g. [TFF06]), and many publicly available software libraries exists that pro-
vides approximate solutions. Examples are METIS/ParMETIS [KS13], Zoltan
[DBRC09], and Scotch [RHR10]. The METIS/ParMETIS library, which is the
partitioner chosen for this project, is also capable of generating the dual graph
based on the ﬁnite element mesh.
4.1
Method
4.1.1
Finite Element Mesh Input
Initially, sections of the ﬁnite element mesh is read into memory by each pro-
cess. The sections are predetermined based on the element identiﬁers such that
each process receives an identically sized section. This may be considered a
partitioning, albeit a very poor one. This naive partitioning method essentially
randomizes (in the worst case) the element assignment for each process. There-
fore, it should be seen exclusively as a temporary partitioning.
In practice, the ﬁnite element mesh is initially copied to each compute node that
participates in the execution of the application. Once there, the processes reads
the sections which have been assigned to them. The GMSH ﬁle format is used
in this project and it does unfortunately not support random access. Therefore
all processes need to read and seek until the section is found within the ﬁnite
element mesh ﬁle.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Method
32
4.1.2
Node Usage Distribution
At this point, only the element-node connectivity (that is given directly in the
mesh ﬁle) is known by each process. Using a hash-map of sets, it is rather trivial
to convert the known element-node connectivity into node-element connectivity
data. Doing this locally on a sequentially split mesh provides enough informa-
tion to quickly determine the element-element connectivity by linking elements
sharing one or more common nodes. However, it is unknown whether or not an
element is also connected to elements allocated to remote processes.
In order to solve this issue, the node identiﬁers in connection with the elements
of one process may be communicated to the remaining participating process.
By knowing the ﬁngerprint (that is, the node identiﬁers in use by) remote
processes, we may quickly determine whether there is a non-local element-to-
element connection. Naively communicating sets containing all node identiﬁers
in use by a single process would be detrimental to network performance, and
would very quickly deplete available process-local memory. The use of AMQ1
data structures can eﬀectively be used to share ownership information in a
distributed system [TRL12], using only fractions of memory. The node identiﬁer
set
Using an AMQ data structure renders it feasible to all-to-all communicate the
ownership sets between the participating processes. That is, we may insert all
node identiﬁers in use by one process into a single AMQ set, and distribute that
set among other processes. By the properties of such data structures member-
ship queries into the ownership sets of remote processes can be done in minimal
time [BFC12]. In order to deduce which remote processes contain local elements
(i.e. the remote processes that contains elements in connection with locally used
nodes), the ownership sets of the remote processes may simply be queried for
each local node identiﬁer.
That is, for each remote process pr, every local node identiﬁer nj is tested
against the node ownership set O (pr) of pr. If nj is contained in O (pr) then pr
is likely2 to contain an element e which is interfacing some local element.
Alternative
An alternative of this method would be to pre-delegate node
ownership to processes based on node identiﬁers. With a known owner of nodes,
processes could communicate node-element connectivity directly to the owning
1Bloom ﬁlters and other similar data structures are introduced in section 2.2.7.
2AMQ data structres may produce false positives, so this test is not deﬁnitive. The con-
ﬁguration of the chosen data structure may be tweaked to decrease likelihood of false positive
in trade of increased memory footprint and lower query performance.
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Method
33
process without having to determine (in non-constant time) the owners of a
node. Using this method entails that the node-owning process then distributes
the connectivity of each node to processes with elements in connection with that
node. It is certainly feasible to follow this alternative approach, however, the
additional step of communication is almost guaranteed to introduce overhead
greater than using the Bloom-ﬁlter method.
4.1.3
Element Connectivity Distribution
With the knowledge of which remote processes contain neighboring elements
(which can be inferred using the method described above), it is possible to
directly push the local connectivity to the relevant remote processes.
Given
the local node-element connectivity information and a local node n with remote
processes P also known to contain n, the element identiﬁers in connection with
n is sent to all processes within P. The remote processes receives the element
identiﬁers for n and buﬀs the local node-element connectivity with the newly
received data.
If all the connectivity update requests are sent before processes begin receiving
(this is supported through the MPI asynchronous messaging system), there is
no requirement to keep track of local- and non-local node-element connectivity.
Algorithm 4.1 Determining dual elements to construct mesh dual
1: for every element e at process P do
2:
buﬀer ←∅
3:
for every node n in e do
4:
buﬀer ←all elements connected to n
5:
remove duplicates from buﬀer
6:
insert remaining buﬀer elements into dual for e
After the element connectivity distribution process, each process contains com-
plete information about node-element connectivity (inclusive elements contained
by a remote process). With this information the element-element connectivity
may be determined by iteration through the nodes of each element and adding
connected elements to the CSR formatted dual graph (see alg. 4.1). That is,
for each element, all other connected elements are found by checking the node-
element connectivity for each node in the element.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Communication Pattern
34
4.1.4
Graph Partitioning
The dual graph, which is be stored using the CSR format, may now be par-
titioned by any available graph partitioner.
In use for this project is the
ParMETIS graph partitioner, as mentioned previously.
The output of the
graph partitioning is a list of partition assignments that maps each element
to a partition based on some integer identiﬁer.
Figure 4.1 shows the result of the graph partitioning. Here, all the elements
within the Stanford bunny have been assigned some partition. For display pur-
poses the partitions are colored.
(a) Volume edges only
(b) Surface elements only
Figure 4.1: Result of partitioning of Stanford bunny using a K-way algorithm
(8 partitions)
4.2
Communication Pattern
The result of this pipeline step is two crucial components which are used later in
the pipeline. First, the dual of the ﬁnite element mesh is produced (providing
the element-to-element connectivity information).
Secondly, each element is
assigned to some partition that allows for the partitions to be distributed.
The element-process assignment is memory-wise lightweight, given that it only
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Implementation Details
35
requires storage of a single integer per element in the ﬁnite element mesh. While
not insigniﬁcant, we may distribute this information among processes without
expecting any large penalty of network performance3, or one could even share
the information through some shared ﬁle system. However, the dual graph is far
less lightweight and requires careful handling in order to avoid being penalized
for either network communication or ﬁle system access overhead.
Knowing the element-element connectivity greatly simpliﬁes construction of the
ﬁnite element mesh graph described in section 5. Naively distributing the dual
graph through a collect-and-distribute mechanism using the ﬁle system was
found to be extremely ineﬀective to the point where the communication of the
graph greatly overshadowed all other computations.
An intermediate step was put in place. First, the element-process assignment is
collected and shared such that every process is aware of the entire assignment.
Then, using the process-partition allocation also given as input to the ﬁnite el-
ement mesh-graph builder, the portions of the dual graph required to build the
graph is communicated directly to the relevant process. Inserting this interme-
diate step very eﬀectively reduces the portion of time spent communicating the
element-element connectivity and ensures absolute minimum data duplication
(and, in eﬀect, also network communication overhead).
4.3
Implementation Details
4.3.1
Graph Storage
Storing graphs is a signiﬁcant part of this entire implementation. The element-
element connectivity data can eﬀectively be considered a bidirectional ﬁnite
graph of considerable size, depending on the degree of inter-connectivity between
elements. Therefore is it greatly important to consider the manner in which the
graph is put in memory.
At a high level we may consider two approaches: the adjacency matrix and
the adjacency list (both approaches are described in detail in [KT05]).
At
a glimpse we can quickly discard the adjacency matrix as the dimensionality
would explode given the large number of elements expected to be in a ﬁnite
element mesh intended for physical simulations. It is clear that the approach
3An element-process assignment for a ﬁnite element mesh of 1mil elements is just 4Mb
assuming 32-bit integers.
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Implementation Details
36
that must be taken is using adjacency lists. That is, for each graph node some
list of adjacent nodes must be stored.
Now, delving into implementation details, it must be considered how to do
memory allocation and access for these adjacency lists. One immediate and
perhaps naive approach would be to allocate a dynamically sized array (f.x. a
std::vector using the C++ Standard Template Library (STL)) for each graph
node. Depending on the size of the adjacency list, this may be an appropriate
implementation, but one should be aware that allocating many smaller pieces
of memory may be detrimental to cache performance [Alb09].
A discussion
how to eﬃciently store a great number of dynamically sized lists can be found
in section 5.5.1 on page 54.
In the case of a statically sized graph, such as
the element-element graph after construction, eﬃcient storage is much simpler.
For example, we may store adjacent graph node identiﬁers in a single block of
memory A, and have another block of memory containing start and end indices
within A.
4.3.2
Eﬃcient Repeated Bloom-Filter Queries
In the scheme of using distributed Bloom ﬁlters to determine which processes
contains certain nodes (section 4.1.2), the same queries will be performed for
each Bloom ﬁlter representing a single or group of process.
In section 2.2.7
(on the subject of Bloom ﬁlters and their implementation) we’ve seen that a
single membership query requires a number of hash-operations to be performed.
The hashed values are checked against the bit-arrays of the Bloom ﬁlters and
immediately discarded.
In order to reduce the number of hash-operations performed, we may instead
pre-compute the look-up indices and store them in separate buﬀers. One should
note the signiﬁcant memory overhead entailed by this operation. Given n re-
mote processes, m local nodes identiﬁers, and k hash functions, one would need
to allocate buﬀers (and compute) for m × k hashed values. Without precompu-
tation, no additional buﬀer space is required, but one would necessarily have to
hash n × m identiﬁers with each of the k hash functions.
4.3.3
Message Packing
MPI is based on a message-passing scheme where communication is reduced to
passing binary blobs of data between processes. Each message being passed
between processes incurs some overhead on both involved processes and the
==PAGE:46==
4.4 MPI/OpenMP Hybrid
37
network as well. It is therefore import to group smaller message into fewer, larger
messages ([SS06]). Doing do will decrease the overhead of passing messages, and
therefore increase the overall performance of the system.
Multiple libraries exists to assist in optimizing MPI processes (e.g. AUTOPACK
for message packing [[Loy00]], and Boost.MPI for datatype optimizations [[GT14]]).
In the case of this particular implementation, a simpler approach has been taken.
Here, buﬀer vectors are initialized locally (one per destination), then ﬁlled up
with messages, and ﬁnally the entire buﬀer is communicated. This also provides
a much simpler design, as the expected number of messages are more easily de-
termined (however, the messages sizes become unknown). Using this approach
eﬃciently minimizes the overhead in the communications network.
4.4
MPI/OpenMP Hybrid
As the results in section 4.5.1.1 indicates, the method of using a Bloom ﬁlter
ﬁngerprint for each process is not feasible as the number of participating pro-
cesses grows. This does not come as a surprise, as a large number of checks (i.e.
one per mesh node) needs to be done for each remote process.
By using an MPI/OpenMP hybrid solution (as mentioned in section 2.2.4) it
is possible to signicantly reduce the number of processes while maintaining the
same number of active threads. Therefore the same amount of processing cores
remain active, however since fewer processes are in play, fewer Bloom ﬁlter
ﬁngerprints needs to be maintained. As a consequence the ﬁngerprints do get
larger in order to maintain the false positive probability.
The section of the application which are run in parallel using OpenMP is the
ﬁngerprint-checking mechanism.
This section was chosen for parallelization
based on the performance results gained via the pure MPI implementation.
4.5
Results & Discussions
The implementation of the element-element dual graph generator has been
tested in terms of scalability against an existing implementation within the
ParMETIS library, ParMETIS_V3_Mesh2Dual. In order to determine the scala-
bility of the two systems, both have been deployed on the DTU TopOpt Cluster
consisting of 25 HP SL390s nodes each equipped with 2 x 6 core Intel Xeon
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Results & Discussions
38
Figure 4.2: Element-element dual graph generator versus ParMETIS reference
implementation, speedup
5660 CPUs, 48GB RAM and a QDR Inﬁniband interconnect. Together with
the element-element dual graph generator, the performance of the partitioner
is also measured. For each application, the partitioner is asked to construct 16
partitions regardless of the number of participating processes.
4.5.1
Fixed Workload
In the ﬁrst set of performance measurements, the workload size has been ﬁxed
while the number of processes is increased. A single ﬁnite element mesh have
been used which is that of a cube meshed to contain roughly 50,000,000 (50mil)
elements. The mesh consists solely of hexahedra and quadrangles. All measured
data is the average of at least 8 runs. A copy of the ﬁnite element mesh is placed
on each compute node before the proﬁling is run.
4.5.1.1
MPI Only
Figure 4.2 shows the scalability of the system for a ﬁxed sized ﬁnite element
mesh, with an increasing number of participating processes. Note that the pro-
cesses are mapped by node (see section 2.2.2.1), meaning that the processes are
mapped to each machine in a round-robin fashion.
The implementation de-
scribed in this paper as the custom implementation. Also included in the ﬁgure
==PAGE:48==
4.5 Results & Discussions
39
Figure 4.3: Breakdown of the custom implementation into principal compo-
nents
is the scalability of the graph partitioner, ParMETIS_V3_PartKway , and the sum
scalability of element-element dual graph generator and graph partitioner.
It is immediately obvious that the scalability of the system is far from ideal, and
is in fact decreasing as more processes are added over a certain point. In order to
determine the bottlenecks the application has been broken down into principal
components as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3. The major bottleneck is immediately
identiﬁed as the Bloom ﬁlter distribution, which covers Bloom ﬁlter ﬁngerprint
construction for each process and distribution of ﬁngerprints. Also included is
the time spent determining processes with ghost elements and building MPI
requests. This part of the application becomes dominant as the number of pro-
cesses is increased. Even though the Bloom ﬁlters are limited in size, there are
still an extensive number of checks being made against each remote ﬁngerprint.
Any attempt to optimize on the application should be focused on this point.
The remaining components seem to be scaling well, as would be expected.
In terms of wall-clock time spent for both implementations, a comparison can be
found in ﬁgure 4.4. Despite the poor scaling behavior, the novel implementation
does outperform the implementation found in ParMETIS up to a certain point.
One should note the time spent in disk I/O where the ﬁnite element mesh is
read from disk. This portion quickly becomes signiﬁcant, and does overshadow
the time actually computing the dual graph. It comes as an unsurprising fact,
as in this implementation, many processes are seeking from the same ﬁle on the
same physical disk. With up to 12 processes seeking from the same ﬁle, some
major overhead would be expected.
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Results & Discussions
40
Figure 4.4: Element-element dual graph generator versus ParMETIS reference
implementation, measured performance
Components
Node to elements Converting the initial element-node graph given via GMSH
into a node-element data structure.
This is done using vectors within
hashmaps.
Bloom ﬁlter construction Building the Bloom ﬁlter ﬁngerprint for each pro-
cess and distribution of ﬁngerprints. Also included is the time spent de-
termining processes with ghost elements and building MPI requests.
Element communication This component consists solely of MPI communi-
cation of the requests built previously.
Dual graph construction Here the requests are used to update the local
node-element connectivity. After that, the element-element graph is con-
structed by ﬁnding neighbors within the local node-element connectivity.
4.5.1.2
MPI/OpenMP Hybrid Mode
Here the hybrid MPI/OpenMP mode has been enabled and all test run once
more with a certain number of OpenMP threads per MPI process. The size of
the ﬁnite element mesh remains ﬁxed. In the previous section, it was identiﬁed
that a major bottleneck of the system could be found within the construction,
distribution and checking against a large number of Bloom ﬁlters. By using
==PAGE:50==
4.5 Results & Discussions
41
Figure 4.5: Element-element dual graph generator versus ParMETIS reference
implementation, speedup, MPI/OpenMP
a shared memory structure one may signiﬁcantly reduce the number of Bloom
ﬁlters at the cost of slighter larger ﬁlter size. In ﬁgure 4.5 we see the speedup
as more processes are added to the system. Every MPI process executes 12
OpenMP threads which are kept awake during the entire simulation using the
OMP_WAIT_POLICY directive. By mapping the MPI processes in a round-robin
fashion per node, it is ensured that all cores within the participating compute
nodes are fully utilized, while no two processes are placed on the same machine.
One should note that the number of active threads is determined by multiplying
the number of processes by the number of OpenMP threads, which is this case
is 12.
The scalability of the system is greatly increased while in the hybrid MPI-
OpenMP mode. Unlike the results found in ﬁgure 4.2, the scalability is ap-
proximately linear, although at a low factor. By using OpenMP, the number of
remote Bloom ﬁlter ﬁngerprints is greatly reduced. Also, the membership tests
are now done in parallel by the OpenMP threads.
Figure 4.6 conﬁrms the fact that the time spent working with the Bloom ﬁl-
ter ﬁngerprints is indeed decreased, and remains largely constant when adding
processors. Instead, more time is spent building the actual dual graph. As this
component is implemented as a serial process, this is expected. That is, while
the graph is built by a single thread, the other threads remain idle. The node-
to-elements component and communication component are also serial. These
components are implemented as serial, non-parallel, methods because they all
involve updating a single data structure. Parallelizing the update of a single
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Results & Discussions
42
Figure 4.6: Element-element dual graph generator versus ParMETIS reference
implementation, component breakdown, MPI/OpenMP
data structure would require a signiﬁcant amount of data access management
(e.g. by the use of mutexes), that would slow the algorithm signiﬁcantly.
In ﬁgure 4.7 the wall-clock time spent in the two methods is measured. Also,
the time reading the ﬁnite element mesh is included as disk I/O. The time spent
in the custom implementation is signiﬁcantly lower than the time spent in the
METIS/ParMETIS implementation, indicating the the custom implementation
performs better.
It is interesting to notice that the time spent in disk I/O
remains largely constant. One might expect that the time spent for disk I/O
would decrease, as smaller portions of the ﬁnite element mesh ﬁle is read as
the number of processes is increased. The fact that disk I/O remains constant
might suggest that by reading the ﬁnite element mesh, the operating system
of the compute nodes is able to pre-load and buﬀer sections of the mesh ﬁle.
While reading, the processes do perform many small reads in order to locate the
allocated section of the mesh. Even so, the reads are all progressing forwards,
meaning that new sections of the ﬁle is likely already buﬀered.
4.5.2
Partition Optimizations
The element-element graph which will be produced may be partitioned in a
number of ways depending on the objective and algorithm in use by the par-
titioner. In the case of partitioning the mesh for the purpose of building local
mesh graphs that together form a global mesh representation, the objective
==PAGE:52==
4.5 Results & Discussions
43
Figure 4.7: Element-element dual graph generator versus ParMETIS reference
implementation, actual measurements, MPI/OpenMP
should be to minimize the interface between any two partitions.
Here we will deﬁne the minimum interface as the interface where the number
of shared mesh nodes between any two partitions is minimized. This deﬁnition
disregards the physical properties of the mesh. That is, the physical coordinates
of the mesh nodes is disregarded, which could otherwise be used to determine
the physical span of the interface between meshes. This information may be of
some use for certain simulations, but in this pipeline information this particular
data set is ignored.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Distributed Mesh Graph
At this point in the pipeline, the element-element dual graph (an example is
shown in ﬁgure 2.4 on page 9) has been constructed, and some assignment of
partitions has been set for each element in the ﬁnite element mesh. Figure 5.1
show a conﬁguration of 5 partitions over the mesh in ﬁgure 2.3. Here, elements
are all assigned some process.
Between the elements are indicated partition
element connections via dotted lines.
With this information at hand, in addition to the ﬁnite mesh itself, the mesh
graph can be constructed. Similarly to the previous pipeline step part of the
problem is ﬁrst solved locally (i.e.
building the local graph) and then glob-
ally by communicating between neighboring (in terms of partition assignment)
processes. The steps are described in detail below.
5.1
Local Construction
5.1.1
Setup
The parallel graph construction mechanism resides within a separate applica-
tion. As input is given the partition-element assignment as provided by the
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Local Construction
45
Figure 5.1: Simple bunny mesh partitioned into 5 parts
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Local Construction
46
graph partitioner (see section 4.1.4), the ﬁnite element mesh and element-
element dual graph, and ﬁnally a partition-process assignment dictating the
ownership of graph partitions to processes. As an optimization the partition-
process assignment is only read by the master MPI process and hence distributed
via MPI operations.
With the local partition IDs known, each process initially reads the adjacency
list of the mesh elements which have been assigned to the local partitions. The
adjacency list is stated in the element-element dual graph and provides the list
of elements which are adjacent to one mesh element. The local elements are
pooled with the adjacent elements and used to identify which elements needs to
be read from the ﬁnite element mesh ﬁle.
After the elements have been read, each process is aware of all non-generated
elements which will be present as node in the local mesh graph, including those
nodes which will serve as ghost nodes (i.e. all elements of process-local partitions
and their immediate neighbors). With each element the partition is also known.
This set of elements in addition to the partition assignment is used to construct
the local mesh graph.
5.1.2
Construction Queue
To begin with the graph is constructed locally on each participating process.
This is done via ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out queue-based approach where graph nodes are
built from the top-most level (element level) down to the bottom-level which
corresponds to element nodes. In between the outer layers are the nodes repre-
senting sides and edges (see section 2.1.2.3 for details).
The node construction queue is initially ﬁlled with mesh elements (i.e. elements,
sides, edges and nodes) given from the setup process. Elements of higher order
are inserted ﬁrst, such that top-most graph nodes are created ﬁrst. Five distinct
attributes are recorded for each object inserted into the construction queue:
partition ID, element ID, parent graph node ID, element type (i.g. triangle,
quad, tetrahedron) and ﬁnally the set of mesh nodes that constitutes the object
(see ﬁgure 5.2). The size of this set is variant depending on the object type
(e.g. 3, 4, and 8 for triangles, quads, and hexahedra, respectively) but is ﬁxed
at compile time to simplify memory management at the cost of a small memory
overhead. Some invalid ID (e.g. −1) is used for the parent graph node ID as
the initial nodes represents the top-level nodes of the graph.
After the initial insertion of ﬁnite element mesh objects into the queue a rel-
atively simple scheme is run on the non-empty construction queue. Once the
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Local Construction
47
Figure 5.2: Overview of the construction node struct
queue empties, the algorithm stops and the local graph is complete.
5.1.3
Algorithm
Algorithm 5.1 Local construction phase
1: Q ←initial construction objects
2: while Q is not empty do
3:
q = (prnt,part,elm,typ,N) ←head(Q)
4:
if x ←m(N, typ) ̸= nil then
5:
add prnt as parent to x
6:
else
7:
construct x from q
8:
add subelements of x to Q
9:
m(N, typ) ←x
The algorithm which constructs the local graph is run recursively until the
construction queue is empty. While running the algorithm may push objects
onto the queue until the algorithm ﬁnds that the graph is complete.
In the construction phase all graph nodes are uniquely identiﬁed via the con-
stituent mesh nodes, and the element type. That is, some mapping exists be-
tween constituent mesh nodes, the element type to the graph node (i.e. a map
function m (N, typ) →x, where m is the mapping function, N is the set of
constituent nodes, typ is the element type and x is some graph node identiﬁer).
For quick indexing the construction nodes are also given a hash value based on
the constituent nodes. As an example, a graph node based on the mesh element
with 4 nodes N = {n1, n2, n3, n4} (perhaps a quadrangle) is given the hash
value:
X = h (n1) ⊕h (n2) ⊕h (n3) ⊕h (n4)
(5.1)
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Local Construction
48
, where h (x) is some non-cryptographic hash function and ⊕is some hash-
combine function. Given that we can not guarantee collision free hashes, the
hashes may only be used for indexing and not for checking uniqueness. That is,
the entire set N must be stored alongside the construction object and can not
be replaced solely by X.
Until the construction queue is empty the head object of the queue is extracted.
We may rewrite the construction object into a 5-tuple of ﬁelds:
q = (prnt, part, elm, typ, N)
(5.2)
Now it is checked whether a graph node with the same set of constituent nodes
has already been constructed by checking if there is a mapping m (N, typ) which
is not invalid. If there is such a mapping, the parent node recorded in q is added
as a parent to the already constructed graph node. If not, a new graph node is
constructed of the attributes of q and recorded in the mapping m.
5.1.3.1
Subelement Construction
The subelements of the element in q are added to the construction queue. For
example, in the case of a hexahedron, 6 quadrangle subelement construction
objects are added to the construction queue. Each subelement object now con-
tains a selection of nodes from N of which the order is highly signiﬁcant. The
selection ordering is derived from the native ordering of GMSH. As an example,
given a quadrangle with nodes N = {n1, n2, n3, n4}, 4 subelement lines must be
added with the nodes:
N1
=
{n1, n2}
(5.3)
N2
=
{n2, n3}
N3
=
{n3, n4}
N4
=
{n4, n1}
For a hexahedron with nodes N = {n1, n2, n3, n4, n5, n6} we shall instead add
6 subelement quadrangles:
==PAGE:58==
5.1 Local Construction
49
N1
=
{n1, n5, n8, n4}
(5.4)
N2
=
{n5, n6, n7, n8}
N3
=
{n1, n2, n3, n4}
N4
=
{n4, n8, n7, n3}
N5
=
{n6, n2, n6, n2}
N6
=
{n1, n2, n6, n5}
With a closer inspection one will ﬁnd that this ordering is an exact imitation of
the native GMSH ordering.
5.1.3.2
Artiﬁcial Nodes
By the term artiﬁcial nodes is meant the nodes which are not explicitly given
in the ﬁnite element mesh but must be constructed on the basis of the existing
elements.
For example, one may specify only tetrahedral elements as input
which means that all triangle sides, lines and nodes must be constructed as
artiﬁcial nodes. On the other hand, another may instead deﬁne all 3-dimensional
elements and lines. In this situation, the entire set of sides must be added as
artiﬁcial nodes but not the lines (which should stay non-artiﬁcial). Artiﬁcial
nodes do not carry an element ID as they are not referring to elements which
exist in the ﬁnite element mesh ﬁle.
The ﬁrst-in ﬁrst-out queue mechanism
eﬀectively avoids adding artiﬁcial nodes in places where the user has already
explicitly deﬁned elements. A stack-based or recursive approach could also have
been used. In this case, one would have to carefully mark non-artiﬁcial nodes
as they are being discovered.
Figure 5.3 shows a situation where it is necessary to construct artiﬁcial nodes.
Here the element IDs for the nodes and sides are given (in ﬁg. 5.3a), however
the IDs for the edges are unknown or not speciﬁed. Therefore the edges must
be represented by artiﬁcially constructed nodes, which are shown with a gray
background in the graph in ﬁgure 5.3b.
5.1.3.3
Finalizing
As the construction queue empties the bottom-most node elements are con-
structed. These bottom-most elements will all be non-artiﬁcial as all nodes are
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Ghost Nodes
50
(a) Simple 2D ﬁnite element mesh
(b) Corresponding mesh graph
Figure 5.3: Graph representation of simple 2D ﬁnite element mesh (identical
to ﬁgure 2.5)
Figure 5.4: Ghost elements for partitions 0, 1 and 4 in ﬁgure 5.1. Note how
elements are included even for connections via a single mesh node
explicitly deﬁned in the GMSH ﬁle format. By recording child-parent connec-
tivity on the graph nodes the graph becomes connected. As a ﬁnalizing step
the reverse graph is built by traversing child-parent connections and adding
the children to each of the parents. This ensures that traversal will be highly
eﬃcient during the matrix assembly process.
5.2
Ghost Nodes
A considerable amount of graph nodes will be shared among multiple processes.
This is caused by having neighboring mesh elements split onto multiple processes
==PAGE:60==
5.2 Ghost Nodes
51
Algorithm 5.2 Determining ownership and locality
1: for every graph node n in graph G do
2:
if n is generated/artiﬁcial then
3:
owner(n) ←min(construction_partitions(n))
4:
else
5:
elm ←element_of(n)
6:
owner(n) ←assigned_partitions(elm)
7:
local(n) ←true if owner(n) ∈local_partitions else false
causing elements to appear on more than one process. Figure 5.4 displays such
a scenario. Here, all elements from partition 1 are also part of the ghost node
set for partition 0, as all the elements of partition 1 is part of the dual for the
elements in partition 0.
All nodes in the graph must be uniquely assignable and it is therefore necessary
to introduce the concept of ownership. That is, a process will take ownership
of nodes based on certain criteria. Graph nodes residing on a processes that do
not own the nodes will denoted as ghost nodes.
Ownership of nodes of elements explicitly deﬁned in the input ﬁnite element
mesh ﬁle (i.e. non-artiﬁcial nodes) is immediately given by the partitioning of
the graph. That is, elements that are explicitly assigned to one process will never
be marked as a ghost node in that partition. However, determining ownership
of artiﬁcial nodes is not trivial. In order to determine the ownership of artiﬁcial
nodes, additional information is recorded during the construction phase. As
graph nodes are built and updated, all unique partitions in relation to some
graph node is stored, similarly to how parent nodes are recorded. For example,
if a construction node q belonging to partition p1 has already been built into
graph node x, then p1 will be stored as a partition for x.
In a separate process, after the graph has been fully constructed, the ownership
of an artiﬁcial graph node is determined as the integer minimum of the partition
set (see alg. 5.2). If the node is non-artiﬁcial, the owner is set to the partition
given by the graph partitioner. It is also at this point where nodes are mark
local or remote. This is done trivially by comparing the partition which has
been used to determine the owner to the partitions assigned to that particular
process. If the process is assigned that partition, the node is marked as local.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Global Unique Indexing
52
5.3
Global Unique Indexing
Each node in the global graph must be uniquely identiﬁable, such that one
may later refer to individual nodes from remote processes. At this point, graph
nodes are identiﬁable by the mesh element identiﬁers which have been used to
construct the graph node. This is rather inconvenient, both in terms of usage
and because of the additional storage required. Therefore each graph node is
assigned globally unique index of some integer type, which is then communicated
to remote processes containing that particular node. The scheme of assigning
globally unique indices consists of three separate steps.
First, every participating process assigns locally unique indices to each node
which has been marked as local. The local indices ascending, consecutive inte-
gers starting from 0. Non-local nodes (i.e. ghost nodes) are temporarily assigned
some invalid index (f.x. −1).
Secondly, the ﬁnal local index (which is conveniently identical to amount of local
nodes) is scattered to all remote processes, such that each individual process is
made aware of the number of local nodes contained by all other remote pro-
cesses. Each local node index is positively shifted by the amount of local nodes
contained by lesser-ranking processes (see ﬁgure 5.5). After this operation, all
process-local nodes will have some globally unique index.
Thirdly, the local indices are communicated to the neighboring remote processes
which will contain ghost nodes referring to local nodes. As done in the local
graph construction phase, the nodes are temporarily identiﬁable by the con-
struction element identiﬁers. These identiﬁers are sent together with the global
index, such that a receiving process may look up the ghost node and assign
the received global index. This step completes the process of assigning global
indices.
5.4
Serialization
Computation is often halted in the midst of solving the ﬁnite element equation
system for various reasons. For example, a job scheduler in a cluster may only
allow certain time slot sizes thus requiring that the processes are restarted once
the time slot runs out. In these cases it is highly desirable that the graph is
easily rebuilt. This is achievable by serialization of the graph and writing it to
the ﬁle system of the compute nodes.
==PAGE:62==
5.4 Serialization
53
(a) Before shifting
(b) After shifting
Figure 5.5: Process of determining global identiﬁers.
Local identiﬁers are
shifted by the number of nodes residing on remote processes of
lesser rank
==PAGE:63==
5.5 Physical Fields
54
As described in section 2.1.3.1, graphs may be represented in a format consisting
of a number of arrays of simple data types. The element-element dual graph is
stored using this format, and so is the mesh graph built in this pipeline step.
Therefore serialization is straight-forward and is implemented by concatenating
the graph storage arrays into bit-strings that may be written to the disk. This
process, and its reverse (deserialization), can be done very eﬃciently.
5.5
Physical Fields
In order to perform the matrix assembly, each node in the distributed mesh
graph is assigned a number degrees of freedom for each physical ﬁeld to which
the node belongs. These degrees of freedom (DOFs) are tagged by a unique
index chosen by the user, and can be meant for any physical property such as
temperature, displacement, pressure etc.
The DOFs are easily stored alongside the actual nodes as tuples of at least the
DOF tag and physical ﬁeld. More importantly, each tuple must be assigned a
globally (i.e. across all participating processes) unique identiﬁer, much in the
same way as the nodes of the mesh graph.
5.5.1
Storage
The storage of DOFs and physical ﬁelds is not insigniﬁcant, as the graph size
per process can be expected to grow rapidly in size even for simple meshes. It is
therefore important to consider the memory layout and implementation of the
data structure that eventually contains the DOFS. In this section two distinct
methods are described.
The problem that needs to be considered is that each node in the graph (of
which there is a considerable amount) each contains a relatively small number
(in the order of 10s) of DOF-ﬁeld tuples. At any time before invoking the matrix
assembly process, the user should be able to add a number of DOF-ﬁeld tuples
to a selection of nodes.
5.5.1.1
Vector of Vectors
A straight-forward design for storing a variable number of elements for a variable
number of objects is an array-of-array data structure. Going by the terminology
==PAGE:64==
5.5 Physical Fields
55
Figure 5.6: Overview of the pooled linked lists data structure.
of the C++ standard template library, the term vector-of-vectors will be used
to refer to a data structure containing variably sized arrays within a variably
sized array.
Vectors within the C++ standard template library are implemented to auto-
matically allocate memory as required. The developer may conﬁgure the vector
instance to defer allocation to some user-deﬁned memory allocators (e.g. pool
allocators), however, by default the allocation will be left to the operating sys-
tem via the new-allocator. This may lead to heavy memory fragmentation as the
vectors are resized. It is therefore expected that some performance boost will
be achievable by reducing the number of allocations and memory fragmentation
via the use of another data structure.
5.5.1.2
Pooled Linked Lists
By storing vectors inside vectors memory allocation control is left entirely to
the operating system. In some circumstances this might result in fragmented
memory resulting in bad cache performance. Given that the number of tuples
to be stored is fairly small, having a large amount of small allocations spread
throughout memory could prove to be a signiﬁcant bottleneck in the system. By
using another approach some of this overhead in poor cache performance might
be mitigated. Linked lists are often seen as poor performing data structures
on modern architectures, as the fragmentation of data is fairly poor. Elements
that should ideally be spatially close in memory is instead spread over large
distances.
==PAGE:65==
5.6 Results & Discussion
56
Instead of using a single linked list, the pooled linked lists data structure stores
multiple linked lists within the same block of memory. Each linked list have a
separate head-pointer into the collective pool of linked lists. Inside the memory
block is pairs of next-oﬀset pointers and data.
An overview is provided in
ﬁgure 5.6.
Here three linked lists are pooled into the same data structure.
One linked list is empty, which is indicated by the fact that the head-pointer
is non-existent.
Elements are inserted by appending pointer-data pairs into
the collective memory block and updating the appropriate next-pointers. The
memory block may need to be resized which would most appropriately be done
using the doubling-over scheme used in many vector implementations. Ideally
this data structure should improve cache performance if elements are inserted
right after one another. In this way, the data will be spatially close except for
the added pointer.
Thread Safety
One signiﬁcant beneﬁt of using pooled linked lists versus
vectors of vectors is the added ease of multi-processing support. By using the
pooled linked lists, one may have multiple threads working on an instance of
the data structure with only very little overhead. When one thread is inserting
an element into a sublist, it only needs to lock the structure while moving
data into the sublist, and for updating the next-pointer of the head of the
sublist. This means that a single locking mechanism may be used for the entire
instance. Seeing that the insertion operation is simple and very fast (except
when a new, larger data segment needs to be allocated for the instance), it
would be appropriate to use some atomic spin-locking mechanism.
Thread safety for the vector-of-vectors data structure is not trivially imple-
mented, as one would have to be able to lock every sublist within the data
instance. On the other hand, this may allow two threads to insert elements into
the data structure if the elements are inserted into separate sublists.
5.6
Results & Discussion
5.6.1
Distributed Mesh Graph
In ﬁgure 5.7 a complete graph is built over a very simple mesh of few elements
(ﬁgure 5.7a). One should immediately notice the three-dimensional structure
which stems from the original mesh. Another immediately obvious fact is that
the graph node count is increased considerably. In the graph only non-artiﬁcial
nodes are labeled with an element ID.
==PAGE:66==
5.6 Results & Discussion
57
(a) Simple hexahedral mesh of 34 elements and 27 nodes
0
1
3
1
2
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
5
8
12
11
10
4
6
9
7
16
17
15
13
14
18
20
21
19
23
24
22
25
26
27
(b) Single partition mesh graph for simple mesh (ﬁgure 5.7a) with 124 graph nodes.
Node
shapes are 3D boxes, quadrangles, double-cirles and circles for hexahedra, quadrangles,
lines and node elements, respectively
Figure 5.7: Single partition example graph
==PAGE:67==
5.6 Results & Discussion
58
1
3
2
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
5
8
12
11
10
4
6
9
7
16
17
15
13
14
1
18
20
21
19
23
24
22
25
26
27
Figure 5.8: 2-partition mesh graph for simple mesh (ﬁgure 5.7a). Node shapes
are 3D boxes, quadrangles, double-cirles and circles for hexahedra,
quadrangles, lines and node elements, respectively
The result of the locality test is shown in ﬁgure 5.8. Nodes which have been
marked non-local are shown in a grey color, while the rest of the graph is identical
to the one in ﬁgure 5.7b.
5.6.2
Pooled Linked Lists
All performance measurement binaries have been compiled using gcc version
4.9.1 (Ubuntu 4.9.1-16ubuntu6) with ﬂags -O2 -DNDEBUG -std=c++11, on
a desktop computer housing an Intel® CoreTM i7-4790K CPU @ 4.00GHz with
an L3 cache size of 8192 KB.
First we will look at the performance of inserting elements into the pooled linked
lists data structure versus inserting elements into vector of vectors. Two types
of insertion tests have been made; one where elements are inserted immediately
==PAGE:68==
5.6 Results & Discussion
59
after one another into the same lists, and one where elements are inserted into
arbitrarily chosen lists until all sublists contains an identical number of elements.
The data that is inserted into the data structures are pairs of two elements,
implemented as a struct of two 4-byte integers. In the case of the pooled linked
lists, an 8-byte integer is used for the next-pointer, thus making the total element
size 2 × 4 + 8 = 16 byte, or 128 bit.
5.6.2.1
Linear Insertion
Testing has been done by iterating through the outer-most lists and inserting a
number of elements immediately after one another. Figure 5.9 shows the results
of the measurements that have been made. In ﬁgure 5.9a the number of outer
lists is shown on the ﬁrst axis. That is, how many linked list or vector sublists
are created while averaging measurements over size of the sublists.
The results give an indication that the novel data structure perform insertions
in a more eﬃcient way than by using a vector of vectors. This is not surprising,
if one looks at the number of memory allocations being made.
When using
vectors, several allocations need to be made as the sublists grow. For example,
inserting elements into a sublist will cause an allocation of a memory containing
1 data object, then 2, 4, 8 and so forth (this is due to the doubling behavior
of the C++ std::vector implementation, giving an amortized constant time
complexity for insertions). Much fewer allocations need to be made using the
novel data structure, as the allocations are based on the total number of elements
being inserted. When combined with the doubling behavior of a vector (which
is used to contain the linked lists), far fewer allocations are made.
This behavior is conﬁrmed in ﬁgure 5.9b where the sublist size is given on the
ﬁrst axis. The pooled linked lists show a roughly linear time complexity which
is as expected as the amortized time complexity for inserting elements into a
vector is also linear.
In the case of vector of vectors, the behavior features
plateaus which is also expected. As mentioned earlier, memory for 1, 2, 4, 8,
etc. elements is allocated. Thus, once enough space has been allocated, the time
complexity is constant. If the sublists sizes had been larger, one might ﬁnd that
the vector of vectors eventually performs faster. However, these data structures
are implemented for the sake of adding degrees of freedom to the ﬁnite element
nodes. Here, it would not be expected that large amounts of degrees of freedom
are added to a single node.
==PAGE:69==
5.6 Results & Discussion
60
(a) By number of lists
(b) By number of elements (sublist size)
(c) Combination
Figure 5.9: Linear insertion
==PAGE:70==
5.6 Results & Discussion
61
5.6.2.2
Random Insertion
While the elements were inserted linearly in the previous section, here the ele-
ments are inserted arbitrarily. That is, the data structures are ﬁlled by arbitrar-
ily picking a sublist, inserting an element, and repeating until an equal amount
of elements have been inserted into all lists. The results are shown in ﬁgure
5.10, following the same structure as in the previous section.
First a comparison is made on the ground of the number of sublists.
The
performance behavior is largely equivalent to that of the linear insertion, yet
the two data structures perform signiﬁcantly worse when accessed non-linearly.
A similar observation may be made for ﬁgure 5.10b. Here the same plateau-
behavior is displayed, yet not as clear as in the previous scenario. It is assumed
that the diﬀerence in scaling behaviors stems from a lesser degree of certainty
(i.e. noise) in the data, as the operation sequence is now arbitrary.
In general, one should note the signiﬁcant performance decrease in all methods
when compared to the linear insertion in ﬁgure 5.9. This is explained simply by
the poor usage of the caching system described in section 2.2.5. As sublists are
chosen arbitrarily, it is unlikely that the memory sections worked on are ever
found in the cache, causing a cache miss. Cache misses are incredibly expensive
[Alb09], requiring a magnitude more CPU cycles to resolve than if the items
were already cached. When cache misses occurs, data must be fetched all the
way from the main memory which operates much slower than what the CPU is
capable of.
5.6.2.3
Linear Update
In the second set of tests, elements with the data structures have all been up-
dated with some basic arithmetic assignment operations (an integer addition and
multiplication, to be exact). With a signiﬁcant margin, the novel data struc-
ture unfortunately performs worse than the vector-of-vectors data structure, as
shown in ﬁgure 5.11.
As the number of sublists increase, a sharp increase in time spent per operation
is observed. This behavior is not entirely unexpected, as the cache system is
tailored for this scenario. By using vector-of-vectors, the entire sublist may be
cached on the ﬁrst fetch in the list, and hence updated. Using pooled linked
lists, the sublist may also be cached, but seeing as the data is intertwined with
the next-pointers, the elements are not trivially updated. Figure 5.11b serves
to prove this observation. Here, the execution thread is able to quickly update
==PAGE:71==
5.6 Results & Discussion
62
(a) By number of lists
(b) By number of elements (sublist size)
(c) Combination
Figure 5.10: Random insertion
==PAGE:72==
5.6 Results & Discussion
63
(a) By number of lists
(b) By number of elements (sublist size)
(c) Combination
Figure 5.11: Linear update
==PAGE:73==
5.6 Results & Discussion
64
already-cached elements regardless of the number of elements (up to some limit,
it is assumed), while the updates to the pooled linked lists are strictly linear
in time complexity, due to the fact that the next-pointer needs to be read and
used for each update. Note that while the near-constant behavior of the vector-
of-vectors could indicate usage of SIMD (e.g.
SSE or AVX) operations, the
-O2 compile ﬂag does not allow for such optimization. Also, in that case, some
diﬀerence between sublist sizes ﬁtting within an 16 byte vector register and those
larger, would be observable.
It is crucial to note the scale of time used on the second axis. These opera-
tions are extremely quick and well-performing compared to the other insertion
scenario. The update operations, where no new memory allocations are being
made, operates in the order of 100× faster than the insertion operations. It
could therefore be argued that while the novel pooled linked lists data structure
performs worse than the common vector -of -vectors implementation, the actual
time spent doing any of these operations is not truly signiﬁcant.
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
In this project, multiple data structures and algorithms intended for supporting
the parallelization of the solution of partial diﬀerential equations using the ﬁnite
element method have been investigated and implemented. Solutions to partial
diﬀerential equations using FEM are used within the simulation of physical sys-
tems, which in turn plays a signiﬁcant role in the ﬁeld of topological optimiza-
tion. Some data structures and algorithms were implemented into a pipeline
of applications, transforming a discretized problem domain, in the form a ﬁnite
element mesh, into a distributed mesh graph. The applications of the pipeline
are implemented with MPI and OpenMP, thus enabling simultaneous execution
on distributed compute nodes within cluster-based supercomputers.
All nodes of the distributed mesh graph may each be assigned a number of tags
corresponding to degrees of freedom of the nodes in the ﬁnite element mesh. By
allowing the users to navigate the nodes of the mesh graph, they may construct
the stiﬀness matrix used in the ﬁnite element method.
In order construct the mesh graph, the mesh dual is ﬁrst computed with the
assistance of distributed Bloom ﬁlter ﬁngerprints. The mesh dual, in a DCSR
graph format, is then partitioned using a graph partitioning application. The
custom mesh dual generator application and algorithms described in this report
was found to perform faster, yet with a poorer ﬁxed workload scalability, than
an existing implementation found in the METIS/ParMETIS library. This was
==PAGE:75==
66
determined by proﬁling the custom implementation on the HPC TopOpt cluster
at DTU Campus, Kgs. Lyngby.
In a separate application, the ﬁnite element mesh and the corresponding mesh
dual is combined to construct and distribute the mesh graph. The implementa-
tion of this application include various schemes for detecting and managing ghost
nodes, and a globally unique numbering scheme for the nodes of the graph. To
facilitate the addition of degree-of-freedom tags to the nodes of the distributed
mesh graph, a novel data structure coined pooled linked lists has been proposed
and implemented. Via proﬁling it was found that the novel data structure per-
forms well for object insertion, while performing worse than other common data
structures for object updates and reads.
The thesis has been completed as a joint project between the two departments
DTU Compute and DTU Mechanical Engineering of the Technical University
of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an
M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
[AL13]
Niels Aage and Boyan S. Lazarov. Parallel framework for topology
optimization using the method of moving asymptotes.
Structural
and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 47(4):493–505, January 2013.
[Alb09]
Tony Albrecht. Pitfalls of object oriented programming. Sony Com-
puter Entertainment Europe: R&D Division, . . . , 2009.
[App11]
Austin Applyby. MurmurHash3, 2011.
[BFC12]
M.A. Bender and M. Farach-Colton. Don’t thrash: how to cache
your hash on ﬂash. Proceedings of the . . . , 5(11):1627–1637, 2012.
[BS00]
Martin Philip Bendsoe and Ole Sigmund. Topology Optimization:
Theory, Methods and Applications. 200.
[DBRC09] Karen D Devine, Erik G Boman, Lee Ann Riesen, and Umit V
Catalyurek.
Getting Started with Zoltan :
a Short Tutorial.
Proc. 2009 Dagstuhl Seminar on Combinatorial Scientiﬁc Comput-
ing, 2009.
[GR15]
Christophe Geuzaine and Jean-Francois Remacle. GMSH Reference
Manual 2.9. Technical report, 2015.
[GT14]
Douglas Gregor and Matthias Troyer. Chapter 20. Boost.MPI, 2014.
[KK09]
Matthew G Knepley and Dmitry A Karpeev.
Mesh algorithms
for PDE with sieve I: Mesh distribution. Scientiﬁc Programming,
17(3):215–230, 2009.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
68
[KPSC06] Benjamin S. Kirk, John W. Peterson, Roy H. Stogner, and Gra-
ham F. Carey. libMesh : a C++ library for parallel adaptive mesh re-
ﬁnement/coarsening simulations. Engineering with Computers, 22(3-
4):237–254, November 2006.
[KS13]
George Karypis and Kirk Schloegel. Parmetis: manual. pages 1–32,
2013.
[KT05]
Jon Kleinberg and Éva Tardos. Algorithm Design, volume 1. 2005.
[LA05]
Boyan Lazarov and Charles Augarde.
Object Oriented Design of
Parallel and Sequential Finite Element Codes. pages 1–4, 2005.
[Loy00]
Raymond Loy. AUTOPACK User Manual, 2000.
[MM]
Tim Mattson and Larry Meadows. A “Hands-on” Introduction to
OpenMP. Presentation, page 153.
[MP13]
Scott Meyers and D Ph. CPU Caches and Why You Care A Tale of
Two Traversals. 2013.
[ND10]
John Nickolls and William J Dally. THE GPU COMPUTING ERA.
Ieee Micro, pages 56–70, 2010.
[Nik04]
G. P. Nikishkov. Introduction to the Finite Element Method. pages
1–2, 2004.
[Pac98]
Peter Pacheco. A User’s Guite to MPI. 89(0):51, 1998.
[RHJ09]
Rolf Rabenseifner, Georg Hager, and Gabriele Jost.
Hybrid
MPI/OpenMP Parallel Programming on Clusters of Multi-Core
SMP Nodes. 2009 17th Euromicro International Conference on Par-
allel, Distributed and Network-based Processing, (c):427–436, 2009.
[RHR10]
Phil Ridley, Wilkinson House, and Jordan Hill Road. Guide to Par-
titioning Unstructured Meshes for Parallel Computing. c:1–15, 2010.
[SA11]
Mark S Shephard and Thesis Adviser. A parallel ghosting algorithm
for the ﬂexible distributed mesh database (fmdb). 2011(May), 2011.
[Sig01]
O. Sigmund. A 99 line topology optimization code written in matlab.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 21(2):120–127, 2001.
[SS06]
E. Seegyoung Seol and Mark S. Shephard. Eﬃcient distributed mesh
data structure for parallel automated adaptive analysis. Engineering
with Computers, 22(3-4):197–213, November 2006.
[Str14]
Bjarne Stroustrup. The Essence of C++. 2014.
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[SW98]
Alf Samuelsson and Nils-Erik Wiberg. Finite Element Method: Ba-
sics. Studentlitteratur, 1998.
[SYL95]
Larry a Schoof, Victor R Yarberry, and Sandia National Labora-
tories. EXODUS II: A Finite Element Data Model. Distribution,
(November), 1995.
[TC11]
Sarah Tariq and Nvidia Corporation. An Introduction to GPU Com-
puting and CUDA Architecture GPU Computing. 2011.
[TFF06]
James D. Teresco, Jamal Faik, and Joseph E. Flaherty. Hierarchi-
cal partitioning and dynamic load balancing for scientiﬁc computa-
tion. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics),
3732 LNCS:911–920, 2006.
[TRL12]
Sasu Tarkoma, Christian Esteve Rothenberg, and Eemil Lagerspetz.
Theory and Practice of Bloom Filters for Distributed Systems. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 14(1):131–155, 2012.
[WP13]
Jeppe U. Walther and Søren Vinther Poulsen. Human Interaction
on Real-time Reconstructed Surfaces. 1, 2013.
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A - Users Manual
In an attempt to simplify the usage of the mesh partitioning application a
Python wrapper is provided.
The wrapper is responsible for setting up the
command line parameters for the processes participating in the execution of the
application. The command line interface for the Python wrapper is shown in
table 6.1 on the following page.
==PAGE:80==
71
usage :
partition_mesh . py [−h ]
[−np NUM_PROCS]
[−n NUM_PARTS]
[−nr NUM_REPS]
[−e EXECUTABLE]
[−p PROFILING_FILE ]
[−o OUTPUT_FILE]
[−d DUAL_OUTPUT_FILE]
[−mpi MPI_ARGS]
[−w WORKING_DIR]
mesh_file
Generates
element
dual
and
p a r t i t i o n s
a mesh
using
ParMETIS
p o s i t i o n a l
arguments :
mesh_file
o p t i o n a l
arguments :
−h , −−help
show
t h i s
help
message
and
e x i t
−np NUM_PROCS, −−num_procs NUM_PROCS
The number
of
p r o c e s s e s
used
to
generate
dual
graph
and
p a r t i t i o n
mesh
−n NUM_PARTS, −−num_parts NUM_PARTS
Number
of
p a r t i t i o n s
−nr NUM_REPS, −−num_reps NUM_REPS
Number
of
dual
graph
generation
r e p e t i t i o n s
( intended
f o r
p r o f i l i n g
purposes )
−e EXECUTABLE, −−executable EXECUTABLE
Path
to
the
dual
generator / p a r t i t i o n i n g
executable
−p PROFILING_FILE, −−p r o f i l i n g _ f i l e
PROFILING_FILE
Path
to
the
p r o f i l i n g
output
f i l e
−o OUTPUT_FILE, −−o ut p u t _f i l e OUTPUT_FILE
Path
to
the
p a r t i t i o n s
r e s u l t s
output
f i l e
−d DUAL_OUTPUT_FILE, −−dual_output_file DUAL_OUTPUT_FILE
Path
to
the
dual
graph
output
f i l e
−mpi MPI_ARGS, −−mpi_args MPI_ARGS
Additional
arguments
f o r
the MPI runner
−w WORKING_DIR, −−working_dir WORKING_DIR
Temporary
working
d i r e c t o r y
Table 6.1: Command line interface for the Python wrapper of the mesh parti-
tioning application
