==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Because of the global energy crisis, the reduction of CO 2 emissions, as well as the increase of
power plants  efficiency has been one of the main engineering targets during the recent
decades. In the attempt to mitigate the depletion of energy sources and the climate change, the
development of alternative energies has increased. Technologies related to the use of Solid
Oxide Fuel Cells, hydrogen, biofuel and methanol have acquired a primary role in the
development of more sustainable power generation systems.
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC) technology is the main topic of this thesis. It consists of an
electrochemical device which converts the energy contained in a fuel into electricity and heat.
The principal advantages of SOFCs are among others, high volumetric energy density, light
weight, long lifetime and modular design. They are suitable for electricity generation,
transportation, desalination units and aircraft applications. However, the high operating
temperatures make difficult their use for transportation while the aircraft applications are still
under investigation. For these reasons it seems that the brighter future of this technology will
be focused on the electricity generation.
From the thermodynamic point of view, these power plants have already been proved to be
effective. On the other hand, it is still uncertain whether they can be economically profitable
or not. Even though nowadays the SOFC technology is still characterized by relatively high
prices, the fact that the main companies of this technology continue investing in research may
lead to more affordable prices, and thus SOFC could become an important solution for the
emerging energetic problems.
The purpose of this thesis is to evaluate the economic viability of combining SOFCs with
existing power plants. The use of hybrid SOFC power plants enables to reach higher
efficiencies, and this may lower the cost of the electricity production.
The results suggest that this technology could be profitable for small-scale generation. These
plants could be built close to residential buildings and universities in order to auto-produce
their energetic requirements. If the electricity is sold at a price that is similar to the one paid
by the householders, then the investment costs could get repaid in 15 years. On the other
hand, it seems that this technology cannot compete with large-scale power plants because the
actual spot prices in the electricity market would make them not economically viable when
the electricity is sold directly to the grid.
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Spanish Abstract
Como consecuencia de la crisis mundial energética, la reducción de emisiones de CO
2, así
como el incremento de la eficiencia total de las centrales de energía, han sido los principales
objetivos ingenieriles durante las últimas décadas. En el intento de mitigar el agotamiento de
los recursos de energía y el cambio climático, se ha fomentado el desarrollo de nuevas
tecnologías. Tecnologías relacionadas con el uso de pilas de combustible óxido sólido,
hidrógeno, biocombustibles y metanol han adquirido un rol primario en el desarrollo de
sistemas de generación de potencia más sostenibles.
La tecnología de las pilas de combustible óxido sólido es el principal tema de esta tesis.
Consiste de un dispositivo electroquímico que convierte la energía contenida en un
combustible en electricidad y calor. Las principales ventajas de las pilas de combustible óxido
sólido son entre otras: alta densidad energética, peso ligero, larga vida útil y diseño modular.
Esta tecnología podría ser útil para la generación de electricidad, transporte, unidades de
desalinización y aplicaciones aeroespaciales. Sin embargo, las altas temperaturas de operación
hacen que su uso sea todavía complicado para aplicaciones de transporte, mientras que las
aplicaciones aeroespaciales están aún bajo investigación. Por estas razones, parece que el
futro más prometedor de esta tecnología está enfocado a la generación de electricidad.
Desde un punto de vista termodinámico, estas plantas de energía ya han sido probadas para
ser efectivas. Por otra parte, es aún incierto si pueden ser económicamente viables o no.
Incluso aunque actualmente las pilas de combustible óxido sólido están caracterizadas por
costes relativamente elevados, el hecho que las principales compañías implicadas en esta
tecnología siguen investigando, podría conducir a precios más asequibles, y por lo tanto, las
pilas de combustible óxido sólido podrían convertirse en una importante solución para el
actual problema energético.
El objetivo de esta tesis es evaluar la viabilidad económica de combinar pilas de combustible
óxido sólido con centrales de energía ya existentes. El uso de centrales híbridas permite
alcanzar eficiencias más altas y esto podría reducir el coste de producir la electricidad.
Los resultados sugieren que esta tecnología podría ser viable para pequeña escala. Estas
plantas podrían construirse cerca de edificios residenciales y universidades con el objetivo de
satisfacer sus necesidades energéticas. Si la electricidad se vendiera a un precio similar al que
pagan las familias, la inversión se recuperaría en 15 años. Por otra parte, parece que esta
tecnología no puede competir a gran escala, porque los actuales precios del mercado eléctrico
harían que no fuera económicamente viable si la electricidad se vende directamente a la red.
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
Preface and acknowledgements
This Master Thesis represents the final project of my 5-year degree of Industrial Engineering
with energy and power supply systems as majors at Universidad Politécnica de Valencia
(Spain).  It consists of 30 ECTS and has been carried out in the period between September
2014 and February 2015 by means of an Erasmus scholarship.
I would like to thank my supervisor Masoud Rokni for the useful guidance during the 5
months period and for letting me use his thermodynamic data in order to calculate the cost of
the different plants. It has been a pleasure to work with you.
My special thanks to my parents and grandparents for their endless support throughout my
academic years, and my brother Andreu because he is the essence of my life.
I am grateful also to my office mates Enrico and Kristóf. The long hours working with you
have been more entertaining and productive.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Juanfran because we have together fought for our
goals at 2000 km distance, and my buddies Alberto and Álvaro: they have been my best
mentors during this period.
Marc Jerez Itarte, February 2015
==PAGE:7==
==PAGE:8==
Index
Abstract
Spanish Abstract
Preface and acknowledgements
Index
List of figures.
List of tables.
Nomenclature
1.
Introduction
1.1 Project Objectives
1.2 Computational tools
1.3 Outline of the MSc Thesis
2.
Description of the eight Solid Oxide Fuel Cell based power plants.
2.1
SOFC based power plants without a biomass gasification system.
2.1.1
SOFC-Gas Turbine
2.1.2
SOFC-Steam Turbine
2.1.3
SOFC-Heat engine.
2.2
SOFC based power plants with a biomass gasification system.
2.2.1
BG-SOFC-Organic Rankine Cycle
2.2.2
BG-SOFC-Gas Turbine
2.2.3
BG-SOFC-Steam Turbine
2.2.4
BG-SOFC-Absorption Plant.
2.2.5
BG-SOFC-Heat engine
3.
Equations description.
4.
Techno-economic analysis
4.1
Capital Cost
4.2
Operating Cost
4.2.1
Natural gas cost
4.2.2
Wood pellets cost.
5.
Payback period, Net Present Value and Internal Rate of Return.
6.
Electricity prices according to type of plant and investor.
7.
Sensitivity analysis
7.1
BG-SOFC-ORC and BG-SOFC-GT analysis.
==PAGE:9==
7.2
Analysis of changes in the electricity price.
7.3
Operating costs scenario.
8.
Specific CO2 emission.
9.
Conclusions and possible further work
Conclusions
Recommendations for further work
List of references
Appendix
==PAGE:10==
List of figures.
Figure 1: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell principle (See: Fuel Cells in Power plants, Masoud Rokni).
Figure 2: Natural gas processed before SOFC system [11].
Figure 3: Layout of SOFC-Gas Turbine [11].
Figure 4: Layout of SOFC-Steam Turbine [11].
Figure 5: Layout of SOFC-Heat Engine (Stirling Engine) [11].
Figure 6: Layout of a biomass gasification system in a SOFC hybrid plant [11].
Figure 7: Layout of a gasification system in a SOFC combined with an Organic Rankine Cycle [9].
Figure 8: Layout of a biomass gasification plant in a SOFC combined with a gas turbine[11].
Figure 9: Layout of a biomass gasification system in a SOFC combined with a steam turbine [11].
Figure 10: Layout of a biomass gasification plant in a SOFC combined with an absorption system
[10].
Figure 11: Layout of the absorption cycle [11].
Figure 12: Layout of a biomass gasification system in a SOFC combined with a Stirling engine [11].
Figure 13: Total Capital Investment per kW of different plants.
Figure 14: SOFC technology versus Current power plants
Figure 15: Pix Pellet Nordic Index between 2009 and 2014 [40].
Figure 16: Operating Cost and Capital cost of SOFC hybrid plants.
Figure 17: Operating and Capital Cost as a percentage.
Figure 18: Spot electricity price variation [44].
Figure 19: Users of electricity [45].
Figure 20: Flow diagram with current prices.
Figure 21: Load-duration curve.
Figure 22: Comparison between SOFC-ST electricity price and spot price.
Figure 23: Comparison between residential/industry electricity prices and estimated prices in hybrid
power plants
Figure 24: Flow diagram.
Figure 25: Sensitivity Analysis BG-SOFC-ORC (1).
Figure 26: Sensitivity Analysis BG-SOFC-ORC (2).
Figure 27: Sensitivity analysis BG-SOFC-GT (1).
Figure 28: Sensitivity analysis BG-SOFC-GT (2).
==PAGE:11==
Figure 29: Sensitivity analysis of Net Present Value in BG-SOFC-GT plant.
Figure 30: Sensitivity analysis of Net Present Value in BG-SOFC-ORC plant.
Figure 31: Sensitivity analysis according to the electricity price.
Figure 32: Operating costs scenario of SOFC hybrid plants without biomass gasification system.
Figure 33: Specific CO2 emissions and efficiency.
Figure 34: Comparison of CO2 emissions respect average.
Figure 35: Share of each component in Total Capital Investment for SOFC-GT [%].
==PAGE:12==
List of tables.
Table 1: Classification of the eight plants considered.
Table 2: Net power production of plants studied [11].
Table 3: Additional costs [7].
Table 4: Component cost rates [7, 15].
Table 5: Industrial natural gas prices for European and non-European countries.
Table 6: Industrial natural gas prices for European countries.
Table 7: Gross calorific value of natural gas
Table 8: Cash inflows and outflows.
Table 9: Electricity prices.
Table 10: Feasibility study
Table 11: Economical balance SOFC-HE (8% discount rate).
Table 12: Economical balance SOFC-GT (8% discount rate).
Table 13: Economical balance for SOFC-GT
Table 14: Total Capital Investment for SOFC-GT
Table 15: Total Capital Investment for SOFC-HE
Table 16: Total Capital Investment for SOFC-ST
Table 17: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-HE
Table 18: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-GT
Table 19: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-ST
Table 20: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-AS
Table 21: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-ORC
Table 22: CO2 emissions for SOFC-GT
==PAGE:13==
==PAGE:14==
Nomenclature
AC 
 
Alternating Current
AOH 
 
Annual Operating Hours
AP 
 
Anode Preheater
AS 
 
Absorption System
BG 
 
Biomass Gasification
CC 
 
Capital Cost
COF 
 
Consumption of Fuel
CP 
 
Cathode Preheater
CPO 
 
Catalytic Partial Oxidation
CV  
 
Calorific Value
DC 
 
Direct Current
DHW 
 
Domestic Hot Water
DNA 
 
Dynamic Network Analysis
ECO 
 
Economizer
EVA 
 
Evaporator
FC 
 
Fuel Cost
FP  
 
Fuel Preheater
GAP 
 
Gasifier Air Preheater
GT 
 
Gas Turbine
HE  
 
Heat Engine
HEX 
 
Heat Exchanger
HHV 
 
Higher Heating Value
HR 
 
Hybrid Recuperator
HRSG 
 
Heat Recovery Steam Generator
IC 
 
Indirect Cost
IHE  
 
Intermediate Heat Exchanger
IRR 
 
Internal Rate of Return.
==PAGE:15==
LHV  
 
Lower Heating Value
LMTD 
 
Logarithmic Mean Temperature Difference
LPST 
 
Low Pressure Steam Turbine
NG 
 
Natural Gas
NPV 
 
Net Present Value
OECD 
 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OC 
 
Operating Cost
OCY 
 
Operating Cost Year
ORC  
 
Organic Rankine Cycle
P 
 
Pressure
PEC 
 
Purchased Equipment Cost
PR  
 
Pre-reformer
REC 
 
Recuperator
RP 
 
Reformer Preheater
SG 
 
Steam Generator
SH  
 
Space Heater
SOFC 
 
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
SRC 
 
Steam Rankine Cycle
ST 
 
Steam Turbine
SUP 
 
Super Heater
T 
 
Temperature
TC 
 
Total Cost
TCI 
 
Total Capital Investment
VRF  
 
Volumetric Rate of Fuel
==PAGE:16==
1.Introduction
Recently, there has been a trend towards the development of small-scale power generation
systems. If these plants are installed close to urban areas, then the transports costs can be
minimized and the heat released can be effectively used in order to obtain domestic water or
provide refrigeration by means of an absorption system during the summer months. This
could make these power plants more economically profitable.
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell technology satisfies the requirements to ensure a good performance
when the system is installed close to the end-user. Non-moving parts guarantee low noise and
vibrations during operating hours. Compared to other fuel cells, SOFC has a wide flexibility
with regard to fuel. Besides, the polluting emissions are low.  The most used fuels in SOFCs
are natural gas, methanol, ethanol, biomass and Di-Methyl-Ether. Furthermore, this
technology could be combined with existing large scale power plants.
SOFC works as an electrochemical reactor as depicted in the figure below:
Figure 1: Solid Oxide Fuel Cell principle (See: Fuel Cells in Power plants, Masoud Rokni).
As shown in Figure 1, the SOFC consists of an anode, a cathode and an electrolyte separating
both electrodes. Pre-reformed fuel is supplied to the anode, while the oxidant (air) is sent to
the cathode. For each CO or H 2 reacted, two electrons are transferred to the anode. The
==PAGE:17==
reaction occurs inside the fuel cell because of the high operating temperature and its products
are carbon dioxide and water. Since the fuel is not completely burned and it has a very high
temperature, it can be combusted along with the air in a catalytic burner in order to use its
high enthalpy in a bottoming cycle.
In this project, SOFCs are integrated into steam turbine, gas turbine and heat engine cycles
where SOFCs are working as a topping cycle fueled with natural gas. Then, the same power
plants with a biomass gasification system are also studied. Organic Rankine cycle and
absorption system are also considered as bottoming cycles.
There are many studies in the literature based on SOFCs operating as a topping cycle of
different power plants (ST, GT, HE, AS and ORC). However, they are mainly focused on the
technical feasibility and on the optimization of the thermodynamic aspects. A thermodynamic
analysis of SOFC-ST system has been studied by Rokni [1], while thermodynamic of SOFC-
GT and SOFC-HE have been investigated in [2] and [3], respectively. Regarding to plants
with a biomass gasification system, thermodynamic investigation of BG-SOFC-ST is
evaluated in [4]. C. Bang-Møller, M. Rokni and B. Elmegaard researched exergy analysis and
optimization of BG-SOFC-GT in [5] and [6] while M. Rokni carried out recent studies
concerning thermo-economic and thermodynamic of BG-SOFC-HE (see Refs. [7,8]).
L.Pierobon et al. [9] carried out a research of the combination between a biomass gasification
SOFC plant and an organic Rankine cycle. S.Velumani et al. [10] proposed a hybrid system
composed of SOFC, microturbine and absorption chiller, although in this thesis the
microturbine has not been included.
On the other hand, this project has been carried out to analyze the technoeconomy of the
plants and to evaluate the electricity prices ($/kWh) that this technology could provide to the
final users and make a comparison with current prices.
1.1 Project Objectives
This study focuses on the estimation of the economic feasibility of the hybrid SOFC based
power plants, obtaining the plants cost and calculating the price of electricity in terms of
$/kWh in order to make a comparison between the different plants. Another important aspect
is to evaluate the influence of certain parameters in the results. This has been investigated by
means of sensitivity analysis in order to compare future scenarios. Finally, the specific CO 2
emissions of each plant are calculated and a correlation with the plant efficiency is obtained.
1.2 Computational tools
The computer calculations and simulations during the Master Thesis have been carried out
with the software Microsoft Excel and Dynamic Network Analysis (abbreviated as DNA).
==PAGE:18==
Microsoft Excel is a spreadsheet application and has been used for developing the techno-
economic analysis and for obtaining representative charts and tables. DNA, a computational
tool developed at the Technical University of Denmark, is used to simulate energy process in
a wide range of plant layouts. The thermodynamic data of the 8 different plants simulated in
DNA has been provided by the supervisor of the thesis.
1.3 Outline of the MSc Thesis
The methodology, results and discussions of this MSc Thesis are organized into 9 chapters.
Additionally, there are appendices showing the thermodynamic data of the plants, costs
calculations of the different components and CO 2 emission. It is structured as follows:
Chapter 2 describes the eight hybrid Solid Oxide Fuel Cells based power plants,
arguing the advantages and disadvantages of each plant and their thermodynamic
characteristics.
Chapter 3 provides equations used to obtain the cost of the different components of
the plants. These equations have been either found in the literature or obtained by
interpolating a wide range of cost data.
Chapter 4 is dedicated to elaborate the techno-economic analysis of the power plants.
Capital and operating costs of each plant are calculated and a discussion comparing
the cost of the different plants is made at the end of the chapter.
Chapter 5 shows the value of different tools for the economic analysis, such as Net
Present Value, payback and Internal Rate of Return. These parameters help to
understand the feasibility of each plant.
In chapter 6, the electricity prices in terms of $/kWh are calculated for each plant.
The estimation is done considering a public and private investor. Finally, the
electricity prices are compared with the current prices in the electricity market.
In chapter 7, several sensitivity analyses are carried out using the results obtained
previously. These sensitivity analyses are based on future scenarios.
Chapter 8 includes a chart showing the efficiency and CO 2 emissions of each plant.
The results are discussed and compared in order to obtain conclusions.
Chapter 9 summarizes the most important conclusions obtained throughout the
project and suggests further possible work in the topic of the thesis.
==PAGE:19==
==PAGE:20==
2.Description of the eight Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
based power plants.
In this project eight different hybrid plants containing Solid Oxide Fuel Cells are considered.
SOFCs working as a topping cycle are combined with different bottoming cycles. The
bottoming cycles operate as a waste heat recovery unit and thus allow increasing the overall
plant efficiency. The plants studied can be divided in two groups depending on the fuel used:
the first category includes plants using natural gas (NG) as pre-reformed fuel, while the
second category includes plants using wood pellets in a process of biomass gasification (BG).
A list of the considered plants can be seen in the following table:
Table 1: Classification of the eight plants considered.
Fueled by natural gas
 Biomass Gasification system
SOFC-Gas Turbine 
BG-SOFC-Gas Turbine
SOFC-Steam Turbine
BG-SOFC-Steam Turbine
BG-SOFC-Heat Engine
SOFC-Heat Engine 
BG-SOFC-Absorption System
BG-SOFC-Organic Rankine Cycle
Once the names of the plants are known, a detailed explanation of them is carried out.
2.1
SOFC based power plants without a biomass gasification system.
Firstly, SOFCs based hybrid plants without biomass gasification system are discussed. In
these types of plants, fuel (natural gas) needs to be processed before being sent to the anode of
the SOFC stacks as it can be observed in the next figure.
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2: Natural gas processed before SOFC system [11].
Although several fuels can be used in these types of plants (biogas, methanol, ethanol, Di-
Methyl Ethyl [12]), the selected fuel is natural gas, since this is the fuel used by the most
viable fuel cell technologies (see page 115, [13]). The major aim of the pre-process is to crack
down the heavier carbon substances and remove sulfur [12].
The first step of the system is preheating the natural gas in a fuel preheater (FP) to reach the
operating temperature of the desulfurization unit (200°C). This is accomplished by means of
the transfer of heat from the high temperature of the off-gases coming from the SOFC anode.
After the FP, the sulphur content is removed in a desulfurization unit using a catalyst. Another
heat exchanger is required (RP, reformer preheater) to increase the temperature, before
entering the Catalytic Partial Oxidation (CPO). In this reactor, a catalyst is used to decrease
the operating temperature, and compressed air is required to get a hydrogen-rich syngas
breaking down the heavier hydrocarbons contents. The pre-reformed natural gas, which
reaches a temperature of 650°C in the CPO because of the exothermic reactions (page 6, [3]),
is now ready to be sent to the anode side of the SOFC system. The abovementioned heat
exchangers are required in order to avoid thermal stresses in the stacks [14]. The desulfurizer
operation temperature and the SOFC anode inlet temperature are extracted from a table of the
main thermodynamics parameters in a study of Rokni [12] (Table 1, page 4694).
In addition, a preheated air at 600°C (pressurized as well in the case of SOFC-Gas Turbine) is
sent to the cathode side of the SOFC.
At this point, with the reformed gas and air, the electrochemical conversion in the SOFC can
be performed. Finally, since the temperatures of the exhaust gases of SOFC are high (780°C)
and the natural gas in the SOFC is not completely burned because of concentration losses
==PAGE:22==
[11], it can be sent together with the cathode side air to a catalytic burner. The heat recovered
in the burner can be used in a bottoming cycle (gas turbine, steam turbine, heat engine), as
describe the studies below.
2.1.1
SOFC-Gas Turbine
The first configuration studied is a SOFC-Gas Turbine as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: Layout of SOFC-Gas Turbine [11].
The power of this hybrid cycle is categorized as medium size, considering plant powers larger
than 500KW. One of the applications of this configuration could be providing power to
residential buildings (500 kWe system would be able to meet the needs of 100 family in US)
[15]. Unlike SOFC-ST and SOFC-HE, this configuration has pressurized fuel cells, which
could lead to technology difficulties, since the cell stacks are inserted in a pressurized vessel
in order to avoid pressure differences between the anode and cathode sides [12].
The natural gas is processed to obtain a pre-reformed gas and sent to the anode side, as
already mentioned previously. Additionally, the air is compressed in the cathode compressor
and heated up in two heat exchangers (recuperator, REC, and Cathode Preheater, CP) before
being introduced in the cathode side of the SOFC. In the SOFC, an electrochemical
==PAGE:23==
conversion produces direct current (DC) and afterwards an inverter changes to alternating
current (AC). Finally, the hot gases after the catalytic burner are expanded in the gas turbine
to generate mechanical power. One part of this mechanical power is used to run the
compressor, and the remaining energy is converted into electrical power by means of the
generator.
2.1.2
SOFC-Steam Turbine
The second configuration considered is a SOFC-Steam Turbine as depicted in the following
picture.
 4: Layout of SOFC-Steam Turbine [11].
As can be noted from Figure 4, a single pressure Rankine cycle is integrated as a bottoming
cycle for the plant. This technology is suitable to medium/large scale, larger than 20000 kW.
Its main purpose would be to supply electricity to the grid. The pre-reforming process is
exactly the same as the used for SOFC-Gas Turbine. Unlike the SOFC-Gas Turbine, in this
configuration it is not required to compress the SOFC stacks. In this case the exhaust gas of
the catalytic burner is not directly converted into electric energy. The energy contained in the
exhaust gases comes into the heat recovery steam generator (HRSG) to heat up the water
inside and generate high pressure steam, and the remaining energy in the gas is used to
preheat the air sent to the SOFC system. The HRSG consists of three stages, the economizer
(ECO), the evaporator (EVA) and the superheater (SUP). Firstly, the temperature of the water
is increased in the economizer. Then, the evaporator increases the temperature up to the
saturation point producing steam, and finally the steam temperature is increased above
saturation in the superheater. This superheated steam is expanded in a steam turbine. Part of
==PAGE:24==
the steam is not completely expanded because it is leaded to the deaerator. The rest of the
steam is expanded in a low pressure steam turbine (LPST) and cooled in a condenser at
vacuum conditions before being pumped to the deaerator, where the oxygen and other
dissolved gases are removed. The turbine is connected to a generator to transform the
mechanical energy in electrical (the two pumps run using a minimal quantity of this
electricity). After that, the water is pumped to increase the pressure before entering the
HRSG.
2.1.3
SOFC-Heat engine.
Another configuration is the SOFC-Heat engine, in particular the Stirling Engine. This type of
engine has been chosen due to the fact that is more efficient and safer than similar heat
engines, becoming one of the most interesting engines for the micro combined heat and power
[16].
This plant works with small scale power outputs (2kW to 50kW) [11] to cover power and heat
needs of family homes and small buildings. Other proposals could be the integration of a
SOFC-heat engine in a car [17] or its application in emergency and portable power systems.
The main advantage is that this type of plant can be placed close to the users, minimizing heat
losses and transportation costs. The configuration of the plant is presented below:
Figure 5: Layout of SOFC-Heat Engine (Stirling Engine) [11].
==PAGE:25==
As can be seen in the previous figure, the fuel (NG) has to be processed in the desulfurizer
and pre-reformer units, as well as RP and FP heat exchangers. This process is the same as in
the case of SOFC-Gas turbine and SOFC-Steam Turbine. After the electrochemical reactions
at the SOFC, the air coming out of the cathode side is separated into two streams by means of
a splitter. One stream is led to a heat exchanger in order to preheat the air before entering to
the cathode side, while the other air stream is sent to the combustion chamber where it burns
with the unreacted fuel from the anode side. This combustion takes place in the catalytic
burner and provides heat for the bottoming heat engine. The Stirling engine converts the heat
energy into mechanical work, and at the same time is turned into electricity in the generator.
In order to cool down the engine, a heat exchanger designated as SH (Space heater) is used to
warm all the rooms in the house. The off-gas of the Stirling engine still has heat energy,
which is used to obtain domestic hot water in a heat exchanger.
2.2
SOFC based power plants with a biomass gasification system.
The second field of study is the hybrid SOFC based power plants with a biomass gasification
system. In this system, wood pellets are
similar
specifications of natural gas, and it can be used as a fuel using the natural gas infrastructure.
Future applications for this type of gas could be transportation fuel and cogeneration at
domestic level using fuel cells [18]. Although the calorific value of natural gas is higher
(49MJ/kg) than the one in wood pellets (18MJ/kg), there are studies to convert biomass into
Synthetic Natural Gas with a similar quality [19].
Wood pellets are well established in Europe, since besides the industrialized markets of
Sweden and Austria, more markets pellets are being developed providing great variety [19].
Biomass is essential for large scale power generation because is widely available, and it can
reduce the CO2 emissions and consequently the greenhouse effect. In Europe there are many
initiatives to enhance the use of wood pellets as fuel for generation plants. One example is
related to Holland, since in 2020 the 10% of the total primary energy should be provided by
renewable energy sources, and half of this goal can be achieved by using waste and biomass
[18].
The layout of the biomass gasification system is provided in the next figure:
==PAGE:26==
Figure 6: Layout of a biomass gasification system in a SOFC hybrid plant [11].
As discussed above, wood pellets are used as a feedstock. Firstly, they are sent to a dryer and
pyrolysis reactor [20]. The gasification system used in this analysis consists of a gasifier
developed and built by the Biomass Gasification Group at the Denmark Technical University.
It is the Viking two-stage gasifier with a power of 75kW th [11]. The first reactor is composed
of a dryer and a pyrolysis system. In the dryer, the moisture content of the feedstock is
removed in order to increase the efficiency of the total process. The pyrolysis process consists
in applying heat at high temperature in absence of oxygen in order to obtain a gas product and
a residue called char (solid material rich in carbon content) [21]. The heat produced by wood
pellets is recovered to warm the dryer and pyrolysis reactor. Between the char gasification and
the pyrolysis, there is a gasifier air preheater (GAP) where preheated air is injected and the
partial oxidation of the products takes place heating up the endothermic char gasification
reactions [11]. In the gasifier, CO 2 and H2O are the gasifying agents and the char is gasified in
the fixed bed. Afterwards, the sulfur contained in the syngas is removed and the content of
methane in the clean gas is increased in a methanator. The principal aim of the methanator is
to increase the syngas production efficiencies up to 70% (LHV) [18], and therefore increasing
the SOFC plant efficiency. After the methanator, an anode preheater is required in order to
reach the operating temperature of the SOFC (650°C).
At this point, an electrochemical conversion in the SOFC is produced by means of the
reaction between the syngas in the anode side and the preheated air in the cathode side. After
the SOFC system, the temperatures of the exhaust gases of SOFC are high (780°C) and the
syngas in the SOFC is not completely burned because of concentration losses (page 1, [11]).
Finally, air and syngas are sent together to a catalytic burner and the heat recovered in the
burner is used in a bottoming cycle (organic Rankine cycle, gas turbine, steam turbine,
absorption plant and heat engine), as described below.
==PAGE:27==
2.2.1
BG-SOFC-Organic Rankine Cycle
The first configuration of hybrid SOFC including a biomass gasification plant is represented
in the following picture.
All the thermodynamic data are taken from the study of Pierobon L., et al. 2013 [9]. From this
study the optimal fluid for the Organic Rankine cycle is considered the propyl- cyclohexane
(C3CC6).
The plant considered belongs to small to medium power station. Wood pellets are dried and
pyrolised before being gasified to obtain a syngas, as aforementioned. This syngas is sent to
the anode side where an electrochemical conversion is produced along with the compressed
and preheated air (HR: Hybrid recuperator and CP: Cathode preheater) on the cathode side.
This electrochemical conversion produces direct current (DC) and afterwards an inverter
changes it into alternating current (AC). Because the fuel utilization factor of the SOFC is not
100%, the remaining fuel can be burned together with the air coming from the cathode side in
Figure 7: Layout of a gasification system in a SOFC combined with an Organic Rankine Cycle [9].
==PAGE:28==
a catalytic burner. A heat transfer fluid called DOWTHERM Q, composed of a mixture of
diphenylethane and alkylated aromatic with a high thermal stability [22], absorbs the heat of
the off-gases from the catalytic burner in an intermediate heat exchanger (IHE). These off-
gases are used after the IHE to preheat the compressed air before entering to the cathode side
of the SOFC. The heat of the DOWTHERM Q, is transferred to the propylcyclohexane in the
Heat Recovery Steam Generator (HRSG). The HRSG is composed of three heat exchangers
(as explained above). Afterwards, the organic steam is expanded in the ORC turbine. The off
vapor after the ORC turbine still has enthalpy, therefore it is used to preheat the organic liquid
after the condenser and increase the performance of the system [9].
As seen from the above discussion, the ORC is similar to the SRC. The difference is that the
working fluid used is an organic fluid, respecting the environment.
2.2.2
BG-SOFC-Gas Turbine
The next figure displays SOFC with a biomass gasification system. Gas turbine is working as
a bottoming cycle.
Figure 8: Layout of a biomass gasification plant in a SOFC combined with a gas turbine[11].
The biomass gasification plant and the SOFC system work in the same way as in the previous
cases, with the only difference that in this plant the air on the cathode side is compressed up
to 8.146 bar, while in the other cases the SOFC stacks operate under atmospheric pressure [4].
==PAGE:29==
In the SOFC take place the electrochemical reactions and the unburned fuel together with the
air is combusted in the catalytic burner. The combustion gases are expanded in a gas turbine
in order to produce electricity.
2.2.3
BG-SOFC-Steam Turbine
The layout of a biomass gasification system with SOFC and a steam cycle is depicted below:
Figure 9: Layout of a biomass gasification system in a SOFC combined with a steam turbine
[11].
This type of plant seems the most technically viable option of the plants with a biomass
gasification system. It enables high sizes and therefore it is possible to supply large amounts
of electricity to applications with steady demand such as industries.
Moreover, it operates at lower temperatures than BG-SOFC-GT, and this is particularly
interesting because the development of the SOFC may lead to lower operation temperatures
[4].
Finally, this technology works under atmospheric pressure, no being necessary to pressurize
the SOFC stacks in a vessel.
==PAGE:30==
2.2.4
BG-SOFC-Absorption Plant.
The layout of SOFC technology combined with a biomass gasification plant and an
absorption system is represented in the picture below:
Figure 10: Layout of a biomass gasification plant in a SOFC combined with an absorption
system [10].
It is worth to notice that this specific plant uses wood pellets as a feedstock. The main reason
is that the growing electricity demand and the environmental problems related to energy
production with fossil fuels have led to the use of wood to obtain a sustainable fuel for power
plants. The process to recover the energy from biomass is the same as explained above using
a Viking two-stage gasifier. The flue gas and off-gases after the SOFC are combusted in a
catalytic burner and the heat produced
t
provide cooling. As can be seen in Ref. [10], these cogeneration systems increase the total
efficiency of the plant
they are using waste heat instead of mechanical
and electric energy to drive the
 Furthermore, as can be found in Ref.
[23], in energy systems where the heat demand during the summer season is reduced, energy
companies can utilize this heat energy for generating air conditioning.
==PAGE:31==
As regards absorption cycle, it is very similar to the steam compression system, with the
difference that a thermal compressor is placed instead of a mechanical compressor. This
thermal compressor is composed of an absorber, a desorber (also known as generator), a valve
and a pump, as can be seen in the next figure.
Figure 11: Layout of the absorption cycle [11].
The cycle water-lithium bromide (H 2O-LiBr) is the most widely used because it has the
maximum efficiency [24]. The main advantage of the lithium bromide is the capacity to
absorb water and get dehydrated with heat.
The following description of the absorption system is based in references: [24], [25] and [26].
The water (liquid refrigerant), which flows in a low partial pressure environment, evaporates
in a heat exchanger called evaporator. The heat to evaporate the water comes from the place
you want to cool down (e.g. refrigerating chamber). After the evaporator, the lithium bromide
absorbs the water vapor in the absorber, allowing more refrigerant to evaporate. This diluted
solution flows to the desorber (generator), where solvent and solute are separated due to the
heat contained in the off-gases of the gas turbine. On the one hand, the water goes to the
condenser, where the most part of the heat received in the desorber is transferred to the
environment, and finally this water is expanded by means of a valve until the evaporator. On
the other hand, the bromide returns to the absorber for restarting the cycle.
==PAGE:32==
2.2.5
BG-SOFC-Heat engine
The next picture shows a combined heat and power plant. It is composed of a SOFC system
with a biomass gasification plant and a heat engine, operating as a waste heat recovery unit.
Figure 12: Layout of a biomass gasification system in a SOFC combined with a Stirling
engine [11].
The process for converting woodchips into syngas is the same as in the previous cases. The
syngas is led to the methanator and heat exchanger, before being sent to the anode side of the
SOFC system. On the other side of the SOFC, ambient air is compressed and heated until the
operating conditions of the cathode side (600° C and 1.108 bar). The Stirling Engine working
as bottoming cycle uses the off-gases of the catalytic burner as the energy source, generating
electricity and heat. The heat is used for heating domestic water from 20° C to 60° C, so that
the relatively high temperature would remove the possible bacteria and the water would be
adequate for domestic purposes.
==PAGE:33==
Once the power plants have been described, the following table shows the net power
production and overall efficiency of each plant given by DNA:
Table 2: Net power production of plants studied [11].
Plants using natural gas
Net Power Output
[kW]
Overall
efficiency [%]
SOFC-Gas Turbine 
457.97
69.81
SOFC-Steam Turbine 
41064.17
68.03
SOFC-Heat Engine 
10
59.03
Plants with Biomass Gasification
system
Net Power Output
[kW]
Overall
efficiency [%]
BG-SOFC-Gas Turbine 
612.55
53.73
BG-SOFC-Steam Turbine 
7856.17
57.43
BG-SOFC-Heat Engine 
120
42.35 (68.34*)
BG-SOFC-Absorption System 
134.99
30.96 (52.02*)
BG-SOFC-Organic Rankine Cycle 
114.79
62.93
It can be appreciated that the size of the different plants is very different. Regarding plants
without a gasification plant, SOFC-ST has the highest power production which is about 41064
kW. It would be used to supply electricity to the grid together with other large power stations.
Its capacity would be to supply around 8000 families. The SOFC-HE with a net power output
of 10kW would be able to meet the requirements of two families, while SOFC-GT belongs to
medium size units with a power of about 458 kW. It could satisfy the demand of residential
buildings.
With regard to plants with a biomass gasification system, BG-SOFC-ST belongs to medium
scale and it has the highest power output (7856 kW) within this category. BG-SOFC-ORC,
BG-SOFC-AS and BG-SOFC-HE have very similar power outputs of about 125kW and the
BG-SOFC-GT has a medium size of 612.55 kW. Their activity sector would be to meet the
requirements of public and private buildings.
It has to be noticed that plants including GT as a bottoming cycle need to have pressurized
SOFC vessels. Therefore, their electricity production capacity is limited.
As shown in Table 2, all the plants would perform with high efficiencies independent of the
size. SOFC-GT would have the highest efficiency (69.81%). BG-SOFC-HE and BG-SOFC-
AS would work with the lowest efficiencies (42.35% and 30.96%, respectively). However,
the efficiency of these two plants would be higher since they are using combined heat/cooling
and power technology. The domestic hot water produced with the hot off-gas of the Stirling
engine and the cooling energy supplied by the absorption system will increase the efficiency
values if they are taken into consideration* (68.34% and 52.02%, respectively).
==PAGE:34==
3.Equations description.
The equations to calculate the purchased equipment cost (PEC) of all the elements which
integrate the plants are expressed in $ and are extracted from the study of Braun [27], Arsalis
[15] and Ghirardo [28]. Thermodynamic data used in these equations are provided by DNA
(see Appendix A).
For the cost of Solid Oxide Fuel Cells the followings equations are used:
,
where the operation temperature of the cell (T cell) is 1053 K and the values for the diameter
and length of the cells are assumed to be 0.005 and 0.12 m, respectively. The cost of the
SOFC inverter is:
For the purchase cost of generator, steam turbine and pumps the following equations are used:
The pump correction and its efficiency are calculated as follows:
The condenser and deaerator purchase cost is determined by:
,
where the area of the condenser (A Condenser) is obtained as:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
==PAGE:35==
LMTD is the Logarithmic Mean Temperature Difference (in K), Q is the exchanged heat duty
(in W), U the heat transfer coefficient (in W/m 2 K) and F the correction factor.
The heat transfer coefficient (U) is assumed to be 350 W/m 2 K for vacuum condensers and
850 W/m2 K for organic vapors [31].
The correction factor (F) is considered 1, since the temperature is kept constant in the
condenser.
As regards to the cost of the fuel pre-reformer, it is calculated by:
,
where VPR is the volume of the fuel pre-reformer which is composed of a reactor. V PR is
calculated from the residence time in this reactor and the mass flow of the clean gas at the
inlet.
The finned area can be assumed to be the 10% of V PR. The residence time of the catalytic
partial oxidation in the pre-reformer could be few milliseconds at elevated pressures [29], thus
achieving a considerable reduction of the size of the reactor. However, in this case the
pressure is not so high, and a residence time of 0.5 seconds is assumed.
For the purchase cost of the methanator and desulfurizer, the equation used is the same and
the residence times are considered 0.5 seconds for the methanator and 1 second for the gas
cleaner [30].
The cost of gas turbine and compressor are obtained from
,
while the heat exchanger purchase cost is attained from
,
where the area (A HEX) is defined as
.
The overall heat transfer coefficient (k) depends on the type of hot and cold fluid used and the
values can be found in [31] according to the specific case.
(13)
(14)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(15)
==PAGE:36==
With regards to the heat recovery steam generator (HRST) cost can be calculated by means of
the following formula,
 ,
taking into account the sum of the three heat exchangers (economizer, evaporator and
superheater). In addition, for each heat exchanger the pump, piping and gas conduit costs are
obtained from
,
where the cost corrector factors
 are defined as
.
For the catalytic burners, two options are available according to the thermal load. On the one
hand, if the incinerator has a thermal load (W TL) lower than 300kW, such as in SOFC-Heat
Engines, the following equation is used:
where the estimated number of catalytic burners produced is 1000.
On the other hand, for higher thermal loads (W TL) an equation has been developed by
adjusting the cost of catalytic burners with thermal loads between 300 kW and 10000KW
extracted from Ref. [32].
The plants based on integrated biomass gasification system contain a gasifier and pyroliser,
whose price can be calculated from [33] and [34] respectively, as follows
,
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
==PAGE:37==
where in the case of pyroliser
A  is the duty in kW and k 1, k2 and k3 are 2.3859, 0.9721 and
0.0206 respectively.
For the Organic Rankine Cycle operating as a bottoming cycle of the SOFC, two calculations
have been developed. Firstly, the equation given in [28] has been used:
In order to validate this equation, each element of the Organic Rankine Cycle (organic steam
turbine, condenser, deaerator, pumps, generator and HRSG) has been calculated with its
proper equation, verifying that the sum is the same as above.
The Absorption Chiller cost has been obtained with the same method. In the first place, the
purchase cost is attained by means of [28]
where
 is the cost factor.
In second place, it is checked calculating the cost element by element (condenser, valves,
evaporator, absorber, desorber, heat exchanger and pump).
(30)
(31)
==PAGE:38==
4.Techno-economic analysis
The purpose of this techno-economic analysis is to make a viability comparison between
different hybrid SOFC power plants. This requires taking into consideration some
assumptions which are summarized below. Firstly, Capital Cost (CC) for each power plant
will be calculated, and then the Operating Cost (OC), in order to determine the Total Cost
(TC), as shown in the following equation:
4.1
Capital Cost
In this case of study, the Capital Cost (CC) is defined as fixed expenses of the plant project
and its construction. It includes the purchase of the components used in the plant, buildings,
instrumentation, insurance, architectural work and facilities used in the generation of
electricity, and hot water or cooling, depending on the type of power plant.
The capital cost is one-time expenses. However, in this case it is a significantly amount of
money and it may be financed by a loan from a bank. It is the sum of the Total Capital
Investment (TCI) and cost rates related to economical parameters, e.g. interest on outside
capital cost, insurance cost and maintenance cost.
CC = TCI + Cost rates
The Total Capital Investment (TCI) is composed of the Purchased Equipment Cost (PEC) and
the additional cost:
TCI = PEC + Additional cost
In this case, the PEC is the sum of the prices of the different elements used in a power station
calculated by means of the components cost equations described in the chapter 3, while the
additional cost can be divided into direct costs and indirect costs.
The following table shows the different additional costs expressed as a percentage of PEC.
(32)
(33)
(34)
==PAGE:39==
Table 3: Additional costs [7].
The land is 0 because it is considered an agreement with the government of the country.
On the basis of the above, below is a table showing the TCI (Total Capital Investment) per
kW of the different SOFC hybrid plants analyzed (see Appendix C):
Figure 13: Total Capital Investment per kW of different plants.
ADDITIONAL COST 
% of PEC
DIRECT COSTS
1. Onsite Costs
Purchased equipment installation 
33
Piping 
35
Instrumentation and controls 
12
Electrical equipment and materials 
13
2. Offsite Costs
Land 
0
Civil, structural and architectural work 
21
Service facilities 
35
INDIRECT COSTS
Engineering and supervision 
8
Construction and
 profit 
15
Contigency 
15% of IC
==PAGE:40==
By focusing on hybrid plants working with natural gas, SOFC-GT has the highest cost per
kW, which is about 3100 $/kW. The lowest price corresponds to SOFC-ST with a value of
1036 $/kW, while the SOFC-HE has an intermediate cost of 2842 $/kW.
It should be noted that the power output of the SOFC-ST is 41064 kW, which is much higher
than the power of SOFC-GT (457.97 kW) and SOFC-HE (10 kW). As a result, the
comparison in terms of $/kW may not be entirely rigorous.
These three plants might be competitive taking into consideration current prices of similar
type of plants, as can be observed in the following figure:
Figure 14: SOFC technology versus Current power plants
Figure 14 compares the cost of current plants (GT, HE and ST) using combined heat and
power, with the cost of the same plants used as hybrid plants in a SOFC system. The cost of
current plants has been extracted from [13], and the power outputs of the compared plants are
similar in order to ensure consistency.
As can be appreciated, prices in SOFC technology are slightly higher than current plants
costs. However, SOFC hybrid plants could be feasible in many sectors of the energy
production since they are within a normal range of plant costs.
==PAGE:41==
With regard to hybrid SOFC based power plants with a biomass gasification system, these
plants include a gasifier, dryer and pyrolysis reactor in order to convert the wood pellets into
green gas. For this reason, the cost of these types of plants is increased.
The lowest cost is 3142 $/kW for the BG-SOFC-ST, 2100 $/kW more than in the case
without a biomass gasification system. The costs of BG-SOFC-GT and BG-SOFC-HE are
7895 $/kW and 4760 $/kW, respectively.
BG-SOFC-ORC and BG-SOFC-AS are also included in this case. The costs are slightly
higher with values of 8798 $/kW for the BG-SOFC-ORC and 6052 $/kW for the BG-SOFC-
AS.
All these comparative estimates have been developed assuming the accuracy of the equations.
However, a sensitivity analysis will be carried out in a later stage in order to analyze the cost
of a power plant if the price of several element changes.
Regarding the cost rates, they are calculated by means of the parameters provided in Table 4:
Table 4: Component cost rates [7, 15].
COMPONENT COST RATES
Economical parameters 
Value
Interest rate (
interest)
3 %
Inflation rate (
inflation)
2 %
Taxation factor (
taxation) 
0.54%
Maintenance factor (
maintenance)
1.1
Insurance factor (
insurance)
0.2%
Construction period  
1 year
Currently, the interest and inflation rates have a low value because of the economic stagnation
in most European countries [35]. However, economic growth is expected and normal values
of 3% and 2% are assumed for the interest and inflation rates, respectively. These values are
obtained from the study of Rokni [7].
The taxation, maintenance and insurance factors are considered to be 0.54%, 110% and 0.2%,
respectively [36], and the construction period until the commissioning of the plants is 1 year.
In order to ensure modeling consistency in the calculation costs, the same economical
parameters and methodology are used in the different plants.
With the aim of estimating the annual investment, the following equations expressed in $/year
are given [15]:
==PAGE:42==
4.2
Operating Cost
As operating cost is considered the cost of the fuel used to run the power plant. This value is
calculated in $/year. It depends on the following factors:
-
Annual operating hours of the plant (h/year).
-
Fuel cost per cubic meter ($/m 3).
-
Volumetric rate of the fuel (m 3/h).
The annual operating hours are different for each element of the plant. The Solid Oxide Fuel
Cells can be operated continuously for more than 40000 hours (5 years) [37] with low
degradation. This is important because the bottoming cycle needs to extract the heat out of the
hot gases after the SOFC to work.
A steam turbine can be in service for over 50 years and it is used to working continuously due
to the fact that the warm up takes more than 10 hours [38].
Heat engine and gas turbine have the advantage of being turned on and off within minutes,
thus the maintenance stops are fast.
With all this information, it is assumed that the different power plants could work during 7500
hours every year (utilization factor of 85%) and the equipment lifetime is 20 years with
regular maintenance operations.
In regards to the calculation of the fuel cost and its volumetric rate are described below.
4.2.1
Natural gas cost
Regarding the cost of natural gas, it presents highly fluctuating prices depending on the
country and the day. A list of natural gas prices for the industry has been extracted from a
report by the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries,
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
==PAGE:43==
according to a recent study (International Energy Agency, 2014) in order to calculate an
average price.
In the first place, all the OECD countries have been taken into account as it is shown in the
next table:
Table 5: Industrial natural gas prices for European and non-European countries.
Country
Natural gas price for industry
[$/MWh]
Austria 
48.84
Belgium 
39.89
Canada 
13.72
Czech Republic 
47.33
Estonia 
47.15
Finland 
47.5
France 
51.83
Germany 
49.89
Greece 
60.99
Hungary 
45.62
Ireland 
51.74
Korea 
78.68
Luxembourg 
53.53
Netherlands 
41.48
New Zealand 
24.01
Poland 
42.27
Portugal 
55.71
Slovak Republic 
49.34
Slovenia 
57.89
Spain 
45.12
Sweden 
63.8
Switzerland 
72.24
Turkey 
43.73
United Kingdom 
41.89
United States 
15.39
Denmark 
42.87
AVERAGE 
47.40
The average price in this case is 47.40 $/MWh.
Secondly, an average price with only European countries has been calculated, since as seen in
have very low prices, and this study is focused in European countries.
==PAGE:44==
Table 6: Industrial natural gas prices for European countries.
Country
Natural gas price for industry
[$/MWh]
Austria 
48.84
Belgium 
39.89
Czech Republic 
47.33
Estonia 
47.15
Finland 
47.5
France 
51.83
Germany 
49.89
Greece 
60.99
Hungary 
45.62
Ireland 
51.74
Luxembourg 
53.53
Netherlands 
41.48
Poland 
42.27
Portugal 
55.71
Slovak Republic 
49.34
Slovenia 
57.89
Spain 
45.12
Sweden 
63.8
Switzerland 
72.24
Denmark 
42.87
United Kingdom 
41.89
AVERAGE PRICE 
50.32
Finally, the price considered for the industrial natural gas (fuel cost, FC) used in the plants is
50.32 $/MWh, a 6.5% higher than including non-European countries.
In addition, the calorific value of natural gas is required for the calculations. This value
depends on the country of origin. Therefore, an average calorific value of top-ten natural gas
producers in 2013 is shown in the following table [39]:
==PAGE:45==
Table 7: Gross calorific value of natural gas
Country
Gross calorific value
[MJ/m3]
United States 
38.155
Russian Federation 
38.23
Qatar 
41.4
Islamic Rep. Of Iran 
39.356
Canada 
38.74
People´s Rep. Of China 
38.931
Norway 
39.4
Netherlands 
33.339
Saudi Arabia 
38
Algeria 
39.565
AVERAGE VALUE 
38.5116
The calorific value used for the following calculations is 38.5116 MJ/m 3, or equivalently
0.010697667 MWh/m 3.
With the consumption of fuel (COF) obtained from the thermodynamic data file and the
calorific value (CV), the volumetric rate fuel is calculated as follows:
The fuel cost is calculated as:
With the fuel cost, volumetric rate fuel and the annual operating hours, the operating cost year
can be obtained as:
(41)
(42)
(43)
==PAGE:46==
4.2.2
Wood pellets cost.
In the case of a biomass gasification plant on top of the SOFC, wood pellets are used to
produce a syngas. The cost of the wood pellets can be obtained by means of the PIX Pellet
Nordic Index. This index includes the industrial wood pellets price in Nordic countries and its
change over time, as the next figure shows:
Figure 15: Pix Pellet Nordic Index between 2009 and 2014 [40].
An average cost of 38.53 $/MWh (30.
is taken from the above figure, and using a
coefficient of 4.8 for converting price per MWh in price per ton, a value of 185.14 $/ton is
obtained for further calculations.
The bulk density of wood pellets is considered 650 kg/m 3 [47] and therefore the wood pellets
cost per m3 can be calculated as:
From the thermodynamic data file (see Appendix A), the mass flow of the wood pellets in
kg/s is obtained and the volumetric rate is calculated as follows:
Finally, multiplying the fuel cost, volumetric rate fuel and the annual operating hours, the
operational cost per year is obtained as:
(44)
(45)
==PAGE:47==
Taking into account all of the above, operating and capital costs were calculated and a
comparison between them has been obtained in the two figures below.
Figure 16: Operating Cost and Capital cost of SOFC hybrid plants.
As seen in the figure above, plants with biomass gasification (BG) system have higher
operating and capital costs per kW and year. The former is due to the lower thermal efficiency
of these power plants while the latter is mainly related to the high cost of the gasification
equipment.
SOFC-ST is the plant that can be built at a lower capital cost per kW and year, and  SOFC-GT
can run with less operating cost in terms of $/kWyear.
The higher capital and operating costs are subject to the BG-SOFC-ORC.
(46)
==PAGE:48==
The figure below illustrates the percentage of capital and operating cost in each plant:
Figure 17: Operating and Capital Cost as a percentage.
The chart shows that the operating costs are higher than the capital costs in all the power
plants, except for the BG-SOFC-GT and BG-SOFC-ORC. In the BG-SOFC-GT the capital
cost and operating cost are approximately the same, while in the BG-SOFC-ORC the capital
cost is slightly higher because of the high cost of the components integrated in the Organic
Rankine Cycle.
The SOFC-ST is the plant with the biggest difference between the operating and capital cost
since their components are relatively cheap.
In the cases of BG-SOFC-ORC, BG-SOFC-GT and BG-SOFC-AS the percentage of the
capital cost is high, it means that the initial investment will be significant. Alternatively, in
SOFC-ST, SOFC-HE and BG-SOFC-ST the share of the operating cost is greater, therefore
the main cost is associated with running the plants.
==PAGE:49==
==PAGE:50==
5.Payback period, Net Present Value and Internal
Rate of Return.
In order to check the viability of the construction and operation of the different power plants
if the electricity is sold at the current prices, a feasibility study was made.
Three evaluation criteria are considered in this analysis:
-
Payback period.
-
Net Present Value.
-
Internal Rate of Return.
Regarding payback period, it is related to how long it is required to get back the money
invested to carry out the project. The payback is calculated by means of cash flows, but it
could have some disadvantages since it does not take into consideration the time value of
money and the risk of the investment.
Net Present Value enables the company to calculate the present value of the final profits
taking into account all the future cash flows and it is given by:
where:
-
t is the year of the cash flow.
-
Rt is the net cash flow in the year considered (cash inflow
 cash outflow).
-
i is the discount rate or opportunity cost of capital.
-
N is the lifetime of the plant expressed in years.
In this case, the discount rate considers economic criteria like financing, risk, opportunity cost
and time value of money. It also takes into account the type of investor, depending on whether
the investor is public or private.  Therefore, it is very important to choose a proper value for
the discount rate. According to the references [41] and [42], in power plants discount rate
values of 4 and 8% are considered to public and private investors respectively.
The Internal Rate of Return indicates the quality of the inversion, and it can be defined as the
discount rate that makes the NPV equal to 0 at the end of the lifetime.
), the project will be accepted since the profitability
is greater than the required.
The cash flow calculations are developed in an Excel sheet (see appendix B), calculating the
decision parameters and taking into account the different cash inflow and outflows shown in
the table below.
(47)
==PAGE:51==
Table 8: Cash inflows and outflows.
CASH INFLOW
CASH OUTFLOW
Maintenance
 
Insurance
Sale of electricity
Taxation cost
 
Interest
Operating cost
The main assumptions in the calculations are:
-
Taxation and interest cost are assumed constants over the life time of the plants, because
they are set for the government and the bank which lend the initial investment to the
company.
-
Operating cost, electricity price and insurance are subject to inflation over the years.
-
Maintenance cost is considered constant over the years, since the cost of maintenance are
supposed to increase due to inflation but the different elements in the plant depreciate
over the time, obtaining an economic balance.
-
For simplicity reasons, it is considered that all the electricity generated can be either sold
at a fixed price (spot price) or used by industries/houses/buildings, according to the case.
-
During the operating hours of the plants (7500 h/year), the load factor is 100%.
-
The duration of the loan is assumed to be over the lifetime of the plant (20 years).
-
Power plants with a biomass gasification system can receive a subsidy between 45-65%
of the initial investment costs (see Ref. [43]). In this case a 50% of subsidy is considered.
As mentioned in previous sections, the considered power plants have a wide range of sizes.
Consequently, each plant would supply power to different sectors and they would be subject
to different electricity prices. The plant with the highest power output is SOFC-ST (41.06
MW). It could sell the electricity to the electricity market (electrical grid), whose price is set
by the electricity spot price. Regarding SOFC-HE, this technology could be installed in order
to supply electricity and heat for two houses, since it has a small capacity of 10 kW. In this
case, the price should be the same as the one paid by the household consumers. BG-SOFC-ST
has a power of 7.85 MW and it could suit to industry demands.
The remaining plants with power outputs ranging from 114 to 612 kW, might supply
electricity to public and private buildings such as: hotels, universities and residential
buildings. Consequently, these prices would be fixed by normal tariff.
Once plants have been categorized, their current price of electricity can be estimated
according to the different usages.
==PAGE:52==
In the case of SOFC-ST, it works for the exclusive goal of generating electricity to be sold to
the electricity market (grid). The electricity spot price is found in Epexspot [44], where a chart
represents the 200-days average of the spot electricity price in the European countries. It is
noted that price is relatively low since it does not include the distribution and taxation costs.
As shown in the figure below, it could vary between 37.5
 87.5
$/MWh (7
 For this study, an
average value of 63 $/MWh is taken.
Figure 18: Spot electricity price variation [44].
Regarding the electricity selling price for industries and households, it is calculated based on
Eurostat [45]. Eurostat provides the average prices of electricity charged to the final users
during the last year, in the 28 countries which form the European Union. These prices were
0.23 $/kWh and 0.115 $/kWh for households and industries, respectively [46]. As can be
noted, the electricity price for industries is lower, since they have high demands.
The main users of electricity are households/services, industries and transport, as shown in the
next figure expressed in GWh (
).
==PAGE:53==
Figure 19: Users of electricity [45].
The electricity consumption by households/services is approximately twice as high as
industry, while transport consumption is relatively low.
Summarizing, the current electricity prices are shown in the next table:
Table 9: Electricity prices.
Sector
$/kWh
Industry
0.115
Households/Services
0.23
Spot price (Grid)
0.063
During low demand hours, small plants located close to the end users are generating more
electricity than needed by the building requirements. Consequently, the remaining electricity
is sold to the power grid at a low price (0.063 $/kWh, electricity spot price). Therefore, these
power plants are not always able to sell the electricity at 0.23 $/kWh. Assuming that they sell
to the grid around 35% of the operating hours, a weighted average of the electricity price is
calculated as follows:
(48)
==PAGE:54==
A flow diagram is presented below in order to facilitate understanding of the distribution:
Figure 20: Flow diagram with current prices.
For each plant, an economic feasibility study in an Excel sheet has been carried out (see
Appendix B) considering the previous electricity prices and the corresponding cash
inflow/outflows. The main objective is to estimate the feasibility of these plants according to
the purpose of the plant and the current electricity prices.
The following results are obtained in the order of most viability to least viability:
Table 10: Feasibility study
The previous table illustrates that the SOFC-ST would not be feasible if it sold the electricity
to the grid at the corresponding spot price of around 0.063 $/kWh. Consequently, it would
have financial losses every year, being impossible to amortize the investment.
==PAGE:55==
Regarding BG-SOFC-ST, it would supply energy to big industries with their corresponding
tariffs. However, it could not compete with the current industrial prices of the electricity in
Europe (0.115 $/kWh), as the negative Net present value indicates. Therefore, the investor
would be in economic losses.
If the remaining plants are considered, they are small-medium scale power plants, which
could be located close to residential buildings, shopping centers, universities and office
buildings in order to provide their energy requirements. Plants with a biomass gasification
system using gas turbine (GT) or organic Rankine cycle (ORC) as bottoming cycle would not
be viable. If they sold the electricity at 0.171 $/kWh, they would get a negative Net Present
Value and as a result, their payback times would be higher than the lifetime of the plant (20
years). These plants would need to run efficiently more than 20 years in order to amortize the
expenditure.
The other plants included in this category would be profitable. If they sold the electricity at
the normal price (0.171 $/kWh), they would get back the invested money before the lifetime.
The most profitable plant would be the SOFC-GT. It would have a payback time of 5.76 years
and a NPV in the year 20 of 2499141 or 1326799 $, depending on whether the discount rate is
considered 4 or 8%. SOFC-HE and BG-SOFC-HE would be also feasible, with a payback
times of 6.44 and 10.6 years, respectively. BG-SOFC-AS is in the limit between being
profitable and not, depending on the discount rate considered. This plant would be able to
supply electricity and cooling.
Discussion of the results:
SOFC technology would be more feasible to small/medium plants ranging from 10 to 700
kW, which could be installed close to the end-users. Therefore, relevant uses of these power
plants would be to meet the energy requirements of hotels, universities, residential buildings
and shopping centers, among others.
Even though SOFC large scale plants (ST-SOFC, 41 MW) have lower prices than
medium/small SOFC plants (in terms of $/kW), they would not be feasible since they could
not compete with the existing large power plants such as, nuclear and combined power plants.
Large power plants are built in order to sell the energy to the electrical grid, and SOFC
technology would not be able to reach the low market price of electricity, unless the
government paid them subsidies.
Future scenario:
Nowadays, SOFC systems have relatively long startup time compared to other fuel cells such
as Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell [13]. This is because it requires high operating
temperatures (750°C) in order to work effectively. However, according to a recent study [49]
==PAGE:56==
in the Ritsumeikan University, a porous structure could be developed and used as a fuel cell.
With this method, cathode and anode are not isolated, and the operating temperatures could be
reached in approximately 10 seconds. If this process is implemented successfully and SOFC
technology is led to lower prices because of this development, SOFC hybrid plants would be
able to sell to the electrical grid in the near future.
If they achieve the goal of selling electricity to the grid, SOFC systems combined with gas
turbine (GT) and heat engines (HE) would operate at times of peak demand, since both of
them have short start-up times. The start-up time of a heat engine is about 10 seconds while
for the gas turbine is between 10 minutes and 1 hour [13]. Therefore, these plants could
support the grid for peaking load service, since during these hours the electricity prices are
higher and this technology could play a primary role.
On the other hand, SOFC hybrid plants combined with steam turbine should operate as base
or intermediate load power plants. The start-up time of a steam turbine can be between 1 hour
and 1 day. In this way, these plants would only be viable if they are working continuously,
except for the operations of maintenance.
In order to clarify when this technology could sell electricity to the grid, different SOFC
plants have been included in a load-duration curve, as presented in the next figure:
Figure 21: Load-duration curve.
==PAGE:57==
As depicted from the figure above, the load-duration curve represents the percentage of hours
during a year that different power plants would operate. For this hypothetical case, the graphic
shows that during the 30% of the year the power demand would be at least 50000 MW. As a
consequence, SOFC combined with gas turbine (GT) and heat engine (HE) would be started
up to supply electricity for these peak hours and support the other plants.
On the other hand, SOFC systems combined with steam turbine (ST) would be running most
of the time in order to be profitable. They would perform along with cogeneration,
hydroelectric, coal and nuclear plants.
==PAGE:58==
6.Electricity prices according to type of plant and
investor.
In the previous section, the NPV, payback time and IRR have been obtained for the different
types of plants using the current selling prices of electricity according to the purpose of the
plant (industry, households or electric grid). In this section, it will be calculated the selling
electricity price ($/kWh) that would make each plant economically viable; in order to
compare with the actual electricity prices and propose the most appropriate application for
each hybrid plant.
For this calculation, it is considered as a condition that the Net Present Value will be positive
from the year 15. Therefore, from then, the company will be in a gain position.
For each type of plant, the estimated selling price of the electricity has been calculated for two
different cases depending on the investor:
-
Public company, 4% discount rate.
-
Private company, 8% discount rate.
Developing the calculations in an Excel sheet (see Appendix B), the following figure is
obtained for the SOFC-ST. The blue line represents the current spot electricity price in
Europe and the green one is the industrial price:
Figure 22: Comparison between SOFC-ST electricity price and spot price.
==PAGE:59==
As the previous figure shows, SOFC-ST plant could sell the electricity by around 0.1 $/kWh
in order to be feasible. Nevertheless, the current large-scale power plants are selling the
energy to the electricity market at 0.063 $/kWh, which means that the mentioned plant could
not compete with them. A feasible possibility for SOFC-ST would be to build it in an
industrial park with continuous processing and a significant electricity demand. For example,
this plant could supply electricity to a big industrial park with many factories producing
ceramic. These factories are characterized by high energetic consumptions, and they pay the
industrial tariff established in 0.115 $/kWh which is higher than the electricity produced by
SOFC-ST technology (0.1 $/kWh).
In regard to small/medium power plants, the following chart is drawn, where the green line
represents the electricity price of the industrial tariff. The purple one is the selling price of
electricity, based on a weighted average, since these small-scale plants supply electricity to
residential buildings and sell the excess energy to the electricity market (grid), as discussed
earlier.
Figure 23: Comparison between residential/industry electricity prices and estimated prices in
hybrid power plants
==PAGE:60==
From the Figure 23, it is noted that in most of the plants the electricity price considering a
discount rate of 8% is about 0.01$/kWh higher than with a discount rate of 4%.
When comparing SOFC selling electricity prices with the current prices paid by public and
private buildings, it is seen that residential buildings could reach more affordable prices
introducing this technology. This proves again that these plants would be profitable in small
distributed systems generating electricity close to the residential customers. On the other
hand, they could not generate energy to industries since nowadays industries have reduced
tariffs with more competitive prices (0,115 $/kWh).
As mentioned in the previous section, BG-SOFC-GT and BG-SOFC-ORC would not be
profitable, since as shown in the figure above, in order to become viable they should sell the
electricity at higher prices than the prices paid by residential consumers. The prices for the
BG-SOFC-GT are 0.203 $/kWh or 0.217 $/kWh while for the BG-SOFC-ORC are 0.221
$/kWh or 0.237 $/kWh, depending on the discount rate considered.
With regard to BG-SOFC-HE and BG-SOFC-AS, they are just at the price limit to be
profitable. The main advantage of these two plants is that, in addition to generate electricity,
they could also supply heating or cooling. Therefore, energy savings would be produced
because of the increment of the overall efficiency. The investment in these projects would
depend on
BG-SOFC-AS would be suitable for warm countries while
BG-SOFC-HE for hot countries.
SOFC-GT, SOFC-HE and BG-SOFC-ST are all economically feasible, because they could
sell the electricity at very competitive prices. SOFC-GT is the hybrid plant that could sell the
electricity at the lowest price which is 0.134 $/kWh or 0.144 $/kWh. SOFC-HE has a power
of 10 kW, therefore it could supply electricity to a big house or two small houses at lower
prices than the offered by the electricity market. The prices would be 0.144 $/kWh or 0.154
$/kWh. BG-SOFC-ST with a capacity of 7856 kW would be able to sell the electricity at
0.139 $/kWh or 0.145 $/kWh, values which are lower than current prices.
It has to be noted that in the chapter 5, BG-SOFC-ST was in financial losses according to the
economical balance. Its net present value was negative since it was calculated considering the
selling electricity price for the industry (0.115 $/kWh). However, in this chapter it has been
observed that this plant could sell the electricity by around 0.14 $/kWh in order to be feasible.
This means that this plant would not be able to sell the electricity to industries, but it could be
built close to residential buildings and supply electricity at affordable prices.
==PAGE:61==
The next flow diagram is a schematic presentation of the previous discussion:
In the case of SOFC-ST, its electricity price (0.1 $/kWh) appears in red color since it cannot
compete with the electricity price of current power plants (0.063 $/kWh). Therefore, it is not
feasible.
Figure 24: Flow diagram.
==PAGE:62==
7.Sensitivity analysis
7.1
BG-SOFC-ORC and BG-SOFC-GT analysis.
As discussed in the previous chapter, BG-SOFC-ORC and BG-SOFC-GT would be
unprofitable since they need to sell the electricity at a higher cost than the price set for the
householders and residential buildings.
Therefore, a sensitivity analysis was carried out in these two plants to evaluate the possible
solutions that could turn them into feasible alternatives.
In first place, the most representative components in the plants are studied to determine their
influence in the Total Capital Investment [$/kW] of the plants. In the case of BG-SOFC-ORC,
these components are the ORC, SOFC and catalytic burner as illustrated in the following
picture:
Figure 25: Sensitivity Analysis BG-SOFC-ORC (1).
The chart shows that a change in the price of ORC has the highest influence on Total Capital
Investment of the plant followed by catalytic burner and SOFC. The cost of SOCF stacks is
unlikely to be reduced in the future because this price was calculated assuming an increase in
the production of this technology, and the equation already includes this price reduction.
However, the cost of the catalytic burner and the ORC might drop due to technology
developments. If a simultaneous 20% reduction of ORC and catalytic burner costs are
==PAGE:63==
considered, the Total Capital Investment would decrease to 7811.46 $/kW, as shown in the
figure below.
Figure 26: Sensitivity Analysis BG-SOFC-ORC (2).
Thus, the 20% reduction referred to above would significantly decrease the TCI of the BG-
SOFC-ORC plant, allowing more affordable prices for the sale of electricity. However, this
technology still cannot compete with other SOFC hybrid plants using different bottoming
cycles.
In the case of BG-SOFC-GT, the most representative components are SOFC system, catalytic
burner and gas turbine. The sensitivity analysis is presented on the following page:
==PAGE:64==
Figure 27: Sensitivity analysis BG-SOFC-GT (1).
It is found that the gas turbine is the most relevant component for the Total Capital
Investment of BG-SOFC-GT. As regards SOFC system and catalytic burner, they have a
similar sensitivity, behaving in the same way. If the gas turbine and catalytic burner costs are
reduced by 20% in the near future, the Capital Investment of the plant would be around 7077
$/kW. Consequently, this type of plant may be established as an effective way of power
generation for residential consumers. The mentioned reduction is depicted in the following
chart:
Figure 28: Sensitivity analysis BG-SOFC-GT (2).
==PAGE:65==
Moreover, there are other factors that would be of possible interest in order to improve the
viability of these power plants. These elements are the maintenance, operating cost and
annual operating hours. The influence of these parameters in the net present value is
illustrated in the two figures below:
Figure 29: Sensitivity analysis of Net Present Value in BG-SOFC-GT plant.
In the case of BG-SOFC-GT, the previous graph shows that if the electricity is sold at the
current price for residential consumers (0.171 $/kW), the Net Present Value would be
-1559359 $, which means that the plant would be in financial losses. However, if the
company could reach a reduction of 10% in the operating costs, it would start making profits.
This can be done by increasing the efficiency of the plant, which is at present of 53%.
Another possible solution would be increasing the annual operating hours, which are at
present of 7500 hours/year. With an operating hours  increment about 18%, (8700
hours/year), the Net Present Value would become positive. However, the plant cannot work
8700 hours/year because of the time used in the maintenance operations. With respect to
maintenance costs, they are not very relevant for the Net Present Value analysis. Finally, if
the electricity could be sold to the consumers approximately 6% more expensive than the
current price, the plant could also be profitable.
==PAGE:66==
It can be understood that a reduction of 10% in the operating costs or an increment of 16% in
the annual operating hours would not be possible, but a combination of both with lowest
differences would be viable and effective. One example would be reducing 5% the operating
and maintenance cost and increasing 3% the operating hours, achieving a positive Net Present
Value with the same electricity price.
In the case of BG-SOFC-ORC, the corresponding graph is shown below:
Figure 30: Sensitivity analysis of Net Present Value in BG-SOFC-ORC plant.
In this case, variations in operating hours, maintenance and operating costs up to 20% are not
sufficient to achieve economic gains. Therefore, it can be assumed that BG-SOFC-ORC is not
viable with current technology and electricity prices.
In summary, BG-SOFC-ORC and BG-SOFC-GT are two new technologies that would not be
feasible at present because they should sell the electricity at significantly higher prices than
other plants. Nevertheless, further innovation and development of this technology could turn
the BG-SOFC-GT plant in a feasible investment.
As stated before, a positive NPV could be achieved if the catalytic burner and gas turbine
prices are decreased in the future, as well as reducing the maintenance and operating costs.
Regarding the BG-SOFC-ORC, it will not be profitable in the near future, unless the
government paid subsidies to the investor companies.
==PAGE:67==
7.2
Analysis of changes in the electricity price.
The price of the electricity might change throughout the lifetime of the plants. Inflation has
been considered in the study. However, there are other aspects to take into account such as a
possible economic crisis, changes in taxation or technological development.
Consequently, a sensitivity analysis was carried out in order to see how the change in the
electricity price would affect the Net Present Value of each power plant. This allows
companies to know which plants are more sensitive to the electricity price variation and
therefore to estimate the investment risk.
It has to be noted that the sensitivity analysis has been developed for a discount rate of 4%, in
other words, the investor considered is a public company. The sensitivity analysis is reflected
in the graphic below:
Figure 31: Sensitivity analysis according to the electricity price.
As shown in the figure, the SOFC-ST is the plant which has the minimum slope. This means
that it is the least sensitive power plant to changes in the electricity price. It occurs because
the SOFC-ST plant has the highest output power (41064 kW), and therefore it generates large
==PAGE:68==
amounts of electricity and the capital and operating cost per year are higher than in the other
plants. Thus, a possible change in the price of the electricity does not affect significantly the
final Net Present Value. However, the disadvantage of this plant is that belongs to large
power plants, therefore it could not be built close to the end-users and it should compete with
others large power stations which can generate power at lower prices.
At the other end of the scale appear BG-SOFC-AS and BG-SOFC-HE which are the most
sensitive plants, since they have a low power output about 120 kW. As a result, a small
reduction in the electricity price would decrease revenues, while maintenance, insurance and
interest costs would remain constant, producing a decrement of the Net Present Value.
The other power plants have a similar sensitivity. In the case of SOFC-GT a 5 percent
decrease in the electricity price, while all other parameters remained constant, would cause
the earnings in the year 20 to suffer a decline of 27% with respect to the current value.
In summary, the sensitivity of the net present value in hybrid Solid Oxide Fuel Cells plants
mainly depends on the size, which means that earnings of plants with large-scale power
generation are less sensitive to the variation of the electricity price. In small plants such as
BG-SOFC-HE, BG-SOFC-ORC and BG-SOFC-AS, the Net Present Value might change
significantly depending on the electricity sales price.
7.3
Operating costs scenario.
In the case of SOFC hybrid plants without biomass gasification system, the price of the
natural gas was set at 0.54 $/m 3. This price was obtained from calculating the average for
European countries.
However, the price of natural gas is volatile since it could be affected by numerous factors.
Notable among these are the depletion or discovery of resources, a change in demand, energy
crisis and interruption of gas supply from the supplier countries.
In this section, a future scenario is carried out in order to see the change in the operating costs
value, if the price of the natural gas is either reduced to 0.5 $/m 3 or increased to 0.6 $/m 3. This
investigation is shown in the following figure
price in terms of $/m 3
different plants.
==PAGE:69==
Figure 32: Operating costs scenario of SOFC hybrid plants without biomass gasification
system.
In the figure above, it can be seen that SOFC-HE has the highest operating costs in terms of
$/kW·year, while SOFC-GT has the lowest.  Even if the natural gas price is increased to 0.6
$/m3, SOFC-HE and SOFC-GT will remain profitable, as illustrated in tables below:
Table 11: Economical balance SOFC-HE (8% discount rate).
Table 12: Economical balance SOFC-GT (8% discount rate).
Regarding SOFC-ST, even if natural gas price is reduced to 0.5 $/m 3, this plant will not be
profitable. As explained in previous sections, it has a high size (41 MW) and therefore, its
main application is to sell the electricity to the grid (0.063 $/kW), being impossible to obtain
benefits with this tariff.
==PAGE:70==
8.Specific CO2 emission.
CO2 emissions contribute to global warming and power plants companies need to take
measures to control these emissions, since they pay a special taxation according to the amount
of carbon dioxide emitted.
In the SOFC hybrid plants, CO 2 is produced during the electrochemical reaction when natural
gas is converted into hydrogen, as well as in the combustion produced in the catalytic burner.
Therefore, the specific CO 2 emissions of each plant are of interest, and they are calculated in
an Excel sheet (see Appendix D) using the following steps:
where the molar base
 contained in the off gas is found in the output DNA file.
where the
 is known from the thermodynamic parameters.
5. Finally, the mass flow of CO 2 per net electrical power production is obtained as
follows:
(50)
(51)
(52)
(53)
(49)
==PAGE:71==
The specific CO2 emissions and efficiency for each plant are shown in the chart below:
As can be in the graphic, the three plants fired with natural gas (red line) work with a higher
efficiency than the plants with biomass gasification (green line). This increase of the
efficiency causes a decrease of the CO 2 emission. Therefore, there is a significant inverse
correlation between the efficiency and the CO 2 emission.
The SOFC-GT and SOFC-ST have the highest efficiency values of about 70%, while BG-
SOFC-AS and BG-SOFC-HE perform with the worst efficiency. However, in BG-SOFC-AS
and BG-SOFC-HE plants have been considered only the output electrical powers. If the
output refrigeration power in the absorption chiller of the BG-SOFC-AS is also taken into
account, the efficiency would be 52,05% instead of 30,96%. The BG-SOFC-HE efficiency
also would increase if the production of domestic hot water by means of the heat released is
considered (from 42.35% to 68.34%).
Considering the plants that integrate a biomass gasification (BG) system, the BG-SOFC-ORC
performs with the best efficiency (62,93%) and consequently it emits the lowest amount of
CO2 per kWel (0,5939 kg CO 2/kWh).
Figure 33: Specific CO2 emissions and efficiency.
==PAGE:72==
The following figure shows a comparison between the CO 2 emissions of SOFC hybrid plants
and the average for power generating facilities in the world [48].
Figure 34: Comparison of CO 2 emissions respect average.
As depicted in Figure 34, the three plants without a biomass gasification system emit
considerably less carbon dioxide than the worldwide average (yellow line). This is primarily
because these plants use twice (in the SOFC, as well as in the bottoming cycle) the natural gas
they are consuming and consequently, the overall efficiencies increase.
With regard to plants with a biomass gasification system, plants using GT, ST and ORC as a
bottoming cycle, slightly exceed the worldwide average. These plants use wood pellets as
fuel, therefore the overall plant efficiencies decrease compared to plants fueled by natural gas.
Regarding BG-SOFC-HE and BG-SOFC-AS, their emissions are significantly high. They are
using combined heat/cooling and power technology. Therefore, their emissions in terms of
[kg CO2/kWelectric h] are not representative. In order to compare with the worldwide average,
both kilowatt thermal and kilowatt electrical should be taken into consideration in the specific
CO2 emission calculation.
Although plants with a biomass gasification system emit more CO 2 per kWh than the plants
fueled with natural gas, Figure 34 is not completely representative, since wood pellets are
considered carbon neutral under the Kyoto Protocol [51]. This means that the net greenhouse
==PAGE:73==
gas emissions of the plants using biomass gasification can be considered zero. The reason is
that when the combustion of wood pellets takes places in the catalytic burner, the carbon
emitted to the atmosphere is the same as the carbon emitted by logs in the organic
decomposition produced in forests. As a consequence, there is a trade-off between the CO 2
absorbed by the threes from the atmosphere and the CO 2 emissions produced, either by the
catalytic combustion of wood pellets or organic decomposition.
Another advantage of biomass technology is that in Europe there are wide wood pellets
markets in countries such as Sweden and Austria.
Therefore, the two aforementioned aspects ensure a promising future for SOFC technology
using wood pellets as a fuel in biomass gasification systems.
==PAGE:74==
9.Conclusions and possible further work
Conclusions
The aim of this project was to analyze the feasibility of the SOFC technology combined with
existing power plants. These plants are either fueled by wood pellets in a biomass gasification
system or by natural gas. Depending on their characteristics and size, they are suitable for
different applications such as electrical grid, public and private buildings or residential
houses.
In the second chapter, eight power plants with different sizes were described. Plant
efficiencies extracted from DNA proved that SOFCs can perform efficiently over a wide
range of power outputs. The overall plant efficiencies range between 50% and 70%.
Therefore, SOFCs could be easily adapted effectively for small, medium and large scale
applications.
The costs of different plants in terms of $/kW were calculated in chapter 4. The results
showed that SOFC-ST has the lowest capital expenditures (1036 $/kW), while the capital
investment of BG-SOFC-ORC and BG-SOFC-GT are the highest (8798 and 7895 $/kW). It is
worth to note that plants with biomass gasification system include a pyrolysis and gasification
reactors in their layout. This is one of the reasons why investment costs increase compared to
plants fueled by natural gas. In addition, plants with biomass gasification system perform with
higher operating costs because of the lower efficiency. This decrement in the efficiency is
related to the use of wood pellets instead of natural gas. Moreover, it has been estimated that
for this kind of power plants the most relevant costs are the operating costs.
Although SOFC-ST has the lowest cost in terms of $/kW, this does not mean that it would be
economically viable, since it should be taken into consideration the area of application of each
power plant. The sector of application depends on the main characteristics of the plants such
as the size and efficiency. SOFC-ST belongs to large-scale size (41 MW) and it could not be
constructed close to the residential buildings. As a consequence, it should be suitable to sell
the electricity to the grid. Nowadays, large plants are selling the electricity to the grid with
prices of around 0.063 $/kWh. However, this plant would sell the produced electricity by
around 0.1 $/kWh in order to be feasible. As a result, this plant would not be profitable
compared with the current technology. A feasible alternative application of this plant might be
its construction close to a big industrial park with continuous processing. In this way, SOFC-
ST could supply the energy requirements at a lower price than the electricity market, since
there would not be additional costs for electric distribution.
Regarding small scale SOFC hybrid plants (less than 500 kW), they have a promising future
in certain applications. They could supply energy at low prices to public and private buildings
such as: sports facilities, universities, hotels, residential buildings and medical/shopping
centers.
==PAGE:75==
According to the economic study carried out, SOFC-GT could produce electricity at 0,134
$/kWh, while the price of producing electricity for SOFC-HE would be set in 0,144 $/kWh. In
other words, these small hybrid SOFC plants could supply electricity at lower prices than the
grid. SOFC-HE could be adapted in cold countries like Denmark, since it could be built close
to residential buildings, supplying electricity and using the waste heat for heating systems
(micro-cogeneration). On the other hand, BG-SOFC-AS could be used in hot countries like
Spain in order to meet the electricity and cooling requirements. BG-SOFC-ST and BG-SOFC-
HE could also supply electricity at affordable prices for public and private buildings, while
BG-SOFC-GT and BG-SOFC-ORC would not be feasible based on data previously obtained.
In the near future, a decrement of the investment cost could make SOFC technology
profitable even when the electricity is sold directly to the grid. In this case, SOFC-HE and
SOFC-GT would perform as peaking power plants, since they have short start-up times.
Therefore, these plants would run during the peak hours in order to support the base load
power plants. On the other hand, SOFC-ST would operate as base/intermediate load power
plant, since it has a long start-up time and large size. Regarding SOFC-AS, it is based on
combined cooling and power and it should work close to the end-users. The excess produced
electricity could be supplied to the grid.
As explained previously, operating costs represent a large share of the annual costs in this
type of plants. Fuel price could change due to many variables; consequently a sensitivity
analysis was carried out in the chapter 7 in order to estimate the influence of a possible
variation. The results suggested that if BG-SOFC-GT plants increase even more its overall
efficiency, then the operating costs will be reduced and these plants could turn into feasible
alternatives. In addition, the sensitivity of the total capital investment when the plant
components costs are changed was analyzed.  It was proved that a reduction in the price of the
catalytic burner and gas turbine would lower the total capital investment in the BG-SOFC-
GT, making it more feasible.
With regard to CO2 emissions, SOFC technology would achieve a significant reduction
compared to the worldwide average gas emissions. The waste heat produced in the SOFC
system is used in the bottoming cycle, increasing the overall efficiency. This emissions
reduction is particularly important for plants fueled with natural gas, which would emit less
than 0.4 kgCO2/kWh. Plants including a biomass gasification system would have slightly
higher emissions. However, they could play a primary role in the future since these plants use
wood pellets as fuel. Wood pellets are considered carbon neutral by renewable energy
policies. Consequently, SOFC with biomass gasification could be very promising in countries
like Denmark, where government wants to be fossil fuel free by 2050 [50].
In brief, SOFC technology presents both advantages and disadvantages for the generation of
electricity. Its strength point lies in the small-scale generation: when it is combined with heat
engine and gas turbine, it can produce electricity at very competitive prices compared to
current prices of electricity for residential consumers. On the other hand, when it is used for
large-scale and combined with a steam turbine, the electricity prices are not competitive with
==PAGE:76==
the ones obtained by the current large plants. If the same plants are considered with a biomass
gasification system, the selling electricity prices increase. However, these plants do not use
fossil fuels and governments of the most sustainable countries could invest in this technology
and provide incentives to the companies.
Recommendations for further work
This project represents a first step in the feasibility study of hybrid Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
based power plants. In order to carry out more detailed analysis on this topic, some
suggestions are given:
1. The equations used to calculate the purchased equipment cost were extracted from
different literature. In order to get a more robust model, these equations should be
validated with relevant data of providers.
2. The viability of each plant has been calculated for a specific size (power output). More
power levels should be included in the analysis to check if the results are similar or
not.
3. The economic parameters such as inflation, electricity and fuel prices have been
obtained as an average from the European countries. However, these parameters
should be estimated with greater detail for a particular country.
4. The discount rates considered in the feasibility analysis could have been investigated
with more accuracy depending on the characteristics of the specific power plant (size,
type of fuel, lifetime) and the country where the plant is settled.
5. Besides the applied economic methods, more sophisticated approaches could have
been taken into consideration.
6. SOFC combined with desalination units could also be considered as possible
applications. In this case, the heat released by the SOFCs could be effectively used in
order to produce potable water.
==PAGE:77==
==PAGE:78==
List of references
[1] Masoud Rokni, Thermodynamic analysis of an integrated solid oxide fuel cell cycle with
a rankine cycle. 2010.
[2]
Single-level
optimization of hybrid SOFC-GT power plant . 2006. Pp. 1169-1185.
[3] Masoud Rokni. Thermodynamic analysis of SOFC (solid oxide fuel cell) - Stirling hybrid
plants using alternative fuels , 2013.
[4] Masoud Rokni, Thermodynamic Investigation of an Integrated Gasification Plant with
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell and Steam Cycles. 2012.
[5] C. Bang-Møller, Masoud Rokni,
Thermodynamic performance study of biomass
gasification, solid oxide fuel cell and micro gas turbine hybrid systems. 2010.
[6] C. Bang-Møller, Masoud Rokni, B. Elmegaard. Exergy analysis and optimization of a
biomass gasification, solid oxide fuel cell and micro gas turbine hybrid system. 2011.
[7] Masoud Rokni. Thermodynamic and thermoeconomic analysis of a system with biomass
gasification, solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) and Stirling engine . 2014
[8] Masoud Rokni. Biomass gasification integrated with a solid oxide fuel cell and Stirling
engine. 2014.
[9] Pierobon L., Rokni M., Larsen U. and Haglind F. Thermodynamic analysis of an
integrated gasification solid oxide fuel cell plant with an organic cycle , Renewable Energy,
Vol. 60, pp. 226 234, 2013.
[10] S. Velumani, Carlo Enrique Guzmán, Ricardo Peniche and Ramon Vega.
Proposal
of a hybrid CHP system: SOFC / microturbine / absorption Chiller, November 2009.
[11] Masoud Rokni. Technoeconomy of different solid oxide fuel cell based hybrid cycles.
November 2014.
[12] Masoud Rokni. Plant characteristics of an integrated solid oxide fuel cell cycle and a
steam cycle. September 2010.
[13] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Combined Heat and Power Partnership .
Catalog of CHP Technologies,  September 2014.
[14] 
Gregor 
Hoogers. 
Fuel 
cell 
technology 
handbook , 
2003. 
URL:
http://books.google.es/books?hl=da&lr=&id=_IFmUIRHNH8C&oi=fnd&pg=PA1&dq=Hand
book+of+fuel+cell+performance.+Institute+of+Gas+Technology%3B+1995.&ots=ZDZMAii
3Hq&sig=-91XJ7G35_4aRSMVdO2uXKvbLgM#v=onepage&q&f=false
==PAGE:79==
[15] Alexandros Arsalis. Thermoeconomic modeling and parametric study of hybrid SOFC-
gas turbine-steam turbine power plants ranging from 1.5 to 10MWe . January 2008.
[16] Sleeve notes from A.J.Organ (2007) and. F.Starr (2001).
[17] Wolfgang Winkler and Hagen Lorenz. Design studies of mobile applications with
SOFC heat engine modules. April 2002. URL:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378775301010655
[18] M. Mozaffarian, R.W.R. Zwart, H. Boerrigter, E.P. Deurwaarder Biomass and
waste-related SNG production technologies. Technical, economic and ecological feasibility.
Rome (Italy) May 2004. URL:
http://www.biosng.com/fileadmin/biosng/user/documents/reports/rx04024.pdf
[19] European real-time Pellets Atlas. Development and promotion of a transparent
European Pellets Market. Munich (Germany), December 2009. URL:
http://ec.europa.eu/energy/intelligent/projects/sites/iee-
projects/files/projects/documents/pelletslas_pellet_market_overview_report_europe.pdf
[20] Greenlight Energy Solutions Corp. MSW Processing Technology, 2008
 2014. URL:
http://www.glescorp.com/en/energy_dep/technology_1.html
[21] KTH Biotechnology. Burning of wood. URL:
http://virtual.vtt.fi/virtual/innofirewood/stateoftheart/database/burning/burning.html
[22] Dow Chemical Company. DOWTHERM Q, Synthetic Organic Heat Transfer Fluid.
November 2001. URL:
http://msdssearch.dow.com/PublishedLiteratureDOWCOM/dh_0918/0901b8038091807e.pdf
?filepath=heattrans/pdfs/noreg/176-01467.pdf&fromPage=GetDoc
[23] Tomasz M. Mróz. Thermodynamic and economic performance of the LiBr
H2O single
stage absorption water chiller, April 2006.
[24] Consejería de comercio, Industria y Energía . Plan de eficiencia energética 2006-
2015.http://www.caib.es/conselleries/industria/dgener/user/portalenergia/pla_eficiencia_energ
etica/climatitzacio_2.es.html
[25] Casper Frimodt and Kim Frithjof Mygind. Integration of Solid Oxide Fuel Cells and
Absorption Cooling units, Master thesis, 2010.
[26] G.A. Florides, S.A. Kalogirou S.A. Tassou , L.C. Wrobel.
Design and construction of
a LiBr water absorption machine, Energy Conversion and Management, 2003.
==PAGE:80==
[27] Rober J. Braun. Tecnho-Economic Optimal Design of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Systems for
Micro-Combined Heat and Power Applications in the U.S.,  2010.
[28] Federico Ghirardo, Marco Santin, Alberto Traverso, Aristide Massardo . Heat
recovery options for onboard fuel cell systems,  2011.
[29] Maxim Lyubovsky, Subir Roychoudhury and Rene LaPierre . Catalytic partial
September 2004.
http://www.precision-combustion.com/High_Pressure_CPOX_methane.pdf
[30] James H. Gary Petroleum Refining Technology and Economics Fourth Edition , 2001.
URL: https://www.scribd.com/doc/30135416/Gary-J-amp-Handwerk-G-Petroleum-Refining-
Technology-2001
[31] Engineering page. Typical Overall Heat Transfer Coefficients.
http://www.engineeringpage.com/technology/thermal/transfer.html
[32] Matches' Process Equipment Cost Estimates
http://www.matche.com/equipcost/Default.html
[33] Kempegowda RS, Tran KQ, Skreiberg . Economic analysis of combined cycle biomass
gasification fuelled SOFC systems. International Conference on Future Environment and
Energy, 2011.
[34] Richard Turton, Richard C. Bailie, Wallace B. Whiting, Joseph A Shaeiwitz .
Analysis, Synthesis, and Design of Chemical Process. Third Edition , 2009.
[35] Trading Economics. Interest rates countries list. 2014
http://www.tradingeconomics.com/country-list/interest-rate,
[36] S. Pelster. Environomic Modeling & Optimization of Advanced Combined Cycle
Cogeneration Power Plants Including CO 2 Separation Options. Doctoral Thesis, advisors:
M.R. von Spakovsky, D.Favrat, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Switzerland,
1998.
[37] L. Blum, U. Packbier, I. C. Vinke, L.G. J. deHaart. Long-TermTesting of SOFC
Stacks at Forschungszentrum Jülich . November 2013.
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/fuce.201200151/pdf
[38] Energy and Environmental Analysis. Technology Characterization: Steam Turbines
December 2008. http://www.epa.gov/chp/documents/catalog_chptech_steam_turbines.pdf
[39] International Energy Agency , Key World Energy Statistics, 2014.
http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/KeyWorld2014.pdf
[40] FOEX Indexes, Pix Pellet Nordic Index, 2014.  http://www.foex.fi/biomass/
==PAGE:81==
[41] Committee on Climate Change Discount rates for low-carbon and renewable
generation technologies,  April 2011.
http://www.oxera.com/Oxera/media/Oxera/downloads/reports/Oxera-report-on-low-carbon-
discount-rates.pdf?ext=.pdf
[42] Executive Summary. http://www.iea.org/textbase/npsum/eleccostsum.pdf
[43] KPMG Global Energy & Natural Resources. Denmark Taxes and incentives for
renewable energy.
http://www.kpmg.com/global/en/issuesandinsights/articlespublications/taxes-and-incentives-
for-renewable-energy/pages/denmark.aspx
[44] European Electricity Index (ELIX)  URL: http://www.epexspot.com/en/market-
data/elix/index-table/2015-01-18/
[45] Eurostat http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/main/home
[46] Eurostat URL:
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/graph.do?tab=graph&plugin=1&pcode=ten00117&language
=en&toolbox=data
[47] Green Building Press, http://www.buildingforafuture.co.uk/autumn03/wood_pellets.php
[48] Siemens Global Website, Environmental Portfolio.
http://www.siemens.com/about/sustainability/en/environmental-portfolio/products-
solutions/fossil-power-generation/combined-cycle-power-plants.htm
[49] Ritsumeikan University, Solid Oxide Fuel Cells with instantaneous start-up will
revolutionize the future market for fuel cells.
http://www.ritsumei.ac.jp/eng/html/research/areas/feat-projects/energy/10-08-fuelcell.html/
[50] The official website of Denmark. URL: http://denmark.dk/en/green-living/strategies-
and-policies/independent-from-fossil-fuels-by-2050/
[51] Don Black, Hugh Overholt, John Chaffee. Wood pellet production, 2012.
http://www.newbernsj.com/opinion/editorials/wood-pellet-production-1.58489
==PAGE:82==
Appendix
In this section, the following tables show the thermodynamic data of all the nodes in the
power plants. Data has been obtained simulating the different plants by means of the software
Dynamic Network Analysis.
==PAGE:83==
==PAGE:84==
==PAGE:85==
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
==PAGE:96==
In this section the economical balance carried out in SOFC-GT plant is shown, as an example.
The same structure has been used in all the plants studied. The condition in order to calculate
the selling electricity price was considering the Net Present Value positive from the year 15.
Table 13: Economical balance for SOFC-GT
==PAGE:97==
The Total Capital Investment corresponds to the sum of purchased equipment cost and
additional cost of each element in the power plant. The purchased equipment costs were
calculated with the equations described in the chapter 3, while the additional costs were
calculated as a percentage of the purchased equipment cost.
The following table summarizes the calculations carried out in the SOFG-GT in order to
obtain the Total Capital Investment in terms of $/kW.
Table 14: Total Capital Investment for SOFC-GT
Moreover, the pie chart below shows the proportion that each component represents in the
Total Capital Investment:
Figure 35: Share of each component in Total Capital Investment for SOFC-GT
[%].
==PAGE:98==
The Total Capital Investment for the remaining plants is presented below:
Table 15: Total Capital Investment for SOFC-HE
Table 16: Total Capital Investment for SOFC-ST
==PAGE:99==
Table 17: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-HE
Table 18: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-GT
==PAGE:100==
Table 19: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-ST
Table 20:  Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-AS
Table 21: Total Capital Investment for BG-SOFC-ORC
==PAGE:101==
Regarding the calculation of CO 2 emissions, the following tables show the method applied for
SOFC-GT as an example:
Table 22: CO2 emissions for SOFC-GT
==PAGE:102==
