==PAGE:1==
Anne Soﬁe Brodersen L¨utken (s122529)
CO2 targets and climate policy
modelled in a small open economy
Master’s Thesis, August 2015
==PAGE:2==
CO2 targets and climate policy modelled in a small open economy
This report was prepared by:
Anne Soﬁe Brodersen L¨utken
Advisor:
Lise-Lotte Pade, Senior Researcher at System Analysis, DTU Management Engi-
neering
DTU Management Engineering
System Analysis
Produktionstorvet
DTU – Building 424
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tlf. 4525 4800
Project period:
January 2015 - August 2015
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Sustainable Energy Engineering
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank my supervisor Lise-Lotte Pade for
giving me the opportunity for working with such an interesting, but also challenging,
ﬁeld, and to thank her for her down-to-earth approach to thesis writing, which has
prevented many meltdowns. Furthermore, I would like to thank Ida Græsted Jensen
who took the time to look at my previous model code in GAMS. It helped a lot.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
3
1
Introduction
4
2
Climate policies in small open developed economies
6
2.1
Examples of climate policies in small open economies . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Climate policies in small open economies in the literature
. . . . . .
8
2.3
Timing of climate policies and induced technological change . . . . .
10
2.4
Modelling climate change policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Knowledge spillover eﬀects
15
3.1
Knowledge spillover eﬀects in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Foreign vs. domestic knowledge spillovers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Foreign knowledge spillover eﬀect - the deciding factors
. . . . . . .
17
4
Investigation of the optimal climate policy; the model in the present
study
19
5
The model
21
5.1
Introducing the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Emission sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Abatement Equipment Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
The R&D sector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.5
The government
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Simulations
29
6.1
The ﬁrst analysis: Investigation of the eﬀect of new foreign ideas, nF
t
30
6.2
The second analysis: Investigation of the eﬀect of existing foreign
ideas, NF
0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Third analysis: Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
Results
32
7.1
The three scenarios – the eﬀect of new foreign ideas, nF
t
. . . . . . .
32
7.2
The eﬀect of the initial existing foreign ideas, NF
0 . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3.1
Sensitivity analysis for the Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3.2
Sensitivity analysis for the three scenarios . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Discussion
45
1
==PAGE:4==
9
Conclusion
49
A Derivation of ϕ
50
B Graphs from Greaker and Pade
52
C Calculations to sensitivity analysis
53
2
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This study examines how an optimal carbon tax path should be set for a small open
and developed economy if national CO2 emissions are restricted by a CO2 concen-
tration target. The investigations are done by establishing an endogenous growth
model that assumes R&D knowledge accumulation and includes both knowledge
spillover eﬀects from the domestic and a foreign country. The study particularly
focuses on how foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects inﬂuence the optimal carbon tax
path. Results are obtained by running simulations for three diﬀerent scenarios: A
scenario where foreign knowledge spillovers come from a foreign country with pro-
gressive technological change, a scenario where foreign knowledge spillovers come
from a foreign country with regressive technological change and a scenario where
foreign knowledge spillovers come from a foreign country with passive (ie. constant)
technological change. The results show that the optimal carbon tax path is in line
with the ﬁndings of the endogenous growth literature that includes R&D knowl-
edge accumulation: The tax is set low for the near future and gets higher with time.
The result is that abatement is postponed to the future. The results furthermore
show that including foreign knowledge spillover in the model changes the optimal
tax path both with respect to shape and relative tax level: When including for-
eign spillover eﬀects from a foreign country with a progressive technological change
the optimal tax path and overall abatement cost are lowered. But if the foreign
spillover eﬀects come from a foreign country with a regressive or passive techno-
logical change the optimal tax path and overall abatement cost are increased. To
the author’s knowledge the study is the ﬁrst in the endogenous growth literature to
successfully model a small open and developed economy in an endogenous growth
model that includes foreign knowledge spillovers.
3
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Ever since the eﬀects of anthropogenic CO2 emissions began to be taken serious in
the early sixties and scientiﬁc investigations were initiated on the subject (Harding,
2007), there has been an increasing focus on human induced climate change. The
number of scientiﬁc reports on climate change has grown rapidly in the past two
decades along with improved scientiﬁc approaches to climate change investigations
(Treut et al., 2007). It is especially the large reports on climate change published
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that have fuelled the
public focus on the severe eﬀects of climate change. The warnings from the IPCC
reports and from scientists in the climate change literature are getting more insisting
with the ongoing discoveries of new critical climate risks – the last discovery was
published as recent as July 2015 and it announced that the former predicted see level
rise is strongly underestimated (Hansen et al., 2015). Publications like these and the
warnings from institutions like IPCC have helped to move the public and political
consensus on climate change: Now, pressure is building up on world leaders to
take action from climate research scientist, non-proﬁt organizations, IPCC, several
head of states and the beginning uproar from the world citizens, last seen when the
Dutch people ﬁled and won a lawsuit against the Dutch government for having an
unambitious climate change policy (Howard, 2015).
The increasing pressure from several fronts means that governments around the
world are starting to show political will to implement climate policy goals: An
agreement between USA and China was entered in 2014 with agreements on grad-
ual reductions of national emissions along with the European Commission’s new
emission reduction goals towards 2030. And as a consequence of the new emis-
sion reduction goals, president Barack Obama announced in summer 2015 the new
Clean Power Plan for USA that plans to reduce CO2 emissions from all national
power plants. These initiatives mean that by December 2015 at the COP21 meeting
in Paris three of the biggest polluters in the world will have upgraded their CO2
emission reduction goals. This may build the foundation of ﬁnally reaching a wider
international climate policy agreement between multiple countries of the world.
If negotiations about an international CO2 emission reduction agreement are ac-
complished at the COP21 meeting in Paris, the consequence would be that emission
reduction goals should be carried out nationally for the participating countries. But
4
==PAGE:7==
since every nation is diﬀerent with respect to political foundation, welfare and tax
systems, trade policies, technological progress, wealth and so on, the emission re-
duction goals should be implemented through national climate policies that are
individually designed for each country. Therefore, each government needs to ad-
dress the issue on how to decide on a nationwide climate policy. In policy decision
making processes cost is one of the main aspects that are considered, and hence
the government for a given country would like to know a way to implement climate
policies to the lowest cost.
The study presented in this report addresses the speciﬁc issue of how a government
can set a climate policy the cheapest way possible in order to obey an externally
set emission reduction goal. The study is founded on following problem statement:
The objective of this study is to investigate the optimal climate policies for small
open and developed economies. More speciﬁcally to model the optimal carbon taxa-
tion path for a small open developed economy with a focus on the eﬀects of foreign
knowledge spillovers. The study is carried out for a small open and developed econ-
omy since such an economy represents many of the world countries that might need
to implement a carbon tax in the future, given that an international CO2 emission
reduction agreement in COP21 in Paris has been completed. The model used in
the investigation is based on the endogenous growth model developed by Romer
(1990), and the climate policy implemented is a carbon tax. As far as the author is
informed, the present study is the only one that successfully investigates the eﬀects
of foreign knowledge spillover on the optimal carbon tax for a small open developed
economy. It is beyond the scope of this study to investigate the beneﬁts of other
climate policies.
The report is structured so that chapter 2 gives an overview of climate policy in
small open economies along with the modelling of climate policies, chapter 3 ex-
plains knowledge spillover eﬀects, domestic as well as foreign, chapter 4 summarizes
the climate policy model in the present study, chapter 5 presents the model in de-
tails and chapter 6 explains how the simulations of the model are run. The results
and discussion of results and model are presented in chapter 7 and 8, respectively,
and ﬁnally, chapter 9 draws a general conclusion.
5
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 2
Climate policies in small open
developed economies
This chapter touches upon some aspects of climate policies in small open developed
economies. Section 2.1 gives examples on current climate policies for four diﬀerent
small open developed economies, while section 2.2 draws some general tendencies
about the economic consequenses of climate policies in small, open and developed
economies as it is presented in the literature.
Section 2.3 addresses the design
of climates change policies with respect to timing and introduces the concept of
induced technological change, while the last section, section 2.4, goes through some
aspects in relation to climate change policy modelling.
2.1
Examples of climate policies in small open economies
In general, a small open economy is characterized by being aﬀected by surrounding
big economies, with respect to the interest rate for instance, but is unable to re-
versely aﬀect the economies around it (Guerron-Quintana, 2013). Another property
of the small open economy is that it has a great openness to trade but only takes
part in a small share of the collected world trade (Guerron-Quintana, 2013). This
is coherent with the perception that small, open economies are non-competitive
internationally - according to WTO (WTO, 2002). But the small open economies
such as the small European states are also characterized by being able to specialize
in niche markets with an ability to innovative continuously, which gives them an
competitive advantage (Gram, 2013; Katzenstein, 1985).
According to WTO (2002), it is hard to deﬁne a small open economy since it could
be deﬁned by population size, vulnerability, trade shares, per capita income, etc.
and since none of the economies that are denoted small and open share all character-
istics. Schmitt-Groh´e and Uribe (1998) have a more sharp deﬁnition on a small open
economy, namely that it is an economy where interest rates and world prices are
independent on domestic features of the respective country. According to Schmitt-
Groh´e and Uribe almost all countries in the world are small open economies with
Denmark, The Netherlands, Switzerland, Austria, New Zealand, Australia, Canada
and Norway as examples of developed small economies and USA, Japan, Germany
6
==PAGE:9==
and UK as examples of big economies.
Focusing on the climate policies for some the listed small open economies, it can be
seen from the results of the Climate Change Performance Index (CCPI) for 2015
(Burck et al., 2014) that Denmark, Norway and Sweden along with Switzerland
have good climate policies, whereas especially Australia and Canada have very
poor climate policies along with The Netherlands and New Zealand.
Denmark is taking the lead in CCPI due to major improvements in emissions (the
downward trend has grown 19% in the last ﬁve years), which is due to a progressive
policy in the energy sector with feed-in-tariﬀs for renewable energy production,
ambitious green transition plans and energy saving obligations both for the energy
sector, but also for manufacturers and the building industry (Burck et al., 2014).
This is backed up by an introduction of carbon taxes in 1992 that for instance builds
on tax on heating for households and industries, general carbon taxes for industries
(Andersen, 2004) as well as increasing CO2 tax on fossil fuels (OECD Database).
In summing up, the Danish policy instruments can roughly be seen as a mix of tax
(and the mandatory EU quotas), agreements and subsidies. With these achievings
Denmark sets an example of how an ambitious climate policy can be implemented
(Burck et al., 2014).
Sweden is the second best in the CCPI, which is due to major reductions in emissions
primarily from the residential sector (Burck et al., 2014). Sweden’s energy taxation
history goes back to the 70’s like the Danish, and the country introduced speciﬁc
carbon taxes in the early nineties as well. The carbon taxes were set to start low
and gradually rise with several industry tax exceptions to avoid carbon leakage
(industries moving to other countries and polluting there) and avoid damaging the
competitiveness of the nation (Hammar and ˚Akerfeldt, 2011). Generally in Sweden
the carbon taxes for industries are lower than the carbon taxes for households –
contrary to the case of Denmark where most of the environmental taxes are levied
on companies (CFE Portal, 2015).
This means overall that Sweden bases their
environmental policy highly on environmental taxes - along with subsidies (OECD,
2014).
The reason for the poor performance of Australia and Canada in the CCPI is due
to the roll back of the existing climate policy by Prime Minister Abbott’s hand and
Canada’s lack of initiating policymaking (Burck et al., 2014), respectively. Critical
voices claim that this is due to protection of the carbon heavy export industries of
Australia and Canada (Naughten, 2014), indicating that lobbyism from the carbon
heavy industries is the underlying reason (Medhora, 2015)1. This could be plausible
since Australia has the second largest export of coal and Canada is a large exporter
of bitumen from their tar sand. Furthermore, Australia and Canada have a history
for refusing to agree to the Kyoto Protocol (Jones, 2014) and this has evoked critics
who state that the two prime ministers are working against international climate
policies agreements deliberately (Naughten, 2014). In general, the two countries
are characterized by having almost no environmental taxes on federal level, but
several on individual state level (OECD Database, 2015), which illustrates the lack
1That lobbyism in fact is a heavy factor to inﬂuence the decision making of politicians is
indicated by the many studies conducted on the subject, where Frederiksson and F¨unfgelt is some
of them, (Frederiksson, 1997), (F¨unfgelt and Schulze, 2009))
7
==PAGE:10==
of federal environmental initiatives.
Sweden and Denmark have reached high environmental policy standards with ex-
tensive tax and subsidies programs together with agreements across sectors. One of
the reasons for the ambitious Danish environmental policy can be ascribed to the
perception of competitiveness; in Denmark an ambitious climate policy is perceived
as critical to achieve long term competitiveness via innovation and creation of niche
technologies (Gram, 2013). In contrast to this, for Canada and Australia it seems
to be a strong lobbying activity that underlies their lack of climate policies. The dif-
ferences ﬁrst and foremost bear witness of a current lack of ambitious international
climate agreements that make heavily polluting countries take responsibility. But it
also shows that several diﬀerent factors can contribute to the decision making pro-
cess about undertaking a climate policy - and they can all be boiled down to which
policy is considered to be the economically responsible one. In relation to this,
an ongoing discussion in the climate change policy literature concerns whether an
ambitious climate policy economically pays oﬀor not. The following section looks
in to the diﬀerent theoretical consequences of ambitious climate policies presented
in the literature.
2.2
Climate policies in small open economies in the lit-
erature
The climate policy literature has a role to play in policy making processes by
providing the background for the decision makers to make informed choices. Hereby,
uncertainties concerning both climate change and impacts of climate policies can be
reduced, making the decision makers more prone to take action 2 (but seen from the
previous section, this is not always done). Studies have for several decades tried to
help out decision makers by addressing the delicate subject of economical impacts
of climate change policies. The studies have tried to identify the consequences of
diﬀerent climate policies through cost-eﬀective or cost-beneﬁt analyses, for small
open economies among others, but the ﬁndings point in multiple directions.
One focus point of the many disagreements in the literature is whether an ambitious
climate policy inhibits economic activities, competitiveness and private welfare or
not. Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1994b) address the impact of climate policies
on economic activities in their study from 1994. Here they use a theoretical model
framework to examine how the enhanced focus on climate in politics impacts public
ﬁnances, employment and domestic capital stock. One of the main conclusions is
that seen through the pessimistic lens, an environmental tax reduces the employ-
ment and the general economic activities if abatement technology productivity is
decreasing with abatement and the sensitivity of the production sector towards the
price of resources is low. This scenario also results in capital ﬂight from the domes-
tic country due to the liberal trade policy of the small open economy (Bovenberg
and van der Ploeg, 1994b). In addition to this, Adu (2013) shows that an ambitious
climate policy can result in the domestic production moving to other less environ-
mentally strict countries (the pollution heaven eﬀect or carbon leakage). This is
2Discussed in detail by the IPCC’s Fifth Assesment Report Edenhofer et al. (2014)
8
==PAGE:11==
found to inﬂuence the long run growth negatively, especially if the country is a net
importer of goods. So both production and capital ﬂight eﬀects may occur in the
small open economies due to their liberal trade policies.
In addition to the ﬁndings of negative consequences of climate policies, another
conclusion can be found in the literature: Climate policies increase the investment
in clean energy technologies and lead to growth in this way. Bovenberg and van der
Ploug (1994b) present in their study from 1994 an optimistic case in addition to
their negative, where the productivity of abatement technologies is non-decreasing
and the sensitivity towards resource prices is higher. In this case, the environmental
improvement is reached through investments in cleaner technologies (opposite to
the lower economical activity). Furthermore, Bovenberg and Ploug state that the
fall in economic activity could be an initial reaction, whereas in the long run a
substitution of dirty factor with clean ones could be more feasible. Greaker and
Rosendahl (2006) likewise report a positive eﬀect of environmental policies; they
result in an increased investment and hence growth within the cleantech sector.
They state that a higher environmental tax means higher domestic competition
within the abatement sector, which results in a lower abatement price. But due to
the liberal trade policies of a small open economy this eﬀect could beneﬁt foreign
abatement technology producers as well as the domestic, depending on the nature
of the climate and trade policies (Greaker and Rosendahl, 2006).
Another large discussion in the climate policy literature is whether national environ-
mental policies will decrease international competitiveness or not (Copeland, 1994).
Ulph shows in a study from 1996 that if environmental policies are only imple-
mented in some countries, in a framework of multiple countries with free trade and
strategic behaviour, the market share for countries with environmental policies will
drop (substantially more for environment standards than for environmental taxes)
(Ulph, 1996). Furthermore, the study shows that if policies are implemented for all
countries in the framework, no loss of competitiveness will happen. Consequently,
diﬀerent climate policies across countries could lead to diﬀerences in competitive-
ness. In addition, the OECD report ”Linkage between Environmental Policy and
Competitiveness” ﬁnds that competitiveness could be impacted negatively by ”re-
ducing demand for the ﬁrm’s output, increasing input prices, imposing transaction
costs, imposing new cost elements on a ﬁrm and adversely aﬀecting productivity”
(OECD, 2010). Conversely, a number of positive eﬀects on competitiveness from
environmental policies are identiﬁed by the report: improved resource eﬃciency,
improved stakeholder relations, improved marked access, creation of new business,
product diﬀerentiation, etc. The net impact of these beneﬁcial and adverse eﬀects
on competitiveness could diﬀer in the long and short term. But the report makes
clear that no empirical evidence exists for the theoretical claim that environmental
policies mostly have negative results for competitiveness. This conclusion is backed
up in the ”Environmental Policy and Competitiveness” report from 1997 that ﬁnds
little evidence for negative eﬀect on competitiveness, and further state that the
negative eﬀects of climate policies are compensated by recycling tax revenues (The
double dividend eﬀect) (Barker and K¨ohler, 1996).
Recycling of environmental taxes is the subject for Stoschek in 2007, who ﬁnds that
the negative eﬀects of strict environmental policies are fully compensated by the
government, who turns protectionistic and provides indirect subsidies to the imple-
9
==PAGE:12==
mented industries (Stoschek, 2007). The result is that the polluting industries in a
small open economy will experience a net gain from a strict environmental policy,
she ﬁnds. As an example, Stoschek mentions the implementation of the European
emission trading system where industries across countries were compensated by re-
ceiving free emission permits. Such a compensation by annulling the transaction
cost is actually a recommended tool in the OECD report (OECD, 2010). Eliste
and Frederiksson (2002) likewise ﬁnd that a more strict environmental policy in a
sector is compensated by policy adjustments from the government.
The positive eﬀects on competitiveness is exempliﬁed by Klaudia Gram (2013) who
ﬁnds that key political players within Danish energy and climate politics mention an
ambitious climate policy as means for international long term competitiveness. The
competitiveness is in this case strengthened through formation of niche markets,
innovation and through a decrease in national dependency on imports. Gram along
with Hammar and ˚Akerfeldt (2011) opens up for the possibility that Denmark and
Sweden could serve as inspiration for other small open economies for undertaking
ambitious climate policies. In this way, one could imagine that the ﬂexible economic
nature and continuous innovation progress for the small open economy could make
it advantageous to set an ambitious climate policy that could boost the development
of new abatement technologies and thereby secure a share of new niche markets.
So overall, even if the reports of possible negative eﬀects of ambitious climate
policies like loss of competitiveness, decrease in the economic activities and capital
ﬂight are numerous, and many governments worldwide base their climate policies
on them, there still exist many reports on positive economical aspects of climate
change policies and governments that base their ambitious climate change policy
on these reports.
2.3
Timing of climate policies and induced technologi-
cal change
When a government’s decision of taking action to reduce CO2-emissions is done,
the next hurdle is to design a proper policy. There exist multiple political tools for
reducing environmental and climate impact of a country, but the more common ones
are subsidies, taxes, quotas and diﬀerent kinds of regulations. All these policy tools
correct diﬀerent kinds of market failures: As an example, carbon tax and quotas
take care of externalities in the price of output, subsidies increase the incentive for
private ﬁrms to invest in R& D for instance (Heggedal and Jacobsen, 2011) and
regulations can cover multiple market failures 3. Of these policy tools, carbon tax
is often mentioned as the most eﬃcient choice since it can be quite general, simple
and hence cheap to implement and is able to change consumer behavior (Edenhofer
et al., 2014).
When designing a climate policy the decision maker must also consider the time
3Greaker and Rosendahl state that subsidies are industry policies since they apply to spe-
ciﬁc industries, and carbon tax and quotas are environmental policies since they internalize the
externalities connected with CO2 emissions on a more broad basis (Greaker and Rosendahl, 2006)
10
==PAGE:13==
proﬁle for the policy design4. The timing of environmental policies is both impor-
tant climate wise and economic wise and there are plenty arguments for addressing
the timing issue in the literature: Ulph and Ulph (1994) argue that a non-changing
carbon taxation pathway (tax path) does not change the utilization of fossil fu-
els, which a policy ought to, and furthermore, that the aﬀect of CO2 on climate
change should be a deciding factor for timing policies. IPCC stated in their ”Cli-
mate Change” report from 1995 (Bruce et al., 1995) that the economical risks by
starting abatement early should be evaluated against the economical risks of de-
laying abatement. But most often when an optimal tax path is found in scientiﬁc
studies it is not the depletion of fossil fuels nor the eﬀect of CO2 on climate that
is a deciding factor, it is the direct economic implementation of the policy (and
not even the long term economical eﬀects of climate change and adaptation). This
focus reﬂects the prioritizations of the politicians in their decision making process
(Edenhofer et al., 2014).
Concerning the economic point of view, Wigley, Richels and Edmond (Wigley et al.,
1996) argue that the cheapest way of abating is to wait to do it until the far future.
They identify four reasons for that: 1) you can exploit a positive return on capital.
Money in the bank generates positive return, which would not be the case if used, 2)
The stock of existing energy technologies is expensive to place at once; the existing
energy technologies may be long lived and hence, it will be cheaper to replace them
gradually when they are exhausted and have reached the end of their economic life,
3) Technological progress will make abatement technologies cheaper in the future
or more eﬃcient and hence in either way save money, 4) Since CO2 emitted sooner
than later is exposed to a longer period of decomposition in the carbon cycle, late
abatement should result in less accumulated CO2 (from this argument).
The third argument (technological progress) to why carbon taxes should start low
and get higher with time should be nuanced since there are many views in the
literature on how exactly technological change (TC) is driven, or more precisely, how
technology knowledge or knowhow is accumulated. When modelled and described
in the literature TC can either be viewed as exogenous or endogenous. Concerning
the endogenous TC, internal factors within the speciﬁc economy drive the change,
and concerning the exogenous TC, external factors outside the speciﬁc economy
drive the change. The endogenous technology change was originally formulated by
Romer (1994) (along with other contributors) where economical long term growth
was attributed to endogenous technology change (innovation) instead of exogenous
unspeciﬁc technological change previously assumed by the neoclassic models. The
endogenous TC is referred to as induced technological change or ITC. An induced
technology change could for instance be driven by policies, ie. a carbon tax that
drives the demand for abatement technologies and hence the investments in research
and development (R&D). This means that when including ITC there is suddenly a
positive side eﬀect to carbon tax and quotas: they spur technology innovation.
ITC is the most prevailing view on TC in the climate policy literature and within
this, two theories for knowledge accumulation dominates: The learning by doing
4In this section multiple names are ascribed to the concept of policy design, because diﬀerent
studies denote it diﬀerently. The time proﬁle for the climate policy design is called climate policy
path, abatement path, emission reduction path, carbon tax path for instance, but all refer to the
overall same concept
11
==PAGE:14==
theory and the R&D theory (Gerlagh et al., 2009). The ﬁrst indicates that knowl-
edge advancement (and hence TC) is happening while technology is used and evalu-
ated (Goulder and Mathai, 1999). The second indicates that knowledge (and hence
TC) is accumulated through R&D. Goulder and Mathai (1999) found by modelling
a closed, big economy in an endogenous growth model that with an R&D driven
TC the abatement is shifted towards the future, where the abatement path for the
learning by doing case is more ambiguous. The R&D result is backed up by Greaker
and Pade (2009) who likewise used an endogenous growth model to examine the
optimal tax path in a big closed economy including knowledge spillovers: Greaker
and Pade ﬁnd that carbon taxes should start low and increase with time. Ulph and
Ulph (1994) ﬁnd that the carbon tax should rise with time and fall subsequently.
Goulder and Mathai explain this tax path result with the argument that future
abatement is cheaper compared to current abatement because the technology has
been allowed to advance (which reduce the price on abatement equipment). This
result for an emission reduction path is the most common in the endogenous growth
literature for R&D accumulation.
Concerning the learning-by-doin knowledge accumulation Gr¨ubler and Messner
(1998) argued that the emission path derived by Wigley, Richels and Edmonds
is based on an assumption about exogenous TC and ﬁnd that by changing the TC
to endogenous with the learning-by-doing approach, the emission pathway shifts to
lower emissions in the near-term. This means that the emissions should be reduced
right away. Zwaan et al. (2002) likewise ﬁnd that early emission reduction should
be taken on in order to meet an emission constraint in their macroeconomic climate
model including endogenous TC by learning-by-doing. In general, economic models
for endogenous growth with ITC give a climate change policy path of either starting
low and going towards a higher policy level with time for the R&D driven approach
(through later abatement investment), or an climate change policy path that starts
high and goes towards a lower level of policy with time for the learning by doing
approach (Gerlagh et al., 2009)(through up-front investment in abatement tech-
nologies). But S¨oderholm and Klaassen (2007) suggest that in reality ITC might
be a combination of both R&D and learning-by-doing and hence, the abatement
path becomes more complex.
In the section above the timing of carbon emission reductions is both expressed as
timing of abatement, carbon policies and emissions – but the three terms are not
interchangeable: The carbon emissions path is the ﬁnal result and abatement and
climate change policies are the steps towards it. This is expressed by Schneider and
Goulder (1997), who state that abatement pathways and policy pathways should not
be confused as one, but should be separated into two diﬀerent terms – and that this
separation could annul the contradictions of learning-by-doing and R&D emission
reduction paths. According to Schneider and Goulder, a short term (immediate)
carbon policy is crucial in order to prepare for a delayed emission abatement in the
future. They thus separate the knowledge accumulation eﬀort from the abatement
eﬀort with a time lag and ﬁnd that an abatement policy should come ﬁrst in order
to have abatement in the future. This is in opposition to Greaker and Pade (2009)
who model policy and abatement close together timewise.
Up until this point, the chapter has been addressing emission reduction pathways
from a more economical point of view where the studies used have modelled en-
12
==PAGE:15==
vironmental impacts of CO2 emissions as an externally applied emission reduction
goal. The underlying premise, expressed by Wigley et al., for even considering the
economical aspect when choosing emission reduction path is that the “cumulative
emissions are approximately independent of the emission pathway” (Wigley et al.,
1996). This argument or should we say, assumption, justiﬁes an economical priori-
tization of the climate policy pathway. The assumption is also connected to the fact
that a constant CO2 decay rate is assumed. This assumption means that the growth
and decline of the CO2 stock is seen as a reversible process. But this may not be the
case as Farzin and Tahvonen (1996) point out since the carbon cycle is complicated
and includes a predicted slowing in ocean carbon uptake and a predicted increase
in the permanent share of the CO2-emission that stays in the atmosphere. Farzin
and Tahvonen furthermore show that the tax path is very sensitive to the modelled
CO2 stock and that caution should be taken when modelling it. In a second study
from the same year, Farzin (1996) investigated the optimal abatement path in a
dynamic model, where resource depletion and CO2 stock were taken into account.
The optimal abatement path proved to be immediate abatement with increasing
rates.
So where Pade and Greaker and Goulder and Mathai have tehcnological change as
the main focus in their model with external set CO2 emission targets, Farzin et.
al. have the CO2 stock and natural resource depletion as focus with an externally
applied abatement technology.
This proves that there are diﬀerent approaches
to modelling emission reduction paths and that the two diﬀerent methods give
very diﬀerent results. The question is whether the irreversible nature of resource
depletion and carbon stock growth should be ruling out the economical way of
approaching climate policies.
2.4
Modelling climate change policies
When investigating the results of diﬀerent climate policies in the literature it can
be diﬃcult to do it empirical, since it might be hard to separate the results of en-
vironmental policies from all other policies and factors that can inﬂuence the out-
come. We saw for instance in section 2.2 that trade policies and climate policies are
intertwined and the example of Denmark’s and Sweden’s policies show that imple-
mentations of climate policies can be diﬀerent even in countries that are somewhat
similar. Of these reasons (and probably many more) modelling and simulations are
a widely used tool in the literature to assess the results of diﬀerent climate policies.
This is also reﬂected by the fact that all the climate policy studies treated in this
report almost solely are model based ((Bovenberg and van der Ploeg, 1994b; Adu,
2013; Greaker and Rosendahl, 2006; Copeland, 1994; Ulph, 1996; Stoschek, 2007;
Greaker and Pade, 2009; Goulder and Mathai, 1999) and many more).
Climate policy models, or Integrated Assessment Models (IAM) 5, can be used to
determine the best climate policy for a government to undertake while implement-
ing factors from the environmental, social and economic spheres into the model,
5the term IAM is actually broader than just policy determination: It is also used to set climate
change problems into perspective relative to other threats facing human kind (Kelly and Kolstad,
1998)
13
==PAGE:16==
the three fundamental pillars of sustainability, in order to make the most social,
environmental and ecological sustainable political decision (EPA, 2015). Most of
the IAMs concerning policy making in the literature are cost-beneﬁt analyses or
cost-eﬀective analyses (Edenhofer et al., 2014). The cost-eﬀective analyses con-
sider social costs and beneﬁts for diﬀerent policies in order to maximize welfare
(typically). This is the case for the study done by Bovenberg and van der Ploeg
(1994a) who among other things examine the trade-oﬀbetween three aspects of
social welfare; quality of the environment, public consumption, and private welfare
when introducing diﬀerent policies. Cost-beneﬁt analyses tend to be more complex
(typical a ﬁrst best solutions with multiple policy tools available) than cost-eﬀective
analyses (typical a second best solutions with only one policy tool available). The
cost-eﬀective analyses ﬁnd the optimal policy trajectory in order to fulﬁll at pre-
deﬁned climate goal at the lowest societal cost (Edenhofer et al., 2014). Goulder
and Mathai (1999) and Greaker and Pade’s (2009) studies are examples of cost-
eﬀective analyses where the optimal tax is found by reducing the overall abatement
cost under the restrictions of a concentration target. The models of Goulder and
Mathai and Greaker and Pade are both based on Romer’s model of endogenous
growth from his study in 1990. But unlike Goulder and Mathai and like Romer,
Greaker and Pade include knowledge spillovers in their model as a market failure
that contributes to the accumulation of knowledge. The knowledge spillover eﬀects
are explained more elaborately in next chapter, chapter 3.
The climate policy model is like every other model a set of equations that describe a
causal connection in the given system one wants to simulate. But these connections
are based on assumptions whether the model is complex or simple, which means
that the validity of the model results solely depends on the assumptions done. For
this reason one can worry about the scarcity of empirical studies covering the design
of climate policies as well as the broad range of results from studies in the climate
policy literature (as seen in section 2.2). The studies do as mentioned before inﬂict
climate policy decision making 6. Therefore, it is crucial to assess the limitations
of climate policy models. This is done in chapter 8 for the model in the present
study. In spite of the limitations and possible lack of empirical foundations, climate
policy models can still provide insight about the relationship between key economic
variables and the driving factors for cost estimates and uncertainties (Pindyck,
2013) (S¨oderholm, 2012). But as S¨oderholm (2012) points out, no climate policy
model should be used alone to draw a general trend about future climate policies,
instead a broad variety of models should be represented.
6S¨oderholm mentions as an example USA and Australia, who withdrew from the Kyoto Protocol
due to the perceived future cost of carbon abatement (S¨oderholm, 2012)
14
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Knowledge spillover eﬀects
This chapter introduces the knowledge spillover eﬀects. It only includes the aspects
of knowledge spillovers that are important when implementing it in a model frame-
work. Section 3.1 introduces some of the commonly described knowledge spillover
eﬀects and their inﬂuence on a climate policy path.
Section 3.2 treats domes-
tic knowledge spillovers in relation to foreign knowledge spillovers and addresses
which of the two is most signiﬁcant in a small, open economy. Finally, section 3.3
explains the deciding factors in relation to foreign knowledge spillovers.
3.1
Knowledge spillover eﬀects in general
The endogenous growth model is a frequently used tool for cost-eﬀective climate
policy modelling, and several of the models based on R&D knowledge accumulation
include an eﬀect called knowledge spillover. The endogenous R&D based models
by Romer (1990) and Greaker and Pade (2009) are two examples of inclusion of
knowledge spillovers. The knowledge spillover eﬀect is the principle that knowl-
edge itself inﬂuences the production of knowledge (and not only the production of
technology and ﬁnal goods). The most dominating view in the knowledge spillover
literature is that existing knowledge aﬀect knowledge growth positively so that the
existing ideas become a basis for creating new ideas. This is called the standing-
on-shoulder eﬀect, which is a positive spillover eﬀect. Other studies suggest that
existing knowledge on the contrary has a decreasing eﬀect on knowledge growth
under the assumption that only a certain amount of ideas exists and that ideas
are ”ﬁshed out” when discovered (Galarraga et al., 2011). The ﬁshing-out eﬀect
is a negative spillover eﬀect. The standing-on-shoulder knowledge spillover eﬀect
is by Blakeley et al. (2005) ascribed to the fact that knowledge is a non-rival and
non-excludable good. This means that one person’s use of knowledge does not limit
others person’s use of it and that it is impossible to prevent people from gaining ac-
cess to it, respectively (Blakeley et al., 2005). But the non-rival and non-excludable
character of knowledge also indicates that it can be used to replicate technology
and products without contributing to the knowledge pool.
This is yet another
knowledge spillover eﬀect and is denoted ”free-riding”.
A fourth eﬀect connected to knowledge is the ”crowding out”-eﬀect. This eﬀect
15
==PAGE:18==
is treated by Greaker and Pade (2009) as negative where newly formed knowledge
(or ideas) within the same time period blocks for other researcher’s production of
new ideas. This eﬀect arises because of the assumption of time lag between the
formation of an idea and the addition of the idea to the existing knowledge (also
denoted ”knowledge pool”). The knowledge crowding-out eﬀect has some of the
characteristics of the ﬁshing-out eﬀect.
When looking at the eﬀects of knowledge spillover, Greaker and Pade (2009) have
examined how diﬀerent kinds of knowledge spillover aﬀect an optimal tax path set
by the government in a large open economy. They investigate the eﬀects of ﬁshing-
out and standing-on-shoulders in their endogenous growth model and include the
crowding out externality as well. Greaker and Pade ﬁnd that the optimal tax path
is ”smoothed out” by the standing-on-shoulders eﬀect: The timing of the carbon
tax is moved towards the early years in the simulation period with an increase
in the start tax (for the initial tax years) and a decrease in maximum tax level.
The ﬁshing-out eﬀect creates the opposite result: it decreases the start tax values
and increases the maximum tax values. These results show that it is relevant to
include knowledge spillovers in an endogenous growth model with R&D knowledge
accumulation since they alter the optimal climate policy path (within a large closed
economy).
3.2
Foreign vs. domestic knowledge spillovers
Knowledge spillovers do not only happen within an economy, but they also take
place between economies on an international level. This means that in addition to
knowledge spillover within the particular economy, the domestic spillover eﬀects,
one must also consider the foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects from the economies of
the rest of the world. These foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects might even be more
signiﬁcant for small open economies than the domestic knowledge spillover eﬀects
according to studies within the knowledge spillover literature (this is discussed
below).
If one wants to assess the relative importance of foreign and domestic knowledge
spillover eﬀects in the knowledge spillover literature, the ﬁndings are generally scat-
tered but some tendencies can be drawn out: Holod and Reed (2009) investigate
the inﬂuence of foreign versus domestic spillover on growth and human resources.
They consider domestic spillover eﬀects to arise from internal mobility of labour
force and the strength of knowledge protection. Foreign knowledge spillovers they
consider to arise from trade (export and import). The study concludes that foreign
knowledge spillovers have a positive eﬀect on growth and human resources and that
domestic knowledge spillovers may have a negative eﬀect when foreign spillovers are
present. Foreign knowledge spillovers can however also have some negative free-rider
consequences and hence have negative eﬀects on growth and human resources. In
the studies done by Coe and Helpman (1995), foreign knowledge spillovers have
a similar positive eﬀect on small open economies. Keller (2004) reports that the
foreign knowledge spillover eﬀect is connected to the import share of the respective
country. In addition to this, Coe and Helpman (1995) ﬁnd that several factors can
aﬀect the ability of domestic country to utilize the knowledge spillover eﬀects in a
16
==PAGE:19==
positive way: openness to trade, a good R&D eﬀort, well-founded institutions and
strong knowledge protection (the last from a later study (Coe et al., 2009)). Fur-
thermore, they point out that for small economies, the foreign knowledge spillover
eﬀect can be just as important as the domestic, and for the majority of small coun-
tries even more important. A similar tendency can be extracted from the study
by Eaton and Kortum (1999) whose data show that the ratio between domestic
and foreign spillover eﬀects increases with increasing economy size, indicating that
foreign spillover is more signiﬁcant for small countries. Likewise, in his study Keller
(2004) presents a result showing that for nine OECD countries smaller than UK,
the domestic R&D share only constitutes 10 %. So considering the results from the
literature, foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects can be even more signiﬁcant than the
domestic knowledge spillover eﬀects for a small open economy.
3.3
Foreign knowledge spillover eﬀect - the deciding
factors
When foreign knowledge spillover is implemented in a model, say the endogenous
growth model for an economy, it is necessary to assess which factors constitute the
eﬀect of foreign knowledge spillover on the domestic economy. Multiple studies
show that there are several factors that can alter how foreign knowledge spillovers
aﬀect the domestic country. These factors are more locally than globally based
indicating that knowledge spillover eﬀects happen on local scale, when and going
through the literature the factors basically boil down to the relation between the
domestic country and the respective foreign country. The factors can be sorted
into two categories: The transference of knowledge to the domestic country and
the domestic country’s ability to utilize that knowledge.
The transference of knowledge both depends on the characteristics of the foreign
countries and the channels of knowledge transfer. Basile et al. (2011) ﬁnd that
knowledge spillovers depend on relational and geographical proximity of the foreign
and domestic country, where the relational proximity resembles societal similarities
expressed as trust between the two countries. Fracasso and Marzetti (2013) con-
clude that the foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects are locally founded with the main
spillover channel being trade. This is backed up by Krammer (2014) who mentions
trade as the dominating factor for foreign spillovers and identiﬁes foreign direct
investment and patent-related spillovers as two other, but less signiﬁcant factors.
Zhu and Jeon (2007) identify information technology as an additional knowledge
transfer channel, which signiﬁcantly enhances the R&D spillover eﬀects from foreign
R&D.
In addition to the serveral factors concerning the transference of knowledge to
the domestic country, the state of the domestic country itself is a determining
factor in terms of how well the transferred knowledge can be utilized. Coe and
Helpman (1994) report that the degree of R&D of the domestic country can aﬀect
its utility of foreign technology and knowledge spillover.
This is supplemented
by the ﬁndings of Coe in 2009, who discovers a positive relation between well-
established institutions and the country’s utility of foreign and domestic R&D.
This relational eﬀect between institutions and R&D utility could for instance be
17
==PAGE:20==
present in developing countries, where R&D institutions and institutions in general
are not strongly founded, resulting in a lower utility of foreign R&D.
In conclusion, this shows that the foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects depend on
two things: Local channels for foreign knowledge spillovers between the foreign
and domestic country and the utility or perhaps more accurate, the sensitivity of
the domestic country towards foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects. These factors are
important to consider when foreign knowledge spillovers are modelled (see chapter
4 to see how this is done for the present study).
18
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 4
Investigation of the optimal
climate policy; the model in the
present study
The present study positions itself within the endogenous growth literature by setting
up a model based on Romer’s (1990) endogenous growth model with a carbon tax
as driver for the technological change. This is done in accordance with the models
proposed by Greaker and Pade (2009) and Goulder and Mathai (1999), where
abatement costs are minimized from the government’s point of view in order to
ﬁnd an optimal carbon tax path under the constraints of a carbon concentration
target.
As was the case in Romer and Greaker and Pade’s studies, knowledge
spillover eﬀects are incorporated into the present model, but as oppose to Greaker
and Pade’s big closed economy, the model in the present study is set up for a small
open developed economy. The property of dealing with a small and open economy
means that while Greaker and Pade only include domestic knowledge spillover, the
model in this study includes the foreign knowledge spillover eﬀect as well.
The foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects are incorporated into the model with a
higher weighting relative to the domestic spillover eﬀect in accordance with the
ﬁndings of Coe and Helpman (1995), Eaton and Kortum (1999) and Keller (2004)
(explained in section 5.4). The incorporation of the foreign spillover eﬀect into the
endogenous growth model is made as an extension to the model by Greaker and
Pade and is done in accordance with Pade (2009). Furthermore, the interpretations
of the diﬀerent foreign knowledge spillover parameters from Pade and Greaker and
Pade have been changed in line with the ﬁndings by Coe and Helpman (1995) and
Coe (2009) (explained in detail in section 5.4). As far as the author is concerned,
this study will be the ﬁrst to successfully include foreign knowledge spillovers in an
endogenous growth model for a small open developed economy.
The model is solved by running simulations where a set of parameter values are
chosen and scenarios are set up to investigate the eﬀect of including foreign knowl-
edge spillover eﬀects in the model on the optimal tax path. Considering the general
tendency for the optimal carbon tax in the endogenous growth models to start low
and end high with the studies by Greaker and Pade (2009), Goulder and Mathai
(1999) and Ulph and Ulph (1994) as examples, the expected outcome of the model
19
==PAGE:22==
is a tax path that starts low and increases with time. Furthermore, since the for-
eign knowledge spillover eﬀects are implemented in a similar way as the domestic
knowledge spillover eﬀects are implemented in Greaker and Pade’s study, one can
expect that the foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects inﬂuence the optimal tax path
in the same way as the domestic.
20
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 5
The model
In this chapter the model is explained ﬁrst in an overview in section 5.1 and then in
more details through section 5.2 to 5.5, where the equations concerning the diﬀerent
sectors in the model are explained and the optimization problem formed. Section
5.4 describes the R&D sector and includes the primary extensions to the Greaker
and Pade model.
5.1
Introducing the model
The endogenous growth model for the domestic country consists of 3 diﬀerent sec-
tors, the emission sector, the abatement technology sector and the R&D sector
representing the three sectors in Romer’s original endogenous growth model: The
ﬁnal output sector, the intermediate good sector and the R&D sector, respectively.
The emission sector produces and sells energy to consumers and thereby emits CO2.
The government of the domestic country sets a carbon tax that the emission sector
has to pay. The emission sector can either pay the tax or choose to abate, which
brings the abatement technology sector into play. The abatement technology sec-
tor rents out abatement technology to the emission sector so it can reduce its CO2
emissions. The abatement technology sector buys the rights to produce technolo-
gies from the R&D sector, which generates technologies by the means of researchers
that get ideas. A generic illustration of the model can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1.1.
The open nature of the small open economy means that technologies and ideas from
the foreign countries surrounding the domestic country is set to aﬀect the growth in
the domestic R&D sector. These foreign countries are represented by one country,
denoted the foreign country. In our model this means that the generation of ideas
is both aﬀected by the knowledge stock of the domestic and the foreign country (see
section 5.4). The model explained in the following sections is set for a developed
small economy like Denmark.
21
==PAGE:24==
Figure 5.1.1: An overview of the diﬀerent sectors and the relations between them.
5.2
Emission sector
The emission sector is a production sector that produces energy for consumers.
The emission sector is assumed to only represent one energy producer with multiple
energy generating units. It is assumed that the emission of the energy producer
equals the demand of energy, qt:
ε0
t = qt
(5.2.1)
ε0
t can be called the business as usual-emissions, that is the emissions without
any abatement. The demand is assumed to be completely inelastic and hence the
emissions are constant through time.
Due to the externally set CO2 concentration target, the government imposes a
CO2/carbon tax, τt on the emission sector. The energy producer in the emission
sector can choose to pay tax on the business as usual emissions, which would be
ε0
t τt, or to abate and reduce emissions, which would occur in accordance to the
following expression:
εt = ε0 −
Nt
X
i=1
(ui
t)ρ
(5.2.2)
ui
t is amount of the individual abatement technology i that the energy producer rents
from the abatement equipment sector in a certain time period t, ie. the demand
for the abatement technology i at time t. In the abatement equipment sector there
22
==PAGE:25==
is Nt diﬀerent available abatement technologies that can be rented 1. The amount
of CO2 abated from the emission sector is the sum of the demands for all the i
individual abatement technologies up to the available number of technologies, Nt.
ρ is a factor that ensures decreasing returns to scale for each technology and is
denoted the technological scale factor. This factor mimics the decreasing eﬀect of
one individual abatement technology with increasing use.
The energy producer will in order to reduce the overall cost of emitting CO2 do a
combination of paying tax and abating. The energy producer will hence have to ﬁnd
the appropriate amount ui
t of abatement equipment to rent in order to minimize
the overall cost. This can be expressed as a minimization problem:
Minimize
ui
t
"
τt
 
ε0 −
Nt
X
i=1
(ui
t)ρ
!
+
Nt
X
i=1
pi
tui
t
#
(5.2.3)
Here, p i
t is the price per amount of abatement technology and hence the last term
in equation 5.2.3 represents the overall abatement cost of the emission sector 2.
From the ﬁrst order condition of the minimization problem, an expression for the
price can be found. The ﬁrst order condition:
−τtρ
Nt
X
i=1
(ui
t)ρ−1 +
Nt
X
i=1
pi
t = 0
(5.2.4)
Rearranging gives the overall price in each period for renting the abatement equip-
ment:
Nt
X
i=1
pi
t = τtρ
Nt
X
i=1
(ui
t)ρ−1
This means that for each abatement equipment, the price is:
pi
t = τtρ(ui
t)ρ−1
(5.2.5)
And from this an expression for demand for each abatement technology ui
t at time
period t can be isolated:
ui
t =
τtρ
pi
t

1
1−ρ
(5.2.6)
1This could for instance be retroﬁtting of old heavily emitting power plants, implementation of
the carbon capture and storage technology or the replacement of old energy producing technology
with emission free energy producing technology as for instance wind mills. In short, abatement
technologies denote in this model every energy producing technology that reduce CO2 emissions
or every emission improving technology that aids the already existing energy technologies.
2The ﬁrst term in the equation is what the energy producer pays the society for dealing with the
emitted CO2, the second term is what the energy producer pays to directly reduce own emissions.
One can argue that the ﬁrst method of paying for the CO2 should not be denoted abatement, but
rather damage control. But for simplicity both payments are denoted abatement costs.
23
==PAGE:26==
This equation shows that the demand for abatement technologies is directly de-
pendent of the tax level, τt, set by the government. So by setting a large tax the
government can induce a large demand for abatement technologies.
5.3
Abatement Equipment Sector
The abatement equipment sector consists of multiple ﬁrms that rents out abatement
technologies to the emission sector to the per period price pi
t for each abatement
technology i. It is assumed that the abatement equipment sector overall holds Nt
unique abatement technologies at time t, where only one technology is owned and
sold by one ﬁrm. This comes about through licensed technologies, ie. patented
technologies, bought from the R&D sector. This is further explained in section 5.4.
Each ﬁrm earns proﬁt by renting out the abatement equipment:
π =

pi
tui
t −ui
tbi
t

(5.3.1)
Here, bi
t is the overall cost for the abatement equipment sector for the individual
abatement technology i at time t. The cost includes production cost and the cost
of purchasing technology licenses from the R&D sector for the time period t. Each
ﬁrm in the abatement equipment sector seeks to maximize its proﬁt by choosing
the right amount of abatement technology to produce of type i, ui
t. ui
t is the supply.
The equation for proﬁt maximization of each abatement equipment ﬁrm can be
written as:
Maximize
ui
t
πi
t = τtρ(ui
t)ρ−1ui
t −ui
tbi
t
(5.3.2)
Here, equation 5.2.5 for pi
t has been substituted in to equation 5.3.1. From the ﬁrst
order condition to the maximization problem an expression for ui
t, the supply of
abatement technologies, is derived. The ﬁrst order condition is:
τtρ2(ui
t)ρ−1 −bi
t = 0
(5.3.3)
Equation 5.3.3 is rearranged to:
ui
t =
τt · ρ2
bi
t

1
1−ρ
(5.3.4)
When this ui
t is inserted into the equation for price in 5.2.5, this gives the following
new rental price pi
t = bi
t
ρ . If it is assumed that all the individual abatement tech-
nologies have the same cost per amount, and that the cost is constant over time bi
t
can be expressed as b and the rental price can be rewritten to p = b
ρ. This means
that ui
t becomes independent of i as well, which again means that equation 5.2.2
can be simpliﬁed to:
24
==PAGE:27==
εt = ε0 + Nt · (ut)ρ
(5.3.5)
The rental price of p =
b
ρ is higher than the actual cost of manufacturing the
technology, b, since ρ is below 1.
This implies that the abatement equipment
sector charges monopoly-like prices and experiences a markup in the short run.
The short run proﬁt for each abatement ﬁrm can be expressed as:
πt = ϕτ
1
1−ρ
t
(5.3.6)
, where ϕ = ρ(1−ρ)

ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ , see the derivation in appendix A. The total (present)
value, ηt, of a ﬁrm to undertake an technology license from the R&D sector can be
expressed as the discounted sum of the short run proﬁts for the technologies over
all tax periods from t to ∞:
ηt = ϕ
Z ∞
t
τ
1
1−ρ
t
e−r(s−t)ds
(5.3.7)
But since environmental tax can be expected to be implemented for a limited time
period, say from t to T, and the causal coherency of our model only can be expected
to exist within this limited time frame, the integral can be expressed as:
ηt = ϕ
Z T
t
τ
1
1−ρ
t
e−r(s−t)ds
(5.3.8)
The limited time scope means that the value of a technology inevitable becomes
smaller with each time period t, since the possibility for future proﬁt making has an
expiration date. If the time scope for renting out abatement technology is unlimited
the value for an idea is not determined by time and tax path in combination but
solely the tax path set.
5.4
The R&D sector
The abatement ﬁrms from the abatement equipment sector buy their technology
license from the R&D sector. These licenses are actually rights to or patent on ideas
that are developed in the R&D sector. It is assumed that one idea from the R&D
sector only gives rise to one technology so that the amount of available abatement
technologies at a certain time matches the existing amount of overall abatement
ideas. The existing amount of ideas at time t hence equals ND
t under the assumption
that only domestic technology licenses are bought by the abatement equipment
sector. Furthermore, it is assumed that researchers in the R&D sector generates a
number of new domestic ideas, nD
t , at each time period t and that researchers freely
can enter the sector. This assumption indicates that there is perfect competition
in the R&D sector. Ideas accumulate in time period t according to:
˙ND
t
= nD
t .
25
==PAGE:28==
In line with the description in chapter 3 the generation of new domestic ideas
is assumed to be dependent on knowledge spillover eﬀects and the crowding out
eﬀect. In this model the nature of the spillover eﬀects is assumed to be standing
on shoulders (in accordance with Pade (2009)). The generation of new domestic
ideas comes with a cost - and the above stated assumptions means that the cost is
inversely proportional to the domestic knowledge stock, ie. the existing domestic
ideas, ND
t , representing the standing-on-shoulders eﬀect, and proportional to the
amount of new ideas nD
t that enter the sector at time t, representing the crowding-
out-eﬀect. As opposed to Greaker and Pade, the cost function in this model will
contain an additional contribution from the foreign ideas in form of existing foreign
ideas NF
t
and new foreign ideas nF
t .
The foreign ideas are assumed to have a
similar eﬀect on cost as the domestic ideas. Overall, this gives the following cost of
developing a domestic idea at time t, a(ND
t , NF
t , nD
t , nF
t ):
a(ND
t , NF
t , nD
t , nF
t ) =
1
a0
(ND
t )−α1 · (NF
t )−α2 · (nD
t )α3 · (nF
t )α4
(5.4.1)
Here, a0 is a positive parameter called the R&D constant and α1 and α2 are pa-
rameters that decide the size and nature of the spillover eﬀect on the domestic
country (as expressed in (2009)). In Greaker and Pade’s study an α that lies be-
tween [-1;0] result in the standing on shoulder spillover eﬀect, and an α that lies
between [0;1] result the ﬁshing out knowledge spillover eﬀect. This means that to
model the standing on shoulder knowledge spillover in this model α1 and α2 are
written with a negative operational sign and assumed to lie between [0;1]. The
sensitivity of the domestic country towards domestic knowledge spillover eﬀects is
assumed to be larger than towards the foreign spillover eﬀects, and hence α1 > α2.
α3 and α4 are regulating the crowding out eﬀect for the domestic and foreign new
ideas respectively and α3 > 1 and α4 = 1 ensure that the crowding out eﬀect of
the domestic new ideas, nD
t , is greater than for the foreign new ideas. These three
constraints for the α parameters reﬂect the general assumption in this study that
domestic ideas have more eﬀect on the domestic country.
The α parameters in this model are assumed to represent the sensitivity of the
domestic country towards existing and new ideas. NF
t and nF
t are assumed to be
foreign ideas that make it through the spillover channels to the domestic country,
ie. the foreign ideas that enter (or previously have entered) the domestic country.
In this way, NF
t and nF
t account for the spillover channels and the α parameters
for the domestic sensitivity towards foreign knowledge spillover, exactly like the
two principles were formulated in 3.3. Furthermore, the fact that foreign knowl-
edge spillover eﬀects were observed to be more signiﬁcant than domestic in 3.2 is
reﬂected in the assumption that NF
0 > ND
0 and nF
0 > nD
0 .
The overall interpretation of equation 5.4.1 is that in general existing knowledge
both from domestic existing ideas and foreign existing ideas makes it cheaper for
the researchers to develop an idea. On the contrary it is getting more expensive
with each researcher that comes up with a new idea within the same time period
- both for new domestic ideas and new foreign ideas that ﬁnd their way to the
domestic country.
The ﬁrms from the abatement equipment sector acquire ideas from the R&D sector
through bidding, which is competitive. The ideas are bought for a fee, f. The
26
==PAGE:29==
competitive bidding means that the fee for an idea is the highest price that every
abatement ﬁrm from the abatement equipment sector can oﬀer: The present value
of an idea.
This indicates that we can set the present value of an idea for an
abatement ﬁrm equal to the license fee that is charged for an idea in the R&D
sector: ηt = ft.
The same is the case for the production of ideas due to the free entry of researchers
(or research group) in the R&D sector: it becomes the researcher who invest most
in research that gets the idea fastest aka ﬁrst. This means that the cost of gen-
erating ideas will be what the researchers within the R&D sector can provide as
a maximum: the fee from selling the idea to the abatement equipment sector. So
f = a(ND
t , NF
t , nD
t , nF
t ), which again means that the following equation can be
written:
ηt =
1
a0
(ND
t )−α1 · (NF
t )−α2 · (nD
t )α3 · (nF
t )α4
(5.4.2)
The equal sign in equation 5.4.2 represents the the connection between the three
sectors, which is initiated with the tax set by the government. This connection can
be seen from ﬁgure 5.1.1. Rearranging equation 5.4.2 gives an expression for the
formation of new domestic ideas:
nD
t
=
a0 · ηt · (ND
t )α1 · (NF
t )α2
(nF
t )α4
 1
α3
(5.4.3)
This equation expresses that the number domestic new ideas depends of the value
of a domestic idea for the abatement equipment ﬁrms, which again depends on
the tax, τt, set by the government. Furthermore, the standing-on-shoulder eﬀect is
represented by (ND
t )α1 and (NF
t )α2, while (nF
t )α4 is the crowding out eﬀect from
the foreign new ideas.
5.5
The government
The government sets a carbon tax, τt, in order to obey an externally set concen-
tration target - but the government also wants to implement the tax the cheapest
way possible and thereby minimize the societal cost of reducing CO2 emissions.
Therefore, the overall problem that needs to be solved from the governmental point
of view is a minimization problem: Which tax path over a time period from t to
T is the optimal so the abatement cost is minimized? The minimization problem
of the model is expressed as an optimal control problem with an objective function
and condition equations, representing the state variables. The state variables are
the change in CO2 concentration, ˙θ, the change in the existing ideas, ˙ND
t , and the
change in the value of an idea, ˙ηt. The change in CO2 concentration for period t is
governed by the emission, εt and the degradation of CO2 in the atmosphere, Φθt:
˙θ = εt −Φθt
(5.5.1)
27
==PAGE:30==
The change in existing domestic ideas is just the formation of new ideas, nD
t , which
was formulated in equation 5.4.3, while ˙ηt can be formulated as follows:
˙ηt =
d
dt

ϕ
Z T
t
τ
1
1−ρ
t
e−r(s−t)ds

(5.5.2)
The whole minimization problem with constraints can hence be formulated in the
following way:
Minimize
τt
T
X
t

Nt
b
ρut −N0πt

1
(1 + r)t
(5.5.3)
S.t.
˙θt = εt −Φθt
˙Nt =
a0 · ηt · (ND
t )α1 · (NF
t )α2
(nF
t )α4
 1
α3
˙ηt = d
dt

ϕ
Z T
t
τ
1
1−ρ
t
e−r(s−t)ds

and
θ(0) = θ0, N(0) = N0, θ(¯t) ≤¯θ ∀t ≥¯t
Equation 5.5.3 expresses the total cost of abatement for the abatement equipment
sector for a time period from t to T. The ﬁrst term in the bracket is the abatement
outlay for the emission sector/the revenue for the abatement equipment sector and
the second term is the pure proﬁt for the abatement equipment sector from the
already existing ideas. The expression for abatement cost in equation 5.5.3 comes
from the fact that the long run proﬁt for ideas formed after t = 0 is assumed to be
zero. For the existing ideas, there is a long run proﬁt of PT
t N0πt
1
(1+r)t . Therefore,
the total abatement cost for the abatement equipment sector, which consists of
R&D cost and production cost, must be equal to the total revenue of the sector
minus the total pure proﬁt for the existing ideas.
28
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 6
Simulations
Chapter 6 gives an overview of the general parameter values used for the simulations
and the three diﬀerent analyses carried out in the simulations.
The three diﬀerent analyses are conducted in order to investigate the eﬀect of
foreign knowledge spillovers on the optimal tax path set by the government: The
ﬁrst concerns investigation of how the new foreign ideas nF
t inﬂuence the optimal
tax path, the second analysis investigates the eﬀect of existing initial foreign ideas
NF
0 on the optimal tax path and the third analysis is a sensitivity analysis. The
analyses are presented further below. The simulations are done in Excel with Excel
Solver. The model is run for 40 period with each period representing 5 years.
The model parameter values are set to approximately match the model values set by
Greaker and Pade in their study from 2009. The parameters for all three scenarios
and the reference scenario are shown in table 6.0.1.
Parameters
Symbol
Interpretation
Value
θ0
Initial value of the CO2 concentration
425
ε0
Business as usual emissions
25
ρ
Technological scale factor
0.15
r
Interest rate
0.04
b
Cost for renting abatement equipment
15
Φ
Decay rate of CO2 in the atmosphere
0.025
a0
R&D constant
0.07
α1
Sensitivity of the domestic country towards domestic ideas
0.5
α2
Sensitivity of the domestic country towards foreign ideas
0.25
α3
The congestion factor for the domestic country
2
α4
The congestion factor for the foreign country
1
ND
0
Initial stock of existing domestic ideas
2.5
NF
0
Initial stock of existing foreign ideas
5
Table 6.0.1: List over the parameters and values assigned for the simulations.
29
==PAGE:32==
The ﬁrst six values in the table (down to Φ) are set in accordance with Greaker
and Pade (2009).
The sensitivity of the domestic country towards the foreign
ideas, α2, is set to half of the value of the domestic ideas, α1, in accordance with
the assumption in section 5.4. The domestic congestion factor is likewise set to be
higher than the foreign congestion factor, as assumed in section 5.4. For the initial
stock of existing ideas, the foreign is set to be larger, double the value, than the
domestic stock of existing ideas, which is based on the assumption in section 5.4.
All the above parameters (except for NF
0 ) are kept at the ascribed values throughout
the ﬁrst two analyses, where nF
t and NF
0 are varied.
6.1
The ﬁrst analysis: Investigation of the eﬀect of new
foreign ideas, nF
t
In the ﬁrst analysis three diﬀerent scenarios are established to evaluate diﬀerent
growth paths for the appearance of new foreign ideas, nF
t , each year in the domestic
country. These scenarios are set in accordance with Pade (2009):
1. The Progressive Scenario: The number of new foreign ideas, nF
t , is set to
increase with time, corresponding to a progressive technological change for
the foreign country1
2. The Regressive Scenario: The number of new foreign ideas, nF
t , is set to
decrease with time, corresponding to a regressive technological change for the
foreign country
3. The Passive Scenario: The number of new foreign ideas, nF
t , is set to be
constant with time, corresponding to a passive technological change for the
foreign country
The Reference Scenario is called ”the Reference”/”Reference” in the rest of the
report (to be able to better distinguish the three scenarios from the reference sce-
nario when mentioned in the text). In the Reference foreign ideas are set to have
no inﬂuence on the endogenous growth model.
The number of foreign new ideas is set to nF
0 = 1 for the Progressive Scenario
with a growth rate of 0.04. This growth proﬁle for new foreign ideas per period is
inverted for the Regressive Scenario so the ﬁnal value nF¯t of the Progressive Scenario
becomes the start value nF
0 of the Regressive Scenario. This speciﬁc value is 4.80.
For the Passive Scenario nF
0 is set to 2.43. All the values for the new foreign ideas,
nF , are calculated so the ﬁnal value for total foreign ideas, NF¯t , would be the same
for all three scenarios. NF¯t = 99.83 for all three scenarios. The resulting growth
paths for nF
t are illustrated in ﬁgure 6.1.1.
1The progressive technological change might represent a progressive climate policy but can also
be a result of other policies.
30
==PAGE:33==
0,0
1,0
2,0
3,0
4,0
5,0
6,0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
New foreign ideas per period
Year
New foreign ideas 
Progressive
Regressive
Passive
Figure 6.1.1: An overview of the diﬀerent growth paths for foreign ideas set for the three
scenarios.
6.2
The second analysis: Investigation of the eﬀect of
existing foreign ideas, NF
0
In the second analysis NF
0 is varied to examines the eﬀect of initial foreign ideas on
the taxation pathway. Four values are examined, NF
0 = 1, NF
0 = 5, NF
0 = 20 and
NF
0 = 200. NF
0 = 1 and NF
0 = 200 are picked to investigate extreme cases of no
knowledge pool or a very large knowledge pool, respectively.
6.3
Third analysis: Sensitivity analysis
For sensitivity analysis the following parameters are examined: the technological
scale factor ρ, the interest rate r, the business-as-usual emission ε0, the abate-
ment cost b, the R&D constant a0, the sensitivity parameter for domestic ideas
α1, congestion factor for the domestic country α3 and the concentration window
represented by ¯θ. When possible and reasonable, the parameters are varied with
the same percentage, 80%. Otherwise, the most reasonable number is chosen. You
can question whether the concentration target ¯θ should be a part of the sensitivity
analysis since it is actually a constraint in the problem. But it is included because
it is very interesting to see how it aﬀects the taxation pathway.
31
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 7
Results
In this chapter the results for the endogenous growth model formulated in chapter
5 are presented for the two analyses regarding the foreign knowledge spillover pa-
rameters nF
t and NF
0 . The analysis of new foreign ideas, nF
t , is presented in section
7.1 and the analysis of initial existing foreign ideas, NF
0 , is presented in section 7.2.
The sensitivity analysis is presented in in section 7.3.
7.1
The three scenarios – the eﬀect of new foreign ideas,
nF
t
From ﬁgure 7.1.1 1 the results of ﬁrst analysis are shown for the Reference and for
the Progressive Scenario. The Reference represents the case where foreign ideas are
neglected and only domestic ideas are allowed as spillover eﬀects. This taxation
pathway starts from above 10 and rises to towards 60 in year 50. This is in accor-
dance with the simulations done by Greaker and Pade, which showed that for their
ITC model with a standing on shoulder knowledge spillover the tax rate should
start low and peak at year 65 (see Appendix B). The diﬀerences between Reference
and Greaker and Pade’s ITC standing on shoulder graph are due to diﬀerences in
model parameters. The steep rise in tax over the ﬁrst 50 years is both seen for
the exogenous technological change (ETC) and induced technology case in Greaker
and Pade’s reference scenario (see graphs in Appendix B). This means that the
steepness in the Reference in our model cannot be ascribed to ITC or knowledge
spillover eﬀects. But the sensitivity analysis shows that the steep rise most likely
is due to the interest rate eﬀect; it lowers the value of future abatement proﬁt for
the abatement equipment sector with time and hence the future abatement cost,
see section 7.3.
In going from no foreign spillover eﬀect in the Reference to foreign spillover eﬀect in
the Progressive Scenario shown in ﬁgure 7.1.1 the optimal tax level drops. The tax
1One should notice that even though the ﬁgures are plotted in years, the simulations are done
in steps of 5 years, which gives a ”lower resolution” than indicated on the graphs. Of the same
reason the y axis on the ﬁgures in this chapter are shown in tax per period and not per year - to
avoid misleading the reader.
32
==PAGE:35==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
50
100
150
200
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway, the Progressive Scenario
Reference
The Progressive Scenario
Figure 7.1.1: A graph showing the taxation path for the Reference and the Progressive
Scenario
drop can also be seen in table 7.1.1, where the maximum tax level drops from 54.3
in the Reference to 42.2 in the Progressive Scenario. Hence, it can be concluded
that knowledge spillover eﬀects from a foreign country with a progressive climate
policy, ie. an increasing number of new foreign ideas, cause a decrease in optimal
tax path for the domestic country.
Figure 7.1.2 shows the development of new
domestic ideas with time and from this it can be seen that the decrease in optimal
tax level in ﬁgure 7.1.1 stems from an increase in the new domestic ideas. The
foreign new ideas in the Progressive Scenario have then had a positive spillover
eﬀect on the domestic new ideas. This can be explained by looking at equation
5.4.3 again:
nD
t
=
a0 · ηt · (ND
t )α1 · (NF
t )α2
(nF
t )α4
 1
α3
Recall from section 5.4 that nF
t within the same time period has a crowding out
eﬀect on the formation of new domestic ideas, nD
t , and that NF
t has a standing-
on-shoulder eﬀect. The net result of the foreign spillover eﬀect on new domestic
ideas is hence decided by the relative values of NF
t
and nF
t . In the Progressive
Scenario nF
0 is low and relative to this, NF
0 is set to a large value: nF
0 = 1, NF
0 = 5.
 NF
0
α2 then becomes 1.5. For this case, the positive standing-on-shoulder eﬀect is
larger than the negative crowding-out eﬀect, which means that as a result, the net
foreign knowledge spillover is positive. And this is also the case for the following
years. Thanks to this, there is created more domestic new ideas each year than in
the Reference with the consequence that the optimal tax path for the Regressive
Scenario is lower.
Looking at the optimal tax path for the Regressive Scenario in ﬁgure 7.1.3 we can
33
==PAGE:36==
0
1
1
2
2
3
0
50
100
150
200
New domestic ideas
Year
New domestic ideas, the Progressive Scenario
Reference
The Progressive Scenario
Figure 7.1.2: The graph shows the new domestic ideas at a given year for the Reference
and the Progressive Scenario
see that the tax level is much higher than the Reference tax level - and hence also
higher than the optimal tax for the Progressive Scenario. This can also be seen from
table 7.1.1, where the max tax value is 88.2 for the Regressive Scenario compared
to 54.3 for the Reference and 42.2 for the Progressive Scenario. The higher optimal
tax values in the Regressive Scenario reﬂects a lower amount of new domestic ideas
from the start years, as seen in ﬁgure 7.1.4. This is because the foreign crowding out
eﬀect is larger than the standing on shoulder eﬀect in the beginning: nF
t starts high
at nF
0 = 4.8 and hence overrule the eﬀect from the initial foreign ideas, which still is
(NF
0 )α2 = 1.5. For each year up to around year 35 the amount of new domestic ideas
produced is lower for the Regressive Scenario than for the Reference due negative
foreign knowledge spillovers and this conversely means that the carbon tax is higher
than for the Reference.
When the foreign new ideas are set to be constant through the years in the Passive
Scenario, which can be seen in ﬁgure 7.1.5 it gives a slightly lower optimal tax level
than for the Regressive Scenario. This gives a max tax value about 65.3 in table
7.1.1, which is lower than the max tax value in the Regressive Scenario on 88.2,
but still higher than the max tax value for the Reference on 54.3. Furthermore, the
optimal tax proﬁle for the Passive Scenario has the approximately same proﬁle as
the tax path in the Regressive. For this scenario the foreign crowding out eﬀect is
larger than the standing on shoulders, since nF
0 = 2.43 and
 NF
0
α2 is 1.5. This net
result is that the knowledge spillover for the Passive Scenario is negative because
of a high crowding out eﬀect, which can be seen in ﬁgure 7.1.6. The result is that
the optimal tax path has been set high compared to the Reference (but lower than
the Regressive Scenario).
When comparing the minimized abatement cost Z∗for the three scenarios and the
Reference presented in table 7.1.1 we can see that it is the Progressive Scenario
34
==PAGE:37==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway, the Regressive Scenario
Reference
The Regressive Scenario
Figure 7.1.3: A graph showing the taxation path for the Reference and the Regressive
Scenario
Reference
Progressive
Regressive
Passive
τ ∗
max (year)
54.3 (50)
42.2 (50)
88.2 (45)
65.3 (45)
Z∗
96.4
75.9
142.6
111.1
nD∗(year)
1.91 (40)
1.99 (40)
1.97 (40)
1.96 (40)
Table 7.1.1: The table presents the maximum values for tax, τ ∗
max, and new domestic
ideas, nD∗, for the optimal solution of the problem in equation 5.5.3 along with the optimal
value of abatement cost, Z∗.
that has the lowest total abatement cost – lower than the cost in the Reference,
whereas the Regressive and Passive Scenario have higher abatement cost compared
to the Reference. We can hereby conclude that the spillover eﬀects from foreign
ideas in the Progressive Scenario lowers the overall abatement cost, since the cost of
manufacturing ideas are lowered through the positive spillover eﬀects, and because
of that the tax does not need to be that high in order to create a suﬃcient demand
for the abatement technologies. In return, when the negative foreign spillover eﬀect
is dominant in the Regressive Scenario and the Passive the total abatement cost
becomes higher than when no foreign spillover eﬀect is present in the Reference.
So we can conclude that knowledge spillover from a foreign country with a regressive
or constant technological change reduce the number of new domestic ideas (in the
ﬁrst 50 years) through negative spillover eﬀects and result in an increased tax level
– compared to the case with no foreign spillover eﬀects. If the foreign country has
a progressive technological change the domestic tax level is generally lower and the
number of new domestic ideas higher than the case without any foreign spillover
eﬀects. This is due to a higher positive spillover eﬀect than negative. The overall
abatement cost when positive foreign knowledge spillover is present is lower than
when no foreign spillover eﬀects are present. But if the spillover eﬀects are negative
the cost increases signiﬁcantly.
Furthermore, we can generally see that all the
35
==PAGE:38==
0
1
1
2
2
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
New domestic ideas
Year
New domestic ideas, the Regressive Scenario
Reference
The Regressive Scenario
Figure 7.1.4: The graph shows the new domestic ideas at a given year for the Reference
and the Regressive Scenario
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway, the Passive Scenario
Reference
The Passive Scenario
Figure 7.1.5:
A graph showing the taxation path for the Reference and the Passive
Scenario
scenarios have a tax path that starts somewhat low and increases with time – in
accordance with Greaker and Pade’s results.
7.2
The eﬀect of the initial existing foreign ideas, NF
0
The results for the second analysis where the eﬀect of existing initial ideas, NF
0 , is
examined, is shown in ﬁgure 7.2.2 to 7.2.4. For this analysis all three scenarios have
36
==PAGE:39==
0
1
1
2
2
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
New domestic ideas per period
Year
New domestic ideas, the Passive Scenario
Reference
The Passive Scenario
Figure 7.1.6: The graph shows the new domestic ideas at a given year for the Reference
and the Passive Scenario
been simulated with four diﬀerent values of NF
0 , NF
0 = 1, NF
0 = 5, NF
0 = 20 and
NF
0 = 200. From the three ﬁgures we can generally see that increasing NF
0 from NF
0
= 1 to NF
0 = 200 decreases the taxation level. This is due to an increased amount
of domestic ideas for all three scenarios in the ﬁrst 50 years as illustrated for the
Progressive Scenario in ﬁgure 7.2.1.
0
1
1
2
2
3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
New domestic ideas
Year
New domestic ideas, the Progressive Scenario
NF0 = 1
NF0 = 5
NF0 = 20
NF0 = 200
Reference
Figure 7.2.1: The graph shows the new domestic ideas for the Progressive Scenario with
4 diﬀerent values of NF
0 along with the Reference
We can see from ﬁgure 7.2.3 and 7.2.4 that with only a single existing foreign idea,
NF
0 = 1 (which corresponds to a cancelled eﬀect from the existing foreign ideas), the
taxation path is at its highest level for the Regressive and Passive Scenario. This is
because the crowding out eﬀect dominates since only nF
t is signiﬁcant in equation
37
==PAGE:40==
5.4.3 at t = 0, when NF
0 is one. This means that the amount of new domestic ideas
with foreign knowledge spillover is even lower than for the Reference without any
foreign knowledge spillover. Hence, innovation is decreased when foreign knowledge
spillovers comes from countries with a regressive and passive technological change,
when NF
0 = 1. In the NF
0 = 1 case for the Progressive Scenario in ﬁgure 7.2.2 the
taxation path is still lower than the Reference, which is due to the fast growth in
the existing domestic ideas, which can be seen in ﬁgure 7.2.1. This eﬀect is due to
an increasingly positive spillover eﬀect with the growth of NF
0 with time: Already
in year 10, the spillover eﬀect becomes positive compared to the Reference. It can
then be concluded that a foreign country with a progressive technological change
has a positive knowledge spillover eﬀect on the domestic country even when the
amount of foreign existing ideas is as low as possible.
With the growth of NF
0 the taxation level gets lower as mentioned. This is because
the standing on shoulders eﬀect gets higher. But the decrease in tax level does
not follow the increase in NF
0 proportionally: The diﬀerence in tax level for the
Progressive Scenario between NF
0 = 1 and NF
0 = 5 (see ﬁgure 7.2.2) in year 45
can be calculated to 6, whereas the diﬀerence between NF
0 = 20 and NF
0 = 200
roughly is 10 in the same year. So even though there is an additional 180 existing
foreign ideas in the latter case the tax path only increases with 10 - approximately
1.5 times the amount of the tax decrease of 4 when the existing ideas goes from
NF
0 = 1 to NF
0 = 5.
This is most likely due to the eﬀect of α2 on NF
0 that is
set to 0.25 in the simulations. The value is set below 1 with the result that the
positive eﬀect of foreign standing-on-shoulders spillover decreases with the amount
of existing foreign ideas, NF
0 .
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway, the Progressive Scenario
NF0 = 1
NF0 = 5
NF0 = 20
NF0 = 200
Reference
Figure 7.2.2: The graph shows the tax path for the Progressive Scenario with 4 diﬀerent
values of NF
0 along with the Reference
Another eﬀect of initial existing foreign ideas that can be spotted is the eﬀect on
maximum tax level. From ﬁgure 7.2.3 we can see that the maximum tax value is
the tax value that is reduced the most with the increasing NF
0 , as shown in table
7.2.1 (calculated for the Regressive Scenario as an example). In going from NF
0 =
38
==PAGE:41==
1 to NF
0 = 200 the tax diﬀerence for the max tax value is reduced from 39.7 to 4.6
that is with 35.1, whereas the tax diﬀerence for the start tax value going from 10.1
to 1.2 only is reduced with 8.9. Hence it can be concluded that the maximum tax
values are more aﬀected by changes in NF
0 than other tax values in the tax path.
NF
0 = 1
NF
0 = 5
NF
0 = 20
NF
0 = 200
∆τ 0
10.1
8.1
5.8
1.2
∆τ max
39.7
33.9
25.0
4.6
Table 7.2.1: The table presents the diﬀerence between tax path in the Reference scenario
and in the four diﬀerent NF
0 cases for the Regressive Scenario, respectively. It is only the
diﬀerences for the start values ∆τ0 and maximum values ∆τmax that are presented.
Looking at ﬁgure 7.2.3 again it can be seen that for NF
0 = 200 the tax level in
the Regressive Scenario does not get below the Reference, whereas it does by far
in the Passive Scenario in ﬁgure 7.2.4. This indicates that the crowding out eﬀect
of the foreign new ideas in the Regressive Scenario is so signiﬁcant that it takes a
very large amount of existing foreign ideas to cancel the eﬀect out - 350 existing
foreign ideas when tested to be exact, whereas in the Passive Scenario it only takes
30 existing foreign ideas to cancel out the crowding out eﬀect. This proves that the
crowding out eﬀect for a foreign country with a regressive technological change is
more signiﬁcant than for a foreign country with a passive technological change.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway, the Regressive Scenario
NF0 = 1
NF0 = 5
NF0 = 20
NF0 = 200
Reference
Figure 7.2.3: The graph shows the Regressive Scenario with 4 diﬀerent values of NF along
with the Reference
In summation, these results show that foreign knowledge spillover from initial ex-
isting foreign ideas in general decreases taxation levels due to a positive spillover
eﬀect - and especially the maximum tax values. Furthermore it is shown that the
crowding out spillover eﬀect is more signiﬁcant coming from a foreign country with
a decreasing amount of new ideas, a regressive technological change, than coming
from a foreign country with a constant amount of new ideas, a constant technolog-
ical change.
39
==PAGE:42==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway, the Passive Scenario
NF0 = 1
NF0 = 5
NF0 = 20
NF0 = 200
Reference
Figure 7.2.4: The graph shows the Passive Scenario with 4 diﬀerent values of NF along
with the Reference
To sum up over the results of the investigations of the impact of nF
t and NF
0 on
carbon tax, we can see that in general the foreign spillover eﬀects impact the carbon
tax both with respect to the form of the tax path curve and the level of the tax.
This is in line with the conclusions about domestic knowledge spillover eﬀects by
Greaker and Pade, and as they did we can conclude that foreign knowledge spillover
eﬀects should be included into the endogenous growth model that includes R&D
knowledge accumulation. Furthermore, the investigations showed that a foreign
country with an progressive technological change has a positive spillover eﬀect on
the innovation in the domestic country - even with a minimum amount of initial
foreign ideas. Hence the tax path for the domestic country was generally lower
with a progressive foreign country. If however the foreign country has a passive or
regressive technological change, the spillover eﬀect on domestic innovation is gener-
ally negative. The maximal negative spillover eﬀect occurs when the technological
change is regressive for the foreign country with no initial existing foreign ideas.
7.3
Sensitivity Analysis
A sensitivity analysis has been carried out in order to investigate how the optimal
taxation paths of the three simulated scenarios changes when exogenous parameters
are changed. This analysis has been carried out for all three scenarios, including
the Reference.
Table 7.3.1 shows which parameters has been varied in the sensitivity analysis and
with how much. Most of the values are varied with as much as 80 % when the model
simulations allowed it, to be able to see a clear result. Such a high variation might
not seem realistic for especially the interest rate, r, but was conducted anyway to
clearly see the eﬀect of r on the optimal tax rate.
40
==PAGE:43==
ρ
r
b
a0
ε0
α1
α3
¯θ
ND
0
∆
80 %
80 %
80 %
80 %
20 %
80 %
50 %
11 %
80 %
Table 7.3.1: Parameters varied in the sensitivity analysis along with the percentage value
they are decreased and increased with.
First, results of the sensitivity analysis are presented for the Reference so some
tendencies can be drawn about the eﬀect of the nine parameters in table 7.3.1 on
the optimal tax path – without the inﬂuence of foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects.
Secondly, results of the sensitivity analysis are presented for the three scenarios.
These results illustrate how the sensitivity of the optimal tax path towards the
parameters is changed when foreign knowledge spillover is included in the model.
7.3.1
Sensitivity analysis for the Reference
The results for the ﬁrst sensitivity analysis is presented in table 7.3.2 and 7.3.3.
The tables show the percent-wise change in the start tax value in year 0, τ0, and
the maximum tax value, τmax, for the Reference, when the diﬀerent parameters are
decreased and increased, respectively.
ρ
r
b
a0
ε0
α1
α3
¯θ
ND
0
τ 0
33.2 %
59 %
-46 %
229 %
-87.2 %
38 %
-21 %
1035 %
94 %
τ max
89.2 %
-55 %
-39 %
286 %
-64.3 %
88 %
-21 %
279 %
58 %
Table 7.3.2: Results of the sensitivity analysis for the Reference when the parameters are
decreased.
ρ
r
b
a0
ε0
α1
α3
¯θ
ND
0
τ 0
-2.2 %
-40 %
25 %
-32 %
238 %
-29 %
20 %
-82 %
-35 %
τ max
-3.8 %
85 %
25 %
-32 %
131.5 %
-36 %
39 %
-38 %
-22 %
Table 7.3.3: Results of the sensitivity analysis for the Reference when the parameters are
increased.
From the tables it can be seen that when the interest rate r is lowered the tax
path changes shape: With a 80 % decrease in r the start tax value is increased by
59 % and the maximum tax level is decreased with 55 %. This means that the
shape of the tax path is smoothed out. If the entire tax proﬁle is examined (not
shown here) it still reveals a tax peak around year 45, but the steep rise that can
be seen in ﬁgure 7.1.1 is gone. This eﬀect is most signiﬁcant, when r is decreased
with 80 % from 0.04. When r is increased with 80 % from 0.04, the maximum tax
value increases with 80 % as well and the start values decrease with 40 %, which
means that the opposite eﬀect takes place: The steep rise in the optimal tax path
is enhanced. This shows that the shape of the tax path is very dependent on r.
As mentioned in section 7.1 an increase in interest rate lowers the value of future
abatement proﬁt for the abatement sector with time and hence the abatement cost
with time. An increase in the interest rate simply means that future abatement
is cheaper and a decrease that future abatement gets more expensive. Hence, the
41
==PAGE:44==
interest rate has a direct cost inﬂuence and when the tax is set with the objective
to minimize cost the interest rate naturally has a large eﬀect on the optimal tax
proﬁle. The other parameters do not show the same eﬀect; they do not smooth out
the tax proﬁle, but increase or decrease the entire tax path simultaneously.
The research constant a0 shows some signiﬁcant changes of above 200 % for a de-
crease of 80 %. The same eﬀect is not seen for a rise, which is probably because
the original value of a0 is very small; a 80 % decrease results in a value of 0.03 and
this value leads to a large decrease in new ideas in equation 5.4.3 and hence a large
increase in tax level. Therefore the sensitivity results might not be so signiﬁcant
for smaller changes in a0.
The optimal tax path shows large sensitivity for a decrease in the initial domestic
ideas ND
0 with an increase of 94 %. The decrease of 80 % corresponds to having
only one domestic idea. This is the minimum value of the positive standing-on-
shoulder eﬀect and hence, fewer domestic ideas are produced with a ND
0 value of 1.
The resulting optimal tax is then higher. But the optimal tax path does not show
signiﬁcant changes when ND
0 is increased. So overall, the sensitivity might only be
high for a decrease in ND
0 because the minimum value of ND
0 was reached and the
spillover eﬀect from it turned oﬀ.
It can furthermore be seen that the optimal tax path is quite sensitive to the
business-as-usual emissions, ε0 With an increase of only 20 % the optimal tax path
increases with 238 % and 131 % for the start tax value and max tax value, respec-
tively. This seems natural since ε0 directly inﬂuences how fast the concentration
target ¯θ is reached: An increase in ε0 means that ¯θ is reached earlier in time and
hence that the abatement and tax must rise in early years. The changes in optimal
tax path for a decrease in the business-as-usual emissions are also fairly high. It
can then be concluded that the optimal tax path is very sensitive to ε0, since it is
directly constrained by a concentration target.
Another parameter that aﬀects the tax path is the decrease (and increase) of the
emission window, represented by a decrease and increase in the maximum allowed
concentration, ¯θ. The resulting increase in the start tax value of 1035 % and the
max tax of 279 % not only show that the general tax level increases signiﬁcantly,
but also that the tax path shape changes to have a less steep rise from start of
the period to the maximum tax year. In addition, the maximum tax value shifts
to year 15, which means that abatement should start much earlier than year 45
(which was the year of maximum tax for the Progressive Scenario in ﬁgure 7.2.2).
The conclusion is that a narrow emission window shifts the tax towards earlier years
and increases the tax level.
So for the Reference studied in the sensitivity analysis the results show that the
optimal tax path have a high sensitivity towards the business-as-usual emissions ε0,
the CO2 concentration target, ¯θ and the interest rate, r. The rest of the parameter
sensitivities are not as signiﬁcant. It could also be seen that in general a lower
interest rate and a lower emission window shifts the tax to earlier years -meaning
that the tax starts higher in the early years.
42
==PAGE:45==
7.3.2
Sensitivity analysis for the three scenarios
The results for the sensitivity analysis of the model with foreign knowledge spillovers,
represented by the three scenarios, is presented in table 7.3.4 to 7.3.6. The values
in the tables are percentage diﬀerences between a) the tax-diﬀerences between the
Reference and a scenario (eg. the Progressive Scenario) for year 0 and maximum
tax year - when no parameters are changed aka. before the sensitivity analysis,
and b) the tax-diﬀerences between the Reference and a scenario (eg. the Progres-
sive Scenario) for year 0 and maximum tax year - when the diﬀerent parameters
are changed aka. after the sensitivity analysis. An example of the calculations of
one of the resulting values can be found in Appendix C, which explains it in more
details. These values serve to illustrate how the nine diﬀerent parameters varied
in the sensitivity analysis aﬀect the optimal taxation path when foreign knowledge
spillover is included. This is done to see if the foreign knowledge spillover leads to a
change in the sensitivity of the optimal tax path towards these parameters. When
analysing the results in table 7.3.4 to 7.3.6 only the tax value-diﬀerences above 20
% is considered to be signiﬁcant.
ρ
r
b
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Decrease
τ 0
32.9
49.8
32.9
5
8.5
13.9
-1.7
-0.1
2.8
τ max
36.3
-3.4
29.6
5.4
-4.4
7.1
0.7
-35.5
-55.1
Increase
τ 0
-25.3
-30.1
-25.6
4.4
-2.9
1.6
0.6
1.4
3.5
τ max
-21.6
-53.8
-54.1
1.6
-41.3
-55.5
1.3
0.3
0.7
Table 7.3.4: The results of the second sensitivity analysis for two tax values, τ0 and τmax.
The results are the percentage diﬀerence between the unchanged scenario diﬀerence and
the changed scenario diﬀerence. 1 represents the Progressive Scenario, 2 the Regressive
Scenario and 3 the Passive Scenario.
a0
ε0
α1
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Decrease
τ 0
-2.4
-1.8
3.2
-6.5
-29.2
-27.1
-1.2
6.5
4.5
τ max
0.7
-42.1
-54.6
-15.2
-39.0
-48.7
-2.4
-44.7
-47.3
Increase
τ 0
0.2
1.4
4.6
1.7
14.7
15.6
-0.3
-4.3
-3.2
τ max
1.2
-1.2
0.6
3.1
13.9
14.3
4.1
3.2
0.4
Table 7.3.5: The results of the second sensitivity analysis for two tax values, τ0 and τmax.
The results are the percentage diﬀerence between the unchanged scenario diﬀerence and
the changed scenario diﬀerence. 1 represents the Progressive Scenario, 2 the Regressive
Scenario and 3 the Passive Scenario.
Looking at the sensitivity results for the technological scale parameter ρ in table
7.3.4 a general high change in sensitivity can be seen for almost all scenarios for
both tax values. When changing the interest rate r the results in table 7.3.4 only
show signiﬁcant changes in the sensitivity of the Regressive and Passive Scenario
and only for the maximum tax values. The same is the case for abatement cost b
in table 7.3.4 and the research constant a0 in table 7.3.5, where only the sensitivity
43
==PAGE:46==
α3
¯θ
ND
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Decrease
τ 0
7.8
13.9
13.3
-2.0
36.6
43.7
3.7
9.2
8.6
τ max
15
-15.8
10.8
1
41
44.5
2.4
-13.2
-49.8
Increase
τ 0
-10.2
-13.2
-26.5
-5.2
-33.4
-35.7
-5.6
-10
-3.2
τ max
-9.7
-48.3
-54.6
-4.9
-42.7
-38.4
-6.1
-15.2
-13.1
Table 7.3.6: The results of the second sensitivity analysis for two tax values, τ0 and τmax.
The results are the percentage diﬀerence between the unchanged scenario diﬀerence and
the changed scenario diﬀerence. 1 represents the Progressive Scenario, 2 the Regressive
Scenario and 3 the Passive Scenario.
of the maximum tax values for the Regressive and Passive Scenario has changed
signiﬁcantly (but only for a decrease in the parameters). For the rest of the param-
eters in table 7.3.5 and 7.3.6, the same observations can be done: The signiﬁcant
changes in sensitivity generally happens for the Regressive and Passive Scenario.
For α1, ¯θ and ND
0 the sensitivity furthermore only changes for the maximum tax
values. These results show that when including foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects
in the model the sensitivity of the optimal tax path towards all the parameters
change. In addition to this, two tendencies can be observed: The change in sensi-
tivity seems to concern mostly the Regressive Scenario and Passive Scenario – as
well as the maximum tax values.
So in general, the present model results show high sensitivity towards the ε0, ¯θ and
r parameters. This means the model results may be highly inﬂuenced by the value
these three parameters if they are not set carefully. Furthermore, the sensitivity
analysis shows that the sensitivity of the parameters changes when foreign knowl-
edge spillovers is included, especially with respect to the Regressive and Passive
Scenario.
44
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 8
Discussion
The results in chapter 7 show that the optimal carbon tax path that should be
set by the government is starting somewhat low and then rises to a maximum tax
value around year 45 - quite like what was expected in chapter 4. This tendency
is in line with the results found by Greaker and Pade (2009) for their ITC and
ETC analyses and by Goulder and Mathai (1999), Ulph (1994) and Wigley, Richels
and Edmonds (1996). It was concluded that this result stems from the interest
rate (see explanation in section 7.1).
This is in line with Wigley, Richels and
Edmonds (1996), who mention positive return on capital as one of four reasons for
the abatement to be set in the future. The eﬀects of nF
t and NF
0 on carbon tax show
that the foreign spillover eﬀects generally change the shape of the optimal carbon
tax path with respect to the maximum tax values. This particular ﬁnding is in
line with Greaker and Pade’s ﬁndings for their ITC spillover cases. But Greaker
and Pade also found that the shape of the optimal tax path was ﬂattened in the
standing-on-shoulder case. Such a change was not, in contrast to what was expected
in chapter 4, found in the results from in the present study, even though standing-
on-shoulder spillover eﬀects was assumed. The diﬀerence could lie in the fact that
the new foreign ideas add a crowding out eﬀect to the formation of domestic ideas. It
was also seen that foreign countries with diﬀerent technological change had diﬀerent
net spillover eﬀects on the innovation of the domestic country: A regressive or
passive technological change proﬁles had a negative eﬀect on domestic innovation
and a progressive technological change had an increasing eﬀect. As far as the author
is concerned, no other study has done an investigation of how diﬀerent time paths
of technological change for a foreign country aﬀects the domestic innovation and
optimal tax path for a domestic country. Therefore, the results in this study are
yet to be conﬁrmed or dismissed.
The sensitivity analysis in section 7.3 can give some hints about the validity of
the results though. The model results are only as valid as the assumptions and
parameter sensitivity of the model allow them to be. As mentioned in section 7.3.1
most of the model parameters aﬀect the optimal tax level with respect to the max
and start tax value simultaneously, which corresponds to shifting the general tax
curve up or down in tax level. For this reason the model results in this study are
not good indicators of which absolute tax level the government of a small open and
developed economy should set when inﬂuenced by foreign knowledge spillover. This
45
==PAGE:48==
is in line with S¨oderholm’s (S¨oderholm, 2012) recommendation regarding climate
policy models; the results of a scenario should always be compared with a reference
scenario, which gives relative and not absolute values as results.
Therefore the
model set up in this study for a small open and developed economy only should
be used to give an indication of the shape of the tax path as well as the relative
optimal tax level and not the absolute tax level. But as seen from the sensitivity
analysis the relative optimal tax levels are also aﬀected by the parameters, especially
for knowledge spillover eﬀects from foreign countries with Regressive and Passive
technological change. In order to make more speciﬁc conclusions about how the
relative tax levels are aﬀected, one has to make more thorough evaluations of the
results of the second analysis in the sensitivity analysis, which due to the extensive
size of the task has been excluded from this report. Considering the shape of the
optimal tax path, the sensitivity analysis revealed high sensitivity towards ε0, ¯θ and
r. This means that the general results of the steep rise of the tax can be ascribed to
the interest rate, the late peak of the optimal tax to the somewhat wide emission
window and the potentially low business-as-usual emissions.
The model in the present study is constructed on a foundation of multiple as-
sumptions, some which relate more speciﬁcally to the model setup (which has been
presented in chapter 5), and others that relate to the framework of the model.
Considering the assumptions done in the model setup in chapter 5, the assumption
that all knowledge spillover eﬀects are of the standing-on-shoulder type is impor-
tant, since it aﬀects the results signiﬁcantly. Greaker and Pade (2009) show that
the eﬀect on optimal tax path of standing-on-shoulders knowledge spillover is the
complete opposite of the ﬁshing-out knowledge spillover eﬀect, as explained in sec-
tion 3.1. This means that if the ﬁshing out knowledge spillover had been assumed
in the model in the present study, some of the carbon tax would have been post-
poned to the future. Another assumption in the model is that α1 and α2 are below
zero and hence that sensitivity towards knowledge spillover eﬀects is decreasing
with increasing amount of existing ideas, ND
t
and NF
t respectively. The eﬀect of
this assumption is that when NF
0 approaches large numbers, its impact on tax (tax
change per existing foreign idea) gets smaller, which is why it took up to 350 for-
eign existing ideas to turn the crowding out eﬀect around of the new foreign ideas
in the Regressive Scenario (see section 7.2). 350 foreign existing ideas seems very
high to restore a positive spillover eﬀect. An alternative would be to set the α1 and
α2 value higher to increase the sensitivity of tax towards high number of existing
ideas.
A third assumption in the setup of the model is regarding the business-as-usual
emission from the electricity production, ε0. The business-as-usual emission (that
equals the electricity demand) in the emission sector is set to b external and thus
does not interact with any of the variables of the model. But this might not reﬂect
reality since a price increase on electricity forced by the carbon tax might lower
the electricity consumption and hence have an decreasing eﬀect on emissions. This
corresponds to the eﬀects reported by Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1994b) where
a CO2 policy lowers the economic activity (from an economical point of view, this
is bad since lower CO2 emissions should arise from more abatement or eﬃciency
improvements). Therefore, one could argue that the model would be more accurate
if the the emission/demand of energy was included as a dynamic size that would
depend on the tax. A fourth assumption that might inﬂuence the optimal tax path
46
==PAGE:49==
concerns the existing ideas, Nt. In the model Nt is assumed to equal ND
t , which
means that it is only the domestic ideas and technologies that can be traded be-
tween the sectors in the model. But as reported in chapter 3 the foreign knowledge
spillover partly arises from imported foreign technologies. From this standpoint one
could argue that if foreign knowledge spillover is included in the model it would
be natural to also include foreign ideas and technology into the trade between the
diﬀerent sectors. In our model this would mean that Nt should be equal to NF
t +
ND
t . This would imply more abatement technology choices, which would alter the
optimal tax path.
The last two assumptions regarding the model setup concern the CO2 emissions.
The ﬁrst is the concentration target, ¯θ. In reality it seems unrealistic to set concen-
tration targets for a small open economy, considering that local CO2 concentration
measurements for a single country would be hard to conduct, since the concentra-
tion to a wide extent is inﬂuenced by emissions from other countries. Therefore, it
would be hard for the small open economy to monitor whether the concentration
target is met or not. A more realistic approach would be to include emission targets
in the model instead. In this case, monitoring of emissions from the diﬀerent sector
in society (production eg.) would be doable. Diﬀuse emission from the transport
sector would be diﬃcult to assess though, and the emission target solution would
therefore only work if emissions from certain sectors were considered in the model.
The second assumption in the model setup that concerns the CO2 emissions is the
degradation of CO2 in the atmosphere, Φ: it is set to a constant share. This does
not reﬂect reality as we saw in section 2.3 since the carbon cycle is very complex
and is aﬀected by the continued rise in atmospheric CO2 concentration that poten-
tially causes irreversible changes in the carbon stock. Therefore, the degradation
share may vary considerably during the time period investigated. This would af-
fect the net CO2 concentration that stays in the atmosphere and hence the tax
path - probably causing higher taxes in early years as we saw in the case for lower
concentration targets in section 7.3.1.
When looking at the assumptions regarding the more general framework or context
of the model we have the assumption that the government is trying to minimize
abatement cost – and act economically rational. This might not be realistic, since
chapter 2 proved that lot of other factors inﬂuence the political decision making
processes. Therefore it might not be safe to assume that the decision makers solely
act with a cost minimizing agenda. Another assumption regarding the model frame-
work is that ideas arise from investments in the private sector. This assumption
rules out the entire independent research that is going on at research institutions
and universities, which could have added to the existing and new ideas. But it
could be fair to rule the universities and research institutions out since they mostly
provide primary research.
The fact that the carbon cycle and climate systems may undergo irreversible changes
was mentioned above. This is an important point to consider when discussing the
framework of the model in this study, because it could alter the whole foundation
for it: The model is build on an assumption (as discussed in section 2.3) that CO2
emissions now have the same eﬀect on the carbon cycle as CO2 emissions in the fu-
ture. But if the present atmospheric concentration is close to a threshold value that
leads to irreversible changes in the climate systems the right timing of abatement
and hence carbon tax is of great social importance. Consequently the cost-eﬀective
47
==PAGE:50==
model, where all abatement timings are equally good from the nature perspective,
looses its value. Is this case a more relevant optimization problem would sound:
How can we implement a climate change mitigation policy as fast as possible to a
low cost with diﬀerent policy mix.
But when all this is said it is also important to point out that the model in this study
is constructed with the purpose of being simple and only to address some aspects of
a decision making process regarding climate change policies in a government. Hence,
it might not be fair to demount the model by pointing out all the things that could
have been incorporated into it. In fact, S¨oderholm (2012) argues that simple models
might give as reliable results as complicated models since more factors incorporated
into a model bring more assumptions and insecurities if they are not well founded in
empirical studies (which was not the case for the climate change policy literature,
see section 2.4). Our model can therefore only provide an indication for how a
government that is interested in incorporating carbon tax as cheap as possible
should time the carbon tax path if they are going to satisfy a externally set carbon
concentration goal.
48
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
The study presented in this report has investigated the optimal climate policy for
small open and developed economies and has done so by modelling a small open
economy in an endogenous growth model with R&D driven ITC, where foreign
knowledge spillover has been included.
The developed model has been used to
examine the optimal carbon tax path for a government that seeks to minimize
abatement cost while obeying an externally set CO2 concentration goal. The inves-
tigation has focused on the impacts of foreign knowledge spillovers on the domestic
tax path. It was found that both shape and relative tax level of the tax path were
aﬀected, which was expected. Furthermore, the general shape of the tax path was
in agreement with previous results in the endogenous growth literature.
The eﬀect of foreign knowledge spillover on tax path was found to be solely depen-
dent on the technological change proﬁle of the foreign country: A foreign country
with a progressive technological change resulted in positive knowledge spillover
that reduced the relative tax level and abatement cost. A foreign country with a
regressive or passive technological change was found to induce negative knowledge
spillovers on the foreign country, which resulted in a higher relative tax level and
abatement cost. A regressive technological change resulted in the most negative
spillover eﬀect, which could not even be turned around by a very large foreign
knowledge pool. These speciﬁc results for foreign knowledge spillover eﬀects on
optimal carbon tax for a small open economy have not been obtained before in
the literature and have yet to be conﬁrmed. Furthermore a sensitivity analysis of
the model parameters revealed that including foreign knowledge spillovers in the
model, especially for a case of a regressive or passive TC in the foreign country,
changes the model sensitivity towards some of the parameters. The speciﬁc details
of this have yet to be investigated.
The model created in this study is a simple model that only deals with a single
aspect connected to a decision making process about climate change policies: the
cost-eﬀective implementation. Since multiple other factors such as irreversible cli-
mate changes and national health issues aﬀect the decision making process as well,
the results from this model should be assessed along with results from studies that
select an optimal climate policy based on other factors.
49
==PAGE:52==
Appendix A
Derivation of ϕ
The derivation of ϕ is shown here:
The equation for the proﬁt of the abatement equipment sector from section 5.3 can
be written: πt = τtρ(ut)ρ−1ut −utb. This can be reduced to:
τtρ(ut)ρ −utb
ut =

τt·ρ2
b

1
1−ρ is inserted into the equation:
τtρ
τt · ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ
−
τt · ρ2
b

1
1−ρ
b ↔
First, τt is isolated and extracted from the expression:
τtτ
ρ
1−ρ
t
ρ
ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ
−τ
1
1−ρ
t
ρ2
b

1
1−ρ
b ↔
τ
1−ρ
1−ρ
t
τ
ρ
1−ρ
t
ρ
ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ
−τ
1
1−ρ
t
ρ2
b

1
1−ρ
b ↔
τ
1
1−ρ
t
"
ρ
ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ
−
ρ2
b

1
1−ρ
b
#
Then, the second term within the bracket,

ρ2
b

1
1−ρ b, is treated and rewritten in
the following way:
ρ2
b

1
1−ρ  b1−ρ
1
1−ρ
↔
 b1−ρ ρ2
b

1
1−ρ
↔
ρ2ρ
ρ2ρ
 ρ2
bρ

1
1−ρ
↔
50
==PAGE:53==

ρ2(1−ρ)
ρ2ρ
bρ

1
1−ρ
↔

ρ2(1−ρ)
1
1−ρ
ρ2
b
ρ
1
1−ρ
↔ρ2
ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ
This term is inserted instead of the last terms in the square bracket further above:
τ
1
1−ρ
t
"
ρ
ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ
−ρ2
ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ #
↔τ
1
1−ρ
t
"
ρ (1 −ρ)
ρ2
b

ρ
1−ρ #
51
==PAGE:54==
Appendix B
Graphs from Greaker and Pade
Two graphs from Greaker and Pade (2009) is shown in ﬁgure B.0.1. In both ﬁgures
the ITC case is shown along with the case for Exogenous Technological Change
(ETC).
"Reference scenario"
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
5
15
25
35
45
55
65
Time
Tax rate
Tax rate ETC
Tax rate ITC
(a) Reference
"Standing on shoulders"
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
5
15
25
35
45
55
65
Time
Tax rate
Tax rate ETC
Tax rate ITC
(b) Standing on shoulders
Figure B.0.1: B.0.1(a) The reference scenario from Greaker and Pade with ITC and with
ETC. B.0.1(b) The standing on shoulders scenario from Greaker and Pade with ITC and
with ETC.
52
==PAGE:55==
Appendix C
Calculations to sensitivity
analysis
In ﬁgure C.0.1 two graphs are presented (on the next page). Figure C.0.1(a) shows
the optimal tax path for the Reference and the Progressive Scenario before any
parameters have been changed in the sensitivity analysis. The diﬀerences in maxi-
mum tax values are 22.1 % as shown (the start tax diﬀerence is not shown for this
example). Figure C.0.1(b) shows the optimal tax path for the Reference and the
Progressive Scenario again, but with a change i the interest rate, r. The resulting
diﬀerence between the max taxes are 22.5 %. The ﬁnal percentage diﬀerence of the
two percentage values are:
22.1% −22.5%
22.1%
· 100 = 1.8%
(C.0.1)
This is the ﬁnal value that is put in the tables 1. These calculations have been done
for all scenarios and all parameters and are presented in table 7.3.4 to 7.3.6.
1the value is actually 1.6 without the round-oﬀof the numbers
53
==PAGE:56==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway
Reference
Scenario 1
22.1 %
(a) Unchanged
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Tax level per period
Year
Taxation pathway, 
r increased 80%
Reference
Scenario 1
22.5 %
(b) r changed
Figure C.0.1:
(a) The unchanged Reference and the Progressive Scenario.
The bar
illustrates the 22.1 % diﬀerence between the Reference and Progressive Scenario for the
max tax values. (b) Reference and Progressive Scenario with parameter r changed. The
bar illustrates the 22.5 % diﬀerence between the Reference and Progressive Scenario for the
max tax values
54
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
Adu, G. (2013). Eﬀects on growth of environmental policy in a small open economy.
Environmental Economics and Policy Studies, 15.
Andersen, M. (2004). Vikings and virtues: A decade of co2 taxations. Climate
Policy, 4.
Barker, T. and K¨ohler, J. (1996). Environmental policy and competitiveness. En-
vironmental Policy Research Briefs, 6.
Blakeley, N., Geoﬀ, L., and Mills, D. (2005). The economics of knowledge: What
makes ideas special for economic growth? Technical report, New Zealand Trea-
sury.
Bovenberg, A. and van der Ploeg, F. (1994a). Environmental policy, public ﬁnance
and the labour market in a second-best world. Journal of Public Economics, 55.
Bovenberg, A. and van der Ploeg, F. (1994b). Green policies and public ﬁnance in
a small open economy. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 96.
Bruce, J. P., Lee, H., and Haites, E. F. (1995). Climate change 1995: Economic and
social dimensions of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Technical report, IPCC.
Burck, J., Marten, F., and Bals, C. (2014).
The Climate Change Performance
Index, Results 2015. Technical report, Germanwatch and Can.
CFE Portal, C. F. E. (2015).
Environmental tax in Denmark.
https://www.
cfe-eutax.org/taxation/environmental-taxes/denmark. Visited the 29th of June,
2015.
Coe, D. T. and Helpman, E. (1995).
International R&D spillovers.
European
Economic Review, 39.
Coe, D. T., Helpman, E., and Hoﬀmaister, A. W. (2009).
International R&D
spillovers and institutions. European Economic Review, 53.
Copeland, B. R. (1994). International trade and the environment: Policy reform
in a polluted small open economy.
Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 26.
Eaton, J. and Kortum, S. (1999). International technology diﬀusion: Theory and
measurement. International Economic Review, 40.
55
==PAGE:58==
Edenhofer, O., Pichs-Madruga, R., Sokona, Y., Farahani, E., Kadner, S., Seyboth,
K., Adler, A., Baum, I., Brunner, S., Eickemeier, P., Kriemann, B., Savolainen,
J., Schl¨omer, S., von Stechow, C., Zwickel, T., and Minx, J. (2014). Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. contribution of working group III to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Technical report, IPCC.
Eliste, P. and Frederiksson, P. G. (2002). Environmental regulations, transfer and
trade: Theory and evidence. Journal of Environmental Economics and Manage-
ment, 43.
EPA, U. S. E. P. A. (2015). Integrated assessment modelling. http://www.epa.
gov/sustainability/analytics/integrated-assessment.htm. Visited the 18th of July,
2015.
Farzin, Y. H. (1996). Optimal prizing of environmental and natural resource use
with stock externalities. Journal of Public Economics, 62.
Farzin, Y. H. and Tahvonen, O. (1996). Global carbon cycle and the optimal time
path of carbon tax. Oxford Economic Papers, 48.
F¨unfgelt, J. and Schulze, G. G. (2009). The political economy of environmental
policy formation in an international setting. Sustainability Economics Group,
Leuphana University of L¨uneburg.
Frederiksson, P. G. (1997). The political economy of pollution taxes in a small open
economy. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 33.
Galarraga, I., Gonz`alez-Eguino, M., and Markandya, A. (2011). Handbook of Sus-
tainable Energy. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Gerlagh, R., Kverndokk, S., and Rosedahl, K. E. (2009). Optimal timing of climate
change policy: Interaction between carbon taxes and innovation externalities.
Environmental and Resource Economics, 43.
Goulder, L. H. and Mathai, K. (1999).
Optimal CO2 aabatement in the pres-
ence of induced technological change. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 39.
Gram, K. (2013). Climate and energy policy and national competitiveness in Den-
mark. Master’s thesis, Copenhagen Business School.
Gr¨ubler, A. and Messner, S. (1998). Technological change and the timing of miti-
gation measures. Energy Economics, 20.
Greaker, M. and Pade, L.-L. (2009). Optimal carbon dioxide abatement and tech-
nological change: should emission taxes start high in order to spur R&D? Climate
Change, 96.
Greaker, M. and Rosendahl, K. E. (2006). Strategic climate policy in small, open
economies. Statistics Norway, Research department. Discussion paper.
Guerron-Quintana, P. (2013). The economics of small open economies. Business
Review, Q4.
56
==PAGE:59==
Hammar, H. and ˚Akerfeldt, S. (2011). CO2 taxation in Sweden: 20 years of expe-
rience and looking ahead. http://www.globalutmaning.se/wp-content/uploads/
2011/10/Swedish Carbon Tax Akerfedlt-Hammar.pdf.
Visited the 1st of July,
2015.
Hansen, J., Sato, M., Hearty, P., Ruedy, R., Kelley, M., Masson-Delmotte, V.,
Russell, G., Tselioudis, G., Cao, J., Rignot, E., Velicogna, I., Kandiano, E., von
Schuckmann, K., Kharecha, P., Legrande, A. N., Bauer, M., , and Lo, K.-W.
(2015).
Ice melt, sea level rise and superstorms: evidence from paleoclimate
data, climate modeling, and modern observations that 2 ◦C global warming is
highly dangerous. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 15.
Harding, S. (2007). The long road to enlightenment. The Guardian, Jan. 8th, 2007.
Heggedal, T.-R. and Jacobsen, K. (2011). Timing of innovation policies when car-
bon emissions are restricted: An applied general equilibrium analysis. Resource
and Energy Economics, 33.
Holod, D. and Reed, R. R. (2009).
Regional external economies and economic
growth under asymmetry. Southern Economic Journal, 75.
Howard, E. (2015). Hague climate change judgement could inspire a global civil
movement. The Guardian, Jun. 24th, 2015.
Jones, S. (2014). Flirting with climate change: A comparative policy analysis of
subnational governments in canada and australia. Journal of Comparative Policy
Analysis, 16.
Katzenstein, P. J. (1985).
Small states in world markets: Industrial policy in
Europe. Cornell University Press.
Keller, W. (2004). International technology diﬀusion. Journal of Economic Liter-
ature, 42.
Kelly, D. L. and Kolstad, C. D. (1998). Integrated assessment models for climate
change control. Edvard Elgar Publishing. Published in Henk Folmers and Tom
Tietenberg, International Yearbook of Environmental and Resource Economics
1999/2000: A Survey of Current Issues.
Medhora, S. (2015). Australia has forfeited world leadership on climate policy, says
KoﬁAnnan panel. The Guardian, Jun. 5th, 2015.
Naughten, B. (2014). No surprises: Canada and Australia are behind on climate.
The Conversation.
OECD (2010). Linkage between environmental policy and competitiveness. OECD
Environment Working Papers.
OECD
(2014).
OECD
Environmental
Performance
Review:
Swe-
den
2014.
http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/
environment/oecd-environmental-performance-reviews-sweden-2014
9789264213715-enpage32. Visited the 30th of June, 2015.
OECD
Database,
I.
(2015).
Environmental
tax
for
Denmark.
http://www2.oecd.org/ecoinst/queries/QueryResult 2.aspx?Key=
57
==PAGE:60==
de37f279-29fc-4388-b0c2-9dc0da1a1369&QryCtx=1&QryFlag=3.
Updated
the 26th of March, 2014.
Pade, L.-L. (2009). Climate policy of a small open economy under induced techno-
logical change and technological diﬀusion. Article published in relation to PhD
thesis.
Pindyck, R. S. (2013). Climate change policy: What do the models tell us? Tech-
nical report, National Bureau of Economics Research.
Romer, P. M. (1990). Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 98.
Romer, P. M. (1994). The origins of endogenous growth. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 8.
Schmitt-Groh´e,
S. and Uribe,
M. (1998).
International macroeconomics.
http://www.econ.umn.edu/∼deniz/teaching spring2012/uribe-schmitt%
20grohe-2011.pdf.
Teaching
notes
from
Colombia
University,
Updated
2014.
Schneider, S. H. and Goulder, L. H. (1997). Achieving low-cost emission targets.
Nature, 389, 389.
S¨oderholm, P. (2012). Modeling the economic cost of climate policy: An overview.
American Journal of Climate Change, 1.
Stoschek, B. (2007). The political economy of environmental regulation and indus-
try compensation. Department of Economics, University of Kiehl.
Treut, L., Somerville, H. R., Cubasch, U., Ding, Y., Mauritzen, C., Mokssit, A.,
Peterson, T., and Prather, M. (2007). Historical overview of climate change,
Climate Change 2007: The physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group
I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge University Press.
Ulph, A. (1996).
Environmental policy instruments and imperfect competitive
international trade. Environmental and Resource Economics, 7.
Ulph, A. and Ulph, D. (1994).
The optimal time path of carbon tax.
Oxford
Economic Papers, 46, 46.
van der Zwaan, B., Gerlagh, R., Klaassen, G., and Schrattenholzer, L. (2002).
Endogeous technological change in climate change modelling. Energy Economics,
24.
Wigley, T. M. L., Richels, R., and Edmonds, J. A. (1996). Economic and environ-
mental choices in the stabilization of atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Nature,
379, 379.
WTO (2002). Small economies: A literature review. COMTD, World Trade Or-
ganisation. Published note.
58
