==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Combining Operational Modal Analysis and Active 
Lubrication Techniques to Perform Rotordynamic 
Testing
Peter Kjær Svendsen 
Januar 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Technical University of Denmark
Combining Operational Modal Analysis and Active
Lubrication Techniques to Perform Rotordynamic
Testing
Author:
Peter Kjær Svendsen
Supervisor:
Ilmar Ferreira Santos
==PAGE:4==
iv
==PAGE:5==
v
Abstract
Structural health monitoring has become a large topic in the civil and mechan-
ical engineering areas over the past decade.
The condition of a structure can
be monitored by using experimental modal parameter identiﬁcation techniques so
that beginning cracks can be identiﬁed before major breakdown occurs. For per-
forming modal parameter identiﬁcation the structure needs to be excited. The
excitation force needs to be known when employing the classical input / output
identiﬁcation techniques. However, if the input force is unknown and the excita-
tion can be assumed to be random, the output only identiﬁcation algorithms can
be applied. The excitation force for civil structures normally originate from nat-
ural forces such as wind and waves acting on e.g. a bridge. In turbomachinery
these natural forces are not as common, consequently, artiﬁcial excitation is often
required. At the present time "in-situ" modal parameter identiﬁcation of rotating
machines are performed by experienced engineers, and the excitation is obtained
utilising an electromagnetic shaker or a hammer. In general the machine needs to
be stopped and disassembled, in order to apply the excitation equipment. While
initiating and performing the tests, the machine can often not operate at fully op-
erational speed. The active lubricated bearing is an integrated part of the machine
and allows for controlling and exciting the lateral vibrations of the rotor, which
can be utilised for modal parameter identiﬁcation.
In this project a rigid and ﬂexible rotor, supported by the tilting-pad journal
bearing are analysed, using the electromagnetic shaker as a perturbation force.
The results from this setup are used in comparison with the system excited by the
active lubricated bearing. The obtained results show that with carefully calibrated
servovalve input signals and supply pressure, the bearing renders non-invasive
perturbation forces. Consequently, the active lubricated bearing can be used as
a replacement for the electromagnetic shaker. Perturbing the system using the
active lubricated bearing, allows for continuous monitoring of the condition of the
rotating machine, without reducing the operational speed.
It is a troublesome task to obtain a precise measure of the input forces when
using the active lubricated bearing as a perturbation force. One has to either
measure the pressure in the pad using an installed pressure sensor or characterise
the transfer function of the hydraulic and electronic system. Using the output
only identiﬁcation algorithms the requirement for knowing the input forces are
bypassed. In the experimental campaign utilising both the electromagnetic shaker
and the active lubricated bearing as a perturbation force, the output only identiﬁc-
ation technique obtains very good estimates of modal parameters when compared
to the classical input / output identiﬁcation technique. Consequently, the output
only identiﬁcation technique can be used for modal parameter identiﬁcation in the
area of turbomachinery.
==PAGE:6==
vi
==PAGE:7==
vii
Preface
This thesis is handed in as a partial fulﬁlment in order to obtain a Master’s degree
in Engineering Design and Applied Mechanics at the department of Mechanical
Engineering, Solid Mechanics Section at the Technical University of Denmark. The
project was carried out from the 24th of August 2015 to the 24th of January 2016,
under the supervision of Professor Ilmar Ferreira Santos.
First and foremost I would like to thank Professor Ilmar Santos for guidance,
many good conversations, and for giving me the opportunity to explore the output
only identiﬁcation techniques combined with rotordynamics, both theoretically as
well as experimentally.
Many people have contributed to this project along the way. I would especially
like to thank Sebastian von Osmanski for his friendship, and good co-operation
throughout the years. I would like to thank Rune Brincker and Anela Bajric for
their valuable contributions concerning the output only identiﬁcation techniques.
I would also like to thank Alejandro Varela and Jorge Salazar for their support
regarding ﬂuid ﬁlm bearings and active lubrication. I would like to thank Christian
Svendsen and Thomas Gredal for general commenting on the report at the ﬁnal
stage.
Finally, I owe my greatest gratitude to my parents, Åse Kjær Svendsen and
Gunnar Christian Clement Svendsen, and my siblings, Judith, Andreas, Palle,
Johanne and Martin, my nephew, Niels Christian, and my niece, Frida. You have
provided me with constant encouragement, care and love, and I am profoundly
grateful for having all of you in my life.
24th of January 2016
Peter Kjær Svendsen
==PAGE:8==
viii
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
ix
Contents
Nomenclature
xiii
I
Introduction
1
1
Mechatronics and Fluid Film Bearings
1
2
The Passive and Active Tilting-pad Journal Bearing Design
2
3
Operational Modal Analysis and Application in Rotating Ma-
chinery
4
4
About This Project
7
II
OMA – Theory
9
5
OMA – Assumptions
9
6
OMA – Input
10
6.1
Mean and Mean Square
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.2
Autocorrelation Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6.3
Cross-correlation Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6.4
Direct Calculation of the Correlation Function Matrix . . . . . . . .
12
6.5
Fourier Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
6.6
Spectral Density Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
7
OMA – Identiﬁcation Algorithms
15
7.1
Time Domain Identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
7.1.1
Ibrahim Time Domain Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
7.1.2
Stochastic Subspace Identiﬁcation Technique . . . . . . . . .
22
7.2
Frequency Domain Identiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7.2.1
Basic Frequency Domain Technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.2.2
Frequency Domain Decomposition Technique . . . . . . . . .
29
8
Numerical Analysis
32
8.1
Numerical Analysis – Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
III
Experimental Rotordynamic Testing
45
==PAGE:10==
x
CONTENTS
9
Experimental Facilities
45
9.1
Modiﬁcations of the Test Rig
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
10 Conventional TPJB Analysis
52
10.1 Testing Procedure and Signal Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
10.1.1 Inﬂuence of Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
10.1.2 Stabilisation Diagram – Oversizing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10.1.3 Experimental Analysis – Random vs. Harmonic Sweep . . .
55
10.1.4 Summary of Experimental Parameter Analysis . . . . . . . .
58
10.2 Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Conventional TPJB System
. . .
59
11 Active Lubricated TPJB Analysis
64
11.1 Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Active Lubricated TPJB System .
64
12 Electromagnetic Shaker vs. ALB
70
13 Active Lubricated TPJB – Parameter Study
73
13.1 Summery of Parameter Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
14 Flexible Rotor – Experimental Analysis
79
15 Conclusion
86
15.1 Future Aspects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
References
89
IV
Appendix
A-1
A Appended Publication
A-1
B Experimental Modal Analysis
B-13
C ALB Excitation Bandwidth
C-17
D Numerical Analysis – Appendix
D-19
D.1 Inﬂuence of Simulation Length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D-19
D.2 Inﬂuence of Sampling Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D-22
D.3 Estimation Performance Using a Harmonic Sweep . . . . . . . . . . D-24
D.4 Inﬂuence of Signal Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D-27
D.5 Inﬂuence of Harmonic Forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D-29
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
xi
E OMA – Experimental Parameter Analysis
E-31
E.1
ITD – Experimental Parameter Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-31
E.2
FDD – Experimental Parameter Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E-39
==PAGE:12==
xii
CONTENTS
Abbreviations
ALB active lubricated bearing, p. 2
CF correlation function, p. 5
DFT discrete Fourier transform, p. 13
EMA experimental modal analysis, p. 4
FDD frequency domain decomposition, p. 5
FRF frequency response function, p. 3
ITD Ibrahim time domain, p. 5
MIMO multiple input multiple output, p. 21
OMA operational modal analysis, p. 4
SD spectral density, p. 10
SIMO single input multiple output, p. 21
SSI stochastic subspace identiﬁcation, p. 5
TPJB tilting-pad journal bearing, p. 2
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xiii
Nomenclature
[µn]
Diagonal matrix holding discrete eigenvalues, see equation (25)
[g2
n(f)] Diagonal matrix with auto spectral density function, see equation (59)
¯x
Mean value of x, see equation (6)
∆t
Sampling interval, see equation (21)
˙y
Temporal derivative of y (dy/dt), see equation (33)
ˆA
Estimate of system matrix, see equation (28)
λi
Eigenvalues – continuous time poles, see equation (21)
Γ+
Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of the observability matrix, see equation (48)
Γs
Observability matrix, see equation (43)
Λ
Matrix holding the discrete eigenvalues, see equation (23)
Φi
Eigenvectors – mode shapes, see equation (21)
Ψ
Matrix holding the mode shapes, see equation (23)
Ψu
Unscaled mode shape matrix, see equation (50)
A
System matrix, see equation (27)
Ac
System matrix in continuous time, see equation (35)
Ad
System matrix in discrete time, see equation (38)
f(t)
Time dependent forcing, see equation (33)
H
Hankel matrix, see equation (22)
H1
Top Hankel matrix, see equation (22)
H2
Bottom Hankel matrix, see equation (22)
Hf
Future block Hankel matix, see equation (40)
Hp
Past block Hankel matrix, see equation (40)
O
Projection Matrix, see equation (41)
o
Column vector of the projection matrix, see equation (43)
q(t)
Modal coordinate vector, see equation (56)
R(τ) Correlation function matrix, see equation (11)
r(t)
Correlation function vector, see equation (21)
S
Diagonal matrix holding singular values, see equation (45)
T
Toeplitz matrix, see equation (29)
==PAGE:14==
xiv
CONTENTS
U and V
Unitary matrices of singular vectors, see equation (45)
X0
Initial condition matrix, see equation (44)
x0
Initial condition vector, see equation (43)
Y(t)
Response data matrix, see equation (13)
y(t)
Total response vector of several measuring points, see equation (10)
z(t)
State variable, see equation (34)
µi
Eigenvalues – discrete time poles, see equation (21)
σ2
Variance, see equation (6)
τ
Time lag, see equation (6)
ζn
Damping ratio (-), see equation (55)
E[·]
Statistical expectation of · , see equation (1)
fn
Natural frequency (Hz), see equation (55)
H(f) Frequency Response Function, see equation (71)
M
Measuring points, see equation (10)
p(x)
Probability density function, see equation (1)
q(t)
Modal coordinate, see equation (52)
Rxx(τ) Autocorrelation function, see equation (6)
Rxy(τ) Cross-correlation function, see equation (9)
Sxx(ω) Spectral density function, see equation (18)
Sxx(k) Discrete spectral density function, see equation (19)
Sxy(ω) Cross spectral density function, see equation (20)
T
Total measurement time, see equation (2)
X(f) Signal x(t) in the spectrum, see equation (15)
X(k) Discrete Fourier transformation, see equation (17)
B
Load distribution matrix, see equation (35)
C
Damping matrix, see equation (33)
f
Force vector, see equation (33)
K
Stiﬀness matrix, see equation (33)
M
Mass matrix, see equation (33)
P
Observation matrix, see equation (35)
y
System response vector, see equation (33)
==PAGE:15==
1
Part I
Introduction
1
Mechatronics and Fluid Film Bearings
During the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st century, a signiﬁcant de-
velopment in the area of electronics and informatics have been seen. Among other
things, this period brought forward the accelerometer, the digital displacement
sensor and the personal computer (PC). Alongside the development in the elec-
tronic area the requirements for rotating machines have increased e.g. the industry
requires larger operational range, both regarding load and angular velocity.
When designing rotating machines, the requirements of the speciﬁc machine
are normally deﬁned and used for construction of ﬁxed components. This thereby
limits the possibility of performing later adjustments in a non-invasive manner
when the machine is completely assembled.
In the design stage, one of the most crucial subjects is the choice and design
of the applied bearings. The bearing provides support to the rotor, moreover it
contributes with addition of stiﬀness and damping to the system.
One of the
advantages of the ﬂuid ﬁlm bearing is its capability of adding damping to the
system, when compared to e.g. the ball bearing.
Since the ﬂuid ﬁlm bearing is one of the main sources of stiﬀness and damping,
modiﬁcation of this part of the machine signiﬁcantly modiﬁes the dynamics of
the whole system. Consequently, the bearing is a reasonable part to alter into a
"smart" mechatronic device.
With a "smart" bearing design, the operational range can be extended and
general lifetime improved by actively creating lift oﬀat start and stop. In addition,
the lateral vibrations can be controlled when crossing critical speeds via a closed
loop conﬁguration. Furthermore, the mechatronic bearing allows for performing "in
situ" modal parameter identiﬁcation without an external electromagnetic shaker.
Consequently, the bearing becomes an essential part for monitoring the machine
and its condition. Small failures, such as beginning cracks, can be identiﬁed before
a major breakdown occurs, since cracks will modify the stiﬀness and damping of
the system, and, thus also the modal parameters of the system.
==PAGE:16==
2
2
THE PASSIVE AND ACTIVE TILTING-PAD JOURNAL BEARING
DESIGN
2
The Passive and Active Tilting-pad Journal
Bearing Design
In this work the tilting-pad journal bearing (TPJB) is analysed. The bearing is
widely applied in the turbomachinery area due to its outstanding stability char-
acteristics, when compared to other oil ﬁlm bearings [1]. For the TPJB the cross
coupling coeﬃcients of the stiﬀness and damping can be neglected [2, 3]. Since the
bearing signiﬁcantly alter the dynamics of the whole system, a theoretical model
for describing the dynamic characteristics of the bearing is necessary. Lund [3]
made a signiﬁcant contribution regarding the theoretical modelling of the TPJB.
He solved the Reynolds equation in order to obtain the linearised stiﬀness and
damping coeﬃcients of the TPJB. By representing the bearing with a set of stiﬀ-
ness and damping coeﬃcients, it is possible to directly couple the dynamics of the
bearing with the rotor. Since Lunds work, a continuous eﬀort has been made to
improve the theoretical prediction of the static and dynamic behaviour of the bear-
ing [4]. Alongside the theoretical advances, a signiﬁcant amount of experimental
work has been carried out for the validation of the theoretical models [5].
The dynamic characteristics of the bearing are strongly dependent on the pre-
load [6] and, consequently, a good starting point for transforming the bearing into
a mechatronic device. One of the ﬁrst designs featuring an active modiﬁcation
of the preload was investigated in [7]. The TPJB was designed with piezoelectric
actuators, which are capable of adjusting the clearance between rotor and pad.
Another design was investigated theoretically and experimentally in [8, 9], here
the pivot was supported by membrans covering a hydraulic chamber. By adjust-
ing the pressure in the chamber, the membrans would deform, and thus modify
the preload in the bearing.
Another approach for modifying the static and dynamic characteristics of the
bearing, is to modify the ﬂow and pressure within the clearance. This design is re-
ferred to as the tilting-pad journal bearing with controllable lubrication. The ﬁrst
design was introduced in 1994 by Santos [8]. This design features a modiﬁed pad
with multiple oriﬁces, which are located across the pad. Through these oriﬁces oil
can be injected and controlled by means of a servovalve and a control signal. Injec-
tion of oil directly into the clearance alters the hydrodynamic ﬂow. Consequently,
the static and dynamic characteristics of the bearing can be altered. Since its
introduction, continuous eﬀorts have been performed to include the contributions
of the active ﬂuid ﬁlm forces into the mathematical model of the bearing [10].
Theoretically, it has been shown that an increase in damping and stability charac-
teristics can be obtained, by using an active lubricated bearing (ALB) [11]. This
claim is supported experimentally [12, 13].
The initial idea behind the active lubricated bearing focuses on increasing the
==PAGE:17==
3
damping and stabilisation characteristics of the bearing. In recent years, the focus
has turned to the possibility of using the active lubricated bearing to actively excite
the system [12, 14, 15]. In contrast to the initial idea of the design, the goal of using
the bearing as a perturbation force is, to maintain the dynamic characteristics of
the passive bearing. Two main parameters inﬂuence the dynamics of the system,
namely the supply pressure and servovalve input signal. It has been demonstrated
that by carefully selecting supply pressure and servovalve input signal, the active
lubricated bearing renders non-invasive perturbation forces [14].
In order to establish the frequency response function (FRF) the input needs
to be known. The input forces originate from the injected high pressurised oil
when using the active lubricated bearing for perturbing the system. These forces
can be measured using an installed pressure sensor, or obtained by identifying the
response function of the hydraulic system. In both cases, it is a troublesome task
to obtain a precise measure of the input force. The knowledge about the input
force is bypassed when using an output only identiﬁcation technique for modal
parameter identiﬁcation. A continuation in the line of work set by the authors [12,
14, 15] is to combine active lubrication techniques with output only identiﬁcation
techniques, which is the main goal of this project.
==PAGE:18==
4
3
OPERATIONAL MODAL ANALYSIS AND APPLICATION IN
ROTATING MACHINERY
3
Operational Modal Analysis and Application
in Rotating Machinery
Modal parameter identiﬁcation is inherently the process of ﬁtting a mathematical
model to measured data obtained from the physical structure. This applies to both
the cases, where (i) input (e.g. force) and output (e.g. acceleration) are used for
modal parameter estimation. This is commonly referred to as experimental modal
analysis (EMA), and (ii) only the output of the structure is used for estimating
the modal parameters.
The subject of estimating the modal parameters from
structural response only, is referred to as operational modal analysis (OMA). OMA
is normally applied to structures where artiﬁcial excitation is ineﬃcient, expensive
and time consuming.
Typical examples are modal parameter identiﬁcation of
bridges, tall buildings, nuclear power plants et cetera. In general, applying OMA
is less time consuming than EMA, since the need of controlling and measuring the
input force is bypassed. However, since the input forces are unknown, the FRF
can not be established.
In order to experimentally identify the modal parameters, the structure needs
to be excited. Without any excitation, no response can be measured, and thus
no modal parameters can be identiﬁed. The needed level of excitation depends
among other things on the measurement equipment at hand. Since OMA relies on
ambient excitation, and the amplitude is arbitrary, the requirements for the meas-
urement devices (accelerometers, displacements sensors and general piezoelectric
transducers) are generally higher, when compared to cases where the amplitude of
excitation can be controlled.
Ambient excitation is traditionally the main source of excitation when applying
OMA. A bridge will experience ambient excitation in the form of wind, water waves
and traﬃc. These excitation forces are arbitrary and uncontrolled with respect to
both amplitude and frequency of the excitation. The probability density function
of a long measurement of wind acting on a structure tends to become Gaussian
distributed, this claim is supported by the central limit theorem [16, p. 80]. If
the input force to a linear structure is random, the structure will vibrate in a
superposition of its mode shapes.
The idea of OMA is to extract these mode
shapes, and the corresponding natural frequencies and damping ratios, without a
direct measure of the input forces.
Although some of the earliest applications of OMA dates back to the 1930s [17],
a signiﬁcant development of the technique has been seen since the early 1990s. The
increased interest for this technique has several reasons: For robust estimates of
the modal parameters, the technique generally requires long measurement length
of the structural response, especially when the natural frequencies and damping
ratios are low, and the excitation forces are ambient. Moreover, an optimal use
==PAGE:19==
5
of this technique relies on multiple input and output measurements, and, con-
sequently, a reasonable high computational power is required for calculation of
modal parameters. It is evident, that the quality of the estimated modal paramet-
ers is directly coupled to the quality of the obtained measurements. Consequently,
a good signal to noise ratio is needed for well-estimated modal parameters. The
improvement and miniaturisation of equipment, such as accelerometers, have also
been a signiﬁcant impetus to the development and inclusion of the technique for
experimental modal parameter identiﬁcation.
OMA identiﬁcation algorithms, which treat the signal in either the time do-
main, frequency domain or in a combination of both, have been developed during
the past four decades. The Ibrahim time domain (ITD) technique, introduced in
1977 by Ibrahim and Mikulcik [18], was one of the ﬁrst multiple output identiﬁc-
ation techniques. The technique is based on ﬁtting the correlation function (CF),
and it is capable of estimating all modal parameters i.e. mode shapes, natural
frequencies and damping ratios. It is a relatively simple technique, and it is cap-
able of giving a quick ﬁrst hand estimate of the modal parameters. Later in 1985
the eigensystem realization algorithm was introduced by Juang and Pappa [19].
This algorithm is also correlation driven, however, the regression problem is es-
tablished using block Hankel matrices.
This algorithm is also relatively easily
implemented, and all modal parameters can be estimated. In 1996, the stochastic
subspace identiﬁcation (SSI) technique was formally introduced by Overschee and
Moor [20]. Two main versions of the technique exist: a data driven and a cor-
relation driven technique. Both are time domain techniques, where the former
processes the data directly whereas the later processes the correlation function.
The technique is generally recognised as being a very powerful time domain iden-
tiﬁcation technique [21]. However, the implementation and usage of the algorithm
is more complicated. When using this technique, the user needs to select the size
of the block Hankel matrix, and the number of eigenvalues and corresponding ei-
genvectors returned from the algorithms. Consequently, the model order has to be
determined, which is normally based on a stabilisation diagram.
A breakthrough for the frequency domain techniques happened, when the
frequency domain decomposition (FDD) technique was introduced in 2000 by
Brincker et al. [22]. This technique treats the signal by calculating the spectral
density matrix. Subsequently is a singular value decomposition performed for each
discrete frequency of the spectral density matrix. The singular values are then ex-
tracted and plotted in the spectrum. Compared to traditional frequency domain
techniques, the simpliﬁed singular value plot helps the user of the algorithm to
more clearly identify the physical modes of the analysed system. Ampliﬁcations
in the singular value plot indicate natural frequencies, and the corresponding sin-
gular vectors are estimates of the mode shapes. Only the natural frequencies and
==PAGE:20==
6
3
OPERATIONAL MODAL ANALYSIS AND APPLICATION IN
ROTATING MACHINERY
mode shapes are identiﬁed using the technique. Damping and reﬁnement of the
natural frequency estimate can be obtained by combining the technique with a
time domain identiﬁcation technique. This coupling is performed by selecting a
frequency band around the natural frequency of interest. For a low damped system
the power of the mode is preset in a small band around the natural frequency. This
band is inverse Fourier transformed, and a correlation function is obtained, which
can be fed into a correlation driven time domain technique. An improvement of
the technique was introduced in 2005 by Zhang et al. [23]. Here the used band of
the spectral density matrix is ﬁltered by means of the extracted singular vector.
This helps isolate the natural frequency of interest from closely spaced modes and
noise.
With the vast span of studied topics and improvements of the algorithms, a
focus on applying the technique for modal parameter identiﬁcation in other en-
gineering areas have emerged; one is the mechanical engineering area. This is,
however, not a trivial task: The structures encountered in the mechanical and
civil engineering areas diﬀerentiate themselves in many ways, when considering
experimental modal parameter identiﬁcation. The structures analysed in the civil
engineering area are generally larger and are often exposed to random ambient
forces.
Moreover, the design of the structures does not normally include any
artiﬁcial forces strong enough to alter the vibrational patterns of the overall struc-
ture signiﬁcantly. The structure analysed in the mechanical engineering area are
generally smaller and the structures are often located in a relatively controlled
environment, where random ambient forces are not as pronounced. Because of the
in general smaller structures artiﬁcial excitation can be performed by applying an
electromagnetic shaker or using an impact hammer. Furthermore, many mechan-
ical structures have rotating components, which generate harmonic forces. These
harmonic forces can easily dominate the vibrations of the system. Harmonic forces
do not respect the fundamental assumption of the force being randomly distrib-
uted. This represents a signiﬁcant challenge for the OMA identiﬁcation techniques.
The presence of harmonic forces and the fact, that a controlled excitation force can
be applied relatively easily and measured, is some of the main reasons why OMA is
not yet commonly used in the mechanical engineering area for experimental modal
parameter identiﬁcation.
In the past decade, many of the challenges related to rotating machines have
been studied, and methods to identify and separate or remove disturbing harmon-
ics have been purposed [24]. Commercial software packages such as ARTeMIS
now give webinars on how to detect and separate harmonics from natural frequen-
cies [25], and despite the aforementioned challenges, the application of OMA in
rotating machinery has shown promising results [26, 27, 28].
Today OMA is recognised as being a strong tool and companion to EMA for
==PAGE:21==
7
modal parameter identiﬁcation; also when testing rotating machines. It is, how-
ever, safe to say that being a more experienced user of the technique is advantage-
ous, especially when testing rotating machines supported by ﬂuid ﬁlm bearings.
There are certain pitfalls to be aware of when using this technique. They can lead
to erroneous estimates and consequently wrong conclusions.
4
About This Project
The main goal of the project entitled "Combining Operational Modal Analysis
and Active Lubrication Techniques to Perform Rotordynamic Testing" is twofold:
Firstly, to study all main aspects involved in performing experimental modal para-
meter identiﬁcation; especially with respect to the identiﬁcation procedure referred
to as OMA. The associated topics such as: random vibration concept, data ac-
quisition, signal processing and the aspect of performing experimental work and
vibration testing are studied. Secondly, to apply the knowledge and the techniques
to perform rotordynamic tests, using the active lubricated bearing as a perturba-
tion force. Herein lies analysing the inﬂuence of the main parameters responsible
for modifying the static and dynamic characteristics of the bearing. These para-
meters are: supply pressure and servovalve input signal. This project includes both
theoretical work and a large amount of experimental work. The experimental work
has been carried out on the tilting-pad journal bearing design with controllable
lubrication.
==PAGE:22==
8
4
ABOUT THIS PROJECT
==PAGE:23==
9
Part II
OMA – Theory
5
OMA – Assumptions
For performing modal parameter identiﬁcation using OMA the force is assumed
to have a Gaussian distributed probability density function. A random signal can
be classiﬁed by the taxonomy presented in Figure 5.1. If the signal is assumed
to be weakly stationary then the probability density function will only depend
on the time separation of the measuring points, not on the total time [16, p. 20].
If the signal is ergodic (most physical processes are ergodic), then the assemble
average involved in determining the mean and the CF can be substituted by the
time average. Assuming ergodicity, the signal can be analysed by estimating the
time-invariant mean an mean square value, the probability density function and
the autocorrelation function. Consequently, the CF of the response of a linear
time-invariant system randomly excited, will show a free decay equivalent to the
direct structural response after a hammer impact.
This is fundamental in the
OMA identiﬁcation procedure.
Random
Stationary
Non-Stationary
Special Cases
Non - Ergodic
Ergodic
Cyclostationary
Figure 5.1: Diagram showing diﬀerent subcategories of random processes (illus-
tration from [29]).
For obtaining valid modal parameter estimates using OMA, following main
assumptions have to be respected:
1. The force is assumed to be Gaussian distributed
==PAGE:24==
10
6
OMA – INPUT
2. The response of the system is assumed to be ergodic
3. The system is assumed to be linear and time-invariant
4. The damping is suﬃciently weak so that a relative decay of the CF is obtained
5. The mode shapes are geometric orthogonal, ΦT
i Φj = 0
6
OMA – Input
All OMA techniques function by treating the signals either in the time domain,
the frequency domain or a combination of both.
When dealing with the time
domain techniques, the initial step is to calculate the CF, which is used as input
to the time domain techniques1. When dealing with frequency domain techniques,
the ﬁrst step is to calculate the spectral density (SD) function, which is used as
input to the frequency domain techniques.
Since the identiﬁcation starts with
calculating the correlation and spectral density functions, they are brieﬂy treated
in this work. These topics are carefully treated in [16, 17, 30].
In this work, the derivations and presentations of equations are in general
represented in both continuous and discrete time; this will ease the understanding
and numerical implementation.
6.1
Mean and Mean Square
The mean value of a signal x is by deﬁnition [16, p. 8] given as
E[x] =
Z ∞
−∞xp(x)dx
(1)
where E[x] is the expectation of x and p(x) the probability density function of x.
Often the probability density function is not known for the signal, however, the
mean value can be estimated as
E[x] = 1
T
Z T
0 x(t)dt
(2)
where T is the total measurement time. Similarly the mean square value can be
calculated as:
E[x2] = 1
T
Z T
0 x2(t)dt
(3)
1Some methods (like the Data-Driven SSI technique) treat the signal directly and calculation
of the correlation function is an integrated part of the algorithm [17, p. 254]
==PAGE:25==
6.2
Autocorrelation Function
11
Numerically eq.(2) and eq.(3) are calculated as:
E[x] = 1
N
N
X
k=1
x(k)
(4)
E[x2] = 1
N
N
X
k=1
x2(k)
(5)
Because of stationarity, the mean and mean square value do not vary. Calculation
of the mean square value is applied when calculating the correlation function.
6.2
Autocorrelation Function
The autocorrelation function of a random signal x(t) is the average value of
x(t)x(t + τ)
Rxx(τ) = E[x(t)x(t + τ)]
(6)
where Rxx(τ) is the autocorrelation function of signal x(t), and τ is the time lag.
For a single random signal, the correlation function will be perfectly correlated
(Rxx(τ) = σ2+¯x2 [16, p. 26]) at zero time lag and theoretically have zero correlation
for any higher value of τ.
For a measurement, the level of correlation for each discrete time lag k, (τ =
k∆t), can be calculated as
Rxx(k) =
1
N −k
N−k
X
n=1
x(n)x(n + k)
(7)
where N is the total number of data points. The summation is limited to N −k
for not exceeding the total measurement length.
6.3
Cross-correlation Function
The correlation between multiple signals can also be calculated, this is referred to
as the cross-correlation function
Rxy(τ) = E[x(t)y(t + τ)]
(8)
Ryx(τ) = E[y(t)x(t + τ)]
(9)
where Rxy(τ) and Ryx(τ) can be calculated using eq. (7). If M measuring points
(measurement channels) are used, then one needs to calculate M × M correlation
functions.
==PAGE:26==
12
6
OMA – INPUT
The calculated auto- and cross-correlation functions from the structural re-
sponse is used as the only input to many of the OMA time domain techniques;
among them are the Ibrahim time domain technique and the eigensystem realiza-
tion algorithm. For a damped system, which is excited randomly, the correlation
function of the system response becomes a free decay.
6.4
Direct Calculation of the Correlation Function Matrix
The correlation function matrix (both auto- and cross-correlation functions) can
also be calculated directly by collecting all measured signals into a response vector
yT(t) =
n
y1(t),
y2(t),
· · · ,
yM(t)
o
(10)
where y(t) is the response vector of M measuring points. With the deﬁned total
response vector eq.(10), the calculation of the CF matrix is very similar to eq.(6);
however, now it is operating on the deﬁned response vector
R(τ) = E[y(t)yT(t + τ)]
(11)
where R(τ) is the CF matrix.
Since the individual responses are arranged as
deﬁned in eq.(10), the calculation performed in eq.(11) is an outer product, i.e.
the size of R(τ) becomes M×M. The diagonal elements of the CF matrix are auto-
correlation functions and the oﬀ-diagonal elements are cross-correlation functions.
The CF matrix can be calculated using eq.(7):
R(k) =
1
N −k
N−k
X
n=1
y(n)yT(n + k)
(12)
By collecting the response vector eq.(10) at each discrete times, a response matrix
can be deﬁned:
Y =
h
y(1),
y(2),
· · · ,
y(N)
i
(13)
The correlation function matrix can then be obtained by direct matrix multiplic-
ation [21],
R(k) =
1
N −kY(1:N−k)YT
(k+1:N)
(14)
which is an unbiased estimate of the correlation matrix at time lag k. The way
of calculating the CF matrix presented in eq.(14) is indirectly applied in the SSI
algorithm, which is treated in Section 7.1.2.
==PAGE:27==
6.5
Fourier Analysis
13
6.5
Fourier Analysis
The Fourier transform is essential, especially when doing modal parameter iden-
tiﬁcation with the frequency domain techniques. For a signal x(t), the complex
Fourier transform is:
X(f) =
Z ∞
−∞x(t)e−i2πftdt
(15)
A Fourier transform can be applied to a signal, when the Dirichlet condi-
tions [30, p. 237] are satisﬁed:
1. The signal x(t) has a ﬁnite number of ﬁnite discontinuities.
2. The signal x(t) has a ﬁnite number of maxima and minima
3. The signal x(t) is absolutely integrable, that is:
Z ∞
−∞|(x(t))|dt < ∞
(16)
For calculating the Fourier transform numerically, the discrete Fourier trans-
form (DFT) can be applied [16, p. 116]:
X(k) = 1
N
N−1
X
n=0
x(n)e−i2π k
N n,
k = 0, 1, 2, ..., (N −1)
(17)
Theoretically the stationary random signal has inﬁnite energy [30, p. 828] i.e.
the signal is not absolutely integrable and it is not satisfying eq.(16); consequently,
the classical Fourier transform is not directly applicable to the signal itself [16,
p. 41]. This problem can be resolved by analysing the Fourier transform of the
correlation function, which is referred to as the spectral density function. The
correlation function contains all information of the stationary random signal and
it is absolutely integrable. It should be noted that the DFT still applies directly to
the signal because only a ﬁnite number of points are used for the transformation
and, hence, the signal has a ﬁnite length.
6.6
Spectral Density Function
The frequency domain techniques base their estimates of modal parameters on the
spectral density function, which is given as [16, p. 42]
Sxx(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞Rxx(τ)e−iωτdτ
(18)
==PAGE:28==
14
6
OMA – INPUT
where Sxx(ω) is referred to as the spectral density function or the power spectral
density function. Numerical implementation can be performed by calculating the
discrete spectral density function [16, p. 122]
Sxx(k) = 1
N
N−1
X
n=0
Rxx(n)e−i2π k
N n,
k = 0, 1, 2, ..., (N −1)
(19)
where Sxx(k) is obtained by calculating the DFT of the discrete autocorrelation.
Both discrete Rxx(n) and Sxx(k) functions are estimates of the true continuous
Rxx(t) and Sxx(f) function. The quality of their estimates are linked to the length
of the measured signal and the sampling frequency utilised, i.e. the more physical
information obtained in the measurement, the better their estimates become. For
multiple signals, the cross spectral density function can be obtained as:
Sxy(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞Rxy(τ)e−iωτdτ
(20)
It is similar to the auto spectral density, in this case, however, the Fourier transform
of the cross-correlation function Ryx(τ) is performed.
==PAGE:29==
15
7
OMA – Identiﬁcation Algorithms
Now the foundation for performing modal parameter identiﬁcation using OMA is
established. The existing OMA identiﬁcation algorithms can in general be divided
into three categories: Time, frequency and joint frequency-time domain techniques.
Some of the more known algorithms in their respective categories are listed as:
1. Time domain algorithms
(a) Ibrahim time domain
(b) Poly reference
(c) Eigensystem realization algorithm
(d) Data-driven stochastic subspace identiﬁcation
(e) Correlation-driven stochastic subspace identiﬁcation
2. Frequency domain algorithms
(a) Peak picking / basic frequency domain
(b) Frequency domain decomposition
(c) Enhanced frequency domain decomposition
(d) Curve-ﬁt frequency domain decomposition
3. Joint frequency-time domain algorithms
(a) Frequency domain decomposition & Ibrahim time domain
There are strengths and weaknesses related to all of the techniques listed above.
The approach of the time domain techniques is to ﬁt a mathematical model to the
CF. Because the CF is derived from the entire signal, it is in general easier to obtain
bias free estimates using the time domain techniques. It is, however, diﬃcult to
control the identiﬁed modal parameters, and noise modes or non-physical modes
are often among the outputs of the algorithms, and it is up to the user to determine
which of them are of physical nature.
The approach of the frequency domain techniques is to ﬁt a mathematical
model to the spectral density function. In general, a band, where the mode is
dominant, is used for the ﬁt. The bandwidth and selection of the mode is performed
by the user; consequently, the user has more control over the identiﬁed modal
parameters. Because only a speciﬁc band is used for the identiﬁcation, bias free
estimates is more diﬃcult to obtain.
There are many factors that inﬂuence the quality of the estimations. To men-
tion a few: the measurement length, sampling frequency, general noise, harmonic
==PAGE:30==
16
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
forces, applied ﬁlter, correlation function length and the bandwidth when using
the frequency domain techniques.
The most signiﬁcant parameters and their inﬂuence on the estimated modal
parameters will be addressed in the numerical study presented in Section 8. And
the experimental study presented in Section 10.1, based on experimental data
obtained from the test rig.
Despite careful parameter study when performing experimental modal para-
meter identiﬁcation, it is always an advantage to apply more than a single iden-
tiﬁcation technique for estimating the modal parameters. The techniques use dif-
ferent mathematical descriptions for extracting the physical information from the
measured data. In the case where diﬀerent techniques estimate modal parameters
that are nearly identical, more conﬁdent conclusions can be made regarding the
dynamic characteristics of the analysed system.
In this light, three diﬀerent OMA identiﬁcation algorithms are selected through-
out this work. The following algorithms, which work both in time and frequency
domain, are: the Ibrahim time domain technique, the data-driven stochastic sub-
space identiﬁcation technique and the frequency domain decomposition technique.
The Ibrahim time domain technique is selected because: (i) its ease of implement-
ation, (ii) capability of treating multiple outputs, (iii) all modal parameters are
extracted and (iv) its bias free estimate if the linearity and time invariant assump-
tion is obeyed. The data-driven stochastic subspace identiﬁcation technique is se-
lected because: (i) all modal parameters are extracted, (ii) number of eigenvalues
returned can be adjusted even with a single input signal and (iii) its wide spread
application in the industry [31]. The frequency domain decomposition technique
is capable of estimating the natural frequencies and corresponding mode shapes.
In this work, this technique is combined with the Ibrahim time domain technique,
thus enabling damping ratio estimate and enhancement of natural frequency estim-
ate. This technique is selected because: (i) more precise structural information is
obtained by means of the singular value plot, (ii) accelerated and improved modal
parameter estimates when compared to classical frequency domain techniques.
Numerical and experimental validation of the chosen algorithms have been
reported in the literature [17, 32], and are generally recognised as robust identiﬁc-
ation algorithms.
Many of the general steps involved in establishing the system matrix, are similar
to those performed in other time and frequency domain techniques.
==PAGE:31==
7.1
Time Domain Identiﬁcation
17
7.1
Time Domain Identiﬁcation
The main idea of the time domain techniques is to ﬁt a mathematical model to
the correlation function. In the situation where no noise exist, the correlation
function contains all physical informations of the linear time invariant structure
that is excited randomly; here the quality of the estimated modal parameters are
determined by the quality of the ﬁt i.e. the quality of the utilised model.
The ﬂowchart presented in Figure 7.1 shows the main steps involved in per-
forming modal parameter identiﬁcation using the Ibrahim time domain and data-
driven stochastic subspace identiﬁcation algorithms. The steps of the ﬂowchart
are described in further detail below:
a) obtain structural response measurement using accelerometers, displacement
sensors or other transducers. It is important to: (i) obtain a good structural
response, (ii) obey Nyquist sampling criterion (fs ≥2fmax), (iii) have long
measurements, and (iv) have multiple measuring points. The more measur-
ing points, which are well distributed all over the structure, and the longer
the measurements the better.
b) calculate and plot of the correlation function. With the plotted correlation
function there are two important characteristics that one have to look for:
(i) High noise level will show at the ﬁrst time lag, discarding the ﬁrst time
lag can be an advantage. (ii) a short measurement will result in a rather
dominant noise tail, application of a window will force the tail to become
zero and will often stabilise the algorithms. Window type and removal of
the ﬁrst time lag also depends on the level of damping in the system if e.g. a
highly damped system is analysed, a steep decay will be seen and the removal
of the ﬁrst time lag is not as crucial.
c) the correlation function is fed into the Ibrahim time domain algorithm. The
technique will identify as many modal parameters as the number of signals
fed into the algorithm. If the signal is noise contaminated or harmonic forces
exist the need of oversizing becomes crucial, consequently a larger amount
of measurements is needed.
d) the measured signal is fed into the data-driven stochastic subspace iden-
tiﬁcation technique and the correlation function is established inside the
algorithm. The needed oversizing is determined typically based on a sta-
bilisation diagram showing the model order. Physical modes and harmonic
components will be relatively constant whereas noise modes will ﬂuctuate in
frequency.
==PAGE:32==
18
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
e) the modal participation vector is calculated for validating the estimated
modal parameters. Based on the modal participation vector and estimated
modal parameters are the estimated CF calculated. The ﬁt is considered
reasonable if the estimated CF is close to the one obtained from the meas-
urements. The modal participation factor is calculated. There is one modal
participation factor for each mode; a high modal participation factor indic-
ates a physical mode.
==PAGE:33==
7.1
Time Domain Identiﬁcation
19
Φn, fn, ζn
Ibrahim time domain
Data-driven SSI
Φn, fn, ζn
t
A
τ
τ
Ryy(τ)
τ
Ryy(τ)
Ryy(τ)
Window
Noise tail
Ryy(τ)
ˆRyy(τ)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
L
Figure 7.1: OMA – time domain ﬂowchart: (a) obtain good structural response,
where long measurements, and well distributed measurement points is preferred.
(b) calculate, plot, and processing of the CF (c) the CF is fed into the ITD tech-
nique. A ﬁt is performed and modal parameters are estimated. (d) Structural
response is fed into the data-driven SSI algorithm, and the model order is determ-
ined. (e) Estimated CF is compared with the CF obtained from the data.
==PAGE:34==
20
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
7.1.1
Ibrahim Time Domain Technique
The idea of the Ibrahim time domain technique is that the free system response
can be formulated as a linear combination of mode shapes and exponential decays
r(t) = r(k∆t) =
Nm
X
i=1
ciΦieλik∆t =
Nm
X
i=1
ciΦiµk
i
(21)
where Nm is the number of modes in the considered free decay. Each row of r(t)
is a correlation function of a corresponding measuring point M. Φi denotes the
eigenvectors (mode shapes), λi the eigenvalues (continuous time poles), µi the
discrete eigenvalues (discrete time poles), and ci is the initial modal amplitudes,
and deﬁnes the free decay at time zero.
The CF is arranged to obtain a Hankel matrix (a matrix that has constant
skew diagonals) and split into a top Hankel matrix H1 and a bottom matrix H2
H =
"H1
H2
#
=


r(1)
r(2)
· · ·
r(n −3)
r(2)
r(3)
· · ·
r(n −2)
r(3)
r(4)
· · ·
r(n −1)
r(4)
r(5)
· · ·
r(n)


(22)
where n is the amount of time lags of the correlation function. H1 can then be
deﬁned as
H1 = ΨΛ
(23)
where Ψ and Λ holds the mode shapes and the discrete time poles respectively:
Ψ =
" Φ1
Φ2
· · ·
ΦNm
µ1Φ1
µ2Φ2
· · ·
µNmΦNm
#
,
Λ =


c1µ0
1
c1µ1
1
· · ·
c1µn−4
1
c2µ0
2
c2µ1
2
· · ·
c2µn−4
2
...
...
...
...
cNmµ0
Nm
cNmµ1
Nm
· · ·
cNmµn−4
Nm


(24)
The bottom Hankel matrix H2 from eq.(22) is H1 delayed with two time lags;
creating a diagonal matrix with the discrete eigenvalues squared [µn]2, H2 can be
established:
H2 = Ψ[µn]2Λ
(25)
Λ can be separated in both eq.(23) and eq.(25) to obtain:
Ψ−1H1 = [µn]−2Ψ−1H2
(26)
==PAGE:35==
7.1
Time Domain Identiﬁcation
21
The above equation can be further rearranged to obtain,
A
z
}|
{
Ψ[µn]2Ψ−1 H1 = AH1 = H2
(27)
which deﬁnes the system matrix A. If n −3 is larger than 2Nm, where Nm is the
number of modes in the considered free decay, then the linear system of equations
becomes overdetermined. The system is traditionally solved using regression [17,
p. 249], which is also applied in this work. By multiplying eq.(27) from the right
with HT
1 , one obtains normally a fully ranked matrix H1HT
1 .
Multiplying the
equation with (H1HT
1 )−1, A is estimated according to
ˆA1 =
T21
z }| {
H2HT
1 (
T11
z }| {
H1HT
1 )−1
(28)
where the indicated T11 and T21 are block Toeplitz matrices (diagonal-constant
matrices). Another estimate can be obtained by multiplying from the right with
HT
2 thus one obtains:
ˆA2 =
T22
z }| {
H2HT
2 (
T12
z }| {
H1HT
2 )−1
(29)
The traditional Ibrahim time domain formulation is single input multiple out-
put (SIMO). The formulation can be extended to multiple input multiple output
(MIMO) by summing the contributions from M free decays into the block Toeplitz
matrices:
T11 =
M
X
i=1
H1,iHT
1,i,
T12 =
M
X
i=1
H1,iHT
2,i,
T21 =
M
X
i=1
H2,iHT
1,i,
T22 =
M
X
i=1
H2,iHT
2,i
(30)
The estimation of the system matrices for the MIMO case is then deﬁned as:
ˆA1 = T21T11,
ˆA2 = T22T12
(31)
For both the SIMO and MIMO case, the estimates of the system matrix can
be improved by calculating the average value of the estimations, ˆA = ( ˆA1 +
ˆA2)/2, which is also referred to as the unbiased estimate. By taking the eigenvalue
decomposition of ˆA the discrete eigenvalues and eigenvectors are obtained. From
eq.(21) the relation between the discrete and continuous time poles are µi = eλi∆t,
thus the modal parameters are obtained as
λi = ln(µi)
∆t ,
ωi = |λi|,
fi = ωi
2π,
ζi = −Re(λi)
|λi|
(32)
==PAGE:36==
22
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
7.1.2
Stochastic Subspace Identiﬁcation Technique
The input to the data-driven stochastic subspace identiﬁcation technique is the
measured response of the system. The technique can be formulated based on the
state space formulation of the equation of motion. Having M > 1 measurements,
a multi degree of freedom, equation of motion is obtained as
M¨y(t) + C˙y(t) + Ky(t) = f(t)
(33)
where M,C and K denotes the mass, damping and stiﬀness matrices of the system,
respectively, ˙y(t) denotes the temporal derivative and f(t) the time dependent for-
cing. A discretisation is needed for solving the equation numerically; normally the
discretisation is performed by ﬁrst transforming the linear second order diﬀerential
eq.(33) into two equations of ﬁrst order using the state space formulation. Starting
with formulating a new variable:
z(t) =
(y
˙y
)
(34)
Eq.(33) can then be transformed into
˙z(t) = Acz(t) + Bf(t),
y(t) = Pz(t)
(35)
where Ac, B and P are the system matrix in continuous time, load distribution
matrix, and observation matrix respectively, which are deﬁned as:
Ac =
"
[0]
I
−M−1K
−M−1C
#
,
B =
" [0]
M−1
#
,
P =
h
I
[0]
i
(36)
With the deﬁned state space form of the equation of motion, the solution can
directly be obtained as presented in [33, p. 165]:
z(t) =
Homogeneous
z
}|
{
eActz(0) +
Particular
z
}|
{
Z t
0 eAc(t−τ)Bf(τ)dτ
(37)
The ﬁrst term is the homogeneous part (transient response), and the second term
is the particular part (steady-state response) of the solution. With a sampling
interval of ∆t, the discrete values of y(t) become yk = y(k∆t); thus the solution
of the homogeneous equation becomes:
zk = eAck∆tz0 = Ak
dz0
(38)
==PAGE:37==
7.1
Time Domain Identiﬁcation
23
It is noted that the exponential function is applied directly to the continuous
system matrix; this equals its power series and is calculated by performing an
eigenvalue decomposition of the matrix and taking the exponential function of
the eigenvalues [21]. Inserting the discrete from of the homogeneous solution into
eq.(35) the discrete response is obtained.
yk = PAk
dz0
(39)
Block Hankel Matrix
In Section 6.4 the data matrix Y was deﬁned for direct calculation of the correl-
ation function matrix using matrix multiplication. This approach can be further
extended by shifting the data matrix Y to create a block Hankel matrix [21]
H =
"Hp
Hf
#
=


Y(1:N−2s)
Y(2:N−2s+1)
...
Y(2s:N)


(40)
where N is the total sample size. The number of block rows in the Hankel matrix
is determined by 2s which is user deﬁned; the number of block rows determine the
size of the ﬁnal system matrix, and is consequently, limiting the total amount of
eigenvalues possible to extract. With M measurements the number of rows in the
block Hankel matrix are 2sM, and the number of columns are N −2s. The total
block Hankel matrix are evenly split into two matrices where Hp is referred to as
"the past" and Hf is referred to as "the future" block Hankel matrix.
Projection
With the deﬁned past and future block Hankel matrices the so-called projection
matrix can be deﬁned
O = E[HfHp]
(41)
where the expectation is operating on the future Hankel matrix, which is considered
to be stochastic, whereas the past matrix is treated as being deterministic. The
calculation of the projection matrix can be found to be [21]
O =
Tfp
z }| {
HfHT
p (
Tpp
z }| {
HpHT
p )−1Hp
(42)
where the projection matrix O is a sM × sM matrix. By analysing the individual
terms, it is noted that the ﬁrst four products produce the covariance between the
==PAGE:38==
24
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
channels at diﬀerent time lags and the last matrix deﬁnes the conditions. Under
the assumption of the signals being Gaussian distributed and having zero mean
value, the columns of the projection matrix, which are deﬁned in eq.(42), are seen
to be stacked free decays (equivalent to correlation functions) to a set of unknown
initial conditions [21].
It is worth noting the close similarity between the projection matrix in eq.(42)
and the estimated system matrix for the Ibrahim time domain technique in eq.(28).
The solution of the projection matrix deﬁned in eq.(42) can be calculated. How-
ever, in contrast to the Ibrahim time domain technique, the Hankel matrices con-
tain the measured data, which means that the matrix sizes are generally signiﬁc-
antly larger; consequently, the direct solution of the projection matrix in eq.(42),
can easily exceed the computational power available.
The free decays are mathematically described by the homogeneous part of the
solution in eq.(37). A single column of the projection matrix can therefore be
deﬁned as
o = Γsx0,
Γs =


P
PAd
PA2
d
...
PAs−1
d


(43)
where Γs is referred to as an observability matrix. By inspecting eq.(43), it is
evident that the equation can not be solved directly because both the observability
matrix and the initial conditions are unknown and, therefore, an estimate of the
projection matrix has to be found.
Observability and Initial Condition Estimation
For estimating the initial conditions and the observability matrix a QR - decom-
position is ﬁrst performed on the transposed block Hankel matrix from which an
orthogonal matrix O and a upper triangular matrix R is obtained. The problem
is signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed by realising that only the upper part is needed for the
projection. Based on eq.(43) the projection matrix can be deﬁned as:
O = ΓsX0
(44)
The next step is to take the singular value decomposition of the projection matrix
O = USVT
(45)
==PAGE:39==
7.1
Time Domain Identiﬁcation
25
where U and V are unitary matrices holding singular vectors in each column, and
S is a diagonal matrix holding singular values. An estimate of observability matrix
ˆΓ and the initial condition ˆX0 also referred to as the Kalman state matrix can then
be given by [21]:
ˆΓs = US1/2,
ˆX0 = S1/2VT
(46)
Using the estimated ˆΓs, the system matrix can be separated from eq.(43) by re-
moving one block from the top and one from the bottom:
ˆΓ(2:s) ˆAd = ˆΓ(1:s−1)
(47)
And the discrete system matrix can then be found directly by regression [20, p. 51]
according to
ˆAd = ˆΓ+
(2:s)ˆΓ(1:s−1)
(48)
where Γ+ denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of the observability matrix.
The observation matrix P can be extracted directly from eq.(43):
ˆP = ˆΓ(1:1)
(49)
With the obtained discrete system matrix ˆAd, the procedure is identical to that
of the Ibrahim time domain technique. By performing an eigenvalue decomposition
of the discrete system matrix, one obtains
ˆAd = Ψ1
u[µn]Ψ−1
u
(50)
where Ψu and [µn] are the unscaled mode shape matrix and discrete eigenvalues,
respectively.
By using eq.(32), these can be converted into modal parameters,
where the estimated mode shapes need to be scaled with the observation matrix
Ψ = PΨu
(51)
==PAGE:40==
26
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
7.2
Frequency Domain Identiﬁcation
The frequency domain techniques treat the spectral density function which de-
scribes the correlation function in the frequency domain. Most information of a
speciﬁc mode is located in a small band around the natural frequency of the mode
(for a low damped system). Consequently, it is customary to use only a small band
close the natural frequency for the ﬁt.
The main steps using the peak picking technique and the frequency domain
decomposition is presented in Figure 7.2. The steps of the ﬂowchart are described
in further detail below:
a) the requirements for the measured signal is the same as for time domain
techniques (see Section 7.1). Good structural measurements should be ob-
tained.
b) calculate the spectral density function. Averaging, overlap and application of
window helps obtaining a well deﬁned spectral density function and improves
the estimated modal parameters.
c) the spectral density function is used for identifying natural frequency, mode
shapes and damping ratios using the classical frequency domain / peak pick-
ing technique. An ampliﬁcation in the spectrum indicate a natural frequency.
d) the correlation function arranged in a 3D matrix is used as input to the fre-
quency domain decomposition technique. A singular value decomposition is
calculated at each discrete time lag and the singular values are plotted. A
singular value ampliﬁcation indicate a natural frequency, where the corres-
ponding singular vector is extracted. The singular vector is an estimate the
mode shape, and is utilised as a modal ﬁlter applied to the spectral density
function.
e) the ﬁltered spectral density function is inverse Fourier transformation and
the correlation function is obtained.
The correlation function is fed into
a correlation driven time domain technique which enables damping ratio
estimate and enhancement of the natural frequency estimate.
f) the modal participation vector is calculated and the estimated spectral dens-
ity function is obtained and compared with the spectral density function from
the measurements.
==PAGE:41==
7.2
Frequency Domain Identiﬁcation
27
Φn, fn, ζn
FDD
Classical
t
f
Db
A
f
τ
Ryy
SV
Db
f
B2
B1
f2
f1
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
f
Db
(f)
Time domain
technique
Figure 7.2: OMA – frequency domain ﬂowchart: (a) obtain good structural re-
sponse. (b) calculate, plot and processing (apply: averaging, overlap, window) of
the spectral density function (c) the spectral density function is feed into the clas-
sical frequency domain technique, and the natural frequencies, mode shapes and
damping ratios are estimated. (d) singular values of the spectral density matrix
are plotted, high ampliﬁcation indicate a natural frequency, the singular vector is
extracted to ﬁlter the band. (e) the ﬁltered spectral density function is inverse
Fourier transformed and a free decay is obtained, which is fed into a correlation
driven technique. (f) estimated modal parameters are validated.
==PAGE:42==
28
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
7.2.1
Basic Frequency Domain Technique
The frequency domain decomposition technique is a natural extension of the clas-
sical frequency domain / peak picking technique, in this section the classical ap-
proach is brieﬂy introduced, and limitations of the technique is discussed.
A structural response for a single mode is deﬁned as
y(t) = Φq(t)
(52)
where Φ is a mode shape column vector and q(t) the modal coordinate.
The
correlation function can be calculated as in eq.(11)
R(τ) = E[y(t)yT(t + τ)] = ΦE[q(t)q(t + τ)]ΦT = Rq(τ)ΦΦT
(53)
where Rq(τ) is the autocorrelation function of the modal coordinate q(t). Applying
the Wiener-Khintchine theorem [30, p. 285], the spectral density matrix becomes
Gy(f) = Gq(f)ΦΦT
(54)
where Gq(f) is the auto spectral density function of q(t). By inspecting eq.(54), it
is noted that since Φ is a column vector multiplied with it self transposed, which
is an outer product, each column or row are estimates of the mode shape.
A
more robust estimate can be obtained by averaging all columns in Gy(f) which is
equivalent to the measuring channels.
The estimation of the damping ratio can be performed following the approach
derived in [34, pp. 18-21], where it is argued that the width of a low damped mode
in the spectrum can be estimated by its half-power point bandwidth. An estimate
of the damping for the speciﬁc mode thus becomes
ζn = B
2fn
(55)
where B is the half-power point bandwidth. The bandwidth depends on the level
of damping, higher damping yields a lager bandwidth before the half power point
is reached. fn is the selected natural frequency of interest.
With the mode shapes, the selected natural frequency and estimated damping
ratio all modal parameters are obtained. There are, however, some limitations to
where this approach can be applied and especially four conditions by Bendat and
Piersol [34, p. 202] (here restated) has to be fulﬁlled
a) Gxx(f) ≈constant for fi −3Bi ≤f ≤fi + 3Bi
b) ζi < 0.05
c) ∆f < 0.2Bi
==PAGE:43==
7.2
Frequency Domain Identiﬁcation
29
d) fi −fi−1 > 2(Bi + Bi−1)
where Gxx(f) is the auto spectral density function of the excitation force. Here
a) is fulﬁlled when the excitation is random. It is common to see a damping ratio
below 0.05 (especially in the civil engineering area), and thus b) is often fulﬁlled.
c) relates to the resolution in the frequency domain, a ﬁner resolution than the
half-power bandwidth is needed. d) deﬁnes the allowed closeness of modes.
If modes are closely spaced, the natural modal decomposition [17, p. 260] of
modes is no longer valid because the estimations become heavily biased. Especially
in the civil engineering area closely spaced modes are often seen and thus the
violation of point d) has been one of the main incentives behind the development
of the frequency domain decomposition technique.
7.2.2
Frequency Domain Decomposition Technique
The frequency domain decomposition technique takes the classical frequency do-
main technique a step further and is based on a singular value decomposition of
the spectral density matrix.
The method can be introduced in the same manner as the classical method;
however, in contrast to eq.(52) the response vector is now considered to be a
summation of normal modes and modal coordinates
y(t) =
M
X
i=1
Φiqi(t) = Ψq(t)
(56)
where Ψ =
h
Φ1(t), Φ2(t), · · · , ΦM(t)
i
is a mode shape matrix of size M × M with
each normal mode placed in columns, and q(t) =
n
q1(t), q2(t), · · · , qM(t)
o
of size
M × 1 is the modal coordinates. The correlation function matrix can then be
established
R(τ) = E[y(t)yT(t + τ)] = ΨE[q(t)qT(t + τ)]ΨT = ΨRq(τ)ΨT
(57)
where Rq(τ) is a correlation function matrix of modal coordinates. Transforming
eq.(57) into the frequency domain yields
Gy(f) = ΨGq(f)ΨT
(58)
where Gq(f) is the spectral density matrix of the modal coordinates.
Assuming that the modal coordinates are uncorrelated, Gq(f) simpliﬁes to a
diagonal matrix, which is also positive deﬁnite because of Parseval’s theorem [30,
p. 288].
Because energy dissipation will exist, the mode shapes are complex.
Further, since it is known that the spectral density matrix is Hermitian one needs
==PAGE:44==
30
7
OMA – IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHMS
to use the Hermitian instead of the transposed. Evidently, eq. (58) can be written
as:
Gy(f) = Ψ[g2
n(f)]ΨH
(59)
Now the spectral density matrix is decomposed into auto spectral densities located
in the diagonal matrix [g2
n(f)] and normal modes.
The decomposition stated in eq.(59) can be performed by a singular value de-
composition of Gy(f) and since Gy(f) is complex, hermitian and positive deﬁnite,
the decomposition becomes [22],
Gy(f) = USUH = U[s2
n]UH
(60)
where [s2
n] can be interpreted as auto spectral densities and U can be interpreted
as singular vectors. The steps in going from eq.(58) to eq.(60) is the main idea
behind the technique.
An example of this application can be illustrated by analysing a 2DOF system;
the correlation function matrix then becomes
R(n) =
"Ry1y1(n)
Ry1y2(n)
Ry2y1(n)
Ry2y2(n)
#
,
n = 1, 2, · · · , N
(61)
where R(n) is a 3D matrix of size 2 × 2 × N, and N is the number of lags. The
correlation function matrix is Fourier transformed to obtain the spectral density
matrix:
G(k) =
"gy1y1(k)
gy1y2(k)
gy2y1(k)
gy2y2(k)
#
,
k = 1, 2, · · · , N
(62)
With the aforementioned assumptions, the singular value decomposition is per-
formed for each discrete frequency and one obtains:
Gy(k) =
h
Φ1, Φ2
i "s2
1(k)
0
0
s2
2(k)
# "ΦH
1
ΦH
2
#
,
k = 1, 2, · · · , N
(63)
The technique uses the singular vectors as estimates for the mode shapes. If
the amount of sensors equals the amount of dominant modes then because the
decomposition is performed for each discrete frequency all modes can be extracted
at the same and at any discrete frequency. Extracting all modes at one discrete
frequency, however, often results in heavily biased estimates
The best estimate of the individual modes is obtained at the discrete frequency,
where the singular value is dominant [17, p. 271]; by plotting the singular values
for all discrete frequencies this can be found and selected by the user.
==PAGE:45==
7.2
Frequency Domain Identiﬁcation
31
The singular value decomposition performed in eq.(60) is an estimate because
it do not completely correspond to the theoretical decomposition of the spec-
tral density matrix. It is, however, a reasonable decomposition if the system is
lightly damped and the modes are well separated or the modal coordinates are
uncorrelated [17, pp. 267-268]. Even if these assumptions are violated, the singu-
lar value decomposition of the spectral density matrix signiﬁcantly improves the
modal parameter estimates when compared to the classical approach [22].
The quality of the natural frequency estimation, which is obtained from the
decomposition in eq.(60) depends directly on resolution in the spectrum; moreover,
no damping estimates is obtained. The damping can be estimated and enhance-
ment of the natural frequency estimate can be obtained by linking the frequency
domain technique with a time domain technique. A selected band of the spectral
density matrix around the identiﬁed singular value ampliﬁcation is used. Further-
more, for isolating the natural frequency of interest, the extracted singular vector
is used as a modal ﬁlter [23].
The applied modal ﬁlter can be explained by deﬁning a matrix with vectors
arranged in columns U =
h
u1, u2, · · ·
i
such that:
UHA = I
(64)
Here U equals the Hermitian of the pseudo inverse of the mode shape matrix Ψ,
(U = (Ψ+)H) [17, p. 272] and the vectors u1, u2, · · · are therefore orthogonal to
the mode shapes Φ1, Φ2, · · · . Therefore, when a singular vector is obtained, the
vector can be used as a modal ﬁlter by:
uH
n Gy(f)un = g2
n(f)
(65)
All non-related mode shapes are thereby ﬁltered away. The output is a ﬁltered
auto spectral density function which predominantly contains information from a
particular mode. The auto spectral density is then transformed back to the time
domain and a free decay is obtained, this can be fed into a correlation driven
identiﬁcation technique. In this project, the Ibrahim time domain techniques is
utilised.
==PAGE:46==
32
8
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
8
Numerical Analysis
The quality of the estimated modal parameters using OMA identiﬁcation tech-
niques depend on many parameters, which all have to be considered when using
the algorithms. Some of the most important parameters and their inﬂuence on the
quality of the identiﬁed modal parameters are analysed numerically. This numer-
ical analysis considers both rotating and non-rotating structures. The simulated
system is excited randomly, and the quality of the estimated natural frequency
and damping ratio are analysed. The inﬂuence on following parameters have been
tested:
1. Simulation length, which here also includes excitation via swept harmonics
2. Sampling frequency
3. Signal noise
4. Harmonic forces
The estimated modal parameters are obtained from the selected three OMA
identiﬁcation techniques. Additionally, is the experimental modal analysis tech-
nique applied, and calculation of the frequency response function is performed
based on input and output information. Modal parameters are obtained using
the least squares approach. A brief introduction to EMA and the least squares
technique are given in Appendix B.
The estimated modal parameters are also depending on the processing para-
meters such as: correlation function length, window type, overlap, averaging and
used frequency band for the frequency domain techniques. These parameters are
depending on the analysed system and are brieﬂy discussed in this section. A more
thorough convergence study of these parameters is performed on experimental
data, that are obtained from the test rig. The study can be found in Section 10.1.
The processing parameters utilised in the numerical studies are given in Table 1.
The simulated system is illustrated in Figure 8.1, where the selected mode
shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios are indicated. It is a 2DOF system
and the mode shapes are orthogonal. The numerical system is excited by a single
input force, this is not an optimal excitation case for OMA [17, p. 13] and it
is applied because many of the experimental tests are conducted with a single
excitation force (the electromagnetic shaker).
Strong harmonic components, noise and the natural frequencies can normally
be seen by plotting the correlation function and the spectral density function.
The correlation functions of the simulated system is plotted in Figure 8.2a and
the spectral density function in Figure 8.2b. The excitation force is random and
==PAGE:47==
33
Algorithm
Setting
EMA
–
frequency
response
function
50% overlap, Hanning window with block
size = 4096
EMA – least squares
Frequency bandwidth 0.2 Hz with centre fre-
quencies at 1 and 2 Hz
Correlation function
250 time lags, 60% ﬂattop triangular win-
dow.
Stochastic subspace identiﬁca-
tion
12 block rows, 4 modes returned.
Frequency domain decomposi-
tion
Frequency bandwidth 1.5 Hz with centre at
1 Hz, frequency bandwidth 2 Hz with centre
at 2 Hz, 300 spectral density points and 200
time lags.
Frequency domain decomposi-
tion (inﬂuence on noise)
Frequency bandwidth 0.5 Hz with centre at
1 Hz, frequency bandwidth 1 Hz with centre
at 2 Hz, 300 spectral density points and 200
time lags.
Table 1: Processing settings of the diﬀerent algorithms
no noise is added. This results in a smooth exponential decay of the correlation
function. The spectral density function shows two clear peaks in the spectrum
at 1 Hz and 2 Hz. The input forces to the 2DOF system is know, evidently, the
frequency response function can be calculated. The frequency response function,
phase and coherence for the numerical system are presented in Figure 8.3.
The variance and standard deviation increases when the simulation length de-
creases, especially when noise exist. This results in deviation of the estimated
modal parameters. In order to quantify the deviations of the individual algorithms,
are the simulations replicated 100 times. The mean value of the 100 estimates ( ¯fest,
¯ζest) is compared with the predeﬁned modal parameters of the numerical system
(fana, ζana). This is performed in order to obtain the level of error. The percentage
error is calculated according to:
Natural frequency error = | ¯fest −fana|
fana
× 100
(66)
Damping ratio error = |¯ζest −ζana|
ζana
× 100
(67)
Graphs that are showing error convergence and additional plots, are displayed
in the appendix sections D.1, D.2, D.3, D.4 and D.5.
This section contains a
summary of the numerical analysis.
==PAGE:48==
34
8
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
y
x
y1
y2
Shaker
(a)
(b)
(c)
f1=1 Hz, ζ1=0.03
f2=2 Hz, ζ2=0.04
Figure 8.1: (a) illustration of simulated SIMO 2DOF system, (b) ﬁrst mode shape
and corresponding natural frequency and damping ratio. (c) second mode shape
and corresponding natural frequency and damping ratio.
0
10
20
30
−1,000
−500
0
500
1,000
1,500
time (s)
Rij(t)
Ry1y1(t)
Ry1y2(t)
Ry2y1(t)
Ry2y2(t)
(a) Auto and cross-correlation functions
0
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
Frequency (Hz)
10log10(|Gyiyj(F)|)
Gy1y1(F)
Gy1y2(F)
Gy2y1(F)
Gy2y2(F)
(b) Spectral density functions
Figure 8.2: Correlation function and spectral density function of simulated 2DOF
system. The correlation functions show clearly a free decay. The spectral density
functions shows two ampliﬁcations at 1 Hz and 2 Hz.
==PAGE:49==
35
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
−40
−30
−20
−10
0
10log10(|H(F)|)
y1
y2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
−200
−100
0
100
200
Phase ◦(degrees)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
Figure 8.3: Frequency response function, phase and coherence plot of simulated
2DOF system. Two clear peaks and phase shifts are seen at 1 Hz and 2 Hz; coher-
ence is one because no noise is added.
==PAGE:50==
36
8
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
1 – Inﬂuence of Simulation Length for a Randomly Excited Structure
The estimation errors of both natural frequencies and damping ratios are seen to
decrease signiﬁcantly as the simulation length increases. The simulation length
corresponds to a measurement length. The errors in natural frequencies are in
general very small, this is also the case for a small sample size. With a sampling
frequency fs = 8 Hz, the errors are below 1% at N = 210. This corresponds to
a measuring time of t = 128 s. An estimation error below 0.2% for the natural
frequencies is obtained when the sample size is increased to N = 216 (t = 8192 s
≈2.28 h).
The estimation errors for the damping ratios are higher; the errors are above
10% for all OMA algorithms with a simulation length of N = 210. The errors
decrease below 5% when the sample size is increased to N = 216.
The band-
width, which is used for the frequency domain decomposition technique, signiﬁc-
antly alters the damping estimates. Smaller bandwidths yield lower damping ratio
estimates whereas the natural frequency estimate remains nearly unaﬀected.
The results are in good correspondence with theory, i.e. the longer the sim-
ulation length, the better the estimates become. This is because the algorithms
receive more information from the analysed structure. The required measurement
length depends on the modal parameters of the system and the level of bias al-
lowed in the estimates. For instance, if the bias error is 4% and the variance error
is 10%, then the total measurement of a randomly excited structure should be [17,
p. 153]
T = 200
ζf
(68)
where f is the fundamental frequency of the structure and ζ the corresponding
damping ratio. In the situation where f1 = 1 Hz and ζ1 = 0.03, this will result in
a total measurement time of T = 6667 s i.e. 1 h and 51 min. From eq.(68) it is
evident that a shorter measurement is needed when the natural frequency is higher
or the system is more damped.
2 – Inﬂuence of Sampling Frequency for a Randomly Excited Structure
The resolution in the frequency domain depends on the amount of samples as well
as the sampling frequency. In the situation, where the sample size is ﬁxed, the
resolution will decrease when the sampling frequency is increase and visa versa.
This can also be seen in the errors of the estimated modal parameters, where
sampling frequencies range from fs = 8 Hz to fs = 128 Hz. With a sample size
of N = 218 the estimates are reasonable up to a sampling frequency of 32 Hz;
as the sampling frequency is further increased, the errors are seen to increase
==PAGE:51==
37
signiﬁcantly. Especially the Ibrahim time domain technique and the frequency
domain decomposition technique show this trend when the sampling frequency
becomes high. The stochastic subspace identiﬁcation algorithm is relatively stable
and the technique gives generally good estimates for high sampling frequencies.
This analysis shows that a high sampling frequency is not an advantage for
the algorithms. A high sampling frequency will result in an increase in the stored
data, which eventually becomes a problem because long structural measurements
are desired. Moreover, the large amount of data increases the computational time
of the identiﬁcation algorithms. The minimum sampling frequency is determined
by the Nyquist frequency (fmax = fs/2); if this is not respected, then problems
with aliasing will occur.
3 – Inﬂuence of Simulation Length for a Structure Excited by a Sweep
Harmonic
The application of a harmonic sweep excitation force is commonly applied when
using the electromagnetic shaker as an excitation force. The artiﬁcial excitation
force can be measured using a force transducer, and an EMA algorithm can be
applied based on the input and output information.
The harmonic sweep can
for some tests be an eﬀective way of exciting the system. The force, however, is
not random and, therefore, the assumptions concerning random excitation are not
valid.
Identical sweeps are performed while increasing the simulation length, and the
errors of the estimated natural frequencies and the damping ratios are obtained.
It is interesting to study how well the OMA algorithms handle the case of non
Gaussian excitation. Especially the time domain techniques show very low level
of error; this is observed already with short simulation lengths. At N = 210 the
errors of the natural frequencies are below 0.2% and the errors of the damping
ratios are below 3%. Compared to the random excitation case, the same level of
errors is ﬁrst reached at N = 218. The frequency domain decomposition technique
is seen to have converged at a simulation length of N = 216. The errors are seen
to be on the same level as the random excitation case.
This study indicates that even though the harmonic sweep is not Gaussian
distributed, it is still applicable as an excitation force. The OMA identiﬁcation
techniques obtained very good estimates, using a harmonic sweep excitation force.
In addition, it is noted that the algorithms seem to converge faster as a function
of simulation length.
In the case of natural occurring forces such as wind and water disturbances,
the white noise assumption is limited to a certain frequency band; if this band
is much larger than that of interest, it is normally referred to as white. In the
case of a harmonic sweep excitation force, the spectrum of the force in the excited
==PAGE:52==
38
8
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
band also tends to become white and, thus, the frequencies of interest are evenly
excited. That is why a sweep harmonic is also applicable as an excitation force for
the OMA algorithms. The idea of a harmonic sweep excitation force is, however,
often limited to a controlled environment and the possibility of applying the force.
Experimentally the excited frequency band, when using the active lubricated
bearing as a perturbation force, is limited due to the hydraulic transfer function.
This is investigated in Appendix C. Results show that with a supply pressure of
25 bar, the active lubricated bearing is limited to an excitation frequency of 200 Hz.
4 – Inﬂuence of Signal Noise for a Randomly Excited Structure
Noise is always present when conducting measurements on a physical structure.
The noise can originate from the surroundings of the tested structure and the
measurement equipment. Here it is tested how the algorithms perform when noise
is added to the simulated response.
A plot of the system response in time and added 4% of noise are presented
in Figure 8.4a. Because noise in general is random it will be uncorrelated after
a few time lags (theoretically already after one). This means that the energy of
the noise will be found in the ﬁrst few time lags of the CF. This is clearly seen by
increasing the noise to 94% (i.e. close to the power of the repose it self) which is
presented in Figure 8.4b. The corresponding correlation function is also presented.
An ampliﬁcation of the ﬁrst time lag is clearly seen, however, it is followed by a
smooth decay. This demonstrated how the correlation function can separate high
level of noise from the structural response. For a very noise contaminated signal
it is recommended to remove the ﬁrst couple of time lags from the correlation
function before it is fed into the correlation driven algorithms.
In this study 4% of noise is added to system response, and the ﬁrst three time
lags are removed from the CF.
The time domain techniques obtains slightly higher level of estimation errors for
short simulation length, when noise is added. However, as the simulation length is
increased the estimation errors of both the natural frequencies and damping ratios
decreases and reach values close to the case where no noise was added.
The FDD technique estimates converge, however, slightly higher estimation
errors for the second natural frequency and damping ratio are obtained. +0.1%
for the natural frequency estimate and +5% for the damping ratio estimate. The
frequency bandwidth utilised for the noise case is reduced with 1 Hz i.e. a band-
width of 0.5 Hz is used for the ﬁt at 1 Hz and a bandwidth of 1 Hz is used for the
ﬁt at 2 Hz. In the situation, where a larger band is included, the error is especially
seen to increase for the second damping ratio; it does converge, but with a 20%
larger level of error.
==PAGE:53==
39
0
20
40
60
−0.15
−0.08
0.00
0.08
0.15
time (s)
Amplitude
y1
noise
0
10
20
−70.00
15.00
100.00
185.00
270.00
time (s)
Ry1y1(t)
(a) Signal in time, 4% noise and correla-
tion function
0
20
40
60
−0.15
−0.08
0.00
0.08
0.15
time (s)
Amplitude
y1
noise
0
10
20
−70.00
15.00
100.00
185.00
270.00
time (s)
Ry1y1(t)
(b) Signal in time, 94% noise and correla-
tion function
Figure 8.4: (a): Simulated response and corresponding correlation function with
4% added noise. (b): Simulated response and corresponding correlation function
with 94% added noise. Noise add to the ﬁrst time lag.
5 – Inﬂuence of Harmonic Forces for a Randomly Excited Structure
In the presence of rotating components harmonic forces exist. In the situation,
where the angular velocity is swept, the harmonic forces can be utilised as a per-
turbation force in a similar manner as the harmonic sweep function. If, however,
the angular velocity is constant, the harmonic forces represent a challenge for the
algorithm because the structure will vibrate at the harmonic frequency. The har-
monic component can dominate the vibrational patterns of the structure, if the
power is suﬃciently large. With a ﬁxed harmonic frequency, the correlation func-
tion does not decay and it can therefore in particular aﬀect the damping estimates
if no oversizing is made. The problem is clearly seen by plotting the correlation
function and spectral density function shown in Figure 8.5a and Figure 8.5b, re-
spectively. The simulated system is here tested three times with a single harmonic
force at frequencies Ω= 3.5, 2.5 and 2.1 Hz. The result of the added harmonic
==PAGE:54==
40
8
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
force is clear: the correlation function does no longer show a smooth decay in
stead a harmonic component will be present. The harmonic components are seen
in the spectral density plot. The correlation function can be forced to become
zero by application of a window. This can be seen for the correlation function and
spectral density function in Figure 8.5c and Figure 8.5d, respectively. The window
improves the spectral density plot. It does, however, not remove the harmonic
component from the signal.
0
20
40
60
−50
0
50
100
time (s)
Ry1y1(t)
Ω= 3.50 Hz
Ω= 2.50 Hz
Ω= 2.10 Hz
(a) Correlation function without window
0
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
Frequency (Hz)
10log10(|Gy1y1(F)|)
(b) Spectral density function without win-
dow
0
20
40
60
−50
0
50
100
time (s)
Ry1y1(t)
Ω= 3.50 Hz
Ω= 2.50 Hz
Ω= 2.10 Hz
(c) Correlation function with window
0
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
Frequency (Hz)
10log10(|Gy1y1(F)|)
(d) Spectral density function with window
Figure 8.5: Correlation functions and spectral density functions with and without
window for a simulated 2DOF system. – Harmonic components are seen in the
correlation function.
The application of a window improves the quality of the
spectral density function.
The numerical system with added harmonics demonstrate the importance of
supporting the estimated modal parameters with a plot of the correlation func-
tion and spectral density function. This is especially the case when working with
time domain techniques. A harmonic component in the frequency domain often
==PAGE:55==
8.1
Numerical Analysis – Conclusion
41
distinguish itself from a natural frequency by being very pronounced in a narrow
frequency band. The natural frequency will be more wide distributed in the spec-
trum, if the system has a reasonable level of damping. It can, however, be diﬃcult
for some systems to distinguish harmonic components from natural frequencies. In
such a case more sophisticated techniques needs to be applied in order to remove
or model these harmonic components.
In this study, a single harmonic force is applied to the system and the frequency
is continuously decreased from Ω= 3.8 Hz to Ω= 2.1 Hz i.e. the frequency band
between the harmonic component and the second natural frequency is decreasing.
For all analysis, the power of the harmonic force is 50% of the input force, which
is random and with a simulation length of N = 218.
The estimates of the ﬁrst natural frequency at 1 Hz and the damping ratio
is nearly unchanged with the added harmonic force. Small levels of errors are
obtained because of the long simulation length. The errors of the second natural
frequency estimates are, however, aﬀected by the harmonic force; this is especially
the case when it is very close to the second natural frequency.
Largest errors for both the second natural frequency and damping ratio estim-
ates are observed for the FDD technique. The error can be decreased by minimising
the used frequency band. A small frequency band, however, results in a low damp-
ing ratio estimate. This is also the case when the frequency of the harmonic force
is far away from the analysed natural frequency; as a consequence, the quality of
the damping ratio estimate is a compromise between the utilised bandwidth and
the proximity of the harmonic component in the signal. The stochastic subspace
identiﬁcation algorithm is also aﬀected by the harmonic component in the signal,
especially when the harmonic frequency is very close to the natural frequency. It is
important to select at least three retuned modes from the algorithm. In the situ-
ation, where, only two are returned, the second estimated mode will also contain
a contribution from the harmonic force.
8.1
Numerical Analysis – Conclusion
The numerical studies show that the three selected OMA algorithms show errors
of the natural frequency and damping ratio estimates, which are on the same level
as those obtained using the frequency response function with a least squares ﬁt.
Relative to EMA, a longer measurement time is generally needed for the OMA al-
gorithms to reach convergence. It has been shown numerically that the algorithms
give good estimates of the modal parameters when the excitation force is a har-
monic sweep over the frequency band of interest. Moreover, this excitation type
yields faster convergence for the time domain algorithms. The usage of the har-
monic sweep excitation force is also tested experimentally by sending a random
or chirp signal to the electromagnetic shaker. The same tendencies are observed
==PAGE:56==
42
8
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
experimentally with respect to the needed excitation length and speed of conver-
gence; these results can be found in Section 10.1
Because the algorithms do not include any noise modelling, an oversizing of
the model becomes crucial when harmonic components or noise are present in
the signal. Oversizing of the model means extracting more modes than actually
needed. For the case where harmonic components are presented one allows the
algorithms to identify the harmonic components as natural frequencies.
If the
model is not oversized, the estimated modal parameters contain the contribution
from the noise contained in the signal. The need for oversized models is especially
important for the time domain techniques because their problem has full rank (they
identify everything present in the signal), and, therefore, all disturbing components
in the signal contribute to the estimates. Based on experimental data the inﬂuence
of oversizing is carefully studied in Section 10.1.
Ibrahim Time Domain
This technique shows in general very good convergence properties and low level
of errors. In the situation, where noise is contained in the signal, the algorithm
becomes more sensitive to the simulation length and correlation function time lags.
The algorithm can often be stabilised by removing the ﬁrst couple of time lags from
the correlation function; in this case the ﬁrst three lags were removed. Because
the noise is white, the contribution from the noise will for a longer measurement
mainly be found in the ﬁrst time lag. The need for removing the ﬁrst time lag
depends on the level of noise and the level of damping in the system. A steep
decay will be seen for a heavily damped system and, therefore, a rise in the ﬁrst
time lag does not alter the results signiﬁcantly.
The algorithm can identify one mode for each measured response. In the pres-
ence of strong harmonic forces, reasonable estimates are only obtainable if the
harmonic component is modelled as a modal parameter. Consequently, one of the
signals need to be used for the purpose of oversizing. In that sense, the need for
multiple outputs become even more important when harmonic forces and other
noise components are contained in the signal. One can to a certain degree bypass
this problem by creating pseudo measurements. They can be created by adding a
copy of the measured responses shifted in time. This approach does, however, not
add any new structural information and whenever possible it is always recommen-
ded that more measurements are obtained form the structure.
Stochastic Subspace Identiﬁcation
The technique shows a clear convergence tendency also in the case where the signal
is noise contaminated. In the situation, where noise or harmonic components exist,
==PAGE:57==
8.1
Numerical Analysis – Conclusion
43
it is generally an advantage to increase the amount of block rows in the Hankel
matrix and to extract more modes than are actually needed. By doing so the
algorithm is allowed to dedicate some of the modes to noise or harmonic modelling.
The technique can, in contrast to the ITD technique, extract more modes than
the number of signals feed into the algorithm; here the need for multiple outputs
to estimate the natural frequencies and damping ratios are not as critical as it is
for the ITD technique.
Frequency Domain Decomposition
The technique shows a clear convergence tendency also in the situation, where
the signal is noise contaminated. Regarding the user deﬁned parameters i.e. the
settings for ﬁt in the spectrum, it is especially the frequency bandwidth that
determine the quality of the estimated damping ratio. There is nearly a linear
relationship between the bandwidth and the level of damping. A larger bandwidth
yields in general a larger damping estimation.
Biased estimates are, however,
obtained, in the situation, where a too large bandwidth is applied and the signal
is noise contaminated or a harmonic component exist inside this band.
==PAGE:58==
44
8
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
==PAGE:59==
45
Part III
Experimental Rotordynamic
Testing
The experimental work of this project focuses on analysing the tilting-pad
journal bearing. Two bearings are analysed; a rigid rotor bearing system and a
ﬂexible rotor bearing system. The rigid rotor bearing simulates a simpliﬁed TPJB
system, with two pads installed in a "load on pad" conﬁguration. The ﬂexible rotor
bearing system simulates an industrial compressor, where four pads are installed
in a "load between pads" conﬁguration. The aim of the experimental work is to
analyse the system dynamically. An electromagnetic shaker is utilised for exciting
the system, and with the force transducer (input) and the displacement sensors
(output) the modal parameters are estimated using EMA and OMA2. The results
from the conventional TPJB system are used as a benchmark for the second part
of the experimental work.
The second part of the experimental work aims at
replacing the electromagnetic shaker as the perturbation force, with the active
lubricated bearing as a non-invasive perturbation force.
9
Experimental Facilities
The majority of the experimental work conducted in this project is performed on
the rigid rotor bearing system. The complete test rig, with all main components
are presented in Figure 9.1. The rotor is driven by the transmission belt and the
electrical motor 1. The angular velocity of the rotor is controlled using the control
unit 2. Angular velocities in the range 0 - 80 Hz (4800 rpm) can be obtained. The
angular velocity is measured using the diﬀerential encoder 3. Dynamic forces are
applied at the free extremity of the frame using the electromagnetic shaker 4, and
measured using the force transducer 5. The force transducer is connected to the
ampliﬁer 6. A static load is applied at the free extremity of the frame. Using
turnbuckles a maximum static load of 3000 N can be applied and measured using
the force transducer 7. The relative displacement of the frame is measured using
the displacement sensor 8. Two accelerometers 9 and 10 are placed at the free
extremity of the frame. The signals are ampliﬁed using 11 and 12 respectively. A
low pressure pump 13 supplies the bearing with a low pressure oil ﬂow. The oil is
returned to the tank 14 via the suction pump 15. Inside the tank a high pressure
pump is located, which distributes high pressurised oil via the manifold 16. On the
2OMA estimates are based only on the output
==PAGE:60==
46
9
EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES
manifold the maximum pressure can be adjusted manually, and controlled directly
by using the pressure gauge 17. The oil from the high pressure pump is forced
through the ﬁlter 18, before entering the single high dynamically ranged servovalve
19. The servovalve is responsible for controlling the oil ﬂow to the lower and upper
pads of the bearing. The pressure in the clearance between the pads and the rotor
is measured using the pressure sensor 20, one for each pad. All measured signals
are converted from analog to digital using the dSpace unit 21. The recording
and subsequent processing of the obtained signals are performed on the personal
computer (PC) 22. Any signal (random or harmonic sweep) can be send from
the PC via the dSpace unit to either the servovalve or the electromagnetic shaker.
The signal to the electromagnetic shaker is ampliﬁed via 23, before reaching the
electromagnetic shaker.
A closer view of the bearing and the tilting frame is presented in Figure 9.2a.
The two tilting-pads are located inside the bearing 1, and support the rigid rotor.
The rotor is connected via ball bearings to the tilting frame 2. At one extremity of
the frame ball bearings are inserted, allowing only rotational movements around
point O. The frame can move freely at the end P, where the electromagnetic shaker
and static load are added, as presented in Figure 9.1. The angle of rotation of the
frame is limited by the two tilting-pads installed in the bearing housing. Thus,
only small vertical movements of the rotor located at the centre of the frame are
measured. The pressure sensor 3 is installed inside the pad, one for each pad.
An illustration of the TPJB and frame is presented in Figure 9.2b, where the
most important components are indicated. The frame is assumed to be rigid in the
analysed frequency range i.e. from 0 to 300 Hz. A mechanical model is presented
below the illustration, where the tilting pads are replaced with a set of stiﬀness
and damping coeﬃcients. Experimentally one is measuring the reduced dynamic
coeﬃcients of the bearing, which are frequency dependent. Because the frame is
assumed rigid and the reduced dynamic coeﬃcients are measured the system can
be assumed to be a SDOF system, in the analysed frequency range. The SDOF
assumption is valid if there is no noise from the surroundings i.e. disturbing natural
frequencies from other parts of the test rig.
An inside view of the bearing is presented in Figure 9.3. In this view the frame
is removed and the rotor can be seen. The rotor is supported by the lower and
upper pads. For high static loads the lower pad becomes more heavily loaded,
whereas the upper pad becomes more lightly loaded.
At the end of the rotor
a ball bearing can be seen, which is where the frame is connected to. A view
of the pads are also presented, where 1 shows the nozzle, with a O-ring as a
seal. Oil is injected into the clearance through the oriﬁce 2. At the oriﬁce the
pressure measurement is obtained, by means of the pressure sensors 3. The design
parameters i.e. dimensions, material type and utilised oil type are given in Table 2.
==PAGE:61==
47
1
2
3
4
5
4
6
7
8
9
5
9
10
10
12
11
19
21
23
22
20
14
15
16
18
17
13
O
Figure 9.1: Picture of the complete test rig. – 1: Electrical motor and frequency
converter. 2: Control unit for the frequency converter. 3: Diﬀerential encoder.
4: Electromagnetic shaker. 5 and 6: Force transducer and ampliﬁer. 7: Force
transducer for static load. 8: Displacement sensor. 9 and 10: Accelerometers. 11
and 12: Ampliﬁers for accelerometers. 13: Low pressure pump. 14: Tank with
internal high pressure pump. 15: Suction pump. 16: Manifold for controlling
high pressure ﬂow. 17: Pressure gauge. 18: Filter. 19: Servovalve. 20: Pressure
sensor. 21 dSpace A/D converter. 22: PC for recording and processing. 23:
Ampliﬁer for electromagnetic shaker.
==PAGE:62==
48
9
EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES
Force Teans.
kstatic
Shaker
Servo-
Port A
Port B
Displ. probe
l2
f(t)
k
c
Ω
fstatic
y
O
l1
c
k
x
(a)
O
valve
1
P
2
3
O
Acc. meter
3
P
(b)
Figure 9.2: (a): Close bearing view. 1: Bearing with two pads inside. 2: Frame
tilting around point O. 3: Pressure sensor. (b): Illustration of working principle
of the test rig and mechanical model. l1 = 0.21 m, l2 = 0.47 m
==PAGE:63==
49
1
2
3
Figure 9.3: Inside view of the bearing and the pad. 1: Nozzle with O-ring, 2:
Injection port, 3: Pressure sensors
Rotor mass
12
kg
Frame mass
3
kg
Pad inner radius
49.923
mm
Journal radius
49.692
mm
Bearing axial length
100
mm
Preload factor
0.75
-
Number of pads
2
-
Pad arc
69
deg
Oﬀset
0.5
-
Load Angle
on pad
-
Pad thickness
12
mm
Injection nozzle radius
3
mm
Injection nozzle length
10
mm
Oil type
ISO VG22
-
Pad material
Brass
-
Pivot insert material
Steel
-
Oil temperature
35 - 40
◦C
Table 2: Test rig parameters and dimensions
==PAGE:64==
50
9
EXPERIMENTAL FACILITIES
9.1
Modiﬁcations of the Test Rig
A great part of this project is experimental. Experimental work is troublesome
and the amount of work required for obtaining good experimental results is often
very large. This has also been the case for this project. A brief summery of topics
dealt with for obtaining good measurement results is given below:
1. A new high pressure pump, manifold, pressure gauge and larger hydraulic
tank have been installed. The manifold and pressure gauge allow for manual
control of the supply pressure. The larger hydraulic tank together with the
manifold helps to obtain a steady temperature. Even with the large amount
of experimental work conducted in this project there has been no temperature
higher than 40 degrees Celsius after the new system was installed.
2. New roller bearings have been installed connecting the frame with the rotor.
3. The encoder (tachometer) has been installed and connected to the dSpace
unit, in order to give a precise measurement of the angular velocity of the
rotor
4. The seal of the nozzle installed in the pad is fragile and vulnerable, especially
when the supply pressure is increased. Diﬀerent seal types and sizes have
been tested, and it has been found that the O-ring "6.50-1.80, NBR 90" is
currently the best way to limit the amount of leakage behind the pad. The
clearance between the nozzle and the cylinder, where the seal is located, is
relatively large. This clearance is needed in order to enable the tilting motion
of the pad. This relatively large clearance poses a challenge for any seal type.
Consequently, a new design could be considered in the future.
5. As aforementioned, the analysed rigid rotor-lever system is assumed to be an
SDOF system. The SDOF assumption can, however, be diﬃcult to obtain
experimentally because noise from the surroundings can easily inﬂuence the
system. This has also been the case when initiating the experimental cam-
paign. The problem can be seen by inspecting the FRF, phase and coherence
of the original system, which is presented in Figure 9.4. A dive in the middle
of the resonance peak is observed, for the original system. By adding 10 kg
mass to the end of the frame the natural frequency is lowered (fn =
q
k
m).
The modiﬁed system is presented in Figure 9.4. With the lowered natural
frequency a more clear single resonance peak can be observed. This indicates
that the second resonance peak is likely to be a mode from the rest of the
structure.
==PAGE:65==
9.1
Modiﬁcations of the Test Rig
51
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.5
1
1.5 ·10−7
|H(F)|m/N
Original
Modiﬁed
100
150
200
250
300
0
50
100
150
200
Phase ◦
100
150
200
250
300
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Frequency (Hz)
Coherence
Figure 9.4: Magnitude, phase and coherence plot of the rigid rotor with and
without addition of 10 kg mass at the end of the frame.
==PAGE:66==
52
10
CONVENTIONAL TPJB ANALYSIS
10
Conventional TPJB Analysis
The conventionally lubricated TPJB system is analysed initially. In this setup
the dynamic forces are generated by means of the electromagnetic shaker. With
this setup some experimental investigations of the inﬂuence of: ﬁltering, oversiz-
ing, random vs. harmonic sweep are performed in Sections 10.1, 10.1.1, 10.1.2
and 10.1.3. The results from the experimental investigations are summarised in
Section 10.1.4. These initial investigations establish the foundation for the later
modal parameter identiﬁcation, by means of the EMA and OMA algorithms, of
the rigid rotor-lever system.
10.1
Testing Procedure and Signal Processing
In Section 7.1 and Section 7.2 the general procedure and important aspects when
utilising time and frequency domain techniques for structures in general were
treated. In this section more speciﬁc information regarding the procedure of test-
ing the bearing is presented.
The dynamic characteristics of the bearing are frequency dependent i.e. they
depend on the excitation frequency. Moreover the dynamic properties of the rotor-
lever system depends on the angular velocity and the static load. The angular
velocity and static load modify the hydrodynamic pressure according to the Reyn-
olds equation, and consequently, modify the dynamic properties of the rotor-lever
system. This implies that whenever the angular velocity and static load are ad-
justed a new system is analysed. Consequently, data obtained when sweeping the
angular velocity or static load is unﬁt for use, since the stationarity assumption is
violated. A single setting is, however, insuﬃcient for capturing the overall dynamic
tendencies of the system.
Several tests are performed in order to capture the dynamic characteristics of
the bearing as a function of angular velocity and static load, while also respecting
the stationarity assumption. Because the system changes when these parameters
are adjusted, one needs to adapt the techniques to the new analysed system. This
includes analysing the decay of the correlation function, the noise tail, oversizing
and frequency band used for the frequency domain techniques. Another matter, is
the presence of harmonic forces originating from the rotor unbalance. Due to the
fact that each test is performed with a ﬁxed angular velocity the harmonic com-
ponents represent a problem for the algorithms. This problem is evident in the
numerical studies. In addition, to the fundamental frequency (angular velocity)
harmonics of the fundamental frequency are observed, i.e. integers of the funda-
mental frequency. Because of the harmonic components in the signal an oversizing
of the model becomes crucial. For higher angular velocities the unbalance force
==PAGE:67==
10.1
Testing Procedure and Signal Processing
53
becomes so dominant that a simple oversizing of the model is not suﬃcient for
obtaining reasonable estimates, thus a ﬁlter needs to be applied. In this case the
so called notch ﬁlter, or band stop ﬁlter, is applied.
10.1.1
Inﬂuence of Filtering
In this project the notch ﬁlter is applied in order to lower the power of harmonic
components in the signal. The notch ﬁlter is an eﬀective way to lower the power of
a speciﬁc narrow frequency band. This is especially valuable for the time domain
techniques, because they use the total signal for their estimates. If e.g. the system
is analysed with a rotor angular velocity of 3,000 rpm (50 Hz), a high pass ﬁlter
could be applied instead of the notch ﬁlter. With a high pass at 55 Hz the harmonic
component would be removed. However, much more information than just the
harmonic component is removed, and especially the time domain techniques tend
to give an erroneous low estimate of the damping ratio. The errors in damping
estimates are also related to the high level of damping seen in the rotor-lever system
i.e. the mode is active in a large band. The correlation function (CF), without
any ﬁltering and a direct Fourier transformation of the response signal without
any averaging, are presented in Figure 10.1a. This is the bearing analysed with an
angular velocity of 3,000 rpm (50 Hz). The harmonic component inﬂuences the CF
at the initial few time lags, because of its power and the high level of damping. The
ﬁne resolution in the spectrum reveals a clear peak at 50 Hz, 100 Hz, 150 Hz, and
200 Hz. This is the fundamental frequency and harmonics where the fundamental
frequency contains most power. At these speciﬁc frequencies the notch ﬁlter is
applied in order to lower the power of the harmonic components. The CF and the
direct Fourier transformation of the signal, after application of the notch ﬁlter are
presented in Figure 10.1b. Now the CF shows a clear free decay because the power
of the harmonic components are minimised. It is worth noticing the steep decay
of the CF which indicates that the analysed system is highly damped. This can
be a problem for the algorithms, because the fundament for the ﬁt is minimised.
The direct Fourier transformation of the ﬁltered response shows that the power of
the harmonic components is minimised.
The classical digital ﬁlter often results in a distortion of the phase. However,
because the measured signals are not processed in real-time other types of ﬁltering
can be utilised. In this project the designed notch ﬁlter coeﬃcients is combined
with a zero-phase distortion ﬁlter, which results in no phase distortion. However,
it is important to note that when applying any ﬁltering or windowing, some of
the power and information from the signal is removed. The ﬁltering, windowing
and general processing are a delicate balance between obtaining a good signal
representation in the time or frequency domain, while not altering the important
information of the analysed structure in the signal.
==PAGE:68==
54
10
CONVENTIONAL TPJB ANALYSIS
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
−2
0
2
4
6 ·10−6
time (s)
Amplitude
50
100
150
200
250
−180
−160
−140
−120
−100
Frequency (Hz)
Power Y(F) (dB)
(a) Without ﬁltering
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
−2
0
2
4
6 ·10−6
time (s)
Amplitude
50
100
150
200
250
−180
−160
−140
−120
−100
Frequency (Hz)
Power Y(F) (dB)
(b) With ﬁltering
Figure 10.1: Correlation functions and ﬁne frequency representation of the sig-
nal. Rotor angular velocity: 3,000 rpm (50 Hz). The correlation function without
ﬁltering shows a strong harmonic component, and peaks in the spectrum. With
ﬁltering a clear free decay is seen and the power of the peaks in the spectrum is
minimised.
In Appendix E.1 and E.2, a convergence study based on experimental data is
performed for the ITD and the FDD techniques, respectively. For the ITD and
the SSI techniques a simple oversizing can compensate for much of the errors when
harmonic components are present in the signal. However, the notch ﬁlter improves
the estimates of especially the natural frequency for angular velocities where the
damping is high. Due to the fact that the damping is high, a large band is needed in
order for the FDD technique to give reasonable damping estimates (see convergence
study in Appendix E.2). As a consequence, when the angular velocity is increased,
the harmonic components enter the utilised frequency bandwidth. Without any
ﬁltering the natural frequency estimate deteriorates signiﬁcantly, when using the
FDD technique.
==PAGE:69==
10.1
Testing Procedure and Signal Processing
55
10.1.2
Stabilisation Diagram – Oversizing
It is common to plot a stabilisation diagram which shows the model order, espe-
cially when using the SSI technique. The stabilisation diagram can be obtained by:
(i) adjusting the size of the block row Hankel matrix, and extracting all returned
eigenvalues, or (ii) by creating a large block row Hankel matrix and adjusting
the eigenvalues returned. The later is the normal procedure, and is also utilised
herein. Figure 10.2a shows a stabilisation diagram of a measurement obtained
from the bearing with an angular velocity of 4,500 rpm (75 Hz). The y-axis shows
the model order. A stable mode is observed at 120 Hz where an ampliﬁcation of
the spectral density function can be seen. Furthermore, a stable mode exists at
75 Hz, which is the velocity of the rotor i.e. a harmonic component. As the model
order increases more modes are identiﬁed because the algorithm is forced to make
a ﬁt that contains more modes. At some point the model size becomes too large.
This is evident, by analysing the estimates of the damping ratio corresponding
to the natural frequency at 120 Hz, which is presented in Figure 10.2b. With a
model order between 2 – 13 a relatively stable estimate of the damping ratio is
obtained. As the model order is increased further the damping ratio begins to
ﬂuctuate. This clearly illustrates that there is an optimal value for the oversizing
of the model. The level of oversizing depends on, among other factors, the amount
of: harmonic components in the signal, level of noise, and to a high degree the
number of natural frequencies of the analysed system.
For both the ITD and the SSI techniques, oversizing is crucial in order to obtain
good modal parameter estimates. An oversized model is needed even in the case
where the signal is well ﬁltered and a good signal to noise ratio is obtained. Results
show that the ITD and the SSI techniques give good estimates with an oversized
model of two. Remembering that one mode needs to be identiﬁed, this yields all
three response sensors (two accelerometers and one displacement sensor) should
be used for the ITD technique. See Appendix E.1, for the ITD convergence study
based on experimental data.
10.1.3
Experimental Analysis – Random vs. Harmonic Sweep
In the numerical analysis, the usage of a random excitation force and a harmonic
swept in the frequency band of interest was investigated. The numerical results
show that the harmonic sweep (chirp) tends to speed up the convergence of espe-
cially the time domain techniques. By sending diﬀerent types of random signals
to the electromagnetic shaker, which is exciting the rotor-lever system, a similar
analysis is conducted experimentally. Diﬀerent types of random signals are send to
the electromagnetic shaker, i.e. a Gaussian distributed, random integer generator,
uniformly distributed signals, and red noise. The experimental investigation shows
==PAGE:70==
56
10
CONVENTIONAL TPJB ANALYSIS
50
100
150
200
250
300
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Frequency (Hz)
Model order
(a) Stabilisation diagram – fn
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
damping ratio (-)
Model order
(b) Stabilisation diagram – ζn
Figure 10.2: (a): Stabilisation diagram in the frequency domain, (b): Stabilisation
diagram of damping ratio corresponding to the natural frequency at 120 Hz
that especially the random integer generator is an eﬀective random excitation type.
The experimental analysis indicates that random forces in general need a larger
maximum amplitude in order to properly excite the structure (the amplitude is
measured using the force transducer), so a reasonable coherence is obtained. Even
with a larger force, faster convergence was obtained using the chirp function.
The FRF, phase and coherence for a system excited by a random integer gen-
erator can be seen in Figure 10.3a. The FRF, phase and coherence for the same
system excited by a chirp function can be seen in Figure 10.3b. The static load
is 2800 N and the angular velocity is zero. An ampliﬁcation around 200 Hz is ob-
served for both excitation cases. The chirp excited system seems to be slightly less
damped, when compared to the randomly excited system. In order to obtain this
FRF and coherence, the random force reached peaks of 400 N as input force, and
a measurement length of 300 s was needed. When sending a chirp function to the
electromagnetic shaker, peaks of 105 N as input force were reached, and a meas-
urement length of 30 s was needed i.e. 1/10 of the time. The chirp excited system
obtains the same or higher level of coherence with a shorter excitation length. By
ﬁltering the input random force so that only random noise in a band from 30 Hz
to 350 Hz is fed into the electromagnetic shaker the maximum amplitude decreases
to 150 N.
Nevertheless, the required extra excitation time and general lower level of co-
herence have led to the decision to proceed with a chirp function as the excitation
==PAGE:71==
10.1
Testing Procedure and Signal Processing
57
force. It is important to remember that all modal parameters are estimated using
EMA. If the OMA algorithms behave in a strange matter i.e. modal parameter
estimates are far away from EMA estimates, one can redo the analysis with a
random excitation force. The extensive experimental campaign conducted in this
project shows that the OMA algorithms perform very well by sending a chirp func-
tion to the electromagnetic shaker or the active lubricated bearing. The possibility
of adjusting the type of signal, amplitude and frequency band of excitation is a
strength of the electro mechanical machine component, and is not available in the
ﬁelds where OMA is typically applied.
100
150
200
250
300
0.5
1
1.5 ·10−7
|H(F)| (m/N)
100
150
200
250
300
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
Phase ◦
100
150
200
250
300
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(a) Excitation force: Random
100
150
200
250
300
0.5
1
1.5 ·10−7
|H(F)| (m/N)
100
150
200
250
300
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
Phase ◦
100
150
200
250
300
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(b) Excitation force: Chirp
Figure 10.3: Magnitude, phase and coherence of the rotor-lever system excited by
a random integer generator Fig.(a), and a chirp function Fig.(b).
==PAGE:72==
58
10
CONVENTIONAL TPJB ANALYSIS
10.1.4
Summary of Experimental Parameter Analysis
One can, from the notch ﬁlter, oversizing and excitation type analysis, set some
ﬁxed parameters applied to obtain all the later presented results. It is, however,
important to remember that every time the angular velocity or static load are
changed the system is changed and especially the frequency domain techniques
has to be modiﬁed for every run. Nevertheless the following can be stated:
a) All three signals, two accelerations and one displacement, are used for all
the OMA algorithms. EMA uses the force transducer or the pressure sensor
as input for the case where the system is excited by the electromagnetic
shaker or by the active lubricated bearing, respectively. EMA utilises the
displacement sensor as output.
b) All signals are ﬁltered using the notch ﬁlter before modal parameter identi-
ﬁcation.
c) The frequency bandwidth for the FDD technique is in the range 100 - 150 Hz.
This large band is needed because the system is highly damped. For waterfall
diagrams showing a convergence study see Appendix E.2.
d) The correlation function length is adjusted to 300 time lags with a 30%
ﬂattop triangular window.
These values are constant because the signal
is well ﬁltered, the noise is low and long measurements are obtained. For
waterfall diagrams showing convergence study see Appendix E.1.
e) The signal send to the electromagnetic shaker and the active lubricated bear-
ing is a harmonic swept in the frequency range of 30 to 300 Hz, which is the
band of interest. Each sweep has a duration of 30 s and a total measurement
time of 200 s is obtained for each measurement.
f) The FRF is obtained by averaging, where a block size of 212 is utilised, 50%
of overlap and a Hanning window is applied. The inﬂuence of averaging on
the FRF are investigated in Appendix B.
g) For all tests the modal parameters are identiﬁed using three OMA algorithms
and one EMA algorithm. The algorithms are: a) EMA coupled to a least
squares algorithm. b) OMA aided by ITD algorithm, c) OMA aided by SSI
algorithm; and d) OMA aided by FDD algorithm.
==PAGE:73==
10.2
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Conventional TPJB System
59
10.2
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Conventional TPJB
System
In this section modal parameter identiﬁcation is performed on the rotor-lever sys-
tem with conventional lubrication. The electromagnetic shaker is used to impose
dynamic perturbation forces over the bearing. The input forces are measured using
the force transducer, and the response is measured using the displacement sensor.
With input and output the FRF can be established. The FRF of the system
with a static load of 2800 N, and with zero angular velocity is presented in Fig-
ure 10.4, where also the phase and coherence can be seen. A clear ampliﬁcation in
the FRF can be seen around 130 Hz where also a phase shift is seen. This indicates
that the ampliﬁcation is a natural frequency of the system. A strength of using
EMA in contrast to OMA is the possibility of calculating the coherence, which
indicates how noise contaminated the signal is. A value of one indicate no noise
and perfect coherence between input and output. The coherence is also plotted in
the ﬁgure and values around one are obtained, thus reliable modal parameters can
be estimated.
100
150
200
0
0.5
1
·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
|H(F)| (m/N)
(a) Magnitude
100
150
200
50
100
150
Frequency (Hz)
Phase ◦(degrees)
(b) Phase
100
150
200
0.96
0.98
1
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(c) Coherence
Figure 10.4: Magnitude, phase and coherence plot. Ampliﬁcaiton and phase shift
are seen at 130 Hz. Static load: 2800 N. Zero angular velocity. Excitation force:
Electromagnetic shaker
For obtaining a complete picture of the development of the natural frequency
and damping ratio as a function of angular velocity, 17 angular velocities between
0 and 4,800 rpm (80 Hz) are tested. Moreover the tests are performed with three
diﬀerent load conditions: (i) 200 N; (ii) 1400 N; and (iii) 2800 N. In all 51 tests are
conduced.
For each static load case the FRFs are collected to form the waterfall diagrams
presented in Figures 10.5a, 10.5c, 10.5e for load case (i), (ii) and (iii), respectively.
==PAGE:74==
60
10
CONVENTIONAL TPJB ANALYSIS
For zero and low angular velocities there are no lift oﬀi.e. the rotor is not lifted
by the build up ﬂuid ﬁlm pressure. This yields that the direct friction between the
rotor and the pads deﬁnes the level of damping. By increasing the rotor angular
velocity from 0 to 2,400 rpm (40 Hz) the lubricant ﬂuid ﬁlm between rotor and
pads is formed and the rotor is lifted by the ﬂuid ﬁlm forces. This results in a
signiﬁcant amount of energy dissipation in the ﬂuid. This claim is conﬁrmed by
analysing the reduction of the resonance peaks around 130 Hz in the range from 0
to 2,400 rpm (40 Hz). By further increasing the rotor angular velocity from 2,400
rpm (40 Hz) to 4,800 rpm (80 Hz) a signiﬁcant reduction of damping is observed.
The reason for the turn, and decrease in damping is caused by an increase in the
hydrodynamic pressure. As the angular velocity is increased the ﬂuid ﬁlm forces
are increased, and the rotor is moved further toward the centre. The higher ﬂuid
ﬁlm forces yields a decrease in the squeeze eﬀect mainly responsible for dissipation
of energy in the conventional bearing. Comparing the three waterfall diagrams
illustrated in Figures 10.5a, 10.5c and 10.5e one might conclude that the highest
level of damping is obtained for angular velocities in the range 25 Hz – 45 Hz.
Furthermore, in this range the medium load case seem to obtain the highest level
of damping.
Natrual Frequency
The behaviour of the identiﬁed natural frequencies as a function of angular velocity
for the three load cases (i), (ii) and (iii) are presented in Figures 10.6a, 10.6c and
10.6e respectively.
The modal parameters are obtained using EMA and OMA
algorithms and the mean value of their estimates are indicated.
For the medium and high static load cases (ii) and (iii) a clear reduction in the
natural frequency is seen as a function of angular velocity. In case (ii) the natural
frequency varies from 132 Hz at very low speeds to 119 Hz at 4,800 rpm (80 Hz).
In case (iii) it varies from 138 Hz at very low speeds to 128 Hz at high speeds.
At high speeds the natural frequency estimates are seen to stabilise and slightly
increase. This development of the natural frequency is among others caused by
the development of the damping in the system.
Because the damped natural
frequency is estimated by the EMA and OMA techniques it depends on the level
of damping (ωd = ωn
√1 −ζ2), ωn = 2πfn. For the low load case (i) this tendency
as a function of angular velocity is not as pronounced, and a relatively constant
natural frequency as a function of angular velocity can be observed. For all load
cases and in the whole angular velocity range, very good agreement in estimated
natural frequencies for all four algorithms are achieved. The same development is
caught by both the EMA and OMA techniques.
==PAGE:75==
10.2
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Conventional TPJB System
61
Damping Ratio
The behaviour of the identiﬁed damping ratios as a function of angular velocity
for the three load cases (i), (ii) and (iii) are presented in Figures 10.6b, 10.6d and
10.6f respectively.
The development of the damping ratio corresponds very well with the waterfall
diagrams presented in Figure 10.5. At low speeds, damping ratios around 0.07 is
obtained for all the load cases. The damping increases as the angular velocity is
increased, which is caused by the hydrodynamic lubrication. For load case (i) a
maximum damping ratio of 0.12 is obtained at 1,200 rpm (20 Hz). For load case
(ii) a maximum damping ratio of 0.15 is obtained at 2,400 rpm (40 Hz), and for
load case (iii) a maximum damping ratio of 0.125 is obtained at 1,800 rpm (30 Hz).
After these maximum damping ratios are reached a decrease in damping is seen
as the angular velocity is increased. This is because the pressure increases which
leads to a harder ﬂuid ﬁlm and consequently, less energy dissipation is obtained.
The agreement in damping estimates for the four utilised identiﬁcation algorithms
(EMA and OMA) is very good. There are larger deviations between the algorithms
when compared to the natural frequency estimates. The damping ratio is in general
a more diﬃcult parameter to estimate without bias.
This was evident in the
numerical analysis. For the rotor-lever system damping ratios between 0.07 and
0.15 is obtained, this is up to a factor 10 higher than typically seen for structures
in the civil engineering area [17, p. 244][35], where OMA is commonly applied.
This is a signiﬁcant amount of damping, and consequently, the CF becomes more
steep and shorter. Even with this amount of damping good estimates is obtained
using the algorithms.
The highest identiﬁed damping ratios are found for the
medium load case (ii) whereas load case (i) and (iii) obtain slightly lower levels of
damping. For higher loads as in load case (iii), the rotor-lever system dynamics are
more strongly inﬂuenced by the pivot stiﬀness and it explains the slight reduction
of damping ratio values for this case in comparison to case (ii). The identiﬁed
parameters presented in Figure 10.6 will be used as benchmark to validate the
system excited by the active lubricated bearing. The goal is to create non-invasive
perturbation forces using the active lubricated bearing as a perturbation force.
The estimates obtained from using the electromagnetic shaker as a perturbation
force, can be used as a benchmark because no direct modiﬁcation of the ﬂuid ﬁlm
is performed.
==PAGE:76==
62
10
CONVENTIONAL TPJB ANALYSIS
50 70 90 110130150170190
0
20
40
60
80
1
2
·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/N)
(a) Static load of 200 N
80
110 140 170
0
20
40
60
80
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
0.5
1
1.5
2
·10−7
|H(F)| (m/N)
(b) Static load of 200 N
50 70 90 110130150170190
0
20
40
60
80
1
2
·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/N)
(c) Static load of 1400 N
80
110 140 170
0
20
40
60
80
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
0.5
1
1.5
2
·10−7
|H(F)| (m/N)
(d) Static load of 1400 N
50 70 90 110130150170190
0
20
40
60
80
1
2
·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/N)
(e) Static load of 2800 N
80
110 140 170
0
20
40
60
80
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
0.5
1
1.5
2
·10−7
|H(F)| (m/N)
(f) Static load of 2800 N
Figure 10.5: Waterfall diagrams and corresponding contour plots of static load
cases: 200 N, 1400 N and 2800 N. Excitation force: Electromagnetic shaker
==PAGE:77==
10.2
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Conventional TPJB System
63
0
20
40
60
80
103
112
121
130
139
148
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
EMA
ITD
SSI
FDD
Mean (Shaker)
(a) fn – Static load of 200 N
0
20
40
60
80
0.04
0.07
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.17
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(b) ζn – Static load of 200 N
0
20
40
60
80
103
112
121
130
139
148
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
(c) fn – Static load of 1400 N
0
20
40
60
80
0.04
0.07
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.17
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(d) ζn – Static load of 1400 N
0
20
40
60
80
103
112
121
130
139
148
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
(e) fn – Static load of 2800 N
0
20
40
60
80
0.04
0.07
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.17
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(f) ζn – Static load of 2800 N
Figure 10.6: Natural frequency and damping ratio estimates of static load cases:
200 N, 1400 N and 2800 N. Excitation force: Electromagnetic shaker. Modal para-
meters are estimated using EMA, ITD, SSI and FDD.
==PAGE:78==
64
11
ACTIVE LUBRICATED TPJB ANALYSIS
11
Active Lubricated TPJB Analysis
The shaker is now disconnected and the rotor-lever system is excited using the
active lubricated bearing. The tests are performed in a similar manner as when
using the electromagnetic shaker, however, now the signal is sent to the servovalve
instead of the electromagnetic shaker. Because the servovalve injects oil directly
into the bearing clearance, one easily alters the dynamic characteristics of the
rotor-lever system. Two main parameters are responsible for altering the dynamic
characteristics of the rotor-lever system, namely; the supply pressure and the ser-
vovalve input signal. The inﬂuence of these parameters are carefully analysed in
Section 13.
11.1
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Active Lubricated
TPJB System
In this analysis the supply pressure is adjusted to 25 bar, the AC value is set to
0.3 V and the DC value is set to −0.35 V. A negative value signiﬁes a setting where
the spool in the servovalve is adjusted so that oil is sent to the upper pad, i.e. oil
is forced through port B (see Figure 9.2). With this setting limited modiﬁcations
of the ﬂow patterns in the lower, more heavily loaded, pad is achieved.
The dynamic tests in this section are performed by sending a chirp signal to
the servovalve, this signal moves the spool inside the servovalve. The supply pres-
sure is constant, consequently, small dynamic forces are imposed over the rotor.
These forces variate in amplitude and frequency, depending on the spool position,
and are generating the needed perturbation forces for modal parameter identiﬁc-
ation. Especially, when using the active lubricated bearing this perturbation is a
delicate balance between obtaining good signal to noise ratio, and minimising the
modiﬁcation of the hydrodynamic lubrication. The injected high pressurised oil
(input), can be measured using the pressure sensors installed in the pads 3 (see
Figure 9.3). The vertical displacement of the rotor (output) can be measured by
the displacement sensor 8 (see Figure 9.1).
With input and output the FRF can be established. The FRF of the system
with a static load of 2800 N, and with zero angular velocity is presented in Fig-
ure 11.1. The input perturbation forces are now generated by the ALB, hence the
unit of the FRF is m/bar. A resonance peak can be observed around 130 Hz, which
is also where it was found using the electromagnetic shaker as a perturbation force.
The coherence is above 0.9, around the natural frequency, thus the signal to noise
ratio is good, and reliable modal parameters can be obtained.
The same 17 angular velocities and static load cases (i), (ii) and (iii), are tested
using the active lubricated bearing as a perturbation force. And the FRFs are col-
==PAGE:79==
11.1
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Active Lubricated TPJB System
65
100
150
200
2
4
6
8
·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(a) Magnitude
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
Frequency (Hz)
Phase ◦(degrees)
(b) Phase
100
150
200
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(c) Coherence
Figure 11.1: Magnitude, phase and coherence plot. Ampliﬁcaiton and phase shift
are seen at 130 Hz. Static load: 2800 N. Zero angular velocity. Excitation force:
Active lubricated bearing
lected to obtain the waterfall diagrams, which are presented in Figures 11.2a, 11.2c
and 11.2e for load cases (i), (ii) and (iii) respectively. The input signal sent to the
servovalve and the supply pressure are set as aforementioned.
It is important
to highlight that the Figures 11.2a, 11.2c and 11.2e should be compared to each
other for the three load cases (i), (ii) and (iii) with care. Furthermore, a direct
quantitative comparison between Figure 11.2 and Figure 10.5 is not straightfor-
ward possible, since the location of the excitations and the FRF units in m/N and
m/bar are diﬀerent. Nevertheless, comparing them qualitatively, a vibration amp-
liﬁcation around 130 Hz is clearly observed, for all static load cases. Load case (i)
shows a similar characteristics as a function of angular velocity as the conventional
lubricated rotor-lever system (see Figure 10.5a).
At high angular velocities (Ω> 60 Hz) the unbalance response can be seen in
the waterfall diagrams, especially for the lower static load cases. The notch ﬁlter
is applied, however there are still some power of the harmonic component left in
the signal. By removing a larger band the power can be even further minimised,
however this also aﬀects the damping estimates.
Natural Frequency
The behaviour of the identiﬁed natural frequencies as a function of angular velocity
for the three load cases (i), (ii) and (iii) are presented in Figures 11.3a, 11.3c and
11.3e respectively.
The modal parameters are obtained using the EMA and OMA algorithms.
One strives to obtain non-invasive perturbations forces using the active lubricated
==PAGE:80==
66
11
ACTIVE LUBRICATED TPJB ANALYSIS
bearing as a perturbation force. Therefore are the mean values from the modal
parameter estimates of the conventional bearing also presented (continuous line).
This allows for a direct comparison between the rotor-lever system, excited by
means of the electromagnetic shaker, and the rotor-lever system excited by means
of the active lubricated bearing. If one have succeeded in replacing the electromag-
netic shaker with the active lubricated bearing, the tendencies and amplitudes of
the estimated natural frequencies and damping ratios should be close to the same
between these two excitation forces.
For the medium and high load cases, (ii) and (iii) a clear reduction of the natural
frequency can be seen. For case (ii) the natural frequency at low angular velocities
is 125 Hz and decreases to 114 Hz at 4,800 rpm (80 Hz). For case (iii) the natural
frequency at low angular velocities is 148 Hz and decreases to 127 Hz at 1,800 rpm
(30 Hz). The natural frequency is relatively constant around 135 Hz, for higher
angular velocities. For load case (i) the natural frequency is relatively constant
around 121 Hz, until an angular velocity of 3,000 rpm (50 Hz), at this point the
natural frequency decreases slightly to 112 Hz. Comparing the estimated natural
frequencies with the conventional bearing (continuous line), same tendencies can
be observed for the three load cases. Load case (ii) shows very similar tendencies as
a function of angular velocity, the estimated natural frequencies are slightly lower
when compared to the conventional bearing. For load cases (i) and (iii) the same
tendencies are obtained up until 40 Hz, where case (i) decreases slightly, and case
(iii) increases slightly, when compared to the conventional bearing. The overall
tendencies as a function of angular velocity and static load is, however, caught
when compared to the conventional bearing for all three load cases. The agreement
between the four identiﬁcation algorithms are also very good. Higher deviations
are observed when compared to the rotor-lever system excited by means of the
electromagnetic shaker. This is related to the smaller excitation forces applied
when using the ALB. The FDD technique gives slightly lower estimates of the
natural frequencies for load cases (i) and (ii).
Damping Ratio
The behaviour of the identiﬁed damping ratios as a function of angular velocity
for the three load cases (i), (ii) and (iii) are presented in Figures 11.3b, 11.3d and
11.3f respectively.
Damping ratios around 0.08 are obtained at low speeds for all load cases. As for
the conventional bearing the damping increases as the angular velocity increases.
For load case (i) a maximum damping ratio of 0.13 is obtained at 2,400 rpm (40 Hz).
For load case (ii) a maximum damping ratio of 0.16 is obtained at 3,000 rpm
(50 Hz). For load case (iii) a maximum damping ratio of 0.14 is obtained at 2,100
rpm (35 Hz). A decrease in damping can be observed, as the angular velocity is
==PAGE:81==
11.1
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Active Lubricated TPJB System
67
further increased. This development is related to the aforementioned: an increase
in the hydrodynamic pressure. The four diﬀerent algorithms estimate the same
tendencies of the damping ratio development as a function of load and angular
velocity. There are slightly higher deviations between the individual algorithms.
This is related to lower excitation amplitude. One could decrease the deviations
of modal parameter estimates between the four diﬀerent algorithms, by increasing
the supply pressure. An increase of supply pressure can, however, result in a larger
modiﬁcation of the hydrodynamic lubrication. Very good overall agreement can be
observed when comparing the estimated damping ratios with the damping ratios
of the conventional bearing (continuous line). The same tendencies as a function
of angular velocity and static load are seen. The system is slightly more damped
than the conventional lubricated bearing and the maximum damping ratios are
obtained at slightly higher angular velocities.
==PAGE:82==
68
11
ACTIVE LUBRICATED TPJB ANALYSIS
50 70 90 110130150170190
0
20
40
60
80
1
·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(a) Static load of 200 N
80
110 140 170
0
20
40
60
80
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
0.5
1
1.5
·10−6
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(b) Static load of 200 N
50 70 90 110130150170190
0
20
40
60
80
1
·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(c) Static load of 1400 N
80
110 140 170
0
20
40
60
80
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
0.5
1
1.5
·10−6
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(d) Static load of 1400 N
50 70 90 110130150170190
0
20
40
60
80
1
·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(e) Static load of 2800 N
80
110 140 170
0
20
40
60
80
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
0.5
1
1.5
·10−6
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(f) Static load of 2800 N
Figure 11.2: Waterfall diagrams and corresponding contour plots of static load
cases: 200 N, 1400 N and 2800 N. Excitation force: Active lubricated bearing
==PAGE:83==
11.1
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation – Active Lubricated TPJB System
69
0
20
40
60
80
103
112
121
130
139
148
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
EMA
ITD
SSI
FDD
Mean (Shaker)
(a) fn – Static load of 200 N
0
20
40
60
80
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.13
0.15
0.17
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(b) ζn – Static load of 200 N
0
20
40
60
80
103
112
121
130
139
148
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
(c) fn – Static load of 1400 N
0
20
40
60
80
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.13
0.15
0.17
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(d) ζn – Static load of 1400 N
0
20
40
60
80
103
112
121
130
139
148
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
(e) fn – Static load of 2800 N
0
20
40
60
80
0.06
0.08
0.11
0.13
0.15
0.17
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(f) ζn – Static load of 2800 N
Figure 11.3: Natural frequency and damping ratio estimate of static load cases:
200 N, 1400 N and 2800 N. Excitation force: Active lubricated bearing. Modal
parameters are estimated using EMA, ITD, SSI and FDD.
==PAGE:84==
70
12
ELECTROMAGNETIC SHAKER VS. ALB
12
Electromagnetic Shaker vs. ALB
In this section an overall comparison between the rigid rotor-lever system, which
is excited by the electromagnetic shaker, and the rigid rotor-lever system excited
by the active lubricated bearing is given.
The 51 dynamic tests performed in Section 10.2, i.e. 17 rotor angular velocities
and three loading conditions, are used to obtain a benchmark.
These results
were obtained using the electromagnetic shaker for perturbing the system. The
estimated modal parameters using EMA and OMA are used, and the mean values
and 95% conﬁdence intervals are calculated, and ﬁtted using quadratic functions.
The results are presented in Figure 12.1. This ﬁgure presents the overall picture
of how the natural frequency and damping ratio develops as a function of static
load and angular velocity for the conventional bearing. The natural frequency
decreases as a function of the angular velocity, from 132 Hz at zero angular velocity
to 121 Hz at 4,800 rpm (80 Hz). The natural frequency increases as a function of
the static load, from 121 Hz at 200 N to 128 Hz 2800 N. The damping ratio reaches
its maximum value of 0.13 at 2,100 rpm (35 Hz), with a static load of 1500 N. With
an angular velocity of 4,800 rpm (80 Hz) the damping ratio reaches its minimum
value of 0.06.
The 51 dynamic tests performed in Section 11.1, i.e. 17 rotor angular velocit-
ies and three loading conditions are now used. These results were obtained using
the active lubricated bearing for perturbing the system. The estimated modal
parameters using EMA and OMA are used, and the mean values and 95% con-
ﬁdence intervals are calculated, and ﬁtted using quadratic functions. The results
are presented in Figure 12.2. The results using the ALB as a perturbation forces
follows benchmark results very well. The system is slightly more damped, when
compared to the conventional lubricated bearing. A maximum damping ratio of
0.14 is reached at 2,400 rpm (40 Hz) and with a static load of 1500 N. The conven-
tional bearing reaches a maximum damping ratio of 0.13, at 2,100 rpm (35 Hz) and
with a static load of 1500 N. The natural frequencies are generally lower, except
for at high static loads. With a static load of 1500 N and an angular velocity of
40 Hz, the natural frequency is 115 Hz, where the conventional lubricated bearing
is 123 Hz.
==PAGE:85==
71
0
20
40
60
80
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
ζn (-)
0
20
40
60
80
105
113
120
128
135
fn (Hz)
200
1,500
2,800
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
200
1,500
2,800
105
113
120
128
135
0
20
40
60
80
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
Angular velocity (Hz)
Coherence
200
1,500
2,800
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
Static load (N)
Figure 12.1: Fitted mean values and 95% conﬁdence intervals for the natural
frequency and damping ratio estimates obtained using EMA and OMA. Excitation
force: Electromagnetic shaker.
==PAGE:86==
72
12
ELECTROMAGNETIC SHAKER VS. ALB
0
20
40
60
80
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
ζn (-)
0
20
40
60
80
105
113
120
128
135
fn (Hz)
200
1,500
2,800
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
200
1,500
2,800
105
113
120
128
135
0
20
40
60
80
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
Angular velocity (Hz)
Coherence
200
1,500
2,800
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
Static load (N)
Figure 12.2: Fitted mean values and 95% conﬁdence intervals for the natural
frequency and damping ratio estimates obtained using EMA and OMA. Excitation
force: Active lubricated bearing.
==PAGE:87==
73
13
Active Lubricated TPJB – Parameter Study
The goal in this project is to generate non-invasive perturbation forces using the
active lubricated bearing. For generating the perturbation forces oil has to be in-
jected directly into the clearance between the rotor and the bearing. Because oil is
injected directly into the clearance one easily alters the hydrodynamic lubrication.
Evidently, it is a delicate balance between not disturbing the hydrodynamic lub-
rication while imposing suﬃcient perturbation forces to perform reasonable modal
parameter identiﬁcation. In this section the inﬂuence of the supply pressure and
servovalve input signal on the estimated modal parameters are studied.
The input signal sent to the servovalve deﬁnes the spool position inside the
servovalve, and consequently, controls to which pad the oil should be sent. The
input signal can be decomposed into a DC and AC component. Evidently, three
parameters should be analysed, namely: the supply pressure (ps), the alternating
current (AC value) and the mean position of the spool (DC value).
The strong inﬂuence of the AC-value, can clearly be seen in Figure 13.1. The
DC value is adjusted to 0.2 V, and the supply pressure is adjusted to 50 bar. By
inspecting the magnitude and phase plot one can clearly see how much the natural
frequency is lowered when the amplitude of excitation is increased. Moreover when
the amplitude becomes large a signiﬁcant increase in the damping can be observed.
Because of the high supply pressure the coherence is close to one, regardless of the
amplitude of excitation.
AC=0.1
AC=0.2
AC=0.4
AC=0.6
AC=0.8
50
100
150
200
0
0.5
1
·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(a) Magnitude
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
Frequency (Hz)
Phase ◦
(b) Phase
50
100
150
200
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Frequency (Hz)
Coherence
(c) Coherence
Figure 13.1: Magnitude, phase and coherence plot for varying servovalve AC val-
ues. Supply pressure: 50 bar, DC level: 0.2 V
==PAGE:88==
74
13
ACTIVE LUBRICATED TPJB – PARAMETER STUDY
By lowering the supply pressure the forces from the ALB decreases.
As a
consequence, minor modiﬁcations of the dynamic characteristics of the bearing are
obtained. However, because the forces are decreased, the level of excitation of the
rotor-lever system is decreased. Evidently, the amplitude of excitation inﬂuences
more the coherence. The same test as presented in Figure 13.1, is now performed.
However, now the supply pressure is decreased to 25 bar. The results are presented
in Figure 13.2. The coherence drops when the amplitude of excitation becomes
small. This is because the supply pressure is lower and as a consequence, a low
amplitude yields small perturbations of the rotor-lever system. Considering the
AC values where the coherence is reasonable high the natural frequency becomes
less aﬀected by the increase in the AC values. The natural frequency are, however,
still aﬀected. The damping of the rotor-lever system is less, when compared to the
a conﬁguration with a supply pressure of 50 bar.
AC=0.1
AC=0.2
AC=0.3
AC=0.4
AC=0.6
AC=0.8
50
100
150
200
0
0.5
1
·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(a) Magnitude
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
Frequency (Hz)
Phase ◦
(b) Phase
50
100
150
200
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Frequency (Hz)
Coherence
(c) Coherence
Figure 13.2: Magnitude, phase and coherence plot for varying servovalve AC val-
ues. Supply pressure: 25 bar, DC level: 0.2 V
Also the DC-value aﬀects the system. A test with a supply pressure of 25 bar,
and an AC value of 0.35 V, for varying DC values are performed and the results
are presented in Figure 13.3. The coherence is close to unchanged when varying
the DC values. Also the shift in natural frequency is reasonably small. The level of
damping is, however, signiﬁcantly altered by a change in the DC value, the lowest
level of damping is obtained with a DC value of −0.4 V i.e. the perturbations forces
are fundamentally generated between the upper pad and the rotor.
These initial tests presented in ﬁgures 13.1, 13.2, and 13.3 clearly illustrates
how dominant the supply pressure and servovalve input signal can be.
If not
==PAGE:89==
75
DC=0.8
DC=0.4
DC=0.1
DC=-0.1
DC=-0.4
DC=-0.8
50
100
150
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1 ·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(a) Magnitude
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
Frequency (Hz)
Phase ◦
(b) Phase
50
100
150
200
0.8
0.9
1.0
Frequency (Hz)
Coherence
(c) Coherence
Figure 13.3: Magnitude, phase and coherence plot for varying servovalve DC val-
ues. Supply pressure: 25 bar, AC-level: 0.35 V
carefully treated the dynamics of the rotor is altered and the estimated modal
parameters diﬀerentiates themselves from the conventional bearing. Both the nat-
ural frequency and the damping ratio can be signiﬁcantly altered by the supply
pressure and servovalve input signal. Furthermore, the studied parameters (ps,
DC and AC values) depend on each other, and on the conditions of the system i.e.
the static load and the angular velocity. In this light a large parameter study is
conducted in order to obtain a complete picture of how the supply pressure and
servovalve input signal inﬂuence the natural frequency and damping ratio.
In Figure 13.4, are the inﬂuence of the supply pressure, DC value and AC value
presented. These results are obtained based on an exhaustive experimental cam-
paign of 89 tests. The experimental campaign is carefully designed to obtain 95%
conﬁdence intervals using the statical tool SAS JMP for design of experiment [36].
The design is based on the parameter settings presented in Table 3.
Settings
3 static load conditions
200 N, 1500 N, 2800 N
3 angular velocities
0 Hz, 40 Hz, 80 Hz
4 supply pressures
5 bar, 10 bar, 25 bar, 50 bar
4 DC values
−0.45 V, −0.2 V, 0.2 V, 0.45 V
5 AC values
0.1 V, 0.2 V, 0.4 V, 0.6 V, 0.8 V
Table 3: Settings utilised for creating the design of experiment.
==PAGE:90==
76
13
ACTIVE LUBRICATED TPJB – PARAMETER STUDY
The mean values of the coherence function, from the FRFs, are also documented
in Figure 13.4 to assure the quality of the experimental campaign. Figure 13.4 is
presented with an angular velocity of 2,400 rpm (40 Hz) and a static load of 1500 N.
This is where the maximum value of damping, in the rotor-lever system, is obtained
(see Figure 12.2).
As mentioned earlier the rotor-lever system excited by the ALB shows to be
slightly more damped than the conventional lubricated bearing. Moreover, a slight
underestimation of the natural frequency is generally observed, when using the
ALB as a perturbation force. Evidently, a setting of the supply pressure, DC and
AC values, that decreases the damping ratio and increases the natural frequency
i.e. an increase in the stiﬀness, with high level of coherence is the goal. With this
in mind the results in Figure 13.4 can be analysed:
a) Inﬂuence of supply pressure: the natural frequency increases as the supply
pressure decreases, however, a decrease in supply pressure is followed by
a decrease in the coherence. A reasonable setting of the supply pressure
is 25 bar, where low damping is obtained while the high coherence level is
preserved.
b) Inﬂuence of DC value: the damping is observed to decrease and the natural
frequency to increase, when the spool position is adjusted so that small
perturbations are mainly generated between the upper, more lightly loaded,
pad and the rotor. With such a setting the rotor equilibrium is slightly moved
closer to the lower pad which result in an increase in stiﬀness and decrease in
damping. High levels of coherence are obtained with a DC value in the range
of -0.2 to -0.45 V. In this range the perturbation forces are fundamentally
generated between the upper, more lightly loaded, pad and the rotor.
c) Inﬂuence of AC values: the damping is observed to decrease and the natural
frequency to increase, as the AC value is decreased. A signiﬁcant reduction
in the coherence is, however, observed as the AC value goes below 0.2 V. A
low level of damping followed by a high level of coherence, is obtained with
AC values in the range of 0.2 to 0.4 V.
==PAGE:91==
77
(a) Supply pressure
5
10
25
50
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
ζn (-)
5
10
25
50
95
105
115
125
135
fn (Hz)
5
10
25
50
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
Pressure (bar)
Coherence
(b) DC level
-0.45
-0.2
0.2
0.45
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
-0.45
-0.2
0.2
0.45
95
105
115
125
135
-0.45
-0.2
0.2
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
DC level (V)
(c) AC level
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
95
105
115
125
135
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
AC level (V)
Figure 13.4: Experimental parameter study showing the inﬂuence of supply pres-
sure (a), DC value (b) and the AC value (c), on the estimated damping ratio and
natural frequency of the rotor-lever system.
==PAGE:92==
78
13
ACTIVE LUBRICATED TPJB – PARAMETER STUDY
13.1
Summery of Parameter Study
The experience gained from the numerous tests performed on the "load on pad"
rigid rotor-lever system indicates that when using the active lubricated bearing for
perturbing the system it generally tends to become more damped. The parameter
study helps to identify how the diﬀerent parameters inﬂuence the natural frequency
and damping ratio, and gives some indication of how to adjust the parameters in
order to obtain non-invasive perturbation forces. It has to be mentioned that since
the system changes as a function of the static load and the angular velocity, it is in
general diﬃcult to ﬁnd one single setting of supply pressure and servovalve input
signal that is optimal for the whole angular velocity and static load range. For
example, one requires a larger force (supply pressure) in order to excite a system
where high static loads are imposed over the rotor, in contrast to a lightly loaded
rotor. In this regard some investigations in the area of a more adaptive approach
still lies ahead.
When utilising the active lubricated bearing as a perturbation force, it is es-
sentially a compromise between: (i) either you modify the pressure proﬁle of the
hydrodynamic lubrication, or (ii) you modify the equilibrium of the rotor.
==PAGE:93==
79
14
Flexible Rotor – Experimental Analysis
A ﬂexible rotor bearing system is now under analysis. The test rig is presented
in Figure 14.1. The rotor is driven by the electrical motor 1 and the transmission
belt. The shaft is supported at one end by a ball bearing 2, and close to the
centre by the TPJB 4. A shaker is connected at the free extremity of the shaft
5. Between 4 and 5 discs can be mounted simulating e.g. impellers. Between the
TPJB and the ball bearing an active magnetic bearing can be seen 3. The active
magnetic bearing is disconnected in this project.
The TPJB consists of four pads of the same type as the one used for the
rigid rotor-lever system. A nozzle is installed in each pad allowing for injection
of high pressurised oil into the clearance. The bearing has a "load between pads"
conﬁguration. The goals using the ﬂexible rotor are:
1. To show that the OMA identiﬁcation techniques can be used as an alternative
to EMA also for a larger and more complex structure such as the ﬂexible
rotor.
2. To show that the ALB can be used as a non-invasive perturbation force for
identiﬁcation of modal parameters for the ﬂexible rotor.
3. To show that the mode shapes of the ﬂexible rotor can be estimated using
the OMA identiﬁcation techniques.
The ﬂexible rotor analysis is constrained to two test cases:
a) Dynamic analysis of the ﬂexible rotor with an angular velocity of 1,000 rpm
and with one disc mounted on the ﬂexible shaft. Tests will be performed
using the electromagnetic shaker as a perturbation force and the ALB as
a perturbation force. two vertical displacement sensors and two horizontal
displacement sensors are installed to obtain the structural response. Natural
frequencies and damping ratios are estimated. Experimental data for this
case was obtained in [37].
b) Dynamic analysis of the ﬂexible rotor with an angular velocity of 3,000 rpm.
No discs are mounted on the ﬂexible shaft. Test will be performed using
the electromagnetic shaker as perturbation force. ﬁve vertical displacement
sensors and ﬁve horizontal displacement sensors are installed to obtain the
structural response. Natural frequency, damping ratio and mode shape are
estimated.
Test case a) is ﬁrst conducted, using the electromagnetic shaker as a perturba-
tion force, applied at the free end of the shaft. The force is measured using a force
==PAGE:94==
80
14
FLEXIBLE ROTOR – EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
5
TPJB
4
3
2
1
Disp. Sensors
k
c
c
k
k
c
c
k
Ball bearing
a)
b)
Disc
Figure 14.1: Picture of the ﬂexible rotor bearing test rig, and the two test case
conﬁgurations: a) and b).
==PAGE:95==
81
transducer (input) and the response (output) is measured using the displacement
sensor. The FRF (in unit m/N) is calculated and is portrayed in Figure 14.2a,
together with the phase plot and coherence. Two resonance peaks are seen at
130 Hz and at 165 Hz. Also a phase shift is seen at these frequencies and the co-
herence is close to one, meaning that the FRF and phase plot is reliable. The
ALB is subsequently, applied as a perturbation force, where the supply pressure
is set to 60 bar and the AC level is set to 1 V. Servovalve 1 is used for exciting the
bearing, which controls one top and one bottom pad, displaced 45 degrees from
vertical. For this ﬂexible rotor there is no direct measurement of the pressure in
the clearance between the rotor and the pad i.e. there is not an installed pressure
sensor in the pad. As a consequence, no directly measure of the input force is ob-
tained. The input signal to the servovalve is, however, obtained and can be used
as input, remembering that there is a phase lag in the hydraulic system. With
input and output the FRF (in unit m/V) can be obtained and is portrayed in
Figure 14.2b, together with the phase plot and coherence. Two resonance peaks
are seen at 130 Hz and at 165 Hz. Also a phase shift is seen at these frequencies
and the coherence is close to one.
Comparing the FRF obtained using the electromagnetic shaker and the FRF
obtained using the ALB as a perturbation force, a clear resemblance is evident.
There is a slight diﬀerence at low frequencies in the magnitude spectrum expected
to be related to the not direct measurement of the input force when using the ALB
as a perturbation force.
The natural frequencies and damping ratios are estimated using EMA and
OMA. The identiﬁed parameters are presented in Figure 14.3, where both the
estimates of the system excited by the electromagnetic shaker and the ALB are
presented. Natural frequencies are estimated at 132 Hz and 167 Hz. The respective
damping ratios are estimated to be 0.072 and 0.045. Very good agreement in values
of estimated modal parameters between the four diﬀerent techniques are seen. The
estimated modal parameters of the ﬂexible rotor excited by the electromagnetic
shaker and excited by the ALB is very close. This indicates that using the ALB
as a non-invasive perturbation force is possible also for a larger and more complex
structure such as the ﬂexible rotor system. Moreover, the output only identiﬁcation
algorithms are capable of identifying the modal parameters with same level of
accuracy as EMA also for this more complex structure.
Even though the electromagnetic shaker is only applied in the vertical direction,
the ITD algorithms stabilise and obtain better estimates when both horizontal and
vertical measurements are fed into the algorithm. From an EMA point of view
using the horizontal displacement measurement gives very low level of coherence
as expected, however, they do contain structural information and allows for and
oversizing for the time domain techniques.
==PAGE:96==
82
14
FLEXIBLE ROTOR – EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
50
100
150
200
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
|H(F)| (m/N)
y1
50
100
150
200
−200.0
−150.0
−100.0
−50.0
0.0
Phase ◦
50
100
150
200
0.8
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.0
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(a) Shaker
50
100
150
200
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
|H(F)| (m/V)
y1
50
100
150
200
−200.0
−100.0
0.0
100.0
200.0
Phase ◦
50
100
150
200
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(b) ALB
Figure 14.2: Test case a): magnitude, phase and coherence of the ﬂexible rotor, (a):
Excitation force: electromagnetic shaker, (b): Excitation force: Active lubricated
bearing.
Test case b) is secondly conducted, in which the disc is removed from the shaft,
which results in a reduction of the ﬂexible rotor mass. Moreover, the gyroscopic
eﬀects are reduced when no discs are mounted. The electromagnetic shaker is
used for perturbing the system, and it is applied at the free end of the shaft. The
force is measured using a force transducer (input) and the response (output) is
measured using the displacement sensors. Five vertical displacement sensors are
utilised in this setup. The FRF (in unit m/N) is calculated and is presented in
Figure 14.4. One resonance peak is clearly seen at 225 Hz. Also a phase shift is
seen at this frequency and the coherence is close to one around the ampliﬁcation
of the FRF. The displacement sensors measure on the shaft directly, and evidently
runout is present. The runout has been removed while obtaining the signal, in real
time. The dives in the coherence are a result of the angular velocity (fundamental
frequency) which in this experiment is 3000 rpm (50 Hz) and harmonics of the
fundamental frequency.
The identiﬁed natural frequency, mode shape and damping ratio are presented
==PAGE:97==
83
EMA-shaker ITD-shaker SSI-shaker FDD-shaker
EMA-ALB
ITD-ALB
SSI-ALB
FDD-ALB
f1
f2
120
130
140
150
160
170
fn (Hz)
(a) Natrual freqeuncies
ζ1
ζ2
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.10
ζn (-)
(b) Damping ratios
Figure 14.3: Test case a): modal parameter estimates of the ﬂexible rotor using the
electromagnetic shaker as a perturbation force and the active lubricated bearing
as a perturbation force.
in Figure 14.5 for the four identiﬁcation algorithms. The natural frequency and
damping ratio are also given in Table 4.
The natural frequency estimates are very close and corresponds with the amp-
liﬁcation in the FRF. The damping ratio estimates are also very close especially
for EMA, SSI and FDD, while the ITD estimates a slightly higher level of damp-
ing. The mode shape estimates from the four algorithms have the same form. The
mode shape shows high amplitudes of vibration at the free end of the shaft and a
node is observed just a little oﬀset from the centre position of the TPJB. At the
middle of the shaft, between the TPJB and the ball bearing, high amplitudes of
vibration are seen. Each mode is normalised using the highest value of the mode
shape vector. The normalised mode shape is mirrored around 0 for obtaining a
better picture of the mode. The SSI technique estimates the mode shape, with a
node that is moved slightly closer to the free end of the shaft, when compared to
EMA.
fn
ζn
EMA
224.1
0.019
ITD
223.2
0.032
SSI
223.1
0.015
FDD
222.1
0.019
Table 4: Modal parameters for EMA and OMA for test case: b)
==PAGE:98==
84
14
FLEXIBLE ROTOR – EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
|H(F)| (m/N)
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
50
100
150
200
250
300
−200.0
−100.0
0.0
100.0
200.0
Phase ◦
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
Figure 14.4: Test case b): magnitude, phase and coherence plot for the ﬂexible
rotor, without discs and with a angular velocity of 3000 rpm.
==PAGE:99==
85
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
(a) EMA: fn = 224.1 Hz, ζn = 0.019
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
(b) ITD: fn = 223.2 Hz, ζn = 0.032
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
(c) SSI: fn = 223.1 Hz, ζn = 0.015
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
(d) FDD: fn = 222.1 Hz, ζn = 0.019
Figure 14.5: Test case b): Mode shape estimates of the ﬂexible rotor using EMA
and OMA. Blue: TPJB, light red: Shaft, Red: Ball bearing.
==PAGE:100==
86
15
CONCLUSION
15
Conclusion
The project had two main objectives. The ﬁrst objective was to examine all main
aspects involved in performing experimental modal parameter identiﬁcation; espe-
cially with respect to the identiﬁcation procedure referred to as OMA. The second
objective was to apply the knowledge and the techniques in order to perform ro-
tordynamic tests using the active lubricated bearing as a perturbation force. With
these two objectives in mind the following conclusions can be made:
I) An overview of the important assumptions and tools necessary for applying
the output only identiﬁcation techniques were presented in this work. The im-
portance of the correlation functions when using the time domain identiﬁcation
techniques, and the spectral density functions when using the frequency domain
techniques have been clearly stated. An extensive performance analysis of the out-
put only identiﬁcation algorithms have been performed both numerically and ex-
perimentally. It has been demonstrated that the selected three algorithms namely
the; Ibrahim time domain, stochastic subspace identiﬁcation and the frequency
domain decomposition techniques all give estimates of the modal parameters with
same level of accuracy as the classical input / output identiﬁcation approach.
The presence of harmonic components in the measured signal has been investig-
ated both numerically and experimentally. And depending on the frequency of
the harmonic component and its power, ways to deal with these disturbing har-
monic components have been purposed. Consequently, very good estimations of
the modal parameters are obtained using OMA even in the presence of strong har-
monic forces, also for a highly damped system. Any signal, random or harmonic
sweep, can be sent to the electromagnetic shaker and the active lubricated bearing
which is a strength of the electro mechanical machine component. It has been
shown that the usage of a harmonic sweep excitation force tends to speed up the
convergence of the identiﬁcation algorithms, and that the output only techniques
give very good estimates using a harmonic sweep.
II) It has been demonstrated that with carefully calibrated supply pressure
and servovalve input signals, which are mainly responsible for modifying the static
and dynamic characteristics of the rotor bearing system, the active lubricated
bearing renders non-invasive perturbation forces. The active lubricated bearing is
therefore a suitable replacement for the electromagnetic shaker. This is of great
interest in an industrial context, since the need for stop, and dismounting, of the
machine, and connection of the electromagnetic shaker is bypassed when using
the build in "smart" bearing.
This way the bearing signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the
extraction of modal parameters, and consequently, heavily reduces the amount
of work needed in troubleshooting and for performing "in-situ" modal parameter
identiﬁcation on rotating machines. The parameter study of the supply pressure
==PAGE:101==
15.1
Future Aspects
87
and servovalve input signal shows that non-invasive perturbation forces can be
obtained. By adjusting the DC and AC values, so that the perturbation forces are
mainly generated between the lightly loaded pad and the rotor, while the more
heavily loaded pad is kept unaltered. The supply pressure should be set in such a
way that the system is preserved and a high level of coherence is obtained. The
estimated modal parameters can be extracted using the classical input / output
identiﬁcation techniques and the output only techniques. For the latter approach,
all knowledge about the input forces are bypassed which signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes
the extraction of modal parameters.
15.1
Future Aspects
1. A natural extension of this work is to analyse other controllable ﬂuid ﬁlm
bearings using the same principle as outlined in this project i.e. character-
isation of optimal supply pressure and control signal. In this work the TPJB
was tested, in which high energy dissipation exist which is a challenge for
the OMA algorithms. Even more precise modal parameter estimates are ex-
pected for e.g. the gas bearing with controllable lubrication, because these
bearings are less damped.
2. The hydraulic high pressure system can be simulated as a single degree of
freedom system and characterised experimentally. The natural frequency and
damping ratios of the hydraulic system have been identiﬁed using EMA [15].
OMA could be applied for characterisation of the hydraulic system.
3. With carefully calibrated supply pressure and servovalve input signals, the
ALB can replace the electromagnetic shaker, and modal parameters can be
estimated using OMA. A step further would be to apply the technology and
knowledge from this project for performing modal parameter identiﬁcation
"in-situ" on an industrial machine. The tested machine could also work with
another controllable ﬂuid ﬁlm bearing.
4. An extensive experimental parameter study analysing the inﬂuence of the
supply pressure and servovalve input signal on the dynamics of the rotor-
lever system has been performed. With a precise mathematical model of the
bearing, a similar analysis could be performed numerically and the estimated
modal parameters could be obtained using EMA and OMA. This would allow
for the numerical model to be validated experimentally.
5. The system is highly dependent on the angular velocity. The wavelet tech-
nique could be an interesting and eﬀective way to analyse a machine that
variates in operational speed over time. The wavelet technique can handle
==PAGE:102==
88
15
CONCLUSION
non stationary systems and is, like the OMA techniques employed in this
project, based on only the response of the structure.
==PAGE:103==
REFERENCES
89
References
[1]
Hagg, A. C. ‘The Inﬂuence of Oil-Film Journal Bearings on the Stability of
Rotating Machines’. In: Journal of Applied Mechanics-Transactions of the
ASME 13.3 (1946), A211–A220.
[2]
Someya, T. Journal-bearing databook. Springer, 1989, 326 s.
[3]
Lund, J. W. ‘Spring and Damping for the Tilting Pad Journal Bearings’. In:
ASLE Trans 7, No. 4 (1964), pp. 342–353.
[4]
Dimond, T., Younan, A. and Allaire, P. ‘A Review of Tilting Pad Bearing
Theory’. In: International Journal of Rotating Machinery (2011).
[5]
Dimond, T. et al. ‘Identiﬁcation methods and test results for tilting pad and
ﬁxed geometry journal bearing dynamic coeﬃcients – A review’. In: Shock
and vibration 16.1 (2009), pp. 13–43.
[6]
Nicholas, J. C. ‘Lund’s Tilting Pad Journal Bearing Pad Assembly Method’.
In: Journal of Vibration and Acoustics 125.4 (2003), pp. 448–454.
[7]
Ulbrich, H. and Althaus, J. ‘Actuator Design for Rotor Control’. In: 12th Bi-
ennial ASME Conference on Vibration and Noise, Montreal, Canada, Sept.,
(1989), pp. 17–21.
[8]
Santos, I. F. ‘Design and Evaluation of Two Types of Active Tilting Pad
Journal Bearings’. In: The Active Control of Vibration (1994), pp. 79–87.
[9]
Santos, I. F. ‘On the Adjusting of the Dynamic Coeﬃcients of Tilting-Pad
Journal Bearings’. In: Tribology transactions 38.3 (1995), pp. 700–706.
[10]
Santos, I. F. and Russo, F. H. ‘Tilting-Pad Journal Bearings with Electronic
Radial Oil Injection’. In: Journal of tribology 120.3 (1998), pp. 583–594.
[11]
Santos, I. F. ‘Application of Active Lubrication Techniques to Diﬀerent
Types of Journal Bearings’. In: SIRM 2009 - VIII International Confer-
ence on Vibrations in Rotating Machines. Technical University of Vienna,
2009, pp. 1–11.
[12]
Santos, I. F. ‘Trends in Controllable Oil Film Bearings’. In: IUTAM Sym-
posium on Emerging Trends in Rotor Dynamics 25 (2011), pp. 185–199.
[13]
Santos, I. F., Nicoletti, R. and Scalabrin, A. ‘Feasibility of applying active
lubrication to reduce vibration in industrial compressors’. In: vol. 126. 4.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 2003, pp. 888–894.
[14]
Santos, I. F. and Varela, A. C. ‘Actively Lubricated Bearings Applied as
Calibrated Shakers to Aid Parameter Identiﬁcation in Rotordynamics’. In:
Proceedings of the Asme Turbo Expo 7 (2013).
==PAGE:104==
90
REFERENCES
[15]
Varela, A. C. and Santos, I. F. ‘Tilting-Pad Journal Bearings With Active
Lubrication Applied as Calibrated Shakers: Theory and Experiment’. In:
Journal of Vibration and Acoustics 136.6 (2014).
[16]
Newland, D. E. An Introduction to Random Vibrations, Spectral and Wavelet
Analysis. Dover, 2005.
[17]
Brincker, R. and Ventura, C. Introduction to Operational Modal Analysis.
Wiley, 2015, 344 s.
[18]
Ibrahim, S. R. and Mikulcik, E. C. ‘A Method for the Direct Identiﬁcation
of Vibration Parameters from the Free Response’. In: (1977).
[19]
Juang, J. N. and Pappa, R. S. ‘An Eigensystem Realization Algorithm for
Modal Parameter Identiﬁcation and Model Reduction’. eng. In: Journal of
Guidance 8.5 (1985), pp. 620–627.
[20]
Overschee, P. van and Moor, B. de. Subspace Identiﬁcation for Linear Sys-
tems. Theory, Implementation, Applications. Kluwer, 1996, 254 s.
[21]
Brincker, R. and Andersen, P. ‘Understanding Stochastic Subspace Iden-
tiﬁcation’. In: Conference Proceedings: Imac-xxiv: a Conference and amp;
Exposition on Structural Dynamics (2006).
[22]
Brincker, R., Zhang, L. and Andersen, P. ‘Modal Identiﬁcation from Ambient
Responses Using Frequency Domain Decomposition’. In: Proceedings of Spie
(2000).
[23]
Zhang, L., Wang, T. and Tamura, Y. ‘A Frequency-Spatial Domain Decom-
position (FSDD) Technique for Operational Modal Analysis’. In: Proceedings
of the 1st International Operational Modal Analysis Conference, Iomac 2005
(2005).
[24]
Peeters, B. et al. ‘Removing Disturbing Harmonics in Operational Modal
Analysis’. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Operational Modal Ana-
lysis Conference, Iomac 2007 (2007).
[25]
SVIBS. Modal Analysis in the Presence of Harmonic Excitation. [Online;
hentet 20-December-2015]. 2015. url: http://www.svibs.com/solutions/
case_studies/case_harmonic_excitation.aspx.
[26]
Sichani, M. T. and Mahjoob, M. J. ‘Operational Modal Analysis Applied to
a Horizontal Washing Machine: A Comparative Approach’. In: presented at
International Operational Modal Analysis Conference (IOMAC), Copenha-
gen, Denmark. (2007).
[27]
Carden, P. E. and Lindblad, M. ‘Operational Modal Analysis of Torsional
Modes in Rotating Machinery’. In: ASME Turbo Expo 2014: Turbine Tech-
nical Conference and Exposition (2014), p. 9.
==PAGE:105==
REFERENCES
91
[28]
Carden, P. E. and Morosi, S. ‘Operational Modal Analysis of Lateral Ro-
tordynamic Modes of Rotating Machinery’. In: ASME Turbo Expo 2014:
Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition (2014). GT2014-26308, p. 10.
[29]
Larsen, J. Correlation Functions and Power Spectra. 8th edition. 2009. url:
http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/p.php?4932.
[30]
Proakis, J. G. and Manolakis, D. G. Digital Signal Processing, Principles,
Algorithms and Applications. Pearson, 2007.
[31]
SVIBS. Software program: ARTeMIS. [Online; hentet 5-april-2015]. 2015.
url: http://www.svibs.com/products/ARTeMIS_Modal.aspx.
[32]
Bajrić, A., Brincker, R. and Georgakis, C. T. ‘Evaluation of Damping Using
Time Domain OMA Techniques’. In: Society for Experimental Mechanics,
Inc. (2014).
[33]
Kailath, T. Linear Systems. Prentice-Hall, 1980, 682 s.
[34]
Bendat, J. and Piersol, A. Engineering Applications of Correlation and Spec-
tral Analysis. Wiley, 1993, p. 458.
[35]
Datteo, A. et al. ‘Experimental vs Operational Modal Analysis: A Flyover
Test Case’. In: Dynamics of Civil Structures, Volume 2. Springer, 2015,
pp. 365–377.
[36]
SAS Institute Inc. SAS/STAT Software, Version 12.1.0. Cary, NC, 2015.
url: http://www.sas.com/.
[37]
Salazar, J. G. and Santos, I. F. ‘Exploring Integral Controllers in Actively-
Lubricated Tilting-Pad Journal Bearings’. In: Institution of Mechanical En-
gineers. Proceedings. Part J: Journal of Engineering Tribology 229.7 (2015),
pp. 835–848.
[38]
Ewins, D. J. Modal Testing: Theory, Practice and Application. Wiley.
[39]
Avitabile, P. ‘Experimental Modal Analysis’. In: Sound and vibration 35.1
(2001), pp. 20–31.
==PAGE:106==
92
REFERENCES
==PAGE:107==
A-1
Part IV
Appendix
A
Appended Publication
Non-Invasive Parameter Identiﬁcation in Rotordynamics Via
Fluid Flim Bearings – Linking Active Lubrication and Op-
erational Modal Analysis
This paper was submitted to the ASME Turbo Expo 2016 in November 2015.
==PAGE:108==
Proceedings of ASME Turbo Expo 2016
TE 2016
June 13 - 17, 2016, Seoul, South Korea
GT2016-57618
NON-INVASIVE PARAMETER IDENTIFICATION IN ROTORDYNAMICS VIA FLUID
FILM BEARINGS - LINKING ACTIVE LUBRICATION AND OPERATIONAL MODAL
ANALYSIS
Ilmar Ferreira Santos∗
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Email: ifs@mek.dtu.dk
Peter Kjær Svendsen
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Email: peter.kj.svendsen@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
In recent years, theoretical and experimental efforts have
transformed the conventional tilting-pad journal bearing (TPJB)
into a smart mechatronic machine element. The application of
electromechanical elements into rotating systems makes feasible
the generation of controllable forces over the rotor as a func-
tion of a suitable control signal. The servo valve input signal
and the radial injection pressure are the two main parameters re-
sponsible for dynamically modifying the journal oil ﬁlm pressure
and generating active ﬂuid ﬁlm forces in controllable ﬂuid ﬁlm
bearings. Such ﬂuid ﬁlm forces, resulting from a strong coupling
between hydrodynamic, hydrostatic and controllable lubrication
regimes, can be used either to control or to excite rotor lateral vi-
brations. If non-invasive forces are generated via lubricant ﬂuid
ﬁlm, in situ parameter identiﬁcation can be carried out, enabling
evaluation of the mechanical condition of the rotating machine.
Using the lubricant ﬂuid ﬁlm as a non-invasive calibrated
shaker is troublesome, once several transfer functions among
mechanical, hydraulic and electronic components are necessary.
In this framework the main original contribution of this paper
is to show experimentally that the knowledge about the several
transfer functions can be bypassed using output-only identiﬁca-
tion techniques. The manuscript links active lubrication tech-
niques with operational modal analysis, allowing for in-situ pa-
rameter identiﬁcation in rotordynamics, i.e. estimation of damp-
ing ratio and natural frequencies.
∗Address all correspondence to this author.
The experimental analysis is carried out on a rigid rotor-
level system supported by one-single-pad.
The estimation of
damping and natural frequencies is performed using classical ex-
perimental modal analysis (EMA) and operational modal analy-
sis (OMA). Very good agreements between the two experimen-
tal approaches are found.
Maximum values of the main in-
put parameters, namely servo valve voltage and radial injection
pressure, are experimentally found with the objective of deﬁning
ranges of non-invasive perturbation forces.
INTRODUCTION
Controllable ﬂuid ﬁlm bearings (CFFBs) are designed in a
”symbiotic relationship” to different types of electro-mechanical
actuators [1–4]. For example, oil or water lubricated bearings
are normally connected to servo valves and hydraulic servo sys-
tems [5–7], while gas or air lubricated bearings use piezoelec-
tric actuators and pneumatic systems [8–10]. Direct and indi-
rect types of control action onto the rotating shaft can be found.
The control actuation inﬂuences four parameters; i.e. either the
bearing gap function h [11–14] and its geometry dh/dθ [15–17],
or the ﬂuid viscosity µ [18, 19], or the ﬂuid ﬁlm pressure ﬁeld
p [20–22]. All four parameters are directly and explicitly written
inside the Reynolds equation and signiﬁcantly affect the static
and dynamic interaction between rotating parts (journal) and sta-
tionary parts (bearing surface) of the machines. The possibil-
ity of actively controlling the behaviour of such parameters al-
lows for engineering smart design solutions and signiﬁcant per-
1
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:109==
formance improvements of machines.
In the case of actively lubricated bearings (ALBs) – a special
variant of CFFBs where the ﬂuid ﬁlm pressure ﬁeld is controlled
via servo-hydraulic or piezoelectric systems – the bearings are
intentionally designed to be able of operating conventionally, i.e.
under hydrodynamic and aerodynamic lubrication conditions,
and when enhancements of performance are desired, such goals
are achieved by well-tuned feedback control laws [21,23]. Con-
trollable ﬂuid ﬁlm bearing technology have a relatively short his-
tory of about two decades [5–7,12,20], it is in its infancy in com-
parison to active magnetic bearing technology. The behaviour of
CFFBs has been theoretically as well as experimentally investi-
gated mostly under controlled laboratorial conditions, but slowly
the technology is becoming mature towards industrial applica-
tions [4, 6, 7, 24, 25]. The majority of the results shown in the
literature focuses on vibration control [5–7], enhancing of bear-
ing damping properties [26], compensation of cross coupling ef-
fects[27], enlargement of stability range of rigid [21] and ﬂexible
rotors [24,27], and compensation of thermal effects [28–31]. The
idea of using controllable ﬂuid ﬁlm bearings as ”non-invasive
calibrated shaker” to aid rotordynamic testing similar to the us-
age of active magnetic bearings [32–36] - has been ﬁrstly men-
tioned in [4], preliminary exploited in [37] and more deeply in-
vestigated in [38]. In [38] the experimental characterization of
the active ﬂuid ﬁlm forces were carried out in the frequency do-
main using a pair of actively lubricated tilting-pads. The applica-
tion of ALBs as a calibrated shaker with the goal of determining
the frequency response function (FRF in m/N) of a rotordynamic
system was demonstrated. The supply pressure and servovalve
input signal are two key parameters which signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
the rotor-journal bearing system dynamics. Indicators based on
the amplitude of coherence functions were found and used to de-
termine how small such ”non-invasive” active ﬂuid ﬁlm forces
should be to properly excite the rotor-journal bearing system
without changing its static and dynamic characteristics. In terms
of industrial and practical applications of ALBs as non-invasive
testing device it would be very useful to bypass the necessity of
knowing precisely the transfer function between output (active
ﬂuid ﬁlm force applied to the rotor) and input (servovalve input
signal) in N/V to use ALBs as a calibrated shaker to perform
rotordynamic tests.
Output-only identiﬁcation techniques based on operational
modal analysis (OMA) is widely applied in the civil engineering
area when modal parameter estimation of buildings and bridges
is experimentally carried out. It comes due to the difﬁculty of
exciting large structures as buildings and bridges. In the past
decade parameter identiﬁcation procedures based solely on the
system dynamic response has rapidly developed and found its
acceptance in several other areas of engineering, also mechanical
engineering [39–41]. Such techniques have never been used in
connection to actively lubricated bearings.
In this framework, the main original contribution of this
work is to link active lubrication techniques to operational modal
analysis (OMA) aiming at performing rotordynamic tests and pa-
rameter identiﬁcation via ALBs without using the information
about ﬂuid ﬁlm applied forces. The procedure is based only on
the measurement of system response, i.e. rotor lateral move-
ment. Random signal with small amplitude is though used as
input to the servovalve. Small pressure and ﬂow changes are
consequently generated, leading to non-invasive small ﬂuid ﬁlm
forces.
Non-invasive forces means forces able to perturb the
rotor-bearing system via ﬂuid ﬁlm without signiﬁcant changes of
the original static equilibrium position of the journal and with-
out altering the system dynamics. The original contribution of
the work relies on a very extensive experimental campaign, fo-
cused on the identiﬁcation of modal parameters as damping ra-
tio and natural frequency of a simple rotor-bearing system to
start with. Experimental modal analysis (EMA) and operational
modal analysis (OMA) are consistently compared throughout
the whole experimental campaign, using ALBs and conventional
electromagnetic shaker as excitation sources. The results ob-
tained via electromagnetic shaker are used as benchmark to vali-
date the performance of ALBs as non-invasive shaker.
TEST
APPARATUS
AND
EXPERIMENTAL
PROCE-
DURES
The experimental work is carried out by using the test ap-
paratus illustrated in ﬁgure 1(a). The operational principle of the
test rig is schematized in ﬁgure 1(b). The two parallel arms of the
lever system and the rotor are considered as a single rigid body.
The rotor-lever system is pivoted at the extremity A using two
ball bearings. They constrain ﬁve of the six possible degrees of
freedom of the rigid body and allow only rotational movements
around point A. The whole system dynamics becomes restricted
to a 2 dimensional problem, where forces are applied to the mid-
dle and free extremity of the arms via a pair of actively-lubricated
tilting-pads and an electromagnetic shaker, respectively. The pair
of tilting-pads inside of the bearing housing constrains the am-
plitude of the arm movements to very small angles. It means
that small vertical displacements of the rotor center positioned in
middle of the parallel arms are assured. Static loads and electro-
magnetic dynamic forces are applied to the free extremity of the
arm.
Figure 1a illustrate the whole electro-mechanical system.
The driven system is composed of an AC motor and its frequency
converter 1 controlled by a control unit 2. The torque is transmit-
ted to the rotor by belt. The rotor angular position and velocity
are measured by means of a tachometer 3 installed directly to
the rotor. Dynamic forces are applied to the arm extremity by
means of the electromagnetic shaker 4 and measured by the force
transducer 5 and its signal conditioner 6. Static loads are also ap-
plied to the arm extremity and measure by the force transducer
7. The linear displacement sensor 8 detects the linear vertical
2
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:110==
movements of the arm extremity in the rotor-lever system mid-
dle plane. Two accelerometers 9 and 10 are attached to the free
extremity of the arm are used to measure linear vertical acceler-
ations of the arm extremity and verify that no undesired tilting
movement outside of the plane of interest occurs. The accelera-
tion signals are ampliﬁed by means of the signal conditioner 11
and 12. The ﬂuid ﬁlm forces are applied to the rotor-lever system
in the middle of the arms. Oil pressure and ﬂow are generated by
a hydraulic unit not shown in the picture. The ﬂuid lubricant
ﬂows through a ﬁlter 13 up to the high response servovalve 14.
The servovalve is connected to the pair of tilting-pads by means
of pipelines and responsible for generating the active ﬂuid ﬁlm
forces on the top of the hydrodynamic forces. The controlled
injection pressures in the pair of pads are measured by pressure
sensors installed inside of the pads 15.
4
5
6
7
3
4
5
11
8
12
13
16
15
Force
Trans.
kstatic
Shaker
Servo valve
Ω
Port A
Port B
(b)
Displ.
probe
Acc.
meter
l2
f(t)
k
c
Ω
fstatic
x
y
A
l1
c
k
(a)
14
1
9
2
9
10
10
17
FIGURE 1: (a) Photo of the test apparatus; (b) schematic of the
test rig operational principle.
During the experimental campaign random as well as har-
monic (chirp) signals are digitally generated in a PC computer
(no shown in the picture), sent to the D/A card 16 to supply the
power ampliﬁer 17 of the electromagnetic shaker and the power
ampliﬁer of the servovalve (no shown in the picture). In order to
assure the performance of ALBs as ”non-invasive shaker” while
performing rotordynamic tests, the results obtained by means of
actively-lubricated pair of pads are compared to the results ob-
tained by using the electromagnetic shaker coupled to a force
transducer. The results are summarized in form of: i) frequency
response functions (FRFs); ii) waterfall diagrams; iii) identiﬁed
natural frequency; and iv) identiﬁed damping ratio. The results i)
to iv) are obtained when static load, rotor angular velocity, injec-
tion pressure and amplitude of servovalve input signal are varied.
Damping ratio and natural frequency are identiﬁed aided by clas-
sical EMA and OMA methods. It is also important to highlight
that tilting-pad bearings have insigniﬁcant cross coupling effect
between the vertical and horizontal directions. Operation princi-
ple of the test rig takes advantage of such a characteristic and all
analyses are conducted in the vertical direction, without loss of
generality.
EMA and its algorithms for extracting modal parameters are
throughout discussed in the literature [42]. Such algorithms have
their foundation in the knowledge of input (force) as well as out-
put (displacement or acceleration) signals, while OMA uses only
output signal.
The Ibrahim time domain (ITD) algorithm in-
troduced by Ibrahim and Mikulcik [43] in 1977 is one of the
ﬁrst algorithms developed for parameter estimation using multi-
ple outputs. A closely related algorithm is the eigensystem re-
alization algorithm (ERA) developed by Pappa et Al [44] and
introduced in 1985. The estimation of modal parameters based
on such algorithms demands computational power, and the rapid
development of computers stimulated the development of many
new algorithms in the nineties. One example is the stochastic
subspace identiﬁcation (SSI) algorithm developed in this period.
SSI has gained acceptance since formally introduced by Over-
schee and Moor [45]. The SSI identiﬁcation technique is well
known mainly because of its implementation in commercial soft-
ware such as ARTeMIS. Brincker et Al [46] also gave a signiﬁ-
cant contribution to the development of OMA by introducing the
frequency domain decomposition (FDD) algorithm. Many other
algorithms are still being developed. In this work, however, the
algorithms ITD, SSI and FDD are used. During the past decade
such algorithms have been thoroughly validated, numerically as
well as experimentally.
For all measurements conducted an acquisition frequency of
fs = 2000Hz is utilized and the individual measurements have a
total length of 200 s. Regarding the correlation driven OMA al-
gorithms (ITD) a total amount of time lags of 300 are used. Fur-
thermore the tail of the correlation function is removed (i.e. noise
is minimised) using a triangular ﬂattop window. The utilised
FDD algorithm transforms the individual auto-spectral densities
3
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:111==
into auto-correlation functions using inverse Fourier transforma-
tion. The auto-correlation functions are then fed into a SIMO
version of the ITD algorithm, damping estimations is thereby
possible and the natural frequency estimation is improved.
Table 1 reports the main dimensions and geometrical prop-
erties of the rotor-bearing system investigated, followed by the
lubricant type used.
ROTOR-BEARING SYSTEM UNDER CONVENTIONAL
HYDRODYNAMIC LUBRICATION
The rotor-lever system operates initially under conventional
hydrodynamic lubrication. Seventeen angular velocities between
0 and 4,800 rpm (80 Hz) and three different load conditions are
used: i) 200 N; ii) 1400 N ; and iii) 2800 N. For sake of briefness
only experimental results (FRFs) under conditions ii) and iii) are
presented in ﬁgures 2a and 2b. The electromagnetic shaker im-
poses dynamic perturbation forces in the frequency range be-
tween 30 to 300 Hz. The illustration of FRFs is though short-
ened in the frequency range of interest, namely between 50 and
200 Hz. The perturbation forces (input) is measured by the force
transducer 5 and the vertical displacement of the rotor measured
by the displacement sensor 8 (see ﬁgure 1a).
At zero angular velocity and no ﬂuid ﬁlm formation the pad
pivot stiffness and the rotor-lever inertia deﬁne the system reso-
nance frequency around 130 Hz. The friction between the system
components deﬁnes the level of damping. By increasing the ro-
tor angular velocity from 0 to 2,400 rpm (40 Hz) the lubricant
ﬁlm between rotor and pads is formed and a signiﬁcant amount
of damping is introduced via hydrodynamic lubrication. This
claim is easily conﬁrmed by analysing the reduction of the reso-
nance peaks around 130 Hz in range from 0 to 2,400 rpm (40 Hz).
By further increasing the rotor angular velocity from 2,400 rpm
(40 Hz) to 4,800 rpm (80 Hz) signiﬁcant reduction of damping
Pad inner radius
49.923
mm
Journal radius
49.692
mm
Bearing axial length
100
mm
Assembly radial clearance
0.05275
mm
Number of pads
2
-
Pad arc
69
deg
Offset
0.5
-
Load Angle
on pad
-
Pad thickness
12
mm
Injection nozzle radius
3
mm
Injection nozzle length
10
mm
Oil type
ISO VG22
-
Pad material
Brass
-
Pivot insert material
Steel
-
TABLE 1: Test rig parameters and dimensions
is seen, as expected and predicted by the hydrodynamic theory.
Comparing the two waterfall diagrams illustrated in ﬁgures 2a
and 2b one might conclude that the damping ratios in case ii) is
slightly higher than in case iii).
Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the behaviour of the two identi-
ﬁed parameters, i.e. natural frequency and damping ratio, as a
function of the angular velocity for the two load cases ii) and
iii), respectively. The identiﬁcation procedure is carried out us-
ing ﬁve approaches: a) EMA coupled to least square algorithm;
b) OMA aided by ITD algorithm; c) OMA aided by SSI algo-
rithm; d) OMA aided by FDD algorithm; and e) mean values
composed of all four values. In case a) force and displacement
signals are used for the parameter identiﬁcation while in cases
b), c) and d) only displacement and/or acceleration signals, i.e.
output only. Comparing ﬁgure 3a and ﬁgure 4a the reduction of
the system natural frequency as a function of the angular velocity
can be seen. In case ii) the natural frequency varies from 132 Hz
at very low speeds to 119 Hz at 4,800 rpm (80 Hz). In case iii)
50
70
90
110 130 150 170 190
0
20
40
60
80
0
1
2
·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)|(m/N)
(a) Static load of 1400 N
50
70
90
110 130 150 170 190
0
20
40
60
80
0
1
2
·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)|(m/N)
(b) Static load of 2800 N
FIGURE 2:
Experimental Frequency Response Functions in
(m/N) as a function of the rotor angular velocity and static load
conditions: a) static load of 1400 N; b) static load of 2800 N.
4
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:112==
it varies from 138 Hz at very low speeds to 128 Hz, a more nar-
row range in comparison with case ii). Figures 3b and 4b depict
the behaviour of the damping ratio as a function of the rotor an-
gular velocity for load cases ii) and iii). For both loading cases
maximum damping ratio values of 0.15 and 0.125 are achieved
at 2,400 rpm (40 Hz) and 1,800 rpm (30 Hz), respectively. Good
correspondence to the amplitudes of waterfall diagrams in ﬁg-
ure 2a and 2b are found, i.e. exactly at such angular velocities
the rotor-lever system has its minimum vibration amplitudes. All
algorithms based on EMA as well as on OMA identify the same
behaviour for damping ratios as well as for natural frequencies.
The identiﬁed damping ratios for case ii) are slightly higher than
for case iii). For higher loads as in case iii), the rotor-lever sys-
tem dynamics are more strongly inﬂuenced by the pivot stiffness
and it explains the slightly reduction of damping ratio values for
this case in comparison to case ii). The identiﬁed parameters pre-
sented in ﬁgures 3 and 4 will be used as benchmark to validate
the same parameters obtained via ALBs as a non-invasive shaker
in the next sections.
ROTOR-BEARING SYSTEM UNDER CONTROLLABLE
LUBRICATION
The rotor-lever system operates now under the controllable
lubrication regime, i.e. the hydrodynamic plus the hydrostatic
0
20
40
60
80
120
130
140
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
EMA
ITD
SSI
FDD
Mean (Shaker)
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
0.05
0.10
0.15
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(b)
FIGURE 3: Experimental behaviour of the natural frequency and
damping ratio as a function of the rotor angular velocity esti-
mated via EMA (least square algorithm) and OMA (ITD, SSI
and FDD algorithms) and using the electromagnetic shaker –
Static load condition: 1400 N.
0
20
40
60
80
120
130
140
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
EMA
ITD
SSI
FDD
Mean (Shaker)
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
0.05
0.10
0.15
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(b)
FIGURE 4: Experimental behaviour of the natural frequency and
damping ratio as a function of the rotor angular velocity esti-
mated via EMA (least square algorithm) and OMA (ITD, SSI
and FDD algorithms) and using the electromagnetic shaker –
Static load condition: 2800 N.
plus the active time-variant injection. Seventeen angular veloc-
ities between 0 and 4,800 rpm (80 Hz) and three different load
conditions are used: i) 200 N; ii) 1400 N; and iii) 2800 N. Once
again, for sake of briefness only experimental results (FRFs) un-
der conditions ii) and iii) are presented in ﬁgures 5a and 5b. The
servovalve is fed by a chirp input signal with maximum ampli-
tude of 0.17 V and a supply pressure of 15 bar (1.5 MPa), im-
posing dynamic ﬂuid ﬁlm perturbation forces in the frequency
range between 30 to 300 Hz. The illustration of FRFs is though
shortened in the frequency range of interest, namely between 50
and 200 Hz and they are obtained using the pressure sensor 15
as input signal and the displacement sensor 8 as output signal
(see ﬁgure 1a). It is important to highlight, the ﬁgures 5a and 5b
should be compared to each other for the two load cases ii) and
iii) with care. A direct quantitative comparison between ﬁgure 5
and ﬁgure 2 is not straightforward possible, once the location of
the excitations and the FRF units in m/N and m/bar are differ-
ent. Nevertheless, comparing qualitatively them, the vibration
ampliﬁcation around the resonance range of 130 Hz is clearly
seen along the whole angular velocity range. Generally speak-
ing, the rotor-lever system under hybrid lubrication conditions is
slightly more damped than its counterpart conventionally lubri-
cated.
Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the behaviour of the two identiﬁed
parameters, i.e. natural frequency and damping ratio, as a func-
5
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:113==
50
70
90
110 130 150 170 190
0
20
40
60
80
0
1
2
·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(a) Static load of 1400 N
50
70
90
110 130 150 170 190
0
20
40
60
80
0
1
2
·10−6
Frequency (Hz)
Ω(Hz)
|H(F)| (m/bar)
(b) Static load of 2800 N
FIGURE 5:
Experimental Frequency Response Functions in
(m/bar) as a function of the rotor angular velocity and static load
conditions: a) static load of 1400 N; b) static load of 2800 N.
tion of the angular velocity for the two load cases ii) and iii), re-
spectively. The identiﬁcation procedure is carried out using four
approaches: a) EMA (FRF in (m/bar) coupled to least square al-
gorithm; b) OMA aided by ITD algorithm; c) OMA aided by SSI
algorithm; and d) OMA aided by FDD algorithm. The mean val-
ues obtained when the electromagnetic shaker is used, is plotted
and used as benchmark values. In case a) pressure and displace-
ment signals are used for the parameter identiﬁcation while in
cases b), c) and d) only displacement and/or acceleration signals,
i.e. output only. Comparing ﬁgure 6a and ﬁgure 7a the reduction
of the system natural frequency as a function of the angular ve-
locity can be seen. In case ii) the natural frequency varies from
140 Hz at very low speeds to 120 Hz at 4,800 rpm (80 Hz). In
case iii) it varies from 145 Hz at very low speeds to 130 Hz at
3,600 rpm (60 Hz), a more narrow range in comparison to case
ii). Comparing the identiﬁed natural frequency values using the
electromagnetic shaker and the ALB a clear correspondence is
seen, especially for the case ii). Increasing the static loading, i.e.
case iii), deviations are found, especially for the rotor angular ve-
locities higher than 1,200 rpm (20 Hz). Nevertheless, the natural
frequency trends are the same. All algorithms based on EMA
as well as on OMA identify the same behaviour for the natural
frequency.
Figures 6b and 7b depict the behaviour of the damping ratio
as a function of the rotor angular velocity for cases ii) and iii), re-
spectively. For both loading cases maximum damping ratio val-
ues around 0.175 and 0.135 are achieved at 2,400 rpm (40 Hz)
and 1,800 rpm (30 Hz), respectively. All algorithms based on
EMA as well as on OMA identify the same behaviour for damp-
ing ratios. The identiﬁed damping ratios for case ii) are slightly
higher than for case iii), as expected. As mentioned before, for
higher loads the rotor-lever system dynamics are more strongly
inﬂuenced by the pivot stiffness leading to a slight reduction of
damping ratio values. Such a trend is seen when the electro-
magnetic shaker (continuous line) as well as the ALB is used as
excitation devices.
ELECTROMAGNETIC SHAKER vs ALB – PAREMETER
STUDY AND STATISTICAL COMPARISON
Based on an extensive experimental campaign of 51 dy-
namic tests with the electromagnetic shaker, i.e. three static load-
ing conditions at 17 rotor angular velocities, mean values and
95% conﬁdence intervals for the natural frequency and damp-
0
20
40
60
80
120
130
140
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
EMA
ITD
SSI
FDD
Mean (Shaker)
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
0.05
0.10
0.15
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(b)
FIGURE 6: Experimental behaviour of the natural frequency and
damping ratio as a function of the rotor angular velocity esti-
mated via EMA (least square algorithm) and OMA (ITD, SSI
and FDD algorithms) and using the ALB as shaker – Static load
condition: 1400 N.
6
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:114==
0
20
40
60
80
120
130
140
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
fn (Hz)
EMA
ITD
SSI
FDD
Mean (Shaker)
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
0.05
0.10
0.15
Angular velocity Ω(Hz)
ζn (-)
(b)
FIGURE 7: Experimental behaviour of the natural frequency and
damping ratio as a function of the rotor angular velocity esti-
mated via EMA (least square algorithm) and OMA (ITD, SSI
and FDD algorithms) and using the ALB as shaker – Static load
condition: 2800 N.
ing ratio are calculated, aided by the four different estimation
algorithms based on EMA and OMA. The results are ﬁtted using
quadratic functions and presented in ﬁgure 8. The behaviour of
the parameter mean values as a function of static load and ro-
tor angular velocity are used as benchmark. This test campaign
focuses on the effect of the hydrodynamic lubrication on the sys-
tem dynamics. Generally speaking, the system damping ratio
achieves its maximum value for static loads around 1500 N and
angular velocities around 2,400 rpm (40 Hz). The system nat-
ural frequency increases as a function of the static loading and
decreases as the rotor angular velocity increases.
Based on another extensive experimental campaign of 51
dynamic tests with the ALB as shaker, mean values and 95%
conﬁdence intervals for the natural frequency and damping ra-
tio are calculated, aided by the four different estimation algo-
rithms based on EMA and OMA. The results are also ﬁtted using
quadratic functions and presented in ﬁgure 9. The behaviour of
the parameter mean values as a function of static load and ro-
tor angular velocity follows benchmark values very well. When
the controllable lubrication system is turned on, the dynamics of
the original rotor-lever system slightly changes towards a more
damped system. Generally speaking, the system damping ratio
achieves its maximum value for static loads around 2000 N in-
stead of 1500 N and angular velocities around 2,700 rpm (45 Hz)
instead of 2,400 rpm (40 Hz). Its maximum mean value obtained
0
20 40 60 80
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
Damping (-)
0
20 40 60 80
95
105
115
125
135
Angular velocity (Hz)
Natural frequency (Hz)
200
1,500
2,800
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
200
1,500
2,800
95
105
115
125
135
Static load (N)
FIGURE 8: Curve-ﬁtted mean values of damping factor, natural
frequency with 95% conﬁdence interval as a function of the rotor
angular velocity and static load results obtained aided by the
electromagnetic shaker.
aided by the ALB is approx. 0.14, a relatively small variation
when compared to the value of 0.12 obtained with help of the
electromagnetic shaker (ﬁgure 8). The system natural frequency
increases as a function of the static loading and decreases as the
rotor angular velocity increases, the same trend obtained when
the electromagnetic shaker is used. Aided by the ALB the nat-
ural frequency mean value is found at 115 Hz while using the
electromagnetic shaker is 123 Hz. Coherence functions obtained
with the help of pressure sensor inside of the pads (element 15)
and the displacement sensor (element 8) are also presented for
all 51 dynamic tests. The high values of coherence, i.e. around
0.96, assure the quality of the measurement campaign.
The non-invasive perturbation forces generated by the ALB
are strongly dependent on two main parameters: The oil pressure
supply (ps) and the amplitude of the input signal sent to the ser-
vovalve. The input signal can be built by a constant value (DC)
added by an alternating value (AC). With the DC value the static
position of the servovalve piston is controlled, changing the pres-
sure and ﬂow through ports A and B (see ﬁgure 1b) and allowing
higher pressure and ﬂow to one pad then to the other. In case of
generation of non-invasive perturbation forces, i.e. forces which
do not change the static equilibrium position of the journal, the
DC value can be advantageously exploited. The DC value can
be adjusted to reduce the injection of pressurized oil between the
rotor and lower pad, which bears the static load, avoiding in this
7
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:115==
0
20 40 60 80
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
Damping (-)
0
20 40 60 80
95
105
115
125
135
Natural frequency (Hz)
0
20 40 60 80
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.1
1.2
Angular velocity (Hz)
Coherence
200
1,500
2,800
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
200
1,500
2,800
95
105
115
125
135
200
1,500
2,800
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.1
1.2
Static load (N)
FIGURE 9: Curve-ﬁtted mean values of damping factor, natural
frequency and coherence with 95% conﬁdence interval as a func-
tion of the rotor angular velocity and static load results obtained
aided by the ALB as shaker.
matter signiﬁcant changes of system static equilibrium position.
As consequence of such an adjustment of the DC value, the ﬂuid
ﬁlm force between rotor and upper pad will be more signiﬁcantly
affected by the supply pressure. The ﬂuid force between rotor
and upper pad becomes the main source of perturbation. On the
top of the DC value, the AC value of the input signal (random or
chirp) can be added and varied with the aim of shaking the rotor-
level system without altering its dynamics. Figure 10 illustrates
the inﬂuence of the three operational parameters, namely supply
pressure ps, DC and AC values of the input signal, on the iden-
tiﬁcation of damping ratio and natural frequency. The results
are obtained based on an exhaustive experimental campaign of
over 50 tests using both EMA and OMA. The experimental cam-
paign is carefully designed to achieve 95% conﬁdence using the
software JMP and statistic tools for design of experiments [47].
Three values of static load (200 N, 1500 N and 2800 N), 3 angular
velocities (0, 2,400 rpm and 4,800 rpm), 4 values of supply pres-
sure (5 bar, 10 bar, 25 bar and 50 bar), 4 DC (−0.45 V, −0.2 V,
0.2 V and 0.45 V) and 5 AC values (0.1 V, 0.2 V, 0.4 V, 0.6 V
and 0.8 V) are used. The mean values of the coherence func-
tion are also documented in ﬁgure 10 for all three study cases to
assure the quality of the experimental campaign.
As mentioned previously, the rotor-lever system under hy-
brid lubrication conditions is slightly more damped than its coun-
terpart conventionally lubricated. It means that the lower the
damping factor identiﬁed via ALB the closer one might be to
the dynamics of the original system conventionally lubricated.
Generally speaking, the application of ALB as a shaker leads to
a slight underestimation of natural frequencies, especially at high
angular velocities. With this information in mind, ﬁgure 10 can
be analysed:
• Inﬂuence of Supply Pressure – It can be inferred that low
values of pressure supply leads to slight overestimation of damp-
ing ratio and natural frequency followed by a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion of coherence. Optimal values of supply pressure Ps seem to
exist around 25 bar, where the mean values of identiﬁed damping
ratio is 0.14 and of the identiﬁed natural frequency 114 Hz. It is
worth mentioning the high value of coherence, i.e. 0.96, for such
value of supply pressure.
• Inﬂuence of Servovalve Input Signal (DC Values) –
Analysing the inﬂuence of the DC values on the identiﬁcation
of the modal parameters, an optimal range between -0.45 V and
-0.20 V can be found. With values inside of this range good
parameter estimation is achieved, followed by high values of
coherence. Inside of this voltage range the perturbation forces
are fundamentally generated by the ﬂuid ﬁlm between the rotor
and upper pad (under light static load conditions). The ﬂuid ﬁlm
force between rotor and lower pad are kept almost unaltered. For
example, if −0.45 V is used with 25 bar supply pressure, the es-
timation of damping ratio leads to mean values around 0.12 and
of natural frequency around 115 Hz, very close to the original
system parameters under conventional lubrication.
• Inﬂuence of Servovalve Input Signal (AC Values) –
Analysing the inﬂuence of the AC values on the estimation of
damping ratio and natural frequency, an optimal range between
0.2 V and 0.4 V can be found. With values inside of this range
good parameter estimation is achieved, followed by high values
of coherence. Inside of this voltage range the dynamic perturba-
tion force is still fundamentally generated by the ﬂuid ﬁlm forces
between the rotor and upper pad.
It is worth emphasising that the information about the in-
put signals (force and pressure) is not use for the estimation of
damping ratio and natural frequency via ITD, SSI and FDD algo-
rithms. The input signals are only used to calculate the coherence
functions, to assure the validity of claims and supporting techni-
8
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:116==
cally conclusions presented in the present work.
5
10 25 50
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
Damping (-)
5
10 25 50
95
105
115
125
135
Natural frequency (Hz)
5
10 25 50
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.1
1.2
Pressure (bar)
Coherence
-.45 -.2
.2
.45
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
-.45 -.2
.2
.45
95
105
115
125
135
-.45 -.2
.2
.45
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.1
1.2
DC level (V)
.1 .2 .4 .6 .8
0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.18
.1 .2 .4 .6 .8
95
105
115
125
135
.1 .2 .4 .6 .8
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.1
1.2
AC level (V)
FIGURE 10: Curve-ﬁtted mean values of damping factor, natural
frequency and coherence with 95% conﬁdence interval as a func-
tion of: a) the supply pressure; b) DC amplitude of the servovalve
input signal; and c) AC amplitude of the servovalve input signal
results obtained aided by the ALB as shaker.
CONCLUSION & FUTURE ASPECTS
It is important to recall that the main goal of the work is to
link active lubrication techniques with output-only modal anal-
ysis techniques to perform rotordynamic tests in a non-invasive
way and bypassing any need of calibration of ﬂuid ﬁlm forces.
The servo valve input signal, both DC and AC levels, and the sup-
ply pressure are the main parameters responsible for the dynamic
modiﬁcation of the journal pressure distribution, generating ac-
tive ﬂuid ﬁlm forces. Such active ﬂuid ﬁlm forces can be used
either to control, as extensively presented in the literature, or to
induce rotor vibrations in a controlled manner, as investigated in
the present work.
Rotor-bearing system under hybrid lubrication conditions
seems to be slightly more damped than its counterpart conven-
tionally (hydrodynamic) lubricated. Such a claim depends of
course on the levels of pressurization utilized.
Comparisons
between the modal parameters estimation via electromagnetic
shaker and ALB linked to only-output identiﬁcation techniques
leads to the conclusion that ALBs slightly underestimate the val-
ues of natural frequencies of the original system, especially at
higher rotor angular velocities, and slightly overestimate the val-
ues of damping ratio. Such slight deviations can be strongly min-
imized by properly setting values of supply pressure and servo-
valve input signal, i.e. DC and AC levels. With the correct choice
DC voltage ranges non-invasive perturbation forces can be gen-
erated between lightly loaded pad (upper pad) and rotor, while
the behaviour of the ﬂuid ﬁlm force between the heavily loaded
pad (lower pad) is kept unaltered. It means such perturbation
forces introduce minor modiﬁcation to the static equilibrium po-
sition of the journal. On the top of the DC value, the AC value of
the input signal (random or chirp) can be added and accordingly
varied with the aim of shaking the rotor-level system without al-
tering the dynamics of the original system. ITD, SSI and FDD
algorithms are normally used with random signals. During the
extensive experimental campaign random as well as harmonic
(chirp) signals with different AC levels were tested. Both types
of signals used led to similar results. Nevertheless, the utilization
of harmonic chirp signals instead of random signals signiﬁcantly
accelerates the convergence of the numerical algorithms to the
correct values of damping ratio and natural frequencies, simulta-
neously allowing for smaller and shorter amount of experimental
data. This is one of the advantages of using electro-mechanical
machine elements, as ALBs, they are versatile, allowing the uti-
lization of all types of signals, random as well as periodic.
After the exhaustive and throughout experimental campaign
one can conclude that the combination of active lubrication tech-
niques with operational modal analysis might aid the develop-
ment of novel techniques for performing rotordynamic test in
rotating machines supported by ﬂuid ﬁlm bearings. Via non-
invasive ﬂuid ﬁlm forces the rotor-bearing system can be per-
turbed and the modal parameters of the original system accu-
rately estimated. In the near future the novel technique will be
tested using a ﬂexible rotor [48] supported by actively-lubricated
tilting-pad bearing with the aim of estimating not only natural
frequency and damping ratio but also the mode shapes of the
rotor-bearing system.
9
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:117==
REFERENCES
[1] Janocha, H., 1999. “Neue Aktoren aus Sicht der Mecha-
tronik”.
Kolloquium Aktoren in Mechatronischen Syste-
men, edited by Nordmann, R. and Isermann, R, Fortschritt-
Berichte VDI, Reihe 8, Nr. 743, pp. 1–13.
[2] Janocha, H., 1999. “Adaptronics and Smart Structures –
Basics, Materials, Design and Applications”. Springer Ver-
lag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York.
[3] Santos, I. F., 2011. “On the Future of Controllable Fluid-
Film Bearings”. Mechanique et Industries, 12, pp. 275–
281.
[4] Santos, I. F., 2011. “Trends in Controllable Oil Film Bear-
ings”.
IUTAM Bookseries, Proceedings of IUTAM Sym-
posium on Emerging Trends in Rotor Dynamics (Springer
Verlag),1011, pp. 185–199.
[5] Santos, I. F., 1994. “Design and Evaluation of Two Types
of Active Tilting Pad Journal Bearings”. The Active Control
of Vibration, C.R.Burrows and P.S.Keogh, eds. Mechanical
Engineering Publications Limited, London, pp. 79–87.
[6] Bently, D. E., Grant, J. W., and Hanifan, P. C., 2000. “Ac-
tive Controlled Hydrostatic Bearings for a New Generation
of Machines”. In ASME/IGTI International Gas Turbine
and Aeroengine Congress and Exhibition.
[7] Bently, D. E., Eldridge, T., Jensen, J., and Mol, P., 2001.
“Externally Pressurized Bearings allow Rotor Dynamic
Optimization”. VDI BERICHTE, 1640, pp. 49–62.
[8] Morosi, S., and Santos, I. F., 2011. “Active Lubrication Ap-
plied to Radial Gas Journal Bearings. Part 1: Modelling”.
Tribology International, 44, pp. 1949–1958.
[9] Morosi, S., and Santos, I. F., 2012. “Experimental Investi-
gations of Active Air Bearings”. IGTI/ASME Turbo Expo,
pp. 1–10. GT2012-68766.
[10] Pierart, F., and Santos, I. F., 2015. “Steady state charac-
teristics of an adjustable hybrid gas bearing - CFD, modi-
ﬁed Reynolds equation and experimental validation”. Jour-
nal of Engineering Tribology, Proc IMechE Part J, 229(7),
pp. 807–822. DOI: 10.1177/1350650115570404.
[11] Deckler, D. C., Veillette, R. J., Braun, M. J., and Choy,
F. K., 2000. “Simulation and Control of an Active Tilting-
Pad Journal Bearing”. STLE Tribology Trans., 47, pp. 440–
458.
[12] Santos, I. F., 1993. “Aktive Kippsegmentlagerung – The-
orie und Experiment, (trans: Active Tilting-Pad Journal
Bearings – Theory & Experiment)”. VDI – Fortschritt -
Berichte, Reihe 11: Schwingungstechnik, Nr. 189, VDI ver-
lag, Germany, p. 112.
[13] Ulbrich, H., and Althaus, J., 1989. “Actuator Design for
Rotor Control”. 12th Biennial ASME Conference on Vibra-
tion and Noise, Montreal, Canada, Sept.,, pp. 17–21.
[14] Cai, Z., de Queiroz, M. S., and Khonsari, M. M., 2004. “On
the Active Stabilization of Tilting-Pad Journal Bearings”.
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 273, pp. 421–428.
[15] Krodkiewski, J. M., and Sun, L., 1998.
“Modelling of
Multi-Bearing Rotor System Incorporating an Active Jour-
nal Bearing”.
Journal of Sound and Vibration,
210(1),
pp. 215–229.
[16] Sun, L., Krodkiewski, J. M., and Cen, Y., 1998.
“Self-
Tuning Adaptive Control of Forced Vibration in Rotor Sys-
tems Using an Active Journal Bearing”. Journal of Sound
and Vibration, 213(1), pp. 1–14.
[17] Sun, L., and Krodkiewski, J. M., 2000.
“Experimental
Investigation of Dynamic Properties of an Active Jour-
nal Bearing”.
Journal of Sound and Vibration,
230(1),
pp. 1103–1117.
[18] Osman, T. A., Nada, G. S., and Safar, Z. S., 2001. “Static
and Dynamic Characteristics of Magnetised Journal Bear-
ings Lubricated with Ferrofluid”. Tribology International,
34(6), pp. 369–380.
[19] Nikolajsen, J. L., and Hoque, M. S., 1988. “An Electrovis-
cous Damper”. Proceedings of Workshop on Rotordynamic
Instability Problems in High Performance Turbomachinery,
NASA Conference Publication, #3026.
[20] Goodwin, M. J., Boroomand, T., and Hooke, C. J., 1989.
“Variable Impedance Hydrodynamic Journal Bearings for
Controlling Flexible Rotor Vibrations”.
12th Biennial
ASME Conference on Vibration and Noise, pp. 261–267.
[21] Santos, I. F., and Scalabrin, A., 2003.
“Control System
Design for Active Lubrication with Theoretical and Exper-
imental Examples”. Journal of Engineering for Gas Tur-
bines and Power, ASME Trans.,, 125(1), pp. 75–80.
[22] Haugaard, M. A., and Santos, I. F., 2010. “Elastohydro-
dynamics Applied to Active Tilting-Pad Journal Bearings”.
ASME Trans., Journal of Tribology, 132(2). 021702-1 to
021702-10.
[23] Theisen, L. R., Niemann, H. H., Santos, I. F., Galeazzi, R.,
and Blanke, M., 2016. “Modelling and identiﬁcation for
control of gas bearings”. Mechanical Systems and Signal
Processing, 7071, pp. 1150 – 1170.
[24] Varela, A. C., and Santos, I. F., 2012. “Stability Analysis
of an Industrial Gas Compressor Supported by Tilting-Pad
Bearings Under Different Lubrication Regimes”. Journal
of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power, ASME Trans.,,
134(2).
[25] Santos, I. F., Nicoletti, R., and Scalabrin, A., 2004. “Feasi-
bility of Applying Active Lubrication to Reduce Vibration
in Industrial Compressors”. ASME Trans., Journal of Engi-
neering for Gas Turbine and Power, 126(4), pp. 888–894.
[26] Santos, I. F., 1996. “Theoretical and Experimental Identiﬁ-
cation on the Stiffness and Damping Coefﬁcients of Active-
Tilting Pad Journal Bearings”. Identiﬁcation in Engineer-
ing Systems, M. Friswell and J. Mottershead, eds. The
Cromwell Press Ltd., Swansea, Great Britain, pp. 325–334.
[27] Santos, I. F., and Watanabe, F. Y., 2004. “Compensation
of Cross-Coupling Stiffness and Increase of Direct Damp-
10
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:118==
ing in Multirecess Journal Bearings Using Active Hybrid
Lubrication - Part i: Theory”. ASME Trans. Journal of Tri-
bology, 126(1), pp. 146–155.
[28] Santos, I. F., and Nicoletti, R., 1999. “THD Analysis in
Tilting-Pad Journal Bearings using Multiple oriﬁce Hybrid
Lubrication”. Journal of Tribology, ASME Trans.,, 121,
pp. 892–900.
[29] Santos, I. F., and Nicoletti, R., 2001. “Inﬂuence of Ori-
ﬁce Distribution on the Thermal and Static Properties of
Hybridly Lubricated Bearings”. International Journal of
Solids and Structures,, 38, pp. 2069–2081.
[30] Varela, A. C., and Santos, I. F., 2012. “Performance Im-
provement of Tilting-Pad Journal Bearings by means of
Controllable Lubrication”. Mechanics and Industry, 13,
pp. 17–32.
[31] Varela, A. C., and Santos, I. F., 2013. “Steady State Charac-
teristics of a Tilting-Pad Journal Bearing with Controllable
Lubrication: Comparison between Theoretical and Experi-
mental Results”. Tribology International, 58, pp. 85–97.
[32] Ulbrich, H., 1988.
“New Test Techniques using Active
Magnetic Bearings”. Proceedings of the First International
Symposium on Magnetic Bearings.
[33] G¨ahler, C., and F¨orch, P., 1994. “A Precise Magnetic Bear-
ing Exciter for Rotordynamic Experiments”. Proceedings
of the Fourth International Symposium on Magnetic Bear-
ings.
[34] G¨ahler, C., 1998. “Rotor Dynamic Testing and Control with
Active Magnetic Bearings”. PhD Thesis, ETH Z¨urich.
[35] Aenis, M., Knoph, E., and Nordmann, R., 2002. “Active
Magnetic Bearings for the Identiﬁcation and Fault Diagno-
sis in Turbomachinery”. Mechatronics, 12(8), pp. 1011–
1021.
[36] Marshall, J. T., Kasarda, M. E. F., and Imlach, J., 2003. “A
Multipoint Measurement Technique for the Enhancement
of Force Measurement With Active Magnetic Bearings”.
ASME Trans., Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbine and
Power, 125(1).
[37] Santos, I. F., and Varela, A. C., 2013. “Actively-Lubricated
Bearings Applied as Calibrated Shakers to Aid Parame-
ter Identiﬁcation in Rotor Dynamics”. IGTI/ASME Turbo
Expo, pp. 1–10. paper GT2013-95674.
[38] Varela, A. C., and Santos, I. F., 2014. “Tilting-Pad Jour-
nal Bearings with Active Lubrication Applied as Cali-
brated Shakers: Theory and Experiment”.
ASME Jour-
nal of Vibration and Accoustics, 136(6). 061010, DOIs:
10.1115/1.4028452.
[39] Sichani, M. T., and Mahjoob, M. J., 2007. “Operational
modal analysis applied to a horizontal washing machine: A
comparative approach”. presented at International Opera-
tional Modal Analysis Conference (IOMAC), Copenhagen,
Denmark.
[40] Carden, P. E., and Lindblad, M., 2014.
“Operational
Modal Analysis of Torsional Modes in Rotating Machin-
ery”. ASME Turbo Expo 2014: Turbine Technical Confer-
ence and Exposition, p. 9. GT2014-26305.
[41] Carden, P. E., and Morosi, S., 2014. “Operational Modal
Analysis of Lateral Rotordynamic Modes of Rotating Ma-
chinery”. ASME Turbo Expo 2014: Turbine Technical Con-
ference and Exposition, p. 10. GT2014-26308.
[42] Ewins, D. J. Modal Testing: Theory, Practice and Applica-
tion. Wiley.
[43] Ibrahim, S. R., and Mikulcik, E. C., 1977. “A method for
the direct identiﬁcation of vibration parameters from the
free response”. The Shock and Vibration Inform. Ctr. Shock
and Vibration Bull. Part. 4, pp. 183–198.
[44] Juang, J.-N., and Pappa, R. S., 1985. “An eigensystem re-
alization algorithm for modal parameter identiﬁcation and
model reduction”. Journal of guidance, control, and dy-
namics, 8(5), pp. 620–627.
[45] van Overschee, P., and de Moor, B., 1996. Subspace identi-
ﬁcation for linear systems. Theory, implementation, appli-
cations. Kluwer.
[46] Brincker, R., Zhang, L., and Andersen, P., 2000. “Modal
Identiﬁcation from Ambient Responses Using Frequency
Domain Decomposition”. Proceedings of Spie.
[47] SAS Institute Inc., 2015.
SAS/STAT software, ver-
sion 12.1.0.
[48] Salazar, J. G., and Santos, I. F., 2015.
“Feedback-
Controlled Lubrication for Reducing the Lateral Vibra-
tion of Flexible Rotors Supported by Tilting-Pad Jour-
nal Bearings”.
Journal of Engineering Tribology, Proc
IMechE Part J,
229(10),
pp. 1264–1275.
DOI:
10.1177/1350650115577027.
11
Copyright c⃝2016 by ASME
==PAGE:119==
B-13
B
Experimental Modal Analysis
Experimental modal analysis (EMA) can be applied when the input forces and
output response are known, it is a very eﬀective and robust technique but requires
knowledge about the input forces. Both time and frequency domain techniques
exist in EMA. The frequency domain techniques treat the frequency response
function (FRF), which is utilised in this project. The FRF can be derived from
the equation of motion for a linear system. For a SDOF system the equation of
motion is
m¨y + c ˙y + ky = x
(69)
where x is the input and y the response. If a steady harmonic is applied as input the
solution of the equation is a harmonic with same frequency, however, phase shifted
and with diﬀerent amplitude, if damping exist. This yields for a steady-state case,
eq.(69) becomes independent of time and only dependent of frequency [34, p. 19]
[−(2πf)2m + i2πfc + k]Y = X
(70)
The FRF can then be deﬁned as the output over the input
H(f) = Y (f)
X(f) =
1
−(2πf)2m + i2πfc + k
(71)
where H(f) is the FRF. The FRF presented in eq.(71) has input force in Newton
(N) and response measured in displacement (m). If the response is in acceleration
(which is common), the numerator changes to −ω2, and iω if the response is
measured in velocity, which is not so common. By having a measured real input
force and the system response in time, the FRF can in a straightforward manner
be obtained by calculating the Fourier transform of these two signals and dividing
them.
Another approach of estimating the FRF is to use the correlation functions and
spectral densities which as discussed earlier contains the same information about
the signal. The system response can be obtained as a convolution integral between
the unit impulse response function and the input force:
y(t) =
Z ∞
0
h(τ)x(t −τ)dτ
(72)
The input and output autocorrelation function is deﬁned as:
y(t)y(t + τ) = Ryy(τ) =
Z ∞
0
Z ∞
0
h(ξ)h(η)Rxx(τ + ξ −η)dξdη
(73)
==PAGE:120==
B-14
B
EXPERIMENTAL MODAL ANALYSIS
Using the derived relation between the correlation function and spectral density
eq.(18) the Fourier transform becomes
Syy(f) = |H(f)|2Sxx(f)
(74)
which is normally referred to as the input / output autospectrum relation [34,
p. 80]. It is noted that eq. (74) is a real-valued FRF i.e. only the magnitude of the
FRF is obtained. The phase can be obtained by calculating the input and output
cross-correlation function:
x(t)y(t + τ) = Rxy(τ) =
Z ∞
0
h(ξ)Rxx(τ −ξ)dξ
(75)
Which in the frequency domain becomes:
Sxy(f) = H1(f)Sxx(f) ⇒H1(f) = Sxy(f)
Sxx(f)
(76)
The convolution stated in eq. (75) can be rearranged and the second input / output
cross-spectrum relation can be obtained as:
Sxx(f) = H2(f)Syx(f) ⇒H2(f) = Sxx(f)
Syx(f)
(77)
The two FRFs, H1(f) and H2(f) have diﬀerent characteristics. H1(f) is the best
estimate at anti-resonance and H2(f) is the best estimate at resonance. For a real
valued time signal eq.(76) and eq.(76) becomes complex and can be used to obtain
the magnitude and phase plot. The cross-spectrum inequality [34, p. 53] i.e. the
diﬀerent between input and output is deﬁned as
|Sxy(f)|2 ≤Sxx(f)Syy(f)
(78)
which base the foundation for the coherence given as
γ2(f) =
|Sxy(f)|2
Sxx(f)Syy(f)
(79)
The coherence is a measure of the level of noise in the signal. A coherence
close to 1 is preferred. The coherence is one of the features of employing EMA
in contrast to OMA, where there is no input information.
It is generally, not
recommended to calculate the coherence between two output signals, since they
can be completely uncorrelated depending on the mode shape and location of the
sensors. When obtaining the FRF there are some processing parameters commonly
available, these are: the selected type of window, i.e. Hanning, Hamming, ect., the
block size used for averaging and amount of overlap. The inﬂuence of averaging
==PAGE:121==
B-15
can be seen in Figure B.1. where the rigid rotor-lever system is analysed. The
static load is 1400 N, the angular velocity is 300 rpm (5 Hz), the measurement
length is 200 s, and a sampling frequency of 2000 Hz is utilised. A measurement
length of 200 s with a sampling frequency of 2000 Hz results in a complete sample
size of 400000 points. Without any averaging, much noise is observed in the FRF,
as the block size decreases more averages can be made and a more smooth FRF
is obtained. This analysis was performed with an overlap of 50% and a Hanning
window. The window force each block in time to become zero at the ends. A
similar analysis can be performed on the eﬀect of the diﬀerent kinds of window
and the amount of overlap used. In this project, the FRF was generally obtained
with a Hanning window, 50% of overlap and a block size of 212. A result using a
block size of 212 is presented in the lowest plot in Figure B.1
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.5
1
1.5
2 ·10−7
|H(F)|
No averaging
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.5
1
1.5
2 ·10−7
|H(F)|
Block size:262144
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.5
1
1.5
2 ·10−7
|H(F)|
Block size:32768
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
0.5
1
1.5
2 ·10−7
Frequency (Hz)
|H(F)|
Block size:4096
Figure B.1: Inﬂuence of averaging on the FRF. Static load: 1400 N.
Angular
velocity: 5 Hz.
==PAGE:122==
B-16
B
EXPERIMENTAL MODAL ANALYSIS
When the FRF is calculated, and the needed processing is performed, a ﬁt to
the FRF needs to be made for estimating the modal parameters of the system.
There exist diﬀerent techniques for creating the ﬁt, both in the time and in the
frequency domain [38]. One of the frequency domain techniques is the half-power-
point bandwidth, presented in Section 7.2, eq.(55). Another frequency domain
approach is the simple SDOF least square technique, utilised in this project.
The FRF can be separated into a real part and an imaginary part. The real
part contains the modal mass and stiﬀness, and the imaginary part contains the
damping. By selecting a band around the resonance peak, a least squares ﬁt can
be implemented as
A
z
}|
{


−ω2
1
1
−ω2
2
1
...
...
−ω2
N
1


x
z }| {
(m
k
)
=
b
z
}|
{



















ℜ( −ω2
1
H(ω1))
ℜ( −ω2
2
H(ω2))
...
ℜ(
−ω2
N
H(ωN))



















(80)
A
z
}|
{


−ω2
1
−ω2
2
...
−ω2
N


x
z}|{
n
c
o
=
b
z
}|
{



















ℑ( −ω2
1
H(ω1))
ℑ( −ω2
2
H(ω2))
...
ℑ(
−ω2
N
H(ωN))



















(81)
where N is the number of spectral lines around the resonance peak. Both eq.(80)
and eq.(81) can be solved using least squares:
x = (ATA)−1ATb
(82)
This will give the modal mass, stiﬀness and damping, which can then be trans-
formed into natural frequency and damping ratio as:
ωn =
s
k
m,
ζ =
c
2
√
mk
(83)
The mode shapes can be obtained if multiple sensors are located on the struc-
ture. At each natural frequency the ampliﬁcation of the imaginary part of the
FRF obtained for each signal, can the read. The ampliﬁcation of the imaginary
part can be used as an estimate of the mode shape [39] .
==PAGE:123==
C-17
C
ALB Excitation Bandwidth
Due to the hydraulic response function, the excitation bandwidth of the active
lubricated bearing is limited. In this section the frequency bandwidth where the
bearing is capable of properly exciting the rotor lever system is analysed. The
electromagnetic shaker is used as a benchmark for the analysis.
In order to excite the rotor-lever system a chirp function is send to the elec-
tromagnetic shaker, exciting the system in the frequency range 30 - 300 Hz. The
results are presented in Figure C.1a, which is showing the FRF, phase and co-
herence plot. The results are presented in the frequency range 10 - 350 Hz, i.e.
a larger range than the system is excited in. By inspecting the coherence plot a
coherence close to one is observed in the excited frequency range (30 - 300 Hz).
The coherence is observed to decrease signiﬁcantly when going below 30 Hz and
above 300 Hz. Another test is performed using the active lubricated bearing as
a perturbation force. A chirp function is send to the servovalve, resulting in a
perturbation of the system due to the injected high pressurised oil. A signal in
the frequency range 30 - 300 Hz is send to the active lubricated bearing. The res-
ults are presented in Figure C.1b showing the FRF, phase and coherence. Even
though the same signal is send to the ALB i.e. the same frequency band, the
coherence is observed to decrease before the 300 Hz. Up until 200 Hz a reasonable
coherence is obtained, however, as the frequency of excitation is further increased
a signiﬁcant drop in coherence is observed. This drop is caused by the hydraulic
transfer function, which deﬁnes the frequency range of excitation. By increasing
the supply pressure the hydraulic transfer function becomes more aggressive. As
a consequence, the drop in coherence can be moved further up in frequency. This
experiment was performed with a supply pressure of 25 bar. The disadvantages of
a high supply pressure is that one more easily alters the hydrodynamic lubrication.
The natural frequency of interest is at 130 Hz for the rigid rotor-lever system, at
this frequency the ALB obtains good coherence.
==PAGE:124==
C-18
C
ALB EXCITATION BANDWIDTH
30
85
138
192
246
300 350
0
0.5
1
1.5 ·10−7
|H(F)| (m/N)
30
85
138
192
246
300 350
−200
−100
0
100
200
Phase ◦
30
85
138
192
246
300 350
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(a) Electromagnetic shaker
30
85
138
192
246
300 350
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1 ·10−6
|H(F)| (m/bar)
30
85
138
192
246
300 350
−200
−100
0
100
200
Phase ◦
30
85
138
192
246
300 350
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency (Hz)
γ2
(b) Active lubricated bearing
Figure C.1: Magnitude, phase and coherence plot, showing the ALB excitation
bandwidth.
The system is excited in the frequency band: 30 - 300 Hz.
The
coherence for the ALB excited system drops around 200 Hz
==PAGE:125==
D-19
D
Numerical Analysis – Appendix
The performance of the OMA algorithms are numerically analysed in this section.
The estimations of the natural frequencies and the damping ratios are analysed
for ﬁve diﬀerent cases. All analysis are based on a simulated 2DOF system. The
system and its predeﬁned dynamic parameters are portrayed in Figure 8.1. The
natural frequencies and the damping ratios are also shown in Table 5.
f1
f2
ζ1
ζ2
1 Hz
2 Hz
0.03 [−]
0.04 [−]
Table 5: Dynamic parameters of simulated 2DOF system
The variance and standard deviation increases when the simulation length de-
creases, especially when noise exist. This results in deviation of the estimated
modal parameters. In order to quantify the deviations of the individual algorithms,
are the simulations replicated 100 times. The mean value of the 100 estimates ( ¯fest,
¯ζest) is compared with the predeﬁned modal parameters of the numerical system
(fana, ζana). This is performed in order to obtain the level of error. The percentage
error is calculated according to eq.(67) and eq.(66).
The sampling frequency is set to fs = 8 Hz, except for the study analysing the
inﬂuence of the sampling frequency.
D.1
Inﬂuence of Simulation Length
The correlation function uses the complete signal for estimating each time lag,
consequently, a long measurement of structural response yields better estimates
of the correlation function and spectral density function. The simulation length
is equivalent to the measured structural response. The inﬂuence of the simulation
length is analysed and the error of the estimated modal parameters is presented
in Figure D.1.
The error of natural frequency and damping ratio estimates drops signiﬁcantly
as the sample size increases. The errors in natural frequency estimates is below
1% already with a sample size of N = 210, with the used sampling frequency
this equals a simulation length of t = 128 s. The error drops below 0.2% with
N = 216, (t = 8192 s).
The errors in damping ratio estimates is signiﬁcantly
larger than natural frequency estimates.
At N = 210 the errors is above 10%
for all algorithms, however a clear convergence tendency can be observed as the
simulation length is increased. Errors below 5% is obtained at N = 216.
The experimental modal analysis estimations using the least squares approach
shows very robust with regards to sample size. The form of the frequency response
==PAGE:126==
D-20
D
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS – APPENDIX
function is relatively constant as a function of sample size, thus the estimated
modal parameters is relatively constant. With few samples the individual devi-
ations of simulated response has a relatively high inﬂuence on the mean value thus
also on the correlation function consequently the standard deviations between
the individual estimates are seen to decrease as the sample size increases. The
utilised frequency bandwidth for the frequency domain decomposition technique
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the the damping estimates, (also when compared to the
other processing parameters of the algorithm). If a smaller bandwidth is utilised
the technique gives a too small damping estimate, contrary, if a too large band
is applied the damping estimate can become to large. In general the bandwidth
is signiﬁcantly larger than the bandwidth applied for the least squares ﬁt of the
frequency response function.
==PAGE:127==
D.1
Inﬂuence of Simulation Length
D-21
210
213
216
218
220
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
N
Error - Natural frequency (%)
(a) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f1).
210
213
216
218
220
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
N
Error - Natural frequency (%)
ITD
SSI
FDD
EMA
(b) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f2).
210
213
216
218
220
0
10
20
30
N
Error - Damping (%)
(c) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ1).
210
213
216
218
220
0
10
20
30
N
Error - Damping (%)
(d) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ2).
Figure D.1: Error of modal parameter estimates as a function of simulation length.
– The modal parameters shows clear convergence as the sample size increases. The
errors of the natural frequency estimates are signiﬁcantly lower than the damping
estimates. Errors of natural frequency estimates is below 0.2% with a sample size
of N = 1016. Damping ratio estimates is below 5% with a sample size of N = 1016.
==PAGE:128==
D-22
D
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS – APPENDIX
D.2
Inﬂuence of Sampling Frequency
For avoiding aliasing the sampling theorem has to be respected, this yields the
sampling frequency needs to be twice the maximum analysed frequency component
in the signal, commonly referred to as Nyquist frequency. The upper limit for the
sampling frequency is deﬁned by the user or the equipment available.
Deﬁning the measuring period as.
T = N∆t
(84)
where ∆t is the sampling interval and the sampling frequency as.
fs = 1/∆t
(85)
The resolution in the frequency domain can then be deﬁned as.
∆f = 1
T =
1
N∆t = fs
N
(86)
The resolution in the frequency domain depends on the amount of samples
as well as the sampling frequency. With a ﬁxed sample size (N) available by in-
creasing the sampling frequency the resolution in the frequency domain decreases,
consequently less physical information is obtained. This can also be seen in the
errors of estimated modal parameters presented in Figure D.2. The sample size is
N = 218. Until a sampling frequency of 32 Hz, the estimated modal parameters
is reasonable however as the sampling frequency is further increased, the errors is
seen to increase signiﬁcantly. Especially the Ibrahim time domain technique and
the frequency domain decomposition technique suﬀer when the sampling frequency
becomes high. The stochastic subspace identiﬁcation algorithm is relatively stable
and gives generally good estimates also for high sampling frequencies. If the com-
plete sampling period is constant an increase in sampling frequency results in an
increase of data. This analysis shows that an unnecessary high sampling frequency
is not an advantage, especially because one would like to have long structural meas-
urements.
==PAGE:129==
D.2
Inﬂuence of Sampling Frequency
D-23
8
16
32
64
128
0
10
20
30
40
50
fs (Hz)
Error - Natural frequency (%)
ITD
SSI
FDD
EMA
(a) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f1).
8
16
32
64
128
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
fs (Hz)
Error - Natural frequency (%)
(b) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f2).
8
16
32
64
128
0
50
100
150
fs (Hz)
Error - Damping (%)
(c) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ1).
8
16
32
64
128
0
10
20
30
40
50
fs (Hz)
Error - Damping (%)
(d) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ2).
Figure D.2: Error of modal parameter estimates as a function of sampling fre-
quency. – The errors increases as the sampling frequency increases with a constant
sample size of N = 1018. Especially the Ibrahim time domain and the frequency
domain decomposition techniques are inﬂuenced by the increase in sampling fre-
quency.
==PAGE:130==
D-24
D
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS – APPENDIX
D.3
Estimation Performance Using a Harmonic Sweep
A harmonic sweep in the frequency band of interest is commonly applied when
using the electromagnetic shaker as excitation force, and the frequency response
function for modal parameter identiﬁcation. The harmonic sweep can for some
tests be an eﬀective way of exciting the system however, the excitation force is not
random and the assumption of the force being random is therefore violated.
The response of the system excited by a Chirp function can be seen plotted
on Figure D.3, it is noted that the response is not time invariant. The sweep is
running from fmin = 0 Hz to fmax = 4 Hz, over a period of 200 s, it is a linear
Chirp function. Ampliﬁcations are seen around 50 s, where the harmonic sweep
reaches the ﬁrst natural frequency and again at 100 s where it reaches the second
natural frequency.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
time (s)
Amplitude
y1
y2
Figure D.3: System response of 2DOF system using a harmonic sweep function as
excitation force. – The response is not random and is time variant, two ampliﬁc-
ations are seen in time, one at 50 s and one at 100 s.
The errors of estimated modal parameters is presented in Figure D.4. It is
interesting to see how well the OMA algorithms handles the case of non Gaussian
excitation.
Regarding the time domain techniques a very low level of error is obtained
already with few samples. At N = 210 the errors for the natural frequencies is
below 0.2% and below 3% for the damping ratios estimates. The same system
excited by the random excitation force requires N = 218 samples to obtain same
level of errors for the natural natural frequency and damping ratio.
The frequency domain decomposition technique have converged at a simulation
length of N = 216.
The errors is in general on the same level as the random
==PAGE:131==
D.3
Estimation Performance Using a Harmonic Sweep
D-25
excitation case.
This numerical study using a Chirp function as excitation force indicate that
even though the Chirp function is not Gaussian distributed, it is still applicable
as an excitation force also for the OMA identiﬁcation techniques. Additionally it
is noted that the algorithms seems to converge faster as a function of simulation
length. In the case of random excitation white noise is also limited to a frequency
band. If this band is much larger than the frequency band of interest it is normally
referred to as white. In the case of a Chirp excitation force the spectrum of the
force in the excited band also tends to become white thus the frequencies of interest
are evenly excited. The idea of a Chirp excitation force is however, often limited
to a controlled environment and the possibility of applying the force.
==PAGE:132==
D-26
D
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS – APPENDIX
210
213
216
218
220
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
N
Error - Natural frequency (%)
(a) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f1).
210
213
216
218
220
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
N
Error - Natural frequency (%)
ITD
SSI
FDD
EMA
(b) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f2).
210
213
216
218
220
0
10
20
30
N
Error - Damping (%)
(c) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ1).
210
213
216
218
220
0
5
10
15
20
N
Error - Damping (%)
(d) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ2).
Figure D.4: Error of modal parameter estimates as a function of simulation length
with a harmonic sweep excitation force.
– Time domain techniques estimates
modal parameters very precise also with a small simulation length, the the FDD
is more aﬀected by a short simulation length. Errors do not exceed the random
excitation case.
==PAGE:133==
D.4
Inﬂuence of Signal Noise
D-27
D.4
Inﬂuence of Signal Noise
Noise is always present when conducting measurements on a physical structure.
The noise can originate from the surroundings of the tested structure and the
utilised equipment. Numerically it is tested how the algorithms performed when
noise is added to the simulated response. In this test case the power of the noise
is set to 4% of the power of the system response.
The estimation errors of the modal parameters are presented in Figure D.5. The
errors for all algorithms are seen to converged for both the natural frequencies and
damping ratios.
The convergence tendency and level of error in the natural frequency estimates
are very similar to the on without any noise. The FDD algorithm convergence to
a slightly higher level of error for the second natural frequency.
The convergence tendency and level of error in the damping ratio estimates
are also very similar to the one without any noise. The FDD technique converges,
however, the second damping ratio reaches a slightly higher levels of error. The
frequency bandwidth utilised for this noise case is reduced with 1 Hz i.e. a band-
width of 0.5 Hz is used for the ﬁt at 1 Hz and a bandwidth of 1 Hz is used for the
ﬁt at 2 Hz. If a larger band is included the error increases for the second damping
ratio, it converged, however, to around 20% of error.
==PAGE:134==
D-28
D
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS – APPENDIX
210
213
216
218
220
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
N
Error - Natural frequency (%)
ITD
SSI
FDD
EMA
(a) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f1).
210
213
216
218
220
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
N
Error - Natural frequency (%)
ITD
SSI
FDD
EMA
(b) Error in natural freuqnecy estimate
(f2).
210
213
216
218
220
0
10
20
30
N
Error - Damping (%)
(c) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ1).
210
213
216
218
220
0
10
20
30
N
Error - Damping (%)
(d) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ2).
Figure D.5: Error of modal parameter estimates as a function of simulation length
with added noise.– The convergence tendency and amplitude of error is similar to
the one where no noise is added. Slightly higher levels of error are obtained for
the frequency domain decomposition at the second natural frequency and damping
ratio.
==PAGE:135==
D.5
Inﬂuence of Harmonic Forces
D-29
D.5
Inﬂuence of Harmonic Forces
In this study a single harmonic force is applied to the system and the frequency is
continuously decreased from Ω= 3.8 Hz to Ω= 2.1 Hz thus the band between the
harmonic component and the second natural frequency is decreasing. The power
of the harmonic force is 50% of the input force which is random and a simulation
length of N = 218 is applied for all the analysis; the results of the analysis is
presented in Figure D.6.
The ﬁrst natural frequency and damping ratio are close to unchanged and small
levels of errors are obtained because of the long simulation length. The errors of
the second natural frequency estimates are however, aﬀected by the harmonic force
especially when it becomes very close to the second natural frequency.
The frequency domain decomposition technique obtains largest error of both
the second natural frequency and damping ratio estimates.
The error can be
decreased by minimising the used frequency band. A small frequency band however
results in a to small damping estimate also when the frequency of the harmonic
force is far away from the analysed natural frequency. The stochastic subspace
identiﬁcation algorithm is also aﬀected by the harmonic component in the signal,
especially when the harmonic frequency becomes very close. It is important to
select at least three retuned modes from the algorithm, if only two is returned the
second estimated mode is containing also the contribute from the harmonic force.
==PAGE:136==
D-30
D
NUMERICAL ANALYSIS – APPENDIX
3.80 2.90 2.60 2.40 2.10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ω(Hz)
Error - Natural frequency (%)
(a) Error in natrual freuqnecy estimate
(f1).
3.80 2.90 2.60 2.40 2.10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Ω(Hz)
Error - Natural frequency (%)
ITD
SSI
FDD
EMA
(b) Error in natrual freuqnecy estimate
(f2).
3.80 2.90 2.60 2.40 2.10
0.5
1
1.5
2
Ω(Hz)
Error - Damping (%)
(c) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ1).
3.80 2.90 2.60 2.40 2.10
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ω(Hz)
Error - Damping (%)
(d) Error in damping ratio estimate (ζ1).
Figure D.6: Error of modal parameter estimates as a function of closeness of
disturbing harmonic components in the signal
==PAGE:137==
E-31
E
OMA – Experimental Parameter Analysis
This section focuses on studying the inﬂuence of: Filtering the signal, oversizing
the model, correlation function time lags, application of window and frequency
bandwidth used for the FDD technique. These parameters should be adjusted
according to the analysed system at hand consequently, is the analysis based on
the experimental data from the test rig.
E.1
ITD – Experimental Parameter Study
In this section following parameters is studied: Inﬂuence of model oversizing, in-
ﬂuence of ﬁltering, inﬂuence of amount of time lags, inﬂuence of window type.
Errors is based on the average estimate of the four algorithms after a similar
convergence study was performed, more speciﬁcally the average of the estimates
seen in Figure 10.6c and Figure 10.6d for the natural frequency and damping ratio
respectively. Load case ii) i.e. a static load of 1400 N is utilised and the whole
range from 0-80 Hz (4,800 rpm) is analysed.
The ﬁrst analysis aim at analysis the level of errors obtained without the signal
ﬁltered, and to see if a simple oversizing is suﬃcient for dealing with the strong
harmonic forces and general noise. With a 95% ﬂattop triangular window (close
to no window, only active at the last 5% of the correlation function), errors in
estimates of natural frequency and damping ratios can be seen in Figure E.1.
With only one displacement sensor the algorithm have no oversizing and maximum
errors in natural frequency estimates of 65% and damping ratio estimates of 58% is
obtained at 300 time lags. Increasing the input to one displacement sensor and one
accelerometer i.e. an oversizing of one is obtained, because the SDOF system is
analysed thus one would like to estimate one mode, the error decreases to 23% and
45% for fn and ζn, respectively. Increasing the input to one displacement sensor
and two accelerometers an oversizing of two is obtained, and the error decreases
even further to 7% and 25% for fn and ζn respectively at 300 time lags. This clearly
shows the importance of oversizing. The same tendency of oversizing is seen for
the case where a 30% ﬂattop triangular window is used this yields the window is
active at the last 60% of the correlation function and have a less steep cut. The
analysis using a 30% ﬂattop triangular window is presented in ﬁgure E.2. The most
signiﬁcant changes is to see at low correlation function length, where the error is
signiﬁcantly increased using a more active window, this is because with very few
time lags all the data in the correlation function is valuable and describes the
physics of the structure, by applying the window valuable information is disturbed
and the estimations deteriorates. By oversizing with two i.e. one displacement
sensor and two accelerometers are applied the same level of errors for the natural
==PAGE:138==
E-32
E
OMA – EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER ANALYSIS
frequency and damping ratios are obtained as with the 95% window at 300 time
lags, the more active window gives a more smooth error convergence as expected
because the tail is more properly removed. The small discrepancies between the
two window types shows that a suﬃciently measurement length is obtained and
that the power of the tail is low.
These two convergence studies are performed now with a ﬁltered signal, the
results using the 95% triangular window is presented in Figure E.3.
With no
oversizing i.e.
only the displacement sensor is used as input to the algorithm
errors of 67% and 50% is obtained for fn and ζn respectively, which is very close
to the ones obtained without any ﬁltering, if however and oversizing of one is
applied the error drops to 4% and 36% for fn and ζn respectively. Compared to
the non ﬁltered case for the same amount of oversizing this is an improvement of
the natural frequency estimate of 19% and 9% for the damping ratio estimate. By
oversizing with two the errors is further decreased to 3% and 24% for fn and ζn
respectively. Compared to the ﬁltering case this is an improvement of 4% for the
natural frequency and 1% for the damping ratio. The convergence study using
the 30% ﬂattop triangular window with a ﬁltered signal is also performed and
the results is presented in ﬁgure E.4. The same tendencies and level of errors
is obtained when compared to the 95% window test, except from at very low
correlation function time lags, this is as mentioned related to removal of important
physical information from the correlation function. The inﬂuence of removing the
ﬁrst three time lags of the correlation function are tested and the convergence
study is presented in Figure E.5. There is limited changes when compared to the
case where they are kept (see Figure E.4e and Figure E.4f) slightly smaller errors
is obtained at higher angular velocities for the damping ratio estimates, this is
related to the added noise from the test rig.
1. An oversizing is crucial for good modal parameter estimations also with very
good signal to noise ratio, and a properly ﬁltered signal. For this SDOF sys-
tem an oversizing of two i.e. one displacement sensor and two accelerometers
shows good results.
2. The application of the notch ﬁlter to remove strong harmonic components
helps the algorithm in obtaining especially better estimates the natural fre-
quency.
The ﬁltering of the signal furthermore results in a less sensitive
algorithm as a function of correlation function length. between 300 and 800
lags is reasonable for the analysed bearing.
3. The application of window becomes especially important when few samples
are obtained, and the structure is weakly excited. A more smooth removal
of the tail gives better better estimates of modal parameters and long as
==PAGE:139==
E.1
ITD – Experimental Parameter Study
E-33
important information is not removed. i.e. the correlation function length
should ﬁt the applied window.
==PAGE:140==
E-34
E
OMA – EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER ANALYSIS
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
Signal not ﬁltered, Window = 0.95
(a) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
Signal not ﬁltered, Window = 0.95
(b) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(c) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(d) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(e) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(f) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
Figure E.1: Convergence study of natural frequency (Fig. (a),(c) and (e)), and
damping ratio (Fig. (b),(d) and (f)). Signal not ﬁltered and 95% triangular
window. Red line: Mean value of the 17 modal parameter estimates from 0 -
80 Hz 4,800 rpm.
==PAGE:141==
E.1
ITD – Experimental Parameter Study
E-35
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
Signal not ﬁltered, Window = 0.30
(a) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
Signal not ﬁltered, Window = 0.30
(b) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(c) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(d) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(e) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(f) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
Figure E.2: Convergence study of natural frequency (Fig. (a),(c) and (e)), and
damping ratio (Fig. (b),(d) and (f)). Signal not ﬁltered and 30% triangular
window. Red line: Mean value of the 17 modal parameter estimates from 0 -
80 Hz 4,800 rpm.
==PAGE:142==
E-36
E
OMA – EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER ANALYSIS
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
Signal ﬁltered, Window = 0.95
(a) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
Signal ﬁltered, Window = 0.95
(b) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(c) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(d) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(e) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(f) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
Figure E.3: Convergence study of natural frequency (Fig. (a),(c) and (e)), and
damping ratio (Fig.
(b),(d) and (f)). Filtered signal and 95% triangular
window. Red line: Mean value of the 17 modal parameter estimates from 0 -
80 Hz 4,800 rpm.
==PAGE:143==
E.1
ITD – Experimental Parameter Study
E-37
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
Signal ﬁltered, Window = 0.30
(a) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
Signal ﬁltered, Window = 0.30
(b) 1 displacement sensor
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(c) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(d) 1 disp. + 1 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
(e) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
(f) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
Figure E.4: Convergence study of natural frequency (Fig. (a),(c) and (e)), and
damping ratio (Fig.
(b),(d) and (f)). Filtered signal and 30% triangular
window. Red line: Mean value of the 17 modal parameter estimates from 0 -
80 Hz 4,800 rpm. Blue line: Selected time lag.
==PAGE:144==
E-38
E
OMA – EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER ANALYSIS
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
50
100
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
fn – error (%)
Signal ﬁltered, Window = 0.30
(a) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
0
20
40
60
80
200
400
600
800
1,000
0
100
200
Ω(Hz)
Lags (τ)
ζn – error (%)
Signal ﬁltered, Window = 0.30
(b) 1 disp. + 2 accelerometer
Figure E.5: Convergence study of natural frequency (Fig. (a)), and damping ratio
(Fig. (b)). Filtered signal and 30% triangular window, removal of three
ﬁrst time lags. Red line: Mean value of the 17 modal parameter estimates from
0 - 80 Hz 4,800 rpm.
==PAGE:145==
E.2
FDD – Experimental Parameter Study
E-39
E.2
FDD – Experimental Parameter Study
In this section following parameters is studied: Inﬂuence of ﬁltering, inﬂuence of
amount of time lags, inﬂuence of frequency band used for the ﬁt.
Errors is based on the average estimate of the four algorithms after a similar
convergence study was performed, more speciﬁcally the average of the estimates
seen in Figure 10.6c and Figure 10.6d for the natural frequency and damping ratio
respectively. Load case ii) i.e. a static load of 1400 N is utilised and the whole
range from 0-80 Hz (4,800 rpm) is analysed.
The ﬁrst analysis aim at analysing the level of errors obtained without the signal
ﬁltered, The convergence study can be seen in Figure E.6 showing the errors of the
natural frequency and damping ratio estimates. The errors in natural frequency
estimate is relatively constant as a function of frequency band used for the ﬁt,
however as the angular velocity of the rotor increases and a larger band is used,
an increase in error is seen, this is because the larger band begins to include
the harmonic component in the signal. The damping ratio estimate is strongly
inﬂuence by the frequency bandwidth used used for the ﬁt. A band of 150 Hz is
needed for obtaining reasonable estimates, this yields 75 Hz on each side of the
natural frequency is used. This large frequency band however gives large errors in
natural frequency estimate because of the unﬁltered response. The utilised time
lag i.e. the correlation function length used from the Fourier transformed spectral
density function shows that convergence have been obtained already with 100 time
lags, and one needs to decrease the amount of time lags signiﬁcantly if changes
should be seen in Figure E.6a and Figure E.6b a time lag of 10 is used this yields
only 10 points is used for the ﬁt, and reasonable estimates are obtained if the
frequency band used is between 150 and 200 Hz.
Similar analysis is performed now the signal is ﬁltered using the notch ﬁlter.
The results are presented in Figure E.7. A much more smooth convergence is
seen for the ﬁltered signal. Even for a large frequency band the natural frequency
estimate is good, this it because the harmonic components do no longer exist in
the signal. The damping ratio is seen to smoothly decay and low errors of damping
ratio estimates is obtained with a frequency band around 150 Hz and larger. A
little later damping convergence is seen when the used correlation function length
becomes very small.
From this study following can be concluded:
1. The large amount of damping in the bearing i.e. damping ratios between
0.06 to 0.15 yields a challenge for the FDD technique. The large amount
of damping results in a large frequency bandwidth needed for reasonable
damping estimates. This sets high requirements to a clear signal without
noise and harmonic components.
==PAGE:146==
E-40
E
OMA – EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER ANALYSIS
2. The frequency bandwidth used for the ﬁt is by far the most dominant para-
meter when compared to the correlation function length and reasonable es-
timates of especially damping is obtained with a band larger than 150 Hz i.e.
75 Hz on both sides of the natural frequency.
3. If a clean signal is obtained good estimates can be obtained with a frequency
band of 150 Hz and a correlation function length of 100.
==PAGE:147==
E.2
FDD – Experimental Parameter Study
E-41
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0
10
20
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
fn – error (%)
(a) ITD – Lags = 10
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0.00
50.00
100.00
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
ζn – error (%)
(b) ITD – Lags = 10
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0
10
20
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
fn – error (%)
(c) ITD – Lags = 100
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0.00
50.00
100.00
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
ζn – error (%)
(d) ITD – Lags = 100
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0
10
20
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
fn – error (%)
(e) ITD – Lags = 150
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0.00
50.00
100.00
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
ζn – error (%)
(f) ITD – Lags = 150
Figure E.6: Convergence study of natural frequency (Fig. (a), (c) and (e)), and
damping ratio (Fig. (b), (d) and (f)). Signal is not ﬁltered. Red line: Mean
value of the 17 modal parameter estimates from 0 - 80 Hz 4,800 rpm.
==PAGE:148==
E-42
E
OMA – EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETER ANALYSIS
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0
10
20
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
fn – error (%)
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0.00
50.00
100.00
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
ζn – error (%)
(b)
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0
10
20
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
fn – error (%)
(c)
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0.00
50.00
100.00
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
ζn – error (%)
(d)
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0
10
20
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
fn – error (%)
(e)
0
20
40
60
80
50
100
150
200
0.00
50.00
100.00
Ω(Hz)
FDD - width (Hz)
ζn – error (%)
(f)
Figure E.7: Convergence study of natural frequency (Fig. (a), (c) and (e)), and
damping ratio (Fig. (b), (d) and (f)). Filtered signal. Red line: Mean value of
the 17 modal parameter estimates from 0 - 80 Hz 4,800 rpm. Blue line: Selected
frequency bandwidth
==PAGE:149==
==PAGE:150==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 404
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4250
Fax  (+45) 4593 1475
www.mek.dtu.dk
