==PAGE:1==
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pablo Spiegelberg Ramírez (s142517) 
 
 
 
Automation of Honey 
Production 
 
Master’s Thesis, August 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
PABLO SPIEGELBERG RAMÍREZ 
(S142517) 
 
 
 
Automation of Honey Production 
 
 
 
Master’s Thesis, August 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor(s): 
Nils Axel Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering 
Department of DTU  
 
 
 
 
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2015 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
Automation of Honey Production 
 
This report was written by: 
Pablo Spiegelberg Ramírez (s142517) 
 
 
 
Advisor(s): 
Nils Axel Andersen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering 
Department of DTU 
 
 
 
 
DTU Electrical Engineering 
Automation and Control 
Technical University of Denmark 
Elektrovej, Building 326 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Tel: +45 4525 3576 
 
 
 
 
 
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project period: 
February 2011- August 2011 
ECTS: 
30 
 
Education: 
MSc 
 
Field: 
Electrical Engineering 
 
Class: 
Public 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for graduation 
in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark. 
 
Copyrights: 
©Pablo Spiegelberg Ramírez, 2015 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
11 
2 Objectives 
11 
3 Honey and pollen harvesting 
12 
A. 
Hibernation ..................................................................................................................................12 
B. 
The 12 months .............................................................................................................................13 
4 Beekeeping calendar 
14 
A. 
Hibernation ..................................................................................................................................14 
B. 
The 12 months .............................................................................................................................15 
5 Health and bees 
16 
6 Diseases and enemies of the bees 
17 
A. 
Diseases of the brood ...................................................................................................................17 
A.1 Virus diseases  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  17 
A.1.1. Sacbrood virus  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  17 
A.1.2. Black Queen Cell Virus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  18 
A.2   Bacteriosis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  19 
A.2.1. American (malignant) Foulbrood  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  19 
A.2.2. European (benign) Foulbrood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  20 
A.3   Mycosis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      21 
A.3.1. Chalkbrood  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  21 
A.3.2. Stonebrood  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  22 
B. 
Diseases of the adult bees ............................................................................................................22 
B.1 Virus diseases  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  22 
 
B.1.1. 
Chronic paralysis virus (CPV)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  24 
 
B.1.2. 
Acute paralysis virus (APV)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  25 
 
B.1.3. 
Filamentous virus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  26 
 
B.1.4. 
Cloudy wing virus (CWV)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  26 
 
B.1.5. 
Viruses X and Y  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  26 
 
B.1.6. 
Deformed wings virus (DWV)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  27 
 
B.1.7. 
Virus Kashmir 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  27 
B.2   Bacteriosis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  28 
 
B.2.1. 
Blood poisoning  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  28 
B.3   Diseases from protozoans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  28 
 
B.3.1. 
Amebiasis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  28 
B.4   Diseases produced by fungi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  29 
 
B.4.1. 
Nosemosis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  29 
B.5   Diseases produced by arthropods  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  30 
 
B.5.1. 
Varroosis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  30 
 
B.5.2. 
Acarapisosis (acariasis)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  35 
 
B.5.3. 
Bee louse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  36 
 
B.5.4. 
Apimyiasis  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  36 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
C. 
Poisonings ................................................................................................................................... 37 
D. 
Enemies of the bees  ................................................................................................................... 37 
D.1   The Death's-head Hawkmoth  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  37 
D.2   Big wax moth  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  37 
D.3   Minor wax moth 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  38 
D.4   Wasps  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  38 
D.5   The coleopteran Cetonia melicivorus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  38 
E. 
Colony Collapse Disorder (CCD) ............................................................................................... 39 
7 Monitoring systems for bees 
40 
8 Hypothesis and measurements 
41 
A. 
Hypothesis .................................................................................................................................. 41 
B. 
Measurements ............................................................................................................................. 41 
9 Discussion 
44 
10 Future work 
46 
11 Acknowledgements 
48 
 
 
. 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
 
 
List of Figures 
 
 
Figure 1. Capped honey frames (left) vs capped brood frames (right) ............................................ 12 
Figure 2. Pollen trap ......................................................................................................................... 13 
Figure 3. American Foulbrood ......................................................................................................... 20 
Figure 4. Bee with Deformed Wings and varroa mites .................................................................... 27 
Figure 5. Life cycle of the varroa mite ............................................................................................. 32 
Figure 6. Phases in the life cycles of varroa mites ........................................................................... 33 
Figure 7. Big wax moth .................................................................................................................... 38 
Figure 8. Stabilization of brood temperature: screen shot from Arnia graphic user interface ....... 40 
Figure 9. Rune’s beehives ................................................................................................................ 42 
Figure 10. Entrance of the beehive .................................................................................................. 42 
Figure 11. Bottom tray with a couple of slugs  ............................................................................. 43 
Figure 12. Apiscam Beehives ........................................................................................................... 46 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
 
 
List of Tables 
 
 
Table 1. Viruses of the brood of Apis mellifera. ......................................................................................... 17 
Table 2. Virus diseases of the adult bees of Apis mellifera.. ....................................................................... 24 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1&2. INTRODUCTION & OBJECTIVES 
 
11 
 
CHAPTERS  1&2 
 
 
 
Introduction & Objectives 
 
 
 
1. Introduction. 
 
The current situation of the pollinating insects is really serious, due to pesticides and new 
diseases. There are plants that rely on self-pollination or wind-pollination, but the most extended 
pollinating method, cross-pollination, relies on animals - thus called pollinators. 
 
Insects are the most important pollinators, and the honey bees are responsible for 80% of their 
role, meaning more than half of the cross pollination is taken care of by bees.  
 
As a matter of fact, in some countries like Holland, beekeepers rent their hives for the bloom 
season, which last around a month, making the pollination more lucrative for the beekeeper and 
far more beneficial for the plants than the extraction of honey from them. 
 
2. Objectives. 
 
In a first moment, the objective of this thesis was to develop an automated system to extract 
honey from the beehives. 
 
However, after researching the whole process, there was an underlying question: what about 
the rest of the year? 
 
Beekeeping is a very demanding job, even if done as an amateur. However, most of the 
workload is to keep track of the hives in order to make sure there are no issues that require further 
intervention. And so, further intervention is a punctual work. Thus, knowing when the bees don’t 
need to be treated would save a lot of time and work to beekeepers. 
 
That’s why the ultimate objective of this thesis is to be a stepping stone in future research and 
development of a monitoring system for bees. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 3. HONEY AND POLLEN HARVESTING 
 
12 
 
CHAPTER  3 
 
 
 
Honey and pollen harvesting 
 
 
 
A. Honey harvesting. 
For honey harvesting in a frame-based beehive there are several common steps: 
1. Select the frames (figure 1). The best frames are those with no brood - this can be easily 
assured by using a queen excluder, a grid that doesn’t allow the larger size of the queen to 
pass through it to the higher supers (crates of the hive). Also, making sure most cells of the 
frame are capped (closed with a thin layer of wax) is the undeniable proof that the honey 
is mature and ready for consumption. 
2. Brush off bees from the frames using a brush with water or an air blower. 
3. Transport the frames to the extraction point. 
4. Uncap the frames in an uncapping tub. Otherwise the honey will not get out of the cells. 
5. Extract the honey using a centrifugal machine. 
6. Empty the uncapping tub and the extraction machine. This can be done by gravity or using 
a pump. 
7. Filter the honey. After the extraction of the honey, there are many residues in it, 
sometimes even including bees that tried to eat the honey. 
8. Bottle the honey. 
After harvesting the honey, the supers are taken back to the hives so they can “clean” the frames. 
This must be done carefully so we do not give the frames from sick hives to other hives, thus 
spreading diseases. However, if the selection of frames have been well done, this problem should 
be avoided, since weak hives usually have few to none frames with plenty of honey. 
 
 
Figure 1. Capped honey frames (left) vs capped brood frames (right) 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 3. HONEY AND POLLEN HARVESTING 
 
13 
 
B. Pollen harvesting.  
 
Pollen harvesting is done using a pollen trap, a device that retains the grains of pollen 
transported in the hind pair of legs of the worker bees carried in the corbicula, better known as 
pollen baskets. It is made of a plastic gridded sheet bees will pass through, leaving most of their 
pollen in the collecting container of the trap for beekeepers to recollect (figure 2). 
Figure 2. Pollen trap 
 
The grids are constructed in a way that they do not damage the body of the bees going through 
them; metal is not used since there could be sharp edges that would cut the wings or the legs of 
the bees. Also it is important to leave for the entrance a sufficient ventilation to prevent the 
asphyxiation of the bees. After the beekeeper places the pollen trap, the bees diminish the size of 
the balls of pollen instinctively; with this they demonstrate how important the contribution of 
pollen is for the colony. If the grid was retaining the all of the pollen, the bees would not feed the 
brood properly and the colony would soon weaken or even die. 
 
There are several types of pollen traps. According to the position of the grid with regard to the 
beehive they are divided in: 
o Pollen traps, placed with the entry in front of the habitual entrance. 
o Lower pollen traps, installed under the super, instead of the bottom board of the 
beehive. 
o Superior pollen traps, placed instead of the inner cover, or between the cover and 
the super. 
 
The first two are placed in the entrance of the beehive, and the last one needs the entrance 
closed as it is located on the top of the hive and also needs that bees get used to entering through 
the top, thing that happens in a short while. This latter type is adapted to harvest pollen in humid 
places. 
 
Bees need almost as much pollen as they need honey, as it is their main source of protein and 
lipids, also containing vitamins and minerals. That is why we must be careful, especially during 
winter, when they cannot restock neither honey nor pollen. 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 4. BEEKEEPING CALENDAR 
 
14 
 
CHAPTER  4 
 
 
 
Beekeeping calendar 
 
 
 
 
Up until now, we have discussed how to harvest the honey (and the pollen). This covers the day 
or couple of days (depending on whether the beekeeper moves the hives or not) of most amount 
of work when handling honey bees. 
 
However, as stated on the objectives, beekeeping is not summed up to the harvest of the 
honey, but the hives have to survive and thrive as much as possible during the whole year and 
beekeepers need to make sure of that. 
 
To do it, beekeepers try to intervene only as little as possible, since bees can take care of 
themselves most of the time and treatments are  
 
The idea we are trying to implement is to implement a system (probably a wireless sensor 
network or something similar) that notifies the beekeeper something when something is wrong in 
the hives. This way, we will be able to detect the treatment the bees need in a non-invasive way, 
providing a less stressful environment to them and being more effective, since the hives will remain 
untouched unless they need to. 
 
Therefore, the first thing to do is to establish what tasks are needed to be done in order to take 
care of the bees properly during a year, and afterwards categorize them into monitorial and non-
monitorial ones. 
 
This will prove especially useful to amateur beekeepers, since normally they cannot check the 
hives as much as or as properly as professionals. 
However, if the system is proven to be good enough it will be very useful for large-scale 
exploitations.  
 
 
To make sure we understand the tasks a beekeeper has to do to take care of his colonies, we 
need to have a general idea of what happens in a year in an apiary. Of course, depending on the 
species of bees, the size of the colony and its age, the weather, the location and the kind of 
exploitation (migrating or non-migrating), these calendar will need adjustments. It is as well 
important to remember to check and treat the bees against attacks and diseases throughout the 
year and to feed the hives, if necessary, after hibernation and until early blossoms, when they will 
start collecting nectar and pollen and can feed on their own. 
 
A. Hibernation. 
 
First of all, we must know that bees hibernate during winter and how is it: 
 
At the end of fall and the beginning of winter, when there are no flowers to feed from, when 
the temperatures fall and the bad weather arrives, the activity of the hives decreases little by little 
until completely stopping: the queen starts reducing the intensity of the egg-laying and the 
foraging workers (the ones that have worked intensively during summer to provide food to the 
hive, so it has supplies for the winter), start dying since they live less than three months. The 
hibernation of the hive starts around November. 
 
From this moment on, the bees group up in a ball-like form that helps to keep the heat inside 
the hive. The hottest spot, the nest, is located in the middle of the “ball”, with a temperature of 25 
to 32ºC. From there, the heat gets to the outermost bees that can survive this way while the 
external temperatures are below 10ºC, and only when it gets over 12ºC the bees start to move 
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 4. BEEKEEPING CALENDAR 
 
15 
 
again and, if the temperature raise is steadily over, they will take flight. 
 
Beekeepers fear the sudden changes of temperature that can happen during winter. If the 
weather is good and the plants start sprouting, activity inside of the hive begins with the queen’s 
egg-laying. However, a sudden drop of temperature will cause the death of the brood because of 
the inability of keeping the heat in the breeding zones, weakening the hive and slowing down their 
restarting when the good weather comes. That is why it is convenient to have the hives in sunny 
and sheltered places or to protect them with insulating materials. 
 
During wintertime a great quantity of bees dies, both from age and from illnesses or low 
temperatures. Another fundamental element for their survival is having enough reserves of honey 
and pollen. Supplementary food must be provided by the beekeeper in case of scarcity. Also, the 
health situation of the hive must be kept in check, applying the proper treatment if they are 
affected by varroosis or nosemosis. 
 
B. The 12 months. 
 
In January, as the bees are hibernating we must not check on them, just make sure they have 
the entrance free of snow, so they can breathe.  
 
At the end of February, the queen egg-laying starts. Also, first inspection of the year is made, to 
see how they spent the winter and how was the hibernation. We check the fortitude, the health 
(meaning, we check for diseases) of the hive and the first of the treatments against varroa is made. 
 
In March, a following of the egg-laying is made to check the brood combs, adding supers so the 
hives have enough space for the brood when necessary. This is very important to avoid swarming. 
Swarming is the parting of the colony in two, because the old queen leaves the colony with half of 
the bees in search for a new place to nest. A new queen is left in the old colony. 
 
In April, if needed, new swarms are implanted and queen replacements are done. 
 
In May, with a generalized blooming of plants, extra supers for honey are added to strong 
beehives. 
 
In June, we have to keep an eye on possible swarmings. Even if there is enough breeding space, 
the queen may decide to part because she is old or because of her genes (these genes are 
unwanted in beekeeping). 
By the end of the month, honey may be harvested. 
 
In July, plundering is the main problem, as it weakens weak hives and spreads diseases. 
 
In August, again, plundering is the main concern (apart from diseases, of course).  
 
In September, a new varroa treatment is applied to the hive. This treatment has to be different 
from the one in March to prevent the mites to become resistant to the treatments. 
 
In October we just need to check on the hives. 
 
In November it is time for the preparations of the beehives for hibernation. As few frames as 
possible are left inside (only the brood frames), and isolations for winter are placed. 
 
In December the bees must be left alone, since there is nothing we can do for them. In fact, if 
we were to check on them all we would do is hurt the colony, as we would be letting the cold to get 
inside the hive.  
 
 
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 5. HEALTH AND BEES 
 
16 
 
CHAPTER  5 
 
 
 
Health and bees 
 
 
 
 
Before thinking about all the potential attacks the beehives are usually exposed to, we have to 
know how does a healthy bee look like. 
 
There are over 20,000 species of bees in the world. Only 4 of them produce honey. They share, 
however, similar structures and traits. There are many subspecies, and the queen bees (fertile 
females of the bees) can copulate with several drone bees (males of the bees), whether they are 
from the same subspecies or not; as a result, there is a majority of hybrids among the subspecies. 
In every species, there are three different types of bees: the drones, the workers and the queen. 
From this point on, we are going to talk about the species Apis mellifera, main species in all 
European countries and several other countries around the world. 
  
 
The drones: they are the males of the bees, they come from unfertilized eggs and their main 
objective is to fertilize the queen, when the fall comes they will be kicked out of the hives and will 
probably die when winter comes. Their tongue is short and they cannot take nectar from flowers, 
so they need to be fed. 
 
The workers: they are females, generally unfertile, and the responsibles for gathering nectar to 
make honey and royal jelly to feed bees, as well as cleaning, feeding, wax production, honey 
sealing, attending the queen, maintaining the hive, disposing of dead bees... In other words, they 
take care of everything but copulate and lay eggs. They live around 6 weeks in summertime and 
almost 3 months in winter. 
 
The queen: she is the only bee that lays eggs (generally). There is only one in a hive. She will 
only be fertilized once in her life and will lay around 2 million eggs. They normally live 2-3 years (up 
to 5 years in rare cases). 
 
 
The difference between queens and workers resides on their nourishment when they are in the 
brood cells, a queen brood only will only be fed royal jelly. 
 
Therefore, it is also important to know the brood. This word refers to the bees during the 
process from egg until the emergence of the adult bee, including the following stages (in order): 
egg, larva and pupa. All three types of bees go through them, but the emergence time is different. 
It takes 16 days for queen bees, 21 days for workers and 24 days for drone bees. 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER  6 
 
 
 
Diseases and enemies of the bees 
 
 
 
Now that we know how bees are when they are healthy, it is time to know the most important 
diseases and enemies that attack them. 
 
In the detection and control of the diseases, a proper management of the colonies is, in several 
cases, more important than the treatments. Also the periodic control of the beehives has great 
importance, and thanks to these controls we can prevent the appearance of predisposing causes 
from generating; causes that would favour the attack of a pathogenic organism and that could 
bring the death of the colony. 
 
The diseases of the bees are typically divided in the ones of the brood and the ones of the 
adult. There are several diseases that the bees can suffer as a result of the action of different 
pathogenic organisms. For this reason and depending on if they affect only the bees still developing 
inside the cells (also known as broods) or both the brood and the adults, we group the diseases in 
diseases of the adult bees and diseases of the brood. 
 
A. Diseases of the brood: 
 
Obviously, in this section there are included the agents who attack bees inside the brood cells; 
however, some agents, like varroa, attack both broods and adults. These agents are included as 
diseases of the adult bees (detailed in the next section).For a long time these diseases, together 
with the acariasis, have been considered to be the most serious infections that could suffer the 
bees and therefore the most important for the beekeepers. 
 
A.1   Virus diseases. 
 
In this subsection we mention the agents who parasitize the brood. 
 
It is important to highlight that the virus diseases do not have effective treatments and that the 
presence of virus in the colonies is not necessarily associated with the development of a certain 
disease. The virus that has the biggest impact for the brood is the sacbrood virus. 
Virus 
Symptomatology 
Transmission method 
Sacbrood virus 
The dead brood is inside a bag 
full of liquid. It can also cause 
the death of adult bees.  
Horizontal and potentially vertical. 
Varroa destructor 
Black queen cell virus 
Causes the death of the larvae 
of the future queens and 
sometimes of the worker bees. 
Horizontal. 
Nosema apis 
Table 1. Viruses that can affect the broods of Apis mellifera. The vertical transmission is the 
happens from the parents to the descendants, while the horizontal transmission happens between 
the bees in the hive.  
 
A.1.1. Sacbrood virus. The causal agent of this disease was isolated by L. Bailey in the year 
1963. It is an isometric ARN virus, which has a diameter of 28 nm. The visible symptomatology 
appears when the cells are capped, thus making difficult the identification of the pathological 
process. 
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
18 
 
 
The larvae in development suffer the process of pupation 4 days after being sealed the cells 
that contain them. The affected larvae do not turn into pupae and they present an accumulation of 
fluid between the body of the larva and the cuticle of the last shed, which forms some kind of sack. 
The bees do not finish their development inside the sealed cells, and die adhered to the walls and 
presenting the widespread body. 
 
Though experimentally this virus can be transmitted through food to all the larvae in 
development, regardless of their age, the most prone to be infected are the 2 days old. 
 
When the larvae are fed by preparations diluted of this virus, the pupae do not present 
symptoms and finally they emerge as seemingly healthy adults. 
 
The larvae are changing color as the disease progresses, due to the fact that the virus attacks 
several different tissues. They start by taking a pale yellow color, finishing their life with a dark 
brown color and when they die they seem to be wrapped up in some kind of bag full of liquid. If the 
disease is in the last phases of development, larvae can be extracted from their bag without 
bursting it and without spilling the liquid it contains. Finally the larvae are dehydrated and the 
remains acquire the aspect of a scale with form of a gondola. 
 
In the developing brood the virus multiplies inside the dermal glands that cover the body of the 
insect, the above mentioned glands are in charge of segregating enzymes that detach the cuticle 
during the process of shedding. The virus disables the secretion of those enzymes, disabling the 
larva from parting off its cuticle. 
 
In the adult workers the virus multiplies preferably in the hypopharynx glands, without the 
animals demonstrating any symptomatology. Though symptoms do not show, it is possible that this 
viral infection reduces the life expectancy. 
 
This is a seasonal disease. The outbreaks usually take place in spring and normally they 
disappear when the summer comes. Its incidence is normally low and generally does not cause 
serious problems; however in some apiaries affected by varroa virulent outbreaks have taken 
place. 
 
The contagion inside the beehive happens when the nurse bees (worker bees taking care of the 
feeding and production of royal jelly) take the affected larvae out. The fluid that surrounds the 
larva is rich in viral particles and the nurse bees get contaminated when ingesting this fluid. The 
virus invades their hypopharynx glands and the nurse bees transmit it when they feed to the 
healthy larvae. 
 
It seems that the lack of virulence of this virus is thanks to the change in the behavior suffered 
by affected nurse bees. These affected bees will change their activity and stop feeding the broods, 
starting to realize in most cases labors of foraging. Only when due to another reason the 
distribution of the work is altered between the workers and the contaminated ones return to feed 
the larvae, will a virulent outbreak occur. 
 
The mite Varroa destructor can also operate as vector transmitter of this virus. Viral particles 
have been found in the saliva of this parasite. 
 
A.1.2. Black Queen Cell Virus. This virus was discovered in samples of larvae and pre-
pupae of dead queens found in queen cells that presented dark color spots. In the initial states of 
the infection the dead larvae have a pale yellow color and seem to be surrounded with some sort 
of bag similar to the ones surrounding the worker broods affected by the sacbrood virus. 
 
This virus depends on the fungus Nosema apis to be able to infect the adult workers, but how 
the virus is associated with the microsporidian nosema is still unknown. We know that the workers 
infect the larvae in development by feeding them. There have been viral particles present in bodies 
of workers that did not show any symptoms at all. Other viruses that act associated to 
microsporidians are the filamentous virus and the virus Y (these two are diseases from the adult 
bees).  
 
The presence of this virus has been detected in different apiaries, and its presence is thought 
be very common, up to the point of a presence of over 50% of the population of adult bees during 
summertime. Also its latency has been confirmed throughout the year in the apiaries. 
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
19 
 
 
In many cases the virus causes the death of the queens in the states of larva or pre-pupa; in 
these cases the animals in development become dark and finally they decompose, and we can 
appreciate black stains in the walls of the queen cells. In a natural environment the broods of 
workers rarely get affected by this virus, though the virus has been detected in pupae of workers 
without any kind of symptomatology. 
 
A.2   Bacteriosis. 
 
An aspect to bear in mind when studying the bacteriosis is the capacity that many species show 
to develop some type of form of resistance (for example, spores) that allows them to support the 
unfavorable environmental conditions. If we reflect this capacity in the apicultural practices it is 
evident that the spores can stay in the worn material, in the honey or in the pollen of a hive that 
has suffered the attack of some pathogenic germ. 
 
The foulbroods are two diseases that affect the brood. One of them receives the name of 
American or malignant foulbrood, where the bacterium attacks the brood after the capping of the 
cells and has a great virulence. The European or benign foulbrood acts before the capping of the 
cells and its virulence is lower than that of the American’s. 
 
When a certain bacterium attacks some alive being, it is very common that the opening in the 
defensive system of the host is taken advantage of by other species, producing mixed infections. In 
case of the American foulbrood this doesn’t usually happen because the cells are sealed. On the 
other hand, with the European foulbrood, even though there is a majority of a bacterial species, 
other species start to proliferate taking advantage of the situation, actually being a group of species 
the ones to unleash certain pathologies. 
 
The appearance of pathologies produced by bacteria occurs normally as a consequence of an 
imbalance situation in the colony, which favours the proliferation of these microorganisms. The 
lack of care to the brood (for example, inadequate food) and the ingestion of contaminated honey 
(for example, honey from plundering) are two different situations that can favour the appearance 
of outbreaks. 
 
It is a very broad habit among beekeepers to realize preventive treatments against the 
foulbroods. This is a practice that it is necessary to try to stop, since in most cases what we manage 
to do is to make the bacterial strains resistant to the antibiotics; this way, antibiotics may not be 
effective when we really have to treat it. 
 
A.2.1. American (malignant) Foulbrood. It is extended all over the planet and is produced 
by the Paenibacillus larvae. This species has at least seven types of subspecies that have been 
identified, each one with different virulence. 
 
It attacks to the larvae in development and is in the habit of provoking the death of the colony; 
this bacterium can sporulate, being the spores very resistant (they tolerate temperatures of 100ºC) 
and remaining viable during long periods of time (up to 35 years). It can appear in any time of the 
year, providing there is brood. The pupae usually die after 4 or 5 days of being having their cells 
capped; the beehives affected in an advanced state detach a strong smell of sourness (similar to 
the smell of wood glue). 
 
The spores that are ingested by the larvae germinate in the alimentary canal originating 
flagellated bacilli; these bacteria take advantage of the transformation from larva to pupa to invade 
the interior of the body of the developing bee. As soon as they get in the tissues they multiply 
actively, killing the brood before it reaches the state of pupa, and finally when the incoming of 
nutrients diminishes and the environmental conditions stop being favorable, the bacteria make 
resistant spores that contaminate the dissected corpse by the million. When a cleaner bee 
withdraws the remains of the brood's cell it spreads the spores through the whole colony. 
 
The affected larvae begin to demonstrate symptoms by taking a brownish-gray aspect (the 
spores germinate in the intestine after 24-48 hours of being ingested). Later, they take a color 
similar to coffee with milk and a viscous and stringy consistency. Finally, and due to a process of 
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
20 
 
dehydration, the viscous mass transforms in a scale with dark dun color, which strongly sticks to 
the bottom of the cells. 
 
In the infected beehives the brood comb is not compact and has an irregular and mosaic 
aspect. The affected cells are sealed by sunk, dark caps, of humid and oily appearance, beside 
presenting irregular perforations or cracks. If we introduce a toothpick through the cap of a cell 
affected in an advanced stage, a viscous mass of sticky consistency is extracted, consisting on the 
remains of the larva in rotting state. Also, the putrid mass stretches as if it was made of rubber. 
 
The transmission is basically mouth to mouth (the nurse bees play an important role in it), and 
one of the most frequent ways is across the honey contaminated with spores; for its treatment 
traditionally there have been used the sulphamides or tetracyclines (Apiciclina © is the prepared 
commercial one that contains sodium sulphathiazole and hydrochloride of oxitetracycline), but the 
use of antibiotics does not manage to eliminate the disease. 
 
The transmission between beehives is realized thanks to the drift, the drones, the plundering, 
or the beekeeper. Beekeepers take part by not washing the material after working in the affected 
hives, or exchanging material between sick and healthy hives. 
 
Since there are no treatments that give good results it is advised the destruction of the colony 
(generally the wax frames of the hive are burned together with the honey and the pollen) and a 
proper disinfection of the material for its later use (for example, treatment of the supers with 
autoclave or with liquid paraffin at 130ºC; we can also treat the material with 10% soda, followed 
by an intense flaming). In case someone wants to save part of the population, the adult specimens 
will be selected, will be taken to a clean super and will be treated in addition with Apiciclina (both 
hydrochloride of oxitetracycline and sodium sulphathiazole). It is recommended to beekeepers that 
the use of this treatment should be reserved for the really necessary cases in order to avoid the 
reappearance of the disease and the development of resistance to the treatment. 
 
The field diagnosis is not completely trustworthy, and in some cases the symptoms can get 
confused with the produced by other agents, such as the Bacillus alvei that appears in the beehives 
affected by European foulbrood, and that also produces a putrid mass that can be stretched to the 
form of threads. 
 
The laboratory diagnosis is realized through the preparation of smears, in which it is observed 
that the bacteria do not form chains; another diagnosis that can be used for testing is the age of 
the affected insects. In case there are other opportunist agents present, it is necessary to isolate 
this bacterium. This can be done employing specific techniques (for example, cultivation in 
selective environments). 
 
Figure 3. American Foulbrood 
 
A.2.2. European (benign) Foulbrood. It is produced by the Melissoccocus pluton (Bacillus 
pluton or Streptoccocus pluton) and is more benign than the American one (hence, their other 
names); it is generally a seasonal disease that depends on predisposed factors and almost never 
kills the colony. The outbreaks are normally happening in spring, the larvae are affected before 
their cells are capped (the nurse bees are those that spread the infection) and the animals turn into 
putrid masses (of cream or chocolate color) that originate an intense smell similar to the one of 
rotten fish, which do not stick to the cells and can be taken out by the workers. 
 
The diagnosis is realized by the preparation of smears, in which chains of bacteria are looked, 
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
21 
 
for the treatment of this disease the antibiotic is used oxitetracycline (Apiciclina©), also it is 
possible to use the sulphamide (1 g mixed with the food, repeating the treatment three times with 
an interval of one week). 
 
In some cases the affected larvae can be parasitized secondarily by the bacterium Paenibacillus 
alvei that gives them a dark dye, and the animals die after the capping of the cells with symptoms 
that are alike of those of the American foulbrood. 
 
Though traditionally it was considered that there is a clear distinction between both types of 
foulbroods, the certain thing is that most of the times the situation is more complicated than 
foreseen, with the appearance of pathogenic opportunists and secondary diseases that can mask 
the situation. 
 
Preventive treatments should not be carried out, since it increases the risk of development of 
resistances. To avoid problems it is necessary to take care of the possible predisposing causes (for 
example, a disproportion in the relation brood / nurse bee or lack of proteins in the food), it is 
necessary to not feed with honey of unknown origin and take basic hygienic measures. The form of 
dissemination inside and between beehives is the same that was exposed for the case of the 
American foulbrood. 
 
A.3   Mycosis. 
A.3.1. Chalkbrood. Also known as calcareous brood or plastering brood, it is produced by 
the Ascophaera apis fungus; its spores are the infesting agent. The name of "plastering brood" 
comes from the observation of the brood affected by this disease. In the final phase takes place the 
dehydration of the remains of what was a developing bee, looking these remains as a small stone 
of plaster. Nowadays it is not a frequent disease and is considered to be seasonal and factorial, 
since several conditions needs to occur in order for the process to trigger. 
 
We can begin to describe the life cycle of the fungus with the developing larvae’s ingestion of 
spores (the spores can be usually found in the food the nurse bees give, though also they can be 
adhered to the workers or to the surface of the cells). The spores need some special conditions to 
be able to germinate in the digestive system of the larva (specifically in the middle intestine), they 
cross the intestinal wall taking advantage of the structural modifications that the metamorphosis 
produces and they grow inside the body of the animal, appearing in the surface (generally after 3 
days of the ingestion) when the state of pre-pupa is reached. The surface of the animals is where 
the fungus develops its fruitful bodies, which will produce a new generation of spores. 
 
The presence of the spores in the beehives is not rare, since they can remain viable for many 
years, but it is not also a sufficient reason for the development of the disease, because it is 
necessary to have a series of predisposing or stressful reasons (for example, the cooling of the 
brood in a time near the capping of its cell) to trigger it. Together with the cooling of the brood due 
to different reasons (for example, the disproportion of the nurse bees / broods ratio), other 
predisposing reasons have been proposed: 
1. An abuse in the use of the pollen trap. 
2. High dampness. 
 
The diagnosis is realized identifying of mummified corpses in the cells, in the bottom or in the 
proximities of the beehive. 
 
Regarding the spreading ways, there are different routes for the spores to penetrate in a 
colony. Nevertheless, beekeepers can also contribute to its spreading, for example when frames 
with mummies from the sick beehives are put into the healthy ones in order for the bees to "clean 
them". Another way to spread it is to put in a colony a frame of pollen from a sick hive: it is the best 
way for the disease to spread. 
 
An effective treatment does not exist, so we cannot recommend any of the products authorized 
for its treatment. Only preventive measures of managing can be applied, such as: renewing the 
frames to avoid the accumulation of spores, not opening the beehives in cold days, or eliminate the 
queens of the swarms in which systematically appear outbreaks of the disease. Also, beekeepers 
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
22 
 
need to clean the material before reusing it and reduce the exchange of frames between colonies, 
especially between weak and strong ones.  
 
In the first years of the 80s this disease had the beekeepers’ interest, but with the arrival of 
varroa it went to the background; in addition, the appearance of the parasitic mite happened at the 
same time of a drop of the disease’s outbreaks. 
 
A.3.2. Stonebrood. It is a mycosis less virulent than the chalkbrood and is brought about 
by certain fungi of the Aspergillus family. The symptoms are very similar to those of the chalkbrood, 
since in this case there also turn out to appear small mummies with calcareous aspect. To be able 
to differentiate both diseases it is necessary to observe the mummies with a good magnifying glass 
and look for the reproductive forms of the fungi, since for the chalkbrood they are more or less 
spherical, and for the stonebrood they are cone-shaped. It is an infrequent disease that does not 
cause many problems to beekeepers. 
 
The spreading of the spores inside the colony and between beehives follows the same 
guidelines as the ones exposed for the chalkbrood. 
 
B. Diseases of the adult bees: 
 
In the swarms of Apis mellifera, diseases can appear, produced by different agents (as virus, 
bacteria, protozoans, fungi, etc.). To control these agents, compound chemotherapeutics are used 
in many cases, but it is necessary to be always very careful with their handling, since the products 
that are extracted from the beehives (like honey or pollen) are directly commercialized, and they 
can contain traces of the chemical compounds used in the treatments or by-products of these 
chemicals. 
 
B.1   Virus diseases. 
 
Traditionally it has been accepted that in any pathological frame inside a beehive, if the causal 
agent cannot be identified, it is originated by a virus. This way the virus diseases in apiculture have 
become a big group that includes a series of rare pathologies and / or of unknown causal agent. 
The first aspect to bear in mind on these pathogenic agents is that they are probably always 
present in the colonies in a latent or not evident way. In addition, several of them can be present 
simultaneously and if we were to examine the bees these they would not present any symptoms, 
meaning the presence of virus in a colony is not associated necessarily with a disease. It is generally 
admitted that the presence or absence of symptoms in the bees depends of: 
(1) The genetic endowment. 
(2) The entry route.  
(3) The environment.  
 
 
It is also important to know that varroa works in many cases as a transmitter vector, or 
activator of these pathogenic agents. It is known that some of the virus that affect Apis mellifera 
can be induced or activated simply realizing punctures to healthy bees. 
 
Another important aspect to stand out is the absence of effective treatments. However, it is 
true that though there are no treatments that we could apply, the bees do have an immune system 
that protects and defends them. Finally we must highlight two important aspects of the virus 
diseases: 
(1) The populations of viruses in the colonies change throughout the year and 
(2) Some viral diseases only show when another pathogenic agent unleashes. 
 
 
Nowadays we know that in many cases the inhabitants of the colonies can be infected by more 
than one virus. In a work of the year 2006 the authors used molecular techniques to investigate the 
presence of 6 viruses in 10 queens and in their descendants. The results showed that all the queens 
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
23 
 
gave positive to the infection for the black queen cell virus and the virus of the deformed wings. In 
one of the 6 it was found the virus of the sacbrood, in 4 of them it was present the virus of the 
chronic paralysis and in 2, the virus Kashmir. The virus of the acute paralysis was not detected in 
any of them.[XXX] 
 
The viruses that affect the Apis mellifera can cause some of the three following types of 
pathogenic actions:  
 
a) Direct pathogenic action. In this case the presence of a certain virus and its 
multiplication in the tissues of the bees they are the trigger reason of a certain disease. 
 
b) Pathogenic action associated with other diseases. This one appears when another 
disease debilitates the defenses of the insects previously. Then, the situation is taken 
advantage by the virus that acts as an opportunist to unleash its attack. 
 
c) Pathogenic not evident or unobservable. In some cases the action of a certain virus 
does not unleash the appearance of any specific symptomatology in parasitized animals, in 
other words, the affected animal seems to be healthy because its aspect and behavior can 
be considered to be normal. 
 
 
There are 12 known viruses that can affect the European bees, and that unleash someone of 
the pathogenic exposed actions previously. All of them except the filamentous virus (that contains 
DNA) use the RNA as genetic material, likewise they all have spheroidal or polyhydric form, except 
the chronic paralysis and the filamentous viruses. 
The spreading happens in three different levels. 
a) Inside the beehive: due to the density of animals or because of the action of another 
organism like the Varroa destructor.  
b) In the apiary: by means of the drift of the insects, the transfer of bees between beehives 
and the plundering.  
c) Between apiaries: by means of the migrating practices (moving the whole apiary) and the 
reusing of contaminated material. 
 
The diagnosis of a virus disease is complicated and it is necessary to have a laboratory well 
provided of means and instruments. Therefore a field diagnosis is usually realized by exclusion: 
eliminated all the rest of causal agents, the symptoms are thought to be caused by a virus. To 
complicate the situation even more, many of the viruses present very similar symptomatologies 
and in some cases very similar to those of the poisonings from pesticides too. 
 
We can roughly differ a poisoning from pesticides of a virus disease, to do so we have to bear in 
mind that the poisoning tends to affect the whole apiary and the virus only to a few beehives. To 
complicate furthermore the picture, the action of some virus also can be confused, in some cases, 
with the nosemosis (disease produced by a parasitic microsporidian). The symptomatology that 
Nosema apis produces, in some cases, can be digestive disorders together with nervous alterations.  
 
The only way of realizing the correct diagnosis of a virus disease consists of isolating the causal 
agent from sick animals, but this labor is very difficult to realize for a beekeeper, since to do so 
laboratories equipped specifically to identify these pathogenic agents are needed. 
 
Before we carry on, it is important to clarify that there are no effective treatments and that the 
only thing to do is take preventive measurements; for example, to avoid the drift and the 
plundering, to eliminate the weak beehives and to keep in the colonies low levels of varroa 
infestation. It is also interesting not to describe all the viruses that can affect the honey bees, but 
only those that have a higher incidence among them or that cause worse problems. 
 
The virus disease of highest incident nowadays seems to be the chronic paralysis virus (CPV). 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
24 
 
Table 2. Virus diseases of the adult bees of Apis mellifera. The vertical transmission is happens from 
the parents to the descendants, the horizontal one between the bees in the colony. 
 
B.1.1. Chronic paralysis virus (CPV). It was mentioned by the first time in the year 1933 
and several researchers think that it could be the causer of a massive mortality of bees that took 
place in Wight's island (England) that received the name of "Disease of Wight's island". 
The animals infected by the CPV can present two different symptomatologies, described for a long 
time and named "paralysis" and "black thieves". Normally the inhabitants of an infected hive show 
only one of them. This virus is frequent in colonies in which the bees are confined during long 
periods of time. 
 
In the syndrome type I or syndrome of the paralysis, the affected bees present quakes in the 
wings and the body, cannot fly and crawl in the ground or near the entrance, sometimes in masses 
of hundreds. These symptoms can also be attributed to the infections from Nosema apis, 
Malpighamoeba mellificae or Acarapis woodi. 
 
In many cases the abdomen of the animals is swollen (due to an expansion of the maw for the 
honey) and they can have diarrheas. The sick bees die within a few days of the appearance of the 
symptoms. The colonies with a severe affectation can collapse, especially during summer. 
 
In the syndrome type II or syndrome of the black thieves, the bees take a brilliant black 
coloration and a greasy aspect. Though at the beginning they can fly, when they return to the 
Virus & Symptomatology  
Way of transmission 
Chronic paralysis (CPV) 
Quakes, swollen abdomen, disability to fly. Greasy or blackish 
aspect, bees. It provokes the death of the adult bees  
Horizontal, 
through 
contact. 
Potential vertical transmission 
Acute paralysis virus (APV) 
The same symptoms that the virus of the chronic paralysis. It 
provokes the death of the brood and the adults 
Horizontally 
Varroa destructor 
 
Filamentous virus (FV) 
Unspecific symptomatology, it provokes the early death of the 
workers adults.  
Horizontal 
Nosema apis 
Cloudy wing virus (CWV) 
The wings of the animals lose its transparency and take a 
greyish aspect. It provokes the early death of the workers 
adults  
not 
demonstrated, 
probably 
horizontal  
Varroa destructor 
Virus X 
Without symptomatology, it provokes the early death of the 
workers adults  
Horizontal, frequently associated 
to amebiasis 
Virus Y 
Without symptomatology, it provokes the early death of the 
workers adults. 
Horizontal, frequently associated 
to nosemosis  
Deformed wings virus (DWV) 
Deformed wings and small abdomen. It provokes the early 
death of the workers adults.  
Not 
demonstrated, 
probably 
horizontal 
Varroa destructor 
Virus Kashmir 
Unspecific symptomatology. It causes the death of the broods 
and of the adult bees  
Horizontally 
and 
potentially 
vertical  
Varroa destructor 
Virus of the slow paralysis 
Unspecific symptomatology. It provokes the death of the brood 
and of the adult bees.  
Not 
demonstrated, 
probably 
horizontal 
Varroa destructor 
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
25 
 
beehives they are not recognized by the guardians and are denied from access, so in some cases 
beekeepers think that they are bees proceeding from other hives trying to get in for plundering. In 
a few days they lose the ability to fly, begin to tremble and die rapidly. 
 
The syndromes are caused by an ARN virus of ellipsoidal form and variable size, which 
multiplies in the tissues of the nervous system of the bees. The principal contagion route seems to 
be through wounds in the bodies of the bees, or across broken hair. The hairs that cover the body 
of the bees are not dead structures, its interior is alive and in touch with the hemolymph, an 
internal liquid that contains nutrients but no oxygen. The paralyzed bees have its excrements 
contaminated with this virus and disposing of them can act as route of contagion. 
 
Though the paralysis is a disease that affects the adult bees, occasionally the pupae can be 
affected. It has not been demonstrated that Varroa destructor operates as a transmission vector of 
this virus, therefore its role in the spreading of this pathogenic agent must be small if it has any. 
 
In laboratories the symptoms have been reproduced by applying samples of virus on wounds, 
supplying it with the food, or injecting them into the body of the animals. In case of the inoculation 
(or injection) it is necessary 100 viral particles to produce the disease, the application on wounds 
needs a way larger concentration of the virus (10,000,000 viral particles), and in food it is needed 
an even larger concentration (10,000,000,000 viral particles). 
 
This virus is very widespread, producing generally a gradual weakening of the colonies; though 
without them succumbing to the action of the virus. In some places it can be endemic. 
 
Its incident is high and in some cases there has been verified that it is present in seemingly 
healthy bees. The most virulent outbreaks happen in spring or summer, and it seems that this and 
others viruses are permanently in the populations of bees, without the animals present any type of 
symptomatology, and without unleashing its pathogenic action until any environmental factor 
triggers its action. 
 
B.1.2. Acute paralysis virus (APV). Its discovery was realized in a laboratory when there 
were analyzed samples of bees that were presenting symptoms of being infected by the chronic 
paralysis virus (CPV). 
 
The symptomatologies unleashed by both viruses are usually similar. If they are inoculated in 
healthy bees they produce quakes and paralysis within a few days of its inoculation. The difference 
is the time of death: the bees inoculated with the acute paralysis virus die before the ones 
inoculated with the chronic paralysis virus. 
 
Its presence in the beehives is not associated in most cases to the appearance of any specific 
symptomatology, probably because its reproduction in non-vital tissues, or because its 
reproductive rate is low. 
 
The acute paralysis virus can exterminate a whole apiary, but the most frequent thing is that 
the symptomatology that unleashes its action appears sharply, kill some colonies and debilitate 
others, and afterwards a slow recovery begins. 
 
We know that this virus accumulates in the head, brain and hypopharynx glands of the bees. 
The excrements can also contain viral infectious particles. In the nature it might be spread 
unapparently through secretions of the saliva glands and / or the food that the bees mix with these 
secretions. 
 
The maximum incidence happens in periods of maximum activity in the beehive and especially 
towards the middle of the summer, coinciding with a strong collapse of the population of bees. For 
its transmission and "virulent" attack it seems to need a vector (organism) that it transports it and 
inoculates it to the bees, this vector in can be Varroa destructor or Acarapis woodi. In fact, before 
the spread of varroa all over the planet this virus was never detected in serologic form (similar to 
serum) in the adult bees or in the broods; it was never associated to symptoms of disease or to the 
death of the colonies either. 
 
Once varroa was spread around Europe, the serologic tests indicated a high concentration in 
dead adult or brood bees, proceeding from colonies that collapsed rapidly after the arrival of the 
mite. 
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
26 
 
 
Experiments realized in laboratories have demonstrated that the adult females of Varroa 
destructor can operate as vectors, transmitting this virus to the developing pupae, but luckily it 
seems that the virus cannot replicate in the tissues of the mite. 
 
Several studies performed in Europe indicate that this virus is more frequent to find it at the 
end of the summer or beginning of autumn in colonies infected with varroa, coinciding with the 
reproductive peak of the mite. This fact supports the hypothesis that proposes the mite has an 
important role in the transmission of the virus. 
 
B.1.3. Filamentous virus. Originally it got confused with a possible rickettsia (bacterium) 
due to the fact that it is a virus of great size (150 x 450 nm). The symptomatology that it unleashed 
in some cases (bees crawling in the ground under the entrance), was similar to the one that bees 
were presenting supposedly attacked from rickettsias. This is the only virus of DNA type that infects 
bees in its natural form. Also, it is considered generally to be the least virulent of all the known 
viruses, multiplying principally in the tissues of the fat and in the ovary of the adult bees. Though it 
is said to be of low virulence, in some cases it has been cited as responsible of episodes of severe 
mortality. 
 
The symptomatology shown by the animals can be confused with the one produced by other 
pathological processes, due to the fact that the most evident symptoms are bees that crawl and 
die, and that the pupae in the cells become brown or black. 
 
Due to its great size and the presence of the viral particles in the hemolymph, the identification 
can be performed with an optical microscope, from samples of hemolymph from sick or dead 
animals. In some cases there has been described the presence of these viral particles in healthy 
animals, without any symptomatology. 
 
The transmission can be through food or through inoculation from a vector, which introduces it 
inside the body of a bee. The highest incident of this virus disease takes place in spring, following a 
remission in the summer. 
 
B.1.4. Cloudy wing virus (CWV). This virus was discovered in extracts of adult bees that had 
been kept in the laboratory to study other virus. 
 
It is a spherical very small virus (17 nm). The principal symptom that present the bees infected 
by this virus is the loss of the transparency of the wings. The viral particles are located in the head 
and the thorax, but we do not know in what kind of tissues it multiplies. 
 
The performed studies indicate that this virus can be present unapparently in some colonies, 
infecting the brood. In the nature this virus presents a low incident and the level of infestation 
seems to not be associated with the infestation by varroa. 
 
B.1.5. Viruses X and Y. The two viruses are very similar and for many years they were 
confused between each other. They attack the alimentary canal of the adult workers, but the 
animals do not show signs of infection and it spreads through food. The principal difference 
between them is the period of the year in which they infect to the bees, the virus "X" attacks them 
usually in the winter and "Y" in spring. 
 
The virus "X" was discovered in a laboratory in experiments in where they were working with 
others viruses. We know nothing about the natural history of this virus, except that it was isolated 
in samples of adult bees. It does not seem to be very pathogenic and its multiplication is slow, so it 
needs a high longevity or long hibernations from the colony to develop its action. 
 
The viral particles do not multiply when they are injected into adult bees or pupae. But they do 
when they are administered together with the food to young nurse bees kept at 30ºC (they do not 
multiply when the environmental temperature gets to 35ºC). 
 
As with others viruses that attack the bees, there is no specific symptomatology associated with 
its action. We do know that in laboratory conditions it reduces the life expectancy of the workers. 
 
It is interesting to indicate that in a study performed in England it was found that this virus was 
associated frequently with the presence of the parasitic protozoan Malpighamoeba mellificae, in 
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
27 
 
dead bees at the end of the winter. In laboratory studies there has been demonstrated that the life 
expectancy of adult bees fed on both pathogenic agents was minor, compared with bees fed on 
these agents independently. 
 
The virus "Y" was isolated in laboratory from samples of adult bees found moribund or dead in 
the exterior of colonies in the beginning of summer. Its infectivity is similar to that of the virus "X" 
when it is administrated with the food and if the bees are kept at 30ºC. 
 
Though this virus can infect young bees through the food, the majority of the infections occur 
when the virus is administrated with the food together with spores of Nosema apis. 
 
B.1.6. Deformed wings virus (DWV). The first isolation of this virus was realized from 
samples of adult bees from colonies infected with varroa destructor. The beehives were located in 
Japan and for this reason at the beginning it was named Japanese Strain. 
 
The symptomatology that unleashed by this virus looks like the one of varroa destructor. This is 
why in the first moment it was thought that the observed symptoms were the result of the action 
of varroa, and not of a virus. 
 
The virus of the deformed wings is widely spread nowadays and is frequently found in the 
colonies infected by the mite. The affected bees have a lower size than the normal ones and the 
wings present deformities or are atrophied. 
 
This virus can affect the adult bees and the broods, and we know that Varroa destructor acts as 
vector of transmission between healthy and sick insects, and to the brood. As an example we can 
mention that in samples from two American colonies with a high degree of parasitism this virus 
was found in 92% of the mites, 100% of the workers with deformed wings, 75% of the seemingly 
normal workers, 47% of the adult drones, 92% of the pupae of workers and 80% of the larvae. 
 
Besides its presence in the breeding of workers, and in the workers and adult drones, this virus 
has been detected in the queens, in the food that one administers to the larvae, and in the sperm 
of the drones. 
The works done in this matter are not conclusive over of the pathogenicity or how virulent can be 
the diseases produced by this virus. Probably it is not only the causer of deformities in the wings of 
certain animals, but it quite certainly reduces the life expectancy of workers and is involved in the 
loss of animals and broods in critical moments.
 
Figure 4. Bee with Deformed Wings and varroa mites 
 
B.1.7. Virus Kashmir. This virus was discovered in 1974 in samples of bees of the species 
Apis cerana proceeding from the north of the India. 
 
It is considered to be one of the most virulent virus, since a few virus injected into laboratory 
conditions in healthy bees they can kill them in a few days, it also causes the death in only 3 days of 
the pupae to which 35 viral particles are injected. It is important to remark that it is possible to find 
in many colonies without producing evident symptoms. In fact the infection of this virus has never 
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
28 
 
associated with the appearance of specific clinical symptoms. 
 
This virus is widely distributed over the planet and its prevalence is generally low, with the 
possible exception of North America and Australasia. 
 
The food administration containing this virus to the larvae does not seem to have any effect 
since the animals continued its development and finally they emerge as seemingly healthy animals. 
 
But in the cases that in the laboratory the larvae are injected a saline solution, strange proteins, 
or if they are incubated for 3 days at 35ºC, the virus activates and multiplies rapidly, causing the 
death of the bees. 
 
From a serologic, biological and genetic point of view, this virus is very close-related to the 
acute paralysis virus. Several researchers think, based on the available information, that in order 
for virus to demonstrate symptoms in a colony it has to be associated with another disease (for 
example, varroosis or nosemosis). In fact its association to Varroa is verified destructor both in 
laboratory and in field studies. 
 
It is also known the transmission of this virus without the participation of varroa. It is quite 
likely transmitted horizontally between adult bees or between the adults and the larvae. It might 
also be transmitted shown through food or fecal dregs. 
 
Slow paralysis virus. This virus was isolated accidentally when working with the virus "X". When 
it is injected to adult bees, the animals die after 12 days. A typical symptom of the action of this 
virus is that the day previous to the death, or two days before, the animals suffer paralysis in both 
anterior pairs of legs. 
 
The increase in the incidence of this virus has been associated to the progress of the varroosis. 
Probably the parasitism of the larvae from varroa and specifically the feeding activity of the mite 
activates the multiplication of the virus. 
 
B.2   Bacteriosis. 
 
In the adult bees the bacterial infections are usually producing blood poisoning and diarrheas. 
 
B.2.1. Blood poisoning. A blood poisoning is a widespread infection. The symptoms are 
unspecific enough and normally the affected bees are dragging without being able to fly. Moreover, 
in the beehive there is a strong smell of decomposition. The causal agent is Pseudomona auriginosa 
and seems to be that the outbreaks appear in strongly stressed colonies. It is thought that the door 
of entry of pathogenic this one in the bees they are the respiratory openings. 
 
Being a factorial disease, there can be recommended the same managing measures proposed 
for the foulbrood. The most advisable treatment is the sodium sulphathiazole, due to the fact that 
there are known several strains resistant to the erythromycin. 
 
There are also mentions that claim that the bacterium Serratia marcescens, transmitted from 
varroa, can cause blood poisoning in the bees. 
 
B.3   Diseases from protozoans. 
 
The protozoans that can produce diseases in the adult bees are normally present in the bodies 
of the insects, and only under certain circumstances (predisposing causes) they will develop its 
pathogenic action. Though there are different protozoans that can attack the bees, the one which 
presents the higher incident is Malpighamoeba mellificae. 
 
B.3.1. Amebiasis. It is produced by the protozoan Malpighamoeba mellificae and the 
symptomatology is similar to that of the nosemosis. The bees consume the cysts (pathogenic 
agent) orally; these once they are inside the intestine go on to a mobile life phase and go to the 
excretory system.  
 
When they reach Malpighi’s tubules, the protozoan does not penetrate inside the cells, but it 
emits pseudopodia to feed; the cyst evacuates with the dregs. 
 
It is not considered to be an important pathology since it needs very high levels of infestation in 
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
29 
 
order to cause the death of the animals. In its biological cycle it seems to present two annual peaks, 
one in spring and other one in autumn. Though it is not considered to be an important pathology, it 
can frequently appear associated to nosemosis and worsens the situation. 
 
To perform the diagnosis the bee is dissected, and its Malpighi’s tubules extracted and 
observed with 400 increases. The cysts are spherical and its size is double of that of the spores of 
nosema. 
 
B.4   Diseases produced by fungi. 
 
In this section we include two different pathogenic fungi species that produce a disease called 
nosemosis. Traditionally these pathogenic agents have been included inside the group of 
protozoans, but nowadays the taxon to which they belong (Microsporidia) is included in the 
kingdom of the fungi. 
 
The taxon Microsporidia includes 1,200 known species, preferably parasites of different types 
of invertebrates. The life cycle of these fungi includes two phases: one proliferative, and another 
one infecting, that is the one that produces the spores. 
 
The nosemosis is one of the principal pathologies in cold climates, where the bees remain for 
long periods inside the hives. 
 
B.4.1. Nosemosis. Originally in Europe this disease was caused by Nosema apis, which 
attacks the adult animals causing severe diarrhea (caused by the multiplication of the fungus in the 
epithelium of the ventricle of the digestive system) that originate stinking excrements of a color 
that goes from light brown one to almost black brown. Its symptomatology is similar to that of the 
acute paralysis virus (excessive number of bees died in the entrance presenting a swollen 
abdomen, or bees with the abdomen inflamed that cannot fly and suffer quakes in many cases). 
Nosema ceranae is a parasite that originally attacked the Asian bee Apis cerana. From its discovery 
in China its spread all over the planet has been very fast, in fact, nowadays it presents a worldwide 
distribution and seems to compete with Nosema apis, due to the fact that in the majority of studies 
made it is believed that the bees are parasitized for Nosema ceranae or for a of Nosema ceranae 
and Nosema apis. This new parasite works in a very asymptomatic way enough way and some 
believe there is the possibility that it is total or partially responsible for the symptomatology known 
as "bee depopulation" for the beehives. 
 
a) Nosemosis type "A". In 1909 it was described the presence of spores of this pathogenic 
agent (Nosema apis) in the walls of the ventricle of sick or dead bees. 
its fast spread through the whole ventricular epithelium. Its cytolytic action produces the 
dysfunction of the epithelial cells. 
 
The spores can remain viable several months in the honey. They are also present in the wax 
contaminated with fecal remains, the dregs and the corpses. 
The symptoms are unspecific enough and the parasitized bees do not present evident clinical signs, 
even in the cases in which the disease attacks sharply. The climatic conditions determine partly the 
development of this parasitism, being the most affected spring and autumn bees. With low 
temperatures the rate of multiplication of nosema diminishes, increasing of notably with high 
temperatures. The ideal temperature for its development is of 30-34ºC (in the interior of the 
beehive) and in ideal conditions it can complete a life cycle in 48-60 hours (2-2.5 days). 
 
Though there is a great variability with regard to the moment of the year when this pathology 
appears, the most important areas have appeared in periods of unfavorable climatological 
conditions (for example, high dampness or deficient flow of nectar and pollen); clearly it is a 
factorial disease that needs from a few predisposing causes. At the beginning of the disease 
intestinal disorders appear: often constipations, but more frequently diarrheas. Later, the animals 
lose the ability to fly, crawl out gathering in small groups and they suffer from quakes. Finally the 
colony becomes depopulated of adult animals, is dirtied external and internally with the 
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
30 
 
excrements of the insects (that can have a yellowish color). 
 
The affected bees accumulate excrements in its digestive system, causing the abdomen to be 
extended and distended, being diarrhea the most typical symptom. Another symptom that the 
workers present is a brilliant color and the inability to fly due to compression of the abdominal air 
sacks. The weakness originated by the disease demonstrates in the shape of corporal quakes and 
paralysis. It is frequent to find in front of the affected hives groups of dead or moribund bees. 
 
The forms of resistance of this fungus are in the habit of being present of form habitual in the 
colonies. The contagion takes place from mouth to mouth and nosema begins its life cycle when a 
bee ingests the spores. Between beehives the spreading takes place thanks to the drift, the 
plundering, the migration and decanting material between colonies. 
 
The diagnosis is done in a laboratory, macerating alimentary canals of 30-40 workers bees, and 
observing with a microscope the presence of the spores. It is necessary to take into account that 
this disease can be present in the colony asymptomatically. It is also possible to perform the 
molecular identification of this pathogenic agent using polymerase chain reaction's (PCR) 
technologies. 
b) Nosemosis type "C". The spores of Nosema ceranane are morphologically very similar to 
them of Nosema apis. As it happens with the nosemosis type "A" the fungi develops in the 
epithelium that covers the ventricle. We do not know many aspects of its pathogeny, but we can 
suppose that they are similar to Nosema apis. 
 
Its period of incubation is long and asymptomatic. Probably the most evident sign is the 
reduction of the capacity to fly in the affected bees. In the colony other clinical features can be 
observed that usually pass unnoticed: the affected beehives tend to extend the breeding period, 
when in normal conditions (cold) the queens would not lay eggs. Also is observed that it departs 
from the brood is not covered by a cap of protective bees. The affected hives also reduce the 
production of honey and can present symptoms of depopulation. 
 
The diagnosis is also done in a laboratory, with the same steps as for the Nosema Apis:  
macerating alimentary canals of 30-40 workers bees, and observing with a microscope the 
presence of the spores. It is necessary to take into account that this disease can be present in the 
colony asymptomatically. It is also possible to perform the molecular identification of this 
pathogenic agent using polymerase chain reaction's (PCR) technologies. 
 
Until recently the admitted treatment to attack the nosemosis in its two variants was made by 
administrating the antibiotic fumagiline in syrup (water and sugar) to all the colonies of the 
accession. Nowadays the use of this medicine is prohibited because of the residues it leaves in the 
hives. Different alternatives are being evaluated, like the oxalic acid, the thymol or the resveratrol. 
When there is no treatment, the best measure to adopt is being careful handling of the colonies. It 
is necessary to destroy the infected material (like frames spotted with excrements) and to disinfect 
the beehive (flaming with a gas torch, for example). There is an alternative when the quantity of 
material to treat is big; in these cases we can treat the hives and the empty frames with heat (50ºC 
for 24 hours) or with 80% acetic acid. 
 
B.5   Diseases produced by arthropods. 
B.5.1. Varroosis. Both beekeepers and scientists coincide in calling the varroosis the 
principal problem which the western apiculture faces nowadays. The parasite is present in the 
majority of the countries in which the apiculture is practiced using the species Apis mellifera. 
 
This disease is an external parasitism produced by the mite varroa destructor (until the year 
2000 the name of Varroa jacobsoni was in use), ectoparasite that is fed on the hemolymph of the 
adult bees and on the brood. It was discovered in Java in 1904 for A.C. Oudemans and originally it 
attacked the drone broods of Apis cerana, but around the 1940s or 1950s it entered in touch with 
Apis mellifera and started taking it as a host. In its spreading around the planet it reached Japan 
and China in the 1950s and 1960s, came to Europe at the end of the 1960s or beginning of the 
1970s and got to North America in the 1980s. 
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
31 
 
 
The genus Varroa includes nowadays four species: 
(I) 
Varroa jacobsoni described originally in Java as an ectoparasite of Apis cerana, it has 
spread over the whole Asia. 
(II) 
Varroa underwoodi described as parasite of Apis cerana in Nepal.  
(III) 
Varroa rindereri described in Borneo as(like) ectoparasite of Apis koschevnikovi. 
(IV) 
Varroa destructor described initially like ectoparasite of Apis cerana and Apis mellifera 
with the name of Varroa jacobsoni. 
 
The varroa destructor is a mite with the body divided in two regions or tagmas: gnatosome and 
idiosome. The gnatosome is located antero-ventrally and consists in the mouth pieces: 2 sensory 
pedipalps and 2 chelicerae. The chelicerae of the females it has its distal part (3rd segment) mobile 
and endowed with two small teeth; in the case of the males this third segment is modified in a 
structure with the form of a cannula, used to transfer the sperm to the genitalia of the female. The 
idiosome includes the dorsal and ventral shields, and it has with four pairs of legs finished in 
structures that facilitate its adherence to the host. 
 
This species has a clear sexual dimorphism: 
(I) 
The females possess a chestnut-colored ellipsoidal body, sunk back-ventrally and a 
diameter of 1.5 ± 0.036 mm. 
(II) 
The male is smaller in size than the female, its morphology is pear-formed and the 
body is of light yellow color. The males die when the brood's cell is uncapped and the 
adult bee is born. 
 
The body, including the legs and mouth pieces, is covered with different types of "hair", some 
of them are sensorial; they are mechanic or chemoreceptors. Not only that, the first pair of legs 
(frontal legs) is not used to move, they are frequently raised and possess different types of 
receptors. They actually are structures with similar function to the antennas of the insects. In these 
legs there are olfactory and gustatory sensilla; additionally, they possess dampness and 
temperature receptors. 
 
The study of the mitochondrial DNA of this mite has allowed the description of two haplotypes 
(Japanese and Korean) that has different virulence. The Korean is the most virulent and most 
worldwide distributed. To be able to analyze the forms in which this parasite is being fought, firstly 
it is necessary to know its biology and life cycle (figure  5). In the females the life cycle is divided in 
two subcycles:  
(I) 
Phoretic. Occurs on adult bees. As an average, the female mites live on adult bees for 
one week between attempts at reproduction. 
(II) 
Reproductive. Occurs in the broods' cells. Adult female varroa will make 3-4 attempts 
to reproduce. 
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
32 
 
 
Figure 5. Life cycle of the varroa mite. Usually, only the mother mite and 1-2 adult daughters leave 
the brood cell with the emerging bee. 
 
 
We can begin the description of a reproductive cycle in the moment in which a female of varroa 
fertilized penetrates in a cell of workers or of drones that is on about to be capped. For this mite 
the sense of the smell has a vital importance since the animals are attracted to volatile compounds 
(such as esters of oily acids) present in the cuticle of the developing bees, as well as for the smells 
that detach the remains of sheds in the cells. The varroa mites prefer the drone brood, because it is 
the one that gives a bigger rate of parasitism. In the cells of workers the mite has between 15-20 
hours before its sealing and in those of drone it has between 40-50 hours. Once inside the cell it 
submerges in the food present in the bottom in order to not be detected by the nurse bees that are 
taking care of the larvae of the future workers and drones. To be able to breathe it has a 
modification of the cuticle that surrounds the spiracles and that forms a pipe (kind of a snorkel) 
called peritreme that reaches the surface of the nourishing liquid. 
 
As soon as the larva has ingested the food remains the mite begins to feed from its 
hemolymph. The varroa puts the first egg approximately 70 hours after the capping of the brood's 
cell. It puts the following eggs with a cadence of approximately 30 hours. The first egg will give 
birth to a male, the following ones, to females. The female varroas’ newborns take slightly less than 
6 days (5.8) to develop and the males slightly more (6.6). The life cycle goes through the following 
phases: egg - larva - protonymph - deutonymph - adult (figure 6). 
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
33 
 
 
Figure 6. Phases in the life cycles of varroa mites. 
 
 
The female progenitor varroa that penetrates in the brood cell, with its chelicera makes an 
incision in the cuticle of the pupa in order to allow its descendants to feed from it. It is located next 
to another very important zone called "fecal accumulation place" that, as its name indicates, 
gathers with fecal remains; nevertheless, this one is also the zone in which the males are located 
waiting for the females to come and to be able to fertilize them. The females, once reached 
maturity, are successively mating with the male that is inside the brood cell. The males are mature 
sexually between 5.5 and 6.3 days old and the fecal remains deposited in the walls of the cells act 
as "meeting" points in which the males are going to fertilize the females. 
 
When brood cell is opened the female and fertilized varroa adults (phoretic phase), will leave 
the cell to parasitize other bees of the swarm. This parasite prefers the young bees to older ones, 
probably due to the low amounts of the geraniol pheromone made of Nasanov's glands. The 
females of varroa in laboratory conditions can have 7 breeding cycles, but in the nature they do not 
normally have any more than 2 ó 3. The reproductive average rate (number of descendants 
generated in every reproductive cycle) changes depending on whether the reproductive phase is 
realized in a drone or workers cell; in case of cell of workers the value is between 1.3 and 1.4, and 
in those of drone between 2.2 and 2.6. 
 
The bees that have been parasitized do not die, but its physiological capacities are of being 
reduced and they are considered not very productive animals for the colony. The workers that have 
been parasitized during its development present at birth a loss of weight of 7 % (a drone between 
11 and 19 %). These bees begin the foraging at an early age and their life expectancy diminishes 
notably. This parasitism is transmitted by contact between the animals and can destroy the swarms 
or colonies as they cause a high number of workers with malformations (for example, atrophied or 
small-sized wings) and prone to the attack of different pathogenic agents (such as viruses). These 
workers are not in the ideal conditions for taking care of the labors of maintenance for the 
colonies. Therefore this can be great ballast for the evolution of the colony. 
 
In warm climates the non-treated colonies collapse in 2-3 years after the initial infestation with 
this mite; the principal damages of colonial level appear during autumn and winter. Colonies with 
low levels of infestation do not present evident damages, with moderate levels the growth of the 
colonies and the production of honey diminishes, and with high levels the colony collapses. The 
problems are that the line between moderate and high (irreversible) damages places is very thin, 
and that there is no direct correlation with the number of varroas present in the colonies. It 
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
34 
 
depends on other factors like: brood quantity, season and the presence of viruses. An aspect of the 
varroosis to bear in mind very is that if there is abundant brood, the cells can contain between 70 
and 80 % of the total population of the mite in the beehive. The population of varroa does not 
grow in all the colonies with the same speed, there are diverse circumstances and factors that 
influence and determine the prolificacy of the parasite. There are environmental factors, like the 
seasonality or the geographical location and genetic factors, like the hygienic behavior. If a beehive 
keeps low levels of parasitism they are tolerant to the mite. A beehive can be tolerant to varroa 
because of one of the following reasons: 
 
1. Low level of reproduction of the parasite. It happens because: 
a. High infertility or low reproductive rate of varroa (number of viable descendants 
in every brood cycle). 
b. The time of capping of the cells is shorter than usual or varroa reproduces very 
late, therefore the new varroas are not mature and die. 
c. The females of varroa have fewer reproductive cycles than usual. 
 
2. High mortality of the parasites. The explanations for this are: 
a. The bees attack the parasites placed on its companions (grooming behavior). 
b. The bees extract a high percentage of the parasitized brood (hygienic behavior). 
c. The varroas have a high mortality rate because of some environmental factor(s), 
like high temperatures. 
 
 
Nowadays we know that our bees rely on two behaviors that allow them to fight against varroa: 
the grooming and the hygienic behavior. 
 
The bees clean themselves and their companions. This grooming in Apis cerana determines that 
the bees are capable of eliminating the parasites located in the body of the workers in little time; 
unfortunately, though the Apis mellifera have this behavior too, its efficiency is relative. 
 
The hygienic behavior is defined as the capping and retreating of the dead or parasitized brood. 
Though to retreat of the brood does not include specifically the retreat of the mites it does 
interrupts its reproductive cycle. The majority of the researchers think that tolerant broods to this 
mite are the only long-term solution for this pathological problem. When the degree of infestation 
is low it is hard to observe the parasites on the bees. 
 
 
The diagnosis for varroa can be performed introducing a sample of bees in a jar containing 
warm water with a 1% of liquid soap; the jar is shaken for a few minutes, the bees will get rid of the 
varroas that can be observed at the bottom of the jar. It is considered that the degree of parasitism 
is low when the rate of infestation is lower than 5%. With a rate of infestation of 5-10% the colony 
is seriously affected although we do not observe a worrying symptomatology. With a rate of 
between 10 and 20% morphologic alterations are evident in the animals and if the rate is over 20% 
the viability of the colony is questioned. If the rate of infestation is over 30% we can consider the 
colony lost. 
 
The treatment with a systemic product that contains an acaricide must be done when there is 
no brood in the hive. One of the most used is the pyrethroid tau-fluvalinate (Apistan, Klartan or 
Mavrik); it is important to know that only Apistan is registered for apiarist use. The flumethrin is a 
pyrethrin similar to the tau-fluvalinate that is commercialized by Bayvarol©. The current problem 
with these and other active agents is the appearance of populations of resistant mites; in fact, the 
first information of resistance to the fluvalinate dates 15 years ago. Another used acaricide is a 
formamide called amitraz (one of the authorized treatments in apiculture goes by the name 
Apivar), but as in the case of the tau-fluvalinate, resistances to the activate agent are appearing. 
Additionally, to complicate things even more, its toxicity to man is being argued. Coumaphos is an 
organophosphorate compound (Checkmite ©, Asuntol ©, Perizin ©) that is also used as an 
effective acaricide, though just like in the previous cases resistances have been found. 
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
35 
 
 
Also it is very important keep in mind that the increase of resistance to the acaricides obliges to 
rotate its use. The reiterative use of the same active agent only increases the resistance of varroa, 
it is much more advisable to change to a new treatment when the current one trumps. It is clear 
that acaricide products are not the panacea, making it necessary to look for the maximum 
efficiency of the treatments. To do this we have to follow these recommendations: 
1. All the beekeepers in a zone must apply the treatments simultaneously. 
2. Try to use more than one active agent, alternating them. If two annual treatments are 
made it is recommended to use a different substance in each one. Also, two active agents 
must never be applied simultaneously. 
3. If a treatment is not effective it must never be repeated, neither with the same 
substance, nor with a bigger dose, nor with shorter frequency. 
4. Never let a certain product to remain indefinitely in the beehive. This is the best option 
we can follow if we want to prevent as long as possible the apparition of resistant varroas. 
 
As an alternative to the traditional treatments and to the appearance of resistances, different 
products called "alternative" or "natural" are drawn upon. The natural compounds of higher 
efficiency are: formic acid, lactic acid, oxalic acid and thymol. The advantages of these products are: 
(I) 
They have enough efficiency against varroa. 
(II) 
They have a low risk of residues or of pollution of the apiarist products. 
(III) 
There is low probability of appearance of resistances after repeated treatments. 
 
In spite of all the advantages, there are also disadvantages:  
(I) 
Though different presentations exist, the form of application has a great effect in the 
final result. 
(II) 
The difference between effective dose and toxicity for the bees is very narrow, reason 
for which it is necessary to be very careful in how to use it.  
(III) 
The lactic and oxalic acids have to be applied in beehives without brood. 
 
Among the natural mentioned products the thymol is one of the most advisable options. To 
apply it, it is necessary to take care of the dose and use a system that allows a progressive 
liberation of the active agent. 
 
The maximum recommended dose is two strips per hive with a minimum of 8 frames. The 
treatment is repeated a second time with an interval of 8-12 days and exceptionally it can be 
repeated a third time. 
 
After treating varroa, if bees are being observed still carrying mites it does not necessarily mean 
that the applied treatment was trumping, because its efficiency never reaches 98%. It is necessary 
to value how it was carried out and to observe the evolution of the hive. If there appears 
resistance, never treat with the same product, but change it with other alternative. Equivocal 
symptoms can exist, for example, bees with deformed wings. In a beehive where the quantity of 
varroa is not too large it can be a sign not of varroosis (which would be the logical supposition), but 
of virus diseases. 
 
B.5.2. Acarapisosis (acariasis). It is produced by the mite Acarapis woodi, which lives in the 
respiratory system of adult bees (trachea and air sacks). It prefers the first pair of thoracic tracheas; 
due to the fact that the spiracle placed in 2nd terguite (under the insertion zone of the wings) 
cannot be completely closed. 
 
The life cycle of Acarapis woodi is 15-20 days and the different states receive the names of egg, 
larva and adult. 4-5 days after penetrating in the trachea of a bee, the female puts between 5 and 6 
eggs of great size. The development of the eggs up to the adult phase takes 11-12 days for the 
males and 13-16 days for the females. The spread is carried out by contact from an infected bee to 
a young bee (the newborn bees are affected 90% of the times and 5-days-old, 10%), because with 
age the hairs that surround the spiracles harden and form a barrier that prevents the entry but 
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
36 
 
allows the exit of parasites. The spreading of the parasites begins when the bees reach an age of 13 
days old. The females of the parasite are attracted to the new host by the air expelled from the 
prothoracic spiracle as well as by several hydrocarbons in the cuticles of the young bees (less than 4 
days old). 
 
This parasitism is usually asymptomatic. As with almost all the parasites, the population of this 
mite is not stable in a colony throughout the year. In moderated climates the highest population 
increase takes place during winter, when the bees remain inside the colony and the highest drop 
occurs in summer. In subtropical climates the life cycle is similar enough in spite of the lack of 
winter confinement (hibernation). 
 
The external symptoms of the animals are neither specific nor precise and can get confused, 
among others, with nosemosis or with poisoning (problems to fly and in many cases the wings can 
be in an abnormal position). To diagnose the presence of specimens of Acarapis woodi, the first 
pair of thoracic tracheas of the adult bees is observed. A high infestation produces a decrease of 
the brood's area, a small population of bees in the colony, the increase in the consumption of 
honey and a drop in its production. If the infestation is massive it can lead to the death of the 
colony. With regard to the virulence of this disease, the mite produces in the bee two types of 
actions: 
1. Direct action. First, the mites obstruct the respiratory system preventing it to work 
normally, and secondly, they feed of the hemolymph of the host. 
2. Indirect action. Acarapis can be a transmitter vector of different viruses. 
 
For its treatment traditionally Folbex (ethyl chlorobenzene) has been used, but the same 
products for the treatment of varroosis can also be used. Another possible treatment consists on 
the introduction of 5 crystals of thymol or 5 grams of Apithymol in a colony (do not treat the colony 
if it does not have brood since the bees can leave the beehive) every week, for three weeks. 
 
B.5.3. Bee louse. The causal agent is Braula caeca, a chestnut-colored or beige dipteran of 
approximately 1 mm of diameter, which is located in the back of the thorax of the adult bees (with 
high frequency on the queens) and that feeds on the saliva secretions. The eggs are white and the 
animals deposit them in the interior face of the caps of the cells filled with honey; the larvae mine 
the wax of the caps and make galleries to feed on the honey and the pollen, three weeks after the 
laying of eggs (the cycle of development lasts between 16 and 23 days) the adult bee appears in 
the end of a gallery. In some cases the louse is considered to be a parasite and in others as a 
retainer; a few do not cause problems to the colony, but when their number is big they can be 
harmful. 
 
B.5.4. Apimyiasis. It is caused by the endoparasite larva of the fly Senotainia tricuspis, 
which a female (5-7 mm of length, with triangular greyish spots in the abdomen and whitish placed 
between the compound eyes) deposits on the intersegmental membrane that joins the head and 
the thorax of the bee; a female is capable of producing up to 700 larvae. 
 
This fly settles on the lid of the beehive and waits for the bees to go out to attack them. It 
belongs to the Sarcophagidae family. 
The larva (stage I) with a length of 1 mm penetrates inside the body and goes towards the thorax 
feeding of the hemolymph of its host. In the thorax it sheds (stage II with a length of approximately 
2 mm) and normally as a consequence of this process the bee dies (after  4 or 5 days of infestation), 
then the larva realizes the third shed (stage III with a length of 5 mm) and begins to consume the 
tissues of its host. Finally the larva leaves the corpse through the head of the bee and once on the 
outside it buries itself in the ground to a depth of 1-7 cm, to complete its development; in winter it 
can remain buried (diapause) until the following spring. The life cycle inside the host lasts 
approximately 10 days, similar to the time they remain buried in the ground. 
 
The most evident signs of the presence of this parasite are beheaded dead bees at the entrance 
of the hive and empty shells of bees with a reddish pupa attached. 
This parasite weakens the colony by reducing the number of foraging bees, and only in very large 
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
37 
 
numbers it can cause more serious problems. 
 
C. Poisonings. 
In some occasions the bees can poison if they suck nectar that contains toxic products, like the 
horse chestnut trees. They can also poison the animals, when we use of inadequately insecticides 
or acaricides used to treat some diseases. But the poisonings or more frequent poisonings, they are 
the ones caused from the insecticides used in agricultural practices. Treatments do not exist and 
the only possible action consists of trying to limit the damages by moving the colonies to a new 
emplacement. 
 
The symptoms produced by the poisoning with insecticides or acaricides vary a lot, but we 
them can group in the following paragraphs: 
1. If the foraging bees have poisoned themselves out of the beehives and die before 
returning, we observe that the beehives become depopulated without evident reasons 
exist. In addition, there is an imbalance in the ratio broods/workers, meaning there is a 
great quantity of broods and few workers to attend to them. 
2. The foraging bees manage to return to the colony but when they are about to die they are 
expelled, so the corpses are located in the proximities of the beehive. In some cases the 
virus of the chronic paralysis, or VCP (we will talk about it in the next section), can develop 
a similar symptomatology to the described here. 
3. The toxic agent transported by the foraging bees reaches all the members of the colony. In 
this case the workers and even the larvae die inside the colony but it is not observed any 
symptom of infectious disease. 
 
D. Enemies of the bees: 
 
For many animals, a colony of bees represents a food storage that can be plundered when 
there are suitable conditions, or a refuge that can be used on the unfavorable stations. In autumn, 
rodents can penetrate in the beehives destroying the combs; there are also insectivorous birds 
(there is no better example than the bee-eater) that take bees as a part of their diets, or birds that 
can pierce the beehives (for example, royal woodpeckers, Picus viridis). 
 
D.1   The Death's-head Hawk moth (Acherontia Atropos): a lepidoptera with a drawing in the 
shape of skull in its thorax, which tends to penetrate in the beehives to feed. Its food diet is based 
on sugary solutions or nectar, and when it enters the beehive it does not alter the wax of the 
frames; these butterflies use the nails of its legs, to tear the honey combs (frames with honey) and 
to be able to reach the honey with the proboscis. It generally does not cause any problems in the 
beehives, and since its exoskeleton is thick enough and has bee’s venom resistance, it rarely dies 
when it is attacked by workers. 
 
The hosting plant preferred by the caterpillars of this butterfly is the olive tree, and in some 
cases beekeepers can find an adult dead inside the beehives, due to the stings of the bees. 
 
D.2   Big wax moth (Galleria mellonella): Also known as pyralis of the wax or false giant ringworm, 
it is a different lepidoptera that appears where there are beehives. It is a moth of brown greyish 
color that reaches a size from 20 to 30 mm with the wings widespread; its female can put between 
300 and 600 eggs (grouped in sets of 30-50 eggs) in the fissures of the hive. From the eggs a larva 
will be born that when it is young has a white greyish color, later passing to a gray color and 
reaching a size of approximately 2.5 cm; after approximately 18-19 days the larva looks for a solid 
support spinning a cocoon of approximately 2 cm of length, from where which there a butterfly will 
go out. It will live between 3 and 30 days (the females begin to put eggs between 4 and 10 days 
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
38 
 
after the birth), if the environmental conditions are good there several generations develop 
uninterrupted. It is very frightful to beekeepers, since the caterpillars feed of the wax of the 
honeycombs, producing an alteration named bald brood. 
 
The strong and well-populated colonies they defend themselves easily from the assault of this 
butterfly, but the same thing does not happen with the weak ones; it can also attack to the stored 
beehives, for what one recommends to store the supers that contain frames with wax (treated with 
an insecticide gas, as the one produced from the crystals of paradichlorobenzene), in covered 
stacks. To destroy these animals a biological insecticide is used (a bacterium named Bacillus 
thurigiensis, from the awasi strain) that is commercialized under the name of B401®. 
 
Figure 7. Big wax moth  
 
D.3   Minor wax moth: Another lepidoptera that can attack the beehives is Achroia grisella, named 
vulgarly minor wax moth. It is a silvered gray butterfly with a yellowish head; its size ranges 
between 13 mm in the females (they can put between 250 and 300 eggs) and 10 mm in the males. 
Their presence is detected the same way as with the pyralis, by the presence of galleries in the wax 
of the honey combs that contain silk cocoons inside. The treatment is the same as the one for 
Galleria mellonella. 
 
D.4   Wasps: Several wasps can be considered to be true enemies of the bees, between the most 
harmful species we find the hornet (Vespa crabro). This insect makes underground nests of great 
size and can even completely exterminate colonies. 
 
D.5   The coleopteran Cetonia melicivorus: It penetrates in the beehive to feed; its presence is 
detected by the appearance in the combs of broad and sinuous ruts. The shell with which these 
animals are provided prevents the bees from attacking them. This is the reason why in the zones 
where they are very abundant it is necessary to resort to the reduction of the size of the entrance 
of the hives. 
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 6. DISEASES AND ENEMIES OF THE BEES 
 
39 
 
 
E. Colony Collapse Disorder(CCD): 
 
In the winter of 2006 and the spring of 2007, in the United States, a very high mortality of 
colonies (over 30%) took place, and was repeated in the winter of 2007-2008. This situation shot all 
kinds of alarms bees are the most important pollinators in the world. The principal 
symptomatology of the affected colonies was a progressive loss of workers without being able to 
attribute it to a known pathogenic agent. 
 
At the beginning it was thought that varroa destructor could be the causer of this disorder, but 
they did not find clear evidences that supported this affirmation. The study of the animals that 
survived in the affected colonies revealed the presence in the intestines of Nosema's spores, but 
the number of spores found did not confirm a major participation of this pathogenic agent. There 
were also found high levels of viral infections in the analyzed animals, but once again not enough to 
explain such high mortalities. The symptomatology was not clear either: the colonies were losing 
workers though they were preserving its reserves of honey and pollen and massive mortalities 
were not observed in the entrance or inside the beehives; nevertheless the loss of workers was 
evident. An extended idea was that new pesticides used in agriculture (neonicotinoids) were 
responsible of this loss of colonies, and also the possibility of a nutritional cause was considered 
since a natural environment dominated by the monocultures cannot be adapted to cover the 
nourishing needs of the insects. Finally all the available information was gathered and several 
hypotheses tried to explain this new pathology. The most important ones are: 
1) A nutritional problem: pollen contributions in the colony are insufficient or inadequate, 
meaning its quality as source of protein is not enough for the nutrition and development of 
bees. 
2) The action of a pesticide: though the symptomatology associated with this pathology is 
relatively diffuse, it has been proposed that the active agents Imidacloprid or Fipronil used 
in the formulations of different insecticides widely used are in charge of the depopulation. 
3) A viral disease: several researchers are working with the hypothesis that a new virus or a 
variant of someone of the known ones, are in charge of the appearance of this 
symptomatology. 
4) A disease caused by Nosema ceranae: the nosemosis is a disease caused by the 
microsporidia Nosema apis. Recently another species of this family was discovered, the 
Nosema ceranae. Originally it parasitized the Apis cerana, but it has already spread all over 
the planet. 
5) The disorder is a combined effect of the previous diseases: all beekeepers know that 
varroa is a fearsome enemy of the bees. It can be that the combined action combined of 
varroa destructor with another pathogenic agent, like Nosema ceranae, is the responsible 
for this disease. To this fearsome duo or a similar one (like virus + varroa), environmental 
factors might join. 
6) Finally among other possibilities, we can account for the hypothesis that climate change 
is altering somehow the colonies. 
 
 
What can a beekeeper do against a case of depopulation? This is a difficult question. The best 
measures to take seem to be that an improvement in the nutrition of the colony (using protein 
complements) as well as the control of varroa and nosema (and of diseases in general), together 
with a good management. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 7. MONITORING SYSTEMS FOR BEES 
 
40 
 
CHAPTER  7 
 
 
 
Monitoring systems for bees 
 
 
As the idea of the thesis is to start working on a monitoring system for the bees, a 
research on the current systems is mandatory. The most commercialized by far is the 
Arnia system, and is the one we are going to watch. 
 
 
Arnia remote hive monitoring system: It measures the temperature, the humidity, 
the sounds and, optionally, the weight (requires extra hardware). Through sounds, it 
can predict the hive behavior, like swarming, and humidity inside the brood cells will 
be the factor that determines the strength of the colony: between 50-60%, we have a 
strong beehive; below 40% or above 80% the hive is in danger of not developing the 
brood as it should (even dying). 
 
The temperature sensors will check and regulate the heat in the hive and the 
brood cells. 
 
Figure 8 Stabilization of brood temperature: screenshot of Arnia graphic user interface 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 8. HYPOTHESIS AND MEASUREMENTS 
 
41 
 
CHAPTER  8 
 
 
 
Hypothesis & measurements 
 
A. 
Hypothesis. 
 
As a first approach to this hive monitoring I want to measure the amount of bees with the 
Deformed Wings Virus (DWV) and the number of Varroa mites counted at the bottom tray of 
the hive and acknowledge the correlation between them. 
 
To measure the mites at the bottom tray it is convenient that the tray is sticky for the mites 
but not for the bees. This “sticky board” does exist and it is very useful for measure the 
infestation rate of varroa. If we are not planning on using a commercial board, but a home-
made one, it is best if we read about the best adhesives to use and the amount so it works as 
intended sticking the mites but not the bees. 
 
B. 
Measurements. 
 
After contacting with the Danish Beekeeping Association (they are the ones who first give 
me information about the Arnia monitoring system; also telling me that they were not 
completely convinced about how much of help it really was). They were very nice and 
introduced me to Rune Sørensen, who let me use his beehives to make measurements with his 
fullest support. 
 
However, his two beehives (figure 55 - he had another base supper for a third one, but it 
was empty) were quite strong and showed no sign of varroa, although I did find a couple of 
slugs in the bottom tray. I took one picture of the bottom tray (figure 56) every time before 
leaving back home to analyze the images from the camera sensor. 
 
Analyzing the images took after leaving the camera sensor at the entrance of each beehive 
(figure 57) for several hours once every day, I could not find any sign of Deformed Wing Virus in 
them. The images do not have the best resolution, but it was enough to see the wings of the 
bees leaving and entering the beehive. 
 
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 8. HYPOTHESIS AND MEASUREMENTS 
 
42 
 
 
Figure 9. Rune’s beehives 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Entrance of the beehive 
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 8. HYPOTHESIS AND MEASUREMENTS 
 
43 
 
 
Figure 11. Bottom tray with a couple of slugs 
 
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 9. DISCUSSION 
 
44 
 
CHAPTER  9 
 
 
 
Discussion 
 
 
After all the researching on beekeeping, the main areas a monitoring system can help with, 
and the interesting measures for each one, are: 
a) Hibernation: Temperature in the center (nest) during hibernation. Also, temperature 
outside, to check on possible sudden oscillations of temperatures that could make the 
bees start moving again as the temperature rises and kill them as it drops.  
b) Food supply: With the weight of the hive we can have a fairly good idea of the amount 
of honey and pollen a beehive has. However, if we collect too much pollen or if we take 
pollen combs out of the hive, we should make sure that there is enough pollen. We 
should either check the pollen combs, check the weight of the broods when they 
emerge out of the cells (since broods’ growth depends mostly on proteins from pollen) 
or check the amount of brood (the queen will lay less eggs if there is a deficit of food, 
because the adult bees developed would be weak and prone to diseases). 
c) Brood state: this is the most accurate indicator of a healthy beehive, so developing a 
proper way to check out the brood cells is key to make a helpful monitoring system. 
One way to do it is to put a fixed camera in the brood combs. There are several 
problems with this: the queen is free to put brood in any frame of any super below the 
queen excluder (if we are using it); the workers use a substance called propolis for 
constructions, like filling holes in the frames, and they could use it to cover the camera. 
d) Swarming: Weight can also measure the amount of brood frames, so we are aware of 
putting another supper before the queen excluder before the queen runs out of space 
and the half of the colony leaves. 
e) Prevention of diseases: with a camera for the brood, we can detect the intrusion of 
varroa, which is the main vector for many other diseases.  
 
Determining with sensors the cleanness of the material we want to reuse in a 
pass/no pass test helps beekeepers be sure there is no contagion because of this. 
Infected material will be disposed of. 
 
However, the best method for detecting changes in the bees environment is by 
hearing what they have to “say”. Analysis of the acoustics of a beehive is without a 
doubt the best way to know what happens in a colony.  
f) Detection of infestations: for example, counting the number of varroa in the sticky 
board at the bottom of the hive. If done with an infrared camera, it can easily 
differentiate varroa and remains of wasted propolis (they have a similar brown color) 
g) Activity in the hives: with sound sensors, we can check the frequency to know the 
amount of bees in the colony. This can be an indicator of the strength of the hive, but it 
is not sharp enough, meaning it should be combined with other measures to make sure 
of it. In fact, it is not simple to interpret these signals, though. This is because every 
hive is different. Some make a lot of honey and are docile, some are quite ferocious 
anything peeking inside and do not produce so much honey (since they are so fierce, 
they are not weak and produce quite a bit). Any other combination can easily be found. 
This is something observed when harvesting the honey, but it is a clear indication that 
hives react differently to similar events, meaning hives under attack may or may not 
make a distinctive sound. 
h) Drone hives: Drones are louder than workers, so we can also check on the amplitude 
and bandwidth of the sound to check if we have a “drone hive” (this can also be done 
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 9. DISCUSSION 
 
45 
 
by checking the brood). A drone hive is a beehive where the queen has suddenly died, 
without leaving queen larvae to replace her (or the larvae left killed each other after 
emerging, when competing to be the queen in the hive) and this forces one of the 
workers to lay eggs. In spite of developing the ability of laying eggs, workers are 
infertile, so all the broods are drones. If not taken care of in time, the drones will 
plunder nearby hives to survive, eating the supplies, spreading diseases. We know 
varroas multiply exponentially in drone brood cells, so the probability of this hive, with 
only drone brood cells and a dropping number of workers to look after it, to become a 
source of varroa infestation in the apiary is huge. 
i) 
Ascertain the health of the queen: As we know, a queen is the most important bee in 
the colony, so making sure of its condition is very important. To look after her, we must 
not put her any sensors, because even if without any harm, the queen attendants 
(workers that groom and feed the queen) will most likely detect it and try to remove it. 
 
We can try to find the exact bandwidth and intensity of the queen, hoping it will be 
enough to detect changes in health. However, it seems that this method will most likely 
give many false alarms and maybe it would not detect certain health problems. 
 
 
 
 
On a different note, an interesting idea I would like to bring out is making a robot bee with 
the characteristics of a queen attendant. However, I believe that if a queen attendant does not 
take care of the queen, it will be relieved from this duty and taken to another position in the 
hive, or even killed or exiled from the hive because strange behavior is symptom of disease. 
Nevertheless, I think this idea could be used for checking the health of the brood. 
 
Also, given the importance of smell in bees (they have more than double smell receptors, 
170, than any other insect, including fruit flies, 62, and mosquitoes, 79), future works should 
explore this direction. It allows them to differentiate between bees from different hives (even 
when swarming is happening, their smell is already different and that is how they know the 
bees that stay and the ones that go), drones can even know if a queen has been fertilized or 
not, foraging bees use them to search for flowers… In other words, smell controls bees’ 
behavior. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 10. FUTURE WORK 
 
46 
 
CHAPTER  10 
 
 
 
Future work 
 
 
 
After all this research and work in Denmark, I am going to continue this topic with a project 
in Spain (actually, it will be as the PFC, the studies final project). I have already contacted with a 
beekeeping association in Madrid, Apiscam, through a professional beekeeper, Adrián, who has 
helped my family (and me) extracting the honey this August and the two previous years. I will 
be able to work with some beehives they use to teach, meaning they will be perfect to find and 
detect diseases, as well as make the measurements of weight, heat (in the middle, in the walls, 
the average…), sound (frequency, amplitude,bandwidth…) and any others I will find relevant to 
the project.
 
Figure 12. Apiscam Beehives 
 
 
An interesting idea I would like to bring out is making a robot bee with the characteristics of 
a queen attendant. However, I believe that if a queen attendant does not take care of the 
queen, it will be relieved from this duty and taken to another position in the hive, or even killed 
or exiled from the hive because strange behavior is symptom of disease. Nevertheless, I think 
this idea could be used for checking the health of the brood. 
 
Also, given the importance of smell in bees (they have more than double smell receptors, 
170, than any other insect, including fruit flies, 62, and mosquitoes, 79), future works should 
explore this direction. It allows them to differentiate between bees from different hives (even 
when swarming is happening, their smell is already different and that is how they know the 
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 10. FUTURE WORK 
 
47 
 
bees that stay and the ones that go), drones can even know if a queen has been fertilized or 
not, foraging bees use them to search for flowers… In other words, smell controls bees’ 
behavior. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
REFERENCES 
 
48 
 
CHAPTER  11 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
 
I would like to thank my father Juan Carlos for introducing me to the exciting world of 
beekeeping; my advisor Nils for encouraging me to take the difficult but motivating path; Soren 
Hansen for the help with the sensors; Ole Kilpinen from the Danish Beekeeping Association for 
introducing me to Rune Havgaard Sørensen, who I thank for granting me access to his 
beehives. 
 
Also, I would like to thank Adrián for getting me in touch with Apiscam, and I would like to 
thank this association for their offer to help. 
 
