==PAGE:1==
Eﬀects of Specimen Mounting
and Diﬀuser Conﬁgurations on
Sound Absorption Measurements
in Reverberation Chambers
Ana Alexandrina Goncalves Torres
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, building 348,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Absorption coeﬃcients of building materials are widely used in acoustical
design.
The standardized way of estimating a random incidence absorption
coeﬃcient is with the reverberation chamber method and Sabine’s formula,
according to ISO 354. The inter-laboratory reproducibility of this measurement
procedure is known to be low and the resulting Sabine absorption coeﬃcient
is known to be constantly overestimated, many times achieving values higher
than unity. The main reason for the large spread in results is thought to be the
lack and diﬀerences in diﬀusivity between diﬀerent laboratories. Determining
when suﬃcient diﬀusion has been achieved is diﬃcult since there are no good
quantiﬁers of diﬀusion.
The adequacy of two recently proposed diﬀuse ﬁeld
quantiﬁers is accessed in this study. One being the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor, ratio of
the measured standard deviation of the reverberation time to the theoretical
one, and the other one being the average kurtosis of an early window of an
impulse response.
Results show the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is not suitable when
evaluated in third octave bands, but can be used as a rough estimator when
averaged. The kurtosis, when evaluated for high frequencies or a broadband,
did not produce consistent results for small changes in diﬀusivity, and can only
be used as a rough estimator. For low frequencies the kurtosis did not seem
to be correlated with the room’s diﬀusivity and apparently cannot be used as
a quantiﬁer for this frequency range, where low diﬀusivity is a bigger concern.
The main cause for the overestimation of the Sabine absorption coeﬃcient is
thought to be the edge and size eﬀects. The inﬂuence of a ﬂush mounting on
these eﬀects is investigated. Results reveal the ﬂush mounting slightly reduces
the overestimation of the coeﬃcient. Moreover, large diﬀerences are observed
between a theoretically estimated, size corrected, absorption coeﬃcient and the
measured Sabine coeﬃcient. Results lead to believe mounting conditions are
not a major inﬂuential factor on these diﬀerences.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared under the guidance of Professor Cheol-Ho Jeong of
Department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark
and Professor António Carvalho from the Civil Engineering Department of the
University of Porto in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master degree in Civil Engineering.
Kgs. Lyngby, 31-July-2015
Ana Alexandrina Goncalves Torres
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors Prof.
Cheol-Ho Jeong, Melanie Nolan from DTU and Prof. António Carvalho from
FEUP, for providing me the opportunity and facilities to do my research and
for the continuous support on this project. Their guidance helped me in all the
time of research and writing of this thesis.
I must thank my parents and my brother for all their unconditional love and
support throughout the years, I wouldn’t be where I am without them.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my dear friend Dheeraj for his
support during this project.
Finally, a big thanks to the Storks youth group for teaching me, in the course of
these ﬁve years, all those valuable things you cannot learn in a classroom, and
for all the unforgettable moments.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
List of Figures
ix
1
Introduction
1
2
Concepts And Deﬁnitions
5
2.1
Build-up time and Reverberation time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Sabine’s equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Sound Absorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Standardized Measurement Methods . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Reverberation chamber method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Sources of error when using the reverberation chamber
method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Diﬀusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Indicators of Diﬀuse Field Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Inﬂuence of The Mounting Conditions in Absorption
Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Diﬀuse Field Factor and its Potential as an Indicator of Diﬀuse
Field Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.3
Estimation of Diﬀuse Field Factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Kurtosis: Its Potential to Quantify Diﬀusivity and the Proposed
Measurement Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Estimation of the Size Corrected Theoretical Random Incidence
Absorption Coeﬃcient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Experimental Arrangement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7
The Rooms and the Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations
. . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7.1
Room 004 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7.2
Room 904 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7.3
Excitation of the Rooms and Measurement Setup . . . . .
26
3.7.4
Source, Microphone and Test Specimen Positions . . . . .
27
3.7.5
Climatic Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results and Discussion
29
4.1
Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.2
Diﬀuse Field Factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.3
Kurtosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Mounting Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Conclusion and Future work
43
5.1
Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.1
Diﬀuse Field Factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1.2
Kurtosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Mounting Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A Appendix
47
A.1 Kurtosis Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Transmission, absorption and reﬂection of sound
. . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Estimation of the reverberation time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Typical Absorption Curves of Three Types of Absorbers . . . . .
8
3.1
Impulse response and the corresponding kurtosis for a 20 ms
sliding window
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Dimensions of the reverberation chambers . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Cavity used for ﬂush mounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Type A mounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Panel diﬀusers in room 904
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Measurement Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.7
Source(A, B and C), Microphone(1, 2, 3 and 4) and Test
Specimen Positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.8
Thermo-hygrometer used to keep stable climatic conditions
. . .
28
4.1
Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs frequency in third octave bands
for diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers with 95% conﬁdence intervals 30
4.2
Sabine absorption coeﬃcient(averaged from 100 to 5000 Hz) vs
number of panels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Diﬀuse ﬁeld factor vs frequency in third octave bands for diﬀerent
number of panel diﬀusers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Diﬀuse ﬁeld factor vs number of panel diﬀusers for diﬀerent octave
bands
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Diﬀuse ﬁeld factor (averaged from 200 to 5000 Hz) vs number of
panel diﬀusers in the presence and absence of the specimen and
linear correlation in the presence of the absorber
. . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs diﬀuse ﬁeld factor (both averaged
from 200 to 5000 Hz) for diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers . . .
34
==PAGE:12==
x
LIST OF FIGURES
4.7
K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 100 to
5000 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.8
Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 100 to 5000 Hz . . . . .
36
4.9
K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 3150 to
5000 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.10 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 3150 to 5000 Hz
. . . .
37
4.11 K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 100 to
160 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.12 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 100 to 160 Hz . . . . . .
38
4.13 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient in third octave bands for diﬀerent
mounting conditions, with a 95% conﬁdence interval . . . . . . .
39
4.14 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient for diﬀerent mounting conditions
and theoretically estimated absorption coeﬃcient for third octave
bands, with a 95% conﬁdence interval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.1 K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 200 to
315 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.2 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 200 to 315 Hz . . . . . .
48
A.3 K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 400 to
630 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.4 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 400 to 630 Hz . . . . . .
48
A.5 K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 800 to
1250 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.6 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 800 to 1250 Hz . . . . .
49
A.7 K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 1600 to
2500 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.8 Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 1600 to 2500 Hz
. . . .
50
A.9 Radiation impedance - Reference Table
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Acoustical design is usually based on the sound absorption properties of the
various boundary surfaces in the room.
Absorption coeﬃcients are used to
quantify these properties. It has been proven that random incidence absorption
coeﬃcients are superior to normal incidence coeﬃcients, when simulating
three-dimensional rooms [1].
The standardized way of estimating a random
incidence coeﬃcient is with the reverberation chamber method and Sabine’s
formula [2].
This yields the so called Sabine absorption coeﬃcient(αs).
In
the theory behind this calculation process, many simplifying assumptions are
made, notably, that of a completely diﬀuse chamber and that of an inﬁnite
sample. These assumptions are not met in reality. Consequently, the absorption
coeﬃcient is often under or overestimated. Sometimes, it even exceeds unity
(these values are physically impossible and cannot be used in room acoustic
simulations). In fact, in reality, the degree of diﬀusivity and size of the sample
vary from chamber to chamber, which leads to large discrepancies between
results of diﬀerent laboratories, i.e.
a poor inter-laboratory reproducibility
[3].
The diﬀerences in results are much higher than can be accepted, e.g.
from a jurisdictional point of view (when dealing with building contracts and
liability). This constitutes a problem for acoustic engineers and everyone else
involved in the growing international trade of sound absorption products. The
spread in results should be reduced.
Also, the absorption coeﬃcient should
be faithful to its deﬁnition and represent the fraction of incident energy that
is absorbed, it should not be under or overestimated, it should deﬁnitely not
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
exceed unity. The main cause for the poor reproducibility is thought to be the
diﬀerences in diﬀusivity between laboratories. A low degree of diﬀusivity results
in underestimated abs coefs. Eﬀorts are made, in reverberation chambers, to
increase the diﬀusivity and meet ISO 354’s requirements. However, determining
when suﬃcient diﬀusion has been achieved is diﬃcult, if not impossible, since
there are no good quantiﬁers of diﬀusion [4]. Adequate descriptors of diﬀusion
are, therefore, necessary.
Recently, Lautenbach et al. [5] introduced the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor as a possible
indicator of diﬀusion.
It compares the measured standard deviation of the
reverberation time with the theoretical standard deviation under diﬀuse ﬁeld
conditions. In an internal project being carried on by Jeong in DTU, the average
kurtosis of a short and early time frame of the impulse response was proposed
as a quantiﬁer of diﬀusion. In this thesis, both the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and the
kurtosis are measured under several conﬁgurations with a diﬀerent number of
panel diﬀusers, with and without an absorbing sample. Indeed, it is believed
that, if placed correctly, panel diﬀusers increase diﬀusion. It is also known that
a sample with high absorptive properties diminishes the diﬀusivity. Moreover, it
is hypothesized that, as the diﬀusion increases, so does the absorption of sound
by the sample. With all this in mind, the results of these measurements are used
to assess the adequacy of the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and the kurtosis as descriptors
of diﬀusion.
The ﬁnite size of the sample is believed to be the most important cause of
overestimation of αs in low frequencies [6]. It has long been known that αs
depends on the size of the specimen, the smaller the sample - and consequently,
the bigger the relative size of it’s edges - the greater αs becomes [7]. The cause of
this can be separated into two diﬀerent phenomena: the absorption of sound by
the sample’s free edges and the diﬀraction evoked by the edges (a discontinuity)
which leads to additional absorption. Terminology for these phenomena is not
consistent in the literature, but they can be referred to as edge eﬀect and size
eﬀect, respectively. In the ISO 354 a minimum sample size of 10m2 is required in
order to minimize these eﬀects. However, a bigger sample comes at the price of
less diﬀusion. So, while increasing the sample size is not the solution, mounting
conditions may provide some answers.
It is clear that mounting conditions
inﬂuence the edge eﬀect. ISO 354 dictates that when a test specimen is directly
mounted on a surface, its edges must be “totally and tightly enclosed by a frame
constructed from reﬂective material”. The inﬂuence of the mounting conditions
on the size eﬀect, however, is not straightforward. The ﬂush mounting condition,
which is not common practice, consists of embedding the sample into a cavity in
the room’s concrete ﬂoor, in a way that the surfaces are ﬂush and the edges are
completely involved by concrete. In this study, sound absorption measurements
are conducted with a ﬂush mounting and a standard type A mounting, with and
without reﬂective boards covering the edges. The results are compared with the
==PAGE:15==
3
objective of evaluating the ﬂush mounting’s inﬂuence on the edge and size eﬀect.
The idea and motivation for analyzing this particular mounting condition come
from the reasons mentioned in the following paragraph.
A theoretical random incidence absorption coeﬃcient can be estimated by the
so called Paris formula.
It assumes an inﬁnite absorption surface.
On this
account, large discrepancies are found between this theoretical estimation and
the measured Sabine coeﬃcient.
Thomasson [8] introduced a size correction
for the theoretical estimation, taking into account the ﬁniteness of the sample.
However, even with this correction, discrepancies between the theoretical results
and the measurements conducted with a standardized mounting condition are
still observed, as shown in a study conducted by Nolan et al.
[9].
One
of the proposed explanations was the fact that Thomasson’s model assumes
the specimen to be ﬂush mounted in an inﬁnite baﬄe, unlike the conditions
of real standardized measurements. On this account, future work with ﬂush
mounting was suggested in order determine to what extent can the diﬀerences
be explained by the mounting conditions. With this purpose, the results of the
aforementioned absorption measurements are compared with the results of this
theoretical model.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Concepts And Deﬁnitions
Unlike what happens with the propagation of sound in a free ﬁeld, where sound
is attenuated mostly by its medium, in a room, sound is bounded on all sides and
has complex interactions with these boundaries. There is reﬂection, absorption
and transmission of sound. These are illustrated in the ﬁgure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Transmission, absorption and reﬂection of sound
==PAGE:18==
6
Concepts And Deﬁnitions
2.1
Build-up time and Reverberation time
When a continuously emitting sound source, like a loudspeaker, is turned on
inside a room, the direct sound waves are reﬂected from surface to surface,
progressively building up the sound pressure.
At a certain point, sound
absorption in the room balances out the energy output by the loudspeaker.
The time it takes to achieve this equilibrium is called build-up time. As sound
waves propagate inside the room they become weaker and weaker, not only form
the consecutive absorptions and transmissions that happen as they are reﬂected
by the various surfaces, but also because of attenuation by air. It was Sabine
who ﬁrst deﬁned reverberation time as the time it takes for a 60 dB drop in
level (the moment sound becomes inaudible), from the moment the source is
turned oﬀ. In practice, however, it is hard to obtain a 60 dB decay due to the
existence of background noise. Hence, the decay is usually evaluated for a 20
or 30 dB drop (written as T20 and T30 respectively) and then extrapolated in
order to obtain the reverberation time[10]. In this study the T30 will be used
and the extrapolation process is as follows.
Figure 2.2: Estimation of the reverberation time
For each third octave band the evaluation starts 5 dB below the average
steady-state level observed before turning oﬀthe sound source. This starting
point can be determined by taking a linear regression and selecting the point
5 dB below the steady state level, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.2. The endpoint is
then 35 dB below the initial sound pressure level and at least 10 dB above the
background noise. If both requirements cannot be fulﬁlled, the evaluation range
can be reduced from 30 dB to a minimum of 20 dB.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Sound Absorption
7
The decays are evaluated with a linear regression over the evaluation range.
Especially for low frequencies and for evaluation ranges which are less than 30
dB, it is important to assess the agreement between the regression curve and
the recorded decay curve through visual veriﬁcation. From the expression of the
linear regression, the reverberation time can then be calculated with T=-60/b.
2.1.1
Sabine’s equation
Sabine’s original equation was
T60 = 0.161V
A[s],
(2.1)
Where V is the room volume in cubic metres and A is the total absorption area.
Later, a correction term accounting for the medium attenuation was introduced.
T60 = 0.161
V
A + 4mV [s],
(2.2)
Where m is the power attenuation coeﬃcient.
Other alternative formulas, adaptations of the original, were later introduced.
Eyring’s formula in 1930, Millington-Sette in 1932 and others. Sabine’s formula
has certain limitations, and some of the other formulas are believed to be better
in certain aspects. In any case, Sabine’s formula continues to be recommended
by the international standard ISO 354.
2.2
Sound Absorption
When sound is absorbed, its kinetic energy (expressed as particle vibration)
is dissipated into other forms of energy, most commonly heat. An absorption
coeﬃcient (α) represents the fraction of incident energy that is absorbed [10]
and is used to evaluate a material’s eﬃcacy in absorbing sound. It takes a value
ranging from 0 to 1. A perfect absorber would absorb 100% of the incident
energy and α would be 1. A perfectly reﬂecting surface would have α=0. The
absorption coeﬃcient depends on the angle of incidence of the sound wave. In
fact, there are several diﬀerent sound absorption coeﬃcients.
Some refer to
the absorption at a speciﬁc angle of incidence.
If this angle is 0◦then it’s
called a normal incidence absorption coeﬃcient.
Others refer to absorption
in a diﬀuse sound ﬁeld, where sound comes randomly, from all directions and
==PAGE:20==
8
Concepts And Deﬁnitions
angles of incidence. These are called random incidence absorption coeﬃcients.
Absorption coeﬃcients diﬀer also in the way that they are measured. Diﬀerent
measuring methods will be discussed further ahead in this chapter.
The absorption coeﬃcient depends also on the frequency of the incident sound.
Indeed, a material with certain dimensional characteristics, like a certain pore
size, is capable of eﬃciently absorbing sound only within a certain range of
wavelengths and corresponding frequencies. Sound absorbers can be placed into
three main categories according to their basic characteristics and the frequency
range for which they are most eﬀective [10].
There are membrane absorbers, more eﬃcient for low frequencies; resonant
absorbers, acting mostly on medial frequencies; and porous absorbers, which
are used in this study, that are more eﬀective for high frequencies(See ﬁgure
2.3).
Porous absorbers are materials with small interstitial pores where sound energy
is dissipated. Their eﬃciency depends essentially on their density and thickness
[10].
Resonant
Porous
Frequency
Membrane
a
1
0
Figure 2.3: Typical Absorption Curves of Three Types of Absorbers
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Sound Absorption
9
2.2.1
Standardized Measurement Methods
There are two standardized methods to measure the absorption coeﬃcients of
building materials:
One is the so called impedance tube method.
Here, a specimen is attached
to one end of a tube and a loudspeaker to the other; a microphone is moved
lengthwise across the tube and measures the static sound ﬁeld produced. There
are two variations of this method, guidelines can be found in ISO 10534-1 and
ISO 10534-2 [11][12].
The other method is referred to as the reverberation
chamber method; it is of most importance in this study and will be discussed
in more detail.
The Reverberation chamber method surpasses certain limitations of the
impedance tube method.
Indeed, the impedance tube method only allows
the determination of normal incidence absorption coeﬃcients, while in a
reverberation chamber method sound hits the sample from all angles, hence
more closely reﬂecting a real setting. Moreover, in the chamber method, the
absorber can be set up in the same way that it will be used in practice. Also,
the measurements can be conducted for discrete objects such as furniture or
people.
2.2.2
Reverberation chamber method
The measurements take place in a reverberation chamber; this is a large room,
usually larger than 200m2; it has very reﬂective walls, ceiling and ﬂoor so as to
yield a long reverberation time; the longest it is, the more accurate the results
become [13].
This method is based on the comparison of reverberation times.
The
reverberation time of the empty room Tempty is measured ﬁrst, and then, the
reverberation time of the room in the presence of the absorptive sampleToccupied,
which is lower. The equivalent sound absorption area of the absorber, based on
Sabine’s formula, can then be calculated as follows:
Asample = 55.3

Voccupied
coccupiedToccupied
−
Vempty
cemptyTempty

−4(Voccupiedmoccupied −Vemptymempty)
(2.3)
Where Vempty and Voccupied are the volume of the reverberation chamber in
cubic metres, without and with the absorptive specimen respectively; cempty and
coccupied are the propagation speed of sound in air, in meters per second, in the
==PAGE:22==
10
Concepts And Deﬁnitions
reverberation chamber, without and with the absorptive specimen respectively;
and mempty and moccupied are the power attenuation coeﬃcients, in reciprocal
meters, calculated from the climatic conditions in the reverberation chamber,
without and with the absorptive specimen respectively.
The absorption coeﬃcient(αsample) of the specimen can then be calculated with
formula
αsample = Asample
Ssample
(2.4)
Where Ssample is the surface of the test sample in square metres.
The reverberation chamber method is preformed under certain limits and
directions clearly deﬁned in ISO 354[2] in order to minimize errors and
uncertainty. However, in spite of it being standardized, this method still has
questionable reliability and accuracy, as mentioned in the introduction and
further discussed in the following section.
2.2.3
Sources
of
error
when
using
the
reverberation
chamber method
One source of error is the fact that this method assumes a completely diﬀuse
sound ﬁeld, which cannot be met in reality. This being so, the measurement
is still allowed by standard, if suﬃcient diﬀusion is achieved.
The standard
states that suﬃcient diﬀusivity is achieved by adding acoustic diﬀusers until the
absorption does not increase anymore. This procedure, however, has proven not
to be valid [14], because the maximum absorption may not be achieved, since the
addition of diﬀusers doesn’t always lead to more diﬀusivity. Suﬃcient diﬀusivity
is, therefore, not achieved in many cases. This leads to the underestimation of
αs. Moreover, poor inter-laboratory reproducibility has been reported by several
studies conducting round robin tests, and the diﬀerences in the diﬀusivity among
diﬀerent chambers is believed to be the main cause of the large spread.
Another source of error is the fact that in the mathematical model behind this
method, an inﬁnite sample is assumed. In reality, the specimen is ﬁnite. It is
well known that this leads to an overestimation of αs. The smaller the sample,
the bigger the relative edge perimeter, and the more overestimated αs becomes.
There is, in fact, a linear relation between this overestimated αs and the relative
edge length E, which can be expressed as
αs = α∞+ β.E
(2.5)
where α∞is the absorption coeﬃcient for an inﬁnite sample.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Diﬀusion
11
It is also known that this overestimation is related to the wavelength relative to
the dimensions of the sample [15] and occurs mainly for lower frequencies, from
200-500 Hz. As mentioned in the introduction, the cause for this overestimation
can be separated into two diﬀerent phenomena: the simple absorption of sound
by the sample’s free edges and the diﬀraction evoked by the edges leading to
additional absorption. Terminology for these phenomena is not consistent in the
literature, but they can be referred to as edge eﬀect and size eﬀect, respectively.
Additionally leading to overestimated coeﬃcients is the use of the Sabine
equation itself. Eyring’s formula, for example, yields lower results. Even so,
the ISO group continues to recommend the use of Sabine’s formula.
Also to be noted, the frequency range for which this method is valid is limited.
Indeed, a statistical approach is no longer accurate below the Schroeder cut-oﬀ
frequency of the reverberation chamber in question. For frequencies lower than
this limit there is insuﬃcient diﬀusion. It is calculated with
fSchroeder = 2000
r
T
V
(2.6)
Where T is the reverberation time and V is the volume of the reverberation
chamber.
2.3
Diﬀusion
A perfectly diﬀuse sound ﬁeld is homogeneous and isotropic; at any point
in space the sound pressure is the same and waves come from all possible
directions.
It is the sound ﬁeld that would exist in an unbounded medium,
created by distant, uncorrelated sources of random noise, evenly distributed
over all directions. Here, waves come with the same intensity from all angles of
incidence, so we can speak of random sound incidence.
As mentioned before,
a perfectly diﬀuse sound ﬁeld is unattainable in
reality. Even so, the theoretical model behind the estimation of αs assumes
measurements are made in a reverberation chamber with such a sound ﬁeld.
This is a known source of error in the estimation of the coeﬃcient, as mentioned
in the previous section. The sabine absorption coeﬃcient is, therefore, only an
approximation of a random incidence absorption coeﬃcient, since random sound
incidence is not really achieved.
There are, however, several ways to increase the sound ﬁeld diﬀusion. One way
is by having an irregular room shape, with no parallel walls. Boundary diﬀusers
==PAGE:24==
12
Concepts And Deﬁnitions
(irregularities on the boundaries) are another common way of achieving this
goal. However, the size of boundary diﬀusers needed is often prohibitively large
and expensive. A more economic solution is to use slightly concave panels which
are suspended freely in the room at random positions and orientations, referred
to as panel diﬀusers.
2.3.1
Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers
In spite of the eﬀorts to increase diﬀusion, determining when suﬃcient diﬀusion
has been achieved is not an easy task. A good diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁer is yet to be
proposed. Indeed, all quantiﬁers of diﬀusivity proposed in the standards have
shown some issues. In a study by Bradley et al.[4], results from the diﬀerent
procedures revealed to be contradictory. The maximum absorption coeﬃcient
method (αmax) proposed in ISO 354 does not clearly indicate whether suﬃcient
diﬀusivity is achieved by any of the diﬀuser types.
The relative standard
deviation of sound decay (srel) proposed in ASTM C423[16] suggests insuﬃcient
sound ﬁeld diﬀusivity for all diﬀuser types. Whereas the total conﬁdence interval
of sound decay and absorption area (CItot) proposed in ASTM E90[17] indicates
that all diﬀuser types produce adequate sound ﬁeld diﬀusivity for all frequency
bands. Additionally, both αmax and srel suggest diﬀerent optimal numbers of
diﬀusers and diﬀerent test specimen absorption coeﬃcients.
When developing a diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁer, the diﬀuse ﬁeld’s core properties,
homogeneity and isotropy, can be examined directly. Homogeneity is fairly easy
to analyze, isotropy, however, is quite hard to examine because the incident
intensity cannot be measured with suﬃcient resolution, even using high-tech
multi-channel microphone array systems.
Indirectly, the consequences of a
diﬀuse sound ﬁeld can be analyzed instead. Examples of this are: the sensitivity
of the room’s impulse response to the source location, exponential sound decay
over time (a linear decay rate), spatial uniformity of the reverberation time, no
sudden changes in the sound pressure in impulse responses. Both the diﬀuse
ﬁeld factor and the kurtosis, suggested in this study, belong to the indirect
approach, concerning the last two phenomenon mentioned, respectively.
A good quantiﬁer of diﬀuse ﬁeld conditions should be easily measurable and,
when they are to be used for sound absorption measurements in reverberation
chambers, the quantiﬁer should be well correlated to the Sabine absorption
coeﬃcient.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Diﬀusion
13
2.3.2
Assumptions
Three key assumptions are made in this study: the presence of an absorber
diminishes the diﬀusivity; more panel diﬀusers generally increase diﬀusion;
a more diﬀuse sound ﬁeld leads to more absorption (thus higher values of
absorption might indicate more diﬀusion). The pertinence of these assumptions
is explained below.
The sound ﬁeld in a reverberation chamber can be decomposed into a horizontal
component and a vertical one.
When a highly absorptive sample is placed
only on one of the room’s surfaces, which happens when sound absorption
measurements are taken according to ISO 354, there is non-uniform absorption.
The vertical component of the sound ﬁeld will be greatly damped, while the
horizontal component won’t be so aﬀected by absorption.
By correctly adding panel diﬀusers, sound waves can be redirected onto the
sample, hence increasing diﬀusivity and absorption as illustrated in ﬁg..
It should be emphasized that panel diﬀusers only increase diﬀusivity if placed
correctly; otherwise they can actually decrease diﬀusion.
Actually, panel
diﬀusers are sometimes positioned in such a manner that they create a space
above them that acts like a coupled space. The sound is trapped in that space
instead of reaching the absorber, leading to lower, underestimated values of αs.
This happens especially when the sound source is high, e.g. in the ceiling (as
is one of the built-in loudspeakers of this room). Another phenomenon might
happen underneath the diﬀusers, where a horizontal ﬁeld may arise between the
four vertical walls and, again, sound waves are not reﬂected onto the sample.
==PAGE:26==
14
Concepts And Deﬁnitions
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Methodology
3.1
Overview
3.1.1
Indicators of Diﬀuse Field Conditions
The objective is to access the adequacy of two potential diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁers:
the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor, related with the spatial uniformity of the sound ﬁeld,
more speciﬁcally the reverberation times; and the average kurtosis of an early
time frame of an impulse response, related to sudden variations in sound pressure
in an impulse response.
In
reverberation
chamber,
reverberation
times
are
measured
with
the
interrupted noise method and an e-sweep signal is used to obtain impulse
response. Sabine absorption coeﬃcients are also calculated from the measured
reverberation times.
This is done for diﬀerent conﬁgurations with varying
number of panel diﬀusers. All the details concerning these procedures can be
found in following sections.
==PAGE:28==
16
Methodology
3.1.2
Inﬂuence of The Mounting Conditions in Absorption
Measurements
The objective is to analyze the inﬂuence of the ﬂush mounting in the edge and
size eﬀect and, simultaneously, its inﬂuence in the diﬀerences observed between
the measured sabine absorption coeﬃcient and the theoretical size corrected
coeﬃcient based on Thomasson’s work[8]. Sound absorption measurements are
taken under diﬀerent mounting conditions: ﬂush mounting, standardized type A
mounting with reﬂective boards covering the edges of the sample and a similar
mounting condition but where the boards have been removed. Reverberation
times are measured and, with these, Sabine absorption coeﬃcients are estimated.
The details for all these procedures can be found in the following sections.
The model used for the estimation of the theoretical size corrected absorption
coeﬃcient is also presented further in this chapter.
3.2
Diﬀuse Field Factor and its Potential as an
Indicator of Diﬀuse Field Conditions
One of the two diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁers proposed in this study is the diﬀuse ﬁeld
factor, introduced by Lautenbach et al. in 2013 [5]. The diﬀuse ﬁeld factor
was later used by Nolan et al. [18] where it produced promising results and
after, by the same authors, where it revealed not to be a suﬃciently reliable
measure of the diﬀusivity [19]. The diﬀuse ﬁeld factor compares the measured
standard variation of the reverberation time in a room, with the one obtained
theoretically - assuming a perfectly diﬀuse sound ﬁeld. Theory on the variation
of the reverberation time can be found in [20] and will be shortly summarized
next.
When measuring the reverberation time, later used in the calculation of
the absorption coeﬃcients,
several repetitions are made with the same
source-microphone combination. The variance that arises, which is due to the
random diﬀerences between each noise excitation, is called ensamble varience.
It can be written as:
σ2
e(T) = T
 10
ln10
2  720
BD3

F

γDln10
10

(3.1)
Where B is the statistical bandwidth, D is the dynamic range in dB for which the
reverberation time is evaluated, and γ is the ratio of the reverberation time to
the decay time of the exponential averaging device. The function F is expressed
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Estimation of Diﬀuse Field Factor
17
as
F(x) = 1 −31 + e−x
x
−12e−x
x2 + 121 −e−x
x3
When using third-octave bands
B = 1.2 ∗0.23fc
Where fc is the center frequency
The variance that arises from changing the source and microphone positions is
called spatial variance and is given by:
σ2
s(T) = T
 10
ln10
2  720
BD3

F

Dln10
10

(3.2)
When using third octave bands and for a reverberation time evaluation range
of 30 dB, the spatial variance can be written as:
σ2
s(T) = 1.09 T
fc
(3.3)
The measured values are relatively close to the theoretical ones. Some diﬀerences
are, however, observed, due to certain assumptions made in theory that are not
met in reality. The measured values are usually slightly higher for the mid and
high frequency range and lower for low frequencies[5].
The hypothesis here is that, if the sound ﬁeld has poor diﬀusion, the measured
variance is higher than theoretically estimated. If, on the other hand, there is
high diﬀusivity, the measured variance would be lower – this is not expected but
sometimes happens, in cases where the diﬀuse ﬁeld conditions are exceptionally
good[5]. The diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is the ratio between the measured standard
deviation and the theoretical one
fd =
 
σ2
s,m(T)
σ2
t,s(T)
!1/2
(3.4)
3.3
Estimation of Diﬀuse Field Factor
The theoretical standard deviation of the reverberation time is given by
σ2(T) = T 1.09 + 1.65
n
N
(3.5)
==PAGE:30==
18
Methodology
Where T is the averaged measured reverberation time, N is the number of
source-microphone combinations and n is the number of measurements for each
source-microphone combination.
As can be seen in equation 3.5 the standard deviation is the sum of two terms, the
ﬁrst one being the spatial component of the standard deviation and the second
one accounting for the diﬀerences between the several repeated measurements
on a speciﬁc source-microphone combination.
Since in this case, the spatial
standard deviation is of most interest, the number of measurements per source
microphone-combinations should be large enough to suﬃciently reduce the
contribution of the second term. It can be shown that the minimum number
of repetitions to yield accurate values is 18.
In this study however, only 6
repetitions were taken due to the limited time availability of the reverberation
chamber used.
Using the interrupted noise method, the measured ensemble standard deviation
of the reverberation time σe,m is determined, for each frequency band and each
source-microphone combination j from
σ2
e,m,j =
1
n −1
n
X
i=1
(Tj,i −Tµ,j)2
(3.6)
Where
n
is
the
number
of
measurements
for
each
source-microphone
combinations, Tj,i, is the reverberation time at source-microphone combination
j in seconds, and Tµ,j is the average reverberation time at source-microphone
combination j in seconds
Tµ,j = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Tj,i
The average ensemble standard deviation can be determined from
σ2
e,m = 1
N
N
X
j=1
σ2
e,m,j
(3.7)
Where N is the number of source-microphone combinations.
For each frequency band, the measured standard deviation of the reverberation
time σm is determined from
σ2
m =
1
N −1
N
X
j=1
(Tµ,j −Tµ)2
(3.8)
Where Tµ,j
is the reverberation time (average of 6 measurements) at
source-microphone combination j in seconds, and Tµ is the average reverberation
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Kurtosis: Its Potential to Quantify Diﬀusivity and the Proposed
Measurement Method
19
time in seconds
Tµ = 1
N
N
X
j=1
Tµ,j
(3.9)
For each frequency band, the measured spatial standard deviation of the
reverberation time σs,m is determined from
σ2
s,m = σ2
m −σ2
e,m
n
(3.10)
The theoretical spatial standard deviation of the reverberation time σs,t can
be determined from equation (3.3) and the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor estimated using
equation (3.4) .
3.4
Kurtosis:
Its
Potential
to
Quantify
Diﬀusivity and the Proposed Measurement
Method
Kurtosis is the fourth order moment used as a descriptor of the shape of a
distribution; It is commonly thought to be a measure of the peakedness but it
is known to be more aﬀected by the thickness of the tails. The excess kurtosis
can be written as:
K = E(x −µ)4
σ4
−3
(3.11)
Where x is the sample, µ is the mean value of the sample, σ is the standard
deviation of the sample. The excess kurtosis allows for a comparison with the
shape of a Gaussian distribution. If the sample perfectly follows a Gaussian
distribution, the excess kurtosis in equation (3.11) is zero. When the kurtosis
takes higher values, it has a sharper peak and fatter tails; while a low kurtosis
indicates a more rounded peak and thinner tails. In other words, if there are
extreme infrequent deviations to the mean, the kurtosis will be higher, while if
the deviations are frequent and modestly sized, the kurtosis will be lower.
==PAGE:32==
20
Methodology
Figure 3.1: Impulse response and the corresponding kurtosis for a 20 ms
sliding window
From the measured impulse responses, a window of 20 ms is used as the best
ﬁt of a normal distribution (for the sampling frequency of 48000 Hz, 20 ms
corresponds to 960 taps). 20 ms has been reported in other studies to be an
appropriate window length, providing good statistics[21].
So the kurtosis is
taken for a 20 ms sliding window, with intervals of 1 ms. An example of an
impulse response and the corresponding kurtosis results, obtained using this
procedure, is shown in ﬁgure 3.1.
In the beginning of an impulse response (red window in ﬁgure 3.1), sudden
pressure increases are observed.
They are caused by direct sound and
deterministic, strong specular reﬂections.
These sudden pressure increases
constitute infrequent extreme deviations to the mean and, therefore, yield high
kurtosis values. Such sudden pressure increases, caused by strong reﬂections,
keep on occurring in the early part of the impulse response. In a perfectly diﬀuse
sound ﬁeld, however, these would be highly unlikely. Hence, a high kurtosis value
indicates a sound ﬁeld with poor diﬀusion. Later on in the impulse response, the
reﬂections become weaker and the sound pressure fades, leading to low kurtosis
values, close to zero. For this reason, the early part of the impulse response
is the one of interest, the one that can give us information on the diﬀuse ﬁeld
conditions.
With this in mind, two options are considered and evaluated in this study: one
option is the average kurtosis from 0 to 50 ms (K0−50). In order not to include
the direct sound, which would also exist in a room with good diﬀusion, the other
==PAGE:33==
3.5 Estimation of the Size Corrected Theoretical Random Incidence
Absorption Coeﬃcient
21
option is the average kurtosis from 20 to 80 ms(K20−80).
In the kurtosis calculation procedure a band pass ﬁlter combing the high pass
ﬁlter of the 125 Hz octave band and low pass ﬁlter of the 4 kHz octave band
is consistently used. For all the measured impulse responses, the time at which
the acoustic pressure becomes 10% of the ﬁrst peak pressure is used as an onset
of the impulse response; the 100 previous impulse response taps from the onset
are included, which amounts to about 2 ms for a sampling frequency of 48000
Hz. This process serves to align the direct sound at the same time and to not
include the background noise before the direct sound.
3.5
Estimation of the Size Corrected Theoretical
Random Incidence Absorption Coeﬃcient
The theoretical random incidence absorption coeﬃcient can be calculated with
the so called Paris formula:
αrand =
Z
π
2
0
α(θ)sin(2θ)dθ
(3.12)
This assumes an inﬁnitely large surface. This assumption is not met in actual
reverberation chamber measurements, where the sample is, of course, ﬁnite.
Consequently, big discrepancies are observed, throughout the whole frequency
range, between the measured Sabine absorption coeﬃcients and the theoretical
results[3].
To account for the ﬁniteness of the sample, Thomasson[8] suggested a size
correction.
His original formula assumes a locally reacting surface.
This
means that a wave transmitted into a porous material is refracted in a way
that it propagates eﬀectively only perpendicularly to the surface[22]. However,
an extended reaction is considered more correct and it is the model used in
this thesis.
In this case the angle of transmission isn’t only perpendicular
but, instead, is determined by Snell’s law.The size corrected random incidence
absorption coeﬃcient can be written as
αsize = 2
Z π/2
0
4Re(Zs(θi))
|Zs(θi) + Zr(θi)|2 sin(θi)dθi
(3.13)
Where Zs is the surface impedance of the sample, Zr is the averaged radiation
==PAGE:34==
22
Methodology
impedance over azimuthal angles from 0 to 2π expressed as
Zr =
Z 2π
0
Zrdϕ/2π
(3.14)
Where ϕ is the azimuthal angle and Zr the radiation impedance.
Zr is 1/cos(θi) for an inﬁnitely large plate. For a ﬁnite panel, it’s expressed as
follows
Zr(θi) = jk
S
ZZ ZZ
G(M, Mo)ejk(µx(x0−x)+µy(y0−y))dxdydx0dy0
(3.15)
Where k is the wavenumber, S
=
RR
dxdy, µx
= sin(θi)cos(ϕ), µy
=
sin(θi)sin(ϕ), G = (2πR)−1e(jkR) and R =
p
(x −x0)2 + (y −y0)2.
Instead of using numerical integration to calculate the average radiation
impedance, a table A.9 available in appendix A2 is used together with a spline
interpolation.
For a material of thickness d and backed by another material with a surface
impedance of Zx=d, the surface impedance for oblique incidence is determined
using
Zs(f, θi) = Zck0
kx
"
−jZx=dcot(kxd) + Zc k0
kx
Zx=d −jZc k0
kx cot(kxd)
#
(3.16)
Where kt is the complex wave number in the medium, kx is the normal
component of kt , kx =
p
k2
t −k2
0sin2(θi), k0 is the wavenumber in air, d is
the absorber thickness, and j is the imaginary unit. If the backing surface is
acoustically rigid, Zx=d = ∞and Zs(f, θi) = −jZc(k0/kx)cot(kxd).
The characteristic impedance Zc and thecomplex wave number kt are obtained
with the use of Miki’sempirical model
Zc = ρ0c0
 
1 + 0.070
f
r
−0.632
−j0.107
f
r
−0.632!
(3.17)
kt = ω0
c0
 
1 + 0.109
f
r
−0.618
−j0.160
f
r
−0.618!
(3.18)
Even with Thomasson’s size correction, big discrepancies are still observed
between the theoretical absorption coeﬃcient estimated in this way and αs[9].
A possible explanation for these diﬀerences is that while Thomasson’s formula
does account for the ﬁnite size of the sample, it still makes assumptions that are
not met in standardized measurements. Namely, it assumes the test specimen
to be ﬂush mounted in an inﬁnite baﬄe.
==PAGE:35==
3.6 Experimental Arrangement
23
3.6
Experimental Arrangement
This section presents the experimental arrangement used in the estimation of the
two proposed quantiﬁers of diﬀusivity: the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and the kurtosis,
measured in DTU’s reverberation chamber 904, under diﬀerent panel diﬀuser
conﬁgurations. It also presents the procedure used for the estimation of the
Sabine absorption coeﬃcients under diﬀerent mounting conditions in DTU’s
reverberation chamber 004.
The Sabine absorption coeﬃcients are measured according to ISO 354 as
presented in section ??. The decay curves used for calculation of the diﬀuse
ﬁeld factor in room 904 and the absorption coeﬃcients estimated in both rooms,
004 and 904, are measured in third octave bands from 100 Hz to 5000 Hz
and according to the method of interrupted noise. Twelve independent source
microphone combinations are used.
In room 004, eighteen decay curves per
source-microphone combination are measured in the empty conditions as well as
in the occupied conditions, resulting in eighteen independent reverberation times
for each combination. In room 904 only 6 decay curves are measured for each
source-microphone combination. For the estimation of the Sabine absorption
coeﬃcient these results are arithmetically averaged.
3.7
The Rooms and the Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations
3.7.1
Room 004
Room 004 has 245,24 m3 and other dimensions are as seen in ﬁgure ﬁgure 3.2.
Here, all measurements are repeated for three mounting conditions, with and
without the absorber:
• Flush mounting, where the test specimen is embedded into a cavity in the
room’s concrete ﬂoor (seen in ﬁgure 3.3), in a way that the surfaces are
ﬂush and the edges are completely involved by concrete.
• Type A mounting, where the test specimen is directly placed against the
room’s ﬂoor, as described in ISO 354. See ﬁgure 3.4.
• Similar conditions as the previous case but where the reﬂective boards
have been removed.
==PAGE:36==
24
Methodology
Figure 3.2: Dimensions of the reverberation chambers
Figure 3.3: Cavity used for ﬂush mounting
==PAGE:37==
3.7 The Rooms and the Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations
25
Figure 3.4: Type A mounting
3.7.2
Room 904
Figure 3.5: Panel diﬀusers in room 904
Room 904 has 242,22 m3 and other dimensions are as seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
All measurements are repeated for 8 conﬁgurations with diﬀerent numbers
of panel diﬀusers (see ﬁgure 3.5), and in the presence and absence of the
absorptive specimen. In the ﬁrst conﬁguration there are 20 panel diﬀusers in the
reverberation room, the panels are then taken out, three by three, in a spatially
uniform fashion, until there are 2 panels left which are also taken out and the
measurements conducted in the empty room. Therefore, the 8 conﬁgurations
==PAGE:38==
26
Methodology
have the following number of panels: 0; 2; 5; 8; 11; 14; 17; and 20.
3.7.3
Excitation of the Rooms and Measurement Setup
Figure 3.6: Measurement Setup
The interrupted noise method is used to obtain the decay curves used for
estimation of the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and absorption coeﬃcients in room 904.
It is also used for the measurements conducted in room 004. The measurement
setups is shown in ﬁgure 3.6.
A pseudo-random noise signal is fed to a loudspeaker via an ampliﬁer. The
loudspeakers are omnidirectional and built-in the room.
The analyzer turns
its noise generator on and keeps it on for a certain build-up time, chosen
appropriately to allow for a steady state to be reached. The noise generator
is then switched oﬀand the decay measurement starts. It ends when the noise
level measured is that of the background noise. The analyzer then displays the
measured sound decays. The measurement is conducted in third-octave bands
from 100Hz to 5000Hz. In each frequency band, the sampling frequency is of
200 Hz. The analyzer used is a Brüel&Kjær sound level meter type 2250 with
Brüel&Kjær BZ-7227 software for sampling of the signal.
For the estimation of the kurtosis, on the other hand, an impulse response
is necessary, which is not provided by the interrupted noise method. Hence,
==PAGE:39==
3.7 The Rooms and the Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations
27
an e-sweep signal is used.
The e-sweep signal is a sinusoidal signal with a
frequency that increases exponentially over time. The software used was dirac.
The sampling frequency is 48000 Hz.
The microphone is a Brüel&Kjær type 4192.
The loudspeakers are built-in
and omnidirectional.
The conditioning preampliﬁer is a Nexus type 2690
Bruel&kjaer.
3.7.4
Source, Microphone and Test Specimen Positions
For sound absorption measurements, according to ISO 354, at least two
source positions and three receiver positions must be used.
Both in room
004 and in room 904, surpassing these requirements, three source positions
and four microphone positions are used instead, totaling 12 independent
source-microphone combinations.
The loudspeakers are positioned in the
corners of the room and the microphones are carefully placed so that they are
at least 1.5m apart from each other, 2m away from any sound source and 1m
away from any room surface and the test specimen, thus complying with ISO
354 requirements.
Figure 3.7: Source(A, B and C), Microphone(1, 2, 3 and 4) and Test Specimen
Positions
The test specimen is placed so that no part of it is closer than 1m of any
boundary of the room and so that its edges are not parallel to the walls of the
room.(See ﬁgure 3.7)
==PAGE:40==
28
Methodology
3.7.5
Climatic Conditions
Variations in climatic conditions can largely inﬂuence the measurement results,
especially at high frequencies and low relative humidity[23]. Therefore, in both
rooms, the room’s temperature and relative humidity are kept fairly constant
throughout all measurements, with a temperature close to 18◦C and a relative
humidity of 50%. (See ﬁgure 3.8)
Figure 3.8: Thermo-hygrometer used to keep stable climatic conditions
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter the adequacy of the proposed diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁers, the
Kurtosis and the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor, are assessed.
The inﬂuence of the mounting conditions on the size, and edge eﬀect is discussed.
4.1
Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers
4.1.1
Hypothesis
It is here hypothesized that diﬀusivity increases with a higher number of panel
diﬀusers, if placed correctly, as previously said. It is also assumed, as previously
explained, that absorption by the sample increases with higher diﬀusivity. In
the light of these assumptions, we expect absorption to increase with a growing
number of panels.
The Sabine absorption coeﬃcient was calculated for diﬀerent numbers of panel
diﬀusers in the reverberation room. The results are as follows:
As seen in ﬁgure 4.1 the absorption coeﬃcient is markedly lower for the 125 Hz
==PAGE:42==
30
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.1: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs frequency in third octave bands for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers with 95% conﬁdence intervals
Figure 4.2: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient(averaged from 100 to 5000 Hz) vs
number of panels
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers
31
octave band. This can be explained, on one hand, with the fact that in most
reverberation rooms, there is less diﬀusivity for lower frequencies, especially if
they are below the Schroeder cut-oﬀfrequency, as is the 125Hz octave band.
On the other hand, the specimen is a porous absorber, thus it’s not eﬀective in
absorbing low frequencies, it is designed to be optimal for higher frequencies.
On this account, we would also expect to see higher absorption for the highest
frequency bands. However, this is not the case. Actually, the 500 Hz octave
band is the one with most absorption. This might indicate that the diﬀusivity of
the room for higher frequencies is also not as good as it should be, thus leading
to underestimated absorption for these frequencies.
Corroborating our hypothesis, the absorption coeﬃcient generally increases
with an increasing number of panel diﬀusers, with a fairly strong correlation
between both (linear R2=0.88) as seen in ﬁgure 4.2. However, on average, the
conﬁguration with 20 panels yields lower values than the one with 17 panels.
This can be explained with the fact that, as mentioned before in this thesis, if the
panel diﬀusers are not uniformly distributed over space, they will not improve
the room’s diﬀusivity, but can actually decrease it as explained in chapter 2.
4.1.2
Diﬀuse Field Factor
The hypothesis is that, if the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is a good indicator of the diﬀuse
ﬁeld conditions, it should decrease as diﬀusion increases. Hence, keeping in mind
our previously mentioned assumptions, the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor should decrease
as the absorption coeﬃcient increases and, in general, with a growing number of
panel diﬀusers. Actually, it should be lowest for the conﬁguration that yielded
the highest absorption coeﬃcient – the one with 17 panels.
Additionally, it
should be lower when the reverberation room is empty than when the absorbing
specimen is present, since it is believed that its presence diminishes diﬀusion.
The diﬀuse ﬁeld factor was calculated both with and without the absorptive
sample, for all conﬁgurations with a diﬀerent number of panels. Focus will be
kept mainly on the conditions where the absorber is present, for that is the most
critical condition, i.e. with less diﬀusivity, and the one where improvements
are more necessary. The conditions where the absorber is absent will only be
included for purposes of comparison between absence and presence of absorber.
==PAGE:44==
32
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.3: Diﬀuse ﬁeld factor vs frequency in third octave bands for diﬀerent
number of panel diﬀusers
First of all, it should be mentioned that, as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3, in some
cases, e.g. for 5000 kHz with 11 panels, the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor shows as zero. It
is not truly zero. This happens because in formula 3.10 the second component
σ2
e,m
n
is larger than the ﬁrst one σ2
m resulting in a negative σ2
s,m that, when
placed in 3.4, yields a non-real solution, a square root of a negative number.
Since these zeros do not represent the real value of the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor they
were simply discarded in further results, whenever averages are taken.
This
issue would not happen if instead of 6, 18 measurements were taken for each
source/receiver conﬁguration. Indeed, as previously explained in section 3.3,
taking only 6 measurements increases the second component of formula 3.10.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers
33
Figure 4.4: Diﬀuse ﬁeld factor vs number of panel diﬀusers for diﬀerent octave
bands
From ﬁgure 4.4 it can be seen that the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is generally higher
for lower frequencies, especially for the 125 Hz octave band. This agrees with
the observations made before, where the 125Hz band also corresponded to the
lowest absorption. Hence, as hypothesized, a high diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is here
potentially indicating low diﬀusivity. Nonetheless, it should be noted that the
125 Hz band is below the Schroeder cut-oﬀfrequency, where the accuracy of the
procedure used to calculate the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is questionable. As shown in
ﬁg() the 125 Hz octave band produces some outliers. And will not be included in
further analysis, where the arithmetic mean is taken in the third-octave bands
centered from 200 Hz to 5000Hz.
==PAGE:46==
34
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.5: Diﬀuse ﬁeld factor (averaged from 200 to 5000 Hz) vs number of
panel diﬀusers in the presence and absence of the specimen and
linear correlation in the presence of the absorber
Figure 4.6: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs diﬀuse ﬁeld factor (both averaged
from 200 to 5000 Hz) for diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers
35
In the presence of the absorptive specimen, fairly good correlations between the
diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and the number of panel diﬀusers (ﬁgure 4.5)and between
the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and the absorption coeﬃcient (ﬁgure 4.6) are observed
(average from 200 to 5000 Hz). As hypothesized, the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor decreases
as the absorption coeﬃcient increases and, in general, with a growing number of
panels. The conﬁguration with 17 panels is the one with the lowest diﬀuse ﬁeld
factor, corroborating our hypothesis, since it is also the one with the highest
absorption, and so, supposedly, the one with the highest degree of diﬀusion.
However, the conﬁguration with 5 panels results in slightly lower diﬀuse ﬁeld
factor values than the conﬁguration with 8 panels.
This goes against our
hypothesis since the 8 panel conﬁguration produces higher absorption coeﬃcient.
Also against our hypothesis is the fact that, when comparing the results of
absence versus presence of the absorptive specimen, the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is not
lower without the specimen, as it should be if it were a good indicator, since we
assume the room is more diﬀusive without the absorptive sample. Additionally,
when the specimen is not present, no correlation is found between the diﬀuse
ﬁeld factor and the number of panels.
Finally, it should be noted that even if a good correlation is found between the
diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and the number of panel diﬀusers, looking back at ﬁg (ﬁrst)
it becomes clear that this correlation is only true on average, but not for all
individual third-octave bands. Indeed, for some frequency bands, conﬁgurations
with many panel diﬀusers have high diﬀuse ﬁeld factor values and vice-versa.
When evaluated in third octave bands, the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor is not a good
indicator and it is not a suitable tool to fully characterize the diﬀuse ﬁeld
conditions in a reverberation chamber. And when averaged, it permits only a
rough distinction between poor and satisfactory diﬀuse ﬁeld conditions. These
ﬁndings agree with what was concluded in [19].
4.1.3
Kurtosis
The hypothesis for kurtosis is the same as for the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor: If the
kurtosis is a good indicator of the diﬀuse ﬁeld conditions, it should decrease
as diﬀusion increases.
Which, keeping in mind our previously mentioned
assumptions, means the kurtosis should decrease as the absorption coeﬃcient
increases and, in general, with a growing number of panel diﬀusers. It should
actually be lowest for the conﬁguration that yielded the highest absorption
coeﬃcient – the one with 17 panels.
Additionally, it should be lower when
the reverberation room is empty than when the absorbing specimen is present,
since it is believed that its presence diminishes diﬀusion.
==PAGE:48==
36
Results and Discussion
The Kurtosis was calculated both with and without the absorptive sample, for all
conﬁgurations with a diﬀerent number of panels. The results for the broadband
as well as for the 125Hz octave band and the 4000Hz octave band can be seen
in ﬁgures from 4.7 to 4.12. The results for other frequencies can be seen in
appendix A2.
Figure 4.7: K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 100 to
5000 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals
Figure 4.8: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 100 to 5000 Hz
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers
37
Figure 4.9: K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 3150 to
5000 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals
Figure 4.10: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right)
for diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 3150 to 5000 Hz
Figure 4.11: K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 100 to
160 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals
==PAGE:50==
38
Results and Discussion
Figure 4.12: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right)
for diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 100 to 160 Hz
Results show the kurtosis to be well correlated with the absorption coeﬃcient
and with the number of panels for higher frequency bands and for the broadband
(88 Hz to 5680 Hz). Agreeing with the hypothesis, in general, kurtosis decreases
as the absorption coeﬃcient and the number of panels increase, indicating an
increase in diﬀusivity. However, even though this happens in general, many
times with an increase in the number of panels or in the absorption coeﬃcient
comes an increase in kurtosis. This happens with no apparent reason within
our assumptions and it goes against our hypothesis, making the kurtosis only
suitable for a rough estimation, since it is not consistent for small changes.
Moreover, these correlations are not found for the low or mid frequency ranges,
also indicating kurtosis as not a very suitable diﬀusion quantiﬁer.
Within our hypothesis, kurtosis would be expected to be higher (indicating low
diﬀusivity) for lower frequencies, where there is less diﬀusivity.
However, in
general, this is not the case, either for K20−80 or for K0−50.
For higher frequencies and for the broadband, when the absorptive specimen is
present, the K20−80 is, on average, slightly higher than when the absorber is not
present, indicating lower diﬀusivity in the presence of the absorber. For the low
and mid frequency ranges and for the kurtosis 0-50 there are no clear diﬀerences.
If the kurtosis was a good indicator of diﬀusion, higher diﬀerences would be
expected, since according to our assumption, the presence of an absorber highly
diminishes the diﬀusivity.
It can be observed that taking the average from 0 to 50 ms produces higher
values than taking it from 20 to 80 ms. This is because, in the very beginning
of the impulse response, there is direct noise and stronger, specular reﬂections
which as explained in the chapter 3, leads to higher kurtosis. Related to this, it
is also worth mentioning that the combination where the source and microphone
were closer together yielded higher values, also potentially explained with the
direct sound.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Mounting Conditions
39
Finally, no clear diﬀerences between K0−50 and K20−80 are observed. Also, it
should be noted that none of the correlations and comparisons made before are
signiﬁcant since there is a high standard deviation among diﬀerent positions.
In itself this indicates poor diﬀusivity since it means there is less homogeneity
of the diﬀuse ﬁeld. Nonetheless, in general, this standard deviation decreases
with the increasing number of panels indicating increasing diﬀusivity with an
increasing panel number.
4.2
Mounting Conditions
In a reverberation room, the reverberation times in presence of a porous
absorptive sample were measured under three diﬀerent mounting conditions:
Flush mounting, type A mounting with reﬂective boards covering the edges
and a mounting similar to the previous one but where the bpards have been
removed. The Sabine absorption coeﬃcients were then calculated. In the case
without reﬂective boards covering the edges, the area of the free edges was added
to the area of the horizontal surface, and the total was used in the calculations.
The results are plotted in ﬁgures 4.13 and 4.14
Figure 4.13: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient in third octave bands for diﬀerent
mounting conditions, with a 95% conﬁdence interval
Reﬂective boards enclosing the free edges of the specimen are required by the
==PAGE:52==
40
Results and Discussion
ISO 354 standard as they are expected to minimize sound absorption by the
exposed edges, the so called edge eﬀect. And, indeed, the measurements taken
with a mounting without boards yield 6.8 percent higher absorption coeﬃcients
than when using a Type A mounting.
This conforms the pertinence of the
requirements in ISO 354.
On average, the absorption coeﬃcient obtained when using the type A mounting
is 2.2 percent higher than when using the ﬂush mounting. A possible explanation
is that when the specimen is ﬂush mounted, we observe a decrease in both the
edge eﬀect and the size eﬀect , known causes for the overestimation of αs.
The edge eﬀect would diminish because the edges would be more eﬀectively
covered, by a denser material - concrete - and with no discontinuities as happens
between the room’s ﬂoor and the reﬂective boards, where sound can potentially
penetrate. As to the size eﬀect, the analysis is not so straightforward. Indeed,
diﬀraction at the specimen’s edges occurs because there is a discontinuity. Even
when the specimen is ﬂush mounted, there is still a discontinuity. The surface
impedance of concrete is diﬀerent from that of the specimen, so diﬀraction
occurs, but potentially to a lesser extent, or in diﬀerent ways that do not lead
to increased absorption.
Figure 4.14: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient for diﬀerent mounting conditions
and theoretically estimated absorption coeﬃcient for third octave
bands, with a 95% conﬁdence interval
The theoretical random incidence absorption coeﬃcient estimated here is size
corrected, meaning that the ﬁniteness of the specimen should not explain the
diﬀerences observed between theoretical and measured results, as long as the
specimen is ﬂush mounted in an inﬁnite baﬄe, as assumed by this theoretical
method. With this in mind, it was hypothesized that using a type A mounting,
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Mounting Conditions
41
instead of a ﬂush mounting, could be a cause for the discrepancies between
theoretical and measured results, previously observed in other studies [9].
Corroborating our hypothesis, for higher frequencies, ﬂush mounting results are
closer to theoretical results, than the ones obtained with a type A mounting.
However, for lower frequencies, namely for the 125 Hz and 250 Hz octave
bands, the contrary is observed. Indeed, the theoretical method yields higher
values and ﬂush mounting usually originates lower results than with a type A
mounting. Therefore, at least for these frequencies, the mounting conditions
cannot explain the discrepancies between theory and measurements. What can
possibly explain these diﬀerences is the lack of diﬀusivity for low frequencies
in the reverberation room, which leads to the underestimation of the measured
coeﬃcients. When in theory, a completely diﬀuse ﬁeld is assumed, thus leading
to higher results. Additionally, another factor is causing an overestimation of the
theoretical results, which reach values higher than unity. This factor is thought
to be intrinsic to the expression used to determine the radiation impedance, but
further investigation on the matter is required.
On a ﬁnal note, it should be said that none of the diﬀerences discussed above
are signiﬁcant, since the standard deviations of the diﬀerent positions are too
high. This, on its own, indicates low diﬀusivity.
==PAGE:54==
42
Results and Discussion
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and Future work
5.1
Diﬀuse Field Quantiﬁers
In
this
project,
two
potential
diﬀuse
ﬁeld
quantiﬁers
were
measured
in
reverberation
chamber
under
eight
diﬀerent
conﬁgurations:
with
0,2,5,8,11,14,17, and 20 panel diﬀusers. One was the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor, the
ratio between the measured standard deviation of the reverberation time and
the theoretical one. The other one, the average kurtosis of an early time-frame
of an impulse response, analyzed from 0 to 50 ms and from 20 to 80 ms.
5.1.1
Diﬀuse Field Factor
In favor of the diﬀuse ﬁeld factor, results show that it is generally higher for lower
frequencies (where there is less diﬀusion); there are good correlations between
diﬀuse ﬁeld factor and the number of panel diﬀusers, and between the diﬀuse
ﬁeld factor and the Sabine absorption coeﬃcient. On the other hand, pointing
towards the inadequacy of this potential quantiﬁer, diﬀuse ﬁeld factor, in the
presence of the absorptive specimen was not higher than in its absence, and the
correlations mentioned before are only true on average, not for all frequency
bands.
The diﬀuse ﬁeld factor appears to be unﬁt when evaluated in third
==PAGE:56==
44
Conclusion and Future work
octave bands. When averaged it can be used as a rough estimator of the diﬀuse
ﬁeld conditions. These conclusions agree with what was previously found in [9].
5.1.2
Kurtosis
Between the K0−50 and the K20−80, no option is clearly better than the other
and neither seem very suitable as a diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁer. When analyzing high
frequencies or a broadband response, the kurtosis does not produce consistent
results for small changes but it can be used as a rough estimator; but, for the
low frequency region, where diﬀusivity is a bigger problem, where improvements
are crucial and a good indicator is more needed, the kurtosis does not seem to
be a good quantiﬁer.
Currently there is an ongoing project in DTU where the kurtosis as a diﬀuse
ﬁeld quantiﬁer is being analyzed, but there are no previous studies published on
the matter, to the extent of the author’s knowledge, and more data is necessary.
Further investigations on other potential indicators of diﬀusion should be
conducted in order to ﬁnally ﬁnd a suitable diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁer, and greatly
contribute to increase the low inter-laboratory reproducibility we observe today.
5.2
Mounting Conditions
In this study,
absorption measurements were conducted under diﬀerent
mounting conditions:
a standard type A mounting and a ﬂush mounting.
Results show little diﬀerences between both, with ﬂush mounting yielding,
on average, slightly lower absorption coeﬃcients.
The measurement results
were also compared with a theoretically estimated random incidence absorption
coeﬃcient, calculated with a size corrected model based on Thomasson’s work
[8]. Large diﬀerences between theoretical and measured results were observed
for the 125 Hz and 250 Hz octave bands, with the theoretical values being
the highest and the ones obtained with ﬂush mounting being the lowest. For
higher frequencies the diﬀerences faded, with type A mounting having slightly
higher absorption coeﬃcients, followed by the ﬂush mounting and the theoretical
results.
Results conﬁrm the pertinence of the requirement in ISO 345 of covering the
free edges of the specimen with reﬂective material. Indeed, complying with this
demand clearly reduces the overestimation of the absorption coeﬃcients. On the
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Mounting Conditions
45
other hand, employing ﬂush mounting as a standard practice, in order to reduce
the edge and size eﬀect, does not seem plausible, since it would constitute yet
another requirement on reverberation chambers, one not so easy to accomplish,
and with quite a small impact.
As for the diﬀerences between the theoretically estimated coeﬃcients and the
measured Sabine coeﬃcients, results lead to believe mounting conditions are
not a major factor. Not only because both mounting conditions lead to similar
results, but also because, for lower frequencies, coeﬃcients obtained with a ﬂush
mounting are even more distanced from the theoretical ones than when using a
type A mounting.
==PAGE:58==
46
Conclusion and Future work
==PAGE:59==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Kurtosis Results
Figure A.1: K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 200 to
315 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals
==PAGE:60==
48
Appendix
Figure A.2: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 200 to 315 Hz
Figure A.3: K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 400 to
630 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals
Figure A.4: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 400 to 630 Hz
==PAGE:61==
A.1 Kurtosis Results
49
Figure A.5: K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 800 to
1250 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals
Figure A.6: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 800 to 1250 Hz
Figure A.7: K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) vs number of panels, from 1600 to
2500 Hz with 95% conﬁdence intervals
==PAGE:62==
50
Appendix
Figure A.8: Sabine absorption coeﬃcient vs K0−50(left) and K20−80(right) for
diﬀerent number of panel diﬀusers, from 1600 to 2500 Hz
A.2
Tables
Figure A.9: Radiation impedance - Reference Table
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1] Cheol-Ho Jeong.
Absorption and impedance boundary conditions for
phased geometrical-acoustics methods.
The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 132(4):2347–2358, 2012.
[2] Iso. ISO 354 Acoustics–Measurement of sound absorption in a reverberation
room, 2003.
[3] MLS
Vercammen.
Improving
the
accuracy
of
sound
absorption
measurement according to iso 354. In Proc. of the International Symposium
on Room Acoustics, pages 1–4, 2010.
[4] David T Bradley, Markus Müller-Trapet, Jacob Adelgren, and Michael
Vorländer.
Eﬀect of boundary diﬀusers in a reverberation chamber:
Standardized diﬀuse ﬁeld quantiﬁersa).
The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 135(4):1898–1906, 2014.
[5] Margriet R Lautenbach and Martijn L Vercammen.
Can we use the
standard deviation of the reverberation time to describe diﬀusion in
a reverberation chamber?
In Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics,
volume 19, page 015054. Acoustical Society of America, 2013.
[6] A De Bruijn. A mathematical analysis concerning the edge eﬀect of sound
absorbing materials. Acta Acustica united with Acustica, 28(1):33–44, 1973.
[7] Thomas W Bartel. Eﬀect of absorber geometry on apparent absorption
coeﬃcients as measured in a reverberation chamber. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 69(4):1065–1074, 1981.
[8] S-I Thomasson. On the absorption coeﬃcient. Acta Acustica united with
Acustica, 44(4):265–273, 1980.
==PAGE:64==
52
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Melanie Nolan, Cheol-Ho Jeong, Jonas Brunskog, Julia Rodenas, Fabien
Chevillotte, and Luc Jaouen.
Diﬀerent radiation impedance models for
ﬁnite porous materials. EuroNoise 2015.
[10] AP Oliveira de Carvalho. Acústica Ambiental e de Edifícios. FEUP, Porto,
8.8 edition, 2014.
[11] UNEEN ISO. 10534-1: 2002. Acoustics. Determination of sound absorption
coeﬃcient and impedance in impedance tubes, Part, 1.
[12] BSEN ISO. 10534-2: 2001. Acoustics. Determination of sound absorption
coeﬃcient and impedance in impedance tubes. Transfer-function method.
Geneve, 2001.
[13] Frederick Alton Everest, Ken C Pohlmann, and Tab Books. The master
handbook of acoustics, volume 4. McGraw-Hill New York, 2001.
[14] M Vercammen.
The eﬀectiveness of diﬀusers by determining the sound
absorption in the reverberation room, 1997.
[15] A de Bruijn. The edge eﬀect of sound absorbing materials “revisited”, 2007.
[16] ASTM Standard. C423-09a. Standard Test Method for Sound Absorption
and Sound Absorption Coeﬃcients by the Reverberation Room Method,
2009.
[17] ASTM Standard.
E90,
2009,“standard test method for laboratory
measurement of airborne sound transmission loss of building partitions
and elements,” astm international, west conshohocken, pa, 2010, doi:
10.1520/e0090-09.
[18] Mélanie Nolan, Martijn Vercammen, Cheol-Ho Jeong, and Jonas Brunskog.
The use of a reference absorber for absorption measurements in a
reverberation chamber. In 7th Forum Acusticum.
[19] Melanie Nolan, Martijn Vercammen, and Cheol-Ho Jeong.
Eﬀects of
diﬀerent diﬀuser types on the diﬀusivity in reverberation chambers.
EuroNoise 2015, 2015.
[20] John L Davy, IP Dunn, and P Dubout. The variance of decay rates in
reverberation rooms. Acta Acustica united with Acustica, 43(1):12–25, 1979.
[21] Jonathan S Abel and Patty Huang.
A simple, robust measure of
reverberation echo density. In Audio Engineering Society Convention 121.
Audio Engineering Society, 2006.
[22] Keith Attenborough. Acoustical characteristics of porous materials. Physics
reports, 82(3):179–227, 1982.
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[23] DIN ISO. 9613–1: 1993. acoustics. attenuation of sound during propagation
outdoors. part 1: Calculation of the absorption of sound by the atmosphere.
International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, 1993.
