==PAGE:1==
Jonas Karlsson 
Realization of a Distributed 
Modular Robotic
System for Advanced 
Secondary Education 
  
Flexible Master Thesis , 2015-07-05 
==PAGE:2==
Jonas Karlsson
Realization of a Distributed 
Modular Robotic
System for Advanced 
Secondary Education 
  
Flexible Master Thesis, 2015-07-05   
==PAGE:3==
Realization of a Distributed Modular Robotic
System for Advanced Secondary Education
Author(s):
Jonas Karlsson
Supervisor(s):
David Christensen
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
2015-07-05
Class:
1 
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements in the Flexible Master 
Programme to achieve the degree Master of Computer Science 
and Engineering at Technical University of Denmark.
The report represents 15 ECTS points.
Rights:
© Jonas Karlsson, 2015
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Fable is a distributed modular robotic system designed to suit a large
range of diﬀerent users and their applications. To lay the groundwork
for further testing and development this thesis examines the key design
challenges of transforming the system into an applicable education tool
for advanced upper level teaching. This is achieved through a set of pilot
tests focusing on relevant software- and user-programming aspects. The
preliminary results suggests that both visual and conventional program-
ming could be successfully used for engaging students in the making of
small robot applications. To be able to succeed in this a few customiza-
tions of the existing system have been proposed.
Second part of the thesis deals with the speciﬁc problem of preparing the
robotic system to be virtualized in a simulator (V-rep). This part of the
thesis is directly motived by the need to allow students to practice robot
programming without access to the real Fable system. Moreover the eﬀort
is likely to be applicable for other Fable users as well and could potentially
become relevant when developing new functionality for Fable.
In order to express the native control code (C++ ) in a language which is
interpretable by the simulator (lua) a pragmatic approach to automated
translation have been developed and used. The feasibility of the approach
is demonstrated by translating and testing an amount of code correspond-
ing to 81% of the existing control code (amounting to 2566 lines in total).
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
This work could not have been done without help from several people. I would
like to thank David Christensen for inspiring discussions and good feedback. I
would also like to thank Cansu ¨Unalan, Enes Karter, Zozan Seher Yasar and
Seyda Uygur from Københavns Private Gymnasium who volunteered to partic-
ipate in the pilot experiments at DTU. Finally I am very grateful to my wife
and daughter who have provided valuable support.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Design of the fable system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Realization of a robot system for ASE
10
2.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Observations and Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Use of assistive tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
The Fable Python API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Problem solving approach Group B . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.4
Problem solving approach Group B . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Realization of the virtual Fable system
15
3.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Speciﬁcation of requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Initial approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.1
Summary of design and implementation . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Revisited approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5.1
Interfacing with V-rep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5.2
Interfacing with Fable’s existing PC side software . . . . .
18
3.5.3
Control code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Proposed software architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Design and implementation of the adaptor layer . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8
Design and assembling of the physical models . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.9
Overview of source ﬁles and binaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.10 Observations and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.10.1 Ping and round trip lag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.10.2 Completion times for common tasks . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.10.3 Installing and conﬁguring the system . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.10.4 Pilot experiments with the physical design . . . . . . . . .
27
3.10.5 Test of functionality provided through the Fable API . . .
29
3.10.6 Test of integration with the FableBlockly interface . . . .
29
3.10.7 Simulation of more complex robot conﬁgurations . . . . .
29
3.10.8 Current limitations and known issues
. . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.11 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.11.1 Usecase (a) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.11.2 Usecase (b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Realization of the translator
31
4.1
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Design goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Annotation of native code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
==PAGE:7==
4.4
Extension of the Lua language
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Design and implementation of the translator . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.7
Observations and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.8
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.8.1
The translation method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.8.2
Experienced with the automated translation approach . .
40
4.8.3
Maintaining of the translation code. . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Conclusion
41
Appendices
43
A Fable Tests
43
A.1 Pilot test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.1.1
Exercise 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
A.1.2
Exercise 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.1.3
Exercise 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.1.4
Exercise 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
A.1.5
Exercise 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.1.6
Exercise 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.1.7
Exercise 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B Virtual Fable Tests
48
B.1
Ping lag tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
B.2
Dongle tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
B.3
Joint module tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
B.4
Turning robot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Fable is a user-conﬁgurable modular robotic system aimed at enabling users to
design and develop their own robot applications possibly through play.
For
advanced secondary teaching such heuristic and at the same time practical
activities have been found to stimulate learning, creativity and algorithmic
thinking[8, 13]. Hence in near future such user-conﬁgurable robot systems could
possibly be envisioned to disrupt the practice of science and technology teach-
ing.
Rather than diving into the vast amount of new didactic opportunities this the-
sis focus on the challenges that need to be overcome in order to make the system
applicable for use in advanced secondary education (ASE).
1.1
Related work
The deﬁning feature of modular robot systems is the encapsulation of key func-
tionality in independent robotic modules. Those modules can be conﬁgured and
possibly self-reconﬁgured to form highly customisable robot morphologies[3, 10,
21]. This even allow some modular robot systems to adapt their shape to cir-
cumstances and form tools or furniture [12, 14, 4, 20].
Fable is a user-reconﬁgurable robot system that allows it’s users to assemble
their own robots by attaching modules providing diﬀerent shapes and function-
alities. Such user-reconﬁgurable robots have been found to be particular suited
for rapid robot prototyping [9], rehabilitation [11], play [17] and education [2, 7].
1.2
Design of the fable system
The physical building blocks of the fable system is a collection of passive and
active modules that can be assembled in a nearly endless number of conﬁg-
urations using genderless magnetics connectors[15].
In contrast to playware
platforms such as Lego Mindstorms this allows interactive robots and construc-
tions to be assembled and disassembled in seconds making the system ideal for
rapid prototyping of robots. Modules are divided in two types: active modules
contain electronic boards with micro controllers and provide module speciﬁc
functionality for actuation and sensing. Passive modules consists of a variety of
shapes and provide shape and structure to the overall construction. Figure 2
shows how a walking robot has been assembled from 4 active joint modules and
a passive branching module.
To ensure a simple and yet ﬂexible user programming experience the system is
designed to provide an illusory abstraction of a centralized robotic system con-
nected directly to the PC. Thus rather than being cross compiled and installed
on the distributed and embedded platform the web service architecture of the
system allows user applications to run directly on a local PC by utilizing a low
lag radio communication link. As illustrated in ﬁgure 1 the communication link
between the modules and user control application is provided by a serially con-
nected dongle module.
User applications can be developed in conventional languages such as Python
and Java and uses a set of simple API’s to remotely invoke functions on mod-
ules based on their ID. In addition to development in conventional languages the
8
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1: Graphics from [15] illustrating the network architecture of Fable.
(a) Real modules
(b) Virtual modules in V-rep
Figure 2: Example of modules and robot conﬁgurations. Figure (b) shows the
dongle, a joint module and a conﬁguration of four joint modules attached using
a 4-way module.
FableBlockly GUI has been developed to allow visual application programming
using Blockly. FableBlockly generates Python source from blocks and can be
seen in Figure 3.
1.3
Problem statement
Rather than providing solutions to speciﬁc problems Fable has been design as
an adaptable tool which is supposed to be suitable for a range of very diﬀerent
users and problems. This suggests that the system may have to be re-designed
or customized in order to become an applicable tool for ASE.
Moreover to support learning activities such as home work and other types of
individual practising a vast amount of Fable modules are currently required.
Apparently this shortcoming is most obviously dealt with by virtualising the
existing Fable system.
Based on the mentioned considerations the follow problem statement has been
formulated:
1. What key challenges need to be overcome in order to make Fable an ap-
plicable education tool for ASE?
9
==PAGE:10==
Figure 3: Example of visual programming using Blockly.
2. How is the existing Fable software best supplemented and/or extended to
allow users to develop and test small robot applications without access to
the real robot system?
The scope.
To answer problem 1 a set of pilot tests were designed and carried
out with students who currently attend advanced secondary education (gym-
nasium) in Denmark.
It was decided to focus solely on software and user-
programming aspects. This part of the thesis is presented in section 2.
Problem 2 was dealt with through analysis, design, implementation and testing
of a software solution. This part of the thesis is presented in section 3. Moreover
a majority of the work on this solution can be attributed the to development of
a translator. As a result the realization of the translator is discussed separately
in section 4.
2
Realization of a robot system for ASE
The modular design of Fable is envisioned to allow the robot building system
to be tailored for a wide range of diﬀerent users such as school children, hob-
byists/makers and possibly researchers. This is aimed to be accomplished by
(1) encapsulating key functionality in modules that can be added according to
speciﬁc user needs (2) providing user-programming interfaces and software tools
suitable for diﬀerent tasks and user groups. Rather than investigating what type
of functionality would be relevant (1) it was decided to focus on the applicability
of the existing user-programming interfaces and software tools (2).
2.1
Analysis
In order to facilitate application development by non-programmers Fable pro-
vides a visual programming GUI (FableBlockly) which was shortly introduced
above. Particularly, the development of the GUI has been driven by the intend
to allow school children to engage in robot building as an educational activity.
The above considerations suggest two diﬀerent approaches which could possi-
bly be relevant to application development at advanced secondary school level:
either the existing visual programming environment could be extended to meet
additional requirements; or development in a conventional programming lan-
guage could be eased by bundling relevant assistive tools in a simple graphical
10
==PAGE:11==
user interface. As a result attention was given to the following subjects:
• How does the supported programming approaches compare with regards
to progress and feasibility (visual programming versus conventional pro-
gramming in Python)
• What text editor features could ease the development in Python?
• What changes should be made to the existing Fable Python API?
• What problem solving approaches are applied/need to be supported by
the system?
2.2
Method
In order to provide the basis for comparison, two pilot tests were carried out in
parallel. The activities of the tests were identical but had to be accomplished us-
ing either visual programming (test A) or conventional programming in Python
(test B).
Do-it-together activities are believed to encourage think-aloud behaviour and
verbose communication and hence may provide a suitable source of quantitative
data[22]. As a result it was decided to engage the participants in pair work.
To be able to test possible candidate features that could ease the development
in Python, several integrated development environments (IDE) were considered.
It was decided to use PyCharm as it provided both syntax highlighting, auto-
complete suggestions and on-the ﬂy error high lighting.
Four students from Københavns Private Gymnasium participated in the test
which was held at DTU Electro. The ages of the participants ranged between
16-18 years and all of them attended their second year of Danish advanced sec-
ondary education (Gymnasium).
The participants were divided into two groups and provided with a set of 8
programming exercises of increasing diﬃculty. The exercises mostly build on
top of each other and ranged in complexity from changing color of a LED to
assembling and programming a walking robot.
Given a timeslot of approximately 90 minutes, each group had to collaborate
about completing as many exercises as possible (in chronological order) using
the programming approaches mentioned above. In addition to the exercises,
participants of test B were provided with a template script for each exercise.
The scripts both contained pre-written code for loading the required modules
as well as exercise descriptions. Moreover some scripts included hints and a few
code snippets. The exercises and templates are available in appendix A.1.
Prior to the test, no introduction was giving to the tools and technologies in-
volved in solving the exercises.
Meanwhile to resemble a realistic education
activity, an instructor was available to provide help when particularly needed.
Due to limited resources each instructor also served as an observer during the
pilot tests.
The analysis of the test were based on in situ observations as well as screencast
recordings from the personal computers on which the exercises were completed.
11
==PAGE:12==
2.3
Observations and Results
While engaging in pair-work all participants were observed to actively commu-
nicate and think-aloud. Together with observed user-product interactions, this
verbal communication has served as the primary source of qualitative obser-
vations. Non-verbal communication such as facial expressions, body posture,
gestures etc. were not recorded.
For test B the recorded video had unintentionally been sampled at a varying
frame rate. Moreover the encoded video had a constant frame rate which turned
out to be almost the double of the average sampling rate. In order to enhance
the synchronization of the audio and video streams, image frames were extracted
and re-encoded at a constant frame rate of approximately 14 fps. By identi-
fying ﬁx points in the screencast1 the maximum temporal diﬀerence on video
and audio was estimated to be around 15 seconds in the re-encoded footage.
Observations made from the screencast video has been timestamped based on
the audio track.
Completion times and average completion times for exercise 1-7 are presented in
ﬁgure 4. The average completion times for test A and B were 11 and 8 minutes
respectively. In the ﬁrst 3 exercises participants of test A are seen to complete
the exercises in less than half the time of participants from test B. During exer-
cise 6 in test B the test had to be cancelled due to technical issues with the serial
connection. Meanwhile prior to the issues a partly working solution with ”rough
edges” had been demonstrated. As a result this exercise was also regarded as
completed.
On average slightly shorter completion times were measured in test A. Moreover
as compared to test B the ﬁrst 3 exercises of test A were all completed on less
than half the time.
Ex.1
Ex.2
Ex.3
Ex.4
Ex.5
Ex.6 Ex. 7 Avg.
0
5
10
15
20
Time (min.)
Test A
Test B
Figure 4: Measured completion times for test A (exercise 1-7) and test B (exer-
cise 1-6). The average completion is only based on exercises completed in both
tests.
1Actions that can be identiﬁed on both audio and video track
12
==PAGE:13==
2.3.1
Use of assistive tools
• On-the-ﬂy error highlighting (red underlining) helped the paticipants to
ﬁnd and correct several syntax errors and reason about the format of input
parameters:”(8:37) there has to be something after the equal sign”,”(9:36)
it has to be a number”, ”(12:42) a parameter is missing..”.
• Autocompletion was not discovered by the participants and had to be in-
troduced (51:44). Meanwhile the participants were subsequently able to
explore the API and ﬁnd appropriate methods by themselves. In auto-
complete suggestions, the self variable appeared together with other input
parameters. This led to confusion among the participants.
2.3.2
The Fable Python API
• The usage as named keywords such as
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(moduleID=11,motorID=1,pos=90)
was perceived as self-explanatory and helped the test persons to provide
appropriate input parameters.
• The semantics of some method names i.e. ”terminate” were not under-
stood as the participants were unfamiliar with the English term.
• The participants did not recognize the color abbreviations (r, g and b)
before they were asked about their meaning several minutes into the exer-
cise: (14:38) ”QUESTION: what is r,g,b an abbreviation for?..ANSWER:
r is red, oh it is color mixing!”
• The naming of motors (motor ID’s) were not consistent across the modules
and the API. This had to be explained by the instructor before participants
were able to provide correct input parameters to control the motor.
2.3.3
Problem solving approach Group B
• The behaviour of the physical robot modules (sound and light emission,
movement) served as the primary source of feedback for doing enquiries
about the system. Particularly, absence of behaviour was used as a proof of
program failure (runtime error). Meanwhile also presence og coloured con-
sole output (stack traces) was noticed as an indicator of failure. Though,
no attempts were made to interpret the console output.
• The print statement was introduced with the intend to provide an ex-
ploration and debugging tool for producing console output and hence to
support other types of enquiries. Meanwhile as compared to achieving
physical behaviour, the ability to produce console output triggered little
excitement and never cached on as an investigation tool. Although the
participants were not interviewed about their rationale, it appears from
their non-verbal communication that this type of feedback was regarded
as less convincing.
13
==PAGE:14==
2.3.4
Problem solving approach Group B
Generally, the participants of this test were observed to work less independently
and rather to engage in more Socratic dialogue with the instructor:
(5:51)
PARTICIPANT: ”Wouldn’t it just remain red forever”?
INSTRUCTOR:
”Yes”
(12:50) INSTRUCTOR:
”What happens here?”(referring to the code)
PARTICIPANT: ”It ’s waiting for 10 seconds, then it is getting green, then it
is changing again...”
(17.54) INSTRUCTOR: ”Can you ﬁgure out why two diﬀerent motors are moving?”
PARTICIPANT: ”Yes it is because we are using x and y”.
As suggested above the dialogue commonly reveal basic understandings of the
programming approach and working of the system.
Rather than combining
blocks to build new solutions, time was often spend looking for existing blocks
to solve the exercises (7.24). As compared to group A the participants do appear
slightly more conﬁdent doing repetitions with loops, still however this concept
appears as one of the hardest to get familiar with.
2.4
Discussion
Only one measurement of completion time exist for each combination of exer-
cise and programming approach. Moreover to a large extend completion times
depend on the amount of help provided by the instructor. This suggest that
no trend can be directly extrapolated from the existing body of quantitative
measurements.
However given the timeslot and type of exercises, both pro-
gramming approaches seem to be feasible options. For small problems however
students using the visual programming approach might be more tempted to
construct solutions by luck - rather than making inquires and reasoning about
the system[13].
In order to be useful, the verbosity of console output such as stack traces is
likely to be too overwhelming for users. However producing less dense and at
the same time informative output may prove to be challenging and may not be
worth the eﬀort at this stage.
Both auto-completion and on-the-ﬂy error highlighting was observed to be help-
ful features for the participants. Most modern word processors encourage ac-
tive use of spell and gamma checking through on-the-ﬂy underlining of errors.
Hence, for most users resolving errors indicated by colored underlining is a fa-
miliar text processing workﬂow which can be directly applied when developing
program code for Fable applications.
A suitable IDE can be envisioned to provide the above set of features while
being stripped from irrelevant functionality in order not to confuse the user. To
achieve this the most ideal solution may be to customize a skinned version of
an already existing (open source) IDE.
Test B revealed that minor changes are required to make the API more user
friendly: by consistent use of motor ID’s and by preventing use of abbreviations.
Moreover, it might be considered to replace ”terminate” with ”stop”.
14
==PAGE:15==
Summary.
The above ﬁndings suggest that only minor challenges need to be
overcome in order for the Fable system to be relevant for ASE: for conventional
programming a customized text editor or IDE would likely ease the develop-
ment. Moreover, the system would also beneﬁt from a a few changes to the
existing API.
3
Realization of the virtual Fable system
This section deals with the speciﬁc problem of virtualising the Fable system.
3.1
Motivation
In an educational setting robot assembling and programming appears as obvi-
ous class room activities because they allow many individuals to share a large
collection of robot modules in a multitude of ways: all participants may work in-
dividually with the same robot conﬁguration and have timeslots for demonstrat-
ing and testing their application in plenum (shifting). Groups of collaborating
participants may be assigned a subset of the modules and run their applications
concurrently by addressing their own modules through diﬀerent radio channels.
Groups of individuals may share speciﬁc robot conﬁgurations based on radio
channels and shifting etc.
Meanwhile resource sharing as discussed above is not applicable for individual
practising such as home work. Moreover, while shifting appears as an elegant
way of demonstrating the state of an robot application it may not always be
suitable for debugging or initial testing.
3.2
Speciﬁcation of requirements
Usecase (a): a tool for users.
The considerations above suggest that the
physical robot system should be supplemented by a simulation tool that would
allow users to run their applications on virtual modules without requiring access
to the real Fable system. This suggests the following requirements:
(a) Portability: the solution should be cross platform as it would have to run
on students laptops with diﬀerent operating systems. Moreover, on typical
laptops simulations with up to 6 modules should be able to run satisfying.
(b) Simplicity: the solution should take no longer than 10 minutes to install
and conﬁgure and no longer than 15 seconds to start.
(c) Integration: the simulation should be able to display in a browser window
in order to integrate with the existing FableBlockly GUI
Usecase (b): a tool for developers.
In addition to satisfying usecase (a) a
simulation tool could potentially allow developers to debug and test their code
when developing new modules for the Fable system. The following criteria was
identiﬁed for usecase (b):
(d) Originality: to the extend possible the virtual modules should be controlled
using the original code running on the Fable modules.
15
==PAGE:16==
While keeping this in mind it was decided to solely focus on a solution that
would satisfy usecase (a).
3.3
Initial approach
This section shortly summarizes the experiences gained while building the ﬁrst
prototype.
3.3.1
Summary of design and implementation
Rather than aiming at a solution that would be applicable for all usecases in
section 3.1, it was decided to tailor the initial solution for usecase a. In addition
to the requirements stated above the tool was designed ﬂexible enough to allow
the simulator and the control code to run on diﬀerent computers. Due to the
existing web service architecture of Fable this was cheap to obtain and provided
several potential beneﬁts.
In order to minimize changes to the existing PC side software it was decided to
let the pc software communicate with a ”virtual” dongle though an ip socket that
faked the serial connection to the real dongle. In this solution the control code
of the embedded programs were rewritten in Python, with a Python process
corresponding to each module.
Rather than attempting to reuse the native
control code at ﬁrst (which might prove challenging), this was done to quickly
gain experience with the usage of web based graphics rendering.
The webbased GUI was implemented in JavaScript and based on the 3D graphics
library three.js. Communication between the GUI and the Python processes
were established using web sockets for two major purposes: To allow the Python
processes to respond to user interactions and to link Python processes/virtual
modules and their graphical representation.
3.3.2
Findings
The rendering of 3D graphics turned out to cause few problems. Meanwhile
in order to be able to simulate dynamics the solution also had to rely on a
JavaScript physics engine. After gaining experiences with various engines, it
was eventually concluded that this technology was yet too immature for the
purpose.
The most important lesson learned from this approach was that early failure is
cheap and late failure is expensive: it simply required too much experimentation
and development to realize that the approach was not likely to succeed.
3.4
Revisited approach
For the second approach I was recommend to use the Virtual Robot Experi-
mentation Platform (V-rep) from Coppelia Robotic, which is already used in
other projects at DTU Electro. V-rep is a general purpose robot simulation
framework with support for a multitude of programming approaches [19].
By relying on V-rep requirement (c) had to be discarded and it was realized
that requirement (b) and possibly requirement (a) might become more diﬃcult
to satisfy. On the other hand using a dedicated robot simulation platform might
16
==PAGE:17==
allow the solution to be more suitable for usecase (b) as well. The follow sections
deals with the realization of the virtual Fable system based on V-rep.
3.5
Analysis
Virtualization in V-rep.
To run a simulation in V-rep a scene need to be
created and subsequently populated with physical models (robot modules among
others). The execution of the simulation is controlled by a main simulation loop.
For each simulation cycle the simulation loop advances the simulation time and
trigger the execution of optional control code. Subsequently the scene is ren-
dered.
The above considerations suggests that the realization of a virtual Fable system
involves two major steps: the physics of the modules need to be modelled and
the control code running on the modules need to be either reused or modelled.
Hence in the following sections the design of the virtual robot system have been
subdivided in the design of physical models and the design of the simulation
speciﬁc software.
3.5.1
Interfacing with V-rep
In V-rep execution of control code fall into three categories. Control code is
either executed (a) on the robot itself2 (b) on the same machine but in another
process or thread (c) on the same machine and in the same thread as the simu-
lation loop. Obviously option a is irrelevant as the simulation is intended to be
used as either a substitute or supplement for the real robot modules. Moreover,
option c can also be discarded as it require the control code to be non-blocking
which is not the case. The remaining option (option b) can be realized through
2 programming approaches:
• Threaded child scripts. The control code associated with a physical
model is contained in lua (version 5.1) scripts embedded in and distributed
together with each model.
• Remote API. External code (which may be the native code running on
the same machine) is used to control the physical models.
Moreover, controlling of a model can in principle be achieved using plug-ins and
add-ons (although they are primarily intended for customization of the simula-
tor itself). As this is generally not recommended [18][19] those approaches have
not been considered. In order to decide on the most appropriate programming
approach a comparison of the two remaining candidate options have been made.
The comparison is summarized in table 1. See [19] for a throughout discussion
of the approaches.
The major reasons for deciding on the remote API appears to be the ability
to use the native control code3 (originality) and to prevent duplication of code
(maintainability). Hence this approach satisfy requirement (d) and thus would
be the most suitable for usecase (b).
2e.q. connected through serial port, socket etc.
3Referred to as the software installed on the robot modules and not the pc side software.
17
==PAGE:18==
Table 1: Comparison of programming approaches supported by V-rep
Remote API and
native control code
Regular API and
child scripts
Originality
Native code, but diﬀerent hard-
ware
No
Code duplication
No.
Control code need manual
or automatic translation
Portability
Platform depended. Need to be
distributed, compiled, installed
separately.
Platform independent and
distributed with model
Flexibility
(1) Need recompilation for each
small code modiﬁcation
Control code can be dupli-
cated/serialized with mod-
els
(2) Model duplication compli-
cated, need hard wired mecha-
nism to launch new control in-
stances
Synchronization
(1) Limitations in synchronisa-
tion with simulation loop [19].
((2) Communication lag dic-
tated by socket connection.)
Can
programmatically
switch
between
free-
running mode (behave as
real
thread)
or
normal
mode with synchronization
at every n cycles.
API limitations [18]
Below 100 functions.
Speciﬁ-
cally no API calls for light ma-
nipulation.
Above 400 functions.
The major reasons for deciding on child scripts appears to be increased portabil-
ity and ﬂexibility - i.e. this programming approach would be the most suitable
for requirement (b) and hence usecase (a).
Initial experimentation with the
remote API further revealed that control of light sources (required to change
the color of LED’s) are not yet supported. The most basic programs for Fable
typically involves changing the color of a LED, and hence this behaviour could
not be animated in a simulation. More importantly, with more than 4 times as
many functions available through the regular API, it might turn out that more
essential functionality were inaccessible from the remote API.
Based on the above considerations it was decided to rely on child scripts. Po-
tentially synchronisation may turn out as an additional reason not to rely on
the remote API. However as the above reasons are suﬃcient this has not been
investigated in depth.
3.5.2
Interfacing with Fable’s existing PC side software
V-rep allows child scripts to communicate through serial connections and as
discussed in section 3.3.1 it is desirable not to modify the existing PC side soft-
ware. As a result it was decided to let the pc side software communicate with a
virtual dongle through a serial connection. This was done in software by creat-
18
==PAGE:19==
ing two virtual serial ports and linking them (on linux using the command line
utility socat). For teaching purposes one drawback with this solution is that
it requires additional operating system speciﬁc conﬁguration. To circumvent
the conﬁguration issue a simple hardware solution was made by attaching two
USB to TTL converters (total price 16 dkr). This solution could eventually be
considered to ease the conﬁguration for some user groups.
3.5.3
Control code
To allow code reuse among modules, the native control code is separated in mod-
ule speciﬁc programs (Arduino programs) and library ﬁles (the Fable library).
Interfaces to the underlying hardware are provided by external dependencies
such as libraries and drivers which are not regarded a part of the control code
- most considerable the Arduino library and the RF24 driver for wireless com-
munication.
The control of virtual modules could be implemented solely by examining the
public API for Fable i.e. what methods are exposed and what are they supposed
to do. However in addition to increased maintenance treating the native control
code as a black box has two major drawbacks:
Firstly, the child scripts are distributed together with the virtual modules and
do not share memory. Hence they anyway have to communicate through mes-
sage passing like the real modules. This suggest that the amount of control
code cannot be reduced signiﬁcantly and hence there are no obvious beneﬁts of
re-inventing the control code.
Secondly, in order for the simulation to resemble the real system also bugs and
other implementation speciﬁc behaviour should ideally be captured whenever
possibly i.e. particularly for usecase (b). Hence in order to produce simulation
control code that closely resembles the native control code (and prevent manual
code duplication), automatic translation of the control code appears as a suit-
able solution.
3.6
Proposed software architecture
Based on the above analyses, a layered view of the proposed software archi-
tecture are presented in ﬁgure 5. The design decisions can be summarized as
follows:
• The virtual Fable system will be controlled by regular user programs and
rely on Fable’s existing PC side software.
• The control code for the virtual Fable system will be generated by a trans-
lator based on the native control code.
• For simplicity the simulation control code will also inherit the interface to
the underlying software layer. This suggests that an adapter layer need to
be implemented to bridge between the inherited interface and the regular
API provided by V-rep.
In order to fully implement the architecture proposed in ﬁgure 5 only two com-
ponents are currently missing: the translator and the adaptor layer.
19
==PAGE:20==
Real robot system
Virtual robot system
User Program
Fable API’s
Fable’s PC side software
Dongle interface
Native control code
Translated
control code
Arduino interface
Driver interfaces
Adapter layer
Hardware
abstraction layer
V-rep regular API
Simulator
Hardware
(a) Layered view on the proposed software architecture. The translated control code
inherits a set of interfaces from the native control code. The role of the adaptor layer
is to implement the inherited interfaces on top of the regular API provided by the
simulator.
Translated
control code
Native control code
Translator
C++
Lua
(b) The control code for the virtual robot system is generated through automatic
translation.
Figure 5: Overview of software architecture. The realization of the architecture
requires two components to be implemented: the translator proposed in ﬁgure
(b) and the adaptor layer proposed in ﬁgure (a).
The translator plays a key role in the proposed solution although it’s only an
external tool. As a result the realization of the translator has been dealt with
separately in section 4. The activity diagram in ﬁgure 6 illustrates how the
translator and the adaptor layer software have been developed in parallel.
3.7
Design and implementation of the adaptor layer
As discussed in section 3.5.3 the translated control code inherits an interface
from the native code that diﬀers from the regular API provided by the simula-
tor. As a result the inherited interface need to be implemented on top of the
regular API.
Before reading this subsection it is recommended to have a look at 4.3 which
shortly explains how the native code have been annotated.
20
==PAGE:21==
extend/improve
translator
translate
run
simulation tests
extend/improve
adapter layer
add source ﬁles
to translation
extend tests
(Typically syntax error)
(Typically Runtime Error)
(Typically Runtime Error)
OK
Figure 6: Activity diagram illustrating the development of the translator and
the adaptor layer software. Generally (but not always) errors in the translator
and in the adapter layer resulted in either syntactic errors or runtime errors
21
==PAGE:22==
Embedding of system information.
Commonly an API call from the in-
herited interface can be mapped directly to an API call in the regular API
because many of the abstractions are the same: both interfaces provide calls for
reading and writing to a serial port, to get the current time etc. For some API
calls however, the mapping cannot be done in a state independent way because
the semantics of the calls depend on how the simulated system is conﬁgured.
To illustrate this assume the color of a LED have to be changed. V-rep provides
an API call for changing light color, however this abstraction is not provided
by the inherited interface. From the view of the control code, manipulating a
LED is a matter about reading, writing and setting the state of GPIO pins.
Thus to trigger a LED color change when invoking a method for writing to a
pin additional information need to be supplied.
In the control code for the user interface board (UIBoard.cpp) constants are
deﬁned to identify the pins corresponding to the RGB colors of a LED. Using
the annotations explained in section 4.3 this appear as the obvious place to em-
bedded the information about how the GPIO pins in question should be linked
to behaviour in the simulation.
To achieve this annotation containing deﬁnitions of empty tables (corresponding
to input pins, output pins and pin states) are added to the control code that
deﬁnes the generic interface of a board - the ﬁle board.h. This allow the pins
to be linked to the simulation behaviour by deﬁning customized functions on
the table ﬁelds:
...
#define RED_PIN 3
//Native control code
...
/*LUA:
//Annotation
Board.PIN_OUT[RED_PIN]=function (arg)
//Embedded pin behaviour
Board.LED:setColor(arg[1],nil,nil)
end
...
*/
When writing a value to a particular pin using the inherited interface (for in-
stance analogWrite(RED_PIN,value)) the associated behaviour can be trig-
gered by invoking the function that are deﬁned on the table ﬁeld corresponding
to the pin: Board.PIN_OUT[RED_PIN](value).
Implementation details and speciﬁcs of the above case is not meant to be im-
portant. Rather they are included to be able to illustrate the problem and to
suggest how the general problem can possibly be dealt with by annotating the
native code.
Modelling the EEPROM.
The EEPROM allow modules to permanently
store informations such as module type and ID. The methods for reading from
and writing to the EEPROM are provided by the inherited interface. In V-rep
however, there is no suitable way to model this part of the system. As a result
22
==PAGE:23==
it was decided to represent the EEPROM by a lua table with table ﬁelds cor-
responding to memory locations. In order to make the storage persistent the
content of the table is synchronized with a text ﬁle after a writing operation and
before a reading or writing operation. This enable the EEPROM to be updated
and read either using a text editor or programmatically through the Fable API.
As for the child scripts, embedding the EEPROM in the model itself appears
as a suitable storage solution. Often however many instances of a model (say a
Fable module) need to participate in a simulation. As a result the state infor-
mation contained on the EEPROM (such as module ID) is going to be instance
speciﬁc. Therefore it makes obviously no sense to let several instances share the
EEPROM of a model - or a copy of it. Rather than having models representing
module types, this problem could of cause be resolved by providing a model
for each physical instance of a module. This however introduces unnecessary
redundancy and still do not prevent several instances of a model to be added.
As a result it was decided to name the EEPROM of a module instance accord-
ing to it’s type and instance number. This solution is appropriate for many use
cases but not perfect. It is ensured that (1) all instances get unique EEPROM’s
and (2) an EEPROM is always used by the same type of module. Meanwhile
when populating a scene with modules, the pairing of EEPROM’s and mod-
ule instances will depend on the the order in which the instances are added.
Having several diﬀerent module types this may become an issue under some
circumstances.
A third solutions is to manually rename every added module instance based on
module type and desired module id. Every EEPROM ﬁle could then be uniquely
identiﬁed based on the instance name. Having to rename every instance manu-
ally quickly becomes tiresome and remembering naming conventions isn’t prac-
tical. Adding and renaming of model instances can however be done using the
remote API. This suggest that a future solution may be to extend the Fable API
with methods for programmatically adding modules and possibly pre-assembled
robot conﬁgurations.
Controlling of joins.
For the joint module a dedicated micro controller is
responsible for the actual control of the joins. The control code accesses this
micro controller through a serial connection.
As a result there is no inher-
ited interface for controlling the joins. The methods associated with the join
control are instead implemented in the dynamixelFable library. Rather than
re-implementing the software running on the dedicated micro controller it was
decided to use the annotation to replace the body of the deﬁnition of the ap-
plicable functions from the dynamixelFable library. This was particularly easy
because the functions for controlling joins i V-rep are nearly the same.
3.8
Design and assembling of the physical models
Overview.
In V-rep the main simulation elements consists of scenes and mod-
els where models are sub-elements of scenes that can be reused in multiple
scenes. Both scenes and models may contain other models . In addition to
models a scene also contain pages (cameras) for viewing the simulation as well
as an environment to host the robot system being simulated. In order for a
23
==PAGE:24==
conﬁguration of the robot system to participate in a scene, models of it’s con-
stituents need to be build. This was done on the level of modules. Subsequently
models of a few robot conﬁgurations were pre-assembled from the robot mod-
ules.
Models were build for 3 diﬀerent types of modules, the dongle module, the joint
module and a passive four way module - the latter is used for attachment of
other modules.
Figure 7 shows a screenshot of a scene during simulation. The scene contains
a dongle module and a pre-assembled robot conﬁguration consisting of 4 joint
modules that are attached using a four-way module. The virtual robot sys-
tem is controlled through the FableBlockly interface (the window seen in upper
left corner). The status information in FableBlockly shows what virtual joint
modules have been auto-detected.
Modelling the dongle module.
No CAD model exists for the dongle module
and the expected shape and color of it’s casing is yet unknown. As a result the
shape and visual appearance have been freely fabricated and scaled according
to the approximate size of the current print board. The module is supposed to
remain in a ﬁxed posting without dynamic interaction with other scene objects
(i.e. it is not dynamically enabled in the simulation). However like the real
dongle this model plays a key role as it allows the PC to communicate with the
other modules. Hence by dragging the module into a scene the native PC side
software can communicate with the virtual module through a serial connection
as if it was the real dongle.
Modelling the joint and 4-way module.
For the joint module and the 4-
way module the existing CAD models were imported as triangular meshes (rigid
bodies) for the rendering. Initially the joint module was represented by several
meshes. Some meshes corresponded to ﬁxed parts (relative to each other) of
diﬀerent materials. Those meshes were grouped to form rigid entities. Due to
the joins other meshes were distinguished as they corresponded to parts that
could move relative to each other. Those meshes were attached using generic
joins provided by V-rep.
The shapes used for the appearance of the modules could as well be used for the
dynamics calculations (collision response, etc.). This however would almost cer-
tainly lead to ineﬃcient simulations due to the complexity of the shapes. Instead
the shape of a model have been approximated by forming groups of non-visible,
primitive shapes (spheres cylinders and cuboids) which are used for the dynam-
ics calculations. This standard approach [18] allows collision detection (which
is diﬀerent from collision response) to be done using the non-primitive shapes.
Modelling of wireless communication.
V-rep allows wireless communica-
tions to be simulated and visualized. By default the reception of a wireless signal
is constrained to the period of one simulation time step after the transmission.
For wireless communication the translated control code depend on the inher-
ited interface for the RF24 driver.
When implementing the RF24 interface
the API calls for wireless communication in V-rep cannot be invoked from the
same thread as the control code. This is due to the fact that the control code
24
==PAGE:25==
Joint Module
Dongle
Autodetection
of modules
Pinging
Pre-assembled
robot conﬁguration
Figure 7: Programming of virtual modules using FableBlockly
uses blocking calls and hence cannot be guaranteed to synchronize with the
simulation loop at every n simulation steps. Hence to allow for asynchronous
communication it was considered necessary to build a model that would buﬀer
incoming and outgoing messages and take care of the actual transmission and
reception. The logic for this was implemented in a non-threaded child script
associated with the model. As the model also serves as antenna object for trans-
mission and reception it was decided to name it RF24 although it only resembles
the physical radio on a very abstract level. Moreover, with this design, the im-
plementation of the RF24 interface can likewise be thought of as the equivalent
of the RF24 driver.
3.9
Overview of source ﬁles and binaries
This section is supposed to provides a short overview of the distribution of
source ﬁles and binaries in the source folder and are merely used for reference
in the following sections.
the source folder (src) all the native PC side software are contained in the api
folder and all the embedded software are contained in the embedded folder. In
addition to the existing folders, all simulation speciﬁc software have been orga-
nized in the simulation folder. Currently this folder also contains the scripts
for translating the source ﬁles and the robot simulator (V-rep).
Embedded software for simulations are contained in the src/simulation/embedded
folder where ﬁles are organized like in the native embedded folder: the modules
folder contains the translated programs and the libraries folder contains the
translated library code (i.e. the FableLib and dynamixelFable libraries). The
software implementing the inherited interface of the translated control code have
been added to the dependencies subfolder.
25
==PAGE:26==
Table 2: Measurements of ping lag/round trip lag. Measurements were done in
intervals of 0.5 s using the API methods measureDonglePingLag and measure-
ModulePingLag.
Virtual dongle
Real dongle
Virtual joint module
Sample size
100
100
100
Mean [ms]
0.131
0.219
0.477
Std [ms]
0.038
0.057
0.085
Table 3: Recorded completion times for common tasks involved in programming
the virtual Fable system
Time [s]
Task
Time [s]
Task
112
Manually setup serial ports
5.35
Start V-rep
7
Turn on virtual dongle
4
Start FableBlockly
23
Auto
detect
modules
in
FableBlockly
By default the model browser in V-rep displays the content of the V-rep sub-
folder models. As a result all models and EEPROM ﬁles have been added to
the subfolder .../models/fable.
In order to bootstrap the software in the embedded folder, fable also contains
a ﬁle lib.lua responsible for paths loading and necessary customization of lua
(and V-rep).
3.10
Observations and results
Overview.
The state of the project suggest that the native PC side software
can now be used to run user applications on virtual modules. Currently the
available building blocks for virtual robots and constructions consist of join
modules and passive 4-way modules. In addition to modules a robot with 4 legs
have been assembled. Tests and demonstrations are presented in the following
sections. Finally known issues of the current state of the project are outlined.
3.10.1
Ping and round trip lag
The Fable Python API provides two methods for measuring ping lag: measure-
ModulePingLag and measureDonglePingLag. Tests (available in appendix B.1)
have been carried out to measure ping lag for the virtual dongle and virtual
joint module. In order to compare with the real Fable system the same dongle
test was carried out using a real dongle. However due to lag of availability it
was unfortunately not possible to test with a real module (for instance a joint
module).
The test results are presented in table 2. 100 measurements of ping lag (with
0.5 s delay) have been made for each module. The virtual dongle is seen to have
slightly lower ping lag (mean 0.131 ms) than the real dongle (mean 0.219 ms).
The mean ping lag of the virtual module is 0.477 ms.
26
==PAGE:27==
No direct measurement of ping lag is provided by [15]. However it is noticed
that a round-trip lag for a simple remote procedure call is around 4.2 ms (and
longer if the remote module need to perform processing). This high value is
suspected to be caused by an issue with a windows driver4
3.10.2
Completion times for common tasks
Completion times were recorded for the 5 major steps involved in preparing
the virtual Fable system to be programmed. Tasks (i.e. the steps) and their
completion times are presented in table 3. Rather than using virtual serial ports,
two USB to TTL converters were used to provide the physical communication
link between Fable’s PC side software and the virtual Fable system (see section
3.5.2). This was done in an attempt to make the task (to prepare the serial
connection) more comparable across operation systems. In order to be able to
communicate with modules in a simulation scene a virtual dongle need to be
dragged into the scene and the simulation need to be started. This task have
been referred to as ”turning on the dongle”. Assuming that the serial connection
is already setup table 3 suggests that it takes at least 40 seconds before a virtual
Fable system can be programmed. In addition to that robots and modules need
to be added to a scene and a existing application may need to be opened in
FableBlockly.
The 4 legged robot have been rebuild from modules 3-4 times using diﬀerent
models of the joint module. Assembling a robot the ﬁrst time takes in the order
of 1-2 hours (when already having the experience of assembling the modules).
When repeating the task several times the completion time could be reduced to
around 20-40 minutes. To assemble a robot using real modules [15] reports the
average completion time to be 16.9 s for a similar robot conﬁguration.
3.10.3
Installing and conﬁguring the system
No user tests of the installation and conﬁguration process have been made.
However I have now prepared the setup twice and the required installation and
conﬁguration have both times taking me at least 20 minutes - counting the
installation of the Fable PC side software and the virtual Fable system. On
top of that most users would likely not be able to install the software without
instructions or a installation guide.
3.10.4
Pilot experiments with the physical design
In theory the eﬃciency of the (dynamics) simulation is both impacted by the
number and the type of the dynamically enabled primitive shapes. Eﬃciency-
wise spheres are for instance cheaper than cubioeds. Hence in order to arrive
at an approximation which is both satisfying with regards to performance and
realism of the dynamical behaviour pilot testing have been carried out with sev-
eral alternate shape conﬁgurations to arrive at the ﬁnal models for the virtual
modules.
All testing were done on a laptop using a graphics card which was not designed
4Noticed by David Christen in January 2015, while testing the Fable system on Linux for
the ﬁrst time.
27
==PAGE:28==
for intensive gpu processing such as gaming and dynamics simulation. Gener-
ally speaking all prototypes was observed to consume many system resources.
However some tests did appear more ﬂuent than others. Unfortunately observed
behaviour turned out to be hard to reproduce and often seemed not agree with
the theoretical considerations suggested above.
Hence to a large extend the
iteration on the physical design was found to be a matter about trial and error.
To illustrate this a discarded prototype JointModuleDiscarded.ttm have been
included in the fable folder. The physics of the module is approximated only
using 5 spheres and 1 cuboid. The ﬁnal model JointModuleDiscarded.ttm
uses 2 cylinders and 7 cubioeds. Realizing this however the ﬁnal prototypes
were found to exhibit less jittering and reproducible eﬀect caused by rounding
errors in the dynamics calculation (and determined by the physical properties
of the objects).
Lack of ﬂuency in the rendering may be experienced when the simulator at-
tempts to meet real time constraints by catching up with the simulation loop
(i.e. in real time simulations) and hence provide a observable measure for the
eﬃciency of the calculations.
However like for the freezing events discussed
below, due to lack of reproducibility judgements were hard to make.
Random freezing
While iterating on the physical design V-rep was in some
periods observed to freeze randomly. To isolated the problem additional testing
was done particularly to see if the occasional freezing could be attributed to one
of the many simulation settings or to the control code.
However the additional testing did not reveal any such patterns. Eventually
it was realized that the seemingly random freezing could also be observed in
simulations that did not involve any control code from the Fable project (only
physical models where the control code had been removed). Moreover, occa-
sional crashes have also been observed when playing with other pre-build robots
provided together with V-rep - although it is hard to judge this likely happens
more rarely. Based on the above ﬁndings it was concluded that the freezing
must either be related to the design of the physical models or possibly a bug in
V-rep.
Despite being random and not reproducible there seem to be some underlying
pattern in the freezing.
• Periods with freezing. In some periods V-rep freezes. It than happens
both randomly and repeatedly (say within minutes). Moreover, the prob-
lem cannot be isolated to particular scenes or models. It however appears
that the likelihood of freezing do increase with the number of models in
a particular scene. However the likelihood of freezing does not seem to
depend on whether user applications are being run or not. 3 such periods
have been experience and they have lasted between roughly 0.5 and 9.
• Periods without freezing. V-rep can be used for 12-14 hours (accu-
mulated time) without a freezing. When running the exactly same scenes
and simulation models as above V-rep cannot be made to freeze.
The cpu usage of V-rep was reduced using the program cpu limit. This seemed
to have a positive impact on the freezing without eliminating the problem. But
again due to the random and non-reproducible nature of the freezing it is really
hard to judge.
28
==PAGE:29==
3.10.5
Test of functionality provided through the Fable API
A collection of simple tests have been made to demonstrate the working of basic
functions accessible through the Fable API. The test is subdivided based on the
type of modules the functions are invoked on: the DongleTests folder contains
the dongle related tests and the JointModuleTests folder contains the joint
module related tests. Both folders are located in in the folder tests. Each
folder contains 3 ﬁles:
• a Python script with the unit tests
• a test scene that can be loaded in V-rep
• a video showing the tests being run and commented
The unit test are included in appendix B.3 and B.2.
3.10.6
Test of integration with the FableBlockly interface
The tests/BlocklyDemo folder contains a Blockly program and a video demon-
strating how FableBlockly is used to program virtual modules in V-rep. No
scene is included because the scene is being populated with models as part of
the demonstration. The demonstration shows that the virtual Fable system can
be successfully controlled using FableBlockly. However as apparent from the
video this ideally requires 2 displays: one for FableBlockly and one for V-rep.
3.10.7
Simulation of more complex robot conﬁgurations
To demonstrate the working of a more complex application a 4 legged vir-
tual Fable robot have been programmed to turn around in circles. The folder
TurningRobotDemo contains the user application and scene as well as a video
demonstrating the virtual robot in action.
3.10.8
Current limitations and known issues
Random freezing
As discussed in section 3.8 V-rep have sometimes been
observed to freeze randomly. This issue haven’t been resolved yet.
Serial communication.
Currently the original baud rate of the serial con-
nection does not work with V-rep. As a result the original baud rate have been
changed in the native PC side software. Moreover, the naming of ports for serial
communication is operating system depended and hence to run on a Windows
operating system the port names need to be changed accordingly (for both sides
of the connection).
Light sources.
For the virtual modules LED’s are modelled as light sources.
V-rep only allows a ﬁxed number of light sources to be activated in every scene.
Hence when adding more than 4 modules to a scene, none of the additional
modules will have visible LED’s.
29
==PAGE:30==
Force/torque and position mode of the joint modules
In V-rep the
mode of a join cannot be changed during the simulation.
As a result it is
currently not possible to use all join related functions provided by the Fable
API: rather than allowing the speed of the motor to be adjusted, it was decided
to enable torque settings.
3.11
Discussion
3.11.1
Usecase (a)
As discussed in section 3.1 the primary goal of simulating the robot system was
to allow students to test their programs without access to the real modules - for
instance for individual practising such as home work. The current state of the
translated control code suggest that all the functionality used in the pilot tests
(as well as the 3 applicable module types) are now available to use. Moreover
in addition to the subset of API methods used during the pilot tests, nearly all
the remaining methods associated with the module types have been tested and
showed to work with the virtual modules.
Requirement a.
With regards to portability requirement a is claimed to be
satisﬁed: the virtual Fable system only relies on existing cross platform appli-
cations (V-rep and Fable’s existing PC side software) and the control code itself
consists of portable lua scripts. However that being said, the solution yet have
to be tested on diﬀerent systems.
To fully satisfy the requirement the simulation is also expected to run satisfying
on regular laptops. This initial requirement is loosely formulated by intention as
it requires further investigation of user needs. To guide testing and optimization
the speciﬁcation of this requirement appears as the natural next step.
However the current testing with real time simulations have demonstrated the
working of user applications and robot conﬁgurations having the same complex-
ity as those found in the pilot tests. With regards to ping lag the virtual Fable
system have been shown to perform slightly better than the real system. More-
over the system has also been demonstrated to work with more complex robot
conﬁgurations: a turning robot with 4 legs (5 active modules in total). Hence to
the extend the user is able to accept high fan noise this supports the conclusion
that the simulations do run satisfying. This conclusion have however not made
as a result of a remaining bug: in some periods V-rep have been experience
to freeze in a random, non-reproducible way (discussed in detail previously).
Obviously this is not satisfying behaviour. Hence before doing any further user
testing or optimization this problem should be isolated and resolved.
Requirement b.
Before the virtual modules can be programmed through
Fable 5 steps need to be taken. Currently the completion time of the steps
amounts to at least 40 s. To meet the initial requirement the accumulated com-
pletion time as well as the number of steps need to be reduced. Realizing this
many of the involved action could be automated and made to run concurrently.
This suggest that the requirement of 15 s start up time is not unrealistic. Like-
wise work need to be done to automate, document and simplify the installation
process.
30
==PAGE:31==
Requirement c.
As stated previously requirement c in it’s initial form could
not be met when relying on V-rep. However as discussed in section 3.7 (under
Modelling the EEPROM) several actions could be taken to better integrate the
V-rep and FableBlockly GUI. Using the remote API, the play/stop bottom in
FableBlockly could start/stop the simulation in V-rep, the Fable API could
be extended to allow simulation models to be programmatically added from
FableBlockly etc. This suggests that much can yet be done to enhance the user
experience of the existing solution.
3.11.2
Usecase (b)
In addition to user program testing the ability to simulate the robot system
further allows control code for new and existing modules to be run and (to
some extend) tested. This suggests that the automated translation of control
code could as well ﬁnd usage when developing new modules and software for the
Fable robot system, at least for early testing. While working with the existing
control code some preliminary experiences have been gained in this regard.
The high similarity between the overall structure and syntax of the native and
translated code makes it easy to navigate and switch between the two repre-
sentations of the software. During debugging and experimentation temporary
changes can be conveniently made to the translated code which is both editable
and debuggable . To commit those changes the native code (or translator code)
can subsequently be updated. Potentially such workﬂows could enhance the
development of the native code.
Particularly when developing library code the ability to test the code without
recompiling and installing may provide considerable beneﬁts under some cir-
cumstances.
For instance in order to tests a change to the library (say the
radio manager) the software may have to be re-installed on several interacting
modules. Hence in addition to preventing the overhead of compilation and in-
stallation the ability to instantiate several copies of the same modules serves as
a considerable beneﬁt.
4
Realization of the translator
This section deals with the design, development and testing of a translator that
produces lua code from C++ code. The usage and need of the translator is mo-
tivated in section 3.5.3.
4.1
Analysis
When deciding on the automatic translation approach much time had already
been spend on the initial approach for developing the virtual Fable system (see
section 3.3).
Moreover given the time frame of the project and my lack of
prior experiences with translation the feasibility of this approach was yet rather
uncertain.
The above considerations resulted in the following design goals for the translator:
31
==PAGE:32==
Translated
control code
Native control code
Translator
annotated C++
extended Lua
Figure 8:
The native control code have been annotated to gain control of
the translation process and to embed informaion about simulation speciﬁc be-
haviour. The lua language have been extended to allow syntax that are more
similar to that of native control code.
4.1.1
Design goals
• Designed to fail early: if the realization of the translator is not feasible
(or useful) it should be apparent as early as possible.
• Designed to be useful in case of failure: a partly working translator
should be able to speed up manual translation
4.2
Strategy
Rather than relying fully on automated translation I decided on a pragmatic
approach where annotation in the native code was used to mask code that
required manual translation - i.e.
the masking was both intended for code
that didn’t made sense to translate and possibly code that was to complicated
to translate. With this approach there would at best be no need for manual
translation - and at worst, the eﬀort would serve as a suitable help for the
manual translation.
Moreover it was realized that the translation could be
eased by extending lua to support features and syntax more similar to that
provided by C++ (most importantly bit shifting operators). To illustrated this
the translation process depicted in ﬁgure (2b) have been updated (see ﬁgure 8).
4.3
Annotation of native code
A simple annotation was invented to be able to ignore or manually translate
part of the code. To comment out/ignore or manually translate individual lines
(without modifying the native code) line comments were used:
int a=2; //LUA:a=3
Rather than translating the left side of //LUA: it is simply replaced by the
content of the right side. Optionally the left and right-hand side can be swapped
by the translator leaving the cpp code as comments in the lua code.
Similarly block comments are used to insert multiple lines of lua code in the
translated ﬁle:
int a=1; /*LUA: b=2; */ int c=3;
To replace a block of code, the block is marked with and ID identifying the
replacement:
32
==PAGE:33==
//<@someID
int a=2;
//>
The replacement can then be added somewhere in the ﬁle with:
/*LUA@someID
a=3;
*/
4.4
Extension of the Lua language
Lua, the programming language, only provides a small set of features that can
be extended to suit diﬀerent programming needs and paradigms [5]. The most
central feature or concept in lua is the so-called table which can be customized
and manipulated in a very ﬂexible way.
To mimic the object-orientated programming style applied in the native code
a little syntactic sugar is needed. Lua has no concept of a class, however as
demonstrated by [6] lua tables can be easily extended to support class inheri-
tance and instantiation of objects. Without going in details this is demonstrated
in ﬁgure 1 which is supposed to provide a rather self-explanatory example.
Bit operators.
Another important feature missing in lua 5.1 is bit operators.
[1] discusses various hacks for extending lua with custom operators. I decided
on an approach based on the following idea: by default arithmetic operations
are not deﬁned on tables. However an operation can be implemented by deﬁning
it in the meta-table associated with one of the operands: to deﬁne addition a
function is added to the meta-table ﬁeld __add, to deﬁne subtraction a function
is added to the ﬁeld __sub and so forth.
The above considerations suggest that custom operators can be deﬁned using
tables. This is achieved by adding a customized function to the ﬁeld correspond-
ing to an arithmetic operation - subtraction for instance. This allow syntax such
as: .
0xFF -BitAND- 0xFA.
4.5
Design and implementation of the translator
Overview.
A Python script cpp2lua.py was developed to translate the na-
tive control code. The script operates on individual source ﬁles and produces lua
ﬁles with the same basename. The working of the script can be summarized as
follows: the content of a source ﬁle (or a ﬁle pair consisting of source and header
ﬁle) is initially loaded to a string which is subsequently manipulated through a
sequence of string operations. As a result the string transition through a set of
intermediate states before it is fully translated (the ﬁnal state). Table 4 provides
an overview of the steps involved in the translation.
The string operations are based on pattern matching using regular expressions.
Most operations target substrings of the code (matches) which are translated
and stored in an external data structure.
Rather than inserting the trans-
lated code immediately, matches are commonly replaced by labels identifying
33
==PAGE:34==
the replacement code. This is to prevent the translated code to interfere with
subsequent string operations.
Annotation, comments and simpliﬁcation.
In the ﬁrst step of the transla-
tion annotation is identiﬁed and replaced by labels. In the second step comments
are removed and stored so they don’t interfere with the pattern matching.
The third step of the translation consists of operations that simplify the native
code to ease rewriting and translation. This step is distinguished from rewriting
of the code because it alters the semantics of the native code - however this is
done in a way that is supposed not to aﬀect the translated code. For instance an
input parameter of a function may originally be declared as an char array in the
native code. if the parameter type is changed to char prior to the translation
the translated code won’t be aﬀected because types are anyway not declared in
lua.
Rewriting of the native code.
In the fourth step of the translation the
native code is rewritten.
For the majority of the code both the syntax and
semantics are very similar for C++ and lua. Obviously this makes translation
straightforward. Meanwhile when this is not the case, the native code can in
some cases be replaced with a more suitable syntax having the same semantics.
The case discussed above can be illustrated by the following example: in C++ the
ﬂow control of a for loop depend on three control statements (an initialization, a
condition and an incrementation). Contrary, the ﬂow control of a lua for loop is
determined by 3 values (2 values to deﬁne the range to iterate through, and one
value to deﬁne the step size). This suggest that a C++ loop cannot (in general)
be translated to a lua for loop. Luckily, for loops in C++ may be regarded as
syntactic sugar for while loops - and while loops in lua and C++ do have similar
semantics. Hence the problem can be circumvented by rewriting for loops to
while loops before the translation.
Translation.
The ﬁfth step consists of the actual translation. The vast ma-
jority of the code can be translated by matching syntax patterns with regular
expressions. One exception is implicit references which cannot be identiﬁed from
the syntax alone (and have to be translated to explicit references in lua): for
instance if the statement ”foo();” is invoked in the body of an instance method,
the syntax doesn’t reveal if foo() is a global function or an instance method.
As a result an external data structure is required to hold information about
the methods and data members associated with a particular class (and it’s in-
stances). Moreover if a class inherits from a class deﬁned in another ﬁle the
methods and data members of that class need to be known as well. To facilitate
this, data structures with information about known classes are serialized after
a translation and de-serialized before a new translation.
Batch conversion.
For convenience a small script updateLuaLib.py has
been used for batch conversion of all control code ﬁles. The translation process
could likely be optimized to run more eﬃciently. However batch translating all
ﬁles takes well below a second, so it has not been considered necessary.
Table ?? shows a side by side comparison of the native and translated source
code. Here the content of the ﬁles RadioManager.h and RadioManager.cpp
34
==PAGE:35==
are translated into the ﬁle RadioManager.lua. As seen from the comparison,
indentation and comments are preserved.
4.6
Future work
The value of condition statements.
In addition to missing operators other
translation issues arises as a result of language diﬀerences. A conditional lua
statement such as if (cond) then ... have diﬀerent semantics than the equiv-
alent C++ statement. In lua the statement will execute for every condition value
diﬀerent from false and nil - such as 0. In C++ this is not the case. The issue
could be resolved by inserting a custom operator or function that would en-
sure appropriate mapping between the required and original condition values:
if (value(cond)) then .... Although the original condition value cannot be
relied on this has however not been an issue because the vast majority of the
occurring values result from comparisons which anyway evaluate to either true
or false. When not being the case the values in question have been produced
by bit shifting operations with one operand being either true or false. Hence
as this problem has yet few implications in practice and those can be isolated
to bit operations a ugly, temporary hack have been made: the bit operation
guesses on the intended return type based on the types of the operands. This
should obviously be changed and as proposed above it is easy to deal with the
general problem.
Function overloading.
Another issue arises because LUA doesn’t support
function overloading.
This feature could be mimicked in lua by doing type
checking on input parameters and restructuring overloaded functions to be part
of one common function deﬁnition.
However function overloading are rarely
used in the control code and by applying the proposed solution the translated
code would become diﬀerently structured than the native code. Hence rather
than dealing with the general problem a temporary ﬁx was made by isolating
the problem to a few lines of code (1 or 2 function calls) that were manually
translated using the annotation.
4.7
Observations and results
Figure 9 shows a side by side comparison of the native and translated control
code.
Comments, indentation and the overall structure are seen to be very
similar. This makes it easy to navigate in and switch between the control code
written in lua and C++ .
It took approximately 3 days of work on the translator before the ﬁrst ﬁle
(Dongle.cpp) could be translated and tested in V-rep.
While developing the translator more control code ﬁles have continuously been
included for translation. Generally, including a new ﬁle have required further
development of the translation script which have had to be slightly re-written
and/or extended with more lines of code. However not surprisingly the required
improvements (both measured in development time and increase in the total
number of lines) have been experienced to drop considerable with almost every
additional ﬁle. This is illustrated qualitatively in ﬁgure 10.
Table 5 shows that around 2100 lines of the translated control code have been
35
==PAGE:36==
Table 4: Sequence of operations involved in translating a ﬁle
Reading of source and/or header ﬁle
Extract
annotation
÷
⃝
Code to be inserted
→{..}
ID
⃝
Code to be swapped
→{..}
ID
⃝
Code to be replaced
Extract
comments
ID
⃝
Single line comments
→{..}
ID
⃝
Block comments
→{..}
Simplify
cpp code
÷
⃝
Irrelevant keywords
⟲
Array parameter types
÷
⃝
Include statement, own header ﬁle
÷
⃝
Integer suﬃx
÷
⃝
Conditional groups
Rewrite
cpp code
⟲
Typedefs
⟲
Multi-declaration statements
⟲
Simple ﬂow control substatements
⟲
For loops
⟲
Character literals
⟲
Increment and decrement statements
Deserialization of relevant classes from previous translation
Translate
ID
⃝
Class deﬁnitions
L−→{..}
÷
⃝
Casting
ID
⃝
Constructor calls
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Deﬁnition of variables (primitive types)
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Arrays
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Implicit. ref. to instance methods and data members
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Constructor deﬁnitions
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Beginning of scope for function deﬁnitions
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Beginning of scope for method deﬁnitions
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
End of scopes
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Deﬁne statements
L−→{..}
ID
⃝
Include statement
L−→{..}
÷
⃝
Types (of functions, methods, parameters )
L⃝
Explicit. ref. to instance methods and data members
L⃝
Beginning of scope for control structures
L⃝
Operators (comparison, logical, dereference)
L⃝
Operators (bit)
L⃝
Labels:
ID
⃝
←{..}
Rewrite LUA code
÷
⃝
Optional semicolons
Serialization of classes
Writing of Lua ﬁle
Legend
ID
⃝
repl. by label
÷
⃝
removed
L⃝
repl. by lua trans.
⟲
rewritten
→{..}
added to dict.
←{..}
inserted from dict.
L−→{..}
lua trans. added to dict.
36
==PAGE:37==
--******TRANSLATED from RadioManager.h ********
####RadioManager.h##################
RADIOMANAGER_H_= nil
#ifndef RADIOMANAGER_H_
#define RADIOMANAGER_H_
require("stdint")
#include <stdint.h>
require("State")
#include "State.h"
require("Arduino")
#include "Arduino.h"
require("SPI")
#include <SPI.h>
require("nRF2401")
#include "nRF24L01.h"
require("RF24")
#include "RF24.h"
MAX_RADIO_PACKAGE_SIZE = 32
#define MAX_RADIO_PACKAGE_SIZE 32
RadioManager = {packageBuffer={},LastReturnPacket={},...
class RadioManager{
protected:
uint8_t LastReturnPacket[MAX_RADIO_PACKAGE_...
...
};
#endif /* RADIOMANAGER_H_ */
--******TRANSLATED from RadioManager.cpp ********
#####RadioManager.cpp##############
#include "RadioManager.h"
RF_CE = 8
#define RF_CE 8
RF_CS = 10
#define RF_CS 10
radio = RF24:new(RF_CE,RF_CS)
-- Set up nRF24L01 rad...
static RF24 radio(RF_CE, RF_CS);
// Set up nRF24L01...
-- Constructor
// Constructor
function RadioManager:new()
RadioManager::RadioManager(){
o = {}
LastReturnPacketSize = 0;
setmetatable(o, self)
packageSize = 0;
self.__index = self
}
self.LastReturnPacketSize = 0
self.packageSize = 0
return o
end
function RadioManager:writepacket(buffer,length)
boolean RadioManager::writepacket(unsigned char* buf...
radio:stopListening()
radio.stopListening();
success = radio:write(buffer, length, false)
--
bool success = radio.write(buffer, length, false);
/
if(success) then
if(success) {
-- Store the newly send package, as the last
// Store the newly send package, as the last
i=0
for(int i=0 ; i<length ; i++) LastReturnPacke
while (i<length )do
LastReturnPacketSize = length;
self.LastReturnPacket[i] = buffer[i]
}
i = i+1
radio.startListening();
end
return success;
self.LastReturnPacketSize = length
}
end
radio:startListening()
return success
end
Figure 9: Side by side comparison of native control code (right) and translated
control code (left). The code have been vertically cropped to make it ﬁt on a
page. Further blank lines have been customarily added and removed to align
code in the two columns.
37
==PAGE:38==
-- a table is used to represent the class:
someClass ={dataMember=1}
-- A function for prototyping is associated with the table:
function someClass:new (o)
o = o or {}
setmetatable(o, self)
self.__index = self
return o
end
--Now we have:
anotherClass = someClass:new() -- "Class inheritance"
object = someClass:new()
-- "Constructor"
Listing 1: Example showing how tables can be used to support an object oriented
programming style.
Table 5: Statistics of translated control code. Only translated ﬁles that have
been used and tested are included.
Added lines accounts for code that are
embedded in the native control code (without being part of the translation).
Replaced lines typically accounts for code that have been manually translated
because it doesn’t make sense to translate directly.
Total
Translated
Removed
Added
Replaced
Library ﬁles (31)
1962
1943
9
50
10
Modules ﬁles (2)
139
132
5
0
2
Total (33)
2101
2075
14
50
12
tested and used for simulations. Moreover to have all control code correctly
translated additional 466 lines5 of program ﬁles and 147 lines of library ﬁles6
need to be translated and/or tested. Currently the translation script amounts
to around 1100 lines and it may grow a few more lines to be able to translate
the remaining code.
4.8
Discussion
The results from section 4.7 and 3.10 suggests that the pragmatic approach
for code translation was feasible. The ﬁrst translated control code ﬁle could
be tested in V-rep after a relatively small development eﬀort on the translator
(around 3 days). Moreover in case the translation process was completed man-
ually (which was not the case) improvements to the translator would not have
been wasted. This suggests that the initial design goals were met.
5Counting the wheel module, the proximity module, the head module and the base module.
6The source ﬁles for the accelerometer and the magnetometer.
38
==PAGE:39==
Amount of control code (lines or ﬁles)
Eﬀort (time)
Manual translation
Development
of translator
Figure 10: Development eﬀort associated with manual translation (hypothe-
sized) and automated translation (percieved).
4.8.1
The translation method
[16] discuss a set of common patterns used for translating one programming lan-
guage to another. Most (but not all) translators consist of a reader component
and a generator component. The reader recognizes the input and generates an
intermediate representation (IR) that feeds a generator from which the output is
generated. In comparison this translator works by applying a set of text-to-text
transformations without generating an IR.
Apparently the translation approach cannot be completely characterized by any
of the discussed translation patterns. However it do share similarities with at
least two of the discussed patterns.
Syntax directed translation.
By generating output directly from syntax
(rather than from IR) the translator reminds of a syntax-directed translator
(SDT). However a SDT emits output on the go and only uses one pass. As
a result it cannot resolve all type of references. This is not the case for the
translator in question. Translation does not happen on the go and further does
not rely fully on syntax: in order to resolve implicit references semantics are
analysed as well.
Rule dased translation.
Rule based translation relies on a rule engine and
requires (1) a grammar to specify input syntax and (2) a set of translation
rules like ”this goes to that”. Although this type of translation may seem like
text-text transformations at ﬁrst [16] emphasizes that the underlying engine do
rewrites of trees. The translator in question haven’t made use of external rule
engine and doesn’t rely on rewrites of trees. However the actual translation
approach do share similarities with rule based translation:
• It’s possibly to only care about a subset of the language (no full grammar
need to be speciﬁed)
• Rely on pattern-action rules/input-output transformations
• Good to legacy code because it produces natural output
39
==PAGE:40==
• New/additional pattern-action rules can be easily added
• Uses multiple passes
4.8.2
Experienced with the automated translation approach
As illustrated in ﬁgure 10 the control code need to have a certain size before it
becomes more time-wise eﬃcient to develop a translator rather than translating
the code manually. Comparing the size of the control code and translator code
this suggests that little is gained (at best) by the automated translation. The
project is just about to be to small for this approach to be time wise beneﬁcial.
However if 5-10 times as much code was to be translated the picture may look
very diﬀerent because the translator code becomes increasingly more static.
As suggested in section 3.5.3 reduction in the development time or the num-
ber of lines aren’t the only potential advantages of automated translation. By
preventing unnecessary duplication of code it may be easier to maintain the soft-
ware: updates of the native code are automatically translated to the simulation
control code. Further the automated approach may enforce more consistency
in the translation. In contrast to humans the syntactical patterns identiﬁed in
the native code are always translated following the same recipe.
Section 4.4 showed how the translation could be considerable eased by customiz-
ing lua. On top of that by hiding the language diﬀerences the translated code
arguable becomes increasingly more useful for debugging. This however suggest
a fundamental design ﬂaw with the ”lua customization pattern”. Rather than
aiming at lua and C++ code that are ultimately identical, the simulator should
ideally be able to interpret the native control code. This would reduce to prob-
lem to a matter about specifying the simulation speciﬁc behaviour. However
as argued in 4.5 the proposed solution had to be pragmatically based on the
existing programming facilities provided by V-rep.
4.8.3
Maintaining of the translation code.
When using regular expressions patterns are commonly expressed using very
compact syntax that doesn’t favour readability. Moreover for the string opera-
tions involved in the translation it has often been a challenge to ﬁnd suﬃciently
short and at the same time descriptive names that clearly expresses what a
particular operation is supposed to do.
When relying on regular expressions, the above considerations suggests that the
code may become hard to read and maintain. On the other hand debugging
and understanding the code is eased by the fact that the program executes in
a single thread and consists of a sequence of operations that always follow the
same order. This makes it particularly easy to track errors and to understand
the eﬀect of individual operations. The state of the translated code can simply
be examined before and after an operation.
40
==PAGE:41==
5
Conclusion
Fable is a robot building system tailored for a wide range of diﬀerent users. In
order to make Fable a successful education tool for advanced secondary school
several design challenges need to be considered. To identify those key challenges
a set of pilot tests focusing on relevant software- and user-programming aspects
were carried out. The preliminary results suggests that both visual and con-
ventional programming could be successfully applied when engaging students in
the making of small robot applications. However to be able to succeed in this a
few customizations of the existing system have been proposed.
Second part of the thesis dealt with the speciﬁc problem of preparing the robot
system to be virtualized in V-rep. V-rep provides several options for execution
of the control code. Careful analysis of the various options suggested that vir-
tual modules were best controlled through embedded lua scripts. This decision
favoured ﬂexibility and portability over the originality of the control code.
To be able to reuse the native control code and to prevent duplication of code
it was decided to develop a tool for automatic translation of the native control
code. The translation was done using a Python script relying on regular expres-
sions.
The feasibility of the translation method was demonstrated by translating and
testing an amount of code corresponding to 81% of the existing control code
(amounting to 2566 lines in total). The state of the project suggest that the
native PC side software can now be used to run user applications on virtual-
ized modules ( currently consisting of dongle modules, join modules and 4-way
modules). This has been demonstrated through a set of tests and example ap-
plications running solely on virtualized robot modules. First of all however to
be applicable for students and other potential users work need to be done in
order to smooth the installation and conﬁguration process.
Due to the relatively small size of the native control code it remains questionable
if the automated translation approach pay oﬀtime-wise. However as compared
to manual rewriting of the control code it is argued that this approach are
likely to improve maintainability and to produce control code that are more
consistently translated.
References
[1] Lua-users:
Custom
operators.
http://lua-
users.org/wiki/CustomOperators, 2015. Accessed: 2015-05-29.
[2] David J Barnes. Teaching introductory java through lego mindstorms mod-
els. In ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, volume 34, pages 147–151. ACM, 2002.
[3] Toshio Fukuda and Seiya Nakagawa. Dynamically reconﬁgurable robotic
system. In Robotics and Automation, 1988. Proceedings., 1988 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on, pages 1581–1586. IEEE, 1988.
[4] Kyle Gilpin, Ara Knaian, and Daniela Rus. Robot pebbles: One centimeter
modules for programmable matter through self-disassembly. In Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2010 IEEE International Conference on, pages
2485–2492. IEEE, 2010.
41
==PAGE:42==
[5] R Ierusalimschy, L De Figueiredo, and W Lua Celes. 5.1 reference manual.
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Lua. org, 2006.
[6] Roberto Ierusalimschy. Programming in lua. Roberto Ierusalimschy, 2006.
[7] Frank Klassner and Scott D Anderson. Lego mindstorms: Not just for k-12
anymore. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 10(2):12–18, 2003.
[8] Irene Lee, Fred Martin, Jill Denner, Bob Coulter, Walter Allan, Jeri Erick-
son, Joyce Malyn-Smith, and Linda Werner. Computational thinking for
youth in practice. ACM Inroads, 2(1):32–37, 2011.
[9] Andreas Lyder, Ricardo Franco Mendoza Garcia, and Kasper Stoy. Me-
chanical design of odin, an extendable heterogeneous deformable modular
robot. In Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2008. IROS 2008. IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on, pages 883–888. Ieee, 2008.
[10] Yim Mark, W Shen, B Salemi, R Daniela, M Moll, H Lipson, E Klavis, and
S Gregory. Modular self-reconﬁgurable robot systems-challenges and oppor-
tunities for the future. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 14(1):43–
52, 2007.
[11] Patrizia Marti, Leonardo Giusti, and Henrik Hautop Lund. The role of
modular robotics in mediating nonverbal social exchanges. Robotics, IEEE
Transactions on, 25(3):602–613, 2009.
[12] Satoshi Murata, Eiichi Yoshida, Akiya Kamimura, Haruhisa Kurokawa,
Kohji Tomita, and Shigeru Kokaji. M-tran: Self-reconﬁgurable modular
robotic system.
Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on, 7(4):431–
441, 2002.
[13] Jonathan Osborne and Justin Dillon.
Good Practice In Science Teach-
ing: What Research Has To Say: What research has to say. McGraw-Hill
International, 2010.
[14] Esben Hallundbæk Østergaard, Kristian Kassow, Richard Beck, and Hen-
rik Hautop Lund.
Design of the atron lattice-based self-reconﬁgurable
robot. Autonomous Robots, 21(2):165–183, 2006.
[15] Moises Pacheco, Rune Fogh, Henrik Hautop Lund, and David Johan Chris-
tensen. Fable: A modular robot for students, makers and researchers. In
IROS 2014 Workshop on Modular and Swarm Systems, 2014.
[16] Terence Parr. Language implementation patterns: create your own domain-
speciﬁc and general programming languages. Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2009.
[17] H Parkes Raﬄe, A Ishii, and H Topobo. A constructive assembly system
with kinetic memory. In Proceedings of CHI, volume 4, pages 869–877.
[18] Coppelia
Robotics.
Writing
code
in
and
around
v-rep.
http://www.coppeliarobotics.com. Accessed: 2015-05-22.
[19] Eric Rohmer, Surya PN Singh, and Marc Freese. V-rep: A versatile and
scalable robot simulation framework.
In Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages 1321–1326.
IEEE, 2013.
42
==PAGE:43==
[20] Alexander Sproewitz, Aude Billard, Pierre Dillenbourg, and Auke Jan
Ijspeert. Roombots-mechanical design of self-reconﬁguring modular robots
for adaptive furniture. In Robotics and Automation, 2009. ICRA’09. IEEE
International Conference on, pages 4259–4264. IEEE, 2009.
[21] Kasper Stoy, David Brandt, and David J Christensen. Self-reconﬁgurable
robots: An introduction. intelligent robotics and autonomous agents series.
The MIT Press, 262013711:27–49, 2010.
[22] Maarten W Van Someren, Yvonne F Barnard, Jacobijn AC Sandberg, et al.
The think aloud method: A practical guide to modelling cognitive processes,
volume 2. Academic Press London, 1994.
Appendices
A
Fable Tests
A.1
Pilot test
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 1)
#Lav et program som f˚ar et robot moduls lysdiode til at lyse kort i en rød farve.#
#HJÆLP:
# * Du skal bruge fable.setModuleRGBLed(moduleID=,r=,g=,b=)
# * Tryk CTRL+SHIFT+F10 for at køre programmet
#
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
fable.terminate()
A.1.1
Exercise 2
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 2)
#Lav et program som f˚ar modulets diode til at lyse for evigt i en rød farve.
43
==PAGE:44==
#
#
#
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
fable.terminate()
A.1.2
Exercise 3
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 3)
#Lav et program som f˚ar modulets diode til at blinke imellem rød og grøn..
#
#Hjælp:
#Du kan bruge fable.sleep().
#Prøv at køre programmet nedenfor, og se hvad det gør.
#
#
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
for i in range(10):
print("i=",i)
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
44
==PAGE:45==
fable.terminate()
A.1.3
Exercise 4
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 4)
#Lav et program som f˚ar en af modulets motorer til at bevæge sig imellem to positioner.
#
#Hjælp:
#fable.setModuleMotorPosition(moduleID=,motorID=,pos=)
#
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
fable.terminate()
A.1.4
Exercise 5
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 5)
#Lav et program som udskriver positionen af en af motorerne p˚a modulet (i Blockly lav en g
#Bevæg motoren manuelt for at se positionen ændre sig.
#
#Hjælp:
#Du kan bruge print() til at udskrive positionerne.
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
45
==PAGE:46==
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
fable.terminate()
A.1.5
Exercise 6
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 6)
# Lav et program som gør det muligt at bruge et modul’s motor position til at fjernstyre
# motor positionen af et andet modul.
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
fable.terminate()
46
==PAGE:47==
A.1.6
Exercise 7
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 7)
# Lav et program som styrer positionen af motoren med en sinus kurve med 1Hz.
#
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
fable.terminate()
A.1.7
Exercise 8
import fableAPI
fable=fableAPI.FableAPI()
fable.setup(0)
#Øvelse 8)
# Lav en g˚aende robot.
#
#****************Jeres Program her **********************************************
47
==PAGE:48==
#*********************************************************************************
fable.sleep(0.5)
fable.terminate()
B
Virtual Fable Tests
B.1
Ping lag tests
__author__ = ’Jonas Karlsson’
import sys
sys.path.append("../api/python/api")
import numpy
import unittest, time, logging, sys
from fableAPI import FableAPI as Fable
class DongleTests(unittest.TestCase):
def setUp(self):
self.logger
= logging.getLogger(type(self).__name__)
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)
self.fable=Fable()
self.fable.setup(’/dev/ttyUSB0’)
self.fable.dongle.ser.flushInput()
def testDonglePingLag(self):
t=[]
for i in range(2):
time.sleep(0.5)
t.append(self.fable.measureDonglePingLag())
t=numpy.array(t)
print("Ping lag")
print("Mean: ",numpy.mean(t)," ms")
print("Std: ",numpy.std(t)," ms")
def testModulePingLag(self):
t=[]
for i in range(100):
48
==PAGE:49==
time.sleep(0.5)
t.append(self.fable.measureModulePingLag(9))
t=numpy.array(t)
print("Ping lag")
print("Mean: ",numpy.mean(t)," ms")
print("Std: ",numpy.std(t)," ms")
def tearDown(self):
self.fable.terminate()
B.2
Dongle tests
__author__ = ’Jonas Karlsson’
import sys
sys.path.append("../api/python/api")
import unittest, time, logging, sys
from fableAPI import FableAPI as Fable
class DongleTests(unittest.TestCase):
def setUp(self):
self.logger
= logging.getLogger(type(self).__name__)
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)
self.fable=Fable()
self.fable.setup(’/dev/ttyUSB0’)
self.fable.dongle.ser.flushInput()
def test_1_Connection(self):
self.logger.info("Testing Dongle Connection")
self.assertTrue(self.fable.checkDongleConnection())
self.logger.info("Testing Ping Lag")
def test_1_Ping(self):
self.logger.info("Pinging dongle")
n=10
for i in range(n):
self.assertTrue(self.fable.pingDongle())
self.logger.info("Pinging : %2d times" % (n))
def test_2_PingLag(self):
self.logger.info("Measuring dongle ping lag")
self.logger.info("Ping lag:%2f ms" %self.fable.measureDonglePingLag())
def test_3_Status(self):
self.logger.info("Testing dongle status")
time.sleep(1)
self.fable.updateDongleStatus()
status=self.fable.getDongleStatus()
self.assertTrue(status=="OK")
self.logger.info("STATUS: "+status)
49
==PAGE:50==
def test_4_DongleRGBLed(self):
self.logger.info("Testing Dongle RGB LED")
for i in range(5):
time.sleep(0.3)
self.fable.setDongleRGBLed(255,0,0)
time.sleep(0.3)
self.fable.setDongleRGBLed(0,255,0)
time.sleep(0.3)
self.fable.setDongleRGBLed(0,0,255)
def test_5_DongleTime(self):
’’’Only make sens for real time simulation’’’
self.logger.info("Testing Dongle Time")
self.logger.info("Polling for Dongle time approx. every second")
t0=self.fable.getDongleTime()
for i in range(3):
time.sleep(1)
t=self.fable.getDongleTime()
self.logger.info("time is:" +str((t-t0)/1000)+"s")
def test_6_Buzzer(self):
self.logger.info("Testing Dongle Buzzer")
self.fable.setDongleBuzzer(400)
time.sleep(1)
self.fable.setDongleBuzzer(0)
def tearDown(self):
self.fable.terminate()
B.3
Joint module tests
__author__ = ’Jonas Karlsson’
import sys
sys.path.append("../api/python/api")
import unittest, time, logging, sys
from fableAPI import FableAPI as Fable
class FableInVREP(unittest.TestCase):
def setUp(self):
self.logger
= logging.getLogger(type(self).__name__)
logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)
self.fable=Fable()
self.fable.setup(’/dev/ttyUSB0’)
self.fable.dongle.ser.flushInput()
self.ModuleID=9
def test_pingModule(self):
50
==PAGE:51==
self.logger.info("Ping test")
for i in range(10):
self.assertTrue(self.fable.pingModule(self.ModuleID))
time.sleep(1)
def test_getModuleBatteryLevel(self):
self.logger.info("testing getModuleBatteryLevel")
print(self.fable.getModuleBatteryLevel(self.ModuleID))
def test_setModuleRGB(self):
self.logger.info("Testing RGB LED")
for i in range(5):
self.fable.setModuleRGBLed(self.ModuleID,0,255,0,False)
time.sleep(0.5)
self.fable.setModuleRGBLed(self.ModuleID,255,0,0,False)
time.sleep(0.5)
def test_setModuleBuzzer(self):
self.logger.info("testing buzzer")
self.assertTrue(self.fable.setModuleBuzzer(self.ModuleID,400,True))
def test_getModuleID(self):
self.logger.info("testing getModuleID")
time.sleep(1)
print("moduleID=",self.fable.getModuleID(self.ModuleID))
def test_getModuleType(self):
self.logger.info("testing getModuletype")
print("moduleType=",self.fable.getModuleType(self.ModuleID))
def test_EEPROM(self):
self.logger.info("testing EEPROM")
print("Module Type: ", self.fable.getModuleType(self.ModuleID))
def test_setModuleMotorPosition(self):
self.logger.info("testing setModuleMotorPosition")
for i in range(3):
time.sleep(1)
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,0,0)
time.sleep(0.5)
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,1,0)
time.sleep(0.5)
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,0,90)
time.sleep(0.5)
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,1,90)
def test_getModuleMotorPosition(self):
self.logger.info("testing getModuleMotorPosition")
for i in range(0,90,10):
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,1,i)
51
==PAGE:52==
time.sleep(1)
print("position: ",self.fable.getModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,1), "(expec
def test_setModuleMaxTorque(self):
self.logger.info("testing setMaxForceTorque")
self.fable.setModuleMotorMaxTorque(self.ModuleID,0,10)
time.sleep(1)
for i in range(5):
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,0,90)
time.sleep(0.5)
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,0,0)
time.sleep(0.5)
self.fable.setModuleMotorMaxTorque(self.ModuleID,0,0.9)
time.sleep(1)
for i in range(10):
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,0,90)
time.sleep(0.5)
self.fable.setModuleMotorPosition(self.ModuleID,0,0)
time.sleep(0.5)
def tearDown(self):
self.fable.terminate()
B.4
Turning robot
__author__ = ’jonas’
import sys,time
sys.path.append("../api/python/api")
from fableAPI import FableAPI as Fable
fable=Fable()
fable.setup(’/dev/ttyUSB0’)
fable.dongle.ser.flushInput()
t=0.1
modules=[9,10,11,13]
xoffset=45
yoffset=-70
def leftOf(id):
if id==9:
return 13
elif id==10:
return 9
elif id==11:
return 10
elif id==13:
return 11
def rightOf(id):
if id==9:
52
==PAGE:53==
return 10
elif id==10:
return 11
elif id==11:
return 13
elif id==13:
return 9
def opposite(id):
if id==9:
return 11
elif id==10:
return 13
elif id==11:
return 9
elif id==13:
return 10
for id in modules:
fable.setModuleRGBLed(id,0,0,0)
for i in range(5):
for id in modules:
time.sleep(t)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(id,1,yoffset)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(id,0,xoffset)
time.sleep(t)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(id,1,-90)
for id in [9,10]:
time.sleep(t)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(leftOf(id),1,-45)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(rightOf(id),1,-45)
time.sleep(t)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(id,0,0)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(opposite(id),0,0)
time.sleep(t)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(leftOf(id),1,-90)
fable.setModuleMotorPosition(rightOf(id),1,-90)
#fable.setModuleMotorPosition(id,1,-90)
time.sleep(1)
fable.terminate()
53
==PAGE:54==
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
