==PAGE:1==
Design of a D-band Balanced Power
Amplier MMICs in InP Technology
July 16, 2015
Master's thesis, Spring 2015
Siavash Pakbeen (s125208)
Supervisors: Tom Keinicke Johansen and Michele Squartecchia
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The mm-wave spectrum has availability of wide bandwidth that enables very wide-band
communications and therefore, huge interest to exploit this frequency range.
This thesis describes work relating to the mm-wave power amplier which uses a submicron
indium phosphide (InP) double heterojunction bipolar transistor(DHBT) technology. The
amplier operates at 140 GHz (D-band) which is designed as a balanced power amplier that
contains three stages.
All the components including the power cell, the power combiner which is a sub-quarter
wavelength balun and the matching circuits are analyzed due to electromagnetic simulation
to obtain the requirements for the output power at 1dB compression point. The nal perfor-
mance of the amplier has failed due to the stability problems, which requires to be further
improved. As a nal discussion and conclusion on the work, there will be suggestions of
improvements for the future work at this operational frequency and as well as for the entire
amplier conguration which uses a sub-quarter wavelength balun as a power combiner.
2
==PAGE:3==
Preface
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor and teacher, associate professor Tom
Keinicke Johansen for providing me the opportunity to carry out this interesting thesis. I
would like to give a special acknowledgment to both Tom Keinicke Johansen and PhD student
Michele Squartecchia for their guidance throughout the whole project work. Furthermore, I
would like to thank my fellow student Morten Leopold Dons for the interesting and valuable
discussions about the dierent subjects within the eld of work by additionally review of the
project.
3
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1 Introduction
6
1.1 The D-band
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2 Monolithic microwave integrated circuit (MMICs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.3 Simulation software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4 The layer stack and design rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5 Requirements of the work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2 Transmission Line Design
11
2.1 Inverted µ-strip lines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2 Coplanar waveguide (CPW)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3 Elevated coplanar waveguide (ECPW)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4 Discussion and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3 Sub-quarter Wavelength Balun
25
3.1 Ideally design approach (quarterwave lines) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2 Ideally design approach (sub-quarterwave lines) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3 Design implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Quarterwave length balun design, 1st conguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.2
Quarterwave length balun design, 2nd conguration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4 Sub-quarter wavelength balun, nal design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5 Discussion and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4 Power Amplier Performance
42
4.1 InP DHBT device performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2 Single stage power amplier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3 Transistors biasing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4 Three-stage balanced power amplier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5 Power Amplier Layout Implementation
53
5.1 EM simulation of each circuit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.1.1
Sub-quarter wave balun implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.1.2
The matching network between the input balun and the 1st stage . . . . .
55
5.1.3
The inter-stage matching network of 1st- and 2nd stage
. . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1.4
The inter-stage matching network of 2nd- and 3rd stage
. . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.1.5
The matching network between the 3rd stage and the output balun . . . .
58
5.2 Performance of the entire power amplier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.3 Discussion and conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4
==PAGE:5==
6 Conclusion
66
6.1 Future work and improvements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5
==PAGE:6==
1 Introduction
The continued growth of wireless communication systems and the interests such as the
speed, high data rate and high frequency communication systems challenges the researchers
and companies to nd solutions for this data explosion. Therefore, there is an huge interest
to exploit the millimeter-wave (mm-wave) range which has the possibility of wide bandwidth,
small system size and directive antennas.
The design of an high power amplier at this bandwidth is one of the most demanding
part, which is limited by the transistors ability at this high operating frequency. The tran-
sistor technology, InP DHBT1 used for this frequency bandwidth is among the fastest of the
available technology, but ecient output power combining techniques are necessary for the
design of the power ampliers to reduce the losses to the minimum. Therefore, the choice of
the right power combining network is the important key for a low lossy design.
The sub-quarter wavelength balun is the main approach in the project which combines
the power in a very low loss manner and makes it a very good choice for the combining
technique. This approach is used to achieve a balanced power amplier design that should
both have an high output power and an high eciency. The recent works which are mostly
presented in IEEE journals2 using the above mentioned approach and have been achieving
an output power of approximately 20 dBm and 30 % peak PAE3 for a single stage power
amplier at 86 GHz[4]. Therefore, it is attempted through the whole work in this project
to achieve approximately the same results, all though the centre frequency of this work is
higher and this will be a too optimistic goal.
The project is divided into 5 chapters and in the rst chapter, the reader will be able to
get some acknowledgments and backgrounds about the applied technology, desired frequency
band, goals and an small introduction to the simulation software which the most results have
been based on.
The 2nd chapter presents 4 types of transmission lines which are the most interested
transmission lines at the desired eld of work and analyzes them for dierent aspects. Aspects
as the single mode propagation and as well as the attenuation will be the main subjects and
the results will be veried through simulations.
The 3rd chapter is mostly focused on the sub-quarter wavelength balun which is the most
1Double Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor
2Academic journals published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, IEEE.
3PAE (Power-added eciency) is a metric for rating the eciency of a power amplier.
The denation: PAE = 100 (P outRF −P inRF )
PDCtotal
.
6
==PAGE:7==
essential passive structure of the entire design. Dierent congurations will be simulated to
obtain the best results for the functionality of the balun.
The 4th chapter is mainly related to the design of the amplier. It presents the perfor-
mance of the active devices for state-of-the-art, InP DHBT technology at the desired design
frequency. The performance for the single device and multi-nger devices by additionally
dierent congurations will be the main investigations of this chapter. All the performance
of the devices will be evaluated through schematic simulations.
The 5th chapter is showing the obtained results and performance for each passive structure
and the whole amplier design which are mainly designed as the nal layout realization. The
small- and large signal performance of the full amplier by additionally stability will be
demonstrated based on the electromagnetic simulation results.
The report is ended up by giving an overall conclusion on the whole work and the obtained
results by additionally future work for improvements of the implemented amplier.
1.1
The D-band
The mm-wave region of the electromagnetic spectrum corresponds to radio frequency range
of (30-300 GHz) which is sometimes known as the extremely high frequency range and it's
usually considered to be the range of wavelengths of (10-1 mm) of free space.
The D-band is the band which corresponds to (110- 170 GHz) and in the wavelength
range of (1.8 to 2.7 mm). Actually, the high frequency of D-band as well as the propagation
characteristic through the atmosphere makes the band useful for a variety of applications
including transmitting large amounts of computer data, cellular communications and radar.
As the D-band has been chosen for this range is determined by the atmospheric attenuation
of electromagnetic waves. The attenuation of the electromagnetic waves in atmosphere is
caused by the water vapors and oxygen as shown in Figure 1.1. To minimize the attenuation,
the so-called atmospheric windows are used and one such a window lies in the interval of
110-170 GHz by the centre frequency of 140 GHz. To use this window, it requires transistors
being capable of delivering enough output power and a decent gain at this frequency band[36].
Power gain is inversely proportional to frequency squared which leads to a relatively low
gain at this frequency. The solution which will be much more detailed in the design sections
of the amplier which will be to cascode the transistors to obtain more gain, but at the price
of early compression.
7
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1.1: Atmospheric attenuation in the mm-wave band[11].
1.2
Monolithic microwave integrated circuit (MMICs)
The eld of monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMICs) showed up in the 70s. This is
a type of integrated circuit devise that operates at frequencies 300 MHz to 300 GHz. MMIC
are dimensionally small, from around 1 mm2 to 10 mm2. It's originally fabricated using
gallium arsenide(GaAs), but other technology such as CMOS, SiGi BiCMOS and indium
phosphide (InP), has been shown to oer superior performance to GaAs in terms of gain,
higher cuto frequency and lower noise. Typically, the RF building blocks such as low-noise
amplier(LNA), voltage-controlled oscillators(VCOs), power ampliers(PAs), phase shifters,
and modulators have been using the benets from the marriage of digital and microwave
techniques and have continued to play a signicant role into the upper mm-wave frequen-
cies[10].
As the main active device in MMIC which is the power amplier have originally been using
eld eect transistor (FET), but more recently heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT) have
become very common.
The HBT transistor which is the main device of the design of the amplier in this work
uses dierent semiconductor materials for the emitter and base junction. The eect is to
limit the injection of holes from the base into the emitter region, therefore, this allows a
high doping density to be used in the base, reducing the base resistance while maintaining
gain[10].
A model of HBT transistor is going to be used in the simulation which is based on a
Gummel-Poon model4 with some extension to account for the additional behavior of the HBT.
One nger-model device which has been modeled based on the measurements, is combined to
model multi-nger transistors as 2-nger and 4-nger device that will be used in the design
of the amplier in this project.
1.3
Simulation software
Most of the passive structures of this work have been simulated in the program Ansoft HFSS
(High Frequency Structural Simulator). HFSS is a high-performance full-wave electromag-
netic(EM) eld simulator for arbitrary 3D volumetric passive structures. It uses Microsoft
4The Gummel-poon model is a model which models the electrical and thermal behavior of the bipolar junction transistor.
8
==PAGE:9==
Windows graphical user interface and is integrating simulation, visualization and solid mod-
eling. HFSS apply the nite element method (FEM)5 to solve the electromagnetic problems.
The most important aspect of simulation in HFSS is to understand the port excitation
which is the essential key for the precise results. A port is a 2D surface on which the elds will
be solved according to Maxwell's equations to determine the characteristic of the structure.
A port refers to an type of aperture in which the led distribution and orientation is known
for the steady-state nite element solution. Therefore, it's far important to use the right port
excitation to have the right results for the structure under test. The lumped ports which will
be mostly used to simulate the dierent structures in HFSS, are internal excitation and they
also refers to Gap Source Ports, since they excite uniform gap E-elds[1].
Another software program which has been used mostly in the layout part of the project
is Momentum and it is an integrated part of Agilent ADS6. Momentum is a 3D planar EM
simulator in which combines full-wave and quasi-static EM solvers to analyze EM behavior of
the passive structures. It is able to do an partial dierential equation to solve the Maxwell's
equations based on the method of moments7.
Momentum uses two approaches when a port refers to ground. Either a common ground
which is specied as default in the program, and it's called the internal port, or the port can
be referred to a ground plane[12].
1.4
The layer stack and design rules
The layer stack of the technology which has been used for the simulation results in both HFSS
and Momentum for this project, includes three TiAu metal layers with the conductivity of
3.333e7
s
m. The layer stack and the properties of the materials for the mentioned technology
used, is shown in Figure 1.2 and Table 1 respectively.
Figure 1.2: The layer stack used in this work by additionally thickness of the materials.
5The method is a numerical technique for nding solutions to boundary value problems for partial dierential equations such
as the Maxwell equations.
6Advanced Design System by Keysight
7The boundary element method(BEM) is a numerical computational method of solving linear partial dierential equations.
9
==PAGE:10==
Conductivity [ s
m]
ϵr
TanD
TiAu
3.333e7
-
-
Polyimide
-
2.9
0.005
Si3N4
-
6.825
0
InP
-
12.56
0.0002
Table 1: The materials properties of the layer stack.
The design rules of the technology is specied in Table 2 which should be taken into
account for each part of the realization for the passive structures and active devices of the
layout design. The design rules are mainly used to base the layout simulation results on and
to make sure that it will be possible to fabricate the design for a nal measurement purpose
which will not be a part of this project, but a submission-ready and nal layout of the design
in Cadence is one of the main goals.
Parameters
[µm]
m1
m2
m3
capa
vcap
via
via2
Minimum
width
4
4
6
4
-
-
4
Metal1
(m1)
4
4
6
OK
OK
Inside, 2
OK
Metal2
(m2)
-
4
-
OK
OK
Inside, 2
Inside, 4
Metal3
(m3)
-
-
6
OK
OK
OK
Inside, 4
capa
-
-
-
OK
OK
4
OK
vcap
-
-
-
-
OK
19
4
via
-
-
-
-
-
4
4
via2
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
Table 2: Design rules of InP technology for the nal layout design.
1.5
Requirements of the work
The overall goals for this project is to demonstrate high power amplier MMICs for the
wireless communication network using InP DHBT technology. Thus, as the main require-
ment, the linearity is the main issue and all the optimization should be obtained at the 1dB
compression point. For the proposed application an output power around 20 dBm(100mW)
must be targeted.
The power amplier design should be performed in Agilent ADS and performance of the
critical passive structures should be veried in HFSS. As the additionally and nal step in
this work, the complete layouts should be transformed to Cadence for the nal design rule
and furthermore, the verication of the results for the layout versus schematic[13].
10
==PAGE:11==
2 Transmission Line Design
The design of the transmission lines for this work has been investigated for 3 dierent
types, the inverted µ-strip lines, coplanar waveguide(CPW) and elevated-coplanar waveg-
uide(ECPW). All the simulation results for the transmission lines have been obtained in
HFSS. The main requirements, as the single-mode propagation and low loss have been taken
into account for the analysis of the lines. The choice of these specic transmission lines has
been due to the high frequency of the design and the wide bandwidth which most of the
literature suggest.
All the design models have been excited by two dierent port excitation due to the dierent
purposes.
One way of excitation is using the lumped ports for both the input and output which is
permitting the user to have the S-parameters as output to further analysis of the characteristic
impedance and the attenuation of the lines. These simulation results will be discussed in the
end of the chapter to make the nal conclusion for the choice of the transmission line for the
project.
The 2nd way of excitation is using waveports which is mostly carried out for a single port
to simulate the propagation constant γ and thereby nding directly the phase constant β to
examine the structures, if the single mode propagation is possible for the desired transmission
line at the desired bandwidth.
All the models have been constructed as a 500X500 µm structure, which makes all the
transmission lengths to be 500 µm.
2.1
Inverted µ-strip lines
A typical inverted microstrip conguration has the ground plane located on top of the sub-
strate and conducting signal strip is embedded in the substrate. This design has been con-
structed for two dierent congurations.
The rst conguration is constructed such that metal 2(m2) is used as the signal trace.
The second conguration is constructed such that metal 1(m1) is the signal trace. Both
designs are shown in Figure 2.1 on the next page respectively.
11
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.1: Two design models of inverted microstrip transmission line (Cross sectional view).
The calculation for the width of the traces has been done using the conventional microstrip
calculations which are dened in the following equations[8].
_
Z0 =
377
(w
d + 2)√εr
(2.1)
The width of the signal trace called w, and d is the thickness of the dielectric material
and εr is the dielectric constant of polyimide in this case.
A = Z0
60
r
ϵr + 1
2
+ ϵr −1
ϵr + 1(0.23 + 0.11
εr
)
(2.2)
w
d =
8eA
e2A −2
(2.3)
Both lines were dimensioned to have a characteristic impedance of 50 Ω. The signal traces
have a width of 3 µm and 8 µm for the rst and second conguration respectively.
Both lines have been exited and simulated for a two port simulation using Wave Port
which presents the characteristics of the lines. The results for this simulation will be demon-
strated later in the chapter together with other transmission line results to be able to compare
the dierence in the case of characteristic impedance and attenuation. The setup for the two
port excitation is shown in Figure 2.2 .
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the setup for two port excitation using wave port, Inverted µ-strip structure.
12
==PAGE:13==
These lines have also been excited and simulated for a single port simulation(using wave-
port) to conrm if it's possible to have single mode propagation in the structures at the
desired frequency range. The setup for the single port excitation is illustrated in Figure 2.3.
Notice that the setup for simulation is carried out for a structure using metalization plate8
(PEC9) at the bottom of the structure.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the setup for single port excitation using wave port, Inverted µ-strip structure.
The simulation results plotted in Figure 2.4 shows that there exists one hybrid fundamental
mode consisting of microstrip and quasimicrostrip mode[14] in this structure model, but the
transverse electric mode of second TE20 is appearing up at 145 GHz. The simulation results
are based on β, the imaginary part of the γ as the propagation constant.
8Due to the nal fabrication of the chip and packaging, there will exist an metalization plate.
9Perfect Electrical Conductor
13
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.4: Modes within the inverted µ-strip line structures.
2.2
Coplanar waveguide (CPW)
A symmetric coplanar waveguide(CPW) structure contains one main centre strip and other
two ground strips which usually refers to as side-grounds and in a case of a symmetric CPW,
these two ground sides have the same width. This mentioned design model which is illustrated
in Figure 2.5 will be analyzed and simulated in this section. The width of the centre strip is
22 µm and the gab in between the centre strip- and side grounds is 11 µm for a characteristic
impedance of 50 Ωat the desired frequency. The dimensions have been obtained through
the dierent simulation results in ADS.
Figure 2.5: Coplanar waveguide design model(Cross sectional view).
The simulations have been carried out in HFSS as for the previous ones, but it's been
excited by some specic guidelines for this kind of structure[37]. For the two port simulation,
the design has been excited for both ports using Lumped Port by additionally airbridges
made of PEC. The setup for the two port simulation is illustrated in Figure 2.6 on the next
page.
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.6:
Illustration of the setup for two port excitation using lumped port by additionally air-
bridges(PEC), CPW structure.
The results for the obtained simulation will be presented in the end of the chapter which
will demonstrate the characteristic impedance and the attenuation constant α of the waveg-
uide to compare the results with all the other transmission lines.
Since the CPW is the most attractive transmission line among the dierent transmission
line structure for MMICs applications, it's very important to examine the structure for the
various modes that will propagate in the structure. In many applications of coplanar waveg-
uide used, the substrate has a conducting surface on the back side due to mounting in a
metal housing or packaging which is called the metalization plate in this project.
An ideal CPW structure consists an conducting strip(centre strip) with innite side
conductors(side-grounds) on the surface of an innitely thick dielectric substrate. This ideal
structure considered as a pair of coupled slotlines which has only two normal propagation
modes, the odd(CPW) and the even(slotline), but for an real case of CPW, other modes can
exist in the structure. A real symmetric coplanar waveguide with backside metalization and
nite ground sides can be described as three coupled microstrips and therefore, the normal
propagation mode is actually a sum of three modes[15][16].
The normal propagation modes of these coupled microstrips can be dened as:
[L][C]V = 1
v2V
(2.4)
V is a three dimensional vector describing the voltage excitation on the three top conduc-
tors.
Notice, a particular voltage excitation can correspond to a normal propagation mode.
v is the phase velocity.
I is presenting the corresponding currents at these conductors.
[L] and [C] are 3X3 matrices whose elements consist of self, mutual inductances and
capacitance per unit line length.
The waveguide excitation which is the most interesting in our case, has a signal propagat-
ing along the centre conductor with the two side conductors(side-grounds) with zero potential
15
==PAGE:16==
and it can be expressed as a vector:
V0 =


0
1
0


(2.5)
If this expression is dened for a normal propagation mode of the structure and it's
propagating with a well-dened phase velocity, thus the potential on the side-grounds remains
zero, but it's not the case which means that the relationship between the three potentials
on the line will change as the excitation propagates. The fundamental mode traveling in the
conventional CPW is a hybrid mode of other three modes. Since the substitution of this
vector expression into the the equation 2.4 will show that this vector(the normal propagation
mode) should be analyzed as the sum of three normal propagation modes which are the
eigenvectors of the matrix [LC].
Thus, these normal modes which exist in a real CPW structure are dened as[15]:
V1 =


−1
0
+1


(2.6)
V2 =


a
1
a


(2.7)
V3 =


−b
1
−b


(2.8)
V1 is the even mode or the slotline mode and V2 which is referred to the microstrip mode
and V3 is the CPW mode.
V2 and V3 consists of the parameters a and b which are the
functions of the physical dimensions of the line.
To conrm these theoretical assumptions, the CPW structure has been simulated for a
single port simulation (using waveport) at one specic dimension to see the propagation
modes that exist in the structure. Illustration of the single port excitation using waveport is
shown in Figure 2.7 on the next page. Notice that the setup for the simulation is carried out
for both a structure using metalization plate(PEC) and a structure without any metalization
plate at the bottom of the structure.
16
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.7: CPW structure, The setup for single port excitation using wave port. left: Without metalization
plate, right: With metalization plate.
The following Plot shows the number of modes which contains in a CPW structure for
the desired frequency band. The simulation results are based on a structure dimension of
substrate thickness 160 µm and the side-grounds width of 20 µm which is the lowest possible
width10 and still have a characteristic impedance of 50 Ωat the desired frequency band.
Notice, that a metalization plate at bottom of the structure has been used for these results.
10As a rule of thumb, the ground-sides often not more than 2-3 times the width of the center trace itself.
17
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.8: Modes within the coplanar waveguide structure.
As it's seen that there exists three normal propagation modes for the entire frequency
band, since the structure is a CPW as it's discussed earlier, but at 115 GHz another mode
which is the TE20 is appearing up and propagating in the structure due to the nite substrate
and ground-sides. As it's desirable in most applications to design the CPW in a way, that it
would allow only the single propagation mode which is a problem for the current technology
used in this project.
In the following Figures, the eld distributions for these four traveling modes are illustra-
tion which includes the three normal propagation mode and the TE20 mode.
Figure 2.9: Field distributions of four propagation modes. upper left: Microstrip mode, upper right: Slotline
mode, bottom left: CPW mode, bottom right: TE20 mode.
Here at the end of this section, Table 3 on the next page summarize the obtained simulation
results for dierent dimensions of CPW and it shows TE20 propagation mode which is the
worst case scenario for the desired bandwidth. The analysis are to demonstrate what requires
to not have TE20 propagation mode for the desired frequency range.
The width of the centre strip (22 µm), the gab between the centre strip- and the side
18
==PAGE:19==
grounds (11 µm) will be remained xed due to maintaining an approximately characteristic
impedance of 50 Ωat the desired frequency, but the parameter such the height of the substrate
and the width of the side-grounds will be changed to examine the TE20 mode in the structure.
Notice that as in the previous cases, the results are based on the β, the imaginary part of
the γ as the propagation constant.
CPW Structure
Substrates thickness [µm]
Side Grounds (Width) [µm]
Metalization, TE20[GHz]
None Metalization, TE20[GHz]
1
260
200
65
45
100
70
45
50
70
45
20
70
40
2
160 (Current technology)
200
85
75
100
110
75
50
115
75
20
115
75
3
60
200
130
135
100
230
185
50
250
195
20
300
200
Table 3: TE20 mode propagation for dierent dimensions of CPW.
As it's seen and concluded from the Table above, it's obvious that the thinner is the
substrate, then the TE20 is appearing to propagate at higher frequencies which is seen from
the results for the three dierent substrate's heights in the case of using a metalization plate
in the bottom of the structure. The other parameter such as the width of the ground-sides
have also eects and the wider is the width, thus TE20 mode is appearing up earlier in the
frequency band.
The parameter such as the metalization plate is a very important factor which is preventing
TE20 to propagate early in the frequency range, but fortunately using a metalization plate
is mostly common for all the used applications.
2.3
Elevated coplanar waveguide (ECPW)
An elevated coplanar waveguide (ECPW) structure is almost the same structure as a CPW
which was analyzed in the previous section, but by the dierence that the centre strip is lifted
up compared to the side-grounds and it's the only dierence for these two structures. The
design model of this structure is seen in Figure 2.10. The width of the centre strip is 32 µm
19
==PAGE:20==
and the gab in between the centre strip- and the ground sides is 11 µm for a characteristic
impedance of 50 Ω.
Figure 2.10: Elevated Coplanar waveguide design model(Cross sectional view).
The determination of the dimensions have been based on some experimental values sim-
ulated in ADS to nd the exact characteristic impedance of 50Ω.
The simulation of the design has been carried out in HFSS as for the previous ones and
it's been excited for both a two port and a single port simulation in the same way as for
the CPW structure. All the theoretical assumptions which have been described for a CPW
structure will surely be valid for this structure, but to conrm that the same modes will be
propagating in the structure, several simulations have been carried out.
The plot in Figure 2.11 shows the number of modes which contains in an ECPW structure
for the desired frequency band. The simulation results are based on a structure dimension of
substrate thickness 160 µm and the side-grounds width of 20 µm which is the lowest possible
width and still have a characteristic impedance of 50 Ωat the desired frequency band. Notice,
that all the simulation results are only obtained for a structure by a metalization plate at
bottom of the structure.
Figure 2.11: Modes within the elevated-coplanar waveguide structure.
As it's already seen in the CPW section and concluded in the theoretical assumptions
that the same modes also exists in ECPW structure, and as it's expected, TE20 mode is also
appearing up at the same frequency as for a CPW design.
Table 4 shows the obtained results of dierent dimensions for an elevated-CPW structure
20
==PAGE:21==
and it shows TE20 propagation mode for the desired frequency range which is almost the
same results as for a CPW structure.
ECPW Structure
Substrates thickness [µm]
Side Grounds(Width) [µm]
TE20[GHz]
1
260
200
65
100
70
50
70
20
75
2
160 (Current technology)
200
85
100
105
50
115
20
115
3
60
200
110
100
225
50
250
20
295
Table 4: TE20 mode propagation for dierent dimensions of ECPW obtained using metalization plate at the
bottom of the structure.
Since the mode propagation results are almost the same as for a CPW design model, the
illustration of the eld distributions for ECPW structure has been avoided, but to see more
details of the eld distributions refers to the previous section.
The same conclusion for the propagation mode in ECPW structure is achieved and it
means that the parameter such as the width of the side-grounds and mainly the thickness of
the substrate are the factors in preventing the higher modes propagates in the structure. In
the current technology which has a thickness of 160 µm for the substrate, the single mode
propagation is not possible and it requires at least to apply a technology of 60 µm thickness
for the substrate to get the ride of TE20 propagation mode for the desired bandwidth.
2.4
Discussion and conclusion
The S-parameters results for each transmission line have been obtained for a two port exci-
tation of the structures and then S-parameters have been converted to ABCD parameters to
nally extract the characteristic impedance Z0 and the complex propagation constant γ of
each transmission line for the entire frequency range.
The conversion of the S-parameters to ABCD parameters is dened as[8]:
A = (1 + S11)(1 −S22) + S12S21
2S21
(2.9)
B = Z0
(1 + S11)(1 + S22) −S12S21
2S21
(2.10)
C = 1
Z0
(1 −S11)(1 −S22) −S12S21
2S21
(2.11)
D = (1 −S11)(1 + S22) + S12S21
2S21
(2.12)
21
==PAGE:22==
A lossy transmission line expressed as[8]:

A
B
C
D

=

cosh(γl)
jZ0sinh(γl)
j 1
Z0sinh(γl)
cosh(γl)

(2.13)
Where l is the physical length of the line.
Thus the characteristic impedance of the line is:
Z0 =
r
B
C
(2.14)
And then the complex propagation of the line is expressed as:
γ = α + jβ = cosh−1(A)
l
(2.15)
Where α is the attenuation constant (the real part).
β is the phase constant (the imaginary part of the equation) which has already been
analyzed for all the structures at each section to show the propagation modes.
Figure 2.12 presents the extracted characteristic impedance for a CPW transmission line
model which has been simulated in both HFSS and ADS. It's seen that there are some spikes
around 120-140 GHz in both simulation models.
Figure 2.12: The characteristic impedance results based on a CPW structure model of the length 500µm.
The spikes can be caused due to the length of the structure which is 500 µm, more than
a λ
4 that give rise for some limitations in the ABCD parameters, specially the characteristic
impedance have this kind of characteristic. The problem have been discussed and it has been
suggested to unwrap the phase of the S-parameters to solve the problem. But it is done and
the results have been even much worse than before and not any better results have been
achieved. Therefore, it's decided to decrease the length of all the structures to be sure that
this problem is not eecting the results. The simulation result for the new CPW structure
22
==PAGE:23==
model by a length of 250 µm are plotted in Figure 2.13. As it is seen that the spikes are not
appearing in the results.
Figure 2.13: The characteristic impedance results based on a CPW structure model of the length 250µm.
Therefore, all the structure models have been re-designed and simulated based on a length
of 250µm. The results are shown in Figure 2.14 which are only based on the models in HFSS.
Figure 2.14: The characteristic impedance (4 dierent transmission lines), Structure models of length 250µm
The attenuation constant α which is the other important parameter (the real part of the
complex propagation constant) and presents the losses in a transmission line, is shown in
Figure 2.15 for all the four transmission line models.
23
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.15: The attenuation constant α (4 dierent transmission lines)
As it's seen that the ECPW has the lowest loss compared to the other transmission lines,
specially at the desired bandwidth 110-170GHz. Based on the simulation results for these
investigated transmission lines, the ECPW has been chosen as the preferred transmission line
type for this work.
24
==PAGE:25==
3 Sub-quarter Wavelength Balun
Compact, ecient power combining techniques are necessary for high power-added e-
ciency (PAE). Classical transmission line power combiners or Wilkinson combiners have high
attenuation and occupy large area. Power can be combined using baluns, either in LC form
or using quarter-wave multi-conductor transmission lines, but these transmission line can be
long and will occupy too much area and further, the associated losses can be high[4].
The sub-quarter wavelength baluns are much shorter than a λ
4 length, hence more compact
and having less insertion loss. The method is similar to a wide-band Marchand balun, but
unlike the Marchand design, uses line sections much shorter than quarterwave and the losses
are greatly reduced because of the reduced line length. The planar Marchand balun consists of
two pairs of coupled quarterwave transmission lines, with open and short circuit terminations
at the right points. The balun is a three terminal device with two balanced ports and one
unbalanced port as shown in Figure 3.1[5].
Figure 3.1: A symmetrical Marchand Balun
The symmetrical Marchand balun is modeled such that all the microstrip lines have the
same width and characteristic impedance, thus:
Z0 = Za = Zb = Zab
(3.1)
How ever, the analysis are dierent for an asymmetrical balun, since the characteristic
impedance of each line can be dierent. The conditions for the widest possible bandwidth
and a low loss balun will be[5][17]:
25
==PAGE:26==
2Za ≥R ≥Zb
(3.2)
Zab > 2Za ≥R > Zb
(3.3)
The conventional design formulas of the even- and odd-mode impedances Z0e , Z0o and
its coupling coecient Cc are as follows[18]:
Z0e = Rr
r
1 + Cc
1 −Cc
(3.4)
Z0o = Rr
r
1 −Cc
1 + Cc
(3.5)
Cc =
r
Rr
Rr + 2RL
(3.6)
The coupling coecient is a function of the termination impedance at the input (Rr) and
output(RL) ports of the balun.
For the case of a sub-quarter wavelength balun, the lines are shorter and thus, the anal-
ysis take a dierent form.
The balun introduces shunt inductive loading at the output
ports(balanced ports) due to the sub-quarter wave lines. This can be used as the tuning
network for the transistors, since the output ports of the balun will be connecting to the
input of the amplier. The principle of this combining method is shown in Figure 3.2. Metal
1 (m1) is considered as the main ground of the system and the balun consists of two λ
4 stubs
in m2 which are shorted to ground at their end point and behave as open stubs. A 50 Ω
transmission line is constructed on (m3) and note, that the m2 conductor is much wider
than the m3 which assures the balance between the ports 2 and 3 by shielding conductor m3
from m1 ,because the most important factor in the proposed structure is the eld separation
between the top metal m3(so-called main transmission line) and m1(so-called main ground).
In this case, a traveling wave will enter the main transmission line from P1 and propagate
along the line while it is shielded from outside, because of the wide λ
4 stub on (m2). As the
traveling wave reaches to the end of the main transmission line, it sees the two balanced
ports (P2 and P3) in parallel with two open stubs, but due to the symmetry power will be
divided equally between the two ports[6][20].
Figure 3.2: Quarter wavelength balun using three metal lines. m3 regards as the main transmission line and
m2 as quarterwave lines.
26
==PAGE:27==
The voltage V1 and V2 are connected to balun ports P2 and P3 and are in series between
conductors m2 and m3. Voltage sources V1 and V2 each see a 25 Ωload and simultaneously
loaded by the shunt-stub impedance Zstub = jZ0,m1−m2tan(θ2) associated with the short
circuited transmission line stubs between m1 and m2.
In reality, the two balanced ports (P2 and P3) which will be connected to the transistors,
include a nite amount of capacitance. Therefore, the length of the stubs can be decreased in
an amount that they resonate with the total capacitance of the transistors and simultaneously
matched the transistors to the balun. In this way, the length of the stubs which is determining
the length of the balun will be decreased up to
λ
16, which is the important key for the total
insertion loss of the structure[4][6][20].
3.1
Ideally design approach (quarterwave lines)
As an ideal device, the balun has been simulated in ADS to see the exact response for the
desired frequency. The schematic of the balun is shown in Figure 3.3 . It's been constructed
by using 3 ideally quarterwave lines at 140 GHz which represent exactly the principle shown
in Figure 3.2. As it's seen in the schematic that all the lines have an impedance of 50 Ωand
the balun is terminated by 25 Ωfor the two balanced port each.
The S-parameter results for the ideally balun are shown in Figure 3.4. As it's shown that
the S21 and S31 which are the insertion losses for the two balanced ports are -3 dB and S11,
the return loss for the balun is very high. The phase dierence for the two balanced ports
is 180◦which is due to the power divided equally at each port, as it's assumed for a 180◦
hybrid coupler[8].
Figure 3.3: The ADS schematic of the ideal quarterwave length balun.
27
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.4: Performance of an ideal balun. The S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports
from left to right respectively.
As an requirement for the balun to function, it's important to terminate the output ports
into the right impedance. It'll say that if the balun is designed for a 50 Ωsystem, then all
the quarterwave lines need to be designed to have an impedance of 50 Ω, specially in the
case of the main transmission line and the output ports needs to be terminated into 25 Ω
each, otherwise the performance of the balun will will be degraded quite a lot.
In the following steps, two other ideal baluns have been designed. One which is designed
for a 20 Ωsystem and the quarterwave lines have an impedance of 20 Ωeach and the output
ports are terminated into 10 Ωeach.
The second one which is designed for 100 Ωsystem and the quarterwave lines have an
impedance of 100 Ωeach and the output ports are terminated into 50 Ωeach. The results
for both balun designs are shown in Figure 3.5 on the next page. As it's seen that the balun
is functioning, as it's supposed to at the desired frequency.
28
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.5: Performance of an ideal balun for a 20Ωand 100Ωsystem respectively. The S-parameters and
the phase dierence for the output ports from left to right respectively.
3.2
Ideally design approach (sub-quarterwave lines)
So far, the case and the results were valid for a design which have the length of the lines as
quarterwave. What, if the balun is designed by lines which are smaller than a quarterwave,
but still are designed as 50 Ωlines. The following S-parameter shows the results for a balun
which has a length of 60◦.
Figure 3.6: Performance of an ideal sub-quarterwave balun. The S-parameters and the phase dierence for
the output ports from left to right respectively.
As it's seen that the baluns functionality is still obtained, but it's upshiftet in the frequency
29
==PAGE:30==
range and it's now at 210 GHz. Since the sub-quarterwave lines acts as inductive stubs, the
frequency can be downshiftet, if the balun is matched by a shunt capacitor which is xed for
the frequency of 140 GHz. The new results are shown in the next Figure.
Figure 3.7: Performance of an ideal sub-quarterwave balun shunted by a capacitor of 13µF. The S-parameters
and the phase dierence for the output ports from left to right respectively..
As a conclusion for an ideally balun by sub-quarterwave lines, the functionality of the balun
for the desired frequency is obtained by using a shunt capacitor at the output ports(Balanced
ports), since the balun introduces shunt inductive loading at the output ports as it's been
discussed in the beginning of the chapter .
3.3
Design implementation
As the rst design criteria which has been concluded in the previous sections, to have a
good performance for the balun, it's important to assure that all the quarterwave lines, and
specially in the case of the main transmission line should have characteristic impedance of
50 Ωat the desired center frequency.
The main transmission line which connects the the unbalanced port into the balun top
metal m3(Figure 3.2), is unfortunately putting the limits in the design of the balun. Since
the width of the transmission line due to the design rules has to be at least 6 µm and the
height(vertical distance) between m3 and m2 is very small (1.2 µm ), thus the design of a
characteristic impedance of 50 Ωneeds a width less than 6 µm, which cannot be possible for
applied technology. Therefore, it makes us to investigate for two balun congurations.
These two approaches are going to be investigated and simulated for further analysis in
the following sections. Most of the simulation results will be obtained in HFSS.
3.3.1
Quarterwave length balun design, 1st conguration
Designing the main transmission line as microstrip on m3, by using the tool LineCalc in
ADS , where m2 regards as the reference ground, the width of m3 requires to have a width
of 2.4 µm to achieve a 50 Ωcharacteristic impedance. This dimension of the width is very
narrow and it's not allowed due to the design rules for the technology, as it's been mentioned
before. Therefore in this conguration, it's decided to design the main transmission line as
an elevated-CPW instead, which allows for more possibilities to achieve a transmission line
of 50 Ω.
It has already shown in Chapter 2, Section 3 that it's possible to have a characteristic
impedance of 50 Ωby a centre strip of 32 µm and a gab of 11 µm for a design of ECPW. To
30
==PAGE:31==
see the obtained simulation results for the characteristic impedance of the main transmission
line as ECPW, refers to Figure 2.14 in Chapter 2.
As the second design criteria, the balance between port 2 and 3 is the main characteristic
of the balun's function. Therefore, the balun is constructed such that an open window in
(m1, main GND plane) under the quarterwave lines (m2) will be in the design. It's all due
to fully shielding m3 (the main transmission line) from m1 (the main GND plane) as this
option decreases port imbalance in the balun, which has also been mentioned before[4]. The
design structure of this conguration is shown in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: The balun structure. The upper metal m3 as ECPW .
The S-parameter simulation results for this conguration are shown in Figure 3.9. As it's
seen that the port imbalance is a huge problem in the implementation of this conguration,
looking at the phase dierence which is 170◦and the dierence for S21 and S31 that represent
the balance ports, is almost 3.5 dB which should have been identical. Notice that the results
are due for a lossless structure.
31
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.9: Performance of a lossless balun structure, 1st conguration(the upper metal m3 as ECPW). The
S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports from left to right respectively.
The problem of the port imbalance is probably due to m2 not being connected properly,
since it is acting as the reference plane for m3. Therefore, after several simulation experi-
ments, it's obtained that if m2 is connected periodically by some lines across the m3, the
problem of the port imbalance will be overcome. The modied conguration is shown in
Figure 3.10 and the results are plotted in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.10: The balun structure. The upper metal m3 as ECPW (m2 is connected periodically) .
32
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.11: Performance of a lossless balun structure. Modied version of the 1st conguration(the upper
metal m3 as ECPW). The S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports from left to right
respectively..
As it's seen from the results for S21 and S31 which means that Port 2 and 3 are well-
balanced and the performance is very good for a lossless case at 140 GHz, but the phase
dierence of the output ports is not completely 180◦, as it requires. The structure has been
simulated for a lossy case and the results are plotted in Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12: Performance of a lossy balun structure. Modied version of the 1st conguration(the upper
metal m3 as ECPW). The S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports from left to right
respectively.
As it's seen that structure is very lossy in the desired bandwidth and the results are not
fullling the requirements for a balun at all. As a conclusion, the design of main transmission
line for the balun as ECPW makes the balun's performance useless.
3.3.2
Quarterwave length balun design, 2nd conguration
The 2nd conguration of the balun is based on the balun implementation principle described
in the beginning of this chapter. The design principle, which has the main transmission
line as a microstrip line, ref to Figure 3.2. The design attempts to be designed and checked
regardless of the 50 Ωcharacteristic impedance for the main transmission line to see if an
acceptable functionality can be achieved. The limitation of the narrow width due to the
design rules for the technology has been the main reason to not go rstly for this design
conguration.
33
==PAGE:34==
The quarterwave lines on m2 are designed rstly, since they regards as the reference planes
for m3 to know exactly how wide these lines will be. The quarterwave lines dimension was
achieved by some experimental simulations in HFSS. The quarterwave lines are designed
as elevated-CPW with reference to m1 to assure already the shielding between the main
transmission line m3 and the main ground plane m1. A characteristic impedance of 50 Ω
has been obtained by having the centre strip of 19 µm and a gab of 11 µm. The quarterwave
line structures have been simulated and excited in the same way as for an CPW model for
two port simulation using lumped port by additionally PEC airbridges, to see more details,
ref. to Figure 2.6 in chapter 2. The results for the characteristic impedance of the line has
been achieved using the same method presented in the end of Chapter 2 and these current
results are plotted in Figure 3.13 at the desired bandwidth.
Figure 3.13: The characteristic impedance for the quarterwave lines: m2 as ECPW .
Since the design rules for the technology allows to have a minimum width of 6 µm for
m3, the width of the main transmission line is chosen to be as low as possible to have an
impedance as close as possible to 50 Ω. The main transmission line has been simulated and
excited by lumped ports for a two port simulation and the principle of the excitation for this
microstrip line is illustrated in Figure 3.14 on the next page.
34
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.14: Illustration of the setup for two port excitation using lumped port. Main transmission line(m3)
as microstrip .
The results of the characteristic impedance for the main transmission line are obtained
by the same method as it has been presented in Chapter 2 and these results are shown in
Figure 3.15 which show an impedance of approximately 30 Ωhas been achieved.
Figure 3.15: The characteristic impedance for the main transmission line: m3 as microstrip.
The quarterwave length balun structure is now constructed by having m3(The main trans-
mission line) as the microstrip line and m2(Quarterwave lines) as the ECPW and the balun
design is shown in Figure 3.16 on the next page. It's to be emphasized that the width of the
main ground plane m1 is 20 µm to maintain the upper mentioned characteristic impedance
for the lines. The simulation results for a lossy case structure are shown in Figure 3.17 on
the next page. The balun structure has been excited by using lumped port at all 3 ports.
35
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.16: The quarterwave length balun structure, the upper metal m3 as Microstrip .
It's noticed for the results that the bandwidth is very wide in this case and the port
imbalance is much less than the previous congurations.
Figure 3.17: Performance of a lossy quarterwave length balun structure, 2nd conguration(the upper metal
m3 as Microstrip). left: The S-parameters, right: Phase dierence for the output ports.
The port imbalance for this structure is now around 0.8 dB, but the balun is downshifted
to 75 GHz which is probably due to the mismatches of the line impedances.
Therefore,
it's important that the balun is terminated into the right impedance at the output ports to
compensate for the impedance mismatch of the lines. The balun is than terminated into 12
Ωimpedance at the output ports which actually degrade the insertion loss a bid, but it's
almost nothing and the desired performance for the centre frequency of 140 GHz is achieved.
The response of the balun at 140 GHz is shown in the next Figure.
36
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.18: Performance of a lossy quarterwave length balun structure, 2nd conguration(the upper metal m3
as Microstrip). The S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports from left to right respectively.
A well-performance quarterwave length balun at 140 GHz has been obtained for the actual
conguration and as a conclusion, it's obvious that the balun has to be implemented as the
2nd conguration which has two great advantages:
1. The implementation is possible due to the design rules for the applied technology.
2. The performance is very good and the imbalance at the output ports is negligible.
3.4
Sub-quarter wavelength balun, nal design
To decrease the length of the balun and do a more compact design, the length of the m2
(quarterwave lines) can easily be decreased which makes it the signicant about the sub-
quarter wavelength balun. The new design with short length ( λ
15) of 81 µm as the most
compact design has been made and simulated and these simulation results are shown in
Figures 3.19. As it's seen that the performance of the balun is very bad, and it's upshifted
as expected.
Figure 3.19: Performance of a lossy sub-quarter wavelength balun structure of length λ/15 terminated by
an impedance of 25Ωat the output ports. The S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports
from left to right respectively.
The performance is due to the sub-quarterwave lines which act inductive as it's been
described in the beginning of the chapter and it needs to be tuned by some capacitance.
The design is now loaded by a shunt capacitor of the value 26 fF which actually improve the
performance much more, and the performance is best at the desired frequency of 140 GHz.
The results are shown in Figure 3.20.
37
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.20: Performance of a lossy sub-quarter wavelength balun structure of length λ/15 loaded by a shunt
capacitor of 26fF and terminated by an impedance of 25Ωat the output ports. The S-parameters and the
phase dierence for the output ports from left to right respectively.
The balun structure has been simulated in Momentum to conrm the performance of the
sub-quarter wavelength balun and the results are shown in Figure 3.21. Notice that the
structure is loaded by a shunt capacitor of value 26 fF and terminated by an impedance of
25 Ωat the output ports as for the previous one.
Figure 3.21: (Momentum results) Performance of a lossy sub-quarter wavelength balun structure of length
λ/15 loaded by a shunt capacitor of 26fF and terminated to an impedance of 25Ωat the output ports. The
S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports from left to right respectively.
As it's concluded that the balun has very good performance at this frequency and the port
imbalance (the dierence for S21 and S31) is around 0.4 dB for the HFSS simulation results
which are more reliable. The simulation results obtained in Momentum are a bid dierent,
and it's probably due to the excitation ports which is not that precise for an electromagnetic
analysis of the structure compared to the HFSS results.
3.5
Discussion and conclusion
As it's been discussed in the beginning of this chapter, the good shielding between m3 and
m1 makes the port imbalance much less, then to improve the port imbalance even more, there
can be constructed some side-walls on m3 that are connected by vias to m2 (sub-quarterwave
lines), thus it can isolate the main transmission line m3 from the main ground m1 (to see
more details for such a structure, refers to Figure 3.23).
38
==PAGE:39==
By adding the side-walls, it will improve the results much more, but there are two problems
by adding the side-walls to the current design:
1. The space between the side-walls and the main transmission line will be very small and
due to the design rules for the technology, this distance is not allowed.
2. The vias which are connecting the side-walls on m3 to the sub-quarterwave lines on m2
cannot have these dimensions. They need at least to be 4 µm from the edge of the m3 and
the smallest size possible for these vias is 4X4 µm due to the design rules.
To come around the problem of the small distance between the microstrip lines on m3 and
additionally, the dimensions of the vias, the sub-quarterwave lines are constructed wider and
thus, the width of the side-walls can easily be wide enough to have the right dimensions of
the vias for the side-walls. But a problem of mismatches for the characteristic impedance of
the system can be occurred in the design which actually has shown that it can be overcome
by a xed value of the shunt loaded capacitor and the impedance at the output ports.
The new design by adding the side-walls have shown superior performance and it follows
all the design rules. The new structure is actually designed by having the sub-quarterwave
lines being 50 µm wide which present an approximately 35 Ωimpedance each and the main
transmission line by a width of 8 µm that presents an approximately 25 Ωimpedance for the
centre frequency of 140 GHz. The lines are designed to have space enough for the purposes of
the side-walls and the dimensions of vias respectively due to the design rules. The simulation
results for the characteristic impedance of these lines are shown in Figure 3.22. Notice that
the microstrip line and the sub-quarterwave line have been simulated and excited in the same
way as in the Section 3.3.2 and the method to obtain the results is more detailed in the end
of Chapter 2.
Figure 3.22: Characteristic impedance of the main transmission line(m3 as microstrip), and sub-quarterwave
lines (m2 as ECPW) respectively.
Figure 3.23 on the next page shows the simulated structure in HFSS, that has been
constructed by using the new dimensions of the lines which makes it possible to implement
due to the design rules of the current technology and at the same time improve the port
imbalance. The results for the performance of this structure is plotted in Figure 3.24 on the
next page as well.
39
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.23: The sub-quarter wavelength balun structure by adding the side walls.
Figure 3.24: (HFSS results) Performance of a lossy sub-quarterwave length balun structure of length λ/15
loaded by a shunt capacitor of 20fF and terminated by an impedance of 25Ωat the output ports. Results
for a structure of having side-walls and the increased dimensions of the width for the sub-quarterwave lines
and the main transmission line. The S-parameters and the phase dierence for the output ports from left to
right respectively.
As it's seen for the improvement that there is almost no imbalance at the output ports and
the mismatch of the lines don't eect the performance of the balun. The simulation results
shows that the current sub-quarter wavelength balun have a total loss around 0.8 dB which is
very good and the return losses are better than 25 dB. The even- and odd-mode impedances
of the structure for the design frequency of 140 GHz is shown in Table 5 according to the
results based on the previous simulation.
Design frequency
Z0o
Z0e
140 GHz
50.7+j1.2Ω
54-j12Ω
Table 5: The even- and odd-mode impedances according to the simulation structure.
From the even- and odd-mode impedance results, it's concluded that the desired odd-mode
impedance for approximately 50 Ωis achieved by the input and output termination.
40
==PAGE:41==
As the nal conclusion on the entire balun design, the most important key in the design
of the sub-quarter wavelength balun are the shunted capacitors, since the sub-quarterwave
lines are inductive and have to be tuned by the capacitance for the desired centre frequency.
The next important issue is the termination at the output ports which has to be optimized
to have the best performance.
It's shown by a couple of dierent simulation results for
the sub-quarter wavelength balun that it actually doesn't matter for it's functionality and
performance, if the sub-quarterwave lines and the main transmission line are designed for
an characteristic impedance less than 50 Ω, as far as they are terminated at the output
for the right impedance and capacitance which have shown to be the main factors in the
performance.
41
==PAGE:42==
4 Power Amplier Performance
The power amplier circuit in this project will be designed as a fully dierential amplier
which improve the common-mode rejection ration thereby reducing any signal-imbalances.
Dierential ampliers are usually implemented with a basic two transistor circuit called a
long-tailed pair or dierential pair. The conguration of a dierential amplier is shown in
Figure 4.1
Figure 4.1: A classic long-tailed amplier
The two inputs and the two outputs forms a dierential amplier stage. The two bases
are the inputs which are dierential amplied by the pair. The input is fed by a balanced
input signal and the dierential output can drive another stage with the dierential input.
The transistors for the proposed topology will be driven in class A, which maximize
linearity and gain, but it is at the expense of poor eciency, due to a theoretical maximum
eciency of 50 %. For this case, the transistor is biased to conduct over the entire range of
the input signal which corresponds to a conduction angle of 2π[19].
All the following simulation results and performance are based on a harmonic balance
simulation which is a frequency domain analysis technique for simulating distortion in a
nonlinear circuit[12].
42
==PAGE:43==
4.1
InP DHBT device performance
Three dierent InP DHBT devices, such as one-nger, two-nger and four-nger devices have
been investigated for the large-signal performance at the desired centre frequency, 140 GHz.
Each device needs to be supplied by 2.4 V and 15 mA par nger are the requirements for the
optimal biasing point of the devices.
As the rst step to analyze the performance of the device, is to do a load-pull simulation
to gure out the optimum output power and the optimum load at the 1dB compression
point. As soon as the optimum load and the input impedance of the device have been found,
the next step will be to do a harmonic balance simulation to examine the device for the
performance. The simulation results of the large-signal performance for these three devices
are shown in the following Figures. Note, that the optimum load and the specic source
impedance by additionally Ic current is marked under each Figure.
The black curve represents the linear curve as for an ideal amplier to nd the 1dB
compression point of each device for the large-signal analysis[7].
Figure 4.2: One-nger device performance (Optimum load: 30.65+j45.44Ω, Input Impedance: 12.55-j8.18Ω,
Ic:15.2mA)
43
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.3: Two-nger device performance (Optimum load: 24.97+j23.35Ω, Input Impedance: 7.11-j0.32Ω,
Ic:30.3mA)
Figure 4.4: Four-nger device performance (Optimum load: 12.9+j9.1Ω, Input Impedance: 4.77-j0.10Ω,
Ic:60.5mA)
As it's seen that the output power at 1dB compression point for the one-nger device is
around 10 dBm which is the lowest output power compared to the other devices. The best
performance regarding the output power at 1dB compression point is the four-nger and
two-nger devices which is around 15 dBm and 13 dBm respectively.
The gain of all the devices is almost the same by ±1 dB's dierent. The one-nger and
two-nger devices exhibits almost more than 20 % peak PAE which is a little better than a
four-nger device.
Since the best performance regarding the output power at 1dB compression is a four-nger
and a two-nger device, another simulation will be obtained which shows the performance for
the devices, if they are in cascode of two devices each. The following two plots demonstrate
the performance for 2 cascode two-nger and 2 cascode four-nger devices respectively.
44
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.5: 2 cascode two-nger device performance (Optimum load: 18.77+j25.9Ω, Input Impedance: 8.6-
j3.5Ω, Ic:2*29.5mA)
Figure 4.6: 2 cascode four-nger device performance (Optimum load: 6+j16.47Ω, Input Impedance: 6-j1.64Ω,
Ic:2*60.7mA)
It's seen from the above results that by cascoding the devices, it's possible to obtain
much more gain, but on the price of early compression. Overall performance for the cascode
congurations is actually better, specially regarding the gain and the output power for the 2
cascode four-nger devices.
As a conclusion for the performance of these dierent devices and the cascode congu-
rations for the desired centre frequency, two-nger and four-nger devices are going to be
choices for the further design of the complete amplier. Since the 2 cascode two-nger device
that has a gain of 10 dB can easily be used in the driving stage and the 2 cascode four-nger
device that have the best performance of the output power at 1dB compression point before
it gets saturated, thus used in the last stage.
4.2
Single stage power amplier
The single stage is designed by a two-nger device to assure the performance of the sub-
quarter wavelength balun and at the same time assure the performance of the two-nger
device in a balanced conguration. The single stage power amplier has only been designed
and tuned on a circuit and schematic level by lumped and ideal components to get an
45
==PAGE:46==
understanding of the whole performance.
The schematic of the circuit is shown in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Single stage schematic of the power amplier by additionally matching circuits, the balun and
the ideal bias circuits.
The matching circuits for both the input and output of each amplier has been found
by using the smith chart. The output ports of the balun needs to be matched to 25 Ωand
simultaneously matched the input impedance of the amplier which is found by the load-pull
simulation in the previous section for the two-nger device. The input impedance for the
device is Zin =7.11-j0.32 Ω.
The output matching circuit needs to be matched for an optimum load impedance to get
the maximum output power and at the same time being matched to the balanced ports of
the balun. The optimum load impedance of the amplier which is also been found in the
previous section by the load-pull simulation of the two-nger device and this impedance is
Zopt =24.97+j23.35 Ω. The output matching circuit's found to be a very small capacitor
of the value 4 fF and an inductor of the value 24 pH, but since this circuit has also been
tuned to have the most optimized results, the matching circuit has ended up having only one
component, which is the inductor of the value 28 pH as it's seen in the schematic in Figure
4.7.
The simulation results for the output gain at each branch is shown in Figure 4.8.
46
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.8: Output gain at each branch. [Red solid line: Branch 1] , [Blue Dot: Branch 2].
As it's seen that the gain devision at each branch is around 2 dB due to the balanced
ports of the balun.
The output power of each branch will be summed up again by the output balun and the
simulation results of the gain, output power and additionally PAE for the whole stage are
shown in Figure 4.9. As it's seen from the plot that the gain is degraded by 1dB compared
to a single two-nger device(Figure 4.3) which is caused probably by the losses in the balun
and the mismatches in the matching circuits.
Figure 4.9: Single stage power amplier performance
Figure 4.10 shows the S-parameters performance of the whole circuit, as it's seen that the
circuit is well-matched around the centre frequency of 140 GHz based on the S11 and S22
results. The isolation is very good for the entire frequency range which is seen from results
for the S12 and a 3 dB bandwidth of more than 60 GHz has been achieved.
47
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.10: Single stage power amplier S-parameter's performance
The stability factor k which is a value more than 1 for the entire frequency band and is
shown by plot in Figure 4.11, thus means that the amplier is stable for a single none-cascode
conguration.
As a conclusion, the overall performance of the single stage balanced power amplier and
furthermore the balun together at the schematic level is quite good.
Figure 4.11: The stability factor for the single stage power amplier
4.3
Transistors biasing
All the stages will be biased through a quarterwave transmission line and shorted by a MIM
capacitor of value 115 fF at the centre frequency, 140 GHz.
The value of the capacitor
has been chosen based on the small dimension in the design and the small impedance at the
desired frequency. This option assures to bias the common-emitter stage for improve linearity
and allows better exibility in the layout, placement of the bias circuits[9]. Common-base
transistors are also RF-grounded by a capacitor of the value 115 fF and the DC blocking at
the output of the balun is implemented by the same value of the capacitor. Notice that the
DC blocking capacitors for the interstages are designed dierently which are some capacitance
in between m2 and m3.
The impedance of the capacitor is dened:
48
==PAGE:49==
Zcap = −
1
2π140GHz ∗115fF ≃10Ω
(4.1)
The dimension of the capacitor is calculated as:
C = ϵrε0
A
d
(4.2)
A is the area of the overlapping plates
ϵr is the relative permittivity of the Si3N4 material which is an integrated layer of the InP
technology.
ε0 is the electric constant:8.854 ∗10−12
d is the height of the Si3N4 material layer
A =
C
ϵrε0
d =
115fF
6, 825 ∗8.854 ∗10−12180nm = 342pm2 = 18X18um
(4.3)
4.4
Three-stage balanced power amplier
The design of the three-stage balanced power amplier have been investigated for three
dierent congurations to nd out the best large-signal performance of the amplier.
As the rst conguration, the three stages have been build up by only one pair of tran-
sistors for each stage. For each inter-stage, the matching networks have been designed based
on the real layout transmission lines of InP technology. The rst- and second stage contains
two-nger devices which have a decent gain and it is able to drive the circuit and as in the last
stage using four-nger device which handles much more output power at the 1dB compres-
sion point. The matching networks have been designed as transmission lines which includes
biasing networks and other parts such stubs. All the transmission lines are constructed as
ECPW that has shown to be the best option for this bandwidth due to the minimum losses
as it's been investigated in the previous chapters.
The simulation results for the 1st conguration are shown in Figure 4.12.
Figure 4.12: The performance of the three-stage balanced power amplier, Conguration 1 (1st Stage: A
pair of two-nger device, 2nd Stage: A pair of two-nger device, 3rd Stage: A pair of four-nger device )
49
==PAGE:50==
As it's seen that the gain for the amplier is around 10 dB and the amplier exhibits 6.5
% peak PAE by additionally output power of 14 dBm at the 1dB compression point.
To improve the performance, the 2nd conguration of the amplier is going to be simu-
lated. The second conguration is modied such that two pairs of two-nger device are in
cascode at the 1st stage of the amplier. The results are shown in Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.13: The performance of the three-stage balanced power amplier, Conguration 2 (1st Stage: 2
cascode two-nger device at each branch, 2nd Stage: A pair of two-nger device, 3rd Stage: A pair of
four-nger device)
As it's seen that the gain is around 13 dB, but the amplier exhibits only 2.5 % peak PAE.
The output power is quite low which is around 11 dBm at the 1dB compression point due to
the cascode conguration already at the 1st stage that causes early compression point.
As the last and the 3rd conguration, the amplier constructed such that the last stage
contains two pairs of four-nger device in cascode and all the other stages contains only one
pair of two-nger device. The results are seen in Figure 4.14
Figure 4.14: The performance of the three-stage balanced power amplier, Conguration 3: (1st Stage: A
pair of two-nger device, 2nd Stage: A pair of two-nger device, 3rd Stage: 2 cascode four-nger devices at
each branch )
As it's seen that the performance is much better in the last conguration compared to the
other two congurations. The gain is 15.5 dB and the amplier exhibits almost 7 % peak
50
==PAGE:51==
PAE. The output power is the highest at the 1dB compression point for this conguration
which means by using the cascode conguration at the last stage is a better option.
As the nal conclusion in this section, the cascode congurations makes it possible to get
more gain , but on the price of lower PAE and lower output power at 1dB compression point.
The other aspect of the cascode conguration, which is pretty much important and it needs
to be considered for the nal design of the amplier, is the stability of the amplier. The
cascode conguration can have stability problems in the nal layout implementation, but
to be able to have an acceptable gain at this frequency, the cascode conguration for each
stage is a must. All the designs here at the schematic level have not shown any tendency to
instability problems based on the small-signal simulation results.
Therefore, to obtain more gain and a decent high output power, the nal schematic that
is going to be implemented as a layout design will follow this conguration:
The 1st stage will have 2 cascode of two-nger devices and the 2nd and 3rd stages will
have 2 cascode of four-nger devices each which gives the possibility of an higher gain and
further more output power at 1dB compression point.
The schematic of the whole design conguration which will be implemented in the layout
chapter as the nal design for the three-stage balanced power amplier seen in Figure 4.15
on the next page.
51
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.15: The entire three-stage balanced power amplier schematic
52
==PAGE:53==
5 Power Amplier Layout Implementation
In this chapter, the complete three-stage balanced power amplier will be implemented
as layout in Momentum for verication of the schematic results and then the layout will
be transferred to the Cadence for the nal design rule check (DRC). All the following EM
simulation results in the chapter will be done and presented based on Momentum which
analysis the EM behavior of the passive structures.
Before, the complete amplier layout puts together for an entire EM simulation, each small
circuit layout will be simulated and analyzed for an independently EM simulation to assure,
if the obtained results are due to the requirements. Each layout structure has been optimized
using narrow or wide airbridges in the design to achieve inductance and capacitance to fulll
the desired matching impedances. Analyzing each circuit at a time has been due to consume
less time on the obtained simulation results, since Momentum divides the layout into small
area and it calculates all the small area with respect to others for computing the matrix
equations for each. This approach can be less accurate, but it's only applied to the circuits
which have minimal inuence on each other. Notice that the design rules of the technology
in Table 2 Chapter 1 have been taken into account under the layout design of each part.
5.1
EM simulation of each circuit
The mesh density used for all the following simulation results is 30 cells per wavelength
which is relatively a good choice. The port denition has been based on the default option of
Momentum, which is called the internal port and all the ports have a common ground(GND)
and it means that the ports are not referred to any ground plane which could be a case
for an ECPW structure. A couple of simulations have been done to examine, if there's any
dierence for these two options, but not any specic changes for the results have been shown.
Furthermore, it's to be noticed that not any calibration has been done for the port setup.
Figure 5.1 on the next page illustrates an example of how the ports have been dened for
the following structures which mostly are ECPW.
53
==PAGE:54==
Figure 5.1: 3D illustration of the port denition in Momentum for a structure as an example.
5.1.1
Sub-quarter wave balun implementation
The Momentum layout of the sub-quarter wavelength balun shown in Figure 5.2, has been
the nal optimized design for this work. The design illustration shows the balun by the
additionally shunt, DC block capacitors which are designed in HBT technology and the
externally transmission line.
Figure 5.2: 3D illustration of the sub-quarter wavelength balun by additionally port representations
The sub-quarter wavelength balun is constructed such that the sub-quarterwave lines
have an characteristic impedance of 50 Ωand the main transmission line has a characteristic
impedance of 30 Ω. The sub-quarterwave lines are chosen approximately λ
8 in this design
to match the balun for the best performance at the desired frequency into the input of the
two-nger transistor. Notice, that the structure is designed without the side-walls.
The capacitors for the purpose are of the value 115 fF and 40 fF as DC block and the
shunt capacitors respectively.
The EM simulation results for this block is plotted in Figure 5.3.
As it's clear that
54
==PAGE:55==
the baluns functionality is well-obtained and the performance is not that bad, since the
additionally transmission line and the capacitors are added to the design which have some
losses each. The imbalance of the port is around 0.5 dB which is seen from the dierence
between the results for S21 and S31 at the centre frequency of 140 GHz. This could have been
improved by constructing the side-walls. The phase dierence for the balanced ports is 181◦
which is as it needs to be, but the insertion loss of the block (S21 and S31 ) is around 6 dB
which could have been optimized for more.
Figure 5.3: The performance of the λ
8 balun by additionally shunt, DC blocking capacitors and the externally
transmission line
5.1.2
The matching network between the input balun and the 1st stage
The circuit between the balun and the input of the 1st stage is the most important matching
circuit which requires to match the balanced ports into the input of the 1st stage transistors
without degrading the balun's performance. The biasing networks, or quarterwave transmis-
sion lines which are used to bias the transistors are used as a part of the matching networks.
The layout of these matching circuits is shown in the next Figure.
Figure 5.4: Matching/Biasing network between the input balun and the 1st stage.
The input of the matching circuits require to match the balun by having an impedance of
30 Ωfor the best performance and this impedance needs to transfer and match the input of
the two cascode two-nger transistors for the most optimal output power. These matching
55
==PAGE:56==
requirements and the obtained results for the desired centre frequency are presented in the
Table below.
Parameters
Outputs of the
input Balun
Inputs* of the two
cascode two-nger
devices (Stage 1)
Frequency
(140GHz)
Input impedance
(Branch 1)
Input impedance
(Branch 2)
Output impedance
(Branch 1)
Output impedance
(Branch 2)
Desired
Impedance
30Ω
30Ω
8.6+j3.5Ω
8.6+j3.5Ω
Obtained
Impedance
26.5-j3.6Ω
25.8-j3Ω
9.5+j3.6Ω
10+j4Ω
Table 6: The optimum matching impedances for the Balun and the 1st stage
The S-parameters for the matching networks which demonstrate the insertion and return
loss at the desired frequency for the current circuits are presented in the following Table.
Parameters
Matching Network (Branch 1)
Matching Network (Branch 2)
Design frequency (140GHz)
S21
S11
S22
S21
S11
S22
Magnitude [dB]
-1.4
-21
-26
-1.5
-20.6
-21.6
Table 7: The S-parameter representation of the matching circuit for the Balun and the 1st stage.
As it's optimized by the matching circuits and is seen for S11 and S22 results that the balun
and 1st stage of the amplier will be well-matched for the design frequency. The insertion
loss S21 for each branch of the circuit is actually very low due to the obtained results which
is a quite good result.
5.1.3
The inter-stage matching network of 1st- and 2nd stage
The matching circuit between the 1st- and 2nd stage of the amplier has been designed for
the bias and matching purposes in the same way as in the previous one. The networks have
been simulated for an EM simulation to achieve the S-parameters and it has been tuned and
optimized for the desired impedance to obtain the optimum power at 1dB compression point
for two cascode two-nger device at each branch. The matching circuits contain quarterwave
lines for both biasing the collector of the 1st stage and biasing the base of the 2nd stage by
additionally a DC blocking capacitor which is constructed between m3 and m2. The layout
of these matching circuits is shown in Figure 5.5 on the next page.
56
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.5: Matching/Biasing network between the 1st- and 2nd stage.
The input of the matching circuits require to match the output of the 1st stage into the
input of the 2nd stage for the optimum power. The matching requirements and the obtained
results for each branch are presented in the following Table.
Parameters
Optimum Outputs
of the two cascode
two-nger device
(Stage 1)
Inputs* of the two
cascode four-nger
devices (Stage 2)
Frequency
(140GHz)
Input impedance
(Branch 1)
Input impedance
(Branch 2)
Output impedance
(Branch 1)
Output impedance
(Branch 2)
Desired
Impedance
19+j26Ω
19+j26Ω
6+j2Ω
6+j2Ω
Obtained
Impedance
20+j20Ω
19.7+j20Ω
7+j0.8Ω
7.5+j0.9Ω
Table 8: The optimum matching impedances for the 1st- and 2nd stage
The S-parameters for the matching networks which present the insertion and return loss
for the circuits are presented in Figure 9.
Parameters
Matching Network (Branch 1)
Matching Network (Branch 2)
Design frequency (140GHz)
S21
S11
S22
S21
S11
S22
Magnitude [dB]
-2.2
-16
-18
-2.2
-16.7
-17
Table 9: The S-parameter representation of the matching circuit for the 1st- and the 2nd stage.
The insertion loss S21 of the matching circuits are actually high which causes mostly by
the mismatches regarding the input impedance.
Therefore, the circuits could have been
optimized for better results which would have improved the performance of the amplier at
the output.
5.1.4
The inter-stage matching network of 2nd- and 3rd stage
The matching networks of this section is again a combination of four biasing paths by quar-
terwave lines. The circuits require to match the 2nd stage for the optimum power which
have two cascode four-nger device at each branch. The layout for the matching networks is
illustrated in Figure 5.6 on the next page.
57
==PAGE:58==
Figure 5.6: Matching/Biasing network between the 2nd- and 3rd stage.
The matching requirements and the obtained results for each branch are presented in
Table 10.
Parameters
Optimum Outputs
of the two cascode
four-nger device
(Stage 2)
Inputs* of the two
cascode four-nger
devices (Stage 3)
Frequency
(140GHz)
Input impedance
(Branch 1)
Input impedance
(Branch 2)
Output impedance
(Branch 1)
Output impedance
(Branch 2)
Desired
Impedance
6+j16Ω
6+j16Ω
6+j2Ω
6+j2Ω
Obtained
Impedance
10+j11.5Ω
10+j12Ω
7+j1.6Ω
6.6+j1.4Ω
Table 10: The optimum matching impedances for the 2nd- and 3rd stages
The S-parameters for the matching networks which present the insertion and return loss
of the current circuits are shown in Figure 11.
Parameters
Matching Network (Branch 1)
Matching Network (Branch 2)
Design frequency (140GHz)
S21
S11
S22
S21
S11
S22
Magnitude [dB]
-2.4
-12
-22
-2.3
-12
-23
Table 11: The S-parameter representation of the matching circuit for the 2nd to the 3rd stage
The insertion loss for the circuits are very high and could have been more optimized as
well, since the insertion loss is around 2.4 dB at each branch, due to the input impedance of
the circuits which is not well-matched.
5.1.5
The matching network between the 3rd stage and the output balun
The nal matching circuits have the same importance as the rst matching circuits which
require to match the 3rd stage for the optimum power at 1dB output power into the balanced
ports of the balun without decreasing the performance of the balun. The layout of these
matching circuits is shown in Figure 5.7 on the next page.
58
==PAGE:59==
Figure 5.7: Matching/Biasing network between the 3rd stage and the balun.
The input of the matching circuits match the output of the 3rd stage for the optimum
power. The matching requirements and the obtained results for each branch are presented
in the following Table.
Parameters
Optimum Outputs
for two cascode
four-nger device
(Stage 3)
Balanced ports of
the balun
Frequency
(140GHz)
Input impedance
(Branch 1)
Input
impedance(Branch
2)
Output impedance
(Branch 1)
Output impedance
(Branch 2)
Desired
Impedance
6+j16Ω
6+j16Ω
30Ω
30Ω
Obtained
Impedance
11+j15Ω
11+j14.6Ω
30+j2.5Ω
30+j4Ω
Table 12: The optimum matching impedances for the 3rd stage and the output Balun
The S-parameters for the matching networks present the insertion and return loss for the
circuits are presented in Table 13.
Parameters
Matching Network (Branch 1)
Matching Network (Branch 2)
Design frequency (140GHz)
S21
S11
S22
S21
S11
S22
Magnitude [dB]
-1.7
-10
-28
-1.7
-10.5
-24
Table 13: The S-parameter representation of the matching circuit for the 3rd stage and the output Balun
The results for the insertion loss is okay, but they could be lower for better performance
of the output power.
5.2
Performance of the entire power amplier
The nal design has been implemented by adding all the previous blocks together for an
EM simulation of the entire circuit layout by additionally transmission paths in between the
two cascode devices at each stage which also includes the bias circuits. Unfortunately, no
results has been achieved for the entire amplier layout and the problem has shown to be
the transmission paths in between the cascode devices which surely have caused instability
59
==PAGE:60==
in the circuit design. Therefore, these transmission paths and the included biasing circuits
for the design have been removed to examine the layout, if this can provide any results. It's
done and the results for the large- and small signal simulation of the amplier layout are
shown in Figures 5.9 and 5.9 respectively.
Figure 5.8: Large-signal performance of the complete three-stage balanced power amplier.
Figure 5.9: Small-signal performance of the complete three-stage balanced power amplier.
All though, a gain of 13dB and an output power of 10dBm has been achieved, but based on
the small-signall performance of the amplier, the results for S22 concludes that the amplier
is not well-matched and it looks like that the response is sort of downshifted, probably due to
the balun. Taking a look at the stability factor in Figure 5.10 on the next page for the small-
signal simulation results, shown that the amplier actually suers from stability problems,
since this factor is less than 1 in the frequency band and specially at 140 GHz.
60
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.10: Stability factor for the output results of the complete three-stage balanced power amplier.
The stability problem for the amplier is a huge issue which is an important aspect due
to the interstage cascode congurations. To examine the layout for further conclusions, the
layout has been simulated for only one pair of devices at each stage which means that no
cascode devices are used for the following obtained simulation results.
The large- and small signal simulation by the additional stability factor for the layout
design without having any cascode conguration are shown in the following 3 Figures.
Figure 5.11: Large-signal performance of the complete three-stage balanced power amplier.
61
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.12: Small-signal performance of the complete three-stage balanced power amplier.
Figure 5.13: Small-signal performance of the complete three-stage balanced power amplier.
The nal and the complete layout design which is now only valid for a design without
any cascode conguration is shown in Figure 5.14 on the next page. Notice that the layout
contains all the extra transmission paths and bias circuits by the additional resistance for
the desired bias points.
62
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.14: 3D illustration, Momentum.
The complete layout for three-stage balanced power amplier
(2.05X1.15 mm).
5.3
Discussion and conclusion
As it's concluded from the above results that by using the nal layout as a conguration
which doesn't include any devices in cascode, it is possible to obtain a gain of 2 dB and an
output power of 11 dBm at 1dB compression point and the amplier exhibits 0.3 % peak
PAE. The obtained performance is quite bad which is obvious, since the nal layout has
been optimized and matched for an interstage cascode design, but the obtained results can
be useful for a couple of important conclusions:
1. The S-parameter simulation results shows that the design layout is well-matched for a
wide bandwidth of (80-150GHz), since S11 and S22 are below -10 dB and it's clearly due to
the wide-band balun.
2. The balanced amplier for a none-interstage cascode conguration is stable up to 152
GHz based on the results for the stability factor in Figure 5.13, since the stability factor is
above 1.
The stability problem of the amplier should have been considered much properly in the
beginning, before the design of the entire three-stage balanced power amplier using the
interstage cascode conguration. The problem has been due to focusing too much on the
obtaining higher gain and output power and the attention towards an more stable system
63
==PAGE:64==
has been overlooked. The reasons for this has been the lack of time, otherwise the amplier
could either have been optimized for a none-interstage cascode design to have better perfor-
mance or it could have been designed and simultaneously taking the stability problems into
considerations for a better performed design for the interstage cascode conguration.
The achieved results for the matching circuits have been obtained in Momentum as it's
been mentioned in the beginning of the chapter, but the obtained results can have some
uncertainty which causes due to the port denition in Momentum. To verify the claim about
these results, one of the matching circuits as an example (The matching network of 2nd- and
3rd stage) ref. to Figure 5.6, has been transferred to HFSS to do a new simulation to see how
much the input and output impedances of the network and furthermore, the S-parameters
can vary, results in Table 10 and 11 respectively. Due to the symmetry of the mentioned
network, branch 1 and branch 2, only one of this branches(The left branch) have been re-
simulated in HFSS. The HFSS simulated model of this network is seen in Figure 5.15. Notice,
that the structure model simulates by the same method presented in Chapter 2 and to excite
the circuit using lumped ports by additionally PEC airbridges.
Figure 5.15: Matching/Biasing network between the 2nd- and 3rd stage (Left Branch), HFSS Model.
The same type of results as it's been obtained by Momentum in Section 5.1.4 are now
presented based on the results achieved by HFSS and they shown in the following Tables.
Frequency (140GHz)
Input impedance
Output impedance
Momentum Results
14+j9Ω
11.7-j0.16Ω
HFSS Results
16.6+j4.6Ω
14.7+j4.7Ω
Table 14: The optimum matching impedances for the 2nd- and 3rd stage. Momentum and HFSS results
comparison.
64
==PAGE:65==
Parameters
Matching Network
Design frequency (140GHz)
S21
S11
S22
Magnitude [dB], Momentum
-2.4
-28
-9
Magnitude [dB], HFSS
-3
-14.5
-7
Table 15: The S-parameter representation. Momentum and HFSS results comparison.
As it's seen from the impedance results for the network circuit and the S-parameter, the
results obtained in HFSS are very dierent compared to the results obtained in Momentum
for the same circuit. The dierence of the result is probably due to the denition of the ports,
since the denition of the ports in HFSS is much more reliable for such a ECPW structure
than Momentum. The insertion loss, S21 for the network circuit is 0.6 dB more than it's for
the case in Momentum and the return loss, S11 is quite dierent which causes due to the
mismatch at the input impedance of the network. It will be a huge problem, when the entire
circuit is simulated for the EM simulation in Momentum and the results for the calculated
waves in the structure can vary and create dierent results and furthermore, shows another
performance than it is been counted on for each network design. It might be noticed that no
calibration has been done for the port excitation of the HFSS results which could be required
for further and more precise analysis of these results.
65
==PAGE:66==
6 Conclusion
A balanced MMIC power amplier for D-band at the centre frequency of 140 GHz has
been designed and implemented as a layout. The power amplier consists of 3 stages by
having two pair of devices in cascode at each stage.
First of all, the substrate and dierent transmission lines for the desired work have been
analyzed and mainly low attenuation have been the parameter which has been taken into
account for the further design of the amplier at the operational frequency. The ECPW
(Elevated Coplanar Waveguide) has shown better results regarding low loss compared to
other lines which is usually used at this high frequency range. Furthermore, it's been veried
by the analysis and simulations that, if e.g using ECPW as transmission line for the design
purposes, the requirements for not having the transverse electric mode of second TE20 in
the structure are mainly the thickness of the substrate that needs to be around 60µm. It is
shown for the current technology having a thickness of 160µm, the single mode propagation
cannot be possible for the desired frequency band(110-140 GHz).
Afterwards, an broadband power combiner, the so-called sub-quarterwave line balun has
been analyzed and simulated for the purposes of low loss and small die area at the desired
frequency band. A couple of dierent design approaches has been presented and analyzed to
achieve the best results. It's been conrmed by the results achieved in HFSS that the balun
design constructs such that the main transmission line of the system being as a microstrip and
the sub-quarterwave lines as ECPW by additionally added side-walls have the most superior
performance as a balun structure. A balun design of length λ
8 has been implemented as the
nal layout which has shown to have a total loss of 0.8 dB for the HFSS results which is
relatively good for the desired purposes.
It's been attempted by simulating simple transistor congurations due to the applied
technology to nd the limitations for the output power at 1dB compression point at the
desired centre frequency. It should have been possible to achieve a maximum output power
of 13 dBm and a gain of 16 dB for 2 cascode four-nger devices which has been as the further
attempted conguration and a good choice to implement all the stages as two cascode devices,
but due to the stability problems, this goal has failed.
Furthermore, the EM layouts for each single part of the amplier, which have been includ-
66
==PAGE:67==
ing capacitors, transmission lines and bias paths, have been created to verify the behavior
and performance of each passive structure due to the requirements to achieve the best per-
formance.
The matching circuits for the amplier have been obtained through dierent
dimension of the width of the airbridges which should act as capacitor and inductor to tune
the network for the best results and simultaneously having in mind a low loss structure as
the main priority. The obtained results based on Momentum have shown to be the most op-
timized result which should provide an high output power and gain at the design frequency
of 140 GHz for 2 cascode device conguration.
Since the stability of the three-stage balanced amplier has not been obtained and the
implemented layout has failed in obtaining the requirements regarding the output power and
gain for the desired conguration, the design has not been transferred to Cadence to verify
for the DRC, but all the design rules for the technology have been taken into account for
each part of the layout design. Therefore, the procedure of the amplier implementation and
the layout as a proposed solution can easily be used as an inspiration source to design any
balanced amplier using the sub-quarterwave line balun as power divider.
The entire work process has been done through the dierent approaches and simulations to
gure out the limitation for the most optimized performance. The design of the sub-quarter
wavelength balun has been the most time consuming part of the project, since the knowledge
about the design options and the behavior of such a structure has been limited.
6.1
Future work and improvements
It is been shown for a couple of EM simulations for both electromagnetic simulators, Momen-
tum and HFSS that the results for HFSS are more reliable. Therefore, it can be necessary in
the future that the designs of the matching circuits has to be designed and further transferred
to HFSS to be veried. It's further to optimize the output results for a following measure-
ment case, otherwise the results achieved in Momentum for the transmission line structures
as ECPW and CPW at this operational frequency are not quite optimum due to the port
denitions for this kind of structures.
The sub-quarter wavelength balun can be implemented as in Figure 3.23 which presents
superior improvements by using the side-walls compared to the other achieved results for the
baluns. The results for the nal implemented balun in Momentum are still much worst than
the results for the HFSS results obtained for the same structure which means the problem
of port denition and excitation of the structure in Momentum at this high frequency is a
problem.
The current implemented layout can still be used as a future inspiration to implement
the balanced power amplier, but a network in between the cascode devices requires to be
designed to make the design unconditionally stable.
67
==PAGE:68==
Appendix A Load-Pull Simulation Setup
(a) Load-pull simulation setup for the two-nger device as an example by ideal components in Agilent
ADS.
68
==PAGE:69==
(b) Load-pull simulation setup for the 2 cascode two-nger device as an example by ideal components in
Agilent ADS.
69
==PAGE:70==
Appendix B Extraction of ABCD Parameters
70
==PAGE:71==
 
clear; 
clc; 
  
[f,S_CPW]=SXPParse('TransmissionLineConfigurations_Coplanar2PortSimulation 
.s2p'); 
[f,S_ECPW]=SXPParse('TransmissionLineConfigurations_ElevatedCPW_2PortSimulation.
s2p'); 
[f,S_Inv1]=SXPParse('TransmissionLineConfigurations_InvertedMicroStripMetal1_2Po
rtSimulation.s2p'); 
[f,S_Inv2]=SXPParse('TransmissionLineConfigurations_InvertedMicroStripMetal2_2Po
rtSimulation.s2p'); 
  
Z0 = 50; 
  
l = 250*10^(-6) 
  
  
  
S11_CPW = reshape((S_CPW(1,1,:)),length(S_CPW),1); 
S12_CPW = reshape((S_CPW(2,1,:)),length(S_CPW),1); 
S21_CPW = reshape((S_CPW(1,2,:)),length(S_CPW),1); 
S22_CPW = reshape((S_CPW(2,2,:)),length(S_CPW),1); 
  
  
  
  
  
  
S11_ECPW = reshape((S_ECPW(1,1,:)),length(S_ECPW),1); 
S12_ECPW = reshape((S_ECPW(2,1,:)),length(S_ECPW),1); 
S21_ECPW = reshape((S_ECPW(1,2,:)),length(S_ECPW),1); 
S22_ECPW = reshape((S_ECPW(2,2,:)),length(S_ECPW),1); 
  
  
  
S11_Inv1 = reshape((S_Inv1(1,1,:)),length(S_Inv1),1); 
S12_Inv1 = reshape((S_Inv1(2,1,:)),length(S_Inv1),1); 
S21_Inv1 = reshape((S_Inv1(1,2,:)),length(S_Inv1),1); 
S22_Inv1 = reshape((S_Inv1(2,2,:)),length(S_Inv1),1); 
  
  
  
S11_Inv2 = reshape((S_Inv2(1,1,:)),length(S_Inv2),1); 
S12_Inv2 = reshape((S_Inv2(2,1,:)),length(S_Inv2),1); 
S21_Inv2 = reshape((S_Inv2(1,2,:)),length(S_Inv2),1); 
S22_Inv2 = reshape((S_Inv2(2,2,:)),length(S_Inv2),1); 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
==PAGE:72==
for i = 1:length(f) 
     
B(i) = Z0*((1+S11_CPW(i))*(1+S22_CPW(i))-S12_CPW(i)*S21_CPW(i))/(2*S21_CPW(i)); 
  
C(i) = 1/Z0*((1-S11_CPW(i))*(1-S22_CPW(i))-
S12_CPW(i)*S21_CPW(i))/(2*S21_CPW(i)); 
  
  
Z_CPW (i) = abs(sqrt(B(i)/C(i))); 
  
  
A(i) = ((1+S11_CPW(i))*(1-S22_CPW(i))+S12_CPW(i)*S21_CPW(i))/(2*S21_CPW(i)); 
  
  
gamma_CPW(i) = 8.686*abs(real((acosh(A(i))/l)/1000));  
  
  
end  
  
  
  
  
for i = 1:length(f) 
     
B(i) = Z0*((1+S11_ECPW(i))*(1+S22_ECPW(i))-
S12_ECPW(i)*S21_ECPW(i))/(2*S21_ECPW(i)); 
  
C(i) = 1/Z0*((1-S11_ECPW(i))*(1-S22_ECPW(i))-
S12_ECPW(i)*S21_ECPW(i))/(2*S21_ECPW(i)); 
  
  
Z_ECPW (i) = abs(sqrt(B(i)/C(i))); 
  
  
  
A(i) = ((1+S11_ECPW(i))*(1-
S22_ECPW(i))+S12_ECPW(i)*S21_ECPW(i))/(2*S21_ECPW(i)); 
  
  
gamma_ECPW(i) = 8.686*abs(real((acosh(A(i))/l)/1000));  
  
  
end  
%  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
==PAGE:73==
for i = 1:length(f) 
     
B(i) = Z0*((1+S11_Inv1(i))*(1+S22_Inv1(i))-
S12_Inv1(i)*S21_Inv1(i))/(2*S21_Inv1(i)); 
  
C(i) = 1/Z0*((1-S11_Inv1(i))*(1-S22_Inv1(i))-
S12_Inv1(i)*S21_Inv1(i))/(2*S21_Inv1(i)); 
  
  
Z_Inv1 (i) = abs((sqrt(B(i)/C(i)))); 
  
  
  
A(i) = ((1+S11_Inv1(i))*(1-
S22_Inv1(i))+S12_Inv1(i)*S21_Inv1(i))/(2*S21_Inv1(i)); 
  
  
gamma_Inv1(i) = 8.686*abs(real((acosh(A(i))/l)/1000));  
  
end  
  
  
  
  
for i = 1:length(f) 
     
B(i) = Z0*((1+S11_Inv2(i))*(1+S22_Inv2(i))-
S12_Inv2(i)*S21_Inv2(i))/(2*S21_Inv2(i)); 
  
C(i) = 1/Z0*((1-S11_Inv2(i))*(1-S22_Inv2(i))-
S12_Inv2(i)*S21_Inv2(i))/(2*S21_Inv2(i)); 
  
  
Z_Inv2 (i) = abs((sqrt(B(i)/C(i)))); 
  
  
  
A(i) = ((1+S11_Inv2(i))*(1-
S22_Inv2(i))+S12_Inv2(i)*S21_Inv2(i))/(2*S21_Inv2(i)); 
  
  
gamma_Inv2(i) = 8.686*abs(real((acosh(A(i))/l)/1000));  
  
end  
  
==PAGE:74==
figure(1) 
  
plot(f1*10^(-9),Z_CPW,'r',f*10^(-9),Z_ECPW,'b',f*10^(-9),Z_Inv1,'g',f*10^(-
9),Z_Inv2,'k','LineWidth',2) 
legend('Coplanar','Elevated.Coplanar','InvertedMicroStripMetal1','InvertedMicroS
tripMetal2') 
  
plot(f*10^(-9),Z_CPW ,'r','LineWidth',4) 
  
legend('Quarterwave Line(19um) M2') 
xlabel('Frequency[GHz]','FontSize',25) 
ylabel('Characteristic Impedance[Ohm]','FontSize',25) 
set (gca,'YLim',[48,55]) 
set (gca,'XLim',[60,180]) 
  
grid on 
  
  
  
  
figure(2) 
plot(f1*10^(-9),gamma_CPW,'r',f*10^(-9),gamma_ECPW,'b',f*10^(-
9),gamma_Inv1,'g',f*10^(-9),gamma_Inv2,'k','LineWidth',2) 
  
  
legend('Coplanar','Elevated.Coplanar','InvertedMicroStripMetal1','InvertedMicroS
tripMetal2') 
xlabel('Frequency[GHz]','FontSize',25) 
ylabel('Attinuation[dB/mm]','FontSize',25) 
set (gca,'YLim',[0,5]) 
set (gca,'XLim',[20,180]) 
  
grid on 
  
==PAGE:75==
Reference
[1] HFSS user guide- High Frequency Structure Simulator V.9.2.
[2] Stephen H. Hall and Howard L.Heck, Advanced Signal Integrity For High-Speed Digital
Designs.
[3] Constantine A.Balanis, Antenna Theory, Second Edition .
[4] Hyun-chul Park, Saeid Daneshgar, Zach Grith, Miguel Urteaga, Byung-Sung Kim
and Mark Rodwell Millimeter-Wave Series Power Combining Using
Sub-Quarter-Wavelength Baluns IEEE Journal of Solid Circuits, Vol.49, No. 10, October
2014.
[5] Duane C.Howard, Choon Sik Cho and John D.Cressler, A Broadband, Millimeter
Wave, Asymmetrical Marchand Balun in 180 nm BiCMOS Technology IEEE
Radio Frequency Integrated Ciruits Symposium 2012.
[6] Saeid Daneshgar, Hyun-chul Park, Johann C.Rode, Zach Grith, Miguel Urteaga,
Byung-sung Kim and Mark J.W.Rodwell, High Eciency W-band Power
Amplier using Ring-Shaped Sub-Quarter-Wavelength Power Combining Technique IEEE
2014.
[7] S. Levy, H Moalem, D. Ackerman and Dr. H. Matzner, Experiment 3- High Frequency
Ampliers February 2009.
[8] David M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, Third Edition.
[9] Roee Ben yishay and Danny ELad, A 17.5-dBm D-band Power Amplier and Doubler
Chain in SiGe BiCMOS Technology IBM Haifa Research Lab, Israel.
Proceedings of the 9th European Microwave Integrated Circuits Conference.
[10] Sorin Voinigescu, High- Frequency Integrated Circuits First published 2013.
[11] Simone Montanari, (WWW.gorgia.no-ip.com/phd/html/thesis/phd_html/node2.html).
[12] Agilient Documentation 2011.
[13] Requirments of the master thesis, Design of a D-band Balanced Power Amplier
MMIC in HBT Technology.
[14] George E.Ponchak and Manos M.Tentzeris, Multiple Modes on Embedded Inverted
Microstrip Lines IEEE 2006.
[15] M.Riaziat, I. J. Feng, R. Majidi-Ahy and B. A. Auld, SIGNAL-MODE OPERATION
OF COPLANAR WAVEGUIDES Varian Reserach Center, September
1987, Stanford University, USA.
[16] Majid Riaziat, Reza Majidi-Ahy and I-Jaung Feng, Propagation Modes and Disper-
sion Characterstics of Coplanar Waveguides IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques,vol. 38. No. 3, March 1990.
==PAGE:76==
[17] C.Hwann-Kaeo and Y.Tsung-Yu, Low-Loss and Broadband Asymmetric Broadside-
Coupled Balun for Mixer Design in 0.18-µm CMOS Technology IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques vol. 56, 2008.
[18] Hee-Ran Ahn and Sangwook, Nam New Design Formulas for Impedance-Transforming
3-dB Marchand Baluns IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques vol. 59, No. 11, Novemeber 2011.
[19] Guillermo Gonzalez, Microwave Transistor Ampliers, Analysis and Design, Second
Edition.
[20] Hyun-chul Park, Saeid Daneshgar, Zach Grith, Miguel Urteaga, Byung-Sung Kim
and Mark Rodwell, 30% PAE W-band InP Power Amplier using
Sub-Quarterwavelength Baluns for Series-connected Power-Combining IEEE 2013.
[21] Nathan Marchand, Transmission-Line Conversion Electronics, December 1944.
[22] Anne-Sophie Grimault-Jacquin, Bouchra Tissa, Etienne Perret and Frederic Aniel,
CONSIDERATION TO MINIMIZE LOSSES IN TERAHERTZ COPLAR
WAVEGUIDE ON INDIUM PHOSPHIDE MICROWAVE AND OPTICAL TECHNOL-
OGY LETTERS vol. 54, NO 1, January 2012.
[23] Thomas M. Weller, Rashaunda M. Henderson, Katherine J. Herrick, S. V. Robertson,
R. T. Kihm and Linda P. B. Katehi, Three- Dimensional High-Frequency
Distribution Networks-Part I: Optimziation of CPW Discontinuities IEEE 2000.
[24] T. M. Weller, R. M. Henderson, S. V. Robertson and L. P. B. Katehi, OPTIMIZA-
TION OF MM-WAVE DISTRIBUTION NETWORKS USING SILICON-BASED
CPW IEEE 1998.
[25] Vinu Govind, DESIGN OF BALUNS AND LOW NOISE AMPLIFIERS IN INTE-
GRATED MIXED-SIGNAL ORGANIC SUBSTRATES Georgia Institute of
Technology, August 2005.
[26] Choonsik Cho and K. C. Gupta, A New Design Procedure for Single-Layer and Two-
Layer Three-Line Baluns IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE
THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, vol. 46, NO. 12, December 1998.
[27] WILLMAR K. ROBERTS, A New Wide-Band Balun IRE, June 17, 1957.
[28] H. C. Park, 30% PAE W-band InP Power Ampliers using Sub-quarter-wavelength
Baluns for Series-connected Power-combining Power Point presentation at
the university of California at Santa Barbara, 16th October 2013.
[29] F. Aghamoradi, I. McGregor, S. Roy, and K. Elgaid, LOW-LOSS GROUNDED
ELEVATED COPLANARWAVE- GUIDE FOR SUB-MILLIMETERWAVE
MMIC APPLICA- TIONS Progress In Electromagnetics Research B, vol. 34, 2011.
[30] Tom K. Johansen, Lei Yan, Jean-Yves Dupuy, Virginie Nodjiadjim, Agnieszka Kon-
czykowska, and Muriel Riet, MILLIMETER-WAVE INP DHBT POWER
AMPLIFIER BASED ON POWEROPTIMIZED CASCODE CONFIGURATION MI-
CROWAVE AND OPTICAL TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, vol. 55, No. 5, May 2013.
76
==PAGE:77==
[31] Tom K. Johansen and Lei Yan, Design of mm-Wave InP DHBT Power Ampliers
DTU Elektro, Technical University of Denmark 2011.
[32] F. Schnieder, R. Doerner adn W. Heinrich, High-Impedance Coplanar Waveguides
with Low Attenuation IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave letters, vol. 6
NO. 3, March 1996.
[33] Xiuzhi Wen, Yanling Shi, Jing Liu, Fuquan Cao, Yanfang Ding, Xi Li Hao Huang,
Hongbo Ye, and Linyan Xue, Coplanar Waveguide with Elevated Center
Strip Conductor Based on HR-Si Substrate PIERS Proceedings, China, March 2008.
[34] Brian C. Wadell, Transmission Line Design Handbook1991.
[35] K. C. Guppta Ramesh Garg and I. J. Bahl, MICROSTRIP LINES and SLOT-
LINES1979.
[36] WWW.ethw.org/Millimeter_Waves.
[37] WWW.scribd.com/doc/29255375/Port-Tutorial-CPW#scribd.
77
