==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Dynamic Modeling of 
Diﬀ erent Types of Sealing Rings for 
Predicting Lateral Rotor Dynamic Stability
Mikkel Winsløw Grauballe
March 2015
1
==PAGE:2==
Dynamic Modeling of Diﬀerent Types of
Sealing Rings for Predicting Lateral
Rotor Dynamic Stability
In collaboration with:
Siemens Turbo-machinery
&
Lloyd’s Register Consulting
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Engineering
DTU - MEK
March 2015
Mikkel Winsløw Grauballe - s093538
Department of Solid Mechanics
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Engineering against instability plays a vital role in todays design phase of turbo-machinery
in order to achieve superior quality and higher eﬃciency of high-speed rotordynamic sys-
tems. Such analysis is done by investigating the static and dynamic forces acting onto
the rotor arising from the machine elements that surround it. One such element is the
annular seal, which, under certain operating conditions act destabilizing to the rotor.
Such engineering challenges are in the industry generally approached by capturing the
rotordynamic coeﬃcients for a range of operating conditions with time-consuming full-
blown 3D CFD models. As no analytical solution excites to support such models, a
reason for developing a faster and simpler model for validation purposes is desired and
necessary.
Throughout this thesis a so called bulk-ﬂow analysis is investigated.
Such bulk-ﬂow
models neglect any variation in the ﬂuid ﬁlm thickness and average components are
instead developed, hence the bulk-ﬂow designation.
This thesis attempts to establish an initial understanding of the dynamic coeﬃcients
arising from the use of such bulk-ﬂow analysis. The main purpose of the study consists
of:
• To provide a comprehensive recapitulation of the underlying method of bulk-ﬂow
theory.
• To conduct a literature-supported argumentation of the methodology, approach
and underlying assumptions behind the bulk-ﬂow theory.
• To develop a 1D numerical implementation based on the ﬁnite diﬀerence method.
• To validate to what extend literature based results, match the numerically obtained
results based the bulk-ﬂow theory.
• To investigate the dynamic behavior of a seal through a parameter study.
While the steady state bulk-ﬂow equation was successfully implemented and the results
validated against literature, it was not possible to obtain correct results for the ﬁrst
order bulk ﬂow perturbation equations. The dynamic coeﬃcients obtained showed no
1
==PAGE:4==
coherence with literature on the ﬁled and are not included in the report. The numerical
method shows to be stable and with fast converge rate, the equations derived are vali-
dated against literature, hence the only an implementation mistake can be the root for
the error.
2
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This is of a project conducted in corporation with Siemens Turbomachinery and the
Department of Solid Mechanics at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU-MEK.
Throughout the project the ﬂuid dynamics team behind Kenny Krogh Nilsen from
Lloyd’s Register Consulting has also contributed with support and supervision.
The
work conducted in this Master’s Thesis corresponds to 30 ECTS points and is mandatory
for obtaining the degree "Master of Science - Engineering Design and Applied Mechanics
of DTU".
The supervisor of the project is Professor, Dr.-Ing. dr.techn. Ilmar F. Santos, DTU
MEK and the co-supervisors are, Industrial Ph.D Jonas Lauritsen from Siemens Turbo-
machinery, and , Industrial Ph.D Andreas Voigt from Lloyd’s Register Consulting.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my advisor Professor Ilmar F. Santos,
for both his guidance and advices throughout my studies.
Ilmar’s passion for rotor
dynamics and extremely inspiring teaching through the course 41514 - "Dynamics of
Machinery" laid the foundation for me to pursue further into the ﬁeld of dynamics in
a more theoretical and challenging area through tripology based bulk-ﬂow analysis and
CFD.
I would also like to thank Mr. Jonas Lauridsen for his vast support, assistance and
advices throughout the process. Furthermore, I am grateful for the advises I received
from Mr. Joe Alexandersen. His knowledge in the ﬁeld of CFD contributed greatly in
making the numerical development possible.
Last but not least, I am immensely grateful to Victoria who encourage me through the
process.
Mikkel Winsløw Grauballe
Department of Solid Mechanics
mikkelgrauballe@gmail.com
DTU MEK
3
==PAGE:6==
Contents
I
Background
14
1
Introduction
15
2
Classiﬁcation of Seal Types
17
2.1
Prediction of Leakage Through a Seal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.1.1
The Friction Factor of Interstage Seal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.1.2
A study of Entrance loss & Exit recovery factor . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2
Commercial Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
II
Theory
30
3
The Incompressible Bulk Flow Theory
31
3.1
Introduction to bulk-ﬂow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Assumptions to the Bulk-Flow equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Derivation of the Governing Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
Governing Equation - Continuity equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.2
Governing Equation - Axial Momentum Equation
. . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
Governing Equation - Circumference Momentum Equation
. . . .
38
3.4
Non-dimensinalization of the System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.1
The Dimensionless Continuity Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.2
The Dimensionless Axial Momentum Equation . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.3
The Dimensionless Circumferential Momentum Equation
. . . . .
42
3.5
Perturbation Equations for the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.6
Zeroth Order Perturbation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
3.6.1
Zero order - Continuity Equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.6.2
Zero order - Axial Momentum Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.6.3
Zero order - Circumferential Momentum Equation
. . . . . . . . .
45
3.7
First Order Perturbation Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.7.1
First order - Continuity equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.7.2
First order - Axial Momentum equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.7.3
First order - Circumferential Momentum equation
. . . . . . . . .
49
3.7.4
First order - Moody’s Friction Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.8
Solution of the First-Order Equations for Obtaining the Rotordynamic
Coeﬃcients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.8.1
Boundary Conditions to the ODE’s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4
The Dynamic Characteristics of a Seal
55
4.1
The Equation of Motion for Incompressible Seal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2
Dynamic Characterization of the Incompressible Seal
. . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.1
Relationship between forces and Equation of Motion . . . . . . . .
60
III
Implementation & Results
62
5
Numerical Implementation using the Finite Diﬀerence Method
63
5.1
Discrete Formulations of the FD-scheme and Grids
. . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.1.1
Consistency and Stability of FD grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.2
Discrete Formulation of the Zero-order Momentum Equations . . . . . . .
66
5.2.1
Step 1 - Discrete Formulation of the Continuity Momentum Equation 67
5.2.2
Step 2 - Discrete formulation of the Axial momentum equation . .
69
5.3
First order - implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.4
Numerical Integration method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Validation of FD-Scheme using Short Journal Bearing Theory
75
6.1
Implementation and validation of Reynolds Equation for Journal bearing
75
7
Results
76
7.1
Straight Seal Analysis - Zero-order Perturbation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.1.1
Circumferential Momentum Equation - Zero order
. . . . . . . . .
77
5
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
7.1.2
Axial Momentum Equation - Zero order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.1.3
Evaluating of the Friction Factors - Zero order
. . . . . . . . . . .
86
7.2
Tapered Seal Analysis - Zero-order Perturbation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
IV
Discussion & Conclusion
93
8
Discussion
94
8.1
Robustness of Assumptions for the bulk-ﬂow analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
8.2
Dynamic Coeﬃcients from the ﬁrst order perturbation . . . . . . . . . . .
97
9
Conclusions
99
10 Future studies
101
Appendices
A Moody’s Diagram
i
B
Inﬂuence of the Added Mass Term as a Function of Seal Length
iii
C
The boundary value problem
v
D Alternate friction model based on E.Storteig
viii
6
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Compressor conﬁgurations of a straight-through impeller system with a
seal at the end, and a back-to-back system with a seal in the center.
Both shown with the 1st bending mode shape and position of the seal.
(Illustraten taken from D.Childs(1993)[14])
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1
Illustration of the change in pressure over a seal, indicating the inlet drop,
the friction drop, and the exit recovery.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Flowrate Q as a function of a collected set of variables fρL. Shown for
three diﬀerent clearances.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Illustration of the ﬂow proﬁle over the clearance in the seal in the axial and
circumferential direction for both laminar and turbulent ﬂow region with
no-slip condition. R is the clearance height, ωR is the surface velocity of
the rotor, Z is the axial coordinate through the seal.
. . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.4
Moody’s friction factor f as a function of a collected set of variables e/Dh.
Shown for three diﬀerent axial Reynolds numbers.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Illustration of a vena contracta in a pipe inlet. From sensorprod.com . . .
25
2.6
Illustration of the behavior of Equation (2.6)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.7
Illustration of the behavior of the exit recovery factor. Negative pressure
is a recovery.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.1
Diﬀerential-ﬂuid control volume indicating the wall stresses and their di-
rection. The blue bottom surface indicates the rotating rotor with the
velocity U = Rω, and the red top surface indicates the stationary seal. . .
35
3.2
Illustration of the convergent-tapered seal geometry showing the seal in
the Z −Y direction and the cross-section X −Y . Blue indicate rotor, red
indicate seal.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3
Illustration of the rotor inside the seal which is being perturbed and eval-
uated at a given eccentricity.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF FIGURES
4.1
Illustration of the whirl of the rotor where the frame of reference follows
the position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2
Sketch of the coordinate system for the reaction forces and the perturbed
pressure distribution around the seal where blue illustrate the restoring
where the blue and the red sphere illustrate any given pressure distribution 60
5.1
General scheme for a 3-point stencil w.
n=6, red indicate the stencil
center postion at which it is being evaluated while the empty circle shows
the points the scheme include in it’s evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Illustration of the seal represented by a 1D ﬁnite diﬀerence domain.
. . .
67
5.3
Shifted grid illustration for the pressure evaluation points. . . . . . . . . .
69
5.4
A matrix before and after imposing boundary conditions. each square is
of the size n × n hence the entire matrix is 3n × 3n. Here the system is
visualized for n = 5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.1
Coarse mesh (5 nodes) of circumferential velocity evolution through a
plain seal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.2
Circumferential velocity change in axial direction - zeroth order incom-
pressible seal - Analysis made for ϵr = ϵs = 0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.3
Circumferential velocity change in axial direction - zeroth order incom-
pressible seal - Analysis made for ϵr = 0, ϵs = 0.05
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.4
Pressure change in axial direction - zeroth order incompressible seal -
Analysis made for varying roughness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7.5
Result of the inlet pressure loss and exit pressure recovery. . . . . . . . . .
83
7.6
Result of the inlet pressure loss and exit pressure recovery. . . . . . . . . .
84
7.7
u0 = 0.5 Analysis made for ϵr = ϵs = 0.1 analyzed using dataset#2 . . . .
86
7.8
Comparison between results and literature for four diﬀerent taper and
three diﬀerent pressure diﬀerences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.9
Comparison between results and literature for four diﬀerent taper and
three diﬀerent pressure diﬀerences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.10 Comparison between results and literature for four diﬀerent taper and
three diﬀerent pressure diﬀerences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
7.11 u0 = 0.5 Analysis made for ϵr = ϵs = 0.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
8.1
Two illustrations from Yamada(1962)[40] showing a Taylor ﬂow which is
not fully turbulent.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
8
==PAGE:11==
LIST OF FIGURES
A.1 Illustration of Moody’d diagram for determination of the friction con-
stants.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
B.1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
9
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
2.1
List of software available in the ﬁeld of rotordynamic seal coeﬃcient de-
termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.1
Dimensions and Conditions associated with Dataset:1
. . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.2
Dimensions and Conditions associated with Dataset:2
. . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.3
The four diﬀerent cases of taper from W.Lindsey(2000)[26][ﬁg.1]
. . . . .
88
7.4
Dimensions and Conditions associated with Dataset:3
. . . . . . . . . . .
88
10
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Super-script
Description
˙□
The total derivative in respect to time
¯□
Average of the parameter
˜□
Complex parameter
□∗
Non-dimensional parameter indicator
Sub-scripts
Description
□0
Zeroth order perturbation variables
□1
First order perturbation variables
□z
Variables related to the tangential direction
□θ
Variables related to the tangential direction
□r
Rotor side of seal
□s
Stator side of seal
□O
Indicate rotor orbit
Roman Letters
Description
¯
Cr
Seal Clearance (average when tapered)
L
Seal Length
R
Seal Radius
D
Seal Diameter
Dh
Hydraulic Diameter
W0
Average Axial bulk velocity
W, w
Axial bulk velocity, and the dimensionless part
U, u
Tangential bulk velocity, and the dimensionless part (swirl)
˙Q
Volumetric ﬂow rate
q
Dimensionless angle for a tapered seal
T
Fluid transit time through the seal
11
==PAGE:14==
LIST OF TABLES
H, h
Local- and dimensionless ﬁlm-thickness of seal
b
ratio - tangential rotor surface velocity to average axial bulk velocity
Rez
Axial Reynolds number
Reθ
Tangential Reynolds number
P, p
Pressure and dimensionless pressure over seal
Ps, ps
Seal supply pressure (source), and its dimensionless counterpart
Pe, pe
Exit chamber pressure, and its dimensionless counterpart
Pin, pin
The pressure just inside the seal(inlet)
Pex, pex
The pressure just before the exit of the seal (exit)
a1, b2, b3
Moody’s friction factor constants
e
Absolute pipe roughness (Moody’s)
ϵs, ϵr
Stator and Rotor relative roughness (Moody’s)
fs, fr
Stator and Rotor friction factor (Moody’s)
f, ¯f
Isotropic and mean isotropic friction factor
A1z, A2z, A3z
First order perturbed friction factors in axial direction (Moody’s)
A1θ, A2θ, A3θ
First order perturbed friction factors in tangential direction (Moody’s)
RO
Radius of the rotors orbit
Cd
Total Pressure drop coeﬃcient (Discharge Coeﬃcient)
FX, FY
Reaction forces from the ﬂuid acting on the rotor (X and Y direction)
t
Time
K, k
Direct and Cross-Coupled stiﬀness
C, c
Direct and Cross-Coupled damping
M, m
Direct and Cross-Coupled inertia (mass)
Greek Letters
Description
α
Angle arising between the two ends of a tapered seal
F
Whirl Frequency - dimensionless (normally denoted f)
µ
Dynamic viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity
ω
Rotational speed of the rotor
Ω
Angular speed of the rotors orbit motion
ρ
Density of the working ﬂuid (incompressible)
σθ, σz
Tangential and Axial friction parameters
τ
dimensionless time
τr, τs
Shear stress (walls)
θ
Angular coordinate
ζ, ζe
Viscous entrance and exit loss and recovery coeﬃcients
12
==PAGE:15==
LIST OF TABLES
Abbreviations
Description
BC
Boundary Conditions
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
DOF
Degrees of freedom
EOM
Equation of motion
FD
Finite Diﬀerence
ODE
Ordinary Diﬀerential Equation
PDE
Particular Diﬀerential Equation
WFR
Whirl Frequency Ratio
13
==PAGE:16==
Part I
Background
14
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Annular seal rings are commonly used in turbines and compressors where the objective
is to control the ﬂuid leakage around the rotor from the high pressure regions to the
low pressure regions. Here the leakage of seals determines the performance eﬃciency
which is aﬀected by numerous parameters such as pressure diﬀerences, type of ﬂuid,
temperature, geometry and the number of cavities in the case of grooved seals.
The working ﬂuid ﬂow through the seal creates a net pressure and shear forces acting
onto the rotor. Predicting these forces accurately is not only vital in terms of increasing
the reliability and eﬃciency of the turbo machinery but also vital in terms of avoiding
destabilization of the already marginally stable dynamics of the high-speed rotor system.
A major diﬀerence between hydrodynamic bearings and annuli seals is that seals develop
a signiﬁcant direct stiﬀness in the centered eccentricity position due to the distribution
of the axial pressure drop between the inlet losses and an axial pressure gradient due to
the present friction loss of the rotor and seal.
The working ﬂuid in the seal is either a process liquid of light viscosity or gas. Plain
annular seals are geometrically completely similar to plain journal bearings. The diﬀer-
ence arises from the diﬀerence in ﬂow structure where a seal’s ﬂow is dominated by fully
developed turbulence and signiﬁcant ﬂuid inertia eﬀects in the ﬁlm.
Operating characteristics that are usually unique to seals are the rather large axial pres-
sure gradients and similar large clearance to radius ratios compared to journal bearings,
and the fact that the development of the circumferential velocity over the length of the
seals is of importance in the generation of cross-coupled (hydrodynamic) forces.
Thus, to enhance the prediction of the dynamical behavior of rotating machines, it is
sought to investigate seals forces typically represented by stiﬀness, damping and added
mass coeﬃcients. Such coeﬃcients vary strongly as a function of the mentioned param-
eters.
The seal’s inﬂuence of dynamic response of the rotor in the actual turbomachinery
has given reason to many experimental investigations and some analytical ones. Seals,
15
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
due to their relatively exposed positions within the rotor-bearing system, can modify
sensibility to the system’s dynamic behavior since especially seals will be subjected to
large relative amplitudes, as illustrated in Figure 1.1. The dynamic force coeﬃcients,
in especially density-signiﬁcant working ﬂuids, can be as large as those arising in the
oil-lubricated journal bearings. Hence, the seal, as a machine element, can have great
inﬂuence of the stability threshold.
Figure 1.1: Compressor conﬁgurations of a straight-through impeller system with a seal
at the end, and a back-to-back system with a seal in the center. Both shown with the 1st
bending mode shape and position of the seal. (Illustraten taken from D.Childs(1993)[14])
In this study, an analysis is developed to calculate the static and rotordynamic charac-
teristics of a plain and tapered annular seal that includes the inertia eﬀect under the
assumption of incompressible ﬂow.
An analytical perturbation of the ﬂow parameters leads to a set of zeroth-order and
ﬁrst-order equations. The integration of nonlinear and coupled zeroth-order equations
leads to the steady state solution which permits the calculation of the seal leakage and
static load. Dynamic stiﬀness, damping and added mass coeﬃcients are obtained from
the integration of the linear ﬁrst-order pressure distribution.
A numerical implementation based on the 1D ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme has been utilized
to solve the coupled nonlinear PDE’s of mass continuity and momentum conservation
arising from the governing bulk-ﬂow equations. To accelerate the convergence of the
schemes, a two point stencil derivative matrix has been implemented and validated
against Ocvirk’s(1952)[33] short bearing analysis. This is done because the validity of
this method is of great theoretical and practical importance to the correctness of the
found results - however as no theoretical solutions to seal analysis exist, and the numerical
implementation of the journal bearings Reynold’s equation is somewhat similar to that
of a seal’s this has been used as a veriﬁcation practice. Another way of verifying the
results is with comparison against commercial computational ﬂuid dynamic software
(CFD). However, validation against commercial software has not been carried out as it
is not a part of the scope of this study. Since the primary goal is to develop and present
a strong understanding in the ﬁeld of bulk ﬂow theory and because numerous literature
has already conducted such CFD analysis, it is considered redundant for this project.
Instead, comparisons are made with the existing and documented experimental setups
results that combine experiments with the Bulk-ﬂow analysis developed.
16
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Classiﬁcation of Seal Types
In general comprehension, the study of seals can be classiﬁed into two groups, liquid
seals or gas seals. The classiﬁcation depends on the governing working ﬂuid utilized in
a given system. A third but much more complex group is the so called two-phase ﬂuid
group, which is a ﬂuid with both gas and liquid. For example it is often assumed that
the gas is considered dry, if this was not entirely true the seal would catch the water
mist in the gas and this would generate small drops of liquid which again would violate
a lot of assumptions from the governing equations. When considering that the working
ﬂuid is either liquid or gas, the most common working ﬂuids are:
• H2O - Water
• O2 - Oxygen
• CBrF3 - Tri-ﬂuro-bromo-methane
• Air
• N2 - Nitrogen
• H2 - Hydrogen
The choice of ﬂuid depends on the desired setup. Typically, ﬂuids can be said to work
as incompressible, whereas gases compress through the seal. Often, one cannot chose
the working ﬂuid but will be required to use the ﬂuid which is transported inside the
compressor or pump. At other times the working ﬂuid is used as a lubricant, here the
ﬂuid properties are of high importance - for example if it is desired to have a high direct
stiﬀness, one should seek a highly viscous ﬂuid.
When assessing the diﬀerent application forms a seal might be utilized in, there are
primarily two diﬀerent main classiﬁcations, either static or dynamic seals. The static
seals are commonly used where the two adjacent surfaces do not have any motion relative
to each other at any time, however since static seals are of little interest to this study
they will be discussed no further. Dynamic seals are, when the two adjacent surfaces
are set in motion relative to each other, this could be either of the two, or both of them.
Within dynamic seals the following sub categories exist:
• Reciprocating dynamic seal.
• Movement dynamic seal.
• Oscillating dynamic seal.
• Rotary dynamic seal
17
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
The only focus of this study is on the rotary dynamic seals. Rotary dynamic seals have
a very wide range and variety of applications in high-speed, high-pressure and often
temperature changing conditions. They are widely applied in the automobile-, aviation-
and space industry, where they are present in components like turbine stages, turbo-
pumps, compressors, gear boxes and the like. Hence, because of the wide application
use, it is convenient to further subdivide rotary seals into either contact or clearance
rotary dynamic seals.
Here contact seals are grouped as the type of seals where the tow abjecting surfaces are
in contact with each other which is formed by a positive pressure by e.g. a rubbing-like
contact between the two opposing surfaces. These kind of contacts are highly nonlinear,
any contact between a seal surface and a rotor surface in high speed rotor dynamics
would lead to a dramatic increase in direct stiﬀness and would completely chance their
rotordynamic behavior, or in other words, the rotor would become potentially unstable.
Clearance seals are deﬁned as the case where the two surfaces are non-contacting, and
at all times have a positive clearance while being circumferential around a main axis.
Within clearance rotary dynamic seals an continuously increasing number of diﬀerent
geometries has been developed over the years. The design-type is dependent on the given
application and the desired rotordynamic eﬀects and can vary very widely. However three
major groups are classiﬁed as smooth plain annular seals, which in geometry are quite
similar to journal bearings. However the clearance over radius ratio is as low as 2 and
as high as 10 to avoid rotor/stator contact. These can be straight, tapered or stepped
in geometry over the length of the seal. These will be the main focus of this study.
More complex seals can be seals such as grooved surface seals which have diﬀerent
internal surface patterns where the labyrinth and honeycomb is the most widely used.
2.1
Prediction of Leakage Through a Seal
Leakage through a seal can be predicted when a pressure diﬀerence over a deﬁned domain
i given. An illustration of such domain is depicted in Figure 1.1 to the left. Here, the
working ﬂuid enters the ﬁrst stage of the pump/compressor with a pressure P = Pstart
to the right and the pressure of the ﬂuid is increased through each impeller up until
P = Pend. In the system the ﬂuid’s trajectory passes a seal at the center of the rotor. In
this case the seal functions to reduce the leakage that is driven by the pressure diﬀerences
over each impeller. This is in practice done by a one or a series of multiple seals.
The change in pressure across the axial direction of the seal can be described through
the following basic steps which are also the underlying basics for also more complex seal
analysis. This is also illustrated in ﬁg. 2.1 for a given plain seal:
• Inlet drop: The ﬂow through the seal enters from the left inlet chamber. Due
to the sudden change in geometry the ﬂow will experience an inlet pressure drop
deﬁned by the inlet geometry. This is illustrated by the ﬁrst arrow in the upper
part of the ﬁgure.
18
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
• Friction loss: Between the two chambers is what is called the interstage seal
domain. Here the ﬂow will experience an interstage pressure drop due to friction
resistance arising from the stator/rotor surfaces which is illustrated by the arrow in
the middle of the ﬁgure. This domain can have many diﬀerent geometric attributes
as previously described. Throughout the study a tapered and plain seal will be
undertaken an analysis but in this chapter the seal is considered plain and simple.
• Outlet recovery: The ﬂuid ﬂow exits to the right into the exit chamber where the
ﬂuid will experience an exit pressure drop OR an exit pressure recovery depending
on the sudden geometric change in the seal. This is illustrated with the arrow at
the right bottom of the ﬁgure.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Pressure
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Illustration of pressure drop over a seal
1
Axial Location over seal
Seal Exit
Seal Entrance
Friction Drop
Inlet Drop
Exit Recovery
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the change in pressure over a seal, indicating the inlet drop,
the friction drop, and the exit recovery.
These three stages will be discussed in turn in the following section where focus will be
on the physical behavior and the dependence on each parameter.
An example of how a typical pressure drop ∆P is calculated, from inlet to exit chamber, is
seen below which is based on the Fanning format originally introduced by Black(1969)[8]
and later D.Childs[14] for a un-tapered seal where inlet/exit loss coeﬃcient inﬂuence has
been neglected:
Ps −Pe =

ζ + ζe + 4f L
2C

ρ1
2W 2
(2.1)
where f denotes the governing friction factor,which is dependent on the ﬂow’s behavior.
However if assuming that the ﬂow is fully turbulent, f is typically within the region of
0.01 to 0.04 as seen later. L and C are the seal length and clearance. ρ is the ﬂuid
19
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
density, W is an average of the axial velocity. ζ and ζe are inlet and exit loss coeﬃcients
which are typically in the range of 0.5 to 1.0 and 0.1 to 0.5 depending on inlet/outlet
geometry.
If the geometry of a seal is in the order of L = 50[mm], which is the case for the seals
evaluated later when undertaken the full bulk-ﬂow analysis, then a clearance would typ-
ically be the order of C = 0.1[mm], hence L >> C. With this setup, the friction loss
term shown in Equation (2.1) would have a value of around f 2L
C = 10 (when assuming
a low friction). Hence, being about one magnitude larger than the inlet/exit loss coeﬃ-
cients that was in the vicinity of 0 to 1. This practically means that the sought pressure
diﬀerence over the seal is by far dominated by the friction loss term. Furthermore, it
is evident that for increasing L, the term becomes increasingly dominating. One could
conclude from this rough analysis that inlet/exit coeﬃcients therefore are neglectable.
However, D.Childs(1993)[14], found that the dynamic characteristics of a seal are, not
insigniﬁcantly, inﬂuenced by the inlet and exit loss coeﬃcients. Thus, even though they
do not have any directly signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the leakage per say, they are still im-
portant to be included in a rotordynamic system’s behavior when optimizing against
dynamical coeﬃcients. Their direct inﬂuence are evaluated in the results section.
A leakage prediction can be expressed through a volumetric ﬂow rate1 over the seal as
being:
˙Q = 2πR
 
(Ps −Pe)C3
fρL
!1/2 "
m3
s
#
(2.2)
From this, it is evident that for a predeﬁned pressure diﬀerence that drives the ﬂow,
the most dominating variable in terms of leakage is the clearance which work cubic.
Figure 2.2 illustrates changes in the ﬂow rate when varying C against the collected
constants fρL.
From this it is evident that the clearance is clearly dominating the
ﬂow rate through the seal, and if changing the collected constant which can be though
any variation of the length, density and friction, then the eﬀect in terms of ﬂow rate
is minimal. However, it is seen that in the physical admissible area of interest which
typically lies between 0.2 and 0.4, there is a non-neglectable inﬂuence on the volumetric
ﬂow rate. This is a very important information since the ﬂow rate will later be proven
to be an iterative solution over the friction.
1 The volumetric ﬂow rate is later used in the bulk ﬂow analysis based on D.Childs(1993)[14] however
an actual expression for the leakage through a seal is never expressed.
This expression is based on
White(1994)[39]
20
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
Variable - Q(f
L) 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Flowrate - Q
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Flowrate through plain seal
C = 0.01[mm]
C = 0.02[mm]
C = 0.03[mm]
     Physical
area of interest
Figure 2.2: Flowrate Q as a function of a collected set of variables fρL. Shown for three
diﬀerent clearances.
2.1.1
The Friction Factor of Interstage Seal
The expected radial velocity proﬁle in an annular plain seal at laminar and turbulent
ﬂow is illustrated in Figure 2.3. Two diﬀerent ﬂow cases are shown, the one to the left is
an illustration of the laminar ﬂow within the clearance of the seal, where the ﬂow proﬁle
is parabolic in the axial direction, when the pressure in the seal is driven by the axial
ﬂow. This is known as a Poiseuille ﬂow. A linear proﬁle is present in the tangential
direction which is introduced by a circumferential shear-introduced driven ﬂow, also
known as Couette ﬂow. This is because the rotational motion of the seal drags the ﬂow,
and since it is laminar the ﬂow proﬁle becomes linear in shape.
When the ﬂow regime turns to a turbulent behavior as shown in Figure 2.3 to the right
the velocity proﬁle changes a lot especially in the circumferential direction. Before the
friction forces restrained the ﬂuid to the parabolic, however now the shape is in the form
of a ’square’ where the no-slip condition are imposed onto the boundaries. Hence, the
ﬂow-ﬁled is practically turbulent while having a laminar ﬂow at the boundary to the
edges. This is also the case for the circumferential direction2.
Turbulent ﬂow is one of the main assumptions of a bulk ﬂow code in a seal, since it
makes it possible to simplify the model in terms of the local velocity determinations.
2 From this it is very illustrative why the assumption of turbulence ﬂow is important in having a
good approximation of any bulk ﬂow since velocity change in the radial direction becomes smaller for
turbulent ﬂow.
The illustration orgin is from Yamada(1962)[40] and was later adapted to bulk-ﬂow
theory by Hirs(1973)[22]
21
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
Laminar Flow
Turbulent Flow
ωR
ωR
Z
Z
R
R
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the ﬂow proﬁle over the clearance in the seal in the axial
and circumferential direction for both laminar and turbulent ﬂow region with no-slip
condition. R is the clearance height, ωR is the surface velocity of the rotor, Z is the
axial coordinate through the seal.
Hirs(1973)[22] discusses how the friction factor of a fully developed turbulent Couette
ﬂow is in fact 20% larger than the friction factor caused by the Poiseuille ﬂow, or in
other words, the friction factor in the circumferential direction dominates compared to
the axial direction. However, what is most interesting from Hirs’s ﬁndings was that he
made a very good prediction of the pressure distribution from a combination of both
the Couette and Perusille ﬂow when only based on information about the Poiseuille ﬂow
in the axial direction, therefore with this in mind the following discussion about the
inﬂuence of the friction factors in a seal only about the pressure driven turbulent ﬂow
in the axial direction.
For a fact, the pressure drop in pipes or a set of parallel plates with a fully developed ﬂow
is very similar to that of a seal’s both in terms of geometry, behavior and determination
of the ﬂuid friction factor interaction with the surfaces. Hence, these setups are used
widely to determine the friction factor in seals also.
The average of the two ﬂow types has an inﬂuence on the friction factor which determines
the pressure drop over the seal. Hence, the friction factor can be considered essential
for prediction of exactly how the ﬂow develops through the seal and how precise the
dynamic coeﬃcients can be determined.
In order to compare diﬀerent geometries, or more speciﬁcally the cross-sections of dif-
ferent geometries, one will need to follow the procedure developed by White(1994)[39],
who deﬁnes the friction factor as a function of i) the axial Reynolds number, ii) the
relative roughness. And from these two dimensionless parameters, it is possible to relate
how the corresponding parameters of the seal with a diﬀerent cross section are calcu-
lated based on an equivalent hydraulic diameter which for seals are simply two times
the given clearance. This deﬁnition is used throughout the study where it is important
to remember that the clearance can change over the length of the seal and therefore also
the hydraulic diameter. This procedure is also not entirely without loss of precision in
the results and White(1994)[39] mentions that an expected precision should be within
the vicinity of ±15% from actual values.
22
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
By accepting the loss in precision with the argument that a plain seals cross-sectional area
is very similar to that of a pipe’s and therefore is relatively well-represented, therefore
it is also acceptable to use a model of the friction factor in the seal based on that of
a pipe’s which is widely documented. Diﬀerent models exit, and Moody(1944)[23] has
set the industry standard for friction factor determination in pipes with the following
expression:
fpipe = 5.5 · 10−3

1 +
 
2 · 104 e
Dh
+ 106
Rez
!1/3

(2.3)
This model is dependent on the axial Reynolds number Rez, the hydraulic diameter
Dh and an expression for the absolute roughness e.
The Reynolds number can be
determined as Rez = ρWDh
µ
which is acceptable in the range 4000 ≤Rez ≤107. The
relative roughness is simply the term e/Dh and operates in the range 0 ≤e/Dh ≤0.05.
This behavior is depicted in Figure 2.4 below which demonstrates how the friction factor
changes for three diﬀerent Reynolds numbers over the relative roughness. For a very
smooth pipe e/Dh →0 the friction factor goes towards zero except for the fact that,
the turbulent correction constant will add an "eﬀective" value. It is seen that for highly
turbulent ﬂow, the friction factor is low.
Variable - e/Dh 
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Friction Factor  - f
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Friction factor in pipe
Rez = 4" 103
Rez = 2 " 104
Rez = 1 " 107
Figure 2.4: Moody’s friction factor f as a function of a collected set of variables e/Dh.
Shown for three diﬀerent axial Reynolds numbers.
The Fanning based Moody’s friction factor is the most widely used for seals as seen in
f.x Fleming(1979) [18] and T.Hao(2001) [20]. The Fanning format is simply a quarter
of the original Moody’s friction factor. Throughout the study, Fanning based Moody’s
friction will be the one used. An illustration of the Moody’s diagram can be found in
Appendix A.
23
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
The friction on the stator and rotor can be represented through adapted pipe ﬂow friction
factors. Nelson(1987)[30] showed that as Moody’s friction factor is both a function of
Reynolds number and roughness. It can positively account for changes in circumferential
ﬂow that alters the relative roughness. Yamada(1962)[40] proved that the friction factor
of a smooth pipe was very linear in behavior thus laying a ﬁnal approval behind using
friction factors adapted from pipes in rotating clearance seals.
D.Childs(1993)[10] presented the following model for Moody’s friction factor for the
stator and rotor which is corrected with a factor of four based on Fanning:
fr = 1.375 · 10−3

1 +
 
2 · 104 er
2H +
106
Ur2H ρ
µ
!(1/3)

(2.4)
fs = 1.375 · 10−3

1 +
 
2 · 104 es
2H +
106
Us2H ρ
µ
!(1/3)

(2.5)
Which should be considered as an approximate representation of the actual friction
factor on the rotor and stator respectively. Here the term e/(2H) = e/Dh is recognized
as the relative roughness where er and esis the absolute roughness on the stator and
rotor. For a centered seal with a constant clearance, H = Cr and e/2Cr are the only
two parameters that can be adjusted.
The Reynolds number is recognized through the term Re = U2H ρ
µ is an important factor
of this expression, for 4000 ≤Re ≤107 and with relative roughness lower than 0.01 the
expression is within 5%. However, when e/D > 0.01 it underestimates the friction a
signiﬁcantly.
2.1.2
A study of Entrance loss & Exit recovery factor
At the pipe entrance a vena contracta will develop with a small recirculation zone which
results in a quite sharp drop in the pressure, the eﬀect is illustrated in Figure 2.5. This
exact same eﬀect is present for seals and in order to account for this, an entrance loss
factor is deﬁned which includes all physical eﬀects associated with entrance loss.
24
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
Figure 2.5: Illustration of a vena contracta in a pipe inlet. From sensorprod.com
Hence, D.Childs(1993)[14] set up the following entrance loss coeﬃcient behavior (1 + ζ)
which accounts for the energy required in the ﬂow to accelerate the ﬂuid upstream of the
seal length from the nominal zero velocity to a fully developed ﬂow at a given velocity.
His ﬁndings showed that the entrance should be made as sharp as possible to achieve the
maximum possible entrance loss (=best leakage). However, this contradicts the classical
pipe entrance analysis done by White(1994)[39], who analyzed entrance loss factors for
very long pipes connected to a so called "inﬁnite reservoir". He found that the highest
possible entrance loss factor is achieved by using a pipe geometry that goes out into the
inlet domain. However, such geometry has not been tested yet for seals.
Generally throughout the literature the notation for the inlet and outlet entrance and
exit loss factors are denoted as ζ and ζe, and are given as:
Ps −Pin = ρ
2(1 + ζ)W 2
Pex −Pe = −ρ
2(1 −ζe)W 2
(2.6)
where W is the average axial velocity through the seal. Ps is the inlet chamber pressure,
or ’source’. Pin and Pex represent the pressure just inside and just before the exit of the
seal. Finally, Pe denotes the exit pressure.
When analyzing the ﬁrst expression of Equation (2.6) with respect to the pressure dif-
ference, the depicted behavior in Figure 2.6 shows the response for diﬀerent values of
entrance loss factor, while varying the density and average axial velocity. It is seen that
while the system is at standstill (e.i no axial velocity), there is no pressure diﬀerence
between just before the inlet and just after. When increasing the relative axial velocity,
the pressure loss starts to increase accordingly. Similarly the eﬀect of the entrance loss
factors indicate that for increasing values, the pressure diﬀerence increases accordingly.
25
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
Variable - (;W2) /2 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Pressure difference: Ps-Pin
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Entrance loss factor influnece
1 = 1.0
1 = 0.5
1 = 0.0
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the behavior of Equation (2.6)
When analyzing the exit recovery, it is in a similar fashion as the inlet loss factor assumed
to have many similarities with pipes. White(1994)[39] states that if a sharp corned pipe
exits into an inﬁnite chamber, the system experiences no recovery factor in terms of
pressure.
When assessing the exit pressure recovery, it is seen from the equation that ζe = 1 is
equivalent to having no pressure recovery downstream of the seal since (1−ζe) = 0, which
is dominating over the axial velocity variable. This is directly translated to the fact that
a sharp edged seal would also have an exit recovery factor of ζe = 1.
D.Childs[11]
describes that this is also the most used value when assessing seals in general, since it
makes no practical sense to add a pressure recovery after a seal.
A few articles mention the fact that even if the seal has a sharp edge, there is still a
minor recovery of the pressure. This eﬀect has to the author’s knowledge only been
assessed by Schetz& Fuhl(1996)[34]. They argue that this could potentially be due to
a diﬀusive exit behavior because of the tapered angles and a whirling eﬀect of the ﬂuid
that suppress the separation of the ﬂow from exiting "normally" out of the seal, thus
giving a recovering eﬀect3.
Below, Figure 2.7 depicts the behavior of the pressure at the exit. The pressure diﬀerence
is negative due to the fact that it recovers. Again the behavior is shown for diﬀerent ζe
and it is seen that for ζe = 1 there is no recovery and that for ζe = 0 the fully potential
recovery is about 0.5.
3 Again, the reason why this is important is because it has proven to have very large inﬂuence on the
rotordynamic coeﬃcients in the system
26
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
Variable - (;W2) /2 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Pressure difference: Ps-Pin
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
Exit recovery factor influnece
1e = 1.0
1e = 0.5
1e = 0.0
Figure 2.7: Illustration of the behavior of the exit recovery factor. Negative pressure is
a recovery.
2.2
Commercial Software
Computational ﬂuid dynamics, CFD, can solve very detailed and fundamental versions of
the Navier-Stokes equations and is a strong addition to the experimental and theoretical
work. In theory, it can be used to solve all problems with an inﬁnite level of detail,
but in practice they come in short by requiring a lot of computational eﬀort. Especially
turbulence has proven to be very costly for larger problems.
For this, special turbulence models have been developed.
For example there is the
Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes(RANS) and k −ϵ models which is used for turbulence
modeling.
Due to the nature of the turbulent ﬂow, the velocities have a lot of ﬂuctuations inherent.
This means that very small time steps must be taken which makes even simulations over
short period of time, which is costly costly.
Another turbulence model that is widely used is the k −ϵ turbulence model, which
is based on the partial diﬀerential equations that solve for the kinetic energy and the
associated dissipation of energy of the system. However this method does not include
any boundary layer development from the ﬂuid ﬂow through the seal.
Numerous diﬀerent kinds of software is more or less directly applicable to rotordynamic
coeﬃcient determination of seals, however what is applicable for all of them is that
they are quit limited in terms of openness. Free software which can be modiﬁed and
understood like for example OpenFOAM is simply not yet constructed for this ﬁeld.
This leaves the engineer to choose between either constructing and validating his own
code or chose to accept a closed or "black box" software where it is not possible to
27
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
understand the underlying assumptions and limitations. Such software will over time
lead to results hard to fully validate and accept. Therefore, any commercially available
software should be used with extreme caution as it may potentially give misleading
results. It is not uncommon that when comparing two such commercial codes with the
same empiric setup they deliver diﬀerent results, simply because they have diﬀerent
underlying assumptions and governing equations. At the end, the engineer is left with
uncertainty in the results.
However, commercial software is still widely used, some are better than others, and this
section will try to give an overview to what software that is available on the market
which could be used within in the ﬁeld of seal coeﬃcient determination. This list is
solely based on the tools currently known to the author, hence others may be available.
From the table, the probably most used softwares are ANSYS, openFOAM, STAR
CCM+ and COMSOL which should be considered in a group for themselves as they
usually ﬁnd a solution to the full Navier-Stokes equations. They are widely used in ro-
tordynamic coeﬃcient determinations, but what is general for all of them is that they can
become very computationally heavy. And it is because of this the need for specialized
seal codes arises.
For this, XLAnSeal and XLLubeGT are the most used tool. They are semi-commercial
softwares, meaning that they are available only to groups connected to the XLTRC©
Rotordynamic Software Suite. Speciﬁcally XLLubeGT uses a Reynolds equation based
solution while XLAnSeal uses bulk-ﬂow Navier-Stokes solutions.The software is in its
essence a bulk-ﬂow tool for seals of any form and shape, the downside however is that
it is not possible to have a look into the actual code, which greatly limits its usability.
One major assumption in bulk-ﬂow code is the assumption of "dry" gas. This is done
to avoid inclusion of complex two-phase ﬂow models. However the software HSeal2P
includes this physical behavior.
28
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. CLASSIFICATION OF SEAL TYPES
Table 2.1: List of software available in the ﬁeld of rotordynamic seal coeﬃcient deter-
mination
Name of software
Type of application
Source
CAE(General)
STAR-CCM+ , OpenFOAM(free), ANSYS, COMSOL and
the like are all solvers which calculate the fully
complex system in i.e. 3D
Commercial
XLrotor
Handle the entire system for both lateral and torsional analysis.
The plus side is that it includes a code for ﬁnding the coeﬃcients
for ﬂuid ﬁlm seals speciﬁcally as well.
Rotating Machinery
Analysis Inc.
GCYL
Gas Cylindrical Seals (compressible) w. tapered and hydrostatic
geometries solves the laminar and turbulent ﬂow in thin ﬁlm
(most suitable for small clearance seals)
NASA
(COSMIC Collection)
ICYL
Liquid Cylindrical Seals (incompressible)
2D isoviscous solver for fully tutbulent ﬂow
NASA
(COSMIC Collection)
RotorLab
A package for modeling the rotor systems bearings and seals.
It’s advantages lies in the combination of design, modeling,
analysis and ﬁnally post processing where empiric data can
be included in the simulation.
Texas A&M
HCOMB
Software for calculating the dynamical coeﬃcients in
straight-through honeycomb seals. Upside is that it is
specialized in compressible honeycombs.
Texas A&M.
SEAL2
Software for determining the stiﬀness and damping coeﬃcients of
plain and grooved seals under the assumption of incompressible
turbulent ﬂow in the axial direction. Uses bulk-ﬂow model.
Texas A&M.
TURSEAL
Similar to SEAL2 but includes the eﬀects of not fully
developed turbulent ﬂow in the seal.
Texas A&M.
HydroSealT
Stiﬀness and damping coeﬃcients and corresponding stability
analysis for seals and in the thermo-hydrostatic domain.
Texas A&M.
ISOTSEAL 1 & 2
Isothermal bulk ﬂow model, gradually used in the industry,
and have a lot of documentation associated with it.
Texas A&M.
XLAnSeal
Forces and moment coeﬃcients for turbulent ﬂow in annular seals.
Can distinguish between laminar, turbulent and transition zones.
Based on the bulk ﬂow code of D. Childs.[13]
Texas A&M.
XLGGrv
Similar to XLAnSeal but can also determine coeﬃcients for
grooved seals.
Texas A&M.
XLLaby
Similar to XLAnSeal and XLGGrv, but can also determine
coeﬃcients for labyrinth seals.
Texas A&M.
HSeal2P
Two-phase operating ﬂow in seals can be analyzed in this
software.
Texas A&M.
HSealM
Similar to HSeal2P but is focusing on annular pressure seals.
Texas A&M.
29
==PAGE:32==
Part II
Theory
30
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
The Incompressible Bulk Flow
Theory
3.1
Introduction to bulk-ﬂow
In this section, a method for obtaining the perturbed pressure distribution for a plain
and tapered seal with incompressible ﬂow is derived. For this, Hirs(1973) [22] bulk ﬂow
lubrication theory is applied, which throughout this section, to a wide extend follows
the notation, methodology and documentation of D.Childs(1993) [14]. As a result of the
documentation of the bulk-ﬂow equations, to a great extend, is un-explained, this sec-
tion’s primary focus is to seek a physical and mathematical understanding of the system
at hand. Derivation of the governing equations and associated underlying perturbation
equations is considered a quite technical procedure and typically not documented nor
discussed in the available literature, hence a lot of eﬀort has therefore been put into the
derivation of these equations.
Hirs described that when neglecting the inertia of a given ﬂuid, all the nonlinear convec-
tive inertia terms goes out of the governing Navier-Stokes equations. Also, when having
a closely deﬁned space between the two surfaces, more simpliﬁcations can be made mak-
ing it possible to neglect the local surface curvature and the given gradient of the ﬂuid
shear stress acting onto the two surfaces because they are simply neglectable compared
to the much larger gradient across the thin ﬂuid ﬁlm. From that, it is possible to also
neglect the ﬂuid velocity and change in pressure in the normal direction to the ﬁlm hence
eliminating all terms in the normal direction in the full Navier-Stokes equation.
This is practically done by making the assumption that the velocity proﬁles within a
narrow passage such as the one present in a seal are actually "self-similar" so that the
equations of the governing ﬂow parameters can be averaged over the entire gap/clearance
while still maintaining a precise result. Such an approximation is employed many times
in the well-known Reynolds lubrication equation that is adapted for the full Navier-
stokes equations where its limitations arise with the introduction of turbulent ﬂuids as
descried in S.Morosi(2011)[29].
31
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
Flows in seals are of Reynolds numbers within the turbulent region, this practically
means that the inherent bulk-ﬂow model requires an expression that relates the turbulent
shear stresses to the clearance averaged velocities in the system. The shear stresses on
the two surfaces are expressed using friction coeﬃcients.
If the turbulent ﬂow separates within the seal1 then when using averaged bulk velocity
to evaluate the shear stresses, that surface will introduce a residual in the found stresses
and forces. In many uni-directional lubrication problems, like journal bearings it is not a
serious concern and is usually neglected but when the ﬂow becomes multi-directional, like
seals, this could introduce a limitation to the governing equation. Sivo et al.(1993)[35]
& [36] examined the physical correctness of the bulk-ﬂow averaging approach by inves-
tigating the behavior of the ﬂow’s velocity proﬁle in a seal experimentally. In brief,
they found that the bulk-ﬂow approximation was indeed in good agreement with the
full three-dimensional model that they compared against presented by Baskharone and
Hensel(1993)[6]. However, they found that in some cases, recirculation regions were ob-
served. This destroyed the assumptions for the bulk-ﬂow approach and led to serious
potential error’s, this occurred for highly eccentricity ratio and/or large clearance ratio.
Furthermore, the bulk-ﬂow equations heavily depends on empirically derived friction
factor coeﬃcients and are therefore only to be considered moderately accurate or as
accurate as the coeﬃcient factors one can obtain for ones physical system.
Precise
determination of friction factors are both troublesome and change over time as the seal
get worn.
3.2
Assumptions to the Bulk-Flow equations
While the derived material in this chapter tries to give a broad understanding of the
subject at hand it still focuses only on a small portion the governing lubrication theory,
analysis and the associated results, many eﬀects have not been included nor discussed2
and the study is restrained under the following set of assumptions that are used in the
procedure for simplifying the real physical model down to a mathematical model:
1. Thin ﬁlm-thickness
Local curvature in the ﬂuid is neglected, this is due to
the assumption of a small ﬁlm clearance to radius ratio. Hence leading to the
simpliﬁcation that the pressure drop (and velocity proﬁle) in the radial direction
can be neglected compared to the circumferential and axial direction as according
to Hirs(1973) [22].
2. No-slip Condition: The ﬂuid is assumed to have the zero velocity at the bound-
ary surface across the seal at both rotor and stator side. As even the slightest
viscosity makes the ﬂuid stick to the surface this would be violated for an ideal
1
meaning that the velocity close to one surface is in a diﬀerent direction than the actual clearance-averaged velocity directio
example angular perturbation would give the dynamic coeﬃcients related to the moment forces, but
these are not interesting in this study as it is assumed that the rotor does not bend in the axial direction
- hence only perturbation in the radial direction is of interest.
32
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
ﬂuid (inviscid ﬂuid) with a perfect ﬂow, as it would slide over the surface, however
that is very unlikely.
3. Fully Turbulent: A bulk-ﬂow code is only valid for a fully developed and tur-
bulent ﬂow regime in the Reynolds number range 4000 −106 as described by Hirs
(1973)[22].
4. Dominant Axial Flow: The ﬂow has to be a dominant axial ﬂow, if the mean
tangential ﬂow exceeds the mean axial ﬂow, the calculation becomes inaccurate
through the friction as mentioned in D.Childs(1989) [11].
5. Pre-swirl: It is assumed that the entrance circumferential velocity (pre-swirl)
is uniform around the seal and that it can be precisely predicted.
Often it is
assumed that the pre-swirl is 50%. This is a very weak assumption as it is often
quite diﬃcult to have a uniform pre-swirl around the rotor. Pre-swirl is omitted in
journal bearing theory but has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on dynamic coeﬃcients in seal
theory as described in D.Childs(1983)[10].
6. Circular Orbit: It is assumed that the motion of the seal is known to be a circular
orbit, this means that time dependency can be neglecting thus render the necessity
of a transient solution. This is a very important underlying assumption, as most
rotors have elliptical shape.
It is developed by Adams(1987) and described in
M.Adams(2010)[1](p.221) as "the mechanical impedance hypothesis". This implies
that the rotor dynamic coeﬃcients are "not function of the shape of the imposed
harmonic orbit". Hence, there is a potential inﬂuence of orbit shape on the seals
rotor dynamic coeﬃcients.
7. Moody’s Friction: It is assumed that the friction model can be represented
through an adapted Moody’s pipe model which is considered valid for high Reynolds
number far away from the transition domain as described previously and in D.Childs(1993)
[14].
8. Flow Properties The working ﬂuid has to be a Newtonian ﬂuid, and for this
analysis the ﬂuid also has to be assumed incompressible. The incompressible ﬂuid
is assumed either a fully dry gas or a fully wet ﬂuid.
9. Perfect Geometry: The system is assumed to consist of a perfectly circular and
straight seal and rotor in the tangential and axial direction.
Furthermore any
rotor-to-stator misalignment has to be neglected as it would introduce moments
to the system that are not included in the perturbation equations as described
in Venkataraman(1995) [4] and D.Childs(1993)[14]. Finally rotor-to-stator static
eccentricity is assumed to be zero for the isotropic model and can therefore not be
evaluated. When added, eccentricity has to be small compared with the concen-
tritic clearance, that is ϵ << 1.
10. Isothermal ﬂuid: It is assumed that there is no change of temperature (adia-
batic) over the seal. This is an acceptable approximation according to Y.Zhou and
33
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
D.Childs(1993)[42] which found a diﬀerence in results with and without tempera-
ture change was less than 3%. This is mainly due to the generally short length of
the seal that restricts a large temperature diﬀerence over the domain.
11. Empiric values: A lot of empirically estimated values are used in the bulk-ﬂow
analysis and would have to be experimentally determined, including coeﬃcients
for entrance pressure loss and exit pressure recovery, relative roughness on stator
and rotor.
12. Growth of rotor: It is assumed that there is no radial growth of the rotor
as the rotational speed is increased.
Hence radial clearance does not decrease
with increasing operation speed3. However for comparison reasons of results and
implementation in respect to available literature, this eﬀect is not included in this
study.
3 This phenomena is well known in rotor dynamics and should be included for higher running conditions,
which D.Hartog(1987)[21][chapter 2] provides an explanation for.
34
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
3.3
Derivation of the Governing Equations
A model of a seal is illustrated on Figure 3.1 where, the stator (red) should be considered
as being static and the rotor(blue) as rotating with the tangential velocity U = Rω.
Between the two surfaces, a ﬂuid ﬁlm is present, and from this a diﬀerential ﬂuid element
or control volume between the rotor- and stator-surface can be deﬁned, where dZ ≪
L and Rdθ ≪Rθ.
This arbitrary ﬂuid-element extends across the entire ﬂuid ﬁlm
thickness, hence giving reason to the "bulk" name of the theory.
Based on the above, all ﬂuid properties are deﬁned as being their average value over
the ﬁlm-thickness, where its base-point is the average height of the diﬀerential control
volume, indicated as H in Figure 3.1. From H the velocity components in the control
volume are also averaged in the axial and circumferential direction respectively denoted
W and U.
ω
−Z
Control Volume
Rω
Rdθ
dZ
H
U
W
τrZ
τsZ
τrθ
τsθ
Figure 3.1: Diﬀerential-ﬂuid control volume indicating the wall stresses and their direc-
tion. The blue bottom surface indicates the rotating rotor with the velocity U = Rω,
and the red top surface indicates the stationary seal.
Due to the turbulent nature of the seal, inertia eﬀects have to be included, and this is
done through shear stresses acting on the surfaces. Here they are shown as their respec-
tive vector components τsθ, τsz and τrθ, τrz. These shear stresses act on the boundary
rotor and stator walls, are denoted as full vector τr and τs, and act from the location
of the average hight position H. From the bulk-ﬂow theory for turbulence in thin ﬁlm
ﬂows4, the wall shear stress diﬀerences are developed from Hirs, (1973)[22] and, Launder
and Leschziner(1978) [5] whom documented the eﬀect of inertia in a turbulent regime.
Generally known as Hirs friction law of lubrication theory this theory states the shear
can be coupled to the ﬂuid density, the seal friction and the rotor and stator tangential
velocity, as:
4 This analysis would be much more complicated for a labyrinth seal as the Poiseuille and the Couette
friction laws are much more diﬀerent in a textured seal
35
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
τs = ρfsU2
s
2
τr = ρfrU2
r
2
(3.1)
Where fs and fr is the friction factor on the stator and rotor, ρ is the ﬂuid density and
Ur and Us are the bulk-ﬂow velocity relative to the boundary wall on rotor and stator,
given as:
Us =
p
W 2 + U2
Ur =
q
W 2 + (U −Rω)2
(3.2)
From the above, four direction speciﬁc shear components can be deﬁned as the following
which are also depicted in Figure 3.1, as:
τrZ =τr
W
Ur

= ρfr
UrW
2
τrθ =τr
U −Rω
Ur

= ρfr
Ur(U −Rω)
2
(3.3)
τsZ =τs
W
Us

= ρfs
UsW
2
τsθ =τs
 U
Us

= ρfs
UsU
2
(3.4)
Where it is seen that:
• τrθ shear governing the tangential ﬂow on the rotor surface is a function of the
rotational speed of the shaft the pre-rotated tangential velocity and the local bulk
velocity on rotor side.
• τrZ and τrZ are deﬁned from the bulk velocity on the boundary and the axial bulk
ﬂow through the seal
• τsθ are deﬁned from the local stator bulk velocity and the pre-rotated tangential
velocity.
it is seen that the
3.3.1
Governing Equation - Continuity equation
A free body diagram over the forces acting on the diﬀerential-ﬂuid element can be found
in D.Childs(1993)[ﬁg 4.5][14] which is originally based on the work of Normann(1987)
[32] and the derivation of this part is therefore not included.
The governing equation is derived from the Reynolds transport theorem which states
that:
dNsys
dt
= ∂
∂t
Z
CV
ηρd∀+
Z
CS
ηρ¯v · d ¯A
(3.5)
Where ∀indicates the volume, and A the surface. From this the continuity equation is
given as the following, when assuming conservation of mass:
∂
∂t
Z
CV
ρd∀+
Z
CS
ρ¯v · d ¯A = 0
(3.6)
36
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
Direct substitution of Equation (3.6) into the diﬀerential ﬂuid element in Figure 3.1
yields the bulk ﬂow continuity equation:
∂(H)
∂t
+ 1
R
∂(HU)
∂θ
+ ∂(HW)
∂Z
= 0
(3.7)
that describes the transport of a conserved quantity through the seal.
3.3.2
Governing Equation - Axial Momentum Equation
The general conservation of linear momentum in the axial direction can be deﬁned as
the sum of forces acting over the control volume in the axial direction.
X
FZ = ∂
∂t
Z
CV
ρWd∀+
Z
CS
ρW ¯v · d ¯A
(3.8)
When including tapered angles assumption to the seal, but also assuming that they are
not very large compared to the clearance, then the ﬂuid pressure force acting on the
surface from the W velocity projection can be approximated by:
W = P ∂H
∂Z ∆θ∆Z
(3.9)
Applying this to the control volume, the sum of pressure forces in the Z-direction is
thus:
X
FZ =
−∂H
∂Z
+ P ∂H
∂Z

∆θ∆Z
(3.10)
The shear stress components illustrated in ﬁg. 3.1 are relative vector components of
the net wall shear stresses resulting from both the pressure induced ﬂow and the drag
induced ﬂow. Including this into the above force equilibrium gives:
X
FZ = −R∆θ∆Z

H ∂P
∂Z + (τrZ + τsZ)

(3.11)
Where τrZ and τsZ are the shear stress component related to the Z-direction (axial).
Substituting Equation (3.11) into the diﬀerential ﬂuid element from Equation (3.8) gives,
when multiplying the continuity equation in Equation (3.7) with W and subtracting the
result from the above equation, the following:
ρ
"
∂(HW)
∂t
+ 1
R
∂(HWU)
∂θ
+ ∂(HW 2)
∂Z
#
= −H ∂P
∂Z −(τrZ + τsZ)
ρH


∂(W)
∂t
| {z }
Local
+ U
R
∂(W)
∂θ
+ W ∂(W)
∂Z
|
{z
}
Convective

= −H ∂P
∂Z −(τrZ + τsZ)
= −H ∂P
∂Z −ρ
2(WfsUs + WfrUr)
(3.12)
37
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
Where the last expression is found by substitution of the shear stress vector components
from eq. (3.4) into the above equation thus yielding the ﬁnal deﬁnition of the governing
axial momentum equation.
The under-braced terms are recognized as the local and convective acceleration 5. Local
acceleration is deﬁned as the rate of change of the velocity with respect to time at a
given point in the bulk ﬂow ﬁeld. Convective acceleration is deﬁned as the rate of change
of velocity due to the change of position of the ﬂuid particle in the bulk ﬂow ﬁeld.
3.3.3
Governing Equation - Circumference Momentum Equation
The conservation of momentum equation in the circumference direction can similarly be
deﬁned as the sum of forces acting in the circumference direction as:
X
Fθ = ∂
∂t
Z
CV
ρUd∀+
Z
CS
ρU¯v · d ¯A
(3.13)
In a similar manner as for the axial direction, the ﬁnal circumferential momentum equa-
tion is given as:
ρH
∂(U)
∂t
+ U
R
∂(U)
∂θ
+ W ∂(U)
∂Z

= −H
R
∂P
∂θ −ρ
2(UfsUs + (U −Rω)frUr)
(3.14)
Hence it is concluded from the three governing equations that when excepting the con-
vective inertia eﬀects, the bulk ﬂow equations were obtained under the same simplifying
assumptions as the more popular Reynolds equation used in Lubrication theory for jour-
nal bearings. It is to be noted that, as a by-product of Hirs’[22] assumptions, the viscous
terms do not contain any derivatives and appear only as linear algebraic terms.
Convective terms are recognized to be the only terms containing derivatives. This con-
cludes that the governing bulk ﬂow equations are to be considered valid only as long as
the convective terms does not vanish from the system at hand.
5 Usually neglected in journal bearing analysis
38
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
3.4
Non-dimensinalization of the System
The system can be non-dimensionalized by using the geometry deﬁnition from Figure 3.2
θ
X
Y
L
C0
C1
R
α
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the convergent-tapered seal geometry showing the seal in the
Z −Y direction and the cross-section X −Y . Blue indicate rotor, red indicate seal.
From this, A clearance function around the seal is deﬁned by assuming that the rotor
and the seal remain parallel to the z-axis at all times. This means that H0 can be deﬁned
as:
H0 =

¯Cr + αL
2

−αZ = ¯Cr
h0
z
}|
{
[1 + q(1 −2z)] = ¯Crh0
(3.15)
Where α denotes the angle in the tapered seal, h0 is the normalized ﬁlm thickness and
L is the seal length with:
¯Cr =C0 + C1
2
q∗= αL
2 ¯Cr
= C0 −C1
C0 + C1
z∗=Z/L
(3.16)
Where q∗is a measure of the degree of taper in a seal and varies from zero, for a constant-
clearance conﬁguration, to approximately 0.4 for a maximum-stiﬀness seal as described
by Fleming(1977) [17]. From this the following variables can be introduced as a substi-
tute of the original ones which is to be inserted to complete the non-dimensionalization
of the system. Here they are stated so the terms can be inserted directly:
˙Q =W0 · 2πR ¯Cr
⇒
W0 =
˙Q
2πR ¯Cr
"
m3/s
m2
#
=
m
s

L =T · W0
⇒
T = L
W0
 m
m/s

= [s]
Here ˙Q denotes the ﬂow-rate of the volume and W0 denotes the average axial velocity
in the seal which is simply found by summation of w0∗. T is the transit time of a given
ﬂuid element proceeding through the seal. All terms denoted with an asterisk(∗) is the
39
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
actual non-dimensional units when isolated:
t =τ ∗· T
⇒
τ ∗= t
T
s
s

= [-]
H =h∗· ¯Cr
⇒
h∗= H
¯
Cr
m
m

= [-]
W =w∗· W0
⇒
w∗= W
W0
m/s
m/s

= [-]
U =u∗· Rω
⇒
u∗= U
Rω

m/s
m · rad/s

= [-]
Rω =b∗· W0
⇒
b∗= Rω
W0
m · rad/s
m/s

= [-]
P =p∗· ρW 2
0
⇒
p∗=
P
ρW 2
0
"
kg · m · s−2
kg/m3 · m2/s2
#
= [-]
and τ is an introduced non-dimensional time variable and b∗, h∗and p∗are the dimension-
less shaft rotating speed, ﬁlm thickness and ﬂuid pressure. From hereon the superscript
asterisk notation for the non-dimensionless units are excluded for notation-simplicity.
3.4.1
The Dimensionless Continuity Equation
Starting with the continuity equation the following is found when inserting the dimen-
sionless values:
∂h · ¯Cr
∂τ · T + 1
R
∂(h · ¯Cr)(u · Rω)
∂θ
+ ∂(h · ¯Cr)(w · W0)
∂z · L
= 0
(3.17)
Dividing through with ¯Cr and collecting in b and inserting T = L/W0 and multiplying
with L, gives:
∂hW0
∂τ
+ L
R
∂(h)(u · bW0)
∂θ
+ ∂(h)(w · W0)
∂z
= 0
(3.18)
And when dividing through with W0 it is seen that the continuity equation is only
dependent of the average axial velocity through b, and the following is then found:
∂h
∂τ + b
 L
R
 ∂(hu)
∂θ
+ ∂(hw)
∂z
= 0
(3.19)
where
•
∂h
∂τ : Describes the change in ﬁlm thickness as a function of the non-
dimensional time.
•
∂(hw)
∂z
: Describes the change in axial bulk velocity w as a function of the
axial position. This is seen to be dependent on the ﬁlm thickness h.
40
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
•
b

L
R
 ∂(hu)
∂θ
: Describes the change in tangential bulk velocity u as a function
of the circumferential position. This is seen to be dependent of the ﬁlm thickness
h, and the ratio of the tangential rotor surface velocity to the average axial bulk
velocity.
3.4.2
The Dimensionless Axial Momentum Equation
For the axial and circumference momentum equations, the bulk ﬂow velocities relative
to the wall is non-dimensionalized as:
Us =
q
(wW0)2 + (uRω)2
=
p
w2 + u2b2
= W0us
Ur =
q
(wW0)2 + (uRω −Rω)2 =
q
w2 + (u −1)b2 = W0ur
(3.20)
Inserting this deﬁnition of the non-dimensional relative vectors into the axial momentum
equation yields:
−h ¯Cr
∂pρW 2
0
∂zL
= 1
2(ρwW0fsW0us + ρwW0frW0ur) + ...
... + ρh ¯Cr
∂(wW 2
0 )
∂τL
+ uRω
R
∂(wW0)
∂θ
+ wW0
∂(wW0)
∂zL

(3.21)
Dividing with ¯Cr and ρ and collecting W0 the following is found:
−h∂pW 2
0
∂zL
=
1
2 ¯Cr
wW 2
0 (fsus + frur) + hW 2
0
 ∂w
∂τL + ub
R
∂w
∂θ + w ∂w
∂zL

(3.22)
This can be further reduced by multiplying with L on both sides and re-arranging to
get the form similar6 to that of D.Childs, as:
−h∂p
∂z = w
2 fsus
 L
¯Cr

+ w
2 frur
 L
¯Cr

+ h
∂w
∂τ + b
 L
R

u∂w
∂θ + w∂w
∂z

(3.23)
where
•
h ∂p
∂z : Describes the change in pressure in axial direction which is de-
pendent on the local ﬁlm thickness.
•
w
2 fs,rus,r

L
¯Cr

: Describes the inﬂuence of friction on stator and rotor on the ﬂow
in the axial direction, which is seen to be dependent of the local tangential velocity
ur or us, this is driven by the change in the axial direction over the length.
•
h · ∂w
∂τ : Describes the change of axial blow ﬂow velocity as a function of
time, which is dependent of the local ﬁlm-thickness.
6
In practice this could be further reduced, but it is throughout this thesis chosen to keep the original
form from literature for comparison purposes
41
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
•
h · w ∂w
∂z : Describes the change in axial bulk ﬂow velocity w as a function
of the position in the seal
∂
∂z, which is dependent of the local ﬁlm-thickness.
•
h · b

L
R

u∂w
∂θ : Describes the change in axial bulk velocity w as a function of the
circumferential position
∂
∂θ which is driven by the tangential bulk velocity. This is
seen to be dependent of the ﬁlm thickness h and the ratio of the tangential rotor
surface velocity to the average axial bulk velocity.
•h

∂w
∂τ + b

L
R

u∂w
∂θ + w ∂w
∂z

: The collected terms therefore describes the axial mo-
mentum and trajectory of a ﬂuid particle through the seal.
3.4.3
The Dimensionless Circumferential Momentum Equation
Similar for the circumferential momentum equation one obtains:
−hL
bR
∂p
∂θ =
L
2 ¯Cr
(ufsus + (u −1)frur) + h
∂u
∂τ + b L
Ru∂u
∂θ + w∂u
∂z

(3.24)
where
•
−hL
bR
∂p
∂θ : Describes the change in pressure in axial direction
which is dependent on the local ﬁlm thickness.
•
L
2 ¯Cr (ufsus + (u −1)frur) : Describes the inﬂuence of friction on stator and rotor
on the ﬂow in the circumferential direction, which is seen to be dependent of the
local tangential velocity ur or us and the diﬀerence in velocity between the pre-
swirl of the ﬂuid and the surface velocity of the rotor, this is more easily seen when
expanding and simplifying the expression to (ufsus + ufrur) −L
2 frur.
Furthermore, it is recognized that this terms work non-linearly through u · us
and u · ur, hence the deﬁnition of the circumferential ﬂow is non-linear. If the
ﬂow was not parabolic in behavior the expression would not catch the change in
circumferential velocity over the length of the seal.
• h

∂u
∂τ + b

L
R

u∂u
∂θ + w ∂u
∂z

: The collected terms are recognized from the axial
momentum equations and describes the circumferential momentum and trajectory
of a ﬂuid particle through the seal.
42
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
3.5
Perturbation Equations for the system
The small parameter used for the perturbation analysis is denoted as ϵ and describes a
perturbation in the eccentricity ratio for small motion around the center position of the
rotor. When the seal is eccentric (ϵ ̸= 0) the ﬂuid pressure varies in such a way that
forces are generated that acts to restore concentricity of the rotor.
Zeroth order equation describes the leakage ﬂow-rate of the centered seal and its cir-
cumferential velocity distribution.
First order equation describes the rotor-dynamic
coeﬃcients governed by small centered motion of the rotor in the seal. From this a
solution is sought for small values of the perturbation parameter 0 < ϵ << 1 of the rotor
about the geometric centered position which is deﬁned as:
χ(τ, θ, z) =
N=1
X
i=0
χi(τ, θ, z)ϵi = χ0(θ, z) + ϵχ1(τ, θ, z)
(3.25)
where χ deﬁnes the ﬂow variables being perturbed, as χ = [h, w, u, p]. Where i = 0..N
describes the level of perturbation. For instance the i + 1’th N is much much smaller
than the i’th N. Here N = 1 has been chosen to ﬁnd up to the ﬁrst order perturbation of
the governing equations. N = 2 would result in the second order perturbation equation
which provides the non-linear rotordynamic coeﬃcients, however these are of no interest
in this study. The ﬁrst term on the right side of the above equations is the steady-state
term and the second term is the perturbation term, also from ϵ it is clear that h0 >> ϵh1
(and all other ﬁeld variables). The governing equations can be solved by substituting
these equations into them and divide them in likewise order of terms containing ϵ0 (zeroth
order) and terms containing ϵ1 (ﬁrst order)
The zeroth order equations represents the very base of the seals state in terms of the ﬂow
of the unperturbed system, whereas the ﬁrst order equations represent the perturbed
ﬂow due to the whirling rotor inside the seal.
3.6
Zeroth Order Perturbation analysis
The zeroth order perturbation equations is obtained by inserting the zeroth order pertur-
bation variables and sorting. In zeroth order the system is independent of time and the
change in the circumferential direction is constant, hence loosing the partial dependence.
3.6.1
Zero order - Continuity Equation
Applying the zeroth order perturbation to the continuity equation will directly give the
following:
∂h0
∂τ + b
 L
R
 ∂(h0u0)
∂θ
+ ∂(h0w0)
∂z
= 0
(3.26)
43
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
In steady state the change in time is neglected, hence ∂h0
∂τ = 0 which gives:
b
 L
R
 ∂(h0u0)
∂θ
+ ∂(h0w0)
∂z
= 0
(3.27)
When assessing the control volume with zero eccentricity and while having steady state
it becomes clear that the change in height and therefore velocity in the circumferential
direction is zero, hence ∂h0u0
∂θ
= 0 which leads to:
∂(h0w0)
∂z
= 0
(3.28)
Now applying an integral on each side and normalizing the constant gives the following
deﬁnition of the zeroth order continuity equation, as:
Z ∂(h0w0)
∂z
dz =
Z
0dz
(3.29)
h0w0 =constant = 1
(3.30)
This new and very simpliﬁed deﬁnition of the continuity equation will be used sorely
to simplify the momentum equations through the deﬁnition that w0 =
1
h0 . In the later
implementation it follows that h0 = 1.
This is backed up from Equation (13.c) In
Normann(1987)[32] 7. Physically this means that as the clearance in the seal gets tighter
, the axial velocity will increase and vice versa.
3.6.2
Zero order - Axial Momentum Equation
The zero order version of the following terms are left unchanged, hence us = us0, ur = ur0
and fs = fs0 , fr = fr0 , and when introducing the zero order perturbation the following
is found:
−h0
∂p0
∂z =
Term 1
z
}|
{
w0
2 (us0fs0 + ur0fr0)
 L
¯Cr

+
Term 2
z
}|
{
h0
∂w0
∂τ + b
 L
R

· ur0
∂w0
∂θ + w0
∂w0
∂z

(3.31)
Where terms can be collected as σs0 = fs0

L
R

and σr0 = fr0

L
R

. Inserting this and by
assessing each term by it self and using the proportionality of the continuity deﬁnition
all terms including w0 can be replaced with w0 =
1
h0 . Hence the ﬁnal form for Term 1
gives:
−h0
∂p0
∂z =1/h0
2
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0)
(3.32)
∂p0
∂z = −1
2h2
0
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0)
(3.33)
7 http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19870012773.pdf
44
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
For Term 2 steady state again remove the time dependency and therefore also the
change of axial velocity over time, as:
−h0
∂p0
∂z =h0

0 + b
 L
R

· ur0
∂w0
∂θ + 1
h0
∂w0
∂z

(3.34)
∂p0
∂z = −1

b
 L
R

· ur0
∂w0
∂θ + 1
h0
∂w0
∂z

(3.35)
And by using partial integration by substitution, the following is rewritten as:
∂w0
∂z =∂w0
∂z · ∂h0
∂h0
= ∂w0
∂h0
· ∂h0
∂z
=∂(1/h0)
∂h0
· ∂h0
∂z = ∂(h−1
0 )
∂h0
· ∂h0
∂z = −1
h2
0
∂h0
∂z
(3.36)
which can be inserted, thus achieving the ﬁnal expression for Term 2 when using the
deﬁnition that the axial velocity will not change in the circumferential direction, dw0
dθ = 0,
as:
dp0
dz = −

b
 L
R

· ur0
dw0
dθ + 1
h0

−1
h2
0
dh0
dz

(3.37)
= −

−1
h3
0
dh0
dz

(3.38)
Now collecting Term 1 and Term 2, gives the ﬁnal expression for the axial momentum
equation, as:
dp0
dz = −1
2h2
0
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0) + 1
h3
0
dh0
dz
(3.39)
where us0 and ur0 are the non-dimensional total velocity relative to stator or rotor. This
expression is identical to the result of D.Childs [14] and E. Storteig(1991)[38].
For a physical understand the axial momentum equation is reduced to a non-tapered
seal by having ∂h0
∂z = 0 it is seen that the change in pressure in the axial direction is
given by a diﬀerence in velocity and friction between the rotor and stator being inversely
proportional to the ﬁlm thickness, squared.
If bringing back the assumption of tapered angles it is seen that the term
1
h3
0
∂h0
∂z alone
functions as an addition to the pressure drop, by the inversely proportional ﬁlm-thickness
cubed, and as the diﬀerence in the tapered angle goes towards zero the inﬂuence of this
term also vanish.
3.6.3
Zero order - Circumferential Momentum Equation
Similar as for the process of the axial momentum equation, the continuity equation is
derived with the same set of techniques, thus giving:
du0
dz = −1
2 (u0us0σs0 + ur0σr0(u0 −1))
(3.40)
45
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
where u0 is the non-dimensional swirl velocity and which is also identical to the result
of D.Childs [14] and E. Storteig(1991)[38]
Firstly it is observed that the ﬁlm-thickness or any change related to the ﬁlm-thickness
is included, this makes good physical sense as the equation only describes change of
the circumferential velocity over the seal. Secondly it is seen that the velocity change
is included between the stator and rotor as for the axial momentum, which will be
multiplied with u0, being the initial pre-swhirl of the working ﬂuid in the seal. A third
term arises from the rotor, which describes the diﬀerence between the pre-swhril and
the rotor velocity as ur0σr0u0 −ur0σr0.
3.7
First Order Perturbation Analysis
Similar as for the zeroth order perturbation equations the ﬁrst order perturbation is now
sought. They are obtained by inserting the zeroth and ﬁrst order perturbation variables,
expanding, neglecting terms with no change and sorting to minimize the expressions.
These derived ﬁrst order equations deﬁne the pressure and bulk velocity ﬂuctuations
resulting from the seal clearance change due to the rotor’s whirling, this is shown graph-
ically by ﬁg. 3.3.
Since the ﬁrst order perturbation analysis requires a lot of algebra only the ﬁrst order
continuity equation is fully derived and explained. However the axial and circumferential
momentum equation can be derived with the exact same mathematical techniques as for
the derivation method used upon the continuity equation.
ω
−Z
Ω
Perturbed Rotor
ϵ
Rotor
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the rotor inside the seal which is being perturbed and evaluated
at a given eccentricity.
46
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
3.7.1
First order - Continuity equation
To repeat the governing continuity equation from Equation (3.7) we have the following
expression which are to be perturbed for h,u and w:
Term 1
z}|{
∂h
∂τ
+b
 L
R

Term 2
z }| {
∂(hu)
∂θ
+
Term 3
z }| {
∂(hw)
∂z
= 0
(3.41)
The perturbation of the continuity equation is most easily done by ﬁrst describe the
perturbed value of each variable, and then collect them and identify terms that goes
out.
From earlier we had that the perturbation h = h0 + ϵh1, hence when applying this to
the only time dependent term ’Term 1’, the following can be said:
∂h
∂τ =
=0
z}|{
∂h0
∂τ +∂ϵh1
∂τ
= ϵ∂h1
∂τ
(3.42)
where the unperturbed change of the ﬁlm-thickness in respect to the time goes out due
to the deﬁnition of steady state.
The second and third term in the continuity equation is identiﬁed as the bulk ﬂow
velocities change with height over the length and circumference of the seal respectively.
When assessing only sub-terms, hu and hw in Term 2 and 3, and temporarily neglecting
the partial derivatives. Then the following expansion can be conducted when perturbing
u and h together:
hu = (h0 + ϵh1)(u0 + ϵu1) =
goes out
z }| {
h0u0 +h0ϵu1 + ϵh1u0 +
inﬁnit small
z }| {
ϵ2h1u1
(3.43)
= h0ϵu1 + ϵh1u0
(3.44)
where hw gives the same solution as hu, since u and w are interchangeable. The reason
h0u0 (and h0w0) goes out is that when making the partial derivative it will express
the zero order change of height and bulk velocity in respect axial and circumferential
direction, which is zero. Furthermore since 0 < ϵ < 1 it is given that ϵ2 << 1 hence
terms related to this inﬁnitively small perturbation, goes out.
Back substituting this information back into the original two terms, and conducting the
expansion of the variables the following is then found:
∂(hu)
∂θ
= ∂(h0ϵu1)
∂θ
+ ∂(ϵh1u0)
∂θ
(3.45)
∂(hw)
∂z
= ∂(h0ϵw1)
∂z
+ ∂(ϵh1w0)
∂z
(3.46)
Inserting the derived expressions back into the continuity equation, one will get the
following expression:
ϵ∂h1
∂τ + b
 L
R
 ∂(h0ϵu1)
∂θ
+ ∂(ϵh1u0)
∂θ

+ ∂(h0ϵw1)
∂z
+ ∂(ϵh1w0)
∂z
= 0
(3.47)
47
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
And when dividing through with the perturbation constant it is possible to further
expand the partial derivatives and realize the following:
∂h1
∂τ + b
 L
R






=0
z
}|
{
∂(h0)
∂θ u1 +∂(u1)
∂θ h0 + ∂(h1)
∂θ u0 +
=0
z
}|
{
∂(u0)
∂θ h1




+ ...
... + ∂(h0)
∂z w1 + ∂(w1)
∂z
h0 + ∂(h1)
∂z w0 +
=0
z
}|
{
∂(w0)
∂z
h1 = 0
(3.48)
Here, three terms are identiﬁed that goes out. The ﬁrst term deﬁnes the change in height
as a function of circumferential position to the zeroth order solution, which is constant.
The next two deﬁnes the change in bulk ﬂow velocity in the circumferential and axial
direction, also in zero order, which is also zero. Hence the system can be reduced to the
following:
∂h1
∂τ + b
 L
R
 
+∂(u1)
∂θ h0 + ∂(h1)
∂θ u0

+
re-collect
z
}|
{
∂(h0)
∂z w1 + ∂(w1)
∂z
h0 +∂(h1)
∂z w0 = 0
(3.49)
This is now rewritten to ﬁt the form of the literature, here it is noticeable that the last
term again can be rewritten using the previous method to get:
∂(h1)
∂z w0 =∂h1
∂z
∂h0
∂h0
1
h0
= ∂h0
∂z
∂h1
∂h0
1
h0
=∂h0
∂z
h1
h0
1
h0
= ∂h0
∂z
h1
h2
0
(3.50)
In-order to not loose the physical understanding it should be noticed that the original
term deﬁned the perturbed change in height over the seal length times a axial bulk ﬂow
at that point. When re-arranged the same should be the case even though it is not as
easily seen.
Furthermore, in-order to ﬁt literature on the ﬁeld the two terms with the ’Re-Collected’
brace, is collected back together as the original term ∂(h0w1)
∂z
. If expanding it is important
to recall that the term ∂h0
∂z ̸= 0 as it deﬁnes the tapered angle within the seal. Hence a
physical understanding of the system of this term would be the change in the perturbed
axial bulk velocity over the seal and its change in tapered angle.
By doing these two steps and re-arranging some of the terms, the following ﬁnal expres-
sion for the continuity equation is found:
b
 L
R
 ∂(u1)
∂θ h0 + ∂(h0w1)
∂z
= −∂h1
∂τ −b
 L
R
 ∂(h1)
∂θ u0 −h1
h02
dh0
dz
(3.51)
It should be stressed that this is not identical to that of D.Childs (1993)[14] The ﬁrst term
The last term is negative here and positive in his work and the second last term having
48
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
u0 multiplied onto it here, where it is completely left out in his work, ﬁnally the ﬁrst term
include the term L
R whereas the book describes it as
¯
Cr
R .8 However a clear agreement is
found between this derivation and the one expressed by E. Storteig(1991)[38]
3.7.2
First order - Axial Momentum equation
Similar is done for the axial and circumferential momentum equations, these are not
derived and expressed here as they follow the exact same procedure as above. The result
is as stated in D.Childs, as being:
A1zh1 = ∂p1
∂z + A2zu1 + A3zw1 +
∂w1
∂τ + b
 L
R

u0
∂w1
∂θ + w0
∂w1
∂z

(3.52)
3.7.3
First order - Circumferential Momentum equation
A1θh1 = 1
b
L
R
∂p1
∂θ + A2θu1 + A3θw1 +
∂u1
∂τ + b
 L
R

u0
∂u1
∂θ + w0
∂u1
∂z

(3.53)
The expressions for A1θ, A2θ and A3θ are the friction constants in the circumferential
direction and A1z, A2z and A3z are the friction factors for the axial direction. Both sets
are based on the zeroth order perturbation solution.
The format of the above three perturbation equations is similar to that described by
Nordmann et al. (1987)[32] apart from the single term
∂
∂z(h0w1), which is due to the
angular whirling motion which was added by D.Childs (1993)[14].
3.7.4
First order - Moody’s Friction Model
Friction arising from the axial direction of the system from both the rotor and stator
are deﬁned by D.Childs(1993)[14] and are not derived in this study to the very excessive
length and complexity of the derivation of these. The model is based on Moody’s friction
factor and in order to validate equations from D.Childs it is compared against the derived
friction model of E.Storteig(1991) [38], which is presented in Appendix D.
A1z = w0
2h2
0

σs0us0

1 + 1
3

1 −a1
fs0

+ σr0ur0

1 + 1
3

1 −a1
fr0

A2z =w0b2
2h0
σs0
us0
u0(1 + bs) + σr0
ur0
(u0 −1)(1 + br)

A3z = 1
2h0
σs0
us0
h
u2
s0 + w2
0(1 + bs)
i
+ σr0
ur0
h
u2
r0 + w2
0(1 + br)
i
−1
h0
dh0
dz

(3.54)
and
8
The Author has identiﬁed those as typo-errors they seems not to follow through to the later imple-
mentation of the actual system.
49
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
A1θ = 1
2h2
0

σs0u0us0

1 + 1
3

1 −a1
fs0

+ σr0(u0 −1)ur0

1 + 1
3

1 −a1
fr0

A2θ = 1
2h0
σs0
us0
u0
h
u2
s0 + b2u2
0(1 + bs)
i
+ σr0
ur0
h
u2
s0 + b2(u0 −1)2(1 + br)
i
A3θ = −1
2
σs0
us0
u0
h
b2u2
0 −bsw2
0
i
+ σr0
ur0
(u0 −1)
h
b2(u0 −1)2 −brw2
0
i
(3.55)
where bs and br are a collection of constants:
bs =
a1a3
fs0 −a3
3h0us0

a2s
h0 +
a3
h0us0
 = 1
3
a3 (a1 −fs0)
fs0 (a2sus0 + a3)
br =
a1a3
fr0 −a3
3h0us0

a2r
h0 +
a3
h0ur0
 = 1
3
a3 (a1 −fr0)
fr0 (a2rur0 + a3)
(3.56)
with the dependency of:
a1 =1.375 · 10−3
a2s = 2 · 104
 es
2 ¯Cr

a3 = 106
Rez0
fs0 =a1
 
1 +
a2s
h0
+
a3
h0us0
1/3!
fr0 = a1
 
1 +
a2r
h0
+
a3
h0ur0
1/3!
(3.57)
3.8
Solution of the First-Order Equations for Obtaining the Rotordy-
namic Coeﬃcients
From the preceding derived ﬁrst order perturbations, it is convenient to conduct a sepa-
ration of the variables in terms of the seals displacement vector components previously
deﬁned sorely by the angle θ, hence the following clearance function is for perturbation
in radial direction is redeﬁned as in terms of the seal-rotor displacement as function of
time, as:
H = ¯Cr −(X cos θ + Y sin θ)
(3.58)
h =h0 −(x(t) cos θ + y(t) sin θ)
(3.59)
where x and y are deﬁned from the non-dimensional parameter x = X/ ¯Cr and y = Y/ ¯Cr.
The θ denotes the angular position around the rotor circumference.
Hence, by loosing the time dependency (and θ dependency Normann(1987)[32]) accord-
ing to the perturbation values deﬁned in Equation (3.25) the following is found:
ϵh1 = −(x cos θ + y sin θ)
(3.60)
= −(x + jy)
(3.61)
50
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
The notation j = √−1 has been used as the imaginary number. 9 Time-dependency in
the governing equations can be eliminated by constraining the trajectory and the motion
of the rotor in the seal to a known behavior, which will radically simplify the governing
ODE’s.
From this the perturbed ﬁlm thickness can be expressed sorely as the real part of h1:
This is done by assuming a recessional seal motion of the perturbation on the following
1D harmonic form:
ϵh1 = −
R0
¯Cr

ejΩt = −rOej(ΩTτ)
(3.62)
where rO = R/ ¯Cr is a real constant deﬁned from the amplitude of the seals harmonic
motion divided by the average ﬁlm clearance, hence by deﬁnition xmax = ymax = rO,
and since rO =
p
x2 + y2 then for x = 0 it is given that the eccentricity amplitude can
be deﬁnes sorely as rO = y10. The shafts processional velocity is denoted Ωwith the
unit T−1 and are deﬁned through Ω= fω and Ω= 1
T .
Solutions to the ﬁrst order equations must satisfy the circumferential continuity condi-
tions (θ = θ + 2π), and to satisfy this, the following solution format is assumed for the
dependent perturbation variables:
p1(z, τ, θ) =p1(z, τ, θ + 2π) = p1(z, τ)(cos θ + sin θ)
(3.63)
This should be thought of as an assumed solution for a sinusoidal response for the per-
turbed variables in the Rθ direction. It is Similar for the other dependent perturbation
variables the following is found when conducting a separation-of-variables solution for
the remaining perturbed variables:
¯p1 =p1e−j(ΩTτ)
¯u1 =u1e−j(ΩTτ)
¯
w1 =w1e−j(ΩTτ)
(3.64)
Here p1, u1 and w1 denotes the complex part of the ﬁrst order pressure, axial- and
circumferential velocities that are relative to the non-rotating coordinate system (x,y,z),
and their complex conjugate ¯p1, ¯u1 and ¯w1 are simply the complex solutions that are
relative to the rotating frame of reference previously deﬁned.
Now, by making a substitution of the perturbed ﬁlm thickness expression in Equa-
tion (3.62) and the assumed solution forms of complex equations in Equation (3.64),
which will eliminate τ as the dependent variable, then the ﬁrst order continuity and
momentum equations can be set up on the following matrix form for the three coupled
9 Here it should be stressed that h1 is not a function of z and the time dependency of h1 sorely arises from the two displacem
fact that rO = y is poorly described in D.Childs[14] however there is a very clear description of it in
Dietzen(1987)[15]
51
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
and complex ODE’s which now only depend on the axial coordinate z, as follow:
d
dz





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





+


q
h0
−jωT
0
h0A3θ
h0 (A2θ + jΘ)
−jh0b( L
R)
A3z + 2q
h2
0 + jΘ
A2z + jωT
h0
0







¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





= ...
r0
ϵ








−2q
h3
0 + jΘ
h0
−h0A1θ
−A1z −2q
f4 −j Θ
h2
0







(3.65)
where q is recalled as the angle in the tapered seal, which is similar to taking the slope
of the tapered walls. Hence it can be rewritten to the following, as:
d
dz





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





+
[A(z)]
z
}|
{


1
h0
dh0
dz
−jωT
0
h0A3θ
h0 (A2θ + jΘ)
−jh0b( L
R)
A3z + 1
h2
0
dh0
dz + jΘ
A2z + 1
h0 jωT
0


{x(z)}
z }| {





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





= ...
rO
ϵ

{g}
z
}|
{







−1
h3
0
dh0
dz + j Θ
h0
−h0A1θ
−

A1z + 1
h4
0
dh0
dz + j Θ
h2
0








(3.66)
where Θ = T (Ω−ωu0(z)) is a collection of variables to save space.
This formulation is similar to that of D.Childs(1993)[14] except for the terms in A2311
and A3112 and g313.
The derivation in Equation (3.66) is similar to that from Nordmann(1987) [32] to a wide
extend, when neglecting groove terms that he includes in his deﬁnition, and to some
extend also D.Childs(1983)[10] (for the more inﬂuential A23 ’typo’). Conclusionary it is
hence considered that the A matrix and b vector in 3.66 is otherwise correct.
A comparison can also be made to Childs and Kim (1985)[12] except this reference holds
a typo itself in A11 beside this it is identical.
For a non-tapered seal C0 = C1, then h0 = 1 thus having no change in height in the
axial direction making terms containing dh0/dz vanish, thus reducing the system (and
associated friction models)to:
11 −jh0b( L
R) here, instead of −j h0
b ( L
R) in Childs
12 A3z +
1
h2
0
dh0
dz + jΘ here, instead of A3z −
1
h2
0
dh0
dz + jΘ in Childs.
13
−

A1z +
1
h4
0
dh0
dz + j Θ
h2
0

here, instead of −

A1z −
1
h4
0
dh0
dz + j Θ
h2
0

in D.Childs
52
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
d
dz





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





+
[A(z)]
z
}|
{


0
−jωT
0
A3θ
A2θ + jΘ
−j
b ( L
R)
A3z + jΘ
A2z + jωT
0


{x(z)}
z }| {





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





= ...
rO
ϵ

{g}
z
}|
{





jΘ
−A1θ
−(A1z + jΘ)





(3.67)
This reduced model will be used for validating against D.Childs experiments in the
results section, and later when tapered angles are included the full model will be used.
3.8.1
Boundary Conditions to the ODE’s
Regardless of the full or reduced model it is clear that the system will be considered
of 3 equations with 3 unknowns, being the change in perturbed pressure , perturbed
circumferential bulk velocity and perturbed axial bulk velocity. Hence also 3 boundary
conditions are required to solve the system at hand.
Firstly the unknowns for the zeroth order equations are repeated from the previous
section as w0 = w0(z) , u0 = u0(z), and p0 = p0(z) which are all determined from the
zeroth order perturbation.
In Equation (3.67), two of the unknowns can be deﬁned directly from the Bernoulli’s
equation while assuming that the viscous pressure from inlet and outlet have a loss factor
connected to it. Hence, in the following the upstream pressure for the seal is given as
Ps and the downstream pressure is given as Pe, as:
Z = 0 :
Ps −P(0, θ, t) = ρ
2(1 + ζ)W 2(0, θ, t)
(3.68)
Z = L :
P(L, θ, t) −Pe = −ρ
2(1 + ζe)W 2(L, θ, t)
(3.69)
This is nondimenzionalized in similar fashion as previously where the continuity h0w0 = 1
has been used, which gives:
z = 0 :
ps−p(0) = 1
2(1 + ζ)w2
0(0)
(3.70)
z = L :
p(1)−pe = −1
2(1 + ζe)w2
0(1)
(3.71)
53
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 3. THE INCOMPRESSIBLE BULK FLOW THEORY
The third boundary condition can be deﬁned from the fact that the inlet swirl u0(z = 0)
is determined from the governing ﬂow conditions in the given seal’s inlet chamber, so to
say. D.Childs deﬁne this boundary from the fact that the seal motion does not perturb
the circumferential velocity at the very entrance of the seal, hence it is simply zero.
This gives the following set of boundary conditions:
¯p1(0) =−(1 + ζ) ¯w1(0)
h0(0)
(3.72)
¯p1(1) =−(1 + ζe) ¯w1(1)
h0(1)
(3.73)
¯u1(0) =0
(3.74)
From here the set of ODE’s can be solved either through the direct solver in MATLAB or
by a fourth order Runge Kutta method, or similar solution procedures. The system can
also be solved with Matlab using a boundary value problem solution package ’bvp5c’,
this has not been used in this study.
54
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
The Dynamic Characteristics of a
Seal
In the following ,the derivation of the equation of motion for a rigid rotor within a seal
derived. The derivation of the dynamic coeﬃcients are deducted from the pressure forces
and presented.
In the following it is assumed that the housing is inﬁnitively stiﬀand that the rotor has
no bending included, nor misalignment .
4.1
The Equation of Motion for Incompressible Seal
From the coupled system of equations form the ﬁrst order perturbation analysis, the
solution to the perturbed pressure distribution over the seal can be considered as forces
acting directly onto the rotor. When splitting this into its relative x and y coordinate
components one can deﬁne the following expression: Fx = fx −Wx and Fy = fy −Wy
where Wx and Wy denotes the static load acting onto the seal, and fx and fy denotes
the dynamic load acting onto the rotor
The dynamic deviation of force between the seal and the rotating rotor can be expressed
as a continuous function of position, velocity and acceleration components. Hence, when
expanding the expressions for Fx and Fy in a Taylor-series and neglecting higher order
terms, the following force components in the x and y directions are found when assuming
static equilibrium condition (F + W = 0) of the rotor inside the seal:
Fx + Wx = fx = ∂Fx
∂x x + ∂Fx
∂˙x ˙x + ∂Fx
∂¨x ¨x + ∂Fx
∂y y + ∂Fx
∂˙y ˙y + ∂Fx
∂¨y ¨y + ...
Fy + Wy = fy = ∂Fy
∂x x + ∂Fy
∂˙x ˙x + ∂Fy
∂¨x ¨x + ∂Fy
∂y y + ∂Fy
∂˙y ˙y + ∂Fy
∂¨y ¨y + ...
(4.1)
Here, F = F(x, y, ˙x, ˙y, ¨x, ¨y) and x and y are the reference relative to the static equilib-
rium position of the rotor in the seal. Retaining only the linear terms and excluding the
55
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. THE DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A SEAL
nonlinear terms in the model is considered appropriate according to governing literature
in the ﬁeld, furthermore also including the fact that nonlinear eﬀects like large unbal-
ance, shock motion, self-excited vibration limit cycles and impact phenomena are not of
interest in this study this is considered perfectly acceptable. Hence when dropping the
higher-order terms the reaction-force/seal-motion model of a seal and the shafts motion
takes the following general matrix form:
(
fx
fy
)
= −
Stiﬀning force
z
}|
{
"
kxx
kxy
kyx
kyy
# (
x
y
)
−
Damping force
z
}|
{
"
cxx
cxy
cyx
cyy
# (
˙x
˙y
)
−
Inertia force
z
}|
{
"
mxx
mxy
myx
myy
# (
¨x
¨y
)
(4.2)
Where kij = −∂Fi
∂xj , cij ≡−∂Fi
∂˙xj and mij ≡−∂Fi
∂¨xj are the known as the linearized seal
stiﬀness, damping and inertia coeﬃcients and are deﬁned at static equilibrium of the
rotor inside the seal.
To further justify the use of a linearized model for describing the dynamic properties one
should examine and understand th opposite situation where the governing vibrations
levels are "relatively" large.
Here "relatively" should be understand in terms of the
seal clearance and the shafts vibration cycle. If the shaft has reached or are close to
it’s "limit cycle" it is considered unstable.
An unstable shaft has a vibrational level
that should be considered "relatively large" and consequently non-linearities should be
included in the model. Lund [28] compared elliptical whirl orbit calculated on the basis of
these linearized coeﬃcients with a true non-linear model. He found that the amplitudes
no higher than 38% of the clearance, indicate close agreement between predicted and
experimental results. This should be hold against the fact that amplitudes larger than
40% of any given seal-clearance is bad engineering practice. Hence the justiﬁcation of
using a linearized model for extracting the dynamic coeﬃcients is accepted.
kxx is the direct work due to the horizontal displacement of the shaft (x-direction) and
kyy is the direct work due to the vertical displacement of the shaft (y-direction). This
is recognized as direct stiﬀness of the system. kxy can be said to be the the horizontal
work due to the vertical displacement of the rotor and kyx is the vertical work due to the
horizontal displacement. This is recognized as the cross-coupling stiﬀness of the system.
Similar goes for the damping and inertia terms.
Having this in mind, one can therefore rewrite Equation (4.2) by identifying that kxy +
kyz = 0 and cxy + cyz = 0.
Furthermore, mxy and myx are considered insigniﬁcant
and can therefore be neglected in the model. Also, if capital letters denote all terms
working direct onto the rotor and minuscule letters denote all cross-coupled terms, then
the following is given:
−
(
fx
fy
)
=
"
K
k
−k
K
# (
x
y
)
+
"
C
c
−c
C
# (
˙x
˙y
)
+
"
M
0
0
M
# (
¨x
¨y
)
(4.3)
• K is hence the direct stiﬀness that produce a radial force orientated inward against
the center if positive and outward if negative, as the outward force assist push the
rotor away from the center it is said to destabilize the system.
56
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. THE DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A SEAL
• k is the cross-coupled stiﬀness that produce a force tangential to the rotor the
direction of this depends on the sign. If the combination of the cross-coupling is
kxy > 0 then kyx < 0 and the vector pushes forward with the whirl direction, this
is said to be slightly stabilizing as it would work in the trajectory of the motion.
• C is the direct damping that produce a tangential force normal to the rotor deﬂec-
tion vector which oppose the whirl velocity direction if positive and will remove
energy from the system. If this coeﬃcient is negative the force would be in the
direction of the whirl and add energy to the system instead.
• c is the cross-coupled damping that produces a radial force outwards to the rotor
if positive. The sign of the vector determine weather the eﬀect is stiﬀening or
de-stiﬀening. If the combination of the cross-coupling is "cxy > 0,cyx < 0" then the
vector is stiﬀening.
The inﬂuence of the added mass term is discussed and analyzed in Appendix 3 where a
comparison between a typical compressible and incompressible working ﬂuid is compared
to show the importance of [M] in seal analysis when using incompressible ﬂuids.
The radial forces (Direct K, Cross-coupled c) have only little eﬀect of the actual stability
of a rotor, these coeﬃcients mainly aﬀect the natural frequency and location of the
critical speeds in the rotor dynamic system.
The tangential forces (Cross-coupled k, Direct C) only have little eﬀect of the natural
frequencies as these mainly aﬀect the stability and ampliﬁcation factors at the rotors
critical speeds and are therefore considered the main destabilizing forces.
4.2
Dynamic Characterization of the Incompressible Seal
Having obtained the pressure-ﬁeld solution of the incompressible seal in Equation (3.67),
the solution for the dynamic coeﬃcients is now sought.
The perturbation reaction-force components that acts onto the rotor due to the motion
of the shaft is simpliﬁed by performing the integration at a time when the shaft center
is sorely along the Y-axis, or in other words when the time is t = 0. This is not what is
illustrated in Figure 4.1, where the general motion of the rotor inside the seal is depicted.
Depicted is however the forces acting onto the seal from the perturbation showing how
the radial force acting out of the normal of the seal, and the tangential force acting
in the direction of the whirl motion of the seal. The magnitude of the two deﬁnes the
actual component of the force in the x and y direction.
57
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. THE DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A SEAL
X
Y
rO
Ωt
ω
fθ1(f)
fr1(f)
FY 1
FX1
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the whirl of the rotor where the frame of reference follows the
position
Applying the radial perturbation the numerical solution can be written on the following
form as in agreement with the notation of D.Childs(1993)[14]:





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





= rO
ϵ





ϕ1c + jϕ1s
ϕ2c + jϕ2s
ϕ3c + jϕ3s





(4.4)
Here ϕi denotes the magnitude of the complex part of the i’th state ¯w1, ¯u1 and ¯p1
respectively, to the rotating reference frame1. Furthermore tan(θi) = ϕis/ϕic where θi
is the i’th ange between the radial rotating axis and the i’th state. This is depicted in
Figure 4.2 where the state-vector for ¯p1 is visualized with its relative vector components
p1c and p1s.
From here substitution of the shaft’s center coordinates into the governing rotor-dynamic
equation of motion gives the following terms that can be expressed as:
FX1 = −ϵ
L
Z
0
2π
Z
0
P1 cos θR dθdZ
(4.5)
FY 1 = −ϵ
L
Z
0
2π
Z
0
P1 sin θR dθdZ
(4.6)
Here P1 is the perturbed pressure which is physically given at the rotor surface inside the
seal. The two equations can be re-written in the non-dimensional form, by introducing
1 ϕic and ϕis has the actual meaning of ϕi · cos(θ) as the cousins part, and ϕi · sin(θ) as the sinus part.
58
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. THE DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A SEAL
the following parameters:
P1 = ¯p1ρW 2
0
z = Z
L
F0 = 2LR∆P
∆P = Cd
ρW 2
0
2
(4.7)
Where F0 is the pre-forcing acting on the rotor inside the seal, also recognized as the load
from journal bearing theory, Cd is a discharge coeﬃcient. This coeﬃcient is not discussed
much in the theory on the ﬁeld2, U.Yucel(1996)[41] mentions that is a coeﬃcient ﬁtted
experimentally, however in this case, since Cd is the only unknown in this analysis it is
simply isolated from the expression and recognized as Cd = 2∆P/(ρW 2
0 ).
By using this onto Equation (4.6), and by applying continuity in the circumferential
direction, the dependency of θ vanish, and re-writing the pressure in similar fashion as
for ϕ from Equation (4.4) the force can thus be expressed as the following:
FX1 = −ϵ
Cd
F0
1
Z
0
2π
Z
0
p1(z, θ, τ) · cos θδθδz
FX1
F0
= −ϵ · π
Cd
1
Z
0
p1c(z, τ)δz
(4.8)
FY 1 = −ϵ
Cd
F0
1
Z
0
2π
Z
0
p1(z, θ, τ) · sin θδθδz
FY 1
F0
= −ϵ · π
Cd
1
Z
0
p1s(z, τ)δz
(4.9)
Now, by assessing the forces in the cylindrical r−θ polar coordinates plane the reaction-
force component can be expressed as terms that are precessing with the whirling speed
Ω. Therefore the sum of the radial and tangential forces becomes:
Fr1 + jFθ1
F0
=(FX1 + jFY 1)
F0
e−j(Ωτ)
= −ϵ π
Cd
1
Z
0
(p1c + jp1s)e−j(Ωτ)dz
(4.10)
Applying the knowledge that t = 0, then gives the following force expression:
Fr1 + jFθ1
F0
= −ϵ π
Cd
1
Z
0
(p1c + jp1s)dz
= −ϵ π
Cd
1
Z
0
¯p1dz
(4.11)
2
D.Childs(1993)[14] never mentions the relation to Cd which is an un-introduced parameter in his
work. He also uses ¯V 2 which is also a non-introduced constant in his work but is in-fact the average
axial velocity in the z-direction, W 2
0 .
59
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. THE DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A SEAL
Which gives, when inserting the deﬁnition of ¯p1 the following expression for the reaction-
force components:
Fr1 + jFθ1
F0
= −ϵ π
Cd
rO
ϵ

1
Z
0
(ϕ3c(z, τ) + jϕ3s(z, τ))dz
(4.12)
From this it is seen that the perturbation constant ϵ goes out and when dividing with rO
and taking the real and imaginary part of the two sides, it yields the following component
force deﬁnitions parallel and normal to the displacement vector, as:
ℜe
Fr1 + jFθ1
F0rO

= Fr1
F0rO
= −π
Cd
1
Z
0
ϕ3c(z, τ)dz
(4.13)
ℑm
Fr1 + jFθ1
F0rO

= Fθ1
F0rO
= −π
Cd
1
Z
0
ϕ3s(z, τ)dz
(4.14)
Which is a frequency response solution to the reaction-force components of the system.
The direction of these can be seen in Figure 4.2.
X
Y
Re
rO
Im
p1s
p1c
¯p1
θ1
Figure 4.2: Sketch of the coordinate system for the reaction forces and the perturbed
pressure distribution around the seal where blue illustrate the restoring where the blue
and the red sphere illustrate any given pressure distribution
4.2.1
Relationship between forces and Equation of Motion
If the force/motion relationship in any way conforms to the form of the equation of
motion from Equation (4.3) the following can be stated when conducting a least-square
60
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. THE DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A SEAL
curve-ﬁt of the real and imaginary parts versus frequency:
Fr1(f)/rO = −K∗−fc∗+ f2M∗
(4.15)
Fθ1(f)/rO =
k∗−fC∗
(4.16)
Where the superscript asterisk denotes non-dimensional values. Here the constant term
is recognized as being equivalent to stiﬀness, the linear term is damping and the quadric
term is inertia(added mass).
All the components are expressed as being a function of f = Ω/ω. This the equation
above provides the system with a frequency response solution for the reaction force
coeﬃcients. 3
It is noticed that when the excitation frequency is synchronous, f = Ω
ω = 1 then the
dynamic coeﬃcients reduced to the following simple expression:
Fr1(1)/rO = −K∗−c∗+ M∗
(4.17)
Fθ1(1)/rO =
k∗−C∗
(4.18)
From here the dynamic coeﬃcients can be obtained by calculating the two force com-
ponents Fr1(f) and Fθ1(f) for a frequency range of 0 ≤f ≤2. This speciﬁc range have
been chosen to with the ﬁndings of D.Childs [11]. However, ﬁrstly the corresponding
non-dimensional coeﬃcients K∗, k∗, C∗, c∗, M∗for the rotordynamic system are related
to the dimensional parts, through:
K∗= k∗=K
¯Cr
F0
N/m · m
N

= [-]
⇒
K = K∗F0
¯Cr
 N
m

(4.19)
C∗= c∗=C
¯Crω
F0
Ns/m · m · rad/s
N

= [-]
⇒
C = C∗F0
¯Crω
Ns
m

(4.20)
M∗= m∗=M
¯Crω2
F0
"
Ns/m · m · rad/s2
N
#
= [-]
⇒
M = M∗F0
¯Crω2
"
Ns2
m
#
(4.21)
Which are re-dimensionalized according to Brennen(1994)[9] and D.Childs(1993)[14]
From this a whirling frequency ratio (WFR) of the system can be deﬁned from the
tangential force on the rotor as:
WFR =
k
CΩ[−]
(4.22)
Where it is recalled that a positive k and C is in the direction of the whirl. Consequently,
if the WFR is below 1 then Ft is a stabilizing force and if it above 1 it is a destabilizing
force.
3
With a predeﬁned seal geometry (L, R, Cr), coeﬃcients (ρ, ϵ, µ) and operation conditions (∆P, ω)
then the excitation frequency ΩT is the only independent variable.
61
==PAGE:64==
Part III
Implementation
&
Results
62
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Numerical Implementation using
the Finite Diﬀerence Method
In the following section the numerical implementation of the 1D ﬁnite diﬀerence method
will be presented.
First a ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme will be formulated which is used to numerically evaluate
the derivative terms in the zero and ﬁrst order governing equations that are to be eval-
uated. Secondly a ﬁnite diﬀerence representation of the physical domain is deﬁned in
1D. Finally the algorithms and associated procedures used in the study is presented as
a pseudo-code1 and discussed.
The algorithm developed solves the coupled and nonlinear one-dimensional, bulk-ﬂow,
incompressible, Navier Stokes equations to predict the static and rotordynamic charac-
teristics of a straight and tapered annular seal, in centered and eccentric positions.
While a perturbation analysis yields a zeroth-order solution for static ﬂow rate and
pressure distribution a ﬁrst-order solution for perturbed velocity and pressure ﬁelds due
to rotor-to-housing relative motion provide the dynamic coeﬃcients which are straight
forward in terms of implementation and not discussed.
5.1
Discrete Formulations of the FD-scheme and Grids
The seal’s domain is deﬁned from, just after the inlet of the seal to just before the
outlet of the seal, and in-between an evenly spaced grid is deﬁned with n number of
nodes. Where ∆z is a dimensionless ﬁnite-diﬀerence grid size over the length of the seal
z = L/Z.
For the study the discretization of the seal is quite straight forward since it is in 1D.
The implementation takes into account the possibility of a grid which is not uniform in
spacing but in the following the system is described as if the spacing were in fact uniform
over the length of the seal.
1 Contact the author for the actual bulk-ﬂow code.
63
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
The size of ∆z is bounded by the distance between the two neighboring grid points in
the z-direction. The gird-spacing ∆z is kept constant at all time and with a spacing
given as ∆z = (n −1)/z between each node. Hence for the example given in Figure 5.2
there would be 5 nodes with a spacing of ∆z = 1/4.
Each node point in the spacial grid, is considered a ﬁnite diﬀerence point, at which the
governing equations are to be evaluated. Hence the equations will have to be discretized
and evaluated over the spacial domain for all variable parameters. The calculation of
the gradient sought on any given point can be expressed with the r −term Taylor series
expansion of its function denoted φ(z) about its point of interest zi while evaluating each
point of the given stencil, according to H.Bingham et al.(2014) [7] with:
φ(z) =
∞
X
m=0
(z −zi)m
m!
φm
i
(5.1)
Taylor expansion around the point has the form:


1
−1
1/2
1
0
0
1
1
1/2







∆z0φ0(z0)
∆z1φ1(z0)
∆z2φ2(z0)





=





φ(z0 −∆z)
φ(z0)
φ(z0 + ∆z)





(5.2)
where φ denotes the function and the i’th superscript denotes the i’th spacial derivative
to that function. When solving this Taylor expansion for the coeﬃcients, the following
expression is then obtained:





∆z0φ0(z0)
∆z1φ1(z0)
∆z2φ2(z0)





=


0
1
0
−1/2
0
1/2
1
−2
1







φ(z0 −∆z)
φ(z0)
φ(z0 + ∆z)





(5.3)
When considering the continuous ﬁrst derivative function φ(z) the following three dif-
ferent ﬁnite diﬀerence formulas can be developed for the ﬁrst order derivative:
φ1(z0) = ∂φ(z)
∂z
(z0) ≈lim
∆z→0
φ(z0 + ∆z) −φ(z0 −∆z)
2∆z1
CDS
(5.4)
φ2(z0) = ∂2φ(z)
∂z2
(z0) ≈lim
∆z→0
φ(z0 −∆z) −2φ(z0) + φ(z0 + ∆z)
∆z2
(5.5)
The ﬁrst expression from Equation (5.4) is recognized as the centered ﬁnite diﬀerence
coeﬃcient scheme(CDS)2 formula of the ﬁrst order derivative. Equation (5.5) express
the second order CDS, which is not used in this study and is thus obsolete. Throughout
the study a three-point stencil has been found suﬃcient in terms of converging rate hence
no higher order stencils have been implemented.
2 Second-order approximation
64
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
In similar fashion can an expression can be developed for what is known as the for-
ward3(FDS) and backward4(BDS) ﬁnite diﬀerence coeﬃcient scheme, result in the fol-
lowing:
φ1(z0) = ∂φ(z)
∂z
(z0) ≈lim
∆z→0
φ(z0 + ∆z) −φ(z0)
∆z1
FDC
(5.6)
≈lim
∆z→0
φ(z0) −φ(z0 −∆z)
∆z1
BDC
(5.7)
They are obtained by using a Taylor expansion of the function φ(z0+∆z) and φ(z0−∆z)
where the leading term of the truncation error (approximation error) for the central-
diﬀerence formula is proportional to ∆z2, hence decreasing ∆z with a factor 2, the
truncation error should proportionally decrease with a factor 4.
This technique can be used to solve the momentum equations on a discretized domain
of dimensions 1 × n spanning over the z-coordinate as shown in Figure 5.2.
The three derivatives will in practice give three diﬀerent approximate results for the
same derivative.
The derivative is conducted using a diﬀerential operator that works in the z direction
(since it is in 1D this will be the only diﬀerential operator), and denoted Dz, as:
Dz = ∂
∂z
(5.8)
This derivative operator is constructed in a way that it uses the upwind diﬀerence at the
left boundary and downwind diﬀerence at the right boundary, which give a much better
result for the boundaries than with a central diﬀerence scheme without one of the side
evaluational points 5. This is visualized in Figure 5.1.
UDS
CDS
CDS
CDS
BDS
CDS
Figure 5.1: General scheme for a 3-point stencil w. n=6, red indicate the stencil center
postion at which it is being evaluated while the empty circle shows the points the scheme
include in it’s evaluation
3 First-order approximation
4 First-order approximation
5 See Chapter 9 for a discussion about the
validation of such scheme
65
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
5.1.1
Consistency and Stability of FD grid
The most important property of a FD-scheme is to be consistent, stable, and to converge
towards a solution as the spacial grid ∆z →0. In-order to achieve this, ﬁrstly consistency
is considered.
A FD-scheme is considered to be consistent with a ODE if the truncation error between
a FD-scheme and the ODE vanishes as the spacial grid space goes towards zero. Hence,
|ODE −FD| ≈0 for ∆z →0.
The most natural choice of the FD grid for the spacial formulation is the conventional
even-grid in which all bulk velocities and pressure-force components are located at each
grid point, however this is not always stable. A FD-scheme is considered to be stable
if the exact solution to the ODE goes toward a given result without "wiggle" of ex-
treme ﬂuctuations. There are particular applications, e.g. anisotropic media or source
dynamics, in which diﬀerent grid positions for diﬀerent evaluation components pose a
considerable problem in terms of stability. Therefore, a shifted grid has been also used.
In this type of shifted grid all bulk velocity components share the same grid position
and all the pressure components share some other grid position in-between.
The proof of the convergence of an FD-scheme is not a trivial problem, in general. If
an analytical solution is not possible to compare against it follows from Lax equivalence
theorem6 that a convergence is to be considered achieved if the FD-scheme is both
consistent and stable. However, even though no analytical solution exist to bulk-ﬂow
seal analysis it is still sought to validate the scheme against an analytical solution in
Section 6.1.
5.2
Discrete Formulation of the Zero-order Momentum Equations
When assessing the two momentum equations derived for the zeroth order solution it is
evident that they are coupled through the circumferential bulk velocity u0(z) and the
average axial bulk velocity W0 which is present through σs0 and σr0.
du0
dz = −1
2 (u0us0σs0 + ur0σr0(u0 −1))
∂p0
∂z = −
1
2h2
0
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0) + 1
h3
0
∂h0
∂z
(5.9)
The two momentum equations are simpliﬁed by the utilizing continuity equation in
Equation (3.30) stating that w0 =
1
h0 .
Due to the nature of the system, the two equations are coupled through the circumfer-
ential bulk velocity. This means that the change in pressure will be a function of the
circumferential bulk ﬂow distribution over the seal. Since the circumferential velocity is
independent of the pressure in the circumferential momentum equation, this equation
can be solved for alone, described as ’step 1’ and then be used to solved for the change
in pressure as ’step 2’.
6 can be found with : doi:10.1002/cpa.3160090206
66
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
5.2.1
Step 1 - Discrete Formulation of the Continuity Momentum Equation
For the continuity momentum equation the solution to solve for is du0/dz and is sought
at every node as seen in Figure 5.2. All parameters in the momentum equation work as
vectors deﬁned from z = 0..1 and every n’th node include the information of the n’th
parameter. Like sa for the tangential velocity distribtution shown in the Figure.
u0(1)
u0(2)
un(n)
∆z
Figure 5.2: Illustration of the seal represented by a 1D ﬁnite diﬀerence domain.
The solution procedure can be written on the form, where the expression has been split
up into terms that are directly dependent of u0 and terms that are not7:
α1
z}|{
d
dz
u0
|{z}
x
+
α2
z
}|
{
1
2σs0us0 u0
|{z}
x
+
α3
z
}|
{
1
2σr0ur0 u0
|{z}
x
=
β1
z
}|
{
1
2σr0ur0
(5.10)
Each constant is put into a sparse diagonal, and then by collecting constants of [A] and
{b}, as:
[A]n×n =α1
n×n · Dz + α2
n×n + α3
n×n
{b}1×n =β1
1×n
(5.11)
where α1
n×n contains ones, but is included for generalization of the procedure.
Boundary conditions will be imposed to the pre-whirl entrance velocity as:


1
0
· · ·
0
a2,1
a2,2
· · ·
a2,n
...
...
...
...
an,1
an,2
· · ·
an,n




x1
x2
...
xn


=


b1 = u0(0)
b2
...
bn


(5.12)
From here the system can then be solved for using ﬁxed point iterations (Picard) on
the system [A]u0 = {b}.
Since [A] and {b} are both dependent on u0 it has to be
solved through an iterative procedure over the velocity component until the relative
error |u0,new ≈u0,old| approaches zero, like expressed in the following pseudo-code:
7 This is not entirely true since the terms σr0 and ur0 include u0 as previously described
67
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
Algorithm 1 Circumferential Momentum Equation
1: procedure incom_0order_u0.m
2:
u0,old = {1} vector of ones
3:
γ = 0.1 Relaxation Parameter
4:
while u0,old ̸= u0,new do
5:
[σs, σr, us0, ur0] =FrictionFactor(u0,old)
Algorithm 2
6:
[A] = α1Dz + α2 + α3 Set up coeﬃcient matrix
7:
{b} = β1
8:
{u0,new} = [A]\{b}
9:
[A](1, :) = 0 (Impose BC)
10:
[A](1, 1) = 1 (Impose BC)
11:
{b}(1) = u0BC (Impose BC - inlet pre-whirl)
12:
{u0,old} = {u0,new} · γ + {u0,old}(1 −γ)
If Algorithm 1 does not have a relaxation factor γ of the newly found velocity proﬁle,
the solution will converge to becomes unstable. γ should be set between 0 and 1 where
a value 1 would be equivalent to accept 100% of the new step 8.
From Figure 2.2, it is seen that even though the volumetric ﬂow rate are largely domi-
nated by the clearance that works cubic, the collected constant of friction, seal length,
and density would still change ˙Q with a not insigniﬁcant value.
The ﬂow rate is a function of the friction factor which is calculated in Algorithm 2. The
friction is a function the average axial velocity and the reynolds number, which both are
a function of the ﬂow rate in the seal. Hence the friction is coupled with the unknown
ﬂow rate and will therefore have to be solved iteratively.
The friction of the seal is a component of both rotor and stator side and in practice one
would have to make a convergence loop over both fs and fr, but instead of doing this
one can without the loss of truncation error take the mean of the two vectors, as the
following simpliﬁcation:
¯¯fnew = 1
2
 N
X
1..N
fs + fr
N
!
(5.13)
where ¯¯fnew is a scalar and the double bar superscript therefore denotes the mean value
of the rotor and stator friction vectors.
The friction algorithm follows the procedure of Algorithm 1 and is initialized with ¯¯fold
as9:
8 The author received contentiously good results with a relaxation of γ = 0.1 or 90% relaxation. Since the computational tim
frictionZeroOrder_Moody is a simple function calculating the friction factor as being expressed from
the theory section
68
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
Algorithm 2 Friction Factor Algorithm
1: procedure frictionFactor.m
2:
{u0}old i’th velocity coming from Algorithm 1
3:
¯¯fold = 1
4:
while ¯¯fold ̸= ¯¯fnew do
5:
˙Q = 2πR
r
∆P ¯C3r
foldρL
6:
W0 =
˙Q
2πR ¯Cr
7:
Rez0 = ρ ¯CrW0
µ
8:
b = Rω
W0
9:
[fs,fr]=frictionZeroOrder_Moody(W0, Rez0, b)
10:
¯¯fnew = 1
2
 ¯fs + ¯fr

11:
us0 =
q
{w0}2 + b2 · {u0}2
old
12:
ur0 =
p
{w0}2 + b2 · ({u0}old −1)2
13:
σs = fs

L
¯Cr

14:
σr = fr

L
¯Cr

5.2.2
Step 2 - Discrete formulation of the Axial momentum equation
For the pressure distribution a slightly modiﬁed spacial grid is necessary . If using the
same scheme as the one obtained for the circumferential bulk velocity the solution will
"wiggle" and become numerically unstable as described by Wendt(1992)[16].
Hence a new scheme is developed which is shifted, and two ghost-points added. This
practically means that the pressure is to be evaluated as p0(i) −p0(i −1)/2 in order to
have consistency with the original grid.
u0(1)
u0(2)
un(n)
∆z
pghost
pghost
p0(1)
p0(2)
p0(n)
Figure 5.3: Shifted grid illustration for the pressure evaluation points.
The axial pressure distribution is coupled with the circumferential velocity of which a
result for, is achieved in Algorithm 1. And since the nature of the axial momentum
equation is linear a solution procedure is much more straight forwards.
The solution procedure can be written on the form, where the expression has been split
69
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
up into terms that are directly dependent of u0 and terms that are not10:
∂p0
∂z = −
1
2h2
0
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0) + 1
h3
0
∂h0
∂z
(5.14)
α1
z}|{
d
dz
p0
|{z}
x
=
β1
z
}|
{
−1
2h2
0
us0σs0
β2
z
}|
{
−1
2h2
0
ur0σr0 +
β3
z
}|
{
1
h3
0
∂
∂z h0
(5.15)
Each constant is put into a sparse diagonal, and then by collecting constants of [A] and
{b}, as:
[A]n×n =α1
n×n · Dz
{b}1×n =β1
1×n + β2
1×n + β3
1×n · Dz
(5.16)
where, for an un-tapered seal β3
1×n · Dz →0 as there is no change of ﬁlm-thickness in
the axial direction.
Boundary conditions will be imposed as the pressure exit forced to be zero, as:


1
a1,2
· · ·
a1,n
a2,1
a2,2
· · ·
a2,n
...
...
...
...
0
0
· · ·
1




x1
x2
...
xn


=


b1
b2
...
bn = 0


(5.17)
In this way the pressure will from that point be developed through the seal. As the axial
momentum equation is linear the solution procedure is straight forward, as:
Algorithm 3 Axial Momentum Equation
1: procedure incom_0order_p0.m
2:
[{u0}] =incom_0order_u0(u0BC)
Algorithm 1
3:
[σs, σr, us0, ur0] =FrictionFactor(u0,old)
Algorithm 2
4:
[A] = α1Dz Set up coeﬃcient matrix
5:
{b} = β1 + β2 + β3Dz
6:
[A](end, :) = 0 (Impose BC)
7:
[A](end, end) = 1 (Impose BC)
8:
{b}(end) = 0 (Impose BC - outlet normalized pressure)
9:
{p0} = [A]\{b}
5.3
First order - implementation
This system is, in contrast to the previously "loosly coupled" system of equations now a
"fully coupled system". This kind of system will have to be solved in another fashion.
10 This is not entirely true since the terms σr0 and ur0 include u0 as previously described
70
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
Recalling the system derived from the theory section it had the following form:
d
dz





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





+ [αij]





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





= rO
ϵ





β1
β2
β3





(5.18)
Practically it can be rewritten on the following:
([A] + Dz) {x} = {b}
(5.19)
where [A] is a 3n × 3n matrix and {b} is a 1 × n vector holding the information about
the system as:
[A]3n×3n =


α11
n×n + Dz
α12
n×n
0
α21
n×n
α22
n×n + Dz
α23
n×n
α31
n×n
α32
n×n
α33
n×n + Dz


{b}1×3n =rO
ϵ





β1
1×n
β2
1×n
β3
1×n





(5.20)
The numerical implementation is done where the discrete values from each FD point
from each ij’th cell of A are put in diagonal form and collected into a larger system
matrix including the derivative components as seen in Figure 5.4afor a system for n = 5.
As the system contains of three ﬁrst order derivatives, also three boundary conditions is
needed, these are deﬁned in Equation (3.74), and repeated here for simplicity:
¯p1(0) =−(1 + ζ) ¯w1(0)
h0(0)
¯p1(1) =−(1 + ζe) ¯w1(1)
h0(1)
¯u1(0) =0
And after imposing these to the system seen in Figure 5.4a one will obtain something
similar Figure 5.4b for the [A] matrix and by imposing u1(0), p1(0) and p1(1) to the
vector {b} which is not visualized.
71
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
(a)
(b) u0 = 0.5
Figure 5.4: A matrix before and after imposing boundary conditions. each square is of
the size n×n hence the entire matrix is 3n×3n. Here the system is visualized for n = 5.
Since ¯w1 is both a part of the imposed BC and the solution which is solved for it is
necessary to use an iterative procedure as described in Algorithm 4 to obtain a converged
result for the pressure ¯p1, beside that, as explained, ﬁrstly the circumferential momentum
equation is used to approximate an expression for the velocity component u0.
72
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
Algorithm 4 Fist order Perturbation Equations
1: procedure incom_1order.m
2:
[{u0}]
=incom_0order_u0(u0BC)
(Algorithm
1)
[{p0}] =incom_0order_p0(u0BC)
(Algorithm 3)
3:
[σs, σr, us0, ur0] =FrictionFactor(u0)
(Algorithm 2)
4:
[A] = α1Dz Set up coeﬃcient matrix
5:
{b} = β1 + β2 + β3Dz
6:
{w1}old = {1}
7:
γ = 0.1
8:
while {w1}old ̸= {w1}new do
9: Inlet pre-whirl
10:
[A](N + 1, :) = 0 (Impose BC)
11:
[A](N + 1, N + 1) = 1 (Impose BC)
12:
{b}(N + 1) = u1(0)BC (Impose BC - outlet)
13: Inlet Pressure
14:
[A](2N + 1, :) = 0 (Impose BC)
15:
[A](2N + 1, 2N + 1) = 1 (Impose BC)
16:
{b}(2N + 1) = p1(0)BC (Impose BC - outlet)
17: Outlet Pressure
18:
[A](3N, :) = 0 (Impose BC)
19:
[A](3N, 3N) = 1 (Impose BC)
20:
{b}(3N) = p1(1)BC (Impose BC - outlet)
21: Solve
22:
{x} = [A]\{b}
23:
{w1}new = {x}(N + 1 : 2N)
24:
{w1}new = {w1}new · γ + {w1}old(1 −γ)
25:
{u1} = {x}(1 : N)
26:
{w1} = {x}(N + 1 : 2N)
27:
{p1} = {x}(2N + 1 : 3N)
5.4
Numerical Integration method
All integrations over the seal, throughout the study, is numerically performed by the
means of the Trapezoidal Method which is implemented by following the deﬁnition of
Chapra(2012)[37]. This method approximate the integration at hand by dividing the
area to integrate down into a ﬁnite number of trapezoids. Hence for an integration with
n+1 evenly spaced points as described in Figure 5.2, then the integration approximation
73
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 5. NUMERICAL IMPLEMENTATION USING THE FINITE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
can be deﬁned as:
b
Z
a
f(x)dx ≈b −a
2N
N
X
n=1
(fxn + f(xn+1))
=b −a
2N [f(x1) + 2f(x2) + ... + 2f(xN) + f(xN+1)]
(5.21)
where it is seen that the spacing between each node from Figure 5.2 is equivalent to the
constant value (b −a)/N = ∆z. It should be stressed that, for a non-constant spacing
this method is no longer applicable. Furthermore it should be noted that, this being an
approximation, truncation error using this method is preset, however it is considered to
be insigniﬁcant.
74
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 6
Validation of FD-Scheme using
Short Journal Bearing Theory
6.1
Implementation and validation of Reynolds Equation for Journal
bearing
All validation of the numerical schemes conducted in the previous chapter, in terms of
convergence rates, stability and truncation error, were done against using Ocvirk’s(1952)[33]
short-bearing approximations for a full journal bearing pressure distribution. The un-
derlying reason for doing this is that it provides an analytical example to compare the
numerical implementation against.
Consequently making it possible to validate and
verify the numerical scheme and method in this study.
Therefore in order to verify that a code is working it is convenient to verify it against
geometrically and physically very similar systems such as journal bearing designs. Here
both analytical solutions and good and well-proved experimental ﬁndings are available.
Thus making in, in terms of validation purposes, much more usable. therefore one could
ague that a critical point of understanding the physical and numerical behavior of a plain
seal is to ﬁrstly throughly understand the physics behind that of the journal bearings.
S.Morosi (2011)[29] conducted a 2D ﬁnite diﬀerence numerical implementation for ﬁnd-
ing the dynamic coeﬃcients from a journal bearing with a compressible ﬂuid using the
same numerical method as in this study. He validated his numerical implementation the
work of Arghir et al. (2001)[3] and (2006)[2] who, instead of 2D ﬁnite diﬀerence scheme
used the triangle element 2D ﬁnite volume method along with later experimental vali-
dation of a compressible ﬂow in a journal bearing.
All this has been analyzed, veriﬁed and validated by Jonas Lauridsen & Mikkel W.
Grauballe (2014) [19] 1. Same results were obtained both against Ocvirks short bear-
ing analysis and Arghir et al.’s numerical and experimental analysis. Thus the ﬁnite
diﬀerence schemes and the numerical approach in this study is considered validated.
1 Which is an unpublished report that can be obtained either by contact to the author or following the
link mentioned in [19]
75
==PAGE:78==
Chapter 7
Results
In the following the results obtained from the numerical implementation of the zero order
and ﬁrst order perturbation analysis for a straight and tapered seal.
The result section is split in two parts, where the ﬁrst part asses zero order equations
governing a plain seal analysis and the second part, the zero order equations governing
a tapered seal analysis.
A third part would have been the results for a ﬁrst order
perturbation for a straight seal, however the results showed to be wrong and are not
included.
Speciﬁcally the numerically found results will be compared against the following litera-
ture:
• The straight seal analysis is conducted with comparison against D.Childs(1993)[14]
of which the bulk ﬂow theory is made around. Further validation has been con-
ducted against V.Lucas et al.(1996)[27] who follows a diﬀerent implementation
procedure than that of D.Childs.
• The tapered seal analysis is conducted with comparison against Linsey(2000)[26]
who made excessive analysis in experimental studies of the axial taper of seals.
It is recalled that actual numerical convergence studies has been carried out in M.Grauballe
and J.Lauridsen(2014)[19] and where consistency, stability and convergence rates has
been validated and veriﬁed against short journal bearing analysis.
76
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.1
Straight Seal Analysis - Zero-order Perturbation
Firstly the straight seals zero order momentum equations are sought validated against
literature, secondly an analysis is carried out for the friction factor behavior under certain
conditions.
7.1.1
Circumferential Momentum Equation - Zero order
The circumferential momentum equation is dependent on a inlet condition for the pre-
swirl of the ﬂuid and is assumed to be a known rate. This pre-swirl is deﬁned as u0(z = 0)
and has great potential inﬂuence on the determination of the friction factors and the
later forces derived in the ﬁrst order perturbation analysis.
Firstly the zero order circumferential momentum equation is repeated. Here all param-
eters are kept constant except for the initial conditions u0(0), which is evaluated in the
range u0(0) = U(0)
Rω = [0; 1]:
du0
dz = −1
2 (u0us0σs0 + ur0σr0(u0 −1))
(7.1)
The output of this analysis will be the development of u0 over the length of the seal. This
equation is evaluated for ﬁve diﬀerent initial conditions and two diﬀerent discretization
in order to give the reader an indication of the convergence rate of the zero order system.
The analysis was carried out using the data of Table 7.1 where all parameters are kept
constant.
Table 7.1: Dimensions and Conditions associated with Dataset:1
Dimensions
Conditions
Rotor
Stator
D
L
ϵr
ϵs
C0
C1
ζ
ζe
Friction
µ
∆P
ω
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
model
[Pa S]
[bar]
[rpm]
152.4
152.4
0
0
0.381
0.381
0.1
1
Moodys
0.0013
35
3000
The ﬁrst discretization is very rough (5 nodes) as visualized in Figure 7.1. Here it is
evident that the evolution of the circumferential slope has in fact fully converged but
is very coarse. The asymptotes all converge towards the same circumferential velocity.
This proves to indicate that for even very few degrees of freedom, the system still predict
a good physical representation of the actual behavior.
By increasing the number of nodes to a very ﬁne resolution (500 nodes) the result as
shown in Figure 7.2a give the same result in terms of where the asymptote converges
towards.
This is a good identiﬁcation that the result converges very fast towards a
solution, and that the number of nodes is almost neglectable. The only inﬂuence the
mesh has on the solution is on how coarse the development is towards this asymptote.
77
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
u0(z)= U0(z)/(R!)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Circumferential Velocity u0(z)
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #1
BC: u0(0) =       0
BC: u0(0) =      1/3
BC: u0(0) =      1/2
BC: u0(0) =      2/3
BC: u0(0) =       1
Figure 7.1: Coarse mesh (5 nodes) of circumferential velocity evolution through a plain
seal
No further analysis will be done in terms of mesh analysis and the +500 nodes are used
for the rest of the study.
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
u0(z)= U0(z)/(R!)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Circumferential Velocity u0(z)
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #1
BC: u0(0) =       0
BC: u0(0) =      1/3
BC: u0(0) =      1/2
BC: u0(0) =      2/3
BC: u0(0) =       1
(a) Fine mesh (500 nodes)
(b) Circumferential velocity for three initial con-
ditions from V.Lucas et al.(1996)[27] who com-
pared his ﬁndings against D.Childs(1993)[14]
Figure 7.2: Circumferential velocity change in axial direction - zeroth order incompress-
ible seal - Analysis made for ϵr = ϵs = 0
78
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
From the assessing the results of Figure 7.2 in terms of the physical behavior of the
circumferential ﬂow, the following is found:
• No Pre-Swirl When not having any pre-swirl u0(z = 0) = 0 it is seen that the
circumferential ﬂow through the seal will start to gain velocity. This is due to the
rotor "pulling" the ﬂow as it progresses through the seal, at some point the ﬂow is
fully developed towards an asymptote.
• Maximum Pre swirl: Similar is observed when having a fully developed pre-
swirl. where the ﬂow will decrease in velocity through the seal due to the rotor
spinning with lower velocity than the ﬂow. In both cases it is seen that regardless
of the initial-conditions the circumferential ﬂow goes towards the same asymptote
u0(z = 1) = 0.5 as the ﬂow progresses through the seal.
• Average Pre-swirl: If having a pre-swirl of u0(z = 0) = 0.5 then the pre-rotated
ﬂow has the same velocity as the rotor, and the ﬂow will progress through the seal
without changing.
• Relative Roughness: Changing the relative roughness of the surface-roughness
to the in-physical ϵr = ϵs = 0.00 (smooth), showed to give the same result. This
proves to indicate that, when having the same rotor and stator relative surface
roughness the asymptote will always be equal to u0(z = 1) = 0.5 at the exit,
this result is not shown as it is identical. These observations makes very good
mathematical sense when looking at the governing equation that is being evaluated
From Equation (3.20) the following deﬁnition of the local bulk ﬂow velocities at
the wall were deﬁned:
us0 =
q
w2
0 + b2u2
0
ur0 =
q
w2
0 + b2(u0 −1)2
Assessing the case with a pre-whirl of 0.5, the expression for the rotor and stator
bulk velocity becomes identical and the average circumferential velocity
R ¯u0 = 0.5
is then the surface bulk velocities are identical, us0 = ur0.
• Comparison to Literature Finally the result is similar to D.Childs(1993)[14] of
which the analysis is developed from, but the result is also directly reproduced by
V.Lucas et al.(1996)[27] as seen in Figure 7.2b
When conducting the same analysis, and changing the system by having a smooth rotor
and a rough stator as, ϵr =
er
2 ¯Cr = 0.0 ∧ϵs =
es
2 ¯Cr = 0.05. Then, the evolution of the
circumferential velocity in the axial coordinate for diﬀerent inlet boundary conditions is
show in Section 7.1.1.
79
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
u0(z)= U0(z)/(R!)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Circumferential Velocity u0(z)
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #1
BC: u0(0) =       0
BC: u0(0) =      1/3
BC: u0(0) =      1/2
BC: u0(0) =      2/3
BC: u0(0) =       1
(a) Circumferential velocity for ﬁve diﬀerent initial conditions
with rotor roughness
(b) Comparison from V.Lucas et al.(1996)[27]
who
compared
his
ﬁndings
against
D.Childs(1993)[14]
Figure 7.3: Circumferential velocity change in axial direction - zeroth order incompress-
ible seal - Analysis made for ϵr = 0, ϵs = 0.05
The following is identiﬁed from the result found in Figure 7.3 where the relative roughness
of rotor and stator is diﬀerent:
• Shift of asymptote: An asymptote is still present regardless of the initial con-
dition, however it is pushed downwards towards the smooth rotor at u0(z =
1) = 0.33.
Furthermore it was found (but not shown), that when switching
the relative roughness on th stator/rotor the asymptote would converge towards
u0(z = 1) = 0.67.
• Average circumferential velocity: When increasing the relative roughness on
the stator compared to the rotor it will decrease the average circumferential velocity
of the ﬂuid. This makes good physical sense as the static stator now assists to slow
down the ﬂuid more aggressively then the rotor can force the ﬂuid around.
• Comparison to Literature: V.Lucas et al.(1996)[27] obtained an asymptote
at about u0(z = 1) = 0.38, and they argues that the discrepancy in respect to
D.Childs(1993)[14] ( which is similar to the result in this study), should be found
from their evaluation of the equivalent sand roughness that they obtain in a slightly
diﬀerent manner. It proved to be more rough than the one obtained in this study
which is based on Moody’s pipe friction factor.
80
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.1.2
Axial Momentum Equation - Zero order
The pressure distribution over the seal which is the sought solution of the axial momen-
tum equation is the focus of this section which is:
dp0
dz = −1
2h2
0
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0) + 1
h3
0
dh0
dz
Since the axial momentum equation is coupled with the circumferential momentum equa-
tion it is convenient to use the most simple of the results from the circumferential velocity
distribution previously obtained. That would be the result with no change of the cir-
cumferential ﬂow over the axial direction. This will ensure to neglect the inﬂuence of
the circumferential ﬂow when conducting the parameter study. As the axial momentum
equation is linear it is also expected that all solutions behave accordingly.
Firstly the pressure momentum equation is assessed for diﬀerent stator relative roughness
as seen in Figure 7.4a. All other constants are kept constant, and the boundary condition
for the exit pressure is applied as p0(z = 1) = 0 is kept constant as-well. Furthermore
the data from Table 7.2 will be the basis of this analysis, here major diﬀerent compared
to the previous analysis is the much smaller L/D ratio compared to before.
Table 7.2: Dimensions and Conditions associated with Dataset:2
Dimensions
Conditions
Rotor
Stator
D
L
ϵr
ϵs
C0
C1
ζ
ζe
Friction
µ
∆P
ω
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
model
[Pa S]
[bar]
[rpm]
152.4
50.8
0
0
0.381
0.381
0.1
1
Moodys
0.0013
35
3000
81
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
p0(z)= P(z)/"P
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Pressure Distribution
Variation over stator friction factor 0s
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #2
0s =0
0s =0.01
0s =0.05
(a) Pressure gradient as a function of stator roughness (rotor
is smooth)
(b) Comparison from V.Lucas et al.(1996)[27]
who
compared
his
ﬁndings
against
D.Childs(1993)[14]
Figure 7.4: Pressure change in axial direction - zeroth order incompressible seal - Analysis
made for varying roughness
From the results presented in Figure 7.4 the following was found:
• Smooth Rotor and Stator: When having a smooth surface on both the rotor
and stator side the pressure evolution over the seal when having a boundary at
p0(z = 1) = 0 shows to give drop on 60%.
• Relative Roughness: When increasing the relative roughness on the stator it
proves to increase the pressure gradient over the seal. As the gradient is increased
the inﬂuence of the inlet loss coeﬃcient on ∆P decreases accordingly and the
pressure drop over the seal increases to 70%.
• Comparison to Literature: When comparing to Figure 7.4b from V.Lucas et
al.(1996)[27] there is a very good agreement with the result. However, it appears
as V.Lucas et al.(1996)[27] has not restrained the solution to the same boundary
condition as in this study for the pressure exit and his solution therefore has
another end pressure.
While having the same gradients his initial pressure is
shifted upwards. This behavior is not commented upon in his study.
82
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Next, it is sought to investigate the inﬂuence of the entrance loss factor ζ and the
exit recovery factor ζe. The exit recovery factor is, as previously described usually not
included in the model and is assumed to be ζe = 1 which means that there is no recovery
of the pressure at the seal exit.
Ultimately the result from this study is considered
validated.
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
p0(z)= P(z)/"P
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Pressure Distribution
Variation over  inlet pressure loss 1
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #2
1 =       0
1 =      1/2
1 =       1
(a) Evaluation of ζ
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
p0(z)= P(z)/"P
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Pressure Distribution
Variation over  exit pressure loss 1e
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #2
1 e =       1
1 e =      3/4
1 e =      1/2
(b) Evaluation of ζe
Figure 7.5: Result of the inlet pressure loss and exit pressure recovery.
From the results presented in Figure 7.5 the following was found:
• Inlet Pressure coeﬃcient: Figure 7.5a shows the inﬂuence of the inlet pressure
loss coeﬃcient. It is seen that while it has no direct inﬂuence on the pressure gradi-
ent it will assist to shift/push the entire pressure solution downwards or upwards.
• Exit Pressure coeﬃcient: Figure 7.5b shows the inﬂuence of the exit recovery
coeﬃcient on the pressure gradient which increase as ζe is decreased. This result in
an increase in the pressure drop over the seal, at the cost of the eﬀect on the inlet
pressure coeﬃcient. Decreasing the exit pressure recovery coeﬃcient will increase
the leakage rate ˙Q while increasing the inlet pressure loss coeﬃcient will decrease
˙Q
• Comparison to Literature: Comparison has been done sorely against D.Childs(1993)[14]
which shows very good agreement. Unfortunately, it was not possible to ﬁnd any
literature backed by experimental studies which discuss the inﬂuence of these fac-
tors for a steady state straight annular seal.
83
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Next, it is sought to investigate the inﬂuence of the leading design geometry, the clearance
to radius ratio ¯Cr/R as seen in Figure 7.6a and the length to diameter ratio L/D as
seen in Figure 7.6b.
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
p0(z)= P(z)/"P
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Pressure Distribution
Variation over Clearence ratio Cr/R
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #2
Cr/R =0.0051
Cr/R =0.0026
Cr/R =0.0077
(a) Evaluation of the clearance ratio ¯Cr
z =Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
p0(z)= P(z)/"P
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Pressure Distribution
Variation over Length ratio L/D
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #2
L/D = 1/3
L/D = 1/6
L/D = 2/3
L/D =  2
(b) Evaluation of the L/D ratio
Figure 7.6: Result of the inlet pressure loss and exit pressure recovery.
From the results presented in Figure 7.6 the following was found:
• Clearance to Radius ratio: When assessing the inﬂuence of the clearance ratio
from Figure 7.6a, it is observed that an increase in the clearance ratio Cr/R will
decrease the pressure gradient. This is equivalent to an increase in the leakage
ﬂow rate ˙Q.
Furthermore from Figure 7.6a, it is seen that the proportion of ∆P absorbed from
the inlet loss, is increased for larger clearance. The larger the clearance the larger
a pressure drop is inherent to the system at the entrance z = 0. This also decreases
the pressure gradient over the seal, and one can put up the following deﬁnition for
the more extreme case:
dp
dz = 0
for
¯Cr
R →1
(7.2)
• Lomakin Eﬀect: D.Childs(1993)[14] express that it is possible to refer to the
clearance ratios from Figure 7.6a, as a centered (blue), tight (red), and loose
(yellow) seal. The diﬀerence between the pressure gradient of the tight and loose
side can provide a restoring force that will oppose the direct displacement of the
shaft. This is equivalent to a large direct stiﬀness K, and can physically be thought
of as a Lomakin eﬀect. Kim et al. (1985)[12] describes this eﬀect with reference to
84
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Lomakin who originally pointed this out, as a behavior very diﬀerent from journal
bearing theory. For seals a zero-eccentricity position will develop signiﬁcant direct
stiﬀness K due to the distribution between inlet losses and the axial pressure
gradient due to wall friction.
• Length to Diameter ratio: When assessing the inﬂuence of L/D in Figure 7.6b,
it is observed that an increase in length will increase the pressure gradient. This
makes good sense as a increasing L/D ratio will result in an increasingly larger
proportion of ∆P being absorbed by wall friction.
It is furthermore observed, that there is a reduced inﬂuence of the inlet pressure
loss coeﬃcient as the L/D ratio increases, and that the following relationship can
be set up:
dp
dz = 1
for
L
D →∞
dp
dz = 0
for
L
D →0
(7.3)
• Comparison to Literature: The blue dashed line indicates a result that is
not in agreement with D.Childs(1993)[14], however the reason for this is to the
author unknown as it is the only result that is inconsistent with his ﬁndings. The
conclusion is therefore, that there is a minor error in the presented parameters
used in the work of Childs. The discrepancy is rather large as the gradient should
have been a lot steeper. Beside from the blue dotted result, there is a complete
consistency with literature for both Figure 7.6a and Figure 7.6b.
85
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.1.3
Evaluating of the Friction Factors - Zero order
In the following a numerical analysis is conducted to evaluate the inﬂuence and behavior
of the friction factor. More speciﬁcally, the surface friction factors, volumetric ﬂow rate
and average axial velocity will be evaluated for a straight annular seal.
The results shown in Figure 7.7are conducted with u0 = 0.5, this mean that the rotor
and stator friction will end up being identical over the length of the seal.
z=Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
fs0# 103 and fs0# 103
0
2
4
6
8
10
Friction over seal as  function of z w. different 0s and 0s
0s=0r = 0.00
0s=0r = 0.01
(a) u0 = 0.5 evaluated with constant Reynolds number at Re =
106
Rez =4000 to 106
#105
0
2
4
6
8
10
f= (fs+fr)/2 # 103
0
2
4
6
8
10
Mean Friction as  function of Re with different 0s and 0s
0s=0r = 0.00
0s=0r = 0.01
(b) u0 = 0.5evaluated with varying Reynolds number at Re =
4000 −106
Figure 7.7: u0 = 0.5 Analysis made for ϵr = ϵs = 0.1 analyzed using dataset#2
From the results presented in Figure 7.7 the following can be observed:
• Constant Reynolds Number The ﬁrst observation from Figure 7.7a proves to
realize that when the pre-whirl is u0 = 0.5 and when the Reynolds number is kept
constant, no change in the calculated friction factor over the seal is present, this
is in agreement with what is to be expected.
• Constant Reynolds Number: Relative Roughness Figure 7.7a shows the
result for two diﬀerent cases of relative roughness. This proves to validate that, as
the relative roughness increases the calculated friction increases accordingly. Even
for very small increase in the relative roughness, the friction jumps a lot, hence
there is a clear nonlinear behavior between a smooth seal and even the slightest
relative roughness.
• Varying Reynolds number Conducting the same analysis with varying Reynolds
number as seen in Figure 7.7b, by taking the mean of the friction over the seal1.
1 Which is the mean of a vector with the same value in this speciﬁc case
86
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Then it is seen that the friction is very dependent on the Reynolds number and
changes quite a lot for low Re before going towards an asymptote.
This is to the authors believe quite concerning as it indicates that the friction will
be overdetermined for less turbulent ﬂow - as a governing assumption was that the
ﬂow was to be fully turbulent...
• Magnitude of friction: As the Reynolds number approaches the maximum al-
lowable magnitude at Rez = 106, then ¯f goes toward the two asymptotes f(ϵ =
0) ≈0.0028 and f(ϵ = 0.1) ≈0.0094 as seen on Figure 7.7a. Especially the last
asymptote is surprising as it is higher than expected from the previous but very
simple analysis depicted in Figure 2.4.
• Dependence on pre-swirl: Changing the pre-whirl initial condition will change
the friction from being independent to dependent, an analysis of this is not shown
here but lower pre-swirl will lower the friction and higher pre-swirl will increase
the friction wile both cases will make the friction have the same slope as the
circumferential velocity evolution through the seal.
• Comparison to literature: It was not possible to ﬁnd any literature in the ﬁeld
of bulk ﬂow analysis that compared the friction factors as a direct output. However
the author believes that the result of the friction factors are quite interesting as
the provide deep knowledge of the underlying system. For example the ﬁndings of
these two results proves to realize that the transition from a smooth rotor/stator
to a rough rotor/stator is in fact very nonlinear and are associated with signiﬁcant
changes in the friction.
87
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.2
Tapered Seal Analysis - Zero-order Perturbation
The taper in seals can be classiﬁed either as a convergent taper (tighter) or a divergent
taper (looser). The taper expression from Equation (3.16) is used to identify the level
of convergence or divergence as:
q = C0 −C1
C0 + C1
Hence, for q > 0 the seal is converging, for q < 0 the seal is divergent and for q = 0 the
seal would be a straining seal. In the following, four diﬀerent cases will be investigated
to validate the zero order implementation of taper. These can be found in Table 7.3,
while the data from Table 7.4 has been used to carry out the study for the tapered seal
analysis. From the table it is evident that it is a short seal.
Table 7.3: The four diﬀerent cases of taper from W.Lindsey(2000)[26][ﬁg.1]
.
case
C0[mm]
C1[mm]
q[-]
# 1
0.076
0.137
q < 0
# 2
0.076
0.097
q < 0
# 3
0.097
0.076
q > 0
# 4
0.137
0.076
q > 0
Table 7.4: Dimensions and Conditions associated with Dataset:3
Dimensions
Conditions
Rotor
Stator
D
L
ϵr
ϵs
C0
C1
ζ
ζe
Friction
µ
∆P
ω
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
model
[Pa S]
[bar]
[rpm]
78.2
13.3
0.001
0.001
var
var
0.1
1
Moodys
0.0013
35
var
The analysis for the four tapered seals are conduct for three diﬀerent pressure distribu-
tions, for three diﬀerent operating speeds.
88
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Taper: q[-]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Leakeage Flow Rate: [liter/min]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Taper Leakate
Variation of  pressure for different taper
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #3
" P =1.4e+06Pa
" P =2.4e+06Pa
" P =3.5e+06Pa
(a) ω = 10200[rpm]
(b) Experimental= solid, theoretical = dashed.
Lindsey(2000)[26]
Figure 7.8: Comparison between results and literature for four diﬀerent taper and three
diﬀerent pressure diﬀerences
Taper: q[-]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Leakeage Flow Rate: [liter/min]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Taper Leakate
Variation of  pressure for different taper
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #3
" P =1.4e+06Pa
" P =2.4e+06Pa
" P =3.5e+06Pa
(a) ω = 17400[rpm]
(b) Experimental= solid, theoretical = dashed.
Lindsey(2000)[26]
Figure 7.9: Comparison between results and literature for four diﬀerent taper and three
diﬀerent pressure diﬀerences
89
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Taper: q[-]
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Leakeage Flow Rate: [liter/min]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Incompressible - Zeroth Order Taper Leakate
Variation of  pressure for different taper
Friction: Moodys;  Dataset: #3
" P =1.4e+06Pa
" P =2.4e+06Pa
" P =3.5e+06Pa
(a) ω = 24600[rpm]
(b) Experimental= solid, theoretical = dashed.
Lindsey(2000)[26]
Figure 7.10: Comparison between results and literature for four diﬀerent taper and three
diﬀerent pressure diﬀerences
From the results presented above the following was found:
• Commercial software: Firstly, from the three ﬁgures showing the literature
results, it should be mentioned that Lindsey(2000)[26] results from his bulk ﬂow
model under-predicts the experimental ﬁndings by rather much, in the worst case
up to 30%. His model is based on the commercial bulk-ﬂow code MUDY which
is an earlier version to some of the work of Texas AM previously mentioned in
Table 2.1. As the program, MUDY , and the experimenter did not now parameters
like pre-swirl rate, entrance and exit loss and ect, this might be the reason.
• Increase in leakage: The results show that the minimum leakage occurs for the
straight sealq = 0, and the leakage increases with increasing |q|. This increase in
leakage is caused by the geometric increase in average clearance associated with
increasing the absolute taper |q|.
• Increase of pressure: When increasing the pressure diﬀerence ∆P over the seal,
it is event that the leakage increases, this is comes directly from the pressure
diﬀerential over the seal that will force the ﬂow through at a higher rate.
• Rotational speed: It is observed that the predicted leakage rate between the
three ﬁgures, is only very weakly dependent on the increasing operating speed ω.
When changing ω from 10400 up to 24600 rpm there is only a slight change in
leakage rate per minute ˙Q.
90
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
When assessing the physical dependence of ω in ˙Q it is recalled that ˙Q was a
function of the mean friction factor over the rotor+stator, as:
˙Q = 2πR
s
∆P ¯C3r
¯fρL
and the mean friction ¯fis a function of the operating speed through us0 and ur0
from:
us0 =
q
w2
0 + b2u2
0
ur0 =
q
w2
0 + b2(u0 −1)2
with b = Rω/W0. Hence as b increases and the pre-swirl rate is kept at u0(0) = 0.5,
then the two local bulk velocities are still identical in magnitude as previously
identiﬁed. This means that the average friction factor will not change much. Thus
leave the leakage almost unaﬀected by the rotational speed.
• Rotor growth: Furthermore it is seen from the experimental comparison that
the radial clearance decreases with increasing rotor velocity, which is indicated
through the lower leakage rate. This according to Lindsey(2000)[26] according to
the growth of the rotor as the velocity is increased.
Hence, the leakage ﬂow rate becomes much lower as the shaft velocity is increased,
and this physical behavior is not included in the bulk ﬂow model in this study.
• Comparison to Literature: From the three results it is interesting is that the
code developed in this study cohere with the ﬁndings of MUDY when using the
same data. Hence, this can be used as a very strong validation of the steady state
taper in the seal.
91
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Next, it is sought to investigate the inﬂuence of the taper on the friction in the seal,
and compare it to the result for the straight seal. Hence in the following, where C0 =
0.381[mm] and having C1 as variable the following was found.
z=Z/L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
f # 103
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
Friction over seal, Change in Taper, w. 0s=0r=0.01
C1 = 0.1[mm]
C1 = 0.2[mm]
C1 = 0.3[mm]
C1 = 0.4[mm]
C1 = 0.5[mm]
(a) u0 = 0.5
Rez =4000 to 106
#105
0
2
4
6
8
10
f= (fs+fr)/2 # 103
9
9.2
9.4
9.6
9.8
10
10.2
10.4
10.6
10.8
11
Mean Friction over seal, Change in Taper, w. 0s= 0r=0.01
C1 = 0.1[mm]
C1 = 0.2[mm]
C1 = 0.3[mm]
C1 = 0.4[mm]
C1 = 0.5[mm]
(b) u0 = 0.5
Figure 7.11: u0 = 0.5 Analysis made for ϵr = ϵs = 0.1
From the results presented above, the following was found:
• Taper Inﬂuence on friction: Firstly it is seen from Figure 7.11a that when
increasing the taper in seal from a converging to a diverging seal, the slope of the
friction df
dz changes while they all go through the same point at the center or the
seal in z = 0.5. This is an interesting ﬁnding, as one would think that, since C0 is
left constant, then it should have been at z = 0 that they shared the same friction
factor.
• Varying Reynolds number: When varying the Reynolds number as seen in
Figure 7.11b, the same behavior as for the straight seal is present for low Reynolds
number. To the authors belief the model over-predicts the friction factors for low
Reynolds number before converging towards an asymptote. Furthermore, it is seen
that there is only little inﬂuence from the taper on the average friction ¯f over the
seal.
• Extreme taper: The blue line in Figure 7.11a shows the result of an extreme
taper. Here it is seen that as the ﬂow progresses through the seal and the clearnce
becomes continuously smaller, and the predicted friction increases accordingly.
• Comparison to Literature: As for the friction analysis conducted for the straight
seal, it was not possible to ﬁnd any literature describing the friction over a tapered
seal.
92
==PAGE:95==
Part IV
Discussion
&
Conclusion
93
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 8
Discussion
In the following chapter the ﬁndings, method, and corresponding assumptions obtained
throughout the study are discussed. Also, the robustness of the assumptions of which the
bulk-ﬂow analysis is based upon is analyzed and assessed. Finally, the possible causes
concerning why the dynamic coeﬃcients are not obtained are discussed.
8.1
Robustness of Assumptions for the bulk-ﬂow analysis
It was not possible to obtain correct results for the ﬁrst order perturbation which is
consistent with the theory. Consequently, a full parameter study cannot be carried out
to investigate the robustness of certain assumptions. However, the robustness of some
assumptions can still be assessed, and they are discussed here:
• Empirical data: If empirical data for inlet loss coeﬃcient, exits recovery factor,
wall friction factors, pre-whirl magnitude, ﬂow rate and ﬂow velocity are known
or given, then the ﬁnite diﬀerence approach to calculating the bulk ﬂow in 1D can
be considered reasonably precise for a plain, smooth and annular seal, when the
analysis is limited to the assumptions of fully developed ﬂow and a ﬂow in the
turbulent regime. However, such empirical data is not always available and this is
where the bulk-ﬂow model shows its weakness. For example, the circumferential
pre-swirl is almost always unknown in the published experiments and this speciﬁc
parameter is very important for the bulk-ﬂow mode.
• Reynolds number: An observation from this study is that the friction over-
predicts for low Reynolds number even-though it is assumed that a Reynolds num-
ber in that regime should in fact be turbulent enough for the bulk-ﬂow model to
function properly. A reason can be that while the ﬂow is in fact turbulent it is still
not fully turbulent in that regime. This is described in Yamada(1962)[40] where
the author links the angular(tangential) velocity of the ﬂuid within a cylinder with
the ﬂow behavior, as observed in Figure 8.1a, Yamada deﬁnes certain sub ﬂow
regimes with Taylor vortices before a fully turbulent ﬂow as seen in Figure 8.1b.
94
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
This could very well be the reason for the over-prediction in friction that is previ-
ously referred to. When increasing the rotational speed of the rotor these Taylor
vortices decreased in volume.
(a) Diﬀerent ﬂow regimes
(b) Development of Taylor vor-
tices
Figure 8.1: Two illustrations from Yamada(1962)[40] showing a Taylor ﬂow which is not
fully turbulent.
• Moody’s Friction: It is evident that the steady state bulk-ﬂow model gives the
best result for fully developed ﬂow in the high end of the turbulent regime as
shown when assessing the friction factors. As the Reynolds number approaches
the transition regime the model becomes continually less valid and an eccentricity
ratio would have increasingly more inﬂuence on the result if conducting a ﬁrst
order perturbation. Such documentation can be found in the work of Kaneko et
al.(1984)[25] and later Iwatsubo et al. (1989)[24] for a very tight seal. The goal
was to reproduce these data but due to lack of information, the author did not
succeed.
Since Moody’s friction factors are based on pipes with no pre-swirl of the ﬂuid, the
comparison to seals should be interpreted carefully as it may disturb the govern-
ing assumption regarding the friction model. This diﬀerence must be taken into
account, as results may diﬀer from physical ﬁndings for extreme cases - it is the
belief of the author that this model has a weakness when going from smooth to
rough relative-roughness, as seen in the result section where the predicted friction
factor showed a rather large "jump" in magnitude between the two cases.
• Steady-state eccentricity: The zero order solution deﬁnes the steady state at
the center of the seal, hence the harmonic motion is also given around the center
of the seal. A rotor is not necessarily positioned at the center of the seal. Hence
this is a very large reduction of practical use of the given bulk-ﬂow procedure but
also a limitation to the analysis. It is not possible to evaluate inﬂuences like the
95
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
Lomakin eﬀect directly and alternative methods have to be used such as looking
at diﬀerent clearances for the same seal to get an indication of the Lomakin eﬀect
as described by D.Childs(1993)[14].
• Pressure boundary conditions: The boundary conditions employed as accord-
ing to D.Childs(1993)[14] at the seal inlet and outlet are questionable. They are
deﬁned as a set of constant pressure conditions based on the inlet and outlet geom-
etry while these might very well change with diﬀerent running conditions. They
are therefore very simply deﬁned in the bulk ﬂow model.
• Velocity initial conditions: Furthermore, the pre-swirl is assumed to be a uni-
form swirl velocity boundary condition, this is a very important and dominating
assumption as all results from the bulk-ﬂow analysis depends on the correct pre-
swirl velocity. Furthermore, it is assumed that the pressure loss at both inlet and
outlet is related sorely to the axial velocity or ﬂow rate, and are thus entirely
independent of the pre-swirl velocity. This too, may not be accurate enough and
givingly a too simple deﬁnition of the pressure loss coeﬃcients.
• Linear Perturbation: D.Childs(1993)[14] describes the rotordynamic ﬂow as
being similar to a linear perturbation approximation on the mean ﬂow in the
annular seal
A = A0 + ϵ1A1 + ϵ2A2 + ...
(8.1)
Which for a linear approximation would reduce to:
A ≈A0 + ϵ1A1
(8.2)
This is considered a suﬃcient and acceptable approximation as the nonlinear dy-
namic coeﬃcients is of no interest. In the future it might be interesting to assess
these non-linearities and they can be included by accepting the second order per-
turbation terms.
• Inﬁnitively stiﬀseal It is considered that the seal is isotropic and no deforma-
tion of the seal occurs regardless of the pressure over the seal. However the author
believes that for increasing pressure and pressure-drop, then a plain seal will start
to deform into a more tapered like shape. Similar for a tapered seal. The inﬂuence
of this could be very easily implemented in the numerical model as a loop over
the steady state solution. First the solid mechanics would be deﬁned (hence not
inﬁnitesimal stiﬀ), secondly the pressure distribution would be calculated as nor-
mally, and ﬁnally a deformation from the pressure would be found and the taper
of the seal changed accordingly until convergence has been reached.
• Growth of rotor The assumption was made that rotor growth could be neglected.
When comparing the numerical results when including taper and varying the ro-
tational speed it is seen that, experiments and bulk was not precise. A reason for
this could be the radial growth phenomenon that is not included in the model.
Hence, when comparing against high-speed results one should include this eﬀect.
96
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
An overall general impression of the bulk-ﬂow analysis is that the rotordynamic co-
eﬃcients can be capture with more conﬁdence (although at the expense of time and
generality) with full-blown CFD models. The advantage of a bulk ﬂow should there-
fore be found in the validation of such CFD programs and in certain parameter studies
and their inﬂuence on the dynamic coeﬃcients. A time eﬃcient 3D approach would
completely obviate the underlying basis and reason for conducting a bulk ﬂow analy-
sis. Nevertheless, as full blown CFD is still costly in terms of computational eﬀort -
this bulk-ﬂow approach still has certain advantages regardless of the many assumptions,
neglections and need of empiric estimated coeﬃcients in a bulk ﬂow.
8.2
Dynamic Coeﬃcients from the ﬁrst order perturbation
No dynamic coeﬃcients are presented in the results section, since it was not possible
to obtain correct pressure output from the ﬁrst order perturbation analysis. This has
shown to be a challenging problem to obtain a solution for. All possible causes have
been investigated in ﬁnding the reason for the incorrect dynamic coeﬃcients without
yielding useful solutions. The following present a list of aspects and factors which the
author has investigated without being able to ﬁnd the error:
• System of Equations: When solving the system of equations that was setup in
Equation (5.18), real and imaginary force distribution over the seal are obtained.
It is from this result that the dynamic coeﬃcients arise. Hence, questioning the
correctness of this system of equations is obvious. However, the author believes
that it is in fact correct since it has been validated against multiple sources of
literature as described in Section 3.8.
• Friction forces: Secondly the perturbed friction factors might be the reason
for the error, however they too are validated against other literature, the friction
factors in Section 3.7.4 are derived by D.Childs(1993)[14] are compared against
E.Storteig(1991)[38]. These two models were implemented and compared against
each other, Both showed to give the same result and indicated not to be the reason
of the wrong dynamic coeﬃcients, author would have liked to derive these friction
factors by himself, however they are very extensive and no time was found for this
and since two diﬀerence sources indicates to give the same result it was ultimately
considered inessential.
• Numerical Model: The ﬂow variables are step-wise expanded to yield the zeroth-
order and ﬁrst-order equations.
The rotor dynamic coeﬃcients are computed
through integration of the ﬁrst-order perturbation solution. The algorithm devel-
oped solves the coupled and nonlinear one-dimensional, bulk-ﬂow, incompressible,
Navier Stokes equations to predict the steady state and rotordynamic characteris-
tics of a straight and tapered annular seal, in a centered position. Since the nature
of a seal leaves no analytical solutions to compare results against, the numerical
algorithm that is implemented is validated against journal bearing theory instead,
97
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
this was done in a study prior to the master this thesis. Further numerical vali-
dation was sought from the stability of the scheme and its convergence rate of the
discrete governing equations. this was achieved and the rate of convergence was as
expected. Furthermore, as the model shows to work for the zero order equations
it is not believed that the error arises from the numerical model.
• Pre swirl The circumferential velocity distribution derived from the zero order
circumferential momentum equation is important in determining the ﬂuid induced
stresses on a rotating rotor, as it is observed that they are included in the ﬁrst
order perturbation as well.
For this study they were always kept constant at
u0 = {0.5} as according to D.Childs. This is in good agreement with other litera-
ture as well as a standard pre-swirl rate that has no change/evolution over the seal
and is thus constant. However when changing the pre-swirl, it should, according
to D.Childs(1983)[10] reduce the cross coupled coeﬃcients k and c. Furthermore,
studies from K.K.Nielsen and H.Underbakke(2012)[31], show that for high, and/or
negative pre-swirl, the bulk ﬂow equations show to under-determine the dynamic
coeﬃcients. When including the thought of avoiding a destabilizing seal it recalled
that k that assist to pull in the direction of the whirling orbit of the rotor (when not
in steady state) is helping to destabilizing the system. Hence, anything the engi-
neer can do to decrease this eﬀect is good engineering practice. D.Childs(1993)[14]
states that there is a clear trend between high tangential velocity and an increase
in cross coupled stiﬀness k. The result of Section 7.1.1 proves to show that when
increasing the relative roughness of the rotor compared to the stator the tangen-
tial ﬂow will decrease and therefore assist to minimize the cross-coupled stiﬀness
developed in the seal.
So one is left to question where the error then might be. Obviously the author has tried
and investigate all possible ideas to the reason of the error, hence the list is short:
• The zero order pressure distribution obtained from the steady state solution is
never used for obtaining the forces from the ﬁrst order perturbation equations.
Hence, there might be a misunderstanding regarding the use of this result.
Previously a discharge coeﬃcient Cp was deﬁned in Equation (4.7) where it was
isolated from the pressure diﬀerence as:
Cd = 2∆P
ρW 2
0
As this discharge coeﬃcient is not mentioned in the work of D.Childs of which
this study to a great extend lean upon, there might be an introduced error here.
The work of E.Storteig(1991)[38][Eq. 4.51] mentions that a similar discharge is
obtained from "the total pressure drop given by the zero order solution". As the
pressure diﬀerence over the seal is usually given in advance the author is left with
no use of the zero order pressure distribution.
98
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
• Most probably a small error is present in the code work which lead to the fact that
it was not possible to obtain the coeﬃcients
99
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 9
Conclusions
This master thesis aims to investigate the dynamic modeling of diﬀerent types of sealing
rings via the bulk-ﬂow method. Conclusions which can be drawn from the realized results
of the conducted work are.
• A recapitulation of the underlying method of bulk-ﬂow theory is presented. The
physical model of an annular plain and tapered seal is described.
From this a
perturbation analysis yielding the steady state solution and the ﬁrst order pertur-
bation equations with associated friction factors and constants are presented and
discussed.
• A literature-supported review and discussion regarding the argumentation of fun-
damental methodology behind the bulk-ﬂow theory is carried out and the under-
lying assumptions are presented for such model. A thorough study of the physics
behind a bulk-ﬂow analysis has been carried out. Furthermore, a brief study on
available commercial bulk-ﬂow codes is presented. Finally, a discussion of the un-
derlying assumptions and their inﬂuence on a bulk-ﬂow model have been carried
out.
• A numerical procedure has been developed for computing the steady state and
dynamic characteristics of eccentric annular seals. The model takes into account
the eﬀect of swirl, inertia and added-mass terms, and can be used for tapered seal
geometry. Results for the steady state solution are successfully obtained using a
1D ﬁnite diﬀerence method approach. A discretization study is conducted which
proves to indicate that for even very few degrees of freedom, the system still shows a
good physical representation. This demonstrates the very strong advantage of bulk-
ﬂow analysis in terms of computational time compared to commercial software.
• The numerical results successfully obtained for a steady state solution are pre-
sented. For this, diﬀerent parameter-arrangements have been investigated, dis-
cussed and validated for a straight seal. Furthermore, the same parameter study
100
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSIONS
was conducted with two diﬀerent tapered seal arrangements (two divergent and
two convergent) and validated against literature.
However, a part of the project goal is unfortunately not achieved. For the ﬁrst order
perturbation analysis it was not possible to obtain any meaningful results, and it was
therefore not possible to validate the numerical implementation against literature. Con-
sequently, no analysis could be conducted of the dynamic coeﬃcients of a seal which are
dependent on the forces obtained from the ﬁrst order perturbation.
As relevant literature typically only presents the ﬁnal results in terms of dynamic coef-
ﬁcients, it has proven to be extremely challenging to conduct a root cause analysis and
ﬁnding the point at which the error might occur. There are therefore no sub-results to
lean upon and compare against in published studies in this ﬁeld, e.g. values of the bulk
ﬂow friction coeﬃcients, velocity and pressure distributions. Thus, despite the fact that
much eﬀort and hard work is put into the analysis in order to succeed, no discussion
nor conclusion can be drawn in respect to the dynamic coeﬃcients and the inﬂuencing
parameters.
Nevertheless, this study provides a solid foundation for future work within bulk-ﬂow
analysis, since the governing equations which are not previously publicly derived are
shown step-wise in this report, discussed and the underlying assumptions evaluated
making it possible to continue the analysis in this ﬁeld.
101
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 10
Future studies
Having obtained a very strong understanding of the underlying physics for a annular seal
and the associated numerical implementation method the author believes that adaption
of the underlying physics to include compressible ﬂow is very realistic in the near future.
From this point the author believes that the following should be considered of interest
in terms of developing a more general bulk-ﬂow code:
• Compressible ﬂow: Firstly the energy equations regarding the compressibility
of the ﬂow should be implemented such that one can use the bulk-ﬂow with gas
ﬂuids. This is not only good in terms of a more general bulk-ﬂow code, but there
is also a lot more literature in the ﬁeld of compressible seals to validate against.
• Labyrinth and groove patterns: The bulk ﬂow code should be further adapted
for taking into account the geometric changes in the form of groove seal patterns
like labyrinth and hole pattern seals. For a grooved seal the ﬁlm-thickness model
is no longer constant and would have to be adapted with the governing equations.
• Moment forces: As a rotor is never perfectly aligned in a seal, it would be
interesting to include this eﬀect in the model. It requires only little change of the
governing equations to include the moment eﬀects from the rotor in the seal and
that would be suﬃcient for catching the misalignment.
The following experiments could be of interest to conduct:
• Exit recovery: Only few studies evaluate the exit recovery factor. The author
believes that with an already well-deﬁned rotor dynamic system then it could
be very interesting to asses the exit pressure recovery for diﬀerent kind of seal
geometries.
• Pressure Diﬀerence: It is considered that the seal is isotropic and no deforma-
tion of the seal occurs regardless of the pressure over the seal. However the author
believes that for increasing pressure and pressure-drop, then a plain seal will start
to deform into a more tapered like shape. Analysis of this could be interesting in
terms of experiments.
102
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1]
Maurice L. Adams. Rotating Machinery Vibration: From Analysis to Troubleshoot-
ing, Second Edition. CRC Press, 2010, p. 476. isbn: 143984755X. url: https:
//books.google.com/books?id=QW4IX6Odi3MC\&pgis=1.
[2]
M. Arghir, S. Le Lez, and J. Frene. “Finite-volume solution of the compressible
Reynolds equation: linear and non-linear analysis of gas bearings”. In: Proceedings
of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part J: Journal of Engineering Tri-
bology 220 (2006), pp. 617–627. issn: 1350-6501. doi: 10.1243/13506501JET161.
url: http://pij.sagepub.com/lookup/doi/10.1243/13506501JET161.
[3]
Mihai Arghir and Jean Frene. “A Triangle Based Finite Volume Method for the In-
tegration of Lubrications Incompressible Bulk Flow Equations”. In: Journal of Tri-
bology 123.1 (2001), p. 118. issn: 07424787. doi: 10.1115/1.1326444. url: http:
//tribology.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.aspx?articleid=
1466365.
[4]
B. Venkataraman; A. B. Palazzolo. “Eﬀects of Wall Flexibility on the Rotordy-
namic Coeﬃcients of Turbulent Cryogenic Annular Seals”. In: The American Soci-
ety of Mechanical Engineers 118(3) (1995), pp. 509–519. url: http://tribology.
asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.aspx?articleid=1460822.
[5]
B.E.Launder and M.A.Leschziner. “Flow in Finite-Width Thrust Bearings Includ-
ing Inertial Eﬀects - II Turbulent Flow”. In: Journal of Lubrication Technology
100.July (1978), pp. 339–345.
[6]
E. Baskharone and S. Hensel. “Flow Field in the Secondary, Seal-Containing Pas-
sages of Centrifugal Pumps.” In: ASME Journal of Fluid Engineering 115 (1993),
pp. 702–709.
[7]
Harry B. Bingham, Poul S. Larsen, and V. Allan Barker. Computational Fluid
Dynamics. 3rd ed. Kongens Lyngby: DTU MEK, 2014, p. 201.
[8]
By H F Black. “Eﬀects of Hydraulic Force in Annular Pressure Seals on the Vibra-
tions of centrifugal pump rotors”. In: Journal of Mechanical Engineering I (1969),
pp. 206–213.
[9]
Christopher Brennen. Hydrodynamics of Pumps. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1994, p. 293. isbn: 9780511976728. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511976728.
url: http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ref/id/CBO9780511976728.
103
==PAGE:106==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10]
D W Childs. “Dynamic Analysis of Turbulent Annular Seals Based On Hirs ’
Lubrication Equation 1”. In: Journal of Lubrication Technology 105.July (1983),
pp. 429–436. doi: 10.1115/1.3254633.
[11]
D Childs, D Elrod, and K Hale. “Annular honeycomb seals: Test results for leak-
age and rotordynamic coeﬃcients; comparisons to labyrinth and smooth conﬁg-
urations”. In: Journal of Tribology 1.April (1989). url: http : / / tribology .
asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.aspx?articleid=1459458.
[12]
DW Childs and CH Kim. “Analysis and testing for rotordynamic coeﬃcients of tur-
bulent annular seals with diﬀerent, directionally-homogeneous surface-roughness
treatment for rotor and stator”. In: Journal of Tribology 107.July (1985), pp. 296–
205. url: http://tribology.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.
aspx?articleid=1458564.
[13]
DW Childs and DL Rhode. “The Measurement and Prediction of Rotordynamic
Forces for Labyrinth Seals”. In: (1988). url: http://oai.dtic.mil/oai/oai?
verb=getRecord\&metadataPrefix=html\&identifier=ADA197185.
[14]
Dara Childs. Turbomachinery Rotordynamics - Phenomena, Modeling, and Anal-
ysis. 1st editio. Texas A&M University: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1993, p. 476.
[15]
FJ Dietzen and R Nordmann. “Calculating rotordynamic coeﬃcients of seals by
ﬁnite-diﬀerence techniques”. In: Journal of tribology 109.July (1987), pp. 388–394.
url: http://tribology.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.aspx?
articleid=1459043.
[16]
Wendt J F. Computational Fluid Dynamics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1992,
p. 69. isbn: 978-3-540-85055-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-85056-4.
[17]
DP Fleming. “High stiﬀness seals for rotor critical speed control”. In: (1977). url:
http://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=19770025211.
[18]
David P. Fleming. “Stiﬀness of Straight and Tapered Annular Gas Path Seals”. In:
Journal of Lubrication Technology 101.3 (July 1979), p. 349. issn: 00222305. doi:
10.1115/1.3453371. url: http://tribology.asmedigitalcollection.asme.
org/article.aspx?articleid=1464241.
[19]
Mikkel W. Grauballe and Jonas Lauridsen. Implementation of the Compressible
Reynolds Equation using the Finite Diﬀerence Method for Finding Dynamic Forces
of Fluids in Rotor-Seal Interaction. Tech. rep. 41319 Computational Fluid Dy-
namics Fall 2014: Technical University of Denmark, 2014, pp. 1–20. url: https:
//www.dropbox.com/s/won084qnuipkkx7/report.pdf?dl=0.
[20]
TW Ha. “Rotordynamic analysis for stepped-labyrinth gas seals using Moody’s
friction-factor model”. In: KSME international journal 15.9 (2001), pp. 1217–1225.
url: http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF03185662.
[21]
J.P.Den Hartog. Advanced Strength of Materials. Dover Publications, 1987, p. 400.
isbn: 0486654079.
104
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[22]
GG Hirs. “A bulk-ﬂow theory for turbulence in lubricant ﬁlms”. In: Journal of
Tribology (1973). url: http://tribology.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/
article.aspx?articleid=1462295.
[23]
Y Hsu and CE Brennen. “Fluid ﬂow equations for rotordynamic ﬂows in seals
and leakage paths”. In: Journal of . . . (2002). url: http://fluidsengineering.
asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.aspx?articleid=1429492.
[24]
T Iwatsubo, BC Sheng, and T Matsumoto. “An experimental study on the static
and dynamic characteristics of pump annular seals”. In: (1989). url: http://
ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=19890013533.
[25]
S. Kaneko, Y. Hori, and M Tanaka. “Static and dynamic Characteristics of Annular
Seals”. In: IMechE (1984), p 223–234.
[26]
W Todd Lindsey and Dara W Childs. “The Eﬀects of Converging and Diverging
Axial Taper on the Rotordynamic Coeﬃcients of Liquid Annular Pressure Seals :”
in: Journal of vibration and acoustics 122.April 2000 (2000), pp. 126–131.
[27]
Victor Lucas, Olivier Bonneau, and Jean Frene. “Roughness inﬂuence on turbulent
ﬂow through annular seals including inertia eﬀects”. In: Journal of . . . 1.January
(1996). url: http://tribology.asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.
aspx?articleid=1460755.
[28]
JW Lund. “Review of the concept of dynamic coeﬃcients for ﬂuid ﬁlm journal
bearings”. In: journal of Tribology 109.January (1987). url: http://tribology.
asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.aspx?articleid=1458945.
[29]
S Morosi. “From Hybrid to Actively Controlled Gas Lubricated Bearings Theory
and Experiment”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2011. url: http:
//forskningsbasen.deff.dk/Share.external?sp=S81d9ae55-b6e8-4d00-
8047-ad461da734c4\&sp=Sdtu.
[30]
CC Nelson and DT Nguyen. “Comparison of Hirs’ equation with Moody’s equa-
tion for determining rotordynamic coeﬃcients of annular pressure seals”. In: Jour-
nal of tribology 109.January (1987), pp. 144–148. url: http : / / tribology .
asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/article.aspx?articleid=1458972.
[31]
Kenny Krogh Nielsen, Register Ods, and Harald Underbakke. “GT2012-69878”.
In: GT2012-69878. ASME, 2012, p. 13.
[32]
R Nordmann et al. “Rotor dynamic Coeﬀcients and Leakage Flow of Parallel
Grooved Seals and Smooth Seals”. In: Proceeding of workshop: Rotorydynamic In-
stability Problems in High-Performance Turbumachinery NASA CP-2443 (1987),
pp. 129–153.
[33]
F.W. Ocvirk. “Short-bearing approximation for full journal bearings”. In: (1952).
url: http://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=19930083541.
[34]
Joseph A Schetz and Allan E. Fuhs. Handbook of Fluid Dynamics and Fluid Ma-
chinery. Wiley and Sons, 1996.
105
==PAGE:108==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[35]
JM Sivo. “The inﬂuence of swirl brakes on the rotordynamic forces generated by
discharge-to-suction leakage ﬂows in centrifugal pumps”. In: Journal of . . . 154
(1995), pp. 1–7. url: http://fluidsengineering.asmedigitalcollection.
asme.org/article.aspx?articleid=1427928.
[36]
JM Sivo et al. “The inﬂuence of swirl brakes and a tip discharge oriﬁce on the
rotordynamic forces generated by discharge-to-suction leakage ﬂows in shrouded
centrifugal pumps”. In: (1994). url: http://authors.library.caltech.edu/
149/.
[37]
Steven Chapra. Applied Numerical Methods W/MATLAB: for Engineers & Scien-
tists. Third Edit. McGraw-Hill, 2012, p. 653. isbn: 978-0073401102.
[38]
Eskild Storteig. “Dynamic characteristics and leakage performance of liquid an-
nular seals in centrifugal pumps”. PhD thesis. Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige
universitet, 1999, p. 200. url: http://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/handle/11250/
231234.
[39]
Frank M. White. Fluid Mechanics. 7th editio. McGraw-Hill, 1994, p. 885. isbn:
978-0-07-352934-9. doi: 620.1.06-dc22.
[40]
Y Yamada. “Resistance of a ﬂow through an annulus with an inner rotating
cylinder”. In: Bulletin of JSME (1962). url: http://jlc.jst.go.jp/JST.
Journalarchive/jsme1958/5.302?from=Google.
[41]
Ugur Yucel. Leakage and swirl velocities in labyrinth seals - Thesis and Disser-
tations. Paper 442. Tech. rep. Applied Mathmatics - Lehugh University, 1996,
p. 112. url: http://preserve.lehigh.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=
1442\&context=etd.
[42]
Yang Zhou, Luis San Andres, and Dara W. Childs. “Importance of heat transfer
from ﬂuid ﬁlm to stator in turbulent ﬂow annular seals”. In: Wear 160.2 (Feb.
1993), pp. 269–277. issn: 00431648. doi: 10.1016/0043-1648(93)90431-K. url:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/004316489390431K.
106
==PAGE:109==
Appendices
107
==PAGE:110==
Appendix A
Moody’s Diagram
The Moody’s diagram is a graph in non-dimensional form that relates the Darcy-
Weisbach friction factor, Reynolds number and relative roughness for fully developed
ﬂow in a circular pipe. It can be used for working out pressure drop or ﬂow rate down
such a pipe.
The Moody chart can be divided into two regimes of ﬂow: laminar and turbulent. For
the laminar ﬂow regime, the Darcy-Weisbach friction factor was determined analytically
by Poiseuille. In this regime roughness has no discernible eﬀect. For the turbulent ﬂow
regime, the relationship between the friction factor and the Reynolds number is governed
by the Colebrook equation. The Fanning friction factor is but a quarter of the Darcy-
Weisbach friction factor and the equation for pressure drop has a compensating factor
of four associated to it.
i
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX A. MOODY’S DIAGRAM
Figure A.1: Illustration of Moody’d diagram for determination of the friction constants.
ii
==PAGE:112==
Appendix B
Inﬂuence of the Added Mass
Term as a Function of Seal Length
The following analysis will serve to realize the actual importance of the ﬂuid inertia
arising from [M] onto the dynamic force performance for seal theory, and that the
added mass should only be included for ﬂuids considered incompressible while it can be
neglected for compressible ﬂuids 1.
A way to estimate this was mentioned by the notes of Dr.Andres(2009) 2 where a predic-
tion of the added mass Mxx = Myy is sought. In the following Mfluid denotes the added
mass coming from the working ﬂuid which is assumed to be water ρf = 1000[kg/m3],
and Mrotor the mass of the rotor itself which is assumed to be steel ρs = 7800[kg/m3],
hence the mass of the ﬂuid and rotor is as follow:
Mfluid =ρfπDCrL
Mrotor =ρrπ(D/2)2L
(B.1)
where the added mass can be expressed as:
Mxx =ρfπ(D/2)3 L
Cr

1 −tanh(L/D)
L/D

(B.2)
Evaluating this expression for increasing L/D ratios one could come to the false conclu-
sion that, the increase in weight from the working ﬂuid contained in the seal would be
next to nothing and thus insigniﬁcant, as the length of the seal is increased compared
to the contribution from the rotor.
Figure B.1a and Figure B.1b shows, for two diﬀerent working ﬂuids which could resemble
a compressible and a incompressible working ﬂuid, with the inﬂuence on the inertia
1 -Under the restriction that the density is similar very low as is typically the case for compressible working ﬂuids such as ga
iii
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B.
INFLUENCE OF THE ADDED MASS TERM AS A FUNCTION
OF SEAL LENGTH
coeﬃcient (or added mass) Mxx on the 1st y-axis compared with the eﬀective mass of
the rotor and working ﬂuid on the 2nd y-axis.
Here it is seen how the added mass from the ﬂuid in Figure B.1a, only has little direct
inﬂuence but has a huge signiﬁcance on the added inertia. It should be stressed that the
ﬂuid mass is multiplied with a factor of 103. Similar in Figure B.1b the same analysis
is conducted for a gas with a much lower density. Here it is that the added inertia is
extremely low compared.
The ﬁgures thus proves to indicate that the seal added mass coeﬃcient is orders of
magnitudes larger. Hence, the conclusion is that while one can neglect the added mass
when working with gas, the added mass has to be included when working with liquid
which has a signiﬁcant density.
Variable - L/D ratio
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Added mass - [kg]
0
100
200
Added mass from WATER as a function of length
Mass of fluid and rotor -[kg]
0
10
20
Mxx
Msteel
Mfluid*103
(a) Change in added mass inherent from a heavy ﬂuid, with
ρ = 1000
Variable - L/D ratio
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Added mass - [kg]
0
0.2
0.4
Added mass from GAS as a function of length
Mass of fluid and rotor -[kg]
0
20
Mxx
Msteel
Mfluid*103
(b) Change in added mass inherent from a light ﬂuid, with
ρ = 1
Figure B.1
iv
==PAGE:114==
Appendix C
The boundary value problem
A speciﬁcation of the inlet and outlet conditions must be speciﬁed for the ﬁrst order
equations which is recognized as a boundary value problem. By utilizing that the ODE’s
are sorely linear, the following method is put-upon which: 1) solves the equations for 3
diﬀerent initial conditions and 2) combine the solution of the 3 equations in a way that
all BC’s are fulﬁlled.
By ﬁrstly setting particular solution equal zero and rearrange on the form
d
dzx =
A(f, z)x(z) where the fat notation indicates vector and matrix form. This gives:
d
dz





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





= −


1
h0
dh0
dz
−jωT
0
h0A3θ
h0 (A2θ + jΘ)
−j h0
b ( L
R)
A3z −1
h2
0
dh0
dz + jΘ
A2z + 1
h0 jωT
0







¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





(C.1)
Since the elements in A are all piecewise continues functions of the space variable z there
exists an unique solution to the problem. Hence, by choosing 3 linear independent initial
boundary condition vectors denoted x(z0)for the three state variables w1 u1 and p1, as:
x1(z0) = [100]T = eT
1
(C.2)
x2(z0) = [010]T = eT
2
(C.3)
x3(z0) = [001]T = eT
3
(C.4)
Then, a solution to the previously given homogeneous problem that corresponds to the
boundary conditions can now be arranged in the following square matrix formation:
U(z) = [x1(z) x2(z) x3(z)]
(C.5)
where U(z) is a matrix with the solutions, and U(z0) is simply:
U(z0) =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1


(C.6)
v
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX C.
THE BOUNDARY VALUE PROBLEM
It is seen that this is a linear independent solution.
Thus, by deﬁnition a non-zero
constant vector c must exist such that the initial boundary conditions gives zero for all
displacements z, as:
[x1(z) x2(z) x3(z)]c =





0
0
0





(C.7)
When imposing z = z0 the following is then found:
[x1(z0) x2(z0) x3(z0)]c = [e1 e2 e3]c =





0
0
0





(C.8)
For this the following BC, has been formulated.
Seal motion will not perturb the velocity of the ﬂuid in the tangential direction imme-
diately. Hence the ﬁrst and most simple BC is:
¯u1(z = 0, θ, τ) = 0
(C.9)
Which also mean that there is no reason the develop the second homogeneous solution
in the above system.
The inlet and outlet perturbed pressure boundary conditions are deﬁned similar as the
zero order, and is thus:
p1(z = 0, θ, τ) =−(1 + ξ) · w1(z = 0, θ, τ)
h0(z = 0)
(C.10)
p1(z = 1, θ, τ) =−(1 −ξe) · w1(z = 1, θ, τ)
h0(z = 1)
(C.11)
Translated into ¯p1,¯u1 and ¯w1 it looks like:
¯p1(0) =−(1 + ξ) ¯w1(0)
h0(0)
(C.12)
¯p1(1) =−(1 −ξ) ¯w1(1)
h0(1)
(C.13)
¯u1(0) =0
(C.14)
The solution is a function of f = Ω/ω, the ratio of the precession frequency to the
running speed and could be evaluated over z if the two unknown initial conditions ¯w1(0)
and ¯p1(0) were in-fact known. The most simple of the unknowns can be acquired through
eq. (C.11) where the second will be obtained from eq. (3.67) with the initial conditions
(1,0,0),(0,1,0),(0,0,1) the following transition matrix [Φ(f, z)] is found:
vi
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX C.
THE BOUNDARY VALUE PROBLEM
d
dz





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





= [Φ(f, z)]





¯w1(0)
¯u1(0)
¯p1(0)





+
r0
ϵ






ν1(f, z)
ν2(f, z)
ν3(f, z)





(C.15)
at z = 1 the following is then found.
¯w1(1) = Φ11(1) ¯w1(0) + Φ13(1)¯p1(0) +
r0
ϵ

ν1(1)
(C.16)
¯p1(1) = Φ31(1) ¯w1(0) + Φ33(1)¯p1(0) +
r0
ϵ

ν3(1)
(C.17)
Substituting this into ¯p1 in eq. (C.14) gives the the ﬁnal expression, here given in matrix
form, on the form Ax = b as:


(1+ξ)
h0(0)
1
Φ31(1) + Φ11(1)(1−ξe)
h0(1)
Φ33(1) + Φ13(1)(1−ξe)
h0(1)


(
¯w1(0)
¯p1(0)
)
=
r0
ϵ
 (
0
−ν3(1) −ν1(1)(1−ξe)
h0(1)
)
(C.18)
Taking the inverse as, x = A−1b gives the initial values ¯w1(0) and ¯p1(0) that causes the
boundary conditions to be satisﬁed. The resultant solution from this can be deﬁned as:





¯w1
¯u1
¯p1





=
r0
ϵ






f1c(z, τ) + jf1s(z, τ)
f2c(z, τ) + jf2s(z, τ)
f3c(z, τ) + jf3s(z, τ)





(C.19)
Here, it is assumed that fi = fic+jfis where subscript c and s denotes that the cosine part
is the real part and the sine part is the imaginary part, both describing the amplitude.
"In analogy to ’short-bearing’ solutions, a short-seal solution is developed which accounts
for the circumferential ﬂow due to shear, but neglects that due to pressure.
vii
==PAGE:117==
Appendix D
Alternate friction model based on
E.Storteig
First order perturbation of the friction coeﬃcients result in the following set of pertur-
bation coeﬃcients which are based on the result of E.Storteig(1991) [38] where h∗
0 = h0
when not including grooved stator surface :
A1z = us0
2h2
0
σs0
h0
−∂σs0
∂h0

+ ur0
2h2
0
σr0
h0
−∂σr0
∂h0

(D.1)
inset functions of σs0 and σr0 and collect terms of L/ ¯
Cr will give:
A1z = us0
2h2
0
 L
¯
Cr
 fs0
h0
−∂fs0
∂h0

+ ur0
2h2
0
 L
¯
Cr
 fr0
h0
−∂fr0
∂h0

(D.2)
Which hold two partial derivatives for the zero order friction on the rotor and the stator.
These can be deﬁned as the following:
∂fr0,s0
∂h0
= 1
h0
1
3 (a1 −fr0,s0) = a1 −fr0,s0
3h0
(D.3)
Substitution of Equation (D.3) this back into Equation (D.2) gives:
A1z = us0
2h2
0
 L
¯
Cr
 fs0
h0
−a1 −fs0
3h0

+ ur0
2h2
0
 L
¯
Cr
 fr0
h0
−a1 −fr0
3h0

(D.4)
= 1
2h2
0
 L
¯
Cr
 
us0
fs0
h0
−a1 −fs0
3h0

+ ur0
fr0
h0
−a1 −fr0
3h0

(D.5)
This is done in similar fashion for A2z and A3z which gives the following:
viii
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX D. ALTERNATE FRICTION MODEL BASED ON E.STORTEIG
A2z = b2
2h2
0

u0
σs0
us0
+ ∂σs0
∂us0

+ (u0 −1)
σr0
ur0
+ ∂σr0
∂ur0

(D.6)
A3z = 1
2h3
0
σs0
us0
+ ∂σs0
∂us0

+
σr0
ur0
+ ∂σr0
∂ur0

−1
h2
0
∂h0
∂z +
1
2h0
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0)
(D.7)
And for A1θ, A2θ, and A3θ which gives:
A1θ = 1
2h0

u0us0
σs0
h0
−∂σs0
∂h0

+ (u0 −1) ur0
σr0
h0
−∂σr0
∂h0

(D.8)
A2θ = b2
2h0

u2
0
σs0
h0
+ ∂σs0
∂h0

+ (u0 −1)2
σr0
h0
+ ∂σr0
∂h0

+
1
2h0
(us0σs0 + ur0σr0)
(D.9)
A3θ = 1
2h2
0
"
u0
 
σs0
h0
b2u2
0
w2
0
−∂σs0
∂h0
!
+ (u0 −1)
 
σr0
h0
b2(u0 −1)2
w2
0
−∂σr0
∂h0
!#
(D.10)
Where fr0,s0 are deﬁned as:
fr0,s0 =a1

1 +
 
a2s
h +
a3
h0ur0,s0
!1/3

(D.11)
And the partial derivatives in respect to the pre-swirl velocity is:
∂σr0,s0
∂ur0,s0
= ∂fr0,s0
∂ur0,s0
 L
¯
Cr

= br,s
fr0,s0
ur0,s0
 L
¯
Cr

(D.12)
br,s =

−1
3
1

a2r
h0 +
a3
h0ur0,s0

 
1 −
a1
fr0,s0
!  
a3
h0ur0,s0
!

(D.13)
==PAGE:119==
==PAGE:120==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Solid Mechanics
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 404
DK- 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4250
Fax  (+45) 4593 1475
www.mek.dtu.dk
