==PAGE:1==
METABOLIC CHARACTERIZATION OF 
HETEROTROPHIC DENITRIFICATION 
UNDER DIFFERENT ORGANIC 
SUBSTRATE AVAILABILITY. 
MASTER THESIS 
Academic year 2014/2015 
Saverio Conti 
 
Assoc. Prof. Benèdek G. Plósz 
Prof. Barth F. Smets 
Assoc. Prof. Paola Branduardi 
 
 
Università Milano Bicocca 
Industrial Biotechnology
==PAGE:2==
i 
Abstract 
 
Advantages are many when it comes to the application of biofilm reactors in wastewater 
treatment (i.e. compact units with small size, robustness, low maintenance, flexibility). 
High denitrification rates in moving bed biofilm reactor (MBBR) have already been 
reported (H. Ødegaard 2006), but alternative configurations of the reactors to improve 
the process performance need further investigation. The purpose of this thesis project 
is to explore the potential of heterotrophic denitrification in a three-staged MBBR 
compared to an un-staged conventional reactor. The goal was to achieve increased 
efficiency and performance in the removal of conventional pollutants (NO3,2) under 
carbon-limiting conditions found in real wastewater by reactor specialization to the 
utilization of the most available organic carbon fraction. Furthermore, because carbon-
limitation can lead to large productions of nitrous oxide (N2O) a potent greenhouse 
gas, during heterotrophic denitrification, special attention was given to the monitoring 
of the nitrous oxide productions from the system. 
The heterotrophic denitrification was investigated for 150 days in lab-scale 
MBBR staged and unstaged systems employing a denitrifying specialized biofilm. In 
this study the denitrification process was tested in continuous and batch incubation fed 
with real wastewater. In continuous operation, looking at the overall performance, the 
staged system removed from 10 to 20% more nitrate than the unstaged reactor due to 
reactors specialization in most available organic substrate consumption. Indeed, the 
three staged reactors due to its specialization, presented remarkable different 
transformation rates between them. The productions of nitrous oxide in both systems 
during continuous operation were very low or not detectable (from 0.1 to 1% of the 
nitrate denitrified). In batch incubation, different removal and production rates were 
observed in each reactor where two or three denitrifying metabolic phases were 
identified (lag, first and second phase) related to the consumption rate of different 
carbon sources, readily or slowly biodegradable both provided at the beginning of the 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
ii 
experiment. Nitrous oxide specific production rate in batch incubation resulted up to 
40 – 80% of denitrification rate occurred in U and S2 reactors while not detectable in 
S1 and S3.  Moreover, quantitative Real-Time PCR assay performed on bioreactors 
microbial community of the functional genes nirS, nirK, nosZ and phylogenetic gene 
16S rRNA showed that the specific gene copy abundance was stable over time and 
partially correlated to variations of denitrification in continuous and batch incubation.  
In conclusion, this study indicates that the metabolic adaptation to different 
carbon sources availability and the stability of the microbial community supported by 
the MBBR staging design resulted in higher nitrate removal performances and lower 
N2O productions because of the reactors activities specialization to the experienced 
substrate. In addiction, nitrous oxide productions from the system seem more 
correlated to the carbon availability sudden changes (shocks) than prolonged activity in 
conditions of carbon limitation. The data obtained result useful for denitrification 
process modeling, and the gene abundance opens up for further transcriptomics 
studies, and further analysis of the community structure in the two systems. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
iii
 
Riassunto Della Tesi 
 
Numerosi sono i vantaggi dell’applicazione di bioreattori a biofilm nel processo 
di trattamento di acque reflue (i.e. unità compatte e di dimensioni ridotte, robustezza, 
limitata manutenzione, flessibilità). Alti tassi di denitrificazione sono già stati riportati 
in reattori con biofilm a letto mobile (MBBR) (H. Ødegaard 2006), ma differenti 
configurazioni per il miglioramento delle prestazioni del processo di denitrificazione 
devono ancora essere studiate. Lo scopo di questo progetto di tesi è quello di esplorare 
le prestazioni della denitrificazione eterotrofica in un MBBR sequenziale, a confronto 
di un reattore convenzionale non sequenziale. La finalità è quella di raggiungere una 
maggiore efficienza e migliori prestazioni di rimozione di inquinanti convenzionali 
(NO3,2) in condizioni limitanti di carbonio e in presenza di acque reflue reali dovute alla 
specializzazione dei reattori per l’utilizzo della fonte di carbonio più abbondante. 
Inoltre, poiché una limitata disponibilità di carbonio organico può causare elevate 
productioni di protossido d’azoto, un potente gas serra, particolare attenzione è stata 
data al monitoraggio delle productioni di N2O dal sistema. 
La denitrificazione eterotrofa è stata studiata per 150 giorni in un sistema su scala 
di laboratorio MBBR sequenziale e tradizionale impiegando un biofilm adatto alla 
denitrificazione. In questo studio, il processo è stato testato su scala di laboratorio in 
incubazione continuo e batch in presenza di reali acque reflue. In operazione continuo, 
guardando alle prestazioni totali, il sistema sequenziale ha rimosso dal 10 al 20 % più 
nitrate del sistemza convenzionale, grazie alla specializzazioni dei sottoreattori 
nell’utilizzo del substrato organico più disponibile. Infatti, grazie alla specializzazione 
dei reattori, differenti tassi di denitrificazione sono stati osservati nei diversi reattori. I 
tassi di productione di perossido d’azoto in entrambi I sistemi durante l’operatività in 
continuo sono stati molto bassi o non identificabili ( da 0.1 a 1 %). In incubazione 
batch, differenti tassi di rimozione ed productioni sono stati identificati tra I diversi 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
iv 
reattori, dove due o tre fasi di denitrificazione sono state osservate (lag, fase 1, fase 2) 
legate alle differenti attività metaboliche dipendenti dal tipo di substrato organico 
consumato, facilmente assimilabile o idrolizzabile entrambi provvisti al sistema ad 
inizio esperimento.  
Inoltre, saggi di Real-Time PCR quantitativa eseguiti sulla comunità microbica 
dei bioreattori per i geni funzionali nirS, nirK, nosZ e il gene filogenetico 16S rRNA 
hanno mostrato un numero specifico di copie gene stabile nel tempo parzialmente 
correlato alla variazione di attività denitrificante nel tempo . 
In conclusione, questo studio indica che la specializzazione dei reattori 
nell’utilizzo di una specifica fonte di carbonio e la stabilità della comunità microbica 
supportati dal design dell’MBBR modulare ha comportato prestazioni superiori di 
rimozione di nitrati e basse productioni di N2O. I risultati ottenuti possono essere utili 
per la modellazione dei processi di denitrificazione e come dati preliminari per i futuri 
studi di sequenziamento e trascrittomica. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
v
Index 
ABSTRACT 
I 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 
THESIS OBJECTIVES AND RESEARCH HYPOTHESIS 
3 
2 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
5 
2.1 
BIOLOGICAL DENITRIFICATION AND ECOLOGY 
5 
2.2 
COMMUNITY AND ECOLOGY OF DENITRIFIERS 
7 
2.3 
MOLECULAR TECHNIQUES FOR CHARACTERIZATION OF DENITRIFYING COMMUNITIES 
9 
2.4 
FUNCTIONAL ABUNDANCE RELATED TO SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
10 
2.5 
DENITRIFICATION IN ENGINEERED SYSTEMS 
10 
2.6 
STOICHIOMETRY AND BIOKINETICS OF DENITRIFICATION 
11 
2.7 
FACTORS INFLUENCING DENITRIFICATION AND NITROUS OXIDE PRODUCTION 
13 
2.8 
THE MOVING BED BIOFILM PROCESS 
14 
3 
METHODS 
17 
3.1 
THE CONTINUOUS EXPERIMENT SET-UP 
17 
3.2 
REACTORS ACTIVITY MONITORING IN CONTINUOUS OPERATION 
21 
3.3 
THE BATCH EXPERIMENT 
23 
3.4 
ESTIMATION OF THE SPECIFIC DENITRIFICATION RATES 
25 
3.5 
TSS MEASUREMENTS 
26 
3.6 
NITROUS OXIDE PRODUCTIONS MEASUREMENTS IN CONTINUOUS AND BATCH EXPERIMENT 
27 
3.7 
MICROBIAL BIOFILM DNA EXTRACTION 
29 
3.8 
NIRK, NIRS, NOSZ AND 16S RRNA PRIMERS SELECTION AND EXPERIMENTAL SPECIFICITY 
EVALUATION 
29 
3.9 
REAL TIME-PCR STANDARDS PRODUCTION 
33 
3.10 
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSES OF MICROBIAL DNA SAMPLES 
36 
4 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
37 
4.1 
PRIMARY METABOLISM 
37 
4.2 
THE ELECTRON DONOR 
37 
4.3 
DENITRIFYING PERFORMANCE AND NITROGEN SPECIES TRANSFORMATION 
40 
4.4 
BIOMASS QUANTIFICATION 
44 
4.5 
NITROUS OXIDE PRODUCTIONS INVESTIGATION IN CONTINUOUS FLOW EXPERIMENT 
45 
4.6 
THE BATCH EXPERIMENT 
49 
4.7 
INVESTIGATION OF THE PRIMARY METABOLISM AND DENITRIFICATION RATES 
49 
4.8 
DENITRIFICATION PERFORMANCES AS ORGANIC SUBSTRATE DEPLETION 
54 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
vi 
4.9 
NITROUS OXIDE PRODUCTION RATES QUANTIFICATION 
56 
4.10 
SPECIFICITY ASSESSMENT OF NOSZ PRIMERS. 
59 
4.11 
QUANTIFICATION OF NIRK, NIRS, NOSZ AND 16S RDNA IN BIOFILM SAMPLES. 
60 
5 
CONCLUSIONS 
65 
6 
APPENDIX 
69 
6.1 
APPENDIX 
69 
6.2 
APPENDIX 
70 
6.3 
APPENDIX 
71 
6.4 
APPENDIX 
80 
6.5 
APPENDIX 
84 
6.6 
APPENDIX 
88 
7 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
vii
List of Tables  
 
Table 3-1 Reactors specifics ...................................................................................................... 18 
Table 3-2set-up specification ..................................................................................................... 20 
Table 3-2 Primers for 16S rRNA, nirS, nirK PCR amplification ....................................... 30 
Table 3-3 Primers for atypical nosZ PCR amplification ...................................................... 31 
Table 3-4 Primers for typical nosZ PCR amplification ........................................................ 31 
Table 3-6 Composition of PCR solution in 25 µl ................................................................. 32 
Table 3-5 PCR conditions for nirK, nirS and atypical nosZ ............................................... 32 
Table 3-6 PCR conditions for typical nosZ ............................................................................ 33 
Table 4-1 mgCOD consumed for incomplete denitrification to Nitric Oxide and Nitrous 
Oxide ............................................................................................................................... 44 
Table 4-2 N2O productions over nitrate denitrified. ............................................................ 47 
Table 4-3 Denitrification rates during batch incubation calculated on NOX removal 
values. .............................................................................................................................. 54 
Table 4-4 Denitrification and nitrous oxide production specific rates identified for each 
different phase and compared, values have been normalized for the active surface 
of biofilm employed ..................................................................................................... 58 
Table 4-5 Gene copies number 16s rRNA, nirK, nirS and nosZ and ratio nirS/nirK .. 61 
Table 4-6 R values calculated by Pearson correlation test ................................................... 63 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
viii 
 
 
List of Figures 
 
Figure 2-1 Canonical respiratory chain of denitrification ...................................................... 6 
Figure 2-2: Alternative respiratory chain of denitrification ................................................... 6 
Figure 2-3 Phylogenetic tree of commonly isolated wastewater denitrifiers (Lu 2014). .. 8 
Figure 3-1 K1 Carriers AnoxKaldnessTM ................................................................................ 17 
Figure 3-2 Overview of the continuous flow experiment ................................................... 19 
Figure 3-3 Batch experiment set-up overview. ...................................................................... 23 
Figure 3-4 Expected profile of N2O productions ................................................................. 28 
Figure 3-5 Standard preparation overview ............................................................................. 34 
Figure 4-1 Influent quality expressed as combined biodegradable Ss and Xs fractions. 38 
Figure 4-2 ΔsCOD in S1, S2 and S3 reactors of the staged system in 8 water batch, over 
150 days, the blue line represents the change in the quantity of the feeding 
medium. .......................................................................................................................... 39 
Figure 4-3 Performance of staged and unstaged lines in NOX (NO3,2) removal in 
comparison. Dot and triangle show the total removal of NOX mg-N m-2 h-1, bars 
show the difference in performance as percentage. ................................................ 40 
Figure 4-4 NOX reduction performance for single reactor in continuous flow experiment 
at days 4, 14, 30, 40, 60, 120, 150. .............................................................................. 41 
Figure 4-6 Available bCOD or potential denitrifiable substrate over the observed 
consumption considering a fixed. .............................................................................. 43 
Figure 4-6 TSS variation in time for each reactor under studies. ....................................... 45 
Figure 4-7 estimations of nitrous oxide production rates measured in liquid phase 
continuous for the four reactors at day 60, 120, 150. ............................................. 46 
Figure 4-8 S1 N-species, two phases identified. .................................................................... 51 
Figure 4-9 S2 N-species, initial lag phase two more phases identified. ............................. 51 
Figure 4-10 S3 N-species, initial lag phase and two more phases identified. ................... 52 
Figure 4-11 U N-species, initial lag phase and two more phases identified. .................... 52 
Figure 4-12 Denitrification performances expressed as mgCOD equivalent for S1, S2, S3 
and U reactors in batch incubation. ........................................................................... 55 
Figure 4-13 Nitrous oxide production rates in liquid phase at different times during batch 
incubation for reactors S1, S2, S3 and U. The dashed line indicates the end of the 
first observed phase. ..................................................................................................... 56 
Figure 4-14 Number of gene copies per ng of DNA calculated from the Ct number 
detected correlated to the proper standard curve. .................................................. 61 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
ix
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
1 
1 
I n t r o d u c t i o n  
It is widely recognized that treatment of high concentration of nitrates in wastewater is a 
key issue of concern for every modern, industrial societies. The discharge of high amount 
of nitrogen to the environment is considered responsible of destabilization of natural 
ecosystems causing directly and indirectly problems for the public health. The thrust to 
achieve greater nitrogen removal performance and efficiency by wastewater treatment 
plants, while minimizing infrastructure investments, operating costs and process’ carbon 
footprint, has resulted in the devising of a wide range of innovative biological nitrogen 
removal processes and bioreactors design optimization. Biological Nitrate Removal (BNR) 
strategies can be a potential contributor to atmospheric nitrous oxide (N2O) depending 
upon the reactor design and operating conditions. This gaseous form of nitrogen is an 
obligate intermediate of the denitrification pathway and it has a greenhouse impact per 
molecule three hundred more times higher than carbon dioxide and considered 
contributing to depletion of ozone layer, its whole effects and productions are currently 
actively researched by environmental scientists and of great interest by the environment 
regulative agencies (Marlies J. Kampschreura 2009). Considering BNR are implemented 
in wastewater treatment plants nationwide, total productions of nitrous oxide are 
potentially on concerning levels. Measurements collected in lab-scale and full-scale 
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) proved that N2O can be emitted in substantial 
amount during not only aerobic nitrification process but especially anaerobic 
denitrification process; however, productions reported in lab scale systems and treatment 
plants are very heterogeneous also because not many information are available on the 
topic. Literature review suggests that many operational parameters play a key role in N2O 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
2 
production rates (i.e. dissolved oxygen concentration, nitrite concentration, low COD/N 
ratio, microbial community structure and activity). Therefore, operational strategies to 
prevent N2O production from WWTPs consist in adopting optimized and improved 
treatment engineered process addressing the presented problems. Moving bed biofilm 
reactors (MBBRs) have proven to be robust, compact and flexible bioreactors with high 
potential denitrification performance. Furthermore, biofilm processes display a number of 
additional advantages over activated sludge reactors, such as: no final sludge separation, 
biomass further specialization and less space demanding plants. In addition, MBBRs have 
a potential for further optimization of biological kinetics by bioreactor staging, already 
proven in activated sludge systems (H. Ødegaard 2006). Biofilm reactors employing 
carriers offer a more stable environment than activated sludge recirculation systems, 
implying a weaker natural selection pressure on slow growing microorganisms. There are 
evidences that high-biodiversity communities take great advantages of the multiple niche 
opportunities and divers systems capture a great proportion of biologically available 
resources (Cardinale2011). Further improvement of the system by process staging has to 
be investigated as a solution for improvement of performance, process efficiency and 
robustness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
3 
1.1 Thesis Objectives and Research Hypothesis 
The overall purpose of this thesis project is to investigate the performance, the efficiency 
and the carbon footprint of a lab-scale unstaged and staged anoxic MBBR as innovative 
technology for the removal of conventional (i.e. nitrate) pollutants from municipal 
wastewater under carbon limitation. More specifically, the objectives of the thesis are:  
• To compare and assess the heterotrophic denitrification performance and metabolic 
rates of 3-staged and unstaged MBBR reactor configuration under continuous flow 
conditions and batch incubation, using real municipal wastewater as feed; 
• To assess the correct functioning of the staged system in differentiation of the 
availability of organic substrate in the different reactors and the specialization of the 
reactors in its consumption; 
• To compare and assess the completion of the denitrification process and the 
production of Nitrous Oxide in the liquid phase in the staged and unstaged MBBR 
under continuous flow operation; 
• Assuming that steady state is reached in terms of biomass characteristics, to assess 
the specialization of reactors substrate consumption and its correlation with 
functional genes nirS, nirK, nosZ abundance; 
The investigation of the experimental set-up implied the validation of the following 
hypothesis: 
• The staged configuration of the MBBR system determines a differentiation in the 
availability and characteristics of the carbon substrate between reactors. 
• In the staged configuration, the microbial community of different reactors adapt and 
specialize to metabolize the most available substrate.  
==PAGE:14==
 
 
4 
• The adaptations of the bacterial community in the staged configuration responsible 
for higher removal rates of conventional pollutants and as a buffer for nitrous oxide 
productions under carbon limitation. denitrification activity is more efficient and 
resilient to fluctuations in system conditions with lower N2O productions. 
• The specialization of the microbial community is related to the abundance of 
functional genes nirS, nirK and nosZ in the bioreactors.
==PAGE:15==
 
5 
2 
B a c k g r o u n d  i n f o r m a t i o n  
 
2.1 Biological Denitrification and Ecology 
Complete biological denitrification is the sequential bioreduction of oxidized nitrogen 
species to nitrogen gas (N2). In absence of oxygen, nitrates (NO3
−) and nitrites (NO2
−) are 
the most common electron acceptors in solution and by complete denitrification they are 
reduced to nitric oxide (NO), to nitrous oxide (N2O) and finally to (N2) (Zumft 1997). 
 
Procaryotic denitrification and aerobic respiration depend on the same core oxido-
reductive machinery consisting of the NADH dehydrogenase (complex I), the quinone 
pool, the bc1 complex (complex III) and cytochrome c. The complete respiration of 
nitrogen oxidate species requires a complex ensemble of components in which in place of 
a terminal oxidase (complex IV) which accepts electrons either from cytochrome c or the 
quinone pool four modules are found: nitrate reductase, nitrite reductase, nitric oxide 
reductase and nitrous oxide reductase (Zumft 1997) (Richardson 1999). While the 
canonical definition of denitrification is the reduction of nitrate to nitrogen gas, the 
reduction of nitrogen oxide species at each step can be carried out separately for the 
purpose of energy optimization, where the denitrification genes expression depends on 
their energetic need or substrate availability. For example, some organisms may have 
truncated pathways where the end product is nitrite, in the case of microrganisms called 
incomplete denitrifiers, or nitrous oxide, in the case of a lack of the nosZ gene responsible 
for the reduction of N2O in nitrogen gas (Chen 2013). Microorganisms that contain at 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
6 
least two or three reductive enzymes of nitrogen oxidated species and produce nitrous 
oxide or dinitrogen gas will be referred to as “denitrifiers”. 
All studied denitrifiers are capable of oxygen respiration in aerobic conditions, thus 
carrying a complex and branched respiration machinery adapted to plug-in the necessary 
components to support their metabolism in different oxygen availability conditions. 
Although the modular operating of the denitrification is represented in series from the 
perspective of electron acceptor:  
NO3
− → NO2
− → NO → N2O → N2, the molecular machinery operates in parallel and 
all modules accept electrons from cytochrome or quinol poll. 
 
Figure 2-1 Canonical respiratory chain of denitrification 
 
Figure 2-2: Alternative respiratory chain of denitrification 
 
In the canonical chain of denitrification Figure 2-1, electrons are transferred in four steps 
from NADH to NOX reductases (nitrate, nitrite, nitric oxide and nitrous oxide reductases) 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
7 
via complex I, ubiquinone/ubiquinol, complex III and cytochrome c. Protons are 
removed from the cytoplasm by complex I, complex III (Q-cycle) and the cytoplasmic 
nitrate reductase. Overall, the contribution to the proton motive force is 6 or 5.5 protons 
per electron pair (Chen 2013). 
 
Molecular studies on numerous different denitrifiers disclosed alternative forms of 
denitrifying enzyme complexes (Figure 2-2) consisting of a periplasmatic nitrate reductase 
module called Nap, copper type nitrite reductase Nirk and a quinol dependent nitric oxide 
reductase (qNor). In this case, cytochrome c is replaced by the alternative transporter 
Pseudoazurine (Paz) (Liu 1999) (Moir 1994) (Koutny 1999). Overall, the contribution to 
the proton motive force is 5.6 proton per electron pair. 
 
2.2 Community and Ecology of Denitrifiers 
The denitrifying ability is wide spread within different ecosystems and bacterial phyla 
almost exclusively in facultative anaerobes, up to 5% of the total amount of bacteria in 
soil are considered capable of nitrogen oxidized species respiration. However, denitrifying 
capacity is not restricted solely to bacteria, few Archeas have been isolated with proven 
denitrifying activity (R. Knowles 1982) (Cabello P. 2004) (R. Knowles 1996). 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
8 
 
Figure 2-3 Phylogenetic tree of commonly isolated wastewater denitrifiers (Lu 2014). 
The majority of currently characterised denitrifiers belong to the phylum of pro- 
teobacteria. Specifically, they have been identified in four classes, Alpha-, Beta-, Gamma-, 
Deltaproteobacteria and also, but in minor entity, among Bacteroidetes, Gram-positive bacteria 
Firmicutes and Actinobacteria. This remarkable diversity of denitrifying communities varies 
sensibly among different environments (R. Knowles 1996). Phylogenetic 16s rRNA gene-
based studies indicate a relative high diversity and species richness of wastewater 
denitrifying communities. However, in wastewater treatment processes the diversity of 
denitrifying bacteria is commonly lower than other environments (e.g. soil) (Throbäck 
2006). This diversity is only partially represented in bacterial strains isolated from biofilm 
and suspended sludge in denitrifying bioreactors under controlled medium composition. 
A discrepancy exists with those actually dominating in real denitrifying systems for 
wastewater treatment, most of which are taxonomically classified as Proteobacteria (59%) 
and Bacteroidetes (16%) Figure 2-3 (T. Zhang 2012) (Lu 2014). Moreover, the abundance of 
dominant populations in denitrifying communities also vary significantly between 
treatment plants, depending on the treatment systems and conditions, influent 
characteristics, especially with different carbon sources (Lu 2014)  
 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
9 
2.3 Molecular techniques for characterization of denitrifying 
communities 
Because of such variability of the community structure found in wastewater denitrifying 
systems, it is strongly believed that optimization of the microbial community structure and 
functioning should be a major objective in the design and operation for the improvement 
of a treatment system assuring a consistent long-term performance (Yuan Z 2002). For 
this purpose, a key issue in studies of microbial communities consists in defining the 
identity and abundance of the resident active populations (Yuan Z 2002). Un-culture based 
approaches with a strong discern ability use molecular techniques for targeting 
phylogenetic and functional biomarkers (e.g. 16s rRNA or denitrification genes). 16s 
rRNA sequences allow more accurate taxonomic assignments than any other method. 
However, since the ability to denitrify is sporadically distributed within bacteria, and 
cannot be utterly associated with any specific taxonomic group, the use of 16S rRNA gene 
is rather impractical. Therefore, many studies focused on targeting denitrifying functional 
genes for nitrite reduction nirS and nirK (Heylen K 2006) and nitrous oxide reductase 
nosZ (Throback IN 2004). Because of the univocal relation between the denitrifiers and 
these functional genes, their quantification gives also information on the abundance of the 
microbial community. However, when investigating the performance in wastewater 
treatment processes, tools that give an insight in the quantitative distribution of nitrogen-
cycling communities in a large number of samples and short times are requested. 
Molecular tools as microarray and FISH are largely used in the field of wastewater ecology 
analysis yet major drawback as sensitive, quantitative accuracy and spatial uncertainty are 
a present issues (Wu L 2004) (Manser R 2005). On the other hand, quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) methods such as competitive and real-time PCR assays have shown 
a much higher sensitivity but are limited by the quantification of only one target gene at a 
time and PCR biases (Wallenstein MD 2005). 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
10
2.4 Functional abundance related to system performance 
In any biological wastewater treatment system microorganisms are the the core of the 
transformation process, therefore investigating changes in microbial community structure 
and functionality and understanding their correlation is an important step toward 
improvement in designing and optimization of wastewater treatment processes. Large-
scale and lab-scale denitrifying bioreactor are characterized by pressing selective 
conditions, high concentration of oxidized nitrogen species and different carbon 
substrates as the most relevant, which promote or limit the abundance of denitrifying 
microbes in the system under analysis. A higher abundance in denitrifying community can 
be connected to a higher metabolic activity and improved performance of the treatment 
system. On the other hand, because of the polyphyletic nature of heteretrophic denitrifiers, 
as previously stated, denitrifying systems are inclined to develop communities rich in 
numerous and different populations with potential differences in metabolic activities, 
especially in carbon consumption and nitrogen species reduction. In denitrifying systems, 
studies reported significant correlation between functional genes nirK and nirS abundance 
with denitrification activity (Wang 2014) (Guo GX 2013), and in some cases more nirK 
rather than nirS (Smith 2008). More over, it was observed that nirK denitrifiers higher 
sensitivity to environmental gradients, whereas denitrifiers harboring nirS are mainly 
driven by nitrate availability (Jones 2008). The quantification of nosZ gene copies is also 
considered consistent to understand the denitrification completion and to identify the 
potential as nitrous oxide sink of a wastewater denitrifying system. 
 
2.5 Denitrification in engineered systems 
Heterotrophic denitrification requires organic substrate for the reduction of nitrate. In 
process designing the source of the organic substrate is internal (i.e. present in the 
wastewater) for pre denitrification (pre D) systems, where the denitrification anoxic 
reactor precedes the nitrification aerobic reactor with high recirculation ratios. Conversely, 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
11
denitrification post D systems function with dosed substrate to the wastewater. Main 
advantages and disadvantages of these configurations is the absence of carbon 
augmentation in a pre denitrification configuration because the system is only supported 
by the biodegradable organic materials in the influent, however the main drawback 
associated with this configuration is the potential incomplete nitrate removal under carbon 
limiting conditions. On the other hand, post denitrification can achieve complete nitrate 
removal independently from the composition of the influent with external carbon sources 
added intro the secondary anoxic zone. Barnard combined the pre and post denitrification 
into the four stage Bardenpho process, joining the advantages of the two described 
configurations (Metcalf and Eddy 1991). In this process, the pre anoxic zone uses organics 
in the influent to remove a large part of nitrate (recirculated from the following aerobic 
zone). The remaining nitrate at the end of the process is reduced in the secondary anoxic 
zone by supplemented carbon. These here presented processes are usually applied with 
suspended biomass but biofilm configurations can be devised with proper adaptations. 
Several organic carbon sources have historically been used to augment the rate of the 
denitrification process, including methanol, ethanol, acetate, molasses (US-EPA 1993). Of 
these substrates, methanol is one the most widely used due to its low cost and low growth 
yield (Lee 1996). However, the price of this chemical compound is very fluctuating due to 
its diverse application at industrial level. In addition, as a highly flammable liquid with a 
low flash point of 49 °C, special designing requirements are needed by legislation code 
about safe storage and handling. Consequently, optimizing processes base only on organic 
electron donors present in the influent can be a cost effective decision for many 
wastewater treatment plants with average low nitrate concentration and sufficient 
biodegradable carbon. 
2.6 Stoichiometry and biokinetics of denitrification 
In an anoxic reactor on a pre denitrification configuration, considering that no dosing of 
external carbon source (methanol, ethanol etc.) occurs, the only organic substrate available 
for the biological transformations is the fraction normally occurring in the wastewater. 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
12
Based on estimations on the average composition of the biodegradable fraction in 
wastewater the complete reductive denitrification process is described by the following 
stoichiometric relation: 
 
Eq 2-1 
C10H19O3N+10NO3
-→5N2+10CO2+3H2O+NH3+10H-  
Eq 2-2 
2NO3+12H++10e-→N2+6H2O 
Eq 2-3 
2NO2
-+4H++4e-→N2+4H2O 
 
According to the previous half reactions, considering the heterotrophic yield (YH) 
expressing the amount of biomass grown per amount of substrate consumed, and the 
grams of COD, which is typical the measure for availability of organic carbon or chemical 
oxygen demand, per electron equivalent (8 gCOD). The following ratio estimate the 
amount of COD necessary to reduce completely 1 mg of N O3 − N or 1 mg of N O2 − 
N by heterotrophic denitrification: 
 
Eq 2-4 
10#$
2 '()#* (+ ,-.
$
1
1 −01
=
80 '45-6
2 ×144,-. −,
1
1 −01
= 2.86
1 −01
'45-6
4,-. −, 
 
Considering YH =0.5 (e-/e-) (Henze 2008) for heterotrophic denitrification the resulting 
amount for the complete denitrification is 5,72 mgCOD/mgNO3-N.  
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
13
2.7 Factors influencing denitrification and nitrous oxide production 
Several factors have been determined affecting heterotrophic denitrification under various 
conditions (Mateju Vit et al. 1992) (G. Tchobanoglous 2003). It has been found that the 
denitrification rate in wastewater treatment system is mainly influenced by: 
• DO concentration; 
• pH; 
• COD/NO3-N ratio  
Efficient denitrification is achieved by assuring the anaerobic conditions of the process. The 
presence of oxygen represses differently the activity and the synthesis of the enzymes in the 
complete denitrification (R. Knowles 1982) (K.L.Thomas 1994). However, bacteria have 
different response to variations in oxygen concentration. Studies show that when oxygen is 
provided to an anaerobic denitrifying system Nar and Nir gene expressions is suppressed in 
about 3-4 hours (R. Knowles 1996) (Mateju Vit et al. 1992). N2Or seems the most sensible 
to oxygen presence which inhibits almost immediately the enzyme activity. Consequently, in 
case of low oxygen concentration, denitrification is interrupted resulting into high nitrous 
oxide productions. 
Denitrification is a chemical process which consumes protons for reduction of nitrate to 
nitrogen gas, resulting in an increase of alkalinity of the medium (R. Knowles 1982). The 
optimum pH range for denitrification is 7.0 to 8.0. Experimental assessment on pure 
cultures showed that the productions of N2O increased when pH was not in the optimum 
range, being maximum at pH 8. (Thomsen JK 1994) Furthermore, pH value higher than 8.5 
have shown to be promoting conditions for accumulation of the intermediate NO2 which 
was also associated with higher productions in nitrous oxide because of the hindering effect 
it exercise on denitrification pathway (Marlies J. Kampschreura 2009) (Thomsen JK 1994). 
The lack of biodegradable organic carbon is an important factor governing denitrification 
performance and nitrous oxide production (Chung 2000) (Schalk-Otte 2000). For complete 
denitrification, a COD to N ratio above 5 is required. Under conditions of limited carbon 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
14
sources the denitrification enzymes compete for electrons potentially resulting in an 
incomplete reduction process. This effect has been observed in experimental reactors and 
with pure culture determining an increase of about 30-60 % in N2O productions in carbon 
deficiency, phenomena promptly  suppressed by carbon dosage (Schalk-Otte 2000). The 
causes to this phenomena could be explained by the fact that the NO3
− and NO2
− reductases 
have relatively higher affinity for electrons than the NO and N2O reductases (R. Knowles 
1982). However exceptions exits considering that carbon sources have different metabolic 
pathway and denitrifying bacteria have varying metabolisms. Therefore, the availability of 
different carbon sources and the enrichment of a denitrifying community may enrich 
different group of bacteria and have positive impacts on denitrification efficiency. 
 
 
 
2.8 The moving bed biofilm process 
Bacteria in aquatic environments when provided with solid supports, have a tendency to 
attach to surfaces and form extensive layered multi-species complex communities called 
biofilms (Metcalf and Eddy 1991) (Syron 2007) The microbes are able to generate a perfect 
environment for their own sustenance by producing extracellular polymeric substances 
(EPS), which form complexes with the surface materials supporting the microbial cells 
adhesion. The EPS is made of polymeric carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, free nucleic acids 
and water. A mature biofilm is a complex ecological ecosystem composed of different, 
interacting species and a mixture of active and dormant or dying cells, inorganic and 
organic materials and tunnels filled with water (Korber 1995) (O’Toole 2000). 
The biofilm exhibits structural, chemical and biological heterogeneity. A schematic 
organization of the biofilm divides it in three compartments: the bulk liquid, the boundary 
layer and the biofilm itself, the whole structure is supported by the biofilm (Henze 2008). 
The metabolic activities within the biofilm layer and the diffusion process generate 
concentration gradients of nutrients, signaling compound and bacterial waste (Stewart 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
15
2008). The diffusion of all these components regulates the mass transport of substrates 
which can become the limiting process, hindering substrate degradation (H. Ødegaard 
2006). The different substrate availability within the biofilm, together with the bacteria 
location, also affect microbial competition. Bacteria respond to gradients, different 
chemical and physical conditions within the biofilm are the driving force of the community 
differentiation and adaptation. The microorganisms on the surface may have easily access 
to the substrate but they are more subject to wash out, vice versa the bacteria living deeply 
in the layer are protected from the detachment but experience different concentrations of 
substrates. These conditions may eventually change with the biofilm re-shaping over time 
(Stewart 2008). The ecology of biofilms is complex and varies depending on the 
conditions, the different microbial species occupy niches which often imply a symbiotic 
relationship which matches with the activities of other biofilm dwellers. 
A way of application of biofilm biochemical transformations activities is in a compact 
biofilm process designed to use suspended inert carriers that moves freely within the 
reactor. Carrier materials are generally made of polyethylene in shape of cylinders with a 
cross in side, providing the microorganisms with a protected surface to grow on. The 
carriers are kept in motion by gas bubbling or mechanical stirring, a sieve in the outlet 
keeps the moving carriers in the reactor. Different shapes and size of the carrier material 
provides an effective specific surface ranging from 220−1200 m2/m3. Biofilm thickness 
depends on carrier design and hydraulic conditions in the reactor (H. Ødegaard 1994). 
The intent is to design the process and select the suitable carrier type which prevent the 
formation of a stagnant laminar layer over the biofilm, causing an increase in the 
diffusional resistance limiting the biofilm processes. 
The most significant advantage of biofilm systems, as opposed to activated sludge, relies 
in the fact that biofilm reactors do not clog and there is no need for backwashing or 
biomass recycling (H. Ødegaard 1994). Three type of biofilm reactors are generally 
distinguished: non submerged system, submerged fixed bed biofilm reactors and different 
kinds of fluidized bed reactors (Henze 2008). 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
16
Biofilm systems have performances similar to the activate sludge system, but more 
advantages characterize the biofilm designed processes. This technology provides cost-
effective treatment with minimal maintenance since MBBR processes self-maintain an 
optimum level of productive biofilm. Additionally, the biofilm attached to the mobile 
biocarriers within the system automatically responds to load fluctuations. The MBBR 
process with a complete mix and continuous flow through, combines the advantage of 
fixed biofilm and suspended growth processes, this advantages include (AnoxKaldnes™, 
Veolia s.d.) (H. Ødegaard 2006): 
• Compact design, the size is a fraction than conventional systems; 
• Expandable, the capacity can be easily upgraded by simply increasing the fill 
fraction of biofilm carriers; 
• Enhanced process stability, the system is superior at coping with changing 
influent characteristics and shock loads; 
• Single pass process, the returning stream of activated sludge with the correlated settling 
tank is not required; 
• Minimal maintenance, no F/M (food-to-mass) ratio or MLSS (mixed liquor 
suspended solids) levels to maintain; 
• Development of symbiotic microbial communities adapted to different niches; 
• Richer microbial community, because of the decoupling of hydraulic retention time 
(HRT) and sludge residence time (SRT) the system allows the accumulation of slower 
growing organisms and richer microbial communities (Stefan Wuertz 2003) (Stewart 
2008). 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
17
3 
M e t h o d s  
 
This chapter provides a description of the set-ups for the continuous flow and the batch 
experiments. The analytical methods used to monitor the performance and the chemical 
reactions of the biofilm in each reactor are also described. The protocols for all the analysis 
are reported in details in the appendix of this thesis. 
 
3.1 The continuous experiment set-up 
The set-up of the continuous flow experiment consists of two anoxic moving bed biofilm 
reactors on a laboratory scale operating heterotrophic denitrification and employing k1 
carriers from AnoxKaldnesTM.  
 
 
Figure 3-1 K1 Carriers AnoxKaldnessTM 
The set-up of the system was designed in accordance of the one by Plosz (2007). For the 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
18
experiment a staged and an unstaged line operate in parallel. The two lines are running 
under the same operating conditions (volume, hydraulic retention time, and feeding 
medium) permitting a comparison and assessment of the operating performances. The 
staged line consists of three cylindrical sub-reactors in series. Previous studies on staged 
activated sludge reactors suggest an optimal configuration consisting of three MBBR 
reactors (Sean E. Scuras et al., 2001) (Plosz B., 2007). The first two reactors (S1 and S2) 
have the same operating volume; they are transparent PVC cylinders, 1 cm thick, 60 cm 
high and 7 cm in external diameter. The third reactor (S3) is again a transparent PVC 
cylinder, 60 cm high and 10 cm in external diameter. The reactors have respectively 1,5 L 
and 3 L volume capacity and the total volume capacity of the system is 6L. Each reactor 
is connected to the next one by approximately 50 cm long PVC pipes of 0.5 cm diameter. 
The un-staged line consists of one cylindrical reactor of 1 cm thick PVC with 6 L volume 
capacity, it is 80 cm high and 12 cm in diameter. The reactor specifications are summarized 
in Table 3-1. 
 
Table 3-1 Reactors specifics 
Line  
Reactor 
Flow 
(mL/h) 
Volume 
(L) 
Height 
(cm) 
Outer 
diam. 
(cm) 
Inner 
diam. 
(cm) 
Material 
Unstaged 
 
625 
6 
80 
12 
11 
PVC 
Staged 
S1 
1.5 
60 
7 
6 
 
S2 
1.5 
60 
7 
6 
 
S3 
3 
60 
10 
9 
 
The four moving bed biofilm reactors (MBBRs) are filled with plastic suspended carriers, 
Kaldnes K1. The filling ratio is set to 30% ensuring the free circulation of the carriers and 
homogeneous mixing. AnoxKaldnes suggests a filling ratio of 60% for K1, but the small 
diameter in reactors S1 and S2 limit the maximum filling ratio. Continuously stirred 
reactors and circulation of the carriers are primarily achieved by sparging nitrogen gas (N2) 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
19
from the bottom.  
N2 sparging is of fundamental importance in order to ensure low concentration of DO 
and no aerobic zones. To further reduce the potential exchange of O2 between the air and 
the water surface the reactors were provided with polystyrene lids and rubber tops sealing. 
This expedient allows to keep the systems in a state of confirmed absence of DO in the 
four reactors. 
 
 
Figure 3-2 Overview of the continuous flow experiment 
The feeding medium used is pre-clarified wastewater collected fresh from Lundtofte 
WWTP (Lyngby), every batch is stored in a 200L tank for 4-5 days at the average 
temperature of 2-3 °C. The tank is continuously mixed by a mechanical stirrer. The cold 
temperature is kept in order to avoid biological degradation of the nutrients by a settled 
biofilm formed in the storage tank and the recirculation pipes. The mechanical stirring 
contributes to prevent biofilm surface adhesion and in order to keep the particulate in the 
water homogeneously suspended. The two lines are fed by a peristaltic pump from a loop 
for the recirculation of the wastewater. The flow rate is 15 L/d (625 mL/h) in both the 
NO3
V = 6 L
V = 1.5 L
V = 1.5 L
V = 3 L
30 L/d
2.4 L/d
∼100 mgN/L
N2
Wastewater storage 
tank (200 L)
S1
S2
S3
U
==PAGE:30==
 
 
20
lines and the entire set-up consumes 30 L/d. The two lines have 6 L capacity in total each 
and the average hydraulic retention time (HRT) is 8.88 hours. 
The COD content naturally occurring in the medium is the only organic substrate available 
for the denitrification and no extra source is added. Nitrate are supplied to the system in 
form of solution made by dissolving Potassium Nitrates (KNO3) in distilled water. The 
amount of nitrates supplied to the system is very large ensuring that the denitrification is 
not limited in any of the reactors. The solution is pumped by one peristaltic pump directly 
into S1 and U reactors, the flow is set to 50 mL/h (3,8% of the total flow) and the 
concentration of the nitrates solution is 10 gKNO3/L. 
 
Table 3-2set-up specification 
Line 
Reactor 
Flow 
(mL/h) 
NO3 flow 
(mL/h) 
NO3 dose 
(mg/L) 
Reactor 
volume (L) 
HRT 
(day-1) 
Unstaged 
 
625 
50 
103 
6 
0.37 
Staged 
S1 
1.5 
0,09 
 
S2 
1.5 
0,09 
 
S3 
3 
0,18 
 
The biofilm’s origin – K1 AnoxKaldnes from Sjölunda WWTP (Malmo, SWE)  
The reactors have been filled with AnoxKaldnes K1 carriers already colonized from the 
post-denitrification anoxic reactor in Sjölunda WWTP (Malmo, SWE). The specific 
surface of K1 carriers is 500 m2/m3, AnoxKaldnes estimated an average “carrier density” 
of 1000 carrier/L. The plant is designed for 550,000 population equivalents; the biological 
treatment consists of high-loaded activated sludge, nitrification with trickling filters and 
post-denitrification with MBBR. The anoxic reactor consists of two zones in series and 
the carbon is supplied in the first zone in the form of methanol. The carriers were collected 
from the second zone in order to shorten the adaptation period and to have a potential 
richer denitrifying community. The biomass per carrier in the second zone is 2.9 
mg/carrier and the concentration is 1.4 kgTSS/m3.  
==PAGE:31==
 
 
21
 
The feeding medium – wastewater from Lundtofte WWTP (Lyngby, DK) The 
feeding medium is pre-clarified wastewater from Lundtofte WWTP (Lyngby, DK). 
Lundtofte WWTP has been designed for a population of 135.000 person equivalents, its 
catchment area is 32 km2 and no hospitals are served. The sampling point in the plant is 
the sump between the primary settling tank and the aeration tank before the recirculation 
of the activated sludge. We were sampling around 200 L of pre-clarified wastewater every 
4-5 days with dry weather conditions and mainly at 12:00 p.m., when the peak of 
household discharges flow occurs. 
 
3.2 Reactors activity monitoring in continuous operation 
The primary and secondary metabolism were monitored in terms of nitrate removal and 
sCOD consumption. 
,-.$;<=>?<=
$
= ,-.$@ABC><AD
$
+ ,-.$=FG<=
$
−,-.$<BBC><AD
$
 
∆*5-6FI@=JD<= = *5-6@ABC><AD −*5-6<BBC><AD 
For every new batch of water fed during the assessment of the system performance the 
conventional pollutants in the influent medium were characterized. The complete 
fractions were measured according to the guidelines of (Roeleveld P.J. 2002) and (Weijers 
1999). 
The following parameters have been measured: 
CODinf,tot; sCODinf; BOD7; bCOD; Si; NO3-N 
The analyses on the influent medium were performed on samples collected from the 
storage tank in the laboratory after filling with fresh wastewater. The soluble non-
biodegradable fraction (Si) was measured on samples collected after the secondary 
sedimentation before the discharge in the Mølleån river. The concentrations of sCOD, Si 
and nutrients (N) are measured on samples filtered with sterilized 0.45µm filters from the 
Greyer. The quantification of CODinf,tot, sCODinf, Si were done with HAXH-Lange 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
22
test kits and and a Hach-Lange DR 2800 spectrophotometer for the quantification. Test 
kits from MerckMillipore and Spectroquant NOVA 60 from Merck were used to measure 
the concentration of NO3-N, NO2-N. BOD7 measurements were collected with Oxitop 
OC 100 from WTW, each measurement was triplicated. The data from the Oxitop were 
treated with ACHAT.exe and Excel. The following protocols are attached in the 
appendices: wastewater complete characterization according to (Roeleveld P.J. 2002) and 
(Weijers 1999);  BOD7 analysis and analysis; use of test kits from Hach-Lange and 
MerckMillipore. 
In the continuous flow experiment the denitrification is the most relevant process 
occurring which causes the pH level to increase naturally and eventually it deviates from 
the optimum range (i.e. 7-8). It was experience an increase of the pH in the staged reactors 
along the line, the maximum level is reached in S3 (8.8-9 pH) follows S2 (8.6-8.8 pH) and 
then S1 (8.4-8.6 pH). For the unstaged system the pH ranges similar to S2, U (8.6-8.8 pH). 
The sampling for conventional pollutants monitoring started since the system was taken 
over after 400 days of continuous operation. The samples were collected from eight 
different batch of wastewater, stochastically over 150 days. Sampling in the morning 
permitted to ensure that pervious perturbations caused by daily maintenance didn’t affect 
the quality of the sample because it occurred before the 9 hours of the HRT. The reactors 
were sampled in the staged line from downstream to upstream in order to minimize any 
perturbations on the system. Assuming that the reactors are completely and efficaciously 
mixed, the effluent of the two lines have similar concentrations as the wastewater in S3 
and U.  
During sampling the following procedure was observed for each reactor: 
• opening the reactor; 
• flushing the syringe by pipetting back and forth the wastewater sucked from the center 
of the reactor; 
• collecting wastewater in the 10 mL syringe; 
• the first 4 mL sample from each reactor are stored in a 6 mL labelled plastic flask; 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
23
• the second 10 mL sample from each reactor are filtered with 0,45 um sterilized filter 
from The Geyer; 
The non-filtered samples are either analyzed right after the sampling or stored at -20 C, 
while the filtered sample is preferably analyzed the same day of the sampling or stored at 
2°C for later analysis. By this way of storage, we experienced that the results of the analysis 
with HACH-Lange test kits and Merck test kits are repeatable for a period of 30 days. 
 
3.3 The batch experiment 
After 60 days of monitoring the continuous operating of the reactors, the flow experiment 
was stopped in order to perform the batch experiment with the biofilm from the same 
four reactors. The set-up of the batch was scheduled to last 48 hours. The preparation of 
experiment consisted in transferring the carriers with the biofilm under test from 
continuous reactor to four new Plexiglas reactors with sizes of 30 cm in diameter, 50 cm 
in height and wrap in by a 3 cm thick jacket layer filled in water to maintain a stable 
temperature of the medium at 20 C during all the time of the experiment (Fig 3-3). 
 
Figure 3-3 Batch experiment set-up overview. 
The preparation procedure of the reactors used is the following: 
Filling ratio         10%           10%          10%         10% 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
24
• Stop continuous operation, disconnect staged and unstaged reactors; 
• empty reactors from wastewater and carriers; 
• rinse quickly the reactors with water; 
• keep carriers in separate backers;  
• insert tap water into jacket; 
• prepare 5 L of new wastewater for each reactor (in total 20 L) with the following 
composition: 5 L wastewater, 3.61 g KNO3 to be added to each of 5 L flasks (KNO3 is 
dosed to reach an initial concentration of approximately 100 mg/L NO3); 
• let wastewater slightly warm up to 16-18 °C under fume hood; 
• insert one pH meter in each reactor; 
• insert carriers into the batch reactors, adjusting the filling ratio to desired value of 10% 
(0.5 L of carriers for 5 L of reactor medium volume); 
• Start N2 sparing; 
• When N2 sparing starts the batch experiment starts, this point is considered time 0 (t=0). 
The four reactors are employed in the same starting conditions, same feeding medium and 
10 % filling ratio (three times lower than in the continuous flow experiment). In order to 
operate at constant filling ratio during the entire experiment, after each sampling a precise 
number of carriers have been removed. 
The feeding medium for the experiment is pre-clarified wastewater from Lundtofter 
WWTP. The medium was collected the same day of the experiment, its quality was 
characterized as it was done for the continuous flow experiment (section 3.2). 
During the experiment, the temperature of the medium was controlled around 20 °C by 
using water cooling jackets. The temperature and pH in the reactors were continuously 
monitored using multimeters. For each sample collected, corresponding to a certain 
wastewater removed, carriers were removed to keep the filling ration (and biomass 
concentration). samples collected at specific time (time table in Appendix 6.2) consisted 
in 13 mL volume. 10 mL were filtered with 0.45 µm filter The Geyer used for sCOD and 
NO3,2 concentration analysis. 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
25
 
3.4 Estimation of the specific denitrification rates  
On the results from the continuous and batch experiment, similar to the method presented 
by (Kujawa K. 1999) and stoichiometry calculations for each denitrification step reported 
by (Henze 2008), the following parameters have been estimated from the four reactors: 
• Denitrification rates in phase 1 and phase 2 (r1, r2) 
According to (Kujawa K. 1999), potentially three different linear phase can be observed 
describing the reduction of nitrates during a denitrifying process in batch incubation, 
however the third phase was not observed in this study. 
For complete denitrification occurring in a denitrifying process over complex wastewater 
as growth substrate the production/accumulation of NO2-N is not negligible and must 
accounted in the calculations; The nitrate reduction/utilisation rate is calculated upon the 
curve built as suggested (Henze 2008) (Kujawa K. 1999): 
mgCODoxd=  2,86NO3N(mgCOD) + 1,14NO2N(mgCOD
1 −01
 
Eq. 3-1 
 
The expression indicates the amount of electrons needed, expressed as mgCOD, for the 
reduction of amounts of nitrate and nitrite to nitrogen gas calculated by using electron 
equivalence factors mentioned in Section 2.6. The value for the heterotrophic 
denitrification (YH)used is 0.5 (e-/e-) as mentioned in Section 2-6. 
The slope in each phase corresponds to the first derivative, estimated by the following 
equation: 
r= '45-6FI=
∆t
 
Eq. 3-2 
 
The quality of the consumed substrate affects the rate of denitrification, the slope in the 
utilization curve changes according to the available substrate. The slopes observed are: 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
26
 
Eq. 3-3 
rD1=rD,Ss+rD,Xs+rD,end 
(i) 
rD2=rD,Ss+rD,Xs 
(ii) 
 
 
The quantification of the biomass in each reactor let to estimate the specific denitrification 
rate in each reactor (KDj) by the following equation: 
KD= rD,i
XH
 mgN mgTSS-1 h-1 
Eq. 3-4 
 
furthermore, considering the active surface of the biofilm in each reactor and the filling 
ratio used the specific denitrification rate per square meter can be estimated as follows: 
KD= rD,i
XM
 mgN m-2 h-1 
Eq. 3-5 
 
3.5 TSS measurements 
The applied procedure is similar to the one described by Falas et al (2012). 4 carriers were 
collected immediately before the batch experiment, after 120 and 150 days of continuous 
flow operation. The procedure for TSS measurement mainly consists of two steps: 
• The biomass in the carriers is dried in an oven at 105°C and weight; 
• The biomass is scraped from the carriers by flushing with sulphuric acid (H2SO4) 
4M, and using a brush and weight a second time. 
The difference in weight is the value of dried biomass and suspended solids composing the 
biofilm. 
Considering the estimations of AnoKaldes about the number of carriers per liter of medium 
we can calculate the concentration of biomass per liter. Assuming the values have a normal 
distribution we considered the error as two times the standard deviation with a confident 
interval of 95 %. 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
27
 
Mtotalbiomass=1000*f*Vreactor*Mcarrier 
Eq.3-6 
 
mbiomass= Mtotalbiomass Vreactor =1000*f*Mcarrier 
Eq. 3-7 
 
Where f is the filling ration e Vreactor is the volume of considered reactor 
 
3.6 Nitrous oxide productions measurements in continuous and 
batch experiment 
N2O productions from denitrifying activity were detected using Unisense nitrous oxide 
microsensor. This miniaturized Clark-type nitrous oxide sensor with a guard cathode is 
designed for research applications within environmental sciences and for wastewater 
treatment productions monitoring (Unisense 2014). The sensor collects information about 
the concentration of nitrous oxide dissolved in liquid phase. Productions detections were 
collected in continuous operation after 30, 120 and 150 days from the beginning of the 
monitored experiment. For the batch incubation, the productions were tested eight 
different times in each reactor, a table of time is provided in Appendix 6.3. Because of the 
need to assure the anaerobic condition in the reactors, nitrogen gas was sparged in the 
medium to prevent the accumulation in dissolved form of oxygen but also of nitrous oxide 
over time. Thus, a special approach is adopted to study the instantaneous production rate 
of nitrous oxide by the active biofilm. N2O production was measured in each reactor by 
intermittently (for approximately five minutes) stopping the N2 sparging and so the nitrous 
oxide stripping from the liquid phase. A whole measurement lasts approximately 15 
minutes and includes three phases Fig 3-4: 
• The sensor is inserted in the reactor for about 2 minutes with N2 sparging. 
• The N2 sparging is stopped and the mechanical mixing is started and nitrous oxide 
production by an increase on N2O concentration. 
• The N2 sparging is restarted and the sensor is kept in the matrix for around 2-5 minutes 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
28
more. 
 
Figure 3-4 Expected profile of N2O productions 
 
Measurements were performed very close in time to the sampling/measurement of NO3,2 
concentration, so that NO3 and NO2 conversion rate can be compared with N2O 
production rate. Medium temperature is measured in each reactor during the experiment. 
The detailed plan of N2O measurement is reported in Appendix 6.3.  
Calibration is performed after polarization of the sensor and signal stabilization. Nitrous 
oxide sensors respond linearly in the range of 0 to 2.5 % or 0-500 M of nitrous oxide and 
signals can thus be linearly converted to partial pressure or concentration. Calibration is 
check and repeated always before any measuring campaign. The membrane permeability 
of nitrous oxide microsensors changes with time, so a change in signal of up to 50% may 
occur over months (Unisense 2014). The method used to build a calibration curve is the 
following: Zero nitrous oxide reading is registered by placing and keeping the sensor tip 
in nitrous oxide free wastewater matrix, stripped of N2O by nitrogen gas bubbling, until 
signal stabilization. This signal read is the calibration value for zero nitrous oxide 
conditions. Four- to six-points calibration is sufficient as stated from the manufacturer 
due to high sensitivity of the instrument. Wastewater matrix for calibration was prepared 
by adding a defined volume of 0.1 mL of nitrous oxide saturated water to a volume of 200 
mL of wastewater in a calibration chamber. The ambient temperature of the saturated 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
29
solution is fundamental to find the correct concentration added to the calibration 
chamber. The concentration of the nitrous oxide saturated stock solution is 739.8 mg/mL 
room temperature. 
mV signal detected was converted to mg/L of N2O by using the equation: 
 
N2O mgN
L
 Detec=∆mgN/L
mV
 Calibr × mV Detect × 1.033Tcalibr-Tprocess Eq. 3-8 
 
By linear regression of the variation of N2O concentration in time the nitrous oxide 
productions rates were calculated. 
 
3.7 Microbial biofilm DNA extraction 
The carrier’s biofilm was sampled after 60, 120 and 150 days during the continuous 
experiment in from reactors for DNA extraction. In order to detach the biofilm from the 
carriers Gyno brushes were used and to collect the biomass of each carrier in Eppendorf 
tubes. The tubes are then centrifuged at 12000 rpm to remove the excess of water. 
FastDNA SPIN KIT for soil (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH, USA) was applied to extract 
DNA from the dried biomass collected. To extract and isolate high quality microbial DNA 
from the samples the protocol consists of both physical and chemical treatments. To 
ensure the quality of the extracted DNA, the concentration of the DNA solution is 
measured with NanoDrop 2000 sepctrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, 
Wilmington, DE USA). The results of these measurements are listed in the Appendix 6.5. 
 
3.8 nirK, nirS, nosZ and 16S rRNA primers selection and 
experimental specificity evaluation 
The selection of primers nirK, nirS, nosZ and 16S rDNA was based on most accredited 
sequences presently available from literature. The nirK, nirS and 16s rDNA (total bacteria) 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
30
primers used were previously used and already available at DTU Environment, Table 3-2.  
 
 
 
The nosZ primers were choose to target the most abundant represented forms of the 
nosZ gene in wastewater samples as reported by (Jones CM. 2013), four primer sets were 
validated experimentally. One primer set targeting specifically Proteobacteria nosZ variant, 
called typical nosZ, and three more variants targeting the Bacteroidetes nosZ variant, called 
atypical nosZ. Table 3-3 and 3-4 below give information about the primers used and its 
source. 
 
Table 3-3 Primers for 16S rRNA, nirS, nirK PCR amplification 
 
Primer 
Primer sequence (5’-3’) 
Amplicon 
Size (bp) 
Annealing 
Temp. °C 
Reference 
Forward 
1055f 
ATGGTCGTCGTCAGCT 
323 
55 
Ferris et al. 1996 
Reverse 
 
1392r 
 
ACGGGCGGTGTGTAC 
 
 
 
Lane et al. 1991 
 
Forward 
Cd3aF 
GTSAACGTSAAGGARACSGG 
158 
51 
Throbäck et al. 2013 
Reverse 
 
R3cd 
 
GASTTCGGRTGSGTCTTGA 
 
 
 
Philippot et al. 2013 
 
Forward 
F1aCu 
ATCATGGTSCTGCCGCG 
427 
57 
Hallin&Lindgren 1999 
Reverse 
R3cu 
GCC TCG ATC AGR TTG TGG TT 
 
 
Hallin&Lindgren 1999 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
31
 
 
The experimental specificity evaluation consisted in running PCR assays with the extracted 
DNA from the reactors as a template to amplify the target gene and agarose gel 
electrophoresis to verify whether the primers amplifies exclusively the gene of interest. 
DNA template from biofilm of the experimental heterotrophic denitrifying reactors 
operating in continuous was used as template for the PCR reactions. Negative controls 
were made without DNA template. The PCR reactions consisted of 25 ul of which 24 ul 
of the master mix and 1 ul of the DNA template or DNA free water for negative controls. 
The composition of the master mix is reported in table 3. 
Table 3-4 Primers for atypical nosZ PCR amplification 
 
Primer 
Primer sequence (5’-3’) 
Amplicon 
Size (bp) 
Annealing 
Temp. °C 
Reference 
Forward 
nosZqPCRF1 
TCGARCAGGAYTGGRACATYCT 
162 
60 
Jung et al. 2013 
Reverse 
 
nosZGeoR 
 
CTTGRTGCARCGCVGAACAGA 
 
 
 
Jung et al. 2013 
 
Forward 
nosZqPCRF2 
ACAGGAYTATGATGTRCCGCACGGA 
158 
60 
Jung et al. 2013 
Reverse 
 
nosZGeoR 
 
CTTGRTGCARCGCVGAACAGA 
 
 
 
Jung et al. 2013 
 
Forward 
nosZqPCRF3 
TGACYGCCATYCGTTCWCACYTT 
246 
60 
Jung et al. 2013 
Reverse 
 
nosZGeoR 
 
CTTGRTGCARCGCVGAACAGA 
 
 
 
Jung et al. 2013 
 
Table 3-5 Primers for typical nosZ PCR amplification 
 
Primer 
Primer sequence (5’-3’) 
Amplicon 
Size (bp) 
Annealing 
Temp. °C 
Reference 
Forward 
nosZ1F 
WCSYTGTTCMTCGACAGCCAG 
259 
58 
Henry et al. 2013 
Reverse 
nosZ1R 
ATGTCGATCARCTGVKCRTTYTC 
 
 
 
Henry et al. 2013 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
32
 
 
The thermo stable polymerase used is a Taq DNA Polymerase from Thermus aquaticus with 
10× PCR reaction buffer containing MgCl2, SIGMA. 
The optimal reaction conditions used come from the most accredited conditions reported 
in literature (Table 3-5, 3-6). The annealing temperatures were checked with the online 
tool Thermofischer scientific. 
 
Table 3-5 Composition of PCR solution in 25 µl 
 
Final conc. 
Volume [µl] 
Taq polymerase  
1 unit/reaction 
0.2 
Forward primer  
0.5 µM 
1 µl 
Reverse primer  
dNTPs 
Buffer 
0.5 µM 
200 µM 
- 
 1 µl 
0.5 µl 
2.5 µl 
DNA Template (approx. 50 ng 
DNA/µl) 
- 
1 µl 
DNase free Water 
- 
18.8 
Total volume 
 
25 
Table 3-6 PCR conditions for nirK, nirS and atypical nosZ 
 
Temperature [°C] 
Time [min:sec] 
 
1. Pre-heating/denatura 
95 
3:00 
 
2. Denaturation 
95 
0:24 
 
3. Annealing 
/ 
0:24 
 
4. Elongation 
72 
0:24 
 
 
 
 
Back to 2. Repeat 39 times 
5. Cooling 
4 
∞ 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
33
 
3.9 Real Time-PCR standards production 
The processing of data for the quantification of microbial genes in DNA samples is based 
on a generated standard curve. After the experimental specificity evaluation shows positive 
result, the standards for the RT -PCR are prepared. The construction of a standard is an 
essential prerequisite for the subsequent quantification of the gene copy number in the 
samples (Larinov et al., 2005). Figure 3-2 provides an overview of the steps involved in 
the construction process of the RT- PCR standards. 
Table 3-7 PCR conditions for typical nosZ  
 
Temperature [°C] 
Time [min:sec] 
 
1. Pre-heating 
95 
15:00 
 
2. Denaturation 
95 
0:15 
 
3. Annealing 
67  
0:30 
 
4. Elongation 
72 
0:30 
Touchdown 1 °C pr. cycle 
down to 61 °C 
6. denaturation 
7. Annealing 
8. Elongation 
9.  
10.  
11.  
12. Cooling 
95 
58 
72 
95 
60 
72 
4 
0:15 
0:15 
0:30 
0:15 
0:15 
0:15 
∞ 
 
 
Back to 2. repeat 6 times 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
34
 
Figure 3-5 Standard preparation overview 
The preparation of the standards for the RT-PCR consists in running fresh PCRs reactions 
under the same conditions which are used eventually on the samples under studies for the 
quantifying reaction. Subsequently, the DNA PCR products are tested on an agarose gel 
to verify the correct molecular weight. The PCR products are purified by QIAquick PCR 
Purification kit (QIAGEN, Hidden, GERMANY). To control the quality of the 
purification, the DNA concentrations are measured using NanoDrop 2000 
spectrophotometer with an absorbance reading at 260 nm (NanoDrop Technologies, 
Wilmington, DE USA). The fresh DNA amplified is thereafter introduced into a vector 
through TOPO-TA Cloning reaction (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, USA) and 
frozen at -20 °C overnight. The following day, the TOPO vector solution is added to One 
Shot TOP10 competent Cells reaction (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The reaction 
mixture is next exposed to a heat shock event in order to transfer the vector into the 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
35
competent E. coli cells. This is achieved by a sudden increase in temperature obtained 
immerging the tubes containing the solution in a 42 °C water bath for 30 seconds. This 
procedure induces the formation of pores in the plasma membrane of the bacteria. The 
instability created in the membrane permits to the vector to penetrate the competent 
bacterial cell (Froger A. 2007). Due to the high sensitivity of the vectors, all processes are 
carried out with extreme caution. After incubation for half an hour at 37 °C in a horizontal 
shaker, the solution is spread on LB agar plate with Kanamycin (50 ug/mL) and X-gal (40 
mg/mL 5-bromo-4-chloro-3idoyl-β-D-galactopyranoside). The plates are incubated at 37 
°C overnight. The plasmid vector carries the kanamycin resistance gene, which is the 
selective marker for the stable plasmid integrating bacteria. X-gal is the second marker, 
which permits to distinguish on the agar plate the blue bacterial colonies, not containing 
the DNA insert of interest, from those containing it. The colorimetric reaction is possible 
because of the LacZa present on the bacterial plasmid, containing the polylinker cloning 
site, which triggers the catalyzed reaction of conversion of X-gal substrate to a blue-
colored product. 
Four cloned colonies with PCR products for each nosZ primer were cultured in liquid LB 
Kanamycin overnight at 37 °C. Plasmids were purified using the QIAprep spin Miniprep 
kit (250) (QIAGEN, Hidden, GERMANY) and the concentration of the purified plasmids 
is measured with NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer. Solutions of 100 ul with 2 ng/uL 
of DNA is prepared for 2 of the 4 selected plasmids and then sent for sequencing. 
The results obtained by Sanger sequencing (Macrogen) were treated by nucleotide BLAST 
against the NCBI non-redundant database. Based on the matching results, the best vectors 
containing cloned target sequences were selected and stored in glycerol stocks. Finally, the 
selected remaining Plasmids from cloned gene were used as standards in qPCR. The 
plasmid copies number (PCN) was calculated with the following formula: 
 
PCN mol µL-1 = 6.02×1023 ×DNAconcentration (g µL-1)
Plasmid size bp ×660 g mol-1
 
Equ. 3-9 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
36
 
The plasmid size refers to the size of the vector (3973 bp) plus the length of the insertion 
(amplicon).  
 
3.10 Quantitative analyses of microbial DNA samples 
Absolute quantitative analyses of functional (nirS, nirK, nosZ) and phylogenetic (16S 
rRNA) gene copies were conducted with RT-PCR technique. This approach permitted to 
online monitor the amplification chain reaction of a target gene in unknown concentration 
by comparing its amplification with a standard at 8 different dilutions from 101 to 108 was 
amplified during the same experiment under the same conditions. RT-q-PCR reactions 
were conducted in 96-well plates, each well was filled with 5 µL of DNA template, 1 µL 
of each forward and reverse primers (0.4 µM), 12.5 µL of SYBR green mixture (2X) 
(Thermo Scientific) and sterile water to a final volume of 25 µL. All the PCR reactions 
were made in analytical duplicates. The amplification conditions were the same reported 
in Table 3-5 and Table 3-6, with addiction of a single reading step after every amplification 
cycle. A final step for melting curve analysis (temperature vs. fluorescence signal) is used 
to verify if there are multiple PCR products. Ct-value, the number of cycles required for 
the fluorescence signal to exceed the background level, is determined based on the 
amplification plot (PCR cycles vs fluorescence). The efficiency of the reaction, the 
equation of the standard curve and finally the copy umber in the samples were calculated 
using the software Opticon Monitor 3 (Thermo scientific). The number of gene copies 
were then normalized per ng of DNA. 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
37
4 
R e s u l t s  a n d  d i s c u s s i o n  
4.1 Primary metabolism 
In the examined lab scale heterotrophic denitrifying systems based on natural wastewater as 
electron donor, the denitrification potential is primarily a function of the available carbon. 
Because of the  three different fraction potentially characterizing natural wastewater, three 
denitrifying rates can be potentially quantified in the systems, depending on the COD 
fraction mainly utilized  (Henze 2008) (Kujawa K. 1999). The three organic fractions 
occurring in natural preclarified wastewater are the soluble biodegradable (Ss), the particulate 
biodegradable (Xs) and the particulate biodegradable by decay of biomass (Xs,BH). The 
heterotrophic activity performed by the biomass in each reactor is connected to the fraction 
most utilized as source of electrons for its activity, hence different denitrifying rates are 
expected. 
 
4.2 The electron donor 
The heterotrophic denitrification was assessed in the staged and unstaged systems and 
compared. The tendency of the denitrification process was examined in terms of 
consumption of biodegradable substrate, or biodegradable COD (bCOD), as electron donor 
and depletion of NO3,2-N as terminal electron acceptors converted in nitrogen gas. The 
biodegradable COD in wastewater varied in availability and quality, dissolved and 
particulate, between the different natural inocula collected from treatment plant. The 
observations over the performance of the system in continuous operating conditions were 
conducted on 8 samples collected in 150 days of continuous flow operation. During this 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
38
period of time, the system was running in steady state conditions, adjusted to the different 
composition of wastewater inocula fed to the reactors. For the characterization of the lines’ 
influent, 8 different wastewater inocula were characterized after 4, 14, 20, 30, 40, 60, 120, 
150 days from the beginning of the experiment Figure 4-1. The system run with the same 
inoculum for approximately four days, depending on the volume of wastewater collected 
and stored. Since nitrate was supplied constantly and in excess dosage of 103 mg-N/L, the 
system was operated under COD-limiting conditions.  
Figure 4-1 Influent quality expressed as combined biodegradable Ss and Xs fractions. 
Regarding the heterotrophic denitrification activity, the plot in Figure 4-2 reports the 
consumption of biodegradable (Ss) sCOD (∆sCOD) for every wastewater inoculum in the 
staged configurations in reactors S1, S2, S3. Significant differences were observed in ∆sCOD 
for every inoculum. Larger utilizations were registered in case of greater availability in the 
content of Ss (day 14, 40, 120). Consumption of ∆sCOD in S1 (∆sCODS1) in all 
investigations was significantly larger than that those occurring in S2 (∆sCODS2) and S3 
(∆sCODS3). ∆SCOD was rather constant in S2 and S3 reactors, ranging between 10 to 1 
mgCOD/L. 
0
50
100
150
200
4
14
20
30
40
60
120
150
bCOD (mgCOD/L)
Time(day)
Xs
Ss
==PAGE:49==
 
 
39
 
Figure 4-2 ΔsCOD in S1, S2 and S3 reactors of the staged system in 8 water batch, over 150 days, 
the blue line represents the change in the quantity of the feeding medium. 
The observed trend in sCOD utilization indicates that the influent readily biodegradable 
fraction is mainly degraded in the first staged reactor. As most of the utilization of Ss 
occurred in the S1 reactor, the COD fraction available in S2 and S3 for heterotrophic 
denitrification and anabolic activities was accounted to the hydrolysis of the slowly 
biodegradable COD or particulate Xs and from endogenous respiration of the decayed 
biomass XH. Therefore, hydrolysis has to be considered the driving process of denitrification 
activity in S2 and S3. A negative removal of sCOD was never observed unlike what reported 
by (Loreggian 2014) during activity monitoring of the staged system under the same 
conditions. The observations do not suggest that in continuous operation the last staged 
reactors, especially the most likely S3, show hydrolyzing activity rates greater than Ss 
utilization rate than the previous reactor. However, a fraction of Ss is detected in S2, which 
could be generated by the hydrolysis process or it could be leftover not consumed from the 
S1 reactor. 
1
10
100
4
14
20
30
40
60
120
150
Log ΔsCOD (mg COD L-1)
Time (d)
Ss
S1
S2
S3
==PAGE:50==
 
 
40
4.3 Denitrifying performance and nitrogen species transformation 
 
Figure 4-3 Performance of staged and unstaged lines in NOX (NO3,2) removal in comparison. Dot 
and triangle show the total removal of NOX mg-N m-2 h-1, bars show the difference in performance 
as percentage. 
Specific nitrate removal performance per surface of active biofilm (∆NO3-N m2h-1) are 
reported in Figure 4-3. Data show different performance in removal of nitrogen oxidized 
species, mainly occurring as ∆NO3-N and in fraction as ∆NO2-N, or so called NOX species 
from the influent ∆NOX{inf,eff} of the staged and unstaged reactors.  The staged system 
during the continuous operation, in the monitored days, performed better than the unstaged 
system, the difference in performance fluctuated from 10 to 30 %. The two lines were fed 
with the same preclarified wastewater. The main parameter affecting the increase and 
decrease in performance is the different composition in organic carbon between each 
wastewater batch. The results suggest that the staged system is more robust, preventing 
performance loss than the unstaged reactor. A significant overall trend over time of 
increasing or decreasing in performances is not observed, confirming that the biological 
processing in both lines is at steady state, adjusted to the temporary experienced 
circumstances at its finest. Considering the two systems were working under same 
conditions and HRT, the difference in performance may be accounted to an optimization 
0
4
8
12
16
20
0%
50%
100%
4
14
20
30
40
60
120
150
ΔNOX (mg-N m-2 h-1)
Time (day)
Δ performance 
staged ΔNOX 
unstaged ΔNOX 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
41
in the denitrifying and growth process due to specialized microbial communities’ activities 
in the different reactors resulting in the consumption of the Ss and the Xs fraction with a 
higher efficiency. 
Specific nitrate reduction rates per TSS in each reactor are showed in Figure 4-4 indicating 
differences in nitrate reduction rates between the different reactors. The staged system 
showed decresing performance from S1, with the highest performance, to S3 with the 
lowest. The decresing in heterotrophic denitrification rates can be explained considering that 
a variation in availability of carbon occurs from reactor S1 with the highest availability, to S3 
with the lowest, going through S2 in an average situation. Comparing the staged line with 
the unstaged line, the rates observed in the unstaged reactor are closer to those occurring in 
the S2, suggesting that the two reactors are populated by reactions performing similarly 
consumption of mostly Xs fraction and in low part Ss. Meanwhile, very different activities 
taking place in S1 and S3 reactors more specialized in the consumption of a single fraction. 
 
Figure 4-4 NOX reduction performance for single reactor in continuous flow experiment at days 
4, 14, 30, 40, 60, 120, 150. 
Temporary accumulation of nitrite during denitrification observed through the staged line 
and it has also been reported by several investigators in denitrifying systems due to 
differences in the maximum rate of reduction by nitrate and nitrite reductases (Michael R. 
0,0
0,3
0,5
0,8
1,0
1,3
4
14
20
30
40
60
120
150
4
14
20
30
40
60
120
150
4
14
20
30
40
60
120
150
4
14
20
30
40
60
120
150
S1
S2
S3
U
mg-N gTSS-1 h-1
Time (day)
ΔNO2 (mg-N/gTSSh)
ΔNOX  (mg-N/gTSSh)
==PAGE:52==
 
 
42
Betlach 1981) or due to inhibitory effects affecting reduction steps from nitrite to nitrogen 
gas (M Kornaros 1998).  As previously described in Section 2.7 temporary accumulation of 
nitrite may influence reactors denitrification performance and completion, which needs to 
be investigated. 
Because the heterotrophic denitrification performance of the system is based on the 
availability of the biodegradable carbon in the processing system it is possible to correlate 
the denitrifying performance to the electron donor substrate consumed. By considering the 
equation Eq. 3-3 which expresses the amount of carbon in mgCOD needed to reduce 
completely or to the different intermediates the nitrate electron acceptors, we can calculate 
the observed carbon demand in mgCOD equivalents for the reductive process of nitrate 
electron acceptor. The values calculated can be compared with the potential maximum 
removal expected expressed by the bCOD calculated from BOD7. In Figure 4-5 are 
reported the ratios of bCOD over potential complete denitrification in mgCOD equivalents 
between the staged and unstaged systems. The data show that in the case of the staged 
system, ratios are closer to the complete substrate depletion and in two cases even over 
estimated. With respect to the unstaged system, ratios are always lower than the expected 
depletion given by the ration 1:1 conveying that the system has a lower efficiency. An 
important factor to consider in the variability of the data is the variable yield (YH) of the 
denitrification bioprocess which is of key importance in the calculation of the amount of 
organic substrate actually used for the denitrification process, different from the theoretical 
yield Section 3.4.    
==PAGE:53==
 
 
43
 
Figure 4-5 Available bCOD or potential denitrifiable substrate over the observed consumption 
considering a fixed. 
Different heterotrophic denitrification growth yield values are not uncommon as previously 
described (A. Muller 2003) with reported yields ranging around 0.5±0.1 (e-/e-). Variations in 
the order of 5% of the growth yield of 0.5 considered for calculations are likely to bring 
closer the ratio CODqe/bCOD to 1:1. Furthermore, an other important factor influencing 
the performance is the load in slowly biodegradable suspended particles. Under large loads 
of Xs the two lines show a lower performance than the potential expected with a complete 
removal of available carbon. This can be accounted to the fact that Xs is not in limiting 
quantity as Ss. However, because of the robustness given to the staged systems by S3 and 
S3 reactors, the removal is more significant than the unstaged system. 
Because we don't know if the complete denitrification is achieved in the systems, especially 
under such carbon limiting conditions of operation and with different water quality in the 
1/1
1.2/1
1.5/1
50
100
150
200
50
100
150
200
COD eq (mgCOD L-1)
bCOD (mgCOD L-1)
staged
unstaged
==PAGE:54==
 
 
44
influent, it is convenient to take in consideration even the amount of mgCOD equivalent to 
incomplete denitrification interrupted at different steps, giving as final product N2O and 
NO Table 4-1. 
Table 4-1 mgCOD consumed for incomplete denitrification to Nitric Oxide and Nitrous 
Oxide 
days 
Staged  
NO3 to 
NO 
Unstage
d NO3 to 
NO 
Staged  
NO3 to 
N2O  
Unstage
d NO3 to 
N2O 
bCOD 
% bCOD consumed 
4 
59,71 
41,75 
79,50 
55,58 
96,82 
62% 43% 
82% 
57% 
14 
76,96 
64,34 
102,47 
85,66 
157,37 
49% 41% 
65% 
54% 
20 
59,87 
45,92 
79,71 
61,14 
96,67 
62% 48% 
82% 
63% 
30 
67,66 
47,50 
90,08 
63,24 
106,67 
63% 45% 
84% 
59% 
40 
72,42 
62,81 
96,42 
83,63 
151,11 
48% 42% 
64% 
55% 
60 
71,58 
61,73 
95,30 
82,18 
124,44 
58% 50% 
77% 
66% 
120 
91,51 
74,21 
121,83 
98,80 
185,49 
49% 40% 
66% 
53% 
150 
73,74 
55,09 
98,18 
73,35 
131,67 
56% 42% 
75% 
56% 
 
4.4 Biomass Quantification 
Interesting information about the biomass in the reactors come from measurements of total 
suspended solids (gTSS L-1) considering a fill ratio of 33 % or 333 carriers per liter in the 
reactors monitored after 60, 120 and 150 days. We detected that in the considered period 
the specific biomass fluctuates in amount detected but a net increase or decrease trend over 
time is not noticeable. However, the specific biomass of each reactor in comparison, has 
very different grow. Particularly, an appreciable high specific biomass is present in S1 where 
the sCOD is abundant. On the contrary in S2, S3 and U reactors the availability of organic 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
45
source is more limiting for the growth and less readily reactive; in these reactors the specific 
biomass content is lower than S1 and the values are similar between them. 
 
Figure 4-6 TSS variation in time for each reactor under studies. 
 
4.5 Nitrous oxide productions investigation in continuous flow 
experiment 
Further investigation of the intermediates associated with heterotrophic denitrification 
during anaerobic conditions occurring in the two lab-scale systems, was achieved by 
measuring nitrous oxide after 30, 120 and 150 days of continuous operation. Numerous 
factors can hinder the completion of the reductive pathway, causing accumulation of side 
products as nitric oxide and nitrous oxide (Section 2-7). Among all the inhibitory agents, pH 
variation, nitrite load and carbon limiting conditions are the most likely to play a key role 
affecting nitrous oxide productions in the system. The nitrite concentration was minimal in 
all reactors. The pH of the system is higher than the optimum (7-8 pH) and increasing from 
8.7 to 8.8 and 9 in the staged reactors S1, S2, S3 while about 8.8 in the unstaged reactor. 
Furthermore, the system design was devised to operate in carbon limiting conditions, with 
a stable dose of nitrate always larger than the COD charge of the influent wastewater. All 
3
4
5
6
7
gTSS L-1
60
120
150
     U                       S1                       S2                       S3 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
46
the mentioned aspects could potentially cause nitrous oxide production and production in 
the experimental system. The method used for data collection and analyses of nitrous oxide 
concentrations in the liquid phase is reported in Section 3.5. As already explained, because 
of the design of the system, which requires continuously sparging of nitrogen gas to assure 
anoxic conditions, it was not possible to monitor the liquid concentrations of nitrous oxide 
in the reactors continuously. Instead, the procedure adopted allowed to determine the 
instantaneous nitrous oxide production rates. 
Productions rates observed Figure 4-7 were very low or not detectable, without a significant 
difference between the rectors. 
 
Figure 4-7 estimations of nitrous oxide production rates measured in liquid phase continuous for the 
four reactors at day 60, 120, 150. 
Production rates identified for each single reactor have been registered and normalized by 
the nitrate reduction rate, results are reported in Table 4-2. 
 
 
0,000
0,500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
30
120
150
mgN2O m-2 d-1
Time (day)
   S1  S2    S3   U           S1   S2    S3     U       S1    S2    S3    U 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
47
Table 4-2 N2O productions over nitrate denitrified. 
days 
S1 
S2 
S3 
U 
30 
0.23% 
0.38% 
1.59% 
0.67% 
120 
0.16% 
0.00% 
0.89% 
0.00% 
150 
0.00% 
0.00% 
0.00% 
0.00% 
 
The specific N2O productions exhibit values in the order of 1% or less. The specific 
productions of the S3 reactor result higher than all other reactors, allegedly accounted to its 
lowest denitrification rates. Previous studies report productions between  0-8 % (Hanaki K. 
1992) and 0.005-0.5 % (Chung 2000) and 0.5→20 % (Itokawa H. 2001) obtained from 
experiments in activated sludge by decreasing COD/N ratio in continuous and batch 
operation which are higher than what observed in the systems under studies. During the 
continuous experiment the lab system experienced a very low carbon load and the relative 
denitrification rates were limited and this could have affected the also low nitrous oxide 
productions experienced. Because of the low variation in the signal measured by the sensor 
because of the matrix noise, it was hard to distinguish a production rate pattern. 
Furthermore, nitrogen gas sparging allows to lower the nitrous oxide concentration 
dissolved in the medium, however fluctuations of the nitrous oxide dissolved equilibrium 
are constantly present and must be keep in consideration. The lack of significant N2O 
productions during carbon limitation conditions could apparently be in contrast to some 
previous reports (Chung 2000) (Itokawa H. 2001) (Hanaki K. 1992). It has been postulated 
that higher electron affinities of two upstream denitrification enzymes, Nar and Nir, relative 
to downstream NOR and N2OR enzymes could be the reason for N2O higher production 
rates during carbon limitation (Betlach MR 1981) (R. Knowles 1982). While specific 
enzymatic activity and affinity was not measured in this study, it might be that the carbon 
composition and availability in the wastewater influent selected denitrifying communities 
which might possess more uniform and high affinities across the sequential reductive 
nitrogen cascade, leading to the reduced nitrous oxide and nitric oxide productions during 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
48
carbon limitation as hypothesized by more else observations in experiments with single 
different organic substrates (Huijie Lu 2010). 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
49
4.6 The batch experiment  
This section describes the experimental procedure applied and results on tests about: 
• The denitrification rates of the system on different substrates; 
• The N2O production for activity on different substrates; 
• The biotransformation trends performed by the adapted biofilm. 
 
The batch experiment was performed after 60 days of monitored operation in continuous 
flow. The day of the experiment, the continuous reactors were stopped and the carries 
covered in biofilm were transferred to four new independent reactors (S1, S2, S3, U). The 
set-up of the system was designed to have the same starting dose of settled domestic 
wastewater, starting concentration of nitrate and fill ratio of carriers in all four reactors. This 
approach has been reported useful to distinct biological transformation rates occurring 
mostly based on Ss and Xs (Kujawa K. 1999) allowing to further test the differentiation in 
the activity of the bioreactors. 
4.7 Investigation of the primary metabolism and denitrification rates 
The fraction of the feeding medium for the batch experiment was quantified by the same 
procedure used for the characterization of the medium quality in the continuous flow 
experiment Section 3.2. The purpose of monitoring the utilization of primary substrates 
during the batch experiment is to identify and study the activities determined for each reactor 
and their behavior with different carbon substrate. In this paragraph the utilization pattern 
of the substrate is discussed on a qualitative base, then the calculations of the observed rates 
are reported. On these estimations, the metabolism and bacterial communities in each 
reactor are compared and discussed. 
As introduced in Section 3-3, there are three different fractions of COD potentially 
consumed to supply the electrons required for denitrification (Henze 2008): 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
50
• The ready biodegradable fraction of bCOD in the medium Ss; 
• The slowly biodegradable fraction of bCOD in the medium Xs; 
• The slowly biodegradable organics generated by dead biomass Xs,BH 
 
The availability, or free concentration in the medium, and the utilization, or utilization rate, 
of these fractions are different and they directly affect the rate of denitrification rD and thus 
the slope of nitrate and nitrite concentration curve. By the sudden change in the 
denitrification rates two or three phases can be defined, as not always is possible to discern 
the endogenous phase (Henze 2008) (Kujawa K. 1999). Each phase is characterized by a 
typical rate rD defined as described in Section3-3. 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
51
 
Figure 4-8 S1 N-species, two phases identified. 
 
Figure 4-9 S2 N-species, initial lag phase two more phases identified. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
NO2 (mgN L-1)
NO3 (mgN L-1)
Time (h)
NO3
phase 1
NO2
0
5
10
15
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
NO2 (mgN L-1)
NO3 (mgN L-1)
Time (h)
LAG PHASE
==PAGE:62==
 
 
52
  
Figure 4-10 S3 N-species, initial lag phase and two more phases identified. 
 
Figure 4-11 U N-species, initial lag phase and two more phases identified. 
   
 
0
5
10
15
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
NO2 (mgN/L)
NO3 (mgN L-1)
Time (h)
0
5
10
15
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
NO2 (mgN L-1)
NO3 (mgN L-1)
Time (h)
==PAGE:63==
 
 
53
In the proceeding of the batch incubation, we saw two clear phase for the nitrate reduction 
Figure 4-8(9, 10, 11). Denitrification rates where calculated as described in Section 3-4 for 
each phase observed, values are reported in Table 4-3. The first denitrification phase which 
lasted for around 6 hours had an extent similar for all reactors except S1. During the first 
phase the nitrate reduction and denitrification rates were the steepest. As expected, S1 
showed the highest removals followed by S2 and U with similar performances, the slowest 
is S3 (Table 4-3). In the second phase, the rates showed a sudden decrease, halved rate for 
S1 with a very slow removal in S2, S3 and U until the end of the experiment after 48 hours. 
The nitrite accumulated over time until reaching a top and then periodically decreased until 
zero concentration in S1 and to 3 mg/l in S2 and U after 40 hours. This trend was not 
observed in S3 where the nitrite concentration increased in time to 9 mg/l and after 20 hours 
slowly decreased to 6 mg/l until the end of the batch incubation. The lag phase in nitrate 
consumption is observed in S2, S3 and U reactors but not in S. This phase was thought to 
be cause by a temporary activity of organic substrate storing which subtracted carbon to the 
denitrification process and a switching of the metabolism for and adaptation to the new 
conditions. This behavior is typically observed for bacteria which operated for long time in 
famine conditions and they are then placed in feast conditions. It is clear that the first phase 
can be associated with microbial activities fostered by the presence of the readily 
biodegradable COD, S1 reactor which is used to experience such high concentrations reacts 
immediately showing the highest denitrification performance. U reactor presented a 
denitrification rate in phase 1 more similar to S2 than S1, this could be explained by the fact 
that though U experiences the same influent than S1 but its operating volume and HRT are 
very different, which means that the microbial community of the U reactor was very 
heterogeneous and not optimally specialized in consuming at high rates the readily 
biodegradable. S2 reactor showed a microbial activity more similar to the U because its 
operating volume and HRT was a fraction of the U, the reactor in continuous operation and 
experienced presence of some left Ss and abundant Xs. Regarding S3, it had the lowest 
denitrification rates observed in phase 1 however the rate is not significantly lower than S2 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
54
and U. This result indicates that although a specialization in proliferation on hydrolysable 
substrate has occurred it is mostly accounted to the rearrangement of the metabolic activity 
primarily affected by genetic expression more than a selection of bacteria species more active 
in hydrolysis or in readily biodegradable usage. The second phase observed proved that S1 
and S2 have a higher hydrolyzing activity, however it must be considered that at this point 
the biomass can sustain part of its activity even by consuming the stored material, which 
might have occurred for all reactors though not showed in S1, or the boost in activity helped 
the hydrolysis too.  
Table 4-3 Denitrification rates during batch incubation calculated on NOX removal values. 
reactors Lag phase 
Phase 1 
Phase 2 
 
rD mgN 
gTSS-2h-1 
rD mgN 
gTSS-1h-1 
SE 
R2 
rD mgN   
gTSS-1h-1 SE 
R2 
S1 
- 
2,78 
0,35 
0,96 
0,56 
0,06 
0,99 
S2 
0 
2,09 
0,56 
0,89 
0,21 
0,02 
0,99 
S3 
0 
1,54 
0,79 
0,71 
0,22 
0,02 
0,99 
U 
0 
2,21 
0,26 
0,97 
0,23 
0,06 
0,96 
 
4.8 Denitrification performances as organic substrate depletion 
The denitrification performances of the reactors were also studied on the calculated 
mgCOD equivalent, hypnotizing the complete denitrification or reduction of NO3,2-N to 
N2 and the substrate consumption for the reduction of nitrate to NO2 temporary 
accumulated. The values are plotted in Figure 4-12 with the bCOD estimated in the influent. 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
55
Figure 4-12 Denitrification performances expressed as mgCOD equivalent for S1, S2, S3 and U 
reactors in batch incubation. 
The denitrification performance detected in S1 differs substantially than in the other three 
reactors. Already from the beginning of the experiment the S1 reactor was highly performant 
in denitrification activity. During the first two hours the reduction rates of the other reactors 
are much lower because of the lag phase previously described. As expected, the highest 
denitrification rates occurred between 3 and 6 hours from the start of the batch experiment 
due to the microbial activity promoted by the consumption of the Ss fraction. The high 
denitrification rates, connected to the great abundance of a fast biodegradable organic 
substrate may connected to the temporary accumulation of nitrite.  Passed the fastest phase 
of denitrification the removal rate substantially decreased and almost complete exhausted 
for S2, S3 and U while S1 seemed showing still activity. Importantly, after 48 hours of activity 
S1 consumed 81 % of the bCOD (blue dashed line on the graph) for nitrate respiration 
while S2, S3 and U consumed respectively 53 %, 41 % and 50 %. Because no hindering 
effects were expected preventing after 48 hours a complete degradation of the carbon 
substrate, the most plausible explanation recalls again the important role of the storing 
0
100
200
300
0,3
0,5
1,0
2,0
4,0
8,0
16,0
32,0
mgCOD L-1
Time (h)
bCOD
S1
S2
S3
U
==PAGE:66==
 
 
56
process triggered by the different conditions the biofilm experienced in batch incubation 
due to the fest famine conditions.  
4.9 Saverio Conti thesis 30.10.2015Nitrous oxide production rates 
quantification 
According to the procedure previously described in Section 3.5, measurements of nitrous 
oxide were collected at 8 different times from each of the batch reactors. The nitrous oxide 
productions investigation allowed determining the production rates of the systems when 
performing on different carbon sources and available carbon in limiting conditions. Nitrous 
oxide productions profiles are reported in Appendix 6.4. On those profile, productions rates 
were calculated with the values collected by the method listed in Section 3.6 and treated as 
mentioned in the same section. In first place a remarkable difference was noted between 
profiles detected in continuous and batch incubation. In batch incubation productions were 
straight following the expected pattern and so we could accurately distinguish between no 
productions profiles and actual productions. Figure 4-12 represents the the production rates 
calculated at different times.  
Figure 4-13 Nitrous oxide production rates in liquid phase at different times during batch incubation 
for reactors S1, S2, S3 and U. The dashed line indicates the end of the first observed phase. 
0,00
3,00
6,00
9,00
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
mg-N2O/ld
Time (d)
S1
S2
S3
U
==PAGE:67==
 
 
57
 
Considering all the bioreactors always operated in carbon limiting condition (COD/N<5) 
during the batch incubation, the profiles describing the production rates of nitrous oxide are 
not monotonous but characterized by two separate phases of climaxing and decreasing. The 
two phases after the lag phase observed in the denitrification and N2O production profiles 
coincided in end and start time. During the lag phase which characterize all reactors except 
S1, no sensible denitrification activity is detected unlike nitrous oxide production rates which 
were considerably present. For this phase only one data was available for each reactor, the 
first points in the graph. Right after the lag phase, in phase 1 which lasted until 6 hours after 
the start of the experiment we could see an increase in N2O productions, matched by high 
denitrification rates, followed by a sudden decrease in S2 and U reactors with a low but 
steady decrease in production rate for S3. Regarding S1, in the first phase the reactor didn’t 
show any nitrous oxide production. After reaching a zero point after 9 hours at the end of 
the firs phase a shift to increasing is then observed determining a second phase. The highest 
production rates were detected during the second phase after one day of batch incubation 
with peaks of 3.5 in U, 7.7 in S2, 0.5 in S1, 0.6 in S3 mgN2O L-1 d-1. Reported productions 
gradually decreased over time and reached zero values in 48 hours. Interestingly, while in 
the first phase the highest production rates were showed by the U reactor, in the second 
phase S2 doubled the production rates of U. S2 and U patters were very similar suggesting 
that similar activities occurred determining a similar outcome. The highest productions in 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
58
S2 and U reactors could be connected to a not complete specialization of organic substrate 
consumption achieved during continuous operation. 
Table 4-4 Denitrification and nitrous oxide production specific rates identified for each different 
phase and compared, values have been normalized for the active surface of biofilm employed 
Lag phase 
Phase 1 
 
Duration  
h 
rN2O/rNOX Duration day 
rN2O/rNOX  
S1 
- 
- 
0,25 
ND 
ND 
S2 
3,0 
- 
0,28 
2% 
5% 
S3 
3,0 
- 
0,25 
2% 
- 
U 
3,0 
- 
0,28 
0.5% 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phase 2 
 
Duration  
day 
rN2O/rNOX  
S1 
1,84 
ND 
 2,00% 
3,00% 
ND 
ND 
ND 
S2 
1,84 
ND 
60,08% 83,16% 79,32% 
32,88% 
10,63% 
S3 
1,84 
ND 
ND 
7,66% 
ND 
10,44% 
ND 
U 
1,84 
ND 
41,50% 42,08% 45,85% 
18,57% 
ND 
==PAGE:69==
 
59 
The normalization of nitrous oxide rates over denitrification rates (Table 4-4) 
indicate the highest picks of productions during phase 2 of 83 % and 10,4 % of 
nitrate reduced converted to nitrous oxide production, respectively in S2 and S3 
reactors for the staged system. The unstaged system instead shows peaks of 35-39 
% of specific N2O productions. In Phase 1 the highest rate detected is in U reactor 
and ranges around 5%, which is similar to values reported in literature. Data 
indicate that during the second phase, after more than 30 hours of incubation the 
denitrification is almost completely interrupted to the intermediate of nitrous 
oxide. By comparison of denitrification rates and production rates during the two 
phases we can see that the highest production rates not always occur with the 
highest denitrification rates. Ultimately, the detected production patterns indicate 
that interruption of the denitrification pathway to N2O is more connected to the 
shock caused by a sudden change in substrate availability without a period of slow 
adaptation. 
 
4.10 Specificity assessment of nosZ primers. 
Environmental studies investigating the abundance of N2O-reducing denitrifiers 
commonly use the nosZ gene as a biomarker for denitrifying communities. 
However, such studies generally apply primers targeting nosZ sequences 
belonging to alpha-, beta- or gamma-proteobacteria (Christopher M Jones 2012). 
For targeting a larger fraction of bacteria carrying nosZ gene, also primers 
targeting the very abundant atypical nosZ containning bacteria in wastewater, 
belonging to the Bacteroidetes (Section2.2) were tested. 
Although all primers used in this study Section 3-8 were described in previous 
studies, in order to prepare pure standard, the primers were tested on samples 
taken from the reactors, where we expected a high abundance of denitrifiers. The 
preparation of the standards followed the protocol detailed in Section 3-7 and 
the samples of plasmids with the incorporated amplified target were sequenced 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
60
in order to identify the specificity of amplification. The sequences obtained were 
blasted towards the database to find the closest relative. For the primerset, 
nosZ1F – nosZ1R (Henry et al. 2006), the blast results grouped our nosZ 
sequences into the expected Proteobacteria. On the other hand, the set of primers 
targeting atypical bacteria resulted in an amplified sequence without matches on 
Blast repository. For this reason, only the typical nosZ was quantified with Real-
Time PCR (Henry et al. 2006).  
 
4.11 Quantification of nirK, nirS, nosZ and 16S rDNA in biofilm 
samples. 
The study of abundance of the functional genes nirK, nirS and nosZ in biofilm 
samples collected from all the reactors in staged and unstaged line after 60, 120 and 
150 days of monitored operation. The DNA was extracted from the biomass 
according to the protocol listed in Section 3-7. Plasmids containing cloned nirK, 
nirS and nosZ genes were used to draw a standard curve relating Ct to the added 
quantity of linearized plasmid DNA and the gene copy number. Linear response 
was observed with the three tested plasmids for 7 order of magnitude ranging from 
102 to 108 gene copies per ng of DNA (r2=0.99). (Appendix) 
The sensitivity of the assay was determined on the standard curve. 
The amplification efficiencies obtained were of 90 % for nirK, nirS, 16S rDNA 
and 88 % for nosZ.  
  
==PAGE:71==
 
 
61
 
Figure 4-14 Number of gene copies per ng of DNA calculated from the Ct number 
detected correlated to the proper standard curve. 
 
Target DNA analytical duplicates were analyzed for each reactor by Real-Time 
PCR experiments. 
 
Table 4-5 Gene copies number 16s rRNA, nirK, nirS and nosZ and ratio nirS/nirK 
GENE COPY PER NG OF DNA EXTRACTED FROM CARRIER BIOFILM 
 
days 
16S rRNA 
±Diff 
nirK 
±Diff 
nirS 
±Diff 
nosZ 
±Diff 
U 
60 
2.89E+07 
1.410E+06 
1.84E+05 
1.06E+04 
1.78E+05 
1.13E+04 
5.15E+02 
6.70E+01 
 
120 
2.88E+07 
5.000E+05 
2.06E+05 
1.47E+04 
2.01E+05 
1.81E+04 
6.80E+02 
1.17E+02 
 
150 
3.07E+07 
4.420E+06 
1.76E+05 
8.00E+02 
1.73E+05 
3.30E+03 
7.26E+02 
1.45E+02 
S1 
60 
2.89E+07 
2.320E+06 
1.32E+05 
7.30E+03 
1.32E+05 
8.00E+03 
5.99E+02 
1.09E+02 
 
120 
2.88E+07 
7.800E+05 
1.43E+05 
4.08E+04 
1.41E+05 
4.33E+04 
1.82E+02 
3.47E+01 
 
150 
3.07E+07 
8.940E+06 
1.68E+05 
1.10E+03 
1.65E+05 
4.00E+02 
2.55E+02 
6.78E+01 
S2 
60 
2.89E+07 
3.390E+06 
1.89E+05 
1.93E+04 
1.85E+05 
1.97E+04 
3.39E+02 
4.92E+01 
 
120 
2.88E+07 
1.310E+06 
1.30E+05 
7.40E+03 
1.29E+05 
1.17E+04 
2.70E+02 
1.19E+02 
 
150 
3.07E+07 
2.600E+05 
1.13E+05 
4.10E+03 
1.11E+05 
6.10E+03 
1.83E+02 
1.10E+02 
S3 
60 
2.89E+07 
2.780E+06 
1.97E+05 
8.70E+03 
1.93E+05 
7.80E+03 
3.98E+02 
N/A 
1,00E+00
1,00E+02
1,00E+04
1,00E+06
1,00E+08
U
U
U
S1
S1
S1
S2
S2
S2
S3
S3
S3
60
120
150
60
120
150
60
120
150
60
120
150
Gene copies/ng DNA
days
16S rRNA
nirS
nirK
nosZ
==PAGE:72==
 
 
62
 
120 
2.88E+07 
2.930E+06 
1.62E+05 
1.24E+04 
1.58E+05 
9.40E+03 
2.12E+02 
N/A 
 
150 
3.07E+07 
3.090E+06 
1.44E+05 
1.22E+04 
1.42E+05 
1.32E+04 
1.89E+02 
N/A 
 
RATIOS OF nirS OVER nirK 
U 
60 
0.97 
 
120 
0.97 
 
150 
0.98 
S1 
60 
1.00 
 
120 
0.98 
 
150 
0.98 
S2 
60 
0.98 
 
120 
1.00 
 
150 
0.98 
S3 
60 
0.98 
 
120 
0.98 
 
150 
0.99 
U 
60 
0.97 
 
Quantification of total bacteria by targeting of 16S rRNA gene resulted in 2,89×107 
to 3.00×107 gene copies per ng of DNA identified from the biofilm samples. 
Obtained values are from one to two order of magnitudes higher than those usually 
reported in literature for quantification from ng of DNA extracted (Wang 2014). 
The cause could be a depredated standard used for the preparation of the standard 
curve or due to a microbial community richer in 16s DNA than usual. 
Two structurally different but functionally equivalent forms of nitrite reductase 
catalyze the nitrite reduction: copper and cytochrome cd1 containing nitrite 
reductases encoded by the genes nirK and nirS, respectively. The copy numbers of 
nirK and nirS showed to be stable over time and between reactors, without sensible 
differences. Nirk and nirS gene copies ranged from 2.06×105 to 1.13×105 and from 
1.11 ×105 to 2.01×105 gene copies per ng DNA, respectively (Figure 4-15). The 
average abundance of nirS and nirK relative to the overall bacterial population was 
close to 0.01% for both (Figure B). The relative abundance of nirK was found 
lower than the results reported by Geets et al. (0.16–2.75%) and Wang, Z., (Wang 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
63
2014). However, the gene copy number of nirK and nirS detected is very similar 
with the resulted reported in the order of 105 copies per ng of DNA. Furthermore, 
this study showed that nirS had similar abundance than nirK in each of the four 
reactors over time (The ratio of nirS/nirK was close to 1.0 in each sample). 
Although limited fluctuations in the abundance were observed, they did not seem 
to define an over all trend of decreasing or increasing in time or between reactors, 
proving that the biofilm was in steady state conditions and not significant 
modifications in the functional population occurred in response to the different 
wastewater inocula composition. In addition, the comparable amount of 
denitrifiers in the reactors proved that the different denitrifying activities detected 
are not due to a different number of potential denitrifiers. It was found that the 
amount of nitrate reduce further after nitrite has a correlation, although in an 
interval of significance of 90%, with the relative abundance of the denitrifying 
genes according to Pearson test. 
 
Table 4-6 R values calculated by Pearson correlation test  
 
U 
S1 
S2 
S3 
nirS 
0.8376 
0.1102 
0.9938 
0.7991 
nirK 
0.7925 
0.1482 
0.9972 
0.8142 
  
Calculations showed that the correlation is stronger in the reactors with a low 
metabolic activity, indicating that in U, S2 and S3 the functional gene copies 
variation can affect the denitrification performance. Previous studies have revealed 
significant correlation between nitrate concentration and the abundance of nirK or 
nirS in soil or wastewater environment (Guo GX 2013) (Wang 2014). Once again, 
the conclusion of a correlation between functional genes abundance and 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
64
denitrifying activity observed could be consistent in limited extent; however the 
gene expression must be taken in greater consideration to account for the broad 
variations in activities observed. The ratios showed are different from results 
obtained from wastewater treatment plants treating hospital wastewater, 
papermaking wastewater or pharmaceutical wastewater (Wang 2014). Data could 
suggest that nirS and nirK could have the same role in the nitrogen removal and in 
the considered reactors the heterogeneity of the microbial community is large. 
Hoever, the expression level of the genes may affect their contribution to nitrogen 
removal (Guo GX 2013). Thus, further studies based on mRNA and protein 
expression have to be conducted. 
N2O is an important component of greenhouse gas, and reduction of N2O to N2 
in the wastewater environment has been attributed exclusively to the denitrifiers 
carrying nosZ gene.  qPCR showed that the copy number of nosZ gene in the 
biofilm samples ranged from 1,82×102 to 7,26×102 gene copies per ng DNA 
(Figure) with relative abundance over nirS and nirK around 0.01 % (Figure B). 
Results indicated that in the biofilm, the abundance of nosZ gene was stable 
between reactors and over time but lower than the total abundance of nirK and 
nirS. The conclusion that most of denitrifiers in the reactors might lack nosZ, 
which may lead to the accumulation of N2O in anaerobic environments, is 
inconsistent with the observed patterns of nitrous oxide productions. Although, as 
previously considered, nosZ is a wide spread and polymorphic gene and the 
primers set used can only detect nosZ belonging to clade I or typical bacteria (Jones 
CM. 2013). Thus, it could be that the community under analysis was mainly 
featured by an heterogeneous ensemble of typical and atypical bacterial genus. 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
65
5 
C o n c l u s i o n s  
 
This study evinces the potential benefit of staging MBBR for optimization of the 
performances of a heterotrophic denitrification process under anoxic conditions, 
confirming the hypothesis made. The staged configuration showed higher 
conversion of influent NO3-N than the staged system using natural wastewater as 
feed of organic carbon. Data on organic substrate consumption and nitrate 
reduction for each reactor prove that the higher performance achieved in the 
staged system is due to a specialization of the bioreactors in an optimized carbon 
utilization to different carbon availability conditions granted by the staged 
configuration. In addition, S1 and U reactors’ performances where strongly 
affected by the composition in bCOD of the influent, indicated by fluctuations in 
the performance. Conversely, S2 and S3 reactors ensured almost constant 
denitrification efficiencies regardless the quality of the medium. The different 
behavior can be explained considering that while the staged configuration fosters 
the consumption of the readily biodegradable substrate in S1, S2 and S3 reactors 
have reductive activities based on the consumption of the hydrolysable organic 
fraction because of the scarcity or absence of Ss fraction. In conclusion the 
specialization achieved assured the higher robustness proved during the monitored 
period to the staged system.  
Nitrous oxide productions rates detected in the system permit to understand the 
completion of the denitrification pathway and to assess and compare the carbon 
footprint of the two systems between them and with detections from previous 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
66
studies of wastewater treatment. Despite the fact the system constantly operated in 
carbon limiting conditions (COD/N<5) and reported studies confirmed a sensible 
presence of production rates under this conditions, during the continuous flow 
experiment in three different days of investigation after 60, 120 and 150 days of 
monitored operation, very low (<0,5%) or not quantifiable specific N2O 
production rates were detected in all reactors except S3 reactor, where higher 
percentages around 1 % are probably connected to the low denitrification rates. 
The unexpected result suggest that the biofilm process could be less inclined to 
produce nitrous oxide which might be trapped in the biofilm when produced acting 
as a N2O sink and induced to be reduced. The long operating of the two system 
under carbon limitation could have assured a specialization of the biomass for nitric 
and nitrous oxide reductase with a higher affinity for the electron donor. 
Furthermore, low nitrate reduction rates or an incompletion of the denitrifying 
pathway leading to the accumulation of nitric oxide can be also a possibility even 
though batch result would point to that conclusion.  
The batch experiment performed allowed to estimate the denitrification biological 
rates in the different MBBR reactors under the same feeding conditions. As 
expected, different rates were detected for denitrification activity divided in two 
different phase. During the two phases fostered respectively mainly by the readily 
biodegradable fraction and hydrolysable fraction reactors denitrification showed 
different behaviors. The specific denitrification rate per biofilm surface during the 
1st phase of denitrification (utilizing the non-limiting Ss fraction in the feed) 
increased from reactors S3 to S1.  This trend further demonstrates that S1 reactor 
specialized over time its biomass for the consumption of readily biodegradable and 
when it is provided in large quantity a proportional increase in denitrification is 
observed. Regarding the second phases, results from this phase showed that all 
reactors performed very low activities, apparently because the biomass was 
subjected to a complete reorganization of its metabolism in response to the new 
feasting conditions in first phase, ended to be not suitable after the depletion of 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
67
the Ss substrate. This behavior is typical when bacteria in famine conditions are 
more move to a rich in substrates environment. Productions detection during 
batch incubation showed production in the first phases and in the second one not 
continuous but apparently interrupted at the separation time of the two phases. S2 
and U reactors showed the highest productions from 2 to 80 % and from 0.5 to 
45% respectively, very low for S3 and non detectable for S1. These observations 
suggest that in absence of nitrous oxide productions the system is apparently 
completing the denitrification pathway while interruption is cause of high 
productions of N2O. Furthermore, result suggest productions of N2O are not 
mainly depended by only the carbon limiting conditions but especially by the 
abruptly changing in availability of carbon. For an ultimate conclusion, Productions 
collected from continuous flow compared to those from the batch incubation 
underline the importance of a stable operation as main parameter affecting N2O 
production. As future prospective, detections of nitric oxide on the system must 
be collected and more different conditions must be tested, as a carbon spiking of 
the system to understand better the causes of the low productions.  
As final goal of this project, a quantification of the functional denitrifying genes 
nirS, nirK and nosZ and phylogenetic gene 16s rRNA was accomplished to 
understand whether the different performance of the reactors and the nitrous oxide 
productions depended on different composition of the biomass. Resulted indicated 
that the biomass is very heterogeneous with a similar abundance of nirK and nirS 
and thus different denitrifiers. nosZ quantification indicated that typical nosZ is 
only partially but not completely representative of the nitrous oxide reductive 
community present in the bioreactors. All gene copies were seen to be stable over 
time and not utterly but partially correlated with the denitrifying performance of 
the system over time. However, not considerable differences were noted between 
reactors with different performances Results demonstrate that the activities of the 
systems are mainly defendant from the genes expression than population 
composition. 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
68
In accordance to the observations on the primary metabolism this study provides 
multiple proofs that a stable differentiation of the bioreactors occurred in the 
staged MBBR system. This differentiation is more accounted to the gene 
expression activity than denitrifying population abundance which seems stable in 
time and space. Further more, the moving bed biofilm systems conducted in stable 
conditions seems to be more effective in completing the denitrification than other 
systems, however not sensible differences in productions can be detected between 
the two systems despite different performances. 
Future investigation on biomass ecology and transcriptome characterization will 
further clarify the metabolism specialization of the biomass and will give more 
information on how to reach a further improvement of the system. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
69
6 
A p p e n d i x  
 
6.1 Appendix   
 
 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
70
6.2 Appendix 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
71
 
6.3 Appendix 
 
MBBR batch experiments (3rd round) – Protocol 
 
After operation in continuous mode for approx. 1 year and 3 months (∼ 450 
days), staged (n=3: S1, S2, S3) and unstaged (n=1: U) MBBR reactors will 
be operated in batch mode for the 2nd time.  
Batch experiments with MBBR carriers from each reactor, adapted to pre-
clarified wastewater during continuous operation, are performed: 
• 
to assess denitrification kinetics, including N2O production 
• 
to assess xenobiotics’ fate in the different reactors 
• 
compare current kinetics with kinetics measured in the 1st (and 2nd) 
round of experiments  
The batch experiments are performed in jacketed reactors, with the possibility 
of temperature control. Since the jacketed reactors available are 2, and the 
total staged and unstaged reactors are 4, the batch experiments will be 
performed in consecutive 1–2-days periods. 
 
 
Equipment 
• 
4 jacketed reactors 
• 
K1 carriers with adapted biomass 
• 
(Tentative) 1 water bath to keep constant temperature 
 
 
Details on the operation during batch experiments: 
 
Reactor 
S1 (staged 
n. 1) 
S2 (staged 
n. 2) 
S3 (staged 
n. 3) 
U (unstaged) 
Volume 
5 L 
5 L 
5 L 
5 L 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
72
Carriers 
volume 
0.5 L 
0.5 L 
0.5 L 
0.5 L 
Filling ratio  
10% 
10% 
10% 
10% 
Temperature 
20°C 
20°C 
20°C 
20°C 
Batch 
duration 
48 h 
48 h 
48 h 
48 h 
 
 
Reactors preparation 
• 
Stop continuous operation, disconnect staged and unstaged reactors  
• 
Empty reactors from wastewater and carriers 
• 
Rinse/quickly wash reactors with water 
• 
Keep carriers in separate bechers 
• 
Start water bath or insert tap water (pre-adjusted to 20°C) into jacket. 
• 
Prepare 5 L inoculum of new wastewater for each reactor (in total 
20 L) 
o 5 L wastewater 
o 3.61 g KNO3 to be added to each of 5 L flaks (Dose KNO3 
for each inoculum, reaching an initial concentration of 
approximately 100 mg/L NO3-N.) 
• 
Fill reactors with new wastewater inoculum. 
• 
Let wastewater slightly warm up to 16–18° C (under fume hood or in 
reactor with filled jacket) 
• 
Insert one pH meter in each reactor. 
• 
Insert one DO meter in one selected reactor. 
• 
Insert carriers into the batch reactors, adjusting filling ratio to desired 
value (0.5 L of carriers for 5 L of reactor). 
• 
Adjust pH in each reactor to 7.0 by adding HCl. 
• 
Start N2 sparging. 
• 
When N2 sparging starts and pH is adjusted, the batch experiment 
starts (t=0).  
 
 
Operation 
• 
Temperature is controlled around 20°C by using water bath or water 
pre-adjusted overnight to 20°C 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
73
• 
Temperature and pH in the reactors are continuously monitored using 
multimeters. 
• 
For each sample collected (=volume of wastewater removed), carriers 
are removed to keep the filling ratio (and biomass concentration) 
constant over the whole experiment.  
• 
Characterization 
of 
the 
wastewater 
inoculum 
is 
performed, 
determining initial concentrations of COD, sCOD, NH4, NO3 and 
xenobiotics. 
 
 
 
Sampling and analysis for filling ratio=10% 
 
1. 
Initial sampling at t=0 from wastewater inoculum and reactors 
• 
Duplicates for COD, sCOD, NH4, NO3 + Initial sample from 
reactors 
• 
Triplicates for BOD 
• 
Duplicates for xenobiotics + Initial sample from reactors 
 
2. 
COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• 
Volume of non-filtered sample to be collected = 3 mL 
• 
Volume of filtered sample = 10 mL 
• 
Total volume = 13 mL 
• 
For sample filtration, use 0.45 um siringe filters 
• 
Storage of samples at < 4° C 
• 
Measurement of unfiltered samples within 24 h from sample 
collection 
 
3. 
Xenobiotics – Kai Bester (KB) 
• 
Collect 4 mL of wastewater using glass pipette 
• 
Add 1.4 mL of MeOH (99% purity) 
• 
Storage of samples at -20° C 
 
4. 
NH4 
• 
Samples to be collected from each reactor at the end of the 
experiments (t=24 h) 
 
5. 
TSS carriers 
• 
5 carriers are collected from each reactor  
==PAGE:84==
 
 
74
i. at the beginning of the experiment (t=0 h) 
ii. halfway through the experiment (t=24 h) or at the end 
of the experiment (t=48 H) 
• 
Carriers in the oven at 105° C for > 1 h 
 
Volumes to be collected for each analyte are the same above 
Details on sampling time, analytes and carriers removed for each 
sampling are included in the following table: 
 
Sampling 
time 
(min) 
Sampling 
time  
(h) 
Sample 
volume (mL) 
Sample collected for 
Carriers 
removed 
(carr./reactor) 
0 
0 
From 
inoculum 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• BOD triplicate 
• [Xenobiotics (KB), 
duplicate] 
• TSS from inoculum 
• Carbon source 
/ 
0 
0 
From 
reactors, 
30 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
• TSS from carriers 
10 
(4 mRNA, 2 
DNA, 4 TSS) 
22.5 
0.375 
17 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
2 
45 
0.75 
17 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
4 
90 
1.5 
17 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
3 
135 
2.25 
33 (S1) 
13 (S2, S3, U) 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Carbon source (S1) 
S1: 6 (4 
mRNA, 2 
DNA)  
S2, S3, U: 2 
180 
3 
37 (S2, U) 
17 (S1. S3) 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
• Carbon source (S2, U) 
S2, U: 6 (4 
mRNA, 2 
DNA)  
S1, S3: 2 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
75
240 
4 
17 (S1, S2, U) 
37 (S3) 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Carbon source (S3) 
S1, S2, U: 2   
S3: 6 (4 
mRNA, 2 
DNA) 
360 
6 
17 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
4 
600 
10 
17 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
2 
1080 
18 
17 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
2 
1440 
24 
37 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
• TSS carriers 
• Carbon source 
10 (4 mRNA, 
2 DNA, 4 
TSS) 
1920 
32 
13 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
2 
2880 
48 
37 
+ 
50 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
• TSS on carriers 
• Carbon source 
• TSS suspension 
10 
(4 mRNA, 2 
DNA, 4 TSS) 
Second part of the experiment with acetate/propionate spike (t =2940 min) 
2955 
48.25 
13 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
2 
2970 
48.5 
13 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
2 
3000 
49 
17 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
• Xenobiotics (KB) 
3 
3060 
50 
13 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
2 
3120 
51 
13 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
2 
3240 
52 
13 
• COD, sCOD, NO3, NO2 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
76
 
 
 
N2O measurements 
• 
N2O production is measured in each reactor by intermittently 
(for approximately 5 minutes) stopping the N2 sparging 
• 
A whole measurement last approximately 15 minutes and 
includes: 
i. Inserting sensor in reactor for 2–5 minutes with N2 
sparging 
ii. Stopping N2 sparging, starting mechanical mixing and 
recording N2O production by an increase on N2O 
concentration due to lower stripping. 
iii. Restarting N2 sparging and keeping sensor for 2–5 
minutes more 
• 
Production rates are measured in each reactor every 2–4 h. 
Importantly, measurements are performed very close in time 
to the sampling/measurement of NO3 concentration, so that 
NO3 and NO2 conversion rate can be compared with N2O 
production rate 
• 
More frequent measurements are forecast in the initial phase 
(first 6–12 h), in order to characterize N2O production when 
NO2 accumulation occurs 
• 
DO is monitored during the phase when N2 sparging is turned 
off 
• 
A detailed plan of N2O measurement is reported below: 
 
Measurement 
Measuring time after 
beginning of 
experiment (h)  
Reactor 
1 
0:45–1.00 
S1 
1:00–1:15 
U 
1:15–1:30 
S2 
1:30–1:45 
S3 
2 
3:00–3:15 
S1 
3:15–3:30 
U 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
77
3:30–3:45 
S2 
3:45–4:00 
S3 
3 
6:00–6:15 
S1 
6:15–6:30 
U 
6:30–6:45 
S2 
6:45–7:00 
S3 
4 
9:30–9:45 
S1 
9:45–10:00 
U 
10:00–10:15 
S2 
10:15–10:30 
S3 
5 
18:00–18:15 
S1 
18:15–18:30 
U 
18:30–18:45 
S2 
18:45–19:00 
S3 
6 
24:00–24:15 
S1 
24:15–24:30 
U 
24:30–24:45 
S2 
24:45–25:00 
S3 
7 
32:00–32:15 
S1 
32:15–32:30 
U 
32:30–32:45 
S2 
32:45–33:00 
S3 
8 
47:00–47:15 
S1 
47:15–47:30 
U 
47:30–47:45 
S2 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
78
47:45–48:00 
S3 
Second part of the experiment with acetate/propionate spike 
1b 
48:15–48:30 
S1 
48:30–48:45 
U 
48:45–49:00 
S2 
49:00–49:15 
S3 
2b 
49:30–49:45 
S1 
49:45–50:00 
U 
50:00–50:15 
S2 
50:15–50:30 
S3 
3b 
50:45–51:00 
S1 
51:00–51:15 
U 
51:15–51:30 
S2 
51:30–51:45 
S3 
 
 
• 
The N2O sensor is calibrated at the end of the experiment by 
using the wastewater from the batch sparged with N2 to flush 
any remaining liquid N2O at the same temperature as the 
batch experiment (don’t get rid of the wastewater at the end of 
the batch!) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
79
Biomass sampling 
 
• 
Samples are collected for  
o mRNA (duplicate, 2 carriers per replicate) 
o DNA (duplicate, 1 carrier per replicate) 
• 
Samples collected 
o At the beginning (t=0 h) 
o When Ss is not limiting (t=3 h for S1, U; t=4.5 h for S2, S3) 
o When Ss is limiting (t=24 h) 
o At the end of the experiment (t=48 h) 
 
Procedure: 
• 
Collect the liquid nitrogen from the big bottle in a thermos. 
• 
Collect (3*2) 6 carriers at a time from one reactor (4 are used for 
mRNA extraction, 2 for DNA extraction). Use gloves 
• 
Prepare a clean tray to weigh carriers (clean with ethanol)   
• 
Weigh the 6 wet carriers on the allow tray (be fast, 1–2 minutes). 
Weigh carriers separately for RNA and DNA. 
• 
Put 2 carriers (one at a time) in a sterile 1.5 ml (or 2 mL) Eppendorf 
tube. 
• 
Cap the Eppendorf tubes and use tweezers dip the Eppendorf tube 
with the carrier in liquid nitrogen. 
• 
Leave the Eppendorf tube in liquid nitrogen for around 0.5–2 minutes. 
• 
Afterwards, quickly open the Eppendorf tube and detach the biomass 
from the hole of the carrier with the tip of the brush. It will take a few 
seconds before the biomass can be detached from the carrier walls, 
meanwhile keep pushing through the carrier’s holes with the tip of the 
brush. Successful detachment results in lumps of biomass on the 
bottom of the tube. 
• 
Thereafter, remove the carrier with tweezers. 
• 
Weigh carriers (use another tray) without the extracted biomass to 
determine weight of extracted biomass [average of g/carrier or total 
g/6 carriers]  
• 
Close the Eppendorf tubes and submerge them in liquid nitrogen 
again. 
• 
Repeat the procedure for all samples (for the second carrier of each 
triplicate, use the same Eppendorf tube where biomass has been 
already 
extracted), 
always 
keeping 
the 
already 
sampled 
biomass+carriers in liquid nitrogen. 
• 
For long-term storage, transfer the samples from liquid nitrogen to a -
80°C freezer in 113. 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
80
 
6.4 Appendix 
Calibration curves built for conversion of mV to nitrous oxide mgN/L. 
Calibartion temperature 19 °C. 
Staged 
 
Unstaged 
 
y = 79,283x + 1,1376
R² = 0,99978
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
0,00
0,05
0,10
0,15
Signal (mV)
N2O-N concentration (mgN/L)
Signal (mV)
y = 79,283x + 1,1376
R² = 0,99978
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
0,00
0,05
0,10
0,15
Signal (mV)
N2O-N concentration (mgN/L)
Signal (mV)
==PAGE:91==
 
 
81
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S1 
S2 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S3 
U 
==PAGE:93==
 
83 
120 
150 
30 
Days 
U                                 S3                             S2                                 S1 
==PAGE:94==
 
84 
 
 
6.5 Appendix 
 
DNA extraction 12_5_2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ng/µl 
µl 
µl 
 
Sample 
 
Avarage 
Final 
concentration 
Final 
volume 
Vol of 
stock to 
add 
PCR 
water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U A 
131,4 
132,85 
2 
250 
3,764 
246,236 
U A 
134,3 
 
2 
250   
  
U B 
185,9 
185,75 
2 
250 
2,692 
247,308 
U B 
185,6 
 
2 
250   
  
S1 A 
153 
153,5 
2 
250 
3,257 
246,743 
S1 A 
154 
 
2 
250   
  
S1 B 
243 
242,25 
2 
250 
2,064 
247,936 
S1 B 
241,5 
 
2 
250   
  
S2 A 
153,2 
153,6 
2 
250 
3,255 
246,745 
S2 A 
154 
 
2 
250   
  
S2 B 
115 
115,5 
2 
250 
4,329 
245,671 
S2 B 
116 
 
2 
250   
  
S3 A 
89 
89,5 
2 
250 
5,587 
244,413 
S3 A 
90 
 
2 
250   
  
S3 B 
94,1 
94,8 
2 
250 
5,274 
244,726 
S3 B 
95,5 
 
2 
250   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
DNA extraction 26_2_2015 
 
 
  
  
S1 
70,6 
70,5 
2 
250 
7,092 
242,908 
S1 
70,4 
 
2 
250   
  
S2 
78,7 
78,3 
2 
250 
6,386 
243,614 
S2 
77,9 
 
2 
250   
  
S3 
64,2 
64,35 
2 
250 
7,770 
242,230 
S3 
64,5 
 
2 
250   
  
U 
71,2 
71,75 
2 
250 
6,969 
243,031 
U 
72,3 
 
2 
250   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
==PAGE:95==
 
 
85
DNA extraction 30_06_2015 
 
 
  
  
S1 
98,7 
99 
2 
250 
5,051 
244,949 
S1 
99,3 
 
2 
250   
  
S2 
60,9 
60,25 
2 
250 
8,299 
241,701 
S2 
59,6 
 
2 
250   
  
S3 
101,4 
101,35 
2 
250 
4,933 
245,067 
S3 
101,3 
 
2 
250   
  
U 
118,2 
118,55 
2 
250 
4,218 
245,782 
U 
118,9 
 
2 
250   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
nirK qPCR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
86
  
nirS qPCR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
87
 
16s rRNA qPCRA for total bacteria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
88
6.6 Appendix 
 
nosZ specificity test 
 
 
 
 
Typical nosZ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
 
 
89
 
NosZ atypical and typical sequences 
==PAGE:100==
 
 
90
 
NosZ qPCR 
 
 
 
 
 
Melting curve standards                   Melting curve samples 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
2
 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
7 B i b l i o g r a p h y  
A. Muller, M.C. Wentzel, R.E. Loewenthal, 
G.A. Ekama. "Heterotroph anoxic 
yield in anoxic aerobic activated sludge 
systems treating municipal 
wastewater." Water Research 37 (2003): 
2435-2441. 
AnoxKaldnes™, Veolia. Moving Bed Biofilm 
Reactor. 
http://www.veoliawaterstna.com/naw
atersytems/ressources/documents/1/
20572,NAWS_MBBR.pdf. 
Betlach MR, Tiedje JM. "Kinetic 
explanation for accumulation of nitrite, 
nitric oxide, and nitrous oxide during 
bacterial denitrification." Appl Environ 
Microbiol 42, no. 6 (1981): 1074–1084. 
BG Plósz, M Weiss, C Printemps, K 
Essemiani, J Meinhold. "One-
dimensional modelling of the 
secondary clarifier-factors affecting 
simulation in the clarification zone and 
the assessment of the thickening flow 
dependence." Water research 41, no. 15 
(2007): 3359-3371. 
Cabello P., Roldán M.D., Moreno-Vivián 
C. "Nitrate reduction and the nitrogen 
cycle in archaea." Microbiology, no. 150 
(11) (2004): 3527-3546. 
Chen, J., & Strous, M. "Denitrification and 
aerobic respiration, hybrid electron 
transport chains and co-evolution." 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-
Bioenergetics, no. 1827(2) (2013): 136-
144. 
Christopher M Jones, Daniel RH Graf, 
David Bru, Laurent Philippot, Sara 
Hallin. "The unaccounted yet 
abundant nitrous oxide-reducing 
microbial community: a potential 
nitrous oxide sink." The ISME Journal, 
no. 7 (2012): 417-426. 
Chung, Y.-C., Chung, M.-S. "BNP test to 
evaluate the influence of C/N ratio on 
N2O production in biological 
denitrification." Water Science and 
Technology 42, no. 3-4 (2000): 23-27. 
Froger A., Hall JE. "Transformation of 
plasmid DNA into E. coli using the 
heat shock method." J Vis Exp, 2007: 
253. 
G. Tchobanoglous, F. L. Burton and H.D. 
Stensel. watewater engineering; treatment 
and reuse. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2003. 
Guo GX, Deng H, Qiao M, Yao HY, Zhu 
YG. "Effect of long-term wastewater 
irrigation on potential denitrification 
and denitrifying communities in soils 
at the watershed scale." Environ Sci 
Technol, no. 47(7) (2013): 3105-3113. 
H. Ødegaard, B. Rusten and T. Westrum. 
"A new moving bed biofilm reactor - 
applications and results." Water Science 
and Technology 29, no. 10 (1994): 157-
165. 
Hanaki K., Hong Z., Matsuo T. 
"Production of Nitrous Oxide Gas 
during Denitrification of Wastewater." 
26, no. 5-6 (1992): 1027-1036. 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
ii
Henze, M. (Ed.). Biological wastewater 
treatment: principles, modelling and design. 
IWA pubblishing, 2008. 
Heylen K, Vanparys B, Wittebolle L, 
Verstraete W, Boon N, De Vos P. 
"Cultivation of denitrifying bacteria: 
Optimization of isolation conditions 
and diversity study." Appl Environ 
Microbiol, no. 72 (2006): 2637-2643. 
Huijie Lu, Kartik Chandran. "Factors 
Promoting Emissions of Nitrous 
Oxide and Nitric Oxide From 
Denitrifying Sequencing Batch 
Reactors Operated With Methanol and 
Ethanol as Electron Donors." 
Biotechnology and bioengeneering 106, no. 3 
(2010): 390-398. 
Itokawa H., Hanaki K., Matsuo, T. 
"Nitrous oxide production in high-
loading biological nitrogen removal 
process under low COD/N ratio 
condition." Water Research 35, no. 3 
(2001): 657-664. 
Jones CM., Graf DR., Bru D., Philippot L., 
Hallin S. "The unaccounted yet 
abundant nitrous oxide-reducing 
microbial community: a potential 
nitrous oxide sink." ISME J. 7, no. 2 
(2013): 417-426. 
Jones, C. M., Stres, B., Rosenquist, M., and 
Hallin, S. "Phylogenetic analysis of 
nitrite, nitric oxide, and nitrous oxide 
respiratory enzymes reveal a complex 
evolutionary his- tory for 
denitrification." Mol. Biol. Evol., no. 25 
(2008): 1955–1966. 
K.L.Thomas, D. Lloyd and L. Boddy. 
"Effects of oxygen, pH and nitrate 
concentration on denitrification by 
Pseudomonas species." (Microbiology 
Letters) 1994: 181-186. 
Knowles, R. "Denitrification: microbiology 
and ecology." Life Support Biosph. Sci., 
no. 3 (1-2) (1996): 31-34. 
Knowles, R. "Denitrification." Microbiol. 
Rev., no. 46(1) (1982): 43-70. 
Korber, D., Lawrence, J., Lappin-Scott, H. 
& Costerton, J. "Growth of micro-
organisms on surfaces. In: Lappin-
Scott, H. & Costerton, J." 
Microbialbiofilms. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, Great Britain, 1995: 15-
45. 
Koutny, M., Kucera, I., Tesarik, R., 
Turanek, J., and Van Spanning, R. J. 
M. "Pseudoazurin mediates 
periplasmic electron flow in a mutant 
strain of Paracoccus denitrificans 
lacking cytochrome c550." FEBS Lett, 
no. 448 (1999): 157-159. 
Kujawa K., Klapwijk B. "A method to 
estimate denitrification potential for 
predenitrification systems using NUR 
batch test." Water Research (Elsevier) 
33, no. 10 (1999): 2291-2300. 
Lee, N. M., Welander, T. "The effect of 
different carbon sources on respiratory 
denitrification in biological wastewater 
treatment." J Ferment Bioeng, no. 82 
(1996): 277-285. 
Liu, H. P., Takio, S., Satoh, T., and 
Yamamoto, I. "Involvement in 
denitrification of the napKEFDABC 
genes encoding the periplasmic nitrate 
reductase system in the denitrifying 
phototrophic bacterium Rhodobacter 
sphaeroides f. sp. denitrificans." Biosci. 
Biotechnol. Biochem, no. 65 (1999): 530-
536. 
Loreggian, L. "Master's Thesis: Removal of 
conventional pollutants and xenobiotic 
trace chemicals." 2014. 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
iii 
Lu, H., Chandran, K., & Stensel, D. 
"Microbial ecology of denitrification in 
biological wastewater treatment." 
Water research, no. 64 (2014): 237-254. 
M Kornaros, G Lyberatos. "Kinetic 
modelling of Pseudomonas 
denitrificans growth and denitrification 
under aerobic, anoxic and transient 
operating conditions." Water research 32, 
no. 6 (1998): 1912-1922. 
Manser R, Muche K, Gujer W, Siegrist H. 
"A rapid method to quantify nitrifiers 
in activated sludge." Water Res, no. 39 
(2005): 1585-1593. 
Marlies J. Kampschreura, Hardy 
Temminkb, Robbert Kleerebezema, 
Mike S.M. Jettena, c, Mark C.M. van 
Loosdrechta. "Nitrous oxide emission 
during wastewater treatment." Water 
Research 43, no. 17 (2009): 4093-4103. 
Mateju Vit et al., S. C. "Biological water 
denitrification - A review." 1992. 
Metcalf and Eddy. Wastewater Engineering: 
Treatment, Disposal, Reuse. New York: 
McGraw- Hill Book Company, 1991. 
Michael R. Betlach, and James M. Tiedje. 
"Kinetic Explanation for 
Accumulation of Nitrite, Nitric Oxide, 
and Nitrous Oxide During Bacterial 
Denitrification." Appl Environ Microbiol 
42, no. 6 (1981): 1074-1084. 
Moir, J. W. B., and Ferguson, S. J. " 
Properties of a Paracoccus 
denitrificans mutant deleted in 
cytochrome c550 indicate that a 
copper protein can substitute for this 
cytochrome in electron transport to 
nitrite, nitric oxide and nitrous oxide." 
Microbiology-UK, no. 140 (1994): 389-
397. 
O’Toole, G., Kaplan, H. & Kolter, R. 
"iofilm formation as microbial devel-
opment." Annual Rev. Microbiol, no. 54 
(2000): 49-79. 
Richardson, D. J., and Watmough, N. J. 
"Inorganic nitrogen metabolism in 
bacteria." Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol, no. 3 
(1999): 207-219. 
Roeleveld P.J., van Loosdrecht M.C.M. 
"Experience with guidelines for 
wastewater characterisation in the 
Netherlands." Wat. Sci. Tech. 45, no. 6 
(2002): 77-87. 
Schalk-Otte, S., Seviour, R. J., Kuenen, J. 
G., & Jetten, M. S. M. "Nitrous oxide 
(N 2 O) production by Alcaligenes 
faecalis during feast and famine 
regimes." water reasearch 34, no. 7 
(2000): 2080-2088. 
Smith, J. M., and Ogram, A. "Genetic and 
functional variation in denitrifier 
populations along a short-term 
restoration chronose- quence." Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol, no. 74 (2008): 5615-
5620. 
Stefan Wuertz, Paul L. Bishop, P. A. 
Wilderer. Biofilms in Wastewater 
Treatment: An Interdisciplinary Approach. 
IWA publishing, 2003. 
Stewart, P. S., & Franklin, M. J. 
"Physiological heterogeneity in 
biofilms." Nature Reviews Microbiology 6, 
no. 3 (2008): 199-210. 
Syron, E. & Casey, E. "Membrane-aerated 
biofilms for high rate 
biotreatment:Performance appraisal, 
engineering principles, scale-up, and 
developmentrequirements." 
Environmental Science & Technology, no. 
42 (2007): 1833-1844. 
T. Zhang, M.F. Shao, L. Ye. "454 
pyrosequencing reveals bacterial 
diversity of activated sludge from 14 
==PAGE:105==
 
 
iv
sewage treatment plants." ISME J, no. 
6(6) (2012): 1137-1147. 
Thomsen JK, Geest T, Cox RP. "Mass 
Spectrometric Studies of the Effect of 
pH on the Accumulation of 
Intermediates in Denitrification by 
Paracoccus denitrificans." Appl Environ 
Microbiol 60, no. 2 (1994): 536-541. 
Throbäck, I.N. "Exploring Denitrifying 
Communities in the Environment." 
Uppsala (2006) Doctoral thesis (Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences), 
2006. 
Throback IN, Enwall K, Jarvis A, Hallin S. 
"Reassessing PCR primers targeting 
nirS, nirK and nosZ genes for 
community surveys of denitrifying 
bacteria with DGGE." FEMS Microbiol 
Ecol, no. 49 (2004): 407-417. 
Unisense. "N2O microsensor." 2014. 
unisense nitrous oxide microsensor. 
US-EPA. "Nitrogen Control Manual." 
EPA-625/R-93-010, Office of Research 
and Development, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington D.C. , 
1993. 
Wallenstein MD, Vilgalys RJ. "Quantitative 
analyses of nitrogen cycling genes in 
soils." Pedobiologia, no. 49 (2005): 665–
672. 
Wang, Z., Zhang, X. X., Lu, X., Liu, B., Li, 
Y., Long, C., & Li, A. "Abundance and 
Diversity of Bacterial Nitrifiers and 
Denitrifiers and Their Functional 
Genes in Tannery Wastewater 
Treatment Plants Revealed by High-
Throughput Sequencing." PLoS One, 
no. 9(11) (2014): e113603. 
Weijers, Stefan R. "On BOD tests for the 
determination of biodegradable COD 
for Calibrating Activated Sludge Model 
No. 1 ." Wat. Sci and Tech. 39, no. 4 
(1999): 177-184. 
Wu L, Thompson DK, Liu X, Fields MW, 
Tiedje JM, Zhou J. "Development and 
evaluation of microarray-based whole-
genome hybridization for detection of 
microorganisms within the context of 
environmental applications." Environ 
Sci Technol, no. 38 (2004): 6775– 6782. 
Ødegaard H., Igarashi T., Watanabe Y., 
Asano T. and Tambo N. "The Moving 
Bed Biofilm Reactor." Water 
Environmental Engineering and Reuse of 
Water (Hokkaido press), 1999: 250-
305. 
Ødegaard, H. "Innovations in wastewater 
treatment: -the moving bed biofilm 
process." Water Science & Technology 53, 
no. 9 (2006): 17-33. 
Ødegaard, H. "Innovations in wastewater 
treatment: the moving bed biofilm 
process." Water Science Technology 53, no. 
9 (2006): 17-33. 
Yuan Z, Blackall LL. "Sludge population 
optimisation: a new dimension for the 
control of biological wastewater 
treatment systems." Water Res, no. 36 
(2002): 482-490. 
Zumft, W. G. "Cell Biology and Molecular 
Basis of Denitrification." 
(Microbiology and Molecular Biology 
Reviews), no. 61 (1997): 533–616. 
 
==PAGE:106==
 
 
 
