==PAGE:1==
Analysis of process variables
inﬂuence on the reproducibility of
sand casting processes
Rune Engelberth Hansen - s093208
Kongens Lyngby 2015
MEK-M.Sc.-2015-1
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Mechanical Technology
Productionstorvet, building 427S,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3351
info@mek.dtu.dk
http://www.mek.dtu.dk/english MEK-M.Sc.-2015-1
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The inﬂuence of variance on reproducibility within the gravity sand casting
process is the target for the analysis in this project. Adding modiﬁer to an
aluminium alloy (AlSi12) is known to alter its mechanical properties as well as
redistributing the porosities in the matrix. The project includes experiments on
variation in the presence of modiﬁer.
To be able to conduct these experiments a modular pattern-plate has been
developed and realised. It has been designed in mind for future variation in the
components that make up the pattern for the casting and for the gating system.
Minimizing variation through tolerance analysis and design clarity has been the
aim while developing the modular system. A self-made program was used to
deﬁne the shape of the gating system through parametric variation. The friction
losses that are encountered by the melt ﬂow within the gating system during
the ﬁlling of the casting have been quantiﬁed analytically.
Of the processes within casting, ﬁlling, solidication and cooling and the defor-
mations it leads to have been analysed numerically using the commercial casting
software MAGMA 5.2. Simulations have been used to quantify the deformations
of the castings from the experiments. Simulations have also been used in the
development of the gating systems and the cast geometries in the project.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Variansens indﬂydelse på reproducérbarhed indenfor sandstøbning er analyseret
i dette projekt. Tilsætningen af modiﬁkatorer til en aluminium legering (AlSi12)
er kendt for at ændre dets mekaniske egenskaber såvel som for at ændre forde-
lingen af porer in emnet. Projektet inkluderer experimenter med variation på
forekomsten af modiﬁkator.
For at kunne udføre disse eksperimenter er der blevet udviklet og realiseret en
modulær formplade. Den er designet med øje for fremtidig variation med de
komponenter der tilsammen udgør formen for støbemnet og indløbs-systemet.
Minimering af variation gennem tolerance-analyse og klarhed i designet har
været målet gennem udviklingen af modulsystemet. Et selvudviklet program
er blevet benyttet til at bestemme formen på indløbs-systemet ved hjælp af
parametrisk variation. Friktionstabene som smelten møder igennem indløbet
under formfyldning er blevet kvantiﬁseret analytisk
Af de mange delprocesser fra støbning er fyldning, størkning og køling samt de
deformationer der følger blevet analyseret numerisk med det kommercielle stø-
beprogram MAGMA 5.2. Simuleringerne er blevet brugt til at kvantiﬁcere defor-
mationerne af de støbningerne som er blevet eksperimenteret med. Simuleringer
er også blevet brugt i udviklingen af indløbene og støbeemnerne i projektet.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring
an M.Sc. in Mechanical engineering.
The work presented in this thesis was supervised by Associate prof. Niels Skat
Tiedje and Senior Researcher Jesper Thorborg during the period October 2014
through March 2015
Lyngby, 06-March-2015
Rune Engelberth Hansen - s093208
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to my supervisors Niels Skat Tiedje and Jesper Thorborg.
For this project, thanks are owed to Nikolaj Vedel-Smith for the help in as-
sembling plates and pins with liquid nitrogen, for help with measurements and
general guidance. The 3D measurements on the castings were possible thanks
to Jakob Rasmussen. The castings from this project were made with the help
of Robert Vedel-Mackay The crazy idea of mounting the pattern plate with
magnets was made possible with good suggestions from Jacob Skov Nielsen The
plastic parts have been printed with the help of Jannick Schultz and Finn Paaske
Christensen. The parts that have been produced by the people at the toolshop
under the strict enforcement of Jan Frank Pedersen.
Special thanks are to the lunch club or material gang, Sebastian Hamdan, Ja-
cob Geert Nielsen, Ömer Can Kücükyildiz, Jes Bandsberg Pedersen and Peter
Bækhøj Schandel.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The casting proces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory in the Casting Proces
5
2.1
Filling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Estimating ﬁlling time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Estimating losses in the gating system . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Solidiﬁcation and cooling of the casting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.1
The behaviour of the material - AlSi12 . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Formation of stresses and strains in the castings
. . . . . . . . .
11
3
Design of patterns
15
3.1
General design constraints in pattern design . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Motivations for developing a new pattern system . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
The magnetic pattern-plate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1
Systems Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Interfaces/couplings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.3
Tolerance Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.4
Assembling the magnets onto the magnet-plate . . . . . .
23
3.3.5
Assembling the parts for the gating system
. . . . . . . .
26
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.3.6
Assembling the casting model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Designing components for the modular system
. . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Design of streamlined gating systems
31
4.1
Components of the streamlined gating system . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
The fangate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.2
The downrunner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.3
The bend below the downrunner . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.4
The pouring cup/funnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
A program for creating gating systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.1
Input list
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Losses in a streamlined gating system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.1
Investigating the inﬂuence of the poured material on the
ﬂow behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.2
Adding ﬂow losses to a direct method
. . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Numerical Simulations
51
5.1
Filling simulations to select gating system . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.1
Results of the ﬁlling simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Tests of U-shaped castings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.1
Numerical Factor Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.2
Checking the numerical model for convergence
. . . . . .
58
5.3
Simulations on stress-harps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3.1
Results from the simulation on the stress-harp casted in
green sand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6
Experiments and Results
71
6.1
Trial One - Handmoulded U-shaped casting . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.1.1
Casting conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.1.2
Results from trial one
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.1.3
Error sources in the geometrical scanning . . . . . . . . .
80
6.1.4
Conclusions from trial one . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
Trial Two - Attempt at moulding stress-harp on the DISA . . . .
81
6.2.1
Conclusions from trial two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.3
Trial Three - Handmoulded stress-harps . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.3.1
Casting conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.3.2
Results from trial three
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7
Discussions
89
7.1
The experiences with the modular pattern-plate . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.2
The use of printed model parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
7.3
The experience with the simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.4
The ﬂow calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7.5
The ﬁlling of the stress-harps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
7.6
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
8
Conclusion
97
A Workdrawings
99
B Flow loss program
105
C Reggressionprogram
115
Bibliography
123
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The quality of a given product can be traced back to the production conditions
it was subjected to. Likewise the variation in quality of the product can be
traced back to the variation in the process parameters.
It is of obvious interest for the manufacturer to know what process parameters
that will lead to a functioning or optimal product.
Knowing how much the
variations of these process parameters will inﬂuence the quality of the ﬁnal
product will answer the question of manufacturability, which in the end is a
question of proﬁtability.
This holds for manufacturing in general. The scope of this project is to investi-
gate the eﬀect of variation in the aluminium sand casting process.
1.1
The casting proces
The casting process involves heating a material to make it become ﬂuid and
then pour it into a mould, that will deﬁne the shape of the casting as it cools
to a solid. Although this simple deﬁnition holds true, it is still a process that
involves a multitude of diﬀerent research ﬁelds, such as ﬂuid mechanics, solid
mechanics, heat transfer, metallurgy and chemistry.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
In this project the inﬂuence of variation of the process parameters on the proper-
ties of the ﬁnal casting are investigated. The material used is aluminium, which
is most typically cast in steel dies, but in this project the moulds are of sand.
One of the main reasons is practicality, since there is easy access to moulding
in diﬀerent types of sand in the university foundry.
A casting that cools unevenly or is constrained by the mould can lead to stresses
building up. The stresses can lead to a deformation in casting, cold cracks and
or hot tears. Since these factors typically leads to a scrapped casting, it can be
important to quantify the magnitude of the problem if the casting geometry is
prone to these problems.
Recent development within 3D scanning technology has made it much more
practical to quantify the geometry of a given casting [21]. The draft angles, ﬁllets
and rounds have normally made it very diﬃcult to measure castings accurately,
but with a scanner available at the university a complete scan of a model can
be made in minutes. For these reasons it was chosen to use a geometry that is
prone to deformations and measure how these may vary with diﬀerent casting
conditions.
The aluminium-silicon (Al-Si) alloys can be modiﬁed in structure by adding
sodium (Na) or strontium (Sr). This changes the alloy from originally brittle
to a much more ductile material [19]. But the modiﬁcation also changes the
porosity distribution and grain size [26]. The modiﬁcation of the alloy serves as
the intended variation on the casting conditions.
To be able to conduct new experiments it was necessary to develop a pattern,
for the shapes of the casting and the various other geometries that are necessary
for a complete casting. This process is repeated every time an experiment using
new geometries is wanted. The recent development within Rapid Prototyping
has given new possibilities in the pattern making. For this reason much of the
work of this project targeted the pattern making part of the casting process, in
order to ease the procedure of realizing a new experiment. This also gives the
opportunity to investigate and to some extend address the sources to unwanted
variation from the design and from the tooling process.
1.2
Objectives of the project
The general objective of the project is to analyse the inﬂuence of variation in
the sand casting process. The originally intend was to do a series of experiments
with variations on the casting temperate, de-gassing, and cell-modiﬁcation. It
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Objectives of the project
3
was since found that the recurring need to re-design of casting and gating system
prior to experiments was interesting to address in this project.
The objective of this project has therefore also become to develop a platform
for easing the process of realizing experiments with casting in vertically parted
sand moulds. In this sense the focus of the investigation on variance in the
casting process also deals with the variation in the production of the pattern.
The variation that originates from the production of the platform has to be
kept low, while also allowing for design variation.
It should be possible to
change the model-geometries on the platform individually. This will make it
possible to reuse a gating system for multiple castings or to investigate individual
parts of the gating system. The gating system is designed by the principles of
streamlining it, as they were developed for minimization of variance and loss of
quality due to ﬁlling.
The impact of variation on the process parameters within aluminium casting in
sand moulds is investigated in this project. The deformation on the casting is
measured as a response from variation in casting conditions.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Theory in the Casting Proces
The theory of the casting process is divided into the ﬁlling of the mould and the
solidiﬁcation of the casting. The processes prior and after to the ﬁlling and the
subsequent cooling of the casting are only mentioned brieﬂy in this section.
The emphasis on the theory behind ﬁlling is to address the inﬂuence on variance
from the poured material. It is also to quantify the behaviour of the gating
systems, that have been developed during this project.
2.1
Filling
The ﬁlling of the casting is characterized by the motion of the ﬂuid melt. The
ﬂow of the ﬂuid is expressed by conservation laws, the continuity, momentum
and energy [28]. These are the famous Navier-Stokes equations. No general an-
alytical method exists, but a set of particular solutions that satisfy the complete
equations for some special geometry have been found [28].
To be able to investigate the ﬂow during the ﬁlling of a casting in a practical
way, the Navier-Stokes are simpliﬁed by a number of assumptions, that may be
more or less satisﬁed when comparing it to the conditions in a real ﬂow.
==PAGE:20==
6
Theory in the Casting Proces
2.1.1
Estimating ﬁlling time
For dimensioning a gating system for gravity casting, the Bernoulli equation is
normally used along with the conservation of mass. Bernoulli’s equation is valid
for steady frictionless ﬂow along a streamline [25].
P2 −P1 + 1
2ρ
 u2
2 −u2
1

+ ρg (z2 −z1) = 0
(2.1)
A pressure loss ∆Ploss can be added to (2.1). It is then referred to as the energy
equation. If the mould is well ventilated, P2 = P1, the velocity of the melt ﬂow
that has fallen the distance H from rest is:
u =
p
2gH
(2.2)
Since there is no pressure diﬀerence, the same velocity can be found from energy
conservation.
The gating systems are designed with a governing cross-section that restricts
the ﬂow rate of melt. In horizontally parted moulds where the melt level does
not change much in height, the free-falling velocity of the melt (2.2) can be
assumed constant and the ﬁlling time becomes:
tﬁll = Vcast
Q
= Acast
Agov
hcast
√2ghtot
(2.3)
Equation (2.3) is also used for the design of gating systems in vertically parted
moulds [13, 18]. The melt level can change quite much in these castings. As
the level of the melt rises in the casting the pressure diﬀerence driving the ﬂow
decreases. Since the assumption of constant velocity is not valid in this case,
(2.3) is used for the instance in time where the castings are halfway full [18].
Instead the melt velocity at a given time can be expressed by the diﬀerence in
pressure height. This model is referred to as uphill casting [8]:
u(t) =
p
2g (htot −h(t)) ,
(2.4)
where htot is the height from the mould top to the bottom of the casting, and
h(t) is the height of the melt level inside the casting. In the inﬁnitesimal time
increment dt the height increases by dh, thus the casting volume increases by
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Filling
7
Acastdh. The increase in casting volume equals the volume ﬂow through the
governing cross-sectional area:
Acastdh = Agov
q
2ghgov −h(t)dt
(2.5)
Through separation of variables and integrating towards tﬁll and hcast in (2.5),
the ﬁlling time becomes:
tﬁll =
2Acast
Agov
√2g
 p
htot −
p
htot −hcast

(2.6)
Equation (2.6) takes into account the increasing back-pressure from the melt
inside the casting cavity during the ﬁlling.
It is important to note that these two models do not account for friction. The
friction in the gating system can be hard to predict. Therefore it is very normal
to calculate the friction as a percentage loss, that is known from experience in
similar gating systems [18].
The diﬀerential equation (2.5) can also be used to ﬁnd the ﬁlling proﬁle of the
casting. In other words, the time history of the melt level inside the casting
cavity can be found. Isolating the melt level h(t) in (2.5) gives:
h1(t) =
p
2ghtot
Agov
Acast
t −g
2
 Agov
Acast
2
t2
(2.7)
Omitting the term with t2 in equation (2.7) gives the same equation for the melt
level as when isolating h from equation (2.3)
h2(t) =
p
2ghtot
Agov
Acast
t
(2.8)
The ﬁlling of the casting is plotted against time in ﬁgure 2.1 using the two
models.
Since (2.7) is a parabolic equation, the melt level in the uphill casting model [8]
actually decreases after reaching to the top of the mould, at 400 mm, where the
pressure inside the casting equals the pressure height from the inlet.
The two models behave very similar for castings below 100 mm. The simpler
model is therefore adequate for most castings in horizontally parted moulds.
==PAGE:22==
8
Theory in the Casting Proces
Figure 2.1: Melt level in the casting calculated using (2.8) (dashed) and (2.7)
(solid).
Agov = 75 mm2, Acast = 40 mm · 100 mm, htot = 400 mm
The models for dimensioning the gating system are highly idealized. The as-
sumption of no friction in the gating system is by far the worst omission in the
models.
2.1.2
Estimating losses in the gating system
The friction loss in the gating systems are normally applied as a percentage
loss, which is known from experience of similar gating systems. Since the gating
systems dealt with in this project are novel, no proper experience are available.
The pressure loss can also be estimated by using the energy equation iteratively
along with empirical models for the losses in the ﬂow through the diﬀerent
geometries of the gating system.
The loss in pressure is separated into major - and minor losses. Major loss is
due to friction against the wall surfaces in the runners. The minor losses come
from the various geometries the ﬂow encounters, such as from bends and abrupt
changes. Both of the sources to losses are based on empirical models.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Filling
9
major loss:
pl = 1
2ρ ¯U 2f L
D
minor loss:
plm = 1
2ρ ¯U 2K
(2.9)
The wall friction in the runners can be estimated using the Moody chart [25].
The data is valid for fully developed ﬂow in circular pipes. For ﬂow in non-
circular runners by introducing the hydraulic diameter.
Dh = 4A
P ,
(2.10)
where A is the cross-sectional area of the runner and P is the wetted perimeter,
which is the length of the wall in contact with the ﬂow in the section. The
hydraulic diameter is a valid correlation for square cross-sections if the ratio of
height to width is less than 3 or 4 [25].
Mathematical formulas have been expressed to avoid ﬁnding the friction factor
graphically. The ﬂow in castings are typically in the turbulent regime. The most
widely used formula for the friction factor f in turbulent ﬂows is the Colebrook
formula (2.11):
1
√f = −2.0 log
e/D
3.7 + 2.51
Re√f

(2.11)
where e is the surface roughness, D is the diameter of the pipe or runner and Re
is the famous Reynolds number which is the ratio of inertial to viscous forces in
the ﬂow.
Re = D ¯U
ν
(2.12)
where D is the diameter of the ﬂow, ¯U is the mean velocity and ν is the kinematic
viscosity
The Colebrook formula (2.11) may be solved iteratively, a good initial guess
is f ≈0.1 since f is less than 0.1 for turbulent ﬂows [25]. In the later ﬂow
calculations it was found that (2.11) would converge with a diﬀerence less than
10−5 in three iterations or less.
If the Reynolds number of the ﬂow is larger than 3000 the Haaland equation
can be used without the need to iterate.
1
√f = −1.8 log
 e/D
3.7
1.11
+ 6.9
Re
!
(2.13)
==PAGE:24==
10
Theory in the Casting Proces
The Haaland equation gives results within 2 % of the Colebrook without needing
to iterate. This has been tested and conﬁrmed with this model. Since (2.13)
is an approximation to the Colebrook formula, the results that are shown in
this report are calculated only using the Colebrook formula. This is to avoid
an unnecessary pile-up of approximation errors, and the extra iterations mean
almost nothing to the calculation time on a simple PC. Flow calculations using
the framework of iterating over the energy equation can be seen in section 4.3.
2.2
Solidiﬁcation and cooling of the casting
When the casting volume has been ﬁlled, the casting problem transitions from
being dominated by the transport of the ﬂuid material, to be dominated by the
transport of thermal energy. The ﬁlling phase of casting is also subject to heat
transport.
The energy of a casting is transported to the surrounding mould, through con-
duction, convection and radiation. The heat conduction equation in one dimen-
sion [6] is given below:
ρcp
∂T
∂t = ∂
∂x

k ∂T
∂x

+ ˙Q′′′
gen ,
(2.14)
where ρ is the density, cp is the thermal heat capacity, k is the heat conductivity
of the material.
˙Q′′′
gen is heat source term, the triple prime means per unit
volume and not diﬀerentiation. The source term in (2.14) can be used to model
the release of latent energy during phase transformation. The calculation of
temperature in the casting serves as the base for the remaining topics in this
section.
2.2.1
The behaviour of the material - AlSi12
The casting alloy that is considered is an aluminium alloy with 12 wt-% silicon.
This alloy is close to the eutectic point at 12.6 wt-% [8]. This alloy contains
almost entirely an Al-Si eutectic at the end of solidiﬁcation. The alloy can be
modiﬁed by adding Sodium (Na) or Strontium (Sr) to obtain better mechanical
properties [19]. The modiﬁers change the microstructure in the alloy from a ﬂaky
platelike structure going through the eutectic cells to a more regular and ﬁner
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Formation of stresses and strains in the castings
11
Figure 2.2: Mechanical properties of an Al-Si alloy versus Sr content. From
[19]
structure [8,10]. Mechanical properties versus increasing amount of Sr-modiﬁer
are shown for a similar Al-Si alloy in ﬁgure 2.2.
The modiﬁcation of the alloy aﬀects it in more ways than purely the mechanical
property [26]. The modiﬁcation leads to fewer nuclei that can form cells, leading
to fever and bigger eutectic cells in the material. The addition of strontium
lowers the eutectic solidiﬁcation temperature [10]. The fewer nuclei available
and a lowered solidiﬁcation temperature leads to a higher undercooling. The
higher undercooling gives the dendritic Al-phase more time to grow. Thus the
modiﬁcation promotes more Al-dendrites in the matrix than the pure Al-Si
alloy. The higher amount of dendrites in the modiﬁed alloy in turn interferes
with the ﬂow of melt to the solidifying areas. This will promote pools between
dendrites that is hindered access to material. The result is a diﬀerent formation
of porosity in the casting [26]. In ﬁgure 2.3 the diﬀerent feeding mechanisms
for Al-Si alloys are illustrated about 70 % solidiﬁed. The diﬀerent formation
of porosity may aﬀect the strength of the casting, which brings upon the next
topic that is of interest for this project.
2.3
Formation of stresses and strains in the cast-
ings
When the hot casting has solidiﬁed and cools it will shrink. To be able to explain
the deformation behaviour of castings, the decomposition of strains is used [6].
==PAGE:26==
12
Theory in the Casting Proces
Figure 2.3: Schematic drawings of the interactions between the dendrites and
eutectic cells in Al-Si alloys with diﬀerent modiﬁers. The surface
of the casting is to the left in the ﬁgures [26]
The shrinkage can be quantiﬁed as thermal strain εth. Thermal strains do not
cause stresses on their own, only elastic strains, εel do. The sum of the thermal
and elastic strains are the deformations that can be measured by an outside
observer. This is denoted the total strain, εtot.
εtot = εel + εth
(2.15)
In simple 1-dimensional theory, the coupling between stress and elastic strain
is:
σ = Eεel
(2.16)
The driver for the deformation behaviour in castings is the temperature ﬁeld,
because it leads to εth. If a casting is allowed to cool evenly and unrestricted the
amount it has shrunk, is called the linear contraction. The free contraction is
compensated for by using the pattern-makers allowance [14]. The model pattern
is simply made a fraction larger so that the casting will contract to the desired
size.
The other extreme scenario is where the casting is completely restricted. In this
case the thermal strain from the cooling of the casting can only lead to elastic
strain, which means stress is build up. If the stress is suﬃciently high, plastic
deformation will occur. When a casting deforms plasticly it will change shape
permanently, and irreversibly. Plastic deformation is a non-linear phenomenon,
which is primarily characterised by temperature dependent yield stress, secondly
by strain hardening [6].
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Formation of stresses and strains in the castings
13
Figure 2.4: Inﬂuence of casting shape on mould constraints. Contraction in
% [3]
The result of thermal contraction in a cooling casting is almost always a case
somewhere between the cases of deformation only or stresses only. Figure 2.4
shows the relative inﬂuence of mould shape on the contraction of a casting.
The values that are reported are for steel in a sand mould. The graph shows
that the geometry of the casting can lead to diﬀerent levels of mould constraint,
thus aﬀecting the ﬁnal shape of the geometry.
The top bar in ﬁgure 2.4 is
not constrained.
This is the shrinkage that one would counter-act with the
pattern-makers allowance.
The stresses in castings have been measured dynamically during cooling by
Japanese scientists [23]. The castings had ﬂanges and were cast in both hard
Furan sand mould and soft Green sand. The experimental equipment that were
used to make these measurements are out of the practical reach for this project.
It is however possible to simulate the dynamic nature of the stress-formation in
a casting numerically.
Thermal and mechanical analysis are needed to predict this behaviour. Defor-
mations in castings can typically be handled in a de-coupled manner by using
the thermal analysis as the driver for the mechanical analysis [6].
==PAGE:28==
14
Theory in the Casting Proces
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Design of patterns
The sand moulds that the molten metal are poured into are shaped by a pattern.
In the University Foundry the sand moulds can be shaped using a Disamatic
2110. The machine produces ﬂask-less moulds that are 400 by 500 mm and a
thickness that can be varied between 100 and 315 mm [13].
3.1
General design constraints in pattern design
The geometric constraints to the models on the pattern-plates are:
Draft Since the sand is formed against the surfaces of the pattern it must be
possible to remove the pattern while keeping the surface of the sand mould
intact. This also means that undercut on the pattern-plates is not possible
Smooth and connected surfaces The surface of the pattern should not pro-
mote sand sticking to it.
Avoid thin wall sections The model must be able to withstand the forces
involved with the mould forming. Thin deep parts on the pattern-plate
may deform or even break oﬀ
==PAGE:30==
16
Design of patterns
Figure 3.1: Recommended draft-angles for sand casting [4]
The draft is necessary to allow the model to part from the mould after forming
the sand. Figure 3.1 shows the typical recommended draft-angles for moulding
green sand on the Disamatic moulding machines. Also note that the required
draft-angle decreases for deeper shapes.
Smooth and connected surfaces are needed to avoid sand sticking to the pattern.
This can lead to loose sand in the mould, and these particles can then get stuck
in the casting, which can harm the ﬁnal quality of the cast product. The help
release the sand mould the pattern geometry is rounded in the corners. If the
pattern-plate is assembled from several components, it will have gaps. If there
are gaps that are big enough to trap sand particles, or if there are inner corners
that needs to be rounded, core glue can be used as ﬁller material.
Thin walls that go deep into the mould can lead to dimensional inaccuracy due
to elastic deformation, or it might even break. The eﬀect of wear is also more
prominent on the thinner wall sections on the model.
These design constraints are to be taken into consideration to allow for mould
forming, regardless of the design of the casting.
Besides these general constraints, there are also considerations to be made that
are speciﬁc to the casting. These considerations may be:
Fluid ﬂow The casting has to be supplied with melt in some way. The most
simple way is to ﬁll the casting from the top, but it is also the least
controllable method.
The most common way to ﬁll castings, that are
made in vertical moulds, is from the bottom [18].
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Motivations for developing a new pattern system
17
Feeding To obtain a sound casting, measures must be made to supply the
solidifying melt with extra material in order to counter-act the liquid and
solid shrinkage. In slowly cooling casting processes such as in sand casting
the extra material can be from feeder geometries that are added to the
pattern.
Core print Hollow sections in the casting can be made by adding a core to the
mould after it is formed. The use of cores allow complex castings such as
manifolds to be made.
Venting When the casting cavity is being ﬁlled, the air inside the mould is
being replaced by the melt. The air inside needs to have a way to exit.
Some moulds in sand are permeable and do not require venting at all.
If vents are needed in gravity sand casting, the vents are very simple
to design. It is often just a cylinder shape extending from the casting
geometry. It is a very critical design feature in permanent moulds.
Deformation The simplest type of deformation to address is the linear or free
contraction. It is solved by adding the pattern-makers allowance. Defor-
mations due to uneven temperature formation and mould restraint can be
alleviated by a number of measures. These measures include: adding ribs,
evening the temperature ﬁelds, counter-acting the deformation by design
and machining allowance [14].
3.2
Motivations for developing a new pattern
system
A modular pattern-plate design would be very beneﬁcial for the research work at
the university foundry. The name modular means a system, where components
such as the casting geometry or a part of the gating system, can be placed and
replaced individually. The modular pattern system should allow for:
1. easy design of new compatible parts
2. easy replacement of components on the pattern-plate
The foundry currently has a modular pattern-plate, that was developed by Søren
Skov Hansen during his pHd-thesis work [13]. The current module pattern uses
a back-plate with precisely drilled holes in an 8 by 8 pattern. In this system
the components are placed and located using guide pins, that are fastened with
bolts from behind. To make a new module for the current system, one has to
==PAGE:32==
18
Design of patterns
assemble a pattern geometry onto a 10 mm aluminium plate and drill holes for
the guide pins. The way this modular system has been used previously was to
attach a single plate with casting geometry, gating system and feeder geometries
onto the back-plate [12]. This meant that the modularity of the system only
beneﬁted by reusing the heavy back-plate that provides the connections to the
DISA and the stiﬀness support.
The new system is built upon the 8 by 8 grid of the current system. It is sought
to make the new system more compatible with patterns that are printed in
plastic.
3.3
The magnetic pattern-plate
The new system is made as an extension to the base pattern. The components
are held in place using neodymium magnets. By using magnets the use of tools
can be avoided, which should lead to a reduction in the time it takes to replace
a part on the pattern-plate.
The magnets are only pulling the components to the base pattern. To control
their orientation, two guide pins are used for each component.
3.3.1
Systems Overview
The modular pattern system is composed of many parts with many connections.
Figure 3.2 shows the intended interfaces in the entire assembly of the pattern-
plate.
The design intend is that the models for the casting and the gating
system will be held onto the plate by magnetic force. The path of forces that
act through the assembly, keeping the components in place is clariﬁed in this
section.
The base component is the back-plate from Søren Skov-Hansen’s system. It
acts as the frame from which the other components are placed onto, and has
the mounts to attach it to the DISA moulding machine.
The magnetplate is fastened to the back-plate guide pins and screws.
The
magnets are kept in place by plastic mounts that are snapped to the plate. This
is the purple support bar in ﬁgure 3.2. The plates with parts for the gating
system and the casting model are located using guide pins and the pulling force
from the magnets.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 The magnetic pattern-plate
19
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the connection paths in the assembly of the modular
pattern-plate. Double arrows indicate connections that are locked
in all directions
The casting plate is only locking the model parts in the out of plane direction (x).
The purpose of the casting plate is only to act as a cover for the magnet-plate,
otherwise the many unused holes on the magnet plate would get ﬁlled with
sand during mould forming. The casting plate is locked in the yz-directions
through the same guide pins that also lock the casting model. This also made
the design of the casting plate very simple. The guide pins are supported in the
x-direction by the surface of the back-plate and by the inner surface of the holes
inside casting model.
3.3.2
Interfaces/couplings
The interfaces are the connecting surfaces between the components in the sys-
tem. Design clarity dictates that the interfaces should be made unambiguous [5].
In short, the parts should only be constrained in the interfaces when needed. As
==PAGE:34==
20
Design of patterns
an example, the parts of the gating system are only fastened to the magnet-plate
using two pins. One pin is needed to locate the part, the other pin prevents
rotation.
3.3.3
Tolerance Design
The models parts have to be assembled on the pattern-plate very precisely, since
any deviations will reﬂect itself further downstream in the production process.
The tolerances that are used in this section follow the standard tolerance grades,
IT-grades. The standard tolerance grades are expressed with the following math-
ematical formula
T =







100.2(ITG−1)h
0.45
3√
D + 0.001D
i
,
for
0 < D < 500
100.2(ITG−1)h
0.004D + 2.1
i
,
for
500 < D < 3150
(3.1)
where ITG is the IT tolerance grade, D is the geometric mean, given in mm and
T is the tolerance, given in in µm.
Figure 3.3 displays recommended tolerances for diﬀerent applications and pro-
cesses. It was chosen to use IT9 tolerances for the components that were to be
machined.
3.3.3.1
Locating parts on the magnet-plate
It is chosen to use guide pins to lock the orientation of the components that are
assembled onto the magnet-plate. The least number of holes that is necessary
to lock two components is two.
The dimensions that have inﬂuence on the
assembly with simple holes are shown in ﬁgure 3.4a. All the dimensions on the
assembly are prone to variation.
Suﬃcient clearance is needed between the pins and holes to allow for the vari-
ation in pin and hole size, D1 and D2, but the clearance must also allow for
variation in the lengths between the pins, L1 and between the holes, L2.
Another design, shown in ﬁgure 3.4b uses a track instead of one of the circular
holes to avoid coping with variation in the distances.
The clearance in this
==PAGE:35==
3.3 The magnetic pattern-plate
21
Figure 3.3: List of tolerance capabilities. [27]
(a) Tolerance stack-up between pins
and holes
(b) Tolerance stack-up between pins
and hole/track combination
Figure 3.4: Schematics for the variational analysis for the two designs for lock-
ing two components together
==PAGE:36==
22
Design of patterns
interface design is only required to cope with the variation in the sizes of the
holes and pins.
As an example clearance X is calculated for the two designs, by going through
the tolerance chain The nominal distances are 150 mm, and the nominal diam-
eter of the holes and pins are 8 mm. The variation of the parts are calculated
using IT9 tolerances and the worst-case scenario is considered.
Xa =
L1 −1
2D1 + 1
2D2 −L2 + 1
2D1 −1
2D2
=
±0.05 ± 0.01 ± 0.01 ± 0.05 ± 0.01 ± 0.01
=
±0.16mm
(3.2)
Xb =
1/2D1 −1/2D2 = ±0.01 ± 0.01
=
±0.03mm
(3.3)
The calculations show that the parts may vary with 0.16 mm in the ﬁrst case,
and only with 0.03 mm in the latter. The 2 × 0.16mm or 2 × 0.03mm could be
added to the outer diameter to give suﬃcient clearance to avoid interference.
It should be noted that this is in the worst case scenario. It is quite unlikely that
all the parts will be in their extreme end of their tolerance window. If one wishes
to take into account the unlikelihood of such an event, statistical tolerancing can
be used. It is also called the Root-Sum-Square, RSS tolerancing. The calculation
schemes for calculating the variation using worst-case tolerancing or RSS is
shown in (3.4):
worst-case =
PN
i=1 toli
RSS =
qPN
i=1(toli)2
(3.4)
Using RSS tolerancing, the variations for the two cases becomes 0.08 mm and
0.02 mm, respectively. RSS tolerances are typically used in larger scale produc-
tions where a small number of defects in the assembly can be tolerated. The
worst-case tolerancing is used in this project.
The variations that were calculated in (3.2) and (3.3) shows the clear advantage
in terms of variance when using the decoupled combination of a hole and a
track. The tracks have to be orientated towards the holes, which will limit the
ﬂexibility of the design The location of the pins for the model parts is restricted
==PAGE:37==
3.3 The magnetic pattern-plate
23
to fever options, than freely choosing between the 8 by 8 holes in the back
plate. It was decided not to machine or modify the existing back-plate, so this
approach will have to be implemented on the magnet-plate. This means that
the precision that parts can be located onto the system, will depend on the
precision the parts can be located onto the magnet-plate, and the precision that
the magnet-plate can be located onto the back-plate. This added link to the
tolerance chain reﬂects itself in a longer gap between the model-parts and the
back-plate, but not in the gap between the model-parts.
It was chosen to implement the hole and slots in the magnet-plate. The beneﬁt
in precision from removing the over-constraints, outweighs the disadvantage of
the longer tolerance chain between the model-parts and the back-plate.
3.3.3.2
The gap between parts on the plates
There is a number of tolerance chains that deﬁnes the space that is necessary to
avoid overlap between the plates. It has been calculated for each of the plates
that are assembled onto the magnet-plate.
The clearances are illustrated in
ﬁgure 3.5. The gap between the plate with the bend and the plate to the left
is 0.16 mm wide, nominally. A sand grain is about 0.2 mm wide on average
[18], so it may be possible to avoid having sand getting into these gaps. The
workdrawings from this project can be found in appendix A.
3.3.4
Assembling the magnets onto the magnet-plate
The magnets are held in holes, located one millimetre below the surface of the
magnet-plate.
The magnets are supported by a plastic bar to avoid having
the magnets falling out when the magnet-plate is not assembled to the original
back-plate.
The plastic bars are printed in Polylactic Acid, PLA, using an upgraded Ul-
timaker. The plastic is derived from maize [20]. Figure 3.6 shows the printer
producing the parts. The bars are assembled to the magnet-plate with snap-ﬁts.
The snap-ﬁt also allows disassembly.
The design of the plastic snaps is constrained by the strain limit material and
the minimum wall thickness the printer is able to produce. The minimum wall
thickness the printer is able to produce is 1 mm. The snap-ﬁt also has to be
small enough to be within the 8 mm of the magnet-plate. These constraints
==PAGE:38==
24
Design of patterns
Figure 3.5: Close-up view revealing the gap between the plates that has been
factored into the design
Figure 3.6: Printing plastic support bars on an Ultimaker
==PAGE:39==
3.3 The magnetic pattern-plate
25
Figure 3.7: Sketch of the U shaped snap, from [24]
Parameter:
L1 [mm]
L3 [mm]
R [mm]
t [mm]
n [−]
ε0 [−]
Y [mm]
Value:
3.67
0.86
0.95
1.0
2
0.04
0.76
Table 3.1: Parameters for the snap-ﬁt design
would make a simple cantilever snap too rigid to function in the limited space
within the magnet-plate.
The needed ﬂexibility is achieved by extending the length of the snap arm into
a U shape. The maximum allowable deﬂection of the arm of a U shaped snap-ﬁt
is shown in (3.5), which is found from [24].
Ymax = 1
n
ε0
3(L1 + R)t

4L3
1 + 2L3
3 + 3R

(2πL1 + 8R) + πR2
,
(3.5)
where n is the safety factor, L1 is the distance from the point where the load
is applied to the center of the bend, L3 is the distance from the load point to
the base of the snap-ﬁt, and R is the radius of the U bend. ε0 is the maximum
allowable strain of the material. The geometric parameters in (3.5) is shown in
ﬁgure 3.7. The allowable deﬂection Ymax will deﬁne the size of the surface that
holds the plastic bar onto the magnet-plate once assembled.
The snap-arms on the bars are designed according to equation 3.5 with a safety
factor n = 2. The maximum allowable strain of PLA is assumed to be 4 %. The
distances L1, L3 and the bend radius R were varied to maximize the allowable
deﬂection, while conforming to the design constraints. The parameters for the
snap design are collected in table 3.1.
The plastic bars have an arm extending from the middle and down to constrain
the magnets from moving around. It was unknown how many magnets that were
needed per hole at the time of design. For this reason the supporting arm has
two levels in a stair-case shape. It is long enough to support a single magnet.
==PAGE:40==
26
Design of patterns
Figure 3.8: The magnet-plate with magnets below and visible plastic support
bars
In the case that two magnets are needed in the hole, the upper level can be cut
oﬀwith a wire cutter. This foresight came in handy since it turned out to be
necessary to have multiple magnets in some of the holes. The plastic bars can
be seen in function in ﬁgure 3.8.
3.3.5
Assembling the parts for the gating system
The shape of the gating system is 3D printed in plastic. The plastic part is glued
onto a plate of a material that the magnets can aﬀect. The 3D printed parts are
located by guide pins to ensure a precise assembly. Two 8 mm guide pins are
shrink-ﬁtted onto each plate for the gating system, to control the location of the
component onto the magnet-plate. The general recommendation for shrink-ﬁts
is H7u6 [1].
Since the supplied guide pins are manufactured with tolerance m6, the hole
tolerance is calculated to match the preferred tolerance pair for shrink ﬁts.
It was found that the tolerance pair N7m6 gives a similar interference as the
preferred pair H7u6, as is displayed in table 3.2. The minimum interference is
a bit lower than the preferred force ﬁt pair H7u6.
The temperature diﬀerence that is necessary assemble the pins on the base
without interference is found assuming linear thermal expansion [17].
==PAGE:41==
3.3 The magnetic pattern-plate
27
Shaft
Hole
interference
Ø8u6
+0.037
+0.028
Ø8H7
+0.015
+0.000
+0.037
+0.028
Ø8m6
+0.015
+0.006
Ø8N7
−0.004
−0.019
+0.034
+0.010
Table 3.2: Hole tolerances for shrink ﬁt
∆T =
δd
αT df
+ 0.001df
αT df
,
(3.6)
where δd is the interference, αT is the thermal expansion coeﬃcient and df is
the ﬁt size. The last term in (3.6) is an added handling deﬂection, to cope with
a decrease in temperature diﬀerence from the parts touching each other.
By inserting the maximum interference from the pair N7m6 into (3.6) and using
αT ≈1.2 one gets a temperature diﬀerence of 440◦C.
This large temperature diﬀerence was achieved by cooling the guide pins with
liquid nitrogen and heating the plates. The pins where inserted with the help
of Nikolaj Vedel-Schmidt. One of the guide pins was a bit misaligned in the
plate but careful nudging with a hammer was enough to make the pin fall into
its proper alignment.
The shape of the gating system is printed on a dimension printer, and glued
onto the plate.
The parts were assembled precisely by using guide pins and holes that were
dimensioned with narrow tolerances. This worked very well, especially consid-
ering the adhesive was contact glue which left no room for adjustment after the
parts met. Some of the pins used for assembling the plastic parts onto the plates
got glued as well. It was chosen to leave them inside the parts and grind them
ﬂat, so the pins would not inﬂuence the interface between these plates and the
magnet-plate.
3.3.6
Assembling the casting model
The casting model is printed in plastic with a Dimension printer, in the same
way as with the parts of the gating system. The design of the casting is limited
to the build-plate of the printer, which is 250 by 250 mm. The casting has some
==PAGE:42==
28
Design of patterns
Figure 3.9: Assembling the casting model with magnets under the surface.
The two guide pins that extends from the plate will keep the model
in position
delicate parts with wall thicknesses around 8 mm so it was decided to have it
printed as one part.
To keep the model on the pattern-plate, magnets are being assembled into the
casting model. Figure 3.9 shows the model with magnets being assembled into
it.
The cavities for the magnets are designed into the back of the casting model.
The lids that hold the magnets in place are also printed along with the casting
model. They are fastened with self-threading screws.
There are about 70 mm extra vertical space above the casting and this space
could be used for a feeder. The design of the casting is therefore prepared with
surfaces that allow for interchanging of the top part, so the casting can be tested
with or without a feeder. The interface for a replaceable feeder can be seen on
the top of the model in ﬁgure 3.9.
3.4
Designing components for the modular sys-
tem
For the modular pattern to be truly successful it must be considered worth the
trouble to design new parts that can be assembled on the existing platform.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Designing components for the modular system
29
Extra eﬀort is therefore made to clarify the design-requirements that must be
met to comply with the system.
Support magnetic pull The component must be able to be pulled to the
magnet-plate. The plates used in this project are made in regular steel.
Locate the part with guide pins The holes in the magnetic plate are de-
signed to ﬁt with standard Ø8m6 guide pins. Only two pins are needed
to locate the parts so two pins should be used. They should be located in
a pair of hole/slide for the least sensitivity to product variation.
Apply gaps The gaps between the parts are to ensure that there is no over-
lap, preventing assembly. The dimensions on the plates are set with IT9
tolerances.
The support for magnetic pull is the only strict requirement to the new design
allow for assembling onto the system. The other requirements are included as
an aid for new design, without needing to adjust afterwards.
A template for a casting model is shown in ﬁgure 3.10. The cross-section of the
ingate from the current gating system can be see in the bottom of the ﬁgure.
The possible hole positions are the blue circles that are shown. This template
was developed and used for the stress-harp model, that is visible in ﬁgure 3.9.
The template is made in the commercial CAD software CREO.
The events during experimentation showed that it is possible to design the
casting model to be glued with guide pins onto a plate. This seems to be simpler
than designing cavities and trays for magnets in the bottom of the casting, like
it was done in this project. The latter should still be possible to work, if one is
using suﬃciently many magnets to hold the model in place.
==PAGE:44==
30
Design of patterns
Figure 3.10: Template for a casting model
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Design of streamlined gating
systems
The gating systems that have been designed and used during this project are
made following the guidelines of streamlined gating design. The term was orig-
inally coined by Per Larsen when he used slim runners and avoiding abrupt
changes to keep the melt ﬂow uniform from mould to mould [18]. Per Larsen
showed that pressure shock waves could be formed when the melt front comes to
a stand-still at dead ends. The pressure waves also appeared when air pockets
in the runners were closed. These shock waves can have a very big inﬂuence on
the ﬂow pattern during ﬁlling as is shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
The approach of streamlined gating design is to avoid such abrupt geometrical
changes, that can lead to pressure waves. Slim runners are used to keep the melt
coherent and conﬁned. The streamlined gating systems were further investigated
by Søren Skov Hansen in production conditions [13]. As an example, the ﬂow
pattern of a streamlined gating system, made during a previous work [11], is
shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
==PAGE:46==
32
Design of streamlined gating systems
Figure 4.1: Small metal bubbles being blown from the melt front due to pres-
sure shock waves. From Per Larsen [18]
Figure 4.2: Example of the initial ﬁlling of a casting, using a streamlined gat-
ing system. From [11]
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Components of the streamlined gating system
33
Figure 4.3: The modular pattern plate (gray) with gating system (yellow),
casting (light gray) and feeder (red). Note that the components
of the gating system are divided individually from the plates they
are attached to
4.1
Components of the streamlined gating sys-
tem
The geometries that make up the gating system are presented as components.
As an overview, the pattern plate is attached with the relevant names for this
section. The components of the gating system are shown in ﬁgure 4.3. The
components as they are treated in this section are divided by the blue lines. For
practical reasons, the ﬂow-relevant division is diﬀerent from the division of the
plates they are assembled onto.
==PAGE:48==
34
Design of streamlined gating systems
4.1.1
The fangate
One of the characteristics of the streamlined gating systems is the use of fangates
to guide the melt from the runners into the casting cavity. The shape of the
fangate results from gradually widening the runner while keeping the cross-
sectional area constant or enlarging it. The fangates can also incorporate the
function of a bend which makes the footprint on the pattern plate much smaller.
The two types of fangates are shown in ﬁgure 4.4. The bent fangate follows a
circular bend. The bent fangate also appear in ﬁgure 4.2 on page 32. There are
two things to note when comparing the melt ﬂow pattern of the fangates:
Melt ﬂow direction: The regular fangate distributes the melt directly upward
whereas the bent fangate has a tendency to distribute the melt to the side
also. The shape of the bent fangate does not restrict the melt suﬃciently,
the melt ﬂow is therefore dictated by a balance between the dynamic forces
and the braking forces, whereas the straight fangate dictates the ﬂow by
the geometry.
Space consideration: Since the straight fangate needs to get the melt deliv-
ered from a bend it takes up more space than a bent fangate. It is not only
a disadvantage in the situation where space is limited, but also because
the entire gating system has to go further down, which means a higher
velocity of the melt ﬂow. In a situation where the same casting is fed from
a bent fangate versus a straight fangate, the melt ﬂow will be faster in the
last case [11].
A good trade-oﬀbetween the two fangates have been established by attacking
the dogma of using circular bends. Instead of having a constant inner radius
in the bent fangate, it is now deﬁned as a polynomial curve going between the
entrance radius and exit radius. This added design freedom gives the possibility
to manipulate with the direction of melt stream into the casting cavity.
How much the melt can be manipulated in the fangates without getting wall
separation can be tested in simulations. It is beneﬁcial to increase the area in
the fangates to allow the melt ﬂow to slow down, and it can also be desirable
to squeeze and redirect the ﬂow in a small space. The simulations in ﬁgure
4.4 shows the consequence of wall separation in the gate. In ﬁgure 4.4a the
cross-sectional area through the gate has been expanded more than the ﬂow
can follow. The simulation predicts dead zones where the melt is stationary
and are allowed to cool much more than the bulk of the melt. These spots are
also at risk of forming vena contracta, where the air pockets may be trapped.
These zones are not contributing to the ﬁlling of the ﬂow, and may even damage
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Components of the streamlined gating system
35
(a) A straight fangate
(b) A bent fangate
Figure 4.4: Examples of a straight fangate and a bent fangate during the initial
phases of ﬁlling. Note that the castings are not the same. From
[11]
the quality of the ﬁnal casting. Since they are formed due to a too optimistic
expansion of the fangate, the remedy is simply to save that excess material
in the fangate. In ﬁgure 4.4b the area expansion in the fangate is below the
limit where separation occurs, resulting in a more coherent ﬂow and more even
temperature distribution.
4.1.2
The downrunner
The downrunner is the part that leads the melt vertically down.
It is also
referred to as the sprue. It is very common to design the cross-sectional area in
the downrunner follow equation (4.1) to avoid air aspiration [13].
A(h) = Agov
r
hgov
h
,
(4.1)
where A(h) is the area at the given height h, and Agov is the governing area that
is deﬁned at hgov. This relation is found when applying Bernoulli’s theorem and
mass conservation on a free falling melt ﬂow.
If the cross-section of the downrunner is kept constant, the melt will narrow
down anyway, as it is accelerating from the free fall.
This leads to air get-
ting sucked into the downrunner and the melt stream, this eﬀect is called air
aspiration.
==PAGE:50==
36
Design of streamlined gating systems
Not only is the air aspiration avoided by having the cross-sectional area of the
downrunner following (4.1), but there is neither introduced any choke points.
The recommended width of the runners in a streamlined gating system for duc-
tile cast iron is 10 mm to match the curvature of the free falling melt ﬂow [18].
The surface tension and the boundary friction is used to keep the melt velocity
down.
This is true in all parts of the gating system, but especially in the
downrunner. To improve the eﬀect of friction in the gating system, the aspect
ratio of the runners can be increased thus increasing the surface area of the melt
where friction occurs. The eﬀect of increasing the aspect ratio of the downrunner
is calculated, using the hydraulic diameter in section 4.3 on page 40.
The aspect ratio can be made higher, either by widening the downrunner or by
narrowing it. Figure 4.5 shows two possible downrunners with diﬀerent widths,
and all else equal. The narrow downrunner in ﬁgure 4.5a is 4 mm, nominally
at the base, whereas the wide downrunner in ﬁgure 4.5b is 36 mm at the base.
The idea of a ﬂat downrunner originates from a previous work [12].
Both of the downrunner designs in ﬁgure 4.5 utilises a variable draft-angle.
Shallower sections needs more draft and vice versa for deeper sections. Recom-
mended values for draft can be found in ﬁgure 3.1 on page 16. The draft at
the top of the narrow downrunner is about 1 ◦, and the draft at the bottom
of the wide downrunner is about 12 ◦. Without variable draft the downrunner
shown in ﬁgure 4.5a would not be possible to get this narrow. Likewise the
wide downrunner design would lead to an inconvenient 12 ◦on all sections of
the gating systems if the required draft-angle is not allowed to vary.
Both of the downrunner designs in ﬁgure 4.5 are viable from a purely geomet-
ric point of view. However the ﬂat downrunner is a much more suitable way
to realize a high aspect ratio when the downrunner pattern is made in a soft
material, like it is in this project.
4.1.3
The bend below the downrunner
The bend redirects the melt ﬂow from vertical to horizontal. Since the wide
runner would be make an awkward bend, it is transformed to a slim runner in
a shape very similar to the fangate. It can therefore also be referred to as a
fanbend.
The design of the bend below the downrunner is ﬂexible in the sense that it
makes the transition from downrunner to siderunner regardless of the shape of
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Components of the streamlined gating system
37
(a) Narrow downrunner
(b) Wide downrunner
Figure 4.5: Two possible ways to design more friction into the downrunner,
with all else equal
the connecting parts. This can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5a where the sectional width
is actually widened from 4 mm to 6 mm in the bend.
4.1.4
The pouring cup/funnel
In this streamlined gating system the pouring cup is shaped as a funnel. The
function of a pouring cup is to act as a stabilising reservoir to help in keeping a
steady ﬁlling. Previous streamlined gating systems used an anti-roll cup from
DISA [4]. The cup can be seen in a conventional - and in a streamlined gating
system in ﬁgures 4.1 and 4.2 on page 32. The intended function of the pouring
cup can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6.
It was later recommended to use a funnel below the pouring cup to avoid a vena
contracta in the entrance to the downrunner [13, 18]. Such a funnel below the
cup can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2 on page 32.
In this project the funnel has been made large so that it can act as a stabilizing
reservoir during the ﬁlling. The smooth transition to the downrunner makes
the anti-roll feature of the DISA-cup redundant, since there are no splashes to
catch.
==PAGE:52==
38
Design of streamlined gating systems
Figure 4.6: Function of the DISA anti-roll pouring cup. From [18]
4.2
A program for creating gating systems
A streamlined gating system can require a lot of eﬀort to design properly. Søren
Skov-Hansen proposed a framework for designing the gating system using a
excel-spreadsheet [13]. Previous work on the gating systems by the author have
been executed by writing the equations and coding necessary directly into a
commercial CAD software, [11, 12]. The aim is to keep the amount of manual
work low. The complexity in design can be tolerated if it does not add cost.
In this project the gating systems are created with a self-made program. In
its current version, the program accepts an input parameter list. It outputs
a geometry ﬁle to the opensource software OpenSCAD from where it can be
manipulated with boolean operations and exported to stl-format [16].
4.2.1
Input list
The complete parameter list of the program is shown in table 4.1. The ﬁrst four
parameters are noted as global parameters. Agov denotes the governing cross-
sectional area, which deﬁne the size and ﬁlling capability of the gating system.
The parameter Draft has the attribute DISAdraft.
This tells the program
to use values of draft that are recommended for moulding in green sand by
DISA [4]. The needed draft on a given section is dependent on how deep the
section goes into the mould. Therefore the program will calculate the required
draft for every section in the gating system and use it. The parameter Draft
can also accept a simple value for draft, eg the attribute 3 will give the entire
gating system a draft-angle of 3 ◦. h1 is the vertical distance from the top of the
mould to the centerline of the siderunner. It is also considered the governing
height, because the governing cross-section is deﬁned at this level. b1 is the
==PAGE:53==
4.2 A program for creating gating systems
39
Parameter:
Agov
Draft
h1
b1
Round
Attribute:
75
Disadraft
355
200
2
Parameter:
Rpoints
funL
funSlices
funTin
funWin
Attribute:
6
90
40
100
80
Parameter:
funWout
dow1Slices
spl1Rin
spl1Rout
spl1Slices
Attribute:
36
30
25
50
40
Parameter:
spl1Wout
gat11Expand
gat11Rin
gat11Rout
gat11Slices
Attribute:
6
2
32
10
100
Parameter:
gat11Tout
Attribute:
1.4
Table 4.1: The parameter list that acts as input for designing a streamlined
gating system
horizontal distance from the center of the funnel to the center of the fangate.
The numbers behind some of the parameters are there because the program is
designed to be expanded to create multiple cavity systems.
Many of the parameters in table 4.1 are geometrical dimensions.
They are
therefore referred to as geometrical parameters. These dimensions are shown in
ﬁgure 4.7. funTin may seem strange, that it extends symmetrically from the
back side of the gating system. It is because the funnel was initially supposed
to extend symmetrically on both sides of the parting line on the mould, and it
never got changed when it was decided to only make a pattern for one mould
half. gat11Expand is also a geometrical parameter although it does not appear
in ﬁgure 4.7. This parameter is the amount the area expands in the fangate.
Round is also a geometrical parameter. It is the round radius that is used for
the rounds and ﬁllets on the gating system.
The last parameters are called the resolution parameters. The individual parts
have a parameter ending with Slices. This is the amount of cross-sections that
are calculated and drawn for each individual part. Rpoints is the amount of
points that are added in every corner to make a round or ﬁllet. Each cross-
section has 4 points if no rounds are used. In table 4.1 Rpoints equals 6. This
means that every cross-section in the gating system will be 4 by 6 = 24 points.
Multiply that with the sum of Slices and the total number of points deﬁning
the gating system can be found.
Figure 4.5 on page 37 shows design variation on the downrunner width. The
==PAGE:54==
40
Design of streamlined gating systems
Figure 4.7: The geometrical attributes of the parameters
Part
Funnel
Downrunner
Bend
Siderunner
Fangate
Dh [mm]
30.4
5.8
6.2
8.1
5.0
L [mm]
90.0
212.0
137.4
93.3
69.9
Table 4.2: The simpliﬁed hydraulic diameters and equivalent lengths of the
gating system
two gating systems are made by inserting 4 mm or 36 mm to the attribute of
funWout, and keeping all else equal.
4.3
Losses in a streamlined gating system
The script for executing the calculations in this section can be found appendix
B. For these calculations the gating system is divided into parts. For simplicity
in the calculations, only one hydraulic diameter,Dh, is associated to each part
of the gating system. It is calculated as the mean of the hydraulic diameter in
the beginning and end of each part. The friction loss from redirecting the ﬂow
in bends is calculated as the loss in a straight runner with an equivalent length.
The equivalent length is found from [25], with the radius being calculated as the
average of the radii in the bends. The hydraulic diameters and the equivalent
lengths where friction occurs are shown table 4.2.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Losses in a streamlined gating system
41
Minor loss
entrance in funnel
entrance to casting
Coeﬃcient, K [ - ]
0.08
1
Table 4.3: Minor losses from the various geometries in the gating system
The minor losses that are included in the model are from the gradual contraction
in funnel and the sudden area expansion in the entrance to the casting cavity.
The loss coeﬃcients are found from [25] and are displayed in table 4.3.
The velocities in the gating system can be found using the energy equation. It
is simply the Bernoulli equation (2.1) with pressure loss terms included.

p1 + 1
2ρα1 ¯U 2
1 + ρgz1

−

p2 + 1
2ρα2 ¯U 2
2 + ρgz2

= ∆ploss
(4.2)
In the energy equation, the ﬂow proﬁles in the runner sections are not assumed
uniform. It is convenient to use average velocities in the sections. The α’s in
(4.2) is the correction factors that allows the use of averaged velocities. For
laminar ﬂow α = 2. In turbulent ﬂow the value of α ranges between 1.03 and
1.08. It is common to use α = 1.06 or to approximate α to unity.
The control points for the ﬂow calculation are located at the top of the pouring
cup and the level of the melt in the casting. The control points for the calcula-
tions are shown in ﬁgure 4.8. The velocities are calculated from the governing
cross-section located the distance hgov below the top of the mould. The second
control point is located in the entrance to the casting. The level of the melt
inside the casting at a given time is hmelt The height diﬀerence is therefore
htot −hmelt. The melt level in the top of the pouring cup is assumed to be
stationary in level with the top of the mould. The mould is well ventilated so
the pressures cancel out.
With considerations in mind, (4.2) becomes:
ghtot −hmelt −1
2α ¯U 2
gov = ∆ploss
(4.3)
The major pressure loss are calculated for each part in the gating system. Using
mass conservation it can be related to the ﬂow through the governing section,
¯Ugov:
∆ploss,major =
n
X
i=1
1
2ρα ¯U 2
i fi
Li
Di
= 1
2ραA2
gov ¯U 2
gov
n
X
i=1
fiLi
DiA2
i
(4.4)
==PAGE:56==
42
Design of streamlined gating systems
Figure 4.8: The points of interest for the ﬂow-calculations
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Losses in a streamlined gating system
43
Likewise the minor loss terms are also collected and expressed in terms of ¯Ugov:
∆ploss,minor = 1
2ραA2
gov ¯U 2
m
X
j=1
Kj
A2
j
(4.5)
The pressure loss terms are inserted into (4.3) and ¯Ugov can be isolated:
¯Ugov =
v
u
u
u
u
t
2g (htot −hmelt)
α
"
1 + A2gov
 
nP
i=1
fiLi
DiA2
i +
m
P
j=1
Ki
A2
i
!#
(4.6)
Note that the density got cancelled out in (4.6) The iterations are started by
ﬁnding the velocity at point 2, without back pressure nor losses.
With an
estimate for the velocities, the friction factor can be found using the Colebrook
formula (2.11). The velocity can be updated and this process is continued until
convergence is reached or the limit on the number of iterations is reached.
When the velocity has converged, the time of the ﬁlling is incremented in a
small step. In this time increment the level of the melt h(t) in the casting rises
and the back pressure builds up.
∆hcast = ¯Ucast∆t
= Agov
Acast
¯Ugov∆t
(4.7)
In the new time step the velocity and friction are again iterated until conver-
gence.
The results of calculating the losses in the gating system are show in ﬁgure 4.9.
For comparison the ﬂow prediction by [8] are also included. The models simulate
the ﬁlling of a casting that is 260 mm in height. The volume of the casting is
also known and from this a rough estimate of the casting area is found, simply
by the dividing the volume by the height.
Figure 4.9a shows the level of the melt versus time for the model with ﬂow losses
and from the model of [8]. The ﬁlling time is where the melt level reaches the
top of the casting. Not surprisingly, the ﬁlling of the casting takes longer when
the ﬂow losses are included. The melt level versus time still has a shape that
looks parabolic. In previous work the ﬂow into the mould was also encountered
as parabolic in shape [11]. At that time it was thought impossible to properly
solve the energy equation and the model from this work relied on guessing a
value for overall friction in the gating system.
==PAGE:58==
44
Design of streamlined gating systems
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Tim e  [s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
He ight in ca sting [ m m  ]
With losse s
Without losse s
top of ca sting
(a) Comparison of melt level prediction
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Tim e  [s]
0
50
100
150
200
Volumeflow [ cm3  ]
With losse s
Without losse s
(b) Flow rate comparison
Figure 4.9: The ﬁlling proﬁle with and without taking loss terms into account
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Losses in a streamlined gating system
45
4.3.1
Investigating the inﬂuence of the poured material
on the ﬂow behavior
The ﬂow loss model described above is used to investigate the inﬂuence of ﬂow
properties on the ﬁlling of a casting. The gating system that is placed on the
modular pattern plate, may be expected to be used in a multitude of casting
scenarios, used on diﬀerent mould or diﬀerent alloys. The ﬂow properties that
are accounted for in the model are:
Viscosity The viscosity of a melt is generally decreasing with temperature.
Variations within alloying elements of the poured material may also have
an eﬀect on the viscosity.
It is also possible that the poured alloy is
changed entirely, as in changing from pouring aluminium to iron
Density Like the viscosity, the density of the melt is also temperature de-
pendent, and is also subject to variations from alloy type and alloying
elements.
Since the density got cancelled out in (4.6), it is predicted that it has no
inﬂuence on the ﬂow. At least in the steady ﬂow model that is presented
here.
Surface Roughness This is a property of the mould and not the poured ma-
terial. It is still being considered as a ﬂow property in this analysis. It is
common to assume that the surface roughness is equal to the average size
of the sand grains. For green sand, the grain size is about 0.2 mm [18].
The ﬂow loss model is calculated in discrete time-steps. The error from the size
of the time-step is found by doing a convergence test. Figure 4.10 shows the
convergence of the ﬁlling time for decreasing time-step. For the calculations in
this section, a casting of volume 358.745 cm3 and height 250 mm is considered.
This reﬂects the geometry of an unfed stress-harp. Figure 4.8 shows the stress-
harp in question. These calculations do not account for the volume in the red
geometry.
The convergence of the ﬂow loss model is very linear. A regression line has been
drawn from the data-points in ﬁgure 4.10. The regression equation is:
ˆt = 3.89795532 + 0.40375555 · ∆t
(4.8)
The R2 statistic for the ﬁt is 99.997 %. The regression equation also predicts
value of the ﬁlling time for the time-step going towards zero. For the following
calculations the time-step is set to 0.005 s.
==PAGE:60==
46
Design of streamlined gating systems
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
∆t - timestep [s]
3.89
3.90
3.91
3.92
3.93
3.94
3.95
Filling tim e  [s]
Figure 4.10: Convergence plot of the ﬂow-loss model.
ν = 4.5 · 10−7 m2/s, e = 0.2 mm
Material
AlSi12
GJS-400
Steel
Water
Viscosity, ν
h
m2
s
i
4.5 × 10−7
1.16 × 10−6
7.04 × 10−7
1.01 × 10−6
Table 4.4: Viscosities of selected materials. Data from the material database
of MAGMA [9], and from [25]
The properties of a selected number of materials are shown in table 4.4. GJS-
400 in the table is a ductile iron alloy. The reason why water is also appearing
in the table is because the ﬂow during ﬁlling are sometimes investigated using
water-analogy models.
Using the material data from table 4.4 a suitable range of viscosity can be chosen
where most ﬂuids in metal casting are covered. The viscosity is tested between
1 × 10−7 to 1 × 10−6 m2/s, and the surface roughness is varied between 0.01 to
0.5 mm. The parameters are tested for in ten steps, in all possible combinations.
This is also called a full factorial experiment [22]. The ﬁlling time found with
loss model is used as the response. The response on the ﬁlling time has been
investigated with regression analysis. The program that was made to perform
the regression analysis can be found in appendix C. The response on the ﬁlling
time vs viscosity and surface roughness is initially assumed to be on the form:
tﬁll = β0 + β1ν + β2e
(4.9)
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Losses in a streamlined gating system
47
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Viscosity [m2 /s]
1e −6
1
2
3
4
5
Surfa ce  roughne ss [m ]
1e −4
3.760
3.840
3.920
4.000
4.080
4.160
4.240
Wa te r
Alum inium
Ste e l
Figure 4.11: Filling time as a function of viscosity and surface roughness
The regression equation that gives the best ﬁt to the ﬁlling time is:
ˆtﬁll = 3.671 + 1.007 × 105 · ν + 8.199 × 102 · e
(4.10)
The R2 statistic for the ﬁt is 97 %. Figure 4.11 shows the eﬀect of variation in
surface roughness and viscosity on the ﬁlling time.
The viscosity of selected materials are also plotted in ﬁgure 4.11 for convenience.
The impact of variations in surface roughness and viscosity on the ﬁlling is not
that large, when considering how extremely they are varied in ﬁgure 4.11.
4.3.2
Adding ﬂow losses to a direct method
Recalling the comparison between the analytical model (2.7) from [8] and the
iterative ﬂow loss model, it was found that they are both parabolic in shape. It
can be convenient to have an analytical solution at hand that does not require
iterations.
The ﬁlling proﬁle found using e = 0.2 mm and ν = 4.5 × 10−7 m2/s to resemble
the ﬁlling of an aluminium casting is analysed with the regression program. The
==PAGE:62==
48
Design of streamlined gating systems
data is ﬁtted to the model:
h(t) = β0 + β1t + β2t2
(4.11)
The best ﬁt for the particular ﬁlling proﬁle is:
ˆh(t) = 1.204 × 10−05 + 8.791 × 10−02 · t −6.049 × 10−03 · t2
(4.12)
with an R2 statistic of 100 %. (4.12) is by itself a direct analytical model for the
ﬁlling of that particular casting. In this case the casting is 250 mm heigh and
has a volume of 358.745 cm3. But the model is not very useful in its current
form, because to obtain it, one had to go through iterating the energy equation
anyway. Seeing how well the model from [8] resembles the ﬁlling with ﬂow losses,
the approach is to add the knowledge of the losses in the gating system to (2.8).
To ﬁnd the loss terms, the coeﬃcients from (4.12) are divided by the coeﬃcients
(2.7).
C1 =
8.791×10−02
√
2ghtot
Agov
Acast
= 0.671
(4.13)
C2 =
6.049×10−03
g
2
  Agov
Acast
2 = 0.451
(4.14)
The model for the ﬁlling then becomes:
h(t) = C1
p
2ghtot
Agov
Acast
t −C2
g
2
 Agov
Acast
2
t2
(4.15)
The ﬂow during ﬁlling is plotted in ﬁgure 4.12. The addition of the coeﬃcients
to the analytical model from [8] has given a perfect overlap between the models.
It is therefore possible to simply use 4.15 in analytical ﬂow calculations for
a gating system were the losses have been found already, using the thorough
iterations over the energy equation.
The ﬂow losses found with the energy equation can give a good prediction of
the capability of the gating system and the resulting ﬁlling time without relying
on prior experience. It is important because this experience is not easily gained
nor easily transferable between diﬀerent casting conditions.
The streamlined gating systems are not very common nor very known, so their
ﬁlling capabilities should therefore be quantiﬁed using a model like this one.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Losses in a streamlined gating system
49
0
1
2
3
4
5
Tim e  [s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
He ight in ca sting [ m m  ]
Ite ra ting e ne rgy e qua tion
With loss coe fficie nts
top of ca sting
Figure 4.12: Filling curves obtained by iterating the energy equation or by
using equation 4.15
==PAGE:64==
50
Design of streamlined gating systems
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Numerical Simulations
5.1
Filling simulations to select gating system
The design of gating system mentioned in chapter 4 on page 31 is made para-
metric. This allows for easy design variation. The aim of the simulations that
are shown in this section is to do some relatively simple and fast tests on the
performance on the gating systems. The questions that these simulations should
address are:
• How fast is the downrunner ﬁlled
• How is the melt delivered into the mould
• Are there troublesome spots (recirculation, vena contracta, vorticing etc)
The virtual experiments are based on the ability of the gating system to ﬁll a
very simple box-shaped casting. The casting is 120 × 30 mm and 200 mm in
height. The set up is displayed in ﬁgure 5.1. Two vents (purple) are placed on
top of the casting. The inlet (red) is 20 mm in diameter, and located 20 mm
from the parting line.
==PAGE:66==
52
Numerical Simulations
Figure 5.1: Geometry settings, with initial gating system
The mesh is generated by selecting ﬁve million elements. The number of cavity
cells are 412,664. The total number of cells is 4,955,500. Figure 5.2 shows the
casting and gating system divided into cells.
The casting material is AlSi12, and the mould material is green sand. The initial
temperatures are 705 ◦C for the casting, and 20 ◦C for the mould material.
The heat transfer coeﬃcient, HTC, for the problem is a standard temperature
dependent function for the contact between AlSi12 an and core.
The ﬁlling boundary condition is deﬁned with the pouring time criteria. Two
sizes of gating systems are simulated, one with a governing cross-sectional area
of 150 mm2 and one with an area of 75 mm2. The pouring time for the big
gating system is 4 s, and 8 s for the small gating system.
It is the simplest pouring criteria to set up, because it only requires a ﬁlling time.
The criteria gives an even volumeﬂow into the domain. The even volumeﬂow is
not very adequate for the bottom ﬁlled castings. A more proper volumeﬂow is
found in section 4.3. The even volumeﬂow typically leads to a overﬂow situation,
which leads to an artiﬁcially high pressure rise.
The aim of these simulations is to test the performance of the gating system in
the early, most critical moments of ﬁlling. The needed results are within the
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Filling simulations to select gating system
53
(a) Overview
(b) Zoomed in view on the mesh near
the entrance to the casting
Figure 5.2: The mesh of the casting and gating system
ﬁrst two seconds, which is before overﬂowing happens.
5.1.1
Results of the ﬁlling simulations
This section represents the results of 12 diﬀerent simulations were the geometry
of the gating system is varied.
The most critical zones in the gating systems that were discovered in these
simulations are in the shape of the fangate and the bend below the downrunner.
Figure 5.3 shows two diﬀerent design approaches to a fangate. The diﬀerences
are primarily achieved by varying the parameters gat11Rin and gat11Rout in
the design program. The functions of these parameters are explained in section
4.2 on page 38. The fangate in ﬁgure 5.3a is achieved by having gat11Rin much
larger than gat11Rout.
This is to guide the melt more vertically upwards.
The attempt of guiding the melt is assessed to be too extreme, since there are
appearing two dead pockets in the fangate. These zones have a much lower
velocity than in the center of the fangate. Recirculation is seen to the left in
ﬁgure 5.3.
A much more even distribution of velocities is seen in ﬁgure 5.3b. This shape is
obtained by having gat11Rout much larger than gat11Rin. The issue with this
fangate shape is that the melt ﬂow is not directed at all. The melt is therefore
==PAGE:68==
54
Numerical Simulations
(a) Fangate where the melt is at-
tempted to be directed too much
to the right
(b) Alternative fangate with less forc-
ing of the melt
Figure 5.3: Two extremes of fangate-variation
sloshing against the left surface of the casting. This induces a surface wave that
was seen rolling back and forth during the ﬁlling of the casting.
The ﬁnal fangate shape is shown in ﬁgure 5.4. The shape of this fangate is
very close to the shape from ﬁgure 5.3. The subtle diﬀerence is a slightly big-
ger gat11Rout and a slightly ﬂatter exit thickness. The ﬂow is more evenly
distributed and the ﬂow is directed more upwards.
Another critical detail that was found is were the melt is transitioned from the
downrunner to the siderunner. The ﬂow details of this part can be seen in ﬁgure
5.5.
The results from these simulations was used to decide on the shapes for the
gating system that was later put in production. The shape of the fangate is
a compromise between how much it can direct the melt ﬂow and still keep a
relatively even ﬂow distribution. It was also found that the transition in the
bend beneath the downrunner could lead to an undesirable ﬂow ﬁeld, if the
change in geometry was too abrupt.
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Filling simulations to select gating system
55
Figure 5.4: Final shape of the fangate
(a) An early iteration with too sharp
curvature leading to a dead zone
(b) The ﬁnal fanbend with a smoother
curvature around the transition
Figure 5.5: The ﬂow in the bend below the downrunner
==PAGE:70==
56
Numerical Simulations
Parameter
-
+
A
40
80
B
110
200
D
10
20
R
1
10
Table 5.1: High and low values of each parameter
5.2
Tests of U-shaped castings
The initial test geometry was inspired by the result reported in ﬁgure 2.4 on
page 13. The idea is to ﬁnd a geometry whose contraction is constrained by
the mould. The mould-constrain can then be varied by using moulding systems
with diﬀerent strengths. Figure 5.6 shows the shape that was envisioned. The
purpose of these tests was to use virtual design of experiment, DoE to investigate
and maximise the angular deformation on the casting.
5.2.1
Numerical Factor Test
The casting geometry is investigated in a numerical study. The geometry is
subjected to changes in 4 factors, and the displacement of the U-shape is noted.
The purpose of this test is to optimize the casting geometry for angular displace-
ment. The test also gives information on the inﬂuence of each of the individual
factors.
The numerical simulations are run as a 2k fractional factorial experiment [22].
Figure 5.6 shows the parameters that are subject to changes. Note that variation
on parameter C has been omitted to avoid a too large number of simulation runs.
The values for the parameters are shown in table 5.1.
As the table shows,
each of the four parameters has two levels, which leads to 24 = 16 possible
combinations.
An experiment that goes through all the possible combinations is called a full-
factorial design.
It is not always beneﬁcial to go through all of the possible combinations, because
of time or economy reasons. Therefore one can settle for using only a fraction of
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Tests of U-shaped castings
57
Figure 5.6: The design parameters of the U-shaped casting
the factorials. The key ideas for using a fractional factorial experiment are [22]:
Sparsity of eﬀects Typically the response of the process is a few of the main
eﬀects and low order interactions
Projection property The fractional design may be projected into larger de-
signs
Sequential experimentation It is possible to combine the runs and assem-
ble a larger design to estimate the interesting factors and interactions of
interest
In this study, the main reason to keep the number of runs low is that the stress
calculations that are to be performed are especially demanding on the computer
resources. The framework of design of experiments is used in the eﬀort get the
most information from a smaller number of tests.
The planned design-variation for the simulations are shown in table 5.2.
The simulations were set up without ﬁlling. The gating system was still included
since it is expected that the thin fangate section will have some eﬀect on the
deformation behaviour of the casting. Figure 5.7 shows the geometry window of
the simulation. The cast alloy is AlSi12 from the standard material database.
Its initial temperature is set to 650 ◦C. The mould is green sand, with an
==PAGE:72==
58
Numerical Simulations
run
A
B
D
R=ABD
combinations
1
-
-
-
-
(I)
2
+
-
-
+
ar
3
-
+
-
+
br
4
+
+
-
-
ab
5
-
-
+
+
dr
6
+
-
+
-
ad
7
-
+
+
-
bc
8
+
+
+
+
abcd
Table 5.2: The 24−1
IV
design for the numerical experiment
initial temperature of 20 ◦C. The chosen HTC between the casting and mould
is the standard AlSi12-core temperature-dependent HTC. The shake-out and
removing of gating system is activated, and set to occur as soon as the maximum
temperature in the casting gets below 100 ◦C. The choice of this temperature
point, is a compromise on simulation speed.
The stress-calculation is activated. All of the materials in the domain, mould,
casting system and casting, are subject to stress calculations. The mould is also
considered deformable. Contact was initially not considered because its function
was initially misunderstood.
The displacement of the u-shape is measured in four points that are visible in
the corners of the casting, in ﬁgure 5.7. They are numbered in the order going
from the top left corner going anti-clockwise when viewing the U-shape as seen
in ﬁgure 5.6.
5.2.2
Checking the numerical model for convergence
To get an estimate of the numerical error due to the spatial discretization,
a convergence test has been performed.
The cell size for each simulation is
found by dividing the metal volume by the number of metal cells. However the
convergence behaviour does not look very textbook. The initial convergence plot
is shown in ﬁgure 5.8. It shows a strange tendency to increase in diﬀerence for
smaller cell sizes. The problem with this plot is that the deformation simulations
are already taking up so much time that simply just increasing the cell size is
not very time-friendly. The ﬁnest grid in ﬁgure 5.8 has just over one million
metal cells.
The simulations were looked through for any eventual mistakes. The option to
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Tests of U-shaped castings
59
Figure 5.7: The geometry of the simulation
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
average metal cell size [mm3 ]
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
Angular deflection [ ◦ ]
Figure 5.8: Convergence plot, where the deformations have been collected to
an angular deformation
==PAGE:74==
60
Numerical Simulations
consider contact in the general settings of the stress simulation was not applied
in the initial couple of simulations. By considering contact the simulations is
able to allow interfaces between diﬀerent materials to part from each other if
they are being pulled. If the setting is not applied the materials are artiﬁcially
glued together. This can give particularly wrong results if the mould material is
hard. This did have a quite big impact on the angular deﬂection that is plotted
versus time step in ﬁgure 5.9a.
The level of accuracy of the iterations that are performed by the deformation
solver was increased from the standard 6 to 8. It led to a very small change. The
higher level of accuracy was applied to the coarsest mesh in ﬁgure 5.9a. The
result of the higher accuracy in the convergence of the iterations is a minutely
lower amount of deﬂection, which can be seen in the diﬀerence between the two
dots in the upper right corner of ﬁgure 5.9a.
To shave oﬀsome of the simulation time required, the gating system was cut in
two in the siderunner. Only the part of the gating system that is close to the
u-shaped casting was considered for stress analysis. Likewise the sand mould
was divided in two. Only the inner sand mould extending about 30 mm in every
direction from the cast materials was considered for stress and deformations.
For clarity the individual displacements that are collected into an angular de-
ﬂection are shown in ﬁgure 5.9b. The measuring points are visible be seen in
5.7. The location of the individual measuring point is written in the corners in
ﬁgure 5.6. It is the points in the upper ends, 1 and 4, of the U-shape that are
the most troublesome.
The convergence of the error still does not seem very meaningful. It seems like
there is a jump in the values of deﬂection when going from the second ﬁnest
resolution to the ﬁnest. It would be interesting to see a result with an even ﬁner
resolution, to see if the strange trend of ﬁgure 5.9a is broken and convergence can
be reached. But such a simulation would take weeks to achieve. The simulation
was looked through very strictly to see if any blunder might be the culprit. It
was not found.
The idea of doing a virtual parameter study was abandoned since the conver-
gence of the error seems unclear. The main suspect to the diﬃculty in reaching
convergence is the porosities that form inside it. The reason the U-shape is
located with the arms upwards was because it was intended to promote stresses
that could be released upon the removal of the gating system. Figure 5.10 shows
the porosity inside the U-shaped casting.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Tests of U-shaped castings
61
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
average metal cell size [mm3 ]
0.25
0.26
0.27
0.28
0.29
0.30
0.31
0.32
0.33
angular deflection [ ◦]
(a) Angular deﬂection after applying contact
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
average metal cell size [mm3 ]
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Y displa ce m e nt
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
(b) Individual Y-deviations for the measuring cells
Figure 5.9: Displacements versus cell size, divided into components
==PAGE:76==
62
Numerical Simulations
Figure 5.10: Porosity prediction within U-shape
5.3
Simulations on stress-harps
It was decided to move on from the U-shaped casting and use a more common
design that is famous for its deformation pattern. The stress-harp, also called
stress-lattice, has three bars that are connected by cross-beams in the top and
bottom. The centre bar is much thicker than the outer bars.
As the stress-harp is cooling, all of the beams will contract. The thinner beams
will cool faster, thereby contracting more relative to the centre beam.
This
means that the outer beams will be in tension, and the centre beam in compres-
sion. The tension on the outer beams is strong enough to make them yield and
elongate plasticly.
When the cooling has progressed enough the centre beam will continue to con-
tract to a shorter length than the plasticly deformed outer beams. The centre
beam will then be in tension and the outer beams in compression [15].
Figure 5.11 shows the initial iteration on the stress-harp in this project. At
this stage in the course of the work, the size of the gating system had been set
and produced. The size of the initial stress-harp indicated that it would not be
easy to properly ﬁll with the gating system at hand. This prompted the work
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Simulations on stress-harps
63
Figure 5.11: The initial stress-harp geometry to be tested
on the analytical calculations on the friction losses in section 4.3 on page 40.
The information on the ﬁlling curve from the analytical model served as the
boundary condition on the pouring rate in these simulations.
The geometry of the ﬁnal stress-harp can be seen in ﬁgure 5.12. The outer walls
on the casting are 7 mm thick.
The simulations on the stress-harps were run with the following processes ac-
tivated: ﬁlling, solidiﬁcation and deformation and shake-out. The cast alloy is
AlSi12 with an initial temperature of 715 ◦C. The mould material is green sand
with an initial temperature of 20 ◦C. The HTC of the casting-mould interface
is the standard AlSi12-core temperature dependent function. The ﬂow through
the gating system that was found analytically in section 4.3 on page 4.3 serves
as the boundary condition for the ﬁlling. The pouring rate condition is used for
specifying the ﬂow. The values for the ﬂow are shown in table 5.3. The ﬂow
rate into the mould was found to be linearly decreasing, which makes it very
simple to put into the simulation settings. The analytical ﬂow model assumes
that the gating system is ﬁlled to the top of the pouring cup at t = 0. The
time from the melt is initially poured until it reaches the casting, is known from
previous simulations to be about 0.5 seconds. The ﬂow is therefore kept at full
speed the initial 0.5 seconds, as table 5.3.
==PAGE:78==
64
Numerical Simulations
Figure 5.12: The ﬁnal stress-harp with insulating feeder sleeve from Foseco.
The outer sleeve has been hidden to reveal the cast volume inside
Time
[s]
0.0
0.5
4.4
Volume Flow

cm3/s

125.79
125.79
58.27
Table 5.3: Deﬁnition of ﬂow rate into the mould
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Simulations on stress-harps
65
The stress-harp is assumed to be poured by hand from 50 mm above the mould.
The size of the inlet was calculated with the Bernoulli equation, (2.1) from page
6, to ensure that the ﬂow into the simulation reﬂects this pouring height. The
radius of the inlet is 7.22 mm, and it is 20 mm above the mould surface.
The cooling simulation was set to continue until the maximum temperature in
the casting falls below 100 ◦C. The shake-out is set to take place as the maximum
temperature in the casting falls below 100 ◦C.
The material for the stress calculations were selected using the experiences ob-
tained from the simulations in section 5.2. The gating system was divided in
two, with only the part of the runners and gate near the casting activated for
stress-considerations. Likewise only a small inner sand mould extend 30 mm
beyond the casting in all directions, was considered in the stress-calculations.
The inner sand mould is also considered deformable by the simulation. The
casting was of course also active in the stress-calculations.
The simulation settings for the ﬁlling are considering surface tension, sand per-
meability and vents. The stress simulation considers the contact in the interfaces
between materials.
5.3.1
Results from the simulation on the stress-harp casted
in green sand
The result in this section are the newest available simulation data. It does not
mimic the conditions of the castings that were produced in 6.3 on page 82, since
these where produced with a feeder on top and in a harder mould, made with
the Fenotec binder system.
The entire pouring of the casting is illustrated in by the ﬁlling time. The local
ﬁlling time is indicated by the color of the regions. It can illustrate how evenly
the casting has been ﬁlled in the simulation. The ﬁgure shows that the entire
gating system has been ﬁlled in about 0.5 seconds. The levels are a bit uneven
in the lower sections of the casting. The ﬂow takes some time to settle after
being delivered into the casting. It also shows that level of melt in the pouring
cup has not given problems with overﬂowing. The relatively simple pouring
conditions that have been inserted gave a good ﬁlling simulation.
The ﬂow in the lower section of the casting and in the runners below is shown
in ﬁgure 5.14. The ﬂow is shown at about 4 seconds into the pouring, where the
cast volume is 70 % ﬁlled. The velocity distribution in the fangate below is not
at all as well-behaved in this scenario as the initial ﬁlling simulation indicated.
==PAGE:80==
66
Numerical Simulations
Figure 5.13: Filling time of the stress-harp
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Simulations on stress-harps
67
Figure 5.14: Melt ﬂow during the later stage of ﬁlling
The original ﬂow simulation can be seen in ﬁgure 5.4 on page 55. The ﬂow in
ﬁgure 5.14 indicate separation in the outer side of the fangate, where the ﬂow
is at a stand-still.
The temperature distribution in the stress-harp is shown in ﬁgure 5.15. There
is a temperature diﬀerence of more than 50 ◦C between the thick and the thin
beams. The diﬀerence is partly due to the diﬀerence in size of the beams. Figure
5.14 indicates that the ﬂow is not distributed evenly to the three beams of the
stress-harp. The centre beam is getting the hot fresh melt, whereas the outer
beams are getting an older melt. It can also be seen in ﬁgure 5.15 that the
outer right beam is slightly colder than the left outer beam. This tendency
was also seen in the initial simulations on the stress-harp, which put emphasis
on investigating the proper ﬁlling capability of the gating system, described in
section 4.3 on page 40. The uneven ﬂow and temperature distribution makes
the ﬁlling diﬃcult to achieve. On the other hand, the uneven temperatures are
exactly what one seeks to achieve in a stress-harp.
The intent of the stress-harp is to promote stresses and deformations. Figure
5.16 shows the predicted deformation of the stress-harp. The color ﬁeld indicate
values of displacements in the horizontal direction on the surface of the harp.
The measurement points have been placed on the outer beams report the total
displacement, followed by the displacements in the Cartesian directions. These
directions are given by the coordinate system seen in the lower left corner. The
==PAGE:82==
68
Numerical Simulations
Figure 5.15: The temperature distribution in the melt ﬂow during the later
stage of ﬁlling
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Simulations on stress-harps
69
Figure 5.16: The deformation of the stress-harp in the horizontal direction at
ambient temperature, magniﬁed 5 times
outer beams have a deviation of about 0.5 mm between the middle point and
the points at the root of the outer beams.
The gradient lines that are shown through the lines of color-change are not
completely vertical. This indicates that the stress-harp is possible also twisted,
by the right beam being a bit smaller than the left beam. It is possible due to
the uneven temperature distribution between the outer beams, that can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.15.
The formation of stresses versus time is shown in ﬁgure 5.17. The measurement
points are located in the middle of each beam. The points are the three green
spots, that are visible in ﬁgure 5.12 on page 64. Note that these results were
made without the red feeder that is visible on ﬁgure 5.12.
Negative values in ﬁgure 5.17 indicate compression and positive are tension.
The development of the curves are in agreement with the explanation of the
stress-development given in the start of this section from. The outer beams
are contracting and building stresses much faster than the centre beam. After
about 200 seconds into the cooling, the centre beam starts to contract on its
own. During the next 200 seconds the tension on the outer beams is falling and
turning into compression. This tendency continues until the casting is cooled
to ambient temperature. At the end of cooling the reported 86.3 MPa and 81.5
==PAGE:84==
70
Numerical Simulations
Figure 5.17: The development in stresses in the harp. Red is the left beam,
blue is the centre beam and purple is the right beam
MPa in compression for the left and the right beam, respectively. It is 51.3 MPa
in tension for the centre beam. The jump in the stress-curves must be the onset
solidiﬁcation in the measuring point
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6
Experiments and Results
In this project three experimental runs were attempted.
6.1
Trial One - Handmoulded U-shaped casting
This experiment was set up as a showpiece for a class of high school students
visiting from Hillerød HTX. This gave the opportunity to have the U shaped
casting tested at a stage where the results from the numerical simulations were
unclear.
The casting was shaped in a way that was believed to promote an angular
deformation as it was cooling down. The gating system was modelled in a way
that should reﬂect the ﬁnal gating system on the modular pattern-plate as much
as possible.
The 3D printed model is shown in ﬁgure 6.1. The model was printed in one
piece since it was supposed to be used as a quick prototype. It took about three
or four hours from idea of designing a model for displaying the casting process
for the visiting students was initially discussed, until the model was ready for
printing.
==PAGE:86==
72
Experiments and Results
Figure 6.1: The 3D printed model for mould-forming by hand in sand
6.1.1
Casting conditions
The moulds were made four days before casting because of convenience in the
time schedule. The sand was prepared for moulding using the Fenotec system,
which is a combination of an alkaline phenolic resin binder that is cured with
an organic ester [7]. The resin bounded sand has a strength that is comparable
to Furan-bounded sand.
Since the model is only forming one half mould, a second mould half was made
simply by ﬁlling the containing frame with sand. The ﬁrst mould got damaged
at the bends below the casting, when the model was removed. There was a clear
increase in the quality of the moulds in the order they were produced. Three
moulds for the U-shape was produced. A mould for a knight chess piece was
also produced in this run. Small amounts of sand were sticking to the printed
model when removing the parts. The best mould for the U-shaped casting was
chosen for a glass-plate trial. This mould was ﬁtted with three glass panes held
by clamps and wooden boards for support.
For the casting recycled aluminium alloy, (AlSi12) was used. It was heated in
the induction furnace to about 800 ◦C. The melt was not modiﬁed nor de-gassed
prior to pouring.
The temperature of the melt was 750 ◦C just before the
pouring. The castings were poured in the following order.
1. Glass plate trial with U-shape
2. Quick-cup sample for cooling curve
3. Knight chess piece
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Trial One - Handmoulded U-shaped casting
73
Figure 6.2: The three castings from trial one with the printed model to the
upper right
4. U-shape 1
5. U-shape 2
The glass-plate trial was video-recorded. The ﬁlling of the glass-plate trial was
interrupted during pouring.
A shard of glass struck oﬀclose to the funnel,
opening a small path for aluminium melt to leak through. Although the ﬁlling
was not continuous, the casting was still complete.
The castings were allowed to cool for ﬁve hours before the castings were knocked
out of the moulds. The moulds had kept enough of their original strength to
retain their cavities after the castings were removed.
The castings from the
experiment are shown in ﬁgure 6.2.
The casting from a glass plate trial is
normally scrapped immediately because it contains glass-shards that are almost
impossible to remove. It was decided to keep the casting from this glass-plate
trial anyway because it was the part with the least amount of rough spots.
6.1.2
Results from trial one
The cooling curve of the melt that was put into the quick-cup sample is shown
in ﬁgure 6.3. The temperature drops to around 567 ◦C before the solidiﬁcation
kicks in. The alloy solidiﬁes in a very narrow temperature range around 572 to
573 ◦C. This is because the alloy with its 12 wt% silicon is very close to the
eutectic point at 12.6 wt% Si [8].
The castings and the 3D printed model were measured by 3D-scanning using
==PAGE:88==
74
Experiments and Results
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Tim e  [ s ]
560
565
570
575
580
585
590
595
600
Temperature [ ◦C ]
Figure 6.3: Cooling curve from trial one
an ATOS Triple Scan geometrical scanner [21].
In order to perfom the scans, special stickers were added to the part that was
to be scanned.
These stickers act as control points that helps the software
of the measuring system to collect the individual scans into one.
The parts
were scanned while being ﬁxed by blue tack to a plate, where stickers were also
applied. Since the parts were ﬁxed to the plate the scanning could be done by
simply rotating the plate between the individual scans. Otherwise the entire rig
of the measuring device would have to be moved around.
The castings were measured as cast with the gating system and then measured
again after removing the gating system. Initially it was attempted to measure
the parts on both sides to get a complete scan, but it was then aborted for
diﬀerent reasons. The ﬂexibility of the plastic model made it hard to combine
the measurements into one part. Casting one was actually scanned on both
sides adn combined, but the coarse surfaces made it a time consuming task and
for this reason it was not done for the other castings. The measurements that
are presented in the following sections are therefore only measured on the top
surface.
The data from the scans are converted to 3D models and stored as stl-ﬁles. The
data is analysed using the freeware GOM Inspect V7 [21]. The measurement
results are generated by overlaying two stl-ﬁles and reporting the deviation
==PAGE:89==
6.1 Trial One - Handmoulded U-shaped casting
75
Event
scanning
print
scanning
casting 1
scanning
casting 2
end of scan-
ning
Tempe-
rature
20.5 [ ◦C ]
21.5 ◦C
21.6 ◦C
22.0 ◦C
Table 6.1: Temperature measurements during scanning
between two 3D models. The parts where measured in the following order:
1. Printed model
2. Casting 1
3. Casting 2
4. Glass plate casting
5. Casting 2 without gating system
6. Casting 1 without gating system
The temperature was measured on the surface on one of the aluminium castings
during the geometrical measurements. These measurements are shown in table
6.1. The scans where done in the university foundry. Initially the foundry was
empty, but while scanning the printed part, people came and operated electri-
cally powered machinery. This was reﬂected in the temperature increase that is
seen in table 6.1. The university has a measuring lab where the temperature is
kept constant at 20 ◦C. The measuring rig is cumbersome to move and since it
was located in the foundry, it was where the measurements where taken.
6.1.2.1
Deviation between CAD model and print
This comparison reveals the capability of the printer to produce an accurate
replica of the original CAD model. The printed model was placed upon pieces
of blue tack to keep it ﬁxed. This made it bend where it was left unsupported,
especially in the ﬂat downrunner section.
The ﬁle from the scan is only overlaid to the original CAD model in the casting
section, in order to reduce the error from the scan on the slightly deformed
printed model. The same applies to all of the following results as well.
The comparison between the printed model and its original CAD geometry is
shown in ﬁgure 6.4. The comparison is shown in two orientations to reveal all of
==PAGE:90==
76
Experiments and Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.4: Deviations between the print and its original CAD model
the surfaces except the back. Most of the top and the surfaces on the inside of
the U-shape are within ±0.125 mm. The outer surfaces deviate slightly more.
To be fair to the 3D printing process, the sides of the printed model has been
ground to smooth the draft surfaces.
6.1.2.2
Deviation between print and castings
By comparing the scans on the printed model and the castings, the inﬂuence
from the casting and moulding processes on the original geometry can be quan-
tiﬁed. The geometrical deviations between the print and the castings are shown
in ﬁgures 6.5, 6.6 and 6.7.
The rough surfaces of the castings made it hard to get all the details into the
scan. It is the reason why there appear holes in the surfaces. These rough spots
are from the mould making, because of sand sticking to the model during its
removal from the sand mould.
The isolated spots with negative deviation are sink marks and pores. The values
that are indicated in the labels on ﬁgure 6.5, 6.6 and 6.7 show that there is a
small angular deﬂection of the U-piece.
The quality of the scans, are increasing in the order they are presented. The
moulds for the castings were made in the same order, and it shows that the
skill of mould making is also a contributing factor, possibly the biggest, in the
==PAGE:91==
6.1 Trial One - Handmoulded U-shaped casting
77
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.5: Measurement deviation between the printed model and casting 1
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.6: Measurement deviation between the printed model and casting 2
==PAGE:92==
78
Experiments and Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.7: Measurement deviation between the printed model and the casting
from the glass-plate trial
variations on these castings.
6.1.2.3
Deviation between castings before and after removal of gat-
ing system
It was suspected that the wide and narrow in-gate section could promote residual
stresses in the casting, that would be strong enough to cause deformation when
released. The gating system were therefore cut oﬀthe casting after the ﬁrst
scans. The casting from the glass-plate trial was not cut because it contains
pieces of glass. One of these pieces is visible on the measurement in ﬁgure 6.7a.
The comparisons before and after the cuts are shown in ﬁgure 6.8 and 6.9.
Warm colors on the plots show positive deviations, which means locations on
the surface that have moved away from the original.
The geometrical deviations of casting 1 looks strange, when compared to the
deviations of casting 2. The large light blue spot on the right arm of casting 1,
shown in ﬁgure 6.8, reveals that the casting was compressed too much in the vice
that held the object when the gating system was cut oﬀ. The positive deviations
that are shown in yellow appear on all of the sides of the arms extending from
the U-shape.
The measured deviations on casting 2 show almost no diﬀerence before and after
removing the gating system.
==PAGE:93==
6.1 Trial One - Handmoulded U-shaped casting
79
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.8: Measurement deviation when releasing gating system from casting
1
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.9: Measurement deviation when releasing gating system from casting
2
==PAGE:94==
80
Experiments and Results
6.1.3
Error sources in the geometrical scanning
The sources of error to the measurements are discussed and quantiﬁed in this
section.
Increase in ambient temperature The measurements were done in an open
environment which reﬂects itself in the increase in the temperatures, that
are reported in table 6.1. The temperature was not noted during the scans
of the glass-plate casting and during the freed castings, by oversight. The
thermal conductivity of extruded abs-plastic is 10.8−23.4×10−5 1/◦C [20]
and 2.4 × 10−5 1/◦C for aluminium, from the standard material database
in MAGMA for AlSi12 [9]. In the case of the removal of the gating system
from casting 1, a temperature increase of 1.4 ◦C leads to an increase of
7.6 µm in the largest dimension.
Temperature increase when cutting gating system oﬀThis source of er-
ror can be rejected because the gating system of casting 2 was removed
and measured immediately after it was cut oﬀ, and it showed almost no
deviations
Deformations from clamping This error source is very apparent in casting
1. It is possible that this is the reason why the surfaces increased on the
right arm of the U-bend. But it does not explain the increase in the other
arm. The results obtained with casting 2 shows that it is possible to avoid
deforming the geometry while clamping it
The use of scanning spray The glossy surfaces on a metal part can some-
times interfere with the scanner. Scanning spray was applied to the cast-
ings in the attempt at getting more details. It did not help. The spray
will build up and will probably increase the wall thicknesses by a couple
of µm.
The surface roughness of the castings Too much variations in the surface
made it hard to get a complete scan. This did not contribute to wrongful
information in and of itself, but lead to missing information.
The software overlaying In the post-processing the individual stl-ﬁles are
overlayed. The surfaces on the back of the models where not scanned.
Because of this, the top surfaces are ﬁtted together, which only leaves the
deviations on the sides for the display. It is not a big problem since the
deviations on the sides are the most interesting from a casting deformation
perspective. The skill of the user, yours truly, is also a factor in selecting
the best surfaces for a local ﬁt
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Trial Two - Attempt at moulding stress-harp on the DISA
81
6.1.4
Conclusions from trial one
Three castings were made for the project. The castings were all ﬁlled completely.
They had large visible pores going through the surfaces, which magnitude could
possibly be reduced by de-gassing and modifying the melt with strontium prior
to pouring. The castings varied much in shape because of the manual moulding.
The quality of the castings increased with the amount of moulds made.
The ﬂexibility of the plastic model and the surface roughness and burrs on
the castings made it hard to obtain a good scan. These were by far the largest
problems, and it should be able to overcome these issues by using the DISAmatic
for moulding the parts. Since the plastic models are attached to rigid plates for
the moulding machine, the ﬂexibility will neither be an issue.
The measurement deviations before and after the removal of the gating system
on casting 1 are treated as an outlier because of the treatment it got from a too
tight squeeze in the vice.
6.2
Trial Two - Attempt at moulding stress-harp
on the DISA
The modular pattern-plate was ﬁtted with a model for a stress-harp, and tested
in the moulding machine of DTU.
The models for the casting and its feeder were pulled out by the sand mould
that was formed around it. When pulling the models out of the mould, the sand
between the beams of the harp also followed ruining the mould.
In the attempt at getting a proper moulding, the casting model and its feeder
were glued to the casting-plate. The adhesive is the same contact glue that was
used to assemble the parts of the gating systems onto their plates. The glue was
used because there were almost no spare magnets left at the time. The casting
model and the plate it was glued to stayed in place on the pattern after this
intervention.
The sand was however still getting stuck in the space between the beams of the
stress-harp, and between the top of the stress-harp and the feeder. The problem
with sand getting stuck between the casting and its feeder could be ignored, by
allowing the stuck sand to stay in place. The space between the feeder and
casting would then be metal.
==PAGE:96==
82
Experiments and Results
The sides on all models on the pattern-plate were then polished to a very smooth
surface and coated with a graphite paint to further improve on the ability to
let the mould go. The problem of sand getting stuck between the beams of the
stress-harp still remained however. A possible explanation could by that the
ﬂexibility of the smaller beams on the sides of the stress-harp acts as springs,
and they give way due to the forces when the mould is formed under pressure.
When the moulding pressure is then released the sand will be under compression
from the outer beams.
6.2.1
Conclusions from trial two
The ﬂexibility of the casting model made the moulding in green sand on the
DISAmatic impossible.
That the casting model was able to pull the sand mould apart while staying on
the pattern-plate can be considered the perfect test on the ability of the magnets
to keep the models in place. The funnel could also use more holding force. This
can be ﬁxed by adding a third magnet behind the funnel.
In the design on the modular system it was anticipated that the casting model
would need to be a distinct part from the casting plate to allow disassembly.
The magnetic holding force needs to be extra strong behind the casting plate,
and the original idea of design was to slide the casting-plate oﬀduring disas-
sembly. Gluing the casting model to the plate below was a hasty measure in the
attempt to get a proper moulding. The casting-plate can no longer slide when
disassembling the pattern. The casting-plate has been tested for disassembly
by pushing on the plate from underneath with small pins. The operation went
remarkably easily, and the conclusion is that gluing the casting model to the
plate below did not break the intended modularity in the design.
6.3
Trial Three - Handmoulded stress-harps
The moulds were formed by hand using the Fenotec binder system. The binder
system has previously been described in section 6.1.1 on page 72. The moulds
made with this binder system gave none of the problems that were experienced
in trial two. Figure 6.10 shows the pattern and one half of the moulds. Six
moulds were made in total. The other side of the moulds was formed by ﬁlling
an empty frame with sand. Space for an insulating sleeve was later dug out of
blank mould. The sleeve is a KALMIN KSP 4/7K with a breaker core BK 14
==PAGE:97==
6.3 Trial Three - Handmoulded stress-harps
83
Figure 6.10: One of the sand moulds and its pattern
Q from Foseco [7]. Foseco distinguishes between feeders that are simply formed
by a cavity in the mould, and exothermic or insulating feeders, by the notions
of an natural feeder and an aided feeder. Foseco reports that as much as 76 %
of the material in a feeder is available for feeding in an aided feeder versus only
10 % in a natural feeder [2].
The moulds with sleeves attached can be seen in ﬁgure 6.11. The sleeves are
protruding above the top of the mould.
6.3.1
Casting conditions
The induction furnace was fed with 18 kg aluminium AlSi12. The material has
not been remelted in the foundry before. The material reached 800 ◦C in the
furnace. It was degassed for about three minutes by plunging a 50 g Elidron
degassing tablet. The surface was carefully skimmed to remove oxides from the
melt, after the degassing was done.
The melt was then reheated to 730 ◦C, which was the target pouring tempera-
ture. The melt was then poured in a quick-cup for a sample cooling curve, and
then into three of the six moulds. Every second mould was poured because the
moulds had been placed in the same order they were made. Figure 6.11 shows
the moulds between after half of them had been ﬁlled with unmodiﬁed AlSi12.
The last ﬁlling of the unmodiﬁed alloy was incomplete because melt droplets
had fallen into moulds before the actual pouring.
==PAGE:98==
84
Experiments and Results
Figure 6.11: The arrangement of moulds, after the initial pouring
The ladle was then returned to the induction furnace and 75 g Strontium reﬁner
was added to the melt. The melt was not de-gassed after the Strontium was
introduced. The melt was reheated to 730 ◦C. The melt was poured in a new
quick cup for a sample cooling curve, and then poured into the remaining three
moulds. The castings were rather slowly ﬁlled. It took around 8 seconds to
ﬁll the castings. After a couple minutes the exothermic sleeves on ﬁve of the
moulds began to blacken in the top of the sleeve and fume. It was taken as a
conﬁrmation that the castings had been ﬁlled properly.
The castings were allowed to cool in their moulds overnight, to ensure that the
castings were at ambient temperature when knocked out.
6.3.2
Results from trial three
In ﬁgure 6.12 the cooling curves from the casting of stress-harps are shown for
both the modiﬁed and the unmodiﬁed alloy. The time on the cooling curves
has been reﬁtted from the raw data, so that both curves report the time from
the thermocouples in the sample sensed the presence of hot melt. The samples
are not ﬁlled completely similar which means the time to solidify is not directly
comparable in ﬁgure 6.12. There is a clear diﬀerence in the cooling characteris-
tics of the aluminium before and after modiﬁcation. The unmodiﬁed Al has a
level of undercooling, but when the temperature is suﬃciently low to allow the
nuclei to grow, the temperature increases to the eutectic temperature [8].
==PAGE:99==
6.3 Trial Three - Handmoulded stress-harps
85
Figure 6.12: Cooling curve from trial three
The Strontium-modiﬁed alloy has a more irregular cooling pattern. The tem-
perature curve show a bump on the cooling at about 50 seconds. This is likely
the onset of solidiﬁcation of the dendritic α-phase Al in the alloy.
The cooling curves have a strange cyclic noise pattern. At the time the moulds
were poured there was a man working with a machine a couple of meters from
the computer to were the data logged. He later told that it was a Discotom he
was using. When explained about the cyclic nature of the noise, he told that
he was using the machine in short intervals to avoid stressing it too much. The
claim has not been tested, but it seems quite likely that the Discotom was the
source of the noise in ﬁgure 6.12.
The castings were knocked out of their moulds the following day. Figure 6.13
shows one of the castings after the mould parts were separated.
The high
temperature of the casting left a dark appearance on the surface of the mould.
Small cracks are visible in the mould in ﬁgure 6.13.
The stress-harps were carefully taken out of the moulds to avoid them breaking
prematurely. One the castings in un-modiﬁed aluminium was not ﬁlled. The
remaining castings were successful.
Figure 6.14 shows the stress-harps after
they were removed from the mould. The deformations in the stress-harp are
suﬃciently large to be seen by eye.
==PAGE:100==
86
Experiments and Results
Figure 6.13: One of the stressharps in its mould half
The feeders have all been ﬁlled nicely, save the one casting in unmodiﬁed Al
that cold-ran. All of the feeders display a shrinkage pipe with an coarse inside
surface with large grains. It is a conﬁrmation that material has been fed to the
stress-harps.
All of the castings display a cold-run in the fangate in the outer edge. It is most
clearly seen on the stress-harp to the right in ﬁgure 6.14a. There are also traces
of cold-runs in the thin bars on some of the stress-harps.
The casting of the stress-harps came at about the time of hand-in of this report.
The work of measuring the deformations on these geometries still remains to be
done in this project.
==PAGE:101==
6.3 Trial Three - Handmoulded stress-harps
87
(a) Unmodiﬁed
(b) Sr-modiﬁed
Figure 6.14: The stress-harps in the as cast state
==PAGE:102==
88
Experiments and Results
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 7
Discussions
7.1
The experiences with the modular pattern-
plate
The modular pattern-plate was developed, produced and assembled during the
course of this project. The design of the pattern-plate has been focused around
simplicity and robustness to variation.
The use of magnets for the holding force was chosen to shorten assembly time.
The uncertainty of how much force that was required was resolved by adding
ﬂexibility in the design.
As an example, the funnel had a tendency to get
pulled out of the pattern-plate when attempting to form sand moulds on the
DISA moulding machine. The solution to the problem is to add another magnet
behind the funnel. The fact that the magnetic force behind the casting-plate
and model was so strong that it could pull a mould apart, was actually a good
stress-test on the viability of the pattern system.
It was feared that the number of magnets behind the big plate for the castings
would lead to so high magnetic holding forces that it would be impossible to
disassemble. This assumption was, because of the events with the moulding
machine, put to the test. It is surprisingly easy to disassemble the casting-plate
from the pattern when applying force from below.
==PAGE:104==
90
Discussions
To make the plates for the components of the gating system, guide-pins were
shrunk-ﬁtted to the plates. It seems to be the most complicated part of the
production process as it involved the use of liquid nitrogen, and it might be
wise to look for alternatives if new parts are to be made. It was an exciting
experience to have though.
The use of contact glue to hold the printed parts onto the plates was feared to
be a bit fragile solution. The glue did its job well. It is still not recommended to
disassemble the components from the pattern-plate by pulling the plastic parts.
It was tried and it did not break, but that is a very poor conﬁrmation. The
incentive to ﬁnd the breaking point of the glued interface is also very low, since
there have been no time to make spare parts in the project.
7.2
The use of printed model parts
The parts that give the shape to the mould are all printed on a Stratasys Di-
mension printer in ABS plastic. The people from the printing lab reports that
the printed models contain 80 % of the mechanical strength of similar injection
moulded parts. Printing the model parts in plastic gives opportunities that are
unique to the process. Being an almost exclusively automated process, means
that only a CAD-ﬁle is needed to get a model manufactured. This is less work
than having to produce work-drawings and specifying tolerances. The part will
simply be produced at the tolerances the machine can deliver.
Features for helping in the assembly can be added without worrying about extra
documentation work or extra cost. Figure 3.9 from page 28 shows the cavities
and the interface that were added to the bottom side of the print of the stress-
harp. In the end the design features were made obsolete by gluing the model
to the plate. But the message should still be clear. Such tricks that are helpful
in the later assembly should be utilised as much as possible when working with
3D printed parts.
The use of plastic support bars to support the magnets is also quite helpful.
They can be seen in function in ﬁgure 3.8. Their task was very simple since
they just have to prevent the magnets from falling oﬀwhen the magnet-plate
is not assembled to the back-plate. But they did their small job very well. The
number of magnets on the magnet-plate was experimented with, and this meant
that the bars were taken on and oﬀmultiple times. Since they were printed on
a very simple printer, it also means that spare parts are easily available.
The downsides of using the 3D printed parts for the mould shaping are due
==PAGE:105==
7.3 The experience with the simulations
91
to their ﬂexibility and their texture. The models for the mould shaping were
printed in ABS plastic, which is relatively soft. The ﬂexibility of the models
is considered one of the reasons to why the mould making with the stress-harp
pattern on the DISAmatic was not possible. The ﬂexibility of the pattern was
not a problem when forming by hand.
The texture of the models can be viewed as spaghetti that is organised. The
way the levels of the model is made in discrete layers gives a coarse surface that
is very good at ripping grains of sand loose when removing the pattern from
the mould. This can be helped by grinding and polishing the surfaces. But it
is not without problems because this ﬁnishing step changes the geometry. The
access to easy and precise measurement technology has also brought the desire
to know exact variations in the production processes, and the manual ﬁnishing
step makes it hard to have reproducibility. It was also found that the repeated
mould-forming with the Fenotec-system opened new small pockets where sand
grains could stick to. This puts one in a tricky dilemma. Either the spots where
the print will rip sand loose are accepted, or the surface is ground which changes
the geometry even more.
I think that the model geometry could beneﬁt from lacquering.
This adds
material to the printed part, and changes the geometry but it also smooths the
surface and adds wear resistance.
7.3
The experience with the simulations
The plan for the numerical factor test that can be seen in section 5.2 indicates
that the expectations on how much could be achieved with the stress-simulations
were a bit too high.
The dip in the convergence plots shown in ﬁgures 5.8
and 5.9a moved the eﬀort towards looking for possible errors in the simulation
settings.
The results from the search for possible errors are not as exciting as the results
a numerical optimization study could have given, but getting correct answers
from a model can be quite crucial. The cold-run in the fangates can be seen
as an example of a consequence of the decision made on wrongfully interpreted
numerical result.
While the simulations were running, the waiting time was used by investigating
other aspects of casting. The emphasis on the design of the pattern-plate and
the work on the ﬂow calculations should be viewed in this light.
==PAGE:106==
92
Discussions
I would recommend avoiding to use stress-calculations when possible. If the
source to deformations of a given casting problem is known to be driven by
uneven cooling, the optimization could be centred around minimizing the tem-
perature gradients, instead of doing very time consuming stress-calculations.
When a suitable solution has been found, then the stress-calculations can be
done to quantify the magnitude of the deformations.
This might have been
possible to do in the parametric study on the U-shaped casting.
7.4
The ﬂow calculations
Having the ability of being able to simulate the casting process instead of relying
solely on relatively simple models, might also have turned the attention away
from the usefulness of simple analytical models. The energy equation was iter-
ated upon to estimate the ﬂow with pressure losses through the gating system.
This model gives a measure of the ability of the gating system to ﬁll a given
casting volume, without having to rely upon past experience.
The decision to use the energy equation was encouraged by the diﬃculties in
ﬁlling that were seen when simulating the stress-harp in ﬁgure 5.11 on page
63. The results of the analytical model did in return help to set the boundary
conditions on the simulations so that the ﬁlling simulations reﬂected the proper
ﬂow.
To illustrate why it is so important to set proper boundary conditions on the
ﬂow, an example of using poor ﬂow conditions is shown in ﬁgure 7.1. This ﬁgure
shows the ﬂow from the ﬁlling simulation on the ﬁrst stress-harp iteration, just
before and after the event of ﬁlling the pouring cup completely. In the lapse of
less than 0.1 seconds, the velocities in the runners are accelerated from about
1 m/s to 2 m/s. The melt is emptied from the inside corner of the fangate by
the sudden acceleration. The reason why this happens is because the top of the
funnel is treated as a closed volume. The ﬂow into the domain is set from the
boundary condition, so in the case of a full pouring cup, the addition of extra
melt will force the pressure artiﬁcially up. It is clear to see that this behaviour
has nothing do with reality except if the melt was truly forced like it is in the
High Pressure Die Casting process.
Once the ﬂow model was made suﬃciently correct, the simulations that were set
up from the predicted ﬁlling curve did not encounter the overﬂowing problem.
The stress-harps were properly ﬁlled in the ﬁrst try, even though their shape and
size were altered. This is an example of synergy by applying the knowledge from
analytical models to numerical models. The time spent on calculating hydraulic
==PAGE:107==
7.5 The ﬁlling of the stress-harps
93
(a) just before pouring cup gets full
(b) just after pouring cup gets full
Figure 7.1: The eﬀect of hitting the artiﬁcial wall on top of the pouring cup
diameters, and ﬁnding empiric relations for the losses in certain geometries
within the gating system, paid oﬀby making it possible to easily set up a ﬂow
simulation with conﬁdence that it would behave in a realistic way.
The steady ﬂow assumption seems to be the biggest ﬂaw of the model, since the
levels of the melt are changing. It can however be argued that if the levels are
changing suﬃciently slowly, it might not be such a bad assumption. The aim
of the design behind the streamlined gating systems is to ﬁnd a geometry that
allows a calm ﬁlling without any unsteady events. The shapes of the fangate
and fanbend have not been taken into consideration regarding pressure losses,
as no knowledge of their contribution exists. The use of the hydraulic diameter
to apply the ﬂow through rectangular runners to models based on diameter, was
only valid if the ratio of height to width is less than 3 or 4 [25]. This condition
is certainly not valid for the geometries in the gating systems of this project.
How big the contribution to error from this violation is unknown.
7.5
The ﬁlling of the stress-harps
All of the castings from the third experiment display a cold-run in the outer
end of the fan-gate. It is visible in ﬁgure 7.2a as a jagged line to the left on the
fangate. The castings still came out nicely but it shows that the gating system
did not perform exactly as intended.
The ﬁlling simulations from the stress-harps displayed recirculation in the fan-
gate. The cold-run from the casting is displayed next to a simulation on the
==PAGE:108==
94
Discussions
(a) Cold-run on the fangate in the ﬁ-
nal casting, (modiﬁed alloy)
(b) Simulation showing recirculation
in the fangate
Figure 7.2: Comparison between real and simulated result
ﬂow in ﬁgure 7.2 The initial simulations on the ﬂow of the fan-gates were made
without considering the speed of the melt ﬂow coming from a ladle that is likely
50 or 100 mm above the mould. The original simulation results can be seen in
ﬁgure 5.4 on page 55. This means that the shape of the fangate has been decided
upon on too optimistic grounds. When designing the shape of the fangate, a
trick is to expand the area of the gate as much as possible without getting wall-
separation. This is because within this limit one is able to lower the speed of
the melt ﬂow, thus lowering turbulence.
It has been speculated, but not properly investigated, that the possible area ex-
pansion of the gates, is dependent on the ﬂow momentum, or dynamic pressure.
Since the possible area-expansion of the fangate was found at a lower level of
dynamic pressure, and we see separation at the more realistic levels, it is further
conﬁrmation to this suspicion.
The cold-run in the gates also turned the attention to other potential problems
that might be with the fangates. The exit height of the fangates was designed
to be 1.4 mm. The fangate was printed on a printer that produces the part
in discrete layers of 0.25 mm. The exit height of the fangate is therefore prob-
lematic. It was therefore measured and expected to be either 1.25 or 1.5 mm
in the actual height. It was only 1.0 mm in height! This is a deviation from
the impossible nominal of 30 %. The CAD-ﬁle that was sent to the print was
re-checked, it was the reported 1.4 mm.
I am convinced that if the fangate was designed with less area-expansion, thus
avoiding wall separation and recirculation, it would not experience the cold-run.
The reason why such geometries with very thin sections are able to transport
==PAGE:109==
7.6 Future work
95
liquid melt without it freezing entirely, is by making sure that everything in the
ﬂow moves.
7.6
Future work
The experiments of casting stress-harps in modiﬁed and unmodiﬁed AlSi12 al-
loys still remains to be measured for deformations. How the eﬀects of increased
ductility or diﬀerent porosity distribution exactly aﬀects the deformation be-
haviour of the stress-harp is unfortunately not known yet.
The work with the pattern-plate that has been done in this project has opened
the door for a number of possibilities. If the ﬁlling behaviour of the current
fangate can be accepted, the pattern is ready to use in its current condition.
If the function of the gate is not acceptable, the solution should be to apply a
more conservative area-expansion and check the behaviour in a realistic ﬁlling
simulation. The current gating system comes with an analytical formula for the
ﬁlling capability (equation 4.15 from page 48). The modularity of the system
should help lighten the workload when designing new patterns for sand casting.
It is yet to be seen if the modularity of the system will be considered worth
looking into by the next people who needs to perform experiments with new
designs.
The experience with the soft models in printed material shows that the current
recommendations for draft are not directly applicable to the printed models.
The recommendations in question can be found in ﬁgure 3.1 on page 16. More
knowledge is needed about the interaction between the ﬂexible printed parts
and the moulding sand within the pressing chamber. Until such knowledge is
gained there will be a certain, but unknown, risk associated with printing model
parts with inside draft for moulding with the DISAmatic.
Applying the energy equation for the streamlined gating systems enables one
to predict the ﬁlling capability newly designed gating systems. The iterations
and book-keeping that has made this kind of calculation very tedious and time-
consuming can be scripted to lower the amount of needed work. I am very happy
with the use of theenergy equation. I think it should become the framework for
the design of new gating systems again, considering how well it performed during
this project. The streamlined gating system has geometries such as sectional
area transformations in the fangates, that have not been quantiﬁed for pressure
loss. This could also be of interest for future work, although complicated by
how much these geometries can vary in shape.
==PAGE:110==
96
Discussions
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
This project has dealt with variance within the gravity sand casting process,
through experimentation, design and simulation.
The objective of the experiments is to apply variance to an aluminium alloy
(AlSi12) and to test the impact of variance on the deformation pattern on a
casting geometry that is especially prone to deformations. Two casting trials
were successfully performed in this project. The initial test geometry has been
investigated for deformations using novel 3D-scanning technology.
The ﬁnal
casting geometry was cast in modiﬁed and unmodiﬁed AlSi12. The measure-
ments on the castings from the last trial remain to be done.
A modular pattern-plate has been developed and tested in this project. It allows
quick assembly and disassembly of components that when combined make up the
pattern for the moulding. The use of magnets to keep the components locked to
the pattern proved to be viable. The design features that can reduce variance,
such as the combination of a hole and a track, has been utilised. The modular
system has the potential to lower the development time for experiments using
new geometries, since the design work can be divided and focused to changing
a single component, such as the casting model, while reusing other components.
The gating system for the pattern has been designed in a self-made program.
The program allows design-changes, and introduces the idea of variable draft.
==PAGE:112==
98
Conclusion
The friction losses in the ﬂow through the streamlined gating system has been
quantiﬁed by applying the energy equation. The inﬂuence of viscosity and sur-
face roughness on the ﬁlling time has also been quantiﬁed.
The deformation behaviour of the castings has been simulated numerically. The
time it took to get a stress-simulation was considerably longer than expected.
A convergence study led to an investigation on all possible sources of error in
the numerical simulation. The ﬁlling simulation on a stress-harp also helped to
identify the cause of the cold-run that was encountered in the fangate.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix A
Workdrawings
==PAGE:114==
A
A
6,07
±0,07
7
24 ±0,07
16 ±0,06
14
8,05
±0,03
8D7
1,4
±0,03
5,8
±0,04
1 ±0,02
6H7
399
389
8
m 4 helicoil 1.5D
m4 helicoil 1.5D
350 ±0,07
300
250 ±0,06
100
150 ±0,05
100
50 ±0,04
350 ±0,07
300
250 ±0,06
200
150 ±0,05
100
50 ±0,04
184,5
±0,05
D7 tolerance applies to all 
Ø8 holes
Revisions
Remarks
Mass
Material
DB-name
Qty.
Name of part / assembly
Item
1
Scale: 1:4
Rune Engelberth Hansen
Drawing no.
Format: A3
Title:
Draw.(DB): MAGNETPLADE
1166436545947,499
Mass:
 Matr:
MPLATE2
DB-name:
04-Dec-14
Date:
Name:
SCALE  1:4
detail A
detail A(1:1)
SECTION  A-A
==PAGE:115==
Technical University of Denmark
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Department of Mechanical Engineering
50
99,78
±0,04
119,71
±0,07
39,91
±0,03
50
49,71
±0,05
3,01
±0,01
3G7
8N7
8N7
24,92
±0,03
49,89
±0,05
4
5
1
max 0,5
Revisions
Remarks
Mass
Material
DB-name
Qty.
Name of part / assembly
Item
1
Scale: 1:1
Rune Engelberth Hansen
Drawing no.
Format: A3
Title:
Draw.(DB): MODELPLADER
47077505810,001
Mass:
 Matr:
FUNPLADE
DB-name:
05-Dec-14
Date:
Name:
Ø8 m6, 8 mm styrestifter krybefittes på plade
==PAGE:116==
Technical University of Denmark
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Department of Mechanical Engineering
74,89
±0,04
39,91
±0,03
150 ±0,1
299,69
±0,07
319,71
±0,07
8,05
±0,03
12 ±0,1
4
1 ±0,1
8D7
Revisions
Remarks
Mass
Material
DB-name
Qty.
Name of part / assembly
Item
1
Scale: 1:2
Drawing no.
Format: A3
Title:
Draw.(DB): STOBEPLADE
382101527584,453
Mass:
 Matr:
CASTPLATESIMPLE
DB-name:
03-Feb-15
Date:
Name:
==PAGE:117==
Technical University of Denmark
DK 2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Department of Mechanical Engineering
193
33
13
4H7
6
6
6
6
4,02
±0,02
6
386
2
360
130
70
46
er +/- 0.1 mm
Mål uden tolerancer
Revisions
Remarks
Mass
Material
DB-name
Qty.
Name of part / assembly
Item
1
Scale: 1:1
Drawing no.
Format: A3
Title:
Draw.(DB): AFSTANDSPLADE
35219364936,810
Mass:
 Matr:
AFSTANDSPLADE
DB-name:
20-Feb-15
Date:
Name:
SCALE  1:1
==PAGE:118==
104
Workdrawings
==PAGE:119==
Appendix B
Flow loss program
1
" ""
2
Calculate
flow
l o s s
in GATING SYSTEM
3
" ""
4
def Area (h) :
5
global Agov ,
hgov
6
import math
7
return Agov∗math . sqrt ( hgov/h)
8
9
def
V e l o c i t i e s ( alpha , ff ,K, hmelt ) :
10
"" "
11
Calculate
the
v e l o c i t i e s
in
the
sections
of
the
Gating system
12
using
the Energy equation .
13
Yes
i t
only
a p p l i e s
for
steady
flow
14
15
I t
must only
give
v e l o c i t i e s
that
w i l l
not
lead
to
too
high
pressure
16
l o s s e s
17
"" "
18
import math
19
20
# h e l p f u l
height
c a l c u l a t i o n s
21
Hfun=Lfun/2
==PAGE:120==
106
Flow loss program
22
Hdow=Ldow/2+Lfun
23
Hbend=hbend/2+Ldow+Lfun
24
25
# bundle
lengths ,
hydraulic
diameters
etc
26
L =
[ Ldow , Lbend ,
Lside ,
Lfan ]
27
Dh = [Dhdow, Dhbend ,
Dhside ,
Dhfan ]
28
Ai = [ Area (Hdow) , Area (Hbend) , Agov , Agov∗Xpfan ]
29
Aj = [ Area ( Hfun ) , Agov∗Xpfan ]
30
Aout = [ Area (Hdow) , Area (Hdow) , Area (Hbend) , Agov ,
Agov∗Xpfan ]
31
32
# The
f a i r i e s
are
crying
33
major =0
34
minor =0
35
for
i
in range ( len (L) ) :
36
major += f f [ i ]∗L[ i ] / (Dh[ i ]∗Ai [ i ]∗∗2)
37
for
i
in range ( len ( Aj ) ) :
38
minor += 1/Aj [ i ]∗∗2∗K[ i ]
39
# The energy
equation :
40
Ugov = math . sqrt ((2∗g ∗( hpour+hgov−hmelt ) ) /
41
( alpha∗(1+Agov∗∗2∗( major+minor ) ) ) )
42
# find
the
dependent
v e l o c i t i e s
43
44
U = [ Ugov∗Agov/x for x in Aout ]
45
return U
46
47
48
49
#
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
50
def
f r i c t i o n (U,
method=’ Cole ’ ) :
51
"" "
52
Calculate
the
f r i c t i o n
in
the
s ections
of
the
gating
system
using
53
Haaland Equation or
the
Colebrook
Equation
54
"" "
55
global nu , g ,
e , Dhfun , Dhdow, Dhbend ,
Dhside ,
Dhfan
56
import math
57
#from
scipy . optimize
import
root
58
59
def Colebrook (Re ,Dh) :
60
"" "
61
The Colebrook
equation
==PAGE:121==
107
62
"" "
63
64
global e
65
x = 0.01 # i n i t i a l
guess
66
t o l = 1e−5
67
maxiter = 10
68
for
step
in range ( maxiter ) :
69
LHS = −2.0∗math . log (( e/Dh) /3.71+2.51/(Re∗math
. sqrt (x) ) )
70
xnew = 1/LHS∗∗2
71
i f
math . fabs (xnew−x)<t o l :
72
break
73
x=xnew
74
i f
step==maxiter −1:
75
print ( ’ Warning␣Colebrook␣at ␣Re : ␣’+s t r (Re)
)
76
return x
77
# Bundle
the
hydraulic
diameters
78
Dh = [ Dhfun , Dhdow, Dhbend ,
Dhside ,
Dhfan ]
79
f f = Dh. copy ()
80
81
for
i
in range ( len (Dh) ) :
82
# Reynolds numbers
83
Re = Dh[ i ]∗U[ i ]/ nu
84
i f Re<2000:
85
f f [ i ]=64/Re
86
e l i f
’ Cole ’ in method :
87
f f [ i ] = Colebrook (Re ,Dh[ i ] )
88
e l i f
’ Haal ’ in method :
89
# get
f r i c t i o n
f a c t o r s
using
Haalands formula
90
f f [ i ]=1/( −1.8∗math . log ( ( ( e/Dh[ i ] ) /3.7)
∗∗(1.11) + 6.9/Re) ) ∗∗2
91
e l i f
’ Blas ’ in method :
92
f f [ i ]=0.316/(Re∗∗0.25)
93
94
return
f f
95
96
97
98
99
def
p l o t s t u f f ( time , melt , Hasse ,Q, HasseQ , Hcast ) :
100
"" "
101
Plot
the
f i l l i n g
of
the
casting
102
"" "
==PAGE:122==
108
Flow loss program
103
import matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
104
#from
m a t p l o t l i b
import HandlerLine2D
105
106
# p l o t
the
f i l l i n g
of
the
casting
107
plt . f i g u r e (1)
108
plt . axis ((0 ,5 ,0 ,350) )
109
plt . plot ( time , melt ∗1e3 , l a b e l = ’ I t e r a t i n g ␣energy ␣
equation ’ )
110
plt . plot ( time , Hasse∗1e3 , l a b e l = ’With␣l o s s ␣
c o e f f i c i e n t s ’ )
111
plt . plot ( [ 0 , time [ −1 ] ] , [ Hcast ∗1e3 , Hcast ∗1 e3 ] , ’−−’ ,
l a b e l = ’ top␣of ␣casting ’ )
112
plt . legend ( loc =4)
113
plt . xlabel ( ’Time␣[ s ] ’ )
114
plt . ylabel ( ’ Height␣in ␣casting ␣[ ␣mm␣] ’ )
115
# p l o t
the
volumeflow
116
plt . f i g u r e (2)
117
plt . axis ((0 ,4 ,0 ,200) )
118
plt . plot ( time ,Q∗1e6 ,
l a b e l = ’With␣l o s s e s ’ )
119
plt . plot ( time , HasseQ∗1e6 ,
l a b e l = ’ Without␣l o s s e s ’ )
120
plt . legend ()
121
plt . xlabel ( ’Time␣[ s ] ’ )
122
plt . ylabel ( ’ Volumeflow␣[ ␣cm$^3$␣] ’ )
123
124
125
126
"""−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
127
Main program
128
"""
129
import numpy as np
130
import math
131
132
global Agov ,
hgov ,
rho , nu , g ,
e , Dhdow, Dhbend ,
Dhside ,
Dhfan ,
\
133
Ldow , Lbend ,
Lside ,
Lfan ,
hbend ,
hfan ,
hpour , Kexp ,
Kfun
134
# Gating system
geometric
data
135
Agov=75e−6
136
hgov=355e−3
137
138
Wfunin=80e−3
139
Tfunin=40e−3
140
Wfunout=36e−3
141
Lfun=90e−3
==PAGE:123==
109
142
143
Ldow=302e−3−90e−3
144
145
hbend=355e−3−302e−3
146
Rbendin=25e−3
147
Rbendout=50e−3
148
Wside=6e−3
149
Lside =136.279782e−3−43e−3
150
151
hfan=355e−3 −320e−3
152
Xpfan=1.4
153
Afan = Agov∗Xpfan
154
Wfan=255.527724e−3 −144.472276e−3
155
Rfanin=32e−3
156
Rfanout=10e−3
157
158
# Casting
geometric
data
159
#VOLcast=620807e−9
160
#VOLcast = 500872e−9
161
#VOLcast = 300103e−9
162
#Hcast=260e−3
163
#VOLcast = 358745e−9
164
#Hcast = 250e−3
165
VOLcast = 0.36 e−3
166
Hcast = 310e−3
167
168
Acast=VOLcast/Hcast
169
170
# flow
data
171
hpour=0e−3
172
g=9.82
173
rho=2400
174
nu=4.5e−7
# v i s c o s i t y
for
alu
175
e=0.2e−3
# the
roughness
in
the
runners ,
measured in
mm
176
177
178
" ""−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
179
The hydraulic
diameters
of
each
part
are
simply
c a l c u l a t e d
as
the
average
of
180
the
hydraulic
diameters
at
the
endpoints
181
Draft
angle
i s
disregarded
182
" ""
183
Dhfun = (4∗Wfunin∗Tfunin /(2∗Wfunin+2∗Tfunin ) \
==PAGE:124==
110
Flow loss program
184
+4∗Area ( Lfun ) /(2∗Area ( Lfun ) /Wfunout+2∗Wfunout) ) /2
185
186
Dhdow = (4∗Area ( Lfun ) /(2∗Wfunout+2∗Area ( Lfun ) /Wfunout)+4∗
Area ( Lfun+Ldow) \
187
/(2∗Wfunout+2∗Area ( Lfun+Ldow) /Wfunout) ) /2
188
189
Dhbend = (4∗Area ( Lfun+Ldow) /(2∗Wfunout+Area ( Lfun+Ldow) /
Wfunout)+4∗\
190
Area ( Lfun+Ldow+hbend ) /(2∗Wside+2∗Area ( Lfun+Ldow+hbend
) /Wside ) ) /2
191
192
Dhside = 4∗Area ( Lfun+Ldow+hbend ) /(2∗Wside+2∗Area ( Lfun+
Ldow+hbend ) /Wside )
193
194
Dhfan = (4∗Area ( Lfun+Ldow+hbend ) /(2∗Wside+2∗Area ( Lfun+
Ldow+hbend ) /Wside )+ \
195
4∗Area ( Lfun+Ldow+hbend ) ∗Xpfan /(2∗Wfan+2∗Area ( Lfun+
Ldow+hbend ) ∗Xpfan/Wfan) ) /2
196
197
"""
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
198
Estimating minor
l o s s
in
bends
using
f i g
8.17 from
intro
to
f l u i d
mechanics
199
Relative
p i p e r a d i i i i i
i s
c a l c u l a t e d
from averaged
pipe
r a d i i i i
200
Also a
b i t
estimated
201
"""
202
rDbend=(Rbendin+Wfunout/2+Rbendout+Wside /2) /2 /Dhbend
203
rDfan=(Rfanin+Wside/2+Rfanout+Wside /2) /2 /Dhfan
204
# from
f i g
8 ,17
the
f o l l o w i n g
values
are found
205
Lbend=22∗Dhbend
206
Lfan =14∗Dhfan
207
208
"""
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
209
Estimating minor
l o s s
210
211
The l o s s
c o e f f
from the
sudden expansion
to
the
casting
volume
212
i s
estimated from
f i g
8.15 from
intro
to
f l u i d
mechanics
213
214
>>>Afan/Acast
==PAGE:125==
111
215
0.0439750196115701
216
" ""
217
Kexp = 1 # from
f i g
8.15
218
" ""
219
Entrance
in
funnel . The flow
l o s s
i s
c a l c u l a t e d
as a
gradual
contraction
220
from
t a b l e
8.3
in
intro
to
f l u i d
mechanics
221
222
Area
r a t i o
223
>>>4∗Area( Lfun ) /(4∗Wfunin∗Tfunin )
224
0.04654834096801947
225
Included
angle
226
>>>math . atan (( math . s q r t (4∗Wfunin∗Tfunin )−math . s q r t (4∗Area
( Lfun ) ) )/
227
. . .
( Lfun∗math . s q r t (math . pi ) ) ) ∗2∗180/math . pi
228
58.16682574196069
229
" ""
230
Kfun = 0.08
231
232
K = [ Kfun , Kexp ]
233
" ""
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
234
Now to
i t e r a t i n g
s t u f f
235
" ""
236
237
h = 0 + 35e−3
238
alpha =1.06
239
f f = [ 0 , 0 . 0 , 0 , 0 ]
240
U = V e l o c i t i e s ( alpha , ff ,K, 0 )
241
242
# do some simple
time
incrementing
243
dt =0.005
244
Tstop = 5.
245
time = np . linspac e (0 , Tstop , Tstop/dt )
246
Q = np . zeros ( [ Tstop/dt ] )
247
melt = np . zeros ( [ Tstop/dt ] )
248
Hasse = np . zeros ( [ Tstop/dt ] )
249
RuneGS = np . zeros ( [ Tstop/dt ] )
250
HasseQ = np . zeros ( [ Tstop/dt ] )
251
F i l l e d = False
252
Laminar = False
253
t o l = 1e−5
254
maxiter =1000
==PAGE:126==
112
Flow loss program
255
DUMPINGdata = False
256
i f DUMPINGdata:
257
with open ( ’ flowlossdat . txt ’ , ’w ’ )
as
f :
258
f . write ( ’ time ’+’ \ t ’+’ timesquared ’+’ \ t ’+’ meltlevel
’+’ \n ’ )
259
260
for index , moment in enumerate ( time ) :
261
# i t e r a t e
to
find
v e l o c i t i e s
with
l o s s e s
262
for
i
in range ( maxiter ) :
263
Ugov = U[ 2 ]
264
Re = Ugov∗Dhside/nu
265
i f Re<2000:
266
alpha=2
267
else :
268
alpha =1.06
269
#Unew = unsteadyvel ( alpha , ploss , pback , Ugov)
270
f f = f r i c t i o n (U, method=’ Haal ’ )
271
Unew = V e l o c i t i e s ( alpha , ff ,K, h)
272
i f
math . fabs (np . dot (U,U)−np . dot (Unew,Unew) )<t o l :
273
break
274
i f
i==maxiter −1:
275
print ( ’ Warning␣solution ␣not␣converged ␣at ␣time
: ␣’+s t r (moment)+’ ␣s ’ )
276
#print (Unew[ −1])
277
U = Unew
278
Ufun , Udown, Ubend ,
Uside ,
Ufan = U
279
Ucast = Afan/Acast∗Ufan
280
# get
the
i n t e r e s t i n g
s t u f f
stored
281
melt [ index ] = h −35e−3
282
# see
’ Leg med flow ’
for
the
c a l c u l a t i o n s
with
the
Hasse model
283
#Hasse [ index ] = 0.1501729227e−2∗math . s q r t (4686) ∗
moment−\
284
#
0.8005926880e−2∗moment∗∗2
285
Hasse [ index ] = (0.2506386545 e−2∗math . sqrt (4686) ∗
moment
286
−0.2230100594e−1∗moment∗∗2)
287
RuneGS [ index ] = (0.67094129∗math . sqrt (2∗g ∗( hgov−hfan )
) ∗Agov/Acast∗moment
288
−0.45096535∗g /2∗(Agov/Acast ) ∗∗2∗
moment∗∗2)
289
Q[ index ] = Ucast∗Acast
290
HasseQ [ index ] = 0.2892977390 e−5∗math . sqrt (4686)
−0.5148152913e−4∗moment
==PAGE:127==
113
291
i f h−hfan>Hcast and not F i l l e d :
292
F i l l e d = True
293
# c a l c u l a t e
backwards
to
find
proper
f i l l i n g
time
294
f i l l t i m e = moment −(h−hfan−Hcast ) /Ucast
295
296
print ( ’ F i l l i n g ␣time : ␣’+s t r (np . round ( f i l l t i m e , 4 ) )+
’ ␣s ’ )
297
print ( ’ Final ␣volumeflow : ␣’+s t r (np . round ( Ucast∗
Acast ∗1e6 , 4 ) )+’ ␣cm^3/ s ’ )
298
i f
alpha==2 and not Laminar :
299
Laminar = True
300
print ( ’ Laminar␣t r a n s i t i o n ␣at ␣time : ␣’+s t r (np . round
(moment , 1 ) )+’ ␣s ’ )
301
i f DUMPINGdata:
302
with open ( ’ flowlossdat . txt ’ , ’ a ’ )
as
f :
303
f . write ( s t r (moment)+’ \ t ’+s t r (moment∗∗2)+’ \ t ’+
s t r (h−hfan )+’ \n ’ )
304
305
# update
the
l e v e l
of
melt
306
h=h + Ucast∗dt
307
308
p l o t s t u f f ( time , melt , RuneGS ,Q, HasseQ , Hcast )
==PAGE:128==
114
Flow loss program
==PAGE:129==
Appendix C
Reggressionprogram
1
# −∗−coding :
utf −8 −∗−
2
" ""
3
Created on Thu Dec 11 14:56:22 2014
4
5
@author : Rune Engelberth Hansen
6
" ""
7
8
def out_raw ( input , name) :
9
"" "
10
Write
the raw data
to a text −f i l e
in LaTex format
11
"" "
12
import csv
13
obs = input . shape [ 0 ]
14
fac = input . shape [1] −1
15
16
with open (name+’ . txt ’ , ’ r ’ )
as
f :
17
reader = csv . reader ( f , d e l i mi t e r=’ \ t ’ )
18
header = next ( reader )
19
20
with open (name+’Out . txt ’ , ’w ’ )
as
f :
21
f . write ( ’%␣’+name+’ ␣RAW␣data\n ’ )
22
f . write ( ’ \\ begin { table }\n\\ centering ␣\n\\ begin {
tabular } ’ )
==PAGE:130==
116
Reggressionprogram
23
f . write ( ’ {| ’+’ c ’ ∗( fac +2)+’ |}\ n ’ )
24
mystring=" ␣&␣" . j o i n ( s t r ( bit )
for
bit
in header )
25
f . write ( ’ \\ hline \n␣obs␣&␣’+mystring+’ ␣\\\\\n␣\\
hline \n ’ )
26
for
i
in range ( obs ) :
27
s = input [ i , : ]
28
mystring = " ␣&␣" . j o i n ( s t r ( bit )
for
bit
in s )
29
f . write ( s t r ( i +1)+’ ␣&␣’+mystring+’ ␣\\\\\n ’ )
30
f . write ( ’ \\ hline ␣\n\\end{ tabular }␣\n ’ )
31
f . write ( ’ \\ caption { ’+name+’RAW}\n ’ )
32
f . write ( ’ \\ l a b e l { f i g : ’+name+’RAW}\n ’ )
33
f . write ( ’ \\end{ table } ’ )
34
35
def out_regr ( input , name) :
36
"" "
37
Write
the
regression
equation ,
anova
t a b l e
and other
cool
s t u f f
to a
38
text −f i l e
in LaTex format
39
"" "
40
import csv
41
42
Beta
43
SE
44
T0
45
p_Beta
46
R2
47
R2adj
48
with open (name+’ . txt ’ , ’ r ’ )
as
f :
49
reader = csv . reader ( f , d e l i mi t e r=’ \ t ’ )
50
header = next ( reader )
51
with open (name+’Out . txt ’ , ’ a ’ )
as
f :
52
f . write ( ’ \n\n\n%␣’+name+’ ␣r e g r e s s i o n ␣data\n ’ )
53
f . write ( ’ \\ begin { table }\n\\ centering \n ’ )
54
f . write ( ’ \\ begin { tabular }{| ccccccc |}\ n ’ )
55
f . write ( ’The␣r e g r e s s i o n ␣equation ␣i s : ␣&&&&&&␣\\\\\
n ’ )
56
f . write ( header [−1]+ ’ ␣=␣’+s t r (np . around ( Beta [ 0 , 0 ] ,
decimals =3)) )
57
for
i
in range ( fac ) :
58
f . write ( ’ ␣+’+s t r (np . around ( Beta [ i +1 ,0] ,
decimals =3))+’ ␣$\ cdot$ ␣’+header [ i ] )
59
f . write ( ’&&&&&&\\\\\nPredictor ␣&␣c o e f f ␣&␣Std . dev␣
&␣T␣&␣P␣&␣&␣\\\\\n ’ )
60
for
i
in range ( fac +1) :
==PAGE:131==
117
61
s = np . around ( [ Beta [ i , 0 ] , SE[ i , 0 ] , T0 [ i , 0 ] ,
p_Beta [ i , 0 ] ] , decimals =3)
62
mystring = " ␣&␣" . j o i n ( s t r ( bit )
for
bit
in s )
63
f . write ( ’ $\\beta_{ ’+s t r ( i )+’ }$␣&␣’+mystring+’
␣&&\\\\\n ’ )
64
f . write ( ’$R^2$␣=␣’+s t r (np . around (R2 [ 0 , 0 ] ,
decimals =2))+’ ␣$R_{\mbox{ adj }}^2$␣=␣’ )
65
f . write ( s t r (np . around ( R2adj [ 0 , 0 ] , decimals =2))
+’ ␣&&&&&&\\\\\n ’ )
66
f . write ( ’ \\end{ tabular }\n ’ )
67
f . write ( ’ \\end{ table } ’ )
68
69
70
71
def out_diag ( input , name) :
72
"" "
73
Write
the
predicted
values ,
r e s i d u a l s
and other
d i a g n o s t i c s
to a
74
text −f i l e
in LaTex format
75
"" "
76
import numpy as np
77
obs = input . shape [ 1 ]
78
with open (name+’Out . txt ’ , ’ a ’ )
as
f :
79
f . write ( ’ \n\n\n%␣’+name+’ ␣r e g r e s s i o n ␣model␣
d i a g n os t i c s \n ’ )
80
f . write ( ’ \\ begin { table }␣\n\ centering ␣\n\\ begin {
tabular } ’ )
81
f . write ( ’ {| cccccccc |} ␣\n ’ )
82
f . write ( ’ \\ hline ␣$\\ begin {matrix }\\mbox{Obs}␣\\\\
␣i ␣\\end{matrix}$␣&␣\n ’ )
83
f . write ( ’ $\\ begin {matrix}␣\\\\␣y_i\\end{matrix}$␣
&␣\n ’ )
84
f . write ( ’ $\\ begin {matrix }\\mbox{ Predicted ␣Value}␣
\\\\␣\\ hat{y}_i\\end{matrix}$␣&␣\n ’ )
85
f . write ( ’ $\\ begin {matrix }\\mbox{ Residual }␣\\\\␣\\
mbox{e}_i␣\\end{matrix}$␣&␣\n ’ )
86
f . write ( ’ $\\ begin {matrix}␣\\\\␣\\mbox{h}_{ i i }␣\\
end{matrix}␣$␣&␣\n ’ )
87
f . write ( ’ $\\ begin {matrix }\\mbox{ Studentized }␣\\\\
␣\\mbox{ Residual }␣\\end{matrix}$␣&␣\n ’ )
88
f . write ( ’ $\\ begin {matrix}␣\\\\␣\\mbox{D}_i␣\\end{
matrix}$␣&␣\n ’ )
89
f . write ( ’ \\ t e x t i t {R}−Student␣\\\\\n ’ )
90
f . write ( ’ \\ hline ’ )
==PAGE:132==
118
Reggressionprogram
91
for
i
in range ( obs ) :
92
s = np . around ( input [ : , i , 0 ] , decimals =4)
93
mystring = " ␣&␣" . j o i n ( s t r ( bit )
for
bit
in s )
94
f . write ( s t r ( i +1)+’ ␣&␣’+mystring+’ ␣\\\\\n ’ )
95
96
f . write ( ’ \\ hline ␣\n␣\\end{ tabular }␣\n ’ )
97
f . write ( ’ \\ caption { ’+name+’ }␣\n ’ )
98
f . write ( ’ \\ l a b e l { f i g : ’+name+’ }␣\n ’ )
99
f . write ( ’ \\end{ table } ’ )
100
101
def
plot_stuff ( Beta ) :
102
# Plot
the
response
surface
103
# TODO, make t h i s
more general
purpose !
104
import matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
105
from matplotlib . contour import ContourSet
106
import matplotlib .cm as cm
107
import numpy as np
108
109
fac = Beta . size −1
# get
the number of
f a c t o r s
110
111
x1 = np . linspace (1 e−7, 2e −6, 300)
112
x2 = np . linspace (0.01 e−3, 0.5 e −3, 300)
113
114
X,Y = np . meshgrid (x1 , x2 )
115
Z = np . zeros ( [ x1 . size , x2 . s i z e ] )
116
for
i
in range ( x1 . s i z e ) :
117
for
j
in range ( x2 . s i z e ) :
118
Z [ i , j ] = Beta [0]+ Beta [ 1 ] ∗x1 [ i ]+Beta [ 2 ] ∗x2 [ j ]
119
120
f i g = plt . f i g u r e ()
121
ax = plt . subplot (111)
122
123
# Shrink
current
axis ’ s
height
by 10% on the
bottom
124
box = ax . get_position ()
125
ax . set_position ( [ box . x0 ,
box . y0 + box . height ∗0.1 ,
126
box . width ,
box . height ∗
0 . 9 ] )
127
CS = plt . contour (X, Y, Z)
128
plt . c l a b e l (CS,
i n l i n e =1,
f o n t s i z e =10)
129
plt . ticklabel_format ( s t y l e=’ s c i ’ ,
axis=’x ’ ,
s c i l i m i t s
=(0 ,0) )
130
plt . ticklabel_format ( s t y l e=’ s c i ’ ,
axis=’y ’ ,
s c i l i m i t s
=(0 ,0) )
131
plt . axvline (1 e−6, l a b e l=’Water ’ , l i n e s t y l e=’−−’ )
132
plt . axvline (4.5 e−7, l a b e l=’ Aluminium ’ , l i n e s t y l e=’ −. ’ )
==PAGE:133==
119
133
plt . axvline (7 e−7,
l a b e l=’ Steel ’ , l i n e s t y l e=’ : ’ )
134
plt . xlabel ( ’ Viscosity ␣[m$^2$/ s ] ’ )
135
plt . ylabel ( ’ Surface ␣roughness ␣[m] ’ )
136
ax . legend ( loc=’ upper␣center ’ , bbox_to_anchor =(0.5 ,
−0.1) ,
137
fancybox=False ,
shadow=False ,
ncol =3)
138
139
def
plot_line ( Beta ,X,Y) :
140
# make a l i n e a r
p l o t
141
import matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
142
import numpy as np
143
steps = 100
144
xmax = 1.1∗max(X[ : , 1 ] )
145
x = np . linspace (0 ,xmax , steps )
146
y = np . ones ( steps ) ∗Beta [0]+x∗Beta [ 1 ]
147
plt . f i g u r e (1)
148
plt . plot (X[ : , 1 ] ,Y, ’ o ’ )
149
plt . plot (x , y)
150
plt . xlabel ( ’ $\ Delta$t ␣−␣timestep ␣[ s ] ’ )
151
plt . ylabel ( ’ F i l l i n g ␣time␣[ s ] ’ )
152
153
" ""
154
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
155
Main program
156
" ""
157
158
import numpy as np
159
from scipy . s t a t s import f
160
from scipy . s t a t s import t
161
162
#name = ’ f l o w t e s t ’
163
#name = ’ flowlossconv ’
164
name = ’ flowlossdat ’
165
#name = ’ ViscosityDATA ’
166
#name = ’ plasmaetchingexperiment ’
167
168
data = np . genfromtxt (name+’ . txt ’ , skip_header=1)
169
170
alpha = 0.05
171
172
obs ,
fac = data . shape
173
fac = fac −1
# number of
f a c t o r s
174
==PAGE:134==
120
Reggressionprogram
175
X = np . zeros ( [ obs ,
fac +1]) # i n i t i a l i z e
matrix
of
l e v e l s
of
independent
vars
176
Y = np . zeros ( [ obs , 1 ] )
# i n i t i a l i z e
vector
of
observations
177
l i n e = np . ones ( fac +1)
178
for
i
in range ( obs ) :
179
for
j
in range ( fac ) :
180
l i n e [ j +1] = data [ i , j ]
181
X[ i , : ] = l i n e
182
Y[ i ] = data [ i , fac ]
183
184
# Find the
l e a s t
squares
estimator
of
Beta !
185
Beta = np . l i n a l g . solve (np . dot (X.T ,X) ,np . dot (X.T ,Y) )
186
# Find the
regression sum of
squares
187
SSr = np . dot (np . dot ( Beta .T ,X.T) ,Y)−sum(Y) ∗∗2/ obs
188
# Find the
error sum of
squares
189
SSe = np . dot (Y.T ,Y)−\
190
np . dot (np . dot ( Beta .T ,X.T ) ,Y)
191
# Find the
t o t a l sum of
squares
192
SSt = np . dot (Y.T ,Y)−sum(Y) ∗∗2/ obs
193
# Find
degrees
of
freedom
194
DOFr = fac
# Regression
degree
of
freedom
195
DOFe = obs−fac −1
# Error
degree
of
freedom
196
DOFt = obs−1
# Total
degree
of
freedom
197
MSr = SSr/DOFr
# Regression mean square
198
MSe = SSe/DOFe
# Error mean square
199
F0 = MSr/MSe
200
p_stat = f . s f (F0 , DOFr, DOFe)
# find p−value
for
the
s t a t i s t i c
201
202
# Find the
c o e f f i c i e n t
of
multiple
determination
203
R2 = SSr/SSt
204
R2adj = 1−DOFt/DOFe∗(1−R2)
# Adjusted R2 s t a t i s t i c
205
# When R2 and R2adj
d i f f e r
s i g n i f i c a n t l y ,
there
i s
a
chance
that non−s i g n i f a n t
206
# terms are
included
in
the model
207
208
# Find
estimator
of
variance :
209
sigma2 = SSe/DOFe
210
211
# Let
the
f a i r i e s CRY! ! !
212
Cjj = np . diag (np . l i n a l g . inv (np . dot (X.T,X) ) )
213
# Find the
standard
error
for
the
regression
c o e f f i c i e n t
214
SE = np . sqrt ( sigma2∗Cjj ) .T
==PAGE:135==
121
215
T0 = Beta/SE
216
p_Beta = t . pdf (T0, DOFe) # s i g n i f i c a n c e
value
of
i n d i v i d u a l
c o e f f i c i e n t s
217
218
# Find
confidence
i n t e r v a l s
on the
i n d i v i d u a l
regression
c o e f f i c i e n t s
219
ConfRange = t . i n t e r v a l ( alpha /2 ,DOFe)∗SE
220
221
# REGRESSION MODEL DIAGNOSTICS
222
Yhat = np . dot (X, Beta )
223
e = Y−Yhat
# Residuals
224
d = e/np . sqrt (MSe) # Standardized
r e s i d u a l s
225
# Let
the
f a i r i e s CRY again ! ! ! !
226
Hii = np . diag (np . dot (np . dot (X, np . l i n a l g . inv (np . dot (X.T,X)
) ) ,X.T) )
227
# Studentized
r e s i d u a l
228
r = e/np . sqrt (MSe∗(1−Hii ) ) .T
229
# Look for
i n f l u e n t i a l
points
230
Di = np . array ( [ i ∗∗2/( fac +1)∗j /(1−j )
for
i , j
in
zip ( r , Hii )
] )
231
232
# R−student
233
#S2 = np . ones ( [ obs , 1 ] )
234
#Rstud = np . ones ( [ obs , 1 ] )
235
#for
i
in
range ( obs ) :
236
#
S2 [ i ] = (DOFe∗MSe−e [ i ]∗∗2/(1 −Hii [ i ] ) ) /(DOFe+1)
237
#
Rstud [ i ] = e [ i ]/ np . s q r t (S2 [ i ]∗(1−Hii [ i ] ) )
238
S2 = np . reshape ( [ (DOFe∗MSe−( i ∗∗2/(1−j ) ) ) /(DOFe+1) for
i , j
in
zip ( e , Hii ) ] , ( obs , 1 ) )
239
Rstud = np . reshape ( [ i /np . sqrt ( j ∗(1−k) )
for
i , j , k in
zip ( e
, S2 , Hii ) ] , ( obs , 1 ) )
240
241
# output raw data
to
Latex
t a b l e
242
#out_raw
243
# output
regression
data
to
Latex
t a b l e
244
out_raw ( data , name)
245
# output
regression
d i a g n o s t i c s
to LaTex
t a b l e
246
out_diag (np . array ( [Y, Yhat , e , np . reshape ( Hii , ( obs , 1 ) ) , r , Di ,
Rstud ] ) ,name)
247
248
# Plot
the
f i g u r e !
249
i f
fac ==1:
250
plot_line ( Beta ,X,Y)
251
e l i f
fac ==2:
==PAGE:136==
122
Reggressionprogram
252
plot_stuff ( Beta )
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
[1] ASME.
[2] J. R. Brown. Foseco ferrous foundryman’s handbook. Butterworth Heine-
mann, 2000.
[3] J. Campbell. The new metallurgy of cast metals CASTINGS. Elsevier, 2nd
edition, 2003.
[4] DISA, Dansk Industri Syndikat A/S.
DISAMATIC 2070 MK2-B Sand
Moulding System Application Manual, 2 edition, 1995.
[5] M. Ebro, T. J. Howard, and J. J. Rasmussen. The foundation for robust
design: Enabling robustness through kinematic design and design clarity.
Proceedings of International Design Conference, Design, Proc. Int. Des.
Conf., Design, DS 70:817–826, 2012.
[6] Jesper Hattel et al. Fundamentals of Numerical Modelling of Casting Pro-
cesses. Polyteknisk, ﬁrst edition, 2005.
[7] Foseco.
Self
setting
resin
systems.
http://www.foseco.com/
en-gb/end-markets/foundry/products-services/steel-foundry/
steel-foundry-details/productsinfo/binders/,
2015.
[Online;
accessed 24-02-2015].
[8] Hasse Fredriksson and Ulla Åkerlind. Materials Processing during Casting.
Wiley, 2006.
[9] MAGMA Gmbh. MAGMA 5 version v5.2.0.10 Build 6583.
==PAGE:138==
124
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Sebasian Hamdan and Jacob Geert Jensen. Modiﬁcation of al-si alloys in
castings, December 2013. Unpublished.
[11] Rune Engelberth Hansen. Optimization of gating systems in smaller steel
castings, 2012.
[12] Rune Engelberth Hansen. Design of experimental method for feeding, 2013.
[13] Søren Skov Hansen. Reduced Energy Consumption of Melting in Foundries.
PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2007.
[14] ASM International. Casting Design and Performance. ASM International,
1st edition, 2009.
[15] E. M. Johnson, T. R. Watkins, J. E. Schmidlin, and S. A. Dutler. A bench-
mark study on casting residual stress. METALLURGICAL AND MATE-
RIALS TRANSACTIONS A-PHYSICAL METALLURGY AND MATE-
RIALS SCIENCE, 43A(5):1487–1496, 2012.
[16] Marius Kintel and Cliﬀord Wolf. OpenSCAD version 2014.03.
[17] Peder Klit, Knud Casper, and Niels L. Pedersen. Machine Elements, Anal-
ysis and Design. Polyteknisk Forlag, 1st edition, 2009.
[18] Per Larsen. Iron Melt Flow in Thin Walled Cast in Vertically Parted Sand
Moulds. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2004.
[19] Hengcheng Liao, Yu Sun, and Guoxiong Sun. Correlation between mechan-
ical properties and amount of dendritic α-al phase in as-cast near-eutectic
al–11.6 % si alloys modiﬁed with strontium. Materials Science and Engi-
neering: A, 335(1–2):62 – 66, 2002.
[20] Granta Design Limited. CES EduPack 2014 version 14.3.5. level 3.
[21] GOM mbH. Atos - industrial 3d scanning technology. http://www.gom.
com/metrology-systems/3d-scanner.html, 2015. [Online; accessed 21-
02-2015].
[22] Douglas C. Montgomery. Design and Analysis of Experiments. Wiley, 7th
edition, 2009.
[23] Yuichi Motoyama, Hiroki Takahashi, Yuki Inoue, Keita Shinji, and Makoto
Yoshida. Dynamic measurements of the load on castings and the contrac-
tion of castings during cooling in sand molds. JOURNAL OF MATERIALS
PROCESSING TECHNOLOGY, 213(2):238–244, 2013.
[24] BASF Coorporation Engineering Plastics. Snap-ﬁt design manual, 2007.
==PAGE:139==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
125
[25] Phillip J. Pritchard, Robert W. Fox, and Alan T. McDonald. Introduction
to Fluid Mechanics. Wiley, 7th edition, 2008. Customized for DTU.
[26] Niels Skat Tiedje, John A. Taylor, and Mark A. Easton.
Feeding and
distribution of porosity in cast al-si alloys as function of alloy composition
and modiﬁcation. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions a - Physical
Metallurgy and Materials Science, 43(12):4846–4858, 2012.
[27] Stellenbosch University. Mechanical design data. http://www.cad.sun.
ac.za/catalogs/DFMGuidelines/ToleranceCapabilities.pdf,
2015.
[Online; accessed 05-03-2015].
[28] Frank M. White. Viscous Fluid Flow. McGraw-Hill, 3rd edition, 2006.
