==PAGE:1==
Jan Brümmerstedt, s121167
Analysis and synthesis of
environmental sounds based on
auditory processing principles
Master’s Thesis, February 2015
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Jan Brümmerstedt, s121167
Analysis and synthesis of
environmental sounds based on
auditory processing principles
Master’s Thesis, February 2015
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Analysis and synthesis of environmental sounds based on auditory processing principles,
This report was prepared by
Jan Brümmerstedt, s121167
Supervisors
Professor Torsten Dau
Richard Ian McWalter
Release date:
February 14, 2015
Category:
1 (public)
Edition:
First
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve the Master of
Science in Engineering (M.Sc.Eng.) at the Technical University
of Denmark. This report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
©Jan Brümmerstedt, 2015
Department of Electrical Engineering
Hearing Systems Group
Technical University of Denmark
Ørstedsplads 1 building 352
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cet
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax:
(+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cet@elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The analysis via synthesis approach has been used to examine auditory percep-
tion. The general idea is to capture a set of statistics from an input signal at the
analysis stage, and then synthesise a new instance based on those statistics. If the
perceptually relevant statistics are measured from a biologically inspired auditory
model, the original and the synthetic sounds should be perceptually similar. Thus,
the analysis via synthesis approach provides a strong test of a perceptual model.
McDermott and Simoncelli (2011) have applied such an auditory model to the syn-
thesis of textures - temporally homogenous sounds, such as rain or birds chirping.
They showed that synthetic textures generated from a biologically inspired model
were preferred over those generated from non-biological models.
This synthesis
method is applicable to sound textures, but does not account for the temporal ﬂuc-
tuations common in many environmental sounds. Here we propose an extension to
account for the dynamic and unique features of environmental sounds. This was
achieved by introducing higher temporal resolution in the modulation domain. The
individual contributions of the various statistics in the spectral domain as well as
the modulation domain were examined. Furthermore, the inﬂuence of the temporal
resolution in the upper modulation ﬁlters on the perceptual synthesis quality was
investigated. Lastly, the sparsity of the representation and the conceptual proxim-
ity to the noise vocoder by Shannon et al. (1995) as well the eﬀect of decoupling
the modulation power statistics from the spectral domain were discussed.
i/xi
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
This thesis was prepared with the Hearing Systems Group, department of Electri-
cal Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark for partial fulﬁllment (30
ECTS) of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Mathematical
Modelling and Computation.
Additional information and sound examples can be obtained by contacting the
author via email: s121167@student.dtu.dk.
I would like to thank my supervisors, Torsten Dau and Richard McWalter, for
providing aid in the genesis of this thesis.
Their constant contribution, helpful
insight and, last but not least, immense support, enabled this work to take shape
in the ﬁrst place. Moreover, i want to thank all the people from the Hearing Systems
Group for ensuring a supporting, communicative and fun work environment. Also,
gratitude goes to my friends and family, for putting up with the less nice, stressed
out version of me. Lastly, a big thank you goes out to all the artists, who sparked
my passion for music and led me on the path of acoustical studies in the ﬁrst place,
and the danish craftbrewers for making really tasty liquid beverages.
14th February 2015, Lyngby
Jan Brümmerstedt
iii/xi
==PAGE:10==
iv/xi
==PAGE:11==
Contents
List of Figures
vii
List of Tables
ix
List of Acronyms
xi
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and Theory
3
2.1
Categorization of sound
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Auditory Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Synthesis of sound textures and environmental sounds . . . .
5
2.2.2
Temporal Modulation Transfer Function . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.3
Envelope Power Spectrum Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.4
Noise vocoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Model
9
3.1
Auditory Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Peripheral Filtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Envelope Extraction and Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Modulation Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Analysis-Synthesis Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2.1
Signal reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Imposed statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1
Envelope domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.2
Modulation domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
v/xi
==PAGE:12==
3.4
Number of total measured data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Imposition of the statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
Convergence Criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Method
23
4.1
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Listening experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model . . . . .
25
4.2.2
Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Results
29
5.1
Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Discussion
35
6.1
Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Sparsity of representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.5
Neuronal basis of statistical representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.6
Decoupling of the modulation domain statistics from the envelope
domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.7
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Conclusion
49
Bibliography
51
Appendix
55
A Stimuli for test on the inﬂuence of the minimum window duration 55
B Boxplots of the test results over subjects and sound ﬁles
57
vi/xi
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
2.1
Potential information over time for speech, noise and sound textures
4
2.2
Model schematic of mr-sEPSM. Source: Jørgensen et al. (2013) . . .
8
3.1
Transformation from acoustical stimulus to neural spike trains (a)
and intracellular receptor potentials for an IHC (b) . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Processing stages of the auditory model with the captured statistics:
(M) marginal moments and (C) across-channel correlations. Source:
McWalter (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Model schematic of the analysis-synthesis framework based on the
auditory model shown in ﬁgure 3.2. Source: McWalter and Dau (2013) 15
5.1
Results of the experiment on the comparison of the multi-resolution
and the long-term model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Results of the experiment on the comparison of the multi-resolution
and the long-term model, for the subgroups sound textures and non-
texture sounds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Results of the experiment on gradual statistics of the multi-resolution
model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Results of the experiment on gradual statistics of the multi-resolution
model, for the subgroups sound textures and non-texture sounds . .
32
5.5
Results of the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
33
5.6
Results of the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution,
for the subgroups sound textures and non-texture sounds. . . . . . .
34
6.1
Spectrograms for original, long-term and multi-resolution model pro-
cessed signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Long-term modulation spectrum and multi-resolution modulation
spectrogram for the sound ’birds-swamp’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
vii/xi
==PAGE:14==
6.3
Spectrograms for gradual statistics of the multi-resolution model
(MR) for the sound ’birds-swamp’
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Envelope marginals for gradual statistics of the multi-resolution model
for the sound ’birds-swamp’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
Envelope correlations for gradual statistics of the multi-resolution
model for the sound ﬁle ’birds-swamp’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.6
Spectrograms on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution in the
multi-resolution model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Envelope marginals on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution in
the multi-resolution model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.8
Envelope correlations on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution in
the multi-resolution model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.9
Spectrograms for a female speech signal, the multi-resolution model
synthetic signal, and the noise vocoded signal . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.10 Spectrograms showing the inﬂuence of locally decoupling the mean
and the variance in the modulation domain for the sound ’birds-swamp’ 45
6.11 Envelope marginals for the original and the modulation-power-only
MR-synthesised signal with and without decoupled mean for the
sound ’birds-swamp’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.12 Envelope correlations for the original and the modulation-power-
only MR-synthesised signal with and without decoupled mean for
the sound ’birds-swamp’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.13 Spectrograms for the modulation-power-only MR-synthesised signal
with and without decoupled mean
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B.1
Results of the experiment on the comparison of the multi-resolution
against the long-term model over subjects and sound ﬁles
. . . . . .
58
B.2
Results if the experiment on gradual statistics of the multi-resolution
model over subjects and sound ﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B.3
Results of the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
60
viii/xi
==PAGE:15==
List of Tables
3.1
Peripheral sub-band ﬁlter channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Modulation ﬁlter channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Number of total measured data points per second for the diﬀerent
models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1
List of stimuli divided into textures and non-textures with corre-
sponding class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
A.1 List of stimuli for the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal
resolution, divided into textures and non-textures with correspond-
ing class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
ix/xi
==PAGE:16==
x/xi
==PAGE:17==
List of Acronyms
ANOVA
analysis of variance
CMR
co-modulation masking release
ERB
equivalent rectangular bandwidth
FIR
ﬁnite impulse response
FT
Fourier transform
ICC
central nucleus of the inferior colliculus
IHC
inner hair cells
LT
long-term sound texture synthesis model
MFCC
Mel frequency cepstrum coeﬃcients
MR
multi-resolution environmental sound synthesis model
mr-sEPSM
multi-resolution speech-based envelope power spectrum model
MUSHRA
multi-stimulus test with hidden reference and anchor
OHC
outer hair cells
SDT
signal detection theory
SNR
signal-to-noise ratio
SNRenv
envelope power signal-to-noise ratio after modulation ﬁltering
TMTF
temporal modulation transfer function
xi/xi
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Humans are constantly surrounded by a great variety of diﬀerent sounds. The hu-
man auditory system, among other senses, informs about our environment, warns of
potential dangers and allows the most fundamental of human activities: communi-
cation. While perception is certainly centred on the visual sense, the contribution
of the auditory sense, while working more in the background, is not to be un-
derestimated. It is quite astonishing, how quickly and reliably one can judge his
environment by its acoustic features alone. It is a natural urge to try to understand
the way the auditory system processes and codes acoustic signals.
The auditory system extends from the outer, middle and inner ear to some promi-
nent pathways in the midbrain and areas on the auditory cortex. The physiology
of the outer and middle ear is reasonably well understood and the transduction
from acoustic vibrations to neural excitation in the cochlea (inner ear) has been
studied extensively (Pickles and Corey, 1992), although some questions remain. It
is beyond the cochlea (retro-cochlear) where many questions of signal coding and
integration have not yet been clariﬁed. These retro-cochlear processes have mainly
been examined indirectly by measuring the inﬂuence of certain parameters on the
auditory perception, especially the intelligibility of speech. The focus on speech
intelligibility is plausible, since communication is of such major importance, but
does not cover all of the inner mechanisms behind auditory perception.
In this work, the stimuli used to examine the interesting mid-level processes (retro-
cochlear and pre cortical) of auditory perception are environmental sounds. These
encompass all the sounds one might encounter in the real world, excluding more
elaborate signals like speech and music. One interesting subset, sound textures, is
especially interesting and comprises the starting point of this work. Sound textures
are interesting because they provide a middle ground between the two classical types
of stimuli: artiﬁcial sounds and speech. Artiﬁcial sounds, like sinusoids and noise are
apt for clinical measurements of basic functionality like audiograms, because they
enable systematic parametrisation. However, their simplicity and lack of real world
context makes the relevance of the results from those tests contestable, especially
with respect to higher-level processing. Speech, in contrast, is very much rooted in
a real world context, but is very complex and variable. This hinders the separation
1/57
==PAGE:20==
Introduction
of the eﬀects of diﬀerent parameters or processes (Theunissen and Elie, 2014).
Sound textures, while having statistical properties that remain constant over time,
are easily identiﬁable and distinguishable. They are deﬁned as a superposition of
many similar sounds (e.g. a rain sound consists of many single rain drops) with
high temporal homogeneity. Sound textures are characterised by their temporal
homogeneity and have been shown to be useful in the study of mid-level auditory
processes (McDermott et al., 2009).
Since there are no methods available to directly measure the processing of auditory
stimuli in the brain, an indirect approach needs to be taken. Therefore, the auditory
models in this work are nested in an analysis - synthesis framework. This means
that the original sound is fed into the analysis system, which captures certain
information of the stimulus. This information is then imposed on a random noise
sample. The idea behind this approach is that if the relevant perceptual information
is captured by the model, then the two sounds - the original and the synthesised
version - should be perceived as the same (McDermott and Simoncelli, 2011). The
converse argument is that, if the original and synthesised version are perceived as
the same, then the model captures the perceptually relevant information.
The thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 provides an overview of the diﬀerent
categorisations of sound including a deﬁnition of environmental sounds and a survey
of models on audio synthesis, which build the basis for further modelling. Chapter
3 describes the model used to analyse and synthesise environmental sounds. In
chapter 4, the method of the subjective evaluation of the models via listening ex-
periments is described, while chapter 5 presents the corresponding results. Chapter
6 provides an overall discussion of the results obtained in this thesis. It presents
the advantages and limitations of the current modelling approach and discusses
the motivation and feasibility of the involved processing steps. The ﬁnal chapter
presents the summary and conclusion.
2/57
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Background and Theory
2.1
Categorization of sound
The type and nature of the diﬀerent acoustic stimuli one encounters in daily life
is manifold.
Therefore, there have been many considerations to categorise the
diﬀerent sounds.
It is unclear, however, on what basis one builds the diﬀerent
categories. Saint-Arnaud (1995) has categorised stimuli according to their potential
information content over time.
This is shown schematically in ﬁgure 2.1.
The
three types of stimuli he considers are speech, sound textures and noise.
This
ties in nicely with sound textures being the starting point of this work. Speech
as the most complex stimulus has a theoretical information content that increases
proportionally with duration. The longer a speech token is, the more information it
will typically contain. Noise, in contrast, possesses very little potential information,
and this little amount is reached quickly. This is due to noise only having spectral
but no temporal information. Sound textures fall somewhere in the middle between
speech and noise. They still exhibit the asymptotic behaviour of noise, in that no
new information is gathered after the initial period.
Their general information
content, however, lies higher, as they are easily identiﬁable and distinguishable and
might provide relevant information about the environment.
The focus of this thesis lies on environmental sounds, which can be seen as a
generalisation of sound textures to include temporally complex sounds as well. En-
vironmental sounds comprise all sounds that can be encountered in a natural envi-
ronment, with the exclusion of the very complex signals speech and music. In ﬁgure
2.1 they would be positioned in the area between speech and sound textures. In the
past, environmental sounds have had less focus in the research domain than speech,
music or artiﬁcially generated stimuli, like noise or sinusoids. However, research has
shown that humans are able to easily and quickly identify a large range of naturally
occurring sounds (Gygi et al., 2004; Lass et al., 1982; Ballas, 1993). These environ-
mental sounds stem from a wide range of sources, being deﬁned by the objects and
the interactions, e.g. the impact of two solid materials or the turbulence of liquids
or gases (Gaver, 1993). Due to this wide range of sources, environmental sounds
3/57
==PAGE:22==
2.1. Categorization of sound
Background and Theory
Time
Potential Information
Speech
Sound Texture
Noise
Figure 2.1: Potential information content over time for speech, noise and sound
textures. Source: Saint-Arnaud (1995)
exhibit a spectral and temporal variation that greatly exceeds that of speech, for
which the source is always the human vocal tract and the interaction is always a
modulated air ﬂow (Attias and Schreiner, 1997). This huge variety of all the dif-
ferent sounds in this class makes it diﬃcult to arrive at generalisations ﬁt for the
whole class. Gygi et al. (2004) also showed that the identiﬁability of environmen-
tal sounds is robust even with degraded ﬁne structure information. Gaver (1993)
proposed a taxonomy according to the sources of the sound. He diﬀerentiated be-
tween "impact", "water-based", "air-based" and "simple", "hybrid", and "complex"
environmental sounds. While the exact categories diﬀer, in this thesis a similar
taxonomy has been applied in order to provide a rough grouping. The categories
applied here, are "animal", "environment", "mechanical", "people" and "water".
Lewicki (2002) adapted a population of ﬁlter shapes to eﬃciently encode diﬀerent
classes of sound in the auditory nerve. He found that their ﬁlter shapes can account
for several basic auditory nerve ﬁber properties. The three categories he considered
were animal vocalisations, non-biological environmental sounds and speech.
He
characterised environmental sounds as "typically broadband, non-harmonic and of
short duration" (Lewicki, 2002). "Animal vocalisations [...] are typically harmonic,
of relatively narrow bandwidth and of longer duration." Speech shares properties of
both other classes, animal vocalisations and non-biological environmental sounds.
Lewicki concluded that the resulting ﬁlters in an eﬃcient code of sound are neces-
sarily represented in the time-frequency domain. The remaining degrees of freedom
(apart from the ﬁlter shape) lie in the particular trade-oﬀbetween time and fre-
quency resolution. He allowed that the tuning properties of the cochlea are adapted
to the eﬃcient represention of a broad set of sounds, including environmental sounds
as well as animal localisations.
In Lewickis deﬁnition, environmental sounds are limited to non-biological sounds,
and exclude animal vocalisations, which are a separate class. Theunissen and Elie
(2014) deﬁned environmental sounds the other way around, excluding sounds gen-
erated by human-made machines. In the framework of this thesis, the deﬁnition of
environmental sounds includes both.
4/57
==PAGE:23==
2.2. Auditory Coding
2.2
Auditory Coding
First, recent concepts in the synthesis of sound textures and environmental sounds
are described in section 2.2.1. Since the temporal envelope and modulations are
paramount to the following models, section 2.2.2 provides a short overview of the
temporal modulation transfer function (TMTF). The multi-resolution version of the
speech-based envelope power spectrum model (mr-sEPSM) is described in section
2.2.3, as it provided inspiration for the model proposed in this thesis.
Finally,
section 2.2.4 describes the noise vocoder. The noise vocoder is also based on the
envelope and provides an upper limit in terms of richness of representation and
perceptual quality.
2.2.1
Synthesis of sound textures and environmental sounds
An overview of the state of the art in sound texture synthesis can be found in
Schwarz (2011). The exact deﬁnition and usage of the term ’sound texture syn-
thesis’ diﬀers, but in the scope of this work, it refers to the synthesis of natural
sounding textures. This does not imply that it has to have an organic source, but
just that it can potentially be encountered in a daily environment. This is in con-
trast to expressional texture synthesis for music composition, performance or sound
art, where the resulting textures are not conﬁned to natural sounds.
Most synthesis methods focus on the recreation of sound textures for entertainment
purposes. These methods are therefore more focused on the creation of realistic
sounding textures, rather than an understanding of the auditory principles involved
in the perception of sound textures. Some of the models are based on the simple
concept of concatenation and mixing, where certain parts of the original sound
(or an ensemble of original sounds) are pasted together repeatedly to acquire the
sound of the desired length. In the granular synthesis methods, short segments of
the audio signal are recombined according to a probabilistic model. While being a
bit more sophisticated, the basic idea is the same as for the concatenation methods.
Its extension, the corpus-based concatenative synthesis, draws from a corpus of pre-
recorded audio. From this corpus, a number of sounds closest to the target sound
(e.g. in the sense of their Mel Frequency Coeﬃcients (MFCCs)) are drawn and
recombined in similar fashion as in the granular synthesis.
There are the physical models, that simulate the interactions between diﬀerent ma-
terials (e.g. concrete, wood or liquids) at the source and how they generate the
sound. As these models are very complex and diﬃcult to develop, there is no gen-
eral physical model for sound textures. Most of the physical models focus on one
special source and interaction (e.g. friction, rolling, machine noises, bubbles, aero-
dynamic sounds). The ﬂuid simulation model by Moss et al. (2010), for example,
synthesises sounds of liquids by a superposition of the spherical harmonics of sev-
eral individually simulated bubbles. The parameters and the temporal distribution
of these single bubble sounds are deﬁned stochastically. Closely related are the
physically-informed models, where only part of the synthesis process is based on
physical modelling.
In contrast to these physical and physically informed models, which are concerned
5/57
==PAGE:24==
2.2. Auditory Coding
with the source of the sound, perceptual models are concerned with the receiver
of the sound, the human listener.
One of the few synthesis methods which is
purely focused on the perceptual qualities of the synthesis is the one by McDermott
et al. (2009), followed by McDermott and Simoncelli (2011), McDermott et al.
(2013) and McWalter and Dau (2013). This method is part of the class of noise
ﬁltering methods, which represent the most classical synthesis approach. Herein
a noise sample is ﬁltered according to the speciﬁc model, which is perceptually
informed in this case. A similar method by Bruna and Mallat (2013), based on
wavelet coeﬃcients, is represented by the scattering moments. Here, a scattering
transform is computed by iteratively decomposing a signal with complex wavelet
ﬁlter banks and computing their amplitude envelope. Singh and Theunissen (2003)
also synthesised natural sounds, but only with ﬁrst and second order statistics in
the envelope domain, and based on the Fourier transform (FT).
Note that, although these models are developed for synthesis of sound textures
only, some use deﬁnitions of sound texture, which include single event sounds and
temporally complex signals. In a sense, these models therefore already cover the
class of environmental sounds, even if only partly. In shifting from modelling sound
textures to environmental sounds, temporal and harmonic information becomes
much more crucial and should be incorporated in corresponding models.
2.2.2
Temporal Modulation Transfer Function
The temporal modulation transfer function (TMTF) is based on modulation de-
tection theory.
The TMTF is a measure to describe the ability to respond to
ﬂuctuations in the envelope, also known as temporal resolution.
The temporal
resolution is the complement to the temporal integration.
Sinusoidal amplitude modulation can be expressed as:
s(t) = n(t)(1 + m cos(wmt)),
(2.1)
where s(t) is the modulated signal, n(t) is the carrier wave form, m is the modu-
lation depth and wm is the modulation frequency. The TMTF then describes the
modulation depth at the modulation detection threshold as a function of modula-
tion frequency.
Viemeister (1979) showed that, for broadband stimuli, the modulation detection
threshold exhibits a low pass characteristic, which he described as the "sluggish-
ness" of the auditory system.
In the model by Viemeister (1979), the envelope
is extracted by half-wave rectiﬁcation and low pass ﬁltering. While the modula-
tion low pass model by Viemeister (1979) captures the modulation threshold for
broadband stimuli, it fails to account for more narrowband stimuli.
Dau et al. (1997) showed that the TMTF depends on the carrier wave form. This
is due to the intrinsic modulations of the carrier. In analogy to the power spec-
trum model, the intrinsic envelope ﬂuctuations of the carrier mask the imposed
sinusoidal modulation. In this model, the envelope is extracted by applying the
Hilbert transform, given in equation 2.2.
6/57
==PAGE:25==
2.2. Auditory Coding
SH(t) = 1
π
Z +∞
−∞
s(τ)
τ −tdτ
(2.2)
By applying equation 2.2, one can construct the corresponding analytic signal, given
by sa(t) = s(t) −iSH(t). The Hilbert envelope can then be extracted by taking
the modulus of the analytic signal, according to equation 2.3.
The modulation
spectrum is then the power spectrum of the Hilbert envelope.
henv(t) = |sa(t)| =
q
s2(t) + S2
H(t)
(2.3)
This leads to a modulation masking pattern, which in turn leads to the formulation
of the modulation ﬁlter bank. By applying this modulation ﬁlter bank, one is able
to predict the TMTF for various carriers.
2.2.3
Envelope Power Spectrum Model
The speech-based envelope power spectrum model (sEPSM) predicts speech intel-
ligibility. It is based upon the EPSM, which predicts modulation detection and
masking.
The prediction of speech intelligibility in the sEPSM is based on the
signal-to-noise ratio in the envelope domain, SNRenv, after modulation-frequency-
selective processing (Jørgensen and Dau, 2011). Figure 2.2 shows the mr-sEPSM.
It consists of audio-domain ﬁltering by a gammatone ﬁlter bank, extraction of the
Hilbert envelope, and a modulation ﬁlter bank applied to the output of each pe-
ripheral ﬁlter. At the output of the modulation ﬁlters, the SNRenv is calculated
and then fed into an ideal observer. The sEPSM yields suﬃcient prediction perfor-
mance for additive stationary noise and reverberant conditions as well as cases of
spectral subtraction. It fails, however, in the presence of ﬂuctuating maskers. This
is due to its long-term integration of the envelope power.
In order to account for temporally ﬂuctuating stimuli, Jørgensen et al. (2013) pro-
posed a multi-resolution version of the sEPSM (mr-sEPSM). The SNRenv is ﬁrst
computed in short time frames, and then integrated over the diﬀerent windows and
subsequently across modulation as well as peripheral channels. The duration of the
time windows is deﬁned as the inverse of that modulation ﬁlters centre frequency.
Thus, lower modulations are measured with longer windows, while higher modula-
tions are measured with shorter windows. This is equivalent to applying diﬀerent
time constants. This multi-resolution approach of the mr-sEPSM provided good
results for ﬂuctuating maskers. The idea of the present study was to also consider
a multi-resolution approach in the synthesis model to be able to describe stimuli
with more dynamic character, like environmental sounds.
2.2.4
Noise vocoder
In Shannon et al. (1995) it was shown that a high speech recognition performance
can be achieved with primarily temporal envelope cues. In their experiment, speech
was synthesised by measuring the envelopes in several broad frequency regions.
The measured envelopes were imposed on white noise. Thus, the amplitude and
temporal cues within each spectral band were preserved, while the spectral detail
7/57
==PAGE:26==
2.2. Auditory Coding
Figure 2.2: Model schematic of mr-sEPSM. Source: Jørgensen et al. (2013)
within each band as well as all temporal ﬁne structure was removed. Even with only
three or four bands of modulated noise, a high word identiﬁcation score (≥90 %)
was achieved. Thus, mainly temporal cues in broad frequency regions, represented
by the envelopes, governed speech recognition in quiet conditions.
In Smith et al. (2002), chimaeric stimuli were created by combining the envelope
of one sound with the ﬁne structure of another.
It was shown, that envelope
information dictates speech perception, while the ﬁne structure governs melody
recognition (including prosody) and sound localisation. This further highlights the
crucial role of the envelope, particularly for speech processing and perception.
The amount of data gathered by the noise vocoder is deﬁned as the product of the
envelope sample frequency and the number of channels. In that sense the noise
vocoder provides the basis for the proposed model, as this is completely derived
from the envelope information.
The model described in chapter 3 represents a
statistical sampling of the envelope distributions.
Therefore, the noise vocoder
constitutes the upper margin of richness of presentation and perceptual quality.
8/57
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Model
There is an abundance of auditory models, some are physiologically inspired, others
take a more functional approach. Many of the early models were built to predict
speech intelligibility, as is the case for the mr-sEPSM mentioned in section 2.2.3.
The ﬁrst step in all auditory models is to account for the frequency selectivity of
the cochlea. This is normally achieved through a time-frequency transformation,
like the Fourier transform (FT), or a ﬁlter bank, like the gammatone ﬁlter bank
used here. The gammatone ﬁlter bank has a constant quality factor, Q, and equiv-
alent rectangular bandwidth (ERB) spacing. In order to account for the non-linear
inﬂuence of the outer hair cells (OHCs), some models apply compression after the
ﬁlter process.
Like most models, this one works on the envelope rather than the signal at the
output of the ﬁlters themselves. This is mainly due to the limited ﬁring rate of
the neurons of the auditory nerve.
For low frequencies (up to roughly 5 kHz,
with a considerable decrease from 1.5 kHz upwards), the neuron or ensemble of
neurons is still able to follow the signal itself.
The ﬁring rate then mimics the
frequency of the signal. This phenomenon is called phase locking (Johnson, 1980;
Plack, 2013). When the signal frequency exceeds the maximal ﬁring rate of the
neuron, it follows the envelope of the signal instead. This response behaviour of
the neurone is exempliﬁed in ﬁgure 3.1b, while ﬁgure 3.1a shows the single stages
of the transformation of the acoustical stimulus into neural spike trains. While
ﬁgure 3.1a shows the output of the neuron as a spike train, it is important to
note that this is for one single neuron. Auditory researches are often focused on
the behaviour of an ensemble of neurons, rather than a single neuron. Since it is
assumed that statistical measures like mean spike rate of an ensemble of neurons are
proportional to, e.g., the basilar membrane velocity, this more functional modelling
approach serves as a good approximation.
One very important addition is the processing of modulations, ﬂuctuations in the
envelope domain. Modulation processing describes the temporal resolution of the
auditory system and was shown to be crucial for a number of applications, especially
regarding speech processing (e.g. mr-sEPSM). Originally, the auditory system was
9/57
==PAGE:28==
Model
(a) Transformation from acoustical stimulus to neural
spike trains. The ﬁgure shows the time representa-
tion of (from to to bottom): the acoustical stimu-
lus, stapes movement, local basilar membrane move-
ment at point xi, deﬂection of the inner hair cell,
receptor potential at the inner hair cell and the re-
sulting spike train in the auditory nerve.
Source:
Gulick et al. (1989)
(b) Intracellular receptor potentials
for an inner hair cell of a guinea-
pig for diﬀerent stimulus fre-
quencies (indicated in [Hz] by
the numbers on the right side
of the curves).
This shows
that with increasing frequency,
the a.c.
(alternating current)
component decreases, while the
d.c.
(direct current) compo-
nent increases. Note the change
of scale for the four bottom
curves. Source: Palmer and Rus-
sell (1986)
Figure 3.1: Transformation from acoustical stimulus to neural spike trains (a)
and intracellular receptor potentials for an IHC (b)
thought of as ’sluggish’, therefore the modulation processing was modelled as a
low-pass ﬁlter (Viemeister, 1979). Later, the modulation stage was modelled as a
modulation ﬁlter bank by Dau et al. (1997), with each ﬁlter tuned to a diﬀerent
modulation frequency processing the output of each (peripheral) ﬁlter.
The sound texture synthesis model was extended to the modulation domain in
McDermott and Simoncelli (2011) and the synthesis performance was tested for
gradual numbers of imposed statistics as well as diﬀerent, non-biological represen-
tations. Both of these changes were found to lead to a degradation in quality. In
McDermott et al. (2013) and McWalter and Dau (2013), the model was examined
further, especially the eﬀect of the duration of the synthesised textures on texture
and exemplar discrimination.
In order to describe a variety of sounds, especially transient, broadband sounds, the
role of across-channel correlations is critical. Co-modulation of diﬀerent frequency
bands (which is akin to correlation) facilitates the detection of tones in noise, a
phenomenon called co-modulation masking release (CMR). Nelken et al. (1999)
10/57
==PAGE:29==
Model
Cochlear
Filtering
Envelope+
Non-Linearity
Subband
Envelope
Modulation
Filtering
Subband
Modulation
Subband
Fine-structure
M
M
M
M
C
C
C
Figure 3.2: Processing stages of the auditory model with the captured statistics:
(M) marginal moments and (C) across-channel correlations. Source:
McWalter (2012)
showed CMR to take place in auditory-cortex neurons and proposed this to be
the basis for behavioural CMR. Across-channel correlations are also very common
among natural sounds, and a major source of variation among them. Nelken et al.
(1999) argued that the auditory system is well adapted to use this attribute of
natural sounds in order to enable real-world processing tasks.
As of now, the validity of these models is diﬃcult to check, since there is still insight
missing into the exact nature of the retro-cochlear processing stages.
Thus, an
indirect approach via an analysis-synthesis framework is taken. In this framework,
a new synthesised instance of the target sound is created by transferring certain
features of the target sound and imposing them on a Gaussian noise sample. Section
3.1 describes the front-end, the auditory model in detail, while section 3.2 shows
the overall structure of the analysis-synthesis framework, the model is nested in.
In order to get an understanding of the amount of information measured by the
various models, see section 3.4. The methods applied for imposition of the statistics
are described in section 3.5, while the convergence criterion is described in section
3.6.
11/57
==PAGE:30==
3.1. Auditory Model
3.1
Auditory Model
The processing stages of the auditory model with their corresponding output and
marginal moments (M) as well as correlation statistics (C) can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
The auditory model consists of three processing stages: Frequency selective ﬁltering,
envelope extraction and compression, and ﬁnally, the modulation processing as
proposed by Dau et al. (1997). The representation of the signal after the frequency
selective ﬁltering, envelope extraction and compression, is deﬁned here as envelope
domain, while the representation of the signal after the modulation processing
is deﬁned here as modulation domain. The statistics captured in these domains
are deﬁned as envelope statistics and modulation statistics, respectively.
After
the envelope extraction, the signal envelopes are downsampled from 20 kHz to
400 Hz, yielding a Nyquist frequency of 200 Hz. The downsampling aids in data
reduction. Ghitza (2001) found that the required bandwidth for suﬃcient coding of
the temporal envelope is roughly half of one critical band. In the case of the applied
gammatone ﬁlter bank, the critical band of the highest ﬁlter is the determining
factor. The highest frequency band has a centre frequency of 8096.9 Hz, its 3-dB
bandwidth is B3dB = (24.7 + 0.108 · fc) · 0.887 ≈798 Hz. Thus, mathematically,
the bandwidth of the envelope should be 400 Hz, leading to a sample frequency
of 800 Hz. However, although the highest modulation band contains frequencies
above the Nyquist frequency, these were generally of low amplitude. Increasing the
envelope sampling frequency was found not to increase the perceptual quality of
the synthesis (McDermott and Simoncelli, 2011).
3.1.1
Peripheral Filtering
The peripheral ﬁltering is implemented as a gammatone ﬁlter bank (Hohmann,
2002; Strahl and Mertins, 2009) of order n = 4 with a tuning parameter of b =
1.0183. A gammatone ﬁlter is deﬁned as:
γ[n] = anv−1e−λne2πifcn,
(3.1)
with center frequency fc, amplitude a, and the damping factor λ = 2πbERB(fc).
The equivalent rectangular bandwidth (ERB) of a human auditory ﬁlter was esti-
mated by Moore et al. (1990) as ERB(fc) = 24.7 + 0.108fc. The tuning parameter
b sets the bandwidth of the ﬁlter in relation to the ERB. The order n = 4 and
tuning parameter b = 1.0183 are derived from a notched-noise masking experiment
(Irino, 1995). The gammatone design is chosen to reﬂect the frequency selectivity
of the peripheral auditory system. The output are 34 channels, or sub-bands, with
center frequencies ranging from 50 Hz to ≈8 kHz, as listed in table 3.1.
3.1.2
Envelope Extraction and Compression
As was shown in Johnson (1980) and Plack (2013), the neurons are able to follow
the signal at the output of the ﬁlters only for low frequencies (up to roughly 5 kHz,
with a considerable decrease from 1.5 kHz upwards).
If the signal exceeds this
maximum ﬁring rate, the neurons follow the envelope of the signal instead. One way
to implement this is via half-wave rectiﬁcation and low-pass ﬁltering (Viemeister,
12/57
==PAGE:31==
3.1. Auditory Model
Table 3.1: Peripheral sub-band ﬁlter channels
Band
Center
Band
Center
Band
Center
frequency [Hz]
frequency [Hz]
frequency [Hz]
1
50.0
3
730.0
25
3068.3
2
80.2
14
834.0
26
3425.7
3
113.7
15
949.1
27
3821.9
4
150.9
16
1076.8
28
4261.0
5
192.0
17
1218.4
29
4747.7
6
237.7
18
1375.3
30
5287.2
7
288.2
19
1549.2
31
5885.2
8
344.3
20
1741.9
32
6548.0
9
406.4
21
1955.6
33
7282.7
10
475.3
22
2192.4
34
8096.9
11
551.6
23
2454.9
12
636.2
24
2745.8
1979). Half-wave rectiﬁcation is applied, because the neurons only ﬁre when the
Inner Hair Cells (IHCs) are deﬂected. The low-pass ﬁltering afterwards is meant
to reﬂect the sluggishness of the system. In this model, the Hilbert envelope is
applied. For a summary on the Hilbert envelope, see section 2.2.2.
If the cochlea would be populated by IHCs alone, it would be a nearly linear
system, as can be observed in dead animals, where the function of the OHCs is
disabled. While the IHCs send eﬀerent signals towards the brain, the OHCs receive
aﬀerent impulses which they transmit back to the cochlea. The OHCs have several
functions, but their primary function is to amplify quiet sounds via compression and
thus increase the dynamic range. This leads to quite a remarkable dynamic range
of over 120 dB. Another eﬀect is the sharpening of the tuning curves, which leads
to a ﬁner frequency resolution. Overall, it seems that many eﬀects of hearing loss
and decrease in speech intelligibility are related to the compressive non-linearity
of the OHCs.
In this case, a very simple model of a static exponential with a
compression factor of 0.3 is applied, as appropriate for normal hearing listeners.
This very simple model ignores any frequency dependency of compression and there
are without a doubt more sophisticated ways to account for compression. However,
in the framework of this model, it is deemed to be appropriate and account for
perception.
3.1.3
Modulation Processing
The last stage in the model is the modulation ﬁlter bank as proposed by Dau et al.
(1997). It is implemented as a bank of 8 FIR bandpass ﬁlters with Kaiser window
and constant relative bandwidth. The center frequencies are octave spaced and
13/57
==PAGE:32==
3.2. Analysis-Synthesis Framework
range from 1.25 Hz to 160 Hz. The modulation bands with their respective center
frequencies and window durations are listed in table 3.2.
The centre frequency
of 1.25 Hz and the subsequent octave spacing were chosen due to the divisibility
of the downsampled envelope frequency (400Hz) to round numbers. The window
durations in table 3.2 refer to the multi-resolution processing described in section
3.3.2. By applying time windows of diﬀerent durations, the model is eﬀectively
implementing diﬀerent time constants.
Table 3.2: Modulation ﬁlter channels
Modulation band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Center frequency [Hz]
1.25
2.5
5
10
20
40
80
160
Window duration L(wn) [samples]
320
160
80
40
20
10
5
2
Time constant τn [ms]
800
400
200
100
50
25
12.5
5
3.2
Analysis-Synthesis Framework
There is no feasible direct method to examine the validity of the model. Therefore,
it is embedded inside an analysis-synthesis framework. The main idea behind this
framework is to capture features from the original sound at the analysis stage, and
then transfer these features to the synthesis stage. At the synthesis stage, these
features are imposed onto a random Gaussian noise sample. The idea is that, if
the perceptually relevant features are captured by the system, then the synthetic
version and the original sound should be perceived as the same (McDermott et al.,
2009). The analysis-synthesis framework is shown in ﬁgure 3.3, where the single
processing blocks are comprised of the auditory model as shown in ﬁgure 3.2. The
same model architecture from section 3.1 is used to encode the original sound and
preprocess the synthetic sound.
The features captured by the analysis system and transferred to the synthesis sys-
tem are described in section 3.3. While the general analysis-synthesis approach is
independent of the type and extent of the captured information, the selection of the
features is guided by auditory principles. As in McDermott and Simoncelli (2011),
the system is not designed towards perfect synthesis, but rather a physiologically
feasible model, which provides insights into the auditory system. All the features
captured in this model are based on auditory processing principles. The imposition
of these statistics is described in section 3.5. After the statistics converged to the
target statistics, the time signal is reconstructed from the modulation and enve-
lope domain information. The details of this signal reconstruction are described in
section 3.2.1.
3.2.1
Signal reconstruction
After the imposition of the statistics, the signal is transferred back to the time
domain, by the inverse of the applied sub-band and modulation ﬁlterbanks. Further
on, the sub-band ﬁne structure, which can be regarded as the phase information, is
14/57
==PAGE:33==
3.3. Imposed statistics
Synthesis
Analysis
Original
Sound
Cochlear
Filtering
Envelope
andNL
Modulation
Filtering
Gaussian
Noise
Cochlear
Filtering
Envelope
andNL
Modulation
Filtering
Impose
Statistics
Impose
Statistics
Synthetic
Sound
Figure 3.3: Model schematic of the analysis-synthesis framework based on the
auditory model shown in ﬁgure 3.2. Source: McWalter and Dau
(2013)
multiplied upon the signal again. The important point is that, while the modulation
domain and envelope domain are shaped by the imposition algorithm, the ﬁne
structure is taken from the noise, making it essentially random. As was described
in section 2.2.4, the envelope is dominant for speech recognition, while the ﬁne
structure governs melody processing and sound localisation.
3.3
Imposed statistics
The model captures information at the two output stages of the auditory model: the
envelope domain and the modulation domain, i.e. before respective after modula-
tion processing. All the information is captured as statistics at the output of either
the peripheral or modulation ﬁlters. In general two types of statistics are captured:
the marginal moments and the pair-wise correlations between diﬀerent channels.
This approach of measuring statistics at the output of ﬁlters is taken originally
from McDermott et al. (2009), McDermott and Simoncelli (2011) and McDermott
et al. (2013). McDermott was inspired by research on texture synthesis in the visual
domain (Field, 1987; Portilla and Simoncelli, 2000).
In the envelope domain, the statistics are captured as long-term averages over the
entire duration of the signal. This corresponds to the original approach by McDer-
mott et al. (2013). The imposed statistics in the envelope domain are described in
section 3.3.1.
In the modulation domain, i.e. after modulation bandpass ﬁltering, a diﬀerent ap-
proach is taken. McDermott captured the statistics as long-term averages also in
this domain, due to the temporally homogeneous nature of the sound textures. In
the proposed model, a multi-resolution approach is used, in order to account for the
temporally more complex characteristics of the wider class of environmental sounds.
This multi-resolution approach is inspired by the multi-resolution speech-based en-
velope power spectrum model (mr-sEPSM), used to predict speech intelligibility.
The information captured at the modulation domain and the implementation of
15/57
==PAGE:34==
3.3. Imposed statistics
the multi-resolution processing are described in section 3.3.2.
3.3.1
Envelope domain
As in the original model by McDermott et al. (2009) and McDermott and Simon-
celli (2011), the statistics imposed in the envelope domain consist of the ﬁrst four
statistical moments, and the pair-wise cross correlation coeﬃcients.
The ﬁrst four statistical moments at the output of each of the 34 ﬁlters are com-
puted, namely:
1. Mean, M1k = µk = P
t w(t)sk(t),
2. Coeﬃcient of Variance, M2k = σ2
k
µ2
k =
P
t w(t)(sk(t)−µk)2
µ2
k
,
3. Skewness, M3k =
P
t w(t)(sk(t)−µk)3
δ3
k
,
4. Kurtosis, M4k =
P
t w(t)(sk(t)−µk)4
δ4
k
,
for the kth envelope sub-band sk(t), and the windowing function w(t), with the
constrain that P
t w(t) = 1. Note that each marginal is normalised to its respective
ﬁlter. In order to get a dimensionless value, the variance has been normalised with
1/µ2, thus giving the coeﬃcient of variance.
In contrast to the original model (McDermott et al., 2009; McDermott and Simon-
celli, 2011; McDermott et al., 2013; McWalter and Dau, 2013), the higher-order
moments were omitted in the proposed system. Nevertheless, these moments are
described here, since they are included in one of the test conditions described in
section 4.2.2. This test was performed to evaluate, wether the omission of those
statistics has a perceptual eﬀect.
Additionally, pair-wise correlations across the 34 channels were measured. Correla-
tion statistics are relevant in general for broadband sounds, such as, e.g., applause,
and especially for sparse and transient sounds, e.g., the crackling of a ﬁre. The
correlations were calculated as given by equation 3.2,
Cjk =
X
t
w(t)(sj(t) −µj)(sk(t) −µk)
δjδk
, j, k ∈[1...34],
(3.2)
such that (k −j) ∈[1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 11, 16, 21]. Thus the correlation for each cochlear
sub-band envelope is computed over a subset of eight neighbouring bands instead
of the full correlation matrix.
This subset was found informally to suﬃciently
reproduce the quality of the full correlation matrix in McDermott and Simoncelli
(2011).
Since the imposition is executed sequentially for the diﬀerent cochlear
channels, the order is crucial.
The imposition of target correlations is strongly
inﬂuenced by the correlations of previously updated channels. Therefore, the order
is speciﬁed by the band importance, which is simply sorting the channels according
to their envelope power. A physiologically inspired band importance function, as
applied in some speech intelligibility models, might possibly increase performance.
16/57
==PAGE:35==
3.3. Imposed statistics
The test on gradual statistics showed that the inclusion of envelope correlations
helps increase the quality to a certain degree, thus this is set as the default multi-
resolution model (MR). The eﬀect on the perceptual quality, however, is relatively
minor and strongly dependent on the target sound, see sections 4.2.2 and 5.2.
3.3.2
Modulation domain
The processing in the modulation domain is inspired from the mr-sEPSM (Jør-
gensen et al., 2013). It was shown that the multi-resolution processing in the mod-
ulation domain increased the predictive power of the model in presence of dynamic,
ﬂuctuating maskers. While the goal, predicting speech intelligibility, diﬀers from
the task at hand here, the intuition is, that what works for speech, might work for
other stimuli as well.
Since the mr-sEPSM is based on the same auditory model or front end, it is easy to
adapt its multi-resolution processing scheme. Instead of computing the modulation
statistics, namely the modulation power, over the entire duration of the signal,
it is computed on shorter time windows.
These time windows are rectangular,
non-overlapping windows, as in the mr-sEPSM. Since the slower modulations are
also expected to change more slowly and vice versa, diﬀerent window duration are
applied for the diﬀerent modulation ﬁlters. For each modulation ﬁlter, the inverse
of its centre frequency is taken as the window duration, giving short windows for
high modulation frequencies and longer windows for lower modulation frequencies.
Thus, each ﬁlter n has a diﬀerent window duration L(wn), which can also be thought
of as multiple time constants τn. This is referred to as multi-resolution processing.
The modulation ﬁlters with their respective window durations and time constants
are listed in table 3.2.
More temporal information generally should increase the synthesis quality, but the
exact magnitude of the time constants in the auditory system is still unclear. Nor-
mally, two diﬀerent values are mentioned in the literature, the temporal resolution
constant, which is assumed to be ≈2 −5 ms, and the temporal integration con-
stant, which is supposed to be around ≈
200 ms. Often it is assumed that the
shorter time constant of the two is more plausible, and the latter is due to the
phenomenon of multiple looks (Viemeister and Wakeﬁeld, 1991), but there have
also been suggestions of multiple time constants or a variable time constant that
adapts to the stimulus duration.
The modulation power is then computed as:
Mk,n,l =
P
t wn,lw(t)bk,n(t)2
δ2
k
, k ∈[1...34], n ∈[1...8], l ∈[1...nw],
(3.3)
with wn,l designating the lth window in the nth modulation channel bk,n.
The
total number of windows nw depends on the modulation channel and the signal
duration. Note, how the modulation power is normalised with regards to the global
sub-band variance δ2
k. Implementations of a local sub-band variance δ2
kwn,l(t) as
normalisation factor failed in producing suﬃcient synthesis results.
In order to
capture only meaningful statistics, the modulation statistics have been limited to
modulation channels with a centre frequency fc,k,n smaller than a quarter of the
17/57
==PAGE:36==
3.4. Number of total measured data
sub-band envelope centre frequency fc,k, fc,k,n < fc,k/4 (e.g., Dau et al., 1997). This
is reasonable, as it does not make much sense to capture the 160 Hz modulation of
a sub-band channel centred around 50 Hz.
The total amount of measured data is described in section 3.4. There is a trade-oﬀ
between the number of imposed statistics and the total amount of measured data.
This is examined further in the discussion in section 6.4.
3.4
Number of total measured data
It is interesting to examine, how sparse the representation by the model is. Al-
though a proper analysis of sparsity is out of the scope of this work, some basic
comparison of the amount of captured data is conducted. In table 3.3, the statis-
tics captured per second are listed for each model. This is intended only as a crude
indication. A further analysis on the degrees of freedom and the interdependencies
of the diﬀerent statistics remains to be conducted. In terms of richness of the repre-
sentation, the proposed multi-resolution model (MR) clearly exceeds the long-term
model (LT) from McDermott and Simoncelli (2011).
By limiting the minimum
window size, it can be seen that the total amount of measured data can be reduced
remarkably. The biggest contribution to the amount of measured data stems from
the short windows in the highest modulation bands. As upper limit on the data
measured per second, the down sampled envelope of the noise vocoder is considered.
For an envelope sample frequency of 400 Hz and 34 peripheral channels, this yields
13600 data points.
Table 3.3: Number of total measured data points per second for the diﬀerent
models
Model
Envelope domain
Modulation domain
Total
Marginals
Corr.
Marginals
Corr.
LT, full set
136
205
272
520
1133
MR
68
205
9075.5
0
9348.5
- correlations
68
0
9075.5
0
9143.5
+ skewness, kurtosis
136
205
9075.5
0
9416.5
MR, L(wn)min = 50 ms
68
205
6417.5
0
6690.5
MR, L(wn)min = 200 ms
68
205
2877.5
0
3150.5
Noise vocoder
-
-
−
-
13600
3.5
Imposition of the statistics
The synthetic signal was initialised with a sample of Gaussian noise and was mod-
iﬁed with an iterative process until it converged to the target statistics. Each cycle
of the iterative process consisted of the following steps, as taken from McDermott
18/57
==PAGE:37==
3.6. Convergence Criterion
and Simoncelli (2011):
1. The synthetic sound signal is decomposed into cochlear sub-bands.
2. Sub-band envelopes are computed using the Hilbert transform.
3. Envelopes are divided out of the sub-band envelopes to yield the sub-band
ﬁne structure.
4. Envelopes are down sampled to 400 Hz to reduce computational load.
5. Envelope and modulation statistics are measured and compared to those of
the target sound to generate a statistical SNR.
6. Downsampled envelopes are modiﬁed using a variant of gradient descent, caus-
ing their statistics to move closer towards the target statistics.
7. Modiﬁed envelopes are upsampled and recombined with the unmodiﬁed ﬁne
structure to yield new sub-bands.
8. New sub-bands are combined to yield a new signal.
The main point of interest here is number 6, the imposition method chosen to
modify the statistics. In the framework of McWalter and Dau (2013), an uncon-
strained optimization method using a line search was implemented. This was done
by use of the MATLAB function minFunc, with the descent direction based on
Quasi-Newton with Limited-Memory BFGS Updating. This was found to be less
stable than desired in the case of this framework. For a large number of target
sounds, the statistics would tend to deconverge with this method. Therefore, the
imposition method has been modiﬁed to a directly implemented gradient projec-
tion as in Portilla and Simoncelli (2000). In this approach, the gradient projection
is computed directly and impositioned with a weighting of p = 0.3. The p value
controls the trade-oﬀbetween convergence speed and stability. The chosen value
was found informally to yield the best results.
3.6
Convergence Criterion
The convergence of the imposed statistics is measured by a statistical SNR, as
the ratio of the squared error of a statistic class, to the squared target statistics.
For each marginal as well as for the correlations one single statistical SNR value is
computed. In order to arrive at a single SNR value, information has to be integrated
across several cochlear channels, and in the case of the modulation power over
several modulation channels and time windows as well. As a criterion, it has been
set, that all relevant statistics have to have a statistical SNR greater than 30 dB.
Depending on the underlying signal model, there are several ways to integrate over
the diﬀerent channels and windows. The integration rule depends on the signal
model as deﬁned by the signal detection theory (SDT). As listed in Green et al.
(1966) there is the integration model and the decision-threshold model.
19/57
==PAGE:38==
3.6. Convergence Criterion
In the integration model, information is accumulated. The integration model pre-
sumes perfect memory, meaning that information is combined without loss, as well
as independence between the diﬀerent observations.
Each observation n is dis-
tributed as ∼N(µ, σ), with equal variance for signal-plus-noise and signal-alone
conditions. This assumption allows to associate a detectability index d′ with each
observation. d′ is a measure of the separation between the means of the noise and
signal-plus-noise distributions divided by the common standard deviation. This
leads to the integration rule:
d′
n =
" n
X
i=1
(d′
i)2
#1/2
.
(3.4)
From equation 3.4 it follows, that if all d′
i are equal, d′
n increases linearly with √n.
In the decision-threshold model, decisions are accumulated, where one positive
decision is suﬃcient to cause a detection. Thus each observation presents another
independent detection possibility of probability p. As in the integration model,
independence between the diﬀerent observations is assumed.
This leads to the
detection probability pn = 1 −(1 −p)n.
Note that the assumption of independence required for both models is not main-
tained in a strict sense as there is always a certain overlap between (peripheral
as well as modulation) ﬁlters introducing some redundancy. The eﬀect of this is
assumed to be negligible, however.
The integration rule used in the original long-term model (McDermott et al., 2009;
McDermott and Simoncelli, 2011; McDermott et al., 2013; McWalter and Dau,
2013) is given in equation 3.5 for target signal X and synthetic signal Y . Note that
this equation is the result of applying the decision-threshold model for integrating
over time, and the integration model for integrating over peripheral as well as
modulation channels.
SNRstat = 10 log10
P
k(P
n)(P
l)X2
stat
P
k(P
n)(P
l)(Xstat −Ystat)2 , k ∈[1...34], (n ∈[1...8]), (l ∈[1...lN])
(3.5)
Interestingly, this yields good results, even for the multi-resolution model with
diﬀerent windows. This is despite the fact, that the logic behind the equation is
counter-intuitive. First, global values for the target statistics and the diﬀerence
to of the synthesis to the target are computed by integrating over channels and
windows. Only then the ratio of those two global values is build.
It seems more reasonable to build the ratio ﬁrst, and to integrate over the diﬀerent
channels and windows afterwards, as given in equation 3.6.
This is the way it
is done in the mr-sEPSM (Jørgensen et al., 2013) and how it was adopted here.
Since it is only the convergence criterion, it does not aﬀect the imposition of the
statistics itself, but deﬁnes the point where the synthesis is close enough to the
target statistics. The statistical SNR after the equation 3.6 tends to yield higher
values, therefore the threshold needs to be adopted as well. In this framework, it
was decided informally to take a value of 40 dB. Both integration rules were tested
informally and found to produce very similar results. Since the perceptual results
20/57
==PAGE:39==
3.6. Convergence Criterion
were almost the same, and the McDermott integration rule exhibited a slightly
more robust convergence behaviour, it was also applied in the frame of this thesis.
A further analysis of the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent integration rules and their validity
in terms of signal detection theory is outside the scope of this thesis.
SNRstat = 10 log10
X
k
(
X
n
)(
X
l
)
X2
stat
(Xstat −Ystat)2 , k ∈[1...34], (n ∈[1...8]), (l ∈[1...lN])
(3.6)
Only in the case of the multi-resolution framework, the statistical SNR is also
summed over the various time windows l. In the case of the long-term model by
McDermott, this sum can simply be omitted.
It should be noted that in both
models, no further weighting, e.g., by band importance, takes place.
A smart
weighting function might increase the performance, but this has not been examined
further.
21/57
==PAGE:40==
3.6. Convergence Criterion
22/57
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Method
In order to estimate the perceptual quality of the diﬀerent synthesis models, a sub-
jective evaluation was performed. This consisted of three listening experiments that
were conducted with human subjects. The ﬁrst experiment compared the synthesis
results obtained with the proposed multi-resolution approach with those obtained
with the long-term model from McDermott and Simoncelli (2011). The second ex-
periment investigated the gradual statistics of modiﬁcations to the multi-resolution
model described in chapter 3.
The third experiment examined the inﬂuence of
diﬀerent temporal resolutions to the perceived quality.
4.1
Stimuli
The stimuli used in these experiments have been chosen to illustrate strengths and
shortcomings of the diﬀerent algorithms. All sound examples have in common that
they are environmental sounds, which means that they can be encountered on a
daily basis. Choosing only natural stimuli instead of synthetically generated ones
implies that there is less control over particular stimuli parameters, but allows for
a more realistic examination of audio representation in the brain. The stimuli were
chosen such as to present a fair mix of sound textures and (more complex) non-
texture environmental sounds. All stimuli can be found in table 4.1, along with
their classiﬁcation. They are classiﬁed into one of the following categories to allow
easier grouping: ’animals’, ’environment’, ’mechanical’, ’people’, ’water’. All sounds
are sampled at a frequency of 20 kHz and have a duration of 7 seconds. They are
ramped with a 100 ms half-cosine window at the beginning and the end.
4.2
Listening experiments
All three listening experiments were designed as a Multi-Stimulus Test with Hidden
Reference and Anchor (MUSHRA). The MUSHRA has been originally designed to
evaluate the perceived quality of lossy audio compression algorithms. It is deﬁned
23/57
==PAGE:42==
4.2. Listening experiments
Method
Table 4.1: List of stimuli divided into textures and non-textures with correspond-
ing class
Nr.
Texture/Non-Texture
Class
Name
1
Texture
animals
bees
2
Texture
animals
birds
3
Texture
animals
crickets
4
Texture
animals
frogs-crickets
5
Texture
environment
ﬁre
6
Texture
environment
rain
7
Texture
environment
whistling-wind
8
Texture
environment
wind-sand
9
Texture
mechanical
helicopter
10
Texture
mechanical
jack-hammer
11
Texture
mechanical
rustling-paper
12
Texture
mechanical
train
13
Texture
people
applause
14
Texture
people
babble
15
Texture
water
stream
16
Texture
water
water-in-sink
17
Texture
water
waves-lake
18
Non-Texture
animals
birds-swamp
19
Non-Texture
mechanical
dozer
20
Non-Texture
mechanical
fast-cars
21
Non-Texture
mechanical
frying-bacon
22
Non-Texture
mechanical
galloping-horse
23
Non-Texture
mechanical
intersection
24
Non-Texture
mechanical
typewriter
24/57
==PAGE:43==
Method
4.2. Listening experiments
by ITU-R recommendation BS.1534-2 (ITU-R, 2014) and recommended for assess-
ing intermediate audio quality. Since the quality range of the stimuli was quite
high, this was the obvious choice.
In the MUSHRA, several diﬀerent conditions for each sound were presented and
asked to be rated on a scale from 0 (bad) to 100 (excellent). The reference (typically
the original, unprocessed sound) was presented and also included in the conditions.
The conditions were randomised, so that the reference was hidden. Since a hidden
reference was included, at least one of the conditions had to be rated with 100. A
low-anchor was also included, but not forced, so subjects did not have to rate any
sound with 0. Instead, the subjects were instructed to use a global scale throughout
all the diﬀerent trials, to grant a higher comparability among the diﬀerent sound
examples. For this thesis, a modiﬁed version of the MUSHRAM framework provided
by Vincent (2009) was used.
The subjects were given instructions and then seated in a double walled sound
attenuated booth, to minimise noise inﬂuence. The stimuli were played over a RME
Fireface UCX soundcard and Sennheiser HD 580 headphones. The presentation
level was set to 65 dB SPL.
Each test consisted of a training phase and a test phase. In the training phase, the
subjects could familiarise themselves with all sounds and all conditions. This was
especially important in order to be able to rate all stimuli on a globally consistent
scale. The test phase consisted of the MUSHRA as described above.
All subjects were self reported normal hearing and between 21 and 33 years old.
No additional audiograms were recorded.
4.2.1
Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model
In order to assess the performance of the proposed multi-resolution model against
the long-term model by McDermott and Simoncelli (2011), a MUSHRA was con-
ducted.
Again, the reference signal was the original sound and the low-anchor
the envelope power shaped noise. The parameters for the multi-resolution model
were chosen with regard to the results of the experiment on gradual statistics, see
section 4.2.2. Therefore, the (default) multi-resolution model (MR) based on the
mean, variance and cross-channel correlations in the subband envelope domain and
the power in the modulation domain was chosen. This corresponds to the third
condition in the experiment on gradual statistics, and the second condition in the
experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution.
The long-term version to be tested imposed all captured statistics, consisting of
mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis and cross-channel correlations in the envelope
domain, and variance and cross-channel correlations in the modulation domain.
The low-anchor was represented by envelope power shaped noise. In this condi-
tion, the long-term power of the sub-band envelope in the 34 peripheral channels
was matched to those of the target signal, resulting in a static noise sample with
approximately the same spectral distribution as the target. Note that, although a
low-anchor was used here, it was not forced to be rated at 0. This was due to the
huge variation of quality in the low-anchor itself and the goal to have all stimuli
rated on a globally consistent scale.
25/57
==PAGE:44==
4.2. Listening experiments
Method
Therefore, the conditions tested were:
• Original
• (default) Multi-Resolution model including correlations
• Long-Term model, including all statistics
• Envelope Power shaped noise
The experiment was conducted with 9 subjects, all male. There was some overlap
of test subjects who also participated in the experiments on gradual statistics, see
section 4.2.2, and on the inﬂuence of the minimum window duration, see section
4.2.3. Five of the subjects also participated in the other two experiments.
4.2.2
Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics
In order to estimate the eﬀect of the various statistics on the perceived quality of the
multi-resolution model, a MUSHRA on gradual statistics was performed. Similar
to the experiments on gradual statistics of the long-term model in McDermott and
Simoncelli (2011), a gradual increase in the captured statistics should theoretically
lead to an increase in perceptual quality as well. Since the main focus of the multi-
resolution model lies on the modulation power, however, the remaining statistics
are deemed to be less crucial. Furthermore it was hypothesised that due to the
multi-resolution processing in the modulation domain, the higher order moments
skewness and kurtosis were no longer relevant for the synthesis. The cross-channel
correlations in the envelope domain, however, were still assumed to make a per-
ceptual diﬀerence. The magnitude of this diﬀerence can be assumed to depend
strongly on the target sound. For highly correlated sounds with strong transient,
like e.g. ﬁre crackling, the inclusion of correlation statistics should increase the
perceptual quality, while for uncorrelated sounds, like e.g. running water or rain,
it should not make a diﬀerence. The reference was again the original sound, while
the low-anchor was the envelope power shaped noise.
The conditions tested were chosen as:
• Original
• Multi-Resolution model without correlations
• (default) Multi-Resolution model
• Multi-Resolution model including skewness, kurtosis and correlations
• Envelope Power shaped noise
The experiment was conducted with 7 subjects, 1 female, 6 male.
26/57
==PAGE:45==
Method
4.2. Listening experiments
4.2.3
Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
The third experiment examined the inﬂuence of reduced temporal resolution. This
was achieved by increasing the minimum window duration L(wn)min for the pro-
cessing of the power in the modulation domain. As was described in chapter 3, the
modulation power is captured and imposed in non-overlapping, rectangular time
windows. The duration of the window is the inverse of the modulation ﬁlters centre
frequency, and can be thought of as the implementation of diﬀerent time constants.
The reason for conducting this experiment is two-fold.
First, it is not entirely
clear, how crucial each time constant is, and how much it contributes to the overall
perceptual quality. In section 3.3.2, the diﬀerent proposed time constants of the
auditory system were discussed.
In order to better understand which temporal
resolution is adequate and which time constants are relevant, the model has been
processed with diﬀerent time constants equivalent to diﬀerent window durations.
Second, due to the multi-resolution approach, a lot more data was gathered over
time, as listed in section 3.4. Since the aim is preferably a maximally sparse rep-
resentation, this motivates a reduction of the overall data captured by the model.
The majority of this data stems from the higher modulation ﬁlters, which are seg-
mented into very short windows. Therefore the minimum window duration was
increased. This is preferable since it achieves a data reduction without limiting the
resolution in the modulation frequency domain by excluding ﬁlters. The (default)
multi-resolution model used short window durations for high modulation rates, e.g.
the highest modulation frequency has L(wn)min = 5 ms (= 2 frames, since the
envelope is down sampled to 400 Hz and the ﬁlters centre frequency is 160 Hz).
In the third condition, however, L(wn)min was set to 50 ms (= 20 frames).
In
the fourth condition, the minimum window duration L(wn)min was set to 200 ms
(= 80 frames). All remaining parameters were taken from the default version of the
multi-resolution model including correlations (MR), as applied in the previous two
experiments. Note, that the second condition with a minimum window duration
L(wn)min of 2 frames was equivalent to the default model. The reference was again
the original sound, while the low-anchor was the envelope power shaped noise.
The conditions tested were:
• Original
• (default) Multi-Resolution model (MR)
• MR with L(wn)min = 50 ms (20 frames)
• MR with L(wn)min = 200 ms (80 frames)
• Envelope Power shaped noise
This experiment was conducted with a subset of 17 sounds (taken from the sounds
listed in table 4.1). The sounds by their index numbers are {2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11,
13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24}. The stimuli used in this experiment are also
listed in table A.1 in appendix A.
The experiment was conducted with 7 subjects, 1 female, 6 male.
These were
exactly the same subjects as in the experiment on gradual statistics, described in
section 4.2.2
27/57
==PAGE:46==
4.2. Listening experiments
Method
28/57
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Results
5.1
Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MUSHRA score
Original
Multi−
Resolution
Long term
Envelope
Power
Figure 5.1: Results of the experiment on the comparison of the multi-resolution
and the long-term model, showing mean and standard deviation over
subjects and sound ﬁles. Conditions from left to right: (1) Origi-
nal sound (hidden reference), (2) (default) multi-resolution model
including correlations, (3) long-term model from McDermott et al.
(2013), (4) envelope power shaped noise (low-anchor)
Figure 5.1 shows the results for the test comparing the proposed multi-resolution
model (MR) against the long-term model (LT) from McDermott and Simoncelli
(2011), grouped over all subjects and sound ﬁles. Interestingly, the hidden reference
was identiﬁed less reliably than in the test on gradual statistics.
A two-factor
repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed that there is a signiﬁcant
29/57
==PAGE:48==
5.1. Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model
Results
eﬀect of the condition on the quality rating (F(1, 8) = 37.054, p < 0.001). Note,
that the ANOVA was performed only over the two synthesis models, excluding the
hidden reference and the low anchor. The proposed MR model shows a signiﬁcant
improvement of 11.273 points (distance dm between the means) over the LT model
even averaged over all sound ﬁles.
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MUSHRA score
Original
Multi−
Resolution
Long term
Envelope
Power
 
 
 
 
Original
Multi−
Resolution
Long term
Envelope
Power
Texture sounds
Non-texture sounds
Figure 5.2: Results of the experiment on the comparison of the multi-resolution
and the long-term model, showing mean and standard deviation over
subjects and sound ﬁles, for the subgroups sound textures (left) and
non-texture sounds (right). Conditions from left to right: (1) Orig-
inal sound (hidden reference), (2) (default) multi-resolution model
including correlations, (3) long-term model from McDermott et al.
(2013), (4) envelope power shaped noise (low-anchor)
Figure 5.2 shows the results grouped into sound textures (left) and non texture
sounds (right). When analysed over these subgroups, the two models show a smaller
diﬀerence when considering the sound textures (dm = 7.500, p = 0.016), and a much
larger improvement of the MR model when considering the non-texture sounds
(dm = 22.593, p < 0.001). This is in line with the hypothesis, as the LT model was
developed for sound textures, while the MR model was developed to speciﬁcally
address non-texture environmental sounds. It is worth mentioning though, that
while the diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant, the data in general exhibit a large
spread.
Figure B.1 in the appendix shows box plots of the results over the diﬀerent subjects
and the diﬀerent sound ﬁles. The diﬀerence in the subjective interpretation of the
scale becomes very apparent in the case of subject number 5, who rated the majority
of the ﬁles at hundred percent. Some of the sound ﬁles show a very large range,
especially for this experiment. In general, it can be seen, that the improvement
from the LT to the MR model is larger for non-texture sounds than for sound
textures.
30/57
==PAGE:49==
5.2. Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics
5.2
Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MUSHRA score
Original
MR no corr.
MR (default)
+Skewness
+Kurtosis
Env. Power
Figure 5.3: Results of the experiment on gradual statistics of the multi-resolution
model, showing mean and standard deviation over subjects and
sound ﬁles. Conditions from left to right: (1) Original sound (hid-
den reference), (2) multi-resolution model based on mean and vari-
ance in the envelope domain, and modulation power, (3) the same
model including across-channel correlations (default MR), (4) the
same model also including skewness and kurtosis, (5) envelope power
shaped noise (low-anchor)
Figure 5.3 shows the results of the experiment on gradual statistics grouped over all
subjects and all sound ﬁles. The reference and the low anchor are clearly set oﬀfrom
the rest of the conditions, although it can be seen that not in all cases the hidden
reference was identiﬁed. The low anchor also shows some deviation from 0 in some
cases. A two-factor repeated measures ANOVA showed that there is a signiﬁcant
eﬀect of the condition on the quality rating (F(2, 12) = 17.840, p < 0.001). Again,
the ANOVA was performed only over the synthesis model conditions, excluding the
hidden reference and the low anchor. In order to examine the diﬀerences between
the diﬀerent models, a post-hoc analysis via a multiple comparison t-test with
Bonferroni correction has been performed. The Bonferroni correction controls the
family wise error rate, to counteract the problem of multiple comparisons, which
lead to type 1 errors. Type 1 errors allude to the fact that when the number of
hypotheses in a test is increased, this also heightens the chance of falsely rejecting
the null hypothesis. This showed statistical signiﬁcance between conditions 2 and
3 (p = 0.011), and conditions 2 and 4 (p = 0.009), but not between conditions 3
and 4 (p = 0.128). This means, that omitting correlation statistics lead to minor,
but signiﬁcant decrease in synthesis quality. Adding the higher order moments,
skewness and kurtosis, on the other hand, was not found to signiﬁcantly improve
the performance.
In ﬁgure 5.4, the sound ﬁles are grouped into sound textures (left) and non-texture
31/57
==PAGE:50==
5.2. Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics
sounds (right).
The latter class was expected to exhibit greater diﬀerences be-
tween the conditions, as it is the temporally more complex class. Again, the two-
factor repeated measures ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the mod-
els (F(2, 12) = 12.386, p < 0.001 for the sound textures, F(2, 12) = 6.468, p < 0.012
for the non-texture sounds). A post-hoc multiple comparison test with Bonferroni
correction on the sound textures showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between condi-
tions 2 and 3 (distance between the means dm = 3.611, p = 0.046), and condi-
tions 2 and 4 (with similar dm = 3.151, p = 0.011), but not between conditions
3 and 4 (p = 0.237). For the non-texture sounds the Bonferroni-corrected multi-
ple comparison test showed only a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between conditions 2 and 4
(dm = 7.619, p = 0.028), but not between conditions 2 and 3 (p = 0.209), and condi-
tions 3 and 4 (p = 1). Therefore, the multi-resolution model of medium complexity
with across-channel correlations but without skewness and kurtosis was chosen as
the model. The quality increase for the included correlations might be relatively
minor, but for some sounds, even if few in number in this test set, they yield a
perceivable diﬀerence.
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MUSHRA score
Original
MR no corr.
MR (default)
+Skewness
+Kurtosis
Env. Power
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original
MR no corr.
MR (default)
+Skewness
+Kurtosis
Env. Power
Texture sounds
Non-texture sounds
Figure 5.4: Results of the experiment on gradual statistics of the multi-resolution
model, showing mean and standard deviation over subjects and
sound ﬁles, for the subgroups sound textures (left) and non-texture
sounds (right). Conditions from left to right: (1) Original sound
(hidden reference), (2) multi-resolution model based on mean and
variance in the envelope domain, and modulation power, (3) the
same model including across-channel correlations (default MR), (4)
the same model also including skewness and kurtosis, (5) envelope
power shaped noise (low-anchor)
In order to get a better understanding of the spread of the results over the diﬀerent
subjects and sound ﬁles, ﬁgure B.2 in the appendix shows box plots of the results
of the subjects and sound ﬁles. This clearly shows some of the problems of the
MUSHRA test. Even though the reference and a low anchor are provided so that
all subjects are forced to use the same range, the interpretation of the scale still
is very subjective. The distribution over the diﬀerent sound ﬁles illustrates the
32/57
==PAGE:51==
5.3. Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
dependance of the synthesis quality on the target sound. Some sounds are simply
closer to noise in the distribution of their statistics and therefore easier to synthesise,
other sounds are more challenging.
5.3
Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MUSHRA score
Original
MR (default)
L(wn)min=50 ms
L(wn)min=200 ms
Envelope
Power
Figure 5.5: Results of the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution,
showing mean and standard deviation over subjects and sound ﬁles.
Conditions from left to right: (1) Original sound (hidden reference),
multi-resolution model with (2) L(wn)min = 5 ms (default MR), (3)
L(wn)min = 50 ms, (4) L(wn)min = 200 ms, (5) envelope power
shaped noise (low-anchor)
In this experiment the synthesis results from the model with three diﬀerent mini-
mum window durations were compared. Figure 5.5 shows the results grouped over
all subjects and sound ﬁles. In this test the hidden reference was identiﬁed much
more reliably compared to the other two tests. A two-factor repeated measures
ANOVA showed that there is a signiﬁcant eﬀect of the minimum window duration
on the quality rating (F(2, 12) = 73.480, p < 0.001). An increase in the minimum
window duration L(wn)min leads to a gradual degradation in the synthesis quality.
The diﬀerence between the conditions with L(wn)min = 5 ms and L(wn)min = 50 ms
was signiﬁcant, but relatively small (dm = 5.277, p = 0.007). The increase from a
window duration of 50 ms to 200 ms leads to more drastic degradation in quality
(dm = 14.966, p = 0.001).
Figure 5.6 shows the results grouped over sound textures (left) and non-texture
sounds (right). Since the sound textures by deﬁnition remain constant over time
in their signal properties, no strong inﬂuence of the minimum window duration
was expected. The non-texture sounds, in contrast, should be degraded heavily
with an increase in L(wn)min. Interestingly, this tendency is not reﬂected in the
33/57
==PAGE:52==
5.3. Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MUSHRA score
Original
MR (default)
L(wn)min=50 ms
L(wn)min=200 ms
Envelope
Power
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original
MR (default)
L(wn)min=50 ms
L(wn)min=200 ms
Envelope
Power
Texture sounds
Non-texture sounds
Figure 5.6: Results of the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolu-
tion, showing mean and standard deviation over subjects and sound
ﬁles, for the subgroups sound textures (left) and non-texture sounds
(right). Conditions from left to right: (1) Original sound (hidden
reference), multi-resolution model with (2) L(wn)min = 5 ms (de-
fault), (3) L(wn)min = 50 ms, (4) L(wn)min = 200 ms, (5) enve-
lope power shaped noise (low-anchor)
data. In general, all conditions are rated lower compared to the sound textures,
but the inﬂuence of the minimum window duration does not show great diﬀerence
between sound textures (F(2, 12) = 54.291, p < 0.001) and non-texture sounds
(F(2, 12) = 38.116, p < 0.001). In the case of the latter group, the increase of
L(wn)min from 5 ms to 50 ms does not yield a signiﬁcant change in the quality rating
(p = 0.616). Increasing L(wn)min from 50 ms to 200 ms, in contrast, drastically
reduces the synthesis quality for sound textures (dm = 14.156, p = 0.004) as well
as non-texture sounds (dm = 16.452, p = 0.002).
Figure B.3 in the appendix shows box plots of the results over the diﬀerent subjects
and the diﬀerent sound ﬁles.
Again the degradation with increasing minimum
window duration was expected to be higher for the non-texture sounds.
This,
however, could not be conﬁrmed.
34/57
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model
The proposed multi-resolution model was compared to the long-term model from
McDermott et al. (2013). The experimental results from section 5.1 showed that
the multi-resolution model allows for an improved synthesis quality, especially for
temporally complex stimuli like the non-texture sounds. Besides the enhancement
of the perceptual quality, another goal of this approach was to reduce the number
of statistics required for a perceptually suﬃcient synthesis. The intuition was, that
the higher-order moments as well as correlations in the envelope domain should be
captured by the marginals in the modulation domain. Thus, the only marginals
computed at the envelope domain were the mean and the coeﬃcient of variance.
This reduction of the captured statistics was motivated by considerations of the
neurological foundation of the diﬀerent statistics. However, it constitutes a trade-
oﬀin the amount of captured information, as discussed further below.
The original model (McDermott et al., 2009; McDermott and Simoncelli, 2011;
McDermott et al., 2013; McWalter and Dau, 2013), which served as inspiration for
the proposed multi-resolution model, was tailored towards the synthesis of sound
textures, whose statistical properties remain constant over time. The long-term
model achieved a satisfactory synthesis quality for sound textures, as expected.
The temporal homogeneity of this class of sounds caters to the models reliance on
long-term, time-averaged statistics. Thus, by the nature of its design, it is bound
to fail for most of the more complex sounds presented in this thesis. The multi-
resolution model addresses this diﬃculty by increasing the temporal resolution in
the modulation domain, which leads to better resolved temporal details, as can
also be seen in ﬁgure 6.1. In the spectrogram for the original sound ’birds-swamp’
(upper left panel), the periodic bird call can be clearly identiﬁed by the distinct
peaks reaching up to roughly 4 kHz. The proposed multi-resolution model (bottom
left panel) can replicate these features with their characteristic temporal structure,
while the long-term model-processed signal (centre left panel) exhibits the same
frequency distribution and amount of detail but completely lacks the temporal
structure. The same can be observed for the ’typewriter’ sound (centre column),
35/57
==PAGE:54==
6.1. Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model
Discussion
which consists almost entirely of transients. For the ’dozer’ (right column), this
is less obvious, but another issue becomes apparent: none of the two models is
able to properly resolve the strong harmonic structure of the signal. This was also
noticed during the listening experiment. So, while the proposed model seems to be
able to capture temporal detail, for the synthesis of strong harmonic signals, pitch
information would need to be incorporated into the model.
(a) ’birds-swamp’ - Original
(b) ’dozer’ - Original
(c) ’typewriter’ - Original
(d) ’birds-swamp’ - LT
(e) ’dozer’ - LT
(f) ’typewriter’ - LT
(g) ’birds-swamp’ - MR
(h) ’dozer’ - MR
(i) ’typewriter’ - MR
Figure 6.1: Spectrograms for the comparison of the multi-resolution model (MR)
and the long-term model (LT). The ﬁgure shows the spectrogram
of the original signal (top), the long-term version (middle), and
the multi-resolution version (bottom). Signals: ’birds-swamp’ (left),
’dozer’ (middle), and ’typewriter’ (right)
36/57
==PAGE:55==
Discussion
6.1. Comparison of multi-resolution and long-term model
The improved synthesis quality is due to the multi-resolution processing scheme in
the modulation domain, described in section 3.3.2. The multi-resolution process-
ing scheme is visualised by ﬁgures 6.2a and 6.2a, showing the long-term modulation
spectrum and the multi-resolution modulation spectrogram for the 26th ﬁlter with a
centre frequency of 3426 Hz, respectively. While those are two diﬀerent representa-
tions, they highlight the same signal characteristics, as e.g. the peak at modulation
frequencies between 5 Hz and 20 Hz. This peak is very distinctive for the sound
of the ’birds-swamp’, and attributed to the periodic bird call. One might note the
similarity between the modulation spectrogram and ﬁgure 6.1a, which show the
same signal excerpt. In contrast to the proposed model, McDermott et al. (2013)
calculated the modulation statistics as log-term averages over the entire duration
of the signal. Note, that there the modulation variance was captured, whereas in
the proposed model the modulation power was captured. Since the modulation
channels are zero-mean bandpass ﬁlters, variance and power are equivalent, except
for the ﬁrst modulation channel, which is a low pass ﬁlter. Note also, how the mod-
ulation power is normalised with regards to the sub-band variance. This serves to
achieve maximally orthogonal statistics and decouple the modulation domain from
the envelope domain. This decoupling of the modulation domain from the envelope
domain is further discussed in section 6.6.
80
344
834
1742
3426
6548
1.3
2.5
5
10
20
40
80
160
 
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
 
Modulation Channel (Hz)
dB
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
(a) Long-term modulation spectrum
0
1
1
3
5
10
20
40
80
160
 
Peripheral Channel 3426 (Hz)
Time [sec]
 
Modulation Channel (Hz)
dB
−20
−15
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
(b) Multi-resolution modulation spectrogram
for the 26th peripheral channel, with a cen-
tre frequency of fc = 3426 Hz.
Figure 6.2: Long-term modulation spectrum and multi-resolution modulation
spectrogram for the sound ’birds-swamp’
In the original model by McDermott et al. (2013), across-channel and between-
channel correlations were captured as well. Across-channel correlations (C1) de-
scribe the correlation across cochlear channels for a ﬁxed modulation channel, while
between-channel correlations (C2) capture the correlation across modulation chan-
nels for a ﬁxed cochlear channel. McWalter and Dau (2013) found the C2 correla-
tions to be of negligible perceptual signiﬁcance, and therefore only C1 correlations
(based on three neighbouring sub-bands) were taken into account for the long-term
model (LT). In the proposed multi-resolution model the across-channel modula-
tion correlations (C1) were omitted as well. This was decided upon for reasons
of stability of the convergence process, and since perceptual quality was already
high without their inclusion. The other moments in the modulation domain were
37/57
==PAGE:56==
6.2. Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics
omitted, since their eﬀect on the synthesised textures was weak (McDermott and
Simoncelli, 2011).
While the statistics captured by the model were reduced and the processing scheme
in the modulation domain altered, most of the main principles of McDermott’s ap-
proach still apply in this framework. As McDermott found, most sound textures
can be captured by the long-term statistics, if all statistics are imposed and the
processing stages are biologically inspired. Changing the ﬁlter spacing in the enve-
lope or modulation domain, or removing the compression impaired the perceptual
quality. Therefore, the auditory model applied by McDermott et al. (2013) and
McWalter and Dau (2013) is maintained in the proposed model.
For most textures, gradually reducing the number of imposed statistics leads to
a reduced perceptual quality as well.
Some textures might not be impaired by
omitting a statistic class, since the distribution of that statistic might already be
close to noise. This is highly dependent on the texture. The analysis-synthesis of
water sounds is not aﬀected crucially by the omission of correlation statistics, since
water sounds are highly uncorrelated. In contrast, broadband and transient sounds
would be impaired drastically in the long-term model. In fact, if ﬁre textures are
synthesised without correlation statistics, the result is a very water-like sounding
texture (see McDermott et al., 2009).
6.2
Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics
In order to understand the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent statistics on the synthesis qual-
ity, a listening experiment with diﬀerent implementations of the multi-resolution
model was conducted (see section 4.2.2). As can be seen in the experimental results
from 5.2, the diﬀerent implementations (once excluding correlations and once in-
cluding skewness and kurtosis) of the multi-resolution model yield almost identical
quality ratings in the listening experiment as the default version with across-channel
correlations but without skewness and kurtosis. Figure 6.3 further illustrates this, as
the two spectrograms show only minor diﬀerences between the two implementations.
This suggests the conclusion that multi-resolution processing in the modulation do-
main allows for an omission of some of the captured statistics. The higher-order
moments can be omitted without a signiﬁcant loss in synthesis quality. As evident
in ﬁgure 6.4, the multi-resolution model, while not explicitly imposing skewness
and kurtosis, shows only minor deviations from the target statistics. The long-
term model matches all marginal moments so precisely, that it cannot be seen in
the ﬁgure. The same holds for the multi-resolution model for the mean and the
coeﬃcient of variance.
The inﬂuence on the synthesis quality is diminished not only for the higher-order
moments, but also the across-channel envelope correlations. It is suggested that the
higher temporal resolution in the modulation domain at least partly captures the
correlations. Figure 6.5 conﬁrms this as the across-channel correlations are largely
captured, even while not explicitly imposed by the model. Some deviations from
the target can be detected, but only of small magnitude. Both of the diﬀerent
implementations can also be seen in ﬁgure 6.3.
The high similarity of the two
diﬀerent implementations spectrograms further illustrates, that the inﬂuence of the
38/57
==PAGE:57==
6.2. Inﬂuence of the gradual statistics
(a) MR excluding correlations
(b) MR including skewness and kurtosis
Figure 6.3: Spectrograms for gradual statistics of the multi-resolution model
(MR) for the sound ’birds-swamp’
higher-order marginals as well as the correlation statistics is close to negligible
and may therefore be discarded. The across-channel correlations still lead to an
increased quality in some cases (dependent on the target sound), but their eﬀect is
less profound than for the long-term model . The quality increase depends strongly
on the properties of the target sound, and is evident mainly for transient and
broadband sounds.
50
273
1486
8097
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Mean
50
273
1486
8097
10
−2
Coefficient of Variance
50
273
1486
8097
0
2
Skewness
50
273
1486
8097
3
10
Kurtosis
Figure 6.4: Envelope marginal moments for the original sound ’birds-swamp’
(red), the multi-resolution synthesis (green), and the long-term syn-
thesis (blue). As a reference, the marginals for pink noise (pink,
dashed) are also included.
39/57
==PAGE:58==
6.3. Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
238
834
2192 5287
238
834
2192
5287
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
238
834
2192 5287
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
238
834
2192 5287
 
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 6.5: Envelope correlations for the original sound ’birds-swamp’ (left), the
multi-resolution model without correlations (middle), and their ab-
solute diﬀerence (right).
6.3
Inﬂuence of the temporal resolution
Since the main drawback of the proposed model is the high amount of measured
data, a reduction of this parameter is of main concern. One way of doing so is
limiting the minimum window duration in the multi-resolution domain. This was
tested in section 5.3 and demonstrated to lead to a gradual degradation of the
synthesis quality.
The reduced temporal resolution is evident especially for the
very transient signals, where the temporal smearing can be observed most easily,
as is illustrated in ﬁgure 6.6 for the ’typewriter’ sound.
Interestingly, the degradation of the perceptual quality does not only concern the
non-texture environmental sounds. It shows at least the same inﬂuence on the tem-
porally homogeneous sound textures. This was unexpected since they are assumed
not to rely on high temporal resolution, as they are deﬁned by their statistical
properties being constant over time. The eﬀect of increasing the minimum win-
dow duration from 5 ms to 50 ms on the perceptual quality, however, is more
pronounced for sound textures than for non-texture sounds. For the non-texture
sounds, the diﬀerence between the multi-resolution model with L(wn)min = 5 ms
and L(wn)min = 50 ms lies below signiﬁcance level. An analysis of the distribu-
tions of the marginal moments of the diﬀerent sounds showed a strong eﬀect of
the reduced temporal resolution in the upper modulation channels. The magni-
tude of this eﬀect was very dependent on the target sound (see ﬁgure 6.7), and
neither homogeneous among the sound textures nor the non-texture environmental
sounds. Strong discrepancies to the distributions of the marginal moments of the
target sound could mainly be observed for very transient sounds with high correla-
tions. As ﬁgure 6.8 shows, even a reduction of the temporal resolution in the upper
modulation channels to 400 ms has no noteworthy eﬀect on the across-channel cor-
relations. Thus, the decrease in quality must stem from the strong onsets, which the
model cannot follow rapidly enough. This, in turn, leads to the temporal smearing
and a divergence in the distributions of the marginal moments.
40/57
==PAGE:59==
6.4. Sparsity of representation
(a) L(wn)min = 50 ms
(b) L(wn)min = 200 ms
Figure 6.6: Spectrograms on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolution in the
multi-resolution model
50
273
1486
8097
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Mean
50
273
1486
8097
10
−2
Coefficient of Variance
50
273
1486
8097
0
2
Skewness
50
273
1486
8097
3
10
20
Kurtosis
(a) Sound: ’typewriter’
50
273
1486
8097
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Mean
50
273
1486
8097
10
−2
Coefficient of Variance
50
273
1486
8097
0
2
Skewness
50
273
1486
8097
3
10
Kurtosis
(b) Sound: ’birds-swamp’
Figure 6.7: Envelope marginal moments for the original signal (red), the multi-
resolution synthesis (green), L(wn)min
=
50 ms (blue), and
L(wn)min = 200 ms (black).
As a reference, the marginals for
pink noise (pink, dashed) are also included.
6.4
Sparsity of representation
There is a trade-oﬀbetween the number of captured statistics and the total amount
of measured data (see section 3.4). The higher temporal resolution in the upper
modulation channels, due to the multi-resolution processing scheme, leads to a
greater amount of total measured data. At the same time, it allows for omission
of some of the captured statistics, namely skewness and kurtosis.
The general
idea is that all higher-order moments can be reﬂected by lower-order marginal
statistics at a higher processing stage, see McDermott and Simoncelli (2011). One
way of reducing the measured data is to increase the minimum window duration,
41/57
==PAGE:60==
6.5. Neuronal basis of statistical representations
238
834
2192 5287
238
834
2192
5287
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
238
834
2192 5287
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
238
834
2192 5287
 
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 6.8: Envelope correlations for the original sound ’birds-swamp’ (left), the
multi-resolution model with L(wn)min = 400 ms (middle), and their
absolute diﬀerence (right).
as discussed above. A reduction of the temporal resolution to 50 ms or 200 ms
cuts the amount of measured data by one third or two thirds. Additionally, this
leads to a distinctly degraded synthesis quality for sound textures as well as non-
texture sounds. Therefore, it is considered as not worthwhile. A comparison of
the captured data points for the diﬀerent models was presented in section 3.4. The
proposed model is relatively sparse compared to the noise vocoder by Shannon et al.
(1995), but captures considerably more data (increasing over time) than the original
long-term approach. Essentially, this model represents a statistical sampling of the
noise vocoder, with the extension of the modulation ﬁlter bank. Therefore, the
noise vocoder sets the upper limit on richness of representation and perceptual
quality. This can also be seen in ﬁgure 6.9, which shows the reproduction of a
speech sentence by the proposed synthesis model and the noise vocoder.
Both
models are able to capture the temporal structure and the frequency distribution,
but not the ﬁne structure of the speech and resolve the harmonics only poorly.
This yields intelligible, but not very natural sounding speech. Nonetheless, it is
quite remarkable that intelligible speech synthesis results can be achieved with the
current model.
6.5
Neuronal basis of statistical representations
One of the reasons to discard the higher-order moments, namely skewness and kur-
tosis, concerns the neuronal basis of the statistical moments. Neurological ﬁndings
suggest a neuronal basis of mean and variance computation, correlation statistics,
and modulation channels, as discussed in Joris et al. (2004). The relevance of the
higher-order moments skewness and kurtosis for auditory processing has not really
been determined, despite being known to have a major impact on visual perception,
as discussed in Field (1994).
Langner and Schreiner (1988) observed modulation-frequency selective neurons in
the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus (ICC) of the cat. Baumann et al. (2011)
found evidence for a spectro-temporal map in the primate midbrain. Using func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging, they observed a topographic organisation of
the two fundamental sound dimensions, spectral frequency (tonotopy) and tempo-
42/57
==PAGE:61==
6.5. Neuronal basis of statistical representations
(a) Original
(b) MR synthetic signal
(c) Noise vocoder
Figure 6.9: Spectrograms for the female spoken sentence ’We tried to replace
the coin, but failed.’, for the original signal (top), the multi-resolution
processed signal (left), and the noise vocoded signal based on the
same 34 peripheral channels as the synthesis model.
ral rate or modulation frequency (periodotopy). Their corresponding gradients lie
along perpendicular axes, which suggests an independent processing of spectral and
modulation frequency. Rodríguez et al. (2010) found that modulation-frequency
sensitive neurons in the ICC approximated ﬁlters of constant relative bandwidth,
ﬁtting with the design of the applied modulation ﬁlter bank by Dau et al. (1997).
This provides an equalisation of the modulation power spectrum and enhances the
neural representation of natural sounds. Furthermore, Zaidi et al. (2013) pointed
out that there is considerable overlap between statistical coding of auditory sig-
43/57
==PAGE:62==
6.6. Decoupling of the modulation domain statistics from the envelope domain
nals, as by McDermott et al. (2013), and the coding of general sensory input, from
sound to vision and olfactory. Apparently the diﬀerent sensory inputs share some
similarities in organisation, and therefore it seems reasonable for sensory models to
do so as well, as the sound texture synthesis model by McDermott et al. (2009) was
inspired by work on visual texture processing by Portilla and Simoncelli (2000).
6.6
Decoupling of the modulation domain statistics from
the envelope domain
In the proposed model, the statistics were chosen with the aim to be maximally
orthogonal and independent. If one is to ﬁnd out which statistics are relevant for
the synthesis and which are not, it is of utmost importance that there are only
minimal interdependencies between the diﬀerent statistics. One relationship that
is especially critical is the one between the power in the modulation domain and
the statistics imposed in the envelope domain. The sub-bands should be informed
by the envelope domain statistics only. Therefore, it is important to decouple the
modulation domain statistics from the sub-band statistics (as was done in the long-
term model). This is normally achieved by calculating the ratio of the modulation
power in relation to the sub-band variance or power. Note that the distinction be-
tween variance and power is only relevant for the ﬁrst modulation channel, which is
a lowpass ﬁlter. Since the remaining modulation channels are bandpass ﬁlters, they
are zero-mean, thus variance and power are equivalent. This decoupling ensures
that the modulation power statistics are captured as relative values instead of total
values. If the modulation domain is not decoupled, then it might inform and shape
the sub-band. This is critical because of the increased temporal resolution of the
multi-resolution model in the upper modulation channels. If the modulation do-
main informs the sub-band, the high resolution is reﬂected in the envelope domain
as well. This leads to a conceptual proximity to the noise vocoder by Shannon et al.
(1995).
In decoupling the two domains, one can chose between dividing by the sub-band
variance or the sub-band power, which is equal to decoupling the variance or the
mean, respectively. In the ﬁrst case, the mean of the synthetic noise signal is added
to the modulation channel signal. In the second case, the mean of the target signal
is added to the modulation channel signal. Additionally, in the proposed multi-
resolution processing scheme, the question arises whether to decouple on a global
or on a local level. If the decoupling is performed on a global level, then the mean
respective variance is computed as a long-term average over the entire signal. If
the decoupling is performed on a local level, then the mean respective variance is
computed in the time window corresponding to that of the modulation domain. In
the long-term model, the decoupling is always performed globally, since all values
are computed as long-term averages. In the proposed model, a global decoupling
was found to be eﬀectively equal to no decoupling at all, since it represents a linear
scaling factor.
Therefore, a local decoupling was implemented test-wise in the
multi-resolution model as well. However, this did not produce acceptable synthetic
sounds. For that reason, the decoupling of the sub-band variance was performed
on a global level. The mean was not decoupled, i.e. the mean of the target signal
was added on a local level.
44/57
==PAGE:63==
6.6. Decoupling of the modulation domain statistics from the envelope domain
(a) (default) MR
(b) MR with decoupled mean
(c) MR with decoupled variance
(d) MR with decoupled mean and variance
Figure 6.10: Spectrograms showing the inﬂuence of locally decoupling the mean
and the variance in the modulation domain for the sound ’birds-
swamp’
In ﬁgure 6.10, the diﬀerent combinations of locally decoupling the mean and the
variance in the modulation domain are shown. The decoupling of the mean leads to
some errors in the synthesis, especially the oﬀset eﬀect in the beginning of the signal.
However, the general signal structure is maintained and the sound, while degraded
in quality, can still be easily identiﬁed. In contrast, the decoupling of the variance
completely corrupts the synthesis process and results in some unrelated noise sound.
This suggests that, without a (local) decoupling from the sub-band variance, the
modulation power statistics inform and shape the sub-band.
Furthermore, this
seems to be necessary for a suﬃcient synthesis. In order to test this hypothesis, the
’birds-swamp’ sound was synthesised by imposing only the modulation power in
the multi-resolution model, and omitting all the statistics in the envelope domain.
This was done with, and without decoupling the mean.
45/57
==PAGE:64==
6.6. Decoupling of the modulation domain statistics from the envelope domain
50
273
1486
8097
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Mean
50
273
1486
8097
0.005
0.05
Coefficient of Variance
50
273
1486
8097
0
2
Skewness
50
273
1486
8097
3
10
Kurtosis
Figure 6.11: Envelope marginal moments for the original sound ’birds-swamp’
(blue), the modulation-power-only MR-synthesised signal with
(green) and without decoupling the mean (red). As a reference,
the marginals for pink noise (pink, dashed) are also included.
Figure 6.11 shows a comparison of the marginals of these two modulation-power-
only MR-synthesised signals, against the original signal.
Figure 6.12 shows the
across-channel correlations for the same signals, while ﬁgure 6.13 compares the
spectrograms of the two modulation-power-only MR-synthesised signals.
238
834
2192 5287
238
834
2192
5287
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
238
834
2192 5287
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
238
834
2192 5287
 
Peripheral Channel (Hz)
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 6.12: Envelope correlations for the sound ﬁle ’birds-swamp’, for the origi-
nal signal (left), the modulation-power-only MR-synthesised signal
with (middle) and without decoupling the mean (right).
From these ﬁgures, it is evident that the modulation power statistics actually do
inform and shape the sub-band, as long as they are not decoupled from the mean.
While the marginals as well as the correlations are not explicitly imposed, they seem
to be captured by the multi-resolution processing, to some degree. The marginal
moments appear to be more directly coupled to the modulation power, than the
correlation statistics, as for the latter, the introduced error is somewhat larger.
Still, in general, the correlations of the target signal are essentially captured. The
similarity of the synthetic to the original signal manifests itself especially in the
46/57
==PAGE:65==
6.7. Outlook
spectrogram, compare ﬁgure 6.13a to 6.1a.
As soon as the mean is decoupled,
however, the envelope statistics deviate strongly from the target.
This further
highlights that global decoupling is equivalent to not decoupling at all. However,
McDermott and Simoncelli (2011) also found that the diﬀerent statistics are not
completely independent: constraining the other statistics, forced the marginals
closer to the target, without being explicitly imposed. It might be the case that a
strict independence of the statistics is not achievable.
(a) without decoupled mean
(b) with decoupled mean
Figure 6.13: Spectrogram for the modulation-power-only MR-synthesised sig-
nals, without decoupled mean (left) and with decoupled mean
(right).
6.7
Outlook
In order to reduce the number of total measured data, the model could be embed-
ded in a larger framework which scales the number of captured statistics and the
temporal resolution according to the properties of the target signal. This seems a
reasonable approach, since the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent imposed statistics on the
perceptual synthesis quality was highly dependent on the target sound. Some very
noise-like sounds might be synthesised well with marginals in the envelope domain
only, while other sounds require a more complex representation.
It is plausible
to deﬁne an objective measure of distance to the target signal (based on the sta-
tistical SNR) and scale the complexity of the synthesis model according to this
distance measure. The parameters which would probably beneﬁt most from scaling
are the minimum window duration and the inclusion or exclusion of across-channel
correlation statistics, depending on the target sound. Also, only a subset of the
modulation channels might be considered, by introducing an adapted binary mask
in the modulation domain, since not all modulation channels are informative for
each sound. It should be noted though, that this proposed scaling approach might
represent a rather technical solution and not one that is motivated by principles of
auditory processing. Still, Nelken and de Cheveigné (2013) found that the texture
47/57
==PAGE:66==
6.7. Outlook
synthesis model by McDermott et al. (2013) presents one very probable pathway
of auditory information processing, yet needs to be supported by other, more tem-
porally reﬁned pathways. Additionally, Ulanovsky et al. (2003) observed neurons
in the primary auditory cortex of the cat, that responded strongly to rare auditory
events. Thus, while sound textures might be summarised in the auditory system
by their long-term statistics, single sound events present at the same time are most
likely processed by more complex systems. Or, as Nelken and de Cheveigné (2013)
put it: they are forming a ’skeleton of events on a bed of texture’.
48/57
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, a multi-resolution model for the synthesis of environmental sounds
was proposed.
It is inspired by the sound texture analysis-synthesis model by
McDermott et al. (2013).
Whereas the latter model produced suﬃcient results
for the temporally heterogenous class of sound textures, it failed to cover more
temporally complex sounds. This short-coming was addressed by implementing a
multi-resolution processing scheme in the modulation domain, inspired by the multi-
resolution speech intelligibility model, mr-sEPSM, by Jørgensen et al. (2013). This
increased the perceptual quality of the synthesis, especially for temporally complex
non-texture sounds, as demonstrated in corresponding listening experiments.
Analysis of the signal properties demonstrated improved quality due to higher tem-
poral resolution in the modulation domain. Furthermore, the multi-resolution pro-
cessing scheme allowed to discard some of the ’original’ statistics that were essential
for the long-term texture synthesis model, namely skewness and kurtosis. An anal-
ysis of the distributions of the marginals in the proposed model, showed that they
are captured even though they are not explicitly imposed. The proposed model also
appears to have a better neurological foundation, as ﬁndings suggest that mean and
variance as well as modulations are coded at a neural level. In the proposed model,
envelope correlations were included.
The experimental results as well as signal
analysis showed, however, that their contribution to the perceptual quality of the
synthesis is far less crucial in the proposed framework than in the long-term model,
since they are partly captured by the multi-resolution processing of the modulation
power.
There is a trade-oﬀbetween the number of statistics and the total amount of mea-
sured data. The multi-resolution processing scheme allows to discard the higher-
order moments, but the high amount of measured data of the proposed model is
clearly a major drawback. It decidedly exceeds the long-term model in richness of
representation. Still, it is sparse compared to a noise vocoder. The proposed model
represents a statistical sampling of the noise vocoder and, as well as the long-term
model, reveals the same shortcomings in properly resolving the harmonic structure.
The model was further tested with increased minimum window duration, which
49/57
==PAGE:68==
Conclusion
is equivalent to a decrease in the temporal resolution of the upper modulation
channels. This was found to reduce the amount of measured data, but gradually
decreased the synthesis quality. The degree of degradation depends largely on the
target sound and no generalisation of eﬀect over either sound textures or non-
texture sounds could be found.
Thus, this approach was considered not to be
worthwhile.
The statistics captured in the original long-term model were chosen to be maximally
orthogonal and independent.
In order to achieve this, the modulation domain
statistics have to be decoupled from the sub-band envelope domain. An analysis
of the signal properties demonstrated that a strict decoupling is not realised in the
proposed model. Therefore, the sub-band envelope statistics are heavily informed
by the modulation power statistics. This appears to be necessary for a suﬃcient
perceptual synthesis quality. However, McDermott and Simoncelli (2011) also found
that the diﬀerent statistics are not completely independent. It might be the case
that a strict independence of the statistics is not achievable.
50/57
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
Attias, H. and C. E. Schreiner
1997. Temporal low-order statistics of natural sounds. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, Pp. 27–33.
Ballas, J. A.
1993. Common factors in the identiﬁcation of an assortment of brief everyday
sounds. Journal of experimental psychology: human perception and performance,
19(2):250.
Baumann, S., T. D. Griﬃths, L. Sun, C. I. Petkov, A. Thiele, and A. Rees
2011. Orthogonal representation of sound dimensions in the primate midbrain.
Nature neuroscience, 14(4):423–425.
Bruna, J. and S. Mallat
2013.
Audio texture synthesis with scattering moments.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1311.0407.
Dau, T., B. Kollmeier, and A. Kohlrausch
1997. Modeling auditory processing of amplitude modulation. i. detection and
masking with narrow-band carriers.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 102(5):2892–2905.
Field, D. J.
1987. Relations between the statistics of natural images and the response prop-
erties of cortical cells. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 4(12):2379.
Field, D. J.
1994. What is the Goal of Sensory Coding? Neural Computation.
Gaver, W. W.
1993. What in the world do we hear?: An ecological approach to auditory event
perception. Ecological psychology, 5(1):1–29.
Ghitza, O.
2001. On the upper cutoﬀfrequency of the auditory critical-band envelope de-
tectors in the context of speech perception. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 110(3):1628–1640.
Green, D. M., J. A. Swets, et al.
1966. Signal detection theory and psychophysics, volume 1. Wiley New York.
51/57
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
Bibliography
Gulick, W. L., G. A. Gescheider, and R. D. Frisina
1989. Hearing: Physiological acoustics, neural coding, and psychoacoustics. Ox-
ford University Press.
Gygi, B., G. R. Kidd, and C. S. Watson
2004. Spectral-temporal factors in the identiﬁcation of environmental sounds.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 115(3):1252.
Hohmann, V.
2002.
Frequency analysis and synthesis using a gammatone ﬁlterbank.
Acta
Acustica United with Acustica, 88(3):433–442.
Irino, T.
1995. An optimal auditory ﬁlter. In Proc. IEEE Workshop on Apps. of Sig. Proc.
to Audio and Acous., Mohonk.
ITU-R
2014. Recommendation itu-r bs.1534-2: Method for the subjective assessment of
intermediate quality level of audio systems.
Johnson, D. H.
1980. The relationship between spike rate and synchrony in responses of auditory-
nerve ﬁbers to single tones. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
68(4):1115–1122.
Jørgensen, S. and T. Dau
2011. Predicting speech intelligibility based on the signal-to-noise envelope power
ratio after modulation-frequency selective processing. The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America, 130(3):1475–1487.
Jørgensen, S., S. D. Ewert, and T. Dau
2013. A multi-resolution envelope-power based model for speech intelligibility.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 134(1):436–46.
Joris, P. X., C. E. Schreiner, and A. Rees
2004. Neural Processing of Amplitude-Modulated Sounds. Pp. 541–577.
Langner, G. and C. E. Schreiner
1988. Periodicity coding in the inferior colliculus of the cat. i. neuronal mecha-
nisms. Journal of Neurophysiology, 60(6):1799–1822.
Lass, N. J., S. K. Eastham, W. C. Parrish, K. A. Scherbick, and D. M. Ralph
1982. Listeners’ identiﬁcation of environmental sounds. The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America, 72(S1):S93–S93.
Lewicki, M. S.
2002. Eﬃcient coding of natural sounds. Nature neuroscience, 5(4):356–63.
McDermott, J. H., A. J. Oxenham, and E. P. Simoncelli
2009.
Sound texture synthesis via ﬁlter statistics.
In Applications of Signal
Processing to Audio and Acoustics, 2009. WASPAA’09. IEEE Workshop on,
Pp. 297–300. IEEE.
52/57
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
Bibliography
McDermott, J. H., M. Schemitsch, and E. P. Simoncelli
2013. Summary statistics in auditory perception. Nature neuroscience, 16(4):493–
8.
McDermott, J. H. and E. P. Simoncelli
2011. Sound texture perception via statistics of the auditory periphery: evidence
from sound synthesis. Neuron, 71(5):926–40.
McWalter, R.
2012. Sound Texture Synthesis. Master thesis, DTU.
McWalter, R. and T. Dau
2013. Analysis of the Auditory System via Sound Texture Synthesis. Pp. 1114–
1117.
Moore, B. C., R. W. Peters, and B. R. Glasberg
1990. Auditory ﬁlter shapes at low center frequencies. The Journal of the Acous-
tical Society of America, 88(1):132–140.
Moss, W., H. Yeh, J.-M. Hong, M. C. Lin, and D. Manocha
2010. Sounding liquids: Automatic sound synthesis from ﬂuid simulation. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 29(3):21.
Nelken, I. and A. de Cheveigné
2013. An ear for statistics. Nature neuroscience, 16(4):381–382.
Nelken, I., Y. Rotman, and O. B. Yosef
1999.
Responses of auditory-cortex neurons to structural features of natural
sounds. Nature, 397(6715):154–157.
Palmer, A. and I. Russell
1986. Phase-locking in the cochlear nerve of the guinea-pig and its relation to
the receptor potential of inner hair-cells. Hearing research, 24(1):1–15.
Pickles, J. O. and D. P. Corey
1992.
Mechanoelectrical transduction by hair cells.
Trends in neurosciences,
15(7):254–259.
Plack, C. J.
2013. The sense of hearing. Psychology Press.
Portilla, J. and E. P. Simoncelli
2000. A Parametric Texture Model Based on Joint Statistics of Complex Wavelet
Coeﬃcients. 40(1):49–71.
Rodríguez, F. A., C. Chen, H. L. Read, and M. A. Escabí
2010. Neural modulation tuning characteristics scale to eﬃciently encode natural
sound statistics. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30(47):15969–15980.
Saint-Arnaud, N.
1995. Classiﬁcation of sound textures. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
53/57
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
Schwarz, D.
2011. State of the art in Sound Texture Synthesis. DAFx-11, Pp. 1–11.
Shannon, R. V., F.-G. Zeng, V. Kamath, J. Wygonski, and M. Ekelid
1995. Speech recognition with primarily temporal cues. Science, 270(5234):303–
304.
Singh, N. C. and F. E. Theunissen
2003. Modulation spectra of natural sounds and ethological theories of auditory
processing. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 114(6):3394–3411.
Smith, Z. M., B. Delgutte, and A. J. Oxenham
2002.
Chimaeric sounds reveal dichotomies in auditory perception.
Nature,
416(6876):87–90.
Strahl, S. and A. Mertins
2009.
Analysis and design of gammatone signal models.
The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 126(5):2379–2389.
Theunissen, F. E. and J. E. Elie
2014.
Neural processing of natural sounds.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
15(6):355–366.
Ulanovsky, N., L. Las, and I. Nelken
2003. Processing of low-probability sounds by cortical neurons. Nature neuro-
science, 6(4):391–8.
Viemeister, N. F.
1979. Temporal modulation transfer functions based upon modulation thresholds.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 66(5):1364–1380.
Viemeister, N. F. and H. Wakeﬁeld
1991. Temporal integration and multiple looks. 90(August 1991).
Vincent, E.
2009. Mushram: a matlab interface for mushra listening tests (2005).
Zaidi, Q., J. Victor, J. McDermott, M. Geﬀen, S. Bensmaia, and T. A. Cleland
2013. Perceptual spaces: Mathematical structures to neural mechanisms. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 33(45):17597–17602.
54/57
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
Stimuli for test on the inﬂuence of
the minimum window duration
Table A.1: List of stimuli for the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal
resolution, divided into textures and non-textures with corresponding
class
Index
old Index
Texture/Non-Texture
Class
Name
1
2
Texture
animals
birds
2
4
Texture
animals
frogs-crickets
3
5
Texture
environment
ﬁre
4
6
Texture
environment
rain
5
7
Texture
environment
whistling-wind
6
10
Texture
mechanical
jack-hammer
7
11
Texture
mechanical
rustling-paper
8
13
Texture
people
applause
9
15
Texture
water
stream
10
16
Texture
water
water-in-sink
11
17
Texture
water
waves-lake
12
18
Non-Texture
animals
birds-swamp
13
19
Non-Texture
mechanical
dozer
14
20
Non-Texture
mechanical
fast-cars
15
21
Non-Texture
mechanical
frying-bacon
16
22
Non-Texture
mechanical
galloping-horse
17
24
Non-Texture
mechanical
typewriter
55/57
==PAGE:74==
Stimuli for test on the inﬂuence of the minimum window duration
56/57
==PAGE:75==
Appendix B
Boxplots of the test results over
subjects and sound ﬁles
57/57
==PAGE:76==
Boxplots of the test results over subjects and sound ﬁles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
Original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
Multi−Resolution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
Long term
0
50
100
Subjects
Envelope Power
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
10
15
20
 
 
 
Stimuli
Texture sounds
Non-
texture
sounds
Figure B.1: Results of the experiment on the comparison of the multi-resolution
against the long-term model over the 9 subjects and 24 sound ﬁles.
Conditions from top to bottom: (1) Original sound (hidden ref-
erence) (2) (default) multi-resolution model including correlations
(3) long-term model from McDermott et al. (2013) (4) envelope
power shaped noise (low-anchor). On the left (sounds 1 to 17) are
the sound textures, while on the right (sounds 18 to 24) are the
non-texture sounds.
58/57
==PAGE:77==
Boxplots of the test results over subjects and sound ﬁles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
Original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MR no corr.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MR (default)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
+Skew.+Kurt.
0
50
100
Subjects
Envelope Power
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
10
15
20
 
 
 
Stimuli
Texture sounds
Non-
texture
sounds
Figure B.2: Results of the experiment on gradual statistics of the multi-
resolution model over the 7 subjects (left) and 24 sounds (right).
Conditions from top to bottom: (1) Original sound (hidden refer-
ence) (2) multi-resolution model based on mean and variance in the
envelope domain, and modulation power (3) the same model includ-
ing across-channel correlations (default MR) (4) the same model
also including skewness and kurtosis (5) envelope power shaped
noise (low-anchor).
On the left (sounds 1 to 17) are the sound
textures, while on the right (sounds 18 to 24) are the non-texture
sounds.
59/57
==PAGE:78==
Boxplots of the test results over subjects and sound ﬁles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
Original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
MR (default)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
L(wn)min=50 ms
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
L(wn)min=200 ms
0
50
100
Subjects
Env. Power
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
10
15
 
 
 
Stimuli
Texture sounds
Non-
texture
sounds
Figure B.3: Results of the experiment on the inﬂuence of the temporal resolu-
tion over the 7 subjects and 17 sound ﬁles. Conditions from top
to bottom to right: (1) Original sound (hidden reference), multi-
resolution model with (2) L(wn)min = 5 ms (default MR) (3)
L(wn)min = 50 ms (4) L(wn)min = 200 ms (5) envelope power
shaped noise (low-anchor). On the left (sounds 1 to 11) are the
sound textures, while on the right (sounds 12 to 17) are the non-
texture sounds.
60/57
==PAGE:79==
==PAGE:80==
http://www.hea.elektro.dtu.dk/
Department of Electrical Engineering
Hearing Systems Group
Technical University of Denmark
Ørstedsplads 1 building 352
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 39 50
Fax:
(+45) 45 88 05 77
Email: cvo@elektro.dtu.dk
