==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Behavioural design: 
The development of a new design method 
The Technical university of Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master’s thesis by 
Charlotte Gram Hartlev, s103008 
Christine boysen Durazo, s082195 
 
Supervisor:  
philip cash, associate professor,  
DTU management engineering 
 
June 30 2015 
==PAGE:2==
 
==PAGE:3==
Preface 
 
Danish title  
Adfærdsdesign: Udviklingen af en ny designmetode 
 
English title 
Behavioral design: the development of a new design method 
 
Project Description  
Behavioral design is a relatively new concept; a prescriptive design process has therefore yet to be developed. 
The main focus in this study will be on the development of a Behavioral design method. A thorough scientific 
literature review will provide the theoretical foundation, whereas the empirical data will come from a study of the 
previous project work in the behavioral consultancy, /KL.7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project:  
 
Master Thesis in M.Sc. Design and Innovation 
Author:  
 
Christine Boysen Durazo and Charlotte Gram Hartlev  
Supervisor:   
Philip Cash 
Submission date:  
30/06/2015 
Department:   
Management Engineering  
University:  
 
Technical University of Denmark, DTU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
___________________________ 
Charlotte Gram Hartlev, s103008 
Christine Boysen Durazo, s082195 
June 30, 2015  
 
June 30, 2015 
 
==PAGE:4==
!
2!
Abstract  
The purpose of this study was to explore and develop a Behavioral Design Method (BDM), based on the theory 
of Nudging. 
 
A scientific review of the current behavior change literature showed a gap in relation to the translation of the 
Nudging theory into an operational design process. Furthermore, the literature review contributed with insights 
on how to obtain knowledge on behavior, which is essential when changes are desired. 
  
A study was conducted to examine behavioral design processes, contributing a practice perspective to the 
development of the BDM. The study consisted of a project review of previous behavioral design projects in the 
behavioral consultancy, /Kl.7. The result of the study emphasized essential activities and approaches in 
successful behavior design processes.  
 
The synthesis between the theoretical behavioral foundation of the literature review, and the practical 
perspective constituted the basis for the BDM. 
 
The BDM shapes an overall guideline for a behavioral design process. It contains key activities to be performed 
when designing interventions that subconsciously change people’s behavior. A major focus has been given to the 
simplicity of the method, ensuring that designers with no previous education within the field of behavior change 
are given the tools to address the complexity and uniqueness of behavior. 
 
Further research should be performed in order to create an even stronger empirical foundation for the BDM as 
well as to test the usability and comprehensibility of the method. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
!
3!
Nomenclature 
Operationalize 
Operationalization is in this thesis understood as the process of defining a vague concept to make it clear and 
measurable, as well as to understand it in terms of empirical data [Our own definition]. 
 
Choice Architect 
A choice architect has the responsibility for organizing the context in which people make decisions. [Thaler et al, 
2008]. 
 
Target 
A target can in this thesis be understood both as a specific chosen behavior (target behavior) or the person 
(target) for whom the behavior change is desired behavior [Our own definition]. 
 
Priming 
Priming can be understood as the construal of inputs, which serves as the basis for subsequent, consciously-
made judgements [Bargh, 2006]. 
 
In this thesis, priming is defined as the influence a stimulus has on a target to activate a subconscious response 
that corresponds with the chosen stimuli.  
 
Trigger 
A trigger can have a variety of meanings depending on the application context.  
The definition of a trigger used in this thesis is derived from Fogg’s Behavior model, and can be seen as either 
external triggers (e.g. a red light) or internal triggers (walking into a dark house triggers you to turn on the lights).  
 
System 1 and System 2 thinking 
Kahneman describes the human mind as a function of two systems: System 1 thinking and System 2 thinking. 
System 1 is the brain's automatic and intuitive mode of thinking, and System 2 is the brain’s analytical mode. The 
two systems are referred to as fast (System 1) and slow (System 2) thinking [Kahneman, 2002].  
 
Intervention 
An intervention should be understood as a product or system, which may trigger a new behavior. [Our own 
definition.]  
 
Nudging  
Nudging means to steer people's behavior subconsciously in a predictable way, without illuminating people's 
freedom of choice [Thaler et al, 2008]. 
 
Context 
The definition of context comes from Mowday and Sutton: “Stimuli and phenomena that surround and thus exist in the 
environment external to the individual, most often at a different level of analysis.” [Mowday et al, 1993]  
 
 
 
Social norms  
A social norm is a pattern of behavior in a particular group, culture or community that has a jointly-recognized 
agreement regarding accepted or unaccepted behavior. [Krupka et al, 2009] Personal Factors. 
Personal factors should be understood as the insight processes of a person that affect behavior, such as emotion, 
values, beliefs, etc. [Our own definition] 
 
Raspberry Pi 
A Rasberry Pi is a small credit-card sized computer. The device was used by /KL.7 in the project Affaldsadfærd i 
nattelivet in order to count the number of people going through the geographical area of the study.  
 
==PAGE:6==
!
4!
Abbreviation 
BDM = Behavior Design Method 
QCA = Qualitative Comparative Analysis 
DS = Descriptive statistics 
BRS = Behavior Requirements Specification  
 
General Information and Reading Guide 
The thesis is composed of eight chapters and related sections. Throughout the thesis, Chapters and Sections will 
be referred to as chapter x, and section x.  
References will be made continuously and presented in brackets. Ex: [Last name; release year].  
Appendices will be referred to as [Appendix x – Figure or Table x]. 
Web references will be referred to as [Web: name of homepage]. 
==PAGE:7==
!
5!
Appreciations  
The authors would first and foremost like to thank supervisor, Associate Professor Philip Cash from DTU 
Management Engineering, for weekly supervision and support throughout the project, for structuring our many 
thoughts, discussing new perspectives and especially the good laughs along the way.  
A special thank go out to /KL.7 for the good cooperation and for allowing the authors to analyse their many 
projects. Without their cooperation it would not have been possible to make this thesis happen. Another great 
thank goes to our contact person in /KL.7, Behavioural Designer in Energy and Ressources Sebastian Borum 
Olsen, whom has ensure regular contact and scheduling of interviews and sparring along the way – as well as 
functioning as interviewee. A thank also goes to the remaining interviewees from /KL.7, Behavioural Designer 
in Data Simon Bentholm, Behavioural Designer in Health Christian Mølgaard and last but not least Director 
Mikkel Holm Sørensen. Your knowledge has provided the thesis with powerful data.  
The thesis group would also like to give a big thank to Industrial Ph.D student Baris Bekdik from Management 
Engineering, for supporting and supervising the use of Qualitative Comparative Analysis. Without you, we 
would not have succeeded.   
 
A final thank go to Geologist and scientific author, Niels Henriksen, CEO and Partner in Whitebox Per Hartlev 
as well as Partner in Whitebox Jørn Johansen for proofreading the thesis.  
==PAGE:8==
!
6!
Learning objectives 
When the students have completed the thesis, they: 
1. Shall have attained a good understanding of – and be able to reflect on – relevant scientific and engineering 
knowledge within the subject area of the project. 
2. Shall be able to identify relevant scientific problems within the subject area and be able to formulate clear 
and relevant research questions/design problems. 
3. Shall be able to identify and review the relevant scientific literature and, based on a literature review, be able 
to develop a conceptual framework for guiding empirical work. 
4. Shall be able to assess, select and apply appropriate scientific methods, tools and competencies within the 
subject area of the project. 
5. Shall be able to assess, select and apply appropriate design methods, tools and competencies to the project 
problem. 
6. Shall be able to analyze, explain and discuss relevant professional and scientific problems. 
7. Shall be able to manage situations that are complex and unforeseen and that require new solution models. 
8. Shall be able to independently initiate and carry out discipline-specific and cross-disciplinary cooperation and 
assume professional responsibility. 
9. Shall be able to disseminate research-based knowledge as well as the final design approach and outcome.  
10. Shall be able to set up a clear framework for the thesis and communicate their work clearly and in a 
comprehensible manner. 
11. Shall be able to provide proper documentation, including proper referencing throughout the project and 
provide a complete reference list.  
12. Shall adjust the staging of the project based on an assessment of the magnitude of the task, its complexity and desired result. 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
!
7!
Table of Contents 
INTRODUCTION 
9 
1.1 AIM OF THE THESIS 
10 
1.2 RESEARCH QUESTION 
10 
1.3 REPORT STRUCTURE 
10 
1.4 DEFINING BEHAVIORAL DESIGN 
11 
CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW 
13 
2.1 BEHAVIORAL CONCEPTS 
14 
2.1.1 INTERVENTION STRATEGIES 
15 
2.1.2 NUDGING 
17 
2.1.3 BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS AND NEUROMARKETING 
18 
2.1.4 PERSUASIVE TECHNOLOGY 
19 
2.1.5 HABIT CHANGE 
21 
2.1.6. SUMMING UP 
21 
2.2 BEHAVIORAL THEORIES, MODELS AND METHODS 
22 
2.2.1. BEHAVIOR THEORIES AND MODELS 
22 
2.2.2 BEHAVIOR CHANGE THROUGH INTERVENTIONS 
26 
2.2.3 SUMMING UP 
30 
2.3 THEORETICAL FOUNDATION FOR THE BDM 
31 
CHAPTER 3: RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHOD 
33 
3.1 CONTEXT DESCRIPTION 
34 
3.1.1 PROJECT DATA SELECTION 
34 
3.1.2 THE POPULATION 
35 
3.2 SETUP AND DATA COLLECTION 
36 
3.2.1 PREPARATION STAGE 
37 
3.2.2 COLLECTION STAGE 
37 
3.2.3 VALIDATION STAGE 
40 
3.3 METHOD OF ANALYSIS: QUALITATIVE COMPARATIVE ANALYSI 
40 
3.3.1 INTRODUCTION TO QCA 
40 
3.3.2 QCA OF THE OVERALL PROJECT PROCESS 
42 
3.3.3 QCA BETWEEN CATEGORIES 
42 
3.3.4 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS 
43 
CHAPTER 4: QUALITATIVE RESULTS 
45 
4.1 OVERALL PROJECT PROCESS 
47 
4.1.1 QCA RESULTS ON THE OVERALL PROJECT PROCESS STEPS 
48 
4.1.2 PROJECT SIZE 
48 
4.2 GROUPING OF MAIN PROJECT STEPS 
49 
4.3 PRACTICAL FOUNDATION FOR THE BDM 
60 
CHAPTER 5: A NEW BEHAVIORAL DESIGN METHOD 
61 
5.1 THE BEHAVIORAL DESIGN METHOD 
63 
5.2 BDM PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
63 
5.2.1 OVERALL BEHAVIORAL PROBLEM OR NEED STAGE 
63 
5.2.2 DESK RESEARCH PHASE 
64 
5.2.3 SCOPING 1 – GATE 
65 
5.2.4 FIELD STUDY PHASE 
65 
5.2.5 SCOPING 2 – GATE 
66 
5.2.6 DEVELOPMENT PHASE 
67 
5.2.7 TESTING – ITERATING STAGE 
68 
CHAPTER 6: DISCUSSION OF THE BDM IN RELATION TO THE LITERATURE REVIEW 
69 
6.1 OVERALL PROCESS STRUCTURE 
70 
6.2 OVERALL BEHAVIORAL PROBLEM/NEED 
71 
6.3 DESK RESEARCH PHASE 
72 
6.3.1 DESK RESEARCH 
72 
6.3.2 ANALYZING THE DATA FROM DESK RESEARCH 
73 
6.4 SCOPING 1 
74 
6.5 FIELD STUDY PHASE 
74 
6.5.1 GETTING INTO THE FIELD AND EXPLORING BEHAVIOR 
74 
6.5.2 ANALYZING THE FIELD STUDY DATA 
75 
==PAGE:10==
!
8!
6.6 SCOPING 2 
75 
6.7 DEVELOPMENT PHASE 
76 
6.7.1 DEVELOPMENT - TRIGGERS AND BEHAVIORAL STRATEGIES 
76 
6.7.2 ASSESSMENT OF INTERVENTIONS 
77 
6.8 ITERATING TESTING STEP 
77 
6.9 SUMMING UP 
77 
CHAPTER 7: LIMITATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
79 
7.1 LIMITATIONS 
80 
7.1.1 DATA ACQUISITION 
80 
7.1.2 INTERVIEWEE BACKGROUND 
80 
7.1.3 LIMITATIONS IN THE USE OF QCA 
80 
7.2 FUTURE IMPLICATIONS 
80 
7.2.1 IMPLICATIONS FOR BEHAVIORAL DESIGN RESEARCH 
80 
7.2.2 IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGNERS 
81 
CHAPTER 8: CONCLUSION 
83 
8.1 FURTHER WORK 
84 
8.1.1 THE STUDY METHOD 
85 
8.2 FINAL WORDS 
85 
CHAPTER 9: REFERENCES 
87 
9.1 BOOKS AND JOURNAL ARTICLES 
88 
9.2 WEB REFERENCES 
91 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
!
9!
 
 
Chapter 1  
Introduction  
==PAGE:12==
!
10!
1.1 Aim of the thesis  
Every day people make thousands of choices, big and small – but not always in the best interest of themselves 
and others. 95% of a person’s decision-making process occurs in the automatic, subconscious mind, which is 
based on intuition [Web: Hbswk]. This opens up the possibility of steering people subconsciously towards 
making better choices, which could improve lives in countless ways. In 2008, Thaler and Sunstein described this 
as Nudging.   
 
A review of current behavior literature has revealed a gap in the operationalization of the Nudging theory – 
making it more than just a theoretical concept with vague applications. Recently, an increasing need has been 
expressed for a practical approach that could aid designers in the use of nudging elements.  
 
Operationalization is to be understood as the practical approach of designing for behavior change. The behavior 
change should be reached through interventions that subconsciously influence behavior. 
 
The aim of this thesis is to develop a new Behavioral Design Method that will endorse the above-stated need, by 
creating process guidelines for designers to subconsciously change people's behavior through interventions. 
 
The hope is that a BDM will achieve a broad application, so that not only designers can benefit from it but also 
large and small companies and researchers as well.  
 
1.2 Research question  
Based on the project description, the following research question was formulated: 
 
What process steps and essential activities should be included in a Behavioral Design Method 
in order to operationalize the nudging theory? 
 
Objectives: 
• 
To develop a comprehensible Behavioral Design Method.   
• 
To create a synthesis between the Nudging theory and practical application of the concept.  
• 
To describe how a new design method fits into the current behavior literature. 
 
1.3 Report structure  
This thesis is composed of eight chapters. The Introduction includes the aim of the thesis and the research 
question.  
 
Chapter 2 outlines the theoretical framework through a literature review, creating a foundation for the thesis.  
Chapter 3 introduces the research design and method chosen for this study. The chapter reviews the study 
approach as well as central considerations related to the consistency and completeness of the study.   
 
In chapter 4, the results of the study will be described and discussed in relation to /KL.7. The study involved an 
analysis of the overall project process in /KL.7 and the related activities conducted in each step.  
 
Chapter 5 describes the developed Behavioral Design Method with an associated project example. This leads to 
chapter 6, in which the Behavioral Design Method is discussed based on the synthesis of the literature review.  
 
==PAGE:13==
!
11!
The two last chapters, 7 and 8, will synthesize the findings thereby outlining the limitations of the thesis, its 
implications and possibilities for further research.   
 
1.4 Defining behavioral design  
In this thesis the following definition of behavior design will be used: 
Design of interventions that change people’s behavior in the antecedent, by affecting the automatic reaction of the brain (System 1).  
==PAGE:14==
!
12!
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
!
13!
 
 
Chapter 2 
Literature Review 
 
==PAGE:16==
!
14!
This chapter presents a review of the literature constituting the basis for behavioral design. The review will 
provide insight into relevant literature, which should be considered when developing the new Behavioral Design 
Method (BDM). 
 
The BDM should fundamentally be based on the concept of nudging. This concept is reviewed (section 2.1.1) to 
determine its specific characteristics, leading to the recognition that there is a gap in the literature regarding its 
operationality.  
 
In order to see where the BDM would add to the existing literature, various behavior change-related concepts 
are explored (section 2.1). These have all applied behavior change in different ways in different fields, ranging 
from economics (section 2.1.1), via Nudging (section 2.1.2) to computer science (section 2.1.3).  
 
The concepts represent the most well-defined theories on how to affect people in order to obtain behavioral 
change and create an adequate framework for behavioral change and design. 
 
The second part of the literature review (section 2.2) aims at synthesizing methods and models describing how to 
understand behavior as well as how to affect it. Firstly, an exploration will be undertaken of theories concerning 
the understanding of behavior and behavior change from a psychological and socio-psychological point of view 
(section 2.2.1). This is followed by a review of concrete methods and models seeking to explain the mechanism 
by which behavior can be changed through interventions (section 2.2.2).  
 
The above-reviewed behavioral concepts, theories and models contribute to defining and outlining important 
perspectives to be incorporated in the BDM.   
 
2.1 Behavioral Concepts 
The aim of this section is to explore different behavior concepts and theories and their related characteristics. 
The review is based on the ABC model (described below) in order to create a basis for comparing the 
differentiated concepts.  
 
As behavioral design involves an intervention (see definition in section 1.4), two overall behavior change 
intervention strategies are reviewed (section 2.1.1). This is followed by a review of four specific behavioral 
concepts starting with Nudging (section 2.1.2). 
 
Antecedent–Behavior–Consequence (ABC model) 
Behavior is a response that happens at an exact moment, and which results in a subsequent action. This model is 
based on the following definition of behavior:  
 
“The actions or reactions of a person or animal in response to external or internal stimuli.” 
[Web: thefreedictionary]. 
 
In other words, behavior can be divided into three aligned parts: an antecedent, a behavior and a consequence, 
also referred to as the ABC model; see figure 2.2 [Miltenberger, 2008]. 
An antecedent comes before behavior and is what may trigger a specific behavior, e.g. the color red triggers an 
awareness, which may lead to the action of stopping for red lights. The behavior is the actual action to specific 
==PAGE:17==
!
15!
stimuli, the action of stopping for red lights. A consequence is what follows the behavior, e.g. when stopping for 
red lights, the consequences could be that the ride takes longer.  
 
 
Figure 2.2:  ABC model 
 
The following behavior concepts will be interpreted in relation to this broad perception of behavior (ABC 
model) and thereby creates a platform for comparing the concepts. The concepts can be interpreted within the 
different stages of the ABC model. 
2.1.1 Intervention strategies  
An element of affecting behavior is to involve some form of intervention before, during or after the execution of 
the behavior. Depending on the desired behavior change, distinctive types of interventions are required, as they 
will affect behavior differently. 
 
Two behavior change intervention strategies, known as the antecedent and consequence strategies, are based directly 
on the ABC model. Antecedent strategies refer to the prevention of a specific behavior before it is conducted, 
and this is achieved through interventions consisting of e.g. information, commitment or goal setting 
[Abrahamse et al, 2005]. Consequence strategies refer to interventions that inform the individual through 
feedback and reward [Abrahamse et al, 2005] with regards to their just-executed behavior. Consequence 
strategies create awareness about a behavior (positive or negative) that has just occurred, in order to change or 
maintain the behavior. This strategy can also influence future behaviors [Robinson, 2007] as it inspires the 
individual to reflect on the behavior. 
 
Both antecedent and consequence strategies aim to change behavior by creating awareness through interventions 
containing either information or reflection. This means that the person has to consciously change the behavior, 
which requires a higher level of motivation from the person compared to changing behavior subconsciously. 
 
Lilley et al (2005) frame different types of behavioral change interventions that can be used before, during or 
after the behavior in order to achieve a more sustainable behavior. Although this is focus, elements in the 
various intervention strategies can be beneficial in a more general perspective related to behavior change. 
 
The interventions are categorized into the following areas: Educational interventions; Technological interventions; and 
Product-led interventions. 
 
Educational interventions consist of three different strategies: 
• 
Linear dissemination of information, based on the assumption that humans are rational and that 
information will increase awareness and thereby lead to a positive action. This strategy draws parallel to 
conventional economics theory (section 2.1.3). 
!
!
!
!
Antecedent! 
Behavior! 
Consequences! 
==PAGE:18==
!
16!
• 
Incentives and penalties. This strategy is often used by governments and can be associated with the 
shoving method (section 2.1.2). 
• 
Guilt strategy. Using guilt to build up a negative feeling to change behavior. 
 
The three different educational interventions correlate to the elements seen in the antecedent and consequence 
strategies, as they affect behavior either prior to or following the action. 
 
The educational intervention perspective is also seen in De Young’s work (1993). De Young talks about three 
antecedent intervention techniques: Informative, Positive motivation and Coercive techniques [De Young, R.; 
1993], where the informative and coercive techniques are closely related to Lilley’s (2005) framing of educational 
interventions. 
 
The effectiveness of technological interventions depends on the interaction with the user, and has been seen in the 
area of sustainability and energy consumption. An example of this is to improve the product’s energy efficiency 
instead of the consumer’s behavior, e.g. in using energy-saving light bulbs. 
 
As with the energy-saving light bulb, the success of some of these interventions requires that certain behaviors 
be maintained. In contrast to other interventions, a change in behavior can lead to a rebound effect – a response 
that offsets the beneficial effects of the new technology. The outcome depends on customer compliance in using 
specific features and selecting the optimized settings [Lilley, 2005] e.g. an eco-washing program. 
 
Product-led interventions are divided into three areas: 
• 
Scripting and behavioral steering emphasize that a product itself can change or create behavior, as the 
product designer has attributed a certain use (script) to the product, which is reflected in the design. The 
intended use can vary from how the product is actually put to use, referred to as de-scription [Akrich, M.; 
1992]. In short the design of the product guides the behavior in the use of the product. 
• 
Eco-feedback builds on the feedback intervention theory [Kluger et al, 1996], which states that providing people 
with information about their task performance will trigger a specific behavior. 
• 
Intelligent products and systems use the avoidance of the user’s decision-making process to prevent 
irresponsible behavior (environmental or social). 
 
Product-led interventions can target behavior change before, during and after the behavior is performed. A 
product can provide feedback, which is consequence-related, but also trigger a specific behavior e.g. through the 
design of the product (script), which is related to the antecedent. 
 
Products are already subconsciously influencing behavior and hold a central and domesticated role in everyday 
life. Therefore, product-led interventions have great potential to change and steer behavior. Consciously 
integrating elements in a product to affect behavior could result in positive patterns of behavior, especially if the 
product is repeatedly used. Repeated use of a product and thereby the repeated performance of a behavior can 
result in the establishment of a habit and a long-term behavior change can be achieved. 
 
The strategies mentioned in this section provide a basic set of methods used to affect behavior, but do not 
describe or outline the more specific elements/factors, which need to be integrated into the intervention to 
affect a specific behavior.  
==PAGE:19==
!
17!
2.1.2 Nudging 
Nudging is one of the newer theories within the field of Behavioral Design, and aims at affecting behavior 
through an understanding of the psychological processes in the human mind. The word “nudging” has within 
recent years become the most commonly used phrasing when talking about behavior change. As Nudging is 
being interpreted in relation to design in many different fields, a specific method or process operationalizing the 
term has yet to be developed. 
 
Looking at the ABC model (figure 2.2), Nudging falls within the Antecedent step as the concept focuses on 
triggering certain behaviors. 
 
Behavioral Economics (section 2.1.3) has the aim of understanding and thereby being able to predict the human 
decision-making process in an economic context. The nudging theory builds on this and uses the achieved 
understanding to change a specific behavior within a certain context through an intervention. 
 
The nudging theory is based on the psychological understanding of the human decision-making process that 
comes from Behavioral Economics. Behavioral Economics aims at understanding what creates a specific 
behavior. To achieve this understanding, Kahneman [Kahneman, 2002] proposed a description of the human 
mind as a function of two systems: intuition (System 1) and reasoning (System 2). System 2 represents the conscious 
self whereas System 1 represents instinctive mental events. This simplistic way of viewing how the mind 
functions adds to the comprehension of human behavior [Kahneman, 1979]. Nudging only intends to change 
behavior through influencing the subconscious part of the human mind (System 1). 
 
The nudge theory was named and popularized in the book “Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and 
Happiness.” [Thaler et al, 2008]. The authors base their work on Kahneman's theories regarding behavioral 
economics and the understanding of the human mind (System 1 and System 2). They define the term as follows: 
 
“A nudge, as we will use the term, is any aspect of the choice architecture  
that alters people’s behavior in a predictable way without forbidding any options  
or significantly changing their economic incentives. To count as a mere nudge,  
the intervention must be easy and cheap to avoid. Nudges are not mandates.  
Putting fruit at eye level counts as a nudge. Banning junk food does not.” 
[Thaler et al, 2008] 
 
As can be interpreted from the definition by Thaler and Sunstein, Nudging is a rather vaguely described notion. 
The result of the unspecific definition is that it creates a broad basis for interpretation. This has led to a wide use 
of behavioral change in the fields of marketing, communication and advertising. This of course adds further to 
the vagueness of the concept. 
 
Thaler and Sunstein described Nudging in a socio-economic context and underpinned the importance of 
freedom of choice and of not using economic incentives when nudging people. This however stands in contrast 
to the more traditional governmental approach where rules and regulations [Local Government Association, 
2013] are used for changing behavior in society. As an example, the method referred to as shoving is what a 
government does when it uses financial disincentives (e.g. taxation on cigarettes) and restricts choices (as in 
preventing takeaway restaurants from setting up close to schools) [Local Government Association, 2013]. In a 
nudging perspective this is exactly seen as eliminating freedom of choice and using economy as incentive for 
changing behavior. This highlights an interesting conflict between how a government usually affects behavior 
versus how Thaler and Sunstein argue it should be done. 
==PAGE:20==
!
18!
 
Interventions associated with Nudging are often seen in the public space trying to guide a specific everyday 
behavior. Examples of these are green footsteps pasted on the streets of Copenhagen guiding people to the trash 
bins [Web: Videnskab] or a fly in the Amsterdam Airport urinals nudging men to decrease spillage [Web: 
Nudges.wordpress]. 
 
Priming is often used as a nudging strategy in order to trigger certain behaviors. Priming affects System 1, which 
can result in subconscious behavior change. This type of intervention results in an immediate response that only 
lasts during the response time (one-time behavior change). In short, priming relies on implicit memory and can 
affect the decision-making process [Gulan, T. et al, 2010]. 
 
The Nudging theory consists of a few overall guidelines mainly extracted from the definition by Thaler and 
Sunstein [Tahler et al, 2008] and is one of the concepts in the behavior literature that is not operationalized.  
 
Although Nudging has been put into practice on several occasions, the act of doing so requires a rather deep 
theoretical knowledge. As the Nudging theory does not describe any methodological approaches on how to 
achieve knowledge of behavior, or how to affect it, the concept lacks operationalization. 
2.1.3 Behavioral Economics and Neuromarketing 
Behavioral Economics and the more recent field of Neuromarketing focus on behavior from a socio-economic 
perspective, seeking to understand and influence society in a broader sense. This perspective makes Behavioral 
Economics and Neuromarketing antecedent strategies. 
 
The starting point for modelling different aspects of human behavior in economics was first presented in 
Conventional Economic theory [Robbins, 1932; Darnton, 2008] and later reinterpreted in other fields. In 
Conventional Economic theory it is stated that humans act rationally and always make ideal decisions [Kollmuss 
et al, 2002]. Psychological experiments, however, demonstrated that the rational choice assumption is not 
realistic [Darnton, 2008], which resulted in a new field called Behavioral Economics. 
 
Behavioral Economics draws attention to the complexity of human behavior. Behavior can consist of multiple, 
conflicting impact factors e.g. inconsistent desires and conflicting motivation [Kara, A., 2009], which makes 
behavior complex. This understanding of the irrationality in human behavior, and the comprehension of human 
choices as well as decision-making processes, has made behavior more predictable and easier to tackle. 
 
The notion that humans are irrational has been operationalized in the field of Neuromarketing. Neuromarketing is 
an effective discipline that improves sales and marketing results by applying the understanding of the human 
subconscious response to marketing stimuli as advertising and other brand-related messages, through 
measurement of the brain [Suomala et al, 2012]. 
 
Neuromarketing also has its limitations with regards to Behavioral Design, as it has no direct link to the act of 
changing behavior, but is an operationalized way of understanding and meeting a customer’s behavior. 
 
Behavioral Economics emphasize the importance of understanding human subconscious behavior. Humans are 
irrational and Neuromarketing operationalizes the process of obtaining this understanding. These two concepts 
clarify that behavior is complex and irrational, emphasizing the necessity of obtaining relevant knowledge and 
understanding about the human decision-making process to successfully affect behavior. 
==PAGE:21==
!
19!
2.1.4 Persuasive Technology 
Persuasive Technology, also referred to as Persuasive Design, is an interdisciplinary research field that focuses on 
design of technologies aimed at changing users’ attitudes or behaviors through conscious persuasion – the 
opposite of Nudging that aims at changing behavior subconsciously. The theory of Persuasive Technology 
implies voluntary change in behavior, attitude or both without the use of coercion or deception [Fogg, 2003; 
Spagnolli et al, 2014]. 
 
Persuasive Technology aims at changing behavior through awareness and reflection (System 2). This is referred 
to in the ABC model as the consequence step (see figure 2.2). The essential difference is the degree of awareness of 
the change in the target. In Nudging, the target is not aware of the change, whereas in Persuasive Technology the 
target volunteers for change. 
 
Persuasive Technology has its origin in the field of computer science, which means that much of the design is 
focused on web sites and mobile applications. However, Persuasive Technology also exceeds the boundaries of 
the web and mobile sphere, being seen in products such as computerized trailers that sit by the roadside and post 
the speed of passing cars [Fogg, 2003]. Persuasive Technology should be understood as technological solutions 
that provide the user with feedback, which leads to some level of reflection (System 2). This could for example 
be an app that incentivizes weight loss by providing informative feedback to the user. 
 
In Persuasive Technology the general thought is that in order for a person to be persuaded, information must be 
presented and the target must pay attention to the argument(s) and comprehend it.  Additionally the persuasion 
relies on the user’s voluntary participation in the persuasion process [Oinas-Kukkonen, 2010] and in general, 
coercion and deceit are not perceived as persuasive elements. 
 
This philosophy is underpinned by the view that persuasive design presupposes that individuals need to be 
convinced to change their attitudes or behavior [Dey; 2013]. This also directs attention towards a more reflective 
action, seen as “to convince” which by definition is: “to bring (as by argument) to belief, consent, or a course of action” 
[Web: Mirriam-Webster dictionary]. From the above it can be concluded that a person must use his/her 
reflective system (System 2) to be persuaded. 
Persuasive Technology in action 
Persuasive Technology tends to use feedback loops to trigger and support behavioral change by affecting our 
reflective thinking (System 2). Feedback can be seen as positive feedback in terms of reward [Fogg, 2002], but 
also as tools that implement persuasion strategies. This is also referred to as the simplification of tracking and 
reinforcement, which has an underlying feedback loop [Müller et al, 2012]. It furthermore leaves the 
interpretation of data to the user. 
 
The feedback is used to create a framework of reflection, which results in learning and knowledge entailing 
change of behavior. Reflection is a process that begins with looking back on a situation (which feedback can 
provide), learning from it and using the gained knowledge in further similar situations. Reflection is learning 
through experiences, and can be used as a mean for developing and changing existing behavior [Clegg, K., 2002]. 
Reflection can deduce during an action, which creates an opportunity to affect the action while it is discharged, 
whereas a reflection on a performed action involves a review of the action and an exploration of the 
understanding [Greenwood, J., 1998]. A reflection stage can lead into double-loop learning, which can create a 
fundamental change of underlying values, assumptions and behaviors. In short, double-loop learning is a theory 
of personal change [Argyris et al, 1978]. 
 
==PAGE:22==
!
20!
Within the field of Persuasive Technology, different branches/field have emerged such as Behavior Change 
Support Systems (BCSS) [Oinas-Kokkonen, 2010] and Explorative Technology [Li et al 2011]. These will be 
presented shortly below.  
 
Subfields within Persuasive Technology 
Fogg, as one of the leading researchers within the field of Persuasive Technology, recommends using computers 
as a way to persuade and motivate people [Fogg, 2003]. He furthermore introduces the word “captology”, which 
is an acronym based on the phrase “computers as persuasive technologies”, that focuses on behavior change 
through human-computer interaction (HCI). 
 
The computer-mediated communication (CMC) is not included in Fogg’s terminology; captology only 
investigates how people interact with computers (HCI) and not through them [Fogg, 2003]. Computer-mediated 
persuasion (CMP) is seen as people persuading others through computers (e.g. discussion forums, blogs or social 
networks), whereas in CMC the computing product is a participant in the interaction and can be a source of 
persuasion [Fogg, 2003]. Fogg’s theories from 2003 do not account for the later development and trends 
introduced by the social media wave, which has subsequently had great influence on human behavior, e.g. how 
we interact through Facebook. CMC thereby gains a whole new role and significance in relation to influencing 
and affecting behavior, as the informative communication is placed in a social context. 
 
Explorative Technology is a branch within the field of Persuasive Technology, which places the focus on 
technology intended to help users explore information about themselves (personal informatics) to support self-
reflection and identify opportunities for changing behavior [Li et al, 2011]. As such it focuses on what kind of 
information the target needs in order to motivate or influence a change in behavior. The central point in 
Explorative Technology is that it is the target itself that is both the choice architect as well as the target. It can also 
be described as in the following statement: “I see Me,” where the “I” self is the subject, the self that is doing the 
action of seeing. The “Me” self is the object, the self being observed [Brown, 1998]. 
 
It is however important to clarify that the will to change behavior in Explorative Technology comes from the 
target itself – and the reflection is a very central part of the process (section 2.2.2). 
 
As one of the few concepts within the field of behavioral science, Explorative Technology invites the user to 
“collect” information over a period of time, and this is made possible by the use of technology. The frequent 
data collecting over a time period makes it possible to see patterns or trends in a given behavior, which can 
reinforce the self-reflection [Li, 2012] and thereby strengthen the action for change. 
 
In Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS) a change in behavior by definition covers the reinforcement, 
alteration and forming of attitudes and behaviors. Thereby saying that one could also reinforce a current attitude 
making oneself more resistant to change, or form a behavior for a specific situation if one does not exist already 
[Oinas-Kukkonen, 2010]. An example of a reinforcement of a present behavior could be how to maintain a 
smoking cessation. Furthermore, BCSS distinguishes itself from Persuasive Technology as presented by Fogg 
[Fogg, 2002] in terms of producing both CMC as well as HCI.  This sheds light on the fact that behavior change 
is not always the goal, but maintaining and reinforcing behavior can be just as consequential. 
 
Persuasive Technology is one of the more effective of the concepts in behavior design, since it clearly 
operationalizes its strategies and puts them into context – an aspect that differentiates the concept from 
Nudging. 
 
==PAGE:23==
!
21!
The approach for changing behavior in Persuasive Technology also distinguishes the concept from Nudging by 
creating awareness and reflection of the persuasion and uses technology for feedback.  
2.1.5 Habit Change 
It has been acknowledged that repeated performance of a specific behavior can result in the establishment of a 
habit [Netemeyer et al, 1991]. Habit change does not fall directly within the definition of the ABC model, as the 
ABC model defines a one-time performed behavior and thereby not a habit. However, habit changes have 
similar characteristics as a behavior change, and are therefore explored. 
 
Habits can be defined as:  
 
“Learned sequences of acts that have become automatic responses to specific cues,  
and are functional in obtaining certain goal or end states.” 
[Verplanken et al, 1999] 
 
Habits are triggered by features of the context, as behavior, which have covaried frequently with past 
performance – including locations, previous actions in sequence or people. Thereby habits become learned 
dispositions to past responses [Neal et al, 2006]. 
 
The close connection between habits and context is also referred to as “context cues”, which broadly refer to 
elements of the performance environment. These can recur as actions are repeated. [Wood et al, 2007] “Direct 
cueing” is a mental representation of a response and is consistently activated in concurrence with representation 
of a context. An example is the action (habit) of putting on your seatbelt when getting into the car (context) 
[Wood et al, 2007] 
 
In terms of behavior change, behavior modification approaches, as used by psychologists, have long recognized 
the benefits of altering performance contexts in order to disrupt habit cueing. [Wood et al, 2007] Also, in social 
psychology the interest in habits has been reinforced by the recognition that much of everyday action is 
characterized by repetition – e.g. up to 45% of everyday behaviors tend to be repeated in the same location. This 
underlines the importance of context change in order to change a specific habit or behavior. Here is an example 
of this: to increase the use of public transportation, a transit service has provided free passes and route 
information to new residents since this group has yet to establish relevant habits and is thus open to influence 
[Neal et al, 2006]. 
 
It is furthermore said that inhibition can contribute productively to behavior change if the suppression of habit 
performance is combined with learning and the action of a new desired behavior. [Wood et al, 2007] This means 
that changing a behavior through the inhibition of a habit demands interventions from several perspectives – a 
trigger that enables the desired new behavior, and provides feedback which could lead to double-loop learning 
[Darnton, 2008]. 
 
Conclusively, there exists a close correlation between changing behavior and changing habits – underlined by the 
importance of context.   
==PAGE:24==
!
22!
2.1.6. Summing up 
In the reviewed behavior concepts and related characteristics, it was seen that Persuasive Technology and 
Nudging were the two most design-oriented concepts within the field of Behavior Change. Behavioral 
Economics constitutes the foundation for both concepts and is the first to address behavior change. Habit 
Formation was seen to be closely related behavior addressing the importance of context.   
 
The main difference between Persuasive Technology and Nudging was found to be their fundamental approach 
to changing behavior. Whereas Persuasive Technology primarily applies the System 2 thinking, Nudging uses 
System 1 thinking. Persuasive Technology is a field that is extensively investigated and includes several 
operationalized methods, all of which apply different behavioral perspectives (section 2.2.2).  
The gap in the behavioral design literature is the missing translation of the Nudging theory into a practical design 
process. This thesis will expand on this gap and base the development of a Behavioral Design Method on the 
theoretical foundation of Nudging. The overall elements that characterize Nudging are:  
 
• 
One-time behavior change; 
• 
The behavior change takes place in the antecedent step; 
• 
The behavior is affected through an intervention; 
• 
People are subconsciously affected (System 1 thinking);  
• 
The target for behavior change must preserve its freedom of choice. 
 
The Behavioral Design Method will focus on bringing the Nudging theory to an operational level for a designer 
to use when aiming to change behavior subconsciously through an intervention.  
 
2.2 Behavioral theories, models and methods 
The scope of the Behavioral Design Method (BDM) to be developed was defined in the previous section as an 
operational approach that facilitates the understanding and affects of behavior through subconscious 
interventions. 
 
The following section will explore existing models, methods and theories, to define how the understanding of a 
specific behavior is achieved and how behavior change is operationalized (Appendix 1). 
 
The first part (section 2.2.1) will look into theories and models that explain how specific elements influence 
behavior and the related decision-making process, providing a deeper understanding of what influences 
behavior.  
 
The second part (section 2.2.2) is a description and assessment of models and methods concerning behavior 
change interventions. The weaknesses and strengths are highlighted in order to create an overview of what to 
include in the BDM. 
 
It is important to acknowledge that the models and methods review in section 2.2 are simplification of the real 
world and often only applicable within very specific and limited frameworks.   
==PAGE:25==
!
23!
2.2.1. Behavior theories and models 
Different elements contribute to the creation of human behavior, making it unique and complex, but difficult to 
predict. However, the factors that affect human behavior can be divided into smaller and more specific areas. 
This makes it possible to explore and investigate single elements e.g. values, social norms and the social 
environment thereby gaining an understanding of what affects the investigated behavior. 
 
The understanding of behavior is found within the fields of social psychology, cognitive psychology and 
emotions theory. Nine theories and models were found to have relevance for behavioral change and behavioral 
design. The review showed two essential conditions for understanding behavior: Personal factors and Social norms. 
2.2.1.1 Social Psychology 
Social Psychology theory is a composition of sociological and psychological theories and is used to create an 
understanding of individual behavior in a social context. The sociological perspective creates an understanding 
and insight to the general social patterns affecting the behavior of particular individuals as well as society’s 
impact on everyday choices.  
 
Table 2.1 shows four social psychology models and theories, and their key insights related to human behavior. 
 
Table 2.1 Four social psychology models and theories 
 
 
The Social Cognitive Theory (SCT) explains human behavior in three dynamic terms: personal factors, environmental 
influence and behavior [Bandura, A., 1999]. The essence of this model is that people not only learn through their 
own experience (psychological theory) but also by observing the actions of others (sociology theories) as well as 
the result of a particular behavior. Thus a person can be a means for changing but also a responder to change. 
 
The Social Ecological Model (SEM) [Bronfenbrenner, U., 1994] builds on the same mindset as the SCT. This model 
creates an understanding of the factors that affect behavior and divides these into five different levels of 
influence: individual, interpersonal, organizational, community and public policy. The model indicates that behavior both 
shapes and is shaped by social environment. The model explains that behavior changes can be achieved through 
targeting factors on various levels [Stokols, 2013], with the goal of fitting intervention strategies. As behavior can 
be difficult to change, i.e. if the environment does not support the change, the behavior change can become 
more successful when the various levels of influence are addressed at the same time. 
 
==PAGE:26==
!
24!
The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) evolves from the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) [Hale, J. et al, 
2003] while adding a new perspective to the model. The central factor in the TPB is the individual’s intention to 
perform a certain behavior [Ajzen et al, 1991], which can vary from the actual behavior. The TPB highlights and 
explains the relationship between the intention and the actual behavior, which can improve the prediction of 
human behavior. The theory also includes the consideration of social norms that help to explain and understand 
the individual’s social behavior. 
 
Intentions are assumed to capture the motivational factors that influence behavior; they are indications of how 
hard people are willing to try, and of how much of an effort they are planning to exert to perform the behavior. 
As a general rule, the stronger the intention to engage in the behavior, the more likely its performance should be. 
It is usually found that it is possible to predict behavioral intentions with a high level of accuracy when the 
following is clear: attitudes towards the behavior, subjective norms with respect to the behavior, and perceived 
control over it [Ajzen et al, 1991]. 
 
Social Identity Theory (SIT) [Tajfel et al, 1979] stipulates that people have not just one personal self, but several that 
correspond to different circles of group memberships [Tajfel, 1982]. The theory describes how an individual 
thinks, feels and acts on different levels whether they be personal, family or national. This is referred to as the 
“level of self”. Additionally, an individual also has multiple “social identities”, which are the individual's self-
image derived from memberships in social groups. 
 
When an individual becomes a group member, he/she begins to differentiate his/her “in-group” (us) against 
“out-groups” (them) in value dimensions, also referred to as social categorization. This quest for positive 
distinction shows that the self-image of individuals is defined in terms of “we” rather than “I”. When individuals 
become aware of their social identity (the group they belong to) their behavior can change dramatically, since 
they are more likely to embrace the group's values and oppose the out-group’s values. 
 
Tajfel and Turner proposed three mental processes involved in evaluating in-group and out-group: social 
categorization, a social identification and a social comparison. 
 
The four theories and models primarily describe how the social environment and social norms influence 
behavior. It is explained that humans not only learn through their own experience but also through others, which 
underlines the effect that social environment can have on behavior. Furthermore, people's intention and 
attitudes toward behavior have great influence on the actual performance of the behavior – as well as the social 
environment having influence on the intentions and attitudes. 
 
2.2.1.2 Cognitive Psychology 
Cognitive Psychology is the scientific study of human behavior and mental processes that aims to uncover why 
and how humans act as they do. The mental processes refer to memory, attention, problem solving, planning 
and language. 
 
There exist many different cognitive psychology theories related to behavior and behavior change. Each theory 
has its weaknesses and strengths, but they all contribute to the understanding of human behavior. This section 
explores three theories found to have relevance for this thesis. The theories outline different important elements 
that influence behavior. 
 
==PAGE:27==
!
25!
Table 2.2 Three cognitive psychology theories 
 
 
Dual Process Theory describes how the human mind works using two different processes: the conscious and 
unconscious processes. William James [Chaiken et al, 1999] describes thinking as a Dual Process consisting of 
two types of thinking: associative and true reasoning. Varieties of dual process theory have been developed 
throughout the years – among them the “System 1 and System 2 thinking” by Daniel Kahneman. [Kahnman, 
2005] 
 
System 1 and System 2 thinking describes thinking in two overall notions, as a distinctive thinking that creates 
impulsive responses through immediate emotions (System 1) and the more deliberative thinking seen as slower 
reactions using reflection and logic (System 2). 
 
In Social Cognitive Theory of Self-Regulation behavior is described as continuously being regulated by an ongoing 
exercise of self-influence [Bandura, 1991]. The self-regulation operates through three subfunctions: self-
monitoring of one’s behavior, judgment of one’s behavior in relation to environment and personal standards, 
and affective self-reaction. 
 
The Theory of Cognitive Dissonance [Festinger, 1957] states that individuals can obtain conflicting attitudes, beliefs or 
behavior (dissonance), which can lead to irrational behavior if the cognitive consistency is maintained through 
powerful motives. The individual will always try to reduce the inconsistency thereby eliminating dissonance. It is 
assumed that the individual can reduce the inconsistency in three ways: 
 
• 
The individual can change one or more attitudes, beliefs or behaviors. The behavior is especially difficult 
to change, as it is often a well-learned behavioral response. 
• 
The individual can acquire new information. 
• 
The individual can reduce the importance of the cognitions. 
 
The theory of Cognitive Dissonance is an important theory as it emphasizes and explains the background of 
human irrationality as the theory state that conflicting beliefs impact the human decision-making process.   
==PAGE:28==
!
26!
2.2.1.3 Emotions 
Emotions are considered to be rather primitive and operate quickly and subconsciously when triggered. Two 
emotion theories were reviewed.  
 
Table 2.3. Emotions theory and model 
 
 
The Activation Theory has focused on personal norms and describes the process by which personal norms are 
activated. Personal norms are free from social expectations and are only focused on personal feelings involving 
morals (emotions and values). The model emphasizes two stages essential for activating personal norms. The 
first is awareness of consequences and the second is ascription of responsibility. 
 
The Risk as Feelings Model [Loewenstein, 2001] identifies a direct path between emotion and behavior, as human 
behavior is driven by emotions. The model also shows that emotions influence attitude formation. The model 
focuses on the power of emotions as it eventually can overcome human intentions, which results in 
abandonment of the intention. One of the most powerful emotions is fear. 
 
These two identified theories and models clarify the immense power that emotions and beliefs have on behavior, 
making it incredibly difficult to predict behavior, as individual emotions are difficult to observe and detect. 
 
Emotions are differentiated from the cognitive processes; however it would be counterproductive to separate the 
cognitive process and emotion from each other, and they are therefore mentioned under the same term, Personal 
factors, in this thesis. 
2.2.2 Behavior Change through interventions 
Models and methods describing processes often contain a high level of interpretative flexibility, as they are kept 
simple in order to be used in practice. The following section aims at creating an overview of the different 
existing approaches to creating behavior change through interventions. 
 
The section is divided into two paragraphs. The first paragraph explores the models and methods concerned 
with understanding the user and product to create behavior change. The second paragraph explores methods 
and tools applying different behavior change strategies. Nine methods and models regarding behavior change 
(see table 2.4) are explored below. 
 
==PAGE:29==
!
27!
Table 2.4 Nine behavior change models and methods 
 
 
To obtain a behavior change, the mind itself goes through a cyclical process. The Transtheoretical Model, also called 
the Stages of Change Model, describes the individual’s decision-making process and the associated change. The 
model was developed by Prochaska (Professor of Psychology) and DiClemente (Ph.D., Clinical Psychology) in 
the 1970s [Prochaska, J. O et al, 1992] and is based on principles developed from scientific research. The model 
operates on the assumption that people change behavior continuously through a cyclical process and not 
decisively. 
 
The model describes how individuals move through six stages of change [Prochaska, J. O et al, 1992] (Appendix 
2, figure 1). The Transtheoretical Model only addresses conscious behavior change, in which the individual 
deliberately takes action in order to change his/her behavior. In addition, the models have further limitations 
since the model ignores the social context in which the change occurs and assumes that the decision-making 
processes is always rational. 
 
2.2.2.1 Understanding the user and product to create behavior change 
 
Loughborough Model – power between product and user 
The Loughborough Model is focused on sustainable behavior, and outlines in an axis where the decision-making 
power lies between the product and the user [Wilson et al, 2010]. At one end of the scale (Appendix 2, figure 2) 
eco-feedback is found being the less powerful tool and as merely guiding people in the decision-making process. 
At the centre of the scale lies product scripting, or behavior steering, which is seen to maintain change. Finally at the 
opposite end of the scale from eco-feedback lies persuasive technology (section 2.1.4), which should ensure change. 
Lilley’s main point is that behavior change interventions should be categorized as above and implemented based 
on the context of use, the user’s willingness and ability to change and the severity of possible misuse. 
 
The Loughborough Model has been expanded in the Consumption Behavior and Design Interventions 
Framework [Tang et al, 2008], in which the axis of influence is combined with behavior theory. The framework 
more specifically seeks to explain when a certain intervention should be used based upon the habitual intent of 
the user. 
 
Although the two models and frameworks covered in this paragraph are specifically focused on consumption 
and sustainable behavior, the concept of combining interventions with behavioral theory is very valuable. 
Furthermore, the model addresses the specific nature of human/product interactions and influence. 
 
==PAGE:30==
!
28!
Socially Responsible Design – the experience of persuasion 
The way a user potentially experiences being influenced, is a rarely discussed perspective on design for behavior 
change. However, the user’s experience can have great influence on the intervention’s effectiveness [Tromp et al, 
2011]. 
 
On this basis a framework (Appendix 2, figure 3) has been developed to specifically describe the relationship 
between the product, human behavior and the implications of the behavior. 
 
The framework has two main perspectives: how a product can coerce, persuade, seduce or decide for somebody. 
Furthermore, it addresses the way a product can exert influence in a more or less explicit or implicit manner. 
 
Just as it is in the interaction with a product that influence can be exerted, the type of influence has to be 
decided. Here the question of collective concerns vs. individual concern arises, and whether they are in line or 
conflicting. Here it is said, that when concerns are conflicting, coercive design is more suitable; when concerns 
are in line persuasive design is fitting, whereas seductive and decisive design can be used in both cases. [Tromp et 
al, 2011] In social issues where health is targeted, coercive influence can be an effective intervention strategy, as 
most people would agree on its necessity. 
 
The Socially Responsible Design framework adds to the behavioral design theory by explaining how a product 
can influence a person depending on the individual's concern in a social context – thereby combining social 
psychology theory with product intervention. 
 
Explorative Technology – a view on the individual's experience 
Within the field of Persuasive Technology (section 2.1.4) exists the branch of Explorative Technology covering 
what is called Personal Informatics – a class of systems that help people collect personal information about 
themselves for self-knowledge or self-reflection on their behavior [Li et al, 2010]. These could be programs and 
apps for such tasks as managing physical activity, finances or diet. The Stage-Based Model of Personal 
Informatics Systems is a series of five stages (Appendix 2, figure 4) developed to describe what phases a user 
goes through when engaging in personal informatics or explorative technology. The model shares similarities to 
the Transtheoretical Model. 
 
The five stages cover: preparation, collection, integration, reflection and action. The target participates both in collection 
of behavioral information as well as in the exploration and understanding of the information [Li et al, 2010], 
which has been combined and transformed by the chosen program or app. Personal informatics distinguishes 
itself by looking upon the parts of collection and reflection as a whole process [Li et al, 2012] and looking at it 
from a holistic perspective. 
 
The model can be used as a framework for further research, comparison and evaluation of personal informatics 
systems [Li et al, 2012]. This model should therefore not be seen as a development model but rather as a 
research model. 
 
MINDSPACE - behavioral influence checklist. 
MINDSPACE is a checklist of behavioral influence parameters to be used when making policies. The checklist is 
developed by the Institute for Government [Dolan et al, 2009]. It contains nine things that can influence 
behavior: Messages, Incentives, Norms, Defaults, Salience, Priming, Effect, Commitment and Ego. 
 
MINDSPACE might be useful for the untrained practitioner of behavioral design as it creates a very simplistic 
and easy way to understand the things that can influence behavior. 
==PAGE:31==
!
29!
2.2.2.2 The practical methods and tools 
 
Fogg’s Eight-Step Behavior Model – process and milestones. 
As stated in the previous section on Behavioral Concepts, the field of Persuasive Technology (section 2.1.4) 
holds the most operationalized theories and concepts. B.J. Fogg’s work with Persuasive Technology has 
materialized in the Eight-step Behavior Model (Appendix 2, figure 5) and Behavior Grid (Appendix 2, figure 6), 
among others. 
 
The Behavior Model emphasizes that for a person to change behavior, he or she must be sufficiently motivated, 
have the ability to perform the behavior and be triggered to perform the behavior [Fogg, 2009]. All of the above 
must occur at the same time for behavior to change. 
 
Fogg emphazises that the Eight-Step Behavior Model helps to identify what can be preventing certain behaviors, 
thereby providing guidance to understand the target. However, in terms of developing a solution the model 
suggests identifying and adapting successful technology examples [Fogg, 2009], and in so doing is underpinned 
as the most important step towards creating persuasive technologies. 
 
One of Fogg’s main points is to choose an appropriate behavior to target – a large goal should be broken into 
something more tangible, which is far more useful when targeting behavior. 
 
The model targets the early stage design phase, and can be used as a guide by designers to identify what stops 
people from performing the intended behavior – specifically by identifying what psychological elements are 
lacking [Fogg, 2009]. 
 
The Eight-Step Behavior Model is iterative in steps 1-4 and 5-7, which first underlines its flexibility as a model 
that should fit any academics or practitioners wishing to work with persuasive technologies. The iterations in 
steps 5-7 serve as rapid testing of possible design solutions, with the purpose of gaining insights at what is 
working and not working [Fogg, 2009]. By step 7 the pilot testing should then be completed and step 8 could be 
the starting point for a more controlled experiment.  
 
The model is without comparison the most operationalized aiming directly at the development of persuasive 
technologies. Fogg recognizes that from an academic perspective the models might seem too practical. However, 
the simplicity of the model also demands a high level of behavioral insight from the model’s user. One of the 
central aspects is how to obtain sufficient knowledge on the behavior in question so that Fogg’s Model can be 
used. 
 
Fogg’s Behavior Grid – specific strategies 
Fogg expanded his Eight-Step Behavior Model with the Behavior Grid (Appendix 2, figure 6), a framework for 
categorizing behaviors [Fogg; 2009]. In its latest version the grid describes 15 ways behavior can change – each 
of which uses different psychological strategies and persuasive techniques [Web: behaviorgrid]. 
The Grid matches five types of behavior with three time periods. For each cell, a corresponding explanation of 
the specific behavior and techniques required to change the behavior are described. 
 
As such the Grid provides examples and descriptions of behaviors that are comprehensible and which provide a 
framework for working with Persuasive Technology and the creation of interventions. Furthermore, Fogg 
includes the question of time – should the behavior change occur once, over a period of time, etc. 
 
==PAGE:32==
!
30!
Fogg’s Behavior Grid lacks the same perspective on how to obtain sufficient knowledge on behavior to use the 
framework efficiently. 
 
Design with Intent – for concept generation 
The Design with Intent (DwI) toolkit (Appendix 2, figure 7) has been developed in order to meet the need for 
guidance at the concept generation stage for design teams working on influencing user behavior [Lockton et al, 
2010]. The toolkit is a practical tool which provides a cross-domain guide for addressing existing user behavior. 
 
The DwI method is to be used in situations where a product, service or environment (system) exists and where it 
is beneficial to alter the way it is used. 
 
The method has two modes, “inspirational” and “prescription”, which can be chosen depending on the 
designer’s preference. Either way the method then presents “six lenses” – a grouping of design patterns which 
share similar behavioral understanding, considerations or assumptions. The six lenses consist of: Architectural, 
Error-Proofing, Persuasive, Visual, Cognitive and Security. 
 
The toolkit is described as a suggestion tool, which should inspire design solutions by suggesting techniques and 
real-life examples in the different lenses – this could be how an engineer and a graphic designer would solve the 
same problem in different ways. 
 
The use of real-life examples is the strength of the toolkit; however, it lacks theoretical knowledge on behavior 
assisting the design of interventions. 
 
Behavior Change Wheel – framework, functions and categories 
The Behavior Change Wheel (BCW) is a guide to evaluate and design behavior change interventions and policies. 
The BCW consists of a synthesis of 19 behavior change frameworks covering nine intervention functions and 
seven policy categories (Appendix 2, figure 8). The center of the wheel consists of three essential conditions: 
capability, opportunity and motivation. 
 
The BCW is developed upon a systematic literature review and interviews with behavioral experts. The BCW is 
therefore a theory-based model that still needs further research in terms of establishing to what extent the model 
can lead to effective design and interventions [Michie et al, 2011]. 
 
One of the strengths of this framework is that it incorporates context. As stated in the section on Habits (section 
2.1.5), recognizing context as an essential factor is key. It is therefore highly relevant to have it as a central part of 
the model to do effective design and implementation of interventions. Furthermore, the BCW forms the basis 
for a systematic analysis of how to select interventions and policies [Michie et al, 2011], which can then be linked 
to a specific behavior change technique. 
2.2.3 Summing up 
The section (section 2.2.1) highlighted two main perspectives that greatly influence behavior: social norms and 
personal factors. The theories and models describing how to understand and define behavior emphasized different 
parameters influencing behavior. However, none of the models in the section (section 2.2.1) were 
operationalized.  
 
The behavior change intervention model and methods (2.2.2) describe what steps a designer should go through 
depending on the behavior in question and the desired output. The models do not include any methods on how 
==PAGE:33==
!
31!
to achieve behavioral knowledge. This could have the consequence that one would need expert knowledge to use 
the models and methods.  
2.3 Theoretical foundation for the BDM 
The Behavioral Design Method will be based on the concept of Nudging and will aim at translating the theory 
into a practical design process.  
 
The reviewed theories and models on behavior and behavior change highlighted three areas seen to affect 
behavior: context, social norms and personal factors (section 2.2.1.3). They not only help to understand and describe 
behavior, but also how to affect behavior. 
 
However, no practical explanation on how to achieve understanding of the behavior and how to affect it was 
provided by any of the behavior change methods, leading to the need for a practical study on applied behavior 
change (chapter 3). 
 
The literature review led to key criteria that the Behavioral Design Method must meet and incorporate:  
 
• 
A single behavior should be targeted, as behavior is unique. 
• 
The behavior change should be achieved by affecting people subconsciously – influencing the 
automated behavior (System 1). 
• 
The method should aim at creating a one-time-behavior change in the antecedent step. 
• 
The method should be explanatory in relation to behavior, so that no expert knowledge on behavior is 
needed when applying the BDM. 
• 
Should be presented in easy-to-understand steps.  
• 
To create a useful understanding of the behavior and how to affect it, the behavior should be mapped in 
relation to three areas: context, social norms and personal factors. 
• 
As subconscious behavior change is the aim, ethics need to be considered. The method should only be 
used with good intentions and by ensuring freedom of choice. 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
!
32!
==PAGE:35==
!
33!
 
 
Chapter 3 
Research Design  
and Method 
 
==PAGE:36==
!
34!
Having outlined the theoretical foundation for the Behavioral Design Method (BDM) based on the current 
literature on behavior, a study was conducted by the behavioral consultancy firm /Kl.7 in order to provide a 
practical perspective to the BDM. By conducting a project review of the company’s previous behavioral design 
projects, empirical data is gathered for the subsequent analysis.  
 
This chapter focuses on the chosen approaches for the study and the related considerations and choices.  
3.1 Context description 
This section describes the overall context of the study as well as the subsequent selection of the population. The 
context is to be understood as the situation in which the study was carried out – i.e. the company, external 
influences and internal structures. 
 
The company selected for this study is a Small to Medium-sized Enterprise – a Danish company based in 
Copenhagen named /KL.7, founded in 2011. The company is a management consultancy firm specialized in 
design of human behavior. They take on projects in the private as well as the public sector where they address 
issues in the modern organization and public context. 
 
They describe their methods as data-driven design methods combined with the principles of behavioral 
psychology.  
 
/KL.7’s focus on design is evident in their work with interventions. As their work includes the development of 
physical interventions, web-based interventions and systems, it is assumed that they go through project phases 
comparable to those of a design engineer. These could be structured as in the simple problem-solution model: 
Overall problem, Sub-problem, Sub-solution, Overall solution [Cross, 2008].  
 
/KL.7 was chosen because they are the largest consultancy firm in Denmark that works solely with behavioral 
design. One other company, iNudgeyou [Web: inudgeyou], works with nudging and behavioral design on a full-
time basis, but apart from them, behavioral activities are mostly placed as small units or even single employees 
within companies.   
 
/KL.7 was chosen as appropriate for the study since they have a relatively large project portfolio, which they 
have been building up since their foundation. Another key criterion in the selection of /KL.7 was the access to 
project data.  
 
Due to the size of the thesis study, it was decided to only work with one company. 
3.1.1 Project data selection 
The projects chosen for the study were selected based on a discussion with the Director and one other 
employee.  
 
Out of around 40 projects, 22 were found suited for a process analysis covering a broad range of projects 
(Appendix 3). One of the projects was chosen for the scoping interview in the preparation stage (see section 
2.2.1). 
 
The selection criteria required that the projects have a behavioral design focus, thereby excluding projects that 
were solely data-driven. 
==PAGE:37==
!
35!
3.1.2 The population 
/KL.7 has rapidly grown in size since its foundation to a staff of 10 and one freelance employee. The company 
has diversity in its staff, covering academic backgrounds in data analysis, engineering, economics and 
communication. 
 
The selecting criteria for those to be interviewed were first and foremost based on the projects chosen for the 
analysis (see section 2.2.2). 
 
In total, four people were interviewed. These four people were involved in management of the 20 projects. A 
criteria for being qualified for interviews, was to have been involved in important activities in the projects and to 
possess deep insight into the project process.  
 
The customers in the projects were not interviewed, as they were considered not being able to contribute any 
crucial information or insights to the decision-making processes in /KL.7. However, had there been more time, 
interviews with the customers could have provided new perspectives on the processes – especially in terms of 
determining the project success (section 3.6.1). 
 
Table 3.1 presents an overview of the employees in /KL.7 as well as a description of their position in the 
company.  
 
Table 3.1 Overview of the employees in /KL.7 
Position 
Interviewed 
Director - Nudging 
Yes.  
Behavioral Designer - Health 
Yes.  
Behavioral Designer - Data 
Yes.  
Behavioral Designer - Energy and Resources 
Yes.  
Behavioral Designer - Marketing and Sales 
No. None of his projects were chosen 
for the study. 
Behavioral Designer - Finance 
No. Was hired during the period of 
study. 
Behavioral Designer - Pharma 
No. Was hired during the period of 
study. 
Junior Consultant - Behavioral Economics 
No.  
Junior Consultant - Communication 
No.  
Coordinator - Administration 
No.  
Behavioral Designer (freelance employee) - 
Behavioral Psychology 
No. The projects mostly included one-
day workshops.  
 
Originally some of the chosen projects also included those of the freeelance employee; however, these were 
taken out, as they were one-day workshops. The data was therefore considered too diverse to be used in the 
QCA analysis.  
==PAGE:38==
!
36!
3.2 Setup and data collection 
The data collection was designed to substantiate the nature of the study. An interview approach was chosen, as it 
was the aim to investigate a number of /KL.7’s former projects. The purpose was to identify the process /KL.7 
goes through when doing behavioral design projects.   
 
In order to compare the project interviews and possibly find patterns in their working processes, Qualitative 
Comparative Analysis (QCA) was chosen as analysis approach. This demanded that data be very systematized, 
thus the choice of doing structured interviews [Guest et al, 2008]. 
 
To ensure the validity of the data from the collection stage, a preparation stage and validation stage were 
included. The three stages are as follows: 
 
Figure 3.1 Three data sources related to the study. 
 
Preparation  
The preparation stage included a semi-structured interview based on a well-documented project. The outcome 
would provide essential knowledge for the shaping of the overall structure of the structured interviews.  
 
Conducting structured interviews carries the risk of steering the answers, which makes the preparation stage 
crucial – it ensures relevant content in the questions.  
 
Collection  
The collection stage included the execution of 22 structured interviews as well as nine secondary interviews. A 
secondary interview was based on the same interview guide, and therefore refers to the fact that two interviews 
were conducted on the same project. The secondary interview was used as a comparison and ensured validity 
and consistency in the data.  
 
Validation  
The validation stage included a comparison of the interviews against the secondary interviews as well as the 
project documentation to ensure completeness and credibility in the data. Furthermore, primary data was 
collected through observations and documentation of /KL.7 conducting a parallel project for DTU Skylab, to 
ensure that what was seen in the interviews correlated to what they were actually doing.  
 
To make the data collection rigorous, an ongoing communication with /Kl.7 was established. The casual contact 
made it possible to regularly obtain needed information and plan (new) interviews.  
 
All of the above stages have their limitations, but by bringing them together they guarantee completeness and 
consistency of the collected data.  
 
==PAGE:39==
!
37!
3.2.1 Preparation stage 
The preparation stage consisted of three parts:  
 
• 
Achieving behavior change knowledge in order to understand the work of /KL.7 and be able to state 
elaborating questions during interviews.  
• 
A project documentation review to gain specific knowledge about the scoping project and the overall 
project process, in order to prepare and create the scoping interview.  
• 
A scoping interview, which created more profound understanding and knowledge about /KL.7 and 
their project processes.  
 
The exclusive purpose of the scoping interview was to create an adequate foundation of knowledge from which 
the structured interview guide could be developed. The scoping interview was carried out as a semi-structured 
interview. This approach was selected as it is typically used when initial knowledge is limited. [Rasmussen et al, 
2006; Harrell et al, 2009] 
 
The framework of the semi-structured interview was derived from the project Affaldsadfærd i Nattelivet that was 
done in cooperation with Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen (TMF). This project was chosen to provide the 
structure for the following 21 project interviews, as it was well documented and went through a broad range of 
process steps. The scoping interview was mainly structured after the project’s overall design process, which was 
clearly described in the project documentation. 
   
The size of the project falls in the same range as the other projects chosen for the study in terms of budget 
(Appendix 4) and this made it appropriate as a scoping project.  
 
The semi-structured interview was divided into five main areas that were further clarified through corresponding 
questions (Appendix 5). The five areas were: Introduction, Project, Project Process, Success and Completion. The structure 
followed the overall project process seen in the documentation on the TMF project, in order to create better 
recollections for the interviewee about the project. 
3.2.1.1 Implementation 
The execution of the scoping interview took an hour and was done together with the project manager on the 
TMF project from /KL.7. The semi-structured framework made it possible to manage the interview and thereby 
get around all relevant areas. Furthermore it allowed for the possibility to embrace new and relevant topics to be 
discussed along the way. The interview was recorded and annotated. 
3.2.2 Collection stage 
Following the semi-structured interview, the data was analyzed for the development of the structured interview 
guide. The collection stage was divided into three parts:  
 
• 
Development of the structured interview guide based on the outcome of the semi-structured interview 
as well as a review of all existing project documentation on the 21 projects. 
• 
Structured interviews. 
• 
Secondary interviews, to make the data as rigorous as possible. 43% of the projects were supported by 
secondary interviews. The two interviews were conducted at different times ensuring that the 
interviewees would not affect one another.  
 
By conducting structured interviews it was possible to map the specifics of the project processes through 
identical quantifiable variables in the questions. Furthermore, it was ensured that the questions were presented in 
==PAGE:40==
!
38!
exactly the same order and same way, which is important to minimize the impact of context effects [McClelland 
et al, 1981]. The strict structure of both questions and answers also prepared the data for the Qualitative 
Comparative Analysis (QCA) method applied in this thesis.  
3.2.2.1 Interview guide 
The structure of the structured interview guide was based on the output of the scoping interview and the review 
of all available project documentation. This was done in order to ensure that significant differences in the 21 
projects were taken into account in the interview guide.  
 
The questionnaire included six main steps derived from the scoping interview as well as three additional steps – 
Analysis 1.0, Analysis 2.0 and Reporting – which were included to ensure full understanding of /KL.7’s process 
(Appendix 6) Each step included the exploration of different perspectives on the process step (see figure 3.2 and 
table 3.2). The questions and possible answers to each step originated from the literature review and scoping 
interview as well as the project documentation review. 
 
The structured interview guide had the form of a multiple choice, with the possibility of adding comments if 
necessary. This fact adds a qualitative perspective to the otherwise quantitative approach.  
 
 
Figure 3.2. The structure of the structured interview and the number for related questions. 
 
The possible answers in questions 1, 3 and 10 were mainly derived from the literature review and focused on 
behavioral factors and activities derived from other design models. The rest of the possible answers for the 
questions derived from the project documentation review. These 12 questions were all formulated in order to 
clarify the /KL.7 project process as well as its related focus and activities. The success-related questions (13) 
were asked to determine how successful the project process had been. 
No questions were made for the Test step. 
 
Table 3.2 - Main questions and descriptions 
Question
no. 
Question 
Rationale behind the 
question: 
1 
What was the desired behavioral output of the 
project? 
To determine the objective of the 
project. 
2 
What did you investigate during the desk 
research?  
To determine what they investigate and 
how they obtain new knowledge on a 
specific behavior. 
3 
In your desk research, what did you find out had an 
effect on the behavior?  
To determine what they most commonly 
find to have influence on a behavior 
4 
Based on the gathered knowledge, how did you 
scope the project? 
To determine how they scoped the 
project based on the gathered 
knowledge. 
5 
Which tools/approaches did you use during the 
field study?  
To determine how they conduct field 
work, and how they possibly test their 
interventions. 
==PAGE:41==
!
39!
6 
What tools did you use to analyze the empirical 
data from the field study? 
To determine how data is analyzed and 
handled for further work. Could also 
say something about the nature of the 
data. 
7 
What was the output of the analysis? 
To determine how to proceed with the 
output of the analysis. 
8 
Development of interventions:  
- Did you make a workshop? 
- Did you make a prototype? 
- What form did the intervention have? 
To determine how they develop 
interventions, what form they had and if a 
prototype was made. 
9 
Which “triggers” were incorporated in the 
interventions? 
To determine which triggers are most 
commonly used. 
10 
Which approach did you use in order to affect the 
behavior? 
To determine which behavior intervention 
strategies are most commonly used. 
11 
How did you assess the interventions? 
To determine how they assess and 
evaluate the interventions. 
12 
What did the reporting contain? 
To determine how the project is 
completed. Could give insight to the 
nature of the project and underline the 
initial objective. Also, to see if they used 
any specific tool.  
13 
Success 
Evaluation of the project:  
-How do you assess the process? (1-5) 
-Have they constructively used your final 
recommendations? (1-5) 
-Have they proceeded with the implementation of 
the interventions? 
To get insight on the project outcome 
and the project process. 
 
3.2.2.2 Implementation 
21 structured project interviews were conducted with four different people from /KL.7. Each project interview 
lasted on average 10 minutes, for a total of 3.5 hours of interview. For each interview, an example of the 
structured interview guide was printed out (Appendix 6). The interviewer sat together with the interviewee and 
stated the questions followed by the interviewee filling out the questionnaire. 
 
The physical form in the printed interview guide created an overview of the questions and answers, making it 
easy to understand. The data collection consisted of the completed questionnaire, sound recordings and typed 
hand notes. 
 
The interviewee was first presented with some general questions about the project to make the person tune into 
the project. This was followed by a presentation of the project process (see figure 3.2) and being asked to mark 
which of the steps the project had gone through, followed by questions corresponding to each step. 
 
The interviewee was assured that all information would be kept confidential, to create a safe and confident 
environment. Furthermore, by keeping the interviewee on track with the project process, biases in the answers 
were avoided.  
 
 
Notes from the interviews were typed in and stored electronically. The answers from the interviews were entered 
into an Excel sheet. The data was transformed into binary notation (section 3.6.1). 
==PAGE:42==
!
40!
3.2.3 Validation stage 
The purpose of the validation stages was to ensure the credibility, consistency and completeness of each project 
interview, because the interviews contained a weakness in the sense that the interviews had to recall information.  
 
The validation stage consisted of three individual parts:  
 
• 
Project documentation and product interview comparisons; 
• 
Secondary project interviews, when possible;  
• 
Primary data from a current project.  
 
Conducting interviews about previous projects is uncertain, as people do not always have a realistic picture of 
what actually happened [Memon et al, 1994]. To account for this, a parallel project that /KL.7 was doing during 
the period of the thesis was followed. This ensured that the overall process was comparable or similar with the 
previous projects investigated in the interviews (Appendix 7). 
 
The credibility of the projects was determined on the basis of a consistency assessment based on the comparison 
between product documentation and project interview, as well as a comparison between the first and secondary 
structured project interview (whenever secondary interviews were made) (Appendix 8).  
The comparison between the project documentation and project interview was mainly used to ensure 
completeness of the project data. The quantity and quality of the project documentation varied from project to 
project. Only four projects were not complemented by either a secondary interview or a documentation review 
(Appendix 8), which shows that there was a high degree of completeness in the data.  
 
Based on the consistency assessment, projects were either discarded or reviewed further. One project was 
discarded due to a high level of conflicting answers between the two interviews and having no supporting project 
documentation. Two projects were further reviewed but were not discarded as inconsistency was clarified 
together with /KL.7. All in all, 20 projects were considered sufficiently complete and consistent to proceed to 
the QCA.  
 
3.3 Method of analysis: Qualitative Comparative 
Analysis 
Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) was chosen to analyze the data obtained from /KL.7, as it meets the 
advantages of both the qualitative (case-oriented) and quantitative (variable-oriented) techniques. In short, it 
allows for the systematic comparison of cases [Rihoux et al, 2009]. The factors (conditions) having a meaningful 
effect on the process in the 21 projects were investigated by the use of QCA.  
 
The QCA software [Web: compasss] introduced by Chales Ragin [Ragin, 1987] was the tool chosen for the 
research, as it does not focus on the statistical relation between independent variables, but sought to identify 
different combinations of parameters leading to the same result [Badik et al, 2007]. Furthermore, Descriptive 
Statistics (DS) were used to highlight the frequency in the conditions used in relation to success. 
==PAGE:43==
!
41!
3.3.1 Introduction to QCA  
The advantage of QCA is that it has the ability to work with smaller sets of data, but at the same time work with 
a larger number of cases compared to quantitative approaches [Jordan et al, 2011]. 
 
By using QCA it was possible to address many different aspects of the projects using an integrative approach. 
This should allow for an examination of how the different conditions of the projects fit together both 
contextually and historically. 
 
Furthermore, QCA aids the analysis of the causal contributions of different conditions – in this case how the 
specific methods used have affected the overall project process. QCA is in other words used to describe the 
configuration of the project processes, the various steps and the related conditions leading to a successful project 
outcome.  
 
Table 3.3 Advantages and Limitations of QCA 
Advantages  
Limitations 
• 
Ability to work with smaller data set. 
• 
Ability to work with large number of cases 
(project). 
• 
Transparent.  
• 
Decontamination of data. 
• 
Inability to work with large number of 
conditions.  
 
It has been the objective to describe the project process in /KL.7 through overall project steps with 
corresponding conditions (activities or factors) within each stage.  
 
The projects from /KL.7 are referred to as cases in the QCA. The project success was chosen as the outcome 
(dependant variable), as this was the most descriptive factor for determining whether the chosen project steps 
were rewarding or not.  
 
The conditions in this analysis were the project steps or the activities/factors in each step. The conditions were 
transformed into binary notation in order to conduct the QCA.  
 
In the following section the QCA approach applied in this thesis will be described in detail so that future 
researchers can duplicate the method. First of all, the definition of the project success (dependant variable) will 
be defined. 
 
3.3.1.1 Project success 
The success score 1-5 was chosen as this was the score /Kl.7 was asked to use when evaluating the project 
processes during the interviews.  
/KL.7’s assessment of the success was based on the evaluation of the project processes from 1-5 and whether 
the customer had used the recommendations and/or interventions. The thesis group then qualitatively assessed 
the success rating given by /KL.7 and statements from the interviews (Appendix 9). If no contradictory 
statements were made, then the same grade as the one given by /KL.7 was chosen. If contradictory statements 
were found, a new grade was given based on a general assessment of the project.  
The qualitative success grading was used throughout the QCA and the DS. The qualitative graded success was 
transformed into binary numbers, as a criterion from the QCA software. 
==PAGE:44==
!
42!
The binary number was assigned using the following threshold: 
• 
A score < 4  
= 0 (no success) 
• 
A score of ≥!4  
= 1 (success) 
 
A project with a success score below 4 was not defined as a success and was therefore transformed into 0. All 
numbers above 4 were defined as a success. Ultimately 7 out of 20 projects were given the binary number 0, and 
13 projects were given the number 1.   
 
3.3.1.2 Six independent QCAs 
In order to obtain a thorough knowledge of the project process it was decided to run several QCAs on two 
different levels:  
• 
A first level containing the overall project processes; 
• 
A second level containing the categorization of the conditions within each main step. 
 
The thresholds chosen for the analysis were chosen relative to what the literature describes as an acceptable 
threshold of 75 % [Rihoux et al, 2008].  
3.3.2 QCA of the overall project process 
The objective with running a QCA on the main project process steps was to search for possible patterns in the 
overall process in the reviewed projects. The main steps were the conditions in this QCA in which the project 
success was the outcome. 
The main step Reporting was not included in the QCA analysis, as Reporting in this thesis does not qualify as a 
design step.  
3.3.3 QCA between categories  
The number of single conditions in the different steps was found to be too high for the software to run the 
analysis. It was therefore not possible to run a QCA across all of them at the same time. Since many of the single 
conditions in each question of the interview were similar, it was chosen to categorize the single conditions 
(Appendix 10).  
 
The aim was to run a QCA across the steps, thereby opening up the possibility of seeing patterns in the 
categories at different steps.  
 
Table 3.4 - An overview of the main steps and categories. 
Main 
project 
Steps 
Overall 
Aim 
Desk 
Research  
Analysis 
1.0 
Scoping  
Field 
study  
Analysis 
2.0 
Development  
Test 
Question 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
- 
Categorized 
or not 
C 
C 
B 
C 
C 
UC 
C 
UC 
UC 
B 
B 
- 
C = Categorized conditions, B = Behavioral conditions (Single condition); UC = Uncategorized 
 
Table 3.4 shows an overview of the main steps and in which it was possible to categorize the single conditions 
from each question. 
  
==PAGE:45==
!
43!
Some questions, however, included single conditions that were not possible to categorize. Most of these (Q3, 
Q10, Q11) included conditions that were behavior-related, which meant they were too diverse in their nature to 
be categorized. In a few questions the categorization was not relevant (Q6, Q8, Q9). 
After having categorized the single conditions it was still not possible to run a QCA across all the steps as the 
number of conditions was still too high. It was therefore decided to split up the categories according to the 
output of the QCA of the main steps, as this would be the most natural division of steps. In the end, three 
groups of overall process steps were made in which an independent QCA was made.  
 
It was ensured that the content of the categories was on the same level of detail, which led to consistency in the 
data and comparability. The categories should be sufficiently diverse and yet have explanatory strength in the 
QCA minimization [Badik, 2007]. 
 
The categories in each step are referred to as conditions in this QCA. The three groups of steps and the 
objective of each of them are stated below:  
 
First Grouping: Overall + Desk Research + (÷Analysis 1.0) + Scoping 
By running a QCA on this grouping, the objective was to see if there was a pattern in the way /KL.7 managed the beginning of the 
process.  
Analysis 1 was not part of the QCA, as no categories were made; see table 3.4. 
 
Second Grouping: First Grouping + Field study + Analysis 2 
A QCA on this grouping is focused on the projects/cases that seek to obtain more knowledge on behavior.  
Analysis 1 was not part of the QCA, as no categories were made; see table 3.4. 
 
Third Grouping: First Grouping + Development + (÷Test) 
The QCA to be run on this grouping is searching for patterns in the projects that have included the development of interventions.  
Test was not was not included, as no categories existed.  
3.3.4 Descriptive Statistics 
Descriptive statistics (DS) were used to qualitatively describe the single conditions in the collected data. The DS 
are expressed as a percentage, and is an expression of how frequently a condition arises in a step. As the project success 
was of great importance in relation to the choice of conditions, it was not enough to only consider the frequency 
of the condition. The descriptive statistics are therefore calculated based on both the frequency and the success. 
  
 
!" = !"#$%&%"#!"#!"$$%&&
!"#$%&%"#!"#$%&&'((
∙100% 
 
 
The qualitative grading of the success (Appendix 9) was used as the success criteria in the DS. The maximal 
success score was 5, which meant that the sum of the maximal success score for the 20 projects was 100. As the 
number of projects going through the different steps differentiates, so does the maximal success score for each 
step and thereby the conditions; see table 3.5. 
 
==PAGE:46==
!
44!
Table 3.6. Maximum success score for each stage and the related questions [Appendix - result]. 
 
Overall 
problem 
or need 
Desk 
Research 
Analysis 
1.0 
Scoping 
Field 
study 
Analysis 
2.0 
Development 
of 
interventions 
Test 
Question 
nr. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 and 7 
8,9,10 and 11 
- 
Condition 
maximum 
success 
score 
100 
100 
90 
75 
50 
50 
65 
55 
 
The results from the DS are used to underline the relevance of the single conditions when the QCA patterns are 
discussed in chapters 4 and 6. 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
!
45!
 
 
Chapter 4 
Qualitative results 
 
!
==PAGE:48==
!
46!
This chapter contains all results collected during the study at /KL.7 derived from: 
 
• 
The analysis of the project documentation (section 3.2.1) 
• 
The scoping interview (section 3.2.1) 
• 
The structured interviews (section 3.2.2) 
 
The data is analyzed through the use of Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA), weighted Descriptive Statistics 
(DS) and supportive quotes.   
Reading guide  
This chapter gives a review of the QCA results on the overall project process as a whole followed by a 
subsequent review of the results within each main process step; see figure 4.1. 
 
 
Figure 4.1. Overall project process and the related nine main project steps. 
 
All results are compared to the /KL.7 project process (section 3.2, figure 3.2). The results will therefore refer to 
the project process steps as seen in figure 4.1, as well as the related categories and lastly the single conditions 
within each category.  
 
Specific expressions used in this chapter are described below:  
• 
The raw coverage of the pattern (QCA), presented as a percentage, refers to the frequency of the occurring 
pattern and indicates how often a specific combination of conditions occurs in relation to success.  
• 
The consistency, also presented as a percentage, indicates to which degree the projects constituting the 
pattern (QCA) became a success.  
• 
The Descriptive Statistics (DS) describe the frequency and success of the conditions presented as a 
percentage. The conditions that stand out in each step are highlighted, but as the range of the DS varies 
for each step, a uniform threshold has not been chosen. For clarification on all the single conditions see 
Appendix 13.  
==PAGE:49==
!
47!
4.1 Overall project process 
In order to create an insight to the /KL.7 project process, nine project steps were defined (see section 3.4) and 
analyzed. This section will first present a preliminary counting (figure 4.2) of the project steps that /KL.7 went 
through in their projects. This will be followed by the results of the QCA analysis on the combination of project 
steps.   
 
 
Figure 4.2. The figure shows the distribution of the project's main steps. 
 
Figure 4.2 shows that the 20 reviewed projects always implemented the two first steps of the project process 
referred to as Overall problem and need and Desk Research. Furthermore, figure 4.2 shows that a total 
number of 75% of the projects carried out all the first four steps: Overall problem and need, Desk Research, 
Analysis 1.0 and Scoping. This underlines that the first four steps are the most frequently conducted 
steps.  This result is not surprising as /KL.7 has given the impression of applying a very scientific and research-
minded approach to all their projects.  
 
The figure furthermore shows that only 50% of the projects completed the steps in Field Study and 45% 
completed the steps in Analysis 2.0. This is surprising as these steps are used by /KL.7 to gain more specific 
knowledge on the target behavior, which can be used when developing and testing interventions.  
 
Of the 20 projects, 13 projects were intervention-oriented and thereby included the development step. The 
remaining seven projects were research-oriented and concluded with a behavioral assessment. Almost all the 
interventions were tested in the Test step except for two projects in which it was not possible to measure the 
effects. Testing of interventions was done in order to show if and how behavior had changed. The purpose and 
frequent use of testing underlines the data-oriented and scientific approach applied by /Kl.7 (section 3.1).  
 
/KL.7’s projects have two main and different outcomes: a behavior assessment consisting of for example a report 
describing a specific behavior, or an actual intervention to change behavior. If the outcome is an intervention, a 
behavioral assessment will also be included. This adds to the understanding of why the first four steps are the 
most frequently used. 
 
The last step, Reporting, was used to obtain an overall understanding of how /KL.7 works, which helped to 
describe what the aim of the project was, thereby clarifying procedural steps along the project process. This step 
has not been further elaborated in this study.   
0!
5!
10!
15!
20!
25!
Projects!
Main project stages!
Overall project process!
==PAGE:50==
!
48!
4.1.1 QCA results on the overall project process steps 
A QCA was conducted on the project process steps to investigate whether a pattern existed between the 
different steps in relation to success (section 3.3.1.1). 
 
The results from the QCA showed a pattern consisting of the first six project process steps in the projects with a 
successful outcome (Appendix 11). 
 
Pattern 
Raw 
coverage 
Consistency 
*Overall!*Desk!Research!*Analysis!1.0!*Scoping!*Field!study!*Analysis!2.0!
38!%!
83!%!
 
The pattern has a raw coverage of 38% consisting of the first six steps with a consistency of 83%. This means 
that this pattern exists in around 40 % of all projects. As the consistency is around 80%, this signifies that one 
out of five projects with this pattern does not have a successful outcome.  
 
It makes good sense that the pattern contains the first four steps, both in terms of the frequent use of these 
steps, but also because they can be seen as constituting the project research DNA of /KL.7 (section 3.1). 
Throughout the work with /KL.7 it was observed that they undertake in a general sense a very research-minded 
approach in which they are very up-to-date as to the newest research and published material within their field. 
They give a feeling of having pride in working this way, and it therefore seems reasonable that applying the first 
steps has a positive effect on their work.  
 
As all the projects go through the first two steps, these do not indicate anything about the success of the 
projects.  
 
As the pattern above shows, the two final main project steps Development and Test were not included.  
4.1.2 Project size 
It was considered whether the size of the projects would be reflected in the pattern of the project steps. To test 
this and secure validity of the results, a QCA was conducted on the grouping of small and big projects (section 
3.6.3). Based on the budget, six projects were defined as big projects and 14 projects were defined as small 
projects (Appendix 4). 
 
The QCA results for the small projects: 
Pattern 
Raw 
coverage 
Consistency 
*Overall!*Desk!Research!*Analysis!1.0*Scoping!*Field!Study*Analysis!2.0!
50!%!
100!%!
 
The result from the QCA shows that there exists a pattern of steps in the small projects with success. This 
pattern consists of the six first steps in the overall project process (figure 41) with a consistency of 100%. The 
pattern of steps seen in the small projects is identical to the pattern seen for all the projects (section 4.1.1). As 14 
out of 20 projects were defined as small projects, it makes sense that the pattern found is similar.  
 
However, the consistency was 100% compared to 83.33% in the overall project process, which corresponds to 
the decrease in the total number of small projects. It can therefore be concluded that small projects follow the 
same overall pattern.  
==PAGE:51==
!
49!
 
The QCA result for the big projects: 
X. 
Pattern 
Raw 
coverage 
Consistency 
I. 
*Overall!*Desk!Research!*Analysis!1.0*Scoping!*!Field!Study!
!*Analysis!2.0!
20!%!
100!%!
II. 
*Overall!*Desk!Research!*Analysis!1.0*Scoping!*Development!*Test!
40!%!
100!%!
 
 
 
The result of the QCA for the big projects shows two patterns worth mentioning: pattern X.I. and X.II. Both 
patterns X.I. and X.II. have the first four steps in common. 
 
Pattern X.I. furthermore has Field Study and Analysis 2.0 included in the pattern, thereby showing a similar 
pattern to the small projects and the general pattern. This pattern is seen in 20% of the big projects with 100% 
consistency. 
 
Pattern X.II. also consists of the first four steps and additionally includes Development and Test. This pattern 
is seen in 40% of the projects with success with a consistency of 100%. From this it can be concluded that the 
bigger projects seem to have the character of being more design-oriented, in which the development of 
interventions are included. As the project size is determined based on the budget it makes good sense that the 
big projects include Development and Testing. These steps often become very costly due to the fact that 
/KL.7 as a consultancy often calculates prices based on hours spent. That way physical interventions become an 
additional cost for the customer. 
 
It is, however, surprising that Field Study and Analysis 2.0 are not included in the X.II. pattern, as one would 
expect that the development of interventions requires a deeper knowledge of the behavior. Furthermore the 
possibility of conducting an A-B test is initiated in the field study wherever a baseline can be made. Looking into 
the specific character on the projects presented an explanation to this deviation. As it turned out, the projects 
included in the group of big projects were mostly IT-oriented, making field study more difficult to conduct. 
Based on this, it cannot exclusively be concluded that Field Study and Analysis 2.0 should not be included in 
projects having intervention as an output, in order to obtain success. 
 
In general the results show that there exists a basic pattern consisting of the first six steps of the project process 
– independent of the size of the projects.  
 
4.2 Grouping of main project steps  
The result of the overall project process provided an overview and insight to what the /KL.7 project process 
contains. This included what they do most as well as what combination of steps are needed for the projects to 
become successful. However, this does not indicate more specifically which activities to execute or what to 
investigate in the different steps to achieve success.  
 
This section provides deeper and more specific knowledge and understanding of the actual activities within the 
project steps. 
 
The groupings were made, as mentioned in the chapter 3 (section 3.3.3), because QCA cannot be made if too 
many conditions are present, which was the case in this study. Therefore the analysis was divided into three 
==PAGE:52==
!
50!
separate QCAs (Appendix 12). The division was made in relation to the patterns seen in the big projects, as these 
patterns are the most representative for the different project processes.  
 
The following section is structured relative to three groupings representing three independent QCAs of the 
categories, referred to as groupings 1, 2 and 3. 
 
 
Figure 4.3. Three groupings.  
 
First grouping: 
Overall + Desk Research + (÷Analysis 1.0)* + Scoping  
 
Second grouping: 
First grouping + Field Study + Analysis 2.0 
 
Third grouping: 
First grouping + Development + (÷Test)* 
*The steps with a minus in front are not included in the QCA (see Method section 3.3.3). 
 
The first grouping contains the first four main project steps, as these were the common denominator of all the 
projects; however Analysis 1.0 is not included in the QCA (section 3.3.3). The second grouping furthermore 
includes Field Study and Analysis 2.0, common to the pattern X.I extracted from the big projects.  
 
The third grouping is consistent with pattern X.II extracted from the big projects that Develop interventions.  
 
The results for each grouping are shown in the three subsections below. The results contain the pattern between 
categories found with QCA as well as additional results for each step.   
 
==PAGE:53==
!
51!
4.2.1 First Grouping 
 
The first grouping consists of the first four main project steps; however, the last step (Analysis 1.0) was not 
included in the QCA. A pattern was found between the related categories within the three steps. 
 
The categories related to each main step can be seen below: 
Overall aim:   
Basic and Affecting 
Desk Research: 
Similarity in Theme, Assessment and Experience, Trends, Statistics and Data and 
Stakeholder 
Scoping:  
 
Problem Investigation and Desired Result of the Design and Framing 
 
!
Pattern 
Raw 
coverage 
Consistency 
Steps 
*Overall!*Desk!Research!*(÷Analysis!1.0)*Scoping!
!
!
Cate-
gories 
*Basic!*Affecting!*Similarity!in!Themes!*Assessment!and!
Experience!*Trends*!Statistic!and!Data!*Stakeholder!*Problem!
investigation!*Desired!Result!of!the!Design!
30!%!
100!%!
 
The result of the QCA for the first grouping shows a pattern between all the categories except Framing with a 
raw condition of 30% and a consistency of 100% (Appendix 12). 
 
Each of the four steps in this grouping and the related categories as well as single conditions will now be 
described and discussed. 
 
4.2.1.1 Overall aim  
The step Overall aim contains conditions describing the behavioral aim of the project. Two categories were 
created within this step: Basic and Affecting (Appendix 12). The category Basic should be understood as the aim 
to achieve a deep understanding and knowledge about the behavior in question.  Affecting is to be understood as 
the aim of influencing the behavior. 
 
The pattern derived from the QCA shows that to obtain a positive project outcome a designer must achieve a 
Basic understanding of the behavior in question and have the aim of Affecting the behavior. 
 
Figure 4.4 additionally shows that if a project aims to Affect the behavior but disregards the step of Basic 
understanding, only 20% become a success. The probability of achieving project success with only a Basic 
understanding of the behavior is much higher and has a success rate around 70%. The best way to achieve 
success is, however, to combine Basic and Affecting, which gives a success rate of 75%.  
 
==PAGE:54==
!
52!
 
Figure 4.4. Distribution of the project's overall aim. 
 
The DS (Appendix 13, table 1) highlight the importance of four single conditions in the two following 
categories:  
Basic:  
Understanding and Describing 
 
 
Affecting: 
Changing and Creating 
 
These conditions are the most frequently used in relation to success. The conditions in the category Basic 
underlines that it is not only central to understand the behavior in question but also to be able to describe it – or 
even more importantly, to define it. 
Furthermore, the behavioral aim of the projects in relation to short-term change or long-term change was 
explored. The DS (Appendix 13, table 1) shows that 54.5 % of the projects with success aim to change behavior 
in a long-term sense and 45% aim at reaching a short-term change. As there is no significant difference between 
the two, it was decided not to investigate this further. Moreover, a high number of the projects have them both 
as an objective.   
 
4.2.1.2 Desk Research  
The step Desk Research includes many different proposed investigation areas, which were divided into five 
overall categories: Trends, Similarity in Theme, Statistics and Data, Assessment and Experience, and Stakeholder. 
Figure 4.5 shows a relatively even distribution of the investigated categories within Desk Research, which also 
supports that all five categories are included in the pattern. 
 
 
Figure 4.5. Categories investigated during Desk Research.   
70 %!
20 %!
75 %!
0!
2!
4!
6!
8!
10!
Basic!
Affecting!
Basic and Affecting!
Projects!
Project's overall aim!
No Success!
Success!
0!
5!
10!
15!
20!
Trends!
Similarity in theme!
Statistics and 
Data!
Assesment and 
Experience!
Stakeholder!
Projects!
Categories!
Desk Research !
==PAGE:55==
!
53!
 
The DS highlights five single conditions, belonging to three categories (Appendix 13):  
 
Trends:  
 
 
International Trends and Danish Trends. 
Assessment and Experience:                          Literature Review and Expert assessment/experience. 
Similarity in Theme:  
 
Existing solutions  
 
The condition with the highest score was Literature Review which once again underlines that /KL.7 is very 
research-orientated. It is seen that /KL.7 undertakes a very broad research approach including many different 
areas.  
 
4.2.1.3 Analysis 1.0 
Analysis 1.0 was not included in the QCA pattern (section 3.3.3) but includes a broad variety of different 
behavioral elements that were found during the Desk Research to have an influence on the behavior. Although 
it in an overall sense is an essential step that /KL.7 is able to identify what elements have an effect on the 
behavior, it was not considered as having a direct influence on the success of the project process. 
 
 
Figure 4.6. Conditions pointed out as having influence on behavior. 
 
Figure 4.6 shows that many of the single conditions in Analysis 1.0 were only pointed out once by /KL.7 as 
having an influence on the specific behavior tackled in the different projects. As behavior is unique and 
influenced by many different conditions, the result makes sense because the factors must change as much as the 
investigated behavior – different projects tackle different behaviors.  
 
However, three conditions appeared more frequently than others in the reviewed projects: Social norms, Context 
and The ability to act.  
0!
2!
4!
6!
8!
10!
12!
Projects!
Behavioural conditions!
Analysis 1.0!
==PAGE:56==
!
54!
 4.2.1.4 Scoping  
Scoping was also a result of QCA made on the first grouping. Scoping consists of three categories: Problem 
Investigation, Desired Result of the Design and Framing, each of which contained different tools to scope a 
project. The pattern included two of the three categories: Problem Investigation and Desired Result of the 
Design.  
 
Problem Investigation focuses on defining the problem whereas Desired Result of the Design is more solution-
oriented and focuses on setting requirements for the end design or project. 
 
Three single conditions, all related to the category Problem Investigation, were highlighted by the DS (Appendix 
13, table 3):  
 
Problem investigation:  
Problem Statement, Hypothesis and Stated Questions. 
 
Problem Statement is a method used to give the problem-solving team a clear and concise description of the 
problem that needs to be addressed, whereas a Hypothesis is used to test a problem through further investigation. 
The Stated Questions further elaborate on the hypothesis. In the project Affaldsadfærd i Nattelivet, /KL.7 stated in 
the product documentation:  
 
“A rewarding explorative investigation starts out with posing of hypotheses,  
which allows to state the right questions for the problem.  
Questions which allow the data ‘to speak’ and point toward solutions.” 
[/KL.7 - Affaldsadfærd I Nattelivet] 
This reinforces the specific use of hypotheses. 
 
4.2.2 Second Grouping
 
Second Grouping builds on the pattern of the First Grouping (4.2.1) while adding the stages Field Study and 
Analysis 2.0.  
 
The categories related to the two main steps can be seen below: 
 
Field Study:  Observation, Interview and User interaction 
Analysis 2:  
Premise, Desired result of the design_2 and Framing_2 
 
 
Pattern 
Raw 
coverage 
Consistency 
Steps 
First!grouping!+!Field!Study!+!Analysis!2.0!
!
!
Cate-
gories 
!
Categories!from!the!first!grouping!+!*Observation!*Interview!*!
Premise!!*Desired!result!of!the!design!2!*Framing_2!
15!%!
100!%!
 
The QCA showed a pattern of categories with a raw condition of 15.38% and 100% consistency (Appendix 12). 
This means that 15.38% of the projects with this combination of categories became a success.  
==PAGE:57==
!
55!
 
Each of the steps in this grouping and related categories, as well as single conditions, will now be described and 
discussed. 
 
4.2.2.1 Field Study  
The goal of the Field Study is not just to confirm or deny the Hypothesis from the Scoping steps, but also to 
achieve a more specific Understanding and Definition of the behavior. As behavior is unique, Desk Research 
would not be sufficient to gain a full understanding. It is therefore often necessary to also conduct a Field 
Study.  
 
The question stated in the structured interview related to Field Study was focused on the tools used in the field 
to obtain knowledge. Two out of three categories were included in the pattern: Observation and Interviews. One 
condition in each category was highlighted by the DS (Appendix 13, table 4):  
  
Observation:  Physical observations 
Interviews:  
Qualitative interviews. 
 
Conducting Physical observations adds to the understanding of the individuals performing certain behaviors in an 
exact context in real time. Additionally, for a designer it also enhances comprehension of the physical 
surroundings in which an intervention could be placed. 
 
Qualitative interviews can be used to investigate people's decision-making processes (attitude and intention) by 
asking why and how, leading to an understanding of the behavior and support the research Hypotheses pursued in 
Scoping. 
 
However, although a Qualitative interview approach is highlighted by the DS, /KL.7 is actually quite sceptical about 
their validity as: 
 
“People have a tendency to state the answer that expresses  
who they would like to be, and not who they are.” 
[Quote by /KL.7] 
 
The fact that the Qualitative interviews have been used frequently by /KL.7, despite of what is stated above, could 
give an indication of the difficulty of gathering information that, at the end of the day, provides deep knowledge 
and understanding of the behavior without having to ask the person in question. 
 
The implications should perhaps not be ignored, as they are highly relevant in a behavioral context, but the focus 
could be on the importance of how questions are stated. Nor should the use of qualitative interviews be disregarded, 
but rather be used in support of the observational data.  
 
/KL.7 is also very focused on quantifiable data in a number of perspectives concerning their work with 
behavioral design, and especially in the sense of being able to show measurable effects of an intervention. The 
effect measurements are referred to as AB tests and are conducted during the Field Study. 
 
/KL.7 describes their Field Study, with a focus on a baseline, working method in the project Affaldsadfærd i 
Nattelivet such as: 
==PAGE:58==
!
56!
 
“In the work with measurements of behavior we support observational studies 
 with technological insight e.g. by using surveillance cameras, tracking systems 
 and/or tracks on social media. This use of technology and combinations of hard  
and soft data give a solid mapping of the target group’s behavior 
 as well as a precise effect measurement of the designed interventions.” 
[/KL.7 - Affaldsadfærd I Nattelivet] 
 
An AB test consists of a measurement before and after the implementation of an intervention. The use of 
specific tools to perform such a measurement could be Raspberry PIs and/or counting. [/KL.7 – Affaldsadfærd I 
Nattelivet] 
 
 
4.2.2.2 Analysis 2.0 
The step Analysis 2.0 includes the analysis of the obtained knowledge from the Field Study and Scoping steps 
of the project. No results were found related to the use of specific analyzing methods, which shows that /KL.7 
does not have a uniform way of analyzing their data from the Field Study. However, as it turned out, this step is 
more concerned with scoping the project, rather than using specific tools to analyzing data in a specific way.  
 
The scoping perspective was divided into three categories: Premise, Desired result of the design 2 and Framing 
2. All three categories were included in the pattern.  
 
The conditions highlighted by the DS (Appendix 13, table 6) are related to the following categories:  
 
Premise:  
 
 
Premise;  
Desired result of the design 2:  
Framework for interventions; Possible solutions 
Framing 2: 
 
 
Mapping behavior 
 
The category Premise only contains one condition, premise, which is highlighted by DS. /Kl.7 determines a premise 
for the overall design direction based on the desk and field research.  
 
When /KL.7 states a Premise, it is used as a proposition on how to actually change a behavior. This could be 
prior to developing interventions or stating recommendations for a customer – either way, a premise functions as 
a general requirement for the solution in order to obtain success.   
 
Desired result of the design 2, contains three detailed framing methods which are solution oriented. Like the 
Premise, the two methods point towards an end design.   
 
The last category, Framing 2, is related to structuring the problem and behavior. The methods in this category 
are less solution-oriented. The category can be seen in the light of the project team having gathered data within 
different areas that needed to be framed. In this category Mapping behavior was highlighted in the DS. Mapping 
behavior is a way of structuring and defining the behavior from the data gathered from both the Field Study and 
the Desk Research.  
 
The important focus on scoping at this step is based on the fact that a project at this point can be terminated –
possibly ending with recommendations or a behavioral assessment for a client. The scoping would in this case 
==PAGE:59==
!
57!
therefore not assist the further work, but in contrast work to define the behavioral problem/need thoroughly. As 
a notable portion of the 20 projects ended at this stage, it is relevant to highlight this as a possible end step and 
furthermore to view the categories and conditions within this perspective. 
 
4.2.3 Third Grouping
  
The third grouping included the first four steps (described in the first grouping) and also the Development and 
Test steps. Test did not contain any conditions and was therefore not included in the QCA.  
 
The categories related to the main step can be seen below: 
 
Development: Models, Pragmatics, Desired result of the design 3 and Quantifiable methods 
 
!
Pattern 
Raw 
coverage 
Consistency 
Steps 
First!grouping!+!Development!
!
!
Cate-
gories 
!
Categories!from!the!first!grouping!+!*Models!*!Pragmatics!
*Desired!result!of!the!design!3!
15!
100!%!
 
Three categories from the Development step were included in the pattern. 
 
The QCA result on this grouping contained the same pattern of categories as in the first grouping, combined 
with additional categories from the Development step. This pattern has a raw condition of 15% and 100 % 
consistency (Appendix 12). 
 
4.2.3.1 Development  
The Development step contained five different questions in the structured interview covering the areas seen 
below. However, only one of them was included in the QCA (section 3.3.3, table 3.4). 
 
• 
Assessment of the intervention (QCA). 
• 
Behavioral trigger included in the intervention. 
• 
Behavioral strategies used for developing the interventions.  
• 
The actual form of the interventions (excluded from analysis). 
• 
The use of workshops and prototyping (excluded from analysis). 
 
Only the area concerning the assessment of the interventions was included in the QCA. The actual form of the 
interventions and the use of workshop and prototyping were excluded from the analysis, as they did not 
contribute to the understanding of the /KL.7 process.  
The most commonly used interventions were physical and web-based interventions. This knowledge mostly 
functioned to define /KL.7 as a company working within the field of design. It was not used further, as the 
specific form of the interventions did not add to the understanding of the project process.  
 
==PAGE:60==
!
58!
Assessment of interventions 
The question regarding the assessment of interventions was included in the QCA. Three categories were 
included in the pattern from the result of the QCA related to assessment methods: Desired result of the design 
3, Models and Pragmatics. The category Quantifiable methods was not included in the pattern but the related 
condition “Spoke to the user” was underlined in the DS.  
 
The conditions highlighted by the DS (Appendix 13, table 9) are related to the following categories:  
 
Desired result of the design 3:  
Requirement Specification; The DNA of the ideas 
Models: 
 
 
TRES 
Quantifiable methods: 
 
Spoke to the user 
 
Both Requirement Specification and The DNA of the Ideas are focused on assessing the effect of a solution and the 
degree to which the idea solves the initial problem. The DNA of the Ideas is determined based on the solution – a 
concrete method to describe the most important elements in a solution that solves the problem. Requirement 
Specification is a suitable tool to assess a solution if the tool was used initially in a project. In this way it will 
contain requirements a solution must meet to solve the initial problem.  
 
TRES is an abbreviation for Time, Resources, Effect and Scalability and is used to assess the feasibility of 
ideas/interventions. This type of tool could be used if a company or designer has to consider whether a solution 
can be realized based on the resources at hand.  
 
Behavioral triggers and strategies  
The questions regarding behavioral triggers and strategies were not included in the QCA, but will be described 
and discussed below.  
 
Behavioral triggers and strategies are what can be incorporated in the interventions, thereby subconsciously 
inducing a behavior change. The following behavioral triggers and strategies were used in the projects from 
/KL.7 (figure 4.7): 
 
 
Figure 4.7 Behavioral triggers. 
 
Figure 4.7 shows that some of the triggers were more frequently used in the projects by /KL.7. However, 
triggers that are not that often used can be just as relevant if the context or specific behavior demands it. Figure 
0!
1!
2!
3!
4!
5!
6!
7!
Projects!
Triggers!
Behavioral Triggers!
==PAGE:61==
!
59!
4.7 highlights the triggers: Self-image, Sociability, and Authority Feeling. These make good sense when seen in relation 
to the rest of the study results, as they underline things such as social norms and personal factors (section 
2.2.1).   
 
In this case it is not the purpose to suggest the use of any specific triggers, but rather to emphasize that the use 
of triggers is very contextual and furthermore has to interact with the right behavior strategy (figure 4.8).  
 
 
Figure 4.8 Behavior Strategies. 
 
The above is the most diverse group in the analysis, covering many different approaches and methods to induce 
a behavior change. The conditions seen in figure 4.8 are not on the same level of detail but are all approaches to 
meet the mind’s psychological processes. These can then have a certain angle relative to different triggers. Figure 
4.8 shows that the most frequently used strategy is the activation of Clarity and System 1 Thinking, which was to be 
expected.  
 
 
4.2.3.2 Test  
The step Test is not included in the QCA of the categories. However, this step is a part of the pattern in the 
main stages and is therefore highly relevant for the project process and the success of the outcome. The DS 
further highlights the importance of including testing with 80.9% frequency in use and success (Appendix 13, 
table 10). 
 
In this step the interventions are compared to the baseline (A test), which was conducted during the Field Study. 
In this way, it becomes possible to measure the actual effect of a solution (good or bad) and thereby to conclude 
on the basis of data if the solution has changed the behavior in question. 
 
The Test stage is extremely important within the field of behavior change, as behavior is unique, complex and 
can only be understood to a certain point. It is therefore very difficult to predict if an intervention will have a 
positive effect on the behavior in question.  
 
As knowledge and experience increases, it will naturally become easier to predict and determine whether a trigger 
should be integrated in an intervention to obtain behavior change 
0!
1!
2!
3!
4!
5!
6!
7!
8!
9!
10!
Projects!
Strategies!
Behavior Strategies!
==PAGE:62==
!
60!
4.3 Practical foundation for the BDM 
From the results of the analysis it has been possible to synthesize three main phases which are referred to as: 
Desk Research, Field Study and Development.  
 
The results showed that successful projects are begun by addressing an overall behavioral problem/need, and 
aiming at either understanding and/or changing the behavior. Between these phases two scoping steps were 
found. Furthermore it was seen to be a success to incorporate an iteration step where the interventions are tested 
and concrete data is achieved in relation to the behavior change. In summary:  
 
• 
Project aim (starting point): The overall behavioral problem/need is described and the aim of the 
project defined. 
• 
Desk Research (phase): In the first phase, an overall investigation of the behavior is conducted through 
a broad exploration of different areas. The data is subsequently analyzed, with a focus on context, social 
norms and the person’s ability to act, which were found to have great influence on behavior (retrieved 
from Analysis 1.0).  
• 
Scoping 1 (step): Scoping 1 should lead to the development of a hypothesis and a problem statement, as 
these two will focus the subsequent field study.   
• 
Field Study (Phase): An essential element of researching behavior is to see it in action and in its 
context. Therefore, investigating it based on the hypothesis and furthermore making the behavior 
measurable will help achieve a more concrete exploration of the behavior. Additionally a baseline 
measurement should be set up (A test).  
• 
Scoping 2 (step): Scoping 2 consists of developing a Requirement Specification and a premise for the 
further project work (retrieved from Analysis 2.0). The Requirements Specification should include both 
technical and behavioral elements.  
• 
Development (phase): During the development phase, different interventions are developed based on 
Scoping 1 and 2. 
An assessment of the interventions is conducted based on the Requirements Specification and TRES if 
necessary. 
The interventions that solve the initial behavioral problem will be the output of this phase.    
• 
Test (Iteration step): The effect of the interventions/solutions is tested (B test) in relation to the 
baseline. It will thereby become possible to show how the solutions have affected the behavior in 
question. The test will also provide a foundation for further research on the behavior.  
 
The three main phases described above emphasize the interaction between gaining specific knowledge about 
behavior and translating this knowledge into the development of interventions. The phases have room for 
interpretation, but the process is still focused on a specific behavior change through interventions and it contains 
overall guidelines to achieve this.  
 
In Chapter 5, a new Behavior Design Method will be introduced based on the results from this chapter and the 
literature review (Chapter 2). In Chapter 6 the new design method will be discussed.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
!
61!
 
 
Chapter 5 
 A New Behavioral 
Design Method 
 
==PAGE:64==
!
62!
The Behavior Design Method (BDM) creates a practical synthesis between behavior and design, making it 
possible to design interventions that can subconsciously change behavior. Thus the BDM aims at creating an 
overall guideline for this design process and consists of divergent and convergent thinking that forces the 
designer to think critically in every phase. The method builds on the theoretical foundation of Nudging. 
 
Designers with no previous education or knowledge within the field of behavior and behavior change should be 
able to use the BDM. The method is to be used in situations where a designer seeks to affect or change certain 
behavior through interventions. The BDM is a design process, which includes suggestions for activities to be 
undertaken during each phase. Behavioral perspectives to be aware of when designing for behavior change are 
emphasized throughout the process.  
 
The BDM consists of three main cohesive phases. The method has been developed based on the perception that 
one needs to understand behavior in order to change it. Exploration is therefore an essential element in the 
method – this is emphasized by having both a Desk Research and a Field Study phase. The Desk Research phase 
provides a broad and general understanding of the behavior in question. In the Field Study phase, the designer is 
encouraged to examine the behavior in action. The development of the actual interventions is focused on using 
the knowledge obtained during the previous phases.  
 
Additionally, the BDM proposes two scoping gates where important decisions are made and further work is 
framed. Finally the BDM proposes an iterating testing step, where the effects of the interventions are tested in 
order to assess the behavior change.  
 
So even though the BDM is reasonably simple in its expressions, it matches the complexity and uniqueness of 
behavior.  
 
As the BDM aims at affecting behavior unconsciously, it has been considered relevant to shortly address the 
issue of ethics. The method is developed for designers to help people make better choices, but without forcing 
or limiting the freedom of choice, which is an essential element in Nudging theory. It is the notion that designers 
will use the BDM with everyone’s best interests at heart. This perspective will not be further discussed in this 
thesis.  
 
 
==PAGE:65==
!
63!
5.1 The behavioral design method 
 
Phases: Desk Research, Field Study, and Development  
Stages/Gates: Overall behavioral problem/need, Scoping 1, Scoping 2, Test the concept 
 
 
Figure 5.1 Behavioral Design Method  
 
5.2 BDM process description 
In the following, the elements of the BDM will be described. To support the comprehension of the model, an 
example case is applied in order to offer a concrete idea on the intended use of the BDM. 
 
EXAMPLE case 
The case is based on the scoping project from /KL.7 regarding waste in the streets of Copenhagen. 
 
5.2.1 Overall behavioral problem or need stage 
The project process is initiated by defining an overall behavior problem or need. This would often be related to 
the desire of changing an existing unsatisfactory behavior. The behavioral problem/need can at this point be 
more or less specific. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Problem/need: Waste on the streets during Copenhagen nightlife. The focus will be on a specific street with a vibrant 
nightlife, in this case Gothersgade. 
 
==PAGE:66==
!
64!
5.2.2 Desk Research phase 
The first phase is focused on desk research in which the behavior and problem space is investigated from a 
broad perspective.   
 
It is recommended to explore the problem/need from five different perspectives as seen in figure 5.2.  
 
 
Figure 5.2 Investigation areas and behavioral mapping. 
 
The gathering of theoretical knowledge on the behavior is important, as it creates a foundation and framework 
for the subsequent field study phase. The gained knowledge should be mapped in a Behavior Map. The Behavior 
Map consists of three perspectives: Context, Social norms and Personal factors. The context is related to the 
surroundings that may influence the behavior. Social norms highlight exciting patterns of behavior in particular 
groups or society, which influence other people’s behavior, whereas Personal factors take values, beliefs, 
emotions, etc., into consideration. Together these three perspectives are a foundation of elements influencing 
behavior. 
  
Developing a map on the behavior is a structured process in which the elements influencing behavior are 
categorized. This should aid the designer to obtain an overview of important perspectives to be aware of.    
 
Method: 
• 
Behavior Map (Appendix 14) 
 
EXAMPLE 
Behavior Map 1.0: 
 
Behavior now 
Context 
Nighttime, many young people in the streets, drunken people 
Social norms 
Community feeling, people act as the majority 
Personal factors 
People’s values are weakened/strengthened due to the effects of alcohol 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
!
65!
5.2.3 Scoping 1 – Gate 
Scoping 1 frames the behavioral problem/need and sets the stage for the further exploration of the behavior in 
question.  
A problem statement gives the design team or designer and client a common starting point for the behavioral 
project. The formulation of a hypothesis creates a basis for investigating the behavior in the field study phase, as 
it states an assumption on what is causing the behavior.  
 
Methods: 
• 
Problem Statement 
• 
Hypothesis (based on assumption from Desk Research) 
 
EXAMPLE 
Problem statement: There is a problem with drunken people littering in Gothersgade during the night from Thursday-
Saturday.  
Hypothesis: People throw waste on the streets because they have an indifferent attitude towards it because they are drunk. 
 
5.2.4 Field Study phase 
The goal of the field study is to gain a deeper and more specific understanding of the behavior as well as being 
able to define it. The aim of the field study is based on the hypothesis of what is causing and affecting the 
existing behavior; this hypothesis was formulated during the Desk Research phase. 
 
A suitable approach for investigating the behavior needs to be chosen. Doing interviews and observational 
studies are frequently used methods for exploring behavior –- one just needs to be aware that people may say 
something but in fact apply a different behavior in reality. It is therefore important to state the right questions in 
the right way during interviews to reduce the risk of inconsistency between the statements of the interviewee and 
the actual truth.   
 
The new knowledge obtained during this phase should be put into the Behavioral Map making the behavior 
more specific. 
 
Furthermore a baseline (AB test) on the behavior should be made in order to allow future measurements on the 
effect of the interventions in the Test step. A baseline makes the behavior measurable by examining specific 
parameters.  
 
Methods: 
• 
Behavior Map 
• 
Baseline (a baseline is the A test in an AB test) 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
!
66!
EXAMPLE 
Behavior Map 
 
 
Desk Research 
 Field Study 
Context 
Nighttime, many people in the streets, drunken people   Already litter on the streets, many food 
shops (7-Eleven and pizza places) 
Social norms 
Community feeling, people act as the majority 
 “They throw waste, I throw waste.” 
Personal 
factors 
People’s values are weakened/strengthened due to the 
effects of alcohol.  
 The attitude towards throwing waste 
becomes “I don’t care”.   
 
Baseline (A test): In this case, how much waste is on the streets? This way the effect of future interventions can be 
measured.  
 
5.2.5 Scoping 2 – Gate  
After the field study, the project should be geared towards targeting a well-defined single behavior before 
entering the development phase. Scoping 2 is more solution-oriented than Scoping 1 and creates a foundation 
for the development of interventions with a behavioral focus. A premise could be stated as a guideline for the 
development phase.  
 
Methods: 
• 
Premise 
• 
Behavior Requirements Specification (BRS) (dynamic tool) (Appendix 15) 
 
The BRS describes specific factors that the interventions must take into account – both from a technical and 
behavioral standpoint. Factors from the behavioral map are translated into specific elements that can be 
transformed into future interventions. The BRS is a dynamic tool because it evolves as new knowledge is 
obtained.  
==PAGE:69==
!
67!
 
EXAMPLE 
Premise:  No pointing finger 
 
The table shows how to translate elements from the Behavior Map into elements, which can be integrated in the BRS:  
 
 
Behavior 
Translated elements 
Context 
Nighttime, many people in the streets, drunken people, 
already litter on the streets, many food shops (7-Eleven and 
pizza places) 
Simplicity. 
Make it easy to put the waste into 
the bin. 
Visible placement of bins. 
Bright colors. 
Social 
Norms 
Community feeling, people acting as the majority, “They 
throw waste, I throw waste.” 
Able to sit and eat together. 
Make a common activity.  
Personal 
Factors 
People’s values are weakened/strengthened due to the effects 
of alcohol. The attitude towards throwing waste becomes “I 
don’t care.” 
Make it easy to find a waste bin. 
Make it attractive or fun to 
dispose of waste. 
 
 
5.2.6 Development phase 
The development phase is where interventions are developed and assessed. The development should be based 
on the BRS and should consider the premise stated in Scoping 2.  
 
The developed interventions must change the behavior subconsciously (system 1) by using factors that can 
trigger a change in the behavior. The Trigger Inspiration Board can be used when developing the intervention. 
 
Method: 
• 
Trigger Inspiration Board (Appendix 16) 
 
The concepts can be assessed against the developed BRS and the question of feasibility. The output is a single 
intervention or a system of interventions that solve the overall behavioral problem.   
 
Methods: 
• 
Behavior Requirements Specification 
• 
TRES (Time, Resources, Effect and Scalability) 
 
EXAMPLE 
Intervention: Big (visible), white (color) waste bins that makes a sound when you throw waste in them (attractive). The 
holes in the bin are as big as a pizza tray (easy). The intervention incorporates a fun element, which motivates people to 
throw out trash. It is visible which speaks to the context (night). Numerous waste bins are placed directly where people sit 
and eat. This makes it easier for the user to dispose of waste, as they are aware of its existence.  
 
The words in parenthesis are the elements described in the BRS, which have been incorporated into the intervention described above.   
==PAGE:70==
!
68!
5.2.7 Testing – Iterating stage 
Testing is the last stage in the BDM. By testing the developed interventions, it is possible to get a direct 
indication of the success of the interventions and furthermore to obtain new knowledge about the behavior. This 
can be used to further develop interventions. This stage therefore has an iterating character leading back to the 
development stage.  
 
Method: 
• 
B test  
 
EXAMPLE 
B test: Count waste in the same street after installing the interventions. It is important that the B test is closely related to 
the A test in terms of time of the count, place, period, etc.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
!
69!
 
 
Chapter 6 
Discussion of the 
BDM in relation to 
the Literature 
Review 
 
==PAGE:72==
!
70!
The following discussion will focus on relating the Behavioral Design method (BDM), presented in chapter 5, to 
the existing behavioral literature and the /KL.7 project process. Each of the phases and related steps will be 
discussed and compared to similar steps found during the literature review (Chapter 2). Lastly, the BDM will be 
compared to well-known product design processes with which it is consistent, to provide a new perspective.   
 
The structure of this chapter will follow the structure of the BDM starting with a discussion of the overall 
process.  
 
6.1 Overall process structure 
Looking at the overall project process derived from the results (Chapter 3) has revealed a systematic procedure 
and highlights the importance of the different stages and the related behavioral focus required to achieve 
successful understanding and/or change of a behavior. 
 
The overall project process can be seen in relation to different processes and design methods, all of which 
underlines that the process /KL.7 goes through is consistent with both behavioral methods, product 
development methods as well as more extensive design process methods.   
 
The nature of the different phases in the BDM correlates to the Double Diamond model [Design Council] in the 
sense of being exploratory and defining. The Double Diamond is characterized by its convergent and divergent 
phases in which exploration and defining occurs in successive order. It is a simplified model that describes the 
overall design process for a product/service development by dividing the process into four main phases: Discover, 
Define, Develop, Deliver.  
 
In the sense of being a behavioral design method, the behavioral focus in some of the phases shows resemblance 
to Fogg’s Eight-Step Design Process [Fogg, 2009]. Fogg’s design process emphasizes choosing a behavior, 
exploring this behavior followed by developing a solution, which should then be tested. The two endpoints 
underline some of the central points in behavioral design: choosing a simple behavior to target and testing 
whether a solution/intervention has had an effect on the behavior. The same approach is seen in the BDM.  
 
A significant difference is the way in which a project is initiated and what the chosen starting point may require. 
Fogg emphasizes starting with iteration between choosing a specific behavior, choosing a receptive audience and 
exploring what might be preventing the behavior. [Fogg, 2009] Seeing this in relation to the BDM, Fogg’s 
process requires that you have a thorough understanding of the behavior to begin with. The BDM has in its 
initial phases a broader research of the behavior. One could say that the difference in the two methods could 
come down to the following exemplification:  What is preventing people from throwing trash in the trash bins? (Related to 
Fogg) vs. why are people behaving in this manner when handling trash? (BDM). The last question opens up a greater 
exploration of the solution space, which could have an effect on the possible solutions and behavior targeted.  
 
The BDM also shows resemblance to the generic product development process described by Ulrich and 
Eppinger [Ulrich et al, 2012]. As this process is related towards engineering and industrial design it is interesting 
to see where the two models correlate and where synergies may occur.  
==PAGE:73==
!
71!
 
Figure 6.1 Comparison of design models 
 
The overall process as shown in figure 6.1, containing six development phases oriented towards engineering 
products.  
 
The BDM can be associated with the “Concept Development” phase of the product development process. This 
phase has been expanded (see figure 6.1) into a number of activities described as “front-end activities”, which 
contain several similarities to the phases in the BDM.  
 
In figure 6.1 it has been illustrated how the phases and activities match. Roughly it can be said that in the 
concept development phase of a product development process, it is possible to apply behavioral thinking into 
the product concepts.  
 
6.2 Overall behavioral problem/need 
One of the key findings in the results from the QCA was the combination of not only aiming at affecting a 
behavior but also to understand it. This central activity of obtaining knowledge is met in this first phase of the 
BDM and is quite unique to other behavioral models.  
 
What may seem as a logic sequence of working has, however, not been found in the literature (Chapter 2). From 
the theories and models concerning the understanding of a behavior retrieved from Psychology and Social 
==PAGE:74==
!
72!
psychology, much knowledge can be obtained on factors having an influence on behavior (Section 2.2.1). It is, 
however, a very theoretical behavioral knowledge, not aiming to be used by designers in a practical way. In table 
2.1 (section 2.2.1), it is seen how the four described models either focus on explaining, creating an understanding or 
predicting behavior, by describing different psychological and social psychological elements.  
 
When looking at the models that actually have behavior change as a goal (section 2.2.2), focus is mostly pointed 
towards how behavior is affected. In some cases this is seen in the light of the state of motivation of the 
person/people. But no model or method focuses on the way in which a designer should obtain knowledge on 
the present behavior in order to affect it.  
The MINDSPACE checklist is what comes closest to providing a foundation for the designer to understand 
what may influence behavior. It describes nine central elements, which can influence behavior, but as 
MINDSPACE aims at policymakers, it does not give any suggestions as to how to apply them.  
So although the scientists themselves make use of psychological- and social psychological theories to develop 
their intervention models, they do not pass on these methods/understandings to obtain knowledge.  
Seeing that both understanding and affecting occurred in connection in practice it is highly relevant and should 
be considered as an addition to the existing behavior change literature.  
 
6.3 Desk Research phase 
The Desk Research phase of the BDM is initiated with a convergent phase in which desk research is carried out 
followed by a divergent phase where analysis of the desk research leads to scoping of the project.  
In the following it will be sought to explain how the activities in the Desk Research phase correspond to 
literature and how findings add to existing behavioral literature.  
6.3.1 Desk Research 
The result of the study indicated that a combination of all five desk research categories are preferable and lead to 
successful projects. The designer should conduct a broad work of research, as an initial activity in order to obtain 
knowledge on the target behavior and reach to an understanding of what affects it. 
 
This research strategy relates well to literature, which indicate that behavior is unique (section 2.2.1) and 
therefore should be seen and investigated as such. By regarding behavior as unique it demands the designer to 
also view every new project in a new light, and study what conditions might be affecting the behavior. This is 
where MINDSPACE could come in hand, as it suggests nine perspectives to consider.   
 
The BDM highlights three categories to be investigated based on the study: Trends, Assessment and Experience 
and Similarity in Theme. 
 
The category Assessment and Experience refers to conducting a Literature Review and seeking Expert Knowledge as 
two central activities. By looking at behavioral literature it becomes possible for a designer, who is not an 
experienced professional in behavior, to determine what might be influencing behavior. This must be done to 
create understanding and defining the behavior, but also to obtain knowledge on how to affect the behavior in 
order to reach the desired behavioral output. Seeking expert knowledge is an easier or more direct way to obtain 
the same knowledge. The Similarity in Theme refers to looking at similar projects or existing solutions within the 
same area or perhaps even similar behavioral projects, all of which can give a rapid entry to understanding of the 
behavioral problem/need.  
 
This is also seen in the persuasive design literature. Fogg formulates in his Eight-step Behavior Model section 
(2.2.2) that successful existing technology should be identified and used in the development of a solution. 
==PAGE:75==
!
73!
However, if doing so, it is extremely important to be aware that such existing solutions can be contextual, and 
thereby not necessarily successful in a new context where e.g. other social norms can be at stake.   
 
Relying on existing knowledge or looking towards existing solutions is not uncommon in engineering design. As 
described by Nigel Cross, looking towards competitors of similar products to compare or even ensure sufficient 
diversity is a common step [Cross; 2005]. Ulrich and Eppinger suggests a step in which the designer or design 
team should undertake an external search for finding related solutions. [Ulrich et al, 2012]. This can be done 
looking at Lead Users, Literature, Experts, etc. just as proposed by the results of the analysis. Although both Cross 
and Ulrich & Eppinger suggest these methods as to be used when developing concepts, looking at similar 
solutions also gives the advantage of seeing how others have understood a similar problem.   
 
Trends refer to investigating International and Danish Trends, as the behavior of people in a societal perspective can 
be highly influenced by specific trends. These could e.g. be sustainability or health trends, which can influence 
the motivation or attitude towards a specific behavior. As trends can also be understood as “the inner disposition or 
urge to (always) act or think in a certain way or develop in a specific direction” [Web: ordnet.dk], it seems highly relevant to 
be aware of trends, as they can have consistent effect on a behavior. 
 
So for a designer to do successful behavioral design projects, it is important that trends related to i.e. a context or 
a group of people, are taken into account when developing interventions.  
 
6.3.2 Analyzing the data from Desk Research 
The divergent step in the Desk Research phase is related to analysing the knowledge obtained from the desk 
research, defining what has an effect on behavior and mapping this in a Behavior Map. The mapping of behavior 
should be done in relation to Context, Social norms and Personal factors, as they together highlight important elements 
to behavior – elements that can be further investigated in the field work. This step is therefore also a preparatory 
step to the fieldwork.  
 
From the results of the study Context and Social norms are highlighted as having influence on behavior. This is 
supported by findings in the literature review, in which the importance of personal factors such as emotions, values 
and attitude towards a specific behavior, are pointed out. 
 
The three elements Context, Social norms and Personal factors, together frame what behavior consists of, and 
each can influence the behavior to a greater or lesser extent.  
 
This way of mapping behavior is new to the behavioral literature in the sense of framing the existing behavior. 
MINDSPACE, however, also highlights personal factors referencing it as “emotional associations”, and Norms as 
something “we are strongly influenced by” [Dolan et al, 2009].  
 
Most of the factors influencing behavior are underlying and therefore hard to observe and detect, for others than 
skilled professionals or researchers within the field of psychology, if one do not know what to be aware of. It can 
therefore be relevant for a designer to apply the use of such a Behavioral Map in order to define the behavioral 
problem.  
 
==PAGE:76==
!
74!
6.4 Scoping 1 
The first scoping step in the BDM, functions as a gate between the first and second phase of the process where 
decision-making is emphasised before further continuing the project. The first gate has the purpose of 
congregating the results of the Desk Research phase and scoping it for the Field Study phase.  
 
The two scoping approaches suggested in the BDM are based on the result of the analysis, and consists of two 
activities: A problem statement and formulating a hypothesis.   
 
For a designer it seems ideal to use this approach, as it would provide both a clear definition of the problem or 
behavior that needs to be solved, as well as a basis for investigating the specific behavior in the field study. 
 
To formulate a problem statement of a project is an important step for a designer, as it set the stage for the 
further work. This is also emphasized by Cross, that in his Seven stages of the design process [Cross; 2005], describes 
clarifying objectives as a central initial step in a design process as it aids to manage the design process. The objectives 
can also help to define an ill-stated problem by a client or customer, and function as an agreement for the end 
goal.  
 
The problem statement is a way to agree on the behavioral problem - both internally in a design team and 
towards a client.  
 
A hypothesis is in the BDM used as a tool to prepare for the field study. Based on the outcome of the desk 
research a hypothesis is made on what has an influence on the behavior, and what it might require to change it. 
This can now be used as a guiding line in the fieldwork, where the hypothesis can be confirmed or disproven, 
with the result of obtaining a thorough knowledge on the target behavior.  
 
6.5 Field Study phase 
The Field Study phase consists, as in the first phase of the BDM, of a divergent and convergent phase. The 
divergent phase relates to further exploring the behavior problem, which has now been defined in Scoping 1, as 
well as setting up a Baseline if possible. The convergent phase sought to structure the data from the field study 
for the subsequent development of interventions of a possible reporting – if this is the final stage of the project.  
6.5.1 Getting into the field and exploring behavior 
Part of the exploration of the behavior can be done through Desk Research, but it is still necessary to perform 
field study as context, social norms and personal factors can heavily influence the behavior (section 2.3) and has 
to be studied in the field. It can in many circumstances therefore be difficult to create a full understanding of 
behavior by only doing desk research. Physical observations add to the understanding of the specific people, 
performing certain behavior in an exact context in real time. Additionally, for a designer it also creates 
comprehension of the physical surroundings in which an intervention could be placed. 
 
By conducting a Baseline (A tests) the behavior becomes measureable and it is possible to determine the effect 
of the interventions. This is not only beneficial to determining what interventions to use, but it is also a way for a 
designer to communicate concrete results on the project to the client.  
 
It was nowhere in the behavioral design literature emphasized the need to get into the field. However, this could 
be explained by the fact that none of the models encourage the designer to gather knowledge on the behavior in 
question, thus making it irrelevant to get into the field.  
==PAGE:77==
!
75!
 
Observing the user in action with the aim of gathering data is, however, not an unknown phenomenon in design 
methods. In Contextual Design the design team use contextual inquiry to the customers’ needs and desires [Beyer 
et al; 1999]. Here it is emphasized to observe the user in action while asking questions - in this way the 
interviewer and user develop a shared understanding of the problem. The contextual design approach is based 
on the notion that data gathered from the user is the base criterion for what needs to be addressed and what the 
end solutions should meet.  
 
As pointed out behavior can also be related to habits (section 2.1.5), which are highly contextual. If the 
investigated behavior in a project has character of being habitual then the effect of context cues should be 
considered. Such a situation could e.g. be the case if the behavior is occurring in a workplace – a context that is 
consistent in everyday lives for most people.  
6.5.2 Analyzing the field study data 
As part of the field study the gathered data needs to be analysed which, as in the first phase, is done by mapping 
the behavior. 
 
In the BDM it is suggested to build on the behavioral map from the first analysis. This way it clearly shows how 
the understanding of the behavior is expanded and deepened. Depending on the relevance, the different factors 
should be incorporated in the development of interventions. Furthermore the physical structuring of the data, 
will facilitate the subsequent step in which the project is geared.  
 
6.6 Scoping 2  
At this stage the behavioral problem/need has been investigated thoroughly and a deep comprehension of the 
project at problem obtained. This is the point where a single target behavior is chosen and setting the direction 
for the further project work. 
 
The second gate of the BDM is the Scoping 2 step that once again has the purpose of consolidating the 
knowledge for the further purpose of using this in either the development of interventions. The activities in the 
Scoping 2 step are therefore more solution orientated than in the Scoping 1. 
 
Based on the results of the analysis, the BDM proposes to formulate a Premise as well as creating a Requirements 
Specification. A requirements specification should encompass both technical requirements as well as behavioral 
aspects. This is where the factors highlighted in the Behavioral Map could be incorporated.  
 
Besides scoping the project, a requirements specification will also make the solution easier to assess, as its 
elements are clearly defined and structured.  
 
Making a requirement specification is a frequently used tool in product design, as it sets certain boundaries to a 
design problem. Cross refers to this as a performance specification [Cross, 2005], in which limits to what should be 
achieved by the design is concretized. This also has the effect of restraining the solution space, which is why it 
should not be set to narrow.  
In the Product Design and Development process by Ulrich and Eppinger (2012), the concept development 
phases also holds a step in which the designer is encouraged to Establish Target Functions.   
 
The requirements specification should translate the behavioral factors into more specific factors which can be 
build into possible solutions – in this case the development of interventions.   
==PAGE:78==
!
76!
6.7 Development phase 
The last phase in the BDM consists of a convergent and divergent phase, just as in previous phases. In this 
phase, however, they are directly linked to the generating of concepts followed by selecting a feasible 
intervention through an assessment step. The phase is ended off with testing the intervention in an iterating step 
and conducting a B test if an A test was made (baseline).  
6.7.1 Development - Triggers and behavioral strategies  
In the BDM this step includes the development of interventions to subconsciously affect people.  
The developed interventions will have triggers incorporated to obtain a specific behavior, which is referred to as 
the antecedent to behavior. To obtain a behavior change a combination of a behavior strategy and the right 
choice of trigger is needed.  
 
Together the behavioral strategy and the chosen trigger should subconsciously change people's behavior. The 
trigger includes different specific sociological mechanisms that all have the aim of changing behavior. The 
interventions should beware of Personal factors, Social norms and Context.  
 
What was observed in the study is that the development of interventions and the chosen triggers are as diverse as 
the behavior in question. This relates well to what has previously been uncovered in this study, that each 
behavior is unique. In the BDM the development of interventions is not focused on activities of how to come up 
with concept ideas, but suggests what to consider when choosing triggers. This is done in the Trigger Inspiration 
Board (Appendix 16). 
 
This perspective on the development of ideas is consistent with what is seen in the behavioral change literature. 
Most of the behavior change methods suggest both different ways to affect behavior and different perspectives 
in which the behavior is to be changed - some have sustainable perspectives while others are more general in 
their approach.  
 
Where the Design with Intent toolkit (section 2.2.2) is directly focused at the concept development stage and 
provides techniques and real life examples for the designer to be inspired by. The six lenses described in the 
method, are design patterns that share similar behavioral understanding or assumptions on how to influence 
users. This way of providing prescribed areas, which can be directly incorporated or used in the development of 
interventions, is similar to what the BDM intents to do.  
 
The Behavior Change Wheel (BCW) also specifically considers the motivation and capability of the user, which 
comes the closest of the mentioned methods to considering personal factors as the BDM does. Furthermore, the 
BCW take context into account, which is one of the cornerstones in the view on behavior prescribed by the BDM.  
 
In Fogg’s Behavior Grid (section 2.2.2) 15 ways behavior can change is described. It is as such, a framework for 
categorizing behavior in order to choose the one appropriate for a specific project. The behaviors are categorized 
in relation to time and the whether the behavior is new, should increase in intensity or completely stop etc. – 
each of which contain suggested triggers to change behavior. The nature of the grid is very similar to the Trigger 
Inspiration Board, however, being fairly more developed.  
 
In Fogg’s Behavior Model, this is the step where it is suggested to look for relevant examples of persuasive 
technology - if this is done in an earlier stage, the same solutions can be considered here.  
 
So each of the behavior change intervention methods described in the literature review are consistent with the 
Development Phase in the BDM. This phase does not contribute with something new to literature standing 
==PAGE:79==
!
77!
alone. However, in connection to the previous phases it is the presumption that the knowledge gathered would 
have created an incomparable basis for developing interventions.  
 
6.7.2 Assessment of interventions 
The assessment is considered in order to choose between interventions, and is based upon the requirements 
specification developed in Scoping 2. This is the convergent part of the development phase.  
As the requirements specification is a dynamic tool, it could have evolved during the project process ensuring 
that important elements are taken into consideration and ensuring that knowledge is not lost. By having applied 
the requirement specification in the Scoping 2 step, and now using the content to assess the interventions the 
overall process becomes streamlined and allows for close interaction between the stages. The requirements 
specification is ideal to use at this stage, as the assessment thereby also focuses on both the technical as well as 
the behavioral elements in a solution.  
 
Evaluating alternatives is once again mostly found as a singular step in the design processes. By Cross this is 
proposed as Evaluating Alternatives [Cross; 2005], in which a design evaluated against the criteria set in the 
performance specification. The step has the aim of assessing the value and utility of a design or intervention with 
respect to the overall problem specification or goal of the project.  
 
In addition the assessment of the interventions in relation to the requirements specification, TRES is also 
suggested as a tool. TRES is an abbreviation for Time, Resources, Effect and Scalability and is used to assess the 
feasibility of ideas - especially useful in companies where such factors are deciding elements. The combination of 
the methods mentioned above offers a complete assessment approach as both the solution coverage and 
feasibility is considered.  
 
6.8 Iterating testing step 
The iterating testing step is an important behavioral step, as it helps to determine whether a chosen solution 
actually affects behavior. Without this step the success of a solution solely relies on the assumption of the affect 
based on the previous work. The testing step is also proposed by Fogg in his Behavioral Design Model (section 
2.2.2), where he suggests to do quick and repeated tests in a non-scientific way. The aim is to learn how the 
solution functions based on the target behavior, audience and channel. Furthermore he emphasises how the 
knowledge gained from the tests can be used prospectively in further or future development [Fogg, 2009]. 
 
6.9 Summing up 
The three main phases emphasize the interaction between gaining specific knowledge about behavior and 
translating this knowledge into the development of interventions. This was seen as a missing point in the 
Literature Review. The phases have room for interpretation, but the process is still focused on a specific 
behavior change through interventions and contains overall guidelines to achieve this.  
==PAGE:80==
!
78!
 
==PAGE:81==
!
79!
 
 
Chapter 7  
Limitations and 
Implications 
==PAGE:82==
!
80!
7.1 Limitations 
The most critical and profound limitations in this study is outlined and discussed in this section.  
7.1.1 Data acquisition  
The entire study is based on one main dataset consisting of 20 projects, collected through structured interviews 
with four people from the behavioral design consultancy firm, /KL.7.  
 
A limitation in this study is related to the relatively small amount of data. Although the size of the dataset is 
found adequate with the use of Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA), the validity of the result are limited to 
the specific context of /KL.7. This makes the study highly contextual. Although it does not impair the 
conclusions in this study, it emphasizes the need for further research to prove the applicability of the design 
method to others contexts.  
 
As the dataset was collected through structured interviews, the framework of interview guide was crucial for the 
outcome of the study, especially as the possible answers were predetermined. Based on this the dataset is 
relatively restricted in its content, which in the context of this study was required to apply QCA.  
That the data acquisition was conducted in the early stages of the study, also adds to the limitations, as our 
knowledge within the field of behavioral design at this time was relatively small.  
7.1.2 Interviewee background  
The main data acquisition derived from the structured interview conducted exclusively with people from /KL.7. 
Solely working with data from same population may have had added to a narrow perspective in the answers. 
Furthermore, the interviewees did not seem very critical in their way of considering /KL.7 and the project 
process, which can have limited the dataset. On the other hand, as stated in the method section (section 
3.1.2) the four interviewees have different educational background, which was a clear advantage, as they had 
different perspectives and approaches on their work.  
7.1.3 Limitations in the use of QCA  
The QCA method was an adequate method for analyzing the relatively small dataset, and searching for patterns 
in the design processes of /KL.7. However, QCA have a limitation in the number of possible conditions, which 
made it impossible to determine whether pattern across all the categories existed or not. 
 
As the name emphasizes, QCA is a qualitative method of analysis. The results of the QCA are therefore highly 
affected by the people applying the method, as the decontamination of data prior to running it, directly affects 
the outcome. 
 
7.2 Future Implications 
The outcome of this study is a unique contribution to the research within the field of behavioral design. The 
development of a new behavioral design method will not only have implications for future research but 
particularly also for designers.    
7.2.1 Implications for behavioral design research 
As seen in this thesis, the design research has until now lacked a concrete operationalization of the nudging 
theory. There exists a gap between the comprehension of how to trigger a behavior change, and the actual 
translation of this knowledge into useful steps that will lead a designer towards a result.  
 
==PAGE:83==
!
81!
The psychological behavior research laid the basis; however, the existing design methods either focus on 
persuasive design, function as broad frameworks or are niche methods to increase sustainable behaviors. 
 
As seen in this thesis, the results of the study on the practice of behavioral design have led to the 
acknowledgement of significant missing operational elements in the reviewed behavioral design literature 
(chapter 2).  
 
The implication of this thesis will therefore first and foremost add to the operationalization of behavioral 
knowledge in a design context, where a subconscious influence through the use of behavioral interventions in 
the aim.  
 
This disclosure may lay ground for future research projects applying a research approach, that will enlightening 
the operational needs of a designer to translate nudging theory into behavioral interventions.  
7.2.2 Implications for designers 
The output of this study will not only benefit researchers but also design engineers. As further research and 
testing is made of the design method, the more giving it will be for designers to implement the method in their 
work. The concrete character of the design method can aid designers in their work with behavioral change, 
providing them with concrete guidelines to address a behavioral problem.  
 
As neither the initial literature research nor the investigation of the work by /KL.7 has been focused on a 
specific field of design, the method can obtain a wide application context. The hope is that the behavioral design 
method will gain ground within the field of engineering design as for any designer, independent of background 
that wishes to do behavioral design.  
==PAGE:84==
!
82!
==PAGE:85==
!
83!
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 Conclusion 
 
==PAGE:86==
!
84!
The Behavioral Design Method (BDM) is a concrete approach for a designer to apply when engaging in activities 
with the aim of changing people’s behavior subconsciously through interventions. 
 
The simple process structure and suggested activities create insights into how to obtain knowledge on changing 
people's behavior and what to be aware of when doing so. By applying this approach when designing for 
behavior change, the designer is helped towards understanding behavior in a specific context. This creates the 
foundation for influencing people’s decision-making process by activating the automated (System 1) behavior. 
   
The BDM aids the designer to undertake behavioral design projects, in which people are steered towards the 
“right” behavior, while still ensuring freedom of choice. 
 
The thesis presents the answer to the research question: 
 
What process steps and essential activities should be included in a Behavioral Design Method 
 in order to operationalize the nudging theory? 
The development of the BDM is based on the study of applied behavioral design in the context of /KL.7, and a 
theoretical foundation obtained from the literature review on behavior and behavior change methods. The 
interaction between the two perspectives has contributed to the clarification of central process step and activities 
needed to operationalize the Nudging theory.  
The BDM present seven process steps divided into three phases and four stages/gates. The two first phases of 
the BDM, Desk Research and Field Study, contain specific approaches and activities to gain behavior knowledge, 
which was seen as a missing link in the existing behavioral methods and models.  
The last phase, Development, furthermore contributes with specific elements to be included in the interventions. 
Additionally the BDM ensures a continuous scoping of the behavior project through the gates in the method, 
making the execution of the phases more focused and effective. The iterating testing step is a crucial step in the 
BDM, as effect measurements both provides proof of concept as well as a profound knowledge on the behavior. 
The new BDM will hopefully result in a more widespread application of behavioral design, and create better and 
more focused behavioral design projects. 
 
8.1 Further work  
The Behavioral Design Method (BDM) is a first step towards operationalizing the Nudging theory. The method 
has thereby created a foundation for researcher to further develop on the integration between the nudging 
theory and the practical approach to achieve subconscious behavior change.  
As this study only consisted of 20 projects review a further studies should be performed to create a stronger 
empirical foundation of the BDM. This would furthermore ensure the applicability of the method in other 
contexts.  
The BDM should additionally be tested in practice to ensure comprehensibility of the method and usability for a 
designer with no previous knowledge within the field of behavioral design. 
 
The actual effect of changing people’s behavior by the use of the suggested approach should also be investigated. 
==PAGE:87==
!
85!
8.1.1 The study method 
In new studies also reviewing previous behavior design projects, the same research method could be applied. 
However, the lessons learned from this thesis should be taken into account, when conducting the project review 
and analysis of the results. This would optimize the process and improve the accuracy of the results 
First of all, the success criteria could be determined on a more theoretical foundation, such as a combination of 
time, budget and achievement of goals.  
The Qualitative, Comparative Analysis functioned well as method of analysis used this study; however it was 
found to have its limitations in relation to the number of conditions. A further study should be designed to 
match these limitations.  
 
8.2 Final Words 
This thesis has established a concrete method and approach for designers to manage the process of changing 
people's behavior subconsciously, without having knowledge within the field of behavior. The Behavioral Design 
Method contributes with a practical design method, which incorporates the Nudging theory – both for designers 
and researchers. 
==PAGE:88==
!
86!
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
!
87!
 
 
Chapter 9 
 References 
==PAGE:90==
!
88!
9.1 Books and Journal Articles 
Abrahamse, W., Steg, L., Vlek, C, Rothengatter, T, 2005. ‘A review of intervention studies aimed at  
household energy conservation’, Journal of Environment Psychology, Vol. 25, pp. 273-91. 
Akrich, M., 1992. ‘The De-scription of Technical Objects’ In Wiebe Bijker and John Law, eds.,  
Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change, pp. 205-224. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. 
Ajzen, I., Ryn, M., Netemeyer, R., 1991. ‘The Theory of Planned Behavior’, Organizational  
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Vol. 50, pp. 179-211, University of Massachusetts at 
Amherst, USA. 
Argyris, C., Shön, D.A., 1978, ‘Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective’, The Journal of Applied  
Behavioral Science, Vol. 15 (4), pp. 542-548 
Bandura, A., 1991. ‘Social cognitive theory of self-regulation’, Organizational Behavior and  
Human Decision Processes, Vol. 50 (2), pp. 248-87. 
Bandura, A., 1999. ‘ Social cognitive theory: An argentic perspective’, Asian Journal of Social  
Psychology, Vol. 2 (1), pp. 21-41, Stanford University, Stanford CA, USA. 
Bargh, J.A., 2006. ‘What have we been priming all these years? On the development, mechanisms,  
and ecology of nonconscious social behavior’, European Journal of Social  
Psychology, Vol. 36, pp. 147-68. 
Bekdik, B., Thuesen, C., 2007. ‘Organisational Modularity in Construction – Studying the effects of  
organizational repetitions using QCA’ 
Beyer, H., Holtzblatt, K., 1999. ‘Contextual Design’, Interactions, pp. 32-42. 
 
Bronfenbrenner, U., 1994. ‘Ecological Models of Human Development’, Readings on the  
development of children, pp. 37-43, Freeman. 
Brown, J.D., 1998. ‘The Self’, Boston, Massachusetts: McGraw-Hill.Chaiken, S. and Trope, Y., 1999. ‘Dual- 
Process Theories in Social Psychology’, Social Psychology, pp.  
41-72, Guilford Press, New York, USA. 
Clegg, K., 2002. ‘Improving learning through reflection - part one’, The higher Education  
Academy. 
Cross, N., 2008. ‘Engineering Design Methods - Strategies for Product Design, Forth Edition, Wiley.  
 
Darnton, A., 2008. ‘Reference Report: An overview of behavior change models and their uses’,  
Government Social Research, July, pp. 10-15, University of Westminster. 
De Young, R., 1993. ‘Changing behavior and making it stick: The conceptualisation and  
management of conversation behavior’, Environment and Behavior, 25, pp. 485-505. 
Design Council, ‘The design process’, www.designcouncil.org.uk 
 
Dey, A., 2013. ‘Persuasive Technology or Explorative Technology’, 8th International Coference,  
PERSUASIVE 2013, Proceedings, pp. 1, April, Sydney, Australia. 
Dolan, P., Hallsworth, M., Halpern, D., King, D. and Vlaev, I., 2009. ‘MINDSPACE – influencing  
behavior through public policy’, Institute for Government. 
Festinger, L., 1957. ‘A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance’, Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA,  
USA. 
Fogg, B.J., 2003. ‘Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change what We Think and Do’,  
Morgan Kaufmann.  
Fogg, B.J., 2009. ‘Creating Persuasive Technologies: An eight-step design process’, Persuasive ‘09, 
 
April 26-29, Claremont, California, USA. 
Fogg, B.J., 2009. ‘The Behavior Grid: 35 ways behavior can change’, International Conference on Persuasive  
Technology, Vol. 350, pp. 1-5. 
Fogg, B., 2009. ‘A Behavior Model For Persuasive Design’, Proceedings of the 4th International  
Conference on Persuasive Technology, p. 1. 
Greenwood, J., 1998. ‘The role of reflection in single and double loop learning’, Journal of  
Advanced Nursing, Vol. 27 (5), pp. 1048-53. 
==PAGE:91==
!
89!
Guest, G., MacQueen, K. M., 2008. ‘Handbook for Team-Based Qualitative Research’, Altamira  
Press, 2008. 
Gulan, T., Valerjev, P., 2010. ‘Semantic and related types of priming as a context in word  
recognition’, Review of Psychology, Vol. 17 (1), pp. 53-58. 
Hale, J.L., Householder, B.J., Greene, K.L. 2003. ‘The theory of Reasoned Action’, Communications,  
Vol. 99, pp. 39-44. 
Harrell, M. C., Bradley, M. A., 2009. ‘Data collection Methods, Semi-structured Interview and Focus  
Groups’, Rand National Defense Research Institute. 
Jordan, E., Gross, M.E., Javernick-Will, A.N., Garvin, M.J., 2011. ‘Use and Misuse of Qualitative  
Comparative Analysis’, Construction Management and Economics, Vol. 29, pp. 1159-73. 
Kahneman, D., Tversky, A., 1979. ‘Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk’,  
Econometrica, 47 (2), pp. 263-91. 
[Kahneman, D.; 2002] Kahneman, D, ‘Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral  
Economics’ Revised version of the lecture of Daniel Kahneman delivered in Stockholm, Sweden, 
2002. 
 
Kara, A., 2009. ‘Implications of Multiple Preferences for a Deconstructive Critique and a  
Reconstructive Revision of Economic Theory’, Journal of Economic and Social Research, Vol. 
11 (1), pp. 69-78. 
Kluger, A., Denisi, A., 1996. ‘The effects of feedback interventions on performance: A historical  
review, a meta-analysis and a preliminary feedback intervention theory’, Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 
119 (2), pp. 254-84. 
Kollmuss, A. and Agyeman, J., 2002. ‘Mind the Gap: why do people act environmentally and what  
are the barriers to pro-environmental behavior?’, Environmental Education Research, January, pp. 37-
41. 
Kuru, A., 2013. ‘Exploration of User Experience of Personal Informatics System’, February issue. 
 
Krupka, E., Weber, R. A., 2009. ‘The focusing and informational effects of norms on pro-social  
behavior´,  Journal of Economic Psychology, Vol. 30, pp. 307-20. 
Li, I., Dey, A., Forlizzi, J., 2010. ‘A Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems’, Proceedings  
of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM Press. 
Li, I., Dey, A., Forlizzi, J., 2011. ‘Understanding My Data, Myself: Supporting Self-Reflection with  
Ubicomb technologies’, Human Factors, pp. 2417-20. 
Li, I, 2012. ‘Personal informatics & context: Using context to reveal factors that affect behavior’,  
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, Vol. 4, pp. 71-72. 
Lilley, D., Lofthouse, V. A. and Bhamra, T.A., 2005. ‘Towards instinctive sustainable product use’,  
2nd International Conference: Sustainability Creating the Culture, pp. 2-4. 
Local Government Association, 2013. ‘Changing behaviors in public health - To nudge or to  
shove?’, October, Local Government House, London, Britain. 
Lockton, D, Harrison, D., Stanton, N., 2010. ‘The Design with Intent Method: A design tool for  
 
 
Influencing user behavior’, Applied Ergonomics, Vol. 41 (3), pp. 382-92. 
Loewenstein, G.F., Weber, E.U., Hsee, CK., Welch, N., 2001. ‘Risk as Feelings’, Psychological  
Bulletin, Vol. 127, pp. 267-86. 
McClelland, J.L., Rumelhart, D.E., 1981, ‘An interactive activation model of context effects in letter perception: I.  
An account of basic findings’, Psychological Review, Vol. 88 (5), pp. 375-407 
Memon, A., Cronin, O., Eaves, R., Bull, R., 1995, ‘An empirical test of mnemonic components of cognitive  
interview’, In G. Davies, A. Lloyd-Bostock, M. McMurran, C. Wilson (eds.), Psychology, Law, 
and Criminal Justice, pp. 135-145 
Michie, S., van Stralen, M. M., West, R., 2011. ‘The behavior change wheel: A New method for  
Characterising and designing behavior change interventions’, Implementation science, retrieved 
19/01/2015 http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/42 
Miltenberger, R.G., 2008, ‘Behavior Modification: Principles and Procedure’, 4th Edition, Belmont, CA: Thomson  
 
Wadsworth 
Mowday, R. T., & Sutton, R. I., 1993. ‘Organizational behavior: Linking individuals and groups to organizational  
context’, Annual Review of Psychology, Vol. 44, pp. 195–229. 
==PAGE:92==
!
90!
Müller, L., Rivera-Pelayo, V., Heuer, Stephan, 2012, ‘Persuasion and Reflective Learning: Closing the Feedback  
Loop’, Persuasive Technology – Designing for Health and Safety, 7th International Conference 
PERSUASIVE 2012, pp. 133-144, June, Linköking, Sweden 
Neal, D., Wood, W., Quinn, J., 2006. ‘Habits – a repeat performance’, Current Directions in  
Psychological Science, Vol. 15 (4), pp. 198-202. 
Netemeyer, R., Ryn, M., Ajzen, I., 1991. ‘The Theory of Planned Behavior’, Organizational  
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Vol. 50, pp. 179-211. 
Oinas-Kukkonen, H., 2010. ‘Behavior Change Support Systems: The Next Frontier For Web  
Science’, Web Science Conference. 
Ragin, C., 1987. ‘The Comparative Method: Moving Beyond Qualitative And Quantitative  
Strategies’, London, UK: University of California Press. 
Rasmussen, E.S., Østergaard, P., Beckmann, C., 2006. ‘Essentials of Social Science Research  
Methodology’, University of Southern Denmark, DK. 
Rihoux, B., De Meur, G., 2008, ‘Crisp-set Qualitative Comparative Analysis (csQCA) 
 
Rihoux, B., Lobe, B., 2009., ‘The Case for Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA): Adding Leverage  
for Thick Cross-Case Comparison’, pp. 222-241, Sage Publications. 
Robbins, L., 1932. ‘An essay on the nature and significance of economic science’,  
MacMillian & Co., Limited, University of London, Britain. 
Robinson, J., 2007. ‘The effect of electricity-use feedback on residential consumption: A case study  
of customers with Smart Meters in Milton, Ontario, University of Waterloo. 
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C. and Norcorss, C. J., 1992.  ‘In Search of How People Change- 
Application to Addictive Behaviors’, The American Psychological, Vol. 47 (9), pp. 1102-14.  
Spagnolli, A., Chittatoro, L., Gamberini, L., 2014. ‘Proceedings of the 9th International Conference,  
PERSUASIVE 2014’, Padua, Italy, May 21-23, 2014. 
Stokols, D., Lejano, R. P. ad Hipp, J., 2013. ‘Enhancing the Resilience of Human–Environment  
Systems: a Social Ecological Perspective’, Ecology and Society, Vol. 18 (1), School of Social 
Ecology, University of California, Irvine, USA. 
Suomala, J., Palokangas, L., Leminen, S., Westerlund, M., Heinonen, J. and Numminen, J., 2012.  
‘Neuromarketing: Understanding Customers Subconscious Responses to Marketing’, Technology 
Innovation Management Review, pp. 12-21. 
Tajfel, H., Turner, J.C., 1979. ‘An Integrative Theory of Intergroup Conflict’, W.G. Austin & S.  
Worchel, (eds) The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations, pp. 33-47. 
Tajfel, H., 1982. ‘Social identity and intergroup relations’, Annual review of Psychology, Vol. 33 (1),  
pp. 1-39. 
Tang, T., Bhamra, TA., 2008. ‘Changing energy consumption behavior through sustainable  
design’, International Design Conference – Design 2012, Dubrovnik – Croatia, May 21 – 24. 
Thaler, R.H., Sunstein, C.R., 2008. ‘Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and  
Happiness’, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, USA. 
Tromp, N., Hekkert, P., Verbeek, P., 2011. ‘Design for Socially Responsible Behavior: A  
Classification of Influence Based of Intented User Experience’. Design Issues, Vol. 27, pp. 3-19 
Ulrich, Karl T., Eppinger, Steven D., 2012. ‘Product Design and Development’. McGraw-Hill  
International Edition, Fifth Ed. 
Verplanken, B., Aarts, H., 1999. ‘Habit, attitude and planned behavior: Is habit an empty  
construct or an interesting case of automaticity?’, European Review of Social Psychology, Vol. 10, pp. 
101-34. 
Wilson, G., Bhamra, T., Lilley, D., 2010. ‘Reducing Domestic Energy Consumption: A User-Centred  
Design Approach’, Knowledge Collaboration & Learning for Sustainable Innovation, an ERSCP-EMSU 
conference, Issue: October. 
Wood, W., Neal, D., 2007. ‘A new look at habits and the habit-goal interface’. Psychological  
Review, Vol. 114 (4), pp. 843-63. 
!
!
==PAGE:93==
!
91!
9.2 Web references 
[Web:!Behaviormodel]!
!http://behaviormodel.org/triggers.html!
[Web:!Hbswk]!!
!http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/3246.html,!Viewed!15!June!2015!
!
[Web:!Thefreedictionary]!!
http://www.thefreedictionary.com/behavioral],!Behavioral!definition,!Viewed!
20!April!2015!
[Web:!Videnskab]!
!http://videnskab.dk/kultur^samfund/nudging^hvordan^far^man^folk^til^
aendre^adfaerd,!Viewed!23!February!2015!
[Web:!Nudges.wordpress]!!
https://nudges.wordpress.com/the^amsterdam^urinals/,!!
[Web:!inudgeyou]!!
http://inudgeyou.com,!Viewed!11!June!2015.!!
!
[Web:!Scholarpedia]!!
http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Cognition_and_emotion!
[Web:!Mirriam^Webster!dictionary],!‘to!convince’!definition!
!
[Web:!compasss]!!
http://www.compasss.org/software.htm!!
!
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
 
Reflection 
==PAGE:96==
In the following section, reflections on the process will be presented. These will be based on our initial 
thoughts and planning of the period in which the thesis has been made. Furthermore we will reflect on 
specific elements of the research, which have affected the process – in positive as well as negative ways.  
Process management 
The project management and scheduling unfolded itself in a slightly different way then we predicted.  
As we a both very structured and favour the use of tight and long-term scheduling, we believe that we 
from day one had the odds on our side in terms of getting the job done within the planned time frame.  
However, nothing ever turns out as you plan, and neither the interviews nor the period planed for the 
analysis (QCA) turned out as we expected. As seen below, we updated our time scheme three times, 
but were only used very rarely. It functioned more as a guiding line than an actual time planning tool. 
We definitely started out thinking, that we would update it on a regular basis to keep track of our tasks.  
In the end, we relied far more on a written version of the different task that needed to be made. These 
were written down in both joint and individual notebooks and gave us the overview that we needed. 
This way we were constantly on top of what were to done, thereby avoiding periods of no work if the 
indented plan did not go as expected. This for example happened when the interviews had to be moved 
a couple of weeks, and we chose to fill out this time gap by extending the period planned for the 
literature review.  
A last thing having great influence on the tight process, were the weekly meetings with supervisor, 
Philip Cash. His great engagement in the project and ability to share experience was of great help. 
Furthermore Philip had an unbelievable ability to structure our many thoughts and doubts through 
discussions and talks. For this we are very thankful.  
 
     Figure 1. Time scheme and notes  
==PAGE:97==
The unforeseen 
One of the greatest challenges we met in the work with the thesis was the chosen analysis tool. It not 
only demanded hard work to get to know and use Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA), it was also 
the single most time demanding part of the study.  
It is hard to know whether it would have been possible to handle the situation differently, but it has 
without a doubt been very challenging to work with a new analysis tool for the first time, while having 
to progress with things and not knowing where it would end up. 
Working with QCA has had implications for several parts of the thesis, and one has been for the 
structuring of the content of the interview guides. Had we known the tool better from the beginning, it 
would have been possible to shape the interview guides more precisely for the subsequent use of QCA. 
It has luckily not had influence on the results, but it would have made the process of making the 
analysis far easier. A consequence of the lack of experience in working with QCA has been, that we had 
to rerun the analysis a few times, which then again affected our time schedule. 
Although it at times was a very frustrating working process, it is hard to know whether we could have 
prevented the situation. As we have experienced in several other occasions along the educational path, 
you have to get your hands dirty in order to learn fast. It was undoubtedly a learning-by-doing process, 
which resulted in a very steep learning curve but also many hours of useless work.  
The first hindrance in in the search for knowledge on the use of QCA, was the very difficult scientific 
articles written on the tool. They were almost completely incomprehensible for the untrained eye. This 
can, however, not be blamed the entire reason for our lack of knowledge before beginning. 
Retrospectively we should to a greater extent have relied on the papers in which researches have 
applied QCA, thereby obtaining hands-on knowledge.  
To our luck, we had great help from Ph.D. Baris Bekdik, whom has worked with QCA and was able to 
help us out of many predicaments.  
Next step 
Much can be taken from the process of writing a Master’s Thesis. This is the first project of its size we 
have had to manage on a daily basis, having to keep track of so many different tasks at the same time. 
This will undoubtedly be of great use later on.  
Furthermore the nature of the thesis and how it progressed, demanded of us to make some tough 
decisions along the way, which we knew would have great influence on the outcome. Luckily tough 
decisions are also often the ones that can teach you the most.  
We will not only take new knowledge with us which we can use professionally, but also great memories 
of six months filled with intriguing discussions, meeting fascinating new people and lots of good laughs.  
 
