==PAGE:1==
Power optimization of wind farms
by curtailment of upwind turbines
Simon Kirkeby Wessel
Kongens Lyngby 2015
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Renewable energy is getting more popular and accounts for an increasing part
of the annual energy production in Denmark. Wind energy is one the more
prominent ways of producing renewable energy. Wind turbines are often placed
together in wind farms, which often are placed o-shore. Collecting turbines
in wind farms has the drawback of causing wake eects, which signicantly
decrease the eciency of wind farm.
This report presents a method to limit the wake eects of wind farms by opt-
mising the set point distribution given to all the wind turbines in a wind farm.
Curtailing upwind turbines is shown to increase the total power production of
wind farms of dierent size and shape. Several methods to optimise the set point
distributions are presented to give robust solutions, as the optimised objective
function contains local optmisers.
It is calculated how much the power production can be increased by curtailing
upwind turbines. It is shown that the annual power production for a square
wind farm consisting of 25 turbines can be increased 1.77% when curtailing
upwind turbines compared to more naive strategies. This number is shown to
be dependent on the shape of the wind farm as the increase for a fan-shaped
wind farm is only 1.05%.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Vedvarende energi bliver mere populært og står for en stigende del af den danske
årlige energi produktion. Vind energi er en af de mest fremtrædende måder til
at producere vedvarende energi. Vind turbiner bliver ofte samlet i vindfarme,
der ofte er placeret på havet. En ulempe ved at samle turbine i vindfarme er at
wake-eekter opstår, og reducerer virkningsgraden af vindfarmen betydeligt.
Denne rapport præsenterer en metode til at begrænse wake-eekterne af vin-
dfarme ved, at optimere setpunkter givet til alle turbiner i en vindfarm. Ved
at begrænse foranstående (i forhold til vindretning) turbine bliver det vist, at
en total energi produktion kan øges for vindfarme af forskellige størrelser og
form. Flere metoder til at optimere setpunktsfordelinger bliver præsenteret for
at give en robust løsning, eftersom den optimerede objectfunktion indeholder
local optimisers.
Det bliver udregnet hvor meget energi produktionen kan forøges ved at be-
grænse foranstående turbine. Det bliver vist at den årlige energi produktion
for en kvadratisk vindfarm bestående af 25 turbiner kan øges med 1.77%, når
foranstående turbiner begrænses sammenlignet med en simplere strategi. Dette
tal bliver vist at være afhængigt af formen på vindfarmen, eftersom forøgningen
i energi produktion for en vifte-formet vindfarm kun er 1.05 %.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted at Technical University of Denmark to fulll the require-
ments for acquiring the degree Master of Science in Mathematical Modeling and
Computing.
This thesis has been written at DTU Compute Department of Applied Mathe-
matics and Computer Science from the 16th of September 2014 and to the 31st
of January 2015, and accounts for 30 ECTS poitns. The work has be done under
supervision from Lasse Engbo Christiansen Associate professor, Niels Kjølstad
Poulsen Associate professor from Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science, and Mahmood Mirzaei Postdoc from Department of Wind En-
ergy. Two external supervisors, Klaus Baggesen Hilger and Lars Henrik Hansen
from DONG Energy Wind Power, department of Business Modelling, have also
been associated with the formation of this thesis.
Lyngby, 31-January-2015
Simon Kirkeby Wessel
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to use this opportunity to thank my supervisors at DTU: Lasse
Engbo Christiansen, Niels Kjølstad Poulsen and Mahmood Mirzaei, for oering
guidance, valuable discussions and constructive criticism for the last ve months.
I'm also grateful for the interest taken in this project by Lars Henrik Hansen
and Klaus Baggesen Hilger from DONG Energy, given the report a broader
perspective.
I would also like to thank my family and closest peers for being patient, and
providing support during the project. A gratitude is given to my study group
for discussing relevant matters and providing new perspectives to the project.
Pierre-Elouan Rethore, DTU Department of Wind Energy, should also be ac-
knowledge for proving a solid and highly appreciated framework for a Matlab
implementation of the Jensen wake model.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
3
2.1
2D aerodynamics for wind turbines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Momentum theory for an ideal wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Modeling a wind turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Control regions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Interpolation of the CP- and CT-curves . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Down regulation of the turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Wake eects from wind turbines
17
3.1
Atmospheric conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Modeling of wakes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Wake models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.1
Kinematic models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.2
Field models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Jensen wake model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.1
Partial wake
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.2
Wake superposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
27
4.1
Formulation of optimisation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Analysing optimisation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Penalty functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Optimised set point distribution for row wind farms with
two turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.3
Solution space for a row wind farm with two turbines
. .
35
4.3
Analysis of local optimums in the objective function . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Set point distributions for larger row wind farms . . . . . . . . .
38
4.5
Perturbation of initial guesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Bundling of set points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Wind farms in two dimensions
47
5.1
2x5 wind farm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
5x5 wind farm for dierent wind directions
. . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Sensitivity analysis and structural changes
55
6.1
CART3 turbine model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Fan-shaped wind farm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3
Sensitivity analysis of wind direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Economical eects of curtailing upwind turbines
63
7.1
Wind Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.1.1
Parameter estimation of Weibull distributions . . . . . . .
64
7.2
Annual power production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3
Optimising the direction of the wind warm
. . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8
Discussion
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In the last decades an increased focus has been on renewable energy to decrease
the use of fossil fuels.
Wind energy is one of the most progressive types of
renewable energy. Wind turbines are often placed in wind farms both o-shore
and on-shore. However, grouping the turbines in farms has the downside of
increased wake eects. Wind turbine wakes are the wind elds behind turbine
rotors with a reduced wind speed. As they signicantly reduce the eciency
of wind farms, wakes have been a topic for many research papers in the last
decades.
Reducing the wake eects for wind farms would increase their eciency and
make wind energy more competitive. Wake eects can be reduced in many way
e.g. by making better turbine designs, optimising wind farm layouts, or improve
the controlling of the wind farm. The design and gearing of turbines has not
been considered in this report, but wind farms layouts are analysed and two
control strategies are dened and compared.
The wake eects has to be modelled before the controlling of wind farms can
be optimised. The wake eects are extremely dicult to model accurately as
they are characterised by unstable wind ows. The research on wake eects
has given a wide range of model to describe the wakes which varies a lot in
complexity. Some models are very simple while others are very detailed requiring
high performance computers to be used.
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
The main goal of this report is to analyse the performance of two dierent
control strategies for wind farms. Many control strategies consider fatigue loads
on turbines though, which will not be addressed in this report. Before it is
possible to evaluate control strategies, the wake eects for wind turbines must
be quantied.
Report outline
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
This chapter gives a brief introduction to the aerodynamics aecting wind tur-
bines. The turbine model used in this report is also dened in this chapter,
together with a description of the controlling of the turbine.
Wake eects from wind turbines
The aerodynamics aecting wakes are described in this chapter and an gen-
eral introduction to wake models is given. The wake model used in report is
presented in details as well.
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
A control strategy for increasing the power production is dened and analysed
for row wind farms. Methods to overcome issues, with the optimised objective
function, are proposed.
Wind farms in two dimensions
In this chapter, the control strategy for improved power production will be
tested on wind farms in two dimensions. The control strategy is compared to
simpler more naive control strategy.
Sensitivity analysis and structural changes
The method to optimise the set point distributions are tested for a new kind of
turbine and tested on a more complex wind farm layout. Sensitivity to wind
direction is also tested in this chapter.
Economical eects of curtailing upwind turbines
The annual power production of wind farms is calculated and the economical
gain from using the improved control strategy is presented.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Aerodynamics of individual
wind turbines
To model a wind turbine the aerodynamics of the wind ow when hitting a
wind turbine must be described to some extent. Describing the wind eld pass-
ing through a rotor is considered a dicult task.
This task can luckily be
reduced in complexity by only considering certain factors. For this chapter only
the 2D aerodynamics are described while assuming the wind ow is stationary,
incompressible and frictionless.
2.1
2D aerodynamics for wind turbines
This section will give a summary of the most important forces acting on the
blades of the turbine.
Chapter 2, 3 and 4 from [Han08] have been used as
background material for this and the following section and will not be quoted
continuously in these sections.
Wind turbines obviously work by the blades
extracting kinetic energy from the wind. In other words, the wind is exerting a
force on blades making them rotate. The force acting on the blade is described
in the 2D rotor plane.
Figure 2.1 shows a simple drawing of a turbine blade seen from the center of the
==PAGE:16==
4
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
rotor in the rotor plane. The force, F, acting on the blade, is decomposed into
two directions, one perpendicular to wind and one parallel to the wind. The
perpendicular force is called the lift and the parallel force is called drag. Both
the drag, D, and the lift, L, are shown on the gure parallel to the the x- and
y-axis, respectively.
The drag force is pushing the turbine in the direction of the wind and the
lift is making the rotor rotate allowing the turbine to produce energy. When
considering a wind turbine it is desirable to have the drag as small as possible,
while the lift should be as large as possible to increase the power production.
D
F
L
U0
Figure 2.1: Two dimensional drawing of forces acting on a wind turbine blade.
When the wind hits the blade, making it rotate, a dierence in pressure above
and below the blade is generated. This dierence in pressure is the reason for
force acting on the blade. The pressure above the blade is lower than below
giving mainly a lift component, when the blade is aligned with the wind. The
only drag from pressure in this case comes from friction between the air and
the blade.
As long as the boundary layer between the airfoil and the air is
attached to the blade the ow behind the blade is said to be laminar, meaning
no turbulence is in introduced.
When the angle of the blade increases, the
boundary layer might separate from the blade and turbulent ow starts to occur,
which increases the drag.
It is favorable to have the separation of the boundary layer starting at the
trailing point of blade and move toward the leading point, since this will cause
the drag force to increase slowly when the angle between the wind and blade
increases. If the separation of the boundary layer happened all over the upper
side of the blade, for a small changes in the angle, the drag would increase
dramatically, which is undesirable.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Momentum theory for an ideal wind turbine
5
The aerodynamics of the blade have only been considered in 2D in this report.
A note on one of the results from 3D aerodynamics needs to be made, though.
3D vortexes are introduced, when analysing the 3D aerodynamics of a turbine
blade, changing the angle of attack between the wind and the blade. Due to
this the lift is no longer only having a non-zero y-component with respect to
Figure 2.1. Hence, not the entire lift is used to rotate the blades. However, this
eect is very limited for long slender turbine blades.
2.2
Momentum theory for an ideal wind turbine
To create a model of a wind turbine it is necessary to know how much energy is
extracted from the wind and how the velocity of the wind is decreased passing
the rotor. Finding these values can be done by considering an ideal rotor in
1D. An ideal rotor can be considered as a permeable disk that extract kinetic
energy of the wind, while being frictionless and adding no rotational energy to
the wake.
The wind speed upwind from the rotor, U0 is being slowed down to U at the
rotor and Ui downwind from the rotor, due to a drop in pressure over the
rotor, ∆p. The pressure upwind from the rotor is atmospheric p0, but increases
right before the rotor, drops over the rotor, and continuously goes back to p0
downwind. The pressure drop results in a force slowing down the wind, known
as the thrust, T. The magnitude of the thrust can be found as:
T = ∆pA
(2.1)
Where A is the area of the rotor found by A = πR2, where R is the radius of the
rotor. The ow is assumed to be stationary, frictionless and incompressible. It
is further assumed that no external forces act on it neither up- nor downwind of
the rotor, hence the Bernoulli equations can be applied. The Bernoulli equation
is applied far upwind from the rotor to just before the rotor, where the pressure
is p:
p0 + 1
2ρU 2
0 = p + 1
2ρU 2
(2.2)
where ρ is the density of the air. The Bernoulli equation can also be applied
from just downwind of the rotor, where the pressure is p −∆p to far downwind:
p −∆p + 1
2ρU = p0 + 1
2ρU 2
i
(2.3)
Using Eq. (2.2) and (2.3) together gives:
∆p = 1
2ρ
 U 2
0 −U 2
i

(2.4)
==PAGE:18==
6
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
U0
T
Ai
A
U
Ui
U0
Wind speed inside solid lines
Wind speed outside solid lines
CV
Figure 2.2: Denition of control volume (CV) for ideal rotor.
The momentum equation is applied on integral form on the control volume, CV,
in Figure 2.2 (marked by the dotted lines) to get an expression for the thrust
force. By applying the simplifying assumptions of stationarity, an ideal rotor,
and using conservation of mass an expression for the thrust can be obtained.
These steps are omitted in this report (for more details see [Han08]) and only
the expression for the thrust is presented:
T = ρUA (U0 −Ui)
(2.5)
An expression from the extracted power, P, can be extracted by applying the
assumption of frictionless ow on the integral power equation on the control
volume inside the solid lines in 2.2. These steps are omitted (see [Han08]) and
the expression for the extracted power is:
P = 1
2ρUA
 U 2
0 −U 2
i

(2.6)
Expressions to calculate P and T have now been obtained. The axial induction
factor, a, is now introduced as the reduction of the wind speed over the rotor:
a = 1 −U
U0
⇔U = (1 −a) U0
(2.7)
Eq. (2.1) and (2.4) is inserted into Eq. (2.5) to obtain an expression for T and
P dependent on U0 and a:
U = 1
2 (U0 + Ui)
(2.8)
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Modeling a wind turbine
7
Using a from Eq. (2.7) gives:
Ui = (1 −2a) U0 ⇔a = 1
2

1 −Ui
U0

(2.9)
It is now possible to rewrite the expression for P using Eq. (2.7) and (2.9):
P = 1
2ρ (1 −a) AU0

U 2
0 −((1 −2a) U0)2
= 2ρAU 3
0 a (1 −a)2
(2.10)
The expression for T is then reformulated:
T = 2ρAU 2
0 a (1 −a)
(2.11)
The expressions for P and T are often non-dimensionalised. This is done by
scaling P with the total available power in the air, Pair given by:
Pair = 1
2ρAU 3
0
(2.12)
Scaling P with the available power gives the power coecient, CP :
CP =
P
1
2ρAU 3
0
= 4a (1 −a)2
(2.13)
And likewise, T is scaled with the highest possible thrust force, 1
2ρAU 2
0 , giving,
CT :
CT =
T
1
2ρAU 2
0
= 4a (1 −a)
(2.14)
The power and thrust coecient will be widely used later. The power coe-
cient tells how big a percentage of the available kinetic energy in the wind is
extracted by the turbine. Given the denition of CP , it is possible to calcu-
late the theoretical maximum limit for the power coecient for an ideal rotor.
Dierentiating CP w.r.t. a gives:
dCP
da
= 4 (1 −a) (1 −3a)
(2.15)
From this it is easily seen that CP is obtaining it's maximum at a = 1
3 (since
a = 1 gives CP = 0). The corresponding maximum Cp-value
16
27 = 0.5926.
Hence, the theoretical maximal limit of power extraction from the wind given a
ideal rotor is 59.26%. This limit is known as the "Betz limit".
2.3
Modeling a wind turbine
To analyse the wake eects from wind turbines in a wind farm, a model is needed
for describing how the wind ow changes when passing a turbine. The model
==PAGE:20==
8
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
Rated power
5 MW
Rotor diameter
126 m
Hub height
90 m
Cut-in, Cut-out wind speed
3 m/s, 25 m/s
Cut-in, Rated rotor speed
6.9 rpm, 12.1 rpm
Table 2.1: Specications for 5 MW reference turbine
should be able to calculate how much power is produced and how the turbine
aects the wind ow as the aim of the project is to optimise the power output
for an entire wind farm.
Wind turbines have some limitations that needs to be respected in the model
such as cut-in wind speed, cut-in and rated rotor speed, rated power, etc. When
building the model these limitations dene regions where the turbine is con-
trolled dierently depending on the wind speed. The turbine is controlled by
changing the angle and rotational speed of the blades. This will be elaborated
further in next section.
As dierent turbines have dierent specications a turbine must be chosen for
the model.
The turbine used in this report is the 5 WM reference turbine
(NREL/TP-500-38060), which is described in [JBMS09]. This turbine is chosen
since it is widely known in the literature, but also because detailed data for
this turbine is available. The specications aecting the control strategy for the
turbine can be seen in Table 2.1. More detailed specications can be found in
[JBMS09]
Before giving a detailed description on how the turbine is controlled two control,
parameters must be dened. The rst control parameter is the angle of the
blades, known as the pitch. The second control parameter is the tip speed ratio,
TSR, which describes how fast the tip of the blades is moving compared to the
incoming wind speed. TSR is dened as:
λ = Rω
U0
(2.16)
where λ is the TSR, ω is the rotational speed, and U0 is the wind speed. The
power and thrust coecient for a turbine are dependent on the pitch and the
TSR. By changing the pitch and the TSR the turbine can change its power
coecient and produce more or less energy for the same wind speed. The two
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Modeling a wind turbine
9
coecients can be dened as functions of pitch and TSR:
CP (β, λ)
CT (β, λ)
(2.17)
where β is the pitch. How CP and CT are dependent on β and λ varies from
dierent kind of turbine. The CP - and CT -curves for the reference turbine have
been plotted in Figure 2.3. The highest power coecient is found at β ≈0 and
λ ≈7. The CP -curve has little curvature around the optimum.
The CT -curve has more curvature compared to the CP , meaning that changes in
pitch and TSR might aect the thrust coecient more than the power coecient.
β (degrees)
λ
CP(β,λ) − positive values only
 
 
−10
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
β (degrees)
λ
CT(β,λ) − only values between −2 and 2
 
 
−10
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
−1
−1
−0
0
0.5
1
1.5
Figure 2.3: Plot of the CP (β, λ) and CT (β, λ), for the 5MW reference turbine.
Note, only positive CP values and CT values between -2 and 2 are
plotted.
2.3.1
Control regions
When controlling a turbine the aim is to keep the power coecient as high as
possible, by choosing the best values of TSR and pitch. But due to limitations
of the rotor speed and power output, it might not always be possible to choose
the optimal CP -value. E.g if the wind speed is above 12 m/s the rated power
becomes a constraint and the power coecient needs to be reduced. Due to the
limitations the power curve for the turbine has been split into four regions, the
low, mid, high, and top region. In each region dierent limitations decide how
==PAGE:22==
10
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
the optimal power coecient for that region should be found. Dierent regions
are relevant for dierent wind speeds. The power curve can be seen at Figure
2.4 together with the rotational speed, thrust coecient, and power coecient
for dierent wind speeds.
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
Wind speed (m/s)
Power output and rotational speed for nominal operation
 
 
Low
Mid
Hi
Top
Power (MW)
ω (rpm/2)
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Wind speed (m/s)
CT and CP for nominal operation
 
 
CT
CP
Figure 2.4: Top: Power output and rotational speed for the 5MW reference
turbine, when running in the nominal case. Bottom: CP and CT
for the same case.
At top plot in Figure 2.4 the power output and rotational speed are plotted
as a function of wind speed, when the turbine is operated in the nominal case,
meaning with no down regulation. The rated rational speed is reached before
rated power, which is the most common for wind turbine. Also it is noticed that
the rotational speed is constant in the low, high and top region, opposite to the
mid region where it is increasing linearly for higher wind speeds. In the bottom
plot the CP is seen to be kept constant at its optimal value in the mid region.
CT is high in the rst three regions, but decreases fast in the top region. How
the turbine is controlled in each region is elaborated in the next four paragraphs.
2.3.1.1
Low Region
The low region starts when the wind speed is higher than the cut-in wind speed.
Above this wind speed the turbine can produce power. In the low region the
wind speed is so low, that it is not possible to choose the TSR giving the optimal
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Modeling a wind turbine
11
power coecient, as this would result in the rotational speed below the cut-in
value. Hence, the TSR must then be chosen in such a way that rotational speed
is kept at the minimum value. The TSR is set, so that the rotational speed
is kept constant in the entire low region in Figure 2.4.
The pitch is chosen
to maximize the power coecient for the given TSR, which causes the power
coecient to increase for higher wind speeds. The low region ends when the
wind speed is high enough for TSR to be set at the value given the optimal
power coecient.
2.3.1.2
Mid Region
The mid region starts when the optimal power coecient can be reached, mean-
ing no limitations on the TSR makes it impossible to run the turbine so that it
extracts maximum energy from the wind. In this region the power and thrust
coecient are kept constant, since the pitch and TSR is constant, which also
can be seen at Figure 2.4. When the rated rotational speed is reached the TSR
must be reduced to ensure that the rotational speed doesn't exceed the rated.
At this wind speed the mid region ends and the high region starts.
2.3.1.3
High Region
The optimal power coecient can't be reached in the high region, since the
rated rotational speed is limiting the TSR. The pitch is set to optimize the
power coecient given the reduced TSR. Figure 2.4 shows that the pitch at
rst is reduced and increased to ensure the best possible power coecient. The
reduction in the power coecient in the high region is quite small, as the CP -
curve have little curvature around its optimum and this region only covers a 1
m/s range of wind speed.
2.3.1.4
Top region
The top region starts when the wind speed is high enough for the turbine to
reach full load. Since the power output can't exceed the rated power, the power
coecient has to be reduced. In previous regions where the power coecient
couldn't reach its optimum it was because of a constraint on the TSR but in
this region both the pitch and the TSR can be reduced to lower the power
coecient. This introduces a degree of freedom on how to choose the pitch and
TSR. The rotational speed has reached its rated speed in this region and cannot
be increased further. Keeping the rotational speed at its rated level gives a
==PAGE:24==
12
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
unique way of determining the TSR. For a more detailed discussion of other
strategies see section 2.3.3. As the turbine is running on full load the power
coecient can be found as Prated/Pair. A way to nd the power coecient and
the TSR has now been dened, meaning that the pitch can be found using the
CP -curve. In some cases both a lower and a higher pitch might give the needed
power coecient given the TSR. In these cases the highest pitch is selected, this
choice is elaborated in Section 2.3.3.
Together the four regions dene how the turbine is controlled given the wind
speed in the nominal case. How to down regulate the turbine control is dened
in section 2.3.3. In Figure 2.4 it was shown that how CP and CT changed for
dierent wind speeds. This was obviously due to changes in the TSR and pitch.
On Figure 2.5 the CP - and CT -curves are shown again, together with the pairs
of TSR and pitch when running in the nominal setting for wind speeds between
0 to 25 m/s. The left plot shows how the turbine moves on the CP -curve. For
lower wind speeds the TSR is high, due to the cut-in rotational speed. As the
wind speed increases the turbine moves along the ridge of the CP -curve to the
optimal value, this is the low region. In the mid region the CP is kept constant,
since it is also possible to maintain the optimal value.
In the high and top
regions the CP value is decreased by decreasing the TSR further and increasing
the pitch. When the pitch is increased the CT value decreases quite fast as it
moves toward the lower region of the CT -curve.
β (degrees)
λ
CP(β,λ) − positive values only
 
 
−10
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Nom. Opr.
β (degrees)
λ
CT(β,λ) − only values between −2 and 2
 
 
−10
0
10
20
30
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
−1
−1
−0
0
0.5
1
1.5
Nom. Opr.
Figure 2.5: Relationship between TSR and pitch and the CP - and CT -curves,
when running the turbine in nominal setting.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Modeling a wind turbine
13
2.3.2
Interpolation of the CP- and CT-curves
As mentioned earlier the CP - and CT -curves dier for dierent turbines and
need to be provided to the model. The model needs a NxM equidistant grid
with values of CP and CT together with the N TSR values and M pitch values,
where the CP and CT are evaluated in (the grid needs to be equidistant in each
dimension, the length between points in each dimension can vary). For this
report data is given in a 100x100 grid. This means that the data given to the
model is not continuous, hence Cp and CT are only known for N · M points.
Pitch and TSR can obviously be chosen continuously, so the CP - and CT -curves
need to be interpolated in some way.
There are three cases where the model needs to evaluate the curves for continu-
ous values. The rst case is when the TSR and pitch are known and the thrust
coecient needs to be found. The second case is in the high and low region
where only the TSR is known due the rotational speed limitations. In this case
the pitch must be chosen so that the highest possible value of CP is achieved
given the constraint on TSR. The nal case is in the top region, where the power
coecient is limited given the rated power and the TSR is xed due to rated
rotational speed. In this case the pitch should be calculated so that both of the
constrains are satised.
In the rst case where the CT value is needed given some TSR, λ0, and pitch,
β0 it is unlikely that the CT is actually evaluated in (β0, λ0), hence the CT -
curve needs to be interpolated. To get a smooth interpolation local polynomial
regression is used [FG96]. The pitch value closest to β0 and the TSR value
closest to λ0, where CT is evaluated in, is dened as (βn, λm). With this point
as center, a 9x9 grid of points where CT is evaluated in is found, meaning 81
points of CT with corresponding TSR and pitch values are obtained. These
81 points are used to t a weighted second order polynomial around (β0, λ0).
Before the second order polynomial is tted a kernel function must be chosen
to assign weights to 81 points. Since an optimisation algorithm has to be used
later on it would be benecial to choose a kernel function which has continuous
derivatives. This is indeed an attribute of the tri-cubic kernel function dened
as:
Wh(x) = 70
81

1 −|x
h|33
I (|x| < h)
(2.18)
where I is the indicator function and h is bandwidth. As the polynomial is
tted in two dimensions a product kernel is used, i.e:
Whβ,hλ(β −β0), λ −λ0) = Whβ(β −β0)Whλ(λ −λ0)
(2.19)
A bandwidth for both dimensions must be chosen for the kernel function. Since
the grid is equidistant in each dimension using the length between evaluated
==PAGE:26==
14
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
points is an obvious choice. The maximum distance which any of the 81 points
can have to (β0, λ0) is 3.5 times the length between points in each dimension,
as the 9x9 grid is centered around the point closest to (β0, λ0). A good choice
of the bandwidth is therefore:
hβ = 3.4∆β
hλ = 3.4∆λ
(2.20)
where ∆β = βn −βn−1 and ∆λ = λm −λm−1 is the length between point in
the pitch and TSR dimension, respectively. It is now possible to estimate the
coecients of the weighted second order polynomial, since kernel function has
been dened. The normal equation is:
ˆθ = (X⊺W)−1 X⊺WYCT
(2.21)
where ˆθ is the coecients, YCT is the CT values of the 81 points, and X is the
design matrix given by:
X =


1
β1 −β0
λ1 −λ0
(β1 −β0)2
(λ1 −λ0)2
(β1 −β0) (λ1 −λ0)
1
β2 −β0
λ2 −λ0
(β2 −β0)2
(λ2 −λ0)2
(β2 −β0) (λ2 −λ0)
...
...
...
...
...
...
1
β81 −β0
λ81 −λ0
(β81 −β0)2
(λ81 −λ0)2
(β81 −β0) (λ81 −λ0)


(2.22)
ˆθ(1) is then the estimated value of CT (β0, λ0) as the polynomial has been tted
around the point (β0, λ0).
A method to obtain a thrust coecient given a TSR and a pitch has now been
dened.
In the second case the pitch needed to be chosen so that is gives
the highest possible CP , given a xed TSR, λ0. Since CP most likely is not
evaluated in λ0 or the pitch value, β0, given the optimal CP , weighted second
order polynomial is used to interpolate in a iterative way.
At rst the TSR value, λm, closest to λ0 where CP is evaluated is found. Then
the pitch value, βn, where CP is evaluated in giving the the highest CP for λm
is found. A 9x9 grid centered around (βn, λm) is used to nd ˆθ, the same way as
before, by tting the second order polynomial around (βm, λ0). When keeping
λ0 xed the optimum of CP (β∗, λ0) only depends on β∗. This value can be
found by optimising the second order polynomial of CP (β∗, λ0) and can be done
analytically. When a value of β∗has been found a new second order polynomial
is tted around (β∗, λ0) for the same 9x9 grid. A new estimate of the optimal
pitch, β∗, can then be obtained. This iterative method is used until the change
in β∗for each iteration is smaller than 0.01. When the change in β∗is smaller
than the threshold the iterations stops. The pitch, β0, giving the highest CP
for λ0 has now been found, and CP (β0, λ0) is then found in the same way as
CT (β0, λ0) was found.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Modeling a wind turbine
15
The nal case where the curves need to be evaluated continuously is when a
pitch must be found given a xed power coecient, CP 0, and a xed TSR, λ0,
which indeed is the case in the high region. Once again weighted second order
polynomials are used to interpolate in a iterative way. The setup is very similar
to the previous case, except nding β∗is done by solving the second order
polynomial, instead of nding the pitch optimising CP . As this include solving
a second order polynomial two solutions for β∗might be found. As mentioned
in section 2.3.1 the highest pitch is always chosen, for reasons given in section
2.3.3.
When solving the second order polynomial the discriminant might sometimes
be negative, meaning it is not possible to reach CP 0 for the given second order
polynomial. This happens because the second order polynomials are only an
approximation of the CP -curve and the approximation is tted around a point
too far from the real solution.
This causes the two pitch values solving the
problem to be complex. The two solutions has the same real part, which is the
pitch optimising the second order polynomial. As the CP 0 can't be reached β∗
is chosen as the real part of the solutions, since this gives the highest CP and
thereby the CP closest to CP 0 for the current second order polynomial. A new
second order polynomial is then tted around the updated (β∗, λ0). The updated
β∗is closer to the pitch, beta0, giving CP 0 for λ0 and complex solutions of the
problem are less likely to occur. When β∗is sucient close to β0 the second
order polynomial t the CP -curve well and complex solutions won't occur.
Methods for evaluating the CP - and CT -curves for continuous input has now
been dened. Since weighted second other polynomials has been used, jumps
should not occur as the interpolation method used is sucient smooth.
2.3.3
Down regulation of the turbine
In this report down regulation of turbines is used to increase the total power
production for entire wind farms by curtailing upwind turbine. A gain in the
total power production can be achieved when the loss of power from down
regulating upwind turbines is smaller than the gain in power from the increased
wind at the downwind turbines. E.g consider two turbines, A and B, where
the B is in full wake of turbine A. If turbine A is down regulated 0.5 MW and
thereby leaving more energy in the wind for turbine B. Then the gain turbine
B might be bigger than 0.5 MW and the total power production of the two
turbines is increased.
So far a control strategy for the turbine has only been dened for running in
the nominal case. The aim of this report is to analyse whether a gain might be
==PAGE:28==
16
Aerodynamics of individual wind turbines
achieved by curtailing upwind turbines. To do so a strategy for down regulation
of turbines must to be dened.
Down regulation of a turbine is done when the demanded power, Pd, of the
turbine is smaller than what is obtainable in nominal operation, Pn(U0), for
a given wind speed, U0. Pd can be reached at wind speed Ud, which is lower
than U0.
Making a turbine produce less power is done by not choosing the
highest possible power coecient but choosing a power coecient equal to
Pd
Pair .
Lowering the power coecient meaning descending to a lower level on the CP -
curve. Going to a lower level on the CP -curve introduces a degree of freedom as
both the pitch and TSR can be adjusted to give the needed power coecient.
Some restrictions on the TSR are of course still present, as the limitations on the
rotational speed should be meet. The down regulation strategy is a denition
of how to choose the TSR and pitch for reduced power coecients.
In [MSPN14] three dierent strategies for down regulation is dened. The rst
strategy is to maximise the rotational speed. This means, that the power coef-
cient is reduced by increasing the rotational speed as much as possible. The
rotational speed can be increased until the demanded power coecient can't be
reached for higher values of TSR or until the rated rotational speed is reached.
By maximising the rotational speed a unique way of determining the TSR is
dened. The second strategy is to keep the rotational constant compared to the
speed found for nominal operation for wind speed Ud. As the rotational speed
is kept at the same speed for all wind speeds higher than Ud, a unique way of
nding the TSR is dened. When the TSR is known the pitch can be found, as
the power coecient is also known when down regulating. The third strategy is
to keep the TSR constant. This can be done until the rated rotational speed is
reached, after this point the rotational speed is kept at its rated. This strategy
once again gives a unique way to determine the TSR.
In the two last strategies two pitches might give the needed power coecient
for a xed TSR. The smallest of the two pitches is said to be in the stall region.
It is preferred to operate the turbine away from the stall region, which is why
the higher pitch angle is used in this report.
A comparison of the three strategies is done in Mirzaei (2014)[MSPN14]. The
constant TSR strategy is suggested, since it is combining favorable features
from the maximum and constant rotational speed strategies.
The favorable
features are among other thing related to smooth transition in rotational speed
for changing wind speed and operation away from the stall region. For details
more details see [MSPN14]. As the constant TSR strategy is suggested this
down regulation strategy is used in this report.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Wake eects from wind
turbines
As mentioned wind turbines extract kinetic energy from the wind that passes
through the rotor. The wind eld behind a turbine with an decreased kinetic
energy is called the wake. Modeling wake eects from wind turbines is considered
dicult as it involves describing the aerodynamics of a unsteady complex system
in which some issues are not yet fully described and quantied [VSC03]. The
wake of wind turbines is also aected by the atmospheric conditions in which the
turbine is located. The most important atmospheric conditions are introduced
in this chapter followed by a brief description of dierent ways to model wake
eects. Finally, a more detailed description of the model used for this report is
presented.
3.1
Atmospheric conditions
In this section the most important atmospheric conditions aecting the wake are
introduced. The purpose is to give framework for understanding the dierent
approaches for wake modeling that will be presented later in this chapter. The
paper by Sandersee (2009) [San09] is used repeatedly in this section and will
not be referred to continuously.
==PAGE:30==
18
Wake eects from wind turbines
3.1.0.1
Surface roughness length
The surface of the ground is aecting the wind eld above it, as wind ows
more undisturbed across a at terrain than across a forest or an urban area.
The surface roughness length is a number related to the height of the elements
on the ground surface. The surface roughness length will be larger for uneven
surfaces e.g. it is 0.001 meters rough sea and 0.03 meters for open at terrain.
One of the rst ways to model wakes was by changing the surface roughness
around turbines [New77]. The recovery of velocity and expansion of the wake
is smaller o-shore than on-shore, as the surface roughness length o-shore are
considerably smaller.
3.1.0.2
Atmospheric boundary layer
The atmospheric boundary layer (ABL), also known as planetary boundary
layer, is the lowest part of the atmosphere where the wind is inuenced by the
surface roughness. Above this layer the wind is considered not to be aected by
the surface and usually to be non-turbulent. When the wind is aected by the
surface velocity components not parallel to the mean wind ow are introduced.
This aects the turbulence of the wind and makes the wind eld more unsteady.
The velocity of the wind is increasing in the ABL as the height above ground
increases and is often modeled by a logarithmic approximation dependent on
the surface roughness length. The layer starts at the ground surface and for
dierent surfaces reaches from a hundred meters to a few kilometers in height.
3.1.0.3
Atmospheric Stability
The atmospheric stability is telling if the air rising from the surface is in thermal
equilibrium with the surrounding air, in that case the stratication is said to be
neutral. Neutral stratication is typically met during strong winds and in the
afternoon. If the stratication is unstable the turbulence in the air is caused by
large-scale eddies and the ABL is thick. This is often the case during daytime.
When the stratication is stable, typically during night and in low winds, the
surface roughness is the main cause to turbulence and the ABL to be thin.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Modeling of wakes
19
3.1.0.4
Turbulence
Atmospheric turbulence is occurring in the ABL because the surface roughness is
causing disturbance in the wind ow. An unstable stratication causes increased
turbulence as large-scale eddies rise from the surface. Rotor induced turbulence
is introduced when the wind meets a rotor as deviations are introduced in the
wind velocity because of vortexes from the blade-tips. The turbulence intensity,
which is often used in wake models, is dened as:
I ¯U = σ ¯U
ˆU
(3.1)
where ¯U is the average wind velocity, and σ ¯U is the standard deviation in the
average wind velocity. As the wind eld in wakes have passed a rotor they are
considered to be more turbulent than the free wind eld. Higher turbulence
causes wind ows to mix faster with the free wind ow and is also related to
increased loadings on turbines.
3.2
Modeling of wakes
Wakes are usually studied in two regions with dierent characteristics, namely
the near and the far wake. The near wake starts from just downwind of the
rotor and extend to 2 to 5 rotor diameters downwind [CHF99]. The wake in
this region is characterised by steep pressure gradients and blade tip vortexes.
The vortexes cause a layer of turbulent air between the wake and the free wind.
The mixing of the wake and the free wind are not the same above and below
the wake, causing the recovery and expansion to be dierent above and below
the wake. The increased turbulence works as an ecient mixer, where the high
velocity free wind mixes with low velocity wake [San09]. In the near wake the
wake is expanding and recovering more and faster than in the far wake.
The far wake is no longer characterised by vortexes and pressure gradients and is
not expanding or recovering the wake decit as much as in the near wake. In this
region the atmospheric turbulence is the main reason for expansion and recovery,
meaning that stable stratication and surface roughness aect the recovery. A
self-similar and axisymmetric velocity decit prole is often assumed in this
region, as the pressure gradients are less inuential and often neglected. The
far wake region is the one of most interest when working with optimising set
points distribution in o-shore wind farm as the distance between turbines often
is suciently large.
==PAGE:32==
20
Wake eects from wind turbines
3.3
Wake models
Several motivations for modeling wakes exist e.g. analysing loadings on turbines,
evaluating wind farm controllers or calculating wind farm eciencies. Dierent
purposes require more or less accurate models including various features. The
models in this report are categorised into two categories, namely kinematic and
eld models.
3.3.1
Kinematic models
The kinematic wake models are the simplest category of wake models described
in this report and does in general not require much computational capacity.
They are normally based on an assumption of a self-similar and axisymmet-
ric velocity decit prole, which is assumed only in the far wake. In almost
all of the models the velocity decit is calculated using the global momentum
equation, using the thrust coecient from upwind turbines [VSC03]. Assum-
ing self-similarity and axisymmetric causes it dicult for the models to handle
interactions with the ground and the ambient wind shear. Even though the
kinematics uses unrealistic assumptions they have proven to be in good agree-
ment with experiments and giving a reasonable estimate of wake losses in wind
farms [CHF99]. The loadings on the turbines can not be calculated with these
models. In general these models are used for controlling wind farms where fast
models are needed.
One of the most commonly used kinematic models is developed by Jensen
[Jen83], assuming an (axisymmetric) "top-hat"-shaped velocity decit prole
that expands linearly. This model is widely known for its simplicity and robust-
ness. This model is used for calculating wake decits in this report and a more
detailed description is given later.
A more recent model is the semi-analytical model by Larsen[Lar09], based on
solving the Navier-Stokes equations for experimental data.
This model also
assumes axisymmetric velocity and turbulence proles and a non-linear wake
expansion prole. The turbulence intensity is included in this model, but the im-
provement is shown to be limited compared to the Jensen wake model [GRB+12].
However, the model is expected to estimates the the wake decits better for
larger wind farms, as the Jensen model is considering to over estimate the wake
decit for large wind farms[CC13].
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Wake models
21
3.3.2
Field models
The eld models separate themselves from the kinematic model by describing
every point of the entire ow eld behind a turbine.
This type of model is
usually more complex, but allows to describe more phenomenons in the wake
and to account for eect of more ambient conditions. Most of these model solve
the Reynolds-averaged Navier-stokes equations (RANS) [CHF99], with more or
less simplifying assumption. Ainslie (1988) [Ain88] is known for the Eddy Vis-
cosity model which is very common in the literature. The model solving the
RANS in cylindrical coordinates, neglecting pressure gradients outside the wake
and assuming Gaussian velocity decit prole. This model considers ambient
turbulence as main contribution to mixing of the wake and ambient ow. Inter-
actions with the ground and varying wind velocities in the ABL with height are
not included. The slightly more advance model UPMWAKE considers veloc-
ity changes in the ABL and also atmospheric stability. This model shows that
the wake decit is larger below rotor height than above for neutral and stable
stratication with small surface roughness and little turbulence.
Complex models without the simplifying assumptions used in [Ain88] have also
been developed. These models give a more accurate and detailed description of
the wake, including the near wake. The computational needs for these models
are larger but still have issues handling time-varying thermal structures in the
ABL and large pressure gradients [BRBA12]. An alternative method for detailed
description of wakes is the large eddy simulations (LES). These models are
couple with an actuator disk/line model (see [San09] for details on the actuator
disk concept) and gives very good results compared to experiments even in
the near wake. However, these models are very computational demanding and
require high performance computers.
The eld models can be used to describe the more complex phenomenons of the
wake and describe the near wake in details which the kinematic models aren't
able to handle. The eld models provides more detailed information about the
wakes.
Their results are used for purposes where more accurate models are
required, for example for optimising wind farm layouts, validating performance
of control strategies or verifying results of simpler models [ASJ+14]. E.g. LES
was used to validate a new approach on wake modeling, namely using a particle
lter to track the wake locations [FGC+14].
==PAGE:34==
22
Wake eects from wind turbines
3.4
Jensen wake model
The model used in the report is the Jensen's wake model [Jen83]. As mentioned
the model is quite simple but known for good performance. Since the model
should be used for controlling it should be suciently fast. Another candidate
was the Larsen model which in Crasto (2013) [CC13] showed less overestimation
of the wakes for downwind turbines when narrow bins of wind direction were
analysed.
However, other comparisons of the two models have shown little
dierence in performance, which is why the simple Jensen model is used.
The Jensen model is based on the balance of momentum equation, and assuming
a linear expansion with slope α and constant axial speed in the entire wake,
giving a "top-hat" shaped wake prole. α is known as the wake decay constant
and depends on the ambient conditions. The coecient is high when the wake
spread faster, meaning the wake recover over a short distance. Atmospheric
stability, changing in-ow velocity in with respect to height in the ABL, ambient
turbulence and surface roughness are not directly included in this model but by
changing the wake decay constant the recovery of the wake can be controlled.
For o-shore wind farms a decay constant of 0.04 is usually used [BRBA12,
MBG+14], the same constant will be used in this report. The model is only
valid in the far wake where the rotor induced turbulence and pressure gradient
are assumed negligible.
A control volume has been dened in Figure 3.1. Using the notation from the
gure and applying conservation of mass just downwind of the rotor and further
downwind where the diameter of the wake is Dw gives:
π
D
2
2
U +
r π
 Dw
2
2
−
D
2
2!
U =
0 π
Dw
2
2
Uw
(3.2)
As the wake expand linearly with slope α the diameter downwind of the wake
can be calculated as:
Dw = D + 2α∆x
(3.3)
where ∆x is the distance downwind. Combining Eq. (3.2) and (3.3) gives the
denition of the velocity decit:
∆U = 1 −Uw
U0
=
2(1 −Ur
U0 )
(1 + 2α∆x
D
)2
(3.4)
Using the denition of the axial induction, a =
1
2

1 −Ur
U0

, from Eq. (2.9)
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Jensen wake model
23
U0
UR
D
Uw Dw
1
α 
Figure 3.1: Denition of control volume used for Jensen's wake model.
gives:
∆U =
2a
(1 + 2α∆x
D
)2
(3.5)
Solving the trust coecient from Eq. () for the axial induction factor gives:
a = 1 −√CT
2
(3.6)
Inserting Eq. (3.6) into (3.5)
∆U = 1 −√1 −CT
(1 + 2α∆x
D
)2
(3.7)
It is now possible to calculate the wind speed in the wake further downwind
using the velocity decit from (3.7) and the thrust coecient from the upwind
turbine.
3.4.1
Partial wake
The expression from (3.7) only gives the wind speed inside the wake. A wake
from an upwind turbine might only aect a downwind turbine partially, meaning
not the entire rotor of the downwind turbine is in wake. On Figure 3.2 the
situations of full wake and partial wake are illustrated. Aw is the area of the
wake at some downwind distance, when the wake radius has expanded to Rw. R
is the rotor radius for the i'th downwind turbine, and Aj,i is the area where the
wake of the j'th turbine overlaps the i'th rotor. Dj,i is the cross-wind distance
between turbine i and j, and is dened as the distance between the turbine
perpendicular to the direction of the wind. The cross-wind distance can be used
==PAGE:36==
24
Wake eects from wind turbines
to calculate if the downwind turbine is in full wake, partial wake or not in wake
at all.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of full wake and partial wake. Full wake happens when
Dj,i ≤Rw + R and partial wake when Rw −R ≤Di,j ≤Rw + R.
On Figure 3.2 in the case of the full wake it is easy to see that the wind speed
at the i'th should be the wind speed inside the wake. In the case with partial
wake the entire rotor is not aected by the wake and the wake decit cannot be
calculated that simple. In this case the velocity decit can, according to Wan
(2012) [WWY+12], be calculated as:
∆Uj,i = ∆˜
Uj,i ∗qi,j
(3.8)
where ∆˜
Uj,i is the velocity decit inside the wake from turbine j at the down-
wind turbine i. ∆Uj,i is velocity decit at the i'th turbine from the j'th turbines
wake corrected for partial wake conditions and qj,i is the percentage of the down-
wind rotor covered by the wake, dene by:
qj,i = Aj,i
A
(3.9)
where A is the area of the rotor. Aj,i can be found be:
Aj,i =





πR2
for Dj,i ≤Rw + R
1
2R2 (α1 −sin(α1)) + 1
2R2
w (α2 −sin(α2))
for Rw −R ≤Dj,i ≤Rw + R
0
for Rw −R ≤Dj,i
(3.10)
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Jensen wake model
25
where α1 and α2 are dened as:
α1 ≜∠P1CwP2 = 2 arccos
 
R2 + D2
i,j −R2
w
2RDi,j
!
(3.11)
α2 ≜∠P1CrP2 = 2 arccos
 
R2
w + D2
i,j −R2
2RwDi,j
!
(3.12)
where Cw and Cr is the center of wake the downwind rotor, respectively, and P1
and P2 are points dened on Figure 3.2. Being able to model the partly wake
situations is important as the Jensen model assumes a "top-hat" wake shape.
If there were no partial wake region the wind speeds in front of a turbines in
wake would jump when the wind direction changes just a bit.
3.4.2
Wake superposition
The Jensen wake model has been dened for wake interaction between turbines
in the case of partial and full wake. No method for handling multiple wakes on
one turbine has been dened yet. Dierent methods to handle multiple wakes ex-
ist where the two most common are linear and quadratic superposition. In Katic
(1986) [KHJ86] the quadratic superposition is proposed for the Jensen model
and is also the most common for the Jensen model as well [CC13, GRB+12].
However, the linear superposition is also seen but have a tendency of leading to
negative velocities when many wakes aect the same turbine [CHF99].
The quadratic superposition is used in this report, meaning the wake decit at
a downwind turbine is calculated as the square root of the squared sums of wake
decits from all upwind turbine. Hence, the wind speed in front of turbine i can
be calculated as:
Ui = U0

1 −
v
u
u
t
N
X
i=1
(∆Ui,j)2


(3.13)
where N is the number of turbines in the farm and Ui is wind speed in front of
turbine i. The wind speed reduction for downwind turbines has been analysed
for a row of seven turbines standing in full wake of each other with ve rotor
diameter distance. The normalised wind speed in front of each turbine has been
plotted in Figure 3.3 using the Jensen wake model with both the quadratic and
linear wake decit superposition. Turbines are in nominal operation.
At Figure 3.3 it shows that the wind speed decreases for turbines further down-
wind which is as expected. For the quadratic superposition the wind speeds
seem to reach an equilibrium around Turbine 3, meaning that the wind speed
==PAGE:38==
26
Wake eects from wind turbines
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Turbine Number
Normalised wind speed (Ui/U0 )
Normalised wind speed in front of downwind turbine
 
 
Quadratic merge
Linear merge
Figure 3.3: Plot of the normalised wind speed in front of each turbine for a
row of seven turbines, using both the quadratic and linear wake
superposition.
in front of turbines further downstream of Turbine 3 is almost the same. This
property is not seen for the linear superposition, as it keeps decreasing and
doesn't reach an equilibrium.
Experiments show that the wind speed indeed reaches a equilibrium around the
third or forth downwind turbine [CC13, BRBA12, CHF99]. This conrms that
the quadratic superposition gives the most realistic results for the Jensen wake
model. A method for calculating the wind speed in front of a turbine has now
been dened both for situations where multiple wakes and partial wakes aect
a turbine.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Optimizing set point
distributions for row wind
farms
The purpose of this report is to investigate if it is possible to increase the
total power production for wind farms by curtailing upwind turbines.
The
turbine model from Chapter 2 gave information about a single turbine only.
In the previous chapter it was described how the turbines interact with each
other through wake eects and a model for calculating the velocity decits was
formulated. Before it is possible to calculate the total power production of a
wind farm these two models must be combined.
The most commonly used strategy for optimising wind farms is to use maximum
power point tracking (MPPT). This means that the turbines are optimised indi-
vidually to extract as much power from wind the as possible, without considering
the consequences of the wake eects. I.e. losses to wake eects are just accepted
and nothing is done to prevent them. MPPT will be compared with a strat-
egy where upwind turbines will be curtailed to improve the power production
for wind farms. Other methods of optimising wind farms are also seen, e.g by
yawing (turning direction of the wake) the wake so downwind turbines are less
exposed to wake eects [GTvW+14].
==PAGE:40==
28
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
The turbine model and the wake model are dependent on each other.
The
wake model needs the thrust coecient to calculate the wind speed in front of
downwind turbines. On the other hand, the thrust coecient is given as an
output from the turbine model. Hence, before being able to calculate the wind
speed in front of a turbine it must be known if the turbine is in the wake of an
other turbine.
Wake eects in wind farms obviously depends on the layout of the farm and the
direction of the wind. In this report a stationary wind ow is assumed, meaning
that the free wind speed and wind direction is known and constant over time.
Using this assumption and Jensen's wake model makes it possible to calculate
which turbines are in the wake of each other, given a wind farm layout and a
wind direction.
4.1
Formulation of optimisation problem
The available power for each turbine can be calculated iteratively when it is
known which turbines are in the wake of each other. The available power on a
downstream turbine can be decided when the wake decit from all upwind tur-
bines is known. By calculating the wake decit from the most upwind turbines
rst (this turbine is always in free wind), it is possible to calculate the available
power on all turbines in a wind farm.
Set points must be provided to the turbine model as it allows for down regula-
tion. It was shown in Chapter 2 that the thrust coecient was aected when the
turbine was down regulated. Hence, when the set points of an upwind turbine
is reduced, the wake decit will be smaller for all downwind turbines. Finding
the distribution of set points that maximises total power production of the farm
can be formulated as an optimisation problem.
The total power production from the wind farm should be maximised given
a wind farm layout, a free wind speed, and the wind direction.
Hence, the
optmimal distribution of set points can be found as:
max
xi for i∈I
P(x, U0) =
X
i∈I
p(xi, Ui)
(4.1)
xi is the set point for turbine i, x is a vector containing the set points for turbine
i ∈I, where I = {1, 2, ..., N}, and N is the number of turbines in the wind farm.
U0 is the free wind speed and Ui is the wind speed just in front of turbine i.
p(xi, Ui) is the power production on turbine i given the set point and the wind
speed just in front the turbine. If the set point is higher than the available
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Analysing optimisation problem
29
power on the turbine given the wind speed, p(xi, Ui) is equal to the available
power.
The problem consist of optimising N variables as the set point for each turbine
should be optimised. It would be benecial to reduce the size of the problem,
since larger problems are more dicult and take longer to solve. When optimis-
ing turbines with no turbines in its wake the best solution is always to extract
as much power as possible. This means that only turbines with another turbine
in its wake should have their set point optimised. The optimisation problem
can then be reduced to:
max
xi for i∈J
P(x, U0) =
X
i∈I
p(xi, Ui)
(4.2)
where J is the subset of I consisting of all turbines having at least one tur-
bine in its wake. The set of turbines I \ J is always run in nominal operation
as no gain can come from down regulating turbines with no turbines in their
wake.
The optimisation problem is solved by applying MATLAB's gradient
based unconstrained numerical solver fminunc(). The algorithm uses a Quasi-
Newton nite-dierence method to approximate the hessian, as the gradient of
the objective function is unknown.
4.2
Analysing optimisation problem
Finding the optimal set point distribution has now been formulated as an opti-
misation problem. To validate the dened method for solving the optimisation
problem a very small wind farm is analysed. A simple wind farm to analyse
is a row wind farm consisting of only 2 turbines, where the rst turbine is in
full wake of the other. Turbine 2 is the turbine in full wake of Turbine 1 and is
placed 5 rotor diameters (630m) downstream in the direction of the wind. Only
the set point of Turbine 1 needs to be optimised as Turbine 2 has no turbines in
its wake. As only one set point should be optimised the problem is considered
simple to solve.
Before using the solver to solve the problem a few challenges will be considered.
The rst challenge is that fminunc() solves unconstrained problems, meaning
that the turbine model should be able to take all real numbers as an input.
The second challenge is that the fminunc() is gradient based, so the objective
function should have curvature everywhere.
The nal challenge is that the
objective function has more global optimums in in some cases. E.g. when the
wind speed is low so that if Turbine 1 is started the wind speed in front of
Turbine 2 is below the cut-in speed. This case has more optimums as is doesn't
==PAGE:42==
30
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
matter which one of the turbines is started since the total power production
would be the same.
The turbine model should give meaningful power output, no matter what real
number it is given as set point. The model should handle negative set points
and set points higher than the available power on the turbine. As mentioned
before the turbine model returns the highest available power when the given set
point is higher than the available power. If a negative set point is provided to
the model it will always return 0. This introduces an issue with the objective
function not having curvature everywhere. This issue arises when unreachable
set points are given to the model. The turbine model gives the same output
for all negative set points and for all set points higher than the available power,
which causes the objective function to be constant for those set points. To solve
the issues with no curvature and more global maximums, when not all turbines
are started, penalty functions are added to the objective function.
4.2.1
Penalty functions
Adding penalty functions to the objective function can solve the above men-
tioned issues, so that the optimisation algorithm can be applied. Two penalty
functions are dened, one to solve the challenge with no curvature for unreach-
able set points and one to avoid several optimal solutions when not all turbines
are started.
The penalty added for providing unreachable set points to the turbine model
should depend on how far the given set point is from a reachable set point.
A new variable δi is dened as distance from an unreachable set point to the
closets reachable set point for turbine i, i.e:
δi =





−xi
for xi < 0
xi −p(xi, Ui)
for xi > p(xi, Ui)
0
otherwise
(4.3)
The used solver is gradient based and therefore the penalty function should
preferably be continuous and have continuous derivatives.
To ensure this a
piece-wise penalty function is dened with δi as input. For set points with a
small δi a quadratic penalty function is used and for set points with a larger δi a
linear penalty function is used. The penalty function should be dened so that
it has the same gradient and same penalty for both the linear and quadratic
penalty in the point where it changes from being quadratic to linear, to ensure
continuous derivatives. The gradient should also go towards 0 as δi goes to 0
to give continuous derivatives around δi = 0. A penalty function, Φ1 (δi), is
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Analysing optimisation problem
31
dened:
Φ1 (δi) =
(
φ1δ2
i
for δi < φ2
2φ1φ2δi −φ1φ2
2
for δi > φ2
(4.4)
where φ1 is the penalty factor (how hard unreachable set points are penalised)
and φ2 is the point when the penalty function goes from being quadratic to
linear. Φ1(δi) is seen to be continuous and has continuous derivatives and is
used as penalty in the objective function.
To avoid more global optimums when not all turbines are started a second
penalty function is dened. Considering the row wind farm with two turbines,
when there is only enough wind to have one turbine running. If the wind speed
increases the second turbine needs to be started at some point. It will be shown
later that when the second turbine is started the total power production is
highest when Turbine 1 produces the most power.
Hence, in the case with
not enough wind for having both turbines running, it will always be benecial
to start Turbine 1 rst, since this turbine should produce the most power. If
Turbine 2 was started rst, this turbine would have to be down regulated and
Turbine 1 would have to be started at a higher load.
A solution to the problem with more global maximums on the objective function
is to add a penalty if a turbine produces less power than turbines in its wake.
This penalty works for larger wind farms with many turbines, since it should
always be optimal to start the upwind turbines rst. To dene this penalty
as a function it is necessary to know which turbines stand in the wake of other
turbines. A new set Wi is dened for each turbine to keep track of which turbines
stand in the wake of turbine i. E.g for the row wind farm with two turbines
W1 = {2} and W2 = ∅.
The penalty should be dependent on how much more power downwind turbines
produces compared to their upwind turbines. A new variable ∆Ti,j is dened
as the amount of power turbine j produces more than turbine i:
∆Ti,j = max(p(xj, Uj) −p(xi, Ui), 0)
(4.5)
The second penalty function should have the same attributes as Φ1(δ) with
respect to continuity. The penalty added to the objective function, for having
a turbine producing less power than a turbine in its wake, should be larger
than dierence in power production for the two turbines. The second penalty
function, Φ2(Wi), is dened:
Φ2(Wi) =
X
j∈Wi
∆Ti,j + Φ1(∆Ti,j)
(4.6)
The rst element in the penalty function ∆Ti,j ensures that the objective func-
tion can never be increased by letting a downwind turbine produce more power
==PAGE:44==
32
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
than its upwind turbines. The second element Φ1(∆Ti,j) adds a penalty (which
meets the continuity requirements) to the objective function and it is decreased
when a downwind turbine produces less power than its upwind turbines.
A new objective function which doesn't have the issues with no curvature and
more global optimums can now be dened by using the two penalty functions:
max
xi for i∈J
P(x, U0) =
X
i∈I
(p(xi, Ui) −Φ2(Wi)) −
X
i∈J
Φ1(δi)
(4.7)
Two comments about the new objective function should be noticed. The penalty
function Φ1 is only applied on turbines which have their set points optimised,
as the set points for turbines with no turbine in their wake are always the rated
power. The second comment is that by introducing the second penalty function
Φ2(Wi) the true global maximum is in fact changed in some cases. Consider
three turbines on a row where the wind direction is head on, so that the last
turbine is in full wake of the middle, and rst turbine and the middle turbine is
in full wake of the rst. If the wind speed is so low that only two turbines can
be running the new objective functions maximum is to have the rst and middle
turbine running. However, the true optimal setting is to have the rst and last
turbine running as the wind would recover more over the longer distance. When
working with larger wind farms many cases like could be considered.
This issue is not solved in this report, but it is only aecting results for low
wind speeds. The dierence in total power output is assumed to be quite small.
However, a big gain from using the dened objective function is that the optimal
set point distribution should not change much when the wind speed is only
changed a bit. If it was allowed to start turbines further downwind in a wind
farm these turbines would at some point be shut down to start turbine upwind
instead when the wind increases. This causes the optimal set point distribution
to change a lot (dierent turbine would be running) for small changes in the
wind speed. It is considered more important to have stable optimal set point
distributions for small changes in the wind speeds, than having small gains
in the power production by allowing downwind turbines to start before their
upwind turbines. This is the reason for keeping the second penalty function in
the objective function.
4.2.2
Optimised set point distribution for row wind farms
with two turbines
A suitable objective function has been dened and fminunc() is used to nd
the optimal set point distribution. The rst wind farm where the optimisation
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Analysing optimisation problem
33
algorithm is applied is the row wind farm with two turbines. Only the set point
of Turbine 1 is optimised as Turbine 2 should be run in nominal operation.
The problem is solved for wind speeds form 3 m/s to 15 m/s with steps of
0.1 m/s, meaning 121 problems are solved for the small row wind farm. When
solving the problem the optimiser needs an initial guess. The initial guess should
obviously be as close to the true optimum as possible. The problems are solved
in the order of their wind speeds. This makes it possible to use the last found
solution as the new initial guess. This approach should give good initial guesses
as long as the steps in the wind speeds are suciently small.
The wind speed decides the order in which the problems are solved, meaning
that the problems can be solved in ascending or descending order. It shouldn't
matter in which order the problems are solved, if the problems are convex and
have a sucient curvature all over the solution space. To test if this indeed is
the case the problems are solved twice. The rst time the problems are solved
it will be in ascending order, meaning the initial guess will be slightly too low
compared to the true solution. This method will be known as the "forward scan"
(FS). Afterwards the problems are solved in descending order meaning the initial
guess are too high. As the problems are in reversed order this method is known
as the "reversed scan" (RS).
In Figure 4.1 the results from solving the 121 problems from dierent wind
speeds using the forward scan method are shown. At the left plot the solutions
for all the wind speeds are shown. As a reference the set points from the MPPT
strategy is also shown. It can be seen on the blue and black dotted line that
the average load on the turbines are higher using the optimised set point from
3.8 m/s to around 11 m/s compared to the MPPT strategy. Above 11 m/s it
is optimal for both strategies to have Turbine 1 running on full load, meaning
that the strategies are the same for wind speeds above this level .
Below 3.8 m/s both strategies are also the same as both of them let the Turbine
1 extract as much energy from the wind as possible. After 3.8 m/s the Turbine
1 is down regulated when using the optimised set points. As Turbine 1 is down
regulated the wake decit doesn't reduce the wind speed in front of Turbine 2
below the cut-in speed allowing the turbine to start producing power. Since the
average load is higher for the optimised set points the loss in power from down
regulating Turbine 1 is less than the gain in power from starting Turbine 2.
Looking at the average load for the optimised set points, at the right plot on
Figure 4.1, it appears that a gain in average power could come from down
regulating Turbine 1 for wind speeds lower than 3.8 m/s. These issues will be
investigated further after the results from the reversed scan has been analysed.
==PAGE:46==
34
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Optimised set points for row wind farm of 2 turbines using forward scan
 
 
FS Avg.
MPPT Avg.
FS Turb 1
MPPT Turb 1
FS Turb 2
MPPT Turb 2
3
3.5
4
4.5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Zoomed on low wind speeds
 
 
FS Avg.
MPPT Avg.
FS Turb 1
MPPT Turb 1
FS Turb 2
MPPT Turb 2
Figure 4.1: Optimised set points using the forward scan method compared
with MPPT. Left side is the solution for 3 to 15 m/s. Right side
is zoomed on the solution from 3 to 4.5 m/s.
At Figure 4.2 the optimised set points for the same 121 problems are shown
and the problems are solved using the reversed scan method. Comparing the
solutions from the forward and reversed scan only small dierences are noticed.
Looking at the plot for lower wind speeds it is seen that Turbine 2 is switching
between running and not running for wind speeds around 3.5 m/s to 4 m/s. It
is seen on the blue curve that for 3.6 m/s the total power production is higher
when down regulating Turbine 1 and having two turbines running. Looking at
the solution for 3.7 and 3.9 m/s the optimiser found it optimal to have only
one turbine running, which obviously is wrong as the curve for the average
production clearly indicates it is benecial to have two turbines running in this
case.
An issue with optimising the problems was found when analysing the forward
and reversed scan solutions. Local optimums seems to appear for wind speeds
around 3.5 to 4 m/s. Since only one set point is optimised for this wind farm it
is easy to show the solution space for a given wind speed. This will shed light on
when its optimal to have two turbines running and why the optimiser doesn't
nd the same solutions using forward and reversed scan.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Analysing optimisation problem
35
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Optimised set points for row wind farm of 2 turbines using reversed scan
 
 
RS Avg.
MPPT Avg.
RS Turb 1
MPPT Turb 1
RS Turb 2
MPPT Turb 2
3
3.5
4
4.5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Zoomed on low wind speeds
 
 
RS Avg.
MPPT Avg.
RS Turb 1
MPPT Turb 1
RS Turb 2
MPPT Turb 2
Figure 4.2: Optimised set points using the reversed scan method compared to
MPPT. Left side is the solution for 3 to 15 m/s. Right side is
zoomed on the solution from 3 to 4.5 m/s.
4.2.3
Solution space for a row wind farm with two turbines
Only one set point needs to be optimised for each wind speed. Since the problem
is very small a method to analyse the solution space for a given wind speed is to
evaluate the objective function for a number of set points. This will give a good
idea of how the solution space looks and show the curvature and optimums of
the objective function. This is only possible as long as the problem consists of
optimising at most two set points.
On Figure 4.3 the solution space for the problem is shown for wind speed 3.4 and
3.8 m/s. Each plot shows the power production on each turbine as a function
of the set point given to Turbine 1. It is seen that when the set points given
to Turbine 1 increases less wind is available for Turbine 2 and the production
decreases. The blue curve shows the cumulated power where non of the penalty
functions are added and the magenta curve shows the objective function, i.e.
the cumulated power where penalties are added.
On the right plot on Figure 4.3 it clearly shows that the objective function
and the cumulated power are the same when Turbine 1 produces more power
than Turbine 2 and it is possible for Turbine 1 to produce the demanded set
point. Whenever one of these requirements aren't met the objective function
is penalized. Whenever too high set points are given the cumulated power is
constant whereas the objective has curvature, meaning the penalty function
==PAGE:48==
36
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
fullls its purpose. It can also be seen that the penalty added for given too high
set points starts with being quadratic and at some point becomes linear.
When the wind speed changes from 3.4 to 3.8 m/s it is no longer optimal to
have only one turbine running, meaning that at 3.8 m/s it is optimal to down
regulate Turbine 1, so that the wind speed in front of Turbine 2 is above the
cut-in wind speed. Looking at the left plot it can be seen that the objective
function almost has the same value when Turbine 1 is down regulated to its
optimum and when it is running on full load, meaning that close to 3.4 m/s
curtailing upwind turbines starts to be a better strategy than MPPT.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
−0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Set point (MW)
Power output (MW)
Obj. fct for row wind farm, U0 = 3.4 m/s
 
 
Obj. Function
Cumu. Power
Turbine 1
Turbine 2
Max(cumPower)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Set point (MW)
Power output (MW)
Obj. fct for row wind farm, U0 = 3.8 m/s
 
 
Obj. Function
Cumu. Power
Turbine 1
Turbine 2
Max(cumPower)
Figure 4.3: Plot of solution space of optimisation problem for the row wind
farm with two turbines. The objective function and cumulated
power are plotted as a function of the set point given to Turbine
1. On the left plot the wind speed is 3.4 m/s and on the right side
the wind speed is 3.8 m/s.
On Figure 4.1 and 4.2 it was shown that the optimiser had diculties in nding
the true optimum of the objective function for low wind speeds. At 4.3 it is
clear that both the objective functions and the cumulated powers have local
optimums. These local optimums are most likely the reason why the reversed
scan switched back and forth from having two turbines running for low wind
speeds and why the forward scan didn't nd it optimal to have both turbines
running before 3.8 m/s. It is unfortunate that the objective function has local
optimums for some wind speeds as it complicates nding the true optimum. An
analysis is carried out to nd out if the local optimums can be removed or a
method can be developed to ensure that the optimiser always nds the global
optimum of the objective function.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Analysis of local optimums in the objective function
37
4.3
Analysis of local optimums in the objective
function
In this section two things will be investigated, namely the origin of the local
optimums and a method to avoid them. Two things are suspected to aect the
local optimums. The rst is that the turbines can't produce energy when the
wind speed is below 3 m/s. This is the reason that the local optimums appear
on the objective function. This can be seen on both the plots on Figure 4.3.
Looking at the two optimums on the right plot it can be seen that for set points
slightly higher than the true optimum global a discontinuous drop in objective
function is observed. The drop comes because Turbine 1 doesn't let enough
wind pass to Turbine 2 for it to be running. This gives an extra optimum in
the cumulated power, because when the set points are increased hereafter the
cumulated power starts to increase again, as letting less wind pass to Turbine
2 has no consequences anymore.
The extra local optimums disappear when
the wind speed increases, so that the wind speed in front of Turbine 2 can't
be reduced to less than the cut-in wind speed even with Turbine 1 running in
nominal operation.
The second thing which aects the local optimum is that turbines don't start
producing 0 MW at the cut-in wind speed but start at some small value. This
causes the objective function to become discontinuous when the wind speed
in front of Turbine 2 is less than the cut-in wind speed.
The bigger power
production is at the cut-in wind speed the bigger the discontinuity is.
Finding the true optimal solution to the problems might be easy for the small
row wind farms but as more turbines are added more local optimums will occur
and nding a simple method to nd the global optimum becomes complicated
very quickly.
Even though local optimums disappear when the wind speed
increases the issue will still occur for higher wind speeds as the size of wind
farms increases and higher wake decits are observed.
As the problems with local optimums are caused by the power curve from the
turbine model it is dicult to nd methods that will always nd the true op-
timum without changing the turbine models. Penalty functions are dicult to
apply in this case. Making the proper changes to the turbine model might solve
the issues but would give an unrealistic model. However, the gain from having
a turbine model not giving local optimum in the objective function is robust so-
lutions for all initial guesses. Having a robust solution for changing wind speeds
is important if this strategy ever is to be implemented for test purposes.
Two dierent test-turbine models have been implemented to see if the local opti-
==PAGE:50==
38
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
mums can be removed. In the rst test model a new cut-in region is introduced
for wind speeds between 0 and 3 m/s. When the wind speed is 0 m/s the power
production should be 0 MW and at the cut-in speed the production should be
the same as the production at cut-in speed for the real model. In the cut-in
region it is assumed that the available power depends cubic on the wind speed
like the kinetic energy in the wind. Hence, the available power in the cut-in
region is found by tting a third order polynomial (with a third term only).
In the second test model the low region is removed and the mid region is ex-
tended all the way 0 m/s. This approach will violate the constrain from the
cut-in rotor speed and give an unrealistic turbine model whenever the wind
speed is below around 6 m/s. To test if any of the modications of the turbine
model has removed the issue with local optimums the solution space is plotted
for 3.8 m/s for both test models.
On Figure 4.4 the solution space for the two test models for 3.8 m/s is shown.
On the left plot it can be seen that adding the cut-in region doesn't solve the
problem as two optimums are still seen on the objective function. The local
optimums occur because the slope of the power curve changes when Turbine
2 changes from being operated in the cut-in region and the low region. The
two optimums are close to each other and no discontinuities are seen on the
objective function. For the test model with an extended mid region the objective
function has only one optimum. The reason that no optimums occurs is that no
transitions in operating regions are present, giving a smooth objective function.
The results from modifying the turbine model shows that to get rid of the local
optimums it is not sucient to have a model which can produce power at any
wind speed higher than 0 m/s and will start producing from 0 MW but the
slope of the function will also need to meet some requirements. The model with
extended mid region actually solves the problem with local optimums but this
model is unfortunately considered quite unrealistic as deviations from realty are
seen from 6 m/s and below. No good solution has been found to the problems
with local optimums.
4.4
Set point distributions for larger row wind
farms
The optimisation problem for nding the optimal set point distribution for a
small wind farm was shown not to give robust solutions when the initial guesses
changed, due to local optimums. The number of local optimums is expected
to increase as the number of set points increases, meaning that the solution
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Set point distributions for larger row wind farms
39
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Set point (MW)
Power output (MW)
Obj. fct for U0 = 3.8 m/s  with cut−in region
 
 
Obj. Function
Cumu. Power
Turbine 1
Turbine 2
Max(cumPower)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.
−0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Set point (MW)
Power output (MW)
Obj. fct for U0 = 3.8 m/s  with no low region
 
 
Obj. Function
Cumu. Power
Turbine 1
Turbine 2
Max(cumPower)
Figure 4.4: Solution space of optimisation problem for row wind farm with
two turbines with modied turbine model for 3.8 m/s wind speed.
Left plot: the cut-in region has been added to turbine model.
Right plot: The low region has been removed and the mid region
extended to 0 m/s.
to the problem should be even more dependent on the initial guess given to
the optimiser. To address what happens for larger wind farms the optimisation
problem has been solved using the forward scan method for a row wind farm
with ve turbines standing with ve rotor diameters distance to each other. The
results for nding the optimal set point distribution for wind speeds from 3 to
15 m/s can be seen on Figure 4.5.
The results from optimising the set points for the row wind farm doesn't look
very convincing. Some of the turbines are being started and shut down repeat-
edly for low wind speed, as it can be seen in the right plot on Figure 4.5. This
is also a problem for the MPPT strategy. The problem occurs when Turbine
1 is started and the wind speed is reduced for all downwind turbines to below
the cut-in speed. When the wind speed increases the rst downwind turbine,
which has more than the cut-in wind speed in front of it, is the last turbine as
the distance to Turbine 1 is largest. This issue could be solved by not starting
a turbine if any upwind turbines are not running. This would, however, change
the optimal set point distribution some for low wind speeds. Also in reality
turbines are not allowed to be down regulated when producing less than some
percentage of the rated power. As the issue with turbine is only present for
set points around 4% of the rated power, down regulating at these wind speeds
might not be allowed anyway.
==PAGE:52==
40
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Optimised set points for row wind farm of 5 turbines using forward scan
 
 
RS Avg.
MPPT Avg.
FS Turbi
MPPT Turbi
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Zoomed on low wind speeds
 
 
RS Avg.
MPPT Avg.
FS Turbi
MPPT Turbi
Figure 4.5: Optimised set points using the forward scan method compared
with MPPT. Left side is the solution for 3 to 15 m/s. Right side
is zoomed on the solution from 3 to 5.5 m/s. The solid lines are
the optimised set points and the dotted lines are set points using
the MPPT strategy. (T1 = green, T2 = red, T3 = cyan, T4 =
magenta, T5 = yellow)
On the left plot on Figure 4.5 it is shown that for wind speed less than around
12.5 m/s the forward scan is not beating the MPPT strategy by much. Above
this speed the second turbine is suddenly down regulated causing a signicant
increase in cumulated power. As the solution space should be quite smooth this
is not as expected. It indicates the set points below this wind speed hasn't been
optimised to its global optimum. It is not possible to show the solution space
very well for this problem as four turbines are optimised. It was shown that the
reversed and forward scan didn't nd the same solutions for the row wind farm
of two turbines. The reversed scan is therefore used on the problem to see if it
performs better.
On Figure 4.6 the solution for the reversed scan is shown on the left plot. The
start issues for low winds are still present as expected.
The performance of
the reversed scan is seen to be signicantly better than the MPPT strategy.
For wind speed between 4 and 11 m/s Turbine 1 is down regulated around
20% compared to the MPPT strategy. Turbine 2, 3, 4, and 5 are kept at the
same set point until Turbine 1 is running on full load, hereafter Turbine 2 is
kept a bit higher than the last three turbines. Curtailing the front turbines
allow an increase in the average production for 6 m/s on 29% and 19% at 11
m/s compared to MPPT. The fact that the last four turbines are given the
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Set point distributions for larger row wind farms
41
same optimal set point indicates that the wind speed in front of each turbine
might have reached a equilibrium. This is somewhat in line with the results
from Figure 3.3, where the normalised wind speed in front of turbines on a row
reached it equilibrium around turbine 3-4.
Turbine 1 is being down regulated from full load and then slowly set back to full
load at around 12 m/s (start at 11.9 and ends after 12.2). The average power
isn't aected noticeably but it seems unlikely that the true optimum has been
found. Looking at the exit ag from the optimiser shows that it converged for
all these wind speeds. The algorithm didn't converge for 11.8, however which
seems counter intuitive as the solution for the wind speed is running Turbine 1
on full load.
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Opt. set points for row of 5 turbines − reversed scan
 
 
RS Avg.
MPPT Avg.
RS Turbi
MPPT Turbi
4
6
8
10
12
14
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power Delta(MW)
Difference between reversed and forward scan (RS−FS)
 
 
Avg.
Turb 1
Turb 2
Turb 3
Turb 4
Turb 5
Figure 4.6: Left plot: Optimised set points using the reversed scan method
for 3 to 15 m/s. Right plot: Dierences in the solutions using the
reversed and forward scan.
Looking at the right plot on Figure 3.3 the dierence between using forward
and reversed scan is plotted for 3 to 15 m/s. It is seen that the reversed scan is
giving a better solution than the forward scan until the forward scan suddenly
down regulates Turbine 2. Turbine 1, 3, 4, and 5 are in generel operated at a
higher set using reversed scan which results in a higher average production.
The dierences seen between the forward and reversed indicates that the opti-
miser has issue converging to the right optimum. The solution using forward
scan were consistent (but a wrong optimum was found) until 12.5 m/s indicat-
ing that a local optimum could exist. The issue with the reversed scan down
regulating Turbine 1 around 12 m/s is suspected to come because of lack of cur-
==PAGE:54==
42
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
vature on the objective function. Turbine 1 is down regulated signicantly but
the change doesn't seem to aect the average power. This could be because the
solutions in this region has only little curvature making it dicult for the opti-
miser to nd the true optimal distribution. As the average power isn't aected
signicantly this is mainly an issue if this strategy were to be implemented in a
control system. Evaluating the annual gain for curtailing upwind turbine versus
MPPT wont be aected by this issue.
4.5
Perturbation of initial guesses
If curtailment of upwind turbine was to be tested the solutions should be robust.
The forward scan showed really poor performance and the reversed scan had
inconsistencies. To give even more robust solutions an extra step is made when
solving the problems. Serveral initial guesses are made instead of just using
the previous solution as an initial guess. This will allow the optimiser to come
from dierent places and hopefully one of the initial guess will converged to the
true optimum. Five initial guesses are dened where the rst is the previous
solution.
The next initial guesses are made as random perturbation of the
previous solution. The perturbations are dened as:
x∗
i = xprev + U(−0.25, 0.25) max(xprev)
(4.8)
where x∗
i is the i'th initial guesses, xprev is the optimal set points for previous
iteration and U(−0.25, 0.25) is the uniform distribution from -0.25 to 0.25. This
way to perturbing has been decided due to good performance, when it was
tested against other methods.
Uniform distributions with smaller and large
ranges have been tested as well and the chosen distribution performed the best.
Testing multiple perturbations showed that having more than ve perturbations
didn't improve the results in most cases.
Using ve initial guess gives ve solutions to each problem where the one with
the highest cumulated power is chosen in each iteration. Having to solve the
each problems ve times in each iteration obviously increases the run time. The
results from optimising the row of ve turbines while perturbating the initial
guesses can be seen on Figure 4.7
The optimised set points for the perturbed initial guesses are very similar to
the ones found with the reversed scan method but are more stable. Turbine
1 is not down regulated around 12 m/s as for the reversed scan indicating the
method with perturbing the initial guesses makes the solutions more robust.
Looking at the left plot on Figure 4.7 shows that only small deviations are seen
between the individual turbines for the two methods. The deviations for the
==PAGE:55==
4.6 Bundling of set points
43
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Opt. set points for row of 5 turbines − pertubed init. guess
 
 
PT Avg.
MPPT Avg.
PT Turbi
MPPT Turbi
4
6
8
10
12
14
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power Delta(MW)
Difference between pert. init. and rev. scan (PT−RS)
 
 
Avg.
Turb 1
Turb 2
Turb 3
Turb 4
Turb 5
Figure 4.7: Left plot: Optimised set points using the perturbed initial guesses
for 3 to 15 m/s. Right plot: Dierences in the solutions using
perturbed initial guesses and reversed scan.
turbines doesn't seem to aect the cumulated power as almost no dierences
(in the order of 10−1 compared to turbine deviations) is seen in the cumulated
power, indicating once again that the solution space lacks curvature for higher
wind speeds.
4.6
Bundling of set points
The increased number of set points to be optimised has shown some new issues
with robustness of the solution.
Perturbing the initial guesses showed little
improvement but came with a price of signicantly increased run time. Going
from one to four set points to optimise made it harder for the optimiser to
nd the true optimums. For larger problems this issue is expected to become
even more problematic and using only ve perturbations might be insucient.
Hence, it would be advantageous to be able to reduce the number of set points
to optimise to give faster and more stable solutions.
It was noticed that the optimised set points for the last three turbines was almost
the same set point for most wind speeds when applying both the reversed scan
and perturbed initial guesses. In both cases these set points were optimised
individually but it seemed optimal to have them running at the same load.
Instead of optimising all set points individually, it is tested whether more robust
==PAGE:56==
44
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
solutions can be obtained if some turbines are given the same set point instead
of operating them at dierent levels.
A test is made were only a number of the most upwind turbines are optimised
individually. The rest of the turbines in the row are given the same set point,
meaning only one set point is optimised for all of them. "Bundling" the last
turbines together (giving the same set point) will reduce the number of set points
to be optimised while hopefully not aecting the cumulated power outputs.
Several tests on how to bundle the turbines have been made, including testing
whether the last turbine in a row should be running nominal or have its set
point bundled with the rest of the downwind turbines. These tests indicated
that bundling the last turbine with the other downwind turbines gave best best
performance, both when testing a row of ve and eight turbines. Test of how
many of the downwind turbines should be bundled has also been made. The
results from bundling Turbine 4 and 5 can be seen on the left plot on Figure
4.8, while the results from bundling Turbine 2 to 5 can be seen on the right plot
(meaning only two set points are optimised).
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Opt. SP. 5 turbines − Bundling 4 and 5
 
 
BU Avg.
MPPT Avg.
BU Turbi
MPPT Turbi
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Opt. SP. 5 turbines − Bundling 2, 3, 4 and 5
 
 
BU Avg.
MPPT Avg.
BU Turbi
MPPT Turbi
Figure 4.8: Left plot: Optimised set points when bundling Turbine 4 and 5.
Right plot: Optimised set points when bundling Turbine 2, 3, 4
and 5.(T1 = green, T2 = red, T3 = cyan, T4 = magenta, T5 =
yellow)
The results from bundling the last two turbines shows a smoother solution.
The last three turbines in the row are operated almost identically even though
Turbine 3 is being optimised individually. However, bundling this turbine as
==PAGE:57==
4.6 Bundling of set points
45
well gave a less smooth solution. The cumulated power for these solution are on
average 0.03% better than the reversed scan, but have a more robust solution
space. Looking at the right plot on Figure 4.7 it clearly shows that only two
lines from the optimised set points are visible as Turbine 2, 3, 4 and 5 are
kept running at the same level. This gives a quite smooth solution even though
Turbine 1 behaves a little suspicious, where a jump in the set point is seen
going from 11.3 to 11.4 m/s. This solution is on average 0.11 % lower than the
reversed scan, the run time is however less than a third and due to the bundling
the solution is considered more robust as less set points are optimised.
Tests were also made tests on a row of eight turbines to make sure that adding
more turbines to the row didn't aect how many of the front turbines should be
optimised individually for good performance (plots are omitted). The results
showed that only optimising the rst three turbines individually gave more
unstable and (slightly) worse results than optimising only the rst two turbine
individually.
Optimising only the rst turbine individually lowered the run
time of a factor three compared to optimising three turbine invidually. This
resulted in a loss of only 0.24%. Comparing the cumulated power for the reversed
scan and bundling method for the row of eighth turbines shows that bundling
the turbines gives a decrease of 0.43% in cumulated power.
This is a quite
insignicant loss, considering only one forth of the set points was optimsed.
The solutions when optimising only the rst turbine individually where also
very smooth and without jumps.
This indicates that for larger wind farms
it might be benecial for robustness and CPU time to only optimise the rst
turbine individually. This is done insignicant loss in the cumulated power.
Bundling the most downwind turbines has showed to be benecial if a fast and
robust solution is wanted. A risk of getting a slightly worse cumulated power
is introduced, though. If set points were to be optimised for large wind farms
with e.g. 80+ turbines it might be very benecial to use bundling of turbines
as the the overall power productions wouldn't change signicantly, but much
faster and robust solutions would be obtained.
==PAGE:58==
46
Optimizing set point distributions for row wind farms
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Wind farms in two
dimensions
In the previous chapter row wind farms was optimised and the results were
analysed in details. The analysis was used to dene dierent methods to improve
the performance of the optimiser. The methods will be used in this chapter to
analyse wind farms in two dimensions. Wind farms will be analysed both for
dierent wind speed and directions.
5.1
2x5 wind farm
The rst wind farm to be analysed in this chapter is consisting of two rows of ve
turbine each. The distance between turbines are ve diameter in each direction.
The direction of the wind will be xed at 270 degrees (where 0 degrees is north
and 270 degrees is west) for this entire section. The layout of the wind farm can
be seen on Figure 5.1. The wake eects are largest possible for this layout given
the wind direction, as the turbines in each row stand in full wake of each other.
The wakes from the front turbines are seen not to expand enough to cause wake
decits for turbines in the other row. This problem is very similar to the ones
solved in Chapter 4. The optimal set point distribution for each row in this
problem should be the same as for a single row of ve turbines, as no cross-wind
==PAGE:60==
48
Wind farms in two dimensions
wake interaction is happening.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
−200
0
200
400
600
800
A1
B1
A2
B2
A3
B3
A4
B4
A5
B5
Layout of 2x5 wind farm with wake effects − Wind direction 270 degrees
X−Pos (m)
Y−Pos (m)
Figure 5.1: Illustration of the layout of the 2x5 wind farm with wake eects.
The rotors are marked with blue dots and the blades with black
lines. The blue lines starting at the ends of each blade denes
the area behind the turbine that is aected by the turbines wake.
Rows are named with letters and column with numbers.
The optimal set point distribution will be found for wind speeds from 3 to 15
m/s as done previously. The last turbine in each row are the only ones not
having any downwind turbine, meaning eight set points must be optimised for
each wind speed. The increased number of set points to optimise increases the
run time by more than a factor 5.
The reversed scan method will be used
without perturbation or bundling to solve the optimisation problems for this
entire chapter. The reason for not using bundling of turbines is that no algorithm
has been developed to detect what turbines stand in the wake of each other.
Developing an algorithm to detect patterns of the wake eects from all the
turbines in wind farm with changing wind direction is dicult, as the layouts
of wind farms not always are rectangular or dened by some nice pattern. The
reduced run time and good robustness of the bundling method would otherwise
have been suitable for this problem.
The optimised set point distributions for each row in the wind farm has been
plotted on Figure 5.2. The two distributions look completely similar to each
other as expected. This indicates that the optimiser isn't too aected by the
diculties seen in Chapter 4. The optimiser did have some issues converging
for some winds, so the number of maximum function evaluations had to be
==PAGE:61==
5.1 2x5 wind farm
49
increased signicantly compared to the setting used for the 1x5 row wind farm.
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Opt. Sp. for row 1 (A#) in 2x5 wind farm
 
 
Opt. Avg.
MPPT Avg.
Opt
MPPT
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Opt. Sp. for row 2 (B#) in 2x5 wind farm
 
 
Opt. Avg.
MPPT Avg.
Opt
MPPT
Figure 5.2: Optimised set points for 2x5 wind farm with wind speed from 3
to 15 m/s, using the reversed scan method. Left plot: Set points
for row A. Right plot: Set points for row B. (T1 = green, T2 =
red, T3 = magenta, T4 = cyan, T5 = yellow)
The optimised set point distribution for each row is also very similar to the
reversed scan solutions for the 1x5 wind farm. The dierences in the optimal
set point for each turbine in row A and B have been plotted on the top left plot
on Figure 5.3. No dierences is seen to be large than 0.05, which most likely
is caused by numerical issues. On the top right plot the dierences in the set
point from row A and the reversed scan solution for the 1x5 row wind farm is
seen. The largest dierence is a little less than 0.2 and is caused by the drop
on Turbine 1's set point for 11.8 m/s for the 1x5 wind farm that was seen on
Figure 4.6. Otherwise all dierence are suspected to be due to numerical issues.
The relative gain of curtailing upwind turbines compared to MPPT is shown
on the bottom plot on Figure 5.3. At around 3.5 m/s MPPT is actually better
than curtailing which is caused by the issues with local optimums while not
all turbines are running. The relative gain is largest for 5 m/s where the gain
is around 50%. 50% gain is a very good performance but it should be kept in
mind that this result is based on the wind direction giving the largest wake eect
from this farm. However, the actual gain for these wind speeds are modest as
the cumulated power for 5 m/s is around 1 MW. The relative gain decreases
==PAGE:62==
50
Wind farms in two dimensions
4
6
8
10
12
14
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power differences for row A and B for each turbine (A−B)
Power (MW)
4
6
8
10
12
14
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power differences for row A and reversed scan on 1x5
Power (MW)
4
6
8
10
12
14
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Wind Speed (m/s)
Gain in %
Relative gain when curtaling upwind turbines compared to MPPT
 
Cum.PowerRS / Cum.PowerMPPT
Figure 5.3: Top Dierences in optimised set points for each turbine. Top left
plot: dierences between row A and B from the 2x5 wind farm.
Top right plot: Dierences between row A and reversed scan for
the 1x5 wind farm. (T1 = green, T2 = red, T3 = magenta, T4
= cyan, T5 = yellow). Bottom plot: Percentage gain using the
optimised set points vs. MPPT.
asymptotic as the wind speed increases, until Turbine 1 start to run on full load.
At this point the relative gain is around 20% but drops fast to 14% and starts
to decrease asymptotic again. This happens every time the wind has increased
enough for having a new turbine running on full load.
5.2
5x5 wind farm for dierent wind directions
The impact of changing wind direction on a large square wind farm will be
analysed in this section. A 5x5 wind farm with ve diameters turbine spacing
in each direction is chosen for this analysed. Instead of solving the optimisation
problems for many dierent wind speeds and one wind direction the wind speed
will be xed and direction changed in this section. The farm is analysed for
10 m/s wind speed and with wind speeds changing from 270 degrees to 360
degrees with 3 degrees steps. The optimal set point distribution of a square
wind farm (with equidistant turbine spacing and same number of turbines in
each direction) will repeat it self every 90 degrees due to the layout of the farm.
Furthermore, the solutions from direction 0 to 45 will be same as for 45 to 90,
==PAGE:63==
5.2 5x5 wind farm for dierent wind directions
51
just in reversed order. So nding the optimal set point distribution for wind
directions between 270 and 315 degrees is enough to calculate to solution for all
directions.
The optimal set point distributions for dierent wind directions can be seen
on Figure 5.4. The set points of all 25 turbines has been plotted to illustrate
that the turbines have a tendency to cluster near some set points. E.g. for
297 degrees where turbines are operated either at nominal operation, just below
nominal operation or at around 2.5 MW. This is as expected as patterns in the
wake eects should occur. The solutions are seen to be symmetric around 315
degrees as expected (the set points has been shifted between turbines, but the
average production are almost the same). This indicates that the solver gives
the correct distributions for the problems, even though a little dierence is seen
between 270 and 360 degrees.
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Wind direction (degrees)
Power (MW)
Opt. SP. for 5x5 wind farm, wind speed = 10 m/s
 
 
Opt. Avg.
MPPT Avg.
RS Turbi
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
10
15
20
Wind direction (degrees)
Turbines in wake
Number of turbines affected by wakes
Figure 5.4: Optimised set points for 5x5 wind farm at 10 m/s wind speed
for wind direction 270 to 360 degrees. Top plot: Optimised set
points. Bottom plot: Number of turbines in wake of at least one
other turbine
The bottom plot show how many turbines is in wake for a given direction. When
only few turbines are in wake optimising the set points gives only a small gain.
==PAGE:64==
52
Wind farms in two dimensions
For 270 and 282 degrees only a very little gain is seen compared to MPPT, even
though 20 turbine are in wake. This is because a lot of partial wake is seen for
those direction, meaning only small wake decits are caused by upwind turbines.
It can be seen that it is due to partial wake as the number of turbines in wake
drops to eight at 285 degrees. No big jumps in set points are observed for only
small changes in the wind direction. It is a nice feature that the solutions seems
relative stable for small changes in the direction of the wind.
The layout of the wind farm can be seen on Figure 5.5 for wind direction 297
degrees. The patterns in the optimal set point distribution that was observed
on Figure 5.4 are explained by this layout. Looking at the wake eects it is seen
that turbines has either none, one, or two turbines in wakes and no partial wake
is occurring. The turbines in nominal operation are the ones with no down- or
upwind turbines (e.g. A1, A2, E4, ect.). Turbines with no upwind but at least
one downwind turbines are down regulated little compared to nominal operation
(e.g. B1, B2, E1 ect.). The last cluster of set points are seen for all turbines
in wake, no matter if the have only one or two upwind turbines (e.g. B3, C4,
E5 ect.). These turbine are operated close to the same set points at 2.5 MW
(change very little dependent on number of upwind turbines).
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
A1
B1
C1
D1
E1
A2
B2
C2
D2
E2
A3
B3
C3
D3
E3
A4
B4
C4
D4
E4
A5
B5
C5
D5
E5
Layout of 5x5 wind farm with wake effects − Wind direction 297 degrees
X−Pos (m)
Y−Pos (m)
Figure 5.5: Layout of the 5x5 wind farm with wake eects for wind direction
297 degrees. The wake eect patterns can be clearly seen on the
layout. (NB! axes are not equally scaled)
To give a better overview of the optimised set point for the power production on
each turbine has been plotted on Figure 5.6 together with the MPPT set points.
It clearly shows that the front turbines are down regulated a bit compared to
==PAGE:65==
5.2 5x5 wind farm for dierent wind directions
53
MPPT. The gain from doing so can clearly be seen on all turbines in wake.
However, the relative gain for wind direction 297 degrees is 2.0%.
A1 B1 C1 D1 E1 A2 B2 C2 D2 E2 A3 B3 C3 D3 E3 A4 B4 C4 D4 E4 A5 B5 C5 D5 E5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Turbine name
Power (MW)
Opt. SP. distribution for 5x5 wind farm,  wind dir.: 297 degrees
 
 
RS
MPPT
Figure 5.6: Comparison of curtailed set points and MPPT for 5x5 wind farm
at 10 m/s wind from direction 297 degrees.
The relative gain as a function of wind direction can be seen on Figure 5.7. The
relative gain is seen be symetric around 315 degrees, which was also seen on
Figure 5.4. The gain is highest for 270 degrees (and 360, if the right optimum
had been found). The gain is at 19% which is in inline the results from previous
section as expected, since the relative gain should be the same the 2x5 and
5x5 wind farm at 270 degrees. As the wind direction changes the relative gain
decreases fast as partial wake starts to occur until eight turbines are in wake.
When less wake eects are observed the relative gain is expected to decrease
as less improvement of the farm control is possible. If all turbines was in free
wind the cumulated power would be 91.0 MW. For 282 degrees the cumulated
power is 84.1 MW for the optimised set points and 83.9 MW for MPPT giving
a gain of 0.3%. The gap to wake-free production is only at 7 MW. For 270
degrees where the big gain was seen the cumulated power is 48 and 40 MW for
curtailing and MPPT, respectively. This gives a gap to wake free conditions on
51 MW, meaning it is possible to improve the performance much more than for
282 degrees, resulting om a much higher gain for the optimised set points.
==PAGE:66==
54
Wind farms in two dimensions
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Wind Speed (m/s)
Gain in %
Relative gain when curtaling upwind turbines compared to MPPT. WS = 10 m/s
 
 
Cum.PowerRS / Cum.PowerMPPT
Figure 5.7: Bottom plot: Percentage gain using the optimised set points vs.
MPPT
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Sensitivity analysis and
structural changes
The purpose of the following chapter is to analyse the eect of changing funda-
mental elements in the model. The optimal set point distribution will be anal-
ysed for a dierent turbine model and a new wind farm layout. The sensitivity
of the wind direction will also be tested in this chapter to give an indication
of the losses that might occur if the set points used have been optimised for
another direction
6.1
CART3 turbine model
The turbine used so-far in this report is the NREL-5 MW reference turbine. To
test eect of optimising set points for a dierent turbine a new turbine model
is implemented. The new turbine to be modeled is the NREL-CART3 turbine,
the specications for which are found in [BWF10]. A summary of the relevant
specication can be seen in Table 6.1:
==PAGE:68==
56
Sensitivity analysis and structural changes
Rated power
0.6 MW
Rotor diameter
40 m
Hub height
36.6 m
Cut-in, Cut-out wind speed
4 m/s, 25 m/s
Cut-in, Rated rotor speed
20.0 rpm, 37.1 rpm
Table 6.1: Specications for NREL CART3 turbine.
This turbine is considerably smaller than the NREL-5 MW turbine. The swept
area and rated power are almost a tenth of the 5 MW turbine and the rotational
speeds much higher.
The CT and CP -curves for the CART3 turbines are illustrayed on Figure 6.1.
The CT -curves are quite similar to the CT -curves for the 5 MW turbine. The
pitch and TSR is plotted for nominal operation from wind speed 4 to 15 m/s.
The CART3 turbine is operated for a slightly smaller range of pitch and TSR
compared to the other turbine but otherwise the values are quite similar. The
Cp-curve is seen to have two peaks, but the peak for small pitch values are not
aecting the control region. The second peak caused a small modication in
algorithm nding the pitch in the low region when maximising CP for a xed
TSR. Otherwise only the turbine specications and the CP - and CT -curves have
been changed compared to the model used for the 5 MW turbine.
β (degrees)
λ
CP(β,λ) − positive values only
 
 
−5
0
5
10
15
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Nom. Opr.
β (degrees)
λ
CT(β,λ) − only values between −2 and 2
 
 
−5
0
5
10
15
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
−1
−1
−0
0
0.5
1
1.5
Nom. Opr.
Figure 6.1: Comparison of curtailed set points and MPPT for 5x5 wind farm
at 10 m/s wind from direction 297 degrees.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 CART3 turbine model
57
At Figure 6.1 the power curve, rotational speed, CP , and CT values can be
seen for wind speed from 4 to 15 m/s when the turbine is operated in nominal
operation The rotational speed is seen to be much higher than was observed for
the 5 MW turbine. The optimal CP value 0.31 means that the turbine isn't able
extract to more than 31% of the kinetic energy in the wind. The high region
for this turbine is gone for this turbine meaning that the rated rotational speed
and rated power is reached for the same wind speed.
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Wind speed (m/s)
Power output and rotational speed for nominal operation
 
 
Low
Mid
Top
Power (MW)
ω (rpm/50)
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Wind speed (m/s)
CT and CP for nominal operation
 
 
CT
CP
Figure 6.2: Top: Power production and rotational speed for the CART3 tur-
bine. Bottom: CP and CT . Both plots are during nominal opera-
tion.
The optimal set point distribution has been found for a row of ve CART3
turbines standing on line in the direction of the wind. The turbine spacing is
ve diameters (of the CART3 turbine). The optimised set point distribution can
be seen on Figure 6.3. Curtailing the CART3 turbine gives a higher cumulated
power compared to the MPPT strategy but the gain is less than with the 5 MW
turbine. It is also noted that all turbines are running full load for wind speeds
higher than 16 m/s. Using the 5 MW turbine all turbines were running full load
at 13 m/s. The dierences could be due to the signicantly reduced distance
between turbines.
It has been shown that changing the turbine model doesn't cause any new issues
for the optimisation problems. This indicates that the proposed method for
nding the optimal set point distribution isn't aected by changing the turbine.
==PAGE:70==
58
Sensitivity analysis and structural changes
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Wind Speed (m/s)
Power (MW)
Opt. set points 1x5 wind farm with CART3 turbine
 
 
RS  Avg.
MPPT Avg.
RS Turbi
MPPT Turbi
Figure 6.3: Comparison of curtailed set points and MPPT for 5x5 wind farm
at 10 m/s wind from direction 297 degrees.
However, the gain of optimising set points was shown to be less than for the 5
MW turbine.
6.2
Fan-shaped wind farm
The set point distributions has only been analysed for wind farms with quite
simple layouts so far. The set points for a fan-shaped 5x5 wind farm will be
optimised in this section. The wind farm will be analysed for 10 m/s wind speed
and a number of dierent wind directions.
The more complex farm layout is sure to aect the wake patterns observed
and cause the set points to cluster less. The layout of the wind farm for wind
direction 315 degrees can be seen on Figure 6.4. It was easy to see a pattern
when looking at the wake eects of the squared 5x5 wind farm. This is not the
case for the fan shaped wind farm were no patterns occur.
As no patterns were to see in the farm layout the points are expected to more
scattered for each wind direction. The optimised set point distribution for 10
m/s can be seen on Figure 6.5. A little tendency of clustering happens around
180 and 360 degrees but otherwise the set points appear completely independent.
The number of turbines in wake is also less varying than for the square shaped
farm. It is noticed that curtailing the turbines doesn't seem to give much gain
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Fan-shaped wind farm
59
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
A1
B1
C1
D1
E1
A2
B2
C2
D2
E2
A3
B3
C3
D3
E3
A4
B4
C4
D4
E4
A5
B5
C5
D5
E5
Layout of 5x5 fan−shaped wind farm − Wind direction 317.5 degrees
X−Pos (m)
Y−Pos (m)
Figure 6.4: Layout of the 5x5 fan shaped wind farm for wind direction 297
degrees. (NB! axes are not equally scaled)
compared to the MPPT strategy for this layout. However, the optimised set
points are performing better than MPPT for all wind speeds.
It is possible to evaluate the gain of curtailing compared to MPPT for the two
layouts, i.e. which layout has the most to gain from curtailing their turbines.
It can seen at Figure 6.6 that the gain of curtailing is for most wind direction
quite even for the two layouts. However, the gain of curtailing the squared wind
farm is much bigger for some directions. This is the case for e.g 180 and 270
degrees, which also are the directions where many turbines stand in full wake
of each other.
==PAGE:72==
60
Sensitivity analysis and structural changes
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Wind direction (degrees)
Power (MW)
Opt. SP. for 5x5 wind farm, wind speed = 10 m/s
 
 
Opt. Avg.
MPPT Avg.
RS Turbi
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
10
15
20
Wind direction (degrees)
Turbines in wake
Number of turbines affected by wakes
Figure 6.5: Optimised set points for 5x5 fan shaped wind farm at 10 m/s wind
speed for wind direction 270 to 360 degrees. Top plot: Optimised
set points. Bottom plot: Number of turbines in wake of at least
one other turbine
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
0.5
1
1.5
Wind direction (degrees)
Opt. set points / MPPT
Performance of curtaling for different farm layout. WS = 10 m/s
 
 
5x5 Sq.
5x5 Fan
Figure 6.6: The optimised set points relative to MPPT for the fan shaped and
squared wind farm.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Sensitivity analysis of wind direction
61
6.3
Sensitivity analysis of wind direction
In this section it will be investigated how sensitive the power production is
to changes in the wind direction if the set points aren't changed. It will be
calculated how much the power production is aected if the set points given to
the turbines are optimised for a dierent direction than the current one.
The set point distributions found in Chapter 5 for the 5x5 wind farm will be
extended to cover the wind direction of three and six degrees as well. The power
production for the 5x5 wind farm and wind speed 10 m/s is recalculated twice
for wind direction 270 to 360 degrees. The set points optimised for direction 273
to 363 is given to turbines in rst recalculation of the production. This means
the set points are optimsed for a wind direction with an oset of three degrees.
In the second recalculation, the set points with an oset of six degrees are given
to the turbines.
The results from operating the turbines, with set points optimised for a wind
direction with an oset, can be seen on Figure 6.7. The performance of the
optimised set points are plotted as a function of the wind direction. The relative
gain using the set points with an oset of three degrees optimised for a wind
direction with a three oset are seen to be very even with the MPPT (the gain
is 0.01%). If the set points with six degrees is used, it gives a loss of 2%.
270
280
290
300
310
320
330
340
350
360
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Wind Speed (m/s)
Gain in %
Relative gain using  compared to MPPT. WS = 10 m/s
 
 
Cum.Power0 / Cum.PowerMPPT
Cum.Power3 / Cum.PowerMPPT
Cum.Power6 / Cum.PowerMPPT
Figure 6.7: Relative gain of using power production give
The results from the sensitivity analysis indicates that the optimised set points
can be used with a gain compared to MPPT if thy are optimised for a wind
direction within three degrees of the current. The results are also of interest if
wake meandering is considered (axial movement of the entire wake), or when
==PAGE:74==
62
Sensitivity analysis and structural changes
considering that wind ows in the real life are much more unstable than what
is assumed in the model.
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 7
Economical eects of
curtailing upwind turbines
It has been shown in previous chapters that curtailing upwind turbines can lead
to an increased power production for wind farms. It was shown in Chapter 5
that the relative gain from curtailing upwind turbines was very dependent on the
wind direction. The economical eect of curtailing turbines will be investigated
in this chapter by calculating the annual power production for wind farms given
some wind data.
Dierent wind farm layout will be tested and the optimal
direction of placing a wind farm will also be found.
7.1
Wind Data
The wind data use in this report is forecasted wind speeds with corresponding
directions from DMI's HIRLAM model. Predictions for the next 48 hours are
given on hourly basis, every six hours. The newest forecasts are always used
in this report, meaning no forecast is older than six hours. The data comes
from a location o the west coast of Jutland. The data covers the entire year
of 2003, consisting of 8760 hours. 72 N/A values were observed in the data
(longest period with N/A was 18 hours) and these have been cleansed with
linear interpolation.
==PAGE:76==
64
Economical eects of curtailing upwind turbines
All the observations are assigned to one of 24 bins, dependent on their wind
direction. Each bin ranges 15 degrees and the distribution of the observations
for each bin can be seen Figure 7.1. The probability for an observation to belong
to bin k, Fk, has been calculated for 24 of the bins. The most frequent wind
direction is west and south-west and the least is north-east.
N
NE
E
SE
S
SW
W
NW
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Wind direction
Probability
Distribution of wind direction
Figure 7.1: Distribution of the wind direction for the wind data from 2003.
The wind speed varies from each direction and might have a tendency of being
higher for some wind directions compared to others. Since the wind speed cant
be assumed to be equally distributed for each direction it is analysed in bins.
This means that a wind speed distribution has to be tted for each bin. The
wind speed is assumed to follow the Weibull distribution. A Weibull distribution
is tted for the wind speeds in each bin. The tted distributions can then be
used to calculate the probability for a given wind speed in a given bin.
7.1.1
Parameter estimation of Weibull distributions
The two parameters for the Weibull distributions can be tted to the wind
speeds using the probability density function. The Weibull distribution has two
parameters θ1 and θ2 which is the scale and shape, respectively. The probability
functions are dened as:
f( ¯Uk; θ1
k, θ2
k) = θ2
k
θ1
k
 ¯Uk
θ1
k
θ2
k−1
e
−

¯
Uk
θ1
k
θ2
k
(7.1)
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Annual power production
65
where ¯Uk is the vector of the wind speeds from observations belonging to bin k.
f( ¯Uk; θ1
k, θ2
k) is the probability density function tted to the wind speed in bin k.
The parameter will be tted maximising the log-likelihood function. Optimising
the parameters to t the wind speeds for a given bin can be formulated as an
optimisation problem:
max
θ1
k,θ2
k
Vk
X
i=1
log
 f( ¯Uk,i; θ1
k, θ2
k)

(7.2)
where Vk is the number of wind speeds in bin k and ¯Uk,i is the i'th wind speed
in bin k. This problem is solved for each bin and a probability density function
is tted to each bin. The tted distributions are plotted with their observations
for bins close to north, east, south and west on Figure 7.2. The distribution
ts the observation quite well, even though the t for wind speeds from north
are a bit skewed. It is interesting to notice that the western winds have very a
symmetric at shape but with considerably high wind speeds compared to the
other directions.
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Fitted p.d.f. for wind speeds in Bin 1 (0° to 15°)
Wind Speed (m/s)
Probability
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Fitted p.d.f. for wind speeds in Bin 7 (90° to 105°)
Wind Speed (m/s)
Probability
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Fitted p.d.f. for wind speeds in Bin 13 (180° to 195°)
Wind Speed (m/s)
Probability
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Fitted p.d.f. for wind speeds in Bin 19 (270° to 285°)
Wind Speed (m/s)
Probability
Figure 7.2: Distribution of the wind direction for the wind data from 2003.
7.2
Annual power production
The observations have been sorted in bins and Weibull distribution has been
tted to the wind speeds. This makes it possible to calculate the possibility for
a certain wind speed from a given direction. To calculate the annual production
==PAGE:78==
66
Economical eects of curtailing upwind turbines
of a wind farm the possibility of a given wind speed and direction must be
related to the the cumulated power production wind farm for the given the
wind conditions. Therefore the cumulated power production, Pcum (U, γ), for a
wind farm is formulated as a function of wind speed and direction.
Pcum (U, γ) =
N
X
i=1
p(x∗
i , Ui, γ)
(7.3)
where p(xi, Ui, γ) is the power production for turbine i given the wind speed
in front of turbine Ui for wind direction γ. x∗
i is the optimised set points for
turbine i for the given wind farm, at wind direction γ and free wind speed U.
Using the formulation of the cumulated power function and distribution of wind
speed for each bin makes it possible to calculate the annual power production
as:
Pannual = 8760
K
X
k=1

Fk
M
X
j=1

f(U int
j
; θ1
k, θ2
k)Pcum
 U int
j
, γ



M
X
j=1
f(U int
j
; θ1
k, θ2
k)


−1

(7.4)
where U int is a vector of M equidistant wind speed and Fk is the probability
that an observation belongs to bin k.
The last term in the expression is a
normalisation of the probability for a given wind speed in a bin. The result is
multiplied with 8760 hours on a year. To calculate the annual production the
optimised set points for a wind farm must be found of each wind speed in U int
in each bin.
Each bin covers a range 15 degrees each with a quite wide range considering
the cumulated production for a wind speed can change a lot in this range, see
Figure 5.4. The cumulated power function is for three wind direction in each bin
and the averaged value is used. E.g. the optimal set points has been calculated
for direction 2.5◦, 5◦, and 7.5◦for each wind speed in U int in bin 1. Since the
optimal set point distribution repeats it self every 45◦for square wind farm only
nine dierent wind direction need to analysed. U int is the wind speeds from 0 to
25 m/s with steps of 1/3 m/s, meaning that 684 set points distribution should
be optimised. As all turbines run on full load from 15 m/s the problems from
15 to 25 m/s are not actually solved as the optimal distribution is full load on
all turbine. This counts for the wind speed between 0 and 3 m/s too, as this is
below the cut-in speed. The reduced number of problems to be solved is 333.
The 333 problems have been solved for the 5x5 wind farm. Also the annual
production using MPPT has been calculated. The two annual productions for
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Optimising the direction of the wind warm
67
the two strategies are:
PMPPT
annual = 352560 MWh
(7.5)
Popt
annual = 358796 MWh
(7.6)
PfreeWind
annual
= 413613 MWh
(7.7)
The annual production using the optimised set points are 1.77 % higher than
using MPPT. The annual power production on the wind farm if wake eects
were ignored is seen to be 413613 MWh, which is 14.76 % higher than the
MPPT, meaning that wake eects reduce the power production with 13.25 %
when the MPPT strategy i used. Curtailing turbines removes 11.98 % of the
total wake eects, observed in the squared 5x5 wind farm annually.
The annual production for the fan-shaped 5x5 wind farm from Chapter 6 has
also been calculated using same approach. Due to the shape of the wind farm 180
degrees of direction will have to be analysed meaning the number of problems to
be solved is 1332 as the same step between angles is used. The annual production
for the fan wind farm is:
PMPPT
annual = 360139 MWh
(7.8)
Popt
annual = 363917 MWh
(7.9)
Using the optimised set points gives an increase of 1.05% for the fan-shaped wind
farm, which is 0.72% less than for the square wind farm. This is as expected
since the wake eects only reduces the annual production 12.02 %. This result
indicates that the fan shaped layout has reduced the wake eects compared to
the squared layout.
The average spot price on energy for DK-West for 2014 was 228.63 DKK /
MWh (data from: WWW.Energinet.dk). This means that the annual prot for
curtailing turbines is 1.43 mill. DKK for the square wind farm and 0.864 mill.
DKK for the the fan-shaped wind farm.
7.3
Optimising the direction of the wind warm
The optimal orientation for a given wind farm can also be analysed for the data
set. Changing the wind direction for all observations gives the same change in
annual production as turning the layout of the wind farm correspondingly. The
annual production is calculated for the wind farm 360 times, where the wind
direction is changed 1 degree each time. This gives the annual production as a
function of the orientation of the wind farm. This has been done for both the
==PAGE:80==
68
Economical eects of curtailing upwind turbines
square and fan-shaped wind farm. The results can be seen on Figure 7.3. It is
noticed that the results repeat them selves for the squared wind farm every 90
degrees as expected (the solutions are symmetric every 45 degrees but due to
the non-uniform wind directions, dierent results are obtained depending on the
order of the solution). The optimal orientation of the wind farms are in both
cases 90 degrees (meaning they should be turned 90 degrees west. The square
wind farm is actually place optimal, so turning the farm 90 degrees wont change
the layout.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
3.54
3.56
3.58
3.6
3.62
3.64
3.66x 10
5
Off−set angle
Annual production (MWh)
Annual production, given change in orientation of wind farm
 
 
5x5 Sqaure
5x5 Fan−shape
Opt. orientation
Figure 7.3: Distribution of the wind direction for the wind data from 2003.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Discussion
A control strategy, curtailing of upwind turbines, has been implemented to
reduce wake eects in wind farms and compared with a strategy where losses
to were accepted. The two strategies have been compared for two wind farm
layouts. Curtailing performed better, or as good as MPPT for all wind directions
and speeds (where all turbines were running). The performance of curtailing
was very dependent on the wind direction and performed best in cases with
intense wake eects. Forecasted weather data was used to calculate the annual
production and curtailing improved the production with 1.77%. Strong wake
eects for certain directions could be avoided, if the layout of the wind farm
was fan shaped. This layout had an improved power production on 4.23% when
using the MPPT strategy. The fan shaped layout reduced the production gain
for curtailing to 1.05%. Considering these improvements, it should be noticed
that they have been calculated for realised data, analysed in 15 degrees bins.
The Jensen wake model has been shown to overestimate wake eects after the
second downwind turbine. However, this was only seen when the range of the
bins were smaller than 15% [GRB+12].
The objective function, used to optimise the set points, gave the optimiser con-
verging problems. Several methods were proposed to give more robust solutions.
Bundling downwind turbines performed almost as good as the reversed scan
method but was much faster and gave more stable solutions. Perturbing the
initial guesses gave the most robust solutions but had an increased run time.
==PAGE:82==
70
Discussion
The run time should be reduced for large wind farms, before the method could
be tested on-site. Bundling turbines would be the recommended approach, as
bundling reduces the number of set points to be optimised and run time.
Suggestions for future work would be to develop an algorithm that could detect
patterns in the wake eects, for wind farms in two dimensions.
This would
allow bundling to be used in two dimensions. However, patterns were seen to
be complex for the fan shaped wind farm. Analysing wake eects in patters or
regions is also presented in Frandsen (2006) [FBP+06].
Testing the entire model's ability to t data from a real wind farm could be
an aim of future research. However, the wake model needs to be improved to
handle non-stationary wind ows. The model could also be used to compare
wind farm layouts, which was done in seconds using the MPPT strategy. The
fan shaped wind farm improved the performance more than curtailing turbines
did. An interesting eld for future work could be to focus on optimising wind
farm layouts instead of turbine control.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[Ain88]
J.F. Ainslie.
Calculating the eld in the wake of wind tur-
bines. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics,
27(1):213224, 1988.
[ASJ+14]
J. Annoni, P. Seiler, K. Johnson, P. Fleming, and P. Gebraad. Eval-
uating wake models for wind farm control. In American Control
Conference, Portland, OR, USA, 2014.
[BRBA12]
P. Beaucage, N. Robinson, M. Brower, and C. Alonge. Overview
of six commerical and research wake models for large oshore wind
farms. In Proceedings of the European Wind Energy Association
Conference, pages 9599, 2012.
[BWF10]
A Bossanyi, A Wright, and P Fleming. Controller eld tests on
the nrel cart3 turbine. Report 11593/BR/09, National Renewable
Energy Laboratory l, 2010.
[CC13]
G. Crasto and F. Castellani. Wakes calculation in a oshore wind
farm. Wind Engineering, 37(3):269280, 2013.
[CHF99]
A Crespo, J Hernandez, and S Frandsen.
Survey of modelling
methods for wind turbine wakes and wind farms. Wind energy,
2(1):124, 1999.
[FBP+06]
S. Frandsen, R. Barthelmie, S. Pryor, O. Rathmann, S. Larsen,
J. Højstrup, and M. Thøgersen. Analytical modelling of wind speed
decit in large oshore wind farms. Wind energy, 9(1-2):3953,
2006.
==PAGE:84==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[FG96]
J. Fan and I. Gijbels. Local polynomial modelling and its applica-
tions. Chapman and Hall, 1996.
[FGC+14]
P.A. Fleming, P.M.O. Gebraad, M.J. Churcheld, J.W. van
Wingerden, A.K. Scholbrock, and P.J. Moriarty. Using particle l-
ters to track wind turbine wakes for improved wind plant controls.
In American Control Conference (ACC), 2014, pages 37343741,
June 2014.
[GRB+12]
M Gaumond, P. Réthoré, A. Bechmann, S. Ott, G. C. Larsen,
A Peña, and K. S. Hansen. Benchmarking of wind turbine wake
models in large oshore wind farms. In Proceedings of the Science
of Making Torque from Wind Conference, 2012.
[GTvW+14] P.M.O. Gebraad, F.W. Teeuwisse, J.W. van Wingerden, P.A.
Fleming, S.D. Ruben, J.R. Marden, and L.Y. Pao. A data-driven
model for wind plant power optimization by yaw control. In Ameri-
can Control Conference (ACC), 2014, pages 31283134, June 2014.
[Han08]
M.O.L. Hansen. Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines. Earthscan, sec-
ond edition, 2008.
[JBMS09]
J. M. Jonkman, S. Buttereld, W. Musial, and G. Scott. Denition
of a 5-MW reference wind turbine for oshore system development.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory Golden, CO, 2009.
[Jen83]
N. O. Jensen. A note on wind generator interaction. 1983.
[KHJ86]
I Katic, J Højstrup, and N.O. Jensen. A simple model for cluster
eciency. In European Wind Energy Association Conference and
Exhibition, pages 407410, 1986.
[Lar09]
G. C. Larsen. A simple stationary semi-analytical wake model. In
Risø, Wind Energy Decision, 2009.
[MBG+14]
M. Mirzaei, T.G. Bozkurt, G. Giebel, P.E. Sørensen, and N.K.
Poulsen. Estimation of the possible power of a wind farm. Inter-
national Federation of Automatic Control. World Congress. Pro-
ceedings, 19:67826787, 2014.
[MSPN14]
M. Mirzaei, M. Soltani, N.K. Poulsen, and H.H. Niemann. Model
based active power control of a wind turbine. In American Control
Conference (ACC), 2014, pages 50375042, 2014.
[New77]
B.G. Newman. The spacing of wind turbines in large arrays. Energy
Conversion, 16(4):169171, 1977.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[San09]
B. Sanderse. Aerodynamics of wind turbine wakes. Energy Re-
search Center of the Netherlands (ECN), ECN-E09-016, Petten,
The Netherlands, Tech. Rep, 2009.
[VSC03]
L.J. Vermeer, J. N. Sørensen, and A Crespo. Wind turbine wake
aerodynamics. Progress in aerospace sciences, 39(6):467510, 2003.
[WWY+12] C. Wan, J. Wang, G. Yang, H. Gu, and X. Zhang. Wind farm
micro-siting by gaussian particle swarm optimization with local
search strategy. Renewable Energy, 48:276286, 2012.
