==PAGE:1==
Graphene Contact Resistance
 
 
Christian Søndergaard Pedersen (s103100)
Project supervisors:
Professor Mads Brandbyge
Postdoc Daniele Stradi
M.Sc. Thesis in Physics and Nanotechnology
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
February 24, 2016
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
One of the challenges facing graphene-based electronics lies in developing reliable fabrications methods to
properly utilize the unique electronic properties of graphene. To this end, computational techniques are applied
to gain insight into especially the interface between a metal and a monolayer of graphene. This study uses
calculations from ﬁrst principles to simulate one-dimensional contacts between the Titanium (0001) surface and
the zigzag and armchair edges of graphene, respectively, with intercalated Fluorine atoms and encapsulated
between sheets of hexagonal Boron Nitride. It is discovered that both C and F atoms preferentially bond to the
same sites on the Ti surface and that intercalation of F atoms does not prevent Ti-C bonding in the free-standing
graphene contacts considered here. Rather, graphene sheets are shown to bend to reach preferred bonding sites,
preserving and even improving transmission and current-voltage ﬂow in these devices.
However, graphene
encapsulated in hexagonal Boron Nitride is prohibited from bending which yields a profoundly negative impact
of F intercalation on electronic properties. The contact conductance of aforementioned systems is shown to drop
from 2.32×10−3 G0 for a free-standing F-intercalated Ti-graphene contact to 0.04×10−3 G0 for a corresponding
encapsulated graphene sheet.
Acknowledgements
For invaluable supervision and guidance with nearly all aspects of the project including research, set-ups,
data collection and interpretation and feedback, the author acknowledges the eﬀorts of Mads Brandbyge and
Daniele Stradi of DTU Nanotech. For equally invaluable technical support, code and script development and
for patience the author acknowledges the work of Nick Papior of DTU Nanotech. The author acknowledges the
recommendations given by Bernhard Kretz of the University of the Basque Country and of Aran Garcia-Lekue
of the University of the Basque Country for feedback on certain applied methods.
Thanks to QuantumWise for providing a license without which system set-ups would have taken considerably
longer. Additional thanks for providing prompt and helpful technical support.
Lastly, thanks go to Filip Sandborg-Olsen, Marie-Louise Witthøft and Edoardo Bosco for providing a pleasant
work atmosphere and to Alba Caviedes Nozal for unfailing support and partnership.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Objectives
5
3
Theoretical Background
6
3.1
Crystal Structure of Graphene
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
The Tight-Binding Model of Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Landauer Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3.1
Reﬂectionless Contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.2
Reﬂecting Contacts and Current Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Non-Equilibrium Green’s Function Approach and Density Functional Theory
. . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4.1
DFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4.2
NEGF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Self Energies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5.1
Transmission Coeﬃcients and Current Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5.2
Transmission in Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6
Work Functions, Band Bending and Schottky Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Computational Methods
14
4.1
Device set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
DFT Calculation with SIESTA/TranSIESTA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.1
Basis set and potential representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.2
Electrode calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.3
Structural Relaxation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2.4
SIESTA/TranSIESTA run . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.5
TBT run
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Results
17
5.1
Simplistic view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.1
Primitive optimization of contact distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.2
Basic Calculation of a zigzag contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Structure Relaxation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.1
Force Dependence on k-point sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.2
Relaxation of zigzag contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.3
Relaxation of armchair contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.4
Nitrogen-intercalated relaxation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.5
Analysis of structure relaxations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Transmission and IV-characteristics for zigzag and armchair contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.1
k-resolved transmission spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3.2
k-resolved transmission of relaxed systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
hBN-zGr-hBN sandwich structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4.1
Transmission of a bulk hBN/zGr/hBN heterostructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4.2
Energy-resolved transmission spectra for hBN/zGr sandwich structures
. . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4.3
k-resolved transmission of heterostructures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4.4
Methodical improvement of heterostructure simulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Conclusion and Outlook
32
A Structures
34
B k-resolved transmission
36
C Finite-bias Transmission Spectra
38
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
Graphene - a two-dimensional single layer of graphite - has attracted no ends of attention from the scientiﬁc
community since its successful isolation and characterisation in 2004 [1]. Graphene exhibits remarkable me-
chanical, thermal, electrical and optical characteristics [2][3], including a gap-less linear dispersion curve and
excellent charge carrier mobility even at ambient conditions and high doping concentrations (electrically or
chemically) [4][5]. As conventional Silicon devices approach their functional limits graphene has been suggested
for use in transistor applications due to its thinness and excellent electronic properties and extensive research
has been conducted towards constructing electrical components based on graphene.
As device sizes diminish, however, microscopic phenomena as scattering and contact resistance become increas-
ingly dominant. Moreover, when entering the mesoscopic regime, device fabrication becomes suﬃciently diﬃcult
that results may be impossible to reproduce in any reliable fashion for now. Further, the precise chemistry of
the interface between the device and the electrical leads is poorly understood. Since device fabrication on the
nanoscale is already a diﬃcult endeavour, electron transport calculations from ﬁrst principles has been proposed
as a method which may oﬀer critical insight into the metal-graphene interface by providing reproducible results
from quantum mechanical simulations on known, model systems. Due to traditional device fabrication being
based on transfer of chemically grown or mechanically exfoliated graphene sheets and subsequent deposition
of the contact material onto the sheets, the resultant planar geometries became the ﬁrst model systems to be
simulated upon.
Much work has already been put into the theoretical analysis of planar contact geometries in which a graphene
sheet is modelled as suspended on a semi-inﬁnite metal lead, forming a two-dimensional contact between the
metal surface and the pz-orbitals of the graphene sheet. The work of Barraza-Lopez et al examined the role of
sheet width and length on the conductance as well as the role of the contact metal (Al) on the band structure [6].
Maassen et al showed how Cu leads aﬀected the transmission and conductance of the graphene sheet [7]. Both
studies demonstrate the opening of a second transmission/conductance minimum, attributed to charge transfer
from the interaction between the metal and the graphene. This interaction has been shown to depend strongly
on the metal, e.g. by Giovannetti et al who used Density Functional Theory studies of various metal-graphene
contacts to classify two groups of contact metals that diﬀer by their interaction strength [8]. Al and Pt were
found to form weak bonds by physisorption and dope the graphene sheet electrically while preserving strong
character of the carbon pz band. Meanwhile, Co formed strong chemisorption bonds, disturbing the π orbital
network of intrinsic graphene. As has later been shown, the choice of metal has a profound impact on the
contact resistance associated with the interface.
The contact resistance was found to have a gate-independent part with a value of 800 ± 200 Ωµm for a Ti/Au
contact (at background pressure 8 × 10−7 Torr). Since then, a theoretical study of the contact resistances for
various metal-graphene interfaces was conducted by Ji et al in a Density Functional Theory approach with a
Non-Equilibrium Green’s Function implementation, yielding lateral contact resistances ranging from ∼200 Ωµm
to ∼700 Ωµm and total contact resistances about twice that when taking a transmission into account. Par-
ticularly, Pd and Ti yielded 403 Ωµm and 612 Ωµm respectively. These results are compared to experimental
values reported in the work of Xia et al [9], who measured 680±200 Ωµm for Pd and 900±350 Ωµm for Ti (in
Supplementary Information - SI). Both cited values represent this author’s interpretation of the original data -
in particular, Ji et al cites 480 Ωµm for comparison to their values.
The planar contact geometry as a whole has been criticized by Wang et al due to its lack of surface bond-
ing sites, chemical bonding and orbital hybridization which create high contact resistance [10]. Indeed, two
separate studies have shown how patterning (forming cuts and antidots, respectively) of the graphene contact
area reduced the total/contact resistance of the devices under scrutiny [11][12]. This follows a theoretical study
comparing the planar geometry to a contact in which a nanotube or nanoribbon is contacted along the edge
with the resulting contact resistances showing values approximately two orders of magnitude lower than the side
contacts [13]. Although the nanostructured geometries of [11] and [12] increased the edge character of planar
geometries, it was the study of Wang et al that experimentally demonstrated an actual one-dimensional contact
geometry [10]. A ”sandwich” structure of graphene encapsulated in hexagonal Boron Nitride is etched to expose
the edge of the graphene layer before deposition of metal electrodes - thus forming a one-dimensional contact
along the graphene edge. To the best of this author’s knowledge, the works of Matsuda et al and Wang et
al pioneered the edge contact geometry in the theoretical and experimental areas, respectively. An alternative
has been explored by Cao et al recently in the related ﬁeld of Carbon Nanotube transistor fabrication [14]. In
this study, a Molybdenum electrode was deposited on top of a nanotube and subsequently annealed at 850 ◦C
to let Mo-covered C atoms diﬀuse into the electrode to create Mo2C, thus breaking down the Mo-covered part
of the nanotube and creating an end contact. Challenges facing this unique fabrication method lie mainly in
selecting a metal which 1) has relatively high electronegativity to form carbides rather than oxides, and 2) forms
metal-carbide alloys at suﬃciently low temperatures which motivated the choice of Molybdenum over Tungsten.
Based on the prospects oﬀered by the one-dimensional contact great eﬀort has been put into mapping out its
3
==PAGE:5==
chemical and electrical characteristics theoretically. For instance, Deretzis et al found that band bending, dop-
ing and bonding characteristics of the metal-graphene interaction could induce conduction asymmetries and, in
general, negatively impact the transport properties depending on material parameters such as the work function
[15]. Within a similar framework, Matsuda et al showed in their pioneering work that the contact resistance
per atom diﬀered from 106.5 kΩfor Ti to 253.5 kΩfor Cu.
One key diﬀerence between theoretical and practical work is the imperfection of real systems. Since fabrication
methods rely on plasma etching techniques using e.g. O2/CHF3 gases ([10], SI), the interface may be contami-
nated by foreign species found in the manufacturing process. Intercalation of foreign species found in fabrication
processes has been examined in a theoretical study utilizing ﬁrst-principles calculations [16]. Intercalated group
VI elements (O, C and S) were found to provide a lower contact resistance to a Cr (110) surface than group I
and VII elements (H and F). Interestingly, oxygen intercalants yielded superior transmission even to carbon for
energies above 0.1 eV. Additional simulations with Pd (unspeciﬁed surface) were carried out to reveal similar
results for O and C.
Since Titanium was shown to possess the lowest contact resistance per atom in the theoretical works a crucial
next step is to examine in greater detail how Titanium bonds to graphene and how intercalated species may
aﬀect this bonding. Little is known about the Ti-graphene contact despite the premium contact properties it
has been shown to exhibit. For example, although transmission in graphene is known to occur in narrow lines
around its Dirac points, no attempt has been made to see how the transmission of the metal electrode might
aﬀect the transmission of a metal-graphene device as far as this author knows. Additionally, despite pioneering
experimental work was based on a heterostructure, no theoretical studies have followed suit and investigated
the metal-heterostructure properties to the knowledge of this author.
4
==PAGE:6==
2
Objectives
This study aims to shed more light on the one-dimensional metal-graphene edge contact between Titanium
and graphene, respectively, based on results calculated from ﬁrst principles using a Density Functional Theory
(DFT) approach combined with Non-Equilibrium Green’s Functions (NEGF) as has been used extensively to
calculate transport properties of atomic-scale systems. The main purpose is to examine possible mechanisms
that make Ti stand out as a low-contact resistance material as well as how an intercalant may aﬀect this
mechanism as has been investigated for Chromium and Palladium. Based on the results ways to improve the
contact will be suggested for experiments to come. In particular, the transmission spectra for various devices
will be drawn, scrutinized and compared to the corresponding spectra of the individual parts that make up the
device in an eﬀort to make predictions about similar contacts with diﬀerent components.
Where most studies report on relaxed structures this project will examine both unrelaxed and relaxed
structures to see if information can be acquired from comparisons between the two. In particular, systems
which will be investigated include
• Unrelaxed and relaxed Ti-graphene contacts
• Fluorinated and unﬂuorinated Ti-graphene contacts
• Heterostructures of graphene encapsulated in hexagonal Boron Nitride (hBN) and contacted to Titanium.
The preliminary simulations, i.e. the basic set-up, will account for the basic set-up - i.e. factors such as electrode
size, level of strain, importance of buﬀers and other key parameters. These results are then incorporated when
simulating systems with and without intercalated foreign species and heterostructures. The data will be treated
with respect to the transmission, both energy-resolved and k-resolved, energy-resolved resistance spectrum and
of course current-voltage characteristics. These will be related to physical and chemical properties of the contact
and its constituents. It is expected that these quantities will provide critical insight into the nature of the barrier
and the mechanisms which govern electron injection from the lead into the sheet channels. Lastly, an often
overlooked purpose is to use obtained results to review and criticise the methods with which they were obtained
in order to build a methodical foundation with which to improve future studies.
This work is expected to impact all areas of research which deal with devices that contact graphene with metal
electrodes, which is to say essentially all graphene-based electronics. Additionally, parts of the research may
have applications to other two-dimensional materials, such as Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDC’s) as
well.
5
==PAGE:7==
3
Theoretical Background
This section will present an in-depth review of the theoretical concepts on which the project is based. A brief
description of the graphene crystal structure is provided initially followed by highlights of results from the tight-
binding model for graphene. This follows the review of the graphene tight-binding model written by McCann,
E. [17]. A description of the DFT method for electronic structure calculations is also given, along with the
theory which provides the framework for electron transport calculations.
3.1
Crystal Structure of Graphene
To account for the unique crystal structure of Graphene the electronic conﬁguration and orbital hybridisation
must be understood. Graphene has atomic number 6 and therefore has the orbital conﬁguration 1s22s22p2. This
conﬁguration creates two distinct types of hybridisation referred to as sp2 and sp3 which determine the crystal
structure of a pure carbon system. In sp2-hybridisation (which characterises graphite and therefore graphene),
the 2s orbital hybridises with the px and py orbitals to create three ”lobes” in the xy-plane, leaving the pz
orbital intact, whereas in sp3-hybridisation (which characterises diamond carbon) the 2s orbital hybridises with
all three p orbitals to create a tetragonal orbital network leading to the diamond structure. The sp2 hybridisation
allows for strong σ bonds to be formed between atoms in the xy-plane by direct overlap of the planar, hybridised
orbitals. The result is a chemically stable two-dimensional, hexagonal lattice structure in the xy-plane. This
structure is augmented by the pz orbitals forming π bonds with one another, creating a delocalised electronic
”network” on either surface of the graphene sheet. The structure of a sheet of carbon is illustrated in Figure
(1a). The entire structure can be described as a two-dimensional Bravais lattice as depicted in Figure (1b) with
lattice vectors
a1 =
 
a
2,
√
3a
2
!
,
a2 =
 
a
2, −
√
3a
2
!
,
(1)
in which a denotes the lattice constant as shown. The unit cell contains two atoms, here denoted A (white)
and B (black). These are discernible in the illustration because the literature often splits the lattice into two
sublattices (A and B) consisting of all A atoms and all B atoms separately. The edge seen semi-parallel to the
x axis in Figure 1 is called the zigzag edge while the edge parallel to the y axis is referred to as the armchair
edge. The corresponding reciprocal lattice has vectors
b1 =
2π
a , 2π
√
3a

,
b2 =
2π
a , −2π
√
3a

,
(2)
which satisfy a1b1 = a2b2 = 2π and a1b2 = a2b1 = 0. The Brillouin zone of graphene is illustrated in the inset
of the right frame of Figure 2.
Figure 1: Left: Model of the real-space structure of graphene.
White (black) circles constitute the A (B)
sublattice. a denotes lattice constant and a1,2 the primitive lattice vectors. Right: Corresponding hexagonal
Bravais lattice; crosses indicate lattice points, each with two associated atom, one A and one B. Both ﬁgures
from reference [17].
3.2
The Tight-Binding Model of Graphene
The object of this section is to highlight results from the tight-binding model which are central for the under-
standing of this study. The tight-binding model only considers the π orbital of graphene so only one eelctron
6
==PAGE:8==
Figure 2: Left: 3d surface plot of the dispersion relation for graphene from the TB approach. The Γ point
denotes the center of the Brillouin zone, with K−and K+ denoting qualitatively diﬀerent K points. Right:
Two-dimensional dispersion relation for the line K−→Γ →K+.
per atomic site is included. The tight-binding approach involves solving the secular equation
det(H −EjS) = 0
(3)
For a system with transfer integral matrix H, overlap integral matrix S and energy EJ of the jth orbital. The
matrices represent the Hamiltonian and overlap elements
Hil = ⟨Φi| ˆH|Φl⟩
, Sil = ⟨Φi|Φl⟩
(4)
in which Φi,l denotes a Bloch function representing the atomic orbitals of the unit cell and ˆH is the Hamiltonian
operator of the system. The diagonal elements HAA,BB and SAA,BB of H and S, respectively, are calculated
from the overlap of the π orbital with itself on the A and B sublattices, thus they are given by the 2pz orbital
energy ϵ2p and 1, respectively. The oﬀ-diagonal elements HAB,BA and SAB,BA represent the nearest-neighbour
interactions between the A and B sublattices. Each atom has three nearest neighbours with interaction strength
γ0 and transfer and overlap integral matrix elements
HAB = −γ0f(k)
, SAB = s0f(k)
f(k) =
3
X
l=1
eik·δl ,
(5)
for which δl represents the position vector of nearest neighbour l with respect to an atom. The corresponding
HBA, SBA elements are just the complex conjugates. The function f(k) is written out as
f(k) = e
ikya
√
3 + 2e−
ikya
2
√
3 cos
kxa
√
2

(6)
Using these results to solve the secular Equation 3 gives the bands
E± = ϵ2p ± γ0|f(k)|
1 ∓s0|f(k)|
(7)
The resulting energy band diagram in the (kx, ky)−plane is plotted in Figure 2. The points labelled K±, also
frequently called K, K′, at which the energy bands meet and the Fermi energy is located, are called Dirac points
and are a unique feature of the graphene energy bands. Close to the Dirac points the bands are linear to a
very good approximation with energy E = ℏvF |k| where ℏis the reduced Planck constant and vF the Fermi
velocity. McCann cites Saito et al for values of γ0 = 3.033 eV and s0 = 0.129 [18]. In most literature, ϵ2p -
which represents the location of the Dirac points and thus the Fermi energy - is set to zero.
3.3
Landauer Approach
The fundamental physics framework for examining the current through a microscopical conductor has been
accredited to Rolf Landauer [19] and subsequently called the Landauer Approach. The following treatment
7
==PAGE:9==
follows the outline provided by Datta [20]. The onset is a ballistic conductor at zero Kelvin coupled at either
side to semi-inﬁnite conducting leads with an applied bias, expressed via the chemical potential eV = µ1 −µ2
of lead 1 and lead 2, respectively. The contacts will be referred to as ”left” and ”right”, respectively.
3.3.1
Reﬂectionless Contacts
Initially, it may be assumed that no reﬂection of electronic waves occurs at the interface between the conductor
and the leads. This means that all electronic waves in the conductor with +k (along the transport direction)
originate in the left lead while waves with −k originate in the right lead. The number of (transverse) modes
which support current ﬂow is counted as a sum over step functions,
M(E) =
X
N
θ(E −ϵN) ,
ϵN = E(N, k = 0)
(8)
Each mode may be more or less occupied which is described by Fermi-Dirac statistics. When determining the
current for any number of modes M(E) this number of modes must be multiplied with their occupation:
I = gse
ℏ
Z ∞
−∞
M(E)f(E)dE ,
f(E) =
1
1 + e
E−µ
kBT
(9)
where gs = 2 contains the spin degeneracy. For a constant number of modes at zero temperature within the
bias window µ1 > E > µ2 the current is
I = 2e
ℏM
Z ∞
−∞
f(E)dE = 2e
ℏM(µ1 −µ2) = 2e2
ℏM µ1 −µ2
e
(10)
From this it becomes obvious that, since (µ1 −µ2)/e is the voltage associated with the chemical potential,
the quantity 2e2M/ℏ= Gc is the conductance associated with the contact.
The corresponding resistance,
Rc = G−1
c , is called the ”contact resistance” since it is associated with the contact itself; the conductor itself
being ballistic. The quantity G0 = 2e2/h is called the conductance quantum and has the value
G0 = 2e2
h
≈7.75 · 10−5 S ,
G−1
0
≈12.9 kΩ,
(11)
which has been rounded oﬀto three signiﬁcant digits. The (contact) resistance associated with a single-moded
conductor is thus 12.9 kΩ; a considerable value. The contact resistance is inversely correlated to the number of
modes in the conductor. The reason for this is that as the current ﬂow in the electrode approaches the contact
the charge carriers must redistribute in order to be accommodated by the decreased number of modes. Another
way of saying the same thing is that the contact represents a bottleneck for the electrons.
In the next section the assumption that the interface be reﬂectionless is removed in order to examine a critical
quantity; the transmission.
3.3.2
Reﬂecting Contacts and Current Flow
In real systems an electron travelling through the conductor with +k will have a ﬁnite probability of scattering
to a state with −k, contributing to a negative current. Denoting the probability that an electron is transmitted
through a number of modes in the conductor as T, the resultant conductance will then be
G = 2e2
ℏMT
(12)
The conductor is now thought to be connected to a left lead and a right lead with diﬀerent chemical potentials.
Since the channel no longer can be counted on to transmit every electron that manages to enter it, it is prudent
to separate the current ﬂow across the interface between lead 1 and the conductor (I1) from the current ﬂow
across the interface between the conductor and lead 2 (I2). Further, since electrons may be reﬂected the resulting
negative current ﬂux, I−, must be taken into account as well as the positive ﬂux, I+. The current entering the
conductor from the left lead is equivalent to the current through a reﬂectionless device:
I+
1 = 2e
h M [µ1 −µ2] ,
(13)
while the current ﬂow into the right lead is inhibited by the transmission
I+
2 = 2e
h MT [µ1 −µ2]
(14)
8
==PAGE:10==
Likewise, the negative current ﬂow back across the conductor is
I−
1 = 2e
h M(1 −T) [µ1 −µ2]
(15)
From this the net current I can be determined once it is remarked that all current entering the (ballistic)
conductor is either transmitted, contributing to I+
2 , or reﬂected, contributing to I−
1 :
I = I+
2 = I+
1 −I−
1 = 2e
h MT [µ1 −µ2]
(16)
Although this includes the possibility of intrinsic scatterers in the conductor giving rise to a less-than-unity
transmission it remains a simpliﬁcation. In particular the above formula is still based on the assumption that
all modes M have the same transmission, always. This is essentially equivalent to saying that all modes belong
to one conducting energy channel, which is rarely the case. Further, the current ﬂow calculated assumed zero
temperature, which severely limits practicality. In general the current is supported by a number of channels
with diﬀerent energies. The bias determines which channels may be accessed by charge carriers by altering
the occupation in the leads, given by the Fermi function. The transmission and number of modes are then
energy-dependent since they are associated with diﬀerent channels at diﬀerent energies. The ﬁnite temperature
and energy-dependency of the number of channels mean that electrons may be injected into the channels from
the right lead. The outﬂowing current per unit energy, i(E), is then
i(E) = 2e
h [M(E)T(E)f(E −µ1) −M ′(E)T ′(E)f(E −µ2)]
(17)
with M, T (M ′ , T ′) denoting the number of modes and corresponding transmission for the left (right) channel.
One may collect them in one term, M(E)T(E) −→T(E) and assume T(E) = T ′(E) (justiﬁed for ballistic
conductors) to write the total current, I:
I =
Z
I(E)dE = 2e
h
Z
T(E) [f(E −µ1) −f(E −µ2)] dE
(18)
Thus the problem of calculating current across a device has been reduced to a problem of ﬁnding the transmission
spectrum T(E) for the same device. This problem represents the bulk of modern theoretical studies and several
simulational packages, of which SIESTA/TranSIESTA is one, have been developed which can do this.
A
qualitatively simple approach is provided by the combination Density Functional Theory with Non-Equilibrium
Green’s Functions.
3.4
Non-Equilibrium Green’s Function Approach and Density Functional Theory
This treatment follows the one developed in Chapter 4 of reference [21]. Credited authors are those of chapter
4. The Green’s function describes a class of functions which satisfy that an arbitrary diﬀerential operator yield
a Dirac delta function when operating on a Green’s function. The justiﬁcation is that any function can be
viewed as a sum of delta functions and a diﬀerential equation can thus be reduced to a problem of ﬁnding the
corresponding Green’s function and convoluting the target function with it. In many-body physics, Green’s
functions ”are [...] many-body objects because they describe the propagation of single particles governed by
many-body Hamiltonians” (Bruus and Flensberg, 2004 [22]). I.e. for transport problems, Non-Equilibrium
Green’s Functions (NEGF) can in theory be applied to describe propagation of electronic waves across any
device. The term ”non-equilibrium” is used in the statistical-physical sense of the grand canonical ensemble
which considers exchange of energy and particles, the latter modelled through the chemical potential µ. A
system S (of electrons in this case) in contact with a reservoir R (quasi-inﬁnite leads, still in this case) is in
equilibrium if ES = ER and µS = µR and it can be described by the same Fermi function. If, however, some
ﬁnite diﬀerence exists between the quantities of the system and the reservoir, such as that provided by a bias
voltage eV = µS −µR, the system will be out of equilibrium which must be taken into account in the occupancy
of the microstates of the system and reservoir.
Arguably, any ”interesting” system is going to be suﬃciently complicated that the electronic structure must
be modelled with a simulation framework - the most well-known being DFT. A conceptual explanation of the
origins and central parameters integral to DFT is the subject of the following section.
3.4.1
DFT
DFT is within the frame of this project applied as a tool and, as such, will not be covered in depth. What
follows is a vague outline highlighting some of the topics used later in the project. DFT is an electronic structure
method which for a given system of n electrons and N ions seeks to calculate the Hamiltonian:
ˆH = −
n
X
i=1
ℏ2
2m∇2
i −
n
X
i=1
N
X
µ=1
Zµe2
|ri −Rµ| + 1
2
n
X
i,j=1
e2
|ri −rj|
(19)
9
==PAGE:11==
This includes electron-electron repulsion, electron-ion attraction and exchange-correlation (XC) energy. The
latter correlates the motion between each and every electron which transforms the problem to a many-body
problem, ruling out analytical solutions. Additionally, numerical solutions enjoy an exponential correlation
between computational time and the number of electrons in the system. Brieﬂy, the Kohn-Sham formulation
of DFT circumvents this problem by application of the Hohenberg-Kohn theorems and writing the XC term as
a functional EXC[ρ] of the density of non-interacting one-electron orbitals [23]. Thus, the electrons exchange
energy with a potential set up by the other electrons, but they possess no correlation with the other electrons.
The procedure then self-consistently solves the one-electron eigenvalue problem
ˆH1e = ˆHkin(r) + ˆHion + ˆHe(r) + ˆHXC[ρ](r) ,
ˆH1eφα(r) = ϵαφa(r) ,
ρ(r) =
X
ϵα<µ
|φα(r)|2
(20)
The one-electron eigenstates φ(r) are expanded in a Linear Collection of Atomic Orbitals (LCAO) basis set
described by functions
φα(r) =
M
X
j=1
cαjϕj(r)
(21)
for wave function or band j written with a basis set of size M which may in principle be any positive integer.
Traditionally, DFT requires the system under scrutiny to be either small and simple or periodic. Unfortunately,
transistor devices are not periodic and certainly not simple. The solution oﬀered by SIESTA/TranSIESTA
is to 1) divide the system into scattering region and electrodes (two electrodes are assumed here), 2) run a
DFT calculation for the electrodes, assuming a quasi-inﬁnite periodic system, 3) run a DFT calculation for the
entire device with periodic boundary conditions and 4) use the data for the electrode calculations to set up
boundary conditions for the device, then run another DFT calculation using those boundary conditions. In
order to calculate the electron density the electronic eigenstates must be calculated and divided into left or
right travelling waves, ψkL(ϵ) , ψkR(ϵ). These detail the reﬂection and transmission of the Bloch waves of the
(inﬁnite) bulk electrodes. Algorithms for calculating the scattering states are developed in references [34] and
[35] of the cited chapter for this section, [21]. Once the scattering states have been determined the electron
density is calculated simply as the sum of the norm-square of these states multiplied with the energy levels of
the electrodes
n(r) =
X
kL,kR

|ψkL|2nF (ϵkL −µL) + |ψkR|2nF (ϵkR −µR)

(22)
The next issue to solve is to evaluate the momentum sum accurately. This can be done elegantly using a NEGF
approach.
3.4.2
NEGF
Practically the NEGF approach converts the problem to one of matrix inversion.
The electron density is
represented by a density matrix ˆD with the expression
ˆD =
Z ∞
−∞
dϵ ˆρ(ϵ)nF (ϵ −µ)
,
ˆρ(ϵ) = δ(ϵ −ˆH) ,
(23)
The electron density is then evaluated as n(r) = Tr
n
ˆD
o
. The (retarded) Green’s function has the general
expression in the function and matrix pictures, respectively
Gr(ϵ) =
1
ϵ −ˆH + iη
(Function)
Gr =
1
(ϵ + iη)S −H
(Matrix)
(24)
in which η is a positive inﬁnitesimal which is widely used in solid state physics literature to move poles away
from the real axis. The Green’s function is related to the current problem by the mathematical relation
1
π Im

1
x + iη

= δ(x)
(25)
⇒1
π Im {Gr(ϵ)} = ˆρ(ϵ)
(26)
This establishes the relation between the retarded Green’s function and the charge density matrix.
10
==PAGE:12==
3.5
Self Energies
The above treatment is not quite speciﬁc enough; in particular it does not account for the three diﬀerent
regions that a two-probe system may be split into: the left electrode (L), the interaction region (I) and
the right electrode (R).
Each region has its own Green’s function, overlap matrix and Hamiltonian whose
coupling elements described through the use of perturbation theory such that ˜HLI(ϵ) = ˆHLI −ϵ ˆSLI. Then the
unperturbed Green’s functions may be written
Gr0
II(ϵ) =
h
ϵ −ˆHII + iη
i−1
(27)
and similarly for the left and right lead regions.
Treating the coupling elements of the Hamiltonians with
perturbation theory, the perturbed Green’s function Gr
II can be written in the form of the Dyson equation
Gr
II = Gr0
II(ϵ) + Gr0
II

ΣL
II(ϵ) + ΣR
II(ϵ)

Gr
II(ϵ)
(28)
The ΣL,R represent the self-energy of the left and right electrodes, respectively. The self-energy has the expres-
sion
ΣL
II =
X
ν
|tν|2
ω −ϵν + iη
(29)
where ν describe the possible states in the left lead (here) and |tν|2 represent their respective transmission
amplitudes into the device region. The self-energy of a charge distribution can be interpreted as the part of
that distribution’s energy which comes from interactions with itself (e.g. coulomb repulsions between electrons)
and the system (e.g. a two-probe system with a graphene sheet) it is a part of.
ΣL
II(ϵ) = ˜HIL(ϵ)Gr0
LL(ϵ) ˜HLI(ϵ)
(30)
The terms of (28) can be rearranged to obtain the well-known form of the Green’s function
Gr
II(ϵ) =
1
ϵ −ˆHII −ΣL
II(ϵ) −ΣR
II(ϵ) + iη
(Function)
Gr
II =
1
(ϵ + iη)SII −HII −ΣL
II −ΣR
II
(Matrix)
(31)
This concludes the relation between the transport Hamiltonian, the self-energies and the Green’s functions of
the system. Finally, one last piece remains to uncover in order to determine the current ﬂow across the device.
3.5.1
Transmission Coeﬃcients and Current Flow
As described in the treatment of the Landauer Approach, the current is relatively simple to calculate for a
person who has obtained the transmission coeﬃcient(s), T:
Tk =
X
k′
t†
kk′tkk′
(32)
associated with the scattering states |k⟩where tkk′ represents the transmission amplitude for an incoming
wave with crystal momentum k into an outgoing channel with crystal momentum k′.
The energy-resolved
transmission spectrum for all electrons originating in the left lead and travelling towards the right can then be
calculated as
TL(ϵ) =
X
k
Tkδϵk,ϵ ,
(33)
and similarly for left-travelling electrons from the right lead, TR(ϵ). It is required that these two quantities be
equal to avoid breaking time-reversal symmetry; thus the current becomes
I = 2e
h
Z ∞
−∞
dϵ [TL(ϵ)nF (ϵ −µL) −TR(ϵ)nF (ϵ −µR)]
= 2e
h
Z infty
−∞
dϵT(ϵ) [nF (ϵ −µL) −nF (ϵ −µR)]
(34)
The above treatment of the transmission coeﬃcient highlight their meaning more than their practicality; in
reality, the energy-resolved transmission spectrum is calculated from NEGF theory as
T(ϵ) = Tr
h
ImˆσL(ϵ) ˆG†(ϵ)ImˆσR(ϵ) ˆG(ϵ)
i
,
(35)
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3: Top row: Real-space structure of an armchair contact (left), corresponding k-space structure (middle)
and transmission lines at positive energy (right). Bottom row: Same ﬁgures for a zigzag contact. x denotes the
contact direction while z denotes the transport direction.
3.5.2
Transmission in Graphene
The transmission of electrons through a graphene sheet is brieﬂy described in order to explain some of the
results obtained. The orientation of the ribbon alone dictates the location of the transmission lines in k space
as is conceptually visualised in Figure 3. Brieﬂy, electron transport takes place around the Fermi level where
the delocalised π orbitals lie. In graphene, this is equivalent to saying around the Dirac, or K, K′, points (also
called K±) as pointed out in the tight-binding model treatment. This leads to (kx, ky)-resolved transmission
lines as seen to the right in Figure 3; i.e. only values of kx in an interval around the Dirac points give a non-zero
transmission. The interval broadens with energy as E ≈±ℏvF |k|, the linear dispersion relation close to the
Dirac points.
3.6
Work Functions, Band Bending and Schottky Barriers
The work function φm,s of a metal or semiconductor is deﬁned as the energy required to remove an electron
from a surface of a material to vacuum. As such, the work function is not a bulk material parameter but a
surface parameter dependent mainly on how densely atoms are packed on the surface. Depending on how the
work functions of a metal-semiconductor interface align, the resultant band structure can be either an Ohmic
contact or a Schottky barrier. The former is created when the work functions are aligned and results in a
junction with low contact resistance and a linear IV curve - i.e. a curve that obeys Ohm’s law. A Schottky
barrier is created when the work functions are misaligned and leads to local changes in the energy band location
of the semiconductor - called ”band bending”. As opposed to the Ohmic contact the resistance of a Schottky
contact is greater and the IV curve exhibits rectifying characteristics. Band bending has been observed from
computer simulations in [15] for graphene nanoribbons contacted to Au (φm = 5.1 eV), Al (φm = 4.28 eV) and
Pt (φm = 5.65 eV). The corresponding band structure obtained for Al is reprinted in Figure 4 with respect to
total (left) and local (contour) Density of States. The band bending is evident in the local density of states
although the picture is complicated by the presence of 1) local gap states visible as peaks in the total DOS for
positive energies and red slits in the corresponding local DOS, 2) metal-induced gap states (MIGS) visible in
the original article as a brighter line along the very interface, and 3) wave-like interference patterns in the local
DOS due to reﬂections of electron waves by the contact. These results all point to a greatly non-ideal Schottky
contact. The work function of Titanium is listed as 4.33 eV and is expected to lead to a Schottky contact and
12
==PAGE:14==
Figure 4: Left: Total Density of States as a function of energy for a (semiconducting) nanoribbon contacted to
Al. Right: Real-space representation of the Local Density of States of the same device. The y axis is shared.
Figure reprinted from [15].
resultant downwards band bending qualitatively similar to the one observed by Deretzis et al - although the
systems under scrutiny in this study are not ribbons. The work function for bulk graphite is listed by Oshima,
C. and Nakashima, A. as 4.6 eV [24].
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 5: Plot of strain vs. number of atoms for interface matching between a titanium (0001) surface and a
graphene armchair edge.
4
Computational Methods
This section explains how the calculations are carried out. In particular, the fundamental procedure from system
set-ups to obtaining critical information is outlined together with the choices of key parameters. Care will be
taken to refer to the contact edge - the edge of the graphene sheet which bonds to the electrode - rather than
the sheet edge - which is often used in graphene-related literature but does not make sense when simulating
sheets that are quasi-inﬁnite rather than being nanoribbons. References will be made to aGr and zGr, meaning
armchair and zigzag contact edge, respectively. All calculations are done with periodic boundary conditions
(PBC’s) in the transverse (x, y)-plane.
4.1
Device set-up
In literature, typical calculations are done either using a one-probe scheme (one metal electrode and one ”ideal”
graphene electrode) or a two-probe scheme (two metal electrodes). A two-probe scheme was initially considered
for this study but ultimately rejected in favour of the one-probe scheme. The reason for this was ﬁrst and
foremost to provide better comparison with other studies and second to reduce the computational time required
to converge calculations with twice the number of metal atoms. Since the metal electrodes are three-dimensional
they will obviously be represented by more atoms than the two-dimensional graphene sheet. The metal under
investigation is Titanium which showed signs of hybridisation with the graphene orbitals in referenced studies.
Palladium was also brieﬂy investigated but rejected due to severe diﬃculties with convergence. For all purposes,
the x direction denotes the direction parallel to the contact edge, the y direction is perpendicular to the graphene
sheet and the z direction is the transport direction.
All devices considered in this study have been created using the Virtual NanoLab (VNL) software tool from
QuantumWise. The tool allows for easy structural manipulation by letting users select elements or compounds
from the database and subsequently cleave the selection along a particular surface. Subsequently VNL sets up
interfaces between speciﬁed surfaces and calculates a number of possible lattice matches based on strain, see
Figure 5. Some of these matches consist of multiple graphene layers since the direction perpendicular to the
graphene plane is considered part of the lattice (in the software). Generally, a system with as few atoms and
as little strain as possible is desired. Here only the graphene sheets have been strained since the eﬀect of strain
on the graphene band structure is well understood. The systems consisting of zGr are all strained as ϵx = 3.82
percent, ϵy = 2.69 percent and ϵz = 0.00 percent while aGr systems are strained as ϵx = 3.82 percent, ϵy = 1.57
percent and ϵz = 0.00 percent. Since only one layer is included, the strain along the y direction plays no part
in the calculations. Thus, all systems are strained to 3.82 percent along the x axis. This level of strain was
necessary in order to obtain orthogonal supercells in which the graphene sheet was parallel to the plane spanned
by the xz lattice vectors.
Having constructed the interface geometry the user can set up a device structure from the interface in which the
probes of the original structure are lengthened or shortened (i.e. add/subtract layers) to better accommodate
the electrodes. This gives excellent control over the size of the electrodes which is an important consideration,
trading accuracy for CPU time. Further, it proved especially useful when setting up two-probe systems since
symmetric electrodes are easily attainable. The basic cells used for building the structures are illustrated in
Figure 6. The cells for the zigzag contact (left) and armchair contact (middle) each consist of four atoms.
Occasionally in this study, sheet lengths will be given in terms of cell repetitions. Although care will be taken
to relate this to units of ˚A, the z length of the cells is given here: the zigzag-edge cell has z ≈2.1 ˚A, yielding
≈83.1 ˚A for a commonly-used sheet length of forty repetitions, while the armchair-edge cell has a z length of
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6: Basic repeating structures used to build devices. Left to right: zigzag graphene cell, armchair graphene
cell and Titanium (0001). Vertical dashed lines of Ti show the ﬁrst two individual layers.
≈1.2 ˚A yielding ≈72.722 ˚A for a system of sixty repetitions. More repetitions for aGr systems to obtain sheet
lengths closer to zGr systems. Note that the width (along the x direction) is greater for the aGr cell than for the
zGr cell; this makes it more diﬃcult to ﬁnd a good lattice match when setting up a contact along the armchair
direction and the armchair-contact devices set up in this study generally contain signiﬁcantly more atoms than
the zigzag as a result of the increased width and the decreased length. Finally, Figure 6 also shows the Titanium
geometry. The electrode sized will be given in terms of layers: two layers are highlighted with vertical, dashed
lines in the ﬁgure. A screening approximation is incorporated so that three layers of Ti is considered to be
enough to screen the rest of the leads from the graphene sheet; thus for most of the treatments the leads will
be modelled with three or more layers of Ti in the device region.
4.2
DFT Calculation with SIESTA/TranSIESTA
This project uses the DFT package provided by SIESTA [25] with the TranSIESTA [26] implementation for
modelling transport problems. Finally, transmission spectra and current-voltage characteristics are extracted
with TBTrans (TBT) [27]. The self-consistent cycle of SIESTA attempts to converge the density matrix for
the system, by default deﬁned to be when the calculated density matrix diﬀers from the previous step only by
0.0001. For this reason, the level of mixing of the density matrix is an important parameter. Convergence will
happen faster with a higher mixing but may be ultimately unachievable. The opposite in general applies with
lower mixing. This parameter is generally the one that has been (attempted) tuned in this study if a system is
described as ”diﬃcult” or ”impossible” to converge. In the following an outline of the various steps involved in
performing a full calculation for a system is provided.
4.2.1
Basis set and potential representation
This part references the SIESTA trunk manual available at (departments.icmab.es). SIESTA uses basis sets
consisting of atomic orbitals with ﬁnite support (in the mathematical sense). For all calculations in this project
a double-zeta (Dζ) basis set was used. SIESTA uses a pseudopotential method to describe the ionic cores
and the core electrons. As such, the calculation of a system of any element(s) depends on whether or not
an accurate pseudopotential can be written or acquired for the element(s). The elements scrutinized in this
project are Titanium, Carbon, Fluorine, Boron and Nitrogen. Generally, elements of lower atomic number
have been studied more extensively and the available pseudopotentials are considered thoroughly tested and
valid. Therefore they will not be considered as a serious source of error. All calculations use the Perdew-Burke-
Ernzerhof (PBE) Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) [28].
4.2.2
Electrode calculation
One of the ﬁrst steps is to calculate the electrode Hamiltonian(s). As described in the previous section, TranSI-
ESTA uses the electrode self-energies to provide boundaries for the device. The electrodes are simulated using
50 kz points for Ti and 100 kz points for graphene. The (kx, ky) points must match those of the interactions
region which means they diﬀer, generally between (30, 3) for zGr systems and (5, 5) for aGr systems. Brief
discussions of which k grids are used and why are included in the presentation of the results.
4.2.3
Structural Relaxation
SIESTA supports actual system relaxations which are used in this project to obtain accurate system represen-
tations. This is done using SIESTA’s Molecular Dynamics (MD) package with the Conjugate Gradient method.
The default value of 0.04 eV/Ang is used for the force convergence threshold unless speciﬁed otherwise. The
supercell is kept constant for all calculations.
15
==PAGE:17==
4.2.4
SIESTA/TranSIESTA run
With the electrode and structure calculations done the actual SIESTA/TranSIESTA calculations can be done
either as two separate runs or in the same run although the SIESTA calculation will always precede the Tran-
SIESTA calculation. The reason for this is that SIESTA - as with the electrodes - converges the density matrix
with respect to the Kohn-Sham method for periodic boundary conditions. When the density matrix is obtained
TranSIESTA will use it as the initial density for the scattering region but imposing the boundary conditions
derived from the electrode self-energies rather than standard periodic boundary conditions. Additionally, Tran-
SIESTA can also model an applied bias voltage which will enter the calculation at the transition from periodic
boundary conditions to open boundaries.
Buﬀer atoms may be speciﬁed for the TranSIESTA cycle. Buﬀer atoms Figure into the calculations of the
Hamiltonian and Density Matrix but are discarded when calculating the Green’s Function. The density of these
areas will thus be ﬁxed, which may lead to more stable TranSIESTA cycles with respect to charge ﬂuctuations.
A bias voltage can be speciﬁed as well which enters into the TranSIESTA self-consistent cycle. The bias window
considered in this project lies within ±0.5 V with steps of 0.1 V. Each ﬁnite-bias calculation is carried out using
the TranSIESTA density matrix of the former calculation, meaning the ±0.1 V uses the zero-bias density matrix
and so on. This is done to decrease computational time.
4.2.5
TBT run
The TBT calculation is the ﬁnal to be carried out. The code uses the transport Hamiltonian calculated by
TranSIESTA to calculate the transmission in the speciﬁed energy range and for a k grid speciﬁed by the user
as well as current and power for the bias if present in the transport Hamiltonian. TBT also gives the Density
of States (DOS) if requested. This can be calculated either from the Green’s Function or from the Spectral
Function; the latter is used in this project because it is computationally faster.
16
==PAGE:18==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7: XZ-view (a) and YZ-view (b) of a basic set-up. (c): Total energy plotted versus displacement and
ﬁtted to a cubic spline.
5
Results
In the following the results obtained by ab-initio calculations for the systems considered in this study are
presented and discussed. The resistance spectra are obtained from the transmission spectra by
G(E)G0 = T(E)
w
G0 ,
R(E)G−1
0
=
1
T(E)wG−1
0
(36)
for which w is the width of the supercell (in µm) of the system. The contact resistance is obtained from the
slope of the calculated IV curves at zero bias as
GC = 1
2
I(0.1 V)
0.1V
+ I(−0.1 V)
−0.1V

,
RC = G−1
C
(37)
i.e. assuming a linear current response for low bias.
5.1
Simplistic view
5.1.1
Primitive optimization of contact distance
A ﬁrst step was to perform a series of calculations on a simple setup to become acquainted with the code
and decide on key parameters which would form the basis of the rest of the project. An initial and primitive
structural optimization was performed to determine the optimal (unrelaxed) distance by the z coordinate which
represents the transport direction. A basic Titanium-zigzag contact (Ti-zGr) system was set up using VNL’s
databased default structures. The system is illustrated in Figure 7a-b. The graphene sheet was subsequently
displaced at regular intervals along the z axis and a DFT calculation was performed to obtain the total energy
of the system at each displacement. The base distance in the set-up was 1.90 Ang. A spline was ﬁtted to
the data points and the minimum was determined to lie at −0.255 Ang, i.e. the (crude) equilibrium distance
was 1.645 Ang along the z direction, see Figure 7 c. A similar calculation was done for a Ti-armchair contact
(Ti-aGr) system which yielded an optimal distance of 1.870 Ang (not shown).
5.1.2
Basic Calculation of a zigzag contact
This section presents the data extracted from a series of simulations carried out for a basic system depicted in
Figure 7, with a Ti region of six layers and 40 repetitions of armchair graphene, totalling 160 carbon atoms.
Counting left-to-right, the ﬁrst four layers of Ti make up the left electrode. The last 32 carbon atoms are
designated buﬀer atoms while the 32 atoms before the buﬀer make up the graphene electrode. No buﬀer was
included for the metal electrode for these calculations.
After obtaining the transport Hamiltonian from TranSIESTA, the transmission and corresponding resistance
spectra have been calculated with TBTrans and are shown in Figure 8 together with spectra obtained for the
pristine graphene which makes up the electrode. The resistance peak for the device is two orders of magnitude
greater than that of intrinsic graphene so a semi-logarithmic plot has been drawn rather than a standard
linear-scaled plot. Like pristine graphene, the contact exhibits poor transmission at the Fermi level but excels
on either side. In fact, the device transmission generally follows the intrinsic graphene transmission closely
especially above the Fermi level. As a result the resistance is large at the Fermi energy and drops oﬀas the
energy increases/decreases. The spectrum of the contact is also seen to exhibit some discontinuities close to the
17
==PAGE:19==
(a)
(b)
Figure 8: Transmission (a), and semi-logarithmic resistance (b) for a zigzag contact structure with a sheet
length of 40 repetitions.
Figure 9: Left: IV curves for sheets of lengths 40, 50, 60, 70 and 80 repetitions. Right: Conductance plotted vs
sheet length in ˚A for the same devices.
Fermi level and at large positive energy.
The IV curve for this system and similar systems of lengths 50, 60, 70 and 80 repetitions, all calculated in
intervals of 0.1 eV, are shown in the left frame of Figure 9. All curves exhibit weakly diode-like behaviour
characteristic of Schottky devices. This is evidence of a Schottky contact arising from a diﬀerence in the work
functions of the Ti (0001) surface and the graphene sheet. The current is seen to decrease as the sheet length
increases. The resulting conductance is plotted in the right frame of Figure 9. Strangely, the conductance seems
to decrease linearly with sheet length until 150 ˚A−80 ˚A at which point the curve ﬂattens out. The conductance
of the (short) contact is determined to be GC = 6.88 · 10−3G0.
The above treatment shows that the 40-
repetition system considered here is suﬃciently short that the length factors into the conductance. Although
the abruptness with which the conductance curve ﬂattens out seems unreal and might be an artefact arising due
to a rather large step size, the length at which it occurs is consistent with the results reported in [6]. This also
illustrates how important the electrical properties of the contact are; for nano-scale graphene electronics device
above ∼160 ˚A the contact conductance is governed more by the contact than by the length of the (ideal) device
itself. Likewise, the system is small when compared to any real devices. The relation between sheet length
and conductance shows that the conductances found by simulations of shorter sheets cannot accurately serve
as expectations for experimental ﬁndings for longer sheets, even if near-perfect contacts were somehow created,
as the reduction in conductance from the shortest system to the longest corresponds to roughly 20 percent. It
does show, however, that shorter systems behave similarly to longer systems which is valuable knowledge when
trying to observe tendencies rather than absolute values - this allows researchers to save CPU hours simply by
considering smaller model systems. This study will therefore continue to examine sheets at the length of 40
repetitions or similar for ease of computation; the convergence for the system of 80 repetitions was cumbersome
and initial attempts at ﬁnite-bias calculations of longer systems (90 and 100 repetitions) failed after which it
was decided to discard these systems. Moreover, this convergence test was conducted using only six layers of
Titanium in the electrode region which (when four layers are replaced by the electrode Hamiltonian) leaves only
two screening layers and no possible buﬀer layers. Two screening layers is considered insuﬃcient and the lack
of buﬀer layers was visible in the charge ﬂuctuations of the SCF cycles (dQ ≈0.05e even on the last cycles) but
was accepted in order to examine how the sheet length inﬂuences the conductance and obtain the perspective
with which the data gathered in this work should be viewed.
18
==PAGE:20==
5.2
Structure Relaxation
In the following section the structure relaxations carried out prior to transport calculations are presented for
both zGr and aGr systems with/without ﬂuorine substituted as contact atoms. For all systems most atoms
were constrained, however, diﬀerent constraints were used for diﬀerent systems. Generally, relaxations were
time-consuming which meant that, once converged, it was decided to continue to transport calculations rather
than decrease the number of constrained atoms to further relax the systems. Additionally, armchair contacts
required more atoms and proved more time-consuming and diﬃcult to converge - and hence to relax - which led
to shorter Ti regions and smaller constraints in terms of distance. The constraints for each individual system
will be described in the respective sections in the following. As for the systems themselves, the unﬂuorinated
system was the ﬁrst to be relaxed and consisted of eleven Ti layers and 20 zGr repetitions (approx. 40 ˚A.
This was the early system design before it was decided to reduce the Ti region (in the transport calculations)
to nine layers: two buﬀer layers, four electrode layers and three screening layers. This size proved excessive
and subsequent relaxations were performed using just four Ti layers (and 16 C repetitions). For the system
relaxations the standard k-grid of 5 × 5 × 1 was used which is brieﬂy justiﬁed in the following.
5.2.1
Force Dependence on k-point sampling
The structure relaxation relies on converging the forces experienced by the atoms due to one another; when the
forces drop below the convergence threshold the system is assumed to be in equilibrium. First it is examined
how the k-point sampling aﬀects the force convergence from the possibility that a denser sampling will lead to
the calculation of lower forces. Several calculations have been carried out to probe the relationship between
number of k points and the sum of forces on all atoms. SIESTA provides the sum of all forces in its default
output, which has been examined for numbers 5, 7 and 9 of k-points along the x direction and 3 and 5 along
the y direction. No diﬀerence on any given decimal was found in the SIESTA output. When taking the norm of
all forces before carrying out the sum a diﬀerence on the order of ∼0.01 eV/Ang was found which is considered
to be much too low to be a cause for worry. Hence, the standard 5 × 5 × 1 grid is used for these calculations as
well (indeed, for future references it could be investigated whether even smaller k grids could be used reliably).
5.2.2
Relaxation of zigzag contacts
The structural relaxation of the two zigzag contact systems is presented here - one basic contact structure and
one with Fluorine atoms substituted in place of the two contact carbon atoms. The default device set-up of
VNL gave a zigzag contact structure with two carbon atoms protruding from the rest of the sheet, see e.g. the
contact atoms of Figure 10a. In the literature, this is strictly speaking a zigzag contact with intercalated Carbon
atoms rather than a purely Ti-zGr system. Which diﬀerence this might make for the electronic properties has
not been researched or investigated and the study will refer to the systems as Ti-zGr. Both systems and their
relaxed counterparts are illustrated in Figure 10. Unconstrained atoms of the Ti-zGr system are as follows: 16
carbon atoms closest to the Ti electrode are free as is the last Ti layer. Additionally, the second-to-last Ti layer
has six unconstrained atoms chosen as the closest to the graphene sheet. Unconstrained atoms of the Ti-F-zGr
system are: The ﬁrst thirty-two carbon atoms and the last Ti layer. The unconstrained regions are marked
with red, dashed lines. The pre-relaxation distances in terms of the z coordinate were 1.645 ˚A for the Ti-zGr
system as calculated initially and 1.25 ˚A for the Ti-F-zGr system because this distance yielded the lowest total
energy after relaxation compared to a distance of 1.50 ˚A. In hindsight, the Ti-F and Ti-C distances should have
been optimised the same way, whether before or after relaxation. Also, the system of shorter distance converged
more quickly.
In the absence of ﬂuorine a slight perturbation of the graphene sheet and the Ti electrode can be seen. The
structure after relaxation resembles the unrelaxed structure although the closest Ti atoms move to better
accommodate the graphene sheet. In striking contrast to this, the bottom two frames show a graphene sheet
which has been clearly perturbed by the presence of ﬂuorine. What has evidently happened is that the ﬂuorine
- visible as green circles - has bonded very closely to a site on the Ti surface from which it repels the graphene
sheet. In response, the graphene has bonded to a similar site that is topologically lower on the Ti electrode,
eﬀectively bending the graphene sheet. Seemingly, F and C atoms prefer the same type of site, nestled between
three Ti atoms. However, this suggests that - when the system is allowed to relax - the ﬂuorine atoms do not
actually prevent the graphene from interacting directly with the Titanium electrode. This results contrasts
with those of Gao et al in [16] in which all systems relaxed to an F-intercalated structure rather than the bent
geometry illustrated here.
5.2.3
Relaxation of armchair contacts
A corresponding system relaxation has been carried out for an armchair contact, see Figure 11. It is noted that
the alignment of the electrode and the graphene layer is rotated ninety degrees with respect to the alignment
19
==PAGE:21==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 10: Illustrations of a Ti-zGr system before relaxation (a-b), after relaxation (c), Ti-F-zGr before (d) and
after (e). Vertical dashed lines show the limits of the constrained areas. The colors represent Ti (light blue), C
(grey) and F (green).
of the Ti-zGr contact - this is kept in mind when examining phenomena in reciprocal space. i.e. Here, the
unconstrained atoms are: The last two whole layers of Ti and twenty-four C atoms for the Ti-aGr system, and
one whole layer of Ti and twenty-four C atoms for the Ti-F-aGr system. The initial distances were selected
somewhat arbitrarily; 1.960 ˚A for Ti-aGr (default distance from VNL’s interface builder) and 1.500 ˚A for Ti-F-
aGr. The features are very similar to those of the zigzag contact although the bending of the graphene sheet in
the ﬂuorinated system is more pronounced due to the greater constraints. Apart from this, the ﬂuorine bonds
closely to the Ti surface and pushes the bonding of the graphene sheet to diﬀerent sites.
The relaxed systems as depicted in the ﬁgures and described in the above are the ones used throughout
the study for calculating transmissions etc. The author wishes to note, however, that further relaxation was
carried out. For the Ti-F-aGr system, constraints were removed for the second-closest contact Ti layer after
which the system was relaxed further. The resultant movement of the now unconstrained Ti atoms along the
z axis reached ∼0.5 ˚A, which is signiﬁcant enough that transmission calculations should have been based on
this structure. As mentioned previously, however, system relaxations generally were time-consuming and it was
decided not to wait for the second relaxation.
5.2.4
Nitrogen-intercalated relaxation
This section brieﬂy details the relaxation of a Ti-N-zGr contact analogous to the ﬂuorinated systems treated
in the above. The motivation is to investigate which role a non-halogen might play in the interface between
Ti and graphene. Although no transport calculations have been carried out on the basis of this system, some
qualitative conclusions will be drawn. The set-up is illustrated in the left frame of Figure 12 with a Ti-N
bonding distance of 1.589 ˚A. Five layers of Ti was used with twenty repetitions of zGr. The three screening Ti
layers were constrained together with the last thirty-two C atoms. A close-up image of the relaxed contact is
shown in the right frame of Figure 12. What is immediately observed is that the N atoms bond to the preferred
20
==PAGE:22==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 11: Illustrations of a Ti-aGr system before relaxation (a-b), after relaxation (c), Ti-F-aGr before (d) and
after (e) relaxation.
Figure 12: Left: Nitrogen-terminated Ti-zGr contact before relaxation.
Right: Close-up view of the same
contact after relaxation. The Nitrogen (dark blue) atom to the left is seen to prefer the same site as C and F.
site on the Ti surface; however, the graphene sheet still bonds to the N atoms since Nitrogen forms three bonds
as opposed to Fluorine which forms only one. Deﬂection of the zGr sheet takes place only to the extent that
the contact atoms are misaligned with the bonding site. It is here asserted that most group 13-16 non-metal
elements possess the ability to form similar contacts in which the intercalant serves as a chemical bridge between
the Ti surface and the graphene edge rather than a barrier on the surface which the graphene sheet must bypass
to form a bond to the surface.
5.2.5
Analysis of structure relaxations
A close look at individual contact atoms is provided in Figure 13. The left frame shows carbon bonding after
relaxation for the Ti-zGr system while the right frame shows ﬂuorine bonding for the Ti-F-zGr system. This
illustrates how both elements prefer the same type of site in the Ti topology, nestled on top of a triangular
21
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: Preferred site for C atoms (a) and F atoms (b). Both elements prefer a tetrahedral arrangement
with three Ti contact atoms and one C/F atom.
Table 1: Average movement distances during relaxation (∆d) and average bonding distances to Ti atoms dTi
for two contact atoms (an adjacent pair was selected for armchair contacts), unﬂuorinated (left four columns)
and ﬂuorinated (right six columns).
Ti-(F-)zGR
Ti 1
Ti 2
C1
C2
Ti1
Ti2
C1
C2
F1
F2
∆d (˚A)
0.723
0.715
1.248
0.273
0.714
0.970
2.525
2.524
0.907
0.846
dTi (˚A)
2.229
2.207
2.344
2.498
2.059
2.239
Ti-(F-)aGr
Ti1
Ti2
C1
C2
Ti1
Ti2
C1
C2
F1
F2
∆d (˚A)
0.471
1.085
0.813
0.813
0.787
0.940
1.891
2.065
1.458
1.388
dTi (˚A)
2.343
2.343
2.350
2.364
2.088
2.088
arrangement of Ti atoms to create an arrangement similar to a tetrahedron. Table 1 lists movement distances
upon structure relaxation of Ti-zGr and Ti-aGr systems, including their ﬂuorinated versions. Only strictly
contacted atoms were selected, i.e. atoms which form bonds to atoms of other elements. The relaxation is quite
signiﬁcant with atoms moving ∼0.5 ˚A−2.5 ˚A - the highest values being due to C atoms bonding to topologically
lower sites. The average equilibrium distance of the Ti-F bonds is ∼2.1 ˚A with one outlier at 2.239 ˚A while
the average bond distance of the Ti-C bonds ranges from ∼2.22 ˚A to ∼2.34 ˚A with the lowest values for the
unﬂuorinated Ti-zGr system which arguably provides the best conditions for Ti-C bonding due to this system
having fewer contact C atoms with respect to the Ti-aGr system and not being burdened with Fluorine atoms.
In summary of the system relaxations similar results were obtained for ﬂuorinated zigzag and armchair contacts.
The F atoms preferentially bonded to sites on the Ti surface which would otherwise be occupied by C atoms
after which the graphene sheet bent to reach similar sites below and above the F atoms, respectively. Diﬀerent
schemes were used for the relaxations which is a slight source of inaccuracy with Ti-Gr distances and system
sizes (with and without F) being inconsistent. In hindsight four layers of Ti of which one was relaxed, although
eﬃcient, did not give a close-to-optimal trade-oﬀbetween eﬃciency and accuracy and more Ti would have been
added/relaxed given enough time. Additionally, more graphene atoms should have been allowed to relax for
the ﬂuorinated armchair contact. A relaxation with Nitrogen substituted in place of the contact atoms showed
how Nitrogen could bond both to the Ti surface and to the graphene sheet which lead to a much less deformed
contact than did the ﬂuorination. For future relaxations, the author proposes a set-up which uses at least
ﬁve layers in the metal electrode, preferably more for studies involving highly active elements, leaving three
constrained as screening layers and two or more to relax. For relaxations involving halogens it is recommended
to let several tens of ˚Angstr¨om relax to let the graphene sheet deﬂect with minimal strain.
5.3
Transmission and IV-characteristics for zigzag and armchair contacts
This section presents the data obtained from all transport calculations on Ti-zGr and Ti-aGr systems. No
data is presented for unrelaxed armchair contacts, the reason being that the ﬂuorinated system could not be
brought to convergence for any ﬁnite bias. Although the relaxed systems are more physically realistic than the
unrelaxed systems, both have been simulated and are compared to each other. The transmission calculations of
both zGr and aGr systems are carried out using nine Ti layers allocating two layers as buﬀer, four to represent
the quasi-inﬁnite electrode and three layers to screen the electrode from the graphene sheets. The zGr systems
use ∼83 ˚A (160 atoms) of zGr of which the last 32 atoms are allocated as buﬀer and the second-to-last 32
atoms represent the quasi-inﬁnite graphene electrode. Meanwhile, the aGr systems use ∼73 ˚A (240 atoms) of
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 14: Buﬀer and electrode regions for a Ti-zGR system (top) and Ti-aGR system (bottom).
aGr - once again the last 32 were used as buﬀer and second-to-last 32 as electrode.
For all systems TranSIESTA calculations have been carried out for zero applied bias and for −0.5 eV to 0.5 eV
in steps of 0.1 eV. TranSIESTA calculations utilized a (30, 3, 1) (kx, ky, kz)-grid for the Ti-zGr systems and
(5, 5, 1) for the Ti-aGr systems. The reason for the lower sampling in the Ti-zGr systems is that these had
been problematic and time-consuming to converge; ideally the same grid should be used for all calculations and
more k points should be used in the plane of the Gr sheet to give a more accurate in-plane sampling. For the
TBTrans calculations a grid of (501, 3, 1) was used for zGr systems and (251, 3, 1) for aGr systems, again due
to computational time.
The transmission and corresponding (semi-logarithmic) resistance for all systems is illustrated in Figure 15 and
compared to the transmission of their respective zGr and aGr electrodes (which, as the system, are strained
and therefore not strictly intrinsic). For the unrelaxed zigzag contacts (top row), the unﬂuorinated system
exhibits close-to-ideal transmission especially for positive energy ranges, corresponding to electron transport,
with hole transmission not far behind. The eﬀect of ﬂuorination on this contact is profound, essentially limiting
transmission to one-seventh of ideal zGr transmission and signiﬁcantly increasing resistance nearly everywhere
in the energy window with respect to the unﬂuorinated system. The resistance curve shows that this inhibi-
tion of the transmission is more pronounced for hole transport (negative energies) than for electron transport
(positive energies). Current output is reduced across the entire bias window while part of the smooth character
of the metal-graphene IV curve is disturbed. At −0.4 V the IV curve for the Ti-F-zGr system displays a kink
not found in the ”clean” system. Based on these results, the presence of Fluorine severely limits the electronic
properties of the unrelaxed Ti-zGr contact.
The corresponding relaxed zigzag contacts (Figure 15, middle row) show dramatically diﬀerent results. Here,
the Ti-F-zGr system actually exhibits enhanced electron transmission with respect to the Ti-zGr system; in
fact, the electron transport appears near-perfect in the window 0 eV −0.25 eV. Although hole transmission is
still greatly reduced for energies below −0.5 eV the Ti-F-zGr hole transport properties compete well with those
of Ti-zGr until this value. The enhanced transmission is evident in the IV curve in which the ﬂuorinated system
exhibits greater current for all bias voltages.
The armchair contacts (Figure 15, third row) exhibit inhibited hole transmission for both systems when com-
pared to electron transmission, seemingly for all energy ranges. As far as transmission/resistance is concerned,
no systems appears to outperform the other. Only in the IV curve - and only for positive bias - does the unﬂuo-
rinated system excel. One ﬁnal note about here is that the ﬁnite-bias transmission curves have been drawn and
are included in Appendix C. Although no actual analysis has been done of these, it is worth noting that while
ﬂuorinated systems can retain good electron transport properties the hole transport properties consistently
suﬀer for all systems and all biases.
5.3.1
k-resolved transmission spectra
To provide insight into the asymmetries seen in the energy-resolved spectra, the corresponding k-resolved
spectra are investigated here as transmission contours in the (kx, ky) plane. The spectra are drawn from zero-
bias calculations using a k-grid of (25×25×1) in all cases. Although a higher k point sampling along the contact
23
==PAGE:25==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 15: Transmission (a-d-g), semi-logarithmic resistance (b-e-h) and IV characteristics (c-f-i) of unrelaxed
Ti-zGr systems (a-c), relaxed Ti-zGr systems (d-f) and relaxed Ti-aGr systems (g-i).
zGr/aGr plots show
transmission of intrinsic Gr electrodes.
(kx) axis is preferred for accuracy, this treatment is intended for the visualisation of more general tendencies.
Additionally, although the transmission spectrum of intrinsic graphene does not depend on the out-of-plane
(ky) wave vector, the same cannot be said for the transmission spectrum of Ti; thus the transmission spectra
of Ti-Gr contacts may exhibit ky-dependencies induced by the Ti. The spectra (along with the energy-resolved
spectra) of the Ti electrodes are provided for ±0.495 eV in Figure 16. The calculations that form the basis
for these illustrations have been carried out on systems consisting of the same individual parts of the metal-
graphene devices; i.e.
the supercells have equivalent (x, y)-planes.
One striking feature of the intrinsic Ti
system is that the transmission is signiﬁcantly higher for positive energies than for negative. Moreover, areas of
higher transmission are generally found towards the edges of the (kx, ky)-projected Brillouin zone, although this
eﬀect is greater for the zigzag contact electrode than for the armchair. In the intrinsic graphene spectrum this
corresponds to higher transmission where the zGr bands lie and lower transmission at the aGr bands. Whether
this might carry over into the device transmission is investigated in the following.
The transmission spectra for the unrelaxed zGr systems are plotted in Figure 17 for energies ±0.495 eV. Several
features are seen which should be highlighted; when comparing to the graphene transmission bands the character
of intrinsic zGr is evident in all frames; transmission occurs exclusively around the Dirac points of the graphene.
However, for negative energies a ky dependence has been induced by the contact to the Ti, especially for the
ﬂuorinated system in frame (b). Here, transmission is not only limited by kx but also by ky; peak transmission
is only found in small ”islands” of equal kx and ky widths. The unﬂuorinated system shows a perhaps similar
tendency but to less extent; here transmission is diminished for low ky but is never actually cut oﬀ. Instead,
low transmission is obtained just under kx = 0.4 π/˚A around ky = 0 and at either end of the transmission
24
==PAGE:26==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 16: Transmission of intrinsic Titanium: Energy-resolved (a,d) and k-resolved (b-c,e-f). System are (z)Ti
(top) and (a)Ti (bottom).
lines (|ky| ≳0.4). The corresponding regions in the (z)-Ti contour do actually seem to exhibit slightly lower
transmission but the low k point sampling makes for a blurry comparison. Peak transmission seemingly appears
at the same points as for the ﬂuorinated system but in larger intervals. The positive-energy transmission of the
Ti-zGr contact show very little dependency on ky. Indeed, the unﬂuorinated system appears only slightly less
intense than the intrinsic zGr in Figure 3 while the ﬂuorinated system shows clear transmission lines with greatly
inhibited transmission - less than one-ﬁfth of the unﬂuorinated system. The Ti-aGr contact shows signiﬁcantly
reduced transmission for negative energy. For both energies distinct ky dependencies are visible: the negative-
energy spectrum shows a transmission band with respect to kx that becomes distinctly narrower as ky increases
while the positive-energy spectrum seem to have a window of greater transmission within ky ± 2.5 π/˚A but
an even smaller window of lower transmission within. This window does not correspond to a region of higher
transmission for the (a)Ti electrode; on the contrary, lower transmission is found here. In general the, the
only detailed correspondence between features of the k-resolved contours of the (a-z)Ti contours and the device
contours is found for the Ti-zGr system at negative energies. This could be due to the transmission for this
electrode and energy being lower than for the others or it could be coincidental. It is but a small piece of weak
evidence to support the notion that devices carry k vectors matching those of the electrodes. A much more
conclusive test is likely to match an armchair contact to the (z)Ti electrode - which for negative energies show
very low transmission in the transmission band of the armchair contact - and draw contour plots with a greater
sample rate.
5.3.2
k-resolved transmission of relaxed systems
The transmission in k space for relaxed structures is plotted in Figure 18 for E = ±0.50 eV. A relaxed Ti-F-zGr
system which has subsequently had the two Fluorine atoms removed before conducting the usual transport cal-
culations is shown in the right frames. The relaxed, unﬂuorinated contact shows distinctly lower transmission
than its unrelaxed counterpart, consistent with the energy-resolved spectra. Meanwhile, the improvement of the
transmission of the ﬂuorinated system is seen to come predominantly from a narrow peak between kx = 0.3 π/˚A
and kx = 0.4 π/˚A. Interestingly, the subsequent removal of the Fluorine atoms decreases the overall inten-
sity of the kx transmission band - including the aforementioned peaks - but preserves the narrowing of the
transmission band. One might conclude that the bending of the graphene sheet is somehow responsible for
a signiﬁcant narrowing of the transmission bandwidth in k space; however, this does not happen for the aGr
system (Appendix B). Meanwhile the presence of the F atoms enhances the intensity. The corresponding con-
tours for positive energy show no distinct features; transmission lines appear the same as for intrinsic zGr but
with reduced intensity. The contours do, however, show the same tendency as those of Figure 18 in terms of
transmission strength; the presence of ﬂuorine appears to very slightly enhance transmission with respect to the
same system without ﬂuorine atoms, which again outperforms the purely Ti-zGr system. The bond distances
25
==PAGE:27==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 17: k-resolved transmission data for unrelaxed Ti-zGr (left), Ti-F-zGr (center) and Ti-aGr (right) and
for negative energies (top) and positive energies (bottom).
of the C atoms in Table 1 suggest that for chemical purposes C atoms preferentially bonds more closely and
completely to the Ti surface than would serve electrical purposes - the longer bond distances between C and
Ti atoms in the ﬂuorinated system likely results in a more well-preserved graphene-like orbital network which
better transmits electrons. In the unrelaxed systems, however, the substitution of ﬂuorine for the contact car-
bon atoms greatly increased the bond distance while doing little or nothing to aid transmission to compensate.
The slightly increased transmission for the Ti-F-zGr system versus the same system without the F atoms could
mean that as the F atoms compete with the C atoms for the electron density of the same Ti contact atoms
(see e.g. Figure 13) the more electronegative F atoms further helps preserve graphene-like orbital character
by diverting more of the surface electron density to itself. Fluorine has been shown to simultaneously possess
the ability to slightly aid the electronic properties of metal-graphene contacts and to greatly inhibit the same
properties depending on the nature of the interaction. The mechanism behind the surprising ability of ﬂuorine
to enhance transmission - however slightly - could be investigated by plotting the orbital-resolved density of
states projected onto the contact atoms. Attempts were made to this end but no reliable results were obtained
in time to be included in this report. It is therefore only asserted here that if the presence of Fluorine aids
transmission by indirectly preserving the orbitals of the graphene sheet then it may be visualised through the
projected DOS for the contact atoms compared to bulk Ti and bulk graphene. An additional study proposed
here is one in which a relaxed structure is obtained after which the Ti-Gr z distance is varied to study the
dependence of e.g. projected DOS and conductance on bond length.
The results gathered so far have delved into how a metal-graphene contact might behave when a foreign
element common to fabrication processes is introduced. However, the original work by Wang et al [10] realised an
eﬀectively one-dimensional edge contact not to free-standing graphene but to a graphene sheet ”sandwiched”
between hBN. In the following section, the role of Fluorine intercalants in a Ti-hBN/zGr system has been
examined.
The motivation for this was that the deﬂection of the graphene sheet observed in the system
relaxations when Fluorine was included might not be realistic when the graphene sheet is encapsulated in hBN.
5.4
hBN-zGr-hBN sandwich structure
The treatment of the hBN-zGr-hBN sandwich structure once again begins with a system relaxation of a ﬂuori-
nated contact. No relaxations were carried out for unﬂuorinated systems - the initial purpose of this treatment
was to investigate the eﬀects exerted by F atoms seen previously when hBN sheets were included. Since hBN
is a heterogeneous material calculations have been made both for Boron-terminated and Nitrogen-terminated
hBN. The nomenclature which will be adopted to describe these systems reads as Ti-[F-]hBN/zGr B (N) for
[Fluorinated] contacts with B-terminated (N-terminated) hBN sheets. No armchair contacts were considered
since these systems were expected to require too many atoms and hence too much computational time. When
26
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 18: Transmission contours for relaxed Ti-zGr (left), Ti-F-zGr (center) and relaxed Ti-F-zGr without F
atoms (right).
creating the hBN/Gr heterostructure in VNL, the default distance is 3.35 ˚A which was strained to 3.44 ˚A when
setting up the interface with Ti. On the basis of lessons learned from previous relaxations, systems consisted
of ﬁve layers of Ti and the subsequent relaxations left the two Ti contact layers unconstrained. A total of 100
atoms from the hBN/zGR/hBN heterostructure were unconstrained out of a total of 120 atoms. The relaxed
contact geometries are seen in Figure 19. As predicted, no deﬂection of the graphene sheet occurs since it is
being held in place by the surrounding hBN sheets. In the case of the B-terminated contact the tendency for
the graphene to form contacts to Ti has eﬀectively pushed the F atoms into the electrode as Ti atoms mobilise
to contact to the graphene sheet. This eﬀect is not seen for the N-terminated contact for which F atoms seem
to be pushed slightly aside, allowing a weak contact to form between Ti and C. However, the F atoms occupy
the surface sites preferred by both C and F, the eﬀect of which will be laid bare in the transport treatment to
follow.
The B-terminated relaxation resulted in an average Ti-C distance of 2.708 ˚A for the ﬁrst contact C atom and
2.706 ˚A for the second while the N-termination gave 3.163 ˚A and 3.466 ˚A, respectively. These results suggest
an inferior contact when compared to those of Table 1. An unexpected eﬀect perhaps unrelated to the contact
itself is the deformation of the B-terminated hBN sheets. Since the constraints of the heterostructure are loose
this eﬀect can safely be said to be a local contact eﬀect. The sheet distance was set to 3.44 ˚A but after the
relaxation the (y-) distance reached up to 3.87 ˚A individual atoms in the unconstrained region. The origin may
be investigated by relaxing a Ti-hBN contact (without graphene) and an unﬂuorinated Ti-hBN/zGr contact to
see if the eﬀect arises from the Ti-hBN contact or from the ﬂuorination - or from a third factor. An immediate
guess which may be veriﬁed by considering the orbital-resolved DOS of the contact atoms is that - if such an
investigation revealed the graphene-like orbital network to be disturbed close to the electrode - disturbances in
the graphene orbitals would disrupt the weak bonding between the sheets of the heterostructure close to the
electrode which is the eﬀect seen from the structures.
5.4.1
Transmission of a bulk hBN/zGr/hBN heterostructure
The transmission spectrum of intrinsic graphene close to the Fermi energy is well understood and can be
accurately approximated without resorting to quantum mechanical simulation packages. The corresponding
transmission spectrum of the heterostructure in this part of the project is investigated here. It is at this point
noted that the SIESTA output from the electrode calculations reported forces of several eV/˚A on some of the
atoms of the electrode. Additionally, the size in terms of number of atoms of the Ti-hBN/zGr systems meant
that a lower sampling of k points was used for the TBTrans calculations. The transmission extracted from the
TranSIESTA calculations are plotted in Figure 20. Three visible features are highlighted here: The transmission
greatly increases far away from the Fermi energy. This resulted in the step-like character of the transmission
of the heterostructure electrodes seen in the inset of the left frame. A gap is seen in the transmission curve of
both electrodes, however, where the gap in the B-terminated system can be explained by the low k sampling,
27
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 19: (a): Y Z-view of a relaxed Ti-hBN/zGr system with N-terminated hBN. Red dashed lines encase the
region of relaxation. (b): Closer view of a relaxed B-terminated contact. (c): Close view of the N-terminated
contact. Pink atoms represent Boron. Unrelaxed structures in App. ??.
the corresponding gap in the N-terminated curve cannot. In general there is no physical reason why these
two electrodes should behave radically diﬀerent and care must be taken when interpreting the results from
the devices incorporating the electrodes.
Future calculations should be carried out using relaxed electrode
structures with higher k point sampling to gain a more accurate theoretical understanding of the transmission
of the hBN/zGr/hBN heterostructure.
5.4.2
Energy-resolved transmission spectra for hBN/zGr sandwich structures
TranSIESTA calculations were carried out using the usual set-up of nine Ti layers and forty repetitions of
(hBN/)Gr; the ﬁrst two Ti layers were designated as buﬀer atoms. The hBN/Gr/hBN buﬀer on the other
hand was reduced to contained forty-eight atoms, i.e. sixteen carbon atoms as opposed to the thirty-two used
previously. The same applies to the electrode. The transmission data for both systems has been obtained
using a TBT k grid of (151,3,1) and is included in Figure 21 for both Boron and Nitrogen contacts with the
transmission of free-standing graphene provided as reference. The eﬀect of ﬂuorination is profound, reducing
transmission for negative energies by up to an order of magnitude. The transmission for positive energies is only
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 20: Left: Transmission for the hBN/zGr heterostructure electrodes. Inset: close-up view around the
Fermi level. Center: a zoomed-out view of the transmission shows the extent of the transport at the edges of
the energy window. Right: semi-logarithmic resistance.
28
==PAGE:30==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 21: Energy-resolved transmission data and IV characteristics for unrelaxed, unﬂuorinated structures (a-
c), unrelaxed ﬂuorinated structures (d-f) and relaxed ﬂuorinated structures (g-i). Note the scaling is diﬀerent
from the results for free-standing graphene.
slightly reduced for the relaxed system, however. The resistance plots all exhibit the gap-like character seen for
the intrinsic systems to some extent. In the IV curve the negative eﬀect of the Fluorine on current ﬂow appears
to be ampliﬁed upon relaxation for the heterostructures. Compared to the IV curve for the F-terminated free-
standing graphene provided this serves as strong evidence that residual Fluorine atoms from the etching process
can hamper the electronic properties of graphene-based electronics although the eﬀect could be exaggerated
due to unreliable electrodes. The conductances of the B-terminated systems are Gc = 1.12 × 10−3 G0 for the
unrelaxed, unﬂuorinated system, Gc = 1.87 × 10−3 G0 for the ﬂuorinated system and Gc = 0.46 × 10−3 G0
for the relaxed, ﬂuorinated system. The high conductance of the ﬂuorinated system is perhaps surprising and
stems from the kink visible at V = −0.1 V. A ﬁner sampling of voltages around the zero-bias point could reveal
more about the origin of this eﬀect. Due to the subsequent ﬂattening of the IV curve for negative bias the
conductance does seem misrepresented as a result of this kink. For the N-terminated contact the conductances
are 0.57×10−3 G0 (unrelaxed unﬂuorinated), 0.29×10−3 G0 (unrelaxed ﬂuorinated) and 0.039×10−3 G0 (relaxed
ﬂuorinated). With the N-terminated the ﬂuorination is visible as a severe inhibition of transmission across all
energies. This is interpreted as resulting from the N-terminated and ﬂuorinated contact to exhibit the worst
bonding of all contacts considered in this study both in terms of bond length and availability of Ti contact
atoms. The IV curve shows very limited current ﬂow for the relaxed structure; for this system, the ﬂuorination
and subsequent relaxation reduces the conductance of the contact with more than an order of magnitude, a
powerful result.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 22: k-resolved transmission for ﬂuorinated and relaxed systems. Left frames: Ti-F-zGr contours are
included as references, middle frames: Boron contact system and right frames: Nitrogen contact systems. Top
frames represent negative energy, bottom frames represent positive.
5.4.3
k-resolved transmission of heterostructures
Finally, the k-resolved transmission of these systems is presented in Figure 22 to round oﬀthe results and
discussion. The results for free-standing, ﬂuorinated and relaxed graphene (left frames) is once again provided
as a reference. The TBTrans k-grid used for drawing the heterostructure contact contours is the same (25,25,1)
as was used drawing the free-standing zGr contours of previous systems.
The negative-energy plots show
greatly reduced transmission compared to the Ti-F-zGr system and the corresponding positive-energy contours.
However, where the N-terminated system yields a contour that resembles that of the free-standing system -
exhibiting narrow bands of peak transmission only weaker - the B-terminated contact shows a tendency not
seen before in this project: peak transmission is conﬁned to ky ≥0.4 π/˚A within the normal transmission
bands along the kx axis. More surprisingly, however, is the positive-energy plot of the B-terminated contact.
Here, the transmission bands have moved to the very edges of the Brillouin zone. This quality is shared by
all positive-energy contours of the heterostructures except the ﬂuorinated N-terminated contact in the bottom
right frame of Figure 22. These contours are included in Appendix B. The displacement of the transmission
lines is interpreted as an artiﬁcial quality of the hBN/zGr/hBN electrode, recalling the rather irregular results
obtained for the electrode transmissions. Whether this may be the case is brieﬂy investigated in the next and
ﬁnal part of this study.
5.4.4
Methodical improvement of heterostructure simulations
In order to improve the procedure used in the simulations of heterostructure contacts, the two electrodes
were relaxed to 0.04 eV/˚A using the same (5, 5, 1) k grid as previous heterostructure simulations, providing a
solid basis for comparison. Transport calculations were subsequently performed on systems which consisted of
the relaxed electrode structure repeated three times to give two electrodes and a device region in the middle
connected by ideal ohmic contacts. Transmission data was calculated using TBT k grids of (151, 3, 1), (251, 3, 1)
and (501, 3, 1) and is illustrated in Figure 23. Two results are highlighted here: The behaviour apparent in
Figure 20 is partly corrected; for positive energies the transmission resembles that of a zGr electrode with
very little variation between the two curves.
For negative energies the N-terminated electrode shows well-
behaved transmission while the B-terminated electrode retains the sudden kink and following dramatic increase
in transmission. Evidently, the eﬀect is entirely independent of the TBT k grid. Two alleged artefacts remain:
The large transmission for the B-terminated electrode at negative energies and the transmission gap (not clearly
visible) around the Fermi energy for the N-terminated electrode.
It can be reasonably expected that both
electrodes must behave equivalently to one another in an ideal set-up and that further structural improvements
will facilitate this behaviour. This may be achieved by researching 1) the eﬀect of the TranSIESTA k grid on the
system relaxations and subsequent transmission curve, 2) the signiﬁcance of the Maximum Force Tolerance, i.e.
lowering the force threshold to e.g. 0.01 eV/˚A to more fully relax the structure, and 3) allowing the supercell
to relax along with the structure. Since the electrode structure is small (8.5 ˚A in the z direction), a suboptimal
30
==PAGE:32==
supercell can have a greater impact on the post-relaxation forces than in a system of, say, 100 ˚A. Calculations
have been employed to investigate these three possible solutions but have not ﬁnished in time for the project
deadline.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 23: Transmission for relaxed electrode structures using a TBTrans kx sampling rate of 151 (a), 251 (b)
and 501 (c).
31
==PAGE:33==
6
Conclusion and Outlook
This project has applied the SIESTA/TranSIESTA/TBTrans codes to investigate the Ti-graphene contact in
detail with regards to system relaxations, charge carrier transmission and current/voltage characteristics. The
investigated systems included a standard Ti-Gr contact, a Ti-F-Gr contact with Fluorine atoms substituted
in place of the contact atoms and a contact between Ti and a hBN/Gr/hBN heterostructure. An additional
Ti-N-Gr system was constructed and relaxed, but not investigated further due to time constraints. The set-ups
and subsequent relaxation revealed that both Carbon, Fluorine and Nitrogen atoms prefer to bond to Ti in a
tetrahedral arrangement consisting of three Titanium atoms and one C/F/N atom. It was asserted that the
same holds true for other elements such as Oxygen and Sulphur. The average equilibrium distance between
the contact C and Ti atoms in the Ti-Gr set-ups was found to be 2.229 ˚A for a zigzag contact and 2.343 ˚A for
armchair. For ﬂuorinated systems (both zigzag and armchair), however, the F atoms were found to occupy the
preferred sites upon which the graphene sheets bent to reach similar available sites. The resultant averaged
Ti-C bond distances were 2.421 ˚A (zigzag) and 2.364 ˚A (armchair).
The Ti-hBN/zGr heterostructures were ﬂuorinated and relaxed following the same procedure as previous re-
laxations. This treatment showed that the deﬂection and direct bonding to the Ti electrode was only possible
for free-standing graphene. The resultant contact geometries were found to depend on whether the hBN sheets
were B-terminated or N-terminated; however, both terminations gave signiﬁcantly higher Ti-C bond distances;
2.707 ˚A was obtained for hBN-B and 3.315 ˚A for hBN-N. In the B-terminated case, the electrode deformed
signiﬁcantly to allow C atoms to bond to the surface whereas in the N-terminated case the C atoms eﬀectively
bonded to only one Ti atom.
The conductances and corresponding contact resistances obtained by linear-response theory and TBTrans are
summarised in Table 2. Before relaxation, the TranSIESTA calculations showed signiﬁcant inhibition of elec-
tron and especially hole transport from the unﬂuorinated system to the ﬂuorinated system as evidenced by the
drop in conductance to nearly one-half. Current ﬂow for the ﬂuorinated system reached around ±0.1 µA˚A
−1
at the edges of the bias window. After relaxation on the other hand the Ti-F-zGr system fared better than
both unrelaxed and relaxed systems, excelling to reach the highest contact conductance by far obtained in
this study. The unﬂuorinated system did not beneﬁt from the relaxation; indeed, contact conductance and
current ﬂow was seen to decrease slightly. These rather unexpected results could be indirectly attributed to the
aforementioned diﬀerences in bond lengths; it was theorised that the chemically more optimal Ti-C bonds of
the relaxed Ti-zGr system reduced the graphene-like character of the orbitals - which is known for possessing
outstanding electronic properties - close to the electrode whereas a longer bond distance might help preserve the
same character and thus the conductance. To investigate the possible role of bonding and orbital degradation
calculations the author proposes simulating relaxed contacts and slightly displacing the graphene sheet along
the transport direction, comparing the orbital-resolved projected DOS and IV curve for each step. Additionally,
Fluorine atoms could be added to sites above and below the sites at which carbon atoms bond to investigate
whether this helped preserve graphene-like orbitals of the contact atoms.
The calculations performed on hBN/zGr heterostructures represented a truly novel step within the ﬁeld of the-
oretical graphene electronics research. The author laments two sources of inaccuracy related to this treatment;
ﬁrstly, large atomic forces arose in the electrode from the strain imposed on the system during the interface set-
up in VNL; and secondly, the size of the system led to a lower sampling of k-points in the TBTrans calculations
in order to keep computational times down. With this said, low-bias calculations revealed that a substantial gap
opened in both B-terminated and N-terminated electrode transmission. Although this gap in the B-terminated
electrode could be an artefact arising from the low sampling rate, the corresponding transmission gap in the
N-terminated electrode was signiﬁcantly wider which suggests that the low k-point sampling is not exclusively
to blame for this. The discrepancy between the two seemingly identical systems - uncontacted hBN/zGr/hBN
heterostructures with diﬀerent termination - was not pinpointed, the ﬁrst step in the investigation is to elim-
inated the two sources of inaccuracy mentioned above.
A quick relaxation was performed after which the
positive-energy spectrum conformed with that of intrinsic graphene. Transmission and current was found to
signiﬁcantly decrease upon ﬂuorination which is considered strong evidence for the theory that the presence
of Fluorine will inhibit electronic properties of the Ti-zGr contact when the graphene sheet is encapsulated in
hBN as is the scheme invented by Wang et al in reference [10]. On the basis of this conclusion, the author
proposes studies to investigate whether compounds based on non-halogen elements might be used in place of
of the O2/CHF3 gases employed. Contamination by species such as Oxygen or Nitrogen was shown to perform
better by Gao et al in [16]; additionally, it was discovered that Nitrogen does not deﬂect the graphene sheet in
the Ti-Gr contact as Fluorine does. This suggests that Nitrogen - and possibly other elements - may form a
bridge where Fluorine forms a gap.
32
==PAGE:34==
Table 2: Contact conductances for all systems considered in this report.
Ti-zGr
40
40-F
40 relaxed
40-F relaxed
GC
 10−3G0

1.41
0.74
1.38
2.32
RC (kΩµm)
0.013
0.024
0.013
0.008
RC (kΩatom)
46.374
87.698
47.214
28.044
Ti-aGr
60
60-F
60 relaxed
60-F relaxed
GC
 10−3G0

1.49
1.86
1.28
RC (kΩµm)
0.011
0.009
0.013
RC (kΩatom)
25.189
20.263
29.357
hBN, B
40
40-F
40 relaxed
40-F relaxed
GC
 10−3G0

1.11
1.87
0.46
RC (kΩµm)
0.016
0.010
0.040
RC (kΩatom)
58.202
34.762
143.016
hBN, N
40
40-F
40 relaxed
40-F relaxed
GC
 10−3G0

0.57
0.29
0.04
RC (kΩµm)
0.031
0.062
0.463
RC (kΩatom)
113.467
223.117
1670.752
33
==PAGE:35==
A
Structures
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 24: XZ-view (a) and YZ-view (b) of a basic Ti-zGr set-up with nine layers of Ti and 40 repetitions of
zGr. (c): Closer view of the contact.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 25: XZ-view (a) and YZ-view (b) of a relaxed Ti-zGr contact. (c): Closer view of the same geometry.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26: XZ-view (a) and YZ-view (b) of a ﬂuorinated Ti-zGr contact. (c): Close view of the same geometry.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 27: XZ-view (a) and YZ-view (b) of a relaxed Ti-aGr contact with nine layers of Ti and 60 repetitions
of aGr. (c): Close view of the contact.
34
==PAGE:36==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 28: XZ-view (a) and YZ-view (b) of a relaxed and ﬂuorinated Ti-aGr contact. (c): Close view of the
contact.
Figure 29: Unrelaxed B-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr structure.
Figure 30: Unrelaxed N-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr structure.
35
==PAGE:37==
B
k-resolved transmission
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 31: k-resolved transmission for unrelaxed (left frames) and relaxed (middle and right frames) armchair
structures.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 32: k-resolved transmissions for B-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr systems.
Figure 33: k-resolved transmission for N-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr systems.
37
==PAGE:39==
C
Finite-bias Transmission Spectra
This part details ﬁnite-bias energy-resolved transmission spectra for nearly all ﬁnite-bias calculations performed.
For each positive (negative) bias, the numerical transmission minimum on the negative (positive) energy side
of the spectrum has been marked with a vertical dashed line.
Figure 34: Unrelaxed Ti-zGr system.
Figure 35: Relaxed Ti-zGr system.
Figure 36: Unrelaxed, ﬂuorinated Ti-zGr system.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 37: Relaxed, ﬂuorinated Ti-zGr system.
Figure 38: Unrelaxed, B-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr/hBN system.
Figure 39: Unrelaxed, ﬂuorinated, B-terminated Ti-F-hBN/zGr/hBN system.
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 40: Relaxed, ﬂuorinated, B-terminated Ti-F-hBN/zGr/hBN system.
Figure 41: Unrelaxed, N-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr/hBN system.
Figure 42: Unrelaxed, ﬂuorinated N-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr/hBN system.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 43: Relaxed, ﬂuorinated, N-terminated Ti-hBN/zGr/hBN system.
41
==PAGE:43==
References
[1] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and
A. A. Firsov. Electric ﬁeld eﬀect in atomically thin carbon ﬁlms. Science, 306(5696):666–669, October
2004.
[2] K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal’ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab, and K. Kim. A roadmap for
graphene. Nature, 490(7419):192–200, October 2012.
[3] F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan, and A. C. Ferrari. Graphene photonics and optoelectronics. Nat Photon,
4(9):611–622, September 2010.
[4] A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov. The rise of graphene. Nat Mater, 6(3):183–191, March 2007.
[5] F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson, and K. S. Novoselov.
Detection of individual gas molecules adsorbed on graphene. Nat Mater, 6(9):652–655, September 2007.
[6] Salvador Barraza-Lopez, Mihajlo Vanevi´c, Markus Kindermann, and M. Y. Chou.
Eﬀects of metallic
contacts on electron transport through graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104:076807, Feb 2010.
[7] Jesse Maassen, Wei Ji, and Hong Guo.
First principles study of electronic transport through a
cu(111)—graphene junction. Applied Physics Letters, 97(14), 2010.
[8] G. Giovannetti, P. A. Khomyakov, G. Brocks, V. M. Karpan, J. van den Brink, and P. J. Kelly. Doping
graphene with metal contacts. Phys. Rev. Lett., 101:026803, Jul 2008.
[9] F. Xia, V. Perebeinos, Y. Lin, Y. Wu, and P. Avouris. The origins and limits of metal-graphene junction
resistance. nature nanotechnology, 2011.
[10] L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. M. Campos,
D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard, and C. R. Dean. One-dimensional electrical contact
to a two-dimensional material. Science, 342(6158):614–617, 2013.
[11] J. T. Smith, A. D. Franklin, D. B. Farmer, and C. Dimitrakopoulos.
Reducing contact resistance in
graphene devices through contact area patterning. ACS Nano, 2013.
[12] S. M. Song, T. Y. Kim, O. J. Sul, W. C. Shin, and B. J. Cho. Improvement of graphene-metal contact
resistance by introducing edge contacts at graphene under metal. Applied Physics Letters, 2013.
[13] Yuki Matsuda, Wei-Qiao Deng, and III William A. Goddard. Contact resistance for end-contacted metal-
graphene and metal-nanotube interfaces from quantum mechanics. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
114(41):17845–17850, 2010.
[14] Qing Cao, Shu-Jen Han, Jerry Tersoﬀ, Aaron D. Franklin, Yu Zhu, Zhen Zhang, George S. Tulevski,
Jianshi Tang, and Wilfried Haensch.
End-bonded contacts for carbon nanotube transistors with low,
size-independent resistance. Science, 350(6256):68–72, 2015.
[15] I. Deretzis, G. Fiori, G. Iannaccone, and A. La Magna. Atomistic quantum transport modeling of metal-
graphene nanoribbon heterojunctions. Physical Review B: Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, 2012.
[16] Qun Gao and Jing Guo. Role of chemical termination in edge contact to graphene. APL Materials, 2(5):–,
2014.
[17] Edward McCann.
Electronic properties of monolayer and bilayer graphene.
In Hassan Raza, editor,
Graphene Nanoelectronics, NanoScience and Technology, pages 237–275. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[18] R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus, and M. S. Dresselhaus. Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes. Imperial College
Press, 1998.
[19] Rolf Landauer. Spatial variation of currents and ﬃeld due to localized scatterers in metallic conduction.
IBM Journal of Research and Development, 1957.
[20] Supriyo Datta. Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems. Cambridge Studies in Semiconductor Physics
and Microelectronic Engineering, 1995.
[21] Kurt Stokbro, Jeremy Taylor, Mads Brandbyge, and Hong Guo.
Introducing Molecular Electronics.
Springer, 2005.
42
==PAGE:44==
[22] Henrik Bruus and Karsten Flensberg. Many-Body Quantum Theory in Condensed Matter Physics. Oxford
University Press, 2004.
[23] Jorge Kohanoﬀ. Electronic Structure Calculations for SSolid and Molecules: Theory and Computational
Methods. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[24] C Oshima and A. Nagashima. Ultra-thin epitaxial ﬁlms of graphite and hexagonal boron nitride on solid
surface. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1998.
[25] Jos´e M Soler, Emilio Artacho, Julian D Gale, Alberto Garc´ıa, Javier Junquera, Pablo Ordej´on, and Daniel
S´anchez-Portal. The siesta method for ab initio order-n materials simulation. Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter, 14(11):2745, 2002.
[26] M. Brandbyge, J. L. Mozos, P. Ordejon, J. P. Taylor, and K. Stokbro. Density-functional method for
nonequilibrium electron transport. Physical Review B, 2002.
[27] Nick R¨ubner Papior. Computational Tools and Studies of Graphene Nanostructures. PhD thesis, DTU -
Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[28] John P. Perdew, Kieron Burke, and Matthias Ernzerhof. Generalized gradient approximation made simple.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 77:3865–3868, Oct 1996.
43
