==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Refining Protein Homology Models
integrating Coevolutional information and
Molecular Dynamics
Sanne Bergstrand-Poulsen, s093817
Copenhagen 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
Project type:
Master’s Thesis
Field of study:
Mathematical Modelling and Computation
University:
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve the MSc degree in Mathe-
matical Modelling and Computation at Technical University of Denmark. The
report represents 30 ECTS points.
Project period:
24.08.2015-14.02.2016
Author:
Sanne Bergstrand-Poulsen, s093817
Academic supervisor:
Peter Røgen
External supervisor:
Elena Papaleo
Rights:
© Sanne Bergstrand-Poulsen, 2016
Copenhagen, February 14, 2016
Sanne Bergstrand-Poulsen, s093817
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Predicting the function of proteins with no known structure is a highly sought after
ability with no known well defined solution.
This thesis aims to examine the effects of adding contact prediction restraints to the
Molecular Dynamics simulation of a model and clarify whether doing so improves on
the similarity with a reference structure. Furthermore, a standalone version of the
Molecular Dynamics pipeline should be set up in Python 2.7. It has been imple-
mented and is functional while additional useful scripts for retrieving files containing
information about proteins have also been developed.
The concepts of RMSD and lDDT have been explained in order to justify using them
in the evaluation of the outcome of the simulations.
The results show that using MD simulation with restraints holds promise as a method.
In one of the cases the improvement on the model was clear with respect to the ref-
erence structure. In the other some further parameter adjustment proved necessary
in future work.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
The work in this thesis has been carried out in collaboration with the Danish Cancer
Research Society and with the assistance of the people in the Bioinformatics unit. I
would like to express my gratitude to them for including me in the unit and providing
me with a work place, support and suggestions throughout the project.
Thank you to Matteo Tiberti for feedback, technical support and for providing the
script for converting GREMLIN output to a restraint file.
I would also like to thank my supervisor Elena Papaleo for including me in her re-
search group, leading me through the project and introducing me to many technical
and biological topics and methods.
Finally, I would like to thank my other supervisor Peter Røgen for giving valuable
feedback and for help with the mathematical aspects of the project.
Sanne Bergstrand – Poulsen
February 2016, Copenhagen, Denmark
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Biological concepts
3
2.1
Introduction to Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Amino acids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Mutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Coevolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
3D structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.5
X-ray Crystallography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.6
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.7
Force fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.8
CHARMM22*
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Mathematical principles
11
3.0.1
Root Mean Square Deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.0.2
Local Distance Difference Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Restraints
17
4.1
Applying restraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.1
GREMLIN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2
Generating restraints file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Online tools and sources
19
5.0.1
UniProt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.0.2
HHpred and Modeller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.0.3
ResProx . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6
Molecular Dynamics
21
6.1
Retrieving data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
MD simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.3
Simulation set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.4
GromacsWrapper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.5
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.5.1
Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.5.2
Step 0: 0-start
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.5.3
Step 1: 1-box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.5.4
Step 2: 2-min . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.5.5
Step 3: 3-ions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.5.6
Step 4: 4-min.ions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.5.7
Step 5: 5-equil
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.6
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.6.1
Step 6: 6-pre.nvt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.6.2
Step 7: 7-npt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.6.3
Step 8: 8-eq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.6.4
Step 9: 9-md . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
The two modelled examples
29
7.1
Thioredoxin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.2
Chemotaxis protein CheY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.3
Experimental structures and models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Evaluation of MD simulations
33
8.1
Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
8.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8.3.1
Thioredoxin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8.3.2
Chemotaxis protein CheY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
9
Conclusion and Discussion
41
A
Python code
43
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Proteins are found in all aspects of the world, playing an important part in organisms
such as the human body.
The ability to predict the structure of a protein and thereby get information about
the possible function of it is highly sought after. This project presents a contribution
to the process of predicting the function of a protein with unknown three-dimensional
structure (3D structure).
The aim of this thesis can be split in two: setting up an automatized version of
a Molecular Dynamics simulation (MD simulation) pipeline and evaluating whether
protein structure similarity improve when contact prediction restraints are added to
the simulation.
An introduction to the various biological and mathematical concepts that are relevant
for the understanding of the methods used in this project is given. The online sources
that have provided either software or online calculation through submission are ex-
plained and since several scripts have been prepared in order to automatize both file
collection and MD simulation they are presented as well. They are explained in de-
tail in order to ensure an understanding of how they have been used on specific cases
throughout the project. The cases used in the project are presented including the
reasoning behind choosing those specific ones. The steps performed in analysing the
outcome of the MD simulations are explained in order to clarify how the results are
generated and evaluated. The results are then examined and evaluated with a con-
clusion to whether they represent a successful outcome of using the proposed method.
Lastly, the discussion covers additional work that should be performed in order to
confirm whether the methods presented in the project produce the desired results and
can be deemed successful.
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Biological concepts
In this section the biological subjects relevant for the reader to understand the key
biological aspects related to this thesis will be introduced.
In particular, a basic introduction to proteins and coevolution will be given, and
the biological background of mutations will be covered. Lastly, the methods of X-
ray Crystallography (crystallography) and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
(NMR) will be explained as these are the methods used to generate the initial data
used for the MD simulations performed in this thesis.
2.1
Introduction to Proteins
Proteins are one of biology’s most essential building blocks.[20] They exist in the
world around us as well as inside our bodies and consist of chains of amino acids.
Most sequence of amino acids will under physiological conditions fold to a specific
structure which depends on the order of the amino acids in that sequence. The 3D
folding of the protein is unique for each type of protein and determines how and where
the protein can bind other biological partners. In most cases a protein needs to attain
the proper 3D architecture of its binding or - in case of proteins that are enzymes -
catalytic sites in order to be able to have a function and thus the globular form of
the protein is intimately linked to the function of the protein. The 3D structure of
the protein was originally considered as a rigid key that needs to fit in a lock, where
the lock is the structure of another biological partner, such as another protein, the
DNA or a membrane.
Nowadays, the structural biology community agrees on the fact that proteins are
largely dynamic entities and that they attain an ensemble of multiple conformations
in their folded native state where the overall 3D architecture is conserved but the
local conformation can change and undergoes structural rearrangements.
Proteins are key biomolecules since they have many and very diverse roles. In the
body for instance, they exist as part of the immune system as hormones and anti-
bodies, they are a part of a number of biochemical reactions as enzymes, where they
both function as inhibitors and accelerators and on the surface of our cells multiple
proteins can act as receptor that reply to external stimuli to name a few.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Biological concepts
2.1.1
Amino acids
Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins. Each of them consists of a carbon
atom, the Cα-atom, an amino group (−NH2), a side chain (−R) and a carboxylic
acid group (−COOH).
Figure 2.1: General outline of an amino acid[3].
In order for the amino acids to create sequences that can fold they need to bind
together. This process occurs on the ribosome, i.e. the cell machinery to assemble
proteins, and is done by splitting off a water molecule, creating a peptide bond be-
tween the carboxylic group from one amino acid and the amino group in another.
Even though the chain structure of two amino acids appears to be similar, the main
difference is the side chains - they are unique for each type of amino acid. The side
chain is located on the Cα-atom just like the carboxylic group and the amino group,
and amino acids can be divided into groups depending on their side chain which can
have properties such as being hydrophobic, polar or charged.
As mentioned earlier, the function of a protein is highly dependent on its 3D structure,
which in turn is decided by the order of the amino acids in the sequence. The side
chains therefore have a high influence on the protein folding into a stable 3D struc-
ture, since they determine how the amino acids bind together. To give an example:
amino acids with hydrophobic side chains that are in a watery environment in a cell
will be more likely to group closely together, thus forming a tight, compact structure
to avoid direct exposure to the solvent through their hydrophobic moieties.
2.1.2
Mutations
When a base pair in the DNA sequence is altered permanently it is called a muta-
tion.[20] Mutations happen all the time and are a result of e.g. errors in the replication
process or damage to DNA. They can result in different things depending on where
in the codon the mutations occur and what base pair is altered. Since several codons
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Introduction to Proteins
5
code for the same amino acid a mutation often has no impact on the resulting amino
acid sequence. Other times the mutation results in a codon coding for a different
amino acid that has some of the same properties as the original amino acid.
As
amino acids with the same properties are often interchangeable with respect to the
folding of the protein this is not problematic - for instance, if a hydrophobic amino
acid is exchanged with another hydrophobic acid the resulting change will in most
cases not be important.
If the base pair is duplicated and thereby create a shift in the codons or if a stop-
codon is the result of a mutation or duplication the resulting protein may be rendered
inactive. Lastly, in some cases one or more mutations within the same sequence can
result in such severe changes in the amino acid sequence that the resulting protein
is folded differently than intended and thus end up potentially having a different
function.
Figure 2.2: Graphical explanation of a mutation in a sequence[7].
.
2.1.3
Coevolution
Coevolution is a phenomenon involving the dependency between pairs and how they
change relative to each other.[18] An example of this interaction on macro-level can
be seen in predator-prey situations where the development of a defence mechanism
such as poison in the prey can trigger e.g. heightened resistance to that poison in
the predator. This concept can be applied to pairs on the molecular level such as
proteins or amino acids. Since protein folding depends on the amino acid sequence
and specifically the contact between amino acid pairs it is given that if one amino
acid in such a contact pair changes the other must change as well in order for the
contact to be maintained.
One of the methods for detection of coevolution is multiple sequence alignment (MSA).
In order to create the models used in the simulations carried out in this project MSA
has been one of the important steps for instance when doing similarity comparison
using the tool textbfHHpred. It is also one of the premises on which this project is
built since we want to look into the possibility of improving the models created using
sequences with fairly low similarity with respect to their templates with a known
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Biological concepts
structure. By arranging the sequences of interest as rows in a matrix the sections
of the sequences that are similar can be found. Similarity can be a consequence of
e.g. a functional or evolutional relationship. An example of how MSA looks is given
in Figure 2.3. MSA used on homologous proteins will highlight residue changes and
make it possible to detect changes that are conserved for some sequences.
Figure 2.3: Graphical explanation of sequence alignment.[21].
2.1.4
3D structure
A protein molecule can be described differently depending on what level of detail is
necessary. A protein consists of sequences of amino acids that can be referred to as
the primary structure of a protein. These sequences can be of very different lengths
and determine the folding of the protein. Each sequence can be considered as a build-
ing called the secondary structure block where the two main forms these blocks take
are α-helices and β-sheets depending on the combination and number of amino acids.
The 3D globular form containing the α-helices, β-sheets and unstructured parts is
called the tertiary structure and is recognizable as what most people would see as a
protein. The tertiary structure is considered to be crucial in the function of the pro-
tein since it determines the functional properties of the protein itself. When several
folded protein chains bind together in a larger assembly, it is called the quaternary
structure.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Introduction to Proteins
7
Figure 2.4: Visual representation of the different levels of structure.[4].
2.1.5
X-ray Crystallography
The first studies of crystals – both theoretical and experimental - took place in the
17th century and involved scientists like Johannes Kepler, Nicolas Steno and René
Just Haüy. Their work revolved mainly around describing the structure of various
crystals by looking at the angles between the faces and the stacking patterns within
the crystal. Crystallography as such started with the Braggs (father and son) and
their work on diffraction from crystalline materials[5][6] in the early 1900. Crystal-
lography is a method to find properties of crystallized materials including biological
molecules such as proteins. By using a beam of X-rays the crystal of interest is illumi-
nated such that a diffraction pattern appears. This is a number of regularly spaced
spots that represents the density of electrons in the sample.
The data obtained when illuminating the sample from different angles together with
additional known biochemical data results in a 3D electron density model that can
be used to describe the protein structure at the atomic level. This is done by fitting
a peptide containing the sequence of the protein to the electron density such that the
structure is obtained. The information is stored in pdb file format, which contain the
3D coordinates of most atoms in the protein. The pdb file contains all information
necessary to display the protein in question as well as protein name and information
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Biological concepts
about the author(s). The actual atom information is found in the ATOM lines. They
contain (in order of appearance): atom number, atom type, residue name in three-
letter abbreviation, residue number and x, y and z coordinates to place the atom in
space. It can contain additional information but ends with the pdb file identification
code. This format is standard for most protein related software or packages such as
BioPython or the GromacsWrapper. pdb files are the ones used as initial inputs
for the MD simulations carried out in this project. Some drawbacks of crystallography
are that it can only be used on proteins that can be in crystallized form.
2.1.6
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
NMR is another method used to create such data as is used for the cases in this
project. It was developed independently by groups at both Harvard and Stanford
University around 1950 ultimately ending with the inventors, Drs. Purcell and Bloch,
sharing a Nobel Prize in 1952 because of their discoveries.
NMR is a chemical analytical technique, which can be used to determine the molecular
structure of proteins.[12][13] It is performed by placing the dissolved sample in a
solution, which in many cases consists of water, and placing the ensemble in a strong
magnetic field with a specific direction (B_0). Due to the magnetic field the bulk
direction of all the spins within the sample will align parallel to B_0 and by applying
electromagnetic radiation to the sample it is possible to move the bulk magnetization
in relation to B_0. Electromagnetic radiation is applied and the bulk magnetization
starts to rotate around B_0 with a certain frequency corresponding to the magnetic
field.
Changes in the chemical environment around the nuclei interferes with the
magnetic field experienced by the nucleus and thus also the rotation frequency. By
measuring all the different frequencies the NMR spectrum is obtained. This change
gives the possibility to monitor changes in the chemical environment of each atom in
the sample. It is also possible to measure the distances between the different atoms of
the molecule using NMR. It is possible to deduce the structure of a protein using these
distances as restraints in a molecule and thus create a pdb file containing information
of the structure of the protein. Since NMR can be used to generate output in the same
format as crystallography it is possible to use the results from the two techniques in
the same simulation. One of the biggest drawbacks of NMR compared crystallography
is size limitation. Crystallography has almost no size limitation of when it comes to
proteins while NMR usually performs best on proteins smaller than 35 kDa. Another
drawback is that the technique is rather expensive which makes it less available to
smaller companies. Using NMR machines that give lower resolution results can be a
solution since they in most cases can give sufficient performance.
2.1.7
Force fields
One of the inputs that had to be chosen manually for the MD simulations in this
project is the applied force field.[15] The chosen force field CHARMM22* is explained
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Introduction to Proteins
9
after the general definition. A force field is defined by the set of parameters used in
the potential equation for calculating the energy of a system used in MD simulations.
The basic potential equation is
EF F = Ebonded + Enon−bonded,
which is an energy equation that sums the energy for each parameter group. Those
parameters include angles, bonds-stretch and torsion as well as van der Waals and
electrostatic interactions. They are grouped into ‘bonded’ and ‘non-bonded’ param-
eters where the term ‘bonded parameters’ refers to interactions between covalently
bonded atoms such as their mutual angle and torsion, while ‘non-bonded’ has to do
with interactions between pairs of non-connected atoms. The force constant is a value
determining the strength of a covalent bond between two atoms. Two force constants
have been used in this project – 1000 kJ/mol when running the simulation and 250
kJ/mol when restraints are added and is defined in the itp files.
2.1.8
CHARMM22*
The force field chosen for the MD simulations performed in this project is CHARMM22*.
It is based on the older CHARMM with altered backbone and side chain parameters
[14][15] and has been proven reliable on structures containing both alpha-helices and
beta-sheets. CHARMM22* is an ‘all-atom’ force field meaning that it includes pa-
rameters for all types of atoms in the system and thus is able to separate hydrogen
and carbon atoms. It is one of the most recently developed force fields and has a
good agreement with NMR structures which are what most of this project is based
on. Furthermore, CHARMM22* also scores best in the test performed in [14] which is
evident on Figure 2.5. The figure shows test scores for different force fields as well as
year of publication. It is seen that the newest force fields have a lower score compared
to the older ones and thus more focus has been on them. Figure 2.5 also indicates
which force fields could be interesting to apply in the method used in this project as
substitute for CHARM22*.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Biological concepts
Figure 2.5: Test scores of different force fields..
Several different water models are available when performing MD simulation. A
few of the types are mentioned here in order to argue why TIP3P was chosen.
TIP3P has 3 interaction points called sites and has a rigid geometry matching actual
water molecules. TIP3P is the most common when applying the CHARMM22* force
field since the CHARMM force field parameters are developed based on this type.
Other types include 4-site and 5-site models, where a 4-site has an added dummy
atom with negative charge near the Oxygen.
One such model is commonly used
when applying another force field called AMBER.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Mathematical
principles
The analysis of the MD simulations has been done using different notions of dis-
tance between two conformations of the same protein. Root Mean Square Deviation
(RMSD) and Local Distance Difference Test (lDDT) will be covered in order to ex-
plain why they have been chosen as means of analysis of the results.
3.0.1
Root Mean Square Deviation
As a part of the analysis RMSD is applied. It is a measure of the distances between
atoms within a molecule structure and those found in a reference structure. The
standard formula for RMSD can be defined as
RMSD(Pa,Pb) = minR,T
√∑n
i=1 | rai −(Rrbi + T) |2
n
based on [25], where rai is the position of atom i in structure Pa, rbi is the position
of atom i in structure Pb, R is the rotation, T is the translation and n is the number
of atoms in the structures. The calculation of RMSD is done by applying the grms()
function from the GromacsWrapper to the output from the analysis and is used to
evaluate the results in this project.
It can be proven that for vectors and vector sets RMSD is a metric [23], which is
paramount if clustering of structures is applied at a later state. The complete proof
by Boris Steipe is explained here. In this proof RMSD refers to RMSD calculated
without performing translation and rotation and RMSDopt to the RMSD value in
optimal superposition.
A measure d on a set X, d: X × X →R+ is a metric and a pair of set and measure
(X,d) is a metric space if:
(i) Positivity:
∀x,y ∈X: d(x,y) ≥0, d(x,y) = 0 ⇔x = y
(ii) Symmetry:
d(x,y) = d(y,x)
(iii) Triangle inequality:
∀z ∈X: d(x,z) ≤d(x,y) + d(y,z)
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Mathematical principles
Steipe uses these three conditions to prove that not only is RMSD between vectors
(RMSD(x,y)) a metric but so is RMSD after superposition (RMSDopt). RMSDopt is
used to measure the similarity between a pair of n-dimensional sets of vectors which
molecule structures can be viewed as.
Considering X:= R(3,n) and sets x in X: x1,…,xn, xi in R3. Since RMSD(x,y) is
equivalent to the Euclidian norm in R(3,n) without the dividing factor n it must be a
metric. Steipe then reformulates the sets x with respect to rotation and translation
such that x after optimal superposition on y
˜xy := {Mx→y(x1 −cx), . . . , Mx→y(xn −cx)} + ty
with Mx→y ∈R(3,3) being rotation matrices and ty ∈R3 being translation.
Steipe defines an equivalence class, since two vector sets that are equivalent apart
from arbitrary translation and rotation have RMSDopt = 0
x:{x,x’ in R(3,n), RMSDopt(x,x’)=0}
The conditions (i)-(iii) are then restated for RMSDopt(x,y) with respect to equivalence
classes
X:= R(3,n), d: R(3,n)× R(3,n) →R+, d(x,y):= ∥x −˜yx∥
with arbitrary choices of x in x:
(i’) Positivity:
∀x,y ∈R(3,n): d(x,y) ≥0, d(x,y) = 0 ⇔x = y
(ii’) Symmetry:
d(x,y) = d(y,x)
(iii’) Triangle inequality:
∀z ∈R(3,n): d(x,z) ≤d(x,y) + d(y,z)
Restating condition (i’) and (ii’) in terms of xi,yi ∈R3 and the definition of the
equivalence class show that since
(i’)
∀x,y ∈R(3,n): ∥x −˜yx∥≥0 ⇔x,y ∈x
and
(ii’)
∥x-˜yx∥= ∥y-˜xy∥from the metric properties of
∥xi −yi∥, xi,yi in R3,
both conditions hold after superposition.
Condition (iii) is restated with respect to the sets after transformation by optimal
superposition and by defining equivalence classes for x,y and z transformed by super-
position
(iii’) ∀z ∈R(3,n): ∥x-˜zx∥≤∥x-˜yx∥+ ∥y-˜zy∥
==PAGE:23==
3 Mathematical principles
13
As previously stated, if two vector sets differ by only rotation and translation RMSDopt
for those sets is 0. Thus it must hold that y,˜yx ∈y and ˜zy, ˜z˜y ∈z. Superposition of
˜zy on ˜yx combined with the triangle inequality in R(3,n) on (x, ˜yx, ˜z˜yx) gives that
∥x −˜z˜yx∥≤∥x −˜yx∥+ ∥˜yx −˜z˜yx∥
Thus by the definition of ˜zx:
∥x −˜zx∥≤∥x −˜z˜yx,
meaning that condition (iii) holds as well.
Since it has been proven that the three conditions for defining a metric or a metric
space hold for RMSD after optimal superposition, the proof by Boris Steipe is con-
cluded. Proving that RMSD is a metric for sets of vectors means that RMSD can be
used to evaluate the simulations performed in this project.
According to the GromacsWrapper manual [22] the formula used to calculate
the RMSD is
RMSD(t1,t2) = ( 1
M
∑N
i=1 mi∥ri(t1) −ri(t2)∥2)1/2,
which is slightly different than the standard formula in that a mass-score mi is multi-
plied onto the difference in order to take into consideration, that movement of mass
has a ‘cost’. This also accounts for the sum being divided by the total mass. M is
total mass, N is number of atoms and ri(t) is the position of atom i at time t.
The RMSD value is an indication of how similar a structure is to its reference in
terms of atom-atom distance, but usually it does not take the whole conformation into
account – meaning that differences in the side chain are not evaluated. A low RMSD
value indicates that the target and the reference have a seemingly high similarity
which in most cases is desirable.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Mathematical principles
3.0.2
Local Distance Difference Test
The (lDDT) score [16] measures how well the local interactions between the structure
and the reference are being conserved.
This is done by taking distances between
all pairs of atoms not belonging to the same residue in the reference structure into
account. If the distance between a pair of atoms fall within a chosen threshold or
inclusion radius it is taken into consideration.
lDDT can be defined given a list of (i,j) for the reference with dR
ij ≤15Å
%(| dR
ij −dmodel
ij
|≤0.5) + . . . + %(| dR
ij −dmodel
ij
|≤4)
4
,
with 15Å as the default inclusion radius measured on the reference structure. Each
distance is deemed conserved in the model of interest if it falls within one of 4 in-
tervals with given tolerances. In order for a distance to be conserved it has to have
a difference of either ±0.5Å, ±1Å ±2Å or ±4Å from the corresponding distance be-
tween the reference atoms pair. In order to compute the lDDT score, the amount
of conserved distances over the four different threshold values are found, giving the
lDDT score as the average of those fractions.
The lDDT score is calculated either through online software using the tools available
on http://swissmodel.expasy.org/lddt/ or via a standalone version that can be down-
loaded from http://swissmodel.expasy.org/lddt/downloads/.
In this project the standalone version has been used. The snaps taken of a large
number of frames of the model structure as well as a reference in pdb format are
taken as input and a pdb file containing the calculated lDDT score for each pair of
atoms is given as output. In order to visualize the results the relevant information
(frame number and lDDT score) is collected and sorted according to frame number.
In addition to the standalone version of lDDT a file containing the stereo-chemical
information is downloaded as well.
The file contains reference information about
residue type, mean and standard deviation for bonds and angles, and minimum dis-
tance and tolerance for non-bonded distances. These reference parameters were found
by Engh and Huber in 1991 and have been used as the standard for structure quality
checks since then. [26]
Stereo-chemical quality checks are performed before calculating the lDDT scores. This
ensures that the final lDDT scores represent both the accuracy of the modelled struc-
ture and its physical validity. All bond lengths, angles widths and distances between
non-bonded atom pairs for every amino acid type are compared with the reference
values provided in the stereo-chemical information file. A stereo-chemical violation
is defined as a case where the observed value differs from the average reference value
by 12 standard deviations (default) for bonds and angle widths or by 1.5Å for the
non-bonded distances. If a violation is detected, all distances involving atoms of that
==PAGE:25==
3 Mathematical principles
15
particular side chain or residue are considered non-conserved when calculating the
lDDT. The lists of pairs between which lDDT is calculated are potentially different,
such as in cases where a pair of atoms of distance less than 15Å in one structure has
distance greater than 15Å in the other. Therefore lDDT does not fulfil the rule of
symmetry and thus can not be a metric.
The desired outcome of an analysis of an MD simulation with the two evaluation
tools RMSD and lDDT would be RMSD values as close to 0 as possible and lDDT
scores as close to 1 as possible. For the sake of easy comparison the lDDT scores have
been subtracted from 1 when the results are visualised.
==PAGE:26==
16
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Restraints
The generation of restraints used in this project is important since any improvement
on the method relies on how good the restraints are. Restraints as a concepts is
explained here as well as the applied software and the conversion from software output
file to MD simulation input file.
4.1
Applying restraints
The restraints mentioned in this project refer to contact prediction restraints between
pairs of Cα-atoms. Adding contact prediction restraints is a way of strengthening
interactions between atoms in such way that the probability of the structure folding
in a reasonable manner increases.
4.1.1
GREMLIN
In order for restraint files to be generated for the various proteins simulated in this
project, the submission webpage http://gremlin.bakerlab.org/submit.php has been
used. The method creates contact predictions based on sequence alignment and sta-
tistical learning models by applying an algorithm called GREMLIN.[8]
GREMLIN is used to learn the statistical model of a protein family that captures
both coevolution and conservation in a specific sequence alignment. The statistical
model behind GREMLIN is a Markov Random Field (MRF) with log-linear potentials
and it has been proven that the accuracy obtained by using this learning approach is
higher than for other similar methods.[8]
MRF is defined as a set of random variables described by an undirected graphical
model having a Markov property, meaning that vertices are only dependent on their
neighbours. The global statistical method used in GREMLIN is better to distinguish
between direct and indirect coupling than older algorithms.
The submission page takes as input a starting alignment or single sequence in FASTA
format and outputs contact maps as well as contact prediction probability files. The
file used in this project contains all contact prediction probabilities and consists of 7
columns: two values giving the position of the residue, two values giving the position
ids, the raw score and the scaled score (which are not used in this project) and the
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Restraints
probability. The output has been filtered and re-formatted for further use as an input
file for MD simulation with restraints.
In the following an explanation of the procedure used to generate a contact restraint
file is given.
4.1.2
Generating restraints file
To create the restraints used in the second part of the simulation the output file from
GREMLIN and the conf.gro file generated in the first part of the MD simulation
(steps 0 to 5) have been used. The decision for choosing GREMLIN to generate the
restraint file is based on [8] as well as the fact that it is easy and free to use.
Firstly, the GREMLIN file has been filtered such that all rows with a contact pre-
diction probability lower than 0.9 have been removed. Then, for each row in the
filtered GREMLIN file the position values i and j are found and we are able to search
through the conf.gro file for the row containing the residue with the corresponding
residue number i or j as well as the correct atom name (Cα – here CA).
Example: The first two rows in a GREMLIN file could be
i
j
iid
jid
rscore
sscore
prob
2
15
2_A
15_P
…
…
1.00
which means that the corresponding lines, that should be identified in the conf.gro
file, have to following outline:
2ALA
CA
17
…
…
…
15PHE
CA
229
…
…
…
Thus for the restraints file the atom numbers ‘17’ and ‘229’ need to be extracted
and stored as the a_i and the a_j values.
The restraints file is in the format
a_i
a_j
type
index
type’
low
up1
up2
fac
17
229
1
0
1
0.2
0.8
1.2
1
with one line for every line in the Gremlin file with probability higher than 0.9.
In order to do this automatically a script has been produced by Matteo Tiberti, which
takes as input the GREMLIN and the conf.gro files and outputs the restraint file. The
script gremlin2itp.py can be seen in Appendix.
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Online tools and
sources
Several online sources have been used throughout this project both for collection
of relevant data and for retrieving information used for comparison with produced
results. The most important will be explained here.
5.0.1
UniProt
In preparation for the set up of MD simulations the UniProt website [1] has been the
primary source of data. It is a database containing - among other things - information
about a large number of protein sequences. The database is searchable using either
the name of the protein or the Protein Data Bank code (pdb code), and through
the website the user has the possibility to download pdb and FASTA format files
containing information about specific protein sequences. These formats are widely
used in various simulations and calculations. In this project pdb files are for instance
used as the input for the MD simulations, while the FASTA format is input in most
of the online calculation tools applied. Collecting data from textbfUniProt is free and
it is a collaboration between the SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, the Protein
Information Resource (PIR) and the European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI)
supported by a number of foundations and grants - mainly from the United Kingdoms.
5.0.2
HHpred and Modeller
HHpred is an online homology detection tool that based on a user input sequence
finds sequence alignments and closest homologs [24]. HHpred has in this project
been used by taking a FASTA format file from UniProt as input and getting a list
of homology proteins with alignments as output. Alignments of different similarity
have then been chosen and the software Modeller generates models based these
alignments.
Modeller is an online software designed for comparative modelling of proteins[11].
It requires a sequence alignment between the sequence of interest and a template as
input and gives a homology model as output. For this project the software has been
used in combination with running HHpred and the resulting models has been used
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Online tools and sources
as input for the MD simulations. Modeller is an online based open source software
under the Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology.
5.0.3
ResProx
ResProx (Resolution-by-proxy)[10] is an online calculator that takes a pdb file as
input in order to find the resolution of the submitted structure by using the atomic
coordinates provided within the file. ResProx is most often used to compare experi-
mental structures found using X-ray crystallography or Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
spectroscopy.
It is a possible candidate to use in future work as a substitute for
evaluation tools such as lDDT since it does not depend on a known reference in order
to calculate a score. This will be discussed later.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 6
Molecular Dynamics
One of the corner stones in this project is MD simulations. The idea behind MD, the
GromacsWrapper and the set up are explained as well as the scripts created as a
result of the implementation in Python in order to ensure a thorough understanding.
6.1
Retrieving data
In order to automatize the process of downloading pdb and FASTA files respectively
two scripts are prepared using Python 2.7 and they are called Code2File.py and
Code2Fasta.py. In this project they are used to get the files that are used in the
MD simulations. They can however be used for all cases where pdb or FASTA files
are needed. The package BioPython that is very useful when working on biological
problems and specifically proteins is used as well as other necessary packages, and
the source code can be seen in Appendix. The scripts are fairly similar and thus the
outline is explained as one.
First the scripts make sure that the input list provided by the user containing file
IDs or codes is in the right format. To ensure that users without prior knowledge of
these scripts can input lists of entries in various setups without encountering problems
running the scripts the input is ref-formatted to contain the entries in one column
without spaces or multiple entries on the same line. Then the appropriate URL from
where the pdb or FASTA file should be downloaded from is defined using either the
Protein Data Bank via www.rcsb.org/pdb/rest/search or the Uniprot webpage [1].
The retrieving part of the script is set up as a for-loop in order for it to go through
each entry individually. A read-to file is created to store the information for each
entry and then for each entry in the input list the scripts test whether the entry is
valid for the search. It then either outputs “File not found” or, in case of a valid
entry, downloads the corresponding file. The retrieved data is saved in in a folder
corresponding to the user input file.
For Code2File.py the extension pdb is added to make sure the output is the correct
format for using the file as input in the MD simulation.
For Code2Fasta.py the output is in txt format which is the correct format for using
the FASTA file as input in for instance HHpred or GREMLIN.
==PAGE:32==
22
6 Molecular Dynamics
6.2
MD simulation
The reason for performing MD simulation on a protein is to be able to examine it in
a simulated physiological environment in a naturally folded state. MD simulation is
performed using an input pdb file containing information about the protein of interest,
for instance obtained using the Protein Data Bank webpage. The input file has to
be converted to Gromacs format such that the necessary files for the rest of the
simulation steps are generated. The force field and compatible water model are also
chosen in this step.
To have a simulation environment a box is created around the protein, which can be
of any size and shape deemed fitting for the particular case. Most often when dealing
with globular proteins a dodecahedron is the best choice. The protein is centred in the
box that is then filled with water before the first energy minimization to make sure
the system is relaxed. Counter-ions are added to balance the system, whether it is in
order to imitate the salt concentration related to human physiology or to neutralize
the net charge, and another energy minimization is performed. In preparation for
the simulation the system constructed in the first steps is equilibrated . Having the
protein in an imitated physical environment the actual simulation part of MD can be
performed.
The first simulation step (NVT) is done in order to relax the system with respect to
constant temperature. If this is not done there is a risk of having a system where the
water molecules and the protein have different temperature which is not desirable.
When the system is equilibrated around a constant target temperature a very similar
step of ensuring normalized pressure is performed (NPT). As with the NVT step,
restraints generated earlier are still applied to the backbone of the protein. NVT and
NPT are performed very similarly. To obtain the target temperature all velocities
within the system are scaled when running the dynamics since the velocity of each
atom is distributed about an average. The same approach is applied in order to reach
the target pressure.
Before initiating the production MD step, one need to ensure that the system, that
has been simulated so far, is in equilibrium.
Lastly, the production step can be
initiated, where the only differences between this and the NVT and NPT steps are
that the restraints on the backbone no longer apply and that the sampling time is
longer.
6.3
Simulation set up
The MD simulation is typically performed using command line arguments with Gro-
macs and is in that case completely dependent on the user. One of the aims of this
thesis has been to automatize the MD simulation process to a point where a user with
very little prior computational knowledge only needs to download a folder containing
the script and some necessary input files and obtain pdb files for all proteins the
user would like to perform MD simulation on, in a cleaned form. Having these, the
==PAGE:33==
6.4 GromacsWrapper
23
simulation can be run using very few commands within the terminal. The automati-
zation will also allow us to collect more efficiently simulations of multiple systems at
the same time. All steps both in the preparation and the simulation has been done
manually before scripting in order to ensure a thorough understanding of the process.
The automatized pipeline, that can be seen in full in Appendix, is set up in Python
since a package called GromacsWrapper has been developed by Beckstein et al. [9]
6.4
GromacsWrapper
The set-up of the MD simulation is based on the aforementioned Python package
GromacsWrapper. It allows the user to almost directly translate Gromacs com-
mand line arguments into Python code, making it possible to follow the developed
pipeline for MD simulation. Since one of the aims of this project was to develop one
or more scripts that could handle MD simulations of multiple structures with only
an initial input from the user, the GromacsWrapper was the obvious choice. It
consists of several packages each containing a number of functions targeting different
aspects of both MD simulation and other applications of Gromacs.
6.5
Implementation
The MD simulation code has been modelled such that it bears close resemblance to
the way the simulation is carried out manually. This is done in order to keep the
logic steps of the simulation as well as making it easier to check if the steps are done
successfully.
In the following, the set up will be explained with several of the most important
functions in the steps described in more detail and with a separate part showing the
differences between the set up with and without restraints.
The flow chart in Figure 5.1 should be used as a reference when reading the explana-
tion of the different steps included in the script.
==PAGE:34==
24
6 Molecular Dynamics
Figure 6.1: Flow chart of MD simulation steps provided by Juan Salamanca Vilora.
==PAGE:35==
6.5 Implementation
25
6.5.1
Preparation
The script takes two arguments as input: the list of pdb files obtained either manually
or by using a script such as Code2File.py and the name of the folder where the
user wants the output to be stored.
This could for instance be named after the
structure being simulated. The pdb input files are as previously mentioned obtained
through for instance the Protein Data Bank or HHpred depending on whether it is
a known reference structure or a model structure. To ensure the user can maintain a
full overview of the different steps in the script, subdirectories will be created when
necessary – this also makes sure that the individual simulations for each entry in the
list of pdb files get a separate directory. For each step a ‘step’-folder is created in
order to keep the files created in e.g. step 0 separate from the ones created in step 1.
This also ensures that if the script experience an error and stops the user can easily
see where the error occurred. In order to be able to run the script a folder called
’Files’ should be provided. It contains the necessary input files as well as files defining
the force field.
6.5.2
Step 0: 0-start
The first real step in the MD simulation is the conversion step. Here a pdb input
files is converted to gmx format using the pdb2gmx tool in order to have to correct
format to carry on the rest of the simulation. The pdb file is imported to the ‘0-start’
folder from the user supplied input folder in order to be used as one of the input
for pdb2gmx. The desired force field and water model also have to be specified and
should be changed before running the script in case the user wants to use a different
force field and water model. The user is advised to give some consideration to what
force field and water model are suitable for the simulation of the desired case. In the
initial preparation of the pipeline the force field CHARMM22* explained in Chapter
2 has been chosen along the corresponding water model TIP3P.
6.5.3
Step 1: 1-box
A folder named ‘1-box’ is created and the necessary output files from ‘0-start’ are
imported in order to use them in the simulation. Creating a new folder and copying
files into it are generic commands that are performed in all steps going forward and
they will not be mentioned again. Having the files needed to perform this step the
function Editconf from the ‘tools’ package in the GromacsWrapper is used to create
a box with the shape set as ’dodecahedron’. The distance between the solute and the
box is set to ’1.2’ to make sure the protein does not have any contact with the box.
These are the standard settings and have been chosen since we do not expect any big
abnormalities in the chosen cases. The ‘tools’ package is used throughout the script
as it contains most of the functions used to set up the MD simulation. The Genbox
function fills the box created using Editconf with solvent - in the initial simulations
the provided file ’spc216.gro’ is used as solvent. In order for the user to verify that
==PAGE:36==
26
6 Molecular Dynamics
the structure has been put in a box, a pdb file is generated using Editconf a second
time and can be visualized using for instance PyMOL.
6.5.4
Step 2: 2-min
In step 2 the first energy minimization is performed - it will be repeated later. The
purpose of running an energy minimization is as explained earlier to make sure the
system is relaxed and do not have any irregularities, and here the steepest descend
method is used as default. The min.mdp file is imported from the supplied ‘Files’
folder and used as one of the inputs in the Grompp function.
The Grompp function is used throughout most of the steps in the simulation and will
only be explained here. It is a pre-processor that expands the topology of an input
file from a molecular description to an atomic one. It uses the corresponding mdp
file provided in ‘Files’ and the topology file as well as the file containing information
about the box generated in step 1 and thus provides the input to the Mdrun function.
The Mdrun function can perform (among other things) energy minimization based
on the binary output file from running the Grompp function and is used in most of
the remaining steps to perform the actual MD simulation.
6.5.5
Step 3: 3-ions
The mdp file from step 2 can be re-used since the minimization is performed to
relax the system and generate a structure file used as input in this step. Having the
environment ready, counter-ions are added to the container in order to balance the
net charge - considering for instance the salt concentration in the experiment used
as base for the simulation. The input for the function adding the ions is made using
Grompp with the mdp and gro files from step 2. The function Genion makes sure
ions are added, randomly distributed and in balance with the rest of the system by
replacing solvent molecules with ions. When this step is run manually the user will
be asked to choose from a list of solvents. When creating the script user input are
eliminated using ‘input=’ to specify choices. If the user wishes to use another solvent
it should be changed before the script is run. In this project the solvent is chosen as
‘SOL’. The salt concentration is set to 0.150 mol/l and since the option ‘neutral=True’
is specified enough ions are added to neutralized the system.
6.5.6
Step 4: 4-min.ions
A repetition of the previous minimization step is performed on the system containing
the added ions. The mdp file used in step 2 and 3 is used as input to the Grompp
function as well as the output file from running Genion. Again the MD simulation is
performed using Mdrun on the system being minimized.
==PAGE:37==
6.6 Simulation
27
6.5.7
Step 5: 5-equil
Before starting the actual simulation the system generated so far has to be equili-
brated. In this step the ‘charmm22st.ff’ folder provided in ‘Files’ has to be imported
to the 5-equil folder as well as the ‘equil.mdp’ file from ‘Files’. The structure output
file created in step 4 is used as input in the function Genrestr that gives the position
restraints as output. The choice of index group is defined with the ‘input=’ solution
mentioned before and set to ‘Protein’. The position restraint file is included in the
mdp file used in Grompp to generate the input for the MD simulation with Mdrun.
Thus in this step the solvent around the protein is relaxed after adding ions and
performing minimization, which means that the water molecules and ions can move
while the protein stay fixed within the simulated box.
6.6
Simulation
The steps performed until now are independent of whether contact prediction re-
straints are enforced or not. Regardless of whether the user intend to perform the
MD simulation with or without restraints, the first 6 steps (0-start to 5-equil) should
be run as preparation.
The set up presented here is general in the sense, that if the whole script is run as it
is, the MD simulation is performed without restraints. An additional script has been
prepared to only perform steps 6 to 9 with restraints and with output from 5-equil.
This is simply the last part of the general script with different input files.
The contact prediction restraints are used in the simulation by adding a file containing
the restraints to the topology file generated in 5-equil. This had to be done manually
as time for this project was limited. Furthermore, different input files provided in
‘Files_restraints’ are used as input to include the restraints in the different steps.
6.6.1
Step 6: 6-pre.nvt
After the preparation, the output files from ’5-equil’ including the position restraints
file are imported to ’6-pre.nvt’ as well as the ‘charmm22st.ff’ folder and the ‘pre.nvt.mdp’
file from the provided ’Files’ folder. Using Grompp on the mdp file the system is
relaxed with respect to the desired temperature by performing a simulation with con-
stant volume, temperature and number of atoms. In this project a temperature of
300 K is applied. As in previous steps Mdrun is used to perform the simulation.
6.6.2
Step 7: 7-npt
Similar to the previous step, a simulation with constant number of atoms, temperature
and pressure is done such that the system is relaxed with respect to the correct
pressure. The preparation is set up using the Grompp function with the corresponding
==PAGE:38==
28
6 Molecular Dynamics
mdp file, ‘npt-new.mdp’, and the output gro file from ’6-pre-nvt’ along with the
‘charmm22st.ff’ folder and then run using Mdrun on the output file.
6.6.3
Step 8: 8-eq
When the entire system has been relaxed the restraints on the backbone are removed
and the system is equilibrated in the same manner as in step 5. This time since
the restraints on the backbone have been removed the entire system including the
structure can move. As with the two previous steps the ‘charmm22st.ff’ folder, the
‘eq.mdp’ file and the necessary output files from ’7-npt’ are imported and used as
input in Grompp. The simulation is as always performed using Mdrun.
6.6.4
Step 9: 9-md
In order to complete the MD simulation a last step ’9-md’ is performed. Since it
requires a lot of computational power it is recommended that the user runs the script
as it is and then moves to a stronger external host. On the local cluster used for
the simulation in this project only 24 cores were available to run in parallel. Thus
moving the production part of step 9 is done in order to minimize the running time
as the final part of step 9 can be very time consuming. ’9-md’ has the same set up
as the previous three steps with the input structure being completely relaxed. The
first part of the last step is included in the script in order to minimize the amount of
work the user has to perform.
It should be mentioned that the performance of Gromacs scales with the number of
cores used,meaning that by allocating 32 cores gives double speed compared to using
16 cores. The desired length of each simulation is 1 microsecond and given that it
is possible to collect 40 to 50 ns per day when allocating 32 cores, the time frame is
long. Due to time limitations in this project the results that are presented are not all
1 microsecond.
From the final run the output file traj.xtc can be used to perform the analysis.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 7
The two modelled
examples
Two examples, Thioredoxin and Chemotaxis protein CheY (CheY), have been used
to test the methods described in this project. In order to be able to make a working
pipeline and evaluate the performance, cases with known structures are used. To
ensure that the simulations are reasonably short and manageable small proteins have
been selected, with each of the chosen ones being around 100 residues long. The
protein structures should be fairly representative and thus contain both alpha-helices
and beta-sheets without a lot of unstructured parts.
Since this project is mainly
about constructing the appropriate pipeline for a full MD simulation and analysis
as well as automatizing it and showing whether the method works, proteins with
known 3D structures have been chosen in order to be able to evaluate the results
with respect to a reference structure. Thioredoxin and CheY have been part of a
study [17], which shows that they could potentially be candidates for giving good,
representative results. The authors were able to fold most of these two structures
using coevolution information only and they both have a number of known, similar
structures. A short description of the two proteins is given below.
7.1
Thioredoxin
The first of the two chosen proteins is Thioredoxin.
It is a redox protein that is
present in all organisms and it plays a role in a lot of biological processes such as redox
signalling. It has been found that Thioredoxin is very important in both humans and
plants – in the latter it is involved in e.g. photosynthesis, development of seeds and
cell-to-cell communication. As seen on Figure 7.1 it contains both alpha-helices and
beta-sheets.
==PAGE:40==
30
7 The two modelled examples
Figure 7.1: Visualisation of the 3D structure of Thioredoxin..
7.2
Chemotaxis protein CheY
The other protein used in this project is CheY. It is a signalling protein involved in
the process of rotation of the E. coli flagellum – called chemotaxis. CheY in active
form can bind to a switch component that directs the rotation. As seen on Figure
7.2 it contains both alpha-helices and beta-sheets like Thioredoxin.
Figure 7.2: Visualisation of the 3D structure of Chemotaxis protein CheY..
7.3
Experimental structures and models
Since the majority of the work in this project has been to develop an automatic set
up of an otherwise manual process, the cases that have been used are selected based
on the fact that they have a number of known structures made with either NMR
or crystallography. Knowing the 3D structure of these makes it possible to evaluate
whether the pipeline is functioning correctly when models playing the role of targets
==PAGE:41==
7.3 Experimental structures and models
31
with unknown 3D structure are simulated.
An experimental structure is as the name implies a structure that has been verified
experimentally and thus is known in terms of sequence and 3D structure. The FASTA
and pdb files for the experimental structures used as input for the simulations have
been found using Uniprot through cross-references to the Protein Data Bank which
is the experimental structure database.
The experimental structures used in this
project are either NMR or crystallography structures. For CheY the NMR structures
are 1CEY, 1CYE and 1DJM and for Thioredoxin it is 1QUW while 3CHY for CheY
is a crystallographic structure. All are wild types. One experimental structure for
each case has been used as reference based on the fact that they are almost identical
with the actual proteins, Thioredoxin and CheY. Those were 3CHY for Chey and
1QUW for THIO.
The models are based on existing structures of proteins similar to CheY and
Thioredoxin in that they have the same folding but with slightly different sequence.
To make the models HHpred with the original FASTA file for the corresponding
protein is run in order to get multiple sequence alignments.
The model is then
created with Modeller by selecting templates with the desired similarity for which
to base the model on. In our cases the templates 3q9s for CHEY and 4ekz for THIO
with a similarity of approximately 25 % have been chosen.
Figure 7.3: Chosen similarity range.
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 8
Evaluation of MD
simulations
The process of analysing and evaluating the data from the MD simulations carried
out in this project will be split into two parts: Preparation and cleaning of the
output trajectory files from steps 5 and 9 and evaluation of the cleaned output using
the previously mentioned tools RMSD and lDDT. All structures are prepared and
evaluated using the same process and it will be explained here.
8.1
Preparation
The trajectory file and the structure file generated in step 9 in the MD simulation
as well as the structure file generated in step 5 are used as input in the preparation.
The trajectory is cleaned for any ‘jumps’ in two steps using the trjconv function. The
option –pbc is a way of setting the periodic boundary condition treatment type and
has been used twice. Once to put the centre of mass of the molecules in the box and
once to make sure all atoms that jump across the box are put back. This ensures
that the resulting trajectory file is continuous and can be used in the evaluation.
In preparation for similarity evaluation snaps of the simulation are stored in a direc-
tory such that the files in pdb format can be used as input for the lDDT. The option
–dt 100 makes the function take one frame for every 100 which simplifies capturing
the changes in the structure.
8.2
Evaluation
The evaluation has been done using two distance measures, RMSD and lDDT ex-
plained in previous chapters. RMSD can be performed in Gromacs using the func-
tion g_rms with the cleaned trajectory file of the structure in question and a structure
file of the corresponding reference structure as input. The user has to choose what
type of atom the distance is calculated on. In this project the Cα–atoms are chosen.
The output from the function is an xvg file that can be visualised in programs such
as Grace or Gnuplot. The latter has been used in this project.
==PAGE:44==
34
8 Evaluation of MD simulations
As explained previously the online version of lDDT is available on
http://swissmodel.expasy.org/lddt/ and the standalone version on
http://swissmodel.expasy.org/lddt/downloads/.
The standalone version is used here with input in the form of a pdb file of the ref-
erence structure and the list of snapshots generated in the preparation. In addition
to downloading the lDDT software it is important to make sure a file containing
the stereo-chemical conditions is included in the directory containing the snaps. The
output file from lDDT has to be sorted in order to extract the relevant information
which in this case is the frame number and the global lDDT score. The output is in
txt format and can be plotted in the same way as RMSD.
==PAGE:45==
8.3 Results
35
8.3
Results
The results are presented for the two cases. For each case RMSD and lDDT have been
calculated and plotted for the individual structures. The visualizations are examined
in terms of how the models, and in the CheY case the experimental structures of low
similarity, behave compared to the reference. Both RMSD and lDDT are calculated
for each structure with respect to the corresponding reference structure 1QUW or
3CHY.
8.3.1
Thioredoxin
Figure 7.1 shows RMSD for the experimental reference structure 1QUW as well as
the model with and without restraints, mod_4ekzrest and mod_4ekznorest. It is seen
how 1QUW lies steadily around 0.15 nm while mod_4ekzrest and mod_4ekznorest
start around 0.2nm and 0.25nm. mod_4ekzrest declines slightly over time, thus ap-
proaching the reference, while mod_4ekznorest fluctuates more than mod_4ekzrest
and is inclining. The model without restraints lies consistently above the model with
restraints indicating that the adding of restraints improves the model and makes it
more similar to the reference in terms of distance.
Figure 8.1: RMSD for Thioredoxin for the experimental reference structure and the
model with and without restraints..
==PAGE:46==
36
8 Evaluation of MD simulations
As with RMSD the lDDT scores for the reference 1QUW, mod_4ekzrest and
mod_4ekznorest are shown in Figure 7.2. lDDT is calculated for every frame and
has been subtracted from 1 in order to get a visualization that is comparable to that
of RMSD. It thus shows the tendency instead of the actual value which means that
low scores are desirable in the visualisation.
The reference 1QUW and mod_4ekzrest are very similar and lie steadily around 0.28
apart from the initial frames where mod_4ekzrest lies slightly higher than 1QUW.
mod_4ekznorest fluctuates a lot around 0.35 but lies consistently higher than the
model with restraints. As with RMSD this is an indication that adding restraints
makes the model approach the reference.
Figure 8.2: lDDT for Thioredoxin for the experimental reference structure and the
model with and without restraints..
==PAGE:47==
8.3 Results
37
8.3.2
Chemotaxis protein CheY
Similar to the RMSD plot for Thioredoxin, Figure 7.3 shows the RMSD values for
the experimental reference structure 3CHY as well as the model with and without re-
straints, mod_3q9snorest and mod_3q9srest. The plot shows that 3CHY lies around
0.125nm with only minor fluctuation while mod_3q9snorest and mod_3q9srest fluc-
tuate around 0.35nm. In this case the model with restraints does not show clear signs
of being improved by adding restraints compared to the model without restraints.
Figure 8.3: RMSD for Chemotaxis protein CheY for the experimental reference
structure and the model with and without restraints..
==PAGE:48==
38
8 Evaluation of MD simulations
In addition to the reference and the model, a visualisation of RMSD for the other
experimental structures is presented in Figure 7.4. It is seen that both 1CEY and
1DJM lie consistently high around 0.35nm in comparison with the reference. 1CYE
fluctuates but mainly stays around the same values as 3CHY.
Figure 8.4: RMSD for Chemotaxis protein CheY for the experimental structures..
==PAGE:49==
8.3 Results
39
Similar to lDDT for Thioredoxin, the lDDT scores calculated for CheY have been
subtracted from 1 and can be seen in Figure 7.5.
The graph for the reference 3CHY is very similar to the RMSD for 3CHY and lies
around 0.2 with minor fluctuations. The model without restraints, mod_3q9snorest,
is steady between 0.35 and 0.4 with mod_3q9srest almost consistently below.
Figure 8.5: lDDT for Chemotaxis protein CheY for the experimental reference struc-
ture and the model with and without restraints..
==PAGE:50==
40
8 Evaluation of MD simulations
The experimental structures are presented in Figure 7.6. 1CYE and 3CHY lie
around 0.2 with a slight increase from frame 5000 while 1DJM fluctuates a lot with
values very different from the reference. It is not clear from the plot but 1CEY is
similar to 1CYE and 3CHY.
Figure 8.6: lDDT for Chemotaxis protein CheY for the experimental structures..
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion and
Discussion
Based on the results presented in the previous part, some conclusions can be made.
One of the aims was to set up scripts in Python to perform MD simulation automati-
cally. The scripts for MD simulation both with and without restraints are functional
and can be used as they are or with changed parameters. Another aim was to exam-
ine whether adding restraints to the contacts between pairs of Cα-atoms within the
model structure would improve the model in such a way that it becomes more similar
to the reference structure. The results indicate that adding restraints can increase
the similarity between a model and its corresponding reference structure. They show
that for one of the cases the model is improved significantly and in the other case a
small improvement can be seen.
Several steps can be done to improve on the work performed in this project. In order
to confirm whether adding restraints can in fact improve a model with respect to its
corresponding reference tests on a larger number of cases have to be performed. To
ensure that improvements are not confined to small neat proteins, both bigger and
less well defined proteins should be simulated in future works.
The production step of the MD simulation is the most time consuming part of the
simulation which is the reason it has to be moved to a stronger server. In general,
improvements of the pipeline in terms of time should be focused on steps 6 to 9 as
these require the most running time. Optimization of the parameters used in the MD
simulation is another thing that should be examined. A higher force constant value
has been tested but has not shown any immediate improvement. This could however
be one of the parameters that could be improved.
The evaluation tools RMSD and lDDT can be used to look at differences in terms
of distance but only work when a reference with known structure is available. Addi-
tional evaluation tools should be applied to make it possible to apply the method to
all cases. One possibility is to use ResProx as the calculation of a score does not
depend on a known reference. This is a desirable trait as the hope is to apply MD
simulation to cases with unknown 3D structure. Furthermore, automatization of the
analysis pipeline should be set up as either a standalone version or run as a part of
the MD simulation script, since analysis and evaluation of the simulation outcome
are essential parts.
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX A
Python code
Code2File.py:
1 # Otherwise the user can input a list of codes as a file
2
3 #Import various packages needed
4 import urllib2
5 import Bio
6 import csv
7 import itertools
8 import glob
9 import os
10
11
12 # Define url and load Bio
13 from Bio.PDB import *
14 pdbl = PDBList()
15 url = 'http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/rest/search' # PDB web page
16
17 file = raw_input("Enter the file containing the list of codes here: ")
18 codes = open(file)
19 reader = csv.reader(codes)
20 codes_list = list(itertools.chain(*reader))
21 print codes_list
22
23 for num in xrange(0, len(codes_list)):
24
# Looking through all files in url and outputs the matching one
25
req = urllib2.Request(url, data=codes_list[num])
26
f = urllib2.urlopen(req)
27
result = f.read()
28
# If-statement just in case the user input isn't a valid code or the code
doesn't exists
29
if result:
30
print "The PDB-file is found as:"
31
pdbl.retrieve_pdb_file(pdb_code=codes_list[num], pdir="/home/student/
PROJECT/PDB/THIO") #Sends the files to directory /home/student/
PROJECT/PDB
32
for filename in glob.iglob(os.path.join('/home/student/PROJECT/PDB/THIO'
, '*.ent')):
33
os.rename(filename, filename[:-4] + '.pdb')
34
else:
35
print "PDB-file not found"
Code2File.py.
==PAGE:54==
44
A Python code
Code2Fasta.py:
1
2 # Script to get protein sequence in FASTA format as text-file
3
4 #Import various packages needed
5 import urllib2
6 import urllib
7 import Bio
8 import csv
9 import itertools
10
11 # Define url
12 url = 'http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/rest/search' # PDB web page
13
14 # First enter the IDs we want FASTA files for and make it into a list
suitable for searching
15 file = raw_input("Enter the file containing the list of codes here: ")
16 codes = open(file)
17 reader = csv.reader(codes)
18 codes_list = list(itertools.chain(*reader))
19 print codes_list
20
21 # For every entry in the given file:
22 for num in xrange(0, len(codes_list)):
23
# Looking through all files in url to make sure the given entry is valid
24
req = urllib2.Request(url, data=codes_list[num])
25
f = urllib2.urlopen(req)
26
result = f.read()
27
# If-statement just in case the user input isn't a valid code or the code
doesn't exists
28
if result:
29
print "Fasta-file for " + codes_list[num] + " found."
30
FileName = codes_list[num]+'.txt' # Create a .txt file for each code
31
File = open(FileName,'w') # Open that file such that one can save data
in that file
32
data = urllib.urlopen("http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/" + codes_list[num
] + ".fasta").read() # Download the corresponding data (just the
fasta info)
33
File.write(data) # Save the data in the .fasta file
34
else:
35
print "Fasta-file not found"
Code2Fasta.py.
==PAGE:55==
A Python code
45
MD simulation general script:
1 '''
2 Script to run entire MD simulation etc in one go - on local (or at least
only one) host.
3
4 > nohup python MD_local_FINAL.py directory_name pdb-folder_name -v >& log &
--> this is how it should be run - that way user won't have to enter
this script or change anything
5
6 User input - given as a file containing the codes we want results for.
7 Before running the script, the user should look through the supplied files
in folder 'Files' and change parameters if neccesary
8
9 Also, make sure to be in the desired directory - where all the stuff related
to pdb files, MD etc. should be stored - for instance /home/student/
PROJECT/MD
10 This is taken care of in line 20-31 and should be checked beforehand by the
user
11 Check that the PDB file can be used with Charmm22* - change ZN to Zn2 etc
before
12 '''
13 import os
14 import glob
15 import shutil
16 import gromacs
17 import gromacs.tools as tools
18 import gromacs.utilities as utilities
19 import gromacs.qsub as qsub
20 import gromacs.setup as setup
21 import sys
22
23 #arg1 = directory-name - e.g. "test_of_THIO"
24 #arg2 = pdb-folder-name - e.g. "THIO_pdb
25 arg1 = sys.argv[1] # list of arguments given by the user in the command line
- can be used with "nohup ... -v >& log &"
26 arg2 = sys.argv[2]
27
28 # makes sure alle files are saved within the current working directory
29 _directory = os.getcwd()
30
31 # State what the user wants to name the directory
32 directory_name = arg1
33
34 # create name
35 _dir = os.path.join(_directory, directory_name)
36
37 # create dir, if it does not exist
38 if not os.path.exists(_dir):
39
os.makedirs(_dir)
40
41 # This way for every file we want to run this script for, there will be a
separate folder containing all material related to that specific file
42
43 # Make subdirectory within that folder where the pdb-files can be stored
==PAGE:56==
46
A Python code
44 pdb_folder_name = arg2 #'PDBFOLDER' testing folder
45 # For instance CHEY_pdb, CADH1_pdb or THIO_pdb
46
47 # Make the directory into a list s.t. the entries can be called later on
48 from os import listdir
49 pdb_list = listdir(pdb_folder_name)
50
51
52 for num in xrange(0, len(pdb_list)):
53
# Make sure to be in the correct directory - in this case it should be the
_dir (namely the directory from which the script is run)
54
# Assign the name of the model as determined earlier to the variable '
modelname'
55
modelname = 'Model_'+pdb_list[num]
56
# Now the different paths w. directories are made basically it should be "
Home" --> model_XXXX --> md.no.constraint --> 0-start
57
# Make model_XXXX directory
58
newdir = os.path.join(_dir, modelname)
59
if not os.path.exists(newdir):
60
os.makedirs(newdir)
61
# Enter the above directory
62
os.chdir(newdir)
63
64
# Make md.no.constraint directory
65
mdnocon = os.path.join(newdir, 'md.no.constraint')
66
if not os.path.exists(mdnocon):
67
os.makedirs(mdnocon)
68
# Enter the above directory
69
os.chdir(mdnocon)
70
71
# Having the proper layout of the directories , steps 0 to 5 can be
performed
72
# 0-start
73
# Make 0-start directory
74
start = os.path.join(mdnocon, '0-start')
75
if not os.path.exists(start):
76
os.makedirs(start)
77
# Enter above directory
78
os.chdir(start)
79
# Copy the .pdb file into the current work-directory
80
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+pdb_folder_name+'/'+pdb_list[num], pdb_list
[num])
81
# Convert pdb file to gromacs format in order to be able to carry out the
next steps as well as get the .top file. CHARMM22* and TIP3P are used
- make sure the pdb files are compatible with
this forcefield
82
start_output = tools.Pdb2gmx(f=pdb_list[num],o='start.gro',water='tip3p',p
='start.top',ff='charmm22st',ignh=True)
83
start_output.run()
84
85
# 1-box
86
# Make 1-box directory
87
box = os.path.join(mdnocon, '1-box')
88
if not os.path.exists(box):
89
os.makedirs(box)
90
# Enter above directory
==PAGE:57==
A Python code
47
91
os.chdir(box)
92
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
93
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/0-start/start.gro', 'start.gro')
94
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/0-start/start.top', 'start.top')
95
# Perform editconf in dodecahedron , distance 1.2
96
box_editconf_output = tools.Editconf(f='start.gro',d=1.2,bt='dodecahedron'
,o='box.12.gro')
97
box_editconf_output.run()
98
# Perform genbox
99
box_genbox_output = tools.Genbox(cp='box.12.gro',cs='spc216.gro',p='start.
top',o='wbox.gro')
100
box_genbox_output.run()
101
# Use editconf to produce an output file in pdb format s.t. the user can
visualize in order to check if output is ok to proceed with
102
box_editconf_pdb_output = tools.Editconf(f='wbox.gro',o='wbox.pdb')
103
box_editconf_pdb_output.run()
104
105
# 2-min
106
# Make 2-min directory
107
minimize = os.path.join(mdnocon, '2-min')
108
if not os.path.exists(minimize):
109
os.makedirs(minimize)
110
# Enter above directory
111
os.chdir(minimize)
112
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
113
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/1-box/wbox.gro', 'wbox.gro')
114
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/1-box/start.top', 'start.top')
115
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy min.mdp --> remember to have the
values changed before running the script!
116
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/min.mdp', 'min.mdp')
117
minimize_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='min.mdp',c='wbox.gro', p='start.
top', o='min.tpr', maxwarn=2)
118
minimize_grompp_output.run()
119
minimize_mdrun_output = tools.Mdrun(s='min.tpr', nt=8)# v >& log &
120
minimize_mdrun_output.run()
121
122
# 3-ions
123
# Make 3-ions directory
124
ions = os.path.join(mdnocon, '3-ions')
125
if not os.path.exists(ions):
126
os.makedirs(ions)
127
# Enter above directory
128
os.chdir(ions)
129
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
130
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/2-min/confout.gro', 'conf.gro')
131
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/2-min/start.top', 'start.top')
132
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy necessary files
133
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/min.mdp', 'ions.mdp')
134
ions_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='ions.mdp',c='conf.gro', p='start.top'
==PAGE:58==
48
A Python code
, o='ions.tpr', maxwarn=2)
135
ions_grompp_output.run()
136
ions_genion_output = tools.Genion(s='ions.tpr', conc=0.150, neutral=True,
input='SOL', p='start.top', o='ions.gro') #
137
ions_genion_output.run()
138
139
# 4-min.ions
140
# Make 4-min.ions directory
141
minions = os.path.join(mdnocon, '4-min.ions')
142
if not os.path.exists(minions):
143
os.makedirs(minions)
144
# Enter above directory
145
os.chdir(minions)
146
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
147
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/3-ions/ions.gro', 'ions.gro')
148
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/3-ions/start.top', 'start.top')
149
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy necessary files
150
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/min.mdp', 'min.mdp')
151
minions_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='min.mdp',c='ions.gro', p='start.
top', o='min.tpr', maxwarn=2)
152
minions_grompp_output.run()
153
minions_mdrun_output = tools.Mdrun(s='min.tpr', nt=8)# v >& log &
154
minions_mdrun_output.run()
155
156
# 5-equil
157
# Make 5-equil directory
158
equil = os.path.join(mdnocon, '5-equil')
159
if not os.path.exists(equil):
160
os.makedirs(equil)
161
# Enter above directory
162
os.chdir(equil)
163
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
164
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/4-min.ions/confout.gro', 'conf.gro')
165
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/4-min.ions/start.top', 'start.top')
166
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy necessary files
167
shutil.copytree(_directory+'/'+'Files/charmm22st.ff/', 'charmm22st.ff/')
168
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/equil.mdp', 'equil.mdp')
169
# Compute genrestr
170
equil_genrestr_output = tools.Genrestr(f='conf.gro', input='Protein', o='
posre.itp')
171
equil_genrestr_output.run()
172
# Perform grompp and mdrun
173
equil_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='equil.mdp',c='conf.gro', p='start.
top', o='equil.tpr', maxwarn=3)
174
equil_grompp_output.run()
175
equil_mdrun_output = tools.Mdrun(s='equil.tpr', nt=8)# v >& log &
176
equil_mdrun_output.run()
177
178
179
# 6-pre.nvt
180
# Make 6-pre.nvt directory
==PAGE:59==
A Python code
49
181
prenvt = os.path.join(mdnocon, '6-pre.nvt')
182
if not os.path.exists(prenvt):
183
os.makedirs(prenvt)
184
# Enter above directory
185
os.chdir(prenvt)
186
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
187
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/5-equil/confout.gro', 'conf.gro')
188
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/5-equil/start.top', 'start.top')
189
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/5-equil/posre.itp', 'posre.itp')
190
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy necessary files
191
shutil.copytree(_directory+'/'+'Files/charmm22st.ff/', 'charmm22st.ff/')
192
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/pre.nvt.mdp', 'pre.nvt.mdp')
193
# Perform grompp and mdrun
194
prenvt_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='pre.nvt.mdp',c='conf.gro', p='start
.top', o='pre.nvt.tpr', maxwarn=3)
195
prenvt_grompp_output.run()
196
prenvt_mdrun_output = tools.Mdrun(s='pre.nvt.tpr', nt=8)# v >& log &
197
prenvt_mdrun_output.run()
198
199
200
# 7-npt
201
# Make 7-npt directory
202
npt = os.path.join(mdnocon, '7-npt')
203
if not os.path.exists(npt):
204
os.makedirs(npt)
205
# Enter above directory
206
os.chdir(npt)
207
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
208
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/6-pre.nvt/confout.gro', 'conf.gro')
209
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/6-pre.nvt/start.top', 'start.top')
210
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/6-pre.nvt/posre.itp', 'posre.itp')
211
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy necessary files
212
shutil.copytree(_directory+'/'+'Files/charmm22st.ff/', 'charmm22st.ff/')
213
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/npt-new.mdp', 'npt-new.mdp')
214
# Perform grompp and mdrun
215
npt_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='npt-new.mdp',c='conf.gro', p='start.
top', o='npt.tpr', maxwarn=3)
216
npt_grompp_output.run()
217
npt_mdrun_output = tools.Mdrun(s='npt.tpr', nt=8)# v >& log &
218
npt_mdrun_output.run()
219
220
221
# 8-eq
222
# Make 8-eq directory
223
eq = os.path.join(mdnocon, '8-eq')
224
if not os.path.exists(eq):
225
os.makedirs(eq)
226
# Enter above directory
227
os.chdir(eq)
==PAGE:60==
50
A Python code
228
# Copy the neccessary file into the current work-directory
229
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/7-npt/confout.gro', 'conf.gro')
230
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/7-npt/start.top', 'start.top')
231
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/7-npt/posre.itp', 'posre.itp')
232
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy necessary files
233
shutil.copytree(_directory+'/'+'Files/charmm22st.ff/', 'charmm22st.ff/')
234
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/eq.mdp', 'eq.mdp')
235
# Perform grompp and mdrun
236
eq_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='eq.mdp',c='conf.gro', p='start.top', o=
'eq.tpr', maxwarn=3)
237
eq_grompp_output.run()
238
eq_mdrun_output = tools.Mdrun(s='eq.tpr', nt=8)# v >& log &
239
eq_mdrun_output.run()
240
241
242
# 9-md
243
# Make 9-md directory
244
md = os.path.join(mdnocon, '9-md')
245
if not os.path.exists(md):
246
os.makedirs(md)
247
# Enter above directory
248
os.chdir(md)
249
# Copy the necessary file into the current work-directory
250
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/8-eq/confout.gro', 'conf.gro')
251
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/8-eq/start.top', 'start.top')
252
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+directory_name+'/'+modelname+'/'+'md.no.
constraint/8-eq/posre.itp', 'posre.itp')
253
# From the supplied folder 'Files', copy necessary files
254
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/mdchain', 'mdchain')
255
shutil.copytree(_directory+'/'+'Files/charmm22st.ff/', 'charmm22st.ff/')
256
shutil.copyfile(_directory+'/'+'Files/md.mdp', 'md.mdp')
257
# Perform grompp
258
eq_grompp_output = tools.Grompp(f='md.mdp',c='conf.gro', p='start.top', o=
'md.tpr', maxwarn=3)
259
eq_grompp_output.run()
260
# mdrun should be performed on an external host
MD_local.py.
==PAGE:61==
A Python code
51
GREMLIN to restraints:
1 #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3 #
gremlin2itp: Generate itp restraints file from a Gremlin output file
4 #
Copyright (C) 2015, Matteo Tiberti <matteo.tiberti@gmail.com>
5 #
6 #
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
7 #
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
8 #
the Free Software Foundation , either version 3 of the License, or
9 #
(at your option) any later version.
10 #
11 #
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
12 #
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
13 #
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
See the
14 #
GNU General Public License for more details.
15 #
16 #
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
17 #
along with this program.
If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
18
19 import sys
20 import numpy as np
21
22 def parse_gremlin(fname, min_prob=1.0):
23
#i
j
i_id
j_id
r_sco
s_sco
prob
24
gremlin_dtype = [ ('i','i8'),
25
('j','i8'),
26
('i_id','S10'),
27
('j_id','S10'),
28
('r_sco','f32'),
29
('s_sco','f32'),
30
('prob','f32')
31
]
32
33
data = np.loadtxt(
fname,
34
dtype=gremlin_dtype ,
35
skiprows=1)
36
37
return data[data['prob'] >= min_prob]
38
39
40 def parse_gro(fname):
41
#1MET
N
1
4.822
4.654
0.493
42
gro_dtype = [ ('resn','i8'),
43
('res','S10'),
44
('atomtype','S10'),
45
('atomn','i8'),
46
('x','f32'),
47
('y','f32'),
48
('z','f32') ]
49
50
field_sizes=(5,5,5,5,8,8,8)
51
52
return np.genfromtxt( fname,
53
delimiter=field_sizes ,
==PAGE:62==
52
A Python code
54
skip_header=2,
55
skip_footer=1,
56
autostrip=True,
57
dtype=gro_dtype)
58
59 def generate_itp(gro_data, gremlin_data , output_fname , rtype=1, rtypep=1,
low=0.2, up1=0.8, up2=1.2, fac=1):
60
#ai
aj
type
index
type'
low
up1
up2
fac
61
#591
1001
1
0
1
0.2
0.8
1.2
1
62
63
itp_format = '{0} {1} {2} {3} {4} {5} {6} {7} {8}\n'
64
65
at = "CA"
66
header = "[ distance_restraints ]\n;ai
aj
type
index
type'
low
up1
up2
fac\n"
67
68
out = header
69
70
for i,entry in enumerate(gremlin_data):
71
ci = gro_data[(gro_data['resn']==entry['i'])&(gro_data['atomtype']==at)
]['atomn']
72
cj = gro_data[(gro_data['resn']==entry['j'])&(gro_data['atomtype']==at)
]['atomn']
73
assert(ci.shape[0] == 1)
74
assert(cj.shape[0] == 1)
75
76
out += itp_format.format( ci[0],
77
cj[0],
78
rtype,
79
i,
80
rtypep,
81
low,
82
up1,
83
up2,
84
fac)
85
fh = open(output_fname , 'w')
86
fh.write(out)
87
fh.close()
88
89
90 if __name__ == "__main__":
91
92
# to be replaced with fancier argparse
93
gremlin_fname = sys.argv[1]
94
gro_fname = sys.argv[2]
95
output_fname = "disre.itp"
96
97
gremlin_data = parse_gremlin(gremlin_fname , min_prob=0.9)
98
gro_data = parse_gro(gro_fname)
99
100
generate_itp(gro_data, gremlin_data , output_fname)
gremlin2itp.py.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
The UniProt Consortium, UniProt: a hub for protein information, 2015, volume
43, pages D204-D212, doi:10.1093/nar/gku989, Nucleic Acids Research, eprint:
http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/43/D1/D204.full.pdf+html
[2]
BCA
Education
Resources
and
News,
What’s
in
a
Crystal:
History
of Crystallography, Available from <http://learn.crystallography.org.uk/learn-
crystallography/history/>, [15 December 2015]
[3]
Figure © 2010 PJ Russell, iGenetics 3rd ed.; all text material © 2012 by Steven
M. Carr
[4]
Main
protein
structure
levels
en
by
LadyofHats,
Li-
censed
under
Public
Domain
via
Commons,
Available
from
<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wikiFile:Main_protein_structure_levels_en.svg
#/media/File:Main_protein_structure_levels_en.svg>, [29 December 2015]
[5]
The
Royal
Institution,
Crystallography
timeline,
©
Royal
Institu-
tion
2014,
Avalable
from
<http://www.rigb.org/our-history/history-of-
research/crystallography-timeline> [20 December 2015]
[6]
CSIC, 0. Introduction. Welcome to the world of Crystallography, Available
from <http://www.xtal.iqfr.csic.es/Cristalografia/index-en.html>, [19 Decem-
ber 2015]
[7]
University
of
California
Museum
of
Paleontology,
Understand-
ing
Evolution:
The
causes
of
mutations,
Available
from
<http://evolution.berkeley.edu/evolibrary/article/mutations_04>
[14
De-
cember 2015]
[8]
Balakrishnan et al., Learning Generative Models for Protein Fold Families,
Proteins. 2011 Apr;79(4):1061-78. doi: 10.1002/prot.22934. Epub 2011 Jan 25.,
Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
[9]
Oliver
Beckstein,
Jan
Domański,
©
Copyright
2009-2012,
http://github.com/orbeckst/GromacsWrapper,
Last
updated
on
Aug
07,
2013
==PAGE:64==
54
Bibliography
[10] M. Berjanskii, J. Zhou, Y. Liang, G. Lin and D.S. Wishart, Resolution-by-Proxy:
A Simple Measure for Assessing and Comparing the Overall Quality of NMR
Protein Structures, 2012 Jul, 53(3):167-80, Journal: J Biomol NMR
[11] Fiser A, Šali A, Modeller: Generation and Refinement of Homology-Based Pro-
tein Structure Models, Methods in Enzymology vol. 374, 2003, Pages 461–491,
Macromolecular Crystallography, Part D, doi:10.1016/S0076-6879(03)74020-8
[12] James Keeler, Understanding NMR Spectroscopy, 2010, John Wiley and Sons,
Ltd, 2nd ed. p.cm, ISBN 978-0-470-74608-0 (pbk.)
[13] A. Kwan,M. Mobli, P. Gooley,G. King and J. Mackay, Macromolecular NMR
spectroscopy for the non-spectroscopist, 2011, FEBS Journal, Blackwell Publish-
ing Ltd, doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08004.x
[14] Lindorff-Larsen K, Maragakis P, Piana S, Eastwood MP, Dror RO, Shaw DE,
Systematic Validation of Protein Force Fields against Experimental Data. (2012),
PLoS ONE 7(2): e32131. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0032131
[15] Lindorff-Larsen K, Piana S, Dror RO, Shaw DE., How fast-folding proteins fold.,
Science. 2011 Oct 28;334(6055):517-20. doi: 10.1126/science.1208351.
[16] Mariani V, Biasini M, Barbato A and Schwede T, lDDT: a local superposition-free
score for comparing protein structures and models using distance difference tests,
© The Author 2013, Oxford University Press, doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt473
[17] Marks DS, Colwell LJ, Sheridan R, Hopf TA, Pagnani A, Zecchina R, et al.
(2011) Protein 3D Structure Computed from Evolutionary Sequence Variation.,
PLoS ONE 6(12): e28766. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028766
[18] Pazos F, Valencia A. Protein co-evolution, co-adaptation and interactions., The
EMBO Journal 2008, 27(20):2648-2655. doi:10.1038/emboj.2008.189.
[19] Raval A, Piana S, Eastwood MP, Dror RO, Shaw DE., Refinement of protein
structure homology models via long, all-atom molecular dynamics simulations.,
Proteins. 2012 Aug;80(8):2071-9. doi: 10.1002/prot.24098. Epub 2012 May 15.,
Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
[20] David Sadava et al. Life, The Science of Biology, 9.th ed., 2010, The Courier
Companies, Inc.
[21] Available from <http://molbiol-tools.ca/Alignments.htm>, [10 February 2016],
based on C. Smith et al. 2010. Nucl. Acids Res. 38: W373-377
[22] D. van der Spoel, E. Lindahl, B. Hess, A. R. van Buuren, E. Apol, P. J. Meulen-
hoff, D. P. Tieleman, A. L. T. M. Sijbers, K. A. Feenstra, R. van Drunen and H.
J. C. Berendsen, Gromacs User Manual version 4.5, www.gromacs.org (2010),p.
208
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
55
[23] Boris Steipe, A revised proof of the metric properties of optimally superim-
posed vector sets, Sep. 2002, journal: Acta Crystallographica Section A, doi:
10.1107/S0108767302011637
[24] Söding J., Biegert A., Lupas AN., The HHpred interactive server for protein ho-
mology detection and structure prediction., Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jul, 1;33(Web
Server issue):W244-8.
[25] Thomas Hamelryck, 2. Fold classification & Function from structur, slides, pro-
vided by Peter Røgen
[26] W. Touwa and G. Vrienda, On the complexity of Engh and Huber refine-
ment restraints:
the angle τ as example, Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystal-
logr. 2010 Dec 1; 66(Pt 12): 1341–1350. Published online 2010 Nov 16. doi:
10.1107/S0907444910040928
==PAGE:66==
