==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Modelling of rolling resistance
A literature study
Sidsel Klarskov Sørensen (s103249)
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The aim of this thesis is to provide an overview of the concept of “rolling resistance”.
Rolling resistance is the force acting on a rolling object, and has a big impact when
looking at energy emissions in the transport sector. A reduction of rolling resistance
between the road and the tires is attractive not only for the environment but also for
fuel savings and lifespan of both the tires and the road.
Therefore the Danish initiative, COOEE, started to look into rolling resistance
reducing asphalt funded by Innovation Fund Denmark in 2011. They have shown
a 5% reduction and they still continue the work in a new research project, ROSE,
which seeks to reduce rolling resistance on Danish roads by at least 6.5% before the
end of 2019.
To understand the phenomenon of “rolling resistance” simpler forms of friction, in-
cluding simple sliding and rolling resistance, will be examined and explained through
some simplistic examples.
However, complete rolling resistance is much more complex and phenomena such as
hysteresis are inevitable when dealing with it.
Hysteresis plays a core role in realistic models of tires, but its properties are very
difficult to simulate.
In this thesis it is endeavoured to give a general overview of the complex models
that exist in modelling of tires, roads, and their interaction.
Furthermore, a summary of empirical methods to measure the rolling resistance
is given.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet med denne afhandling har været at give et overblik over konceptet “rullemod-
stand”. Rullemodstand er den kraft der virker på rullende legemer, og har en stor
indvirkning, når man kigger på energiudslip i transportsektoren. En nedsætning af
rullemodstand mellem vej og dæk på biler er derfor attraktiv, ikke kun for miljøet,
men også for brændstofsbesparelser og levetid på både dæk og vej.
I 2011 gik det danskstartede initiativ, COOEE, med et legat fra Innovationsfunden
i gang med at kigge på rullemodstandsnedsættende asfalt. De har nu vist en 5%
nedsættelse, og fortsætter arbejdet i et nyt forskningsprojekt, ROSE, som ønsker at
nedsætte rullemodstanden på de danske veje med mindst 6.5% inden 2019.
For at forstå fænomenet “rullemodstand” bliver mere simple former for friktion,
herunder simple glide- og rullemodstand, undersøgt og forklaret gennem nogle forsim-
plede eksempler.
Virkeligheden er dog mere kompleks end som så, og fænomener som hysteresis er
uundgåelig, når man har med rullemodstand at gøre.
Hysteresis spiller en kernerolle i virkelighedstro modeller af bildæk, men dens
egenskab er meget svær at simulere.
Der er i denne afhandling givet et overordnet overblik over hvilke komplekse mod-
eller, der gør sig gældende i modellering af dæk, vej og deres interaktion.
Ydermere er et sammendrag af empiriske metoder, til at måle rullemodstand på,
beskevet.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Engineering. The thesis was done in collaboration with
Roskilde University and carried out in the period from August 24th 2015 to February
8th 2016. The thesis deals with rolling resistance reduction and simulations.
Kongens Lyngby, February 8, 2016
Sidsel Klarskov Sørensen (s103249)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Poul G. Hjorth, who as always has been amazing
and I always leaves his office in high spirit - even when I felt overwhelmed by informa-
tion overload and did not know what to make of my thesis. I would also like to thank
my extern supervisor Jesper Larsen from Roskilde University, who took the time to
cast a brief and critical look at my work before deadline, and Casten Hoever from
Chalmers University of Technology, who was so kind to reply on my mails regarding
his work in the field. Furthermore, I really want to say a special thanks to Louise
Henriksen who, without any knowledge of the subject, took up the challenge of cor-
recting my English grammar although she had been at work all night. Lastly I want
to give a special thanks to Geoffroy Gauthier, who listened to all my lamentations
during the last couple of months, and his untiring efforts he put into keeping up my
mood, not to mention the time he took to read through my work from the perspective
of an engineer.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
List of Figures
1
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Motivation and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Overview of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
7
2.1
General Friction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Simple Sliding Resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Simple Rolling Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Braking and Stopping Distances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
General Remark on Tires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Mechanisms for Rolling Resistance
23
3.1
Rolling Resistance Coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Hysteresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
More Complex Models
31
4.1
Complexity of Tires
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Energy-efficient Asphalt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Need of further experimental data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Experimental and Practical Efforts
37
5.1
Measuring Equipment and Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Future Developments
45
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6.1
ROSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Further ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Conclusion
49
7.1
General remarks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:13==
List of Figures
1.1
Data from Eurostat: Estimates of changes in CO2 emissions in Europe
showing that Denmark holds a very disappointing lead position when it
comes to CO2 increasement, 2013/2012 (estimated in 2013) . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
An example of apparent and real area of contact. The real area of contact
is actually a lot smaller than the apparent area of contact. This is due to
the small-scale surface roughness, which means that only limited portions
of the objects are actually in contact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
The flow diagram of a block on an inclined plane (the block should be seen
as a particle). The angle of repose is the maximum angle, θ, can obtain
without the block starting to slide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Changes in contact area during loading. At time t1 the asperity peaks are
the only contact points, whereas at time t2 > t1 the bodies get closer due
to the increased load, which thus increases the area of contact . . . . . . .
9
2.4
A very simplified graph of the relationship between static and dynamic
friction. Once motion starts frictional forces generally decrease, and the
dynamic friction resistance will approximately reach a constant value for
some range of speed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Different types of friction: (a) No motion (static friction), (b) Sliding
motion (kinetic or dynamic friction), and (c) Rolling motion, where the
contact point between the rolling object and the surface is instantaneously
at rest (static friction) as long as it rolls and not slides
. . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Motion of (a) a rolling tire (static friction instantaneous at point “P”)
versus (b) a locked/sliding tire (kinetic friction). In the second case the
wheel acts like a block - taken from (Jones and Childers, (1990)) . . . . .
12
2.7
The free body diagram shows all of the forces acting on the block: Fr is
the friction force, N is the normal force, mg is the weight of the block, F
is the force moving the block, υ is the velocity, and direction of motion . .
13
2.8
A rigid wheel rolling on a hard surface, thus, point “P” is the only point
of contact. FPx and FPy are the resultant horizontal and vertical reaction
force respectively acting on the wheel at point P. FPx is the frictional force
making the body roll and FPy is the normal force. ω is the angular velocity
and r is the radius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
==PAGE:14==
2
List of Figures
2.9
A rigid wheel on a soft surface (the deformation of the surface is exaggerated
for clarity). A new variable d is introduced, which represents the horizontal
distance from the vertical line passing through the mass centre to the point
of action P of the resultant forces FPx and FPy. The distance d is assumed
to be small
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.10 Another rigid wheel on a soft surface, now with a force F acting horizontally
on the centre of the wheel causing it to go at a constant speed
. . . . . .
18
2.11 A rolling body in contact with the surface in the inertial frame I . . . . .
20
3.1
Normal force components across the deformed region of contact are not uni-
form in size. They are greater on the rear side, producing a counterclockwise
net torque in this example. Here the normal forces to the deformed surface
have components in the plane, whose sum is in a direction opposite to the
forward velocity, making the normal forces point a little towards the wheel
axis, compared to a case where the surface does not deform, making the
normal forces point directly upward
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Elastic hysteresis of an idealised rubber band. When a rubber tire is de-
formed under load and rotation, the recovery time is not the same as the
deformation time. The area in the centre of the hysteresis loop is the energy
dissipated due to internal friction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1
Illustration of texture wavelengths, anticipated effects, and the classifica-
tion into, e.g., megatexture, macrotexture; rolling resistance is affected by
unevenness or roughness, megatexture, and macrotexture.
λ is texture
wavelength and fsp is spatial frequency, cycles/m. A lighter shade indi-
cates a favourable effect of texture over this range, and a darker shade
indicates an unfavourable effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Illustration of the terms baseline, average level, peak level, profile depth,
MPD and ETD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.1
The many length scales are to be calculated for in the investigation of a
new low rolling resistance pavement, which still accounts for skid resistance,
durability and noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
“Begin at the beginning,” the
King said gravely, “and go on till
you come to the end: then stop.”
— Lewis Carroll, Alice’s
Adventures in Wonderland,
Chapter 12
In 2013 Denmark was the country in Europe which had the largest increase of CO2
emission with an increase of 6.8% from the previous year according to data from
Eurostat (Eurostat, 2014) see Figure 1.1 below.
Figure 1.1: Data from Eurostat: Estimates of changes in CO2 emissions in Europe
showing that Denmark holds a very disappointing lead position when
it comes to CO2 increasement, 2013/2012 (estimated in 2013).
This is primarily due to the fact that more Danes are travelling further distances
between work and home, while avoiding public transportation.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.1
Motivation and Background
To travel, energy is needed. Most cars still use fossil fuel consumption to provide this
energy, which emits CO2 contributing to greenhouse effect and global warming. Traf-
fic is one of the major sources of greenhouse gases and about one fourth of Denmark’s
energy consumption goes into the road sector. Therefore it is essential to limit these
emission.
Transportation is no longer a luxury but has become a human need with the
sustained demand for personal mobility and transportation services in most societies
and by globalisation of the world. Hence, the CO2 emission in road traffic has gone
up tremendously over the last decades.
The fuel consumption depends on a number of different factors related to the vehi-
cle, the road quality, and their interaction. In particular, tire- and road infrastructure
design can contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from road traffic.
According to MIRIAM1 (B Schmidt, (2010)) rolling resistance is responsible for
roughly 20% of the CO2 emitted by a passenger-car driving at 100 km/h. In addi-
tion, a worldwide focus on understanding and modelling rolling resistance is steadily
increasing, since a reduction by only a few percent can lead to substantial energy
savings and CO2 emission reductions. A reduction in rolling resistance of 10% can
yield fuel consumption improvements ranging from 0.5 to 1.5% for passenger-cars
(Fraggstedt, (2008)).
Rolling resistance is not the only parameter in reducing fuel consumption.
In
general, it is essential to lower as many of the impact forces that oppose the movement
of the vehicle, which includes: gravity (not improvable), air slip - which co-acts
against the changes in velocity, aerodynamic forces due to air resistance, and also the
mechanical friction affecting the vehicle from within.
But tires and road surfaces play major roles.
Tire companies and researchers
have come far by optimising tires and many data for the effect of road texture on
rolling resistance are available, but Denmark is a pioneering nation in road surface
optimisation with its new initials.
1.1.1
Energy Conservation
The Danish transport sector’s CO2 emissions in 2012 amounted to approximately
14.3 million tonnes, representing approximately 35% of CO2 emissions from the total
energy usage. CO2 emissions from transport have since 1990 increased by approx-
imately 15%, while emissions from industries and households dropped significantly
(Energistyrrelsen, (2012))
In Denmark it is estimated that 25 percent of the CO2 emitted on the roads is
caused by rolling resistance (COOEE, (2015)). But it was expected that 3 to 5% of the
fuel consumption could be saved through a new research project (see COOEE 1.1.1).
This is equivalent to at least 48 million liter of fuel annually, which will provide 45,000
1Models for rolling resistance In Road Infrastructure Asset Management Systems
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Motivation and Background
5
tons less greenhouse gases as CO2 and 76 tons less nitrogen oxides NOx.
COOEE (/ku:’i:/) interjection • a call used to attract attention, esp (originally)
a long loud high-pitched call on two notes used in the Australian bush
The research project “CO2 emission reduction by exploitation of rolling resistance
modelling of pavements” (2011-2015) is the first out of three stages in an ambitious
pavement-design program. It is a collaboration between the Danish Road Directorate,
Roskilde University, the Technical University of Denmark, and NCC Roads funded in
2011 by the Innovation Fund on 13.8 million DKK (approximately 2 million EUR) to
reduce road transport emissions of CO2 and nitrogen. The primary goal was to model
the relationship between rolling resistance and pavement characteristics, and derive
the energy use, and thus the fuel consumption contribution, of a given pavement.
This project was the first in the world to demonstrate that rolling resistance
can be reduced by optimising pavements. Recent validations on test roads show a
5% reduction of passenger-car energy consumption at a little extra cost and with
acceptable skid resistance.
Most of the rolling resistance loss takes place inside the tire, but since this loss
also depends on the road surface, it is an obvious idea to optimise not just the tires,
but also the roads. Therefore, the main focus of this project was the asphalt mixture
and the size of the stones.
Another benefit shown from the project is the calculated socio-economics; reducing
the rolling resistance by optimising road pavements is one of very few initiatives for
reducing Denmark’s greenhouse gas contribution that has a negative socio-economic
cost, meaning that an implementation of the low rolling resistance road pavement
will actually provide an economic saving for society by fuel savings2 - in contrast to
almost all other measures for CO2 reductions.
This will enable National Road Administrators and pavement entrepreneurs to
optimise pavement constructions with respect to rolling resistance; thus lessen the
CO2 emission with fuel saving. The pavement is already laid on test tracks around
in Denmark, but before more implementations can take place further investigations
and validations need to be made (see ROSE 6.1).
2The saving of the 48 million liter of fuel annually approximately corresponds to a 250 million
DDK cost reduction to the consumers
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.2
Overview of the Thesis
Chapter 2 is a general presentation of friction and the distinction between sliding re-
sistance and rolling resistance in the aspect of Newtonian mechanic is given through
various examples.
A short introduction to braking and stopping distances plus a
small remark on tires will be addressed.
Chapter 3 goes deeper into the complexity of the real world mechanisms for rolling
resistance, especially in regard to the deformation in the tires and hysteresis effects.
Furthermore, the effect of rolling resistance on a vehicle’s fuel consumption is identi-
fied.
Chapter 4 receives the baton from the expressed complexity in Chapter 3, and leads
it into a chapter on various approaches to calculate the rolling resistance by complex
models.
Chapter 5 presents several rolling resistance measuring techniques and texture mea-
surements.
Chapter 6 is a short description of a new research project ROSE, raised from COOEE
in the beginning of the year. Furthermore, some ideas will be addressed on the topic
of both modelling and measurement methods.
Chapter 7 is a short wrap-up of the thesis, and will sum up conclusions made through-
out the thesis, and add some general remarks to the subject.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Sliding Resistance and
Rolling Resistance
“When I use a word,” Humpty
Dumpty said in rather a scornful
tone, “it means just what I
choose it to mean - neither more
nor less.”
— Lewis Carroll, Through the
Looking Glass, Chapter 6
2.1
General Friction
Contact between bodies creating forces and moments whose work in turn causes an
irreversible transfer of energy to many degrees of freedom (heat), which is lost energy.
Bodies moving through a medium in a gas or liquid, experiences a frictional force
that occurs when the liquid or gas is to be moved to give room to the body; or
from the turbulent flows caused by the body. Elements which slide over the surfaces
experiencing the contact resistance and the deformable elements are rollers, and / or
bodies which roll on the deformable surfaces experience rolling resistance.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
The History of Friction
Amongst the pioneers in the science of friction we find, through his journals1 (tribology-
abc.com, (2015)), Leonardo Da Vinci (1452-1519) with his distinction between sliding
and rolling friction. He stated two basic laws long before Newton had the chance to
define force:
• The areas in contact have no effect on total friction
• If the load of an object is doubled, its friction will also be doubled
This was rediscovered by Guillaume Amontons (1699), who also believed that friction
was due to the roughness on the surfaces.
His observation of the proportionality
between friction force and normal load, but independence of apparent contact area,
is known as the Amontons’ paradox. The apparent contact area is often much higher
than the true contact area, see Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: An example of apparent and real area of contact. The real area of con-
tact is actually a lot smaller than the apparent area of contact. This is
due to the small-scale surface roughness, which means that only limited
portions of the objects are actually in contact.
Leonard Euler (1750) defined the angle of repose of a weight on an inclined plane (see
Figure 2.2) and made the distinction between static friction and dynamic friction.
θ
y
x
θ
N
mg sin θ
f
mg cos θ
mg
Figure 2.2: The flow diagram of a block on an inclined plane (the block should be
seen as a particle). The angle of repose is the maximum angle, θ, can
obtain without the block starting to slide.
1which were never published
==PAGE:21==
2.1 General Friction
9
Charles August Coulomb (1785) investigated four main factors of friction:
the nature of the materials in contact, the extent of the surface area, the normal
pressure or load, and the time of repose2. He found that the friction force is opposite
to the direction of velocity but independent of its magnitude. He also added to Da
Vinci’s second law; “strength due to friction is proportional to compressive force”,
“although for large bodies friction does not follow exactly this law”. This second law
of friction is known as the “Amontons-Coulomb Law” and holds for many different
material combinations and geometries.
John Leslie (1766-1832) however noted a weakness in the second law of friction. In
his view the friction should be seen as a time-dependent process of flattening, press-
ing down asperities, which creates new obstacles in what were cavities before (see
Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: Changes in contact area during loading. At time t1 the asperity peaks
are the only contact points, whereas at time t2 > t1 the bodies get closer
due to the increased load, which thus increases the area of contact.
F. Philip Bowden and David Tabor were the first to give a physical explanation for
the laws of friction. They were the ones to determine that the true area of contact is a
very small percentage of the apparent contact area, which is formed by the asperities.
More asperities come in contact with the increase of the normal force, which makes
the contact of the average area of each asperity grow. So frictional force is dependent
on the true contact area, and Bowden and Tabor argued that all dynamics of friction
take place in these asperities.
These asperities in the macroscopic properties of friction have gained its way into
modern studies, and tribology (see Tribology in section 3) is a well-known area of
engineering.
Stribeck found that friction decreases with increasing velocity in certain velocity
regimes, which is known as the Stribeck effect.
2The time the objects are in contact
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
Figure 2.4: A very simplified graph of the relationship between static and dynamic
friction. Once motion starts frictional forces generally decrease, and the
dynamic friction resistance will approximately reach a constant value
for some range of speed.
Friction is in its pure form defined as a force of magnitude
F = µN,
where F is the force of friction exerted by each surface on the other. It is parallel to
the surface, in a direction opposite to the net applied force. There are two cases:
Static friction, Fs, which is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the net
external force. In other words, it acts to cancel out precisely the external force that
would otherwise have caused slipping, thus producing no motion.
Dynamic friction, Fk, does not depend on the direction of other external forces, but
on the direction of potential slippage, which is the friction between moving surfaces.
µ is the coefficient of friction, which is an empirical property of the contacting ma-
terials, and N is the normal force exerted by each surface on the other, directed
perpendicular (normal) to the surface.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 General Friction
11
There exist different kinds of frictions as illustrated in Figure 2.5 below:F
force
static friction
(a) No motion.
The force
applied on the block is not
big enough to overcome the
friction
sliding friction
(b) Sliding motion. The
block
is
moving
and
the
static
friction
is
converted into sliding (or
kinetic) friction
rolling friction
(c) Rolling motion i.e. there
is no slipping at the surface
of contact. The rolling fric-
tion will act in a direction to
oppose potential slipping or
sliding at the surfaces
Figure 2.5: Different types of friction: (a) No motion (static friction), (b) Sliding
motion (kinetic or dynamic friction), and (c) Rolling motion, where
the contact point between the rolling object and the surface is instan-
taneously at rest (static friction) as long as it rolls and not slides .
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
This chapter will attempt to clarify laws of motion in Newtonian mechanics, and
especially for the rolling motion, which as seen in Figure 2.6, can also experience
sliding.
v
2v
P
(a) Contact point of rolling tire
is instantaneously at rest with re-
spect to roadway
2v
v
v
v
P
(b) Contact point of locked tire is
sliding on the road at full velocity
of the vehicle
Figure 2.6: Motion of (a) a rolling tire (static friction instantaneous at point “P”)
versus (b) a locked/sliding tire (kinetic friction). In the second case the
wheel acts like a block - taken from (Jones and Childers, (1990)).
2.2
Simple Sliding Resistance
Sliding resistance and rolling resistance are both types of resistive forces that oppose
an object’s motion over a surface. Sliding resistance occurs when a surface is rubbing
against another surface with kinetic friction and is a consequence of small protrusions
on the surfaces. When the objects in contact are moving relatively to each other, the
protrusions interlock and work needs to be done, in order to keep the motion.
The coefficient of sliding resistance is primarily affected by the texture of the
surfaces in contact and for a small amount by the temperature, but is elsewise not
strongly influenced by any other external factors.
2.2.1
Example: A block sliding on a horizontal surface
If a block of m = 100 kg is at constant velocity υ = 0.5 m/s on a horizontal surface
affected by a force F = 200 N.
a) Find the coefficient of kinetic friction
b) How long will it take for the block to come to rest if the force acting on it
suddenly becomes zero?
c) How far will the block have travelled in this scenario?
The diagram in Figure 2.7 shows the forces.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Simple Sliding Resistance
13
Fr
F
N
mg
υ
y
x
Figure 2.7: The free body diagram shows all of the forces acting on the block: Fr is
the friction force, N is the normal force, mg is the weight of the block, F
is the force moving the block, υ is the velocity, and direction of motion.
Fr is the friction force, N is the normal force, mg is the weight of the block, and F
is the force acting to move the block.
Since the velocity is constant, the block is in equilibrium, so for the forces in the
x- and y-direction it must hold, respectively that
∑
Fx = F −Fr = 0 ⇔F = Fr
∑
Fy = N −mg = 0 ⇔N = mg
Part a) For the friction force it holds that Fr = µkN, so substituting the above
findings into this equation yields
F = µkmg
So the coefficient of the kinetic friction is
µk = F
mg =
200 N
(100 kg)(9.8 m/s2) = 0.2
Part b) Once the force is removed, the system is no longer in equilibrium and
Newton’s Second Law is applied
∑
Fx = −Fr = ma
ma = −µkN
Solving for the acceleration:
a = −µkN
m
= −µkg
With this, the stopping time can be calculated with
υ = υ0 + at.
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
Since the velocity will reach zero, we have that
0 = υ0 + at
t = −υ0
a
= −0.5 m/s2
−1.96 m/s2
t = 0.26 s
Part c) So how far did the block go in the 0.26 seconds?
Integrating the formula for velocity with respect to time yields
x = υ0t + 1/2at2
x = (0.5 m/s2)(0.26 s) + 1/2(−1.96 m/s2)(0.26 s)2
x = 6 m
This was just a small example on the physics on sliding resistance, but since this
kind of friction is not the main contributor acting on rolling bodies, rolling resistance
is now introduced:
2.3
Simple Rolling Resistance
Often rolling resistance is neglected when solving simple mechanical problems involv-
ing rolling. It is, thus, informative to analyse the dynamics of a uniform cylinder
rolling on a flat horizontal surface.
2.3.1
Example: A rigid wheel rolling on a hard surface
Consider Figure 2.8 below, assuming that the wheel is fully rigid, and rolling without
slipping on a hard surface (i.e. no deformations3), thus the only contact between the
two bodies is the point P.
3The rigidity assumption
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Simple Rolling Resistance
15
r
ω
P
FPy
FPx
y
x
Figure 2.8: A rigid wheel rolling on a hard surface, thus, point “P” is the only
point of contact. FPx and FPy are the resultant horizontal and vertical
reaction force respectively acting on the wheel at point P. FPx is the
frictional force making the body roll and FPy is the normal force. ω is
the angular velocity and r is the radius.
First applying Newton’s Second Law in the x- and y-direction respectively yields
FPx = max
FPy −mg = may
The acceleration in the y-direction is zero, therefore,
FPy = mg
Then applying the moment equation for rotation of a rigid body
∑
M = Iα
where M is the moments, I is the moment of inertia of a cylinder, and α = dω
dt is the
angular acceleration with respect to ground. By substituting ∑M = FPxr into the
previous equation
FPxr = Iα
is obtained.
Because the wheel is rolling without slipping
α = −ax
r
So from Newton’s Second Law it is given that
FPx = m(−αr)
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
which in combination with the above equation yields that
−mαr2 = Iα
But since I cannot be a negative number, the only possible solution is α = 0 and
consequently FPx = 0. This means that the wheel will continue rolling indefinitely
without slowing down under the rigidity assumption.
Consequently this is not possible in the real world, which is suggested by the next
example.
2.3.2
Example: A rigid wheel rolling on a soft surface
Consider the new figure below, still assuming that the wheel is rigid, and rolling with-
out slipping but now on soft surface. The new variable d is introduced, representing
the horizontal distance from the vertical line passing through the centre to the point
of action P.
P
r
FPy
FPx
d
ω
y
x
Figure 2.9: A rigid wheel on a soft surface (the deformation of the surface is exag-
gerated for clarity). A new variable d is introduced, which represents
the horizontal distance from the vertical line passing through the mass
centre to the point of action P of the resultant forces FPx and FPy. The
distance d is assumed to be small.
With the same procedure as before Newton’s Second Law in the x- and y-direction is
applied
FPx = max
FPy = mg
The moment equation for rotation of a rigid body is still the same
∑
M = Iα
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Simple Rolling Resistance
17
but since d is assumed to be very small
∑
M ∼= FPxr −FPyd
Substituting this into the moment equation yields
FPxr −FPyd = Iα
It is still assumed that no slipping occurs
α = −ax
r
So Newton’s Second Law now gives
FPx = m(−αr)
and
FPy = mg
which in combination with the above equation yields that
−mαr2 −mgd = Iα
The moment of inertia of a uniform cylinder is
I = 1
2mr2
Therefore
−αr2 −gd = 1
2r2α
Finally solving for angular acceleration yields
α = −2gd
3r2
The angular acceleration is now negative, and the wheel will slow down and eventu-
ally stop. This is the basic mechanism for rolling resistance.
2.3.3
Example: A wheel rolling at constant speed
The fact that a wheel tends to slow down implies that it takes a constant force to
overcome rolling resistance and keep the wheel at a constant speed. Assuming the
applied force F is acting horizontally at the centre of the wheel as seen in the figure
below.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
P
r
FPy
FPx
d
ω
y
x
F
Figure 2.10: Another rigid wheel on a soft surface, now with a force F acting hor-
izontally on the centre of the wheel causing it to go at a constant
speed.
Since it is assumed that the wheel is rolling at constant velocity with no slip, its
angular acceleration is zero, thus the centre of mass has zero acceleration too.
Therefore Newton’s Second Law now gives
FPx = F
in the x-direction
FPy = mg
in the y-direction
since the acceleration is now zero in both cases.
The moment equation for rotation of a rigid body about its centre is still the same.
But since the rotation is at constant speed, the moments can be summed about any
point
∑
M = Iα = 0
So as before, since d is assumed to be very small
∑
M ∼= FPxr −FPyd
Substituting this into the moment equation yields
FPxr −FPyd = 0
Substitution in the results from Newton’s Second Law gives
Fr −mgd = 0
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Simple Rolling Resistance
19
Therefore the force F needed to overcome rolling resistance and keep the wheel at a
constant speed equals
F = mgd
r
From this it is clear that to minimise the rolling resistance (and F itself) d should
be as small as possible. This also explains why tires should be kept well inflated -
under-inflated tires are less rigid and deform more on the road surface, resulting in a
greater distance d, thus increasing the rolling resistance and the fuel consumption.
For a rolling wheel to actually roll and not slip on a surface, a certain amount of
friction is required in the point of contact between the wheel and the surface. The
amount of traction a tire can obtain is determined by the coefficient of static friction
between the tire and the road.
If the wheel is locked, as when braking instanta-
neously, sliding will occur, and the force of friction will then be determined by the
coefficient of kinetic friction. This coefficient is usually smaller than the one of static
friction, which is why most vehicles have ABS brakes installed, in order to counteract
the wheels from locking, giving longer braking distances and eradicating control of
the wheels – a system, which allows the wheels to keep turning, giving them a higher
friction or resistance to decelerate in a safer and more controlled way. This is because
the bottom point of the tire is instantaneously at rest with respect to the roadway
(i.e no slippage) (see Figure 2.6 (a)). If significant differences are to be seen between
the static and kinetic friction, the continuous rolling of the wheels will provide more
braking force.
The coefficient of rolling resistance depends strongly, in contrary to the coefficient of
sliding resistance, on external factors, among them: the radius of the rolling body,
the sinkage depth and the toughness of the surface.
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
2.3.4
Example: Kinetic energy in rolling motion
When a body of circular cross section is rolling, it is rotating about an axis while
having a translational motion. For both rolling and sliding motions, the body will be
in contact with the supporting surface.
I
r
υCM = rω
ω
2υCM = 2rω
M
P
Figure 2.11: A rolling body in contact with the surface in the inertial frame I.
Rolling without sliding is called pure rolling and is characterized by the fact that
the part of the body in contact with the supporting surface is instantaneously at rest
relative to the surface.
In pure rolling, the relationship between the translational velocity of the centre of
mass υCM, the radius r of the body, and the angular velocity ω in the rotation is
υCM = rω
The line of contact participates in both a forward and backward motion - both with
speed υCM. If we place an inertial frame I at rest relative to the supporting surface
as in Figure 2.11, the contact point between the rolling body and the surface thus
has velocity zero relative to I.
The motion of the body can be considered in two ways:
(1) a translation of the centre of mass, CM, plus a rotation about the axis through
CM; or
(2) a pure rotation about the instantaneous axis of rotation, which passes through
the point P of contact between the body and the surface (see Figure 2.11).
However, it should be noted that in a rotation about a fixed axis P, the axis is
characterised by the fact that the velocity of each point relative to the chosen initial
frame of P is zero.
The angular velocity ω is independent of the axis chosen to
describe the motion.
The kinetic energy, T, of a rolling body of revolution can be written in different
forms. If we choose to describe the motion as in point (1) above, we get:
T = 1
2Mυ2
CM + 1
2ICMω2
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Braking and Stopping Distances
21
Whereas if we choose to describe the rolling as seen in (2) pure rotation about the
“contact axis” P, we have
T = 1
2IP ω2
The parallel axis theorem (Knudsen and Hjorth, (2002)) states that
IP = Mr2 + ICM
which makes the kinetic energy the same for both equations.
2.4
Braking and Stopping Distances
For proper operational brakes, the minimum stopping distance for a vehicle is deter-
mined by the effective coefficient of friction between tires and road. The frictional
force of the road must do enough work on the vehicle to reduce its kinetic energy to
zero. If the wheels continue turning while it is braking, it is the static friction oper-
ating, whereas if the wheels are locked and slide over the road surface, the braking
force is a kinetic friction force, and it can be difficult to manoeuvre the vehicle.
One of the primary measurement techniques for measuring rolling resistance is the
cost-down method, which will be further described in Coast-down methods in sec-
tion 5.1.1, where a vehicle goes freely from an initial velocity and position until it
stops.
2.4.1
Example: Stopping a car from constant speed
If a car is driving at a constant speed v0, the frictional force opposes to the moving
direction is F = µmg, so in order to reduce the kinetic energy to zero the work needed
is
Wf = −µmgs = −1
2mv2
0
where Wf is the work of friction and s is the stopping distance, which then equals
s = v2
0
2µg
It should be noted that this implies that the stopping distance is independent of the
vehicle’s mass. And it also implies that if doubling the speed, the stopping distance
will be increased fourfold.
The coefficient of friction can also be derived from the above equation
µ = v2
0
2gs
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Sliding Resistance and Rolling Resistance
This obviously yields that rolling resistance actually is dependent on velocity, and
that the implication of higher velocity will induce an increase in the rolling resistance.
On the other hand, if the rolling resistance is low, longer stopping distances will occur,
which is very logically satisfying.
To clarify the conclusion the coefficient of friction can be substituted into the
equation for rolling resistance force:
F = v2
0
2gsN
F = v2
0
2sm
The frictional force is proportional with the velocity and the mass and inversely
proportional with the braking distance in this example.
2.5
General Remark on Tires
The friction between the tires of the vehicle and the road determines the maximum
acceleration and the minimum stopping distance (Jones and Childers, (1990)). The
tread design for modern vehicles has been developed through many years of research
and practice to offer good traction in a wide variety of conditions, such as “all weather”.
The tread designs are crucial in the combat of hydroplaning, since it channels the
water away from the bearing surfaces on wet roads, which elsewise would allow the
vehicle to “slide” on top of the road surface, because of the layer of lubricant under
all parts of the tire.
Most often the coefficients of rolling resistance are reported to be about 0.7 for
rubber tires on dry roads and 0.4 for wet roads.
Some race cars uses “slick” racing tires with no treads, which on dry surfaces
might give a coefficient of rolling resistance as high as 0.9 providing a superb grip,
but a dangerously low value of 0.1 on a wet surface, making them nearly impossible
to control.
Materials that have a large hysteresis effect, such as rubber, which bounce back
slowly, exhibit more rolling resistance than materials with a small hysteresis effect
(see 3.2) that bounce back more quickly and more completely, such as steel or silica.
Low rolling resistance tires typically incorporate silica in place of carbon black in their
tread compounds to reduce low-frequency hysteresis without compromising traction.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms for Rolling
Resistance
“Contrariwise, if it was so, it
might be; and if it were so, it
would be; but as it isn’t, it ain’t.
That’s logic.”
— Lewis Carroll, Through the
Looking Glass, Chapter 4
As mentioned earlier, rolling resistance is only one component amongst many other
that resists vehicle movement and thus consumes energy during driving.
Between these resistances one find: tire-related energy loss, which is the main
constituent of rolling resistance. This energy loss comes from hysteresis effects of tire
deformation, shear of the tire, and adhesion between surface and tire. Suspension
losses involve the energy loss in the shock absorbers, especially when driving on un-
even roads. Of course there is aerodynamic drag on the whole car, but a subset of it
is specifically related to high-speed rotations of the wheels. Inertial resistance occurs
under acceleration, when the entire vehicle resists change in speed, which requires
energy to overcome. This phenomenon also occurs locally with angular acceleration
of axles and wheels. When the road has a positive longitudinal gradient, energy is
consumed to overcome earth’s gravitational pull caused by gravitational resistance.
Transmission loss happens when the kinetic energy is transferred from the engine to
the wheels, resulting in a transmission loss. This loss is primarily due to friction, but
aerodynamic drag of the rotating axles might play a minor role too. Furthermore,
various components give rise to energy loss in the engine, when transferring energy
from the fuel to the drive-shaft. Examples are excess combustion heat and piston-
related friction.
Hence in reality, when a vehicle is driving on a surface neither wheel nor road is
perfectly rigid, so deformations will occur and energy will be dissipated. The cause
of rolling resistance can be traced back to the tire’s viscoelastic properties, which are
analogous to a mechanical spring/damper system (Ersoy and Heißing, (2011)).
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Mechanisms for Rolling Resistance
After elastic deformation, the tire returns to its origin, but the process, however,
takes a certain amount of time. This phenomenon is known as hysteresis1 (see 3.2).
Historically, rolling resistance has been defined as a force.
Rolling resistance is the force resisting the motion when a body rolls on a surface.
Even though the standard measurement of rolling resistance has been defined as force,
D. J. Schuring argued back in the 1970s that rolling resistance should be renamed into
rolling loss, such that rolling resistance could be defined in terms of energy loss (per
unit distance travelled). This, he argued, would give a more general formulation to
account for more conditions, which are also very satisfying since the main component,
as mentioned, is energy dissipation due to hysteresis losses.
This is actually also
the definition of the ISO 28580 (the International Organization for Standardization)
(Standardization, (2015)).
• 3.1 rolling resistance: loss of energy (or energy consumed) per unit of dis-
tance travelled.2
There is a wide spectrum of different components, when talking about rolling resis-
tance. First of all the ones in the tires (and vehicle), the ones in the pavement, and
then those that result from the interaction between the two.
For the wheel and tire relation, we have following components (Lasse Grinderslev
Andersen, (2015)):
• Hysteresis loss due to tire deformation. Also dependent of the tire pressure and
applied load.
• Inertial resistance due to change in speed.
• Aerodynamic drag of the rolling tire.
• Transmission loss.
The tire-independent pavement rolling losses consist primarily of
• Deflection of the pavement due to the load of the vehicle.
• Movement of chips and stones.
And lastly the interaction of the tire-road
• Hysteresis loss by tire deformation due to irregularities on the longitudinal
surface.
1Elastic hysteresis was amongst the first types of hysteresis to be examined by (Ewing, 1889)
2The International System of Units (SI) unit conventionally used for the rolling resistance is the
newton-metre per metre, which is equivalent to a drag force in newtons.
==PAGE:37==
3 Mechanisms for Rolling Resistance
25
• Hysteresis loss by tire deformation due to irregularities on the transversal sur-
face.
• Hysteresis loss by tire deformation due to road texture.
• Deformations due to stick-slip.
• Stick-slip phenomena.
These categories symbolise the complexity of this problem. The many different phe-
nomena to account for in the tire-road part can seem to overlap, but in the length-scale
differ.
Tribology
Tribology is the study of friction, wear, lubrication, and the design of bearings; the
science of interacting surfaces in relative motion. Tribological knowledge helps to
improve service life, safety and reliability of interacting machine components; and
yields substantial economic benefits. A good understanding of the concept of tribology
is given from (NPTEL, (2015)).
When friction, wear, and lubrication is taught it is usually on a rudimentary level.
So trends as the frictional force being proportional to loading force, static friction
being greater than kinetic friction etc. are the rules of thumb. But these assumptions
have the drawbacks of being idly predictive over a limited range of parameters. Tri-
bology is a science trying to understand the under-laying physical mechanisms. Hence
it is important to integrate the knowledge from multifaceted disciplines such as; solid
mechanics, fluid mechanics, material science, chemistry etc. E.g. in solid mechanics
surface roughness and real area of contact between surfaces play very important roles,
but in general all of these aspects are important in both tire and road optimisation.
Rolling Resistance has a Meaningful Effect on Vehicle Fuel
Consumption
In 2005 a big research project was established in the Committee for the National Tire
Efficiency Study (National Tire Efficiency Study, (2006)). Amongst the key findings
in the project, rolling resistance was found to have a meaningful effect on vehicle fuel
consumption:
For conventional passenger vehicles, most of the energy contained in the fuel is lost
as heat during engine combustion and from friction in the drive-line, axles, and wheel
assemblies. Some of the energy produced by the engine is consumed during idling and
by vehicle accessories. Only about 12 to 20 percent of the energy originating in the
fuel tank is ultimately transmitted to the wheels as mechanical energy to keep the
vehicle in motion. Rolling resistance consumes about one-third of this transmitted
energy.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Mechanisms for Rolling Resistance
In one sense, rolling resistance consumes only a small fraction of the total energy
extracted from the fuel. In another sense, a reduction in rolling resistance will reduce
demand for mechanical energy at the axles. This will have a multiplier effect because
it will translate into less need of fuel being pumped to the engine in the first place.
It is deduced in the study that the overall effect of a reduction in rolling resistance
on vehicle fuel economy will depend on a number of factors, including the underlying
efficiency of the engine and drive-line as well as the relative amounts of energy con-
sumed by other factors, such as aerodynamic drag and vehicle accessories. Further
it is estimated that for most passenger vehicles, a 10 percent reduction in rolling
resistance will have the practical effect of improving vehicle fuel economy by about 1
to 2 percent.
3.1
Rolling Resistance Coefficient
Rolling resistance of a tire depends on the normal load N applied on the tire. A
widely used measure is the rolling resistance coefficient Cr defined as
Cr = Fr/N
where Fr is the rolling resistance.
The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) has developed test practices to mea-
sure the Cr of tires. These tests (SAE J1269 and SAE J2452) are usually performed
on new tires. When measured by using these standard test practices, most new pas-
senger tires have reported Crs ranging from 0.007 to 0.014 (National Tire Efficiency
Study, (2006)).
Throughout the literature many suggestions on how to mathematically calculate
the coefficient of rolling resistance with more attributes are given, e.g., in (Carvill,
(1994))’s chapter of automobile mechanics, the resistance of a vehicle to motion is cat-
egorised into rolling resistance, gradient force and aerodynamic drag, and an equation
for the rolling resistance coefficient for pneumatic tires on dry roads is given as:
Cr = 0.005 + 1
p
[
0.01 + 0.0095
( v
100
)2]
where Cr = coefficient of rolling resistance, v = speed (km/h), and p = tire
pressure in bars.
It has not been possible to find the origin of this formula, but it must come from
some sort of regression line, probably made from empirical data.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Rolling Resistance Coefficient
27
3.1.1
Deformation of contact
As mentioned in Chapter 2, nothing in nature is perfectly rigid, thus wheels form a
contact area with the surface. This gives rise to non-uniform deformations, thus the
reaction of normal force does not pass through the centre of the wheel. Instead, it
gets shifted slightly towards the rear and gives counterclockwise torque (if the wheel
is rolling to the right) which causes net deceleration.
An exaggeration of the magnified view of the contact area and the normal forces
is shown in Figure 3.1 below.
Figure 3.1: Normal force components across the deformed region of contact are not
uniform in size. They are greater on the rear side, producing a coun-
terclockwise net torque in this example. Here the normal forces to the
deformed surface have components in the plane, whose sum is in a direc-
tion opposite to the forward velocity, making the normal forces point
a little towards the wheel axis, compared to a case where the surface
does not deform, making the normal forces point directly upward.
Summing up: the resulting pressure distribution is asymmetrical and is shifted to the
right. The line of action of the (aggregate) vertical force no longer passes through
the centre of the wheel. This means that a moment occurs that tends to oppose the
rolling motion.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Mechanisms for Rolling Resistance
3.2
Hysteresis
“A characteristic of a deformable material such that the energy of deformation is
greater than the energy of recovery. The rubber compound in a tire exhibits hysteresis.
As the tire rotates under the weight of the vehicle, it experiences repeated cycles of de-
formation and recovery, and it dissipates the hysteresis energy loss as heat. Hysteresis
is the main cause of energy loss associated with rolling resistance and is attributed to
the viscoelastic characteristics of the rubber.”
– National Academy of Sciences (National Tire Efficiency Study, (2006))
Hysteresis is defined in (Ersoy and Heißing, (2011)) as the continuation of a process
after its cause has vanished. This lag time required for the tire to return into its
original shape is directly associated with an energy loss.
But it is also the same
viscoelastic properties that are responsible for the tire’s adhesion to the road surface.
So when designing a tire, the manufacturer must compromise between low rolling
resistance and large adhesion force or grip.
When a pneumatic tire rolls, the elastic material has to change shape whenever
it is at contact with the ground, and to make that change, work needs to be done.
When the part of the tire comes off the ground and back to circular shape, not as
much energy is released, since some of it dissipates as heat, which is a loss.
The simplest way of reducing rolling resistance is by increasing the pressure of
the tire, which will lessen the hysteresis. Some rubber materials have less hysteresis,
so less energy is dissipated, as they are deformed and brought back to their original
shape.
Figure 3.2: Elastic hysteresis of an idealised rubber band. When a rubber tire is
deformed under load and rotation, the recovery time is not the same as
the deformation time. The area in the centre of the hysteresis loop is
the energy dissipated due to internal friction.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Hysteresis
29
In the elastic hysteresis of rubber, the area in the centre of a hysteresis loop is the
energy dissipated due to material internal friction at each cycle.
The effect of elastic after-working as well as viscous resistances of the ordinary
type are included in the hysteresis phenomena (Love, (1944)): the state of the body
concerned depends at any instant on its precious states as well as external conditions
which obtained at the instant. Hysteresis always implies irreversibility in the sequence
of states though, which a body passes and is generally traced to the molecular struc-
ture of the matter. The hysteresis effect generally complicates the making of realistic
tire simulation models.
==PAGE:42==
30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
More Complex Models
“Why, sometimes I’ve believed as
many as six impossible things
before breakfast.”
— Lewis Carroll, Through the
Looking Glass, Chapter 5
4.1
Complexity of Tires
The simulation of car tire rolling resistance is a complex task. To achieve valid results
with reasonable computational effort, a variety of different physical processes need to
be modelled with the right balance between accuracy and simplification. As described
in (Hoever and Kropp, (2013)) the tire itself is a highly complex, heterogenous and
anisotropic multi-layered structure. Simulation of the tire dynamics is only possible
if the tire structure is modelled in a simplified way. Next is the tire-road interaction,
which is also impossible to model in every detail. It is by nature non-linear and the
interaction processes can cover length scales from several meters down to molecular
levels. Finally, radiation calculations need to account properly for the complex geo-
metric amplification effects appearing in the proximity of the contact region.
Tires affect fuel economy mainly through the rolling resistance. In the process of
deformation and recovery the mechanical energy that otherwise would be used to
turn the wheels is converted into heat and dissipated from the tires. This means that
more fuel must be consumed to replace the lost energy.
The main structural elements of a tire are the casing assembly and the tread and
belt assembly. The casing contains the volume of air and cushions the tire. The tread
and belt assembly provides the actual road surface contact responsible for minimal
rolling resistance, optimal handling, and a long service life (Redrouthu and Das, 2014).
Mathematical models of tires have been developed for different purposes through
the years. Finite element methods have been used in the attempt to describe tire
behaviour very accurately for reasons of tire design, or to incorporate a precise tire
response in dynamic simulations. But also more qualitative models are made to un-
derstand the mechanism, which is needed in order to develop the more quantitative
==PAGE:44==
32
4 More Complex Models
models (Technology, (2015)[b]).
Tires generate the forces that drive and manoeuvre the vehicle. There is a lot to
account for in physical models: the frictional properties in the tire-road interaction
along with the distribution of the normal contact force, plus the stiffness of both the
tread rubber and the carcass.
The knowledge of magnitude, direction and limit of the tire forces are essential
and valuable for vehicle control systems. However, the estimation of these variables
in all driving conditions and in real-time is a very challenging task.
Most tire models use finite-element methods for simulation of the various aspects of
the rolling pneumatic tire. The challenge is to obtain realistic material models, model
the tread blocks, further develop the finite-element models to include multiphysics,
including transient behaviour, and finally include the modelling of non-rigid surfaces.
As mentioned above, there is a lot to account for in tire models and the questions
are always the same: which level of detail is necessary, which processes need to be
included, which parameters are critical, and which are less critical. The finite-element
modelling of the rolling tires is exacting, and empirical models are still needed in this
area (Lasse G Andersen, J. K. Larsen, et al., 2014).
The relation of tire rolling resistance to the viscoelastic and dynamic hystere-
sis properties of typical tire materials is complex. The combination of operational
variables such as pressure, load, speed, and deflection, and the tire design variables
complicate the characterisation of the stress-strain hysteresis contribution of each
component of the tire and the interaction between them, and hence the determina-
tion of the rolling resistance of the tire on a given surface.
Due to hysteresis losses, heat energy is generated, which leads to higher tire pres-
sure and thus lower rolling resistance and vehicle fuel consumption. The complex
relationship between the various design attributes and operating conditions makes it
difficult to develop analytical models.
A three-stage finite-element model consisting of a deformation model, a dissipa-
tion model, and a thermal model is used to determine characteristics for tires with
smooth and circumferential groove tread patterns.
In (Rao, Kumar, and Bohara,
2006) variations in several aspects affecting rolling resistance is made and the results
are discussed. These include the tire’s rolling speed, tread profile, inflation pressure, a
varying normal load, and ambient temperature. Comparisons are made between a flat
road surface and a circular drum. Various hyper-elastic and viscoelastic properties
of the tread material are considered. The results are summarised in a table showing
that the effective rolling radius is insensitive to parameter variations, whereas the
rolling resistance (and hence the total energy loss per revolution) is insensitive to
rolling speed, convection loss, and friction, but increases significantly with increasing
normal load, tread profile, and tread material loss modulus and decreases significantly
with increasing ambient temperature, convection loss, tread mechanical stiffness, and
tread thickness.
Because of advances in numerical computing resources, it is now possible to model
the tire-pavement contact zone with much more details than previously. This devel-
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Complexity of Tires
33
opment will continue and most likely be combined with more detailed tire models.
Tire modelling depends on the overall purpose of modelling. Magic Formula type of
modelling is used for fast response in real-time vehicle modelling, whereas the ten-
dency in modelling the interaction between tire and pavement surface is to use some
kind of finite-element modelling.
4.1.1
Tire Modelling
In (Redrouthu and Das, 2014) the influence of different parameters such as tire size,
inflation pressure, longitudinal velocity, and normal load on tire rolling resistance
coefficient is investigated through simulations. It also presents each of the parameters’
contribution to average fuel or energy consumption. A combined model of different
layers of mathematical modelling starting with the basic assumption of a linear spring
and damper model is made as the basic and then building from there. The model
though, is rather simple and does not account for the complete material behaviour.
Amongst their findings are that the decrease in inflation pressure will increase rolling
resistance, while an increase in tire diameter implies a decrease in rolling resistance.
In (Stutts and Soedel, 1992) a pneumatic tire is modelled as a tension band on a
viscoelastic foundation. They use a two-point boundary value problem with specified
radial deflections, treating the ground contact end points as unknowns. The rolling
resistance is determined by integrating the forces acting through the elastic foundation
on the wheel axle due to the steady state deformation of the tread band, and it is
shown that rolling resistance results from asymmetric steady state deflection of the
tension band. The model though is simplified and several areas are not addressed,
but match experimental curves.
(Fraggstedt, (2008)) had the objective to estimate the power consumption in the
tires. This was done by a waveguide finite element model of a car tire. A non-linear
contact model was used to calculate the contact forces as the tire rolls on a rough
surface. This plus the tire response were used to estimate the input power to the
tire structure. The model is pretty complex and accounts for: the curvature, the
geometry of the cross-section, the pre-stress due to inflation pressure, the anisotropic
material properties, and the rigid body properties of the rim and is based on data
provided by Goodyear. The non-proportional damping used in the model is based on
an ad hoc curve fitting procedure against measured mobilities, whereas the damping
properties of the tire model are updated based on measurement, equivalent structure
modelling, and viscoelastic material models. The model is employed to calculate the
power dissipation as a tire is rolling on a rough road and shows promising agreement
with empirical measurement. It is concluded that rolling resistance is a low frequency
phenomenon and the damping properties of the tire model should therefore be up-
dated. According to the writer, this should be the first rolling resistance model, based
on physical principles and design data.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 More Complex Models
4.1.2
Tire-Road Modelling
A waveguide finite element tire model is also used in (Hoever and Kropp, 2015) along
with a nonlinear tire-road interaction model, which has been used to calculate the
rolling resistance of a free rolling tire on a real road surface. In this study they seem
to come around the difficulties from the influence of thread pattern. Measured and
simulated rolling resistances have been compared for combinations of three different
tires and 19 conventional road surfaces and five non-traditional rubberised road sur-
faces, and the results should be promising. Due to good simulation the Mean Profile
Depth (MPD) (see section 5.1.1) is identified to correlate very well with rolling re-
sistance. In addition, it is found that rolling resistance can be split into two parts:
one part originating from the large-scale tire structure deformations, and the other
part arising from small-scale tread indentations. In the conclusion they state that for
smooth surfaces rolling resistance is mainly due to a global deformation of the tire
structure, whereas for rougher surfaces significant contributions are made by local
deformations of the tread due to roughness asperities.
A dynamic friction force model for the longitudinal tire-road interaction for wheeled
ground vehicles is presented in (Canudas-de-Wit et al., 2003). It is based on a dy-
namic friction model developed previously for contact-point friction problems, called
the LuGre model, and develops a partial differential equation for the distribution of
the frictional force along the patch. An ordinary differential equation (the lumped
model) for the friction force is developed based on the patch boundary conditions and
the normal force distribution along the contact patch. It is expected that the model
will be useful both for simulation purposes, as well as for control design of ABS and
TCS systems.
(Kim and Savkoor, 1997) gives an analysis of contact problem of a free-rolling
pneumatic tire on a flat road.
The main idea is to establish separate individual
models for the tire alone and for the tire-road interface. The tire is modelled as an
elastic ring supported on a viscoelastic foundation, and the rolling contact of the
tire is studied by considering a non-linear boundary condition. Free rolling of driven
and driving wheels are analysed, and it is shown that the rolling resistance is almost
identical in both cases.
The importance of the tire factors in the affects on rolling resistance is stated in
(Mukherjee, 2014). Findings on the tire’s influence include:
• Different shapes of the tire give different rolling resistance at higher speeds
• Higher air pressure in the tire reduces rolling resistance
• Higher vehicle load gives higher rolling resistance
• The tire manufacturers can change the composition of the tires to achieve a
lower rolling resistance.
• A higher ambient temperature reduces rolling resistance.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Energy-efficient Asphalt
35
But the pavement characteristics as a subject were also addressed as a major contri-
bution to the rolling resistance.
4.1.3
Pavement
In the PhD thesis (Lasse Grinderslev Andersen, (2015)) Functional Data Analysis
(FDA) is applied to empirical rolling resistance modelling. This being the modelling
concerning the relation between road macrotexture and rolling resistance. FDA is
relatively new, and its use in modelling efforts and data analysis are limited and
non-existent in the rolling resistance modelling literature.
Also a new metric for
macrotexture induced rolling resistance assessment called Texture Penetration Depth
(TPA) was developed with the intent of assessing rolling resistance from 2D road
profiles. It is based on fundamental principles of the causes of macrotexture induced
rolling resistance as opposed to, e.g., MPD, which is constructed as a purely empiri-
cal measure that correlates with the old “Sand Patch“ texture measurement method.
The capability of the TPA measure was tested on two datasets: (1) Rolling resistance
data measured directly by a specially designed rolling resistance trailer developed
by the Technical University of Gdansk in Poland and (2) data of coast-down (see
section 5.1.1) experiments performed by Swedish Statens väg och transportforskn-
ingsinstitut (VTI). It was shown that TPA had significantly better correlation than
the MPD in most cases of the dataset from (1), whereas the results from (2) showed
equally good performances for the two. Furthermore, TPA should make it possible
to generalise on future 3D-profilers.
4.2
Energy-efficient Asphalt
The COOEE project was the first in the world to focus on the pavement in the
attempt to reduce CO2 emission in the traffic sector. Because of the proportionality
between the friction, or rolling resistance, a vehicle experience and the fuel usage, it
is essential to look at the road surface.
Asphalt is composed mainly of stone and a substance which is technically called
bitumen (black-brown thermoplastic substance which is a by-product of refining crude
oil) and various additives. Due to the fact that friction is needed for the car to be
able to brake and not slide around on the road, this is an important parameter to
take into account when producing the new asphalt. Therefore the primary task of the
research project was to find a mixture, where the stones were so small that it would
reduce rolling resistance - without simultaneously reducing the friction so much that
it would go beyond traffic safety.
Another special concern was the ageing process of the asphalt. It would not be
enough to reduce the rolling resistance, if this new refined pavement was to be renewed
every fifth year. It has to have a lifespan of at least 15 years, which is the standard
of nowadays asphalts.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 More Complex Models
It is the knowledge of the ageing process in highly viscous liquids where the re-
search centre “Time and Glass” has its expertise, with its many measurements and
computer simulations on a daily basis in this area, and it is this knowledge that is
needed in order to analyse the pavement on a molecular level.
A study suggests that a quarter of the CO2 derived on the roads is due to rolling
resistance. This was what the researchers were hoping to reduce by a minimum of
3%, which would lead to a reduction of 160,000 ton CO2 and 76 ton nitrogen less a
year - on a national scale.
A total of more than six kilometer of test pavements on in-service roads with
different aggregate size, mortar filler, bitumen, and texture depth have been tested
between 2012-2014 throughout Denmark, with the impressive result of an average of
5% reduction in fuel consumption compared to average existing Danish state roads.
The results are averages of results from three different tires (Bjarne Schmidt, 2015).
A positive side-effect should also be the reduction of traffic noise, which is an
increasing problem. In the pre-study of the project, it was assessed that motorists
could save 300 million DKK a year due to the lower cost of petrol. But regardless
of the cost of gasoline, the reduction of noise and CO2-release is a huge gain for the
environment.
The big challenge faced in the project was getting the coating to preserve the
properties for life and to get it to meet all functional requirements. According to
the research team the most vital parameters were as listed: grain size distribution,
mortar composition filler-type, size of the sand, stone, and gravel plus bitumen type
and quality.
4.3
Need of further experimental data
The research in the area is endless, and numerous different modelling approaches
keep becoming more complex and account for more and more aspects of the physical
phenomena required for a complete simulation. The fine calibration of new ideas on
already promising models do not give the full picture.
As mentioned earlier, experimental data is necessary in order to validate the math-
ematical models, and a problem throughout the literature seems to be the lack of raw
data. New data is also required to keep fitting better models, and to include the
complex nature of the constraints in this problem. Not everything can be accounted
for, since that would be almost impossible, so design choices have to be made, but so
far a fully mathematical model for calculating the rolling resistance between a vehicle
and the road surface has not been successfully developed.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental and
Practical Efforts
“She generally gave herself very
good advice, (though she very
seldom followed it).”
— Lewis Carroll, Alice’s
Adventures in Wonderland,
Chapter 1
5.1
Measuring Equipment and Methods
Several factors influence the rolling resistance. Some come from the road (surface
texture, bearing capacity, viscoelastic properties), others from the surroundings (tem-
perature, water, dust), and some from the car (tire type, inflation pressure, load,
speed). Therefore experimental measurement data is at least needed to fit and test
the mathematical models. But due to the wide diversity of areas connected with
rolling resistance measuring and modelling, this chapter will not go into specificities
nor engage in in-depth critiques of the presented material; the aim is primarily to
provide an overview of the references in the area and uncover common threads in
the research field. Most of the information can be found in (Lasse G Andersen, J. K.
Larsen, et al., 2014).
There are different measurement equipments and methods to measure and calculate
the coefficient of rolling resistance, which include both laboratory test machines and
road vehicles.
Testing in laboratories mostly offers more precise control with respect to opera-
tional parameter changes, while road testing offers more realistic conditions. Indoor
measurements such as the drum test are the most commonly used.
A problem with the indoor facilities can be the issue on easily change the surface on
which the tire rolls. Whereas a problem with outdoor measurements is the uncon-
trollable variables such as temperature, wind, and irregular roads, which can induce
variations up to 10% (Technology, (2015)[a]).
==PAGE:50==
38
5 Experimental and Practical Efforts
5.1.1
Rolling Resistance Measuring Techniques
The paper (Lasse G Andersen, J. K. Larsen, et al., 2014) reviews the state of the art
of rolling resistance research, focusing on measuring techniques, surface and texture
modelling, contact models, tire models, and macro-modelling of rolling resistance.
In the measuring techniques primarily four methods are mentioned:
• Drum test
• Trailer methods
• Coast-down methods
• Fuel consumption methods
Drum tests of tires
The drum test is ideal for testing tires in a laboratory. It measures the rolling resis-
tance of the tires by holding a test tire up against a drum and applies a load to the tire.
By rotating the drum and measuring the resistance the tire exerts on the rotation of
the drum, the rolling resistance force of the tire can be deduced. This setup has the
advantage of excluding various factors that normally influence the rolling resistance
of a tire. This test was standardised in 1975.
Trailer methods
In the trailer method one or more test wheels are towed on a trailer, while the
resistance to rolling is being measured by force transducers. This method has been
in development since the 1980s and has been a key component in the creation of a
linear model for rolling resistance’s dependence on the road surface. An advantage of
the trailer method is that many disturbing factors such as transmission losses and air
resistance have been reduced or eliminated in contrast with coast-down experiments.
The trailers are still measuring rolling resistance on actual roads in contrast to the
laboratory drum tests. An extensive comparative study between different trailers on a
test track showed overall good correlations with both macrotexture and megatexture,
though day-to-day variations were significant on the test track. Thus, further research
and trailer standardisations are suggested.
Coast-down methods
The principle in coast-down measurement is to accelerate a vehicle to a certain speed
and then let it roll freely in neutral gear or clutch down. As the rolling resistance of
the tires stops the vehicle, velocity and time are measures as a minimum, but other
quantities like wind speed and road texture may be measured as well. Nevertheless,
this method actually does not yield any direct results on rolling resistance and must
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Measuring Equipment and Methods
39
be fitted to a mathematical model by e.g. estimated parameters of least-square re-
gression. The formulation and complexity of the model may vary depending on the
experimental setting, sources of data, etc. Coast-down models have been used for
several purposes, and apart from rolling resistance and aerodynamic drag assessment,
the methodology has been used to estimate fuel consumption, transmission losses,
and maximum vehicle speed (Lasse G Andersen, J. K. Larsen, et al., 2014).
Fuel consumption methods
The most general way of assessing rolling resistance is by measuring the fuel con-
sumption, because it includes all possible factors that influence the rolling resistance
assessment. However, the energy loss experienced by the vehicle is influenced by so
many factors that it can be difficult to source out the actually fuel consumption due
to rolling resistance loss (see Rolling Resistance has a Meaningful Effect on Vehicle
Fuel Consumption in section 3).
==PAGE:52==
40
5 Experimental and Practical Efforts
5.1.2
Surface Roughness and Texture modelling
Roughness modelling has the challenge to extract useful information from the road
data. In the case of rolling resistance modelling, there are different kinds of informa-
tion extractable on various length scales, as well as different measurement techniques.
Figure 5.1 (Lasse G Andersen, J. K. Larsen, et al., 2014) shows the effects related
to the vehicle and surroundings during driving, such as noise, rolling resistance, and
tire wear, plotted against texture wavelength.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of texture wavelengths, anticipated effects, and the classi-
fication into, e.g., megatexture, macrotexture; rolling resistance is af-
fected by unevenness or roughness, megatexture, and macrotexture. λ
is texture wavelength and fsp is spatial frequency, cycles/m. A lighter
shade indicates a favourable effect of texture over this range, and a
darker shade indicates an unfavourable effect.
Especially two kinds of road measures are widely used in today’s estimation of rolling
resistance; the International Roughness Index (IRI) and the Mean Profile Depth
(MPD). Both methods aim to model two types of texture found in Figure 5.1, i.e.,
roughness and unevenness (IRI) and macrotexture (MPD). These methods are de-
scribed further down.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Measuring Equipment and Methods
41
5.1.3
Texture measurements
Sand Patch Method
The Sand Patch Test is one of the early measures of macrotexture (e.g. skid resistance)
possible because it is simple and robust. To preform the test:
1. Find a suitable patch without irregularities and make it as clean as possible;
2. Pour a pile of sand of a known volume onto the patch;
3. Spread the sand into a circular disc;
4. When levelled, measure the diameter of the resulting circle;
5. repeat; and
6. Calculate Mean Texture Depth as MTD = 4V/πD2, where V is the volume of
the sand and D is the diameter of the circle.
MPD
Mean Profile Depth (MPD) was created as a measure that could be calculated from
2D road profiles (usually measured by a laser) and correlated with volumetric methods
like the Sand Patch Test. MPD measures the highest peak for each 5 cm. It seems
reasonable to assume that higher peaks imply higher indentation and thus higher
energy loss. The MPD is calculated as follows:
1. Take at least 10 100-mm laser profile segments of the road section where the
MPD is to be found;
2. For each segment, subtract the regression line such that the average vertical
displacement is zero;
3. Find the maximum vertical displacement values of the first and second half of
each segment and take the average of these; and
4. Take the average across all segments of the values found previously that yield
the MPD value of the road section.
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Experimental and Practical Efforts
Figure 5.2: Illustration of the terms baseline, average level, peak level, profile depth,
MPD and ETD.
IRI
It was a problem that the different types of measurements were not possible to com-
pare for different countries. Therefore a standardised measure of road unevenness was
formulated. This is the so-called International Roughness Index (IRI) and it stems
from a mathematical model that represents a (quarter) vehicle’s damping response
to the road’s longitudinal profile and comes from the reponse-type road roughness
measuring system (RTRRMS), which consists of a wheel mounted to a spring that
records and accumulates any bumps in the longitudinal road profile. By dividing this
quantity with the distance travelled, a measure of road roughness is obtained.
This shows general rolling resistance model based on literature, coast-down mea-
surements and drum measurements from MIRIAM:
Cr = Cr0 + Cr1 · IRI · v + Cr2 · MPD
where Cri are parameters for passenger cars, trucks and tires.
Moreover, IRI is used in ride comfort estimation, pavement condition number and
as a road parameter in rolling resistance estimation and especially the latter use was
not intended, when the road metric was designed.
Both MPD and IRI are used to make newer measurement equipment backwards com-
patible, and thus relate them to older equipment. Yet another approach is to use
classical measures like MPD, obtained from road laser profiles in conjunction with an
envelope algorithm that mimics the viscoelastic properties of the tire.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Measuring Equipment and Methods
43
Additional inertial profiler considerations can be: the surface shapes involving geo-
metrical properties such as isotropy, texture and cracking. The environment in which
the measurements take place, such as temperature, humidity etc. The operation of
how the profiler is used, i.e. changes in speed, transversal position, awareness of road
irregularities etc. Design of the measurement equipment such as sample frequency,
measurement resolution, initial data processing etc.
5.1.4
PIARC model
The International Experiment by PIARC was conducted in September and October
1992 for the purpose of comparing and harmonising the test results obtained from
various testing devices on skid resistance and pavement texture. As a result, the
International Friction Index (IFI) was developed, based on three types of friction
measuring systems: sideforce, braking force with an unlocked wheel, and braking
force with locked wheel, was developed for converting results measured by different
devices into a common scale. This index consists of two components, the Friction
Number (F60) and a Speed Constant (Sp), and is reported as IFI(F60,Sp).
Once the IFI is obtained, it is possible to calculate the Coefficient of Friction F(S)
at any speed S.
Forty-seven measuring devices from 16 countries participated in the experiment,
and these testers can be used to calibrate other testers that did not participate so
that they too can predict the IFI.
F60 indicates friction at a slip speed of 60 km/h, while Sp indicates the speed
dependency of the friction coefficient and is influenced by the macrotexture of the
pavement.
In 2000 a study was conducted by (Henry et al., (2000)) for the determination of
the International Friction Index using a Circular Texture Meter1 (CTM) and the Dy-
namic Friction Tester2 (DFT). The study analysed the macrotexture measurements
by the Sand Patch Test, the Japanese Sand Track Test method, and the CTM and
friction measurement by the DFT, which were conducted on various kinds of asphalt
pavements and concrete pavements.
Good correlation was found between the Mean Profile Depth (MPD) measured by
the CTM and the Mean Texture Depth (MTD) by a volumetric method. This makes
it possible to measure macrotexture easily and readily with the same accuracy as the
Sand Patch Test using the CTM. The study also found that the IFI can be calculated
from the MPD determined by the CTM and the coefficient of friction at a slip speed
of 20 km/h measured by the DFT.
Entrepreneurs use IRI today to calculate the coefficient of friction as a tender
requirement for their work. The International Friction Index is used e.g. in COWI.
1Laser traces circle, which is divided into 8 segments for analysis
2Rotating rubber sliders contact pavement surface to produce friction profile
==PAGE:56==
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Future Developments
“It’s a poor sort of memory that
only works backwards.”
— Lewis Carroll, Through the
Looking Glass, Chapter 5
6.1
ROSE
A new research project ROSE (2016-2019) started earlier this year as an offspring
of the COOEE project is aiming to design a durable asphalt pavement with an even
higher energy saving. The goal is at minimum a 6.5% reduction of passenger-car
energy consumption compared to that of average on present Danish roads.
The new project wants to answer the questions on how to calculate the rolling resis-
tance and skid resistance for a given surface and tire with a reliable mathematical
model. Furthermore, they want a model that can predict the road’s durability and
resulting road-surface texture from a given asphalt mix design and road construction
method.
Therefore ROSE will be the first in the world to construct a scaled-down labora-
tory for simultaneous measurements of rolling resistance, skid resistance, noise, and
particle emission from the tire.
Hopefully, the final result in the end of this project will be a new and improved gen-
eration of asphalt pavements with low rolling resistance, handling all the parameters
involved.
ROSE is the second stage in the three-stage program, starting with COOEE in
2011 and ending with the EU Horizon 2020 application as its third and final stage.
The EU project will formulate a complete rolling resistance model by combining
the ROSE models with models for the tires, road-tire-car interaction, road deforma-
tion, and noise. A potential use of the complete model could be a formulation of
an EU standard for rolling resistance, another use will be used as input for the EU
countries’ national asset-management systems.
==PAGE:58==
46
6 Future Developments
The project description of ROSE amongst other things state:
“Benefits for Denmark: ROSE’s main value is socio-economic: An 6.5 % [updated]
reduction of the passenger-car energy consumption leads to reduced CO2 emission
and permanent annual savings of several hundred million DKK. Reducing the rolling
resistance by optimising road pavements is one of very few initiatives for reducing
Denmark’s greenhouse gas contribution that has a negative socio-economic cost. By
consolidating a Danish position of strength, ROSE opens for a substantial systems
export.”
(ROSE, (2016))
Figure 6.1: The many length scales are to be calculated for in the investigation
of a new low rolling resistance pavement, which still accounts for skid
resistance, durability and noise.
In the demonstration of the possible 5% energy consumption reduction in optimised
road surfaces, COOEE developed different models on a large length scale. On the
nanoscale models for bitumen at the molecular level was made, and at mesoscale the
asphalt mix. On millimetre scale the tire-road contact was modelled and COOEE
demonstrated on the large kilometre scale a proof-of-concept for the usage of the
result in a road-planning asset-management system (cf. Figure 6.1 above).
Further reductions are planned in the hope of the leading to a 2% overall energy
saving, and a full implementation on the 4,000 kilometre of state roads in Denmark
over the next 15 years, leading to provide a permanent annual saving for the Danish
society of several hundred million DDK1.
The scientific part of ROSE is organized into four work packages; the ROSE manage-
ment is categorized as a fifth work package. The relation between the scientific work
packages is the following:
WP1 Model-validation laboratory: To address the challenge that many uncontrolled
factors in-situ measurements of rolling resistance are not well suited for model
1Should electronic cars be taking over, the low rolling resistance roads will imply an increase in
range per charging
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Further ideas
47
validation, ROSE establishes a scaled-down laboratory for validation of rolling
resistance and skid-resistance models. This will be the world’s first ever labora-
tory of its kind.
WP2 Modelling: The first purpose of WP2 is to create a reliable model for rolling
resistance and skid resistance in the tire-road contact zone in close interaction
with WP1. The second purpose is to construct molecular, as well as coarse-
grained, models of bitumen that can be simulated on realistic time scales and
allow for durability predictions.
WP3 Durability: The COOEE project confirmed that asphalt mixtures can be opti-
mised to reduce rolling resistance properties, but durability must be validated
in order to make their application realistic. Texture stability is an important pa-
rameter, and a model that can simulate the tire-pavement interface will provide
a better understanding of this complex interaction.
WP4 Implementation: Introducing the new generation of pavement functionalities
such as low rolling resistance without jeopardizing traffic safety through loss
of skid resistance requires new design criteria, including knowledge of material
behaviour in the construction process and in-service life time. In order to secure
correct pavement rehabilitation strategies, robust measurement methods are
needed. Presently, the EU project ROSANNE harmonizes existing equipment
for measuring rolling resistance, skid resistance, and noise, as an input to the
upcoming European standardization of these devices.
WP5 Management: This work package is responsible for the overall leadership and
the dissemination of ROSE results. The first task is to ensure that all collabo-
ration agreements are signed ultimo 2015 for ROSE to start by January 1, 2016.
WP5 is furthermore responsible for the EU Horizon 2020 application (ultimo
2018).
6.2
Further ideas
A problem concerning the empirical measurement techniques of road surfaces seems to
come from the influence of other aspects - such as air resistance - on the measurement
equipment. A suggestion for solving this problematic could be found in the use of
drones with laser profilers. Advantages: Same speed, negligible air resistance, does
not “bump” at uneven terrain, can be synchronised to cover the whole lane width.
A problem for the author of this work was to find a suitable simple mathematical
model for a tire. The modelling of the treads always seemed to be in need for very fine
finite element meshes, so in the search to overcome this issue, a way to go around the
problem was considered; if there was no aquaplaning, then the need for treads would
allay, and the modelling would be easier. As it turns out a new “thirsty” concrete with
the ability to absorbs 4,000 liters of water in 60 seconds has already been developed,
==PAGE:60==
48
6 Future Developments
but perhaps in countries like Denmark where the weather conditions make the water
freeze quickly it would ruin the pavement. However, under foreign skies with better
conditions, this might be the road ahead in order to come up with a solution for the
simulation problem.
Furthermore, another hope was to make a model describing the relationship be-
tween rolling resistance and the roughness of the pavement. The idea was to model
the road surface (or the roughness of same, i.e., the size of the stones in the asphalt)
as a series of sinusoidals with increasing frequencies (a simulation of road roughness)
on the x axis and the rolling resistance (coefficient) on the y axis. The assumption
was that it would provide a kind of negative parabola, where one could estimate the
ultimate roughness for a “safe” rolling resistance coefficient.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
“Tut, tut, child!”, said the
Duchess, “Everything’s got a
moral, if you can only find it.”
— Lewis Carroll, Alice’s
Adventures in Wonderland,
Chapter 9
About one forth of Denmark’s energy consumption goes into the road sector. Tires af-
fect fuel economy mainly through the rolling resistance. In the process of deformation
and recovery the mechanical energy that otherwise would be used to turn the wheels
is converted into heat and dissipated from the tires. This means that more fuel must
be consumed to replace the lost energy. A research has found that a reduction in
rolling resistance of 10% can yield fuel consumption improvements ranging from 0.5
to 1.5% for passenger-cars, so with the recent validations on test roads showing a 5%
reduction of rolling resistance in the asphalt at a little extra cost and with acceptable
skid resistance, the field is set for new and more intense research in the field of rolling
resistance and pavements.
Unfortunately the complex relationship between the various design attributes and
operating conditions makes it very difficult to develop analytical models of rolling
resistance. Mainly in the modelling of tires and tire-road interactions: the hystere-
sis effect generally complicates the making of realistic tire simulation models. By
increasing the pressure of the tire, which will lessen the hysteresis, it will also lose
adhesion, so when designing a tire, the manufacturer must compromise between low
rolling resistance and large adhesion force or grip.
Rolling resistance is definitely a high potential field of study, and though a lot has
been done, initiatives as COOEE and ROSE are needed. And fields like tribology,
which is trying to understand the under-laying physical mechanisms, are hopefully
capably of overcoming the model complications, since rolling resistance is found to in-
creases significantly with increasing normal load, tread profile, and tread material loss
modulus and decreases significantly with increasing ambient temperature, convection
loss, tread mechanical stiffness, and tread thickness.
Also the goal of more comparable measurement equipment and more release of
raw data will help for further investigations in the field.
==PAGE:62==
50
7 Conclusion
The research of rolling resistance in tires, road surfaces, and their interaction is endless,
and is mostly with a view to environmental benefits and tire designs.
Nevertheless, thanks to Danish initiatives, hopefully, the objective of a completely
CO2 neutral Denmark in 2050 can be reached.
In regard to this, it is interesting that optimisation of pavement design has not been
examined before, and that the EU’s efforts in order to reduce transport CO2 emission
are concentrated on engine and tire optimisation. Especially with the potential ben-
efits too: environment, politics, mechanics modelling, experimental approaches and
unification of international norms to measure car performances.
7.1
General remarks
The author began the present work with no prior knowledge of the field, and was
overwhelmed by the load of information, and the complexity of the matter. This is
though a very important and interesting subject!
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
MF Alzoubi, EY Tanbour, and R Al-Waked. “Compression and hysteresis curves
of nonlinear polyurethane foams under different densities, strain rates and dif-
ferent environmental conditions”. In: ASME 2011 International Mechanical En-
gineering Congress and Exposition. American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
(2011), pages 101–109.
[2]
Lasse G Andersen and Jesper K Larsen. “Introducing Functional Data Analysis
to Coast Down Modeling for Rolling Resistance Estimation”. In: SAE Interna-
tional Journal of Passenger Cars-Mechanical Systems 8.2 (2015), pages 786–
796.
[3]
Lasse G Andersen, Jesper K Larsen, et al. “Rolling Resistance Measurement and
Model Development”. In: Journal of Transportation Engineering 141.2 (2014),
page 04014075.
[4]
Lasse Grinderslev Andersen. “Rolling resistance modelling: from functional data
analysis to asset management system”. PhD thesis. Roskilde UniversitetRoskilde
University, Institut for Natur, Systemer og Modeller The Department of Science,
Systems and Models, (2015).
[5]
The Automobile Association. Idle Lights Not Good for the Environment Cut the
Queues to cut CO2 @ONLINE. (2008). url: http://www.theaa.com/public_
affairs/news/cut-traffic-queues-to-cut-co2.html.
[6]
Karl Johan Astrom and Carlos Canudas-De-Wit. “Revisiting the LuGre friction
model”. In: Control Systems, IEEE 28.6 (2008), pages 101–114.
[7]
Farid Al-Bender et al. “Theoretical analysis of the dynamic behavior of hystere-
sis elements in mechanical systems”. In: International Journal of Non-Linear
Mechanics 39.10 (2004), pages 1721–1735.
[8]
Michel Boulet and Guy Descornet. “International Experiment to compare and
harmonize the pavement texture and skid resistance measurement Methods”. In:
Road Pavements / Road assets management, PIARC (1994).
[9]
Carlos Canudas-de-Wit et al. “Dynamic friction models for road/tire longitudi-
nal interaction”. In: Vehicle System Dynamics 39.3 (2003), pages 189–226.
[10]
James Carvill. Mechanical engineer’s data handbook. Butterworth-Heinemann,
(1994), pages 77–79.
==PAGE:64==
52
Bibliography
[11]
Technical Committee 1 Surface Characteristics. International PIARC experi-
ment to compare and harmonize texture and skid resistance measurement. Road
Pavements / Road assets management, (1995).
[12]
Samuel Kelly Clark and Richard N Dodge. “A handbook for the rolling resis-
tance of pneumatic tires”. In: (1979).
[13]
Michelin Clermont-Ferrand. The Tyre: Rolling Resistance and Fuel Savings.
(2003).
[14]
Informing Consumers. “Tires and Passenger Vehicle Fuel Economy”. In: TR
News (2006).
[15]
COOEE. CO2 emission reduction by exploitation of rolling resistance modelling
of pavements @ONLINE. September (2015). url: http://www.cooee-co2.dk/
index.htm.
[16]
DTU Technical University of Denmark. Ny vejbelægning sparer brændstof og
CO2 @ONLINE. March (2015). url: http://www.dtu.dk/Om-DTU/Nyheder-
og-presse/Dynamo1/2015/03/Ny-vejbelaegning-sparer-braendstof-og-
CO2.
[17]
Bojana Drincic. “Mechanical models of friction that exhibit hysteresis, stick-slip,
and the Stribeck effect”. PhD thesis. The University of Michigan, (2012).
[18]
Energistyrrelsen. Transportens energiforbrug og CO2-emissioner @ONLINE. Jan-
uary (2012). url: http://www.ens.dk/klima-co2/transport/transportens-
energiforbrug-co2-emissioner.
[19]
Metin Ersoy and Bernd Heißing. Chassis Handbook: Fundamentals, Driving
Dynamics, Components, Mechatronics, Perspectives; with 75 Tables. Vieweg+
Teubner, (2011).
[20]
Eurostat. “Early estimates of CO2 emissions from energy use In 2013, CO2
emissions in the EU28 estimated to have decreased by 2.5 % compared with
2012”. In: Eurostat newsrelease (May 2014).
[21]
James A Ewing. “On hysteresis in the relation of strain to stress”. In: Report of
the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1889), pages 502–504.
[22]
Svante Finnveden and Martin Fraggstedt. “Waveguide finite elements for curved
structures”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibration 312.4 (2008), pages 644–671.
[23]
Martin Fraggstedt. “Vibrations, damping and power dissipation in car tyres”.
PhD thesis. (2008).
[24]
Martin Fraggstedt and Svante Finnveden. “A Waveguide Finite Element Model
of a Pneumatic Tyre”. In: Journal of Sound and Vibration (2007).
[25]
Martin Fraggstedt and Svante Finnveden. “Estimates of the visco-elastic prop-
erties of car tyres”. In: (2008).
[26]
Martin Fraggstedt and Svante Finnveden. “Power dissipation in car tyres”. In:
Journal of Sound and Vibration (2008).
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
53
[27]
Martin Fraggstedt and Svante Finnveden. “The influence of the road on rolling
resistance”. In: (2008).
[28]
Fribo and Viskinde. “Danske forskere udvikler ny asfalt, der sparer benzin for
millioner”. In: Inginøren (2014).
[29]
Gheorghe Frunză and Emanuel N Diaconescu. “Hysteresis and Mechanical Fa-
tigue”. In: The Annals of University “Dunărea de Jos “ of Galati Fascicle VIII,
(2006) (XII), ISSN 1221-4590 tribology ().
[30]
M. Haider, M. Conter, and K-P. Glaeser. “Discussion paper what are rolling
resistance and other influencing parameters on energy consumption in road
transport”. In: Models for Rolling Resistance in Road Infrastructure Asset Man-
agement Systems (MIRIAM) (2011).
[31]
John Jewett Henry et al. “Determination of the international friction index
(IFI) using the Circular Texture Meter (CTM) and the Dynamic Friction Tester
(DFT)”. In: International symposium on pavement surface characteristics of
roads and airfields. (2000), pages 109–121.
[32]
Carsten Hoever. The simulation of car and truck tyre vibrations, rolling resis-
tance and rolling noise. PhD thesis, Department of Applied Acoustics, Chalmers
University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, (2014).
[33]
Carsten Hoever and Wolfgang Kropp. “A model for investigating the influence
of road surface texture and tyre tread pattern on rolling resistance”. In: Journal
of Sound and Vibration (2015).
[34]
Carsten Hoever and Wolfgang Kropp. “A simulation-based parameter study
of car tyre rolling losses and sound generation”. In: Kropp W. Proceedings-9th
European Conference on Noise Control. Prague: S. Hirzel Verlag GmbH. (2012),
pages 926–931.
[35]
Carsten Hoever and Wolfgang Kropp. “The influence of modelling parameters
on the simulation of car tyre rolling noise and rolling resistance”. In: Proceedings
of AIA-DAGA 2013 Conference on Acoustics, EAA Euroregio/EAA Winter
School, 18–21 March 2013 in Merano. (2013), pages 1601–1604.
[36]
Edwin R Jones and Richard L Childers. Contemporary college physics. Addison
Wesley Publishing Company, (1990).
[37]
Rafał Kasperek and Grzegorz Litak. “Response of the mechanical system with
the hysteresis in a high frequency limit”. In: PAMM 9.1 (2009), pages 707–708.
[38]
Son-Joo Kim and Arvin R Savkoor. “The contact problem of in-plane rolling of
tires on a flat road”. In: Vehicle System Dynamics 27.S1 (1997), pages 189–206.
[39]
J.M. Knudsen and P.G. Hjorth. Elements of Newtonian Mechanics: Including
Nonlinear Dynamics. Advanced Texts in Physics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
(2002). isbn: 9783540676522.
[40]
Larsen, Dyre, and Schmidt. “Skyggepris. Bedre veje giver lavere CO2-udslip”.
In: Politiken (2014).
==PAGE:66==
54
Bibliography
[41]
Augustus Edward Hough Love. A treatise on the mathematical theory of elas-
ticity. Dover, (1944), page 116. isbn: 9780486601748.
[42]
NJ Mills. “Finite element models for the viscoelasticity of open-cell polyurethane
foam”. In: Cellular polymers 25.5 (2006), pages 293–316.
[43]
D Mukherjee. “Effect of Pavement Conditions on Rolling Resistance and Fuel
Consumption”. In: American Journal of Engineering Research 3 (2014).
[44]
National Research Council (US). Transportation Research Board. Committee
for the National Tire Efficiency Study. Tires and Passenger Vehicle Fuel Econ-
omy: Informing Consumers, Improving Performance. Volume 286. Transporta-
tion Research Board, (2006).
[45]
NPTEL. NPTEL E-Learning Courses from the IITs & IISc Mechanical Engi-
neering » Tribology @ONLINE. December (2015). url: http://www.nptel.ac.
in/courses/112102015/.
[46]
KV Narasimha Rao, R Krishna Kumar, and PC Bohara. “A sensitivity analysis
of design attributes and operating conditions on tyre operating temperatures
and rolling resistance using finite element analysis”. In: Proceedings of the In-
stitution of Mechanical Engineers, Part D: Journal of Automobile Engineering
220.5 (2006), pages 501–517.
[47]
Bharat Mohan Redrouthu and Sidharth Das. “Tyre modelling for rolling resis-
tance”. In: Department of Applied Mechanics, Division of Vehicle Engineering
and Autonomous System, Vehicle Dynamics Group, Chalmers University of
Technology, Göteborg, Sweden Master’s thesis 2014:24 (2014).
[48]
ROSE. Road Saving Energy. Project describtion - Appendix A. January (2016).
[49]
Kazuo Saito et al. “Development of Testers for Measuring Skid Resistance and
Texture of Paved Surfaces, and Their Application for Determination of the
International Friction Index (IFI)”. In: Journal of the Eastern Asia Society for
Transportation Studies (2001).
[50]
B Schmidt. “MIRIAM: models for rolling resistance in road infrastructure asset
management systems”. In: Arrb Conference, 24TH, 2010, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (2010).
[51]
Bjarne Schmidt. “New Pavement Types Reduce Rolling Resistance”. In: Routes/Roads-
PIARC Magazine 366 (2015).
[52]
JP Sethna et al. IP over Avian Carriers with Quality of Service. RFC 2549
(Informational). Internet Engineering Task Force, April (1999). url: http://
www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2549.txt (visited on September 31, 2014).
[53]
Stage. “Ny dansk asfalt kan spare 64 mio. liter brændstof årligt”. In: Ingeniøren
(2015).
[54]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 28580 @ONLINE. Septem-
ber (2015). url: https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
55
[55]
DS Stutts and W Soedel. “A simplified dynamic model of the effect of internal
damping on the rolling resistance in pneumatic tires”. In: Journal of Sound and
Vibration 155.1 (1992), pages 153–164.
[56]
Tampere University of Technology. Methods and equipment for rolling resistance
and measurements @ONLINE. Might have been removed since January 2016.
December (2015). url: https://www.tut.fi/ms/muo/tyreschool/moduulit/
...8/.../2_2.html.
[57]
Tampere University of Technology. Modelling of tyres @ONLINE. Might have
been removed since January 2016. December (2015). url: https://www.tut.
fi/ms/muo/tyreschool/moduulit/moduuli.../8_1.html.
[58]
tribology-abc.com. History of science friction @ONLINE. September (2015).
url: http://www.tribology-abc.com/abc/history.htm.
[59]
Cambridge University. Viscoelasticity and hysteresis @ONLINE. September
(2015). url: http://www.doitpoms.ac.uk/tlplib/bioelasticity/viscoelasticity-
hysteresis.php.
[60]
RUC Roskilde University. Bedre asfalt skal reducere CO2-udledningen @ON-
LINE. January (2011). url: https : / / www . ruc . dk / om - universitetet /
nyhedsportal/taet-paa-videnskaben/vis/article/bedre-asfalt-skal-
mindske-co2-udledningen/.
[61]
R Van der Steen. “Tyre/road friction modeling”. PhD thesis. Eindhoven Uni-
versity of Technology, Department of Mechanical Engineering, (2007).
[62]
Carl-Gustaf Wallman and Henrik Åström. “Friction measurement methods and
the correlation between road friction and traffic safety: A literature review”. In:
(2001).
[63]
JY Wong. Theory of Ground Vehicles. 2nd. New York: Wiley, (1993), pages 3–
29. isbn: 0471524964.
==PAGE:68==
