==PAGE:1==
Developing an IT-based
Comparison System for Engineer
to Order Products
Mads Dalsgaard Thomsen
Supervisor: Lars Hvam
Company: Haldor Topsoe A/S
Submission Date: April 21, 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of DTU Management Engineering
Produktionstorvet, building 426,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
receptionen@man.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Nowadays, Engineering-to-Order (ETO) companies, are required to use technology
to stay one step ahead of foreign competition. One way to use technology is by es-
tablishing an IT based comparison system within the company making it possible
to reuse information of past experiences. This can result in many beneﬁts, in-
cluding faster design, more eﬃcient engineering and more accurate sales estimates
for customers. The Danish ETO company Haldor Topsoe (HT) has established a
new project where the organisational viability for having such a system has been
investigated.
The main aim of this study was to investigate if it would be feasible to design
a model of a comparison system for a selected product within the company. In
addition, the model should be able to demonstrate that such a system would
be desirable for HT. The method used for this research has been a seven step
framework that describes a procedure for how to establish a comparison system
within a company. The framework is suggested by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] which
also provides a variety on potential beneﬁts of how companies can gain by having
the system. Beside the framework, these potential beneﬁts have been used to form
the research and in particular the development of the model.
As a result of this research, the model of the comparison system has been build
around HT’s WSA condenser in MS Excel. In the model it is possible to deﬁne
a new condenser and based on this the model will automatically navigate though
a data collection of previously made condensers and only return the most similar
ones in an user interface. In addition, the model has been designed so that the
information from the previously products can be analysed from diﬀerent perspec-
tives. All in all, the model demonstrates a variety of beneﬁts on a conceptual level
which indicates that there is great potential for further investigation for such a
system.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared in the department of Engineering Management at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring
an M.Sc. in Engineering Management. The thesis accounts for 35 ECTS points
and was written by Mads Dalsgaard Thomsen. It was written in the time period
September 2015 to April 2016 and was conducted in collaboration with Haldor
Topsoe A/S. The author’s academic background is in Industrial Engineering and
Engineering Management.
The project was chosen in collaboration with Lars Hvam, the supervisor of the
project and the phD students Sara Shaﬁee and Katrín Kristjánsdóttir.
It should be noted that the thesis includes sensitive data for Haldor Topsoe A/S.
Therefore, it is prohibited to make copies, citation or use it in promotions without
consulting with both the company and the author.
Kongens Lyngby, April-2016
Mads Dalsgaard Thomsen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Prof. Lars Hvam, phD student
Katrín Kristjánsdóttir and phD student Sara Shaﬁee for suggesting the project to
me. Without their initial inputs and motivation the project would not have been
possible.
As my advisor, Lars has provided good counseling and his contributions have
helped to maximize the academic contribution in this thesis.
As an important part of the thesis committee, Katrín and Sara have throughout
the project delivered crucial information and introduced me to key employees at
Haldor Topsoe A/S.
I want to thank Katrín, Sara and Lars for their continuous support and clear en-
thusiasm in the project. They have all played a key role, in delivering relevant
literature, and in giving valuable feedback. Last but not least, their great person-
alities and good mood transmit, and makes the whole work much better. I could
not imagine having a stronger team around this master thesis.
My sincere thanks also goes to the employees at Haldor Topsoe A/S. I would
especially like to express my gratitude towards the employees in the IT - and
Mechanical department for prioritizing time and resources for meetings and for
sharing valuable data.
Finally, I would like to make it clear that I take the full responsibility for any
errors or misunderstandings that may exist in the thesis.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Working hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Introduction to company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Theoretical foundations
13
2.1
Product customization and conﬁguration systems . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Comparison system for ETO products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Clustering techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Project Description
31
3.1
The project at Haldor Topsoe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Revised project description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Decision tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
47
4.1
Process analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Step 1 - Identify relevant product variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.3
Step 2 - Retrieve the values of the variables for all previous designed
products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.4
Step 3 - Retrieve product relevant information for previous products
61
4.5
Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
. . . .
68
5
Modeling
81
5.1
Introduction to model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.2
Step 5 - Set up database with previous products design
. . . . . .
85
5.3
Step 6- Compare the new products with the previous products
. .
88
5.4
Step 7 - Integration of the database and conﬁguration system . . .
93
6
Discussion
101
6.1
Project overall
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
6.2
Product selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
6.3
Identiﬁcations of relevant product variables . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
6.4
Deliverable 1 - Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
6.5
Deliverable 2 - Comparison platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
6.6
Deliverable 3 - Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
6.7
Deliverable 4 - Investigating the objective of the comparison system 107
7
Conclusion
111
A Spare parts description
113
B Project description
115
C Prioritising scope of WSA component
121
D Structure of condenser
123
E Retrieved values for the describing variables
125
F Elements in the Cluster Analysis
127
G Working techniques at the company
133
H Future ideas for the User-interface
135
I
Retrieve product relevant information for previous products
137
J
Comparison platform
139
Bibliography
141
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Engineering-To-Order (ETO) companies are known for making highly engineered
and customized products. Nowadays, the companies are aﬀected by several trends
such as globalization, increased competition and turbulent technological advance.
Consequently, ETO companies are challenged when it comes to delivery of their
products due to customer demand of high quality and short delivery time [Shaﬁee
and Hvam, 2015].
The Danish catalysis company Haldor Topsoe (HT) is an ETO company which
face these challenges. For example, the company’s operating business unit ’Envi-
ronmental’ has recently experienced a decline in their sales of Wet Gas Sulfuric
Acid (WSA) plants since expiration of patents has opened the market and made
it more competitive particular regarding price and delivery time. Therefore, to
achieve a proﬁtable business despite all these challenges HT has taken diﬀerent
initiatives. Among other, top management has made the decision to spread the
use of conﬁguration system (CS) to various departments within the organisation.
By utilizing the capability of a CS the company’s sales staﬀcan conﬁgure a product
in collaboration with the customer already in the sales phase. When the sales staﬀ
has conﬁgured a product based on the customer’s requirements the CS checks if
the product is feasible and generates a well-documented description of the product
so that the customer can get an oﬀer within short time. Beside enhancing the sales
activities the product speciﬁcations generated can also be used in other functional
activities leading to a signiﬁcantly reduction in both cost and delivery time of the
order execution[Hvam et al., 2008].
Aligned to HT’s decision to spread the use of the CS a new project in the Environ-
mental business unit has been established. The project has aimed to investigate the
organisational viability for having a so-called comparison system as an integrated
part of the CS. The principle in the comparison system is to compare new and old
products based on the products variables. Using this comparison technique the
comparison system would make it possible for the Environmental business unit to
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
reuse information from similar previously made products when new products are
conﬁgured.
The project idea arose from a scientiﬁc article1 provided by [Shaﬁee and Hvam,
2015] which deﬁnes the principle of the comparison system and suggests a seven-
step framework, for how to establish the system in companies using CS. In addition,
the article provides a whole list of beneﬁts which a company potentially can gain
by having a comparison system. These beneﬁts are related to diﬀerent areas within
the organisation, for example, sales, price estimation and design are some activities
which can be improved by reusing information via a comparison system.
This thesis has been conducted as a part of the new project at HT where it has
been investigated if it was possible to establish a comparison system around the
condenser (part of the WSA plant) based on the theory from the article. The main
focus has been on building a model of the system as a proof of concept based on
the seven step framework and the model should be able to demonstrate some of the
potential beneﬁts from the article. Due to the fact that the suggested framework
from the article has not been tested in practical before it has from the project’s
beginning been uncertain whether or not the model could be build. Thus, this
research has also been important in order to make further developments to the
framework by applying it in a company case.
The present chapter introduces the project’s working hypothesis, and an overview
of the contributions and the remaining parts of the thesis is given.
1The name of the article is ’How to Analyze and Quantify Similarities between Conﬁgured
Engineer-To-Order Products by Comparing the Highlighted Features Utilizing the Conﬁguration
System Abilities’
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Working hypothesis
3
1.1
Working hypothesis
The aim of this research is to support or contradict the following hypothesis:
• Building an automated comparison system, which aim is to make
it possible for the company Haldor Topsoe to compare and reuse
old projects for new orders, will be both desirable and feasible.
To be feasible it should be investigated if it is possible to develop the compari-
son system within the company based on the seven-step framework delivered by
[Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]. In addition, the research should be carried out by build-
ing a model of the comparison system. Thus, the following research questions:
• How can a suitable product be selected for the development of the comparison
system and what are the describing variables of the product?
• What kind of product relevant information for all previously made products
should be used for the comparison system and how is the information found
in the company?
• How should the information from all previous products be treated and stored
in the model?
• Based on the describing variables how can the previous ETO products be
compared with a new conﬁgured product?
• How should the model be constructed so that similar previous products are
returned when a new product is deﬁned? In this context, how should the
interface of the model be designed?
For a comparison system to be desirable it has to demonstrate how HT can beneﬁt
for it. More precisely, it should be found out which stakeholders in the company the
comparison system should be addressed to. This leads to the following questions:
• What are the potential beneﬁts ETO companies can gain by reusing infor-
mation from previous products?
• How should the comparison system be set up in order to demonstrate some
of the potential beneﬁts?
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
1.1.1
Scope
Proof of concept The main focus in this thesis has been on developing a model
of the comparison system as a proof of concept. From the project’s begin-
ning the comparison system has been deﬁned as a theoretical idea, where
only the principle and method to build it has been brieﬂy outlined. There-
fore, this project has focused on designing the system on a conceptual level,
whereas tasks such as implementing the system in the company and testing
the potential beneﬁts on a quantiﬁed level have been downgraded.
Build around condenser: For the proof of concept a suitable product should be
found. In this context, it was decided to investigate the comparison system
around the WSA condenser.
1.2
Contributions
This project is primarily a master student’s thesis to obtain the Master of Science
in Enginnering Mangement (M.Sc.) degree at the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
In addition, the project also provides value for the Danish catalysis company Hal-
dor Topsoe A/S since the research has investigated if building a comparison system
within the company would be feasible and desirable.
Finally, the project has provided more knowledge to the research of establishing a
comparison system within an ETO company since a theoretical framework provided
by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] has been tested in practical.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Report structure
5
1.3
Report structure
As readers with diﬀerent backgrounds may have interest in the project, an overview
of the thesis is given allowing readers to concentrate on the relevant parts. However,
the recommendation is to read the project in its entirety as central concepts are
deﬁned the ﬁrst time they appear.
In the next section a glossary is given as a reference when reading the thesis.
Furthermore, the ﬁgures and tables in the thesis are listed on respectively after
the main report.
Chapter 2. Theoretical foundations The theoretical foundations is exposed.
It starts with a brief introduction of the generic topic of product customiza-
tion and conﬁguration systems and it concludes with the theory of the tools
used in the project.
Chapter 3. Project Description The project and current situation at HT is
introduced and it is explained what the initial expectations and deliverables
for the project were. Moreover, it will be explained what has been changed
during the project and all central research areas have been visualized by a
decision tree. Finally, the chapter presents and comment the ﬁnal project
plan.
Chapter 4. Analysis at Haldor Topsoe The chapter starts with an analysis
of the processes around the order fulﬁllment of a WSA plant. After that,
the chapter will show how the initial four steps in seven step frame work has
been executed.
Chapter 5. Modeling This chapter shows how the model of the comparison
system has been designed based on the results from the Analysis Chapter.
Chapter 6. Discussion In this chapter, the project’s results are evaluated and
further research is suggested.
Chapter 7. Conclusion The conclusion tie together, integrate and synthesize
the various issues raised in the project whilst reﬂecting and answering the
research’s objectives. Finally, it highlights the study limitations and provide
direction and areas for future research.
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
1.4
Glossary
This section gives an overview and deﬁnition of the most central concepts within
the project. The concepts are listed in alphabetic order. The glossary is meant as
a reference when reading the thesis.
Concept
Deﬁnition
Comparison system
Automated system making it possible for a company to
reuse information from previous and similar project for
new conﬁgured projects (Introduced in section 2.2.1).
Conﬁguration
sys-
tem (CS)
IT system making it possible for a company to make
product conﬁguration (Introduced section 2.1.2).
Cost document
In this thesis cost documents are speciﬁc documents
stored in HT’s SAP system which contain diﬀerent kinds
of cost information related to the condenser (Introduced
section 4.4.2).
Cost types
In this thesis cost types cover the three kinds of costs;
Budget, Invoice order (IO) and Purchase order (PO)
which will be presented in section 4.4.1
Engineering-To-
Order (ETO)
An industrial strategy in which all activities to deliver
the product (design, engineering, manufacturing, assem-
bly) are executed after receiving the customer’s order.
Enterprise resource
planning (ERP)
It is business-management software an organisation can
use to collect, store, manage and interpret data from
many business activities.
Lead time
Lead time is by HT deﬁned to be the time between the
initiation and execution of a process.
Product
Relevant
Information (PRI)
Information related to the product that has been con-
sidered relevant to analyzed. Examples are lead time,
man hours, costs, sales price, drawings etc.
S-number
An unique number which HT uses to name the spe-
ciﬁc WSA projects. All information related to a WSA
project is linked together with the S-number.
Variables
Deﬁned as describing features which form the basis for
the product range.The variables can vary within a de-
ﬁned interval set by the company.
In this thesis de-
scribing variables are mainly related to the design of
the product.
Table 1.1: Central concepts in the thesis
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Abbreviations
7
1.5
Abbreviations
In the thesis abbreviations have been used in place of some full words or names.
An overview of these is given below.
CS: Conﬁguration System
ERP: Enterprise Resource Planning
ETO: Engineer to Order
HT: Haldor Topsoe
HTAS: Haldor Topsoe A/S
IO: Invoice Order
PCS: Price Calculation Sheet
MC: Mass Customization
MW: Module Width
MS: Microsoft
PM: Project Management
PRI: Product Relevant Information
PO: Purchased Order
SI: Silhouette Index
WSA: Wet Gas Sulfuric
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
1.6
Introduction to company
This thesis was elaborated in close cooperation with the Danish catalysis company
Haldor Topsoe A/S (HTAS). One plant that is considered for this project is the Wet
Gas Sulfuric Acid (WSA) plant. Since the plant is huge and complex the project
has been scoped around the WSA condenser which is one part of the plant.
This chapter is dedicated to a short introduction of the company HTAS. In addi-
tion, the WSA plant and the condenser for the project will be introduced.
1.6.1
Haldor Topsoe A/S
HTAS is a Danish catalysis company headquartered in Lyngby, Denmark. The
company was founded in 1940 by Dr. Haldor Topsoe and is today a global leader
within its ﬁeld of catalysts and catalytic process technologies. Topsoe’s business
covers research and development, process technology and design, as well as catalyst
production and sales. Figure 1.1 shows a variety of catalysts produced by HT.
The vision of the company is to build on a strong foundation in catalysis, from
where the company can expand into new businesses of its customers and partners.
Though intensive research and development eﬀorts, Topsoe aims at to develop and
bring new products quickly to market [Topsoe, ].
The company’s customer segments include, among others, the fertilizer industry,
the chemical industries, the automotive industry and the energy sector (reﬁneries
and power plants).
Within the fertilizer industry, HT has a signiﬁcant strong
position as the company is involved in more than half of the world’s approximately
650 fertilizer factories [http://cxomagasinet.dk, ].
Figure 1.1: Variety of HT’s catalysis[Topsoe, 2014]
==PAGE:19==
1.6 Introduction to company
9
1.6.1.1
Haldor Topsoe’s global network
Topsoe is a global organization and has more than 2700 employees all over the
world of which one fourth of the staﬀis employed outside Denmark. Topsoe has
regional oﬃces, production plants and engineering all over the world, which is
illustrated in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Overview over HT’s global network [Topsoe, 2014]
1.6.1.2
Organization
The organizational structure of the company consists of three operating business
units, “Environmental”, “Chemicals” and “Reﬁnery”. All the units are providing
catalysts and technologies within their customer segments. Additionally, the com-
pany has a “New and Emerging” business unit which function is to identify and
bring new business areas forward. The next sub section will, based on HT’s own
company description [Topsoe, ] explain the most important industries as the busi-
ness units serve:
1.6.1.3
Environmental business unit
Sulphuric acid: Sulphuric acid is used in fertilizer production and extraction of
metals from various ores. A major part of the world’s sulphuric acid pro-
duction uses catalysts from HT in the manufacturing of sulphuric acid. The
catalysts provide a more energy-eﬃcient operation with still lower sulphur
emissions.
Sulphur management: HT’s wet gas sulphuric acid (WSA) technology provides
an eﬃcient process for recovering sulphur from various process gasses in the
==PAGE:20==
10
Introduction
form of commercial quality. The technology is applied in all industries where
removal of sulfur is an issue.
Automotive diesel exhaust: In order to meet higher environmental standards
and to achieve environmental beneﬁts the automotive industry strives to
remove harmful nitrous oxide gasses and carbon particles from engines’ ex-
haust gas. HT’s catalysts help the automotive industry to remove hazardous
compounds from the exhaust of vehicles.
Flue gas cleaning: HT’s DeNOx catalysts can be installed at industrial produc-
tion sites such as power plants and reduce NOx emmisions into the environ-
ment.
1.6.1.4
Chemical business unit
Synthesis gas: Synthesis gas can be produced from a variety of feedstocks, among
others, natural gas, petcoke, biomass, coal and heavy oil. Topsoe provides a
wide range of catalysts, processes and technologies for the production of am-
monia, methanol, hydrogen, substitute natural gas and liquid transportation
fuels.
Hydrogen: Hydrogen’s two main uses are the production of ammonia and in
the manufacturing and puriﬁcation of fuels in oil reﬁneries. Topsoe delivers
catalysts and technologies for hydrogen production.
Methanol: The methanol production has several uses. For instance, methanol
is used to manufacturing plastics and formaldehyde. Topsoe’s catalysts and
technology for synthesis gas production are broadly used in the methanol
industry.
Ammonia: The ammonia industry is another important customer segment for
HT. Ammonia is applied for manufacturing fertilizer.
1.6.1.5
Reﬁnery business unit
Cleaner fuels: As many other industries oil reﬁneries strive to accomplish a
more eﬃcient and environmental friendly production. Topsoe’s catalysts and
technologies for hydrotreating and hydrocracking help to manufacturing of
cleaner fuels and a higher utilization of the crude oil. For instance, ultra-low
sulphur diesel can be produced by contribution of Topsoe’s products.
==PAGE:21==
1.6 Introduction to company
11
1.6.1.6
New and emerging business unit
New projects: The “New and Emerging” business unit was established in April
2012. As earlier mentioned, the unit’s purpose is to focus on developing and
bringing new products and services to market. The unit has made notable
progress on a number of exciting projects. For example, the unit has in 2014
produced and tested new types of materials in relation to the company’s
work to develop new, advanced battery materials [Topsoe, 2014].
1.6.2
The WSA Plant
The WSA plant produces concentrated sulfuric acid by condensation from a wet
process gas. Figure 1.3 shows the principle of the WSA process where H2S is used
as the sulfuric feed. All the chemical reactions in the process are highlighted in
blue boxes and it can be seen where in the plant they take place.
Figure 1.3: WSA plant [www.lenzing technik.com, ]
The purpose of the ﬁrst step in the process is to produce a SO2 gas at the oper-
ating temperature of the oxidation catalyst in the SO2 converter. If the sulfur in
the feed is SO2, only a simple preheating is required. Other sulfurous feeds are
oxidized to SO2 by combustion and then cooled to the optimum catalytic conver-
sion temperature in a waste heat boiler. The excess heat from this operation is
recovered as steam. The catalytic conversion of SO2 to SO3 takes place in one
or more catalyst beds. Reaction heat is recovered between the catalyst beds by
superheating of steam. After the last conversion step the gas is cooled and the SO3
==PAGE:22==
12
Introduction
reacts with water vapor to form gas phase sulfuric acid. The process gas is ﬁnally
cooled by a counter current ﬂow of air in the proprietary WSA condenser. Clean
gas exits at the top of the WSA condenser, and the sulfuric acid is collected in the
bottom section from where it is cooled and sent to storage. Hot air generated in
the WSA condenser may be used as preheated combustion air to ensure optimal
energy eﬃciency.
1.6.3
Condenser module
This thesis has focused on one part of the WSA plant which is the condenser,
known among departments as the "Heart of the WSA plant". The design of the
condenser allows controlled cooling of the process gas and condensation of the
sulphuric acid without formation of acid mist.
Figure 1.4 shows the principle.
The sulfuric gas enters in the bottom and ﬂows inside. Next it is cooled with air
and thereby condenses. Finally, the acid will leave the tube by gravity. On the
concept drawing there is only three single tubes where the condensation can be
seen on the inner side of the tubes. A real module contains up to 1000 glass tubes
which length is ﬁxed on 7 meter. As the acid runs downwards the strength will
increase to desired concentration normally around 97-98% which is commercial
quality [Sørensen, 2013].
Figure 1.4 shows in the right side a picture of a real WSA condenser, it is seen by
the stairs that the condenser is a high component which is due to the ﬁxed height
of the vertical glass tubes. The tubes and all other main parts of the condenser
are designed for long service life and avoidance of corrosion.
Figure 1.4: Principle and picture of the condenser [Sørensen, 2013]
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Theoretical foundations
This research has been conducted as a part of a new established project at Haldor
Topose which aimed to build a comparison system within the organisation. The
project idea arose from a scientiﬁc article provided by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015].
In the article the principle in the comparison system is described and a seven-step
framework, which is a method for how to build the system, has been suggested.
Finally [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] provides examples on which potential beneﬁts an
ETO company can gain by building a comparison system. It should be noted that
the seven-step framework is a theoretical framework which has not been tested in
practical before this research. Therefore, the author of this thesis has had to do
own research for some steps in the framework. In this context, literature review has
been conducted within the domain of clustering in particular the k-mean technique.
This theory chapter is dedicated to a detailed explanation on the principle of
the comparison system and the seven-step-framework. In addition, to get a deeper
understanding of the topic, a fundamental knowledge about product customization
and conﬁguration systems (CS) should be facilitated. Thus, the ﬁnal composition
of the chapter is given by:
Product customerization and conﬁguration systems: Contributes to the fun-
damental theory used which is considering product customization, product
speciﬁcations and CS.
Comparison system for ETO products: Introduces the principle of the com-
parison system, the seven step framework and the potential beneﬁts gained
by having a comparison system in the organisation.
Clustering techniques: Explains the k-means clustering technique and silhou-
ette index which has been used in one of the step of the seven-step-framework.
==PAGE:24==
14
Theoretical foundations
2.1
Product customization and conﬁguration sys-
tems
2.1.1
Variety or customization?
According [Salvador and Forza, 2007] the concept of “customization” can be ex-
plained by considering the four operational activities of a generic manufacturing
enterprise: design, fabrication, assembly and distribution shown in Figure 2.1. The
deﬁnition of a “customized” product is when at least one of the activities is carried
out according to the customer’s speciﬁc needs. Thus, we can speak of customiza-
tion when any of the operational activities responds to a speciﬁc feature demanded
by a certain customer.
Figure 2.1: Operational activities in manufacturing [Salvador and Forza, 2006]
In extension of the deﬁnition of customization [Salvador and Forza, 2007] classify
four diﬀerent types of customizations: (1) pure customization, (2) customized fab-
rication, (3) customized assembly and (4) customized distribution. The diﬀerent
types are deﬁned based on which of the operational activities are customized and
which are not. The diﬀerent types are illustrated in Figure 2.2 together with the
lowest level without customization.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Product customization and conﬁguration systems
15
Figure 2.2: Degrees of product customization [Salvador and Forza, 2006]
Pure customization: All four operational activities are highly customized with
this type of strategy. During the entire process producers and customers have
a close collaboration in order to ﬁnd the best solution for both parties. Since,
the customer’s speciﬁc needs are considered in all activities; the product is
completely “made to order”.
Customized fabrication: In the business model, costumer requirements have a
direct inﬂuence on the manufacturing activities, not on the design process.
Usually, the producer oﬀers a base product that is later modiﬁed according
to the customers preferences. The idea is that the degree of ﬂexibility and
the modiﬁcations that can change the base product are deﬁned “a priori”.
Thus, the customer needs are satisﬁed within certain ﬁxed variants without
modifying the basic design.
Customized assembly: In this model, customer requirements inﬂuence the as-
sembly activities, not the design and manufacturing process. Products con-
sist of a set of standard components, but the assembly of this set of compo-
nents is customized to satisfy speciﬁc customer needs.
Customized distribution: In this model, customer requirements only inﬂuence
the distribution. In fact the product is standardized but the customer can
specify requirements related to distribution.
Variety without customization: In this scenario, there are no customized op-
erational activities. However, the company can still oﬀer a vast assortment,
from where the customers can choose a variant.
==PAGE:26==
16
Theoretical foundations
2.1.2
Product speciﬁcations and conﬁguration system
To facilitate a better understanding of the use of CS, this section will ﬁrst deﬁne
speciﬁcations and process speciﬁcations. Next, it is described how a CS can be
implemented in a company and what potential beneﬁts this provide.
Speciﬁcations: A speciﬁcation can be deﬁned as a description which can unam-
biguously transfer needs or intentions from one group of people to another.
In industrial companies speciﬁcations are created in connection with work-
ing out oﬀers and executing orders for customers. Examples on speciﬁcations
are descriptions of customer requirements, product drawings, lists of parts,
assembly instructions and service manuals. Figure 2.3 shows a series of spec-
iﬁcations which are produced during a product’s life cycle.
Figure 2.3: Series of speciﬁcations in a product’s life cycle [Hvam et al., 2008]
Speciﬁcation processes: Speciﬁcation processes denote the business processes
which analyse customer needs, create a customized product, and specify the
activities which have to be performed, for example, purchasing, production,
assembly and servicing of the product [Hvam et al., 2008]. Activities which
are performed as part of a company’s speciﬁcation processes are seen in the
gray area on Figure 2.4. The speciﬁcations which are worked out form the
basis for the subsequent activities outside the gray area.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Product customization and conﬁguration systems
17
Figure 2.4: Speciﬁcation processes [Hvam et al., 2008]
The speciﬁcation activities are divided among diﬀerent departments within
the company. Diﬀerent employees are involved in the speciﬁcation processes,
which means that there are many non-value creating activities and lot of
resources are allocated to coordination both internally in the individual de-
partment and across the organisation.
Build conﬁguration system in the organisation: It is possible to build up
CS to support the speciﬁcation activities. The CS has incorporated infor-
mation about the product in terms of rules for the product’s design, way of
working and so on. In principle, knowledge from the company’s departments
is modelled and made available for other departments.
Figure 2.5 shows
how this principle contributes to supporting and integrating the company’s
speciﬁcation activities. When product knowledge is stored into the CS, the
company’s working procedure related to creating product speciﬁcations are
radically changed and many coordination problems are avoided. For the en-
gineers, the changes mean that whereas they before worked out the product
speciﬁcations by themselves they now become model managers as they have
to develop and maintain the CS which support or automatically produce the
speciﬁcations starting with the customer’s needs.
Figure 2.5: Conﬁguration system supporting speciﬁcation processes [Hvam et al.,
2008]
==PAGE:28==
18
Theoretical foundations
Potential beneﬁts by using conﬁguration system: The CS can be used by
the company’s sales staﬀto conﬁgure a product in collaboration with the
customer. When the salesman has conﬁgured a product based on the cus-
tomer’s wishes the CS provides a variety of outputs. First of all, it checks
if the product conﬁgured is feasible in relation to the company’s product
range. Furthermore, it is able to calculate the price and at the same time,
the customer is insured a well-documented description of the product at an
early stage in the process.
[Hvam et al., 2008] sums up some of the potential beneﬁts achieved by the
use of conﬁguration.
1. Reduced time for working out speciﬁcations, for example from weeks to
hours or minutes.
2. Faster and more qualiﬁed responses to customer enquiries. For example,
it becomes much faster and requires signiﬁcantly fewer resources to give
a customer an oﬀer.
3. Fewer transfers of responsibility and fewer errors in the speciﬁcations
worked out.
4. Reduced use of resources for specifying customized products, and there-
fore more time, for example, for product development and sales work.
2.2
Comparison system for ETO products
Main focus in this thesis has been on building a proof of concept of a comparison
system. The principle in how this system should work and furthermore a sug-
gested framework for how the system should be established has been introduced
by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]. In the following the principle and the method will
be introduced. Last the potential beneﬁts companies can gained by implementing
the system is explained.
2.2.1
Introduction to comparison system
Figure 2.6 illustrates the principle in the comparison system. The idea is to build
a database with previous products in the company’s ERP system and then make
an integration to the company’s CS. When a new product is conﬁgured in the CS,
the system navigates through all previous products in a database and returns the
most similar ones. Finally, it would also allow the company to make reconﬁguration
to ﬁnd better match of previous designed products. When a speciﬁc previously
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Comparison system for ETO products
19
designed product has been identiﬁed, it allows access to all of the existing product’s
speciﬁcations along with product relevant information (PRI) such as engineering
hours used, materials used, cost estimations, etc. From the article [Shaﬁee and
Hvam, 2015] it is not speciﬁed in detail how the comparison should take place,
it is instead overall argued that: ’Using conﬁguration systems and techniques for
comparing products, it is possible to compare diﬀerent product features that have
been ordered with the new coming orders. One of the pre requirements for using the
automatic comparison is to have product conﬁguration system in the sales process.
The scenario is to use product features in the conﬁguration system to compare with
all the previous generated quotations, which are documented in a desired database’.
Figure 2.6: The principles of the comparison system [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]
2.2.2
The seven step framework
[Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] introduces a seven step framework for how to build the
comparison system. Figure 2.7 shows the method and all the diﬀerent steps. The
process is not a complete waterfall process, as it is necessary to iterate in some of
the steps depending on the project.
==PAGE:30==
20
Theoretical foundations
Figure 2.7: The seven step framework [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]
1) Identify relevant product variables In the comparison system, products
are compared based on their describing features/variables. Therefore ﬁrst
step is to study the product range and see how products distinguish from
each other.
Products can have diﬀerent degree of customization which can be analysed
by considering the four operational activities of generic manufacturing. It
is the customer requirements and the company’s willingness to adapt these,
which impact the degree of customization of the product delivered.
For
example, customer can have requirements to the functionality of a product
which lead to changes in the product’s design speciﬁcations or customer
can have requirements which impact distribution conditions of the product.
Thus, in order to identify the describing variables, it should be analysed how
customer requirements are translated into product speciﬁcations which result
in product variation. Based on this product analysis the most important
variables should be identiﬁed. [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] suggest that the
company’s CS can be used to determine the products describing variables.
Reasoning behind doing this is that it is rational to assume that all the
customer requirements which the company has decided to meet are integrated
in the CS.
2) Retrieve the values of the variables for all previous designed products
When the describing variables have been identiﬁed next step is to retrieve
the values of the variables for all the previous designed products. Typically
the company has stored all information of the previous product in the ERP
system.
3) Retrieve product relevant information for previous products The com-
parison system should be able to return PRI for all the previous products, for
example, lead time, engineering hours, costs, sales price etc. Thus, this step
is about extracting and analysing the PRI from the company’s ERP system
with the aim of storing it in the database developed in step ﬁve of the seven-
step framework. In the analysis phase it might also be necessary to have a
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Comparison system for ETO products
21
basic understanding of the product design and the diﬀerent order acquisition
processes across the company in order to retrieve, treat and collect the data
in a correctly manner.
4) Find a way to compare products based on describing variables The com-
parison method in the comparison system is based on the products describing
variables identiﬁed in step one. However, [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] does not
provide any speciﬁc solution to how the comparison should take place in-
stead of the feasibility of the comparison is argued by stating it is possible
to compare products based on their variables. Thus, step four in the seven
step framework requires more investigation on how products based on their
describing variables can be compared.
5) Set up database with previous products design In this step a database
with all the previously products is established in the company’s ERP sys-
tem. [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] gives an overview of database design in the
following three steps:
Requirement analysis: In the requirement analysis it should be under-
stood what data must be stored in the database. This understanding is
linked to the the principle of the comparison system. Thus, the database
should contain two kind of information the describing variables and the
PRI which has already been collected in step two and three of the seven
step framework.
Conceptual database design: The information gathered in the require-
ment analysis is used to develop a high level description of the data
along with the constraints to be stored in the database.
Logical database design: Having designed the database on conceptual high
level a database management system (DBMS) has to be chosen to imple-
ment the database design, and convert the conceptual database design
into a database schema in the data model of the chosen DBMS.
6) Compare the new products with previous products in the ERP systmem
In step four the principle in how to compare products based on their describ-
ing variables have been identiﬁed. In this step the comparison method will
be used to develop a platform where the new product conﬁgured can be com-
pared with all the previously made products in an automated way. In order
to do that the platform should be designed with interfaces to both the CS
and the database. In addition the platform should be able to rank and list all
the previous products after similarity according to the new product. There-
fore compared to step four this step is a more practical oriented deliverable
which is needed before a ﬁnal integration between the CS and the database
can take place in the last step.
==PAGE:32==
22
Theoretical foundations
7) Integration of the database and conﬁguration system In the last step
the integration between CS and the ERP system is made. In other words this
is the step which complete the comparison system. The platform developed
in the previous step is used to connect the database and the CS. In addition
to the integration it should be investigated how the user interface of the CS
should be modiﬁed so that the comparison system can be integrated. Mainly
two research questions related to the interface design are considered:
1. How should the interface be designed so that input for a new conﬁgured
product in terms of describing variables can be used for the comparison.
2. How should the interface be designed so that output from the compar-
ison system is displayed in a meaningful way. In this context, it should
be reﬂected which outputs are necessary to have for the user.
2.2.3
Potential beneﬁts by implementing the comparison
system
[Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] provides lot of potential beneﬁts which an ETO company
can achieve by implementing an automated comparison system. Five areas where
the system can beneﬁt have been identiﬁed and these will now be explained.
Improve accuracy of conﬁguration systems by double checking outputs
[Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] argues that reusing of old product information can
help increase the full advantages of CS. The idea is that outputs from the
CS are double checked as they are compared with previously made products.
Outputs generated from the CS could be design speciﬁcations, list of parts,
process description or other relevant product speciﬁcations. Based on this
comparison the accuracy of the CS can be assessed or potential errors in
outputs from the CS can be discovered.
Avoid time consuming design activities Another potential beneﬁt of the com-
parison system is to avoid time consuming design activities in the mechanical
department. ETO products requires a huge amount of work for designing
the parts of the product, so it fulﬁlls the customers requirements. A major
challenge for ETO companies is to make the designing process more eﬃcient.
Using previously designed plants, modules, designs manuals and so on as the
starting point is recognized strategy in making designing activities more ef-
ﬁcient [Hvam et al., 2008]. In order to execute this strategy, the comparison
system can be used as an eﬃcient and automated way of getting access to
previously saved products.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Comparison system for ETO products
23
Support price estimates When it comes to calculating the price, it is known
that ETO companies have signiﬁcant problems to determining the prices
for the presale and sale processes. That is especially the case when domain
experts cannot determine accurate price curves or as the vendors are not pro-
viding with suﬃcient information to be modeled inside the CS. Inaccurate
price estimates have consequences since underestimating cost in products will
lead to the company will lose proﬁt and when overestimating the customer
choose a competitor’s product instead where the price is more favorable.
Therefore, estimates are used or mark ups factors are added. Hvam et al.
[Hvam et al., 2008] explains this problem by using example from F.L. Smith,
which is an ETO company selling cement plants. In this example, the com-
pany strives to reuse information from previous made products to calculate
the most accurate price based on weight and capacity. According to Hvam
et al.[Hvam et al., 2008], the price and weight curves are made by inserting
the capacity, price and weight based on information from 3-5 previously pro-
duced machines. A curve is then drawn through the points as demonstrated
in Figure 2.8. This allows identiﬁcation of prices and weights for machines
that have not previously been produced.
Figure 2.8: Price and weight curve for main machines in F.L Smith [Hvam et al.,
2008]
However, with regards to highly complex products, the price curves are not
thought to be the most suitable way as there are several dependent features
and great number of neighbors on the curve. Another important drawback
from the price curves is that the user is only provided access to a couple of
the previous made products and not all of them therefore the most similar
previous products might be missed.
In the comparison system the user has access to all previous products and
in addition the similarity is measured on all the describing features of the
products. Thus, the comparison system could be beneﬁcial in order to give
an accurate indicator on the price for new order if similar products have been
made. Moreover, prices on previously made products could be used to assess
==PAGE:34==
24
Theoretical foundations
the accuracy on new price estimations or at least the comparison system can
provide the price estimation department with information which can be used
in the price estimate.
Creation of a recommendation system and its beneﬁts [Salvador and Forza,
2007] describes CS as helping systems for the end users or customers for creat-
ing the communication value. Comparing the new product with the previous
ones could also turn into a recommendation system in the companies. For
instance, if a conﬁgured product has high similarity with a previously made
product, the previous product can be re-used and thereby cost related to
making the product speciﬁcation can be signiﬁcantly reduced. This includes
cost in the sales phase, engineering and production. Furthermore, this is
likely to improve the quality and the accuracy of the cost estimations. It
also makes it easy to have an agreement with the customer to recommend
them a consultancy to conﬁrm the success of the product by small changes
in the order.
Statistically analyze for future product development In general, the com-
parison system provides overview and better control over previously made
products. This enables companies to analyze the products statistically for
the future product development. Using the CS and comparing diﬀerent or-
ders can provide valuable information for the managers, as it helps them to
keep track of the product features and to get an overview of the markets
demand. This will help companies to be more in control over the product
assortment and eliminating the complexity related to the diversity of product
features oﬀered in the production line.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Clustering techniques
25
2.3
Clustering techniques
In this thesis the k-means clustering technique has been used in order to execute
step four of the seven step framework. This section explains the theory used in
this context.
2.3.1
Introduction to clustering techniques
Clustering is a widely known analysis technique that assigns objects of a popula-
tion to clusters (group) so that instances within the same cluster have a degree of
high similarity, and instances from diﬀerent clusters have a high degree of dissim-
ilarity.
Clustering can be divided into several methods, one of these are Exclusive clus-
tering for which observations are grouped in an exclusive way which means that
a datum can only belong to one cluster. Another example is Overlapping cluster-
ing which allows one observation to belong to two or more clusters with diﬀerent
degree of membership [Taboada and Coit, 2008].
2.3.2
the k-means clustering algorithm
The most popular non-hierarchical clustering method is the k-means clustering
algorithm, which is recognized for its eﬃciency. The k-means algorithm assigns
each observation to the cluster with the nearest centroid. A cluster centroid may
be calculated or randomly deﬁned by the algorithm. The objective functionf to
be minimized in the k-means algorithm considers the squard diﬀerences between
the observations data vectors and the cluster centroids over all n observations and
k clusters [Taboada and Coit, 2008]. The number of clusters k is user deﬁned.
Euclidean or Manhattan distances are typically used to calculate the distance
between observations.
The procedure can be summed up in the following ﬁve
steps:
Step 1: Choose k number of clusters
Step 2: Compute the distance between every data point (instance) on the set and
those centers and store that information
Step 3: Supported by the last step calculations, each instance is assigned to the
nearest cluster center.
New cluster centers are calculated as the average
distance for all the assigned instances.
==PAGE:36==
26
Theoretical foundations
Step 4: Update cluster center position
Step 5: If the cluster centers change, repeat the process from 2. Otherwise the
procedure is done and as a result new cluster centroids have been found and
it is found which instances belong to the clusters.
The k-means methodology has both advantages and disadvantages which need to
be addressed:
Advantages
1) Fast The k-means procedure achieves the ﬁnal result of its iterations in
a fast way due to the simplicity of the algorithm.
2) Simple and reliable The process is fairly simple and always terminates,
solving the problem with a solution set even for large data sets of infor-
mation.
3) Eﬃcient This method presents a good solution with relative low com-
putational complexity for the clustering problem
4) Good solutions Provides the best result set speciﬁcally when data points
are fairly separated.
Disadvantages
1) Set Number of Clusters In the algorithm the number of clusters must
be pre-deﬁned. If this number is badly set, the implementation and
results will suﬀer signiﬁcantly. Therefore, techniques to estimate the
best number of clusters should be used.
2) Result Set It is possible that the output is not the optimal minimum of
the selected set of data, but instead a local minimum of the function.
To mitigate this problem, the process can be run more than one time
to get the optimal solution.
3) Initialization Method Depending on the chosen initialization process,
the results will diﬀer.
2.3.3
Silhouette index
One of the most important problems related to the clustering methods is the eval-
uation of the obtained clusters determining which of them correspond to ’good’
cluster and which to ’bad’ cluster [Rand, 1971]. It has hence be decided to intro-
duce the Silhouette Index (SI) which is a reliable measure of clustering procedures
performance that measure the similarity of an observation respect the observations
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Clustering techniques
27
in its own cluster compared to observations in other clusters. The method pro-
vides, for each observation j, the SIj that can vary from –1 to +1. The closest
the SIj is to one the less is the distance within a cluster, meaning that that it was
properly assigned to the right cluster. On the other hand if SIj is close to –1, the
observation are probably assigned to the wrong cluster. Finally if SIj is close to 0
it means that the observation does not clearly belong to one cluster or the other.
SIj is estimated as follows:
SI(j) =
b(j) −a(j)
max(a(j), b(j)
(2.1)
where a(j) is the average distance from the j −th observation to all others in its
cluster, and b(j) is the average distance from the j −th observation to all others
assigned to the nearest neighboring cluster. Euclidean distances is typically used
to calculate the distance between observations.
2.3.4
Generate and analyse diﬀerent cluster scenarios
[Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011] propose a method to select the best set of variables
and number of clusters for clustering purposes. The method is based on six steps
which are illustrated on the Figure 2.9 and will be explained in the following.
Figure 2.9: Clustering Method’s steps. [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011]
==PAGE:38==
28
Theoretical foundations
Select product Before the whole procedure can start the product to analysed
have been selected.
Market considerations play an important role in the
product selection: products chosen must present a clear demand for cus-
tomization and must be relevant to the company. In addition, products with
a large number of models are preferred because it will lead to an optimized
data collection.
Step 1 – Deﬁne experts’ variables Having selected the product, domain ex-
perts describe the product in terms of relevant characteristics. The idea is
to focus on characteristics with respect to which products may be segregated
into groups. Therefore, exclusive characteristics of a product should not be
considered. Relevant characteristics could be: physical aspects, number of
parts, and complexity of manufacturing operations demanded.
Step 2 – Deﬁne modeling variables Beside expert’s variables other modeling
variables can be generated by an LC modeling. [Anzanello and Fogliatto,
2011] provides a series of LC models which can be used to create the modeling
variables. Inputs to the LC modeling is performance parameters based of
selected teams of workers.
Step 3 – Deﬁne bounds on the number of clusters to be tested Deﬁne a
lower – and upper bound on the number of clusters to be assessed in the
iterative procedure. It is recommended to have a lower bound of two clus-
ters, whereas the upper bound is deﬁned by the analyst since the maximum
number of clusters, depends on the nature of the data.
Step 4 – Cluster observations and eliminate irrelevant clustering variables
The aim of this step is to select the best set of clustering variables leading to
an optimized product grouping. Diﬀerent combinations of variables will be
investigated, since this may lead to the best clustering results. As variables
may diﬀer in units and magnitude, it is recommended to scale the variables
prior to carrying out the cluster analysis.
Step 4 can be decomposed into the following sub-processes.
1. A k-means nonhierarchical clustering procedure generating k clusters is
run using all clustering variables. Furthermore, the Silhouette Index is
measured and the SI value obtained is used as a reference.
2. Next, one variable at a time is left out of the clustering procedure, and
the average SI is again evaluated after each variable is omitted.
3. The procedure is repeated until a lower bound of remaining variables is
reached. As a lower bound 2 is recommended, because a sole remaining
variable may lead to unstable clustering procedures.
A graph connecting the average SI and the number of retained variables is
beneﬁcial to generate to identify the ideal number of variables to be used in
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Clustering techniques
29
future clustering applications. Figur 2.10 gives an example of the average
SI proﬁle generated by variable elimination. It is seen that the average SI
increases when fewer variables are retained, which also is typical situation
in practice. In addition, it is seen that the maximum average SI is obtained
when 3 out of 12 variables are retained.
Figure 2.10: Average SI proﬁle [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011]
Step 5 – set k=k+1 and return to step 4 In order to deﬁne the best number
of clusters to be used, number of clusters is set to k=k+1. Variable elimina-
tion is then carried out as described in Step 4, and the maximum average SI
is stored for that value of k. This procedure when stops k reach the upper
bound.
Step 6 – deﬁne the best value of k and selected clustering variables All
the results from the analysis in term of the maximum SI average value for
each k as well as the variables leading to that value may be organized in a
table. The overall maximum SI indicates the best number of clusters k and
the clustering variables to be used.
==PAGE:40==
30
Theoretical foundations
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3
Project Description
This thesis has been conducted as a part of a newly established project at HTAS.
The aim of this chapter is ﬁrst to introduce the project as it was described from the
beginning by the company. After this, it will be described what has been changed
since the project started. In addition, the whole project process will be illustrated
by a decision tree which provide an overview of the choices made.
Finally, an
overall project plan is shown and explained.
3.1
The project at Haldor Topsoe
HT has started to enrich the use of CS across diﬀerent business units in the com-
pany. As a part of this strategy it has in the Environmental business unit been
thought that the CS could be enhanced by building a comparison system into it.
In this context, a new project named "Comparison System for Spare Parts Con-
ﬁgurator for Environmental" was established. The project took place within the
Environmental business unit and involved a project team1 of nine employees over
a six months period. This section will describe the project by using four classical
project framework elements, purpose of project, situation and complication, project
scope and key project deliverables.
3.1.1
Purpose of project
The new project at HT aimed to develop and assess the organisational viability of
a comparison system. This should be achieved by building the system as a proof
1The project team consisted of a project owner, two employees from the business and devel-
opment department , two master thesis students and employees from the IT department
==PAGE:42==
32
Project Description
of concept around spare parts for the WSA plant. From the project’s beginning
the principle in how the comparison system should work and further be developed
was outlined in the article by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]. The idea was to build a
database with previous products in the company’s ERP system and then make an
integration with the CS2. Based on this system the diﬀerent departments across
the organisation would be able to reuse information from previous similar products
when new products have been conﬁgured.
It was from the project’s beginning an open question how the Environmental busi-
ness unit in fact should beneﬁt by implementing the comparison system. Never-
theless, the potential beneﬁts by a comparison system provided by [Shaﬁee and
Hvam, 2015] were the initial motivation for the project3.
Moreover, some of the potential beneﬁts were stated in the project proposal as
an argument for why the project should be started.
These were targeting the
areas within sales, mechanical, price estimation and CS in general. The potential
beneﬁts from the project proposal are listed below.
Sales can check if prices generated by CS are in the right range: ’When
conﬁguration is made the system checks previously made projects based on
predeﬁned product features, where the cost prices and the sales prices are
shown. Based on this information the sales person can verify whether the
cost prices generated by the conﬁguration are in the right range.’
Mechanical department can reuse drawings: ’By comparing new conﬁgura-
tions with previously made projects, a reuse of drawing and solution principles
are enabled.’
Increase accuracy of price calculations: ’In order to make the use of product
conﬁguration system more liable and increase accuracy of the price calcula-
tions integration to the company internal system SAP would create a great
value where the conﬁguration is compared to previous projects. This com-
parison could also create value for departments not utilizing a conﬁguration
tools.’
The potential beneﬁts ranged widely in the organisation, therefore, the intention
of the project was not to build a perfect ﬁnish designed comparison system that
could achieve all these advantages. The project’s focus was primarily on building
the system as a proof of concept for WSA spare parts based on the theory provided
by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]. Developing a proof of concept, would take the theory
closer to reality and more evidence to the beneﬁts could potentially be added. In
2Detail description on the comparison system is given in the theory section 2.2
3The potential beneﬁts by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] is given in theory section 2.2.3
==PAGE:43==
3.1 The project at Haldor Topsoe
33
addition to that, the company would learn more about their own viability for a
comparison system.
3.1.2
Situation and complication
In this section it is explained what was the situation and complications at the
company from the projects beginning.
No common database with information for previous products: In order to
store and manage data from the diﬀerent business functions HT uses the ERP
system SAP. Despite of lot of data are accessible from the company’s ERP
system, there existed no common database where all information related to
a product easily could be retrieved. In addition, there were lot of examples
on that information was saved locally in the departments.
Manual way to ﬁnd data: Departments across the organisation were challenged
if they wanted access to product relevant data. The procedure to ﬁnd data in
SAP was not well-deﬁned and often it would require lot of coordination with
other departments to identify and retrieve relevant data from SAP. For in-
stance, the sales department did not have an overview of prices from previous
products. In order to ﬁnd out they had to manually go into the SAP system
to ﬁnd similar products or request prices from suppliers for the products.
Diﬃcult to ﬁnd similar products: It was diﬃcult and challenging to ﬁnd the
most similar previously made products. Beside the complications in ﬁnding
data the task was also challenging because HT has produced highly cus-
tomized products over an long time period. Therefore diﬀerent aspects such
as design, components deliverable and location of customer and suppliers
made it diﬃcult to assess whether or not diﬀerent products were similar.
A deeper explanation on why these aspects made it diﬃcult to ﬁnd similar
products are given below:
Product design: HT is an ETO company meaning that all the activities
to deliver the product (design,engineering,manufacturing,assembly) are
executed after receiving the customer’s order. In particular, it became
evident that the design of the product could change a lot on diﬀerent
parameters such as the physical dimensioning and choice of material
which naturally would lead to an increase in complexity of the diﬀerent
products sold. This customization made it diﬃcult for the company to
compare the products with each other.
Components deliverable: Another issue was that HT oﬀered the cus-
tomers to supply some of the WSA components by them self.
For
==PAGE:44==
34
Project Description
example, the WSA condenser it was only the internal hardware (the
tube module) which HT insisted to supply to its customer whereas other
parts of the condenser it was optional for the customers if they would
buy from HT or other suppliers. Therefore two previously sold con-
denser having the same design could still be very diﬀerent based on
how many subparts were delivered by HT. This would lead to diﬀerent
product information for the same kind of condenser. For example, the
cost estimate would be higher for the condenser where all parts were
delivered by HT. As a consequence if information from previously made
products should be valuable it would require that ﬁrst an overview of
which parts were delivered by HT and which were delivered outside.
At the moment there was no automated an eﬃcient way to get this
overview.
Location of customer and suppliers: Beside few spare parts and the catal-
ysis HT is not manufacturing anything by them self. Therefore the com-
pany purchases all components for the WSA plant from suppliers. The
procurement department manage the contact with the suppliers and
makes sure that the parts are transported to client. Since the location
of the supplier and customer can vary a lot the transportation cost will
vary as well.
3.1.3
Scope
The initial scope of the project dealt with two areas product selection and proof of
concept which are explained below.
Product selection The project has initially started considering three spare parts
of the WSA plant. The three spare parts under considerations in this were
the bellow, ﬂange and tube plates4. The spare parts were chosen because
they had a simple structure and further were sold frequently in relation to
maintenance of the WSA plant. The idea behind choosing simple products
was that the development of the comparison system would be kept simple as
well. Thus, if the project would succeed and time permit it was possible to
expand the scope to additional parts of the plant.
Proof of concept The project was scoped to be a proof of concept meaning that
the main focus was on the processes around building the comparison sys-
tem for the spare parts.
Thus, project elements such as implementation,
maintenance or roll-out plans were not included for this project.
4An detailed explanation of the parts is given in appendix A
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Revised project description
35
3.1.4
Key project deliverables and criteria for success
Based on the seven step framework provided by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015], the key
project deliverables below were created. The key deliverables are corresponding
to the last three deliverables in the seven step framework, whereas the ﬁrst four
steps were seen as milestones5.
1) Build a database with previous products in SAP
2) Compare the new products with previous products in the ERP system
3) Make an integration between the database and the user interface of the CS
3.2
Revised project description
During the project, changes in the initial project description has been made. Figure
3.1 shows the initial - and the ﬁnal revised project description. What has been
changed are highlighted in the ﬁnal description and the reasons for why it has
been changed will be explained in this section. Furthermore, it is in the end of the
section explained how the stakeholders have been handled in the phases where the
project has been changed.
Figure 3.1: Initial and ﬁnal project description
5The seven step framework is explained in section 2.2.2. The seven step framework
==PAGE:46==
36
Project Description
3.2.1
Changes in purpose of project
During the project two changes have been made in the purpose of the project.
One has been an adjustment of the initial purpose whereas the second has been
an addition of a new purpose.
Building a model of the comparison system: The initial idea was to make
a full automated comparison system between the ERP system and CS for
the spare parts. However, it was found too premature to start building the
proof of concept in the company’s ERP system. In addition, the seven step
framework which was seen as the procedure for building the system was
in fact a generic framework where more research in some of the steps were
required. Therefore start building a database in ERP would be going to early
into solution mode since more research on how to design the comparison
system was needed. In order to facilitate a better understanding on how
the comparison system should be designed it was instead decided to build
a model of the system. Still, the steps in the seven step framework were
used as a guideline for the development of the model. As as ﬁnal outcome
the model should be able to show the principle of the comparison system
and furthermore demonstrate how departments across the organisation could
beneﬁt by the system. In order to build the model, it should be decided which
software should be used. The choice ended up on MS Excel which was found
suitable because of its ﬂexibility and user-friendly functions.
Investigating the objective of the comparison system: In the ﬁrst phases
of the project the main focus was on building the system based on the seven-
step framework. In addition to that a lot of resources was allocated to lit-
erature study on how to compare products based on features. However, it
became more evident that it was not feasible to design a system without
knowing exactly who and how it should beneﬁt. Designing a useful com-
parison system would require a more well-deﬁned direction on how it should
beneﬁt the company and furthermore who it should be addressed to. There-
fore, the author of this thesis decided to change the direction of the project
to allocate more resources to investigate how the comparison system would
be desirable.
3.2.2
Changes in scope
The scope has been changed by changing the product for which the comparison
system should be build around.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Revised project description
37
Selection of a more complex component: The comparison system should be
able to compare ETO products. In relation to that, the author found the
chosen spare parts too simple and therefore decided to expand to the WSA
condenser which is a more complex component of the plant. The reasoning
behind the choice is given in section 4.2.1. Product selection.
3.2.3
Changes in deliverables
By changing the objectives, it has also been necessary to adjust the deliverables.
Furthermore, it has been necessary to make the deliverables more understandable
and speciﬁc. The ﬁrst three deliverables in the ﬁnal project description are aligned
to the ﬁrst objective of building a model of the comparison system whereas the last
deliverable is new and relates to the second objective of investigating the objective
of the comparison system.
Build a model of the database: The initial idea was to build the database for
the spare parts in SAP. However, as the objective now has changed to build
the comparison system as a model in MS Excel, data which was thought
to be put into the database in SAP should instead be put into MS Excel.
Thus, the deliverable will end up to be a collection of records in MS Excel
indicating what kind of information should be stored in a real database for
the comparison system.
Inputs for the ’database’ in MS Excel will still be found in the initial steps
of the seven step framework where data for variables and product relevant
information for all previous products has been gathered. Thus, a task will be
to ﬁnd out how to collect, treat and structure the information in a rational
manner which make it easy to use in the model.
Compare new products with old products in the model: The only diﬀer-
ence here is that the platform for where the comparison takes place will be
in MS Excel. Beside this, the challenges are the same as in the initial deliver-
able. The platform should be able to compare products, measure similarity
and rank the products based on similarity. Therefore step four in the seven
step framework, where a comparison method should be identiﬁed is still a
milestone to achieve before the platform in Excel can be build.
Demonstrate the concept of the integration in the model: In the originally
deliverable the idea was to make an integration between ERP and the CS
where a central task was to ﬁgure out how outputs from the comparison
system should be shown in the user interface of the CS. However, due to the
relaxing from real system to model, the user interface is designed in MS Excel
==PAGE:48==
38
Project Description
and the integration will be to ﬁnd out how to connect all the deliverables to
one model in MS Excel.
Research on how to beneﬁt: The last deliverable relates to the objective in-
vestigation of the comparison system where it should be more well-deﬁned
how it should beneﬁt the company.
In order to accomplish this, an overview of potential beneﬁts from the liter-
ature should be established as a starting point. Subsequently, the potential
beneﬁts should be taken into account during the development of the model.
An as result the model should aim to demonstrate some of these on a con-
ceptual level.
3.2.4
Stakeholder Analysis
Changing the purpose of the project had also changed the roles of the stakeholders.
Therefore it has been important to ensure alignment in the project team. In this
context, it was found necessary to create a stakeholder analysis.
The analysis
can be seen in small format on Figure B.2 whereas a big size of the analysis is
found in B.0.2. The stakeholders are listed after importance and their role in the
project has been described. Furthermore, potential drivers and barriers have been
identiﬁed (attitude towards the project), as well as relevant actions for handling
of the stakeholders.
Figure 3.2: Stakeholder Analysis
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Revised project description
39
3.2.4.1
Stakeholder Analysis used as a tool to change the direction of
the project
The stakeholder analysis was created, because the author got the idea to change
the direction of the project. The project had at that time, focused on building
the database in SAP in cooperation with an expert from the IT Department. In
spite of the fact that the cooperation was working well, the author assessed that a
better academic result could be achieved by changing the objective of the project.
The project’s change was to such a degree, that most of the involved stakeholders,
would be aﬀected by the change. Some of the stakeholders would get a smaller
role e.g. the IT department, whereas new stakeholders such as the Engineering
department would get a bigger role.
In order to change the direction of the project, it was necessary to get acceptance
for the project owner. Thus, a meeting was arranged where the key stakeholders in
the project were invited. Participating on the meeting were the project owner, two
employees from Business Development and the employee from the IT Department,
which was allocated to the project.
In the preparation to the meeting the stakeholder analysis was a powerful tool to
identify which stakeholders, should participate in the meeting. In addition, the
analysis made it clear how the diﬀerent persons would be aﬀected by the change
and in the light of this, there could be made a good communication strategy. In
order to communicate the new idea, a PowerPoint presentation was made which
showed the way the author wanted to drive the project.
The outcome of the
meeting was that the project owner of the project approved the new direction and
the key stakeholders became informed.
3.2.4.2
Stakeholder Analysis used as a tool in meetings with domain
experts
After the presentation, the stakeholder analysis was still a useful tool in the project
since it was used to plan and prepare meetings with other departments in the
company. Especially, it was important to know stakeholders ’ drivers and barriers
towards the project, in order to make the meetings with the stakeholders eﬀectively
and to be able to evaluate the responses.
Based on the stakeholder analysis it was concluded that domain experts did not
have deep insight and interest in the project. Thus, in order to ensure a more
eﬀective cooperation and to avoid working in a wrong direction, it was important,
to make it clear for the domain experts what was the objective of the project. Also,
==PAGE:50==
40
Project Description
it was important to understand that the experts, for obviously reasons, had a better
understanding of the internal processes at the company. This combination of little
interest in the project as well as their expertise made them capable to ask relevant
critical questions to the project idea. This was seen, in the mechanical department,
where an employee provided strong arguments for why the comparison system
would not be a help in the daily work. The argument was that the mechanical
department, had standard drawings for the WSA components. These drawings
were regularly updated in line with the component evolved. Thus, it would not
make sense for the department to use old drawings, since these would be outdated
compared to the standard drawing.
Although, various experts in several cases provided good arguments for why the
project would not be beneﬁcial, it has also been important to have in mind that,
experts because of many years in the same position, have a higher risk of being
stuck in their ways of working and thinking. Therefore, it has also been important
not just to take the criticism for granted.
It has been about ﬁnding the right
balance between insistence and faith in the project idea, but at the same time also
have understanding for the limitations and the reality.
3.3
Decision tree
In order to get an overview of the project a decision tool has been made. Further-
more, the purpose of the tree has been to structure the whole project and to break
main problems down into issues that are small enough to be analysed and all to-
gether are collectively exhaustive. This has ensured that issues could be analysed
without forgetting any important parts and it has been possible to prioritise the
individual issues and split them among stakeholders when doing the project plan.
In the following the tree will carefully be explained by going through the diﬀerent
issues and choices made.
The explanation is on an overall basis which aim to
provide overview of the project for the reader whereas deeper argumentation for
the choices will come later in report.
3.3.1
Presentation of decision tree
The decision tree shows the ’journey’ of the project and highlights the main deci-
sions that were taken throughout the project. Figure 3.3 shows the graph where
the boxes are all the issues which have been considered for the project. For ex-
ample, the tree starts in the box proof of concept where it among four candidates
should be considered which component of the WSA plant should be selected to
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Decision tree
41
build the comparison system around.
The green boxes represents all the choices made in the project thus it is seen that
the condenser among the four candidates became the ﬁnal choice. The pink boxes
represent choices which have been taken, but later were dropped for another choice,
for example, the project started to consider building the comparison system as an
integration between the ERP system and the CS, but later the choice was changed
to build the comparison system as a model in MS Excel. Finally, the white boxes
represent issues which have been discussed as potential areas to do further research
in, but for time reasons have been deselected or downgraded in order to go deeper
in to other issues.
Figure 3.3: Decision tree for the project
3.3.1.1
Proof of concept
The tree starts deciding the component the comparison system should be build
around. Four alternatives have been evaluated. It is seen that ﬁrst decision was
the spare parts, but later the scope was changed to consider the WSA condenser6.
6Argumentation for the choice is given in section 4.2.1. Product selection
==PAGE:52==
42
Project Description
3.3.1.2
Comparison system for WSA Condenser
Having decided the component for the proof of concept, the tree goes to the ob-
jectives of the project. One side of the overall objective is to investigate if the
comparison system will be desirable, whereas the other is to investigate if the
comparison system is feasible.
3.3.1.3
The desirable part
The comparison system will be desirable if beneﬁts weight higher than the costs.
Thus, this part is divided into the sub parts costs and beneﬁts.
Beneﬁts: [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] provides a wide collection of potential beneﬁts
for how ETO companies can beneﬁt by having a comparison system. As
seen in the tree these beneﬁts have been divided into two levels, which in
the thesis have been named the generic level and the speciﬁc level.
The
beneﬁts in the generic level, which have been placed highest in the tree,
can be categorized as overall beneﬁts of the comparison system there will
beneﬁt more departments across the organisation. These beneﬁts are linked
to the overall deliverables of the comparison system which concern building
a database, compare products and automation in returning similar products.
As indicated with the green colors all these beneﬁcial areas have been covered
in the project. Whereas the generic level contains beneﬁts which are more
overall, the beneﬁts in the speciﬁc level are more concrete and targeting
speciﬁc areas in the company, for instance, it is seen that departments and
speciﬁc work tasks are represented as candidates in this level. Among the
candidates in the speciﬁc level of beneﬁts, the project has investigated if the
comparison system could be beneﬁcial in price estimations and furthermore
in the sales department as a recommendation system.
Costs: In order to decide whether or not the comparison system would be desirable
the cost should be taken into account. Despite of this, it is seen that the
cost side has not been investigated in depth. The reason for this is that
most of the resources in this thesis has been allocated to the development
of the comparison system. Subsequently, it has been investigated how the
system should be developed in order to beneﬁt HT. Since the project has been
a proof of concept, the results of the beneﬁt investigations have typically
ended on a conceptual and demonstrating level where further research is
required to achieve more measurable beneﬁts. Nevertheless it is suggested
that rough estimates will be made for both the cost and beneﬁt side when
the development of the comparison system is on a more liable state.
==PAGE:53==
3.3 Decision tree
43
3.3.1.4
The feasible part
The feasible part of the project can be seen in the right side of the tree. This part
is linked to the development of the comparison system which has been based on
the seven step framework. In the project beginning it was decided to build the
system as an integration between the company’s ERP system and CS. However, as
indicated in the tree this was changed to build the comparison system as a model
in MS Excel. Three deliverables were created for building the system, these are
represented by the boxes database, comparison platform and integration, which
choices have been made for each deliverable will now be explained.
Database: The creation of the database is divided into two main issues. Common
for both issues is that they are related to identify, retrieve and treat data.
The ﬁrst issue deals with ﬁnding data for the describing variables. As seen
on the tree, the describing variables are found as the variables which impact
the design of the product. The data has been found in the mechanical de-
partment and no other ways of identifying the describing variables have been
considered7. The other issue relates to ﬁnding product relevant data (PRI).
In this case more alternatives have been evaluated among those have been
lead time, man hours and transport information. Nevertheless, the choice
ended up on ﬁnding data for the three cost types budget estimate, purchase
order (PO) and Invoice order (IO). In addition data for all sub components
belonging to the condenser have been found and considered8.
Comparison platform: This deliverable is about building a platform where new
and old products can be compared. One issue related to this have been to
ﬁnd a way to compare products based on there describing variables. In order
to that, k-means clustering was for long time in the project thought as the
best way, therefore lot of choices have also been made related to clustering.
For example, technical choices were taken in term of deciding how many
variables and clusters were optimal in the clustering method. Moreover, it
should be decided what software should be used for the clustering. Among
four candidates the choice ended up on MS Excel, this decision has also been
a crucial factor for why the whole model of the comparison system were build
in MS Excel as well. Nevertheless, it turned out that clustering was not the
proper solution for the comparison system instead of comparing on Euclidean
distance was chosen as the core principle in the comparison technique9.
7How describing variables have been identiﬁed is explained in section 4.2. Step 1 - Identify
relevant product variables
8More information on why these PRI have been chosen is given in section 4.4. Step 3 - Retrieve
product relevant information for previous products
9The whole procedure in ﬁnding the optimal comparison method is given in section 4.5. Step
4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
==PAGE:54==
44
Project Description
Integration: In the integration deliverable one big task is to design the user
interface for the comparison system. In this context, it should ﬁrst of all be
decided whom are the user. Three diﬀerent scenarios have been evaluated.
One is to address the user interface for the mechanical department, another
for the sales and the last for the price estimation department. As seen on
tree the choice ended up on the Sales department.
3.3.2
Reﬂection on the use of the decision tree as an ana-
lytical tool
Some sub parts have been easy to identify such as the cost and beneﬁt parts,
whereas other sub parts have been harder to identify. It already starts to be more
complicated when it should be identiﬁed which potential beneﬁts there exist. This
step will require more investigation and knowledge. Thus, it has also sometimes
been necessary to climb back in the tree and add or adjust some of the parts.
Another reﬂection on the tree is that it does not tell the whole story when it comes
to the connections between the diﬀerent parts across the tree. For instance, the
three parts database, comparison platform and integration are closely connected.
Changes, in the comparison platform have impact on the other parts, and vice
versa. In the same way it can also be discussed if the beneﬁts can be separated
from the development of the comparison system. On the other hand, what justify
this separation is that the beneﬁts can be tested separately based on the theoretical
idea from the article.
Nevertheless, the decision tree has after all been a brilliant tool in order to get an
overview of the diﬀerent parts and to make rational decisions and scopes trough
the project.
3.4
Project plan
An overall project plan including the task of writing a thesis has been made. Figure
3.4 shows the project plan illustrated by a Gantt Chart. Activities are listed in the
left side and the time in terms of week number can be seen in the top of the chart.
Furthermore, the workload in weeks and the stakeholder involved in the activity
are seen in the right side of the chart.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Project plan
45
Figure 3.4: Gantt Chart of the Project
==PAGE:56==
46
Project Description
The Gantt chart contains color codes of information. Red chart indicates the time
spent on an activity which turned out to be not in line with the ﬁnal result. For
example it is seen that lot of time (8 weeks corresponding to 20-25% of the whole
project) has been spent on cluster analysis both in term of literature review and
building the clustering tool.
Blue indicates where new activities which are diﬀerent from the initial plan have
been started. For instance, it was decided to leave the idea of building the database
of spare parts in the ERP system and instead of choosing the condenser as the
product to analyse.
Green charts with a cross are milestones in the project. Most of these are linked to
the steps from the seven step framework which are aligned to the development of
the comparison system itself. The last milestone has been aligned to the deliverable
of investigating the objective of the system. Notable is resources to the deliverable
for the investigation of objective has been allocated late in project since main focus
in the project’s beginning has been around the steps in the 7-step framework.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
This chapter starts with an analysis of the processes around the order fulﬁllment
of a WSA plant within the Environmental business unit at HT. After this, the
chapter is dedicated to a detailed explanation on how the ﬁrst four steps of the
seven step framework provided by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] have been executed
in the project. Thus, the chapter’s sections are structured after the names of the
steps in the framework. The results from each step is presented and the methods
chosen to achieve those are clearly laid out.
4.1
Process analysis
To gain a better understanding of the order handling, the processes around the
WSA plant have been analysed. As a part of the analysis the Swim-lane in Figure
4.1 has been created based on a meeting with a process manager. The swim-lane
shows the interaction between all the diﬀerent actors when an order has been
placed. The whole procedure typically takes between a half to a whole year. All
the activities are explained carefully in this section and can be hold together with
the swim-lane.
==PAGE:58==
48
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
Figure 4.1: As-Is situation swim-lane diagram
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Process analysis
49
Initial customer contact: The company gets in touch with a potential customer
and contacts take place from the sales department in order to understand
and analyse the needs of the customer.
Check of feasibility and price estimation: The sales department sends the
requirements to the process manager that conﬁrms the feasibility for the
company to actuate such a project. Once it has been approved an expert on
price calculation makes a rough estimation of the cost. The salesman then
makes an oﬀer/quotation to the customer that either accept it or reject it.
Project manager gets assigned to the project: When a contract has been
signed the sales manager inform the process manager. The process manager
will then ﬁnd a project manager which has the overall responsibility for that
the company is able to execute the order.
Clariﬁcation of contract aspects: First the contract will be handed over to a
project manager, which go through the contract and see if anything needs to
be clariﬁed with the sales manager. Based on this a meeting is arranged be-
tween the sales manager and the project manager where all contract aspects
in terms of legal and payment conditions are clariﬁed.
Creation of job instruction and doc. Stat: After contract clariﬁcation the project
manager issues a job instruction for the project members because the depart-
ment has to appoint a process engineer, mechanical engineer and employee
from purchasing. In the job instruction there is some basic information about
the project and the client. In addition to the job instruction the project man-
ager together with engineers also prepare a document list called doc. Stat.
which states all the documents to be a part of the project. The document is
engineer documents HT has to prepare and deliver to the customer. Exam-
ples are ﬂow sheets, diagrams, speciﬁcation drawings, instrument list etc. All
these things have previously been described in general terms in the contract.
Kick-oﬀmeeting with customer: Having prepared the documents a kick-oﬀ
meeting with the customer is arranged.
On the meeting it is important
that all aspects in the documents are clariﬁed before HT starts the real
engineering.
Information is putted into SAP: After the kick-oﬀmeeting HT has to put lot
of information into SAP in relation to the project. Delivery of hardware and
ﬁnancial aspects are examples on information which are stored in SAP so
that all employees have access. Once a month the project managers go into
SAP and revise if something has changed. Things can change if the customer
wants to do something else or due to delay.
Documents handed over to EPC contractor: HT is only delivering few se-
lected equipment to the project, what is called prioritised equipment or
==PAGE:60==
50
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
hardware of HT. Therefore, after HT has delivered the engineering docu-
ments the customer delivers these documents to an Engineering Procurement
Construction (EPC) contractor. The EPC contractor makes detailed engi-
neering based on the engineering package and makes the procurement of the
equipment and all the parts HT is not delivering. When all equipment has
been purchased the EPC goes to the site and starts constructing everything
and in the end the EPC has a complete plant for permission.
Meetings between EPC contractor, customer and HT: The EPC contrac-
tor always have a number of questions to HT about the engineering package.
Therefore, meetings between the EPC contractor, the customer and HT is
regularly arranged to clarify questions and to ensure that the EPC contrac-
tor fully understand the engineering documents before he starts the detailed
engineering. At a certain time, the EPC contactor has made some detailed
engineering and often HT is asked to make a review or check of some few
selected engineering documents are actually fulﬁlling HT’s requirements.
HT contacts suppliers: At a certain time HT has to supply their own hardware
where the company has the full responsibility for the detailed engineering. In
order to do that HT purchases all the needed parts from diﬀerent suppliers.
In this phase HT estimate the price, delivery time and other terms and
evaluate and often clarify and contact the suppliers with questions to the
quotation.
When the order has been placed HT still follow up on their
suppliers to make inspections and to share documents. In the end HT and
the suppliers come to the ﬁnal inspection about the purchase order. HT’s
procurement department is involved and are responsible for arranging the
transport from the suppliers to the customer which might be in China, South
America or Sweden.
EPC contractor and HT start erection on site: After that HT is able to de-
liver the hardware together with the catalysts and the EPC contractor starts
erection on site. HT insists to be involved in mechanical erection of their
own hardware for instance the WSA condenser. Thus, HT has to be present
on time with supervision and installation in order to make sure that the
hardware is installed correct.
Process engineer sent to start the plant: After installation, HT sends a pro-
cess engineer which is responsible for the start up. This service is called site
services and are normally also included in the contract.
In the contract
guarantees of the plant’s functionality is also given. Therefore, HT and the
customer usually agree to make a test run to see if the plant works as stated
in the contract.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Step 1 - Identify relevant product variables
51
4.1.1
Key take aways from process mapping
Beside facilitating a fundamental understanding on how the company works, im-
portant knowledge in relation to development of the comparison system came out
of the meeting with the process manager. The most striking observations are listed
below.
Optional for the customers to buy all parts from HT: An important key take
away from the process mapping is that it was optional for the customers if
they wanted to buy all components for the product by HT or own suppliers.
The role of the EPC and other suppliers increases the complexity in relation
to building the comparison system since the products delivered to customer
will vary on how many parts are delivered by HT.
Lot of coordination between the departments is needed: Another observa-
tion which came out of the interview with the process managers was that the
CS was to be tested and it was not in use yet. Furthermore, HT uses lot of
coordination across the department when an order needed to be fulﬁll. This
information supports the argumentation for why HT strives to spread out
the use of CS in the Environmental business unit. In relation to the project
this is important because a prerequisite for the comparison system is that
the company uses CS.
4.2
Step 1 - Identify relevant product variables
This section starts describing how the product for the comparison system has been
selected. After this, the product is analysed in order to identify the describing
variables and the result of this will be collected in a table.
4.2.1
Product selection
As seen in the decision tree on Figure 3.3 one of the ﬁrst decision in the project
has been to choose a product to consider for the development of the comparison
system.
The choice ended up on the WSA condenser which has been selected
among three other candidates; the whole WSA plant, the SO2 converter and the
spare parts (bellow, ﬂange and tube plates). In the following it is explained how a
decision matrix has been used to evaluate all the candidates against each other.
==PAGE:62==
52
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
4.2.1.1
Selection criteria and decision matrix
The choice of the product has been prioritised based on two criteria: Suitable
number of variables and Suitable product complexity which are explained below.
Number of variables: The number of variables of the product should be suitable
for the research of comparing products. If the number of variables is too
high, the research would be too complex. On the other hand, if the number
of variables is too low the proof of concept would not make sense since the
research is about comparing products which distinguishes from each other.
Product complexity: The complexity of the product should be manageable. If
the product is too complex, the workload of executing all the steps in the
seven step framework would be too demanding taken the time to fulﬁll the
project into account. However, the product should still have a certain de-
gree of complexity, so that challenges associating to the development of a
comparison system at the company will be identiﬁed and handled.
In order to systematically identify the best candidate a decision matrix has been
used to weight the candidates against each other on the two criteria. Figure 4.2
shows the result of the analysis. The candidates have for each criteria received a
grade from 1-10 where 10 is the best. The grades have been formed on a subjective
judgment which is based on discussions with stakeholders at HT. The grades have
same weight of importance and therefore the best candidate is the one with the
highest grade sum. It is seen on Figure 4.2 that the condenser has been weighted
as the best candidate with a total grade score on 12 in front of the spare parts on
10 and the SO2 converter on 9 whereas the whole WSA plant has been evaluated
as the poorest candidate with a total score on only 3.
Figure 4.2: Prioritising scope of WSA component
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Step 1 - Identify relevant product variables
53
4.2.1.2
Grade explanation for candidates
The grades in the table in Figure 4.2 have been based on a subjective judgment.
In this subsection the rationale behind the criteria grades is given and further
appendix C provides the argumentation split on each product.
The number of variables for each candidates were provided from the mechanical
department. It was given that the SO2 converter had 7 variables, the condenser
had 3 variables, the spare-parts had between 1-2 variables whereas it was not clear
how many variables the WSA plant had, however the number was told to be at
least bigger than 50. Based on this information it was evaluated what would be
the optimal variable number for a product to build a comparison system around.
At that moment clustering analysis was thought to be used to compare diﬀerent
products and some theory study within the ﬁeld had shown that better clustering
results would be obtained by more variables. Therefore, the SO2 converter was
argued as a strong candidate by having seven variables whereas the spare parts
were too simple. However, the SO2 converter was compared too the condenser
signiﬁcantly more complex in the design and it would be time consuming to study
the product in order to understand the variables before a cluster analysis. Fur-
thermore, the knowledge to clustering techniques was on a limited basis which
also argued for a bit more simple product. Therefore, based on this rationale the
condenser was rated as the best candidate when it came to have the most suitable
number of variables. Still, it was noted that for a project with longer time horizon
the SO2 converter could have been a better choice.
Regarding the product complexity, it was for each product evaluated how the
complexity of the product mainly in term of subparts would aﬀect the subsequently
tasks of building the comparison system. In particular, the workload related to
gather data and further analyse it was considered. For example, the task of treating
data for the whole WSA plant would be a huge task since it would require data
for all the parts belonging to the plant among those the other candidates. Also for
the SO2 converter and the condenser the task of ﬁnding data and treat it would
be demanding since the way HT has stored data in SAP was based on component
level and not whole products1. Thus, the more complex product the bigger task
of ﬁnding and treating the data for the comparison system, which also has been
reﬂected in the gradings in Figure 4.2.
1How data is stored in SAP is explained in section 4.4.2. Retrieve cost data from SAP
==PAGE:64==
54
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
4.2.2
Product analysis
Having selected the product, next task has been the execution of the ﬁrst step of the
seven-step framework which concerns the identiﬁcation of describing variables. In
order to do this, the product range of the condenser has been analysed by studying
drawings and by meetings with the mechanical department. This subsection shows
the result of the product analysis and the ﬁnal result in term of the describing
variables.
4.2.2.1
How the product variables have been selected
In the development of the comparison system it has been the product’s design spec-
iﬁcations which have been analysed in order to identify the describing variables.
Examples on design speciﬁcations are the dimensions or material requirements for
the product. When the design speciﬁcations are changing in order to meet the
customer’s requirements they can be categorized as describing variables for the
product. Thus, the task in identifying the product variables has been to recognize
which design speciﬁcations can change. Nevertheless, not all design speciﬁcations
which can change have been found as ﬁnal product variables. It was decided that
the design speciﬁcations which could change needed to have a noticeable impact on
the total cost of the condenser before they could be categorized as describing vari-
ables. For example, dimension change for smaller parts of the condenser would be
taken out since their impact on the total cost would be relatively low and thereby
could be neglected.
Beside the cost impact, frequency on how often the design speciﬁcation typically
will change has been a criteria. For example, it was found out that there existed few
special cases where HT makes extraordinary designs which diﬀerentiate from the
usual product range. Consequently, it has been a trade-oﬀbetween including these
rare changes in design or only taken the standard changes. Including all the rare
changes would make the ﬁnal model of the comparison system more comprehensive
and complete but on the other hand the development would be more challenging
and the ﬁnal model more complex. Therefore, it has been evaluated that for the
proof of concept, it would be better to keep the development on a simple level
where only the standard changes in design are included.
Nevertheless, all the
special cases identiﬁed will be collected in this section in order to give a more
holistic picture.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Step 1 - Identify relevant product variables
55
4.2.3
Structure of the Condenser module
This section is made to facilitate an understanding of the structure of the con-
denser. First the overall structure will be explained and last a deep dive has been
made on the tube module which contains parts which dimensioning impacts other
parts of the condenser. Subsequently, it will be stated which design speciﬁcations
for the parts can vary in order to identify the ﬁnal describing variables of the
condenser.
4.2.3.1
Overall structure of the condenser
A whole condenser is build up in condenser modules which consist of ﬁve ﬁxed main
parts which are; tube, casing, gas inlet, gas outlet and acid collector. The main
parts consist again of sub parts and a full part overview of a condenser module can
be seen in Appendix D. In the right side of Figure 4.3 a drawing of three condenser
modules have been made to give an indicator on how the main parts look and are
linked. In the following the main parts will be described and Figure 4.3 can be
used as reference.
Figure 4.3: Overall structure of condenser
Tube module The tube module, known as the internal of the condenser consists
of the glass tubes where the acid condenses. A standard module has between
500-1080 tubes. One tube module is put inside a casing as seen on Figure
4.3. Other important parts of the tube module are the tube plate set, the side
plates and baﬄe plate set which will be described later. The tube module
can vary in width, whereas the height and length is ﬁxed.
==PAGE:66==
56
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
Casing The casing is the box surrounding the condenser and is made of carbon
steel. The casing consists of 2 side walls and 4 end walls and furthermore
internal insulation. The dimensioning of the end walls and the internal in-
sulation is aﬀected by the size of the tube module whereas the design of the
side walls are ﬁxed.
Gas inlet and outlet The gas inlet and outlet consists of a special lined ﬂange
and bellow. The Flange and bellow only vary by one dimension related to
the diameter of the inlet. The variation of the hole diameter has a little
impact on the total cost of the condenser and will therefore not be carried
out for further analysis.
Acid Collector The acid collector, as the name indicates is the place where the
acid after condensing is collected. On Figure 4.3 the collector is shown as
part beside the condenser, however in fact the acid collector make up the
bottom of the condenser which is linked directly to the condenser. The part
consists of bricklining and acid steel parts, where the bricklining is installed
inside to protect the steel for the acid. The width of the acid collector can
vary equal to the width of the tube module.
4.2.3.2
Structure of the tube module
Figure 4.4 shows how the diﬀerent parts in the tube module are linked and some
pictures of the parts are seen in the right side of the ﬁgure.
Figure 4.4: Structure of tube module
Tube plate set In the top of the condenser are the upper tube plate and in the
bottom the lower plate. As illustrated on Figure 4.5 the tube plate is ﬁxed
in one dimension and vary in the other. The variable dimension determine
the module width (MW) of the whole condenser module and has a maximum
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Step 1 - Identify relevant product variables
57
limit on 2120 mm. The MW is determined by a combination of the pitch
between the holes and the number of holes.
Figure 4.5: Sketch of tube plate
Main glass tubes The main glass tubes consist of three parts glass tubes, demis-
ter and lock tubes. The number of parts vary with the number of holes in
the tube plate.
Side plates The side plates are made of stainless steel and is placed vertical
inside the tube module and together with baﬄe plate set they contribute to
the robustness of the tube module.
Baﬄe plate set In the tube module there is 5 baﬄe plates placed horizontal and
parallel with the tube plates. Thus, the length and width is equal to the
tube plates. Three baﬄe plates are in carbon steel and two are in stainless
steel.
4.2.4
Describing variables of the condenser
Having analysed the product it became evident that mainly three variables had an
impact on the design of the condenser. These are respectively the number of holes,
pitch and number of condenser modules. The table below sums up the ﬁndings
from the product analysis.
==PAGE:68==
58
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
Table 4.1: Condenser variables
Features
Explanation
Number of modules
It expresses the number of condenser modules, which
is an integer number and can go from 1 to 64. All the
modules within a plant are of the same kind.
Number of holes
It expresses the number of holes/glass tubes in a tube
plate, it modiﬁes the structure of the condenser adding
tubes only in one dimension.
Pitch
It expresses the distance between the centers of holes.
It is a number between 60 and 72, the unit of measure
is millimeters.
Pitch and holes The pitch and the number of holes are important since it is
a combination of the two variables which is used to determine the MW of
the condenser module. The MW has signiﬁcant impact on several parts of
the condenser module, for example, the end walls and internal insulation are
aﬀected by the MW. It was discussed in the project if the MW could have
been used as one variable instead of using both the pitch and the number
of holes of the tube plate. However, the choice ended to keep both variables
mainly because some parts of the tube module were only aﬀected by the
number of holes and not the MW. In appendix D it can be seen which parts
are aﬀected by respectively the MW, the number of holes and which parts
are not aﬀected by any of these variables.
Number of modules The other variable identiﬁed was the number of condenser
modules. Typically the number of modules to a condenser vary between 1-64
modules. The size of the modules is ﬁxed in one dimension whereas the other
vary up to a limit on 2120 mm as a consequent of the MW. A single row of
modules can vary from 2-7 modules. After that it is possible to have double
rows such as the total number of modules can be 8-10-12..40. The number of
modules were from the beginning assumed to be the most important variable
since the amount of equipment would increase signiﬁcantly with an increase
in the number of modules.
4.2.4.1
Special conditions impacting the condenser module
Beside the describing variables there are special cases where the design of the
condenser can change. In order to give a holistic picture of the product analysis
these will now be listed.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Step 2 - Retrieve the values of the variables for all previous designed
products
59
Less than 500 tubes: If the condenser contains less than 500 tubes the design
of the condenser will be completely diﬀerent. For instance, the baﬄe plates
are not needed.
Parts supplied by the client itself All the internals of the condenser (mainly
the parts around the tube module) is supplied by HT. This is special design
and know-how of the company are kept conﬁdential. However, the casing
and acid collector the clients can supply by them self.
Other parts The customer can choose to buy additional spare parts for the con-
denser. These number can vary a lot and is not linked to the describing
variables.
Temperature requirements can impact material In general there is no changes
in the material of the condenser. However this can diﬀer for some special
cases. For instance HT has used special material for the casing once where
the plant should be build in Russia where the temperature could go down to
be very low.
4.3
Step 2 - Retrieve the values of the variables for
all previous designed products
Data for the describing variables for all previously made condensers have been
provided in an Excel sheet from the mechanical department at HT. Figure 4.6
shows a part of the result whereas all data can be seen in appendix E.
Figure 4.6: Variable values for the condenser
In total HT has made 120 condensers the table shows ﬁve of these. The products
are linked to the S-number which is an unique name for the WSA project which
the condenser has been a part of. The values of the products variables are seen
in the last tree columns. Notable in Figure 4.6 is that the number of holes is way
==PAGE:70==
60
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
smaller than the typically number of glass tubes for the condenser module. The
reason is that this number is only related to the number of holes which vary in
the variable dimension of the tube plate. In the dimension where the dimension of
tube plates are ﬁxed the number of holes is also ﬁxed with a value on 36.
In order to get an overview of all the retrieved variable values for the condenser
the data has been treated and visualized by bar charts. For all data it has been
found what kind of values have been used, next it has been identiﬁed how often
(frequency) the values for the variables have been used. Figure 4.7 shows the result
for all the three variables.
Figure 4.7: Retrieved variables setup in bar charts
Module graph For the ﬁrst graph in the left side it is seen that the number of
condenser modules have diﬀered between 1 and 14 despite of it is possible to
have 64 modules. Around 75% of all WSA plants have contained 5 or less
number of condenser modules.
Holes graph In the graph with number of holes the data has been treated by
multiplying with 36 so that the real number of glass tubes could be seen.
The pattern is more or less normal distribution in the interval of 500 and
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Step 3 - Retrieve product relevant information for previous products
61
1080 tubes. Still, it is seen that for many cases the number of tubes in one
condenser module has been above 1000.
Pitch graph It is random how the pitch between the holes in the tube plate has
been set.
Most striking is that a pitch distance on 65 mm has been the
favorable choice.
4.4
Step 3 - Retrieve product relevant information
for previous products
This section gets across the phase of extracting PRI from the company’s ERP
system and as a ﬁnal result it is shown how the information has been structured
in MS Excel. Furthermore, the section explains how the PRI has been selected
based on the potential beneﬁts collected from the literature.
4.4.1
Selection of product relevant information
4.4.1.1
Background for selecting PRI
Extracting and analysing data from ERP was estimated as a time-consuming task
and therefore it should be prioritised what kind of PRI would be most important
to put into the comparison system. In addition, the project had at that moment
recognized the lack of making it more clear what was the objective of the compar-
ison system and in particular which stakeholders should the system be addressed
to. All this together has resulted to a speciﬁc selection phase of which PRI should
be chosen where both the ease of extracting data and the potential beneﬁts of the
comparison system have played a key role.
4.4.1.2
Summing up the potential beneﬁts
In order to prioritise PRI for the comparison system, it should be summed up
what are the potential beneﬁts.
This is done in Figure 4.8 whereas a detailed
explanation on the beneﬁts can be found in theory section 2.2.3.
==PAGE:72==
62
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
Figure 4.8: Potential beneﬁts
4.4.1.3
Selection matrix
Figure 4.9 shows the matrix wherein each PRI has been evaluated against the
beneﬁts and the ease of extracting data.
The potential beneﬁts are divided into two segments a generic level and a spe-
ciﬁc level. In the generic level the beneﬁts are more overall and relates to the
main functionalities of the comparison system where more departments across the
organisation can beneﬁt from. In the speciﬁc level the beneﬁts belong to more
speciﬁc areas within the company which are the ones deﬁned in Figure 4.8. How
all the PRI has been rated for each beneﬁt is given after the ﬁgure. Beside the
beneﬁts each PRI has also been evaluated based on the eﬀort it would require to
gather data and further place it into the comparison system.
The best PRI candidate has been found as the one with the highest average grade,
which can be seen in the last row in the matrix. It is seen that the best candidate
turned out to be the PRI for cost which obtained an average grade on 3.7.
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Step 3 - Retrieve product relevant information for previous products
63
Figure 4.9: Selecting PRI for comparison system
4.4.1.4
Grades explanation
Common database: Data is in some cases stored locally in departments and
therefore one overall aim of the comparison system has been to collect and
structure all PRI in a common database where all departments have access.
The database would be more favorable if it collects data which currently is
hard to get and further is strongly needed across the organisation. In the
thesis, no deep investigation on this has been made why all PRI got the same
grade on 3 as they all for the proof of concept equally demonstrate the use
of the database.
Compare products: Another objective for the comparison system is its function
when it comes to compare diﬀerent products against each other and show
related PRI. This function can be categorized as the main function of the
comparison system. The analysis of which PRI to put into the comparison
system so that this function will be more beneﬁcial is therefore more or
less equal to all the analysis of PRI related to the speciﬁc level of beneﬁts.
Therefore, in order to avoid repeating analysis all PRI’s have in this case
received same grades on 3.
Automated way to ﬁnd PRI: Currently, departments have to ﬁnd PRI man-
ually, therefore the comparison system capability of returning information
automatically is beneﬁcial when it comes to save time on data extraction.
Especially in departments where lot of time is spent on manually data ex-
traction this function of the comparison system is signiﬁcantly important.
Therefore, in order to decide which PRI would contribute most to this use
of the comparison system it should be found out which PRI across the or-
ganisation is the one where most time is spent on manually data extraction.
This number can be found as the product of the two factors demand and
time consumption, where demand is the number of employees which fulﬁll
the data extraction task over time, whereas time consumption relates to the
==PAGE:74==
64
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
average time it takes the employees to manually ﬁnd the PRI. No deep in-
vestigation of this has been made in this thesis why all PRI candidates have
same grade on 3. However, the drawings have a bit lower score, since it was
noted that drawings were not stored in ERP which could be an indicator on
low demand for this kind of PRI.
Statically analysis for future: In order to keep track of which product has been
sold it is rather the variables than the PRI which is important since the
product range is determined by the variables. However, some PRI may be
more important to use when it comes to analyzing the product assortment
and eliminate complexity related to the diversity of product variables oﬀered
in the product line. For example, the cost and sales price could be used
to determine proﬁtability and lead time as well is interesting to see how
competitive the outstanding products are before eliminating. Based on this
the PRI has been rated, where the drawings were found less relevant whereas
the other for the reasons mentioned were weighted higher.
Improve CS: A comparison between PRI for previous products with outputs
generated from the CS can lead to an increase of the accuracy of the CS.
Thus, PRI to put into the comparison system should be prioritized according
to what would be most natural to double check in the current CS. What a
CS is able to generate of outputs can vary a lot, at HT the CS is still under
development, however it was told at the company that the plan is that the
the CS should be able to generate price estimations. Thus, the cost and sales
PRI would in this sense be interesting.
Recommendation system: The recommendation system makes it possible for
the sales staﬀto recommend successful products for the customer. In addition
to that customer relevant information regarding the products would mainly
concern sales price and lead time. However, for the company cost is also
relevant in this sense since the proﬁtability of the products would make it
possible for the sales person to drive the choice of the customer into more
proﬁtable products for the company. Thus, most important PRIs have been
found as sales price, cost and lead time.
Price estimates: Regarding price estimations most relevant PRIs are obviously
the cost. However, sales price and man hours might also be useful inputs
to have for the price estimation whereas drawings and lead time are less
important.
Reuse drawings: Drawings as the PRI is a requirement for achieving the ben-
eﬁts of reusing solution principles from old drawings in the mechanical de-
partment. In this context, all the other PRIs have no impact.
Ease to get, analyse and put in comparison model: The cost data was most
obviously since it was accessible in ERP and the IT department would be
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Step 3 - Retrieve product relevant information for previous products
65
able to extract the data whereas man hours were more diﬃcult to get access
among others for conﬁdential reasons. Also, the drawings were found less
favorable since it was more complicated to ﬁnd a way to collect and store
all the drawings in the database compared to the other PRIs which were
numbers and thereby easier to handle.
4.4.2
Retrieve cost data from SAP
Cost has been selected as the most proper PRI to use in the model of the compar-
ison system. In this subsection it is explained how the cost of the condenser has
been extracted from HT’s SAP system and further been treated in MS Excel.
4.4.2.1
Introduction to cost types
The condenser’s cost information in SAP was related to all the activities between
procurement of condenser components and to the condenser was assembled and
installed on the customer’s plant. Thus, cost related to all the activities before
procurement (engineering, price estimation, project management and sales) have
not been in scope. Regarding the costs three kind of cost types were considered:
budget, invoice order (IO) and purchase order (PO) which are deﬁned as follows:
Budget An estimate on the purchase order made by HT’s price estimation de-
partment.
Purchase order The amount agreed with the supplier when the order is signed.
Invoice order The amount the supplier has been billed
4.4.2.2
Introduction to cost documents
The three cost types have not determined the cost for whole condensers, instead
of it is all the activities between the procurement and installation which have
been categorized into areas which in this thesis are deﬁned as cost documents.
For example, one cost document could be the activity of purchasing a speciﬁc
assortment of condenser components from a supplier and get them transported to
the customer. Another cost document could be associated to assembly of condenser
modules or supervision. Thus, all the cost documents will together deﬁne the cost
which HT has spent on delivering the condenser to the customer starting from
==PAGE:76==
66
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
the procurement department. The cost documents has been stored as separated
documents in HT’s SAP system and by help from the IT department it has been
possible to retrieve these documents from SAP into MS Excel spread sheets. In
total up to 21 diﬀerent cost documents have been identiﬁed and an overview of
these is seen in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Cost documents for the condenser
Most of the cost documents in Figure 4.10 are linked to the purchase of condenser
parts whereas less are linked to other kind of activities.
For example, no.
17
Module Assembly or no. 1 Bricklining erection are examples on some of the more
special cost documents which are not dealing with purchasing activities.
4.4.2.3
The structure of a cost document in Excel
All the cost documents were retrieved from SAP into 21 Excel spread sheets. Figure
4.11 illustrates with the cost document Top Cover, Steel Parts as an example how
the Excel sheets from SAP were structured.
It is seen that the S-number for all previously projects are linked together with
the three cost types.
In addition there is an item called PO Item text which
contains all areas which contribute to cost. Material price, transport, supervision
or documentation are examples on what kind of PO item text there exist. Finally
the three cost types are shown to the right in the excel sheet, where the sum of all
the PO items related to one S-number is given in the yellow row.
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Step 3 - Retrieve product relevant information for previous products
67
Figure 4.11: Illustration on a cost document retrieved from SAP into Excel
4.4.3
Structuring data from SAP
For further data analysis all the 21 cost document Excel sheets have been treated
so that only the total result of the Budget, PO and IO are together with the S-
number. This has been done by removing all the PO items and only keeping the
yellow result rows. In addition all cost documents sheets have been collected in
one sheet. Figure 4.12 illustrates how the ﬁnal result has been structured. Notable
is that the magnitude of the cost documents diﬀer, the reason is that not all the
previously made condenser consisted of all cost documents because customer can
choose to supply some of the components from diﬀerent suppliers.
Figure 4.12: Removing PO items and collecting all cost documents in one sheet
==PAGE:78==
68
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
4.5
Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based
on features
In the fourth step of the seven step framework it should be investigated how the
condenser based on the describing variables could be compared. As explained in
chapter 3. Project Description clustering was for long time seen as the method
for this purpose. More precisely, a whole cluster analysis has been carried out in
MS Excel for all the previously made condensers. In this section the result of the
analysis will be shown and further it will be argued why the method ﬁrst has been
chosen and why it had shown not to be the favorable solution.
4.5.1
K-means clustering as the initial choice of method
In order to compare the condensers based on their variables, k-means clustering was
found interesting since literature review shown that the technique was frequently
used in highly customized production systems, characterized by large variety of
product models and reduced lot sizes [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011]. Some of the
initial drivers for why the method was chosen is given below.
Comparison based on variables: The method would allow a comparison based
on product variables which is aligned with the idea in the seven step frame-
work.
Fast and eﬃcient analysis: The method was found suitable since it was known
as a fast and eﬃcient process to categorize products. Thus, if the method
would turn out to be not perfect for the comparison, there would still be
time for more research.
Products in same clusters could be recommended in the comparison system:
The initial hope was that the k-means clustering technique could be used as
the ﬁnal comparison method in the comparison system. The idea was that
when a new product was conﬁgured, the k-means algorithm should be run and
assign the product to a cluster, all other products within the cluster would
then be returned in the user-interface of the comparison system. Since the
clustering technique aims to categorize products into clusters so that prod-
ucts within the same cluster would have high similarity it would only be the
most similar products which would be recommended.
Data analysis: Another aim of the clustering analysis was also to investigate
if there existed any coloration between similar products and the PRI. If it
turned out that there was a coloration, this could be a way to determine
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
69
price curves which could be a great application to implement within the
comparison system for the purpose of better price estimation. By dividing
the range of records in diﬀerent families it was expected an easier analysis of
this.
4.5.2
Choice of clustering software
In order to proceed the k-means algorithm it should be decided what software to
use. In this context, four softwares resulted interesting, clustering 3.0, which was
originally developed by Michael Eisen, Sap HANA, which is a software provided
by the SAP SE, SPSS which is a dedicated software but with an expensive license
and a diﬃcult use and Microsoft Excel which is eﬃcient and user-friendly but still
requires basic operation skills and creativity to proceed more advanced analysis.
Due to the expenses of the software and to the time consuming to learn to use
them it was decided to choose Microsoft Excel. Another reason was the author’s
familiarity with the software which together with the little amount of records (only
120 condenser products) would make the task manageable. Finally, it should be
mentioned that, the author at that time had initially started the considerations to
build the whole comparison system as a model in MS Excel, which also argued for
that the comparison method should be developed in same program.
4.5.3
Cluster analysis in MS Excel
Having, decided to execute the clustering analysis in MS Excel, next step was
to ﬁgure out how to build up the analysis. One challenge, was to build the k-
means algorithm in MS Excel around the variables for all previously condensers
whereas another challenge was to ﬁnd the optimal number of clusters to use in the
analysis. Regarding the ﬁrst challenge an e-learning [Gangi, 2014], where the k-
means algorithm was build step by step was used as inspiration in the developing
phase.
For the other challenge about ﬁnding the optimal cluster scenario, the
method provided by [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011] was used. In this method
diﬀerent clustering scenarios are generated and evaluated based on the Silhouette
Index (SI) 2 why it should also be ﬁgured out how to calculate this number in MS
Excel.
Despite of the method from [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011] has been followed, there
have been a deviation when it comes to the number of generated cluster scenarios.
According to the theory, variables are left out one by one to generate more cluster
2SI is introduced in theory section 2.3.3. Silhouette index
==PAGE:80==
70
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
scenarios, since this can lead to a better product categorizing. However, in this
research all scenarios are considering all the three variables identiﬁed in the ﬁrst
step of the seven step framework.
In order to ﬁnd the best set of clusters, it was decided to build a cluster analysis
starting with two clusters and then expand the analysis up to ﬁve clusters. Thus,
in total four cluster analysis have been carried out for respectively two, three, four
and ﬁve clusters where all variables are considered. The upper bound of clusters
was decided to be ﬁve since the number of records were only 120 products adding
more clusters would have split the classiﬁcation with the result in average of less
products in the same cluster. This wanted to be avoided because a data analysis
within the clusters, would require a decent amount of records to analyse.
4.5.4
Running the analysis in MS Excel
Figure 4.13 illustrates how the cluster analysis in MS Excel works. The cluster
is initially placed and based on the k-means algorithm a ﬁnal position for the
cluster’s centroids is found. In addition, the average SI is measured and as seen
on the ﬁgure this number will increase during the procedure.
On the USB pen is found one of the cluster analysis which have been constructed
for this project. Furthermore, it is possible for the reader to proceed the clustering
by him/herself as an instruction for how the analysis has been carried out is found
in appendix F.0.1. In addition the appendix also explains how the clustering tool
in MS Excel has been constructed.
Figure 4.13: Movement of clusters and average SI during k-means
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
71
4.5.5
Result of clustering analysis
Four cluster analysis have been carried out based on the method described in the
previous section. In this section the average SI for each cluster analysis is shown.
After this a deep dive is made on the cluster analysis with the highest average SI
so that both the ﬁnal cluster graphs and average SI for each cluster is presented.
4.5.5.1
Average Silhoette Index for each cluster analysis
In order to assess which one would lead to the optimal clustering the average SI
for all the analysis has been stored which are seen in table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Average silhouette index
Clustering variables
Number of clusters (k)
2
3
4
5
X-Y-Z
0,332
0,378
0,365
0,462
As seen in the table, the cluster analysis using ﬁve clusters has given the highest
average SI. Therefore, it has been decided to make a deep dive in this analysis and
investigate the data within the clusters.
4.5.5.2
Final cluster graphs for the best cluster analysis
The graphs below show the positions of the clusters after the k-means algorithm
and further how the instances are assigned to the clusters.
The assignment of
instances to clusters is seen by the color, where: blue instances belong to cluster
1, gray instances belong to cluster 2, yellow instances belong to cluster 3, red
instances belong to cluster 4 and green instances belong to cluster 5. Notable is
that not all the instances are seen on the graphs because instances can have same
coordinates (variable values), which result in same position in the graphs. The
graphs will be used in further analysis, therefore a big version of Figure 4.14 can
be found in appendix section F.0.4.
==PAGE:82==
72
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
Figure 4.14: Final cluster graphs
4.5.5.3
Average SI for each cluster
Figure 4.15 shows two SI proﬁles for the cluster analysis. The graph in the left
side is an average SI proﬁle for all the clusters.
It shows that cluster 1 is the
best cluster scenario with an Average SI value on 0,563. The next best scenario is
cluster 4 whereas the other clusters have more or less the same average SI value
and are the poorest clusters. However, as seen in the right graph on the ﬁgure,
which is a deep dive on the SI values for the instances within cluster 1 it can be
seen that some instances may still be bad clustered. For example, it is seen that
instance a56 has an SI value close to zero.
Figure 4.15: SI proﬁles for cluster analysis with ﬁve clusters
==PAGE:83==
4.5 Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
73
4.5.6
Clustering for data analysis and comparison system
The clustering result should be used for two purposes. First of all and most im-
portant it should be investigated if the method to ﬁnd the best clustering scenario
could be used as the way to compare products in the comparison system. The
other aim was to see if the clustering technique could be used to discover ten-
dencies between clusters and cost data, which potential could be used for price
estimations.
This subsection will go through the data analysis whereas the evaluations of both
the data analysis and the clustering for the comparison system will be presented
in own sections afterwards.
4.5.6.1
Analysing the Clustering result before data analysis
Having found the best cluster scenario, it was possible to move on with the data
analysis where the cluster result would be linked to the cost data from SAP. To
accommodate the data analysis, it should be recognized what is characteristic for
the instances within a cluster. In order to get this overview table 4.16 has been
established based on studying the graphs in Figure 4.14. The table shows all the
ﬁve clusters and below are the three describing variables categorized on a low-high
scale. The clusters’ variables have been scaled based on an overall assessment of
where most of the instances’ variables within the cluster are placed in the graphs.
For example, it is seen in the graphs on Figure 4.14 (Can be found in big size in
appendix section F.0.4), that for the instances assigned to cluster 1 the Z variable
values can be categorized as low compared to the Z-values for the other instances.
In the same way it is seen that the X-values can be categorized as low-medium
and last the Y-values can be categorized as high since all values are in the top of
the scale. Same analysis has been carried out for the rest of the clusters and the
result is seen in the table below.
Figure 4.16: Analysis of the ﬁve clusters
Having categorized variables for the clusters it should be considered what meaning
this would have in relation to the product relevant information to analyse which
are the total cost of the condenser. In order to do that, it should be recapped that
==PAGE:84==
74
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
the variable X was the number of modules, Y was the number of tubes and Z was
the pitch distance. From the meeting with the mechanical department it was not
stated how exactly the variables would impact the total cost of the condensers.
Nevertheless, it was mentioned that the number of modules typically would have
the biggest cost impact whereas the MW came after with a smaller but still signif-
icantly cost impact. Regarding the MW, the number of tubes were mentioned as
the most important cost factor compared to the pitch distance. Common for all
variables was that an increase in value would lead to an increase in cost.
Based on this information, it was expected that clusters with high values of X,
Y and Z would contain instances with high cost related data. Moreover, a high
X value would contribute most to cost whereas Y and indeed Z would be less
important variables. Based on this logic the clusters have been ranked against
each other on a scale from 1-5, where 1 indicates that the average cost of all
instances within a cluster is excepted to be the highest compared to the average
cost for the other clusters. The result of the ranking is seen in the last row of the
table in Figure 4.16.
4.5.6.2
Analysis of tendency between clusters and cost data
Based on the retrieved cost data from SAP it has been possible to ﬁnd the total
PO, IO and budget for all the condensers3. Since the IO is the actual price which
the suppliers have been billed, this has been seen as the most correct cost of the
condenser of the three kinds of cost types available. Thus, in order to investigate
the consistency between the three variables and the total cost of the condensers,
IO data has been hold together with instances for each cluster.
Figure 4.17 shows the result, where correlated data between cluster’s instances and
cost data have been depicted with graph curves which color indicates the respective
clusters. In addition the table with the expectations for each clusters has been
placed below the graph, so it is easier to assess whether or not the expectations
have been met.
3How the total cost amount for each cost type has been found is explained in 5.2. Step 5 -
Set up database with previous products design
==PAGE:85==
4.5 Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
75
Figure 4.17: Invoice Order for condensers split on cluster and expectation table
Looking at all the graphs it is seen that the total cost of the condensers varies up
to 22 million DKK. In general, the cost of the condenser can vary a lot and there
is no obviously coloration between the cost data and the clusters. Regarding the
expectations, based on the table in Figure 4.16, only one expectation has been
slightly met, which is that cost data for condensers belonging to cluster 3 (yellow
graph) in general belongs to the highest end. Cluster 3 is a unique cluster since
it is the only cluster which contains condensers in the highest interval of 8-14
modules 4 and was therefore expected to be the cluster which instances would
have highest cost related data and this has not been the case. Therefore it makes
sense that the highest peaks belongs to condensers in this cluster. However, all in
all, expectations have not been met since there is no steady trends in the cost data
for the clusters and moreover the graphs are overlapping each other frequently.
4.5.7
Evaluation of data analysis
The data analysis has not been able to meet the expectations from the mechanical
department on how the variables impact the cost of the condenser. Looking back
in retrospect the analysis has from the beginning been to optimistic since several
factors has given rise to an unsustainable analysis. Some of the factors are linked
4Seen in Figure 4.14 as cluster 3 is the only cluster with a x-value higher than 0.6
==PAGE:86==
76
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
to the way the clusters has been found whereas other are linked to the way the cost
calculations. This sub section will go deeper into the factors in order to discuss
the result of the data analysis.
4.5.7.1
Evaluation of the clustering result
In this subsection it is the result of clustering the condensers which will be discussed
based on the methods chosen.
Variables weigted equally: The three variables in the clustering has been se-
lected based on cost impact on the condenser, which in itself makes good
sense since it is the cost which is investigated in the data analysis. How-
ever, the way the variables have been indexed should be discussed. It was
presumed that the variables had diﬀerent impact on the total cost of the
condenser. For example, the number of modules would have high inﬂuence
whereas the pitch distance only has little inﬂuence. In the way the clustering
analysis has been build all variables have equal weight. The whole idea of
clustering is to have clusters wherein the instances are similar compared to
instances in other clusters. Therefore, if the number of modules has signiﬁ-
cantly higher impact on the similarity of the condenser in term of cost this
should also be reﬂected in the way the variables have been indexed against
each other in order to generate clusters where the instances also are similar
based on this fact. By taken a look on the ﬁnal cluster graphs in Figure 4.14
(can be found in appendix section F.0.4)it is seen that the way the clusters
have been placed according to the x-axis are not optimal. Since the x-axis
represents the number of modules it would be preferable to have a more
normal distribution of the clusters for this dimension. However, it is seen
that beside cluster 3 which takes care of all instances with high x-values,
all the other clusters have instances with x-values within the same interval.
However, the indexing of the variables are not the most critical point in
the cluster analysis. Despite of the clusters have not been perfect placed,
the characteristic analysis of each cluster conducted in section 4.5.6.1 has
facilitated an acceptable knowledge of which types of condensers have been
clustered for the further data analysis. Thus, there are other issues which are
more critical to solve before an optimization of the indexing of the variables
should be made.
More cluster scenarious could have been generated: From the theory it was
known that evaluating more cluster scenarios generated by a combinations on
both set of variables and number of clusters will lead to a better cluster sce-
nario in term of a higher SI [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011]. In this research,
due to the scarcity of cluster variables only the number of clusters have
==PAGE:87==
4.5 Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
77
been changed to generate more scenarios. Thus, more time could have been
spent on generating more cluster scenarios by eliminating variables. More-
over, other approaches could have been taken for this purpose. For example,
by including more variables, for instance, the more rare design variables or
the ones with minor cost impacts could have been included5. Having more
cluster scenarios would probably have led to a ﬁnal cluster analysis with a
higher average SI. On the other hand, it is important to know that there ex-
ists numerous quantitative methods of evaluating clustering results and they
should all only be used as tools, when a full understanding of the variables
and the dataset has been obtained. In our case, the result of the clustering
analysis has been diﬃcult to understand since the knowledge of variables and
further their coloration to the cost data, from the clusterings beginning were
limited. In fact, the clustering method was used as a trial to obtain a deeper
knowledge of the coloration between the variables and the cost and therefore
adding more variables into the clustering would only make the whole analysis
more complicated despite of a better value for the average SI could have been
obtain.
Optimizing the accuracy of the current cluster scenarious: For the same
reason as mention above, it has not been vital to spent lot of time on to ensure
that the ﬁnal result of each cluster analysis would be the optimal solution6.
For instance, it was discovered that changes in the initial cluster centroids
aﬀected the average SI number on the third decimal. Despite of that, the
inaccuracy was acceptable since the best way to evaluate the results of the
clustering was to start by actually examining (human inspection) the clusters
formed and making a determination based on an understanding of what the
data represented, what a cluster represented, and what the clustering was
intending to achieve.
4.5.7.2
Evaluation of the cost used in the data analysis
In the data analysis the aim was to see if clustering could be used to identify
the relationship between cost and the variables of the condenser. However,
the result was that the data analysis was unable to support the estimated
expectations. The main reason is not that the expectations outlined from
the mechanical department have been inaccurate or a better clustering could
have been made, instead of the answer should be ﬁnd in the cost data.
In this subsection it is discussed how the result of the data analysis should
be interpreted based on the cost data which have been used.
5How variables have been selected is explained in section 4.2.4. Describing variables of the
condenser
6In section2.3.2. the k-means clustering algorithm, it is in the passage of disadvantages ex-
plained why the k-means clustering result can diﬀer.
==PAGE:88==
78
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
Misleading to aggregated cost data on condenser level: Cost data for the
data analysis has been found by aggregating all cost documents belonging
to the condensers, however this method to treat data has shown to be to
superﬁcial. As mentioned previously in this chapter, it is optional for the
customer if they want to buy all condenser parts from HT or they want
some of them delivered from own external suppliers. Obviously, this will also
impact the number of cost documents for the condenser and thereby the way
the total cost of the condenser has been found. From this perspective, a
possible scenario could be that a huge condenser is less costly than a smaller
condenser, for example in a case where HT for the huge condenser only has
sold the internal tube module whereas they for the smaller condenser has sold
the whole packages of condenser parts. Some of the condenser parts, which
the customer can buy outside HT are heavy and expensive part, among others
the casing steel parts. Thus, it is not acceptable to neglect the diﬀerence of
cost documents when the total cost of diﬀerent condensers are compared
based on the size of the condenser. Therefore before comparing condenser
based on costs the variation of cost documents needs to be taken into account.
Unstainable data foundation: A particular weak point in the data analysis and
in the entire development of the comparison system is the number of records
which is available which is only based on 120 condensers. The little amount
of data makes it diﬃcult to remove potential noise of data in the analysis
and the result is even more critical when the data is analysed in the clusters
where the sample of records is way too low. Moreover, the situation gets
even worst since the 120 condensers have been sold over a period on 20 years.
Obviously, lot of factors have impacted the condenser over two decades; price
of condenser parts have changed, transportation cost has changed, design of
condensers has changed etc.
To conclude, comparing the condenser’s variables with PRI requires another
approach since the complexity of the products need to be handled before a
quantiﬁed data analysis would make sense.
4.5.8
Considering clustering to be used in comparison sys-
tem
During the development of the clustering analysis lot of knowledge of the strengths
and weakness of the clustering technique has been facilitated. Upon this knowl-
edge, it has been considered if the clustering method developed based on the
k-means algorithm and SI could be used in the comparison system.
This section describes how this has been considered and further what the outcome
of the reﬂections has been.
==PAGE:89==
4.5 Step 4 - Find a way to compare products based on features
79
4.5.8.1
The idea of using clustering in the comparison system
From the clustering analysis in MS Excel it was seen that the k-means algorithm
was an eﬃcient way to group products into clusters of similarity based on their
variables. Despite of, a more proper clustering result could have been achieved if
the variables were better indexed or more scenarios were generated the ﬁnal result
was actually quite successful because it was possible to identify what was charac-
teristic for the instances in each cluster.
In contrast, the data analysis was not successful, however this was not because of
the clustering result. The bad result caused that the condensers were compared
based on the total cost without taken into account that the number of condenser
parts delivered by HT were diﬀerent for each order. Thus, a better data analysis
could have been obtained if it was found out which sub parts were common for all
the condensers and then based on that analysing the consistency between describ-
ing variables and the sub parts. For example, it could be interesting to see the
coloration between variables and the cost for the casing or tube module which are
central parts of the condenser7.
The bottom line is that clustering cannot be excluded because of the bad result of
the data analysis. The principle in how the clustering should work in the compar-
ison system is still the same as explained in section 4.5.1. However, the idea still
needs to be reﬁned and is still on a creatively state where more thoughts should
be put into how the best clustering scenario should be generated. In order to do
this, using the method provided by [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011] could be one
possible way, but, still more ways should be found an evaluated.
4.5.8.2
Drawback by using k-means in comparison system
If the k-means clustering should be integrated as the method to compare new and
old products in the comparison system, it should still be found out how the sim-
ilarity between the products should be measured. One way to give an indicator
on the similarity could be by using the SI. Since the recommended products are
returned based on clustering, an average SI on the clusters could be used to express
how well the recommended products have been clustered. Nevertheless, the SI is
not saying anything about how similar the products are compared to each other
and instances within a cluster can still be bad clustered despite of a good average
SI for a cluster8.
In fact with the clustering technique only the products within the same cluster
would be returned. In the context of using the technique for the comparison sys-
tem, this will be a problem because sometimes a product is closer, meaning similar,
7See explanation of casing and tube module in the product analysis in section 4.2.2
8Example on that is seen in section 4.5.5.3 where the SI graphs are shown and commented
==PAGE:90==
80
Analysis at Haldor Topsoe
to a product belonging to another cluster. This happens because the assignation
of a product to a cluster takes place through the average of the distances.
Figure 4.18 illustrates this scenario. It is seen that despite of product a and prod-
uct b belong to the same cluster C2, product b is closer to product g which belongs
to another cluster, C3.
Figure 4.18: Distance issue by k-means clustering
4.5.8.3
Selecting Euclidean distance as the clustering method
Since the comparison system should be able to recommend all the most similar
products, the k-means clustering would not be the proper solution because of
the reason mentioned in the previous section. Thus, it has in the project been
necessary to ﬁnd another comparison method. From the clustering theory it is
known that there exists other techniques than k-means clustering whereas some
of them utilize overlapping clusters meaning that instances can belong to more
clusters. However, it would require more investigation to understand and practice
new cluster theory in the project.
Therefore, it has been decided to build the
comparison method around Euclidean distance measurement which is simple and
thereby a more straight forward method to use compared to clustering. In this
method, it is the new product which are compared to all the previous products.
This should be done by calculating the Euclidean distance among the new product
and each previous products based on their describing variables. Thus, the idea
is that a small distance between the new product and a previous product would
indicate high similarity. Beside being simple the method would also be easy to
implement in the model of the comparison system since the development of the
cluster analysis in MS Excel already had found out how to calculate Euclidean
distances between all the products both in the k-means procedure and in the way
the SI has been calculated. Having chosen this method, more project resources
could be allocated to other project tasks such as creating an user-interface and
establishing the database which were core parts to deliver in order to complete the
model of the comparison system.
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 5
Modeling
The topic of this chapter is about the ﬁnal model of the comparison system in MS
Excel. The sections concern the last three steps of the seven step framework which
in this project have been equivalent to the ﬁrst three deliverables in the revised
project description in Figure 3.1. Each deliverable is a core element in the ﬁnal
model of the comparison system and it is the interaction between these elements
which contribute to the functionality of the model.
5.1
Introduction to model
The purpose of this section is to introduce the ﬁnal model on an overall level
in order to facilitate an overview, before the following three main sections will
go deeper into each deliverable. The section covers a deﬁnition of the model’s
functionality and further a structure overview of the model’s design. In addition
it will be deﬁned how the requirements for the model have been set.
5.1.1
Functionality requirements
Building the model is aligned with the feasible part of the thesis’ working hy-
pothesis where it should be investigated if building a comparison system within
the company would be feasible. Therefore, before building the model it should
be recapped what the deﬁnition on a comparison system is, so that what is build
actually demonstrates the proof of concept.
The principle of the comparison system is given in theory section 2.2.1. Based on
this description three requirements for the model have been set. It is crucial that
the model fulﬁlls these requirements, if even one requirement is not included, the
==PAGE:92==
82
Modeling
model has not demonstrated the feasibility of the comparison system. Thus, the
requirements have set the foundation for the model development.
In addition, to the requirements it has also been found what the model should
have. Issues belonging to this category are not a must in order to demonstrate the
proof of concept, however they would enhance the ﬁnal result signiﬁcantly.
Finally, there has also been found ‘could-have’ issues, which could improve the user
experience of the model for little development cost. For both should – and could
have issues it has been carefully evaluated if time and resources would permit them
to be included.
Figure 5.1 gives an overview of the issues belonging to the three categories.
Figure 5.1: Deﬁning requirements and opportunities for model
5.1.2
What potential beneﬁts to demonstrate
Beside demonstrating the overall functionality of the comparison system by meet-
ing the three requirements in Figure 5.1 it would be even better if the model also
could demonstrate some of the potential beneﬁts summed up in Figure 4.8. Based
==PAGE:93==
5.1 Introduction to model
83
on this the model has been designed in order to demonstrate the following beneﬁts:
Recommendation system in sales: It has been decided that the model and
in particular the interface should be designed as a recommendation system
which can be used in the sales phase. Thus, the model should be able to
demonstrate/visual some of the beneﬁts which come with such a system.
Price estimation: Regarding price estimation it would be beneﬁcial if the model
could be used to analyse the relationship between cost and variables in an-
other way than it has been done in the cluster analysis.
Statiscally analysis: It would be preferable if a more detailed overview of the
products complexity in term of the variation of sub parts could be established.
This would be desirable to have both in the sales phase and in order to analyze
the product assortment for other perspectives.
5.1.3
Choice of software
For the model it should be decided what software to use, the choice ended on MS
Excel, the thoughts behind the decision are given below:
1. Using Excel was aligned with the conceptual scope of the project since the
company could test the system before going into big investment with ERP
and Tacton1
2. For clustering other software was considered, but the choice ended on MS
Excel. Therefore, lot of data was already stored in MS Excel and it would
therefore be easier to take parts from the clustering analysis and use it in
the model.
3. The author wanted to oﬀer HT a ﬁnal model, which was free of charge since
the company already use the Oﬃce package this could be fulﬁlled by choosing
MS Excel. In addition, the enormous amount of information about how to
use MS Excel could be found on the internet.
4. Due work experience, the author had already high familiarity to the software
1CS software used by the company
==PAGE:94==
84
Modeling
5.1.4
Structure overview of the model
On the USB pen is the ﬁnal product of the model attached.
Figure 5.2 gives
a general description of the model and the interaction between the three core
elements which can be found as the sheets interface, comparison platform and
database. In addition, it is seen how the diﬀerent steps of the seven step framework
have provided inputs to each core element/deliverable.
The description of the
sheets are explained below the Figure.
Figure 5.2: Structure and information ﬂow of the comparison system
Database: In this sheet, the ﬁrst deliverable of building a database is found which
is corresponding to step 5 of the seven step framework. The database pro-
vides the storage of data for all previous products. Therefore, inputs to the
database have been found via step 1, 2 and 3 of the framework.
Comparison platform: In this sheet is deliverable 2 found which is executed as
step 6 in the seven step framework. The platform receives variable informa-
tion of the new products from the interface and variable information for all
the old product from the database. Based on this the comparison for the
new product to all the previous products is made. As a result the platform
rank the old products after similarity and returns the result to the interface.
In order to design the platform, results from all the previously steps in the
framework have been used. However, the most central step has been step 4,
where the principle of the comparison technique was deﬁned.
Interface: It is what is seen by the users.
The user enter information of the
new product and similar products are recommended from the comparison
platform. In addition, PRI for the recommend products are retrieved from
the database.
==PAGE:95==
5.2 Step 5 - Set up database with previous products design
85
5.2
Step 5 - Set up database with previous prod-
ucts design
Having found values for the describing variables and PRI it has been possible
to execute the ﬁrst deliverable in project description.
In this step all data is
collected, treated and structured in one sheet in MS Excel. This sheet is deﬁned
as the database in the model of the comparison system. This section explains the
thoughts behind the development and shows the ﬁnal result of the database2.
5.2.1
Requirements for database
Originally, the database should have been build in the company’s ERP system.
However, due to the relaxation to MS Excel, the purpose for the model’s database
is rather to indicate what kind of data should be put into a real database for
the comparison system than what it takes to establish it within the company and
further integrate it with the CS. Thus, what has been most important is that the
the database on a conceptual level shows how to collect all data for the previous
condensers in term of describing variables and PRI. In addition, the database
should aligned with the ﬁrst requirement in the model deﬁnition on Figure 5.1 have
a ﬂexible setup so that other kind of PRI can be ﬁeld into. This will demonstrates,
that the database is a common platform where departments in the organisation
can store and retrieve information. In addition, this will also be proper regarding
further development of the whole model since it would be easier to ﬁeld in more
real PRI than what has been selected in this project.
5.2.2
Deliverable 1: Database in MS Excel
The database has been developed and designed in MS Excel. Figure 5.3 shows the
result as a screen shot of the database.
Figure 5.3: Deliverable 1: Database with previously products in MS Excel
2The ﬁnal result can also be seen on the USB pen, which can hold together with the expla-
nations in this section.
==PAGE:96==
86
Modeling
The database is structured in three parts: Projects, PRI (Condenser) and PRI
(Condenser parts). All data belonging to the same WSA project is placed in the
same raw. This makes the structure of the database simple which is a great beneﬁt
for further development of the comparison system. In the following a more detailed
explanations of the content of the three parts are given.
Projects part: The project part contains the S-number for all previously made
condensers3. Next to the S-number are the variables for the condensers which
are used for comparison4.
PRI (Condenser): This part contains PRI on an aggregated level for whole con-
densers. Despite of the only real PRI is related to cost5 other kinds of PRI
has still been added in the database, with fake (’made-up’) values. This have
been done to highlight that the database should have diﬀerent kind of data
and furthermore it will be easier to test the whole model with other kind of
data for further research.
Regarding the real cost data for respectively PO, IO and Budget6, data has
been found on an aggregated level by summing up for all the cost documents
belonging to the S-number7. In addition to the three cost types a column
called Estimate accuracy has been implemented. Data in this column shows
how well the budget estimated by HT has been compared to the invoiced
order given by:
Estimate accuracy = Budget −Invoice Order
Invoice Order
(5.1)
PRI (Condenser parts): The last section in the database consists of budget,
IO, PO and Estimate accuracy for all the cost documents for the condenser.
Moreover the average and the sum has been taken for all S-numbers belonging
to one cost document.
As mentioned, the number of cost documents vary as a consequence of cus-
tomer requirements and thereby it is not all S-numbers (WSA projects) which
contain all 21 cost documents. This scenario has been important to integrate
in the database. Figure 5.4 shows the principle in how this has been handled
based on the previously collected data for all cost documents illustrated in
Figure 4.12.
3Concept S-number has been used to make the design more simple. Real S-number names
can be found in appendix E
4All data for the project part has been gathered from the engineering department, x is corre-
sponding to the number of modules, y is the number of tubes and z is the pitch
5It is explained in section4.4.1 how and why cost has been prioritised
6See deﬁnition in section 4.4.2.1
7Section 4.4.2.2 Data in SAP is stored on cost document levels
==PAGE:97==
5.2 Step 5 - Set up database with previous products design
87
Figure 5.4: Cost documents retrieved into database
As seen on the ﬁgure MS Excel’s VLOOKUP formula has been used to
retrieve data into the database from the collected cost documents data. The
function uses the S-number to search after data if the this does not exist in
the collected cost documents data no data is returned. Moreover, if this is
the case the database has been programmed so that a gray area will appear
for no data.
The ﬁnal result after this operation is seen in Figure 5.5 which is a screen
shot from the the database. It is seen on the ﬁgure that there exists lot of
cases where customers of the condenser have deselected speciﬁc parts of the
condenser module, represented by the gray areas.
Figure 5.5: Cost documents with no data shown as gray in the Database
5.2.2.1
Valuable information from database
Having structured the database on a detailed cost document level it is possible
to analyse the previous condensers for other and more detailed perspectives. An
example, on that is seen in Figure 5.6 which shows how often a cost aspect has
been used in the history of previously made WSA projects.
==PAGE:98==
88
Modeling
Figure 5.6: Frequency of cost documents used
On the ﬁgure it can be seen, that parts belonging to the acid collector and tube
module have been frequently delivered by HT. Another observation is that the
company in 1 out of 3 cases has been responsible for the assembly and delivery of
whole condenser modules.
This kind of information could be valuable in the sales department, when the sales
man has to argue that the company has lot of experience. For example, if the
client is in doubt if they want HT to do the assembly, the sales staﬀcan argue
that the company has delivered that kind of service up to more times.
5.3
Step 6- Compare the new products with the
previous products
The second deliverable in the project was to build a platform where the comparison
between a new product and all previously products could take place. This section
explains how this has been constructed in the model.
5.3.1
Requirements for comparison platform
The comparison platform must be able to compare the new product from the in-
terface with all the previous products from the database. The comparison should
be based on the variables and it should be able to return the most similar ones in
the interface.
Beside the requirement, it would be favorable, if the platform can turn the com-
parison into a similarity index and return the products according to this, so that
==PAGE:99==
5.3 Step 6- Compare the new products with the previous products
89
the user of the system can assess the similarity to all the previous products.
5.3.2
Deliverable 2: Compare products in MS Excel
Based on Euclidean distance is has been possible to build a comparison method in
MS Excel the result is shown in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Deliverable 2: Compare products in MS Excel
As seen on Figure 5.7 the comparison systems has been build in diﬀerent sections.
The function of each section and how the comparison works will be explained in
the following.
5.3.2.1
Projects and Indexed data
The ﬁrst two sections are the Project section and the Index data. These are seen
on Figure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Normalization of variables
The Project section collects the describing variables for the comparison of new
and old products. Values for the describing variables from the previously made
==PAGE:100==
90
Modeling
products are retrieved directly from the database whereas variables values from the
new product (placed in the light blue row) are retrieved directly from the interface.
Since the variables are related to diﬀerent characteristics of the analyzed product,
a normalization has been made. Thus it is avoided that one variable will aﬀect
the comparison measurement more as a consequence of having a bigger variance
in its interval of variable values than the other variables. The calculation has been
done by subtracting from the variable number the lowest record within the same
variable and dividing this number by the diﬀerence between the maximum value
and the minimum value always of the same variable. In the formula bar in Figure
5.8 it is shown how it has been calculated in the Excel model, as the box above
include the minimum and maximum value for the variables.
5.3.2.2
Weighted Indexed data
Some variables might be weighted more heavy than others when products should
be compared8. For this reason, it was found favorable to incorporate a weighting
feature in the model. Thus, in the interface it is possible to weight the variables
against each other. These inputs are retrieved into the comparison platform in
the box Weighted Variables data. Based on this all the normalized variables are
weighted in the section Weighted Indexed data. The formula bar in the Figure 5.9
shows the procedure.
Figure 5.9: Weighted indexed variables
5.3.2.3
Distance matrix
Next step was the calculation of the distance between new and old products. The
distance has been calculated for all combinations of the variables, so for the con-
8For instance, the number of modules has a bigger impact on the size and thereby the total
cost of the condenser module.
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Step 6- Compare the new products with the previous products
91
denser case where the variables are three (x, y, z) the possibilities have been six
(xyz, xy, xz, yz, x, y, z). All the calculations is collected in the section Distance
Matrix seen in the right side of Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10: Distance matrix
The formula bar in Figure 5.10 shows how the calculations has been made. It is
seen that an index/match9 formula has been used. The purpose of the index/match
formula is to retrieve the considered variables for respectively the new product and
the old ones into the distance calculation. The formula looks complicated, but the
principle is simple based on Euclidean distance measurement.
It has been decided to calculate all the variables combination in order to make
it possible to exclude irrelevant variables in the interface. For instance if one or
more variables do not aﬀect the output whose similarity want to be analyzed they
can be deselected in the interface and the distance will be based on the distance
calculation without the speciﬁc variable. However, it was later found out that
this scenario also could have been obtained by only having the distance formula
containing all the variables xyz. The way, is to set the weights for the variables
which wanted to be excluded as zero. Figure 5.11 shows the scenario, the distance
calculations for xyz, xz and yz and z are the same when the weights for x and y
both are set as zero.
9[url: MicroSoft Oﬃce, ] provides more information on how the formula index/match works
==PAGE:102==
92
Modeling
Figure 5.11: Distance calculations where x and y is weighted zero
5.3.2.4
Distance Rank
The ﬁnal goal of the comparison platform is to list the products after similarity.
This has been done by ranking the distance measurements. On the Figure 5.12 it
is seen how it has been done by help of MS Excel’s Rank formula. In addition, to
the Rank formula a countif formula has been used. How the combination of the
formulas works in detail is described in . However, the bottom line is that in this
section the products are rank so that product with the highest distance to the new
product has the highest rank number and vice versa.
Figure 5.12: Ranking all the distances
5.3.2.5
Project Rank
Having ranked all the distances it is now possible to move on to the ﬁnal step
which is listing the products after similarity.
The principle is simple based on
the distance ranking as the related products are retrieved in the section Project
Ranking. Figure 5.13 illustrates the principle by using three products a4, a6 and
a7 as example. As seen in the distance rank a6 has the shortest distance to the
new product, a4 is the second closets products whereas a7 has the eight closets
distance to the new product among old the previously made products. Based on
this information the products are retrieved into the project rank section by help
==PAGE:103==
5.4 Step 7 - Integration of the database and conﬁguration system
93
of an oﬀset function in Excel. It is seen by the color how the distance rank has
been used in the way the products are listed.
Figure 5.13: Principle of project Rank
5.4
Step 7 - Integration of the database and con-
ﬁguration system
In this step the model of the comparison system will be completed. In order to
do this is has been necessary to build an user interface as an example on how it
could be designed in HT’s CS. This section shows the design of the interface and
further how it works in interaction with the other parts of the model. In order to
get the full experience of this section it is recommended to use the Excel model on
the USB pen as the interface’s features and how they work are explained in the
following.
5.4.1
Requirements for interface
There are two requirements for the interface. First of all, it is needed that the new
product can be described based on its variables. Next, it must provide access to
PRI for the recommended previous products.
Beside the requirements there are several opportunities to enhance the interface.
For example, the ’could-have’ issues about how to visualize the outputs graphically
and the recommendation conditions would improve the user-friendliness of the
interface10.
10These can be seen in the model deﬁnition on Figure 5.1
==PAGE:104==
94
Modeling
5.4.2
Deliverable 3: Interface in MS Excel
It has been possible to build the user interface in MS Excel and Figure 5.14 shows
the ﬁnal result. In the process of designing the interface the potential beneﬁts
have been used as a guideline for how the functionality of the user-interface should
be. Thus, the sales staﬀcan use the interface to easily ﬁnd similar products and
related information and further to get overview of the previously products in term
of which sub components HT has delivered. In addition, lot of features and graphs
have been implemented which ensure an user-friendly operation of the system and
further provides a visual overview of the information from the database. All in all,
the user-interface is designed so that the customer counseling will be signiﬁcantly
improved.
Figure 5.14: Deliverable 3: Interface of the comparison system
As seen on the ﬁgure the user-interface consists of diﬀerent boxes, graphs and
tables. However, the overall structure of the interface is simple, it can be explained
by an input part and an output part, how each part works will now be explained.
5.4.2.1
Input part
The input part is covered by the three upper-left boxes in the user-interface which
are seen in Figure 5.15. The white ﬁelds are where the user can enter inputs. In
total there are ﬁve types of inputs the customer can enter, how they work will now
==PAGE:105==
5.4 Step 7 - Integration of the database and conﬁguration system
95
be described.
Figure 5.15: Input part of user interface
Input: The user can enter the variable values for the new product. No constraints
have been implemented in the model, so therefore the user must enter values
within the product range. It is based on these inputs the comparison to the
previous products are made11.
Choose if relevant: By this feature the user can exclude variables if they are
not relevant. If a variable is taken out in the interface, it will be taken out
of the distance calculation and new products will be recommended.
The
’elimination-feature’ is integrated to increase the similarity of the products
based on the customer’s needs. Figure 5.16 shows how the user can eliminate
variables by clicking ’YES’ or ’NO’ and how it impacts the output.
11Section 5.3.2.1. Projects and Indexed data explains how these inputs are retrieved into the
comparison platform
==PAGE:106==
96
Modeling
Figure 5.16: Exclusion of variables
Variable weight: The variable weight makes it possible for the user to set weight
on the variables. This should be done when some variables are less important
than another. The weights inputs will be indexed after the highest value so
that all weights are indexed between 0-100%. This ensures that the similar-
ity index will be kept between 0-1, how the weights impacts the similarity
index is expressed by the formula 6.1
Recommendation conditions: In the box ’Recommendation conditions’ the user
can put constraints on how many products which should be returned. Fur-
thermore the user can put in a maximum distance/similarity index to the
previous products. These conditions ensure that only the most relevant prod-
ucts are recommended. As seen in the interface on Figure 5.14 there is an-
other condition option ’Maximum age’. This feature has been marked red
since it is considered for future work. The idea of the feature will be discussed
later.
Relevant product information: To make the interface more user-friendly it has
been designed so only three types of PRI data will be returned for the similar
projects. Which are the most important is determined by the user. Figure
5.15 shows how the user can choose between all the types of PRI.
5.4.2.2
Output part
The output part contains all the information which based on the user’s input are
returned to the interface. As seen on Figure 5.14 The information is shown in two
tables and by two graphs.
Recommendation box: The Recommendation box, seen on Figure 5.17 returns
==PAGE:107==
5.4 Step 7 - Integration of the database and conﬁguration system
97
all the similar previously made products and furthermore related PRI chosen
by the user in the input part. In addition to the PRI are the describing
variables (x, y, z) and the similarity shown. In order to visualize how similar
the previous products are to the new conﬁgured product, Excel’s conditional
formatting is used, which by changing color indicates the degree of similarity.
Figure 5.17: Recommended products
PRI Graph for recommed products: In order to visualize the output a bar
graph has been added to the interface. The graph shows the PRI for all
the recommended condensers and it is thereby easier for the user to analyse
the data. Data for the graph is based on the PRI chosen as ﬁrst priority in
the input part. Thus, it is possible for the user to change data after wish.
In addition the graph is programmed so that it will ﬁt to the number of
recommended products. This is seen in Figure 5.18 where the recommended
products are respectively 5 and 15.
Figure 5.18: PRI graphs for recommend products
The PRI graph is a strong analytical tool in the sales department which can
be used in diﬀerent cases. Since the CS is under development at HT, there
might be many speciﬁcations of a new conﬁgured product which it cannot
generate. Therefore, PRI for previously similar products can be used as an
indicator for how the speciﬁcations for new conﬁgured product might look.
For example, cost and lead time information may be relevant to have an in-
dicator on already in the sales phase. Moreover, if more similar products are
==PAGE:108==
98
Modeling
found and they all have similar PRI values (same magnitude on the bars),
it could be an indicator on that the information is liable and thereby more
trustful to share with a potential customer. In the same way the graphs can
be used vice versa if the variation between the PRI for similar products are
high it is an indication on that it might be diﬃcult to determine PRI with a
high accuracy or at least more investigation on why the PRI diﬀers is needed.
Another scenario is that the CS is able to generate same kind of PRI, in this
case the graphs can be used to determine the accuracy of the output from
the CS.
The PRI graphs can also be used in an analysis of how describing variables
isolated will impact PRI. This analysis can easily be achieved by using the
variable exclusion feature. Figure 5.19 shows an analysis of this, where the
recommended condensers have been found by excluding the tubes (Y) and
pitch (Z) and setting the number of modules (X) to 14 which is the highest
number of modules which has been used. On the x-axis it is shown what is
the number of modules for the respectively bars.
Figure 5.19: Cost as a function of the number of modules
It is seen that there is a slightly tendency on that the cost in general is high
when the number of modules is high as well. However, the variation overall
gives rise to deeper investigation. Nevertheless, an indicator on a tendency
has been found, which can be used for further investigation.
Knowing the typically impact from variables would be valuable for the com-
pany to do better estimates on diﬀerent PRI such as lead time and costs.
Overview of cost documents: A signiﬁcant strength in the user-interface is its
ability to visualize the combustion of cost documents for the recommended
products. Figure 5.20 shows how it works for two diﬀerent scenarios. In
the white box the user can enter the name of the previous WSA project (S-
number) the condenser has been a part of and in return data on budget, PO
==PAGE:109==
5.4 Step 7 - Integration of the database and conﬁguration system
99
and IO from each cost document will be shown in the table. All possible cost
documents is seen in the table, therefore if the speciﬁc condenser does not
have certain cost documents, the table will automatically be colored dark
blue. For example, it is seen that for product a13 only 10 cost documents
have been stored in HT’s SAP system. Furthermore, it is seen that mainly
parts belonging to the acid collector, casing and tube module have been re-
quested by the customer. For the other product a49 the case is completely
diﬀerent, the customer has more or less bought the whole package from HT
since only three cost documents are excluded.
Another strength in the cost document overview is that the PRI values in
each column are colored by Excel’s conditional formatting feature. Thereby
it is possible to get a feeling on how much each cost document contributes
to the total cost amount of the speciﬁc cost type. For example, it is seen
for both products that the cost document ’Main and Drain tubes contribute’
contribute signiﬁcant to the total cost for all cost types.
Last thing which also is worth to notice in the cost overview is the calcu-
lations. The column to the right calculates how well the Budget has been
estimated in relation to the IO. Furthermore, the light blue row in the top
takes the sum of all the three cost types and based on this the accuracy of
the budget is also calculated.
Figure 5.20: Overview of cost documents involved in project
This overview is important knowledge for the sales person since it provides
valuable information on how the previously condenser has been constructed.
Two condensers having the same number of modules, tubes and the same
==PAGE:110==
100
Modeling
pitch distance will be equal in the design, but can be very diﬀerent in term
of which components the customer have chosen to buy from HT. This will for
obviously reasons also impact the PRI for whole condensers. Therefore, to
better could compare, the cost documents overview is a great tool which can
be used in several cases. For example, if the customer only is interested in
buying the tube module, condensers with similar design can be found and the
sales staﬀcan inform about prices for only tube modules. In general analyz-
ing the individual cost documents could generate lot of valuable knowledge
already in the sales phase.
The idea behind showing estimate accuracy on both total level and the cost
type level is to provide a full picture of how well the budget estimation made
in the price estimation department has been. For example, in the case for
project a13 seen on Figure 5.20 the condenser for this project has overall been
estimated with an accuracy on -19%. This means that all the costs involved in
purchasing components, transport these, assembly to modules and afterwards
installation on the clients plant, all costs associated to these processes have
estimated with -19% or in other words the price estimation department has
set the total cost for the condenser 19% lower than the real cost. Whether ot
not this accuracy is an acceptable result for the price estimation department
might be interesting to discuss as a KPI for their performance. The overview
will in this context provide more light on the performance. Since , the total
estimation accuracy is not telling the whole story. As seen on Figure 5.20
only one cost documents for project a13 has been estimated better than an
accuracy within 19%. Most of them are estimated with an accuracy within
40-50% and the budget for the Main and Drain tubes which contributes to
most of the total costs are estimated almost 300% above the invoiced order.
Thus, the estimate accuracy on the total level does not tell the whole truth,
by showing all the ﬂuctuations on cost document level the company will get a
better feeling on the performance of price estimation within the organisation.
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 6
Discussion
This chapter evaluates the results of the project and suggests further research. This
will be done by considering how all the steps in the project have been executed.
6.1
Project overall
Overall, the project has shown that more research is still needed when it comes
to ﬁnally decide how a desirable comparison system should be designed within
HT. However, in order to get closer to this answer, the results of this project has
provided valuable knowledge on which challenges there exist in order to design the
concept of a desirable comparison system.
In the project it has been possible to build a model of the comparison system by
executing all the steps in the seven step framework and as result the model is
able to demonstrate some of the potential beneﬁts on a conceptual level. Most
important the model is able to demonstrate the main functions of a comparison
system as they have been outlined from the theory.
1 However, the model still
needs to be reﬁned in order to demonstrate more quantiﬁed results on how HT
can improve by having a comparison system. Thus, in order to understand how a
more useful prototype of the comparison system can be achieved in the future, the
process in how the model has been established should be evaluated starting from
the product selection and ending with the last deliverable of the project.
1The main functions for the comparison system can be seen as the three model requirements
in Figure 5.1.
==PAGE:112==
102
Discussion
6.2
Product selection
For this project, the comparison system has been build around the WSA condenser
which has been selected among three other candidates the WSA plant, the SO2
converter and the spare parts. However, a model consisting of a better data foun-
dation could have been found by choosing another product. In the following are
some reﬂections on the product scope for this project.
Why the condenser has been suitable: The choice of the condenser has shown
to be an acceptable choice since all the steps of the seven step framework
with the condenser as ’test product’ have been possible to execute in order
to demonstrate the proof of concept. For example, the condenser has been
manageable to analyse in order to identify sub parts and describing vari-
ables. Furthermore, the complexity in the design has been suitable in order
to point out some of the challenges there exist in an ETO companies such as
HT. For example, the variation of cost documents stored in SAP as a con-
sequence of that the customer can decide to supply some condensers parts
by itself, has been a valuable insight when it comes to deﬁning some of the
challenges there exist in the exercise of comparing ETO products. That kind
of information would probably not have been found if the product chosen
was a less complex product such as the spare parts. Also, the amount of
describing variables on three has been suitable since identifying an optimal
way to compare ETO products have shown to be a challenging task where
more variables only would have increased the complexity and workload.
Better alternatives: Other candidates than the four bought up could have led
to a more suitable product for the project. For example, some of the main
parts of the condenser such as the casing or tube module would probably
have been better choices in order to get more familiar with the PRI since it
was found that comparing cost for whole condensers were not meaningful.
Nevertheless, the most critical element for the product selection and thereby
for the entire project, has been the poor data foundation for the condenser.
It turned out that HT only has sold 120 WSA projects over two decades and
obviously this has make the whole comparison basis unsustainable.
Therefore, the initial product selection could have been reﬁned by adding
another selection criteria which took the quality of the data foundation into
account. Despite of all WSA products are linked to the number of WSA
projects sold, more products in particular spare parts have been sold more
frequently due to maintenance of the plants installed for previous customers.
Thus, it would have been possible to ﬁnd a product with more data within
the organisation. However, an alternative could have been to ﬁnd a product
in other business unit of HT or in another company.
==PAGE:113==
6.3 Identiﬁcations of relevant product variables
103
6.3
Identiﬁcations of relevant product variables
It has been the product’s design speciﬁcations which have been analysed in order to
identify the describing variables and total three describing variables were identiﬁed,
the number of modules, the number of tubes and the pitch distance. This sections
puts some thoughts on the variables used in the project.
Variables based on design speciﬁcations: It has only been design speciﬁca-
tions which have been analysed.
However, the variables could have been
identiﬁed in other stages of the product’s life cycle. For example, it would
have been rational also to study how customer requirements aﬀect the oﬀer
and is translated into other speciﬁcations.
For example, this information
could have been used to further develop the user-interface so that customer
requirements are translated into the design speciﬁcations which are used in
the comparison method. Nevertheless, identifying the variables in the me-
chanical department has been a good starting point since knowing the design
of the product has facilitated a good understanding of the subsequently activ-
ities in the other departments such as procurement and the price estimation
department.
Variables PRI impact: How the describing variables impact the cost of the con-
denser was only brieﬂy outlined by the domain expert from the mechanical
department, which in the project also has resulted in an inaccurate way of
determining the initial expectations of the relationship between previously
made condensers and cost data, for example this was seen in the cluster
analysis. On the other hand, the fact that the relationship between variables
and the cost was not clear from the beginning only justify the beneﬁt of hav-
ing a comparison system. Since one of the purposes of having a comparison
system is to gain more knowledge of how variables impact diﬀerent kind of
PRI. Therefore, the ﬁnal model can for future analysis be used as a great
tool to discover the variables impact on PRI. The reason is that the variable
exclusion function in the model’s design allows that speciﬁc variables easily
can be isolated and thereby be analysed together with diﬀerent kind of PRI.
Furthermore, diﬀerent kind of PRI can easily be changed, retrieved and visu-
alized in the analysis. For example, this was demonstrated in the project as
the model was able to indicate a tendency between the number of modules
and the cost data, so that a high number of modules in general would result
to a higher PRI. Despite of the result’s liability is debatable the model has
still demonstrated its use to be an analytical tool.
==PAGE:114==
104
Discussion
6.4
Deliverable 1 - Database
The requirement for the database was that it should contain the variables values
and PRI. This information has been gathered in the ﬁrst three steps of the seven
step framework, where cost information and variable values for the condensers have
been found from HT’s SAP system. Based on this information it has been possible
to design the database for the comparison system as a structured collection of the
information in MS Excel.
Nevertheless, establishing a real database in HT’s SAP system and furthermore
how the database should be integrated with the company’s CS are still vital re-
search questions which are needed to be answered in order to decide the feasibility
of the system[Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]. In this project this has not been in scope,
because it was evaluated that due to the fact it was still uncertain how the compar-
ison system should be designed and further beneﬁt HT, it would be more favorable
to spent project resources on conceptual development. However, another approach
could have been taken, starting building the database in ERP could probably still
have added valuable knowledge about the topic from another perspective. Still,
for a conceptual purpose it has been a good choice to develop the database in MS
Excel since the development have raised lot of relevant questions such a what kind
of PRI should be put into a database or how to structure the data in the database.
These questions are also relevant if a real database in ERP should be established
and therefore some of the research carried out in this project can be used as a
starting point for this task. Some of the project’s ﬁndings and further research
related to building a database are listed below:
Prioritise data for database: In the same way as for this project it will be nec-
essary to prioritise PRI for the database. Therefore, the method developed
for how PRI has been prioritised can be reﬁned and used as a starting point2.
Inspiration from the model: The way data has been structured, treated and
further how it interacts with the other parts in the model can be used to
discuss how the setup should be in a real comparison system. For example,
it can be discussed if it makes sense to aggregate data in the way it has been
done in the model. Or it can be discussed if it is necessary to store data on
a more detailed level.
Replace fake data with real PRI: The model of the comparison system can
be further developed by adding more PRI in the database, which will be an
improvement, as more PRI data can be returned in the interface for analysis.
2The method is presented in section 4.4.1
==PAGE:115==
6.5 Deliverable 2 - Comparison platform
105
6.5
Deliverable 2 - Comparison platform
It has been possible to identify a comparison technique which based on Euclidean
distance compare the new product with all the previous products. In addition, the
distance measurement has been turned into an index so the user of the comparison
system can assess the similarity. The ﬁnal solution on how similarity is measured
can be expressed by the formula below:
1 −
p
(w1(xnew −xold))2 + (w2(ynew −yold))2 + (w3(znew −zold))2
(6.1)
where:
w1, w2, w3 are the weights set in the interface between 0-100%
xnew, ynew, znew are indexed variables for the new project
xold, yold, zold are indexed variables for the old project
Advantages and disadvantages by the comparison technique: A great ben-
eﬁt by the formula for similarity is that the index diﬀer from 0 to 1 (since the
indexed variables and the weighting all are between zero and one). Having a
ﬁxed interval, where max- and minimum values do not vary is a good way for
the user to be more familiar with the similarity index. However, despite of
the Euclidean distance is easy math the whole construction of the comparison
method might makes it diﬃcult for the user of the system to get a feeling of
what it means when the similarity between two products are measured. On
the other hand, it can also be argued that the user of the system does not
need to know the technical stuﬀ. Most important is that similar products are
returned and the user will get familiar with how the interface can be served
in order to get the desirable kind and number of products returned.
Deliverable evaluation: The deliverable of the comparison platform has been
time-consuming in the whole project since clustering for long time was thought
to be the proper solution in order to compare products. However, it turned
out it was not the best solution why it was decided to build the comparison
method around Euclidean distance. Since lot of time has been spent on the
clustering part, the main driver for development of the comparison method
has afterwards been speed of development rather than getting to a perfect
solution since the objective of the whole project has been to build the com-
parison system as a proof of concept. In addition, it was also stated from
the article [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] that the seven-step process of build-
ing the comparison system was an iterative process, where it sometimes was
necessary to go back and work on previous steps. Thus, it was important
==PAGE:116==
106
Discussion
to ﬁnd the best possible solution in order to move on to the last core part
of the comparison system, the interface. Having said that, the deliverable
of the comparison method is still a good platform for further development.
Some parts and concepts can be kept or modiﬁed in order to develop a better
comparison platform. For instance, the way products have been ranked and
recommended is a strong element which also can be used after the similarity
measurement has been improved.
6.6
Deliverable 3 - Interface
In the third deliverable for the project, a user-interface for the comparison system
has been designed in MS Excel and the whole model has been completed. As a
ﬁnal result, the interface demonstrates several advantages by having a comparison
system. Especially, the interface’s function to manage what kind of previously
products should be returned and further its ability to be used as an analytical
instrument are great beneﬁts of the ﬁnal design. Still, the ﬁnal product needs
to be evaluated and tested more, before it would make sense to make further
improvements some thoughts about this are given below:
Design approach: The main drivers in the development of the interface has been
aligned to the requirements in the model deﬁnition, which stems from the
theory about the comparison system. Furthermore, some of HT’s challenges
have been used as a guidelines, such as the complication of comparing prod-
ucts because of the variation in sub parts delivered by HT. However, the
interaction with the company has in the development been limited and there-
fore it is suggested that more feedback from the company is gathered in order
to make the user interface more suitable for the company.
Future features: During the development of the interface lot of ideas to new
features for the interface appeared and not all of them have been integrated3.
Especially, the age feature could be relevant to integrate in order to make
it possible to sort the products on age. However, this will also require that
more information is put into the database and which increase the eﬀort of
implementation. It was decided to stop, the development since it was found
that most important was to get more familiar with how the current setup
worked before adding more features into the design. However, for further
development, the ideas generated can be bought up and evaluated.
Moving into CS: When the user-interface designed in the model has been found
suitable it should for further development be assessed what it takes to make
3Appendix H shows some of the features which have been considered for further development
==PAGE:117==
6.7 Deliverable 4 - Investigating the objective of the comparison system
107
a similar design in the company’s CS.
Customer requirements: As previously, mentioned the whole research has been
scoped around the design variables. Since, the user-interface is addressed for
the sales department it should be found out how customer requirements are
translated into the model.
6.7
Deliverable 4 - Investigating the objective of
the comparison system
From the project’s beginning it has been an open question how HT should beneﬁt
from a comparison system. Consequently, it has been a major challenge to de-
velop the model since it subsequently should be investigated how it should beneﬁt
the company. In order to ﬁnd an objective of the comparison system, potential
beneﬁts from the article provided by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] have been used
systematically in the project. For example, it has been seen if comparing products
on variables could be used for identifying cost colorations. Moreover, the potential
beneﬁts have been used to prioritise PRI for the database and the entire develop-
ment of the model has been based on theory from the article. As a ﬁnal outcome,
the model is able to demonstrate some of the ideas from the article on a concep-
tual level. However, more quantiﬁed beneﬁts could probably have been achieved
if another approach were taken. Some thoughts on that and what it takes to get
there are given below:
More resources alloacted: Lot of focus has been spent on building the model
and the objective investigation came later in the project. Therefore, another
approach could have been to allocate more resources to the potential bene-
ﬁts and investigate these assuming the comparison system would be feasible.
A scenario could be to test the current beneﬁts in depth by more interac-
tion with the domain experts at HT. Whereas another scenario could be to
identify new potential beneﬁts which were not stated in the theory used.
Methods for data analysis vs. product selection: In this project it has been
investigated if there could be found a coloration between variables and costs.
However, the results have not been liable. As mentioned previously in this
chapter another product, which had been sold more frequently could have
been selected. This would probably have led to better results for the data
analysis which have been carried out in this thesis4 However, this project
4This is mainly a reference to the cluster analysis and the variable analysis in the modeling
chapter.
==PAGE:118==
108
Discussion
has been about comparing complex products and the fact that HT has sold
6 WSA projects per year over two decades is actually a decent amount taken
the size and complexity of the projects into account. Therefore, it is rational
to assume that it has been the methods chosen for the analysis which have
not been suitable rather than the product selection. Comparing the products
requires more knowledge and study of each product which also is the reason
why the interface has been designed so that each product can be analysed
on a detailed sub part level. Thus, in order to ﬁnd more accurate coloration
between product variables and PRI, the model can be used as an analytical
tool to explore each product prior a more quantitative analysis where more
products are hold together.
Greatest potentials: Beside, the model’s capability to analyse the condensers
part structure. The model’s database has also demonstrated how structuring
data can lead to valuable information. In this thesis, it has been shown how
the frequency of the cost documents easily can be extracted from the database
and ideas for how it can be used in sales have been provided. However, as
the for the other beneﬁts found, it requires more eﬀort to determine how
much HT can proﬁt for the beneﬁt. Another idea which also needs more
investigation is the price estimation accuracy calculation which have been
integrated in the model as an example on how data can be used to determine
KPIs within the company. Further development for this beneﬁt would be
more discussion of its use, where stakeholders would be management and the
price estimation department.
6.7.1
Perspective
Too stubbom on the orginial idea: The approach during the entire project
has been a strong faith on the initial project idea.
It was trusted that
building a model of the comparison system based on theory from the article
would provide deep insight in both desirability and feasibility of the compar-
ison system. As a result, a conceptual model has been build which is able
to demonstrate some of the potential beneﬁts, which before only could be
found as ideas from the theory. However, it can be discussed if a more valu-
able result for both the research and HT could have been obtained if another
approach was taken. Executing all the steps in the seven step framework
has been manageable and lot of learnings for each step has been gathered,
where the requirements and restrictions can be assessed for further research.
Nevertheless, the workload for each step has also been signiﬁcant and more
speciﬁc and quantiﬁed answers could have been obtained if the author of this
thesis had decided to give up the idea to build a whole model based on all
the steps. Another approach could have been to change scope and focus on
speciﬁc steps of the framework. For example, the ﬁnal modeling according
==PAGE:119==
6.7 Deliverable 4 - Investigating the objective of the comparison system
109
to the last steps of the framework could have been left out and instead of
more focus could have been spent on identifying a more optimal method to
compare products. Or in other words, the research could have chosen to fo-
cus on a smaller amount of the issues presented in the decision tree in Figure
3.3.
Another objective: Another scenario could have been to only focusing on the
database. One of the complications at HT is that data is not stored in a
common database and in some cases locally in the departments. Therefore,
building a database isolated would still beneﬁt the company without having
the whole comparison system. In addition, the process analysis has shown
that the CS at HT is still not in use and therefore it might be more favorable
for the company to start building the database isolated before investigating
the use of a comparison system.
Challenge the strategic idea: As mentioned, this project has throughout the
whole project focused on building the comparison system. From an engineer-
ing point of view, the task has been interesting where tasks such as product
analysis and data gathering and treatment have been learn full. However, a
more strategic approach could have been taken. For example, it could have
been relevant also to investigate and challenge the idea that the comparison
system and the enrichment of the CS would be the best strategic decision for
the company.
==PAGE:120==
110
Discussion
==PAGE:121==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The ambition of this thesis was to investigate how building a comparison system
within the Danish catalysis company Haldor Topsoe (HT) would be both feasible
and desirable.
In order to support or contradict this hypothesis, the research
was conducted by building a model of the comparison system around HT’s WSA
condenser. The motivation for the investigation originated from a scientiﬁc paper1
provided by [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] which suggested a seven step framework on
how to build the comparison system and further listed a wide variety of beneﬁts
which a company potential could gain from having such a system. The initial idea
was to use the seven step framework to develop the model and the potential beneﬁts
should subsequently be used to form the development so that the ﬁnal model could
demonstrate these beneﬁts. Due to the fact that the seven step framework had
not been tested in practical before it was uncertain whether or not a model of a
comparison system could be established.
As a result of the research, it has been possible to partially proof the concept
of the comparison system by building a model of it in MS Excel.
The model
demonstrates the main function of the comparison system which concerns the
ability to automatically return previous similar products when a new product has
been deﬁned in the user-interface and furthermore it allows access to all relevant
information from the previous products.
In order to build the model, it was investigated how the products should be com-
pared. First it was researched if clustering techniques in particular k-means clus-
tering could be used for the purpose. However, upon reﬂection of a cluster analysis,
it was evaluated that comparing products based on Euclidean distance would be a
more proper solution. Consequently, the comparison technique within the model
utilize the principle of measuring the Euclidean distance between the new product
1The name of the article is ’How to Analyze and Quantify Similarities between Conﬁgured
Engineer-To-Order Products by Comparing the Highlighted Features Utilizing the Conﬁguration
System Abilities’
==PAGE:122==
112
Conclusion
and the previous products based on their describing variables. In addition, prior
indexing of the variables has permitted that the comparison result is expressed by
a similarity index varying in the interval [0-100%] making it possible for the user
to evaluate the similarity between the new product and the previous products.
Another research area in the project was to identify and gather relevant information
for all the previous products and further how to store it in a structured manner
in the model.
In order to ﬁnd relevant data, the condensers design has been
analysed where three describing variables (number of modules, number of tubes
and pitch distance) were found important. Data for the variables was delivered by
the mechanical department. Furthermore, it was decided, based on the potential
beneﬁts from the theory, to retrieve cost relevant information from the company’s
ERP system. From the cost data lot of valuable information could be gathered
such as which condenser components HT had delivered to the client. Both variable
and cost information have been stored in the model according to the condenser it
belongs to. Based on the storage, it has throughout the project been possible to
analyse the condensers from diﬀerent perspectives.
One of the last deliverables in the project before the model could be completed has
been the development of the user interface. The user interface has been designed
so that a variety of the potential beneﬁts from the theory could be demonstrated.
Some of the areas which the potential beneﬁts cover are within sales, price estima-
tion and conﬁguration system. Thus, the interface has been designed so it can be
used as a recommendation system for the sales department. Moreover, the inter-
face demonstrates on a conceptual basis how the comparison system can be used
as an analytical instrument to discover tendencies between the describing variables
and product relevant information. Finally, it is argued how these analyses can be
beneﬁcial both in order to determine the accuracy of the CS and to improve price
estimation within the company.
Overall this thesis has stretched over a wide variety of research areas related to
designing a desirable comparison system at HT. The reason for this has been to
go through for all the steps in the seven step framework, in order to validate
the use of its theories, which has been a demanding task. Consequently, a solid
foundation of knowledge has been collected which oﬀers a practical basis for further
development of the seven step framework and the thesis’ working hypothesis. For
further development it should in particular be investigated how more quantiﬁed
results can be obtained.
==PAGE:123==
Appendix A
Spare parts description
The project has initially started considering three spare parts; bellow, ﬂange and
tube plates. Explanation of spare parts and their variables is given in this appendix.
Bellow Bellows are a part that looks like a membrane. It is composed of a two
rigid parts, which are attached to the other parts of the plan, for instance the
condenser, and of a soft part, which can be stretched or relaxed according to
the ﬂow of inlet gas. In fact this spare part is needed to make connections
between diﬀerent WSA plant parts. It is a crucial part for the maintenance
department because it is very fragile and it needs to be substitute more often
than others.The bellows diﬀer only of one variable, which is the diameters of
the hole. There are six diameters which are 900 mm, 1000 mm, 1100 mm,
1200 mm, 1300 mm and 1400 mm.
Flange Flanges are a common mechanical component which aim is to attach two
parts. Flanges are used to bond together the very condenser and bellow.
The same type of ﬂange is also used on the other side of the bellow and
in other connections in the WSA plant. The ﬂange, as the bellow, needs
to be substitute more often than others which make it as a crucial part for
maintenance. For ﬂanges,the only variable is the diameters which vary in
the same interval as the bellows diameter.
Tube Plates Tube plates are metal sheets with holes for the tube glass, the plates
are shaped according to the horizontal area of the condenser module. They
can be divided in upper and and lower tube plates. The main function of the
plates are to sustain the glass tubes that run inside the condenser and to act
like a lid and a bottom of the very condenser. Variables that inﬂuence the
plates are two number of holes and pitch. The number of holes modify just
one of the two dimension because the other is ﬁxed. The pitch, which is the
distance between the centers of the holes, also inﬂuences one dimension. In
fact these two variables can be combined to give birth to the module width.
==PAGE:124==
114
Spare parts description
==PAGE:125==
Appendix B
Project description
In this appendix is the Project plan and the Stakeholder Analysis found in big
size.
==PAGE:126==
116
Project description
==PAGE:127==
117
B.0.1
Final project plan
Figure B.1: Final project plan
==PAGE:128==
118
Project description
==PAGE:129==
119
B.0.2
Stakeholder Analysis
Figure B.2: Stakeholder Analysis
==PAGE:130==
120
Project description
==PAGE:131==
Appendix C
Prioritising scope of WSA
component
Argumentation for the grads rating of the candidates in Figure 4.2 is given in this
appendix
WSA plant: It would be a huge workload to ﬁnd data for whole WSA plants.
The way data has been found for the condenser have been by aggregating
data from all subparts to one level. Same kind of work for the WSA plant
is not feasible under the project’s conditions. When it comes to the number
of variables for the WSA plant the number is way too high. It will take too
long time to identify all variables and furthermore the comparison will be
too complex.
SO2 Converter: For a project with longer time horizon the SO2 converter could
have been a better choice. However, due to the fact of limited knowledge
to clustering methods a component with fewer variables would be preferred.
No deep investigation on the product’s complexity has been made, however,
it was told that product was more complex than the condenser and since
the condenser was found complex enough and further has better number of
variables there is no need to investigate the product complexity deeper.
Condenser: The condenser’s product complexity is found realistic to handled
within the project time since it has a decent amount of subparts which also
makes the treatment of data easier. The number of variables are suitable
for the proof of concept. Perhaps a bit too simple, by only having three
variables on the other hand, the amount of work in gathering data will make
it as a good decision too keep the project simple. If the clustering succeeds
it is always possible to expand to a more complex product such as the SO2
Converter.
Spare parts: The spare parts in scope have been tube plates, ﬂange and bellow.
Despite of these spare parts are the most customized of the condenser they
==PAGE:132==
122
Prioritising scope of WSA component
are still too simple for the proof of concept. It is only one of the chosen spare
parts which have more than one variable. On the other hand, the simple
structure of the spare parts would lead to a fast data analysis and treatment
which would increase simplicity in the entire project.
Figure C.1: Prioritising scope of WSA component
==PAGE:133==
Appendix D
Structure of condenser
Figure D.1 shows how the diﬀerent parts of the WSA condenser module are linked.
In addition the color indicates which parts are aﬀected by the module width and
number of holes.
Figure D.1: Structure of condenser module
==PAGE:134==
124
Structure of condenser
==PAGE:135==
Appendix E
Retrieved values for the
describing variables
The Figures show all the previous WSA projects for the condenser together with
the describing variables.
The S-number indicates which WSA project the con-
densers were a part of.
Figure E.1: Feature values for the condenser
==PAGE:136==
126
Retrieved values for the describing variables
Figure E.2: Feature values for the condenser
==PAGE:137==
Appendix F
Elements in the Cluster
Analysis
F.0.1
Running the cluster analysis
This section gives an overall description on how the cluster analysis has been
carried out in MS Excel. This will be done by going through one cluster scenario
where the number of cluster is ﬁve (k=5) . Furthermore, the analysis is attached
on the USB pen and can thereby also be used as reference in this section.
The cluster analysis can be categorized into to tasks. First task has been to identify
the optimal locations of the clusters and further to show which products (instances)
are assigned to the clusters. The other task is to calculate the SI for each instance
and use the number to evaluate the accuracy of the clustering.
F.0.1.1
Find cluster locations and assigned products
In order to ﬁnd new cluster locations two tables have been build in MS Excel.
Figure F.1 shows a slide of the two tables. In these tables are three out of the ﬁve
steps in the k-means procedure executed1 how will now be explained.
Step 1: First step was to choose number of clusters, in this case it is the upper
bound on ﬁve clusters which have been chosen. Each cluster has its own
color and the starting coordinates are placed below in the white row.
Step 2: In step two the Euclidean distance between every instance and the cluster
centroids is calculated. The result of this is seen in the big blue area. In
1The ﬁve steps in the k-means procedure can be seen in theory section 2.3.2. the k-means
clustering algorithm
==PAGE:138==
128
Elements in the Cluster Analysis
our case are the instances the condensers which are named by the interval
(a1, a2..an) where n is the total number of condenser made. The coordinates
are the values for the variables which have been scaled based on the maximum
and minimum variable value2.
Step 3: Based on distance calculations, each instance is assigned to the nearest
cluster. The result of this is seen in the white table to the right in Figure F.1.
Having assigned the instances, the average distance for all assigned instances
are calculated which contribute to the new cluster centers.
Figure F.1: Finding new cluster centers by use of k-mean
Step 4: In step four the cluster centers are updated with the new cluster centers
calculated in step 3. In MS Excel this has been solved by making copies of
sheets. Thus in the new sheet the only diﬀerence is that the initial cluster
centers is not set manually, but instead of equal to the calculated centroids
in the previous sheet. By doing this it has been possible to make the analysis
automated which has increased the speed of the analysis.
Step 5: In the last step, the process is repeated from step 2 until the new cluster
centroids do not change. When all the iterations have been executed the
ﬁnal result of cluster centroids and which instances belong to the centers can
be seen in the ﬁnal sheet.
F.0.1.2
Clustering graphs and average silhouette index
In the cluster analysis graphs have been made to visualize how the k-means pro-
cedure impacts the cluster centroids. Furthermore, the graphs have been useful in
2The scaling has been done based on the same method introduced in section 5.3.2.1. Projects
and Indexed data
==PAGE:139==
129
order to locate the cluster centroids in the ﬁrst place3. Since the clustering takes
place in a multi-dimensional variable space three graphs in each sheet have been
made with respectively the three axis combinations (X −Y ), (X −Z) and (Y −Z).
Figure F.2 shows with (X −Y ) graphs how the clusters have moved from the initial
situation to the ﬁnal situation as a consequence of all the iterations. In appendix
F the same picture can be seen for all the graphs combinations. In addition to
the graphs Figure F.2 shows in the upper table how the cluster centroids and the
average SI have changed during the iterations. For example, it is seen that the
average SI has increased from 0,247 to 0,468. The ﬁnal average SI number has been
especially important to store in order to determine which number of cluster would
result in the optimal clustering. A ﬁnal collection of all the average SI values from
the four analysis is presented in section 4.5.5.
Figure F.2: Movement of clusters and average SI during k-means
F.0.2
Initial placement of clusters centroid
First step in k-means procedure is to place the centers of clustering. The initial
placement of the clusters should be done based on the pattern of the instances,
such as the initial placement is a roughly suggestion on how the ﬁnal placement
on the clusters would be. In order to that the clustering tool has incorporated
graphs such as the initial placement of the clusters can be seen together with all
the instances. Figure F.3 shows the scenario, with a X-Y graph as example. In
this scenario it is seen that cluster C3 is placed around records with high X and
Y values, C5 takes care of the instances with low x and y value, whereas the last
three clusters share the instances in the area where the number of instances are
most. Nevertheless, the initial placement of the clusters cannot only be based on
the XY graph. The case is more complex, since the total amount of describing
3More on which considerations have been made in the initial placement of the cluster centroids
is given in appendix F
==PAGE:140==
130
Elements in the Cluster Analysis
variables identiﬁed is three the instances is placed in a three dimensional space.
Thus, the number of graphs made has been three as well, respectively XY, YZ
and YZ. Operating in a multidimensional variable space, can make the initial
placement of the clusters complicated, therefore another thumps of rule which
have been used in the placement of the clusters have been to ensure that number
of instances assigned to the clusters should be fairly distributed. In order to do
that the number of assigned instances is shown above each clusters. Thus, it has
been possible to use these number together with the graphs to make a good ﬁt for
the the initial placement of the clusters.
Figure F.3: Example on one of the three cluster graphs used to determine the
initial placement of cluster centroids
==PAGE:141==
131
F.0.3
Elements in the Cluster Analysis
Figure F.4 shows the movements of the clusters and the average SI for all graphs
from the initial situation to the last situation in the k-means procedure.
Figure F.4: Movements of clusters and SI for all graphs from the initial situation
to the last situation in the k-means procedure
==PAGE:142==
132
Elements in the Cluster Analysis
F.0.4
Cluster graphs for cluster analysis with ﬁve clusters
Figure F.5 shows the ﬁnal cluster graphs in the cluster analysis with ﬁve clusters.
The color of the instances indicate which clusters the instances belong to. Blue
instances belong to cluster 1, gray instances belong to cluster 2, yellow instances
belong to cluster 3, red instances belong to cluster 4 and green instances belong
to cluster 5.
Figure F.5: Final cluster graphs
==PAGE:143==
Appendix G
Working techniques at the
company
In the following it is given which techniques and approaching methods have been
used in the interaction with stakeholders.
Meeting with diﬀerent departments: The ﬁrst thing done was to meet all the
diﬀerent departments to both know the people working there and establish
a strong network among the key employees. More than one meeting in all
the departments has been arranged.
The meetings outlined who the key people among all the departments were
and have been an unique source of data and information. Especially, when
it came to questions about processes or the product meetings have been an
eﬃcient way to get answers.
Semistructured interviews: In order to maximize the utility of meetings, the
interview has been structured previously. Quite often a series of question
were collected before the meeting. In addition, for the importance to gather
the precise information all the interviews have been recorded.
Collaboration: For some speciﬁc cases, as how to retrieve data from learn SAP,
collaboration with one employ has been established. Some days have been
spent together ﬁrstly as a training course and afterward in dynamic meetings
where doubts have been solved and results have been shown.
Mail correspondences Mail correspondence has been a very utilized technique
to get in touch with the project team and with stakeholders without appeal-
ing to meetings. When what was wanted to be asked has been considered
necessary to move on, the company mail was used. Moreover it has been
used as a mean to exchange data. In fact all the information related to the
company moved within the mail correspondence.
==PAGE:144==
134
Working techniques at the company
==PAGE:145==
Appendix H
Future ideas for the
User-interface
During the development of the interface lot of ideas to new features for the interface
appeared. However, it was decided ﬁrst to implement the requirements for the
interface, and then slightly add more ’nice-to’ features. One nice-to-feature, the
Maximum Age, can be seen in Figure 5.14.
The red ﬁeld indicates that this
feature has not yet been implemented. All the nice-to-feature discussed for further
development are explained below.
Maxium Age: An improving feature to incorporate in the interface is the ability
to sort on product sales date. In the project it became clear that the products
had developed signiﬁcantly over the 20 years for which data is within. This
reduces undoubtedly the basis for comparison. In addition to the design of
the condenser cost of materials and transport has changed over time as well.
It is possible to calibrate for some time-sensitive factors such transport and
material prices. Whether the beneﬁts outweigh the maintenance work will
require a deeper investigation of the speciﬁc case. Nevertheless, the time-
ﬁlter function is a good ﬁrst-step solution, which is easy to implement since
data already exists in the SAP system. An addition to the function could
be key time-comments. These should be returned based on the time chosen
and point out time-factors that the user of the system should have in mind
when a speciﬁc product is recommended.
Maxium conditions: In the same way as the maximum age was discussed other
conditions on product relevant data could be set on for example; lead time,
price, transportation cost etc.
Graph Design: In order to make the interface more useful for the user the graph
could be more customized to the actual need. For instance diﬀerent labels
of relevant information could be assigned or an average curve could be im-
plemented. For example, when looking on a variety of similar projects an
average for e.g. cost or lead time could lead to a more reliable result.
==PAGE:146==
136
Future ideas for the User-interface
More detailed product information: This idea is also related to the database.
However, if more detailed information on the diﬀerent product relevant data
was accessed. For instance, if the subparts of the total cost or price were
obtained, this could be visualized by stacked columns or by other means.
Feasibility of previously projects: The CS already ensures that only projects
within the product range of HT is conﬁgured. However, it might happen
that some of the previously made projects are no longer a part of the product
range. Thus, a function, indicating the feasibility of previous projects could
be integrated.
==PAGE:147==
Appendix I
Retrieve product relevant
information for previous
products
I.0.0.1
Cost aspect sheet from SAP
The ﬁgure below is a screen shot of a cost aspect Excel sheet. In total 21 cost
aspect data sheets were retrieved from SAP. Figure I.1 gives the cost aspect Top
Cover, Steel Parts as an example.
Figure I.1: Top Cover, Steel Parts from SAP
==PAGE:148==
138
Retrieve product relevant information for previous products
==PAGE:149==
Appendix J
Comparison platform
This appendix explains how the distance rank in the comparison platform has been
carried out in detailed.
In addition, to the Rank formula seen on Figure J.1 a countif formula has been
used.
This formula has been necessary to include, since the distance between
two products may be the same and in order to lookup diﬀerent products in the
interface based on ranking, there is still a need to rank all products with diﬀerent
numbers in the interval (1..n), where n is the total number of WSA projects made.
Figure J.2 shows how the ranking works in an example where the formula has been
decomposed into its sub elements.
Figure J.1: Ranking all the distances
Figure J.2: The principle of the distance rank pointed out
==PAGE:150==
140
Comparison platform
As seen on the ﬁgure there is ﬁve old products, where the distance to the new
product is the same for three of the old products (a2, a4 and a5).
When the
formula Rank is used these old products are all rated as the best ones by all
having 1 as value. In order to rank the best three products with diﬀerent numbers
the countif formula has been applied. It is seen how it has been set up in the
formula bar. If a product appears ﬁrst time it will be counted as 1, next time it
appears it will be counted as 2 and so on. Having done that, the products can be
ranked as the sum of the rank formula and the countif formula and by subtracting
1. The result of this is seen in the last column to the right. Product a2 is rated as
the best product, a4 as the next best and a5 as the third best. All this despite of
the distance are the same.
==PAGE:151==
Bibliography
[Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011] Anzanello, M. J. and Fogliatto, F. S. (2011). Se-
lecting the best clustering variables for grouping mass-customized products in-
volving workers’ learning. Int. J. Production Economics.
[Gangi, 2014] Gangi, P. D. (2014). Cluster analysis example (e-learning). https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=3fR-xrGp-Q0. Accessed: 2015-11-15.
[http://cxomagasinet.dk, ] http://cxomagasinet.dk. Haldor topsøe: En dansk ver-
denssucces forklaret.
http://web.archive.org/web/20080207010024/http:
//www.808multimedia.com/winnt/kernel.htm. Accessed: 2015-08-28.
[Hvam et al., 2008] Hvam, L., Mortensen, N. H., and Riis, J. (2008).
Product
Customization. Springer.
[Rand, 1971] Rand, W. M. (1971). Objective criteria for the evaluation of cluster-
ing methods.
[Salvador and Forza, 2006] Salvador, F. and Forza, C. (2006). Product Information
Management for Mass Customization: Connecting Customer, Front-oﬃce and
Back-oﬃce for Fast and Eﬃcient Customization. Palgrave Macmillan.
[Salvador and Forza, 2007] Salvador, F. and Forza, C. (2007). Product informa-
tion management for mass customization: Connecting customer, front-oﬃce and
back-oﬃce for fast and eﬃcient customization. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
[Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015] Shaﬁee, S. and Hvam, L. (2015). How to analyze and
quantify similarities between conﬁgured engineer-to-order products by compar-
ing the highlighted features utilizing the conﬁguration system abilities. page
1–7.
==PAGE:152==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Sørensen, 2013] Sørensen, A. M. (2013).
Wsa technology for treatment of h2s
gasses. Presentation slides.
[Topsoe, ] Topsoe, H. E. Haldor topsoe a/s company description in connection
with admission to trading at ﬁrst north bond market. http://www.topsoe.com/
sites/default/files/haldor_topsoe_as_company_description_2013.pdf.
Accessed: 2015-08-28.
[Topsoe, 2014] Topsoe, H. E. (2014). Annual report. http://www.topsoe.com/
file/documents/annual-report/haldor-topsoe-annual-report-2014.
[url: MicroSoft Oﬃce, ] url: MicroSoft Oﬃce. How to use the index and match.
https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/kb/214142. Accessed: 2016-02-20.
[www.lenzing technik.com, ] www.lenzing
technik.com.
Topsoe
wsa.
http://www.lenzing-technik.com/en/engineering/products/
environmental-technology/waste-air-purification/topsoe-wsa.html.
Accessed: 2015-11-10.
==PAGE:153==
List of Figures
1.1
Variety of HT’s catalysis[Topsoe, 2014] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Overview over HT’s global network [Topsoe, 2014]
. . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
WSA plant [www.lenzing technik.com, ] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
Principle and picture of the condenser [Sørensen, 2013] . . . . . . .
12
2.1
Operational activities in manufacturing [Salvador and Forza, 2006]
14
2.2
Degrees of product customization [Salvador and Forza, 2006]
. . .
15
2.3
Series of speciﬁcations in a product’s life cycle [Hvam et al., 2008]
16
2.4
Speciﬁcation processes [Hvam et al., 2008] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Conﬁguration system supporting speciﬁcation processes [Hvam et al.,
2008] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
The principles of the comparison system [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]
19
2.7
The seven step framework [Shaﬁee and Hvam, 2015]
. . . . . . . .
20
2.8
Price and weight curve for main machines in F.L Smith [Hvam et al.,
2008] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:154==
144
LIST OF FIGURES
2.9
Clustering Method’s steps. [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011]
. . . .
27
2.10 Average SI proﬁle [Anzanello and Fogliatto, 2011] . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1
Initial and ﬁnal project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Stakeholder Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Decision tree for the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4
Gantt Chart of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1
As-Is situation swim-lane diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Prioritising scope of WSA component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Overall structure of condenser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4
Structure of tube module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.5
Sketch of tube plate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.6
Variable values for the condenser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.7
Retrieved variables setup in bar charts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.8
Potential beneﬁts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.9
Selecting PRI for comparison system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.10 Cost documents for the condenser
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.11 Illustration on a cost document retrieved from SAP into Excel
. .
67
4.12 Removing PO items and collecting all cost documents in one sheet
67
4.13 Movement of clusters and average SI during k-means . . . . . . . .
70
4.14 Final cluster graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.15 SI proﬁles for cluster analysis with ﬁve clusters . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:155==
LIST OF FIGURES
145
4.16 Analysis of the ﬁve clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
4.17 Invoice Order for condensers split on cluster and expectation table
75
4.18 Distance issue by k-means clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.1
Deﬁning requirements and opportunities for model . . . . . . . . .
82
5.2
Structure and information ﬂow of the comparison system
. . . . .
84
5.3
Deliverable 1: Database with previously products in MS Excel
. .
85
5.4
Cost documents retrieved into database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.5
Cost documents with no data shown as gray in the Database
. . .
87
5.6
Frequency of cost documents used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.7
Deliverable 2: Compare products in MS Excel . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5.8
Normalization of variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5.9
Weighted indexed variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
5.10 Distance matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
5.11 Distance calculations where x and y is weighted zero . . . . . . . .
92
5.12 Ranking all the distances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.13 Principle of project Rank
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.14 Deliverable 3: Interface of the comparison system . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.15 Input part of user interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
5.16 Exclusion of variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
5.17 Recommended products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.18 PRI graphs for recommend products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5.19 Cost as a function of the number of modules
. . . . . . . . . . . .
98
==PAGE:156==
146
LIST OF FIGURES
5.20 Overview of cost documents involved in project . . . . . . . . . . .
99
B.1
Final project plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
B.2
Stakeholder Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
C.1 Prioritising scope of WSA component
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
D.1 Structure of condenser module
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
E.1
Feature values for the condenser
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
E.2
Feature values for the condenser
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
126
F.1
Finding new cluster centers by use of k-mean . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
F.2
Movement of clusters and average SI during k-means . . . . . . . .
129
F.3
Example on one of the three cluster graphs used to determine the
initial placement of cluster centroids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
F.4
Movements of clusters and SI for all graphs from the initial situation
to the last situation in the k-means procedure
. . . . . . . . . . .
131
F.5
Final cluster graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
I.1
Top Cover, Steel Parts from SAP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137
J.1
Ranking all the distances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
139
J.2
The principle of the distance rank pointed out . . . . . . . . . . . .
139
==PAGE:157==
List of Tables
1.1
Central concepts in the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4.1
Condenser variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2
Average silhouette index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
