==PAGE:1==
Compression Strength of Reinforced Concrete
Disks Pre-cracked in the Transverse Direction
Asbjørn Kirk Jensen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, building 118,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
http://www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Concrete members are often subjected to a plane stress state that involves uniaxthial compression
stresses and tensile stresses in the orthogonal reinforcement mesh. This is commonly observed in
concrete elements subjected to shear, where the ﬁrst and second principal stress are in tension and
compression respectively.
Biaxial loading is present in slack reinforced and pre-stressed concrete beams and panels, where shear
is obtained after cracking by inclined concrete struts acting in compression and stirrups acting in
tension.
It is well known that the compression strength of the concrete is reduced in the given stress state, but
it is a wide spread perception that the strength is recovered, if the transverse tensile force is released.
The postulated hypothesis is that the strength reduction should be partly irreversible. This means that
even released from transverse tension prior to the compression loading, strength reduction will still be
observed.
In the present master’s thesis, experimental and analytical work has been carried out to investigate the
concrete softening when precracked. The analysis if the results and comparison with present empirical
models, reveals that strength reduction is near if not fully irreversible.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is rated at 32.5 ECTS and is a compulsory written assignment to complete the education
as Master of Science in Civil Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. The experimental and
written work has been performed in the period September 8th of august 2015 to February 29th 2016.
An oral presentation and defence will be given on the 8th of March 2016. I would like to thank my
two supervisors, Linh C. Hoang and Gregor Fisher for their help and guidance throughout the process.
Also I would like to thank Jesper Harrild Sørensen for giving me an introduction to ARAMIS digital
image correlation system and occasionally supervision. My gratitude also goes to Per Leth and Steen
Lenskjold Jensen from the laboratory who have assisted me with casting the concrete, some concrete
cutting and manufacturing of form work. In the laboratory, many diﬀerent problems has occurred
along the process, where Christian Rasmussen has help repeatedly.
Lyngby, 29-February-2016
Asbjørn Kirk Jensen
==PAGE:5==
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
1
Introduction
3
2
Experimental work and testing
4
2.1
Concrete Casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Concrete Proportioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Reinforcement steel tensioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Grinding and painting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Three step experimental test/work procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
Step 1, tensioning and concrete cracking (TC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
Step 2, cutting and painting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Concrete compression testing (CC)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Theory
15
3.1
Reinforcement steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Cracks in reinforced Concrete members Exposed to Pure Tension . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Reduction of compressive concrete disk strength due to rebar . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.1
State of the art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.2
Vecchio and Collins
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5.3
Linh C. Hoang et al.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.4
Discussion by Belarbi and Hsu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5.5
Muttoni . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Experimental observations and analysis
33
4.1
Preliminary results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Concrete casting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Reinforcement steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.3
Cylinder strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.1
Mean crack distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Cutting, discarded specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Compressive strength of concrete reference disk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5
Compression of cracked concrete disks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5
Discussion
56
5.1
Vecchio and Collins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Linh C. Hoang et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Error sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
64
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
A Enclosed CD
65
B
Steel
66
C Concrete compressive strength, cylinders
68
D Concrete Tensioning
71
D.1
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
D.2
Results from prism testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
E
Compressive strength of ref. disks
84
F
Concrete Compression strength
86
F.1
Stress-strain curves, two LVDT’s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
F.2
Failure modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
F.3
Concrete strength table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
ϵ1
Average principal tensile strain
ϵ2
Average principal compressive strain
ϵy
Yied strain of reinforced concrete
ϵs.br
Steel strain right before release.
νC
Combined eﬀectiveness factor from cracking and duct
νV
Eﬀectiveness factor from cracking
ρ
Reinforcement ratio
σs
Steel stress in reinforcement
σc
Nominal compressive strength of a concrete disk
σs.ar
Steel stress after tension force release
σs.br
Steel stress at tension force release
a
Minimum crack distance
Ac
Cross sectional concrete area
D
Nominal diameter of reinforceing steel bar
dc
Diameter of concrete cylinder
Ec
Secant E-modulus for concrete
Es
Yield strain of reinforcement steel
Ecs
Elasticity modulus of an uncracked concrete disk
Fc
Compression force
fc
Concrete compressive strength according to [EN1992-1-1, 2004]
ft
Uniaxile tensile cracking strength of concrete
fcs.red.c Concrete disk strength reduced by rebar precense, ηD, and crack reduction νv
fcs.red.c Disk strength with strength reduction due to a combination of duct and cracking
fcs.red.D Concrete disk strength reduced by presence of rebar νv
fcs.red Concrete disk strength reduced cracking νv
fcs
Nominal compressive strength of an uncracked reinforced concrete disk
hc
Height of a concrete cylinder
hc
Height of concrete cylinder
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
2
lm
Mean crack distance [Nielsen, 1993]
rcs
displacement rate for the hydraulic piston during concrete disk test
rcyl
displacement rate for the hydraulic piston during concrete cylinders test
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Concrete members are often subjected to a plane stress state that involves uniaxthial compression
stresses and tensile stresses in the orthogonal reinforcement mesh. This is commonly observed in
concrete elements subjected to shear stresses, where the ﬁrst and second principal stresses are in
tension and compression respectively.
The strength reduction of concrete is utterly important, as one desires a suﬃcient concrete compressive
strength to avoid a brittle failure of the given structure.
Biaxial loading is present in slack reinforced and pre-stressed concrete beams and panels, where shear
is obtained after cracking by inclined concrete struts acting in compression and stirrups acting in
tension.
It is well known that the compression strength of the concrete is reduced in the given stress state. In
the literature, this strength reduction is usually explained by the presence of transverse tensile strains
or stresses. Empirical formulas have been proposed for estimation of the strength reduction depending
on diﬀerent factor e.g. the magnitude of transverse strain. However, the formulas do not take into
account the transverse reinforcement ratio. Furthermore, there is a widespread perception that the
strength is recovered, if the transverse tensile force inducing the strains is released.
The aim of this Masters project is to challenge the above mentioned perception of the problem. It
is the hypothesis, that the strength reduction is mainly a result of cracking caused by the bursting
forces in the tensioned rebars. This eventually means that the parameter(s) that control the strength
reduction may not be solely described by the average transverse strains but may include the transverse
reinforcement ratio as well. The literature also describes a reduction by the mere presence of the
reinforcement, causing stress ﬁeld disturbance yielding strength reduction.
If the reinforcement
comprises a signiﬁcant percentage of the width in its section, the compressive strength will decrease.
This reduction is accounted for and its eﬀects in combination with cracking is investigated. of In
addition, the strength reduction should be partly irreversible according the postulated hypothesis. This
means that even released from transverse tension prior to the compression loading, strength reduction
will still be observed. An example of a construction where this pre-cracked reduction, has relevance,
is a bearing and stabilizing wall cracked by shear loading inﬂicted by ei. an earthquake or a great
storm. How will it perform after cracking? how well does it resist in-plane imposed loading?
In order to investigate the postulated hypothesis, a test program was performed as a part of this project.
Reinforced concrete prism elements with diﬀerent reinforcement ratios were subjected to diﬀerent
levels of transverse tension. During tension loading of the specimens the cracking was recorded
by use of the ARAMIS digital image correlation system. After tension loading, the prisms were
saw-cut (orthogonal to the tensioned direction) into three disks that was subjected to compression
testing. Thereafter the disks were exposed to uniaxial compression and the compression capacity
reduction was found by comparison with similar compression tests on disks not previously exposed to
tension/cracking.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Experimental work and testing
This section concerns the design of concrete test specimens and their test procedures. To investigate
the concrete response, as described in the introduction, concrete specimens were cast and tested. This
chapter is divided into four parts. First, casting of reinforced concrete prisms and concrete cylinders
(section 2.1).
Secondly, the preliminary steel testing (section 2.2).
Thirdly, preparatory work,
consisting of grinding and painting(section 2.3). And last, an experimental work-/test procedure, in
three steps, were performed, as seen in ﬁgure 2.1 to enable investigation of pre-cracked concrete disks
(section 2.4).
1.
Tension
testing of concrete specimen (TC)
2.
Cutting and
painting
3.
Compression
testing of concrete specimen (CC)
Figure 2.1: Test procedure of a cycle
All together, four repetitions of the procedure were carried out.
In the thesis a naming system is used for labelling the diﬀerent test-specimens and ﬁles available on an
enclosed CD in appendix A. The system is brieﬂy clariﬁed in the following. In ﬁgure 2.2, an example
referring to a reference concrete disk with a diameter of 20mm subjected to compression, is given.
Figure 2.2: Naming of specimen/procedure
• Preﬁx, is an abbreviation of a given convenient preﬁx: Cyl(cylinder), Ref(reference piece/disk
in CC), Top(top disk in CC), Bot(bottom disk in CC), Ara(ARAMIS), Cyl(cylinder), log(Data
from logger/LVDT.), Ins(Data from direct output from Instron-machine) or Pic(Picture).
• The reinforcement diameter in mm, is D16, D20 or D25.
• Testing type is T(tension) or C(compression).
• Material is C(concrete) or S(steel)
• Test procedure is in reference to the chronological cycle/procedure number, _1, _2, _3 or _4
from ﬁgure 2.1.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Concrete Casting
5
2.1
Concrete Casting
One of the scopes of the project was to investigate the inﬂuence of diﬀerent reinforcement ratios,
consequently three types of reinforcement was used. 15 reinforced concrete prisms were cast, in
three sets of ﬁve specimens due to a volume limitation of the used compulsory mixer. Each set will
throughout this report, be referred to, by its related nominal reinforcement diameter i.e. set D16, set
D20 and set D25.
For every set, the same concrete recipe was used, aiming for a concrete compressive strength of
fc = 30MPa, as seen in section 2.1.1. All sets had the same dimension, being a rectangular cross
section, with a concentrically placed rebar, but with diﬀerent nominal diameters D, as seen in ﬁgure
2.3. To calculate the compressive cylinder strength fc, 10 cylinders with a height of hc = 200mm and
a diameter of dc = 100mm were cast for each set, making a total of 30 cylinders.
Figure 2.3: Reinforced concrete prism dimensions [mm]
Wooden formwork, as seen in ﬁgure 2.4, was made by DTU employee, Steen Lenskjold Jensen. After
each casting, the holes for the protruding reinforcement in the formwork, was widened to ﬁt the greater
reinforcement diameter of the following set. For each cast, the formwork for prisms and cylinder was
sprayed with oil to ease deshuttering.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Concrete Casting
6
Figure 2.4: Formwork for casting set, D20
The reinforcement used w, for practical reasons, deformed with threads acting as ribs. This was done
to ensure appropriate concrete cracking during tensioning. The orientation of the threads was ensured
to be "up and down" as the threads were only on the two sides providing a oval reinforcement cross
section, as seen through pictures 2.5 to 2.7.
Figure 2.5: Thread orientation
Figure 2.6: Steel threads.
Figure 2.7: D20 oval section.
Each set of specimens was cast of concrete 100L batches. The used gravel was sea material with
a maximum mask width of dmax = 8mm and the sand was pit sand with a maximum grain size of
dmax = 0.4mm. Slump was aimed to be in the range of 60mm to 100mm.
Table 2.1: Concrete recipies [kg/batch] of batches used when casting
Date
Water
Cement
Sand
Gravel
D16 31/08/2015
19.25
28.49
121.96
63.07
D20 01/09/2015
19.05
28.49
122.17
63.07
D25 02/09/2015
19.30
28.49
121.90
63.08
The concrete was mixed in a compulsory mixer. First, aggregate and cement were mixed for two
minutes. The water was applied, and the ﬁnal mixture was additionally mixed for three minutes.
After casting a vibration table was used to remove as much air as possible, without inﬂicting inconsis-
tency in the concrete matrix.
Newly cast cylinders were laid on their sides to ensure smooth surfaces on the top and bottom.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Concrete Casting
7
All specimens remained in the formwork for 12 hours after casting and were, after deshuttering,
wrapped in plastic and sealed until testing.
2.1.1
Concrete Proportioning
The concrete recipe is designed without additives according to a method prescribed in [Hansen, 2014].
The method accounts for the water content in the aggregates before use and its absorbency. The material
components used for the concrete and their relevant properties are listed in table 2.2. Listed values are
mean values and densities are given in saturated surface dry (s.s.d.) condition.
Table 2.2: Concrete component properties, mean values
Component
Density [kg/m3]
Water absorbency [%]
Cement
3100
Water
1000
Sand, 0 −4mm
2620
0.2
Gravel, 4 −8mm
2610
0.8
The mass water-cement ratio w/c by bolomey’s formula, is presented in [PORTLAND, 2007, p. 87]
and given by equation (2.1)
fc = Kp
 1
w/c −αp
!
⇔
w/c =
1
fc/Kp + αp
(2.1)
Where αp and Kp are the constants mainly dependent on the cement type and concrete hardening
period. Also the quality of the gravel has inﬂuence.
The applied water volume is based on the maximum stone size of the aggregate and the desired slump
measurement. The cement mass to be applied, is subsequently found by the water/cement - ratio. The
cement mass and the maximum aggregate size leads to the sand percentage. Both water volume and
sand percentages are given by tables in [Hansen, 2014, p. A17].
It is assumed that the concrete holds 1 percent natural air even after vibration.
When accounting for the water content, a measure is taken when the water content in the sand or
aggregate diﬀers from the water absorbency of the given component in s.s.d condition. Here the water
content is calculated by equation (2.2).
u = ms −md
md
· 100
(2.2)
ms is the mass of the used saturated aggregate and md is the mass of the dried aggregates.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Reinforcement steel tensioning
8
The volume to be added needs to be corrected according to the afore mentioned water content
diﬀerence. If the water content is higher than the water absorbency, the added water must be reduced.
Conversely if the water content is lower, the amount of added water must be increased. Consequently
the needed mass of aggregates must be adjusted. This correction of a given aggregate component is
calculated by equation (2.3).
mi =
100% + ui
100% + wa.i
· ms.s.d.i
(2.3)
ms.s.d.i is the mass needed in s.s.d. condition.
The total water adjustment is calculated from equation (2.4)
w =
X ui −wa.i
1 + wa.i
· ms.s.d.i
(2.4)
2.2
Reinforcement steel tensioning
The reinforcement steel used in the reinforced concrete specimens are threaded bars delivered in
lengths of 1.2m with a characteristic yield strength of fyk = 500MPa and a characteristic tensile
strength of fut = 550MPa.
The threaded bars are deformed, and can be said to have nearly lateral lugs which provides a very good
bonding mechanism.
To determine actual mean material properties of the reinforcement steel bars, lengths of 1.2m were
cut into three 0.4m pieces, see ﬁgure 2.9 and pulled by the same servo-hydraulic testing machine as
the reinforced concrete specimens, see ﬁgure 2.8. The load was monitored by an internal load cell in
the testing machine, and the strain was measured by an extensometer in the form of a clip gauge. The
raw data was logged and can be found on the enclosed CD appendix A. Long nuts were used at the
reinforcement bar ends, as described later in section 2.4.1.
2.3
Grinding and painting
For all specimens, both cylinders- and reinforced concrete prisms-, surfaces which were evaluated as
being too rough, were ground before tension testing was executed. This was done to ensure a smooth
surface for later compression tests.
The mid 3/4 section, that has the painted length of 600mm and the width, 200mm, of one of the
concrete facades, with the dimensions hpr = 800mm and hcs = 200mm, was painted with a black
spatter pattern. This was done to enable a strain-, deformation response and crack formation analysis,
by later use of ARAMIS digital image correlation system- Software (For brevity: ARAMIS). An initial
spatter pattern ﬁneness veriﬁcation was performed, by processing a single picture in ARAMIS. The
pattern was optimized until the software was able to register the whole surface.
==PAGE:16==
2.4 Three step experimental test/work procedure
9
2.4
Three step experimental test/work procedure
An experimental- and test procedure, comprised of three phases took place according to ﬁgure 2.1. This
procedure was repeated four times. In the following the three steps will be elaborated independently.
2.4.1
Step 1, tensioning and concrete cracking (TC)
The crack formation was introduced by conducting axial tension testing. Out of the 15 reinforced
concrete specimens, only 12 were subjected to tension and hereby cracking. The remaining three
specimens were reference specimens for comparison during compression testing. One reference prism
for each casting.
The specimens were exposed to pure tension forces, thereby inducing controlled cracking of the
concrete.
Specimens for tension testing were installed in a servo-hydraulic testing machine and
gripped at nuts, mounted on the protruding ends of the steel reinforcement, as seen in ﬁgure 2.8.
Hereby tensile load was transferred from the rebars to the specimen. Loading was applied under
displacement control at a rate of 1mm/s. The forces were applied in the bottom of the specimen by
the hydraulic piston.
Extensometer
LVDT
Watch
Ruler
Figure 2.8: Tension test set-up in hydraulic testing machine
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Three step experimental test/work procedure
10
The reinforcement used were threaded, which enabled the use of nuts by the reinforcement bar ends.
The nuts used were long nuts as seen in 2.9. Preliminary nut-tests were performed to allow reuse and
simultaneously ensure no occurrence of slip in-between grips and nuts.
Figure 2.9: Long nuts
By using long nuts, the following beneﬁts were obtained:
• When installing the specimen, by crane, a customized lifting eye was easily mounted to the steel
bars by means of the nuts.
• The nuts formed a large grip/friction surface with the hydraulic grips in the machine.
• As the nuts, by the steel-manufacturer, were designed to withstand the breaking forces of the
pairable steel diameter, yield hinges are avoided that would otherwise have needed thread
removal with a lathe.
• Without the long nuts, the closing mechanism of the hydraulic grips inﬂicts a tension force (up
to 30kN) in the specimen when activated. This is avoided as signiﬁcant backlash is present in
the threaded connection.
For all three specimen types, the ﬁrst three tension faces TC1, TC2 and TC3 (Not TC4), the overall
specimen deformation was measured by a pair of linear voltage diﬀerential transducers (LVDT’s).
LVDT’s were mounted on both sides of the specimen. By means of steel-bracing, as seen in ﬁgure
2.8, they were mounted to the concrete surface.
The steel elongation was live monitored with an extensometer in the form of a clip-gauge, fastened as
seen in ﬁgure 2.8. The extensometer measurements provided a guideline for when the desired concrete
strain was reached.
The second phase (Tensioning) in the ﬁrst experimental procedure, TC_1 consists of the following
tests: D16TC_1, D20TC_1 and D25TC_1. Here the reinforcement was tensioned to the proximity
of yielding (before release). The rest of the procedure was carried out, and from compression test -
(phase 5.) results, a reasonable steel strain ϵs, at which to execute the forthcoming test procedure,
could be predicted. The steel strain ϵs.br that the three specimens in each procedure were aimed to
reach before release are listed below.
• TC_1
→ϵs.br = ϵy
• TC_2
→ϵs.br = 20‰
• TC_3
→ϵs.br = 10‰
• TC_4
→ϵs.br = 15‰
==PAGE:18==
2.4 Three step experimental test/work procedure
11
before use, the extensometer and LVDT’s were calibrated with instruments seen in ﬁgure 2.11 and
ﬁgure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: DANAK calibration unit
Figure 2.11: Ruler for LVDT calibration
During the concrete tension testing, a high-resolution 36.6 Mega pixel camera with lighting was set
up, to monitor the painted mid section surface of 600mm. A picture was taken every 10th second,
enabling strain-, deformation response- and crack formation analysis, by later use of ARAMIS.
To ARAMIS, an image series for the given test are imported. The program detects the surface in points.
The points are located and deﬁned by their sizes and nuances. If the painted splatter pattern is applied
adequately, every points position is detected from one image to the next, yielding the deformation
response relative to the other surface points.
An image noise test was carried out beforehand to ensure good data quality. Noise can be caused by
change in light, temperature change or small movements of the camera. An image series was taken
before testing was started. It was processed in ARAMIS and strain development was near to nothing
ϵc ≈0
In the results presented in section 4, the strain is given by a normalized change in deformation over a
given length. The clip gauge measured over a short distance of 50mm on the steel bar. The LVDT’s,
fastened by metal bracing on each end of the concrete, measured from a metal pin at the top to a metal
pin at the bottom over a distance of 753mm and the deformation in ARAMIS is monitored over the
painted length of 600mm.
FT
LVDT s = 753mm
Ext. = 50mm
Splatter Pattern = 600mm
Top
Bottom
Figure 2.12: Statical system with measurement distances
2.4.2
Step 2, cutting and painting
After tensioning the ﬁrst specimen D16TC_1, based on the transverse primary crack distribution, it
was decided to cut the mid section of 600mm on all specimens into three disks, as seen in ﬁgure 2.13
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Three step experimental test/work procedure
12
for future compression. End pieces were not used. Debonding due to longitudinal cracks between
the reinforcing bar and concrete, has in many cases caused complete separation and concrete pieces
falling oﬀas seen from ﬁgure 2.14.
Figure 2.13: Crack distribution, cutting lines and naming of disk specimens
Figure 2.14: Concrete prisms cut into concrete disks after tension phase TC_4
The three uncracked reference specimens were cut into four disks each, making a total of 12 disks.
After cutting, the specimens were once again painted with a splatter pattern, this time on one of the
cut surfaces for ARAMIS analysis during compression testing.
2.4.3
Concrete compression testing (CC)
Compression testing was conducted on 43 (two were too damaged after cutting) specimens, in a
servo-hydraulic testing machine(referred to as INSTRON), as seen in ﬁgures 2.17, 2.18 and 2.19.
Compression tests of a disk, depicted in ﬁgure 2.15, were conducted with a piece of soft masonite,
as seen in ﬁgure 2.16, on the top surface of each specimen to even out potential surface unevenness.
Unevenness is either caused by cracking during tensioning or from casting. The dimensions of a
concrete disk are, height h = 200mm, depth d = 200mm and width, w = 100mm.
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Three step experimental test/work procedure
13
h
d
w
Figure 2.15: re f D20CC_4
t
Figure 2.16: Masionite t = 12mm
Concrete cylinders were also tested with masonite on top. Loading was applied under displacement
control from test phase CC_1, CC_2 and CC_3. To ensure an approximately even loading rate the soft
masonite needed to be compressed at a faster displacement rate than the concrete. Also the dimension
diﬀerence between disks and cylinders meant that the machine was programmed diﬀerently for the
cylinders and the disks respectively as follows:
rcyl = 1mm/s
50kN
−−−−→0.5mm/s
100kN
−−−−−→0.2mm/s
(2.5)
rcs = 1mm/s
150kN
−−−−−→0.5mm/s
250kN
−−−−−→0.2mm/s
(2.6)
where rcyl is the displacement rate for the hydraulic piston during compression testing of concrete
cylinders and rcs is the displacement rate during testing of concrete disks.
Due to mechanical problems, the pressure in the main pump, supporting the INSTRON-machine was
lost, indeﬁnitely, therefore CC_4 was performed in a diﬀerent servo hydraulic machine (referred to
as TONI). However when using the TONI-machine it is only possible to "load-control" the loading
rate. To approximate the loading rate to the one used in the INSTRON-machine, the total time was
compared and a rate of 0.5kN/s was found suitable for compression testing of disks and 0.5kN/s for
cylinders.
During the concrete compression testing, both the section in ﬁgure 2.17 and the facade seen in ﬁgure
2.18, were ﬁlmed with two high-resolution cameras (36.6MP) with lighting. Pictures were taken of
the painted surfaces every 20th second for later ARAMIS processing.
Figure 2.17: R.C. disk section, compression.
Figure 2.18: R.C. disk facade, compression.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Three step experimental test/work procedure
14
The concrete strain was measured as the length reduction over an initial distance of 103mm measured
by two LVDT’s attached by pressuring the LVDT’s against the concrete surface with a spring. Pressure
was upheld with hydraulic magnets as pictured in ﬁgure 2.19. The LVDT output was the average of the
two. They were calibrated with DANAK calibration equipment, seen in ﬁgure 2.10. For calibration
date and factor calibration, see appendix A.
Figure 2.19: LVDT’s, concrete compression test
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Theory
The Theory section includes ﬁrst a presentation of the theory describing the basic steel and concrete
properties, used in the 15 reinforced concrete prisms. Theory on concrete cracking induced by axial
tensioning of protruding rebar is presented in section 3.3. Then a theory on compression reduction
due to rebar in the transverse direction is presented in section 3.4. Lastly in section 3.5, a theory
presentation on concrete strength reduction in biaxial loading, is found.
3.1
Reinforcement steel
The requirements for the material properties of the reinforcement used can be used in relation to the
Eurocode, is given in [EN1992-1-1, 2004].
Slack reinforcement is a highly ductile material, often described by its ductility properties.
The
Eurocode diﬀers between two types of steel, related to the transition from elastic to plastic yielding
and its tensile strength, see ﬁgure 3.1.
(a) Hot rolled steel
(b) Cold worked steel
Figure 3.1: Work curves [EN1992-1-1, 2004]
When the yield strength fy or the maximum tensile strength fu, is calculated, the stresses are given
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Concrete
16
by the nominal diameter and the applied force, as seen in equation 3.1.
σs = F
As
(3.1)
Where σs is the steel stress, F is the tensile force and As = (D/2)2 · π is the initial nominal
reinforcement area.
The elasticity modulus E is deﬁned by Hook’s law in the linear elastic phase, see equation3.2.
σs = E · ϵs ⇒E = σs
ϵs
(3.2)
In the Eurocode, reinforcement is divided in to three classes, class a, class b and class c. Some of the
requirements are presented in table 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Eurocode, Steel classes (Danish), [Bjarne Chr. Jensen and Plum, 2009]
3.2
Concrete
Concrete is a brittle material with an elastic-plastic behaviour.
The compressive cylinder strength of concrete fc is in the Eurocode [EN1992-1-1, 2004] deﬁned from
tests on cylindrical test specimens with a diameter dc = 150mm and the height hc = 300mm, however
in this thesis concrete cylinders are cast in the dimensions dc = 100mm and hc = 200. The strength
is found from
fc = F
Ac
(3.3)
Where F is the compressive force and Ac is the initial area or the cross section. It is well known from
the literature, that both the average strength and the standard deviation increases when decreasing
the size of a specimen. This is related to a lower number of ﬂaws in smaller concrete specimens
[Noor and Boswell, 1992, p. 49].
A conversion factor is presented in the literature [Nielsen, 1974, p. 8] with an increase in concrete
cylinder strength, when scaling the Eurocode reference cylinder by a factor 0.5
fc = fc0.5
1.03
(3.4)
==PAGE:24==
3.3 Cracks in reinforced Concrete members Exposed to Pure Tension
17
Where fc0.5 is the strength of a concrete cylinder with the height, hc = 200mm and a diameter of
dc = 100mm, and fc being the strength of a Eurocode reference cylinder with its dimension beeing
dc = 200mm and hc = 300mm.
The Eurocode presents a model to describe the stress-shortening strain behaviour of a uniaxial com-
pression state for short term loading. The model is depicted in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Work curve, short term uniaxial compression, [EN1992-1-1, 2004]
Here the elasticity modulus of the concrete is described as a secant modulus as seen by equation(3.5).
Ec = 0.4 fc
ϵc,0.4
(3.5)
The concrete tension strength is very limited and will in this report be calculated from equation
[Nielsen, 1993].
ft =
p
fc
(3.6)
3.3
Cracks in reinforced Concrete members Exposed to Pure Tension
When reinforced concrete members are exposed to axial tension to some extent, crack formation will
occur. In this section load induced cracks will be discussed.
Primary cracks The ﬁrst transverse crack will occur when stresses exceed the axial concrete tensile
strength ft. This will happen at the weakest point in the specimen. The location of the weak point will
be caused by irregularities in the concrete matrix, hence it cannot be predicted beforehand. It will occur
in-between the two lengths from each end, at where the steel transfers forces to the concrete matrix,
until a maximum is reached in the mid part. These forces are called bonding forces. After cracking
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Cracks in reinforced Concrete members Exposed to Pure Tension
18
and signiﬁcant deformation, plain concrete which suﬀers splitting cracks looses a signiﬁcant amount
of its stiﬀening contribution until all of it is lost and the crack is fully propagated. [Nielsen, 1993].
Where the crack develops, the reinforcement obtains all the tensile stress previously obtained by the
concrete matrix. Bond stresses will again increasingly transfer forces from the reinforcement to the
concrete matrix. The further from the crack, the greater the stresses in the concrete will be. The
non-linear rate of which the stresses can increase depends on the reinforcements ability to transfer
bond stresses, concrete strength/ductility, and reinforcement ratio. By further elongation the bond
stresses will again exceed the concrete tensile stresses and cause a new crack.
Detailed non micro crack development, based on test specimens similar to the specimens used in this
report, has been described by Yukimasa Goto [Goto, 1971]. The lugs on the deformed bars creates
a bonding mechanism with the surrounding concrete matrix. Lateral cracks are ﬁrst formed, as seen
in ﬁgure 3.4. These are here designated as "primary cracks". The better the bonding mechanism, the
smaller the crack distance. If steel tension is increased, internal and longitudinal cracking is formed.
Occasionally other transverse cracks occur within the minimum distance of an adjacent primary crack,
these are designated secondary cracks.
Figure 3.4: Picture of crack development [Goto, 1971]
Internal cracking
Around deformed bars, shortly after formation of primary cracks, small internal cracks are formed
which do not appear at the concrete surface, see Fig: Gotoschematic. These cracks ﬁrst develop near
a primary crack, then with increase in steel strain, they progress farther from the primary cracks.
Internal cracks are angled (45 -80 deg) towards the nearest primary crack as seen in ﬁgure 3.4. The
angles in the section are due to a formation of cones with their apexes near bar lugs and with their
bases generally directed towards the nearest primary cracks. An internal crack sometimes grows to
such an extent that it appears at the inner face of the primary crack.
==PAGE:26==
3.3 Cracks in reinforced Concrete members Exposed to Pure Tension
19
Figure 3.5: Schematic diagram of deformation of concrete around reinforcing steel after formation of
internal cracks [Goto, 1971]
Secondary cracks
It appears that, following the formation of internal cracks and at fairly high steel stresses, some of the
internal cracks grow from their tips and reach the concrete surface to be secondary cracks. Secondary
cracks are angled as they are progressed interior cracks.
Cracks in direction of bar axis (longitudinal cracks)
When deformed bars are used, there are cases, at fairly high steel stresses, where the concrete adjacent
to existing primary cracks also cracks in the direction of the bar axis, here called longitudinal cracks.
Longitudinal cracks are ﬁrst formed near the steel bar at the faces of primary cracks and then grow
towards the outside of the specimen as the steel stress becomes fairly high.
Other studies [Krstulovic and LaFave, 1994] observed that longitudinal cracks are caused by high
circumferential stresses. It has been found that the load level at which longitudinal cracking occurs is
dependent on the cover thickness, the average bond stress at the interface, and the composite tensile
stress-strain response.
At ﬁrst they lead to a loss of adhesion between steel and concrete. The bond between deformed
bars and concrete must then depend on the mechanical resistance of lugs and the frictional resistance
between concrete and steel. When elongation of the steel bar is increased, these crack will evidently
cause debonding, complete splitting and bursting of concrete cover.
After release of tensile force
Complete relaxation of the external tensile load on the steel bar after formation of internal cracks does
not return the steel stress to zero over the part covered by the concrete (even at the primary cracks).
The widths of primary cracks at the prism surface become zero but not at the surface of concrete. It is
thought that once the concrete is deformed and undergoes plastic deformation, it does not return to its
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Cracks in reinforced Concrete members Exposed to Pure Tension
20
former state even when the steel tensile force is relaxed, due to the interlocking friction at the surfaces
of the internal cracks.
Crack distance and crack widths
Multiple models for calculating the crack distances and widths have been made. From the Eurocode
model [EN1992-1-1, 2004], based on the French model code [CEB, 1985], the crack spacing and a
characteristic crack width can be calculated.
M.P. Nielsen [Nielsen, 1993] has derived a model for calculating the mean crack spacing and the mean
and maximum crack width.
The CEB- model describes a discontinuous behaviour by a combination of two states depending on
whether the ﬁrst primary crack has occurred.
State I: Uncracked sections. It is assumed that both concrete and reinforcement are active in tension
and compression.
State II: Fully cracked sections. It is assumed that the reinforcement is active both in tension and
compression while concrete is only eﬀective in compression. Thus, the concrete in tension does not
contribute to the stiﬀness of the member.
It is seen from ﬁgure 3.6 that the member stiﬀness and its postcracking deformation response after the
ﬁrst crack, are still aﬀected and incurs a stiﬀness contribution from the concrete parts, even though the
main elongation happens in the primary crack. The stiﬀness contribution in the crack is only from the
reinforcement, as brittle matrices, such as concrete, lose their tensile load carrying capacity almost
immediately.
Each crack after the ﬁrst will result in a further reduction of the stiﬀness in the member. Increasing
steel elongation will cause more cracks to occur until a stabilized crack pattern is formed. When a
stabilized crack pattern is reached the existing cracks will widen instead of new cracks being formed.
Figure 3.6: Thoretical work curve for reinforced concrete in tension, [CEB, 1985]
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Cracks in reinforced Concrete members Exposed to Pure Tension
21
In the thesis experiments have been carried out introducing crack formation as described. The theory
and test dictates that the stabilized primary crack system, to some extent, has formation consistency.
But the location of the ﬁrst crack and the reinforcement ratio will dictate the location of the next
primary crack. This means that the overall system placement will be translated when comparing one
prism to the next. After cutting reinforced concrete prisms into disks, the number of primary cracks
and their location within each disk will vary, therefore the overall cracking in a concrete disk will be
described by the normalized elongation over the length of the prism piece to be cut into one disk.
Because of this the model will not be elaborated further. Only the model given by M.P. Nielsen for
estimating the mean crack distance is presented in the following:
Figure 3.7 shows the bonding stress distribution in a segment of a reinforced concrete member in
tension between two cracks.
A simpliﬁed assumption is that the maximum value of the bond stresses τu between reinforcement and
concrete can occur with a maximum value along any given length of the reinforcement bar.
Figure 3.7: Bonding stress distribution in a section between two cracks [Nielsen, 1993]
Over the length l = 2· a in ﬁgure 3.7 the bonding forces are acting in opposite directions of the tension
force. It is assumed that a is given just so the the crack will develop in a mid section when the cracking
resistance ftef Ac is met. By equilibrium this is described in equation (3.7).
πnDaτu = ftef Ac
(3.7)
where D is the reinforcement diameter. n is the number of reinforcement bars. Ac is the cross sectional
concrete area. and ftef is the eﬀective tensile strength of concrete.
ftef = νt ft
(3.8)
where νt = 0.5 is a concrete tensile eﬃciency factor and ft is the concrete tensile strength given by
ft =
p
fc0.1, fc being the compressive strength for a concrete cylinder.
From equation (3.7), equation 3.9 can be derived.
a =
Ac
nπD
ftef
τu
= β
λ
(3.9)
where β = nD
4π is a factor related to the crack and λ =
τu
tte f = 2 is a bonding factor.
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Reduction of compressive concrete disk strength due to rebar
22
The largest crack distance is a yielding that the minimum crack distance has to be a, as a smaller
distance would require larger bonding stresses than τu, which by deﬁnition is the maximum.
As seen in ﬁgure 3.5 the internal cracks are formed by inclined stress resultants from the steel lugs.
Near a primary crack this diagonal force creates a slip between reinforcement and concrete over a
distance 1
2 · l0. between concrete and reinforcement on either side of the crack.
l0 =

1 + σs
100

D ≤

1.3c
0.65as
(3.10)
where,σs is the reinforcement stress in the crack, c is the concrete cover and as is the distance between
reinforcement bars.
When accountion for the slip the minimum primary crack distance will be a + 1
2 · l0
The mean value of the crack spacing is given by equation
lm = a0 + l0c = β
λ + l0c
(3.11)
l0c =
 
1 +
ftef
ρ · 100
!
D ≤

1.3c
0.65as
(3.12)
It is noted that the formulas from the literature on crack- distances and widths depends on the
reinforcement ratio ρ, the concrete tensile strength ft and the bond properties of the deformed
reinforcement related to the lugs.
3.4
Reduction of compressive concrete disk strength due to rebar
This section concerns the reduction of concrete compressive strength due to the precense of rebar in
the transverse direction to loading, also called rebar reduction.
Several researchers have through testing investigated the phenomena related to the presence of rein-
forcement and other bodies in concrete specimens. Muttoni [Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006] com-
pares the testing done by many of these researchers and suggest some alterations to the current code
provisions.
Fritz Leonhardt [Leonhardt, 1969] states that if a body (reinforcement bar) with a elasticity modulus
Es, is embedded in a plain concrete member which has a lower elasticity modulus Ec, the concrete
compression strength of the main body will be reduced, hence the secondary body (reinforcing bar)
has a diminishing inﬂuence, because the internal stress ﬁeld is disturbed, as seen in ﬁgure 3.8 (b). The
presence of a stiﬀmember attracts a large part of the eﬀort, inducing greater stresses and transverse
==PAGE:30==
3.4 Reduction of compressive concrete disk strength due to rebar
23
tensile stresses in the immediate vicinity of the steel bar. On the contrary, the presence of an empty
duct (low elasticity modulus), has the eﬀect of deviating the compression ﬁeld around the void, as seen
in ﬁgure 3.8 (a). In this case transverse tensile stresses are induced further from the empty duct(near
the concrete surface).
Figure 3.8: Eﬀect of presence of ducts in webs on compression ﬁeld [Leonhardt, 1969]
In addition to the stress ﬁeld disturbance, some adverse eﬀects on the quality of the concrete in the
immediate vicinity of the duct, causes compressive strength reduction This may be caused by less
dense concrete immediately underneath the secondary member and cracks along the member path due
to compaction.
The literature mainly concerns ducts of diﬀerent inclination, stiﬀnesses and locations. Leonhardt did
also test specimens with solid steel bars instead of injected ducts. The results were not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent, showing that the stiﬀness of the secondary member is not a governing parameter.
The compressive strain distribution over the thickness of the panel at the level of the tendon showed
that strains parallel to the load are larger near the duct than on the side surface, regardless of whether
the ducts are injected or not.
In equation (3.13), a strength reduction factor ηD to be applied to the concrete strength is seen. This
is also implemented in the code provision.
ηD = 1 −kd · δ
(3.13)
Where δ = P D/bcs is the ratio of the sum of reinforcement diameter, P D to disk thickness, bcs in
the critical section.
The diameter correction factor kd is given for diﬀerent kinds of ducts. Muttoni suggest kd = 0.4 for
an injected steel duct. As the stiﬀnesses do not have signiﬁcant inﬂuence this will be applied for pure
steel bars.
Mottoni also comments on the inﬂuence of two ducts placed on top of one another. Increasing the
spacing between the two ducts increases the strength of the panel. When the spacing between ducts
reaches one times the duct diameter, the strength reduction compared with a specimen with only one
duct is negligible for injected ducts.
In ﬁgure 3.9, some failure mechanisms are pictured. Here steel is a grout injected steel duct.
==PAGE:31==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
24
Figure 3.9: failure mechanisms [Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006]
3.5
Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
Predicting the response of a precracked reinforced concrete disk is not so simple. The compres-
sive strength reduction is related to diﬀerent crack types pre-induced under axial tension loading as
described in section 2.4.1. Some cracks may close or propagate and new cracks may occur. The
load resisting structural system will then consist of separated concrete bodies, still interacting by
interlocking in the concrete matrix and held together by the reinforcement.
3.5.1
State of the art
Several authors have done work on cracking under inplane stress conditions. It is well known that the
cracking is of great importance for the load capacity of the reinforced disk. And that it is likely that the
disk shows a reduction of the compressive strength as well as an increase in softening with cracking.
Some tests were carried out on specimens subjected to shear and compression. Others were similarly
to the one investigated in this, exposed to transverse tensile stresses and compression. Test disks were
of diﬀerent geometry, with diﬀerent reinforcement amount and diameter. Common for the test is that
the in-plane stress condition was simultaneous. Though some were proportional while others were
subsequential. Also the loading rate diﬀered [A. Belarbi and Hsu, 1995]. All these diﬀerences causes
a larger scatter and poor correlation from one model to the next experimental data set.
The models presented in the literature for predicting the strength of cracked disks can be found in
the reference lists presented in [Vecchio and Collins, 1993] and [Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012].
All models are empirical given the complexity of the problem at hand. The authors, state diﬀerent
opinions on why or rather how to describe the cracking background of the given reduction.
The literature on pre-cracked concrete on theotherhandissparse. Muttoni[Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006]
have performed two tests on thin web panels.
Some work and models, performed on the mentioned stress state, will be presented in the following.
==PAGE:32==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
25
3.5.2
Vecchio and Collins
Vecchio and Collins [Vecchio and Collins, 1982] presented in 1982 the opinion that the compressive
strength reduction is a function of the average principal transverse tensile strains.
The authors performed analytical work which was later updated by Vecchio [?], to enable their model to
deal with reinforced concrete subjected to shear. Their model, accounts for interlocking of aggregates
in cracks and was based on average principal stresses found by Mohr’s circle. The theory on this is
called modiﬁed compression ﬁeld theory (MCFT).
Their model on concrete disks subjected to biaxial stresses, are derived only by empirical analysis of
test results. It is presented in ﬁgure 3.10.
The observed ratio of peak stress f p in concrete to concrete cylinder compressive strength fc versus the
corresponding strain ratio ϵ dt/ϵ d, is compared with an empirical model expression for the reduction
of the concrete compressive strength. Here ϵ dt is the average principal tensile strain, and ϵ is the
average principal compressive strain observed in the specimens.
Figure 3.10: Peak principal compressive stresses as a function for [Leonhardt, 1969]
In a later paper [Vecchio and Collins, 1993], Vecchio and Collins give a review on the experimental
data available, of the various models proposed and of the accuracy of the models in correlation to the
test data.
Based on newer data, previously derived analytical models were updated. In regard to the data basis,
the following reﬁnements were made:
1. Only elements subjected to monotonic loads were considered; element subjected to cyclic loads
were omitted.
2. Elements that were improperly cast or tested were omitted; but data from elements failing prema-
turely due to mechanical problems were considered up until the point of failure.
3. Load stages representing post ultimate response were omitted.
4. Load stages at which the principal compressive strain was less than 0.1ϵ0, were omitted.
==PAGE:33==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
26
After omission of unﬁt disk specimens, two models were proposed based on 443 data sets. The
models were also based on a new parabolar shape of the compression softening stress-stain relation
[Vecchio and Collins, 1993]. A strength-strain model with the primary variables as ϵ1, being the
average principal tensile strain and ϵ2, which is the average principal compressive strain, was presented
as "model A", see ﬁgure 3.12(a).
Figure 3.11: Peak principal compressive stresses as a function for [Leonhardt, 1969]
fcs.red· = fcs *
,
1 −η
 l
a
!2
+
-
(3.14)
(a) Model A
(b) Model B
Figure 3.12: Models on cracked concrete disk subjected to biaxial compression
A model with ϵ1, being the average pricipal tensile strain, as the prime variable in a "strength only"
softening model, was presented as "model B", it is here given by the equation 5.1.
==PAGE:34==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
27
In the illustrations fc.2.base is deﬁned from "base" curves, describing the concrete softening, see ﬁgure
3.11 related to model B. here fc.2.base is the concrete cylinder strength, for model A the model for
describing the softening is more complicated and can be studied in the literature.
fcs.red
fc
=
1
1 + 0.27
 ϵ1
ϵc −0.37

(3.15)
Where fcs.red is the compressive strength of a cracked disk.
ϵ0 = ϵc is the strain in concrete cylinder at peak stress fc.
As seen from ﬁgure 3.12(b),reductions down to 20 −33% of the fc were recorded.
Vecchio and Collins report that Shirai and Noguchi (1989) tested a number of uniaxially reinforced
panels under tension-compressive states with loading applied in the reinforcement directions. They
found that the concrete compressive strength and stiﬀness were signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the average
tensile strains, by the tensile force applied to the reinforcement, and by the bond properties of the
reinforcing bars.
3.5.3
Linh C. Hoang et al.
At present most models made, proposes formulas on the strength reduction depending on the variable
ϵ1, without accounting the reinforcement ratio ρ. LinhC.Hoangetal. [Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012]
present a model accounting for the reinforcement ratio, as the ratio has inﬂuence on the crack distance
and internal cracking. The model is also based on a test review of collected tests. The model only
concerns elastic deformation of the reinforcing bars and the collected tests had transverse strain less
than or in the order of the reinforcement yield strain ϵy.
A total number of 127 tests were selected.
Figure 3.13: Tension-compression with reinforcement layout: (a)θ = 0 deg /90 deg, (b) θ ± 45 deg
and (c) pure shear [Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012]
The author present a schematic explanation of the damage caused by internal cracking. Figure 3.14
shows two adjacent primary cracks at the distance a. The cracks are crossed by a reinforcement
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
28
bar that transfers a tensile force T = Asσs. After the development of the primary cracks and as a
consequence of an increase in the reinforcement stress, σs, a system of three dimensional internal
cracks is developed. These internal cracks may be envisaged as a kind of local punching failures
caused by the bursting stresses from the ribbed bars. An assumption, that the punching failure is cone
shaped, is made. The extent of internal cracking and thus the size of the concrete cones depend on
the tensile force in the reinforcement. The extent of internal cracking is described by the penetration
length l.
Figure 3.14: Reduced strength in zones with internal cracking [Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012]
The internal cracks introduce local damages in the concrete. It is therefore reasonable to assume that
the compression stress transmitted through zones with internal cracks must be reduced in comparison
with the strength of uncracked concrete.
A stress distribution at the ultimate state as depicted in ﬁgure 3.14 is considered. In the undamaged
zone with length (a −l), the full compressive strength of the disk fcs may be transferred. Within the
zones with internal cracking, however an average of the reduced strength fcs.red.p, is assumed. Now,
the system of internal cracks is three dimensional. It is expected that the extent of local damages across
the thickness of the disk will increase as the penetration length l increases. This has been illustrated in
ﬁgure 3.14 (to the right) where diﬀerent punching cone diameters have been indicated. It follows from
the above argument that the average reduced disk strength fcs.red.p is not a constant value. Hence,
fcs.red.p decreases as the penetration length l increases. A linear decrease is assumed:
fcs,red.p =
 
1 −η l
a
!
(3.16)
where η is a damage factor, to be calibrated, which has to be less than unity .
To determine the load carrying capacity of the disk, resultants of the stress distribution shown in ﬁgure
Fig:LinhInter are found. The stress resultants are thereafter used to calculate an average compressive
stress, fcs, which is the reduced compressive strength of the disk due to transverse tension. A resultant
equilibrium as in equation (3.17) applies.
fcs.redat = fcst(a −l) + 2 l
2t fcs
 
1 −η l
a
!
(3.17)
which leads to equation (3.18).
fcs.red· = fcs *
,
1 −η
 l
a
!2
+
-
(3.18)
==PAGE:36==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
29
The next step is to asses the crack distance. This is done as described in (3.9). Here using only the
minimum distance approximation.
a = D
8ρ
(3.19)
To make formula (3.18) useful in practice a relationship between the penetration length of internal
cracking l and the reinforcement tensile force is suggested.
The development of a cone shaped internal crack surface can, as mentioned, be envisaged as the
development of a local punching failure surface around the reinforcement bar.
A simpliﬁcation is made when assuming that the punching load approximately, at least, is proportional
to the area of the failure surface and the tensile strength of concrete ft. This gives the relations in
equation (3.20)
Asσs ∝Asur f ace ft
(3.20)
With Asσs = T being the punching load and Asur f ace is the surface of a cone.
Without loosing generality [Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012] (3.20) can be rewritten to equation
(3.21).
Asσs ∝l2 ft
(3.21)
From (3.21) it can be deducted that the penetration length l must be proportional to
p
(σs/ ft) because
As = π
4 D, hence the relation in equation (3.22) is established.
l = C
rσs
ft
D
(3.22)
Where C is a factor to be calibrated from test results. Note that a geometrical restriction, l ≤a, must
be imposed on formula (3.22). In the limiting case with l = a, we will have internal cracks over the
entire zone between adjacent macro cracks.
The factors to be calibrated was ﬁtted for best correlation between the model and the 127 test specimens
yield a damage factor η = 0.5 and factor C = 0.248
For convenience, formula 5.2 is rewritten by replacing a and l with the right hand sides of formula
(3.19) and (3.22). By also inserting the factors η and C. This leads to formula (3.23)
fcs.red = fcs(1 −η χ2),
f or χ ≤1
(3.23)
Where
χ = 1.95ρ
q
σs
ft
The reduction is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.15. Here the value ν is a proposed eﬀectiveness factor related to
the Eurocode. ν = σc/ fc in Equation (3.23) is normalized with the concrete compressive strength fc.
Also a theoretical suggestion of what might occur when the reinforcement is stressed to yielding and
the strain increases. The prop in strength is suggested to be formulated as an increase in the damage
factor η.
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
30
Figure 3.15: Cracked concrete disk strength, steel yielding [Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012]
3.5.4
Discussion by Belarbi and Hsu
The authors’ tests of 30 panels in 1982 contributed greatly to the understanding of the softening
phenomenon by relating the stress-softening coeﬃcient to the transverse tensile strain.
In an article [A. Belarbi and Hsu, 1995], a general discussion of the problem on establishing a softened
compressive stress-strain curve of cracked reinforced concrete disks, is performed. Diﬃculties in
measuring the compressive strains are addressed. In general the true nature of the two-dimensional
softening phenomenon is still unclear.
When measuring the strain by few LVDT’s, results will be unreliable as a LVDT located between two
cracks may measure a small compressive strain, but an LVDT crossing a crack may measure a strain
four times larger. It was concluded that a reasonably reliable average compressive strain would require
measurements from at least eight LVDT’S uniformly distributed in the measured compression region
and two LVDT’s in the measured tension region.
==PAGE:38==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
31
3.5.5
Muttoni
Muttoni [Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006] investigated two pre-cracked specimens, W21 and W22.
They were cut from bridge panels containing two steel duct from post-tensioning, as seen in ﬁgure
3.16.
Figure 3.16: Cut out from pre-crack bridge panel [Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006]
The bridge girder, before cutting, had been tested in the laboratory. It was thus extensively cracked,
although the girder had failed in shear at the opposite side of the beam.
The orientation of the panels, W21 and W22 was chosen, so that the shear cracks were running parallel
to the direction of the loading. Also two reference specimens (W23 and W24) without tendons and
with no visible cracking, were extracted from the existing bridge girders. The uncracked reference
panels W23 and W24 were extracted in a vertical orientation.
Specimen W21 and W22 reached fcs.red.c/ fcs = 56% being the strength of a disk with strength
reduction due to a combination of duct and cracking, related to the strength of their reference panels.
Muttoni addresses that it is much lower than the laboratory specimens with no cracking and injected
steel ducts. And that the reduction is mainly caused by the previous shear loading and the resulting
cracks parallel to the compression ﬁeld.
He calculates the reduced strength due to deformation by the model proposed by Vecchio in equation
(5.1). With a measured tensile strain equal to ϵ1 = 3.5h and a reference concrete cylinder strain
ϵ p = −2h, a strength reduction factor (on fc) is calculated to νV = fcs.red/ fc = 0.7. It is noted that
the article does not mention if ϵ1 is measured before or after shear cracking. The diﬀerence is not
large but lets assume the the measuring took place after cracking, as it otherwise would be diﬃcult to
identify the exact direction of the principal strains.
. .
. Muttoni then makes a comparison. He assumes the same principal tensile strain ϵ1 = 3.5h in two
specimens without cracks(W11 and W12), but with similar ducts. He calculates a reduction factor
to νV = 0.73. And then he multiplies this factor with the duct reduction factor described in section
ηD.W11 = 0.71 and ηD.W12 = 0.82 respectively. He hereby suggest that the two strength reduction
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Compression strength of cracked reinforced concrete disks
32
factors ηD and νV can be combined by multiplication, as in equation (3.24)
νC = ηD · νV
(3.24)
The two tests combined reduction factors νC.W11 = 0.52 and νC.W12 = 0.60 compares well with the
strength reduction factor fcs.red.c/ fcs = 56% from W23 and W24.
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4
Experimental observations and
analysis
In this chapter the test results are presented, described, analysed and veriﬁed. Plots and graphs are
based on collected data from the testing procedure. The material properties are determined in a section
regarding the preliminary design.
4.1
Preliminary results
4.1.1
Concrete casting
The moisture content of the aggregates was in general very low and not much water had to be add or
subtracted to account for this.
When casting the ﬁst set (D16). The concrete was dry and had to be vibrated vigorously and for a
longer time than expected. After the casting set D16, a test casting of 10L was carried out from the
same recipe to examine the workability. The test cast showed a larger slump, and it was concluded
that a fault in weighing the diﬀerent components must have taken place, presumably too little water
was applied. No changes were made for casting set D20 and D25, which showed better workability.
After deshuttering more air voids were observed on the specimen surfaces of set D16 than on the
surfaces of set D20 and D25.
For some cylinders, where insuﬃcient form oil was applied, a top surface was observed as being to
rough due to adhesion between concrete and the steel led. These cylinders were ground before testing.
A good bonding mechanism was obtained as seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Preliminary results
34
Figure 4.1: Well established bonding interface revealed after compression failure
4.1.2
Reinforcement steel
Reinforcement steel bars were tested to determine the material properties, the elastic modulus Es, the
yield stress fy, the yield strain ϵy and the steel class. All parameters are mean values.
The clip
gage measuring the strains had to be demounted, before necking of the steel, to insure that it was not
damaged. The full development is depicted as the Load over the position of the piston in appendix B.
22 test were conducted, but many test had to be discarded due to problems often related to the issue of
ensuring a ﬁrm grip at the bar end.
An average development of the stress-strain curves is plotted by linear interpolation in 1000 increments,
see MatLab scripts and data ﬁles in appendix A, depicted by a black punctured line.
The steel
parameters are based on this average, where the Elasticity modulus is the inclination of the linear
elastic development.
The stress-strain relations of the tested rods, is depicted for each nominal diameter D16, D20 and D25
in ﬁgure 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4. respectively. In general a good consistency is observed for the rods.
The rods with a nominal diameter D = 16mm, experiences a softer development and a smoother
transmission into yielding. Although roughly speaking it still has a fairly deﬁned yield plateau, why
the yield strength is registered at the peak and not from a 2h permanent deformation, as it should have
been, in the case of cold formed steel. This deviates little from a complete linear elastic formulation
by hooks law and is considered acceptable.
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Preliminary results
35
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Strain [mm/mm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Stress [MPa]
σD16TS1_2
fy1=608MPa
σD16TS1_3
fy2=611MPa
σD16TS2_1
fy3=593MPa
σD16TS2_3
fy4=592MPa
σD16TS3_3
fy5=596MPa
σs.ave
fy=600.0MPa
ǫy=0.43%
E=185.2GPa
Figure 4.2: Stress-strain, test D16TS
For the D25 and D20 steel bars, a clear yielding plateau is observed, hence the steel is hot rolled and
the yield strength is found at the peak before yielding.
Unforunatly, only 3 rods gave usable results for the D25.
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Strain [mm/mm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Stress [MPa]
σD20TS3_1
fy1=572MPa
σD20TS2_2
fy2=581MPa
σD20TS3_2
fy3=570MPa
σD20TS1_1
fy4=552MPa
σs.ave
fy=568.8MPa
ǫy=0.37%
E=194.2GPa
Figure 4.3: Stress-strain, test D20TS
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Preliminary results
36
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0.016
0.018
0.02
Strain [mm/mm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Stress [MPa]
σD25TS1_1
fy1=538MPa
σD25TS2_2
fy2=541MPa
σD25TS3_1
fy3=557MPa
σs.ave
fy=545.3MPa
ǫy=0.35%
E=198.6GPa
Figure 4.4: Stress-strain, test D25TS
Results are given in table 4.1 and the it is noted that
Table 4.1: Steel parameters
fy[MPa]
ϵy[%]
Ft[kN]
fut[MPa]
E[GPa]
ft/ fy
D16
600.0
0.43
147.2
732.0
185.2
1.22
D20
568.8
0.37
215.3
685.4
194.2
1.20
D25
545.3
0.35
320.7
653.2
196.8
1.19
From the ﬁrst requirement fut/ fy, meets the steel class C, for 1.15 ≤ft/ fy < 1.35.
4.1.3
Cylinder strength
The material properties are determined as the concrete compression strength is of importance, when
discussing and comparing results to the presented reduction theories. The concrete tensile strength
has inﬂuence on the crack distance.
10 Cylinders were cast from each casting set, set- D16, D20 and D25. The aim for the compressive
strength in each set was 30MPa.
Every time an experimental concrete compression phase here by refered to as, CC_1, CC_2, CC_3 or
CC_4 was carried out, compression tests on cylinders was also carried out.
The results are divided into three: "test", CC_1 −3 and CC_4. The compressive strength of each
specimen is plotted according to the days after casting in ﬁgure 4.5. Where the results are adjusted for
geometric comparability to the Eurocode cylinder, see equation (3.4).
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Preliminary results
37
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Compressive strength [MPa]
Days after casting
D16CC_Test
D20CC_test
D25CC_Test
D16CC_1-3
D20CC_1-3
D25CC_1-3
D16CC_4
D20CC_4
D25CC_4
D25Extreme
Figure 4.5: Compressive strength fc of all cylinders
The ﬁrst test sequence referred to, as the "test series", is performed using the TONI servo hydraulic
machine, which was load controlled.
Test CC_1 −3, were executed on the INSTRON(Position
controlled). And CC_4 was again carried out on the TONI-machine.
The "test series" were carried out the same day, but each cylinder had diﬀerent casting dates, therefore
the cylinders had hardened for 16, 17 and 18 days. They were compressed by a loading rate of
6.28kN/s which is the loading rate suggested in Eurocode.
It is well known that the concrete
compression strength will turn out higher, when the load rate is higher. In the load series, a lower
compressive strength is observed despite the increase in rate. This observation shows the strength
development over time due to hydration, this is conﬁrmed as moisture was observed in the fractured
specimens after testing, hence free water was present for further hydration.
The concrete can increase further in strength after the 28 days, which is considered a maximum
constant according to the Eurocode [EN1992-1-1, 2004]. But the experimental data from CC_1 −3
after 50 days, shows no consistency in strength increase.
The testing of phase CC_4 was executed in the TONI by load control. From ﬁgure 4.5, a signiﬁcant
higher compression strength is observed by when applying the TONI machine.
The increase in
strength might also be due to grinding of most cylinders of CC_4, but disk specimens of CC_4 were
also grinded to ensure compatibility.
Not all failure modes for the cylinders were observed, as they were not compressed extensively beyond
their compression strength. Those observed was cone fractures with one exception, being the extreme
D25 value, also shown in ﬁgure 4.5. This specimen experienced a splitting failure mode.
Based on the above observations, it is decided to omit the "test series" and the extreme D25 specimen.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Preliminary results
38
The rest of the data is still divided into CC_1 −3 and CC_4. Also a parametric material diﬀerence
in-between casts D16, D20 and D25 is kept.
The mean values and the test standard deviation, based on selected specimens, deﬁning the diﬀerent
concrete types are plotted in ﬁgure 4.6.
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
Compression strength
Concrete type
D16CC_1-3
D16CC_4
D20CC_1-3
D20CC_4
D25CC_1-3
D25CC_4
Figure 4.6: Mean
In ﬁgure 4.7 the stress-strain curves of the D16 cylinders, where strain measurements was registered,
is presented. Curves for compression test of cylinders from casting set D20 and D25 is presented in
appendix C.
A large increase in concrete stiﬀness is observed in the test performed on the TONI-machine for
CC4(being specimen cylD16CCG and cylD16CCI. This increase can be explained either by the
diﬀerence in loading rate or by a potential surface roughness diﬀerence between the specimen and the
machine steel surface.
The diﬀerence in stiﬀness is large. It is hard to imagine that this is caused by the above mentioned
factors. The steel surface of the machine was both smooth and seemed similar, and the total loading
time was approximately the same.
==PAGE:46==
4.1 Preliminary results
39
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σcylD16CC_C
fc.cylD16CC_C=36.2MPa
σcylD16CC_D
fc.cylD16CC_D=32.4MPa
σcylD16CC_E
fc.cylD16CC_E=33.9MPa
σcylD16CC_F
fc.cylD16CC_F=33.7MPa
σcylD16CC_G
fc.cylD16CC_G=37.5MPa
σcylD16CC_I
fc.cylD16CC_I=34.4MPa
Ec
0.4*fc
Figure 4.7: Stress strain curve for cylinders
The mean values for the the diﬀerent concrete types are presented in table ?? and parameters for each
specimen is presented in table in appendix C table C.1.
The stress strain curves are not adjusted for geometric comparability to the Eurocode cylinder, see
equation (3.4). This means that the values of stiﬀness Ec and the concrete strain ϵc at peak stress fc
will be a little higher than for a Eurocode cinder of the same concrete.
Table 4.2: Mean concrete parameters
Concrete type
fc[MPa]
Std[Mpa]
ft[Mpa]
ϵc[h]
Ec[Gpa]
D16CC_1-3
32.4
1.7
1.80
2.65
25.48
D16CC_4
33.7
2.2
1.84
2.15
44.06
D20CC_1-3
31.2
1.2
1.77
2.74
24.48
D20CC_4
36.4
2.3
1.91
3.02
49.16
D25CC_1-3
31.1
1.2
1.76
2.54
31.12
D25CC_4
35.2
2.1
1.88
2.58*
46.61*
Few tests were done for the E-modulus, Ec for the fourth testing cycle, why values rest on a thin basis.
The E-modulus Ec and concrete strain at peak stress ϵc for D25CC_4∗is roughly estimated as the
average of the mean E-modulus of D16CC_4 and D20CC_4.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
40
4.2
Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
The load deformation behaviour of the reinforced concrete prism specimens subjected to tension is
described by comparing the deformation response to the stress-strain behaviour of the bare steel bar,
measured at the bottom on the protruding reinforcement, as seen in ﬁgure 2.8. The concrete response
is monitored by picture processing in ARAMIS. The ARAMIS strain measurements are veriﬁed by
comparison with the strain data from the LVDT’s. LVDT’s were only applied for experimental cycles
TC_1, TC_2 and TC_3 (Not TC_4).
Data ﬁles are found on the enclosed CD with a ﬁle description in appendix A.
A case presentation of each specimen, is found in appendix D. The tested specimens are listed in table
4.3. •
Table 4.3: Concrete tension tested elements
Case
Reference
D16TC_1
page 71
D20TC_1
page 72
D25TC_1
page 73
D16TC_2
page 74
D20TC_2
page 75
D25TC_2
page 76
D16TC_3
page 77
D20TC_3
page 78
D25TC_3
page 79
D16TC_4
page 80
D20TC_4
page 81
D25TC_4
page 82
Tabel D.1
page 83
The specimens tested with results summarized, are listed in table D.1
For the presentation of the results, a specimen example being D16TC_2, will be used in the following.
D16TC_2 refers to the tension testing of the element from the second testing cycle(ϵs.br), with a rebar
with a nominal diameter of 16mm.
In ﬁgure 4.8, the crack formation development of the representative specimen is depicted. It was found
that the best way to visualize crack development was by major surface strain development in the range
0 −5%
A quite irregular crack development is observed in the representative specimens as well as in all the
other specimens.
The cracking at the point where the yield stress of the reinforcement is met, is observed in ﬁgure 4.8(f),
and a stabilized crack pattern is met. This means that the crack distance can be compared with the
theoretical crack distance described in section 3.3.
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
41
(a) Picture 0, ϵ1 = 0%
(b) Picture 9, ϵ1 = 0.047%
(c) Picture 10, ϵ1 = 0.061%
(d) Picture 14, ϵ1 = 0.109%
(e) Picture 22, ϵ1 = 0.187%
(f) Picture 33, ϵ1 = 0.301% ϵs = ϵy
(g) Picture 60, ϵ1 = 0.587%
(h) Picture 80, ϵ1 = 0.877%
(i) Picture 100, ϵ1 = 1.147%
(j) Picture 117, ϵ1 = 1.421%
Figure 4.8: ARAMIS Load response in 10 stages
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
42
Strain measurements in sections (bot, mid, and top), that after cutting becomes disk, was conducted for
each test. The average strains from ARAMIS were measured over lines in the middle of the specimen,
as seen in ﬁgure.
(a) Major strains before release brD16TC_2
(b) Major strains after release arD16TC_2
Figure 4.9: ARAMIS line-strains before and after release
In ﬁgure 4.10, a deformation progress comparison of steel bar-(from Instron machine), LVDT-(from
external logger) and ARAMIS data, is presented.
A program (provided by Alexander Mitchel, Post doc at DTU) was used to extrapolate data from the
multiple image series. A MatLab-script found on the enclosed CD, see Appendix A, was then written
to match time stamps from pictures against stamps from data ﬁles. Matching then enabled plotting by
use of the same script.
0
5
10
15
20
0
50
100
150
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=132.5kN
ǫs.br
FVLDT
ǫVLDT.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure 4.10: Force- strain curve D16TC_2
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
43
The diﬀerence between steel deformation and combined steel and concrete deformation is attributed to
the tensile stresses in the concrete matrix between transverse cracks, contributing to a larger stiﬀness.
Due to brittleness of concrete, these cracks cannot transfer any signiﬁcant stress across the crack
after full development of the crack. Consequently this means that the maximum tensile load of the
reinforced concrete equals the tensile strength of the steel only. In the initial post-cracking loading
of the concrete material, reinforcement and concrete matrix deform elastically. The bonding forces
are built up from where concrete meets the protruding rebar in both ends. The ﬁrst major transverse
crack will, as described in the literature, occur when the concrete cracking force is reached. This will
happen at the weakest point in the specimen, but in-between the two lengths from each end, where the
steel transfers forces to the concrete matrix until a maximum is reached in the mid part.
The sudden increase in strain and load drop at approximately 45kN tension loading occurs when the
initial crack development results in an instant stiﬀness loss when the concrete tensile strength ft is
exceeded. The drop in load is explained, as the servo hydraulic testing machine is position controlled.
This dramatic change from uncracked state to cracked state is related to the loading rate and is only
observed in some of the specimens e.g. D16TC_3, D16TC_4 and D20TC_4. In other specimens the
cracking occurred in a more smoothly progressive manner.
Two specimens (D20TC_3 and 16TC4) which were pre-damaged, presumably from being knocked
over by a pallet lifter. For specimen D20TC_3, the concrete force-strain development is deviating
from the CEB theory 3.6 where state 1(uncracked) is not present. This is because the damage crack
here is fully "developed" and causes stiﬀness loss already from the beginning of tension loading.
When investigating the crack formation of specimen 16TC_4, an irregular crack formation is observed
where the pre-damaging occurred.
Large average strains developed here and caused less strain
development in the remaining specimen. The damaging was so extensive that the middle part had to
be discarded after cutting.
The strain development, in many cases, mainly happens, especially after yielding in the reinforcement,
in the cracks. But for other specimens a major diﬀerence between average line strain and steel strain
is observed, see Appendix D25TC_3 D.1. This is due to yielding in the protruding reinforcement. In
ﬁgure 4.11(a), the increase in load is plotted over testing time. The strain developement in the steel
over time is plotted in ﬁgure 4.11(b). From ﬁgure (b) a clear acceleration in the strain development in
the vicinity of the clip gage in the rebar is observed after approximately 500 seconds of testing, which
explains the strain diﬀerence in ﬁgure D.19.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Load[kN]
Time[s]
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Steel strain [-]
Time[s]
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure 4.11: D25TC_3 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
44
A test example where yielding happened only in the cracks, is D25TC_2 on page 76.
In both
cases where no concrete strain development occurred after steel yielding was in prisms with D25
reinforcement.
In most tests the LVDT’s measured an average strain development lower, than the average strains
recorded in ARAMIS. This can be explained by less crack development outside of the area recorded
in ARAMIS, that was recorded by the LVDT’s, see ﬁgure 2.8. A good correlation between ARAMIS
and LVDT data is observed in test D16TC_2, see ﬁgure D.7 in the appendix page 74. This is caused
by a signiﬁcant cracking outside the splatter pattern as seen in ﬁgure D.8.
Noise in the strain measuring in the experimental cycleTC_3 is observed. This is caused by a change in
lighting conditions. The lighting on the specimens during the testing cycle was weaker, which means
that disturbances from background lighting is more inﬂuential. Changes in background lighting was
due to some automatic motion controlled lighting in permanent lamps in the ceiling of the experimental
hall and/or the mobile ceiling crane passing by and hereby casting shadows. The tests were carried
out after sunset which caused the background lighting to be more dominated by lamps.
There accuracy of strain measuremet is discussed by [A. Belarbi and Hsu, 1995], see section 3.5.4.
The number of LVDT’s, here equivalent to lines where over the average line strain is measured, is
claimed to be at least two to get a valid result. However from ﬁgure 4.12 and 4.13, the two line
distances are compared against one in the middle, which to some extent represents the average of the
two line strain, left and right.
Figure 4.12: Distances where over line-strains are measured, D16TC_1
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Reinforced concrete prisms subjected to uniaxial tension
45
Figure 4.13: Line strains comparison D16TC_2
All together the average line strains measured by ARAMIS is, based on the plots and mentioned
conditions, considered veriﬁed.
4.2.1
Mean crack distances
The mean crack distances are calculated form equation (3.11). The calculated mean crack distances
for specimens with the same reinforcement diameter is approximately the same. These are compared
with three prisms with relatively even primary crack formation in table 4.4.
where lm is the calculated mean crack distance, lc.i is a given crack distance observation and lm.exp
is the experimental mean crack distance calculated from the observations.
Table 4.4: Crack distances in reinforced concrete prisms
lm
lm.exp
lc.1
lc.2
lc.3
lc.4
Prism
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
[m]
D16TC_2
253.54
120
100
90
90
200
D20TC_4
211.15
90
85
95
90
90
D25TC_1
176.07
132.5
180
90
130
130
In general the mean crack distance is fare lower what the litrature implies. [Nielsen, 1993] states the
one can set λ = 2 for all ribbed reinforcement. The threading may fall outside this category and this
factor should probably be higher. It is noted that largest crack distances occurred in specimens with
the smallest diameters (D16) in line with the literature. But the smallest crack distances were observed
in prisms with D20 reinforcement.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Cutting, discarded specimens
46
4.3
Cutting, discarded specimens
15 prisms were cast. 12 were subjected to uniaxial tensioning and cracks were inﬂicted. These 12
prisms were cut into three disks making a total of 36 disks.
The reference disks were cut from separate concrete prisms that were not subjected to axial tensile
forces. These specimens were however cut in four pieces, as the end pieces here were usable. Each
reference disk had the same geometry and concentrically placed rebar as the specimens exposed to
transverse tension.
During cutting some specimens fell apart, due to extensive cracking. The specimens that fell apart
were D20CC_1, D16CC_4 and D20CC_2. While D20CC_1 and D16CC_4 were unusable, D20CC2
only missed parts, and it was decided to cut it into a prism with a top area of Act = wcs · dcs =
100mm · 104mm = 10410mm2.
When cutting after the second tension test cycle (CC_1), where the steel strain was largest ϵs.br ≈20h,
damage was observed in several cases.
Some specimens experienced light spalling while others
experienced a loss of ﬁrmness. It was therefore decided to make this the maximum strain limit and
pull the two following to limits in-between TC1(ϵs.br = ϵy and TC2.
4.4
Compressive strength of concrete reference disk
In this section, the compressive strength of the uncracked reinforced concrete reference disks is
presented. The strength of the reference specimens is of importance when one wants to isolate the
reduction related to cracking only.
For each experimental cycle in each compressive phase a reference specimen was compressed, which
makes a total of 12 compressed reference specimens.
The typical failure mode is depicted for three instances in ﬁgure 4.14. It is seen that the rebar has
inﬂuence on the cracking and shear failure mode. When compared to the failure modes on tests done
by [Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006], see ﬁgure 3.9 a resemblance is observed. The rest of the failure
modes are seen in appendix F page 89.
==PAGE:54==
4.4 Compressive strength of concrete reference disk
47
(a) Major strains at failure
re f D16CC_2
(b) Major strains at failure
re f D20CC_2
(c) Major strains at failure
re f D25CC_2
Figure 4.14: ARAMIS line-strains before and after release
In ﬁgure 4.15, the compressive strength of uncracked disks fcs , is plotted for all refrence specimens.
An increase in strength over time seems to be present opposite to the cylinder testing. Strangely a small
reduction in the specimens tested under load control CC_4. A better strength correlation between
CC_1 −3 and CC_4 seems to be present when comparing to the cylinder strength. A great disk
strenth for D20CC_1 −3 is observed, which indicate that the reduction related to the the stress ﬁeld
disturbance caused by the presence of the rebar during compression, does not have much eﬀect.
15.0
17.0
19.0
21.0
23.0
25.0
27.0
29.0
31.0
33.0
35.0
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
Compression strenth of refence disk[MPa]
Age [Day]
refD16_CC1-3
refD20CC_1-3
refD25CC_1-3
refD16CC_4
refD20CC_4
refD25CC_4
Figure 4.15: Compressive strength fcs of all reference disks
The nominal compressive concrete stress σc of the reference disks in uniaxial compression are
calculated from equation(4.1).
σc = Ac · F
(4.1)
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Compressive strength of concrete reference disk
48
where Ac is the concrete area of the top of the specimen and Fc is the compression force from the
machine.
The stress strain development for all four cycles of compression testing of reference specimens are
presented in appendix E.
In ﬁgure 4.16 the work curve is plotted for D16CC tests.
Even though the compressive strength is not increasing much from CC_1−3 to CC_4 a great increase
in stiﬀness is observed, though not as signiﬁcant as for the cylinders.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σrefD16CC_1
fcs.refD16CC_1=25.5MPa
σrefD16CC_2
fcs.refD16CC_2=28.4MPa
σrefD16CC_3
fcs.refD16CC_3=30.9MPa
σrefD16CC_4
fcs.refD16CC_4=31.1MPa
Ecs
0.4*fcs
Figure 4.16: Nominal stress-strain curve, for specimens with D16 rebar
In appendix E, concrete parameters are presented in tabel ??. The same division between CC_1 −3
and CC_4, is kept and the mean values are presented in table 4.5.
The elasticity modulus Ecs is found from equation (3.5).
Table 4.5: Reference disk parameters, mean values
Test type
fcs[MPa]
ϵcs[h]
Ecs[GPa]
D16CC_1-3
28.3
3.57
22.5
D16CC_4
31.1
1.87
35.3
D20CC_1-3
33.1
4.00
20.7
D20CC_4
32.6
2.04
30.8
D25CC_1-3
28.9
3.80
20.0
D25CC_4
30.5
2.62
26.2
==PAGE:56==
4.5 Compression of cracked concrete disks
49
4.5
Compression of cracked concrete disks
In this section, the behaviour and compressive strength reduction of pre-cracked concrete disks is
presented.
During compression, the strain development was measured by two LVDT’s, one on the cut section and
one on the facade. An example of a stress-strain curve is given in ﬁgure 4.17.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
10
20
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
fc.TopD16cc_2=33.9MPa
σMidD16cc_2
fc.MidD16cc_2=16.1MPa
σBotD16cc_2
fc.BotD16cc_2=22.1MPa
σRefD16cc_2
fc.RefD16cc_2=28.4MPa
σcylD16CC_D
fc.cylD16CC_D=32.4MPa
σcylD16CC_E
fc.cylD16CC_E=33.9MPa
Figure 4.17: Stress-strain curve of disks and cylinders, two LVDT’s D25CC_2
From the discussion in section 3.5.4, using eight LVDT’s was suggested during a compression test,
This is presumably for larger elements with many cracks, but the number of distances where over the
normalized deformation is measured, still has importance. To clarify the problem of strain measuring,
an example of a specimen midD16CC_2 with severe cracking is presented in the following. In ﬁgure
4.18 the deformation in the vertical direction(negative values for compression) on the surface of a
facade is depicted.
Figure 4.18: Surface deformation in vertical direction, two LVDT’s midD16CC_2
The ﬁgure illustrates how the load resisting structural system consists of separated concrete bodies,
still interacting by interlocking in the concrete matrix and held together by the reinforcement, after
cracking. This is the reason for the concrete softening as diﬀerent parts of the specimen have individual
stiﬀness and are experiencing diﬀerent stresses. It is estimated that at least three lines to measure
strains over, is needed to ensure an acceptable average strain development. This means that the results
measured by two LVDT’s are inaccurate, why they can merely giving an indication of the extend of
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Compression of cracked concrete disks
50
the concrete softening. More examples of strain measured by two LVDT’s is presented in appendix F.
From ﬁgure 4.19 the strain development measured over the three lines are plotted as functions of the
nominal stress.
Figure 4.19: Stress-strain curve of disks and cylinders, two LVDT’s D16CC_2
Let us assume that the three lines represents three individual bodies of diﬀerent stiﬀness.
The great diﬀerences in strain must be contributed the surface diﬀerences introduced under tensioning,
hence each body has a diﬀerent height. The problem is now a combination of height diﬀerence and
individual stiﬀness.
When observing the major surface strains at ﬁgure 4.20, one can observe that the bodies at the ends
are subjected to the most strain, this is because they are taller than the middle body.
Figure 4.20: Contour plot 0 −1% major surface strains on disk facade midD16CC_2
If studying ﬁgure 4.19 further, it is observed that the bodies are subjected to the same nominal stress
from one picture to the next. This is not the case in reality, as the bodies have diﬀerent stiﬀness and
==PAGE:58==
4.5 Compression of cracked concrete disks
51
heights. Here the plateaus are of interest. It is seen that the mid part(strain2 blue line) has no plateau,
which indicates the the maximum nominal strength is deﬁned by this body. For the other two bodies,
a pleateau is seen which mean that their individual strengths has been reached before the nominal
average strength is reached.
It is noted the the steel plate at the end of the piston has a rotation hinge to make up for surface
unevenness, this may have inﬂuence if the specimens are softer from one end of the facade to the other,
causing the softer parts to experience more strain than if the load was evenly distributed.
In ﬁgure 4.21 the deformation in in the vertical direction is depicted as a contour. It reveals that the
deformation on one side can be a diﬀerent story than the one of deformation on the other side. This
indicates that to really get an accurate average strain development, LVDT’s(or ARAMIS measuring
lines) is needed on both facades if not also on the cut surfaces.
Figure 4.21: Deformation in vertical direction, midD16CC_2 section
The facades do not experience many new propagating cracks during compression, as seen from ﬁgure
4.22, why they are not as interesting as the crack development in the section.
Figure 4.22: Deformation in vertical direction, midD16CC_2 section
The crack development is again best visualized by major strains from ARAMIS. An example is
presented in in ﬁgure 4.23(a-h).
The fully developed longitudinal crack has strain development
already at very low loading as seen in 4.23(b).
==PAGE:59==
4.5 Compression of cracked concrete disks
52
(a) picture 0
σc = 0MPa
(b) picture 10
σc = 0.4MPa
(c) picture 20
σc = 1.57MPa
(d) picture 30
σc = 8.06MPa
(e) picture 35
σc = 12.79MPa
(f) picture 40
σc = 13.77MPa
(g) picture 43
σc = 15.89MPa
(h) picture 46
fcs.red = 16.13MPa
Figure 4.23: Failure modes from ARAMIS, CC_1 ϵs ≈ϵy
The sections reveal the failure modes. Failure modes from prism D16TC_2 is presented in ﬁgure 4.24.
(a) botD16cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(b) midD16cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(c) topD16cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(d) re f D16cc_2
fcs = MPa
Figure 4.24: ARAMIS line-strains before and after release
All failure modes are depicted in appendix F page 86. An interesting observation is that the specimens
with fully propagated longitudinal(here transverse) cracks, form a vertical splitting crack right through
==PAGE:60==
4.5 Compression of cracked concrete disks
53
the middle of the specimen. The longitudinal crack divides the specimens in two, an upper half which
is then supported by the lower half and stiﬀer reinforcement bar in the middle. The vertical splitting
crack formed by this however does not cause immediate failure. After the splitting crack, the separated
bodies resists the compression individually. When the nominal stress is increased further the specimen
will form "y-shape" cracking similar to the reference specimen, which evidently will cause failure.
In ﬁgure 4.25 the compressive strength of the cracked disks fsc.red is plotted and normalized by the
compressive disk strength fcs of the related uncracked specimen, see table 4.5. In the ﬁgure the plotted
development, is related to the steel stress before tension release σs.br.
From the ﬁgure it is clearly seen that the steel stress poorly describes the disk strength reduction.
This is because the concrete experiences cracking after yielding. It is seen that the specimens with a
reinforcement diameter of 16mm are experiencing the greatest steel stresses, which is do to a continuing
stress increase after yielding see ﬁgure 4.2 page 35.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
500
525
550
575
600
625
650
675
fsc.red/fsc
σs.br[‰]
Top
Mid
Bot
D16CC_1
D20CC_1
D25CC_1
D16CC_4
D20CC_4
D25CC_4
D16CC_3
D20CC_3
D25CC_3
D16CC_2
D20CC_2
D25CC_2
Figure 4.25: Reduced concrete compressive strength, steel stress before release
In ﬁgure 4.26, the reduction is plotted as a function of the steel strain. The plotted data shows a
tendency of a linear relation of the disk reduction and the steel strain. However some large deviations
are observed. The specimen set from the same prism that deviates most, is the set D25CC_3. When
comparing the reduction of the set to the stress-strain curves in Appendix D page D.18. It is seen that
steel yielding is happening in the protruding bar ends.
==PAGE:61==
4.5 Compression of cracked concrete disks
54
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
20.0
22.0
fsc.red/fsc
εs.br[‰]
Top
Mid
Bot
D16CC_1
D20CC_1
D25CC_1
D16CC_4
D20CC_4
D25CC_4
D16CC_3
D20CC_3
D25CC_3
D16CC_2
D20CC_2
D25CC_2
Figure 4.26: Reduced concrete compressive strength, steel strain before release
In general when comparing the stress-strain curves in Appendix D to the reductions, an indication of
a better relationship between the cracked disk reduction and the average line strain of the concrete
surface, which is also referred to as the average reinforced concrete principal strain form tensioning
ϵ1. This is plotted in ﬁgure 4.27
As the LVDT’s fell oﬀand gradual movement of the camera took place during tension testing of the
reinforced concrete prism D20TC_1, the average reinforced concrete principal strain was not recorded
and the compression strength reductions of disk set D20CC_1 is omitted, in ﬁgure4.27
==PAGE:62==
4.5 Compression of cracked concrete disks
55
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
fsc.red/fsc
e1.br%
Top
Mid
Bot
D16CC_1
D25CC_1
D16CC_2
D20CC_2
D25CC_2
D16CC_3
D20CC_3
D25CC_3
D16CC_4
D20CC_4
D25CC_4
Figure 4.27: Reduced concrete compressive disk strength, concrete strain before release
The average surface strain ϵ1.br is describing the strength reduction of cracked concrete disks with a
descending non-linear tendency.
It is noted that the specimen D20CC_4 that reached the greates strains is "the prism specimen". Here
the strains were measured over the line strain before reducing the specimen size. During cutting the
most damaged parts were cut of, why the strain is overestimated.
Unfortunately, reliable strain measurements of the average principal concrete strains ϵ2 during com-
pression testing, were not achieved and can therefore not be used to describe a tendency of the decrease
of reinforced concrete disks according to model A[Vecchio and Collins, 1993].
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Discussion
After concrete hardening the reinforcement will be in compression, as a result of concrete shrinkage.
After reinforced concrete tensioning and force release the reinforcement will contract. The extent of
the contraction will be less than ϵy, as the concrete has deformed and can not re-establish is original
form, as described in 3.3. The steel will still be in tension and holding the individual concrete bodies
together, though experience some steel relaxation, over the time interval (typically a day) between
concrete cracking and disk compression. When external force is released some cracks may close .
The strength reduction is caused both by the diﬀerent cracks described in the theory section 3.3, the
micro cracks not visible to the naked eye and the reduction contribution of the mere presence of the
rebar.
In the littrature by [Vecchio and Collins, 1993] the reduction due to stress ﬁeld disturbances caused
by the mere presence of the rebar are not accounted for, see equation (5.1) for model B.
νv = fcs.red
fc
=
1
1 + 0.27
 ϵ1
ϵc −0.37

(5.1)
This means that the reduction caused only bycrackingmaybelessthanthemodelimplies[Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006
sees the two reduction contributions as separated factors.
This is mainly explained as the reduction is not of much inﬂuence if the rebar diameter in its section
does not comprise a signiﬁcant part of the specimen width. [Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006] state
that the reduction can be signiﬁcant, especially in cases where the ratio δ = P D/bcs is large (δ > 0.2).
The background experimental basis is not investigated but it is known that the specimens tested had
diﬀerent reinforcement ratios.
In the semi-emperical model presented by [Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012], the reduction due to
rebar is not accounted for either. The strength reduction factor νv related to cracking is calculated as
a strength reduction of the uncrakced disk.
νv = fcs.red
fc
· = fcs
fc
*
,
1 −η
 l
a
!2
+
-
(5.2)
The eﬀect of the duct reduction in this thesis can not be directly conﬁrmed, as no reference specimen
without reinforcement were cast. Roughly speaking, the geometry of the cylinders does not diﬀer too
much from the disk specimens, and a comparison of the concrete strength fc and the reference disk
strength fcs is found convenient, see table 5.1. Here the cylinder strength is said to be equal to a
uncracked disk without reinforcement.
==PAGE:64==
5.1 Vecchio and Collins
57
The reduction factor ηD due stress ﬁeld disturbances caused by the reinforcement in the disk is
calculated by equation (3.13), where the constant kd = 0.4.
fcs.red.D is here the strength of a disk with no rebar theoretically reduced for the rebar strength
reduction contribution.
fc −fcs.red.D is the theoretical reduction disapation of the rebar.
fc −fcs, is the diﬀerence between disks with no rebar(cylinder) and disks with reinforcement. In
other words, the experimental reduction contribution of rebar.
fsc.red.D −fcs is strength of the theoretically reduced specimen without rebar(cylinder) compared
with fcs, the strength of a disk with rebar, which should result in the value zero, if the theory compare
with the results and if the geometric diﬀerence between cylinder and disk has no eﬀect.
Table 5.1: Comparison related to rebar reduction
Test type
ηD
fc
fsc.red.D ≈fc · ηD
fc −fsc.red.D
fcs
fc −fcs
fsc.red.D −fcs
[−]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
D16CC_1-3
0.94
32.41
30.34
2.07
28.28
4.14
2.06
D16CC_4
0.94
33.68
31.52
2.16
31.15
2.53
0.38
D20CC_1-3
0.92
31.17
28.68
2.49
33.06
-1.89
-4.38
D20CC_4
0.92
36.39
33.49
2.91
32.63
3.76
0.85
D25CC_1-3
0.90
31.12
28.01
3.11
28.93
2.19
-0.92
D25CC_4
0.90
35.22
31.70
3.52
30.50
4.72
1.20
Two cases deviate most, D16CC1−3 and D20CC1−3. The deviation of D16CC1−3 can be explained by
the fact that the concrete mixture was dry during casting, which was suspected to be caused by too
little water. If too little water is added in a mixture this will yield a lower water/cement-ratio which
causes stronger concrete but worse workability. This deterioration of workability can cause voids
and worsening of bonding mechanism between steel and concrete in the vicinity of the rebar during
concrete compacting. D20CC1−3 has a lower concrete strength than the strength of the reference disk,
this might be related to the fact that the disk strength fsc is only based on one observation, which might
have dictated a too great disk strength. The results are else considered reliable, and the theoretical
duct reduction is considered accepted.
5.1
Vecchio and Collins
When comparing the experimental disk strength to the theory presented in [Vecchio and Collins, 1993],
it is not possible to compare with model A, as the principal strains during compression were not
obtained. Hence this comparison will be based on model B, see section 3.5.2 page 25. In ﬁgure 5.2
the concrete disk strength is plotted against model B (5.1) presented by [Vecchio and Collins, 1993].
The model accounts for an increase in reduction as the concrete strength is increasing, by ϵ1/ϵc. The
stronger concrete- the greater the softening eﬀect will have on the disk strength. For plotting equation
(5.1), the concrete strain at peak stress was taken as the average of all specimens ϵc = 2.61h
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Vecchio and Collins
58
In addition, the the two specimens tested by Muttoni(W21 and W22) are plotted.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
fsc.red.c/fc
e1/εc
Top
Mid
Bot
D16CC_1
D25CC_1
D16CC_4
D20CC_4
D25CC_4
D16CC_3
D20CC_3
D25CC_3
D16CC_2
D20CC_2
D25CC_2
vecColMean
w21
w22
Figure 5.1: Reduced concrete compressive strength, before release, Vecchio
The strength reduction of the tested disks are in general greater that the model proposes.
This
is explained by the fact that the reduction contribution from the presence of the rebar is not fully
included, as the model is based on larger specimens with lower reinforcement ratios. It is especially
indicated by the initial drop in strength(at low strain) and by specimen w21 and w22, which have much
higher reduction from post tensioning ducts.
The reduced strength only related to the cracking can be theoretically expressed by equation (5.3).
fcs.red = fcs.red.c + fc(1 −η)
(5.3)
Where fc(1 −η) is the strength reduction related to the stress ﬁeld disturbances caused by the
reinforcement calculated in table 5.1.
The reduction factor ηD for W21 and W22 can be found by the reductionfactor related to cracking
νv = 0.7 given by [Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006] calculated from model B in equation (5.1).
The total reduction factors are given for νW21 = 0.54 as νW22 = 0.57. From this the fc.red can be
==PAGE:66==
5.1 Vecchio and Collins
59
calculated from equation (5.5)
fcs.red.c = fcηνv
⇕
fc · νW = fcηνv
⇓
νv = νw
ηD
(5.4)
fcs.red = fcs.red.c + fc(1 −ηD)
(5.5)
The concrete disk strength reduced by cracking only is plotted in ﬁgure ??.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
fsc.red.c/fc
e1/εc
Top
Mid
Bot
D16CC_1
D25CC_1
D16CC_4
D20CC_4
D25CC_4
D16CC_3
D20CC_3
D25CC_3
D16CC_2
D20CC_2
D25CC_2
vecColMean
w21
w22
Figure 5.2: Reduced concrete compressive strength, before release, Vecchio
A better correlation between model B and the experimental cracked concrete disk strength is seen
from ﬁgure ﬁg:vecStrength. However the reduction of experimental disks was expected to be less.
After tension force release, the steel contracts and internal cracks will also contract to some extent,
causing a lesser reduction than if the force was upheld during compression. The deviation from the
theory can be explained by the highly well established bonding mechanism, see picture 4.1 page 34.
This well established bonding mechanism may in general blur the overall picture of the reduction and
complicate the comparison to models mainly based on data done on specimens with "normal" lugs.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Linh C. Hoang et al.
60
5.2
Linh C. Hoang et al.
[Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012] states that the reinforcement ratio has an inﬂuence on the strength
reduction of a disk. This can be explained as by the larger bonding forces causing internal cracking.
A reinforcement bar with a larger diameter compared to a bar with smaller diameter, inﬂicts more
damage due to the diﬀerence in steel circumference. As seen in ﬁgure In ﬁgure 5.3.
The inﬂuence of the of the rebar may be greater when the steel is in the elastic deformation state, as
the forces here will increase. In the yielding state the reinforcement will elongate with little or non
stress increase. Why a model accounting for yielding combined with reinforcement ratio inﬂuence on
the cracked disk strength, might have to be divided into two separate contributions.
As the model presented by Linh is concerning the elastic deformation state, only the specimens for
where the steel was just tensioned to yielding can be used for comparison. This is done in ﬁgure 5.3.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
fsc.red.c/fsc
χ(ρ,σc,ft)
Top
Mid
Bot
D16CC_1
D20CC_1
D25CC_1
Linh.C.H
Figure 5.3: Reduced concrete compressive, Linh Chao hoang
From the ﬁgure no relation between the reinforcement ratio and the strength reduction seems present.
The number of specimens for comparison are few, but when investigating ﬁgure 4.26or ﬁgure 4.27
it can be directly observed that no apparent greater reduction is related to the specimens with larger
reinforcement diameter, hence larger reinforcement ration.
The suggestion on how to modify the model be altering the damage facto η when accounting for steel
yielding, ﬁgure 3.15, is unlikely to reveal good correlation to experimental results, as the yielding may
happen out side the composit element.
If the model were to be used for steel yielding a dog bone experimental setup could ensure no yielding
==PAGE:68==
5.3 Error sources
61
outside the concrete. Here the steel strains would be monitored by strain gauges applied on the rebar
surface before casting.
As the results ﬁt the presented model by [Vecchio and Collins, 1993] and as the reinforcement ratio
cause no further reduction, a model proposal is not conducted.
Based on the data obtained, the
reduction can also be described by the strain state after release- its real strain. This is done in ﬁgure
5.4, where the combined reduction is normalized by the strength of a reference disk, thereby describing
the reduction due to cracking.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
fsc.red.c/fsc
e1.ar[‰]
Top
Mid
Bot
D16CC_1
D25CC_1
D16CC_2
D20CC_2
D25CC_2
D16CC_3
D20CC_3
D25CC_3
D16CC_4
D20CC_4
D25CC_4
Figure 5.4: Reduced concrete compressive, after release
5.3
Error sources
Many reasons causes deviation in the experimental results, in the following some will be discussed.
The basis for the reference specimens is quite thin, in the sense that not many specimens were tested.
The strength and stiﬀness of reference disks in set CC_4 were only based on one single element which
is too little and can cause large deviations. However a tendency caused the decision of diﬀerentiate
between CC_1 −3 and CC_4
When obtaining surface strains on the reinforced concrete prisms, the strain was only measured over
one strain line. Only one case with two lines were made for comparison. It revealed some deviation.
When calculating the deterioration in concrete disk strength due to cracking in relation to the cylindrical
strength, the crack reduction was kept separated from reduction caused from presence of rebar. The
reduction cause by geometrical diﬀerences was however not accounted for. The geometry of the disks
did not diﬀer much from the cylinders, why this is considered a minor source of error.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Error sources
62
The use of masonite was chosen to even out surface roughness, but it might cause some stress ﬁled
disturbances if the contact surface at one end has diﬀerent friction than the other. How ever few
cylinders were tested without topping and not much diﬀerence was observed.
In general the projected would have beneﬁted form including reference specimens with no reinforce-
ment to get an more substantiated indication of the reduction caused by the presence of the rebar and
the reduction caused by cracking, separately
In ﬁgure 5.5 the reduction due to change in load rate i plotted. σ is stress of a given loading rate. It
is normalised by the stress in concrete loaded at the time=2min σc some reduction is observed when
comparing σ1 to σ2 but the reduction relate to the large increase in stiﬀness and some strength that
was encountered when switching from position controlled loading to load controlled loading cannot
solely be described from this ﬁgure.
Figure 5.5: Reduction due to loading rate, [Nielsen, 1974]
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
It has been shown that the strength reduction fcs is not only a matter of concrete softening, but might
be even more eﬀected by the surface diﬀerences introduced after cracking. This surface diﬀerence
could have been accounted fore by post cracking- pre compression grinding, with a risk of further
strength reduction due to vibrations from the grinder in the cracked concrete. This however raises a
discussion of whether the testing is of scientiﬁc interest, by isolating the reduction to be inﬂuenced by
softening only(grinding), or if the testing is of practical interest by accounting for surface diﬀerence
and softening.
There is a clear tendency to strength reduction after release. Also after the elastic yielding state the
reduction was increasing in relation to an increase in principal tensile strain.
It was expected that the reduction is only partly irreversible as the crack will be contracted by the
reinforcing steel being in tension after external force release. This was not observed, but can be
explained by the highly well established bond mechanism between the rebar and the concrete. An
indication of this is the very short crack distances that deviates signiﬁcantly from the literature.
Another hypothesis was that the reinforcement ration has great inﬂuence on the strength reduction.
This was contributed to the thought that the main reason for concrete reduction is related to internal
cracking, inﬂicted by bonding forces. No reduction related to the reinforcement ratio was revealed
after compression testing. This may indicate that crack contraction is occurring mainly in the vicinity
of the rebar, read internal cracking.
It was also shown that the steel stress and steel strain are inconvenient parameters for describing the
disk reduction for the experimental set up by which the testing was conducted. This is caused by
sporadic yielding in the bare protruding steel bar.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[A. Belarbi and Hsu, 1995] A. Belarbi, T. T. and Hsu, C. (1995). Compression response of cracked
reinforced concrete.
[Aurelio Muttoni and Hars, 2006] Aurelio Muttoni, O. L. B. and Hars, E. (2006). Eﬀect of duct type
on shear strength of thin webs.
[Bjarne Chr. Jensen and Plum, 2009] Bjarne Chr. Jensen, B. B. and Plum, C. M. (2009). Stålkon-
struktioner.
[CEB, 1985] CEB (1985). Ceb-ﬁp model code for concrete structures 1990. Eurocode.
[EN1992-1-1, 2004] EN1992-1-1, E. (2004).
Eurocode 2 en1992-1-1:2004: Design of concrete
structures part 1-1: General rules and rules for buildings. Eurocode.
[Goto, 1971] Goto, Y. (1971). Cracks formed in concrete around deformed tension bars. ACI Structual
journal.
[Hansen, 2014] Hansen, K. K. (2014). Øvelser i byggematerialer. technical report (danish). Technical
University of Denmark.
[Krstulovic and LaFave, 1994] Krstulovic, N Watson, K. A. and LaFave, J. M. (1994). Eﬀect of
increased tensile strength and toughness on reinforcing-bar bond behavior.
[Leonhardt, 1969] Leonhardt, F. (1969). Abminderung der tragfähigkeit des betons infolge stabför-
miger, rechtwinklig zur druckrichtung angeordneter einlagen(reduction of concrete compressive
strength due to rods inserted perpendicularly to the loading (german)).
[Linh C. Hoang and Larsen, 2012] Linh C. Hoang, H. J. and Larsen, B. (2012). Compressive strength
of reinforced concrete disks with transverse tension.
[Nielsen, 1974] Nielsen, M. P. (1974). Beton del 1. materialer.
[Nielsen, 1993] Nielsen, M. P. (1993). Beton del 3 bøjning med forskydning, toaksede spændingstil-
stande, søjler og bjælkesøjler konstruktive regler resumesamling. 2. edition.
[Noor and Boswell, 1992] Noor, F. and Boswell, L. (1992).
Small scale moddelling of concrete
structures.
[PORTLAND, 2007] PORTLAND, L. (2007). Cement og beton, håndbogen om cement, beton og
mørtel(danish).
[Vecchio and Collins, 1982] Vecchio, F. and Collins, M. (1982). The response of reinforced concrete
to in-plane and normal stresses.
[Vecchio and Collins, 1993] Vecchio, F. and Collins, M. (1993). Compression response of cracked
reinforced concrete.
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A
Enclosed CD
In the following an overview of the CD directories are given. Folders are headings, and the ﬁles in the
given folder is listed subsequently. The pictures and ARAMIS FILES together takes up large storage
in the area of 300GB, if these are wanted, one can contact the thesis Author Asbjørn Kirk Jensen:
Asbjornkj@gmail.com and arrangement can be made.
Directories on CD
In the main directory four ﬁles and four folders are located
Files
File1: CalibrationOfLVDT.xls Spread sheet for calculation calibration factors.
File2: Concrete recipes 30 MPa.xls The spread sheet for concrete recipe calculation
File3: GetTimeStampFormFiles2.exe A small program to extract time stamps from pictures.
File4: MainCalFile.xls Spread sheet for general calculations, containing the following tabs:
CalculationFile:
This ﬁle is a main calculation ﬁle containing mulitiple taps
Tab1:
"Dataimport"
Maximum values from compression tests are imported
Tab2:
"TenCom"
Plots from compression testing are made
Tab3:
"Cyl"
Cylinder calculations
Tab4:
"Ref"
Reference disk calculations
Tab5:
"Steel"
Steel results obtained from matlab scripts
Tab6:
"Crack"
Calculation of crackdistance
Tab7:
"Duct"
Calculation for reduction regarding the rebar
Folders
Folder1-3: ConcreteCompression, concreteTension and steel Excel ﬁles, raw data and matlab ﬁles
These folder contain multiple sub directories, for navigation, see specimen naming in the report on
page 4.
Folder4: Picture documentation Experimental picture documentation
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
Steel
The full response tendency is depicted for the tested rods of each nominal diameter D16, D20 and D25
in ﬁgure B.1, B.2 and B.3 respectively. It is noted that the this meassurements does not give an exact
material response, as deformation also happens in the machine, in the grips and and in the nuts.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Posistion [mm]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Load [kN]
FD16TS1_2
Fy1=122kN
FD16TS1_3
Fy2=123kN
FD16TS2_1
Fy3=119kN
FD16TS2_3
Fy4=119kN
FD16TS3_3
Fy5=120kN
Ft=147.2kN
Figure B.1: Force-Pistion postition, D16TS
==PAGE:74==
67
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Posistion [mm]
0
50
100
150
200
250
Load [kN]
FD20TS3_1
Fy1=180kN
FD20TS2_2
Fy2=183kN
FD20TS3_2
Fy3=179kN
FD20TS1_1
Fy4=174kN
Ft=215.3kN
Figure B.2: Force-Pistion postition, D20TS
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Posistion [mm]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Load [kN]
FD25TS1_1
Fy1=264kN
FD25TS2_2
Fy2=266kN
FD25TS3_1
Fy3=274kN
Ft=320.7kN
Figure B.3: Force-Pistion postition, D25TS
==PAGE:75==
Appendix C
Concrete compressive strength,
cylinders
In ﬁgure E.1 to E.3 the work curves of concrete cylinders are presented.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σcylD16CC_C
fc.cylD16CC_C=36.2MPa
σcylD16CC_D
fc.cylD16CC_D=32.4MPa
σcylD16CC_E
fc.cylD16CC_E=33.9MPa
σcylD16CC_F
fc.cylD16CC_F=33.7MPa
σcylD16CC_G
fc.cylD16CC_G=37.5MPa
σcylD16CC_I
fc.cylD16CC_I=34.4MPa
Ec
0.4*fc
Figure C.1: Nominal stress-strain curve, for specimens with D16 rebar
==PAGE:76==
69
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σcylD20CC_B
fc.cylD20CC_B=30.6MPa
σcylD20CC_D
fc.cylD20CC_D=33.7MPa
σcylD20CC_E
fc.cylD20CC_E=33.1MPa
σcylD20CC_F
fc.cylD20CC_F=32.9MPa
σcylD20CC_G
fc.cylD20CC_G=31.2MPa
σcylD20CC_I
fc.cylD20CC_I=38.3MPa
Ec
0.4*fc
Figure C.2: Nominal stress-strain curve, for specimens with D20 rebar
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σcylD25CC_D
fc.cylD25CC_D=32.0MPa
σcylD25CC_E
fc.cylD25CC_E=31.2MPa
σcylD25CC_F
fc.cylD25CC_F=30.8MPa
σcylD25CC_G
fc.cylD25CC_G=31.6MPa
Ec
0.4*fc
Figure C.3: Nominal stress-strain curve, for specimens with D25 rebar
==PAGE:77==
70
Table C.1: Results for tested cylinders
Specimen
Cycle
Date
Age[days]
fc[MPa]
ϵc[h]
Ec[Gpa]
Notes
D16[MPa]
A
Test
18/09/2015
18
30.4
6.28kN/s, No topping
B
CC_1
22/10/2015
52
30.3
No strain
C
CC_1
28/10/2015
58
34.8
3.12
24.03
D
CC_2
12/11/2015
73
31.4
2.28
27.22
E
CC_2
12/11/2015
73
32.9
2.32
25.33
F
CC_3
02/12/2015
93
32.7
2.88
25.33
G
CC_4
07/01/2016
129
36.4
2.69
32.18
0.2kN/s; Grinded
H
CC_4
07/01/2016
129
33.7
Grinded; No strain
I
CC_4
07/01/2016
129
33.4
1.61
55.93
0.2kN/s; Grinded
J
CC_4
07/01/2016
129
31.2
6.25kN/s; Grinded;
D20[MPa]
A
Test
18/09/2015
17
29.4
6.28kN/s; No topping
B
CC_1
23/10/2015
52
29.7
2.66
26.32
C
CC_1
27/10/2015
56
30.9
D
CC_2
13/11/2015
73
31.4
2.26
22.14
E
CC_2
13/11/2015
73
32.9
3.16
23.87
F
CC_3
02/12/2015
92
31.9
2.76
25.34
G
CC_3
02/12/2015
92
30.3
2.88
24.73
H
CC_4
06/01/2016
127
33.8
No strain
I
CC_4
07/01/2016
128
37.2
3.02
49.16
0.2kN/s
J
CC_4
07/01/2016
128
38.2
6.25kN/s, No strain
D25[MPa]
A
Test
18/09/2015
16
27.6
6.25N/s no topping
B
CC_1
27/10/2015
55
31.6
C
CC_1
27/10/2015
55
33.2
D
CC_2
13/11/2015
72
31.1
2.60
23.39
E
CC_2
13/11/2015
72
30.3
2.49
24.54
F
CC_3
02/12/2015
91
29.9
2.62
27.67
G
CC_3
02/12/2015
91
30.7
2.44
48.87
H
CC_4
07/01/2016
127
33.7
No strain
I
CC_4
07/01/2016
127
24.7
0.2kN/s; Splitting failure
J
CC_4
07/01/2016
127
36.7
6.25kN/s; No strain
==PAGE:78==
Appendix D
Concrete Tensioning
D.1
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
D16TC_1
The steel force-strain curve is plotted in ﬁgure D.1. The LVDT’s was not fastened properly and the
data is not usable. Due to inconsistent between time stamp in LVDT-data and ARAMIS, the principal
average concrete strains are not plotted, but maximum values are given in ﬁgure D.2. The main part
of the strain development is observed in the initial splitting crack.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=122.5kN
ǫs.br
Figure D.1: Force-strain curve, specimen D16TC_1
==PAGE:79==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
72
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.2: D16TC_1 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
D20TC_1
The steel force-strain curve is plotted in ﬁgure D.3. The LVDT’s was not fastened properly and the
data is not usable. Due vertical camera movement in-between pictures, the principal concrete strains
are not usable. The crack formation is visualised in ﬁgure D.4.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
200
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=177.9kN
ǫs.br
Figure D.3: Force-strain curve, specimen D20TC_1
==PAGE:80==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
73
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.4: D20TC_1 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
D25TC_1
The steel and ARAMIS force-strain curve is plotted in ﬁgure ??. Here pictures were taken approx-
imately each increase in load of 10kN. The ARAMIS strain has some disturbance and a initially
negative strain, but is all together accepted.
The major surface strains are depicted and principal average concrete strain maxima values over
depicted lines are given in ﬁgure ??.
==PAGE:81==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
74
D16TC_2
The steel-, LVDT- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.7. Here pictures were
taken every 10th second. The ARAMIS strain has no noise. The major surface strains are depicted
and principal average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are given in ﬁgure D.8.
0
5
10
15
20
0
50
100
150
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=132.5kN
ǫs.br
FVLDT
ǫVLDT.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.7: Force-strain curve, specimen D16TC_2
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.8: D16TC_2 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:82==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
75
D20TC_2
The steel-, LVDT- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.9. Here pictures were
taken every 10th second. The ARAMIS strain has no noise. The major surface strains are depicted
and principal average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are given in ﬁgure D.10.
The VLDT’s were loose, why the disturbance in strain developement at approximately ϵ LV DT ≈7h
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
50
100
150
200
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=187.4kN
ǫs.br
FVLDT
ǫVLDT.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.9: Force-strain curve, specimen D20TC_2
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.10: D20TC_2 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:83==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
76
D25TC_2
The steel-, LVDT- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.11. Here pictures were
taken every 10th second. The ARAMIS strain has no noise. The major surface strains are depicted
and principal average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are given in ﬁgure D.12.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=270.3kN
ǫs.br
FVLDT
ǫVLDT.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.11: Force-strain curve, specimen D25TC_2
The concrete ϵ ARA.1 strain developement from ARAMIS is almost to the same extend as the steel
strain. This is because the steel yielding is happening in the cracks.
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.12: D25TC_2 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:84==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
77
D16TC_3
The steel-, LVDT- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.13. Here pictures were
taken every 10th second. The ARAMIS strain has no noise. The major surface strains are depicted
and principal average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are given in ﬁgure D.14.
Here a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between strains recorded by ARAMIS and strains recorded by LVDT’s.
This can be explained by less cracking outside the area recorded by ARAMIS, that is measured by
LVDT’s Here noise in the ARAMIS strain development is observed. This is because of changing
lighting. The specimens did not have a strongly enlightened surface.
Not many cracks are observed in the top and bottom part of the bar. This should lead to a smaller
strength reduction during compression testing after cutting.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=128.3kN
ǫs.br
FVLDT
ǫVLDT.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.13: Force-strain curve, specimen D16TC_3
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.14: D16TC_3 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:85==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
78
D20TC_3
The steel-, LVDT- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.16. Here pictures were
taken every 10th second. The ARAMIS strain has some noise. The concrete force-strain development
is deviating from the CEB theory 3.6 where state 1 is not present. This is because the specimen
was crack before tensioning, presumably as it was knocked over by pallet lifter. The cracks due to
pre-damaging is presented in ﬁgure D.15. The major surface strains are depicted and principal average
concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are given in ﬁgure D.17.
Figure D.15: Specimen D20TC_3, Major surface strains, Picture 4, F = 6.49kN
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
50
100
150
200
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=174.1kN
ǫs.br
FLVDT
ǫLVDT.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.16: Force-average strain curve, specimen D20TC_3
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.17: D20TC_3 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:86==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
79
D25TC_3
The steel-, LVDT- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.18. Here pictures were
taken every 10th second. The ARAMIS strain has some noise.
The major surface strains are depicted and average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are
given in ﬁgure D.19.
A major diﬀerence between average line strain and streel strain is observed. This is due to yielding in
the protruding reinforcement.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=274.7kN
ǫs.br
FVLDT
ǫVLDT.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.18: Force-average strain curve, specimen D25TC_3
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.19: D25TC_3 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:87==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
80
D16TC_4
The steel- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.20. Here pictures were taken every
10th second. A major drop in load is observed, this was caused by pressure lose in the hydraulic
machine, as technical problems in the main hydraulic pump occurred.
D16TC_4 specimen was also cracked before tensioning, presumably as it was knocked over by pallet
lifter.
The major surface strains are depicted and average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are given
in ﬁgure D.21. When investigating the crack formation, an irregular crack formation is observed where
the pre-damaging occurred. Large average strains developed here and causing less strain development
in the remaining specimen. The damaging was so extensive that the middle part had to be discarded
after cutting.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
50
100
150
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=128.0kN
ǫs.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.20: Force-average strain curve, specimen D16TC_4
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.21: D16TC_4 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:88==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
81
D20TC_4
The steel- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.22. Here pictures were taken every
10th second.
The major surface strains are depicted and average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are
given in ﬁgure D.23.
Negative strain occur at initial cracking. This can be explained if cracks propagate from the back side
of the specimen causing compression on the front side.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
50
100
150
200
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=192.0kN
ǫs.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.22: Force-average strain curve, specimenD20TC_4
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.23: D20TC_4 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:89==
Individual cases with ARAMIS pictures
82
D25TC_4
The steel- and ARAMIS force-strain curves are plotted in ﬁgure D.24. Here pictures were taken every
10th second.
The major surface strains are depicted and average concrete strain maxima over depicted lines are
given in ﬁgure D.25.
Negative strain occur at initial cracking. This can be explained if cracks propagate from the back side
of the specimen causing compression on the front side.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Force[kN]
Fs
Fs.br=264.0kN
ǫs.br
FARA
ǫARA.br
ǫARA.ar
Figure D.24: D25TC_4
(a) Major surface strains before release and ϵ1 distances
(b) Major surface strains after release and ϵ1 distances
Figure D.25: D25TC_4 ARAMIS average strains ϵ1 before and after release
==PAGE:90==
Results from prism testing
83
D.2
Results from prism testing
Table D.1: Results from prism testing
Specimen
Part
Fs.br[kN]
σs.br[MPa]
ϵs.br[h]
ϵ1.br[h]
ϵ1.ar[h]
D16TC_1
top
122.5
609.3
4.0
1.1
0.3
mid
122.5
609.3
4.0
5.7
1.1
bot
122.5
609.3
4.0
1.3
0.4
D20TC_1
top
177.9
566.3
3.5
NaN
NaN
mid
177.9
566.3
3.5
NaN
NaN
bot
177.9
566.3
3.5
NaN
NaN
D25TC_1
top
276.0
562.3
3.8
2.0
0.4
mid
276.0
562.3
3.8
4.2
0.5
bot
276.0
562.3
3.8
3.1
0.2
D16TC_2
top
132.5
659.0
20.0
4.6
3.4
mid
132.5
659.0
20.0
21.9
17.5
bot
132.5
659.0
20.0
9.9
7.4
D20TC_2
top
187.4
596.5
20.0
12.4
10.1
mid
187.4
596.5
20.0
29.1
23.9
bot
187.4
596.5
20.0
13.8
11.3
D25TC_2
top
270.3
550.7
20.0
20.7
16.8
mid
270.3
550.7
20.0
15.6
12.6
bot
270.3
550.7
20.0
24.7
19.9
D16TC_3
top
128.3
638.1
10.0
1.7
0.8
mid
128.3
638.1
10.0
11.1
6.2
bot
128.3
638.1
10.0
1.9
0.6
D20TC_3
top
174.1
554.2
10.0
6.3
2.7
mid
174.1
554.2
10.0
2.5
0.7
bot
174.1
554.2
10.0
7.9
3.7
D25TC_3
top
274.7
559.6
10.3
2.8
0.9
mid
274.7
559.6
10.3
0.7
0.5
bot
274.7
559.6
10.3
6.5
3.1
D16TC_4
top
128.0
636.6
15.0
1.4
1.2
mid
128.0
636.6
NaN
NaN
NaN
bot
128.0
636.6
15.0
8.3
5.7
D20CC_4
top
192.0
611.2
15.0
8.5
5.5
mid
192.0
611.2
15.0
15.7
11.3
bot
192.0
611.2
15.0
15.3
11.2
D25CC_4
top
264.0
537.8
15.0
2.9
0.9
mid
264.0
537.8
15.0
4.7
1.1
bot
264.0
537.8
15.0
2.5
0.6
==PAGE:91==
Appendix E
Compressive strength of ref. disks
In ﬁgure E.1 to E.3 the work curves of the reference disk. Strain meassurements are missing from
refD25CC1 and refD20CC1.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σrefD16CC_1
fcs.refD16CC_1=25.5MPa
σrefD16CC_2
fcs.refD16CC_2=28.4MPa
σrefD16CC_3
fcs.refD16CC_3=30.9MPa
σrefD16CC_4
fcs.refD16CC_4=31.1MPa
Ecs
0.4*fcs
Figure E.1: Nominal stress-strain curve, for specimens with D16 rebar
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σrefD20CC_2
fcs.refD20CC_2=33.6MPa
σrefD20CC_3
fcs.refD20CC_3=33.9MPa
σrefD20CC_4
fcs.refD20CC_4=32.6MPa
Ecs
0.4*fcs
Figure E.2: Nominal stress-strain curve, for specimens with D20 rebar
==PAGE:92==
85
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σrefD25CC_2
fcs.refD25CC_2=28.3MPa
σrefD25CC_3
fcs.refD25CC_3=31.8MPa
σrefD25CC_4
fcs.refD25CC_4=30.5MPa
Ecs
0.4*fcs
Figure E.3: Nominal stress-strain curve, for specimens with D25 rebar
Table E.1: Add caption
Specimen
fcs[MPa]
ϵcs[h]
Date
Age[days]
Ecs[GPa]
Notes
D16CC_1
25.5
3.42
28/10/2015
58
21.19
D16CC_2
28.4
4.15
12/11/2015
73
20.37
D16CC_3
30.9
3.14
02/12/2015
93
26.07
D16CC_4
31.1
1.86
07/01/2016
129
35.32
Grinded
D20CC_1
31.7
NaN
26/10/2015
55
NaN
Grinded
D20CC_2
33.6
3.77
13/11/2015
73
18.37
No Strain
D20CC_3
33.9
4.23
02/12/2015
92
22.99
Grinded
D20CC_4
32.6
2.04
07/01/2016
128
30.78
Grinded
D25CC_1
26.7
NaN
27/10/2015
55
NaN
No strain
D25CC_2
28.3
3.11
13/11/2015
72
20.13
D25CC_3
31.8
4.49
03/12/2015
92
19.82
D25CC_4
30.5
2.62
07/01/2016
127
26.17
Grinded
==PAGE:93==
Appendix F
Concrete Compression strength
F.1
Stress-strain curves, two LVDT’s
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
10
20
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
fc.TopD16cc_2=33.9MPa
σMidD16cc_2
fc.MidD16cc_2=16.1MPa
σBotD16cc_2
fc.BotD16cc_2=22.1MPa
σRefD16cc_2
fc.RefD16cc_2=28.4MPa
σcylD16CC_D
fc.cylD16CC_D=32.4MPa
σcylD16CC_E
fc.cylD16CC_E=33.9MPa
Figure F.1: Compression test of prisms and cylinders, D16CC2
NOTES:
top:
Back side cracked, why VLDT’s results are even more unreliable.
mid:
Loos quality. Cut surface UP
bot:
Good quality
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
10
20
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σMidD20cc_2
fc.MidD20cc_2=18.0MPa
σBotD20cc_2
fc.BotD20cc_2=20.6MPa
σRefD20cc_2
fc.RefD20cc_2=33.6MPa
σcylD20CC_D
fc.cylD20CC_D=33.7MPa
σcylD20CC_E
fc.cylD20CC_E=33.1MPa
Figure F.2: Compression test of prisms and cylinders, D20CC2
NOTES:
top:
Unusable mid:
Made as a prism. Pieces were broken oﬀ
bot:
==PAGE:94==
Stress-strain curves, two LVDT’s
87
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
10
20
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σTopD25CC_2
fc.TopD25CC_2=18.9MPa
σMidD25CC_2
fc.MidD25CC_2=17.1MPa
σBotD25CC_2
fc.BotD25CC_2=20.2MPa
σRefD25CC_2
fc.RefD25CC_2=28.3MPa
σcylD25CC_D
fc.cylD25CC_D=32.0MPa
σcylD25CC_E
fc.cylD25CC_E=31.2MPa
Figure F.3: Compression test of prisms and cylinders, D25CC2
NOTES:
top:
Cut Rigth in a crack mid:
On the bask side, a ﬂat piece is missing, no strain, as the VLDT’s couldn’t be mounted F=345kN, top
area =102*200 bottom=180*100. bot:
Broken but held together by tape
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
10
20
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σTopD16CC_3
fc.TopD16CC_3=23.9MPa
σMidD16CC_3
fc.MidD16CC_3=21.4MPa
σrefD20CC_3
fc.refD20CC_3=33.9MPa
σRefD16CC_3
fc.RefD16CC_3=30.9MPa
Figure F.4: Compression test of prisms and cylinders, D16CC3
NOTES:
top:
mid:
bot:
==PAGE:95==
Stress-strain curves, two LVDT’s
88
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
10
20
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σTopD20cc_3
fc.TopD20cc_3=21.5MPa
σMidD20cc_3
fc.MidD20cc_3=26.5MPa
σBotD20cc_3
fc.BotD20cc_3=27.0MPa
σRefD20cc_3
fc.RefD20cc_3=33.9MPa
σcylD20CC_F
fc.cylD20CC_F=32.9MPa
σcylD20CC_G
fc.cylD20CC_G=31.2MPa
Figure F.5: Compression test of prisms and cylinders, D20CC3
NOTES:
top:
mid:
bot:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Nominel Stress [MPa]
σTopD25cc_3
fc.TopD25cc_3=23.5MPa
σMidD25cc_3
fc.MidD25cc_3=25.5MPa
σBotD25cc_3
fc.BotD25cc_3=26.0MPa
σRefD25cc_3
fc.RefD25cc_3=31.8MPa
σcylD25CC_F
fc.cylD25CC_F=30.8MPa
σcylD25CC_G
fc.cylD25CC_G=31.6MPa
Figure F.6: Compression test of prisms and cylinders, D25CC3
NOTES:
top:
mid:
bot:
==PAGE:96==
Failure modes
89
F.2
Failure modes
(a) botD16cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(b) midD16cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(c) topD16cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(d) re f D16cc_1
fcs = MPa
(e) botD20cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(f) midD20cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(g) topD20cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(h) re f D20cc_1
fcs = MPa
(i) botD25cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(j) midD25cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(k) topD25cc_1
fcs.red = MPa
(l) re f D25cc_1
fcs = MPa
Figure F.7: Failure modes from ARAMIS, CC_1 ϵs ≈ϵy
==PAGE:97==
Failure modes
90
(a) botD16cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(b) midD16cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(c) topD16cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(d) re f D16cc_2
fcs = MPa
(e) botD20cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(f) midD20cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(g) topD20cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(h) re f D20cc_2
fcs = MPa
(i) botD25cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(j) midD25cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(k) topD25cc_2
fcs.red = MPa
(l) re f D25cc_2
fcs = MPa
Figure F.8: Failure modes from ARAMIS, CC_2 ϵs ≈20h
==PAGE:98==
Failure modes
91
(a) botD16cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(b) midD16cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(c) topD16cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(d) re f D16cc_3
fcs = MPa
(e) botD20cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(f) midD20cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(g) topD20cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(h) re f D20cc_3
fcs = MPa
(i) botD25cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(j) midD25cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(k) topD25cc_3
fcs.red = MPa
(l) re f D25cc_3
fcs = MPa
Figure F.9: Failure modes from ARAMIS, CC_3, ϵs ≈10h
==PAGE:99==
Failure modes
92
(a) botD16cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(b) midD16cc_4
fcs.red = NaN
(c) topD16cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(d) re f D16cc_4
fcs = MPa
(e) botD20cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(f) midD20cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(g) topD20cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(h) re f D20cc_3
fcs = MPa
(i) botD25cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(j) midD25cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(k) topD25cc_4
fcs.red = MPa
(l) re f D25cc_4
fcs = MPa
Figure F.10: Failure modes from ARAMIS, CC_4, ϵs ≈15h
==PAGE:100==
Concrete strength table
93
F.3
Concrete strength table
Table F.1: Results from compression testing of cracked disks
fc[MPa]
ft[MPa]
fcs[MPa]
fcs.red.c[MPa]
fcs.red.c/f sc
fcs.red.c/ fc
D16CC_1
top
32.41
1.80
28.28
26.79
0.95
0.83
mid
32.41
1.80
28.28
24.13
0.85
0.74
bot
32.41
1.80
28.28
29.58
1.05
0.91
D20CC_1
top
31.17
1.77
33.06
30.11
0.91
0.97
mid
31.17
1.77
33.06
28.96
0.88
0.93
bot
31.17
1.77
33.06
NaN
#VÆRDI!
#VÆRDI!
D25CC_1
top
31.12
1.76
28.93
25.00
0.86
0.80
mid
31.12
1.76
28.93
24.45
0.85
0.79
bot
31.12
1.76
28.93
27.25
0.94
0.88
D16CC_2
top
32.41
1.80
28.28
20.22
0.71
0.62
mid
32.41
1.80
28.28
16.13
0.57
0.50
bot
32.41
1.80
28.28
22.07
0.78
0.68
D20CC_2
top
31.17
1.77
33.06
19.6
0.59
0.63
mid
31.17
1.77
33.06
17.98
0.54
0.58
bot
31.17
1.77
33.06
20.60
0.62
0.66
D25CC_2
top
31.12
1.76
28.93
18.91
0.65
0.61
mid
31.12
1.76
28.93
17.10
0.59
0.55
bot
31.12
1.76
28.93
20.20
0.70
0.65
D16CC_3
top
32.41
1.80
28.28
23.89
0.84
0.74
mid
32.41
1.80
28.28
21.40
0.76
0.66
bot
32.41
1.80
28.28
24.68
0.87
0.76
D20CC_3
top
31.17
1.77
33.06
21.5
0.65
0.69
mid
31.17
1.77
33.06
26.5
0.80
0.85
bot
31.17
1.77
33.06
27.0
0.82
0.87
D25CC_3
top
31.12
1.76
28.93
23.6
0.81
0.76
mid
31.12
1.76
28.93
25.5
0.88
0.82
bot
31.12
1.76
28.93
26.0
0.90
0.83
D16CC_4
top
33.68
1.84
31.15
29.31
0.94
0.87
mid
33.68
1.84
31.15
NaN
#VÆRDI!
#VÆRDI!
bot
33.68
1.84
31.15
20.63
0.66
0.61
D20CC_4
top
36.40
1.91
32.63
23.6
0.72
0.65
mid
36.40
1.91
32.63
21.3
0.65
0.59
bot
36.40
1.91
32.63
23.9
0.73
0.66
D25CC_4
top
35.22
1.88
30.50
27.6
0.91
0.78
mid
35.22
1.88
30.50
28.4
0.93
0.81
bot
35.22
1.88
30.50
27.8
0.91
0.79
Muttoni
53.9
46.89
25.6
0.644
0.475
47.2
39.64
24
0.667
0.508
