==PAGE:1==
Multi-objective Optimization for
Water Resources Management in
Nepal
Sanita Dhaubanjar
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Environmental Engineering
Miljoevej, Building 113,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1600
info@env.dtu.dk
http://www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A national scale multi-objective optimization was set up to assess planned hy-
dropower projects in Nepal from the perspective of integrated water management.
The trade oﬀs and synergies between four water management objectives: reduc-
tion of power deﬁcit, maintenance of water availability for irrigation, reduction
in ﬂood risk and maintenance of environmental ﬂows, were delineated for nine
power development scenarios. Water ﬂows in the system are represented by a
node and link network used to identify all possible ﬂow paths between water sup-
ply and demand nodes. The ﬂow path representation allows for automated set up
of linear mass balances and physical capacity constraints. The model takes basin
inﬂows, hydropower plant speciﬁcations, reservoir characteristics, reservoir rules,
irrigation water demand, environmental ﬂow requirements and power demand as
inputs. Due to lack of prior estimates, the environmental ﬂow requirement at each
modeled basin was evaluated using modiﬁed Tennant, modiﬁed Range Variability
Approach and shifted ﬂow duration curve methods. Pareto fronts and reservoir
operation under interesting points on the Pareto front were analyzed for each
development scenario. While no conﬂict was seen in water use for power produc-
tion or irrigation under current situation, as power production capacity becomes
comparable to power demand, conﬂict in reservoir management is visible. Envi-
ronmental ﬂow requirements do not aﬀect national power production at an annual
scale but aﬀect monthly reservoir operation with conﬂicts seen in some basin and
synergies in others.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is submitted to the Department of Environmental Engineering at Den-
mark Technical University in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring
a Masters of Science in Environmental Engineering with specialization in Water
Resources Management.
The study was carried out from August 2015 to February 2016 under the supervi-
sion of associate professor Peter Bauer-Gottwien and postdoc Claus Davidsen at
DTU Environment. The thesis will be defended on February 11, 2015. It accounts
for 35 ECTS, where this report together with the defense form the basis for the
ﬁnal grade.
Lyngby, February 9, 2016
Sanita Dhaubanjar
Any ﬁgure or illustration not cited has been created by the author based on data collected or
simulated in this study. Water is represented in [MCM/yr] and power in [GWh/yr] in all author
created ﬁgures, unless noted otherwise. Dataset on Nepal are often reported for the Nepalese
ﬁscal year running from 16 July-15 July and often in terms of Nepali calendar months. For this
study, annual data running from Jan-Dec have been compiled where 2 ﬁscal year’s data were
available. In the lack there of, data reported for ﬁscal year have been reshaped to represent the
latter year, for example ﬁscal year 1999/2000 (16 July 1999-15 July 2000) is considered data for
2000.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to my supervisor Peter Bauer for pushing me to pursue this topic
and always having ideas for what more can be done. Peter has been very kind,
ﬂexible and patient. I would like to thank him for giving me a lot of ownership in
my thesis development, while being very prompt with his feedback. I appreciate
the guidance he provided all along and especially the encouragement to spend
time gathering good input data and setting up a good baseline model. It has been
a worthwhile learning process.
I would like to express my gratitude to co-supervisor Claus Davidsen for always
being there to bounce ideas oﬀof. Especially during the hardest parts on my
thesis, it was nice to have someone to discuss and clarify concepts with. Claus
was also my go-to person for all technical questions on Matlab and use of the
HPC. I appreciate the time he spent helping me overcome all the technical barriers
throughout my study.
A study like this on integrated water resources management cannot achieve much
if done in isolation. Local stakeholder and expert input is key to a successful
implementation of a useful multi-objective decision making framework. I have
made my attempts to connect with relevant institutions and experts in Nepal. I
would like to thank Dinakar Khanal, Senior Divisional Engineer, at the WECS for
taking the time to read my thesis proposal in great detail. The questions he raised
and inputs he provided have helped my decision making throughout this thesis.
In the limited time I had, I could not work closely with Mr Khanal but I hope
that my results demonstrate the potential usage of multi-objective optimization
as a decision making tool for WECS and for Nepal.
Local input wise, I would also like to thank Kumud Ghimire, former project man-
ager at the Investment Board, for helping me understand the power development
plans and policies in Nepal. Mahendra Shrestha at the LDC is acknowledged for
providing hourly power demand data. Narayan Rijal helped me obtain hydrologi-
==PAGE:6==
iv
cal data and shared his personal experiences in development and implementation
of environmental ﬂow requirements in Nepal.
Lars Orsoe is acknowledged for
helping me compile the hydrological data into a useful format.
Dr. Hester Biemans from the Climate Change and Adaptive Land and Water
Management Research Team at Wageningen UR, Netherlands shared her team’s
seasonal estimates of irrigation water demand in South Asia. I am very thankful
to her for providing multiple datasets and ﬁgures that form an important basis for
my study. Having access to her estimates gave me more time to focus on model
development rather than estimating model inputs.
Multiple people have helped me edit and polish my draft to make this report
what it is. Prompt and thorough feedback from my advisors, Peter and Claus
have been key to improving the overall content, structure and conceptual basis
of the report. Emil Schultz Christensen is acknowledged for surviving through
all my ﬁrst drafts and helping improve my grammar, language and mathematical
notation. Eva Anker helped clean up some of my maps. Martin Vilhelmsen and
Vaclav Patcek reviewed Part I and II of my draft.
A big thank you to Martin Silvan Vogt, my fellow master student working in the
thesis room, for his presence, humor, unlimited supply of Swiss chocolates and
encouragement through the highs and lows of my thesis. The long days in the
thesis room would have been very diﬃcult without Martin.
Lastly, I am forever grateful to my family for their unconditional love, continued
support and immense faith in all that I do. Special thanks to my brother Ayush
for spending days trying to get power demand data for this study.
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
List of Abbreviations
x
I
Introduction
1
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Thesis Structure and Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
The Case of Nepal
6
2.1
Hydrology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Water and the Agriculture Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Power Sector
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Biodiversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Environmental Regulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Relevant Institutional Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
Need for Nexus Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
II
State of the Art
26
3
Multi-objective Optimization
27
4
Environmental Flows
29
5
Multi-objective Optimization
32
6
Environmental Flows
34
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
7
Irrigation Water Demand
37
7.1
Seasonal estimates of Irrigation Consumptive Water Use for Nepal
39
III
Methods
41
8
Formulation of the Model
42
8.1
General Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8.2
Network based Representation of Nepal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8.3
Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.4
CPLEX Solver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
9
Estimation of Water Availability
61
9.1
Final Inﬂow Series
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
10 Estimation of Environmental Flow Requirements
67
10.1 Modiﬁed Tennant Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
10.2 Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
10.3 Shifted Flow Duration Curve Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
10.4 Final Environmental Flow Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
11 Correction of Irrigation Demand Estimates
76
11.1 Final Irrigation Water Demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
12 Estimation of Power Demand and Supply
78
12.1 Power Demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
12.2 Power Supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
13 Development of Scenarios
86
IV
Results and Discussion
88
14 Water Stress Indicators
89
15 Pareto Fronts
92
15.1 Comparison of Run-of-River scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
15.2 Comparison of Storage scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
15.3 Implication of Environmental Flow Requirements . . . . . . . . . .
98
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
viii
16 Points on the Pareto Front
99
16.1 Power Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
16.2 Operation of Storage Reservoir
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
17 Performance of Implementation Methods
106
18 Limitations
111
19 Future Work
114
V
Conclusion
116
20 Conclusion
117
VI
Appendices
120
A Supplements for Case Study
121
A.1 Irrigation Command Areas in Nepal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
A.2 Characteristics of River Basins in Nepal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
A.3 Review of Climate Change Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
A.4 Identiﬁcation of Existing and Planned Hydropower Plants . . . . . 125
A.5 Review of JICA Study on Storage Hydropower Development . . . . 126
B Supplements for Methods
130
B.1
Summary of Input Data and Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
B.2
Analysis of Basins with Regulated Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
B.3
Miscellaneous Figures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
B.4
Power Plants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
B.5
Environmental Flow Requirement assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . 138
B.6
Environmental Management Classes for Shifted FDC Method . . . 138
B.7
Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach Method . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
B.8
Shifted Flow Duration Curve Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
B.9
Comparison of Cropped and Irrigated Areas to Improve Irrigation
Water Demand estimates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
C Toolboxes
146
C.1 Setting up Network Matrix in ArcGIS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
C.2 MATLAB supplements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
ix
D Supplements for Results
153
D.1 Pareto Fronts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
D.2 Points on the Pareto Front . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
Bibliography
162
==PAGE:12==
List of Abbreviations
BCM
Billion Cubic Meters (109m3)
DEM
Digital Elevation Model
DHM
Department of Hydrology and Meteorology
DOI
Department of Irrigation
DOED
Department of Electricity Development
EF
Environmental Flow
EFA
Environmental Flow Assessment
EFR
Environmental Flow Requirement
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
EMC
Environmental Management Class
EPA 1997
Environmental Protection Act 1997
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FDC
Flow Duration Curve
FP
Flow path
GLOF
Glacial lake Outburst Flood
GWR
Gross Irrigation Water Requirement
GON
Government of Nepal
HDP 2001
Hydropower Development Policy 2001
HP
hydropower plant
ICIMOD
International Center for Integrated Mountain
Development
ICU
Irrigation Consumptive Water Use
IEE
Initial Environmental Examination
==PAGE:13==
List of Abbreviations
xi
IHA
Indicators of Hydraulic Alteration
INPS
Integrated Nepal Power System
IPP
Independent Power Producers
IUCN
International Union for Conservation of Na-
ture
IWRM
Integrated Water Resources Management
JICA
Japanese International Cooperation Agency
LDC
Load Dispatch Center
LP
Linear Program
LPJML
Lund-Potsdam-Jena managed Land
MAF
Mean Annual Flow
MMF
Mean Monthly Flow
MOO
multi-objective optimization
MW
Megawatt
MOA
Ministry of Agriculture
MOE
Ministry of Energy
MOI
Ministry of Irrigation
NEA
Nepal Electricity Authority
NWR
Net Irrigation Water Requirement
RVA
Range Variability Approach
ROR
run-of-river
SEA
Strategic Environmental Assessment
SRTM
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
STO
storage
UTM
Universal Transverse Mercator
WECS
Water and Energy Commission Secretariat
WSI
Water Stress Indicator
==PAGE:14==
Part I
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Water resources development should be optimized through comprehen-
sive identiﬁcation and evaluation of options and alternatives with the
goal of avoiding, rather than ﬁnding means of reducing and/or miti-
gating, environmental impacts to watersheds and aquatic ecosystems.
Water Resources Strategy for Nepal, 2002
An integrated management of water and its multiple users has been hindered
by sectoral divides and one-sided goals within the Government of Nepal (GoN)
(Suhardiman, Clement, & Bharati, 2015; Weitz, Huber-Lee, Nilsson, Davis, &
Hoﬀ, 2014). The current perception, despite the lack of a quantitative basis, is that
there is no conﬂict in water use in Nepal (Suhardiman et al., 2015). Population
growth, expansion in national power and water supply, urbanization and shifts to
more resource intensive lifestyles will increase demands for both power and water
in the future. As demand rises and competition between water users increases,
conﬂicts will arise and trade oﬀs will have to be made. Amidst this anthropocentric
development approach, the needs of the environment also has to be secured.
With feasible power generation potential estimated at over 43000 MW (Shrestha,
1966; Bajracharya, 2015), hydropower is considered the key to unleashing other
development potentials. In parallel to power development, the GoN is pushing
initiatives for expansion of irrigation to improve crop productivity (Water and
Energy Commission Secretariat [WECS], 2005, 2002). While the national Wa-
ter Resources Strategy and National Water Plan recommend Integrated Water
Resources Management (IWRM) to combine the development of irrigation and
==PAGE:16==
3
hydropower, the eﬀorts of the GoN remain divided. Especially, in the light of cli-
mate change and recurring political crisis, development plans would beneﬁt from
including resiliency as part of building capacity.
National level studies conducted to aid power planning have focused on short-
term capacity expansion rather than eﬃciency and equity in long-term resource
utilization. Bajracharya (2015) analyzed power planning by simulating supply
side performance under annual power demand forecasts for 2015-2030 using the
Long Range Energy Alternative Planning model. Based on deﬁned limits on power
supply sources as well as priorities for their use, the approach considered power
supply as a lump sum, using the model to estimate when and in what magnitude
new capacity additions should be made.
At the request of the GoN, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA, 2014)
performed a master plan study to outline the hydropower development pathways
using qualitative multi-criteria analysis. The study rated feasible Storage (STO)
hydropower plants based on multiple criteria. The weighted sum of scores received
by each project was used to shortlist 10 suitable STO projects. JICA (2014)’s
social and environmental performance criterion targeted minimization of social
and environmental impacts of power development. In that regard, the JICA (2014)
study set a good benchmark by ﬁltering out projects with evident impacts. More
can be done to ensure that STO projects are sustainable and equitable.
Aforementioned studies agree that STO plants are needed to meet projected power
demands in the dry months. On the other hand, irrigation water demands are
also high during the dry months due to winter cropping. With the ability to store
excess water from the wet months, STO plants provide promising opportunities
for not only building energy self-suﬃciency but also food security and climate
resiliency. Maintaining suﬃcient ﬂood storage capacity in reservoirscan help min-
imize imminent ﬂood risks. The high capital investments typically required for
STO projects are also more justiﬁed if they are developed as multipurpose projects
beneﬁting more than one sector (Sharma and Awal, 2013).
This study proposes such a integrated analysis of four cross-sectoral objectives
for water management in Nepal using a hydro-economic model based on multi-
objective optimization. More speciﬁcally, the model aims to aid optimal develop-
ment of STO plants to minimize power deﬁcit, irrigation water deﬁcit, ﬂood risk
and environmental impacts. For this purpose, the environment is represented as
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Thesis Objectives
4
another water user in the system whose demand is estimated as the Environmental
Flow Requirement (EFR), i.e. threshold streamﬂow levels required to maintain
natural ecosystems.
In a multi-objective management framework, multiple optimal solutions will exist
that favor diﬀerent combinations of objectives. For instance, saving all wet season
ﬂows will help fulﬁll the objective to minimize future power deﬁcits while releas-
ing some ﬂow as per the EFR is more optimal for environmental protection. The
multi-objective optimization method allows for identiﬁcation of optimal solutions
for all possible combination of objectives in the form of a Pareto front. In the
context of Nepalese power development, Pareto fronts for nine diﬀerent develop-
ment alternatives are evaluated to understand the relative performance of these
alternatives when considering multiple objectives.
A nexus approach, based on analyzing trade-oﬀs and synergies in water-energy-
food in an integrated framework, has proven useful for streamlining development
plans across sectors to fulﬁll multiple objectives concurrently (Weitz et al., 2014;
Hoﬀ, 2011). Through the delineation and analysis of Pareto fronts, this study
aims to help the divided sectors in the GoN understand inter-dependencies in
water management and the impacts of power development. Recognizing linkages
across sectors can form a basis to build partnerships and move towards building
resiliency in water-energy-food management. Additionally, the thesis provides a
much needed basis for including the environment, as recommended by the Water
Resources Strategy for Nepal (2002), in the political process of selecting the best
development alternative for Nepal.
1.1
Thesis Objectives
In a nutshell, this thesis aims to quantify the trade-oﬀs between four objectives
of national-scale water resources management in Nepal. The following steps have
been completed to achieve this objective:
• Water and power ﬂows in Nepal were represented in a deterministic nation-
scale multi-objective optimization model.
• An ensemble of EFR for Nepal were estimated to represent environmental
water demand.
==PAGE:18==
1.2 Thesis Structure and Overview
5
• Pareto fronts for water allocation under existing, planned and proposed
hydropower projects were outlined.
• Changes in water and power allocations under diﬀerent power development
scenarios have been evaluated with a discussion of the implications of in-
cluding environmental objectives in the planning phase.
1.2
Thesis Structure and Overview
The thesis is divided into 6 parts. Chapters in Part I describe the current status of
water resources management in Nepal. More speciﬁcally, Section 2.7 synthesizes
the case study on Nepal to explain the motivation for developing a multi-objective
optimization model.
Part II provides a literature review on topics relevant to this thesis study. Chap-
ter 5 discusses the state-of-the-art in hydro-economic models and multi-objective
optimization. Chapter 6 delves in the importance of and existing methods for es-
timation of environmental water demands. Chapter 7 presents existing estimates
for irrigation water demand in Nepal.
Part III describes the methods and assumptions made in this study. A detailed
description of the spatial and temporal representation of water and power balances
and their formulation into a optimization problem is provided in Chapter 8. Pre-
processing of model inputs and estimation of performance thresholds under the
four management objectives are discussed in Chapters 9, 10, 11 and 12.
Part IV presents the outcomes of the scenario based modeling with discussion of
the results. Limitations of the study are presented in Chapter 18 and future work
is discussed in Chapter 19. Part V includes conclusions from the study. Part VI
contains appendices and bibliography.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
The Case of Nepal
Water resources management is a complex problem requiring considerations for
social, environmental, political and economic issues. This chapter delves into the
complexities of water management in Nepal to help readers understand the need
for a multi-objective optimization model. The facts presented here form the basis
for assumptions and simpliﬁcations made throughout this study.
Covering an area of 147,181 km2, Nepal is divided into ﬁve physiological regions,as
shown in Figure 2.1. The annual population growth rate is 2%, with 83% of the
population (26.5 million) currently living in rural areas and 66% living below the
poverty line (Central Bureau of Statistics [CBS], 2013). Living conditions and
population density decline moving from south to north as shown in Figure 2.1.
INDIA
CHINA
¯
0
100
200
300
400
50
Km
District Population 2011
!
!
1 Dot = 60,000
!
District Population 2011
O
Kathmandu
Boundaries
Country
Region
Zone
District
Physiological Regions [m]
4000 - 8848  High Himalayas
3300 - 4000  High Mountains
1200 - 3300  Middle Mountains
130   - 1200  Siwalik Hills
0       - 130    Terai Plains
Figure 2.1: Administrative boundaries, physiological regions and district popu-
lation (2011) of Nepal. Based on SRTM DEM and data from (ICIMOD, 2015).
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Hydrology
7
2.1
Hydrology
The 6000 rivers in Nepal are grouped into 10 river basins as shown in Figure 2.2
(WECS, 2005; Gautam & Acharya, 2012). Mahakali, Karnali, Narayani (or Gan-
daki) and Koshi are considered the major basins. There are ﬁve medium basins
(Kankai, Kamala, Bagmati, West Rapti and Babai) and eight smaller basins re-
ferred to as the southern rivers, that are strictly rain-fed. These small and medium
rivers are considered most important for local small scale irrigation (WECS, 2005).
The theoretical hydropower production potential for each basin is indicated in the
ﬁgure while other features of the basins are summarized in Table A.1.
Total annual surface water availability is estimated at 224 BCM with groundwa-
ter estimated at 5.8-11.5 BCM per year in the Terai. Groundwater abstraction
is considered feasible in the Terai and Siwalik regions, and some valleys in the
hills and mountains (WECS, 2005; Nepal National Committee of International
Committee of Irrigation and Drainage [NepalICID], n.d.).
Figure 2.2 also shows the 51 river discharge stations maintained by the Depart-
ment of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM); the seven discharge stations used
in this study are also highlighted. The DHM uses water level measurements to
establish river discharge based on local rating curves at most of the stations. The
rating curves are updated annually to maintain accuracy of estimated discharge
(Smakhtin & Shilpakar, 2005). The stations are centered along the Middle Moun-
tains with only a few stations covering the Terai.
In terms of human alteration of natural hydrology, three dams have been identiﬁed
and are indicated in Figure 2.2. The climate change impacts on hydrology and
weather is reviewed in Appendix A.3.
Studies suggest that temperatures are
rising resulting in increased glacier melt contribution to streamﬂow in the short
run. As de-glaciation completes, streamﬂow is expected to decline. However, no
generalizable trend in streamﬂow across the major basins have been established.
2.1.1
Floods
The steep terrain and heavy monsoon make Nepal prone to ﬂoods and landslides.
Floods are triggered by continuous rainfall and cloudburst, Glacial lake Outburst
Flood (GLOF), dam outburst and sheet ﬂooding in low lands (WECS, 2011).
Table A.1 highlights basins with glacier lakes and subsequent risk of GLOFs as
identiﬁed by Ives, Shrestha, and Mool (2010).
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Hydrology
8
Figure 2.2: River basins in Nepal indicated by colored polygons along with river discharge stations maintained
by DHM. Bars indicate ﬂood warning levels established at important discharge stations. Orange rings indicate
basin power production potential. Visualized based on catchments delineated by the author and station data from
(DHM, 2015).
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Water and the Agriculture Sector
9
Figure 2.3 shows the spatial distribution of ﬂoods and their impacts. Between
1971-2011, ﬂoods were most frequent and damaging in the Koshi, Narayani and
Karnali river basins causing on average 269 deaths per year (DesInventar Project
Team [DesInventar], 2011). The top ten ﬂood prone districts lie in these basins
(Department of Water Induced Disaster Prevention, 2014).
Figure 2.3: Impact of ﬂoods in Nepal from 1971-2009. Reproduced from: (DesIn-
ventar, 2011).
Figure 2.2 also shows warning and dangerous discharge levels established by DHM
at some of the river stations as part of an early ﬂood warning system (Gautam
& Dulal, 2013).
Ives et al. (2010) describe warning systems established near
potentially dangerous glacier lakes. Given the known history and risk of ﬂoods,
it is important to incorporate ﬂood risk mitigation in water management.
2.2
Water and the Agriculture Sector
Total annual water use is reported as high as 18.5 BCM/year though recent es-
timates are unavailable (Asian Development Bank & International Center for In-
tegrated Mountain Development [ADB/ICIMOD], 2006). Domestic withdrawal
cover 3.8% while industrial withdrawal is only 0.3% of the national water demand
(ADB/ICIMOD, 2006). As of 2011, only 12.5% of households in the country had
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Water and the Agriculture Sector
10
private pipelines serving their houses while 43.4% have access to a public tap
(CBS, 2013). With the lack of a regulated water supply network, it is likely that
reported domestic water use is underestimate.
Agriculture is considered the most signiﬁcant water user accounting for 95.9 % of
all annual withdrawal. The dominance of agriculture is justiﬁed as it is also the
biggest contributor to the nation’s Gross Domestic Product, generating 32.6% in
2013/14. With 65.6% of the population engaged in agriculture, the annual growth
rate in agriculture is 4.72% (CBS, 2013).
Figure 2.4: Land-use map of Nepal based on Landsat 2010 data overlaid with
boundaries for protected areas. Based on data from: (ICIMOD, 2015).
Figure 2.4 shows the spatial distribution of land use in Nepal. 30% of the country
is used for agricultural purposes (ICIMOD, 2015) while only 18% (26,410 km2) is
considered suitable for cultivation. Furthermore, only 66% of the cultivable land is
considered irrigable (CBS, 2013). Agriculture is still largely traditional and rain-
fed. More than 70% of irrigation systems are managed by farmers themselves (D.
Khanal, Personal Communication, 2015). Figure A.1 in Appendix A shows some
of the irrigation command areas under Department of Irrigation (DOI).
There is limited documentation of both irrigation water withdrawals and estab-
lished facilities for irrigation. A few studies have estimated theoretical water re-
quirements for crops and the subsequent gross water withdrawal. Figure 2.5 shows
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Water and the Agriculture Sector
11
one such estimate by Biemans, Siderius, Mishra, and Ahmad (2015). Gross water
demands are highest in the irrigated parts of Terai because cropping intensity
increases when moving from the northern Himalayas to the southern Terai. Addi-
tionally, Figure 2.5 shows that irrigation demands are signiﬁcantly higher further
south in parts of India. There are six irrigation schemes in India that currently
use water from the Mahakali, Karnali and Rapti basins (JICA, 2014).Depending
on the withdrawal rates of these schemes, India may be a signiﬁcant user for water
generated in Nepalese basins.
¯
0
100
200
300
400
50
Km
Legend
Country
Status of Irrigation 2011
lrrigated
NotIrrigable
PotentiallyIrrigable
Irrigation Demand [mm/yr]
0 - 20
20.1 - 40
40.1 - 60
60.1 - 80
>80
Figure 2.5: Spatial distribution of mean annual Gross Irrigation Water Require-
ment (GWR) visualized based on estimates provided by: H. Biemans (personal
communication, September, 2015). Overlaid pie charts indicate district-wise per-
centages of cultivable areas that are currently irrigated, potentially irrigable or not
irrigable, visualized based on data from 2010/11 in (ABPSD, 2013).
Pie charts in Figure 2.5 show the current status of irrigation in the irrigable parts
of Nepal. Most of the potentially irrigated areas in the southern region have been
utilized. Potential for irrigation expansion is higher in the Hills and Mountains,
however the economic viability of irrigation in these areas is questionable. The
small amount of irrigable and cultivable land under occupation by a majority
of the population highlights pressures on agriculture and the need for improving
agricultural productivity and crop yields.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Water and the Agriculture Sector
12
Temporal variability in agricultural water demand exists due to the double or
triple cropping practices. The country’s main cereal crops are paddy, maize and
wheat. Paddy is the primary crop in the Terai and Siwalik hills where double
cropping of paddy is observed. Maize is the primary crop in the mountains. Wheat
is grown as winter crop throughout the country while barley and millet are grown
in the mountains. Sugarcane, oilseed, potatoes and pulses are important cash
crops with fruits and vegetables as high value crops. Maize is largely a rain-fed
crop, whereas paddy and wheat can be both rain-fed or irrigated depending on
the location. Irrigation is only important in the dry winter months where rainfall
is not enough to water winter crops. (ADB/ICIMOD, 2006)
Figure 2.6: Trend in annual production (left) and cropped areas (right) for major
crops in Nepal from 1999-2013. Based on data in: (ABPSD, 2014).
Figure 2.6 shows the trend in food production. The cropping areas have remained
relatively stable, with some increase in vegetable and fruits in the last few years.
Total productions have increased due to expansion in irrigation, use of improved
seeds and higher cropping intensities (CBS, 2013). But food deﬁcit is already a re-
ality in many districts in the mountains where agricultural conditions are poor and
limited infrastructures exist for irrigation (ADB/ICIMOD, 2006). Fang, Sharma,
Favre, and Hollema (2007) point out that western district are most vulnerable
to food scarcity because these areas have high poverty and scarce road networks
limiting external food supply.
NepalICID (n.d.) highlight the need to increase both cropping intensity and irri-
gated areas to ensure food self-suﬃciency in Nepal under the current population
growth and climate change. Government of Nepal (GoN) has proposed several
river-linking projects like the Sunkoshi-Kamala diversion, the Bheri-Babai diver-
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Power Sector
13
sions and several multipurpose reservoir projects but none have been implemented.
Speciﬁc milestones in agricultural development set forth by the Water Resources
Strategy 2002 and the National Water Plan 2005 are summarized in Table 2.1.
The Water Resources Strategy 2002 also proposes expansion of drinking water
supply.
Table 2.1: Upcoming irrigation development plans proposed by the Government
of Nepal in WECS (2002, 2005).
National Water Plan (2005) Targets
By 2007
By 2017
By 2027
% Year round irrigation in irrigated areas
49%
64%
67%
% of irrigable area irrigated
71%
80%
97%
% increase in cereal yield in irrigated areas
15%
28%
44%
Irrigation eﬃciency
35%
45%
50%
It is reasonable to assume that water demand by diﬀerent sectors will increase over
time and development plans need to account for this. The spatial heterogeneity
in existing agricultural development and urbanization indicates that though the
overall annual water availability is signiﬁcantly higher than current water use, the
stress on water resources is not equally divided throughout the country. There is
need to understand where and when water is available in comparison to when and
where it is used.
2.3
Power Sector
Figure 2.7: Average use of diﬀerent en-
ergy sources in Nepal between 2002-2011.
Based on data from: (CBS, 2013).
Commercially viable hydropower pro-
duction capacity in Nepal is estimated
at over 43,000 MW (Shrestha, 1966).
More recent estimates indicate that the
optimized potential could be higher
(Bajracharya, 2015). Despite this huge potential, hydroelectricity is one of the
least used energy sources.
As indicated in Figure 2.7, traditional wood and
biomass is heavily used because the country is predominantly rural and cook-
ing with ﬁrewood is still a reality. This simple fact presents the current status of
development and resource under-utilization in Nepal.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Power Sector
14
Hydropower development is considered the key precursor to any other develop-
ment.
No other sources of energy can be produced as cheaply as hydropower
(JICA, 2014).
In the lack of natural fuel reserves within the country, Nepal
imports all of its fuel from India creating political and economic dependencies.
Thermal power generation has already been deemed a failure with phasing out of
the two existing thermal plants.
The theoretical potential for solar energy in Nepal is reported at 26000 MW, of
which 2100 MW is potentially viable. Feasible wind energy is estimated at 3000
MW (as cited in Bajracharya, 2015; JICA, 2014). While development of wind
energy is slow, solar energy is receiving the GoN’s attention (Thapa, 2015). But
long term power supply cannot be imagined without tapping into the hydropower
potentially. Power development based on an energy mix, including hydropower
and alternative energy sources, would be best to improve energy security and
resiliency to climate change.
2.3.1
Power Demand
Figure 2.8: Sector wise distribution of annual
power demand.
Based on data from:
(NEA,
2015).
Figure 2.8 shows the distribu-
tion of power demand. Power
demand has more than dou-
bled in the last decade.
Do-
mestic users dominate the de-
mand but there is an increase
across all sectors except export
to India which has been non-
existent in recent years.
Load shedding or power deﬁcit
has been calculated as the dif-
ference between total energy
demand and total energy available (produced + imported) as reported in the
Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) Annual Reports. System losses have been cal-
culated as the diﬀerence between total energy available and total energy sold for
revenue generation. System losses comprise of technical losses in transmission as
well as non-technical losses such as theft. The load shed is comparable to system
losses, both at about 25% of the total demand, indicating that improving the
==PAGE:28==
2.3 Power Sector
15
eﬃciency in power transmission will go a long way in mitigating load deﬁcits.
However, these numbers do not fully represent the true national demand. Similar
to the poor water supply network, the national Integrated Nepal Power System
(INPS) grid has only reached 40% of households (WECS, 2005; Sharma & Awal,
2013). The total number of consumers currently served by the NEA is only 10%
of the total population (NEA, 2015). The potential power demands of the 83% of
rural population after they are connected to the grid needs to be considered.
The Planning Directorate under the NEA, a subsidiary of the Ministry of En-
ergy (MoE), has predicted future national power demand using a linear economic
model that considers increase in domestic, industrial and irrigation use of power,
along with an expansion of the national grid, decreased transmission losses and in-
creased power export. While NEA’s demand forecasting model has been deemed
conservative by many (The Kathmandu Post, 2014), it is the primer used for
national power planning and is thus presented here (JICA, 2014).
Figure 2.9: Observed annual power demand and supply along with demand fore-
casts up to 2030 made by NEA and Japanese International Cooperation Agency
(JICA).
Figure 2.9 shows the latest power demand forecasts made by the NEA in its latest
Annual Report and by JICA (2014) in a power planning study. In general, power
demand is expected to quadruple in the next 15 years. That NEA forecasts for
2015 are already exceeded indicates that rise in demand is stronger than predicted.
While NEA provides annual updates to its forecast, the year to year variability in
forecasts should also be taken into account inherently.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Power Sector
16
2.3.2
Power Supply
Figure 2.10: Con-
tribution
of
power
sources
to
annual
supply
in
2015.
Based on data from:
(NEA, 2015).
As of 2015, only 790 MW of the total hydropower potential
has been utilized by public and private hydropower plants
(NEA, 2015). The slow power development has been unable
to meet the power demands resulting in up to 14 hr/day of
load shedding today. As a result the GoN is debating dec-
laration of a second national energy crisis (The Himalayan
Times, 2016). The ﬁrst crisis was declared in 2008 where
16 hrs/day of load shedding were imposed. With increas-
ing power cut oﬀ, the conﬂicts in equitable allocations of
available power are becoming visible. NEA, the government
body with authority for regulating the national INPS is fac-
ing criticism for allocating power based on sales price and
political authority of the consumers (Sharma, n.d.). Such
discussions will intensify in the future as power demand
increases exponentially.
Figure 2.10 visualizes the contribution of diﬀerent sources in the total power sup-
ply in 2014/15. Diesel based thermal power plants have very limited contribution
while energy imports contribute to a third of the supply. The power supply in
Nepal is currently dominated by hydropower.
According to the production scheme, hydropower plant (HP) plants can be clas-
siﬁed as run-of-river (RoR) plants fed directly by river ﬂows or storage (STO)
plants fed by releases from storage reservoirs. Peaking RoRs is a sub type under
RoRs that can store small amounts of water equivalent to daily ﬂow to maximize
power generation during peak hours. Nepal also has a suite of cascade RoRs that
are a series of RoRs created along the same river. Currently Nepal only has one
STO reservoir that feeds Kulekhani I and cascade RoRs Kulekhani-II and III (un-
der construction). HPs are further classiﬁed as government owned and operation
under the NEA or privately owned by Independent Power Producerss (IPPs).
Figure 2.11 shows the monthly variation in power supply and demand in Nepal.
Supply includes all power sources shown in Figure 2.10. It can be seen that the
dry period power capacity is almost half that of the rated capacity. Most of the
RoR plants have been built based on 40% dependable ﬂow, i.e. design ﬂow is
exceeded 40% of the time (Bajracharya, 2015). These are operated as base ﬂow
==PAGE:30==
2.3 Power Sector
17
Figure 2.11: Monthly power demand and sup-
ply.
Aggregated based on data for peak day in
month available from:
M. Shrestha (personal
communication, September 30, 2015).
plants for year-round power
supply.
Peaking RoR and
STO plants are operated vari-
ably to match demands dur-
ing peak hours.
While the
NEA is now pushing for new
RoR plants to be designed at
65% dependable ﬂow, the need
for STO to oﬀset dry period
demand is recognized (Dhun-
gel, 2013; Singh, 2013; Ba-
jracharya, 2015; JICA, 2014).
Table 2.2 presents the goals established by the GoN under a 20-year plan for
hydropower development. Power development will focus on building STO and
IPP RoRs to meet national demands between 2010-2019 with the focus shifting
to implementation of multi-purpose, large scale, and export oriented projects after
2020. With the current pace of development, these goals are hard to meet.
Table 2.2:
Hydropower development goals speciﬁed in the GoN’s 20-year hy-
dropower development plan 2009.
Target
2015-2019
2020-2024
2025-2029
Installed hydropower capacity [MW]
12423
5114
18034
Various national scale master plan studies conducted in by the GoN form the basis
for current hydropower development (Ministry of Energy [MoE], 2009; Dhungel,
2013). Initial studies were conducted to identify potential projects in the major
basins. Eventually studies were conducted to rank projects and identify priority
for development. The latest master plan study was conducted by JICA (2014)
using a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) framework to rank STO type
projects and identify their order of development. This study represents the only
comprehensive study performed at a national scale and is probably the guide
that will be followed in power development. The methods used in the study and
outcomes relevant to this thesis are reviewed in Appendix A.5.
Figure 2.12 presents power plants that are in varying level of development (see
Appendix A.4 for description on identiﬁcation of HPs). In total, 147 HPs are
selected as relevant for this thesis.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Power Sector
18
Figure 2.12: Overview of HP development plans in Nepal and spatial distribution of power plants. Symbols
diﬀerentiate between STO and RoR HPs with size and color of symbols indicating capacity and current status
of HP. Brown shading indicate distribution of national power demand over eight distribution areas controlled by
indicated NEA regional oﬃces.
==PAGE:32==
2.4 Biodiversity
19
Table 2.3: Comparison of number of projects considered in this study and those
listed in NEA Annual Report 2015.
Relevant in this study
Reported in NEA, 2015
HP Type
Existing
Constr.
Planned
Existing
Constr.
Planned
NEA
13
10
8 (5 STO
and 3 RoR)
28
11
9 (3 STO
and 6 RoR)
IPP
27
86
0
44
83
33
Total
40
96
8
72
94
42
Figure 2.13:
Comparison of capacity of projects
considered in this study and those listed in NEA An-
nual Report 2015.
Table 2.3 provides a com-
parison of the number of
projects
listed
in
NEA
annual report and those
considered
in
this
the-
sis. Figure 2.13 compares
the same but based on
power production capac-
ity.
While the number
of projects considered in
this study is lower, the
capacities represented un-
der existing and under-
construction scenarios are
comparable.
Additional
STO projects not directly
reported in NEA Annual
reports but selected by the JICA (2014) study have been considered.
2.4
Biodiversity
Besides being the most important source of energy in terms of ﬁrewood, forests in
Nepal are also home to many important plants and animal species. The elevation
in Nepal changes from 60 to 8848 m above sea level within the 190 km north
to south span.
This results in a wide variety of hydro-climatic zones suitable
for rich biodiversity (ADB/ICIMOD, 2006). 39% of the country is classiﬁed as
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Environmental Regulations
20
forests (ICIMOD, 2015) (see Land use map in Figure 2.4). Over 118 diﬀerent
ecosystems have been recognized, with 80 ecosystems being actively conserved
(ADB/ICIMOD, 2006; CBS, 2013).
Ten national parks, three wildlife reserves, six conservation areas, one hunting
reserve and twelve buﬀer zones to these protected areas have been established
under the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1973. These protected
areas, shown in Figure 2.4, take up 23.23% (29014 km2) of the country area, which
is higher than the total cultivable area(CBS, 2013).
Over 5% of the world’s recognized plant species and 20% of the animal species
come from Nepal, despite the fact that it only covers a mere 0.1% of the world’s
land surface. The National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1973 speciﬁcally
protects 26 species of mammals, nine species of birds and three species of reptiles
within national park boundaries (CBS, 2013; ADB/ICIMOD, 2006; Kabeli En-
ergy Limited [KEL], 2013). All these protected animals and 20 plant species are
included in the Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora. Although the spatial occurrence of rare ﬁsh species are not well
known, 34 species have been labeled as threatened (ADB/ICIMOD, 2006). The
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened
Species in Nepal also highlight the species that are of global importance.
2.5
Environmental Regulations
The Aquatic Animal Protection Act 1961 (last amendment in 1998) was one of the
ﬁrst acts recognizing the importance of wetlands and biodiversity. It stipulated
the requirement of maintaining 5% of minimum annual ﬂow in de-watered sections
of water diversion projects. Furthermore, it requires the construction of ﬁsh lad-
ders to aid ﬁsh migration or artiﬁcial hatcheries for protection of aquatic species
under water diversion projects. However, the requirements of the Aquatic Animal
Protection act have not been fulﬁlled strictly due to lack of implementation of a
corresponding regulation. (KEL, 2013)
The Environmental Protection Act 1997 (EPA 1997), followed up by the Envi-
ronmental Protection Rules 1997 (last amendment in 2010) is primary basis for
environmental protection today. The EPA 1997 decrees that an assessment be
==PAGE:34==
2.6 Relevant Institutional Framework
21
carried out for any development project aﬀecting the environment. More speciﬁ-
cally, hydropower projects below 50 MW have to perform an Initial Environmental
Examination (IEE) and projects with higher capacities have to perform an En-
vironmental Impact Assessment (EIA). JICA (2014) summarize the requirements
for an IEE and EIA as outlined in the EPA 1997. While both require documen-
tation of potential impacts on the environment, the speciﬁcation for mitigation of
such impacts is vague. The EIA goes as far to require details on measures to either
reduce environmental impacts or provide equivalent ﬁnancial compensation.
The Hydropower Development Policy 2001 (HDP 2001) reinforces the require-
ments of these policies, while additionally requiring the release of 10% of long-
term minimum monthly ﬂow or minimum ﬂow established in the EIA, whichever
is lower (KEL, 2013; Rijal, 2014; Ministry of Water Resources [MWR], 2001).
Even though IEE and EIAs are being conducted as part of the legal framework
for licensing, the implementation and regulation of speciﬁcations made in these
reports are poor (N. Rijal, Personal communication, December 2015).
The Soil and Watershed Conservation Act 1982 and Regulations 1985 require that
any project to be constructed in areas recognized as important ecosystems need
to receive permission from designated authorities. Both the National Water Plan
2005 and Water Resources Strategy 2002 make provisions for adoption of Inte-
grated Water Resources Management (IWRM) practices to prioritize conservation
of biodiversity and animal habitat.
2.6
Relevant Institutional Framework
Table 2.4 lists some of the major governmental institutions that are responsible
for development and management of water, energy and environmental resources.
In addition to these public institutions, a few key non-governmental organization
are considered inﬂuential. Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and the
Independent Power Producers’ Association are considered representative of private
sector in national commissions.
International Center for Integrated Mountain
Development (ICIMOD), IUCN, JICA and Helvatas are non-proﬁt organizations
actively promoting the conservation and equitable development.
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Relevant Institutional Framework
22
Table 2.4: Relevant government institutions for water-energy-environment nexus.
Institution
Focus Area
Ministry of Science,
Technology and En-
vironment
Responsible for formulation and implementation of policies and programmers pertaining to science, tech-
nology and environment, including periodic evaluation of environmental programs implemented by other
governmental organizations. DHM under this ministry is responsible for all hydrological and meteorologi-
cal activities. Department of Environment, established recently in 2012 is responsible for implementation
of environmental laws, auditing of EIA reports and ensuring compliance with international environmental
standards.
Nepal Electricity Au-
thority (NEA)
The NEA, under the MoE oversees the planning, generation, transmission and distribution of power.
The Planning Directorate is responsible for load forecasting, generation/transmission system planning,
NEA internal development planning and determination of tariﬀstructure for power sales.
The Power
Development Department under the Engineering Directorate is responsible for technical study of NEA
hydropower projects and also provides technical consultation services for external projects. The Generation
Directorate is responsible for construction and maintenance of NEA owned plants while the Transmission
Directorate is responsible for the national INPS grid.
Department of Elec-
tricity
Development
(DoED)
The Department of Electricity Development (DoED), under the MoE, regulates the licensing process for
hydropower development and promotion of local investment in hydropower.The development. The DoED
guides the development of technical study for hydropower plants, including EIAs .
Water
and
En-
ergy
Commission
Secretariat (WECS)
The Water and Energy Commission Secretariat (WECS), under the MoE is an cross-sectoral commission
with representatives from 11 ministries along with key private and academic institutions, responsible for
assisting the formulation of policies relevant to development of water and energy sector and protection of
environment.
Ministry of Irrigation
(MoI)
Responsible for implementing policies regarding irrigation development. Oversees the development and
maintenance of irrigation projects using groundwater and surface water. Also responsible for mitigation
and tracking of water induced disasters.
National
Planning
Commission
Responsible for development and implementation of developmental policies and programs across all sectors.
Sets policy targets and priorities regarding budget dissemination for the ﬁscal year with formulation of the
annual and the three-year development plans
Ministry of Agricul-
tural Development
Responsible for development, commercialization and modernization of agriculture sector, including research
and dissemination of knowledge to improve agricultural productivity.
Ministry
of
Urban
Development
Responsible for planning and coordination of physical infrastructure development. The Department of
Water Supply and Sewerage is responsible for development of drinking water and sewage systems.
==PAGE:36==
2.6 Relevant Institutional Framework
23
Suhardiman et al. (2015) highlight the institutional challenges in Nepal that hinder
IWRM. In theory the WECS, backed largely by donor-agencies, has been a leader
in promoting IWRM practices through its formulation of the National Water Plan
2005 and Water Resources Strategy 2002. But both WECS and its policies have
seen little success.
The WECS has been unable to promote cross-sectoral coordination for meaningful
application of IWRM due to lack of authority to review ongoing projects in other
sectors, and coordinate development eﬀorts. The MoE’s hesitation to give more
authority to WECS highlights the fact that IWRM cannot happen by only pushing
it at a policy level.
In fact, Suhardiman et al. (2015) argue that the sectoral
power struggles have been reinforced by donor agencies pushing IWRM practices
through only one department. Gautam (2010) discuss similar fate of visions for
equitable resource allocation and beneﬁt sharing in resource utilization in Nepal.
The impacts of cross-sectoral power struggles and the inherent hierarchy in the
Nepalese society hinders the realizations of many donor-funded national policies.
The National Planning Commission is responsible for developing annual and three-
year development plans encompassing all sectors. Hence it has the highest author-
ity in approval of initiatives taken by other ministries. While the commission has
delegated IWRM responsibilities to WECS in the past, it has failed to internal-
ize the goals in IWRM in its process for budget allocation and project approvals.
Ultimately the standards set by the three-year plans, are the followed by the GoN.
Many government and non-governmental projects have undergone in isolation
without connections either horizontally across departments or vertically across
the administrative levels Suhardiman et al. (2015).
While local level agencies
recognize the need for IWRM, powerful ministries like the MoE and Ministry of
Irrigation (MoI) do not feel the need for IWRM. Suhardiman et al. (2015) found
that at an institutional level, there is strong belief that no conﬂict exists in water
use for agriculture and energy during dry period as the power and irrigation de-
velopment basins are distinct. Powerful ministries have in the past supported the
WECS and IWRM based approaches only in hopes to attract Indian investment
in large-scale multi-purpose projects combining hydropower and irrigation. In-
frastructure development is perceived as a more pressing need than optimization
of resource allocation.
==PAGE:37==
2.7 Need for Nexus Approach
24
2.7
Need for Nexus Approach
From the above overview it is clear that hydropower development is currently the
key priority for the government. Agriculture is recognized as a major player in
the economy. However, water stresses that may be created by expansion of power
and irrigation systems are not considered. Conﬂicts in water allocation between
irrigation and power production are not expected. Therefore there is need for a
closer examination of the spatial and temporal variations in water demand and
supply to provide a quantitative basis to either support or negate such notions of
water abundance.
The list of rich biodiversity in Nepal outnumbers the few environmental protection
policies that are currently in place in the country. While ﬂoods, in particular
GLOFs, are considered a threat, eﬀorts have been limited to establish monitoring
systems for early warning against such disasters. Pro-active measures focusing
on environmental conservation and ﬂood mitigation before damage is done, exists
mostly in paper and visionary policies like the National Water Plan.
In the face of climate change, issues of water-energy-food security and climate
resiliency are receiving attention. But eﬀorts to internalize climate change adap-
tation into development policies are missing from key players. For instance, JICA
(2014)’s study on development plans for storage plants made little consideration
for climate change. If development were to continue in its current state of isolated
eﬀorts in the water, energy and environment sector, the rural communities in the
Himalayan regions will likely bear the burden of inequity in resource allocation.
Storage reservoirs provide a unique opportunity for water management to mitigate
multiple issues. With cross-sectoral and coordinated planning, reservoir operation
can be optimized to improve food, water and energy security in the dry period.
The ability for long-term water storage is also important in building climate re-
siliency. Reservoirs can also provide a good way to prepare for unanticipated ﬂoods
and heavy rainfall that are expected to increase with climate change. However,
reservoirs pose a huge risk to the environment (see Chapter 6) and minimizing
their downstream impacts cannot happen without policy level interventions con-
straining reservoirs operation.
==PAGE:38==
2.7 Need for Nexus Approach
25
As Suhardiman et al. (2015) point out, IWRM cannot be truly incorporated into
the current governance system without "strong institutional commitment to im-
plement these policies". While it is beyond the scope of this thesis to delve into
socio-political reforms, the motivation arises from the need to quantify the inter-
dependencies, or lack thereof, in water-energy-food management. With multiple
ministries pushing their own agendas in Nepal, a nexus approach looking at water-
energy-food all together can be useful in identifying common grounds where trade
oﬀs and beneﬁts for diﬀerent sectors exist, and where collaborations can be made
(Weitz et al., 2014). Hydro-economic models, combining concepts in hydrology
and economic eﬃciency, are chosen as the tool for implementing the nexus. In-
ferring from the above discussion, minimizing water scarcity in irrigation, power
deﬁcit, ﬂood risk and environmental impacts are chosen as important management
objectives to represent in the food-energy-water nexus for Nepal.
==PAGE:39==
Part II
State of the Art
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
Multi-objective Optimization
Any resource allocation problem can be considered an optimization problem con-
strained by the available quantity of resources and constraints to resource uti-
lization. Demands must be met within the constraints in order to maximize the
beneﬁts from resource allocation or to minimize the losses from demand curtail-
ment or deﬁcits. Water resources management problems, especially those in water
scarce regions, are no diﬀerent.
Hydro-economic models refer to a wide range of water resources management
models that combine concepts in hydrology and economics to optimize water allo-
cation. These models argue for management of water based on a monetized water
value to achieve economic eﬃciency.
By representing various water users and
their demands in terms of a common monetary unit, synergies among competing
water users can be evaluated to identify eﬃcient water allocations. If environmen-
tal and social needs are appropriately incorporated, hydro-economic models can
help analyze trade-oﬀs between conventional water use and social values, possibly
providing unique insights to help balance the two. (Harou et al., 2009)
In neoclassical economics, Pareto optimality is considered the ultimate goal in
achieving allocation eﬃciency. A Pareto-optimal or Pareto-eﬃcient solution refers
to a state of resource allocations where improvement in one user’s beneﬁt cannot
be achieved without decreasing the beneﬁt of at least one other user Cohon, 1978.
Hydro-economic models also aim to achieve this state of Pareto eﬃciency where
any change in allocation cannot provide additional gains without creating an as-
sociated loss (Harou et al., 2009).
==PAGE:41==
28
While Harou et al. (2009) promote the use of hydro-economic models that take
into account the variable nature of water value and demand, often such monetiza-
tion of all water users is not easy. Conventional water usages are relatively easy
to monetize. But monetization of social, political, and environmental aspects of
a complex water management problem raise many questions that cannot be an-
swered without the involvement of the stakeholders (Loucks, Van Beek, Stedinger,
Dijkman, & Villars, 2005). Especially when considering water management in de-
veloping world , establishing realistic water values can be a time and resource
intensive process.
Figure
3.1:
Pareto optimal
points (blue) along the Pareto
front (red) for a two-objective op-
timization problem.
Instead, multi-objective optimization methods
advocate for the identiﬁcation of a full spec-
trum of technologically feasible Pareto-optimal
points that make up the Pareto front (Loucks et
al., 2005). Multi-objective optimization refers
to a multi-dimensional problem that requires
the fulﬁllment of multiple objectives, which are
often conﬂicting.
A Pareto front represents
all possible optimal solutions for such multi-
dimensional problems (Ngo, 2006). For a two
objective problem, Figure 5.1 shows Pareto op-
timal points along the Pareto front. Each point
in the Pareto front is Pareto-optimal from a
speciﬁc point of view, represented by a speciﬁc
set of weighted objectives. One Pareto optimal
point may not necessarily be better than the
another, but it may be better at fulﬁlling a diﬀerent objective.
By visualizing the trade-oﬀs between diﬀerent objectives, Pareto fronts can reveal
where greater eﬃciency in water allocation can be attained or help policy makers
understand the implications of new policies and development plans (Harou et al.,
2009; Hurford et al., 2013). Hurford et al. (2013) use visual analytics to present
trade-oﬀsurfaces for reservoir operation with regards to 16 diﬀerent performance
metrics. Such visualizations help identify common grounds between diﬀerent ob-
jectives based on which trade-oﬀs are important to the decision makers.
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4
Environmental Flows
Hydropower promotion in Nepal is reasonably justiﬁed in terms of minimizing the
use and subsequent environmental impacts of traditional ﬁrewood and agricultural
wastes as the country’s most commonly used source of energy. But the argument
cannot be used to discount other impacts of hydropower on other aspects of the en-
vironment. While hydropower is generally considered an environmentally friendly
renewable energy source, the environmental impacts of dams and reservoirs built
for hydropower are well documented (Baxter, 1977; Rosenberg et al., 1997; Poﬀ
et al., 1997). To name a few, dams are blamed for modifying natural ﬂow regime,
impeding ﬂow of sediment downstream, interrupting river connectivity and ﬂood-
ing of upstream areas. Such alteration of basin characteristics have been shown
to vary aquatic ecosystems supporting native biodiversity.
Run-of-river (RoR) plants, presumed to be less environmentally damaging be-
cause they do not require reservoirs, are also coming under scrutiny. Anderson,
Moggridge, Warren, and Shucksmith (2014)’s review found that change in ﬂow
regime and in-channel barriers blocking ﬁsh migration routes are the major criti-
cism towards RoR plants. The authors also argue the need for targeted research
to better understand the impact of RoR plants, especially the case of multiple
cascading RoR on the same river stretch. Peaking RoRs pose a higher threat in
terms of altered ﬂow as high ﬂows are concentrated around peak demand periods
(Cushman, 1985).
Only one of the existing hydropower plants (HPs) in Nepal is storage (STO) type
while the rest are RoR type with a small dam or a diversion that feeds a portion
of river ﬂow into the pen stock leading up to the turbines. With bigger STO type
projects in the pipeline, the environmental impacts of hydropower plants need
==PAGE:43==
30
to be discussed sooner than later in Nepal. Good operational practices focused
on allocating water to fulﬁll the needs of the environment can help mitigate the
impacts of both RoR and STO plants (Poﬀet al., 1997; Dyson, Bergkamp, &
Scanlon, 2003). Ecological impacts due to interruption of river connectivity can
only truly be mitigated by choosing a project layout that minimizes the impact
of any diversions. However, recognizing the environment as an important water
user is an essential step towards environmentally friendly plant designs.
Natural ﬂow in a basin varies in magnitude and timing in response to climatic,
topographic, and geomorphological factors (Searcy, 1969). The magnitude, fre-
quency, duration, timing and rate of change in channel ﬂow maintain ecological
processes that sustain native biodiversity of riparian and aquatic animals (Poﬀet
al., 1997). Recognizing this need to acknowledge the importance of ﬂow variability
in ecosystem maintenance, ‘Environmental Flow (EF)’ was deﬁned by The Bris-
bane Declaration (2007) as "the quantity, quality and timing of water ﬂows
required to sustain freshwater ecosystems and the human livelihoods
and well-being that depend on these ecosystems”. Consequently, historical
practices of maintaining a minimum ﬂow level, largely for practical reasons and
sometimes to conserve the ecosystem, are increasingly being criticized as insuﬃ-
cient to preserve full range of natural ﬂow regimes (Poﬀet al., 1997; Acreman &
Dunbar, 2004; Smakhtin & Shilpakar, 2005).
Recent Environmental Flow Assessment (EFA) methods call for establishing EFs
based on hydrological and ecological knowledge. Environmental Flow Require-
ment (EFR) can be reasonably categorized into ﬁve groups: hydrological, hy-
draulic, building blocks model, habitat simulation and holistic methods (Acreman
& Dunbar, 2004; Tharme, 2003; Gopal, 2013b; Dyson et al., 2003). The methods
are listed in the order of increasing complexity, site-speciﬁcity, data requirements
and Eco-hydrological expert inputs. No EFA method can be considered the best.
Appropriate choice must be made based on issue at hand, available resources
(time, money and expertise) and legislative framework within which EF are to
be set (Dyson et al., 2003). Dyson et al. (2003), Acreman and Dunbar (2004)
suggest the use of simple desktop models, mostly comprising of hydrological and
hydraulic methods as suitable for scoping and basin-scale planning studies similar
to this thesis.
Furthermore, Smakhtin, Shilpakar, and Hughes (2006b) found that in the absence
of local ecological information, using complex hydrological methods developed
==PAGE:44==
31
for other regions can provide unrealistic estimates. Simpler methods may be a
better start for setting initial benchmarks for EFRs. In the lack of clear ecolog-
ical objectives for river management, Acreman and Dunbar (2004) also suggest
scenario-based EF setting where the impacts of an ensemble of EF allocation
scenarios are modeled to provide a basis for discussion between water managers
and stakeholders. Based on the trade-oﬀs presented by various EFR scenarios, a
suitable EF level can be established (Dyson et al., 2003).
All South Asian countries still lack deﬁnitive policies regarding EFRs with limited
ongoing eﬀorts to deﬁne appropriate national assessment methods (Gopal, 2013a).
In Nepal, the Hydropower Policy 2001 requires the release of 10% of long-term
minimum monthly average ﬂow or the minimum-ﬂow identiﬁed in Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) studies, whichever is higher. However the 10% require-
ment is set rather arbitrarily. (Rijal & Alfredsen, 2015) reviewed 130 EIA reports
for Nepalese hydropower project and found that all EIAs for projects licensed after
2001 used hydrological index method1 to establish EFR. Such measures were taken
partly due to pressures from international donor agencies. However, in practice
the EFR are poorly maintained by plant managers and lack of monitoring by the
government (Rijal & Alfredsen, 2015). Both developing robust EFR assessment
standards and monitoring mechanisms for EFR is needed for sustainable water
management in Nepal.
1Method where a ﬁxed percentage of mean ﬂow is allocated to the environment
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Multi-objective Optimization
Any resource allocation problem can be considered an optimization problem con-
strained by the available quantity of resources and constraints to resource uti-
lization. Demands must be met within the constraints in order to maximize the
beneﬁts from resource allocation or to minimize the losses from demand curtail-
ment or deﬁcits. Water resources management problems, especially those in water
scarce regions, are no diﬀerent.
Hydro-economic models refer to a wide range of water resources management
models that combine concepts in hydrology and economics to optimize water allo-
cation. These models argue for management of water based on a monetized water
value to achieve economic eﬃciency.
By representing various water users and
their demands in terms of a common monetary unit, synergies among competing
water users can be evaluated to identify eﬃcient water allocations. If environmen-
tal and social needs are appropriately incorporated, hydro-economic models can
help analyze trade-oﬀs between conventional water use and social values, possibly
providing unique insights to help balance the two. (Harou et al., 2009)
In neoclassical economics, Pareto optimality is considered the ultimate goal in
achieving allocation eﬃciency. A Pareto-optimal or Pareto-eﬃcient solution refers
to a state of resource allocations where improvement in one user’s beneﬁt cannot
be achieved without decreasing the beneﬁt of at least one other user Cohon, 1978.
Hydro-economic models also aim to achieve this state of Pareto eﬃciency where
any change in allocation cannot provide additional gains without creating an as-
sociated loss (Harou et al., 2009).
==PAGE:46==
33
While Harou et al. (2009) promote the use of hydro-economic models that take
into account the variable nature of water value and demand, often such mone-
tization of all water users is not easy. Conventional water usages are relatively
easy to monetize. But monetization of social, political, and environmental as-
pects of a complex water management problem raise many questions that cannot
be answered without the involvement of the stakeholders (Loucks et al., 2005).
Especially when considering water management in developing world , establishing
realistic water values can be a time and resource intensive process.
Figure
5.1:
Pareto optimal
points (blue) along the Pareto
front (red) for a two-objective op-
timization problem.
Instead, multi-objective optimization methods
advocate for the identiﬁcation of a full spec-
trum of technologically feasible Pareto-optimal
points that make up the Pareto front (Loucks et
al., 2005). Multi-objective optimization refers
to a multi-dimensional problem that requires
the fulﬁllment of multiple objectives, which are
often conﬂicting.
A Pareto front represents
all possible optimal solutions for such multi-
dimensional problems (Ngo, 2006). For a two
objective problem, Figure 5.1 shows Pareto op-
timal points along the Pareto front. Each point
in the Pareto front is Pareto-optimal from a
speciﬁc point of view, represented by a speciﬁc
set of weighted objectives. One Pareto optimal
point may not necessarily be better than the
another, but it may be better at fulﬁlling a diﬀerent objective.
By visualizing the trade-oﬀs between diﬀerent objectives, Pareto fronts can reveal
where greater eﬃciency in water allocation can be attained or help policy makers
understand the implications of new policies and development plans (Harou et al.,
2009; Hurford et al., 2013). Hurford et al. (2013) use visual analytics to present
trade-oﬀsurfaces for reservoir operation with regards to 16 diﬀerent performance
metrics. Such visualizations help identify common grounds between diﬀerent ob-
jectives based on which trade-oﬀs are important to the decision makers.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 6
Environmental Flows
Hydropower promotion in Nepal is reasonably justiﬁed in terms of minimizing the
use and subsequent environmental impacts of traditional ﬁrewood and agricultural
wastes as the country’s most commonly used source of energy. But the argument
cannot be used to discount other impacts of hydropower on other aspects of the en-
vironment. While hydropower is generally considered an environmentally friendly
renewable energy source, the environmental impacts of dams and reservoirs built
for hydropower are well documented (Baxter, 1977; Rosenberg et al., 1997; Poﬀ
et al., 1997). To name a few, dams are blamed for modifying natural ﬂow regime,
impeding ﬂow of sediment downstream, interrupting river connectivity and ﬂood-
ing of upstream areas. Such alteration of basin characteristics have been shown
to vary aquatic ecosystems supporting native biodiversity.
Run-of-river (RoR) plants, presumed to be less environmentally damaging because
they do not require reservoirs, are also coming under scrutiny. Anderson et al.
(2014)’s review found that change in ﬂow regime and in-channel barriers blocking
ﬁsh migration routes are the major criticism towards RoR plants. The authors
also argue the need for targeted research to better understand the impact of RoR
plants, especially the case of multiple cascading RoR on the same river stretch.
Peaking RoRs pose a higher threat in terms of altered ﬂow as high ﬂows are
concentrated around peak demand periods (Cushman, 1985).
Only one of the existing hydropower plants (HPs) in Nepal is storage (STO) type
while the rest are RoR type with a small dam or a diversion that feeds a portion
of river ﬂow into the penstock leading up to the turbines. With bigger STO type
projects in the pipeline, the environmental impacts of hydropower plants need
to be discussed sooner than later in Nepal. Good operational practices focused
==PAGE:48==
35
on allocating water to fulﬁll the needs of the environment can help mitigate the
impacts of both RoR and STO plants (Poﬀet al., 1997; Dyson et al., 2003).
Ecological impacts due to interruption of river connectivity can only truly be mit-
igated by choosing a project layout that minimizes the impact of any diversions.
However, recognizing the environment as an important water user is an essential
step towards environmentally friendly plant designs.
Natural ﬂow in a basin varies in magnitude and timing in response to climatic,
topographic, and geomorphological factors (Searcy, 1969). The magnitude, fre-
quency, duration, timing and rate of change in channel ﬂow maintain ecological
processes that sustain native biodiversity of riparian and aquatic animals (Poﬀet
al., 1997). Recognizing this need to acknowledge the importance of ﬂow variability
in ecosystem maintenance, ‘Environmental Flow (EF)’ was deﬁned by The Bris-
bane Declaration (2007) as "the quantity, quality and timing of water ﬂows
required to sustain freshwater ecosystems and the human livelihoods
and well-being that depend on these ecosystems”. Consequently, historical
practices of maintaining a minimum ﬂow level, largely for practical reasons and
sometimes to conserve the ecosystem, are increasingly being criticized as insuﬃ-
cient to preserve full range of natural ﬂow regimes (Poﬀet al., 1997; Acreman &
Dunbar, 2004; Smakhtin & Shilpakar, 2005).
Recent Environmental Flow Assessment (EFA) methods call for establishing EFs
based on hydrological and ecological knowledge. Environmental Flow Require-
ment (EFR) can be reasonably categorized into ﬁve groups: hydrological, hy-
draulic, building blocks model, habitat simulation and holistic methods (Acreman
& Dunbar, 2004; Tharme, 2003; Gopal, 2013b; Dyson et al., 2003). The methods
are listed in the order of increasing complexity, site-speciﬁcity, data requirements
and eco-hydrological expert inputs. No EFA method can be considered the best.
Appropriate choice must be made based on issue at hand, available resources
(time, money and expertise) and legislative framework within which EF are to
be set (Dyson et al., 2003). Dyson et al. (2003), Acreman and Dunbar (2004)
suggest the use of simple desktop models, mostly comprising of hydrological and
hydraulic methods as suitable for scoping and basin-scale planning studies similar
to this thesis.
Furthermore, Smakhtin et al. (2006b) found that in the absence of local ecological
information, using complex hydrological methods developed for other regions can
provide unrealistic estimates. Simpler methods may be a better start for setting
==PAGE:49==
36
initial benchmarks for EFRs. In the lack of clear ecological objectives for river
management, Acreman and Dunbar (2004) also suggest scenario-based EF set-
ting where the impacts of an ensemble of EF allocation scenarios are modeled to
provide a basis for discussion between water managers and stakeholders. Based
on the trade-oﬀs presented by various EFR scenarios, a suitable EF level can be
established (Dyson et al., 2003).
All South Asian countries still lack deﬁnitive policies regarding EFRs with limited
ongoing eﬀorts to deﬁne appropriate national assessment methods (Gopal, 2013a).
In Nepal, the Hydropower Policy 2001 requires the release of 10% of long-term
minimum monthly average ﬂow or the minimum-ﬂow identiﬁed in Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) studies, whichever is higher. However the 10% require-
ment is set rather arbitrarily. (Rijal & Alfredsen, 2015) reviewed 130 EIA reports
for Nepalese hydropower project and found that all EIAs for projects licensed after
2001 used hydrological index method1 to establish EFR. Such measures were taken
partly due to pressures from international donor agencies. However, in practice
the EFR are poorly maintained by plant managers and lack of monitoring by the
government (Rijal & Alfredsen, 2015). Both developing robust EFR assessment
standards and monitoring mechanisms for EFR is needed for sustainable water
management in Nepal.
1Method where a ﬁxed percentage of mean ﬂow is allocated to the environment
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 7
Irrigation Water Demand
In order to estimate the irrigation demand, ﬁrst a relevant deﬁnition for irrigation
demand needs to be established. Plants receive water through excess rainfall, wa-
ter stored in soil as soil moisture and artiﬁcial supply through irrigation. These
three sources fulﬁll evapotranspiration (crop transpiration and soil evaporation)
requirements over the crop period, deﬁned by the Food and Agriculture Organi-
zation (FAO) as the Irrigation Consumptive Water Use (ICU). To ensure
that plant growth and crop yield is not limited, additional water is required for
salt leaching and/or ﬂooding the ﬁelds for the case of rice ( a water layer of 20
centimeters). The sum of ICU and this additional non-consumptive water needed
for crop production is called Net Irrigation Water Requirement (NWR).
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO], 2016)
In practice, water used to irrigate is higher than the net irrigation water require-
ment because of losses during conveyance, distribution and application. Gross
Irrigation Water Requirement (GWR) representing the sum of net irrigation
water requirement and these losses indicates the actual volume of water withdrawn
from water sources. Return ﬂow refers to the non-consumptive and lost portion of
gross irrigation water requirement that is returned to the surface- or ground-water
system which may or may not be recoverable. (FAO, 2016)
For this study, GWR and return ﬂows are of primary interest.
Return ﬂows
available for reuse in surface water downstream of the withdrawal point can be re-
utilized in both power production and irrigation downstream. At each withdrawal
point, irrigation water withdrawal that is removed from the system would be the
diﬀerence between GWR and recoverable return ﬂows. However, such estimation
of various levels water use is complicated and not yet available for Nepal. For the
==PAGE:51==
38
trade-oﬀbased analysis proposed here, spatially and temporally explicit water
demand data is of higher importance.
No records of actual water withdrawal for irrigation is maintained by the De-
partment of Irrigation (DOI) or other governmental institution, partly because
most irrigation systems in Nepal are run at the farmer’s level (NepalICID, n.d.).
Some estimates available for annual GWR withdrawals in Nepal are reported in
Table 7.1. The range of estimates available highlights the lack of a thorough,
deﬁnitive and targeted study on irrigation demands in Nepal. For most reported
values, it was diﬃcult to trace back the original source of the estimates.
Only Biemans et al. (2015) have made a spatially and temporally explicit esti-
mate for Nepal that suits the needs of this study. Additionally, Biemans et al.
(2015)’s study used multi-cropping represented by multiple land use data sets
and monsoon-depending cropping dates to improve the estimation of seasonal
demands. The GWR estimated by Biemans et al. (2015) are used here.
Table 7.1: Various estimates for annual GWR in Billion Cubic Meters (109m3)
(BCM) for Nepal.
Year
[ BCM]
Source and Method
1995
13.45
Reported as ﬁeld data based in (ADB/ICIMOD, 2006)
2002
17.78
Reported in (ADB/ICIMOD, 2006), method unknown
2002
9.32
FAO (2012) estimated annual irrigation water require-
ment at 5.43 BCM using the FAO Crop coeﬃcient
method and scaled up by regional irrigation eﬃciency
to getGWR
2000-2009
2.70
Biemans, Siderius, Mishra, and Ahmad (2015) used an
LPJmL model to estimate ICU and subsequent GWR
by scaling up with a country-speciﬁc eﬃciency factor
that accounts for conveyance and application losses
NA
14.39
Reported in (WECS, 2011), method unknown
NA
17
Reported in (NepalICID, n.d.) as estimate used in
Government of Nepal (GoN)’s Agriculture Perspective
Plan
==PAGE:52==
7.1 Seasonal estimates of Irrigation Consumptive Water Use for Nepal
39
7.1
Seasonal estimates of Irrigation Consumptive Wa-
ter Use for Nepal
Biemans et al. (2015) developed a Lund-Potsdam-Jena managed Land (LPJmL)
model for South Asia to estimate irrigation water demand for production of 12
major crops. LPJmL is a dynamic coupled model that simulates transient changes
in terrestrial carbon and water cycles due to agricultural practices using a com-
bination of empirical and theoretical relations (Bondeau et al., 2007). With a
spatial resolution of 0.5 deg the model was run at daily time steps for 1979-2000
with climate data from WATCH-Forcing-Data-ERA-Interim. Dates for onset of
monsoon was obtained from the Indian Meteorological Department. Addition-
ally, two simulations for Kharif (monsoon) and Rabi (dry) cropping periods were
conducted to account for multiple cropping. (Biemans et al., 2015)
The two cropping periods were run with two diﬀerent land-use and sowing date
datasets. Land-use maps available at 5-min spatial resolution through MICRA2000
for 1998-2002 were used. The 26 crop classes in MICRA were aggregated to be
consistent with 13 classes available in the LPJmL model. Based on analysis of
cropping calendars on MICRA, land-use maps from September and January were
chosen as representatives for the two periods. Cropped areas for rice, wheat and
pulses were adjusted to be appropriately represented within the two cropping pe-
riods. Based on the assumption that all countries had increase in irrigation similar
to that seen in India, 10% of the rain-fed area was shifted to irrigated area. Man-
agement intensity represented by parameters controlling leaf area development
were calibrated to match simulated 5-year average crop yields to those observed
in each country. (Biemans et al., 2015)
The calibrated model was used to estimate crop-speciﬁc ICU1 or the water re-
quired to fulﬁll the diﬀerence between potential evapotranspiration, eﬀective pre-
cipitation and maintain soil moisture at ﬁeld capacity (Biemans et al., 2015). A
country-speciﬁc eﬃciency factor representing conveyance and application losses
was used to evaluate the GWR. While return ﬂows are not explicitly accounted
for, they are incorporated into the losses represented by the eﬃciency factor (H.
Biemans, personal communication, September, 2015).
1‘Irrigation Consumptive Water Use’ is referred to as ‘net irrigation water demand’ in (Bie-
mans et al., 2015)
==PAGE:53==
7.1 Seasonal estimates of Irrigation Consumptive Water Use for Nepal
40
Figure 7.1 shows the average annual GWR for Nepal based on the post-calibration
simulation years 2003-2008. The spatial distribution of the same annual demand
over the country was shown in Figure 2.5 on page 11. The seasonal pattern in
GWR changes closely with monsoon and higher irrigation demands are seen in the
dry season. Biemans et al. estimated total annual ICU for Nepal at 1.4 BCM with
GWR at 2.7BCM, using an irrigation eﬃciency of 37.5% as estimated by Rohwer,
Gerten, and Lucht (2006). Similar to Nepal, the GWR estimates for India are also
lower than that made by other studies, despite the consideration for increase in
irrigated areas (Biemans et al., 2015). Reduced estimates can be expected due to
a more detailed and thorough modeling of actually cropping patterns. Still, the
estimates for Nepal seem unusually low (H. Biemans, personal communication,
September, 2015). Appendix B.9 discusses investigation of ways to account for
the under-estimation.
Figure 7.1:
Net irrigation requirements for main agricultural crops in Nepal
estimated by Biemans, Siderius, Mishra, and Ahmad (2015). Provided by: H.
Biemans (personal communication, September, 2015.
==PAGE:54==
Part III
Methods
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 8
Formulation of the Model
8.1
General Form
8.1.1
Linear Programming
A multi-objective optimization based on linear programming is proposed to rep-
resent water-energy-food nexus for Nepal. Linear optimization or Linear Program
(LP) refers to a class of constrained optimization where the objectives and con-
straints in the problem can be expressed in terms of linear functions of the decision
variables. LP problems are expressed as a minimization problem subject to (s.t.)
a set of equality and/or inequality constraints representing known relationships
and dependencies in the problem. The standard form for an LP in scalar and in
matrix form are stated as:
min
{xi}n
i=1
φ = c1x1 + c2x2 + · · · + cnxn
s.t.
a11x1 + a12x2 + · · · + a1nxn
b1
...
am1x1 + am2x2 + · · · + amnxn
bm
d11x1 + d12x2 + · · · + d1nxn
= e1
...
dq1x1 + dq2x2 + · · · + dqnxn
= eq
x1 ≥0, x2 ≥0, . . . , xn ≥0
min
x
φ = cT x
s.t.
Ax b
Dx = e
x ≥0
(8.1)
==PAGE:56==
8.1 General Form
43
where φ is the objective function that is to be minimized by selecting optimal
values for the decision variables x. c represents the coeﬃcients of the objective
function. A and C are m ⇥n and p ⇥n matrices representing the inequality and
equality constraints while b and e are the right hand side for these constraints. n
represents the number of decision variables while m and q represent the number of
inequality and equality constraints. (Mikosch, Resnick, & Robinson, 2006; IBM
Corporations [IBM], 2014)
Figure 8.1: Feasible region for an LP with 2
decision variables and 4 constraints. Adapted
from: (Loucks et al., 2005).
The linear constraints in an LP
create a bounded or unbounded
polytopes, called the feasible re-
gion with vertices where the con-
straints
intersect.
For
a
2-
dimensional LP with 2 decision
variables, the feasible polytopes is
a polygon as shown in Figure 8.1.
The optimal solution, if it exists,
lies at the intersection of the con-
straints. For a feasible problem, a
unique solution may not always ex-
ist if multiple vertices result in the
same objective function value.
Figure
8.2:
Itera-
tions in a simplex al-
gorithm for a 3D prob-
lem.
Adapted
from:
Wikipedia.
An LP can be solved using an interior-point or simplex
algorithm to obtain optimal values for the unknown de-
cision variables. The latter is chosen in this study as
it is considered one of the oldest and most widely used
algorithm for solving LPs. The simplex algorithm, orig-
inally developed by George Dantzig in 1947, exists in
multiple diﬀerent forms today like the revised simplex
and dual simplex. All variants of the algorithm start at
one of the vertices of the feasible region and pivot iter-
atively from one vertex to another along the direction
where the objective function decreases until no further
decrease is possible as illustrated in Figure 8.2. The
selection of starting point varies for diﬀerent simplex
solvers. The simplex algorithm is usually performed in
two stages where Phase I is for identiﬁcation of the ini-
==PAGE:57==
8.1 General Form
44
tial feasible point and Phase II is for the pivoting to ﬁnd the optimal solution.
(Mikosch et al., 2006; IBM, 2014)
The availability of multiple computer programs that can readily solve LP problems
makes LPs the most commonly applied optimization method in water management
(Loucks et al., 2005; Cheng, Hsu, Cheng, & Yeh, 2009). For the same reason, it is
also common to linearize non-linear problems so they can be solved as LPs. Due
to complexity of water management problems, linear optimization models are
however only considered suitable for preliminary screening to reduce the number
of alternatives rather than ﬁnding the best solution for the problem (Loucks et al.,
2005). Alternatives chosen with the help of optimization can be further analyzed
with more costly and detailed simulation methods.
8.1.2
The Weighting Method
An LP provides one Pareto-optimal set of decision variable for a known objective
function subject to a set of constraints. However, the coeﬃcients of an objec-
tive function, deﬁned as c in Equation (8.1) may not be known a priori For
example, in hydro-economic models, the water value for diﬀerent traditional and
non-traditional water users may not be known, or may vary over time. In such
instance, there is value in identifying alternative Pareto optimal sets for variable
values of the coeﬃcients. multi-objective optimization (MOO) addresses this need
to understand the full range of Pareto-optimal solutions (or the Pareto front) for a
known set of constraints, but an uncertain objective function. It is likely that co-
eﬃcients for the constraints themselves could change, but in a physical system the
constraints usually represent physical capacity constraints which are more certain
than objective functions.
A MOO problem is usually expressed in terms of management objectives for the
system quantiﬁed by reasonable performance metrics. The performance metric
for each objective z is deﬁned as a function of the decision variables as Zz(x). In
the weighting method, the objective function is set up as a weighted sum of all z
objectives, as:
min
x
φ = w1Z1(x) + · · · + wzZz(x)
|
z
X
i=1
wi = 1, w ≥0
(8.2)
==PAGE:58==
8.1 General Form
45
The general MOO problem can be stated as:
min
x {wT Z(x)
|
Ax = b
8
x ≥0, w ≥0}
(8.3)
Figure 8.3:
Exploring the Pareto front with the
weighting method for an MOO with 2 management
objectives and 4 constraints. Adapted from: (Loucks
et al., 2005).
The non-negative weights
wi are varied systemati-
cally and the optimization
is solved multiple times to
explore all possible values
for each objective.
Fig-
ure 8.3 shows the same LP
shown in Figure 8.1 imple-
mented as a MOO. The
objective function is de-
ﬁned as:
min
x {w1Z1(x) + w2Z2(x)}
Z1(x) = x1
Z2(x) = x2
Line a⃝represents a ver-
sion of the objective function with w1 = w2. Line b⃝represents a shifted version
of a⃝indicating the search for the Pareto-optimal minimum point. c⃝and d⃝are
other versions of the objective function. Two Pareto-optimal points are identiﬁed
using the three version of the objective function. With suﬃcient iterations of the
objective function, enough optimal points can be delineated to identify the full
Pareto front.
Figure 8.4: Failure of weighting method
to delineate concave parts of the Pareto
front in a maximization problem. Repro-
duced from: (Loucks et al., 2005).
The weighting method is only suitable
for cases where the expected feasible
region and the bounding Pareto front
is convex (Loucks et al., 2005; Marler
& Arora, 2010).
A feasible region is
a convex set if a line joining any two
optimal points in the region lies within
the feasible region as well. If the fea-
sible region has concave regions, as in-
==PAGE:59==
8.2 Network based Representation of Nepal
46
dicated in Figure 8.4, any combination of weights w will not be able to ﬁnd the
dented part. Only the corners of the dents will be identiﬁed.
8.1.3
The Constraining Method
Figure 8.5: Exploring the Pareto front with the
constraining method for a MOO with 2 manage-
ment objectives and 4 constraints in a maximiza-
tion problem. Reproduced from: (Loucks et al.,
2005).
In order to identify the concave
parts, the constraining method
can be used. Figure 8.5 illus-
trates the method.
Equation
6.2 is additionally constrained
by limiting the feasible region
that is available for minimiza-
tion:
Zz limz
By
iteratively
changing
the
limit limz placed on each per-
formance metric Zz, points on
the
concave
regions
can
be
identiﬁed.
If the limit is not
well established, the constrain-
ing method can end up in non-feasible regions while the weighting method will
always provide a solution on the Pareto front.
8.2
Network based Representation of Nepal
The formulation of a water resources management problem into an LP frame-
work is relatively straight-forward. Loucks et al. (2005) provide a detailed dis-
cussion on such representation.
If all hydrological and engineering features to
be modeled are represented in a node-link network, linear relationships can be
established for linked nodes based on mass balances and constraints on physical
capacities. Tradiwaystoal of expressing water allocation problem as an LP, as
done by (Pereira-cardenal, 2013; Davidsen, 2015) require manual set up of the
linear relationships. In order to automate the generation of these relations based
==PAGE:60==
8.2 Network based Representation of Nepal
47
on a node-link network, an approach proposed by (Cheng et al., 2009) is adopted
in this study.
Cheng et al. (2009) provide a generalized methodology to represent water distri-
bution networks in terms of ﬂow paths indicating all possible water delivery routes
from each source node to the associated demand nodes. Cheng et al. (2009) used
an algorithm to identify all possible ﬂow paths, including loops and two-way pipes.
This study considers only water distribution through natural rivers that are grav-
ity driven and unidirectional. This allows for simpliﬁed way to identify all possible
ﬂow paths in the network.
Figure 8.6: Decomposition of reservoir storage from one time step to another.
Reproduced from: (Cheng, Hsu, Cheng, & Yeh, 2009).
Furthermore, Cheng et al. (2009) decompose reservoir storage into a source and
sink node as illustrated in Figure 8.6. Since reservoirs can carry over storage from
one time step to another, such dual representation allows for separation of the two
time steps. To maintain continuity, water allocated to the storage sink at time t
drains into the storage source at time t + 1. The same reservoir representation is
used here.
A node-link representation for Nepal was setup as shown in Figure 8.7 using
the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) 90m Digital Elevation Model
(DEM) dataset in World Geodetic System 1984 datum (Jarvis, Reuter, Nelson, &
Guevara, 2008). Nepal spans between projected coordinates Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) zone 44N and 45N. Grids covering Nepal were merged together,
projected to UTM zone 45 and processed in ArcGIS.
==PAGE:61==
8.2 Network based Representation of Nepal
48
Figure 8.7: Conceptual map for optimization setup representing Nepal. A total of 503 nodes representing
important water ﬂows in the 170 modeled catchments are shown. Each of the 144 HP subcatchments have three
nodes: inﬂow, irrigation demand and hydropower plant (HP) turbine.
Six of the storage (STO) type HPs’
catchments additionally have two reservoir (sources & sink) nodes. Other modeled catchments have an inﬂow
and a demand node. Outﬂow nodes indicate river stations where environmental ﬂows are checked.
==PAGE:62==
8.2 Network based Representation of Nepal
49
8.2.1
Water Balance Representation
First basins to be modeled were identiﬁed and these were divided into multiple
subcatchments. Since development projects in Nepal function at district or zonal
level, breaking the model in-terms of these familiar administrative units would be
most sensible from a management perspective. However, maintaining administra-
tive boundaries would result in more subcatchments and subsequently a bigger
optimization problem. Hence, the selection and division of the model domain,
as shown in Figure 8.7 has been done largely based on hydrological boundaries,
national power development plans and data availability.
In order to preserve spatial variability in water demand and supply, all major
basins highlighted in Figure 2.2 on page 8 are separated. The proposed optimiza-
tion model is based on the ability to regulate reservoir storage to optimize water
and power beneﬁts over time. Therefore, basins that have existing or planned
reservoirs have to be represented. There is only one existing reservoir at Kulekhani
in the Bagmati basin as indicated in Section 2.3. At least one reservoir is consid-
ered feasible in all basins other than Kamala, Babai, West Rapti and the southern
river basins. Kamala and the southern basins are excluded, despite these basins
being major irrigation water users in Nepal. The lack of discharge stations in these
basins (see Figure 2.2) also make it hard to model these. Babai and West Rapti
have been skipped as they are small basins that have relatively low power pro-
duction capacity. Only a portion of the western-most Mahakali basin is modeled
as discharge data is only available relatively upstream.
Figure 8.8: A preview
into the node-link setup.
For legends refer to Fig-
ure 8.7.
Chosen basins are further divided into smaller sub-
catchments. Figure 8.8 shows a zoomed version of some
subcatchments in the Karnali basin to aid the discus-
sion here. The HP locations shown in Section 2.3 were
used to delineate the HP subcatchments highlighted in
dark creme in Figure 8.7.
In each of the 144 HP subcatchments, a node, shown in
red, indicating a turbine is added. For HPs with storage
reservoirs, two additional nodes are added to represent
storage source and sink (triangles) as done by Cheng
et al. (2009). The storage source - sink - turbine nodes
representing one reservoir were placed in the presented
==PAGE:63==
8.2 Network based Representation of Nepal
50
order. This allows water from the storage source to feed the storage sink and the
turbine. The storage sink in one time-step acts as the storage source for the next
time step as shown in schematic in Figure 8.6.
Given that most of the nation’s irrigation demand occurs at the southern Terai,
downstream of most HP plants, such distinction in areas upstream of HP may be
unnecessary. However, it was seen that many districts in the Hilly region have
potentially irrigable areas that could be equipped with irrigation in the future.
Also, most urban areas lie in the hills. To keep the model ﬂexible and potentially
include other water users signiﬁcant in the Hilly areas in the future, areas upstream
of HPs (see ‘HP catchments’ in Figure 8.7) are modeled explicitly. The resulting
large subcatchments that have multiple tributaries are further broken into smaller
parts to preserve water ﬂow relation such that ﬂow in one tributary is not available
to fulﬁll demand in another. This resulted in a model with 170 subcatchments as
shown by the creme colored polygons in Figure 8.7.
8.2.2
Power Balance Representation
Existing, under construction and selected planned HPs are modeled explicitly
as the HP nodes (red circle). While it is known that the power demand varies
across the nation as discussed in Section 2.3, for simplicity, the spatial variation in
power demand has been ignored. Since power produced in one basin can easily be
transferred to another, assuming transmissions lines are not a restriction, ignoring
spatial variability is reasonable. Hence, power demand is modeled at the national
scale by a single user and no physical node for power demand is assigned in
Figure 8.7. If the carrying capacity of transmission lines are to be accounted for,
power demand users and their connectivity should be modeled explicitly.
This resulted in overall 503 nodes connected by the rivers delineated in ArcGIS.
==PAGE:64==
8.2 Network based Representation of Nepal
51
8.2.3
Network and Flow Path Matrix
Using the Utility Network Analyst tools in ArcGIS, a network matrix was cre-
ated to represent the node-to-node relation. In this study, a network matrix M
representing connectivity between k nodes is deﬁned as a k ⇥k matrix where,
Mi,j = 1
8 nodes j downstream of node i
(8.4)
Appendix C.1 on page 146 describes the work-ﬂow for generation of such a network
matrix in ArcGIS. While the rows of M represent nodes downstream of the row
node, the columns indicate nodes upstream of the column node.
In addition to the network matrix, a nodemap is created to track nodeIDs and
nodeTypes. nodeIDs are unique identiﬁer IDs assigned to each node while node-
Type track of whether the node is a source (+1), sink (-1), storage source (+11),
storage sink (-11), HP turbine (22) or environmental outﬂow (-2).
Figure 8.9
shows the three arrays for the 8-node case presented in Figure 8.8. The Nodemap
can be generated in ArcGIS.
Next, a Flow path (FP) matrix is evaluated. All ﬂow paths or water delivery
routes in the system are identiﬁed by looping through the rows in M representing
sources (+1 and +11) and searching for sinks (-1, -2 and -11) downstream of each
source. In Figure 8.9, the blue arrows indicate the selection of source nodes and
the green arrows indicate the identiﬁcation of sink nodes. The FP matrix tracks
each identiﬁed source-sink combination in terms of the row numbers of source
and sink in the network matrix. The code for the implementation of ﬂow path
identiﬁcation is included below.
%Create
flow
paths by
looping
through
all
sources
and
storages
for n = find(nodeType ==1| nodeType ==11)
temp =M(n ,:) .* nodeType;
sinks = find(temp <0);
FP = [FP;n*ones(length(sinks) ,1) sinks ’];
end
Each row in the FP matrix represents a delivery route, referred to as link from
here on. Note that this method of generating the FP matrix assumes that there
is only one possible route for water ﬂow from one node to another and that there
are no loops in the system. It is also assumed that no water abstraction takes
place at the HP turbines.
==PAGE:65==
8.3 Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
52
Figure 8.9: Network matrix and nodemap used to create the ﬂow path matrix
representing the example network shown in Figure 8.8.
The network matrix based representation provides a lot of ﬂexibility in modeling
diﬀerent scenarios. Not all of the 144 HPs are modeled at the same time. To
model only a subset of HPs relevant to each of the scenario, the rows and columns
representing the relevant HP nodes can be read from the full network matrix.
This way nodes can easily be added or removed to indicate changes in the system.
The nodeIDs are useful in tracking which rows and columns are to be modeled.
They are also used in this study to connect nodes to data tables that store inputs
relevant to the node.
8.3
Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
Using the network matrix, nodemap and FP matrix established above, an LP for
Nepal has been formulated. The optimization is set up for the weighting method
and altered to implement the constraining method. The constraining method is
used to improve the poorly determined areas of the Pareto front estimated with the
weighting method. Cheng et al. (2009)’s representation for linear mass balances
and constraints in terms of FPs are supplemented by additional constraints to
represent the power balance. The model takes basin inﬂows, HP speciﬁcations,
reservoir characteristics, reservoir rules and water and power demands as inputs.
==PAGE:66==
8.3 Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
53
Based on the water available and the speciﬁed demands, the model allocates water
and power between competing users as an output.
8.3.1
Time Step
Both power and water demands have a diurnal pattern that would be best mod-
eled at an hourly scale. Truly capturing the current power deﬁcit scenario in Nepal
would require such detailed modeling of daily variations in water and power sup-
ply. Additionally, the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology (DHM)’s ﬂood
warning system and reservoir operations also function in hourly or daily scale. But
daily scale modeling would be computationally intensive (Loucks et al., 2005).
Since the proposed optimization model is intended to help infrastructure devel-
opment and planning at a macro scale, a monthly time step is deemed suﬃcient
(Loucks et al., 2005). Performance of development alternatives are evaluated in
terms of their ability to fulﬁll constant demand levels under variable historical
inﬂows. Based on analysis of available discharge data, the period from 1995-2008
has been selected to minimize data gaps. The MOO problem is formulated as a
single LP to represent all 14 years modeled in monthly steps.
8.3.2
Objective Function
The overall goal for the MOO is to minimize four objectives: water shortage in
irrigation, environmental impact of regulated ﬂows, downstream ﬂood risk and
load shedding. If ↵represents the set of decision variables and Zz(↵) represents
the performance metric used to quantify the fulﬁllment of objective z, the objective
function for the MOO is:
min
↵
Φ =
w1 · ZWaterDeficit(↵) + w2 · ZEnvDeficit(↵) + . . .
(8.5)
w3 · ZFloodRisk(↵) + w4 · ZPowerDeficit(↵)
where,
w1 + w2 + w3 + w4 = 1
All objectives are deﬁned in terms of deviation from required thresholds estab-
lished a priori. The monthly irrigation water demand (wdemd) at demand nodes
d, environmental ﬂow requirement (edeme) at outﬂow nodes e and national power
==PAGE:67==
8.3 Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
54
demand (pdem) established in Chapters 11,10 and 12 are considered the maxi-
mum thresholds for the minimization of irrigation water shortage, environmental
impact and load shedding. The performance metrics for these objective are thus
deﬁned in terms of deﬁcits (wdef, edef and pdef) in meeting these demand
thresholds. wdef and edef are referred to as water deﬁcit and env deﬁcit from
here on.
In order to minimize waste of resources, the demands of irrigation water users-
wdem should not be exceeded.
But the edem and pdem thresholds can be
exceeded. Any excess power can be sold out as exports, so these are tracked as
pexp. Exceedance of edem is also desirable to maintain healthy river basins, these
are tracked as excd.
Minimization of ﬂood risk is a harder objective to quantify. The DHM has es-
tablished warning discharge and water levels for dangerous ﬂood events for least
4 out of 7 river station used in this thesis. However, these are deﬁned in [m3/s]
as ﬂoods occur at hourly or daily time scales and cannot be scaled to a monthly
scale as was done for most other inputs.
Reservoir rule curves are usually deﬁned in monthly time steps. Rule curves are
also designed to minimize ﬂood risk by maintaining empty space in the reservoirs
to withhold any incoming high ﬂows in ﬂood-prone months (Loucks et al., 2005).
The same metric is used here to quantify the ﬂood risk. Minimization of ﬂood risk
is deﬁned as minimizing the exceedance (sxcdsi) of maximum storage threshold
set by the rule curve at each storage sink node si. Storage is also allowed to fall
below the threshold, which is tracked as the storage deﬁcit (sdef) at all storage
sinks.
Since power and water represent diﬀerent resources quantiﬁed in diﬀerent units,
the deﬁcits and exceedances are normalized by the thresholds and expressed as
percentages. Such normalization is also important to make the optimization eﬃ-
cient. The magnitude of all performance metrics in the objective function should
be comparable else the solver will focus on minimizing the naturally dominant
metric with the highest magnitude (Marler & Arora, 2010). Testing of diﬀerent
normalization is further discussed in Appendix C.2.2.
==PAGE:68==
8.3 Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
55
Based on the above discussion, the following performance metrics for the four
management objectives are deﬁned as functions of wdef, edef, pdef and sxcd:
t = 1, . . . , T;
m = 1, . . . , 12;
nyrs = 14;
8(d, e, si, )
(8.6)
ZWaterDeficit =
1
nyrs
P
m
P
d wdemd,m
·
X
t
X
d
wdefd,t · 100
ZEnvDeficit =
1
nyrs
P
m
P
e edeme,m
·
X
t
X
e
wdefe,t · 100
ZFloodRisk =
1
nyrs
P
m
P
si smaxsi,m(1 −srulesi,m) ·
X
t
X
si
sxcdsi,t · 100
(8.7)
ZPowerDeficit =
1
nyrs
P
m pdemm
·
X
t
pdeft · 100
8.3.3
Decision Variables
Similar to the ﬂow path representation used by Cheng et al. (2009), the water
delivered via each link at each time step is deﬁned as a decision variable. The
decision variable lt
x,y represents water delivered from node x to node y at time t.
lx,y corresponds to the row in FP matrix that have x as the source and y as the
sink. As discussed above, the deﬁcits (wdef, edef, pdef, sdef) and exceedances
(excd, pexp and sxcd) are also decision variables, whose values are optimized
to minimize the objective function. Additionally, turbine release (trp) at each HP
turbine node p is also determined by the optimization.
Decision Variables: ↵= (l, wdef, edef, pdef, sdef, excd, pexp, sxcd, tr) ↵≥0
(8.8)
8.3.4
Water Allocation Constraints
The equality constraints represent mass balance relations at the various nodes
while the inequality constraints represent physical limitations in the system. Both
==PAGE:69==
8.3 Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
56
water and power allocations are limited by equality and inequality constraints. At
each source nodes q, the sum of water supplied by the node is equal to the fraction
of total basin runoﬀgenerated by the subcatchment represented by the node.
Water Supply:
X
x=q
lt
x,y = nq · InBasinq,t
8(q, y, t)
(8.9)
where, InBasinq,t is total runoﬀin the basin where q is located and nq is the area
of the subcatchment drained by q as a fraction of the total basin area. InBasin
for the seven modeled basins were aggregated from historical daily discharges at
the seven river stations in Chapter 9.
At demand nodes d and e, the water balances are represented by Equations 8.10
and 8.11. P
y=d lt
x,y indicates the total water allocated to node d as the sum of
water supplied by all the links ending at node d.
The water allocated to the
environment at each outﬂow node is evaluated similarly.
Water Demand:
X
y=d
lt
x,y + wdefd,t
= wdemd,t
8(d, x, t)
(8.10)
Env Demand:
X
y=e
lt
x,y + edefe,t −excde,t = edeme,t
8(e, x, t)
(8.11)
For each subsequent time step, the continuity equation for storage in any reservoir
can generally be written as:
Storaget = Storaget−1 + Inflowt −UpstreamWithdrawalt −Releaset
Since each storage is decomposed into a storage source node and storage sink
node, the water balance for the same time step t is accounted for by the demand
and supply constraints presented above. The carry-over storage from previous
time-step is made available by draining storage sink from (t −1) to the storage
source at t, as:
Reservoir continuity:
X
y=so
lt
x,y =
(
siniso
for t = 1 and T
P
y=si lt−1
x,y
for 1<t < T
8(so, si, x, t)
(8.12)
For the ﬁrst and the last time step in the simulation (t = 1 and t = T), storage
is set to the same initial storage level to replicate realistic reservoir conditions.
Based on the rule curve for Kulekhani in December, siniso = 0.82 · smaxso was
deﬁned for all reservoirs.
==PAGE:70==
8.3 Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
57
In addition, the sdef and sexcd are evaluated at each storage sink as part of the
ﬂood risk minimization objective.
Flood Storage:
X
y=si
lt
x,y +sdefsi,t −sxcdsi,t = srulet ·smaxsi
8(si, x, t) (8.13)
Similarly, reservoir storage is limited by the total storage capacity.
Storage Capacity:
X
y=si
lt
x,y smaxsi
8(si, x, t)
(8.14)
All parameters in equations 8.9-8.14 indicating water ﬂows in the system are
deﬁned in terms of water volumes aggregated per month.
8.3.5
Power Allocation Constraints
Since HP turbine nodes are not considered withdrawal or supply points, they are
not explicitly represented by the links and hence not included in the water balance.
Instead, turbine releases (tr) are simply limited by the total ﬂow passing through
the node. This is based on the assumption that turbines only use a portion of the
total available ﬂow based on their turbine capacities. The following inequalities
represent this deﬁnition of tr:
Turbine Capacity :
trp,t
tcapp,t
8(p, t)
(8.15)
Turbine Available Flow :
trp,t

X
x2u,y2v
lt
x,y
8(p, t)
(8.16)
where, tcapp,t is the turbine capacity of turbine p. u indicates indices for sources
(q and so) upstream of p. v indicates indices for sinks (d, e and si) downstream
of p. u and v capture all water delivery paths feeding into turbine p.
At the storage reservoirs, downstream releases are also limited by the spillway
capacity (spcap). Therefore, a constraint is placed on downstream releases at
HP turbines connected to the reservoirs:
Reservoir Release Capacity :
X
x2u,y2v
lt
x,y tcapp,t + spcapsi,t8(p, si, t)
(8.17)
where, u and v are deﬁned same as before for HP turbine p feeding from storage
sink si. However, the spillway capacity of the reservoirs was not identiﬁed in this
study and has been assumed to be inﬁnite for all reservoirs.
==PAGE:71==
8.3 Flow Path based Mathematical Formulation
58
Power allocation in the basin is evaluated based on the trp,t and the speciﬁc
production capacity of the plant HPspp. However, total power produced in the
basin cannot exceed its maximum production capacity HPcapp,t over the time
step t. HPspp and HPcapp,t were evaluated in Chapter 12
Power Demand:
HPspp · trp,t + pdeft −pexpt
= pdemt 8(p, t)
(8.18)
Power Capacity:
HPspp · trp,t
HPcapp,t 8(p, t)
(8.19)
Note that although subscript t is used to refer to all demands, thresholds, only in-
ﬂows are deﬁned as time series for the entire simulation period. Demands and
other thresholds are deﬁned as average monthly values that are repeated for
each year. Also, for each reservoir, the indices for so, si and p are paired set
of source/sink/turbine nodes representing the same reservoir. In the setup imple-
mented in this study, the paired so/si can be used interchangeably when referring
to reservoir characteristics like total reservoir capacity smax and p is used to look
up downstream HP properties like tcap.
8.3.6
Constraining Method
For the four objective problem here, the constraining methods was implemented by
limiting three objectives and optimizing the last. The performance metrics Z rep-
resent normalized sum of deﬁcits and exceedances (wdef, edef, pdef, FSexcd).
From the weighting method, limits on the aggregate sums are identiﬁed. So these
non-normalized metrics are constrained as follows:
min
↵
Φ =
ZPowerDeficit(↵)
(8.20)
Limit Water Deﬁcit:
X
d
wdefd,t limwdef
Limit Env Deﬁcit:
X
t
X
e
wdefe,t limedef
Limit Power Deﬁcit:
X
t
pdeft limpdef
(8.21)
==PAGE:72==
8.4 CPLEX Solver
59
8.3.7
Generation of Weights and Limits
Weights w used for successive runs of the MOO should be determined system-
atically to delineate the Pareto front Loucks et al. (2005).
Marler and Arora
(2010) discuss some algorithms available to generate w values while highlighting
that the method chosen for selecting the weights have signiﬁcance as values cho-
sen for the weights may not accurately indicate the intended preference placed
on an objective. In the interest of time, limited attempts were made to gener-
ate w values in this study. The Latin-hypercube sampling method available in
MATLAB was used to generate 8000 sets of 4 points, with each point randomly
varying between 0-1. Each set of 4 points were then normalized by their sum to
ensure P4
i=1 wi = 1. Similarly, for the limits lim in the constraining methods,
Latin-hypercube sampling was use to generate samples between the extents of the
Pareto front identiﬁed by the weighting method.
8.4
CPLEX Solver
Table 8.1: Relevant CPLEX options for using the LP
solver for continuous problems (IBM, 2014).
Setting
Allowed
Algorithms:
interior-point, primal, dual, auto(default)
MaxIterations:
9.2234e+18
TolFun:
1e-9 to 1e-1 (default: 1e-6)
TolRLPFun:
1e-9 to 1e-1 (default: 1e-6)
The MOO was solved
using
LP
solver
by
CPLEX R
⃝V12.4 tool-
box, which is faster
than
the
equivalent
MATLAB solver linprog
.
The choice of al-
gorithm and/or other
parameter settings deﬁned when calling the solver eﬀects the solution speed. Ta-
ble 8.1 presents some relevant settings available for the LP solver cplexlp. The per-
formance of cplexlp was compared with linprog to identify suitable solver settings,
units for model inputs, and normalization of the objectives. See Appendix C.2.2
for discussion. cplexlp was called with ‘primal simplex’ algorithm and tolerances
set to the minimum limits. The primal method is recommended for problems if
number of decision variables exceed the number of constraints signiﬁcantly (IBM,
2014). The LP for existing scenario has 197,736 decision variables with 79,296
constrains (20,496 inequalities and 58,800 equalities), so primal is deemed suit-
able. For units, water ﬂows are accounted in [MCM] and energy in 10 GWh. The
overall parameters in the setup and their units are tabulated in Table 8.2.
==PAGE:73==
8.4 CPLEX Solver
60
Table 8.2: Variables deﬁnition and their units
Variable
Description
Units
t
current time step
[month]
T
total number of time steps in simulation = 168
[month]
nyrs
number of years in simulation = 14
[]yr]
z
number of performance metrics representing management objec-
tives
[-]
q, d, e, p, so, si
indices for source, demand, environmental outﬂow, HP turbine,
storage source and storage sink nodes
[-]
x, y
index referring to start and end nodes of a link l
[-]
OBJECTIVE FUNCTION
w
z x 1 vector for z metric weights
[-]
ZW aterDeficit
scalar performance metric for minimizing irrigation water shortage
[%]
ZEnvDeficit
scalar performance metric for minimizing environmental impacts
[%]
ZP owerDeficit
scalar performance metric for minimizing load shedding
[%]
ZF loodRisk
scalar performance metric for minimizing ﬂood risk in terms of ﬂood
storage exceedance
[%]
MODEL OUTPUTS
lt
x,y
water delivered by link from node x to y at time t
[MCM]
wdefd,t
water deﬁcit at demand node d at time t
[MCM]
edefe,t
environmental ﬂow deﬁcit at outﬂow node e at time t
[MCM]
eexcde,t
environmental ﬂow exceedance at outﬂow node e at time t
[MCM]
pdeft
national power deﬁcit at time t
[10GWh]
pexpt
excess power available for export at time t
[10GWh]
sdefsi,t
storage deﬁcit at reservoir si at time t
[MCM]
sexcdsi,t
storage threshold exceedance at reservoir si at time t
[MCM]
MODEL INPUTS
limwdef, limedef limits for water and environmental deﬁcit for a given MOO run
[MCM]
limpdef
limit for power deﬁcit for a given MOO run
[10GWh]
wdemd,t
water demand at demand node d at time t
[MCM]
edeme,t
environmental ﬂow requirements at node e at time t
[MCM]
pdemt
national power demand at time t
[10GWh]
srulet
maximum allowable storage (as % of smax) in each month as per
the Kulekhani rule curve at time t
[%]
sini
storage level in reservoir at the start and end of the simulation
period assumed to be 82% of smax t
[MCM]
smaxsi, seffsi
total and eﬀective storage capacities for nSto reservoirs
[MCM]
InBasinq,t
volume of basin inﬂow in basin where node q is located aggregated
over time t
[MCM]
ncat,q
area of subcatchment drained by inﬂow node q as a fraction of basin
area
[-]
tcapp,t
turbine discharge capacity of turbine at node p aggregated to vol-
ume over time t
[MCM]
spcapsi,t
reservoir spillway capacity aggregated to volume over time t
[MCM]
HPspp
speciﬁc power production capacity of turbine at node p
[1e4 Wh/MCM]
HPcapp
maximum power production capacity of turbine at node p
[10 GWh]
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 9
Estimation of Water
Availability
The water availability in each modeled basin is estimated based on historical
records of river discharge. Only 6 out of the 10 basins introduced in Section 2.1
on page 7 are modeled, these are: Mahakali, Karnali, Narayani, Bagmati, Sapta
Koshi and Kankai. For simplicity, discharge data from discharge station at the
most downstream location in each basin is used as inﬂow.
These stations are
shown as grey ’+’s in Figure 8.7 on page 48 with magenta polygons indicating the
drainage area for each station. For the Narayani basin, two stations have been
chosen to better represent basin ﬂows as the single existing Kulekhani reservoir
feeds into the lower part of the basin which is not captured by the ﬁrst station at
Devghat.
Water inﬂow into each node q within the station drainage area is estimated by
rescaling the station inﬂow with ncat,q - the fraction of the station’s drainage area
covered by the subcatchment represented by q. This simpliﬁcation is based on
the assumption that all parts of the drainage area contribute equally to the ﬂow
observed at the station, which is unlikely for the case of steep terrains present in
Nepal. It is assumed that the subcatchments downstream of chosen stations are
relatively small and inﬂow available here is insigniﬁcant.
Mean daily discharge data recorded by the Department of Hydrology and Mete-
orology (DHM) at 7 discharge stations are available for variable years between
1962-2010. Figure 9.1 shows the raw daily discharge time series and the seasonal-
ity of ﬂow in all the basin.Table 9.1 summarizes the data availability. All stations
have at least one month with missing data.
==PAGE:75==
62
Figure 9.1: Inter and intra annual variability in daily discharges recorded at relevant river stations between
1962-2010. Based on data from: N. Rijal (personal communication, September 2015).
==PAGE:76==
63
While data overlaps for all stations for the period of 1980-2008, only 1995-2008
has been selected to be used as input to minimize data gaps. For this chosen 14-
year time frame, only station Rajaiya has missing data in 1999 and 2000. Missing
data was patched using monthly average daily data evaluated based on the entire
data series available for the station.
Table 9.1: Summary of mean daily discharge data availability and months with
missing data for more than 5 consecutive days. Bold text indicate months where
entire year of data is unavailable.
Basin: Station
Start
End
Months w/ missing data
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
1962
2008
Jul-Dec 1989
Narayani: 450 Devghat
1963
2010
Sept-Dec 1976
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya**
1963
2010
Jul-Dec 1978; May-Jul 1982; Jun -Sept
1985; Apr-Jun 1990; Jan-Dec 1999; Jan-
Oct 2000; Jul 2004
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi*
1965
2008
Jun 1969; Jul-Sept 1970; Jul 1976; Jan-
Dec 1983; Apr 1991; Aug-Dec 1994
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli*
1972
2008
Aug 1985
Koshi: 695 Chatara*
1977
2008
Jul-Aug 1979; Jun-Dec 1980; Jan-Feb, Jul-
Sept 1981; Jan-Dec 1984
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
1979
2010
Jan, Dec 1979; Jan-Feb, Dec 1980; Jan-
May 1983; Jan-Dec 1986; Jan-May 1987
Bagmati: 590 Karmaiya
1965
1979
Jun-Jul 1971;
Jul-Aug 1975;
May-Jun
1976; Sept-Dec 1979
*Raw data for 2007 and 2008 had to be reshaped due to error in the order of data entry.
Pattern in the error was identiﬁed based on data for Station 695 available from another
source for 2007, see Figure B.5 on page 135,
** Data from 2000 has been ignored because data was noisy and did not match other
years, see Figure B.4 on page 134
Water regulation by two dams in Narayani and Koshi basin are not considered
here as they lie outside of the modeled areas. The dam and existing reservoir
at Kulekhani is important.
Kulekhani collects water from Bagmati basin and
diverts it to the cascade Kulekhani hydropower plants (HPs) I-III (see power
station layout in Figure B.7 on page 137) located in the Rajaiya subcatchment of
Narayani basin. The artiﬁcial connection between the Bagmati and Narayani has
been implemented by adding a manual link between the reservoir and the HP.
Figure 9.2 provides a zoomed in view into this setup.
==PAGE:77==
9.1 Final Inﬂow Series
64
GF
GF
GF
Panauti
Kulekhani-I
Kulekhani-II
460 Rajaiya
590 Karmaiya
589 Padharadovan
GF
Discharge Station
Kulekhani Intake Pipe
Station Drainage Area
Rajaiya
Karmaiya
Pandharadovan
Figure 9.2: Basins potentially af-
fected by the Kulekhani reservoir.
It can be expected that the reservoir may
have altered the natural ﬂow observed at
the river stations downstream of it. Hence
ﬂow at these stations were further analyzed
to identify alteration in natural ﬂow. Ap-
pendix B.3 discusses the analysis in detail.
It was concluded that changes in ﬂows at
the two stations in Rajaiya and Bagmati
could not be explained strictly due to the
reservoir. Other natural or anthropogenic
factors may have causing the overall change
in ﬂow patterns, such as increased ground-
water abstraction upstream.
Due to lack of time and information to es-
tablish a more appropriate natural inﬂow time series, the observed data at Rajaiya
is used as it is. This implies that more water is available in dry period in Rajaiya
as water diversion from Kulekhani into Rajaiya basin is accounted for twice. The
inﬂow at Pandharadovan has been increased slightly to account for year-round
water diversion based on the fact that the Kulekhani reservoir drainage area is
6% of the total station drainage area.
9.1
Final Inﬂow Series
Figure 9.3 shows the historical monthly discharges aggregated from observed daily
ﬂows at 7 river stations between 1995-2008. Table 9.2 summarises the Mean An-
nual Flow (MAF) and drainage area for each station. For all other basins, ob-
served discharge data is considered to be natural ﬂows under the assumption that
no major anthropogenic alteration in hydrology has occurred These aggregated
monthly discharges were added as inﬂows to the model. Stations Pandharadovan,
Mainachuli and Rajaiya drain areas that are primarily rain-fed while the other
stations also receive snow and glacier melt. Nevertheless, all stations show strong
inﬂuence of monsoon.
==PAGE:78==
9.1 Final Inﬂow Series
65
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 10
4
Narayani: 450 Devghat
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 10
4
Koshi: 695 Chatara
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 10
4
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
200
400
600
800
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
100
200
300
400
500
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya
[MCM/month]
Figure 9.3: Monthly average discharge (in MCM/month) at seven river stations
aggregated from daily discharges observed between 1995-2008.
Grey lines show
monthly discharge for 14 individual years, colored lines indicate mean monthly
values. Figure headings indicate river basin followed by discharge station ID and
name.
==PAGE:79==
9.1 Final Inﬂow Series
66
0
20
40
60
80
100
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
Time flow is exceeded (%)
Monthly flow as a fraction of monthly mean
Natural Monthly Flow Duration [1995−2008]
 
 
Narayani: 450 Devghat
Koshi: 695 Chatara
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya
Figure 9.4: Monthly Flow Duration Curve (FDC)
as a fraction of the monthly average discharge for
seven river stations from 1995-2005.
In Figure 9.4 the trend
in normalized FDCs for
all 7 stations are com-
pared.
The high ﬂow re-
gion is characterized by
steep
slopes
typical
of
streamﬂow dominated by
direct runoﬀ.
The high
ﬂow region slopes for the
bigger
basins
eventually
ﬂatten
out
which
can
be representative of basin
storage and snow-melt con-
tribution to ﬂow.
The
FDCs for basins Bagmati
and Kankai that are mon-
soon driven do not ﬂatten
out as much as the other
basins. Station Nayalbadi and Rajaiya with smaller drainage areas ﬂatten out
the fastest.
Table 9.2: Summary of discharge stations used in this study. Areas calculated
using SRTM DEM and MAF calculated using available inﬂow series from 1995-
2008.
Basin and Station ID
MAF [MCM/yr]
Drainage Area [km^2]
Narayani: 450 Devghat
49862
31724
Koshi: 695 Chatara
47660
57786
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
45519
45688
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
4097
2810
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli
2366
1167
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi
1979
1194
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya
898
462
Total
152381
140831
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 10
Estimation of Environmental
Flow Requirements
For simplicity and due to lack of subcatchment level data, Environmental Flow
(EF) regulation is only considered at a basin level in this thesis. Three Environ-
mental Flow Assessment (EFA) methods are used to establish scientiﬁcally based
EFs at the 7 river stations considered in this study. Variations of simple hydro-
logical EFA methods: Tennant, Range Variability Approach (RVA) and shifting
Flow Duration Curve (FDC) method have been applied in case studies for various
basins in South Asia (Gopal, 2013a). Smakhtin’s recommended RVA approach for
Nepal in (Smakhtin & Shilpakar, 2005, 2006b) and FDC based method for India
in (Smakhtin & Anputhas, 2006a), along with Modiﬁed Tennant method used for
India (Rai, Upadhyay, Ojha, & Singh, 2012) have been selected here as suitable for
Nepal. Steps involved in each of the methods are explained in the following sec-
tions. The established Environmental Flow Requirements (EFRs) are presented
and in the end with the selection of three EFRs to be used as optimization inputs.
10.1
Modiﬁed Tennant Method
The Tennant method, also referred to as the Montana method, is one of the
oldest benchmarks for establishing eco-hydrologically relevant EFs.
(Tennant,
1976) found through ﬁeld studies and assessment of ﬂow data from various rivers
that in-stream ﬁsh habitat condition is correlated to portions of Mean Annual
Flow (MAF). He established two sets of seven streamﬂow levels corresponding to
seven habitat conditions for summer and winter season, these are summarized in
==PAGE:81==
10.1 Modiﬁed Tennant Method
68
Table 10.1. Overall, the Tennant method suggested that minimum ﬂow exceeding
10, 30 and 60 percent of the MAF is necessary to maintain minimum, good and
excellent aquatic habitats.
Table 10.1: River ﬂow level and habitat conditions established by Tennant (1976)
for streams in United States and those established for Kaligandaki river in Nepal.
Tennant’s summer and winter requirements have been presented as upper and
lower bounds. Both data as reproduced from (KEL, 2013).
Habitat
Condition
Original for U.S.
Modiﬁed for Nepal
% of annual ﬂow
% of monthly ﬂow
Optimum
60-100
60-100
Outstanding
40-60
40-59
Excellent
30-50
30-39
Good
20-30
20-29
Fair
10-20
10-19
Poor
10
10
Severe
0-10
0-9
While Tennant method has been used widely for its simplicity (Tharme, 2003), it
has also been criticized for not fully capturing the variability in the ﬂow regime,
especially the low ﬂows (Smakhtin et al., 2006b; Gopal, 2013b; Rai et al., 2012).
Additionally, it can only be directly applied to rivers that have geological and
hydrological conditions similar to rivers Tennant studied in Western United States.
Modiﬁed Tennant represents various methods that extend Tennant’s method to
improve these issues (Gopal, 2013b).
The Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) for top two largest existing hydropower plant (HP)s in Nepal - Kaligandaki
and Middle Marsyandi, used a Modiﬁed Tennant method whereby ﬂow levels were
established as a percentage of Mean Monthly Flow (MMF) rather than MAF, to
match Tennant’s habitat conditions (as reported in KEL, 2013). Table 10.1 lists
these levels, and they are nearly the same as Tennant original suggestions based
on % of MAF. The methodology used to establish these levels could not be deter-
mined. However, as Smakhtin et al. (2006b) points out, an equal down-scaling of
all monthly ﬂows is not ecological as it does not preserve the natural ﬂow regime.
In contrast, Rai et al. (2012) estimated EFR for the Yamuna river basin by dis-
tributing the EF allowance established by Tennant temporally using the monthly
ﬂow distribution of MAF. Rai et al. (2012)’s method is thus selected as one of the
methods for EFR assessment here.
==PAGE:82==
10.2 Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach
69
The procedure for Rai et al. (2012)’s Modiﬁed Tennant method is as follows:
1. Update Tennant’s recommendation to match basin conditions.
2. Evaluate long-term MAF volume and MMF volume using historical ﬂow.
3. Evaluate monthly ﬂow distribution of MAF by expressing long-term MMF
for each month as % of MAF
4. Calculate Tennant based annual EFR as % of MAF by selecting desired
habitat conditions.
5. Evaluate EF for each month by multiplying monthly ﬂow distribution from
Step 2 by the Tennant based annual EFR established in Step 3.
Gopal (2013b) mention studies that found Tennant’s recommendation unsuitable
for rivers with high gradient and/or variability in ﬂow. Both of these conditions
can be expected for river basins in Nepal that ﬂow through steep terrain and are
aﬀected by monsoon. However, since a version of Tennant’s thresholds for Nepal
has not been established, the original recommendations shown in Table 10.1 are
used. EFRs are evaluated as 40, 25, 15 and 10 % of MAF for Excellent, Good,
Fair and Minimum habitat conditions.
10.2
Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach
RVA developed by Richter, Baumgartner, Wigington, and Braun (1997) can be
considered the successor to Tennant method, gaining popularity due to it rigorous
consideration for ecologically relevant features of a ﬂow regime and its usability in
ﬂow monitoring (Smakhtin et al., 2006b; Tharme, 2003; Gopal, 2013b). Richter
et al. (1997) established 32 diﬀerent Indicators of Hydraulic Alteration (IHA) to
represent ﬁve ﬂow regime characteristics: magnitude of monthly ﬂows (12), mag-
nitude and duration of extreme ﬂows (10), timing of extreme ﬂows (2), frequency
and duration of high/low pulses (4), and rate of change in ﬂow (4). The IHA
evaluated based on long-term (>20 years) natural daily inﬂow series can be used
to establish acceptable lower limits for IHA under regulated conditions.
==PAGE:83==
10.2 Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach
70
Unlike other hydrological EFA methods, RVA recognizes that the ﬂow and sub-
sequently IHAs can vary over the years but this variation should be within the
natural range for the indicators. The natural range is considered to be 1 or 2 stan-
dard deviations or select percentiles from the mean. RVA does not provide strict
levels for EF, but rather provides an ecologically sound operational window for
basin management. Consequently, it has been used largely as a post-regulation
monitoring assessment method to characterize change in ﬂows (Tharme, 2003;
Gopal, 2013b).
Smakhtin and Shilpakar (2005) modiﬁed the RVA to provide basis for establishing
concrete EF levels for use in Nepal. They reduced the number of IHAs in RVA
because most of them are correlated and not all may be ecologically important.
Gopal (2013b) point out several other studies that also suggest the suﬃciency of
a subset of Richter et al.’s original IHAs. Furthermore, Smakhtin and Shilpakar
(2005) suggests that the mean IHA and the lowest RVA limits represent the natural
FDC and the maximum allowable shift in the natural FDCs. The RVA limit can be
seen as the threshold environmental FDC. Spatial interpolation method developed
by Hughes and Smakhtin (1996) allows the determination of daily EFR based on
the environmental FDC, as done in (Smakhtin & Anputhas, 2006a, 2006b, 2008;
Rai et al., 2012).
The steps for Smakhtin and Shilpakar (2005)’s Modiﬁed RVA method are:
1. Evaluate value of the 16 natural IHA: 12 monthly means, 1-day min/max
and 30-day min/max and their standard deviations based on daily ﬂow data.
2. Evaluate probability of exceedance for 16 IHAs based on daily ﬂow data.
This is considered the natural FDC.
3. Evaluate lowest RVA limit for each IHA as: IHAs as (meaniha - stddeviha).
4. Set the natural probability of exceedance of RVA limit as that calculated
for the meaniha. This is considered the environmental FDC.
5. Use spatial interpolation, as depicted in Figure 10.1 to generate daily EFR
time series for period of interest. First the relevant daily ﬂow is used to eval-
uate exceedance probability of the ﬂow using the natural FDC. The natural
exceedance probability is then used to determine subsequent environmental
ﬂow value in the environmental fdc by linear interpolation or extrapolation.
==PAGE:84==
10.2 Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach
71
A MATLAB function getInterpFlow was implemented to perform the spatial
interpolation (see Appendix C.2.1 on page 149).
6. Aggregate daily EFR to mean monthly EFR.
Figure 10.1: Hughes and Smakhtin’s spatial interpolation method to generate
EF time-series using natural ﬂow series and FDCs for natural and environmental
ﬂows. Reproduced from: (Smakhtin & Eriyagama, 2008).
The original RVA was established as a method suitable for rivers where protection
of the natural ecosystem is of highest priority (Richter et al., 1997). Smakhtin
and Shilpakar (2005) observed that the modiﬁed RVA also estimated relatively
high EFR, comparable to Tennant’s Outstanding conditions and suggest that the
method be used to establish the minimum acceptable EF levels in basins with
high priority for conservation.
==PAGE:85==
10.3 Shifted Flow Duration Curve Method
72
10.3
Shifted Flow Duration Curve Method
Smakhtin and Anputhas (2006a) also did a study for establishing EFA methods for
seven major basins in India and developed a FDC shift based method that works
with limited hydro-ecological data availability to establish EFR that capture full
range of natural ﬂow regime. The method was later developed into a software
package called Global Environmental Flow Calculator (Smakhtin & Eriyagama,
2008). Rai et al. (2012) also used the method to establish EFR for tributaries in
the Yamuna river in India.
Shifted FDC method is aimed towards scenario-based modeling allowing water
managers to compare EFR for diﬀerent river management strategies that can also
represent basin-speciﬁc ecological goals that may not be well-developed for all
basins. Six Environmental Management Classs (EMCs) have been deﬁned largely
from a management perspective, where EMC-A represents rivers that have pro-
tected level and need to maintained in their natural states while EMC-F represents
rivers that are have completely altered states and their ecological functions have
been lost. The six EMCs A-F as described by (Smakhtin & Anputhas, 2006a) are
presented in Figure B.8 in the Appendix.
Similar to the modiﬁed RVA, this method establishes environmental FDC from
natural FDC and uses spatial interpolation to get daily EFR. Environmental FDCs
and subsequent EFRs can be calculated for ecosystem protection/management
levels represented by the six EMCs or just for relevant EMCs. By default, envi-
ronmental FDCs are evaluated by shifting the natural FDC, generated at speciﬁc
exceedance probability points, laterally to the left along the time axis as shown
in Figure 10.2 (Smakhtin & Anputhas, 2006a, 2008). The shifts corresponds to
the reduction in ﬂows as river status declines.
The steps for Smakhtin and Anputhas (2006a)’s shifted FDC method are:
1. Aggregate long-term (15-20 years) daily time ﬂow series to monthly.
2. Evaluate the natural FDC using monthly ﬂow series at 17 percentage points:
0.01, 0.1, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 95, 99, 99.9 and 99.99.
3. Shift natural FDC as required by EMCs such that same ﬂow value has lower
probability of exceedance in the environmental FDC.
==PAGE:86==
10.4 Final Environmental Flow Requirements
73
4. Use spatial interpolation, as depicted in Figure 10.1 to generate monthly
EFR time series from natural monthly ﬂow series for period of interest.
5. Evaluate mean monthly EFR
Figure 10.2: Lateral shifting of natural FDC to repre-
sent six environmental FDCs corresponding to the EMCs.
Reproduced from: (Smakhtin & Anputhas, 2006a).
For the case of Nepal,
no prior EMCs have
been
established
so
Smakhtin’s default rec-
ommendations have been
used. EMC A-D have
been selected for es-
timation as classes E
and
F
are
unlikely
to
be
relevant
for
most basins in Nepal
that are relatively un-
altered as compared
to
other
developing
countries.
EMC D is
likely to be true for
highly populated ar-
eas around the capital
and in industrial areas in the south.
10.4
Final Environmental Flow Requirements
Due to the fact that all EFA methods require long time series input for a good
estimation, all available daily data for each station was used to estimate EFR.
Figure 10.3 summarizes the monthly EFR estimated using the methods described
above. Additionally, the current minimum ﬂow threshold stipulated by the Hy-
dropower Development Policy 2001 (HDP 2001) at 10% of long-term minimum
monthly ﬂow is also shown. Intermediate ﬁgures with environmental FDCs and
daily/monthly EFR series estimated for modiﬁed RVA and shifted FDC methods
can be found in Appendix B.5 on page 138.
==PAGE:87==
10.4 Final Environmental Flow Requirements
74
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
5000
10000
15000
Narayani: 450 Devghat
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Koshi: 695 Chatara
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
500
1000
1500
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli
[MCM/month]
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
100
200
300
400
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi
[MCM/month]
Avg 1995−2008
HDP 2001
ModT−Excellent
ModT−Good
ModT−Fair
ModT−Minimum
EMC−B: SlightMod
EMC−C: ModerateMod
EMC−D:LargeMod
ModRVA
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
50
100
150
200
250
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya
[MCM/month]
 
 
Figure 10.3: EFR for seven river stations in Nepal estimated using multiple
ecological objectives deﬁned under modiﬁed Tennant, modiﬁed RVA and shifted
FDC methods for EFA.
==PAGE:88==
10.4 Final Environmental Flow Requirements
75
Since no Nepal-speciﬁc eco-hydrological information has been used here to fur-
ther customize the method applied, the estimates provided may be speculative.
Nonetheless, Figure 10.3 shows that current EFAs show that the environmental
needs are higher and temporally variable than minimum ﬂows being allocated
under Nepal’s regulations. Station Nayalbadi in the Mahakali basin has the high-
est EFR when compared to the monthly ﬂows which is reasonable and has been
observed for stations with ﬂat FDC indicating low ﬂow variability (Smakhtin &
Anputhas, 2006a). In Figure 9.4 on page 66, it can be seen that Nayalbadi has
the ﬂattest FDC among all stations.
Devghat
Chatara
Chisapani Pandharadovan Mainachuli
Nayalbadi
Rajaiya
0
20
40
60
80
100
% of Mean Annual Flow
 
 
HDP 2001
ModT−Minimum
ModT−Fair
ModT−Good
EMC−D:LargeMod
ModT−Excellent
EMC−C: ModerateMod
EMC−B: SlightMod
ModRVA
Figure 10.4: Comparison of various EFR for seven river stations based on Ten-
nant’s representation of EF as a percentage of MAF. Red highlight indicate EFRs
selected for optimization model runs.
Figure 10.4 shows the same EFRs aggregated to percentage of MAF for com-
parison with the benchmarks established by Tennant.
All estimates made by
the modiﬁed Tennant method are lower than the estimates for the other meth-
ods. EMC-B provides highest EF for larger drainage basins (Narayani-Devghat,
Koshi-Chatara and Karnali-Chisapani) while modiﬁed RVA provides the highest
EF for smaller basins (Kankai-Mainachuli, Narayani-Rajaiya ). But it is hard to
suggest a pattern in EFR based on basin size for modiﬁed RVA or shifted FDC
method. Unlike modiﬁed Tennant, the other two EFA seem to be aﬀected by
river basin characteristics as they provide diﬀerent %MAF as EF for the diﬀer-
ent basins.
In general, the estimated EFs match Tennant’s classiﬁcation with
highly conservative modiﬁed RVA and EMC B falling within Tennant’s optimal
habitat conditions. EMC-C and -D fall within Tennant’s good to excellent habi-
tat conditions. Considering the range of EFR established, estimates for modiﬁed
Tennant-Mid, EMC-D and modiﬁed RVA have been selected to be used as low,
mid and high environmental demand in the optimization model.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 11
Correction of Irrigation
Demand Estimates
Gross Irrigation Water Requirement (GWR) estimated by Biemans et al. (2015) is
used in this study as representative of irrigation demand. No other study provides
spatially and temporally explicit estimates as provided by Biemans et al. (2015).
The study is reviewed in Chapter 7. While estimates from the study are low, the
seasonal variation established provides a good baseline for this thesis.
A comparision of land use input used by Biemans et al. (2015) to data available for
2010/11 in ABPSD, 2013 done to identify a basis to rescale the original estimates
is presented in Appendix B.9. A correction factor of 1.6 was determined based
on comparison.
In the light of other estimates available (see Table 7.1), this
factor is increased to 4. This four-fold increase changes the national level annual
GWR from 2.341 to 9.37 BCM. The increased annual GWR is closer to the crop-
coeﬃcient methods based estimates made by FAO (2012), which can be considered
the best theoretical estimate that currently exists for Nepal. Thus, the GWR
estimated by Biemans et al. (2015) that is inclusive of potentially recoverable
return ﬂow, scaled up by a factor of 4, is used as a representative for irrigation
demand in this thesis study.
1Biemans et al. (2015) report an annual GWR for Nepal of 2.7 Billion Cubic Meters (109m3)
(BCM) as opposed to the 2.34 BCM estimated in this study using the raster ﬁles provided by
the authors. This is attributed to errors due to re-sampling and re-projection of the original
rasters in ArcGIS.
==PAGE:90==
11.1 Final Irrigation Water Demand
77
11.1
Final Irrigation Water Demand
Figure 11.1 shows the ﬁnal irrigation demands estimated for each of the 170 mod-
eled subcatchments based on Biemans et al. (2015)’s estimated for average GWR
in South-east Asia. Due to the multi-cropping pattern in South Asia, the trend in
irrigation water demand is reverse of that for streamﬂow. In the monsoon, there
is suﬃcient rainfall so GWR is limited. The higher winter demand indicates the
potential beneﬁts of having reservoirs to store water from the wet months and
supplement the demand in the drier months. With a closer examination of the lo-
cation of these demands and planned storage (STO) hydropower plants, reservoirs
with potential for multipurpose management could be identiﬁed.
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
50
100
150
[MCM/month]
Figure 11.1: Final irrigation water demand estimated for the 170 subcatchments
based on up-scaling and aggregation of estimates made by Biemans, Siderius,
Mishra, and Ahmad (2015).
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 12
Estimation of Power Demand
and Supply
Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA) annual reports from 2009-2015 were the main
source of power supply and demand data. Unlike water availability, water de-
mand and power demand, power supply is evaluated as one of the model outputs
based on the speciﬁcations setup for the hydropower plants (HPs). The following
sections describe pre-processing of hourly power demand data and compilation of
relevant speciﬁcations for hydropower turbines and storage reservoirs. Addition-
ally, the last section describes the power development scenarios to be modeled in
the this optimization study.
12.1
Power Demand
The NEA annual reports only report annual (observed and forecast) power de-
mand data. To understand intra-annual variability in power demand, more data
was requested from NEA’s Load Dispatch Center (LDC) that controls and main-
tains the national Integrated Nepal Power System (INPS) grid.
However, the
LDC only keeps hourly records for peak days observed in each Nepali calendar
month because they day-to-day variability is low with changes ranging from 3-4%
(M.Shrestha, personal communication, September 30, 2015).
Figure 12.1 shows the power demand and supply for ﬁscal year 2013/14 based
on Nepali calendar obtained from LDC. This hourly demand was aggregated to
identify monthly pattern for power demand. Since the Nepali calendar months
==PAGE:92==
12.1 Power Demand
79
Figure 12.1: Distribution of hourly power demand and supply on peak days in
each Nepali month in 2013/14. Months at the bottom of x-axis indicate nominal
English month for which the day was used as a representative. Based on data
from: M. Shrestha (personal communication, September 30, 2015).
do not follow the English calendar days, peak days were considered representative
for months closest to the recorded dates.
Months at the bottom of x-axis in
Figure 12.1 indicate nominal month for which the day was used. The Megawatt
(MW) demand for each hour in the peak day was summed to evaluate daily power
demand in Megawatt-hours per day [MWh/day] and then scaled by number days
in a month to get monthly and annual power demand.
Figure 12.2: Distribution of monthly power de-
mand and supply based on data for monthly peak
days shown in Figure 12.1.
Monthly demand was expressed
as a % of the annual de-
mand as shown in Figure 12.2.
On average each month consti-
tutes about 8% of annual de-
mand with the highest demand
seen in the summer months.
The identiﬁed power demands
pattern is used to temporally
distribute historical annual de-
mand or projected demand for
the future shown previously in
Figure 2.9 on page 15.
==PAGE:93==
12.2 Power Supply
80
Figure 12.2 also shows the tentative composition of monthly power supplied by
the government owned NEA power plants, privately owned Independent Power
Producers (IPP) power plants, imports from India and the load shed based on
data for peak days. Actual monthly power production at the NEA plants were
available for 2014 in the NEA annual report for 2014 and 2015.
Figure 12.3:
Comparison of ac-
tual NEA monthly production and es-
timated production based on hourly
peak day data.
Figure 12.3 compares the actual NEA
monthly power production with the ten-
tative production derived from the peak
days data. The pattern in the monthly de-
rived and actual NEA production is sim-
ilar. The actual annual production is 7%
lower than the derived production which
can be expected because peak days repre-
sent the highest demands and potentially
the highest supplies seen in the month.
Using peak days as representative for the
month thus results in slightly higher esti-
mates for demand and supply. At an an-
nual level, the peak day derived total an-
nual demand is 4% higher than that re-
ported for 2014. This diﬀerence in consid-
ered acceptable as supply patterns are likely to vary over the years within similar
ranges.
The monthly pattern for total demand is used as a direct input in the optimization
model to distribute chosen annual demand over the year and estimate monthly
demand (pdem). The pattern for monthly production from all plants in the coun-
try is used as representative for current power production practices and compared
with the simulated monthly productions for various scenarios.
12.2
Power Supply
Appendix A.4 on page 125 presented the 147 HP plants considered relevant for
this study. Three existing run-of-river (RoR) plants lie outside the model domain,
shortening the list of modeled HPs to 144. The technical properties of these plants
==PAGE:94==
12.2 Power Supply
81
are input to the optimization model in order to evaluate total power produced in
each time step. Power produced by modeled HPs are used to fulﬁlled the national
power demand. The location and technical speciﬁcations for each HP therefore
need to be identiﬁed. Note that the term ‘power demand/supply/capacity’ as
used in this report refers to amounts of electrical energy. Power, as deﬁned in
physics is referred to as rated power.
12.2.1
Hydropower Plant Speciﬁcation
HPs convert potential energy stored in elevated water to electrical energy. The
rate of conversion of potential energy to electrical energy at the HP, referred to
as the rated power (Pp) of plant p, depends on the water ﬂow through the HP
turbine qp,t [m3/s], the eﬀective head loss for the plant 4hp [m], and the conversion
eﬃciency of the plant, ⌘. The rated power for a plant p in Watts [W] is evaluated
as
Pp = (⌘· ⇢· g · 4hp · qp,t)
(12.1)
where, ⇢is water density (1000 kg/m3), g is the gravitational acceleration (9.81
m/s2) and ⌘the plant eﬃciency is assumed as 70% for all HP here. For simplicity,
head loss is assumed to be constant over time for all HP. In reality heads will
change over time. Especially in storage (STO) and peaking RoRs, water level
in storage and pondage reservoirs will vary over time.
In given period t, the
maximum energy production capacity of plant p, in Watt-hours [Wh] can be
evaluated as (Loucks et al., 2005):
HPcapp,t = Pp[W] · t[h]
(12.2)
= (⌘· ⇢· g · 4hp · qp,t) · t[s]
1h
3600s
(12.3)
In the above equation, qp,t ·t[s] represents the volume of water Vt arriving over the
period t. Based on the design discharge, usually in [m3/s], the turbine capacity
(tcapp,t) of a power plant can be evaluated as the volume of water that can be
utilized by the turbine. tcapp,t determines if all or only a portion of the available
river ﬂow volume can be used for energy production.
The speciﬁc hydropower production capacity, HPspp in [Wh/m3] can be deﬁned
to describe the rate of power production per unit water volume at the plant p as:
==PAGE:95==
12.2 Power Supply
82
HPspp = HPcapp,t
Vt
= (⌘· ⇢· g · 4hp) · 1hr
3600s
(12.4)
The optimization model evaluates water available at each of the HP. So HPspp
is useful to deﬁne as it can be used directly to scale available water to available
energy. Based on the equations above, the parameters to be speciﬁed for each
modeled HP are 4hp, tCapp, HPcapp,t and HPspp.
HP boundaries
HP Point
Figure 12.4:
Generation of HP tur-
bine location in ArcGIS based on co-
ordinates for physical boundaries from
(DoED, 2015).
The Department of Electricity Devel-
opment (DoED) website tracks all li-
censed HPs includes latitude and lon-
gitude marking the physical extent of
licensed plants and their rated power
(DoED, 2015).
Based on the phys-
ical extent, a tentative location for
the HP turbine was selected along the
river generated using Hydrology tools
in ArcGIS. Turbine locations were se-
lected based on additional project doc-
umentation, if found in online searches.
Most projects in their planning phase,
were not in the DoED website.
For
these the locations were identiﬁed based on other reports and documentation. The
tentative turbine locations were used to generate the HP subcatchments shown in
Figure 8.7 on page 48. Figure 12.4 shows an example of physical extents to node
generation.
Rated power, 4hp and tcapp for existing NEA projects were identiﬁed from (NEA,
2016) while that for other NEA projects were obtained from NEA annual reports
and other project-speciﬁc reports. For some IPP projects, P, 4hp and tcapp were
available in (Nepal Hydropower Association [NHA], 2009).
In all cases, rated
design discharge was taken as tcapp while rated or net head was taken as 4hp.
For 7 projects, missing tcapp were estimated using (12.1) and known rated power,
4hp.
For 50 projects, totaling about 350 MW, only rated power information was avail-
able. For these, two reasonable locations within the project extent were chosen
to evaluate tentative head loss at the plant. The ArcGIS estimated heads were
then used to evaluate tcapp. Figure B.6 on page 136 show poor correlation be-
==PAGE:96==
12.2 Power Supply
83
tween estimated and actual heads for projects with known data. However in the
interest of time this simple estimation is deemed acceptable as the rated power is
not changed by this method. A list of all 147 projects and their speciﬁcations are
provided in Excel submission with this thesis.
12.2.2
Storage Reservoirs and Rule Curve
Figure 12.5: Reservoir storage
classiﬁcation. Reproduced from:
(Loucks et al., 2005).
Storage reservoirs providing releases for STO
plants need additional speciﬁcation. The total
storage capacity (smaxp) of a reservoir feed-
ing plant p can be split into at least two parts:
the live storage and the dead storage. As il-
lustrated in Figure 12.5, dead storage refers
to the water stored in the reservoir below the
dam outlet/plant intake level that cannot be
controlled in active reservoir operation. Live/-
eﬀective storage (seffp) refers to the space above the outlet level that can be
actively controlled by regulating dam releases for hydropower production and/or
ﬂood control.
Figure 12.6: Depth vs storage curve for
Kulekhani reservoir.
A portion of the live storage is often
dedicated to ﬂood storage while the
active portion is available for down-
stream release regulation (Loucks et
al., 2005).
Flood storage capacity in
the reservoir is set aside to handle in-
coming high ﬂows and potential ﬂoods
and will vary over the year as per
the natural ﬂow regime.
The total
and active storage capacity of the six
STO reservoirs, one existing and ﬁve
planned HPs, were identiﬁed from documentation available for the reservoirs as
shown in Table 12.1.
Reservoir rule curves are operating policies deﬁned in terms of maximum reservoir
level that is to be maintained in any given period. Reservoir release is increased if
reservoir level gets closer to the maximum threshold and reduced if actual reservoir
==PAGE:97==
12.2 Power Supply
84
Table 12.1: Speciﬁcation for reservoirs and turbine in STO projects. Except
Kulekhani, all other reservoirs are planned.
Storage
Projects
Volume [MCM]
Capacity
[MW]
Head
[m]
Discharge
[m3/s]
Source
smax
seﬀ
Kulekhani
63.3
56.4
60
550
12.1
Hada, 2001
Budhigandaki
4467
2226
1200
200
672
PDD, 2011
Tanahu/Upper Seti
295.1
192.8
127
112.5
127.4
THL, 2013
Nalsing Gadh
419.6
296.3
410
635.5
75
NGHDC2016
Dudhkoshi Storage
687.4
442.1
300
249.3
136
JICA, 2014
West Seti
1483
843
750
258
327
CWE, 2013
level is lower than the rule curve. Rule curves are typically established based
on simulations to fulﬁll speciﬁc management goals for the reservoir operation.
(Loucks et al., 2005)
Figure 12.6 shows the reservoir depth-storage curve for Kulekhani reservoir, the
only existing reservoir in Nepal. Hada (2001) report that due to sediment settling
and upgrades at the reservoir, its original total storage volume (smax) was reduced
from 85.3 MCM to 63.2 MCM. Figure 12.6 shows both the original and reduced
volume depth-storage curve.
Figure 12.7:
Rule Curve for Operation of
Kulekhani Reservoir in terms of water level [m
above sea level] (left axis) and percentage of total
reservoir volume (right axis).
The rule curve for Kulekhani
reservoir was available in (Hada,
2001) in terms of elevation of
the reservoir level.
By using
a polynomial ﬁt to the current
depth-storage curve as shown
in Figure 12.6, the reservoir
level rule curve was expressed
as
a
reservoir
storage
rule
curve (srule). Ultimately the
rule curve was established in
terms of % of the maximum
active storage volume, or the
eﬀective storage (seff). Fig-
ure 12.7 shows the rule curve for Kulekhani in terms of water level and % of
smax.
==PAGE:98==
12.2 Power Supply
85
The basis for the development of the rule curve for Kulekhani could not be es-
tablished. It is assumed that the curve takes power demand as well as the ﬂood
storage requirements into account. In this optimization model, the required ﬂood
storage capacity in a given period is estimated as the diﬀerence between total
reservoir capacity smax and maximum allowable level in any given period as per
the rule curve.
In the lack of better estimates for rule curves for the ﬁve planned STO plants,
the Kulekhani rule curve, expressed as % of smax, is used as rule curves for all
STO plants. This is a signiﬁcant assumption considering the smax and seff of
all reservoirs vary diﬀerently. Reservoir have unique depth-storage relation with
varying surface areas. Given the similar seasonal pattern in inﬂow in all modeled
basins, some similarity in reservoir operation can be expected. The magnitude of
potential ﬂoods may diﬀer. As indicated in Table A.1, Koshi and Karnali basins
have potentially dangerous Glacial lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs), suggesting that
stricter year-round ﬂood storage requirement may be necessary in comparison to
other basins where monsoon driven ﬂoods are more likely.
When considering
scenarios with multiple reservoirs, the actual operational pattern between two
reservoirs may even be reversed.
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 13
Development of Scenarios
Modeling scenarios have been chosen by combining power development plans with
varying Environmental Flow Requirements (EFRs) and power demand using the
two multi-objective optimization (MOO) methods. 40 of the existing hydropower
plants (HPs) are modeled as the Existing case. In addition, eight diﬀerent power
development scenarios have been identiﬁed as interesting. In the aftermath of
the April 2015 earthquake and ongoing political crisis in Nepal, many under-
construction HPs have stalled. Giri (2015b) lists 21 Independent Power Producers
(IPP) projects that are to be completed in 2016. These IPPs combined with the
existing 40 HPs are deﬁned as the Base case.
Additional scenarios model ﬁve storage (STO) plants that are expected to begin
construction soon. Though JICA (2014)’s study on STO development in Nepal
recommended a pathway for the ﬁve plants, it appear that all projects are moving
in parallel. Therefore all ﬁve plants have been modeled one at a time. Only one
scenario "BaseTanBdg" is run with two STO HPs Tanahu and Budhigandaki as
JICA (2014) assume these to be built soonest. The case of no additional STO
plant is also modeled as "ConstAll", which includes 75 additional run-of-rivers
(RoRs) currently listed as under-construction. The nine power development plans
are referred to as follows:
) Existing = 40 HPs: 39 RoRs (13 Nepal Electricity Authority (NEA),
27 IPP) and Kulekhani STO plant
)Base = Existing + 21 IPP RoRs to be completed in 2016
)ConstAll = Existing + 96 RoRs under-construction
)Budhigandaki =Base + Budhigandaki STO plant
)Tanahu =Base + Tanahu STO plant
==PAGE:100==
87
)NalsingGadh =Base + Nalsing Gadh STO plant
)Dudhkoshi=Base + Dudhkoshi STO plant
)WestSeti =Base + West Seti STO plant
)BaseTanBdg = Base +Tanahu+ Budhigandaki STO plants
Currently, minimum ﬂows downstream of HPs are only regulated as per the Hy-
dropower Development Policy 2001 (HDP 2001), which is represented as the case
with no EFR. Next the three selected EFRs from Chapter 10 are combined with
the nine development scenarios and 2015 power demand to be run with the weight-
ing method. The BaseTanBdg is also run with projected demands for 2030. All
scenarios are run with the weighting method with only the Mid EFR case run
with the constraining method. In total, 46 scenarios were run.
==PAGE:101==
Part IV
Results and Discussion
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 14
Water Stress Indicators
Table 14.1: Summary of annual demand and supply used to constrain the opti-
mization.
Within Modeled Areas
Quantity
Unit
Average Annual Inﬂow
152
BCM
Irrigation Demand
7.03
BCM
Environmental
Demand
HDP
0.673
BCM
EMC-D
56.3
BCM
ModRVA
104
BCM
Power Demand 2015
6335
GWh
Power Demand 2030
20812
GWh
Figure 14.1: Monthly variation in inﬂow, irri-
gation demand and power demand as a percentage
of annual sums shown in Table 14.1.
Table 14.1 summarizes the an-
nual demand and supply used
in the model while Figure 14.1
presents the monthly varia-
tions. Environmental demand
is not shown in the ﬁgure as
it follows the same pattern as
inﬂows. While the annual wa-
ter inﬂow is higher than irriga-
tion water demand, there is re-
verse seasonality in water sup-
ply and demand.
In order to understand the
spatial and temporal pattern
in water availability and use,
==PAGE:103==
90
the Water Stress Indicator (WSI) for each basin was calculated as the ratio of
monthly average irrigation water demand to water supply from basin inﬂows.
Smakhtin, Revenga, and Doll (2004) categorized basins with WSI < 0.3 as "en-
vironmentally water safe", 0.3 < WSI < 0.6 as "environmentally water stressed"
and 0.6 < WSI < 1 as "environmentally water scarce". This classiﬁcation re-
ﬂects that as water use increases, it will come in conﬂict with Environmental Flow
Requirement (EFR) for the basin.
Since there is strong seasonality in the ﬂow, the wet (May-Oct) and dry (Nov-Apr)
months are analyzed separately. Figure 14.2a shows the maximum of monthly
WSI observed in each of 170 modeled subcatchments during the wet months while
Figure 14.2b shows the maximum in the dry months. In the wet months, all sub-
catchments are "environmentally water safe". In the dry months, most of the
subcatchments lying in the Middle Mountains and Hills demands exceed avail-
ability and WSI > 0.4.
Especially in the subcatchments close to the capital
Kathmandu, the WSI is quite high. A larger rise in domestic water demand can
be expected for areas around Kathmandu compared to other areas in the country
due to urbanization and increase in population.
However, the magnitude of the WSI must be interpreted with care as both water
demand and supply values have only been approximated.
The trends in WSI
indicate that water stress is likely to exist in dry period in central parts of the
country and may only worsen with rise in demands. Most of the planned storage
(STO) plants lie upstream of these areas.
So there is potential that reservoir
storage could be used to help relax water stresses in the dry months.
==PAGE:104==
91
TANAHU
WEST SETI
DUDHKOSHI
KULEKHANI
NALSING GADH
BUDHIGANDAKI
¯
0
100
200
300
400
50
Km
Legend
Station Drainage Area
Country
Storage HPs
#0
Existing
#0
Planned
Max Wet Months WSI
0.00 - 0.0476
0.0477 - 0.105
0.106 - 0.191
(a) Wet months (May-Oct).
TANAHU
WEST SETI
DUDHKOSHI
KULEKHANI
NALSING GADH
BUDHIGANDAKI
¯
0
100
200
300
400
50
Km
Legend
Station Drainage Area
Country
Storage HPs
#0
Existing
#0
Planned
Max Dry Months WSI
0.00 - 0.400
0.401 - 1.27
1.28 - 2.30
2.31 - 4.44
(b) Dry months (Nov-Apr).
Figure 14.2: Maximum of monthly WSI in wet and dry period when considering
only irrigation water use and available inﬂows. Existing and planned STO projects
are indicated.
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 15
Pareto Fronts
A Pareto front or trade-oﬀcurve comprises of all points representing management
strategies whose overall gain cannot be improved without reducing performance
in at least one objective (Cohon, 1978). For a four-objective optimization, the
Pareto front is a 4D hyperplane. The 4D data has been visualized in 3D form
as isosurfaces and/or color coded 3D points. In the following 3D plots, metrics
for minimization of the three objectives: irrigation water deﬁcit (Wdef), environ-
mental deﬁcit (Edef), and power deﬁcits (Pdef) are shown in the x, y and z axes.
In scatter plots, the ﬂood exceedance (FSexcd) is either represented by the color
of the points or not indicated. All metrics are presented as national level annual
aggregates of the 14 year simulation. Unless noted otherwise, power is presented
in [GWh/yr] and water is in [MCM/yr].
Table 15.1: Diﬀerent factors combined to create modeled scenarios. Highlighted
are the most used option under each factor.
Development
Scenarios
Total
GW
EFR
Power
Demand
Method
Existing
692
no EFR: HDP
.
Low: ModT-Min
.
Mid: EMC-D
.
High: ModRVA
2015
.
2030
Weighting
.
Constraining
Base
896
ConstAll
2859
Tanahu
1023
Budhigandaki
2096
NalsingGadh
1306
Dudhkoshi
1196
WestSeti
1646
BaseTanBdg
2223
==PAGE:106==
93
Table 15.1 summarizes the various power development scenarios and demands
modeled.
Base and ConstAll represent run-of-river (RoR) scenarios.
Tanahu,
Budhigandaki, Nalsingh Gadh, Dudhkoshi and West Seti are ﬁve storage (STO)
plants that are in the pipeline. BaseTanBdg represents Base case along with both
Tanahu and Budhigandaki. All development scenarios with 2015 power demand
and 4 Environmental Flow Requirement (EFR) requirements were run with the
weighting method. All mid EFR scenarios were also run with the constraining
method. Results from both methods were used to interpolate isosurfaces.
Figure 15.1: Outputs from two MOO methods for
Dudhkoshi with mid EFR
Figures D.2-D.6 in the Ap-
pendix D.1 show the optimal
points identiﬁed from the
two methods.
Figure 15.1
shows a representative exam-
ple of the obtained Pareto
front for Dudhkoshi.
There
is a clear trade-oﬀbetween
minimizing FSexcd or min-
imizing Pdef.
The color
gradient indicates that Pdef
decreases with increase in
FSexcd,
as more reservoir
storage is allocated to water
storage in the wet months.
Figure 15.2 shows the interpolated Pareto fronts at the 75th quantile of FSexcd
values for each of the 9 development scenarios under mid EFR. The 75th quantile
is chosen to maximize the number of optimal points used for the interpolations.
For high capacity addition scenarios Budhigandaki, and BaseTanBdg, the Pareto
front ﬂattens out as power deﬁcits are zeroed indicating that these scenarios are
over-dimensioned for 2015 power demands. The ConstAll scenario with all under
construction RoR plants represents the highest capacity additions. Despite this,
it still has deﬁcits due to reduction in RoR production in the dry period. The
range of Wdef values for all scenarios are comparable while Edef is lower for the
high power development scenarios. The shape of the Pareto fronts indicate low
levels of conﬂict between Pdef, Wdef and Edef for 2015 power demands with trade
oﬀs seen only in scenarios with bigger storage plants.
==PAGE:107==
94
Figure 15.2:
Optimal points and interpolated Pareto fronts at FSexcd: 75th
quantile for 9 power development scenarios under mid EFR identiﬁed using the
weighting and constraining methods.
==PAGE:108==
95
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1200
1250
1300
1350
1400
1450
1500
1550
1600
 
Dudhkoshi: Mid EFR
Env Deficit [MCM/yr]
 
Power Deficit [GWh/yr]
Optimal Pts
FSexcd 25th quantile: 0
FSexcd 90th quantile: 292
0
1000
2000
3000
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Water Deficit
Env Deficit
0
1000
2000
3000
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
Water Deficit
Power Deficit 
0
1000
2000
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
Env Deficit
Power Deficit 
Figure 15.3: Interpolated isosurfaces at 25th (light) and 90th (dark) quantiles in
the FSexcd for Dudhkoshi with mid EFR and diﬀerent views of the Pareto front.
Grey scatter plots indicate optimal points from the scenario runs.
Figure 15.3 takes a closer look at the Dudhkoshi example shown earlier. Two
isosurfaces were interpolated to obtain representative 3D Pareto fronts at 25th and
90th quantile values for FSexcd. The non-smooth nature of the lighter isosurface
is likely an artefact of the interpolation while the darker isosurface ﬂattens out as
maximum production capacity for the scenario is reached.
The trade oﬀs between the diﬀerent objectives are clearer in 2D views. If the ﬂood
minimization objective is weighted heavily, the corresponding lighter isosurface
shows greater trade oﬀrelation between Wdef and Pdef. Pdef and Edef do not
appear to be closely related.
However this may be due to aggregation of the
deﬁcits at a national scale. Conducting analysis at a basin-scale will likely show
the trade oﬀs between local power production and Wdef.
The conﬂicts between Pdef and Wdef increase with rise in demand and number of
STO plants. Figure 15.4 presents 2D views of the Pareto fronts for the Existing
and BaseTanBdg run with 2015 power demand and BaseTanBdg run with 2030
predicted demand. The change in curvature of the Pareto front indicates increas-
ing interaction between water usage for irrigation and power production. Such
==PAGE:109==
15.1 Comparison of Run-of-River scenarios
96
trend is absent for Pdef and Edef.
Figure 15.4: 2D views of Pareto fronts for Existing and BaseTanBdg with 2015
power demand and BaseTanBdg with 2030 demands.
15.1
Comparison of Run-of-River scenarios
4000
3000
Water Deficit
2000
1000
0
0
1000
Env Deficit
2000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
3000
Power Deficit 
Exist
BaseCase
ConstAll
Figure 15.5:
Optimal points and interpolated Pareto
fronts at 75th quantile of FSexcd for RoRss under mid
EFR.
Figure 15.5 shows the
Pareto fronts for the
three
RoR
develop-
ment scenarios. Only
the power deﬁcit de-
creases with added ca-
pacity as RoR plants
do not aﬀect the wa-
ter
balances.
The
power deﬁcit in 2015
can be reduced signiﬁ-
cantly by the ConstAll
scenario.
==PAGE:110==
15.2 Comparison of Storage scenarios
97
Figure 15.6: Optimal points and interpolated Pareto fronts at 75th quantile of
FSexcd for small STOs plants under mid EFR.
15.2
Comparison of Storage scenarios
Figures 15.6 and 15.7 present the Pareto fronts for the storage plants. Added
hydropower capacity wise Tanahu < Dudhkoshi < NalsingGadh < WestSeti <
Budhigandaki (See Table 12.1 on page 84 for plant specs).
Performance wise
Dudhkoshi results in higher Pdef reduction than NalsingGadh which is reasonable
as Dudhkoshi reservoir is bigger in size and drainage area. In comparison to other
smaller STO plants, Dudhkoshi also lowers the Wdef and Edef. Budhigandaki
is also able to reduce these.
Both Budhigandaki and Dudhkoshi reservoirs lie
in basins where water stress is high during the dry months (see Figure 14.2b).
Reduction in Wdef and Edef indicate that these storage reservoirs are able to
support irrigation in the dry period. The Pareto front for BaseTanBdg indicates
that it provides the highest reduction in Pdef and Edef in comparison to the
ConstAll scenario, which is also representative of Edef in Existing scenario.
==PAGE:111==
15.3 Implication of Environmental Flow Requirements
98
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
 
EDef
WDef
 
PDef
Budhigandaki
BaseTanBdg
ConstAll
0
1000
2000
3000
0
1000
2000
3000
Water Deficit
Env Deficit
0
1000
2000
3000
0
200
400
600
Water Deficit
Power Deficit 
0
1000
2000
3000
0
200
400
600
Env Deficit
Power Deficit 
Figure 15.7: Optimal points and interpolated Pareto fronts at 50th quantile of
FSexcd for big STOs plants and ConstAll under mid EFR.
15.3
Implication of Environmental Flow Requirements
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
 
BaseTanBdg
EDef
 
PDef
HDP
Low
Mid
High
Figure
15.8:
Optimal points for
BaseTanBdg scenario under four EFRs
identiﬁed by the constraining method.
Based on the assumption that RoR
plants do not aﬀect water availability
in the system, they are not consid-
ered here.
Figure 15.8 shows the op-
timal points for BaseTanBdg scenario
under the four EFRs using weighting
method, other scenarios are shown in
Figure D.7.
No isosurfaces are pro-
vided as the EFRs were not all run
with both multi-objective optimization
(MOO) methods. Brighter colors indi-
cate higher EFR requirements. As seen
previously, the Edef is independent of
Pdef. So higher EFRs simply shift the Pareto front and do not seem to aﬀect
other objectives.
Resistance in establishing EFRs due to fear of reduction in power production
could be countered by these observations. But placing EFRs downstream of each
hydropower plant (HP) may not have the same aﬀect as these basin-level EFRs.
==PAGE:112==
Chapter 16
Points on the Pareto Front
Each point on the Pareto front represents a resource management strategy. A
closer look at these optimal points is helpful in understanding the real life im-
plication of these strategies.
Currently water management is Nepal is largely
focused on minimizing power deﬁcit. On the Pareto front, this is represented by
the optimal solution obtained from the multi-objective optimization (MOO) with
maximum weights placed on Zpowerdeficit. Inter-annual pattern in resource alloca-
tion at ﬁve Pareto points are discussed here. Four points on the Pareto Front are
selected to represent management with preference placed on each objective one
at a time (Min Pdef, Min Wdef, Min Edef, Min FSexcd). A ﬁfth ’Compromise’
point represents a strategy where all objectives are weighted equally. All plots
presented here are from scenario runs with mid Environmental Flow Requirement
(EFR) using the weighting method.
16.1
Power Production
Figure 16.1 shows the monthly power production under the Existing and the two
run-of-river (RoR) development scenarios. The simulated production in Existing
does not match the observed production in 2014. Since some of the existing sea-
sonal power plants were not included in the model, it is reasonable that simulated
production is lower. It is also likely that the water availability is higher than
assumed here. Historical discharge measured at the most downstream location
in the basin was used as indicator of water availability. These discharges may
already exclude upstream abstractions. When irrigation water abstractions are
deducted again in the model, water available for power production will be lower.
==PAGE:113==
16.1 Power Production
100
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Production [GWh/month]
Exist −EmcD
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Production [GWh/month]
BaseCase −EmcD
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
Production [GWh/month]
ConstAll −EmcD
 
 
2015 Demand
2014 Production
Min Pdef
Min Edef
Min Wdef
Min FSexcd
Compromise
Figure 16.1: Average power production under Existing, Base and ConstAll sce-
narios for ﬁve points on the Pareto front.
For all scenarios the wet period production under the ﬁve management strategies
is the same. In the dry period, production is lower if objectives other than power
deﬁcit is favored. Although dependencies in Edef and Pdef was not seen in the
annual Pareto fronts, power production in the dry period is higher for strategy
Min Edef than for Min Wdef and Min FSexcd. Minimizing Wdef removes water
available in the system to fulﬁll irrigation allocations. Minimizing Edef requires
water to be maintained in the downstream most point in the basin. This helps
increase production at plants upstream of the environment outﬂow points. Espe-
cially for ConstAll, where 96 RoRs are added to the Existing scenario, the strategy
for maintaining environmental ﬂows beneﬁts power producers as well.
Figure 16.2 shows the average monthly power production for the storage (STO)
development scenarios. All storage plants supplement the RoR plants in the Base
scenario to provide reduction in dry period Pdef. For Tanahu, Dudhkoshi and
NalsingGadh, there is limited diﬀerence between the ﬁve management strategies,
potentially due to their reservoirs and drainage basins being relatively small. West
Seti reservoir with a larger drainage area shows a greater diﬀerence in dry period
production between strategies. Since all STO plants lie in diﬀerent basins, the
Pdef, Wdef and Edef relations can be expected to diﬀer.
==PAGE:114==
16.1 Power Production
101
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Production [GWh/month]
Tanahu
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Production [GWh/month]
Budhigandaki
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Production [GWh/month]
Dudhkoshi
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Production [GWh/month]
WestSeti
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Production [GWh/month]
BaseTanBdg
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Production [GWh/month]
NalsingGadh
 
 
.
Existing
2015 Demand
Min Pdef
Min Edef
Min Wdef
Min FSexcd
Compromise
Figure 16.2: Average power production under STO scenarios for ﬁve points on the Pareto front. Greyed lines
indicate power production in Existing scenario.
==PAGE:115==
16.2 Operation of Storage Reservoir
102
Budhigandaki and BaseTanBdg minimize power deﬁcits the most in the dry pe-
riod. It appears that these scenarios are not being utilized to their full potential
with excess power only being produced in the wet period. Since the 2015 power
demand is easily fulﬁlled by these scenarios, the optimizer does not focus on in-
creasing power production beyond the 2015 demands. Also, power production is
similar for prioritizing Pdef or the other objectives.
16.2
Operation of Storage Reservoir
Storage level in Kulekhani
J F M A M J J A S O N D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Exist -EmcD
J F M A M J J A S O N D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
BaseCase -EmcD
J F M A M J J A S O N D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
BaseTanBdg -EmcD
Rule Curve
Min Pdef
Min Edef
Min Wdef
Min FSexcd
Compromise
Figure 16.3: Average storage levels in the existing Kulekhani reservoirs under
Existing, ConstAll and BaseTanBdg scenarios under mid EFR. Storage is shown
as a fraction of maximum storage capacity of Kulekhani.
Figure 16.3 shows the storage in the existing Kulekhani reservoir under three de-
velopment scenarios (see Figure D.9 for other scenarios). In Existing conditions,
compared to the strategy minimizing Pdef, minimizing Wdef requires lower reser-
voir storage and subsequently higher releases than minimizing Pdef indicates a
conﬂict in water use for current irrigation and future power production.
Under the Base scenario, addition of new RoRs allows for buildup of reservoir
storage earlier in the wet period compared to the Existing scenario. Under Base-
TanBdg, the two STO plants added to Base scenario allows for both the wet
period storage and dry period release to start earlier. Due to the new reservoirs
supplementing power production in the dry period, Kulekhani is able to maintain
releases all year round.
In both Base and BaseTanBdg, minimization of Pdef
requires lower storage than Wdef. This indicates that if Kulekhani could be oper-
ated more ﬂexibly, it may be more useful for supplementing dry period irrigation
water requirements than for power production.
==PAGE:116==
16.2 Operation of Storage Reservoir
103
Figure 16.4 shows the operation of each of the new reservoirs added under the ﬁve
STO scenarios. The bigger reservoirs - Budhigandaki, West Seti and Dudhkoshi
exceed their rule curve restrictions only under the minimization of Pdef. In these
basins, there is a conﬂict in storing water to meet dry period power demands
or releasing them to fulﬁll wet period irrigation requirements. In Tanahu, min-
imizing Wdef requires higher releases than for Pdef in the dry months which is
reasonable as Tanahu lies upstream of areas in Narayani basin with high irriga-
tion demands. For NalsingGadh, operation is very similar for all ﬁve management
strategies indicating limited conﬂicts.
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Tanahu -EmcD
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Budhigandaki -EmcD
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
NalsingGadh -EmcD
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Dudhkoshi -EmcD
Operation of new reservoirs added in each scenario
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
WestSeti -EmcD
Rule Curve
Min Pdef
Min Edef
Min Wdef
Min FSexcd
Compromise
Figure 16.4: Average storage levels in the new reservoirs under ﬁve single reser-
voir development scenarios under mid EFR. Storage is shown as a fraction of
maximum storage capacity for each reservoir.
16.2.1
Fulﬁllment of 2030 Power Demand
Figure 16.5: Average power production under Base-
TanBdg with 2030 power demand. Greyed out lines
indicate power production in Existing and Base-
TanBdg scenarios with 2015 power demand.
BaseTanBdg was run with
both 2015 and 2030 power
demands.
Figure
16.5
shows the subsequent power
production under the two
demands.
The diﬀerence
in the ﬁve management
strategies is more evident
under high demand with
power production higher
==PAGE:117==
16.2 Operation of Storage Reservoir
104
in some months for prioritizing Wdef and Edef than for Pdef.
For all strate-
gies, the dry period productions appear lower to that seen for the 2015 demand
while the wet period production is nearly doubled.
Figure 16.6 presents storage levels in the three reservoirs in BaseTanBdg for the
two power demands.
Under 2015 demand, the production capacity is able to
cope with year round demand.
Subsequently, storage plants are optimized to
save wet period ﬂows for dry periods. Especially for the strategy to minimize
Pdef, Budhigandaki and Tanahu are strictly used to save water for future power
production.
Under 2030 demand, the optimization increases storage in all three reservoirs in
the dry period while reducing the storage in the wet period. Since 2030 demand is
higher than year round supply capacity, releasing water to meet current demands
is equally prioritized as storing water for future. Tanahu shows strong trade-oﬀs
in Wdef and Pdef for both demands.
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Kulekhani
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Budhigandaki
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Tanahu
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Kulekhani
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Budhigandaki
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Tanahu
Rule Curve
Min Pdef
Min Edef
Min Wdef
Min FSexcd
Compromise
BaseTanBdg under 2030 Power Demand
BaseTanBdg under 2015 Power Demand
Figure 16.6: Average storage levels in the three reservoirs under BaseTanBdg
for 2015 and 2030 power demand with mid EFR. Storage is shown as a fraction
of maximum storage capacity for each reservoir.
==PAGE:118==
16.2 Operation of Storage Reservoir
105
16.2.2
Fulﬁllment of Environmental Flow Requirement
Figure 16.7 considers the change in operation of the three reservoirs in Base-
TanBdg under no EFR and high EFR. The diﬀerence in operation under mini-
mization of Pdef and Edef is clearer for the high EFR case. Generally, the wet
period release requirement under minimization of Edef is higher than that for
Pdef. The trend in dry period regulation diﬀers per reservoir. While the estab-
lishment of acceptable EFR is debatable, it can also be considered representatives
of higher irrigation demand of demands in parts of India that feed from these
rivers. Higher trade oﬀs can be expected if minimization of Edef and Wdef are
combined into a single objective.
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Kulekhani
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Budhigandaki
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Tanahu
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Kulekhani
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Budhigandaki
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Tanahu
Rule Curve
Min Pdef
Min Edef
Min Wdef
Min FSexcd
Compromise
BaseTanBdg under no EFR
BaseTanBdg under high EFR
Figure 16.7: Average storage levels in the three reservoirs under BaseTanBdg
with 2015 power demand for no EFR and high EFR scenarios. Storage is shown
as a fraction of maximum storage capacity for each reservoir.
It is clear from the above comparison that many hydropower plants (HPs) exhibit a
diﬀerence in reservoir operation based on the management strategy chosen. There
is conﬂict in storing or releasing water for fulﬁlling dry period power demand
versus irrigation or environmental water demand. Conﬂicts are more evident as
power production capacities increase and become comparable to power demand.
The optimizer is able to focus more on minimization of other metrics than Pdef
when production capacity is high.
It should also be noted that in all plots, storage hit maximum limit only for
WestSeti. The rule curve is also not exceeded often. This may indicate that water
availability is underestimated and reservoirs can only be ﬁlled to a certain extent.
==PAGE:119==
Chapter 17
Performance of
Implementation Methods
A Multi-objective optimization (MOO) based model can result in a large opti-
mization problem. Especially with the ﬂow-path representation, the number of
decision variables is higher than for normal mass balance based formulation. The
biggest problem setup for the two new storage (STO) plan scenario BaseTanBdg
had 204792 decision variables, 59475 equality constraints and 32760 inequality
constraints for the 14 simulation years. Under the constraining method, three
additional inequality constraints were added. Given the size of the problem, an
eﬃcient method for implementing the MOO and delineating the Pareto front is
desirable.
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
 
WDef
EDef
 
PDef
Weighting
Constraining
Figure 17.1: Pareto optimal points
for BaseTanBdg under mid Envi-
ronmental Flow Requirement (EFR)
identiﬁed using the weighting and
constraining method.
Figure 17.1 presents the optimal points
delineated by the two methods for Base-
TanBdg.
It is known that weighting
method cannot delineate concave portions
of a Pareto front. Therefore it cannot be
conﬁrmed whether the Pareto front is ﬂat
or concave just based on the darker bipolar
points obtained by the weighting method.
The point cloud obtained with the con-
straining method is more reasonable with
points scattered in the feasible region.
Figure 17.2 shows isosurfaces interpolated
based on points identiﬁed by the two meth-
ods. The curves are similar stopping ﬂat at
==PAGE:120==
107
power deﬁcit values corresponding to the chosen ﬂood exceedance level. The more
complete solution set delineated from the constraining method veriﬁes that the
weighting method is performing as it should.
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
1000
2000
0
100
200
300
 
Water Deficit
Weighting Method
Env Deficit
 
Power Deficit 
Optimal Pts
FSexcd 25th quantile: 15
FSexcd 90th quantile: 1640
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0
1000
2000
0
100
200
300
 
Water Deficit
Constraining Method
Env Deficit 
Power Deficit 
Optimal Pts
FSexcd 25th quantile: 2
FSexcd 90th quantile: 1528
Figure 17.2: Isosurfaces for BaseTanBdg interpolated using points identiﬁed by
the weighting and constraining methods.
Figure
17.3:
Comparison
of feasible regions explored by
the constraining and weighting
method.
The lack of points in the middle section in the
weighting method is likely due to the simplex
based solver. Simplex is a vertex-search algo-
rithm that only looks at the intersection points
between constraints. In Figure 17.3 illustrating
a 2D optimization problem, simplex search can-
not identify regions in between optimal points
P1 and P2 using the weighting method.
In the constraining method, a new vertex is
created in between P1 and P2 by addition of
the constraint a⃝representing limit put on ob-
jective Z1. This allows for delineation of parts
between P1 and P2. If this concept is extended
to a 4D problem, an isosurface in the feasible
region is similar to the line segment P1 −P2 where objective Z1 is held constant.
So simplex is only able to ﬁnd the edges for these isosurfaces.
==PAGE:121==
108
However, the point delineated along the edges of the isosurface by the weighting
method would be expected to behave more randomly than clustered as seen in
the previous plots. The clustering eﬀect could be an artifact of the weights used.
Marler and Arora (2010) argue that the method for selection of weights wz itself
can result in unintended preferences placed on diﬀerent objectives.
wpdef
0
0.5
1
wfsxcd
0
0.5
1
wedef
0
0.5
1
wwdef
0
0.5
1
wpdef
0
0.5
1
wfsxcd
0
0.5
1
wedef
0
0.5
1
wwdef
0
0.5
1
Figure 17.4: 8000 combinations of four weights wz placed on the four objectives
to implement the weighting method for BaseTanBdg with mid EFR.
Figure 17.4 shows the Latin-hyper cube sampling based selection of weights for the
8000 runs in the weighting method. Figure 17.5a shows the subsequent optimal
combinations of the four objectives identiﬁed by using these weights. In both
ﬁgures, the scatter plots indicate combinations of two parameters at a time with
the histograms indicating distribution of each parameter. Though the weights
chosen seem to cover possible combinations of wz well, the coverage in the optimal
solution space is not very good. In contrast, the optimal solution space explored
using the constraining method, shown in Figure 17.5b for the same scenario has
much better coverage. Figure 17.5b also visualizes the inter-dependency in Pdef
and FSexcd well.
==PAGE:122==
109
0
200
400
Pdef
0
1000
2000
FSexcd
0
1000
2000
Edef
0
2000
4000
0
200
400
Wdef
Pdef
0
1000
2000
FSexcd
0
1000
2000
Edef
0
2000
4000
Wdef
(a) The weighting method.
Pdef
0
20
40
FSexcd
0
1000
2000
Edef
0
1000
2000
Wdef
0
2000
4000
Pdef
0
20
40
FSexcd
0
1000
2000
Edef
0
1000
2000
Wdef
0
2000
4000
(b) The constraining method.
Figure 17.5: Coverage of 8000 optimal solutions identiﬁed from the two method
for BaseTanBdg with mid EFR. The scatter plots indicate combinations of two
parameters at a time and the histograms along the diagonal indicate distribution
of each parameter.
==PAGE:123==
110
The constraining method may appear better based on these comparisons. However
it must be highlighted that the outputs of the constraining method are more disap-
pointing if the limits within which constraints are applied are not pre-determined
by the weighting method as done here. As indicated in Figure 17.6, even for well
determined limits, on average about 50% of the 8000 runs were infeasible.
0
1000
2000
3000
0
500
1000
1500
0
100
200
300
 
WDef
EDef
 
PDef
Iterations
Feasible pts
Figure 17.6: Comparison of feasible and infea-
sible combinations of objectives out of the 8000
runs performed in the constraining method for
BaseTanBdg.
Running the BaseTanBdg sce-
nario with limits on objectives
expanded to include the en-
tire range of possible values re-
sulted in no feasible solution
for 8000 runs. In contrast, the
weighting methods will always
provide a feasible solution, al-
though they may not all be
unique. So from the point of
view of saving computational
resources, the methods should
be combined with few scoping
runs with weighting method
used to identify limits to be
tested with more runs in the
constraining method.
Additionally, computational speed
were comparable for both the
weighting and constraining methods. For 8000 optimization runs, BaseTanBdg
with mid EFR took about 4 hrs1 for both method. The CPLEX solver itself took
about 2 seconds to solve each of the 8000 optimizations.
1All times reported for codes run on the HPC with 16 workers.
==PAGE:124==
Chapter 18
Limitations
The focus of this thesis has been on developing and demonstrating the use of multi-
objective optimization (MOO) models for infrastructure development in Nepal.
MOO is presented as a possible way to narrow down the list of development plans
by analyizing trade-oﬀs associated with the plans. The MOO does not intend
to pick the best solution but provide a more complete picture of the potential
impacts of planned hydropower plant (HP) infrastructure development in Nepal.
In the interest of time, reasonable estimates for demands, reservoir operation
and HP characteristics have been used.
Spatial and temporal variations have
been aggregated where possible. Simpliﬁcations have been made with the aim of
developing a simple model that captures the main aspects of the water-energy-
environment nexus in Nepal. Some limitations and important assumptions behind
the method chosen here are highlighted in this section.
For a trade-oﬀbased optimization, an accurate quantiﬁcation of demands is cru-
cial. Accessible data was pre-processed to ﬁt the needs of this study. The scaling
of irrigation demand estimated by Biemans et al. (2015) is done on a qualitative
basis. The model also only includes irrigation demand in the Nepal and some
parts of Tibet. However, higher irrigation demands occur at locations further
downstream in the river basins. Inclusion of relevant parts of India would provide
a better estimate of water stress imposed downstream of the HPs. Additionally,
inclusion of the southern river basins would have been interesting from the point of
view of identifying potential irrigation schemes that may be connected to planned
reservoirs. Not enough data was available at the time of the study to include these
in the basin network.
==PAGE:125==
112
The use of historical discharge as representative of current water available, with
the assumption that most of the river basins are in their natural state, also comes
with high uncertainty.
It is likely that the discharge observed at the chosen
stations lying at the downstream locations in each basin already excludes wa-
ter abstracted to fulﬁll upstream demands. Subcatchment-wise inﬂow estimated
based on fraction of basin area represented by subcatchment may further dis-
tort the estimation of water availability.
The steep terrain and heterogeneity
in land cover across basins will also impact amount of basin inﬂow generated
in a catchment.
Groundwater usages has been ignored completely though 1.1
BCM of annual groundwater usage for irrigation and domestic used is reported
(ADB/ICIMOD, 2006). All of these assumptions on water availability result in
overestimation of water stresses.
Some local expert input on deﬁning periods of natural and unnatural ﬂow regimes
would also help improve the Environmental Flow Requirement (EFR) estimates.
Additionally, EFR has strictly been look at from maintaining water ﬂow point
of view. Sediment transport, an important river function in glacier-fed Nepalese
river basins (Gabbud & Lane, 2016), has been completely ignored in this study.
Given very limited regulations in currently in Nepal for regulating environmental
ﬂows, the basic desktop Environmental Flow Assessment (EFA) chosen here is
considered an acceptable start.
The use of the same reservoir storage rule curve for all storage (STO) HP is a
strong assumption. The dimensions of the reservoirs and their drainage areas vary.
Additionally, ﬂood magnitude and frequency will vary in each basin, indicating the
need for diﬀerent reservoir operation policy. Reservoir regulation policies hugely
impact the patterns in power supply. Change in total reservoir storage capacity
due to sediment deposits encroaching into reservoir dead storage is another factor
that can reduce power production over time. By extension, the poor quality of
reservoir storage rule curves makes the performance metric used for ﬂood risk
minimization a poor one.
The assumption of constant head for evaluation of
power supply is another source of uncertainty.
As pointed out by Bajracharya (2015), transmission capacity is also a bottleneck
in power development in Nepal. Lack of spatial distinction in power supply and
demand makes is hard to analyze transmission capacity here.
This limitation
can be overcome by addition of a power distribution network with constrains
placed by transmission lines as done by Wolfgang et al. (2009). Load-segment
==PAGE:126==
113
representation of demand as used by Wolfgang et al. (2009) can also be adopted
to run the model at weekly time steps while accounting for hourly variation.
However, the ﬂow-path representation results in a lot more decision variables per
time step than traditional mass-balance representations. The number of decision
variables will increase signiﬁcantly when modeling in ﬁner time steps, requiring
more computational time.
Model structure wise, the water ﬂows have strictly been formulated in terms of
demand and supply balances. Losses and recharge through hydrological processes
are not considered explicitly. Also no proper calibration for the model has been
done. As input data represents diﬀerent time frames, it was hard to establish a
calibration metric. The eﬃciency in HP production could be changed to match
simulated and observed power production. Basin inﬂows could also be scaled up
to indicate real water availabilty based on this matching of power productions.
Record on storage levels in the existing Kulekhani reservoir, if available, can form
another basis for calibration.
The use of constant demands over the years is a weakness that could be over-
come easily by changing model inputs. It is also recognized that modeling power
demands at a ﬁner steps is necessary and could be done by using load segments
based representation of diurnal variations (Wolfgang et al., 2009).
A potential way to account for supply and demand variability would be to perform
a sensitivity analysis and quantify the parameter and model uncertainty. Saltelli,
Ratto, Tarantola, and Campolongo (2006) present local and global sensitivity
analysis methods that can be applied.
The problems with generation of weights w and limits lim for the 8000 runs in
weighting and constraining method have been discussed previously. Marler and
Arora (2010) review some common methods that can improve the selection of
weights. Further literature review on existing methods for generation of w and
lim is suggested to identify more eﬃcient methods.
==PAGE:127==
Chapter 19
Future Work
Suggestion for future research can be grouped into two aspects - better application
of the existing framework and continued development of current framework. The
following recommendations are made for the future:
• Calibration and uncertainty analysis should be conducted to further test
the model structure. A local or global sensitivity analysis should be done
to quantify sensitivities to uncertainty in established thresholds for the four
objectives. Such analysis would improve the robustness of model outputs
and help target data search to improve the inputs that are most important.
• While the model is developed to recognize spatial variations in water demand
and supply, the results have been analyzed at an aggregated national scale.
Water and environmental deﬁcits have only been studied at a national scale.
By digging deeper into the model outputs for each node and link in the
network, spatial variability can be used as a means to compare basin-wise
trade oﬀs and development potentials, and also identify projects that could
serve multiple purposes. Such analysis, as done by Hurford et al. (2013) for
the Brazilian Jaguaribe basin, would be a well suited follow up to this study.
• Scenarios considering inter-annual growth in demands over the planning
horizon and climate change impacts on water availability can be useful.
In the lack of existing estimated for predicted streamﬂow, a rainfall-runoﬀ
model front end can be setup to predict streamﬂow based on present and
future weather data.
• Spatial and temporal representation of power demand and supply as done
by Wolfgang et al. (2009) can be incorporated into the present model to
==PAGE:128==
115
better represent the power distribution network. Such representation can be
used to analyze the transmission line development alongside development of
hydropower plants in Nepal.
• Environmental Flow Requirements (EFRs) have only been considered at
the basin level. Since the model is spatially explicit, deﬁning EFR at each
turbine node would provide a way to account for local impacts of the power
plants. If combined with a ﬁner temporal resolution for the model, such
local EFRs would help quantify environmental impacts of both run-of-river
and storage plants.
• The method used here for generation of all possible ﬂow paths in the net-
work does not work for looped systems as it assumes that there is only one
connection between each source-sink pair, which is not suitable for looped
systems. The approach used by Cheng et al. (2009) is more generic. A
similar algorithm that works with the network and ﬂow path matrix setup
used here could be developed to make the model more generic.
• Implementation wise, the structure of the MATLAB code for setting up
the objective function and constraint matrices could be improved to make
scenario based modeling easier and faster. Currently all parts of the Linear
Program (LP) are setup at the same time for each hydropower plant (HP)
development scenario.
This thesis mostly focused on modeling diﬀerent
infrastructure performance for given supply and demand scenario.
Since
the left hand side of the constraint do not change over time for scenarios
where only the supply and demand relationships change, the problem setup
can be separated and increase the ﬂexibility of the model.
==PAGE:129==
Part V
Conclusion
==PAGE:130==
Chapter 20
Conclusion
Finding the best compromise among competing decisions is a political
or social process. The process is helped by having available the trade
oﬀs among competing objectives.
Loucks et al., 2005
Increasing hydropower development in Nepal raises questions regarding the impact
of promoting water use for power production on water availability for other uses.
In particular storage (STO) plants that directly aﬀect the water balance in the
system can monopolize water allocation. A hydro-economic model using multi-
objective optimization (MOO) was developed in this study to identify optimal
water management strategies for Nepal under two run-of-river (RoR) and six
STO based power development scenarios.
Four water management objectives
were considered relevant - minimization of power deﬁcit, irrigation water deﬁcit,
environmental impacts and ﬂood risk. The trade oﬀs and synergies among these
objectives were visualized to help decision-makers understand the consequences of
chosen power development pathways. Additionally, two methods for implementing
MOO were evaluated.
It is demonstrated that the MOO method, though computationally intensive, can
provide a ﬂexible and thorough means to model various objectives under water
management as a nexus.
Network matrix and ﬂow path based representation
of the system saves model set up time and is easy to extend to systems other
than Nepal. The weighting and constraining methods, if implemented as done
in the study, work best in combination. The weighting method provides a good
basis for performing initial runs to identify realistic limits for each objective. The
==PAGE:131==
118
constraining method based runs can be done within these limits to further improve
estimation of the Pareto fronts. However, it is also likely that these methods can
work better on their own if better sampling methods are chosen to identify weights
and limits to be used for successive runs.
Water availability in Nepal, represented by historical discharge, shows strong sea-
sonality with high inﬂow in the wet period and low inﬂow in the dry period. Floods
are considered high risk during the high inﬂow periods. Power supply, currently
dominated by hydropower, also mirrors the same pattern in inﬂow while power
demand does not vary signiﬁcantly. Irrigation water demand has the reverse trend
in inﬂow due to double cropping practices in Nepal. Suﬃcient rainfall is available
for summer crops while winter crops are dependent on irrigation. The needs of
the environment, estimated here as the water required to maintain aquatic life
in rivers using three desktop Environmental Flow Assessment (EFA) methods,
follow the pattern in natural inﬂow. The trends in demand, supply and ﬂood risk
indicate that conﬂicts can exist between the four water management objectives.
Pareto fronts were delineated for nine development scenarios for two power de-
mands and three Environmental Flow Requirements (EFRs). The common per-
ception in relevant agencies under the Government of Nepal (GoN) that currently
there is no conﬂict in water use for irrigation and power production is veriﬁed
at an annual scale. The Pareto fronts for existing scenario, as well as two RoRs
scenarios have sharp edges indicating no trade-oﬀs between the objectives. How-
ever, Pareto fronts for STOs, especially under higher power demand indicate that
trade oﬀs in irrigation water deﬁcit and power deﬁcits will arise as power supply
capacity and demands increase.
The trade-oﬀand synergies in water allocation are more evident in monthly power
production and reservoir operation at speciﬁc points on the Pareto front. It is hard
to generalize these inter-dependencies across all development plans as each new
storage plant is in a diﬀerent basin and each basin has its own water demands. The
interdependencies between objectives could be understood better by looking at
basin level Pareto fronts. Nonetheless, it is seen that meeting power demands for
the dry period presents conﬂicts in reservoir management. Conﬂicts are strongest
in the scenario with addition of two STO plants, 2015 power demand and high
EFR. When power production capacity is comparable to demands, wet period
power demand is fulﬁlled easily and reservoirs can be store all incoming water for
future power production. As a result, there is more conﬂict in reservoir operation
==PAGE:132==
119
to minimize power deﬁcit or other objectives.
If the focus of the GoN remains on expanding power capacity, the water needs
of the environment or irrigation users, especially in the wet period, will not be
prioritized. As a means to secure both water users, imposing EFRs early on would
allow for sustainable expansion of hydropower.
Placing EFR at basin outﬂow
points did not present any evident impact on power deﬁcit in this study. In fact,
in comparison to minimization of irrigation deﬁcits, minimization of EFRs was
seen to improve dry period power production.
However, the impacts of place
EFR downstream of each hydropower plant may have other implications.
Among the STO development scenarios only Budhigandaki and scenario with
Budhigandaki and Tanahu can meet the 2015 power demand. Furthermore, in
comparison to the scenario with 96 new RoRs, these STO projects also provide
reduction in irrigation and environmental deﬁcits. The potential for developing
STO plants as multipurpose reservoirs, and reducing the number of RoRs and
subsequent barriers placed on rivers provide a strong case for the promotion of
STO development in Nepal. In this study, all plants were modeled assuming the
same reservoir rule curve as for the Kulekhani. Synergies in combined operation of
multiple reservoirs could be maximized further by considering realistic rule curve
for each reservoir, or deriving rule curves by coupled simulation of these reservoirs.
The uncertainty in the model inputs and lack of proper calibration make the model
speculative.
The model currently underestimates water availability and power
production while over estimating water scarcity. But the inter-dependencies seen
in management objectives are still valuable. At minimum, it is safe to conclude
that with increased production capacity, monthly reservoir operation will face
increasing conﬂicts as power deﬁcits can be minimized relatively easily.
==PAGE:133==
Part VI
Appendices
==PAGE:134==
Appendix A
Supplements for Case Study
A.1
Irrigation Command Areas in Nepal
Figure A.1: Irrigation Command Areas regulated by the government. Labels are
in Nepali. Provided by: D. Khanal, (Personal Communication, 2015).
A.2
Characteristics of River Basins in Nepal
==PAGE:135==
A.2 Characteristics of River Basins in Nepal
122
Table A.1: Some characteristics of river basins in Nepal. Hydrological information compiled from (Gautam
& Dulal, 2013; Sharma & Awal, 2013; WECS, 2005) and glacier information from (Ives, Shrestha, & Mool,
2010).
Basin
Area
[km2]
Special features
Power
potential*
[GW]
Sapta Koshi
60400 [46%
in Nepal]
Snow and rain fed, includes 8 peaks over 8,000
m high, including Mount Everest, 779 glaciers,
and 1062 glacial lakes (16 potentially danger-
ous), history of glacial lake outﬂow ﬂoods
22.35
Narayani/Gandaki
34960 [90%
in Nepal]
Snow and rain fed, East Rapti subcatchment
within the basin entirely rain fed, passes through
world’s deepest gorge around 5000 m deep, 1025
glaciers and 338 glacial lakes
20.65
Karnali
43679 [94%
in Nepal]
Snow and rain fed, 1,361 glaciers and 907 glacial
lakes (4 potentially dangerous), estimated ice re-
serve of 128 km3
32.01
Mahakali
15260 [34%
in Nepal]
Snow and rain fed,forms the western border 4.16
between Nepal and India, 87 glaciers and 16
glacial lakes
4.16
Babai
3400
Rain fed, trans-boundary
NA
West Rapti
5200
Bagmati
3700
Kamala
3500
Kankai
1148
Southern Rivers
23150
Rain fed, some are trans-boundary
4.11
*Theoretical hydropower potential as estimated by (Shrestha, 1966)
==PAGE:136==
A.3 Review of Climate Change Impacts
123
A.3
Review of Climate Change Impacts
Shrestha, Wake, Mayewski, and Dibb (1999)’s study of change in historical max-
imum temperature was one of the ﬁrst studies showing warming trends in the
Himalayas. Through the analysis of observed temperature at 49 stations in Nepal
from 1971-94, Shrestha et al. (1999) found that temperatures have been rising
after 1977 at 0.06-0.12o C/yr in most of the Mountains, and at less than 0.03 o
C/yr in the Siwalik and Terai regions.
Based on trend analysis of historical rainfall from 80 stations from 1948 to 1994,
WECS (2011) report a decreasing trend in annual rainfall and longer droughts
in all basins, except Koshi. Rainfall is stronger along the southern hills than in
the mountains. Consistently, annual discharge in Koshi, Narayani and Karnali
basins is decreasing but it is increasing in the southern basins. Based on trend
analysis of monthly discharge, there is increase in wet season ﬂow due to increasing
snow melt contribution and decline in dry season ﬂow is observed.
Increased
snow melt contribution point towards the increased risk of Glacial lake Outburst
Floods (GLOFs). (Shrestha & Shrestha, 2004) agree with the trends reported by
WECS (2011) and Shrestha et al. (1999) add that observations in temperature
and precipitation match the predictions by global climate models.
Sharma and Awal (2013) found no general trend in streamﬂow in their moving
average based trend analysis of nine rivers from 1961-1995.
A more rigorous
analysis based on the Mann-Kendall and Sen’s trend test was done by Gautam and
Acharya (2012) using more than 20 years of data from 56 river stations. Gautam
and Acharya (2012) found that most stations showed an upwards trend in pre-
monsoon and winter discharge, indicating the increased contribution of glacier
melt. There was no signiﬁcant trend on the post-monsoon discharge. Most of
the larger basins did not show any trend in annual or seasonal ﬂow. Shrestha
and Shrestha (2004) suggest that impact on discharge is not evident yet but inter
annual variability can be expected to change.
Shrestha, Khatiwada, Babel, and Parajuli (2014) speciﬁcally looked at the impact
of climate change on the existing Kulekhani hydropower plant (HP) by downscal-
ing the climate forecasts of a global circulation model for 2010-2099. A rainfall-
runoﬀmodel was used to estimate future discharge based on forecast climate con-
ditions for the Bagmati river basin. While an increasing trend in temperature and
decrease in average precipitation was observed in the downscaled climate series,
==PAGE:137==
A.3 Review of Climate Change Impacts
124
change in predicted discharge did not have any trend. Kulekhani reservoir sim-
ulated with the predicted discharge and same operation policy as today resulted
in a 30% decrease in power production.
By altering the operation policy, the
decrease in production was lowered. WECS (2011) warn that the dependability
of dry season ﬂow ill decline resulting in lower productions. The increase in ﬂood
events also imply higher sediment loading into power plants reducing eﬃciency.
Based on multiple regression analysis and correlation between historic crop yields,
cropping season temperature and monthly precipitation in the Koshi basin, Bhatt,
Maskey, Babel, Uhlenbrook, and Prasad (2014) established that mean tempera-
ture is increasing. Higher temperatures are correlated with higher yield in the hilly
region and lower yield in the Terai. Bhatt et al. (2014) suggest that long term
impact of temperature rise will however be negative. The crop yield correlation
with precipitation were relatively weaker than that with temperature, potentially
due to lack of distinction between rain-fed and irrigated crops. Bhatt et al. (2014)
found that increased precipitation had higher yields up to a certain level, after
which yields declined again.
While there is lack of consistency in available predictions and forecasts, reviewed
literature show with high certainty that temperatures are rising, resulting in melt-
ing of glacier and decrease in overall crop yields. Flood events are likely to increase
in frequency. Precipitation is expected to decrease but a distinct pattern in river
discharge is hard to predict with certainty. The lack of reliable long term time
series and high intra-annual variability make it hard to detect streamﬂow patterns
(Shrestha & Shrestha, 2004; Gautam & Acharya, 2012). The climate change im-
pacts for water resources management in Nepal can be expected to reduce crop
production, aﬀect operation of hydropower plants and increase the risk of GLOFs.
At the policy level, the Climate Change Policy 2011 has been formulated to mit-
igate the eﬀects of climate change by "adopting a low-carbon emissions socio-
economic development path". National Adaptation Program of Actions, Local
Adaptation Plan of Action, and REDD Readiness Preparedness Proposal were
developed as follow up to aid implementation and adoption of the Climate Change
policy. However, as Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation (Helvetas, 2011) point out,
the policy fails to assign responsibilities and give agency to appropriate players to
ensure climate change adaption in ongoing projects. Lack of input from grassroot
organizations and the most vulnerable communities in the development of the
policy itself may be another reason preventing full adoption and implementation
==PAGE:138==
A.4 Identiﬁcation of Existing and Planned Hydropower Plants
125
of the policy goals.
A.4
Identiﬁcation of Existing and Planned Hydropower
Plants
Many HPs that have completed initial studies are waiting to be implemented.
Already identiﬁed projects are slowly being developed by the Nepal Electricity
Authority (NEA) or Independent Power Producerss (IPPs) under the conditions
of the Electricity Act 1992 and the Hydropower Development Policy 2001 (HDP
2001). Under the HDP 2001, IPPs are only allowed to operate HP as per the
Build, Operate, Own and Transfer scheme, whereby the IPP has to transfer the
HP to the Government of Nepal (GoN) at the end of their licensing period. Both
NEA and IPPs have to receive approval license from the Department of Electricity
Development (DoED) to be able to perform feasibility studies, start construction
or generation. Bajracharya (2015) provide an overview of the current licensing
and HP development procedure.
The DoED website maintains a running list of HP projects that have received
licenses for feasibility studies, construction or operation of HPs (DoED, 2015).
But, the number and status of projects are changing frequently. Especially with
projects licensed by IPPs, the stages are not well documented. Many projects tend
to run out of licenses prior to completion due to ﬁnancial and management issues.
Bureaucracy and ﬁnancial issues also loom large over GoN funded projects, with
multiple storage (STO) projects being pushed by various committees but none
reaching promising milestones.
Projects listed in the DoED website in September 2015 are considered as a starting
point in this study for identiﬁcation of existing and under construction projects.
As of September 2015, the website listed 43 operational and 96 under-construction.
On the other hand NEA Annual Report 2015 published in August listed 72 plants
as operational, with some small plants listed as ‘not in normal operation’, and
94 as under construction. All under construction projects are run-of-river (RoR)
types.
For identiﬁcation of planned RoR and STO plants, information from NEA An-
nual Reports, current news and other available literature were used. Under the
==PAGE:139==
A.5 Review of JICA Study on Storage Hydropower Development
126
assumptions that GoN projects are more likely to be implemented than IPPs,
only planned project under the NEA are considered in this thesis. Based on NEA
annual reports, Upper Modi A, Tamakoshi V and Upper Arun have been chosen
as planned HPs.
Additionally, ﬁve STO projects have been chosen as planned HPs.
The NEA
has already setup three committees for the development of the Tanahu (or Upper
Seti), Budhigandaki and Nalsing Gad hydropower projects (Tanahu Hydropower
Limited [THL], 2013; Project Development Department [PDD], 2011; Nalsing Gad
Hydropower Development Committee [NGHDC], 2016). Based on a recent JICA
master plan study on STO plant development (discussed in the next section),
Dudhkoshi has also been selected. Lastly, West Seti project pushed by the GoN’s
Investment Board is also included in the list of planned project (Ghimire, 2014).
All ﬁve STO projects are in diﬀerent stages of development and are discussed in
current media in terms of ﬁnancing, contracting and land acquisition (Rathaur,
2016; Shahi, 2015; Singh, 2016; Post Report, 2015; Giri, 2015a). This way in total
147 projects have been selected as relevant.
A.4.1
Expansion of Transmission Lines
Expansion of transmission lines to evacuate power generation from plants to users
should go hand-in-hand with construction of new power plants. Currently, NEA
has the sole responsibility and authority for transmission line development. Ba-
jracharya (2015) found that transmission lines are not initiated even in major
power corridors where new projects are under-construction or being licensed. Var-
ious legal requirements and social hindrances to acquisition of land are some rea-
sons for such delays in construction of new lines (Bajracharya, 2015). Delays in
transmission lines are also discouraging IPPs to speed up the completion of their
plants. Existing issues with transmission lines are deﬁnitely a bottleneck in the
development of power in Nepal. Due to limited time, transmission capacity issues
are not considered in this study.
A.5
Review of JICA Study on Storage Hydropower De-
velopment
==PAGE:140==
A.5 Review of JICA Study on Storage Hydropower Development
127
Figure A.2:
Estimation of required
run-of-river,
peaking run-of-river and
storage hydropower plant capacities by
JICA (2014). Reproduced from: (JICA,
2014).
The latest master plan study was con-
ducted by JICA (2014) using a Strate-
gic Environmental Assessment (SEA)
framework to rank STO type projects
and identify their order of development
by 2032.
This study represents the
only comprehensive study performed
at a national scale and is probably the
guide that will be followed in power de-
velopment. The methods used in the
study and outcomes relevant to this
thesis are reviewed here.
First JICA (2014) established the re-
quired STO plant capacity as the
deﬁcit between expected installed ca-
pacities for RoR and peaking RoR plants by 2032 and power demand represented
by a simpliﬁed hourly load duration curve as illustrated in Figure A.2. The curve
was developed based on known hourly patterns in system demand. RoR plants
and Indian imports were assumed to supply base demands, peaking RoR were
assumed to be operated during 6 hour peaks, and rest of the load is expected to
be fulﬁlled by STO plants. Based on projected demands for 2032 as shown in
Figure 2.9, Indian imports at 150 MW, required STO plant capactiy for 2032 was
estimated at 2,900 MW.
Further, a multi-criteria analysis based SEA was carried out by JICA to suggest
projects that are environmentally and socially sustainable while being able to
meet the forecast demand and STO capacity requirement for 2032. Note that this
master plan study looks at power planning to meet predicted demands using STO
plants and not the targets set by the 20-year plan set by the GoN (Ministry of
Energy MoE, 2009).
An initial screening of 67 projects was done based on 7 screening criterion related
to project capacity, cost, location and resettlement requirements. The 31 projects
from the screening were examined in detail where the performance of each project
was scored under the following list of criterion:
availability of ﬂow data, presence of potentially dangerous GLOF up-
==PAGE:141==
A.5 Review of JICA Study on Storage Hydropower Development
128
stream, sedimentation, site geology, proximity to active fault lines (risk
of earthquakes), length of new roads and transmission lines required,
level of project development, ease of ﬁnancing, unit production cost,
installed capacity, annual energy production, loss of forest, touristic
or agricultural area, proximity to protected area and areas with im-
portant biodiversity, occurrence of conserved fauna in project area,
resettlement requirements, number of people from 84 ethnic groups
aﬀected
The criterion were grouped into technological, economic, social and natural envi-
ronment. Weights were placed on each criterion with stakeholder input on their
importance. Three cases of diﬀerent weighting combinations were developed to
get a single aggregate score for each of the 31 projects. The best projects from this
analysis were further screened by limiting the number of projects in each basin to
5, removing projects that overlap with planned licensed RoRs and limiting total
installed capacity of all projects to the goal for 2032. This lead to recommendation
of 10 STO projects that should be developed.
The 10 projects were further evaluated in detail through site visits and analysis
of existing documents to evaluate the project in terms of 50 performance criterion
grouped into six categories. The method used for establishing order of develop-
ment for the scheduled STO plan is not clear but appears to be done based on the
plant capacities compared to desired capacity in 2032. The suggested development
pathways for the ﬁrst 5 STO plants by JICA (2014) is as follows (see Figure 2.12
for location of plants):
High Demand: Tanahu ! Budhigandaki ! Dudhkoshi ! NalsyauGad ! WestSeti
(A.1)
Low Demand: Tanahu ! Budhigandaki ! NalsyauGad ! Dudhkoshi ! WestSeti
While JICA (2014) have considered many criterion of interest to qualitatively
rank and short list favorable projects, the authors agree that an optimization
based model is more suitable for future capacity estimation. The scoring method
provides a good basis for narrowing down a long list of storage projects. Screening
criterion like proximity to areas with important biodiversity and resettlement
requirements are simple but can go a long way in ensuring protection of both the
natural and social environment.
==PAGE:142==
A.5 Review of JICA Study on Storage Hydropower Development
129
However, the performance of an ensemble of STO plants working together under
spatial and temporal variation in power balance and water availability cannot be
evaluated by the qualitative SEA based on multi-criterion analysis. JICA (2014)
also recommends coordinating the operation of selected projects as a means to
optimize power production and increase resiliency to natural disasters. The au-
thors also push for evaluation of STO and RoR in parallel to minimize the number
of barriers placed on river that block ﬁsh migration pathways, an impact that is
hard to mitigate otherwise. The study also recommends establishing environmen-
tal ﬂow levels to minimize downstream impacts of the project.
==PAGE:143==
Appendix B
Supplements for Methods
B.1
Summary of Input Data and Sources
==PAGE:144==
B.1 Summary of Input Data and Sources
131
Table B.1: Summary of input data series, their source and resolutions.
Data
Source
Spatial
Resolu-
tion
Temporal
Resolu-
tion
Start
Date
End Date
SRTM DEM grid
(Jarvis,
Reuter,
Nelson,
&
Guevara,
2008)
90m
NA
2000
District-wise
agricul-
tural
production
and
harvested area
(ABPSD,
2013)
District
level
Annual
15-07-1999
14-07-2014
District-wise
irrigated
area
(ABPSD,
2013)
District
level
Single Year
15-07-2010
Gross and net irrigation
water demands
(Biemans,
Siderius,
Mishra,
&
Ahmad,
2015)
0.5 degrees
Monthly,
Daily avail-
able
1979
2009
280
Chisapani
N. Rijal (personal communication, September 2015)
Stations
Daily
1964
2008
450
Devghat
1964
2010
120
Nayalbadi
1965
2008
460
Rajaiya
1963
2010
589
Padharadovan
1980
2010
590
Karmaiya
1965
1979
695
Chatara
1977
2008
795
Mainachuli
1972
2008
Hourly power demand
on peak days of the
month
M. Shrestha
(personal
commu-
nication,
September
30, 2015)
National
Hourly
for
12 days
Jul-13
Jul-14
Annual
energy
de-
manded
National
Annual
2008
2015
Annual energy supplied
NEA
Annual
Reports
2014-2015
National
Annual
2000
2015
Monthly energy produc-
tion
Govt HPs
Monthly
and Annual
15-07-2013
14-07-2015
Annual energy forecast
National
Annual
2016
2034
Annual energy forecast
(JICA, 2014)
National
Annual
2013
2032
==PAGE:145==
B.2 Analysis of Basins with Regulated Flows
132
B.2
Analysis of Basins with Regulated Flows
Figure B.1:
Correlation be-
tween daily ﬂow at Karmaiya
and Pandharadovan.
The impounding at Kulekhani started on Oc-
tober 1981 (Hada, 2001) with power produc-
tion initiating in 1982 (NEA, 2016). Flow data
before and after the year 1981 was compared
for the downstream stations.
Station Pand-
haradovan has ﬂow data available after 1979
only.
So nearby station Karmaiya with data
from 1965-1979 is used to estimate ﬂow at
Pandharadovan prior to 1979. Based on data
availability year 1965-1980 is considered pre-
reservoir period while 1982-2010 is considered
post-reservoir period for the natural ﬂow anal-
ysis.
Daily ﬂow data is available at both Karmaiya and Pandharadovan for year 1979.
Figure B.1 shows that there is good correlation between the two stations. The
drainage area for Pandharadovan represents 99% of drainage basin of Karmaiya
but the ﬂow at Pandharadovan is only 77% of the ﬂow at Karmaiya. Based on
the relation established in Figure B.1, ﬂow data for Karmaiya from 1965-1978
is scaled to be used as proxy for ﬂow at Pandharadovan. Figure B.2 shows the
simulated and observed ﬂow for Pandharadovan for the pre-reservoir period.
1965
1967
1970
1972
1975
1977
1980
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Discharge [m3/s]
 
 
Observed − Bagmati: 590 Karmaiya
Simulated − Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
Observed − Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
Figure B.2: Simulated and observed ﬂow at Pandharadovan for pre-reservoir
period.
The pre and post-reservoir ﬂows for Pandharadovan and Rajaiya is compared
based on the daily and monthly ﬂow duration curves and monthly average ﬂows.
A Flow Duration Curve (FDC) presents the frequency distribution of streamﬂow
==PAGE:146==
B.2 Analysis of Basins with Regulated Flows
133
in diﬀerent time scales. It is a common tool used to describe and compare ﬂow
variability in streams (Searcy, 1969). In Figure B.3, the daily and monthly FDC
indicate that the low ﬂows occurring during dry months are higher in the post-
reservoir period in both basins. The high ﬂows in Rajaiya is reduced while it is
increased in Pandharadovan.
Given that Kulekhani reservoir is ﬁlled during July-November and drained dur-
ing the other months (Hada, 2001), one would have expected the high ﬂows in
Pandharadovan to be lower in the post-reservoir period. Rajaiya only receives ﬂow
from the reservoir, so the increase in low ﬂow can be expected but decrease in high
ﬂows is hard to explained. The catchment for the Kulekhani reservoir is only 6%
of the total drainage area of Pandharadovan. So impact of water being redirected
from the reservoir to Rajaiya may not be signiﬁcant for ﬂow at Pandharadovan.
In conclusion, the changes in ﬂows at the two stations cannot be explained strictly
due to the reservoir. Other natural or anthropogenic factors may explain the over-
all change in ﬂow patterns, such as increased groundwater abstraction upstream.
Due to lack of time and information to establish a more appropriate natural inﬂow
time series, the observed data at Rajaiya is used as it is. This implies that more
water is available in dry period as the diverted water from Kulekhani into Rajaiya
basin is not discounted. The inﬂow at Pandharadovan has been increased slightly
to account for year-round water diversion based on the fact that the Kulekhani
reservoir drainage area is 6% of the total station drainage area.
Time flow is exceeded (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Daily Discharge [m
3/s]
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 3
10 4
Daily Flow Duration Curve
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
Monthly Discharge [m
3/month]
10 7
10 8
10 9
10 10
Monthly Average Flow
Pre - Pandharadovan
Post - Pandharadovan
Pre - Rajaiya
Post - Rajaiya
Time flow is exceeded (%)
0
50
100
Monthly Discharge [m
3/month]
10 6
10 7
10 8
10 9
10 10
Monthly Flow duration curve
Figure B.3: Comparison of pre and post reservoir ﬂows at Pandharadovan and
Karmaiya at daily and monthly time scales.
==PAGE:147==
B.3 Miscellaneous Figures
134
B.3
Miscellaneous Figures
0
100
200
300
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Day in Year
m3/s
 
 
2000
All other years
Figure B.4: Daily mean discharge from year 2000 for 460 Rajaiya basin overlaid
with data from other years to show discrepancy in data.
==PAGE:148==
B.3 Miscellaneous Figures
135
Figure B.5: Reshaping of incorrect data order in Station 695, 795 and 120 based
on data available from alternative source for Station 695.
==PAGE:149==
B.4 Power Plants
136
B.4
Power Plants
B.4.1
Correlation between actual and estimated HP speciﬁca-
tions
Figure B.6: Comparison of actual heads and discharges reported for hydropower
plant (HP) with heads and discharges estimated using ArcGIS. Heads were esti-
mated as diﬀerence in elevation between two representative points within HP ex-
tent. Discharge was estimated using known rated power and estimated head using
Equation (12.1).
B.4.2
Kulekhani Power Plants
==PAGE:150==
B.4 Power Plants
137
Figure B.7: Kulekhani reservoir and power station locations. Reproduced from: (Hada, 2001).
==PAGE:151==
B.5 Environmental Flow Requirement assessment
138
B.5
Environmental Flow Requirement assessment
B.6
Environmental Management Classes for Shifted FDC
Method
Figure B.8: Smakhtin and Anputhas (2006a)’s default Environmental Manage-
ment Classs (EMCs) for environmental FDC determination. Reproduced from:
(Smakhtin & Anputhas, 2006a).
==PAGE:152==
B.7 Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach Method
139
B.7
Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach Method
Exceedance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Narayani: 450 Devghat
Exceedance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/s]
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Koshi: 695 Chatara
Exceedance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
Exceedance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/s]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
Exceedance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli
Exceedance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/s]
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi
Exceedance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/s]
0
200
400
600
800
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya
Natural FDC w RVA params and std
Environmental FDC at RVA limits
Figure B.9: Natural Indicators of Hydraulic Alteration (IHA)s (x) and their
corresponding lowest Range Variability Approach (RVA) limits (o) shown as daily
natural and environmental FDC for 7 river stations.
==PAGE:153==
B.7 Modiﬁed Range Variability Approach Method
140
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x 10
4
Narayani: 450 Devghat
MCM
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Koshi: 695 Chatara
MCM
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
5000
10000
15000
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
MCM
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
MCM
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli
MCM
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi
MCM
Environmental Flow Requirements: Modified RVA
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya
MCM
Figure B.10: Monthly Environmental Flow Requirement (EFR) evaluated based
on modiﬁed Range Variability Approach method. EFR for each year from 1995-
2008 in gray overlaid with and average month EFRs shown by colored lines.
==PAGE:154==
B.8 Shifted Flow Duration Curve Method
141
B.8
Shifted Flow Duration Curve Method
FDC for EMCs: SmakhtinFDC
% Time flow exceeded
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/month]
10 8
10 9
10 10
10 11
Narayani: 450 Devghat
% Time flow exceeded
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/month]
10 8
10 9
10 10
10 11
Koshi: 695 Chatara
% Time flow exceeded
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/month]
10 8
10 9
10 10
10 11
Karnali: 280 Chisapani
% Time flow exceeded
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/month]
10 7
10 8
10 9
10 10
Bagmati: 589 Pandharadovan
% Time flow exceeded
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/month]
10 7
10 8
10 9
10 10
Kankai: 795 Mainachuli
% Time flow exceeded
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/month]
10 7
10 8
10 9
Mahakali: 120 Nayalbadi
% Time flow exceeded
0
20
40
60
80
100
[m 3/month]
10 6
10 7
10 8
10 9
Narayani: 460 Rajaiya
EMC-A: Natural
EMC-B: SlightMod
EMC-C: ModerateMod
EMC-D:LargeMod
Figure B.11: Monthly FDCs established for four EMCs of interest as per the
shifted FDC method.
B.9
Comparison of Cropped and Irrigated Areas to Im-
prove Irrigation Water Demand estimates
Biemans et al. (2015) developed a Lund-Potsdam-Jena managed Land (LPJmL)
model for South Asia to estimate irrigation water demand for production of 12
==PAGE:155==
B.9 Comparison of Cropped and Irrigated Areas to Improve Irrigation Water
Demand estimates
142
major crops. LPJmL is a dynamic coupled model that simulates transient changes
in terrestrial carbon and water cycles due to agricultural practices using a com-
bination of empirical and theoretical relations (Bondeau et al., 2007). However,
the estimates made by Biemans et al. (2015) are signiﬁcantly lower than the those
available in literature.
Biemans et al. (2015) do not explicitly account for water typically needed to ﬂood
rice ﬁelds, but since rice is only grown in the monsoon-fed kharif season, it does
not aﬀect the overall demand estimate signiﬁcantly. Additionally, the irrigation
eﬃciency of 37.5% used by Biemans et al. (2015) is higher than the 30% estimated
by the Government of Nepal (GoN) in the (WECS, 2005). But FAO (2012) also use
a much higher eﬃciency of 58% for Nepal in their calculation for Gross Irrigation
Water Requirement (GWR). The lack of well-deﬁned eﬃciency factor makes it
hard to compare GWR estimated by diﬀerent methods.
wheat
rice
maize
tropical cereals
pulses
soybeans
groundnuts
rapeseed
sugarcane
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
wheat
rice
maize
tropical cereals
pulses
soybeans
groundnuts
rapeseed
sugarcane
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
wheat
rice
maize
tropical cereals
pulses
soybeans
groundnuts
rapeseed
sugarcane
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Kharif − statistics
Rabi − statistics
Annual − statistics
Kharif − LPJmL
Rabi − LPJmL
Annual − LPJmL
crop area (MHa)
Figure B.12: Comparison of total crop area for major crops in Nepal over two
growing season from national statistics and derived from MICRA for Biemans,
Siderius, Mishra, and Ahmad (2015)’s study. National statistics indicate average
areas reported for 2003-2008. Provided by: H. Biemans (personal communication,
September, 2015).
Since input land-use maps were manipulated before use in this study, the land use
representation for Nepal was investigated. Figure B.12 shows the comparison of
total crop areas input to the LPJmL model and that Biemans et al. (2015) found
in national statistics for 2003-2008.
For cereal crops, especially maize, actual
cropped areas are higher than that used in the LPJmL model. However, on closer
inspection of data on cropped areas published by Ministry of Agriculture (MoA),
==PAGE:156==
B.9 Comparison of Cropped and Irrigated Areas to Improve Irrigation Water
Demand estimates
143
crop area for maize used by Biemans et al. (2015) is reasonable.
Figure B.13
presents the total annual cropped areas for major crops in Nepal. The areas for
maize is half of that for rice, similar to values input to the LPJmL model.
Figure B.13: Trend in cropped areas for major crops in Nepal from 1999-2013.
Based on data in: (ABPSD, 2014).
Only the irrigated portion of the cropped area contribute to the GWR estimate.
So the irrigated areas input to the LPJmL model and district-wise irrigated areas
available for 2010/11 in (ABPSD, 2013) were compared. The LPJmL model was
run with irrigated areas derived from MICRA2000, with a conversion of 10%
previously rain-fed areas into irrigated areas to account for increases in the last
decade. The LPJmL model inputs also distinguished between irrigated areas in
kharif and rabi seasons. For this reason, a maximum of two 0.5 deg gridded raster
dataset representing the fraction of irrigated areas were used to evaluate district-
wise irrigated areas in ArcGIS. Since some of the districts in Nepal are smaller
than the original raster resolution, the rasters were re-sampled before aggregation
to district-level sums.
Figure B.14 visualizes the district-wise comparison.
Figure B.15 presents the
same without spatial distinction. Districts in the south have larger irrigated areas
than those deﬁned as LPJmL inputs. These districts are also the ones that are
agriculturally important. ABPSD (2013) reports national irrigated areas at 12,597
km2 while the LPJmL model input was 9,036 km2. While some discrepancy can
be expected as the two datasets represent diﬀerent time-frames, the 40% diﬀerence
is signiﬁcant and may be one explanation for low estimates of GWR.
==PAGE:157==
B.9 Comparison of Cropped and Irrigated Areas to Improve Irrigation Water
Demand estimates
144
Figure B.14: Spatially explicit comparison of district-wise irrigation areas used
in (Biemans, Siderius, Mishra, & Ahmad, 2015) and reported in (ABPSD, 2013).
Districts highlighted in pink fall within the model domain for this study.
Figure B.15: Comparison of district-wise irrigation areas used in (Biemans,
Siderius, Mishra, & Ahmad, 2015) and reported in (ABPSD, 2013). Districts
highlighted in pink fall within the model domain for this study.
==PAGE:158==
B.9 Comparison of Cropped and Irrigated Areas to Improve Irrigation Water
Demand estimates
145
Figure
B.16:
Correlation
between
district-wise irrigation areas shown in
Figure B.15 for districts within the model
domain and for all districts.
Figure B.16 shows a cross plot com-
paring the correlation between the two
datasets. Correlation and linear trend-
line have been evaluated twice: con-
sidering all districts and only districts
that fall within the model domain.
While the former case has higher cor-
relation than the latter, the linear ﬁt
is similar.
Based on the linear ﬁt,
a correction factor of 1.6 can be the
basis for a simple correction to the
GWR estimated by Biemans et al.
(2015). Such correction is very crude
suggesting that the GWR can be scaled
equally through out the nation when
Figure B.14 clearly shows that there is
spatial variation in diﬀerence between the irrigated areas in the two datasets.
==PAGE:159==
Appendix C
Toolboxes
C.1
Setting up Network Matrix in ArcGIS
After delineation of stream and identiﬁcation of points of interests in the river
network, the following steps can be use to generate network connectivity matrices
in ArcGIS. In this thesis study, location of hydropower plants were identiﬁed based
on mid points of bounding coordinates. Watersheds were delineated for each HP
plant and the centroid of each watershed were moved around to create irrigation
demand and inﬂow points. It is important that all points are snapped correctly
to the stream network and points don’t overlap each other. Environmental ﬂow
points were selected at the basin outﬂow points. Assign node type ID for each
node category. Here inﬂow nodes were assigned HYDROID = 1, demand points
were -1, HPs +11, reservoirs were +22 and outﬂows were -2.
Next, merge all points into a single point layer1 and assign a unique ID for all the
the points manually or using "Assign HydroID" tool from ArcHydro Extension.
Save both point layer and stream layer into a single feature dataset.
Open ArcCatalog. Right click on feature dataset>New>Geometric Network.
Allow snap on and select all layers to be used in the network.
Select Yes to
preserve existing enabled values. Allow the stream or any other polyline to be
Complex edge. This will allow the addition of nodes anywhere along the stream
network and not just the ends of the stream polygons. If the points are created
properly the network should be built with few or no errors.
1Points can be in multiple layers but it is easier when tracing if they are in the same layer.
==PAGE:160==
C.1 Setting up Network Matrix in ArcGIS
147
Open ArcMap and drag-drop the newly created network ﬁle. Turn oﬀthe layer
with additional junctions created automatically.
Do not delete this layer.
If
the network was built with errors, import the build error table and look at the
ErrorCodes.
See link for interpreting the error codes.
To ﬁx errors, turn on
editing for the network features.
Open Geometric Network editing toolbar by
right clicking anywhere on the menu bars. Click Network Build Errors to select
features with issues and edit them as needed. Check ArcGIS help on repairing
geometric network for tips on editing. If there are too many errors, it is easier to
edit the points outside of the network and create the network again. Note that
each feature dataset can only have one network so either create a new dataset
or delete the geometric network, edit your point features and then recreate the
network.
Once all the geometry is repaired, use Data Management Tools>Geometric
Network>Set Flow Direction to set ﬂow in the network.
If the stream is
created using ﬂow accumulation raster, the ﬂow direction will be with digitized,
else you might have to set you points as sources and sinks. Note that everytime
you edit the network, you need to reset the ﬂow direction.
Next, turn on the Utility Network Analyst toolbar by right clicking on the menu
bar. Check if your ﬂow direction is correctly set by selecting Display>Display
Arrows from the Utility Network Analyst toolbar. If the ﬂow direction is set cor-
rectly, Utility Network Analyst has various tools that allows you to trace through
the network and identify connected features. Tracing can also be done through
Data Management Tools>Geometric Network>Trace Geometric Net-
work.
The Trace Downstream option was used in this thesis to identify all nodes down-
stream of every node in the network. The attached python script loops through
points in a point feature class one at a time to trace downstream of each node.
The trace is used to record HYDROIDs of node being considered along with all
downstream in a table.
Arcpy code for Network Matrix
#Last
updated: 27/11/2015
# Code
loops
through
each
node in the ’ptList ’ to trace
all
nodes
downstream
of it. The
workflow
is as
follows:
# 1. Create a point
feature
layer
with
just
the
current
node
==PAGE:161==
C.1 Setting up Network Matrix in ArcGIS
148
# 2. Trace
downstream
in the ’myNetwork ’geometric
network
that
already
has
Flow
directions
defined. Use the
newly
created
point
layer as input
flag
for
tracing. Save
traced
selections
as
groupLayer
’outNet ’.
# 3. Read
through
selected
nodes in the ’nodeLayer ’ inside ’outNet ’
# 4. Append
HydroID
of
current
node
and
HydroIDs
of
selected
nodes
from
the
trace to ’outList ’. Write
HYDROIDs
also to
textfile
’outf ’
# 5. Delete ’flag ’ and ’outNet ’
# 6. Repeat 1-6 for all
nodes in ’ptList ’. Save
final ’outList ’ to ’
outtable ’ in ArcGIS.
# Based on https :// github.com/marchchad/Trace - StormDrains /blob/master/
Scripts/Trace.py
import arcpy
from arcpy import env
from arcpy.sa import *
#Define
workspaces
and
input
locations
arcpy.env.workspace = r’F:\ s130903\ GISArchive \Network.mdb ’
myNetwork = r’F:\ s130903\GISArchive\Network.mdb\Merged2\ Merged2_Net ’
ptList =r’F:\ s130903\ GISArchive \Network.mdb\ centroid_merged3_Modelled2sel ’
#Define
layer
names
nodeLayer = " centroid_merged3Modelled "
outNetwork = " selectedNet "
tabtemplate = "testtab"
outtable = " FPlist_Trace02 "
nodeID = "HYDROID2"
#Open
text
file to record
resuts
outf=open(outtable+".txt", "a")
#"a" - create if file
does
not
exist or
append
to
existing
outf.write("Writing￿to￿list ...")
print "Writing￿to￿list ..."
#Loop
through
points
i=0
outList
=[]
with
arcpy.da. UpdateCursor (ptList ,nodeID) as
flaglist:
for
pt in
flaglist:
i+=1
print "Run￿no:￿", i
#Create
temporary
layer
with
each pt in
ptlist
currentID = pt [0]
exp = ’[’ +nodeID + ’]￿=￿’+
str (currentID)
flag = "flaglayer"+ str (currentID)
arcpy. MakeFeatureLayer_management (ptList ,flag ,exp)
#For
select
point
trace
downstream
outNet = outNetwork +
str (currentID)
#Trace
geometry
using
temporary
layer
arcpy. TraceGeometricNetwork_management (myNetwork ,outNet ,flag ,"
TRACE_DOWNSTREAM ")
#Record
the
HYDROID
for
selected
nodes in node
layer
selectedusers = arcpy. SearchCursor (outNet+"\\"+nodeLayer)
for
user
in
selectedusers :
DSid = user.getValue(nodeID)
==PAGE:162==
C.2 MATLAB supplements
149
outList.append ([ currentID ,DSid ])
outf.write("\n"+ str (currentID)+"￿"+ str (DSid))
print "Completed￿Run￿no:￿", i, currentID
del user , selectedusers
arcpy. Delete_management (outNet)
arcpy. Delete_management (flag)
outf.close ()
print "End￿of￿simulations "
#Create
Arc
table
and
write
data
#arcpy. CreateTable_management (env.workspace ,outtable , tabtemplate )
tabcursor = arcpy.da. InsertCursor (outtable ,( nodeID , "DSids"))
print "Writing￿table ..."
for
fp in
outList:
tabcursor.insertRow(fp)
del
tabcursor
C.2
MATLAB supplements
C.2.1
getInterpFlow
% Smakhtin ’s Spatial
Interpolation
function [newFlow] = getInterpFlow (oldFDC , newFDC ,oldpts)
%old/newFDC: col1: nprctile , col2: flow
val
%oldpts: npts x ndataseries
where
newFlow
has to be
evaluated
%Check
for
duplicate
flow
vals as
interp1
requires
that
independent
vars
are all
unique
dups = find( d i f f (oldFDC (: ,2))==0);
oldFDC(dups ,2) = oldFDC(dups ,2) -1e -4;
newFlow = 0* oldpts;
% Get
exceedance
of oldpts in
natural
FDC
oldpts_excd = interp1(oldFDC (: ,2),oldFDC (: ,1),oldpts ,’linear ’,’extrap ’);
% Get
flow
value
for
exceedance
in newFDC
newFlow = interp1(newFDC (: ,1),newFDC (: ,2),oldpts_excd ,’linear ’,’extrap ’); %
Get
flow
value
for old
exceedance
from
newFDC
end
==PAGE:163==
C.2 MATLAB supplements
150
C.2.2
Testing CPLEX R
⃝performances
CPLEX R
⃝V12.4 for MATLAB, an optimization toolbox developed by IBM for
solving Linear Program (LP) problems, is chosen as the LP solver for this study
for its computational speed. The toolbox allows the use of multiple algorithms
(dual simplex, primal simplex, interior-point/barrier) to solve an LP using the
function cplexlp. By default, the solver selects an appropriate algorithm based
on its classiﬁcation of the problem. In most cases, the dual simplex optimizer is
chosen by default. (IBM, 2014)
Table 8.1 on page 59 presents some of the relevant settings available for the LP
solver cplexlp that were altered in this study.
Options ’TolFun’ and ’TolRLP-
Fun’ represent the optimality tolerance for simplex algorithms.
The tolerance
determines the sensitivity with which the solver distinguishes small coeﬃcients in
the model and algorithm that have meaning for round oﬀand numerical errors.
Any objective function value less than the tolerance is considered acceptable as
non-negative when deciding whether a tried feasible point is an optimal solution.
Depending on the magnitude and range of coeﬃcients in the objective function
and the constraints, IBM Corporations (2011) suggest setting the tolerance "at
least one order of magnitude smaller than the smallest meaningful problem data
values". Since the weights and the performance metrics chosen can lead to a wide
range of coeﬃcient values, a low tolerance is considered suitable for this study.
(IBM, 2014; IBM Corporations, 2011)
Default setting for algorithm selection and tolerances were altered in this study.
The algorithm and other settings are chosen when calling cplexlp with the de-
sired options. Following are two possible ways of deﬁning desired tolerances and
algorithms:
options1= cplexoptimset (’LargeScale ’, ’off ’, ’Simplex ’, ’on’,’TolFun ’,1e-9,’
TolRLPFun ’,1e -9);
options2= cplexoptimset (’cplex ’);options2.lpmethod = 1;
%0-’auto ’|1-’
primal ’ | 2-’dual ’ | 4-’interior -point ’
x = cplexlp(f,Aineq ,bineq ,Aeq ,beq ,lb ,ub ,x0 ,options1);
The performance of cplexlp was compared to MATLAB’s built-in linprog solvers
to identify suitable settings and units for model inputs, normalization of the per-
formance metrics and outputs. Normalization and input units are important to
ensure that magnitude of number values are suitable for the solver settings.
==PAGE:164==
C.2 MATLAB supplements
151
3560
3570
3580
3590
3600
3610
3620
3630
3640
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Water Deficit [MCM]
Power Deficit [1e10 Wh]
 
 
CP:NoNorm
CP:AnnualNorm
CP:AnnualNorm*100
CP:14yrNorm
CP:14yrNorm*100
LP: 14yrNorm*100
Figure C.1:
Comparision of various
normalization of the performance metrics
to ensure acceptable cplexlp performance.
Following Pareto fronts for multiple
multi-objective optimization (MOO)
runs compare cplexlp performances for
various settings.
Figure C.1 shows
Pareto fronts comparing various nor-
malization of the performance met-
rics to ensure acceptable cplexlp per-
formance. Normalization by 14 years
demand multiplied by 100 to represent
the performance metrics as % of to-
tal demands is selected as it provides
the same results as 2 other normaliza-
tions tested. cplexlp was called with de-
fault settings to solve the optimization
model for existing scenario. Units are [MCM] for water and [GWh] for power.
Note that default cplexlp provides lower values than default linprog for this chosen
normalization.
3.58
3.59
3.6
3.61
3.62
3.63
3.64
x 10
4
50
100
150
200
250
300
Water Deficit [MCM]
Power Deficit [GWh]
Comparison of Units and LP and CPLEX: Existing with 14yrNorm*100
 
 
LP: 10GWh−MCM
CP: 10GWh−MCM
CP: 100GWh−MCM
CP: iGWh−1e4M3
Figure C.2: Comparision of various in-
put units to ensure acceptable cplexlp per-
formance using the 14yrNorm*100 nor-
malization.
Figure C.2 shows Pareto fronts com-
paring various input units to ensure ac-
ceptable cplexlp performance. Water in
[MCM] and power in [10GWh] is cho-
sen as suitable cplexlp was called with
default settings to solve the optimiza-
tion model for existing scenario. Note
that default cplexlp provides higher val-
ues than default linprog for this chosen
normalization.
Figure C.3 shows Pareto fronts com-
paring cplexlp and linprog solvers called
with simplex algorithm.
For cplexlp
, diﬀerent tolerances were also tested.
For all runs, the two solvers give the same solutions when the MOO problem is
run with comparable weights placed on the two performance metrics shows. At
the edges of the Pareto front the solver solutions diﬀer. This is because the prob-
lem is loosely constrained when more weight is placed on one metric, so multiple
optimal solutions exist. It was veriﬁed that the optimal solutions obtained at the
==PAGE:165==
C.2 MATLAB supplements
152
edges have the same objective function value for both solvers. The use of simplex,
more speciﬁcally ’primal’ simplex, ensures that cplexlp and linprog solvers give the
same optimal solutions for a tightly constrained case.
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
x 10
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
Water Deficit [MCM]
Power Deficit [GWh]
Testing CPLEX options Existing with 10GWh−MCM Normalised by 14 years*100
 
 
LP simplex
CP default
CP simplex
CP minTol
CP simplex+minTol
Figure C.3: Comparison of cplexlp and linprog solvers called with simplex algo-
rithm and tolerance settings using the 14yrNorm*100 normalization.
Based on these comparisons, the cplexlp was called with the algorithm set to ‘pri-
mal simplex’ and the tolerances (‘TolFun’ and ‘TolRLPFun’) set to their minimum
values of 1e-9. The primal method is recommended for problems where the num-
ber of variables exceeds the number of constraints signiﬁcantly (IBM, 2014).
==PAGE:166==
Appendix D
Supplements for Results
D.1
Pareto Fronts
Figure D.1: Interpolated isosurfaces at 25th (light) and 90th (dark) quantile in
the FSexcd for BaseTanBdg with mid Environmental Flow Requirement (EFR) and
2030 power demand. Grey scatter plots indicate optimal points from the scenario
runs.
==PAGE:167==
D.1 Pareto Fronts
154
Figure D.2: Optimal points delineated by weighting method run with no EFR (or just requirements of the HDP).
Power is in GWh/yr and water is in MCM/yr. Color gradient indicates the fourth objective of minimizing ﬂood
exceedance.
==PAGE:168==
D.1 Pareto Fronts
155
Figure D.3: Optimal points delineated by weighting method run with low EFR. Power is in GWh/yr and water
is in MCM/yr. Color gradient indicates the fourth objective of minimizing ﬂood exceedance.
==PAGE:169==
D.1 Pareto Fronts
156
Figure D.4: Optimal points delineated by weighting method run with mid EFR. Power is in GWh/yr and water
is in MCM/yr. Color gradient indicates the fourth objective of minimizing ﬂood exceedance.
==PAGE:170==
D.1 Pareto Fronts
157
Figure D.5: Optimal points delineated by weighting method run with high EFR. Power is in GWh/yr and
water is in MCM/yr. Color gradient indicates the fourth objective of minimizing ﬂood exceedance.
==PAGE:171==
D.1 Pareto Fronts
158
Figure D.6: Optimal points delineated by constraining method run with no EFR (or just requirements of the
HDP). Power is in GWh/yr and water is in MCM/yr. Color gradient indicates the fourth objective of minimizing
ﬂood exceedance.
==PAGE:172==
D.1 Pareto Fronts
159
Figure D.7: Comparision of optimal points delineated for the four EFRs using weighting method in all storage
scenarios.
==PAGE:173==
D.1 Pareto Fronts
160
Figure D.8: Comparision of Pareto fronts for diﬀerent scenarios under each EFR.
==PAGE:174==
D.2 Points on the Pareto Front
161
D.2
Points on the Pareto Front
J
F M
A M
J
J
A
S O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Tanahu -EmcD
J
F M
A M
J
J
A
S O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Budhigandaki -EmcD
J
F M
A M
J
J
A
S O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
NalsingGadh -EmcD
J
F M
A M
J
J
A
S O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
Dudhkoshi -EmcD
J
F M
A M
J
J
A
S O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
WestSeti -EmcD
Operation of Existing Kulekhani Reservoir
J
F M
A M
J
J
A
S O
N
D
% of Smax
0
0.5
1
BaseTanBdg -EmcD
.
Existing
Rule Curve
Min Pdef
Min Edef
Min Wdef
Min FSexcd
Compromise
Figure D.9: Average storage levels in the existing Kulekhani reservoirs under six
storage development scenarios. Storage shown as a fraction of maximum storage
capacity of Kulekhani.
==PAGE:175==
Bibliography
Acreman, M. C. & Dunbar, M. J. (2004). Deﬁning environmental river ﬂow re-
quirements – a review. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 8(5), 861–876.
doi:10.5194/hess-8-861-2004
Agri-Business Promotion and Statistics Division. (2013). Statistical information
on Nepalese agriculture: Time series information 1999/2000-2011/2012. Gov-
ernment of Nepal, Ministry of Agricultural Development. Kathmandu, Nepal.
Retrieved from http://www.moad.gov.np/uploads/ﬁles/Year%20book%
202014.pdf
Agri-Business Promotion and Statistics Division. (2014). Statistical information
on Nepalese agriculture 2013/2014. Government of Nepal Ministry of Agri-
cultural Development. Kathmandu, Nepal. Retrieved from http://www.
moad.gov.np/uploads/ﬁles/YearBook%202013.pdf%20http://www.moad.
gov.np/uploads/ﬁles/Year%20book%202014.pdf
Anderson, D., Moggridge, H., Warren, P., & Shucksmith, J. (2014). The impacts of
’run-of-river’ hydropower on the physical and ecological condition of rivers.
Water and Environment Journal, 9. doi:10.1111/wej.12101
Asian Development Bank & International Center for Integrated Mountain De-
velopment. (2006). Environment assessment of Nepal emerging issues and
challenges. Kathmandu, Nepal.
Bajracharya, I. (2015). Assessment of run-of-river hydropower potential and power
supply planning in nepal using hydro resources (Ph.D. Dissertation, Tech-
nischen Universität Wien). Retrieved from http://publik.tuwien.ac.at/ﬁles/
PubDat%7B%5C_%7D238319.pdf
Baxter, R. (1977). Environmental eﬀects of dams and impoundments. Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics, 8(1977), 255–283. doi:10.1146/annurev.
es.08.110177.001351
Bhatt, D., Maskey, S., Babel, M. S., Uhlenbrook, S., & Prasad, K. C. (2014).
Climate trends and impacts on crop production in the Koshi River basin
of Nepal. Regional Environmental Change, 14(4), 1291–1301. doi:10.1007/
s10113-013-0576-6
==PAGE:176==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
163
Biemans, H., Siderius, C., Mishra, A., & Ahmad, B. (2015). Crop-speciﬁc seasonal
estimates of irrigation water demand in South Asia. Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences Discussions, 12(8), 7843–7873. doi:10.5194/hessd-12-7843-
2015
Bondeau, A., Smith, P. C., Zaehle, S., Schaphoﬀ, S., Lucht, W., Cramer, W.,
. . . Smith, B. (2007). Modelling the role of agriculture for the 20th century
global terrestrial carbon balance. Global Change Biology, 13(3), 679–706.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2006.01305.x
Central Bureau of Statistics. (2013). Statistical year book of Nepal 2013. Gov-
ernment of Nepal National Planning Commission Secretariat. Kathmandu,
Nepal. Retrieved from http://cbs.gov.np/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/
Statistical-Year-book-2013%7B%5C_%7DSS.pdf
Cheng, W.-C., Hsu, N.-S., Cheng, W.-M., & Yeh, W. W.-G. (2009). A ﬂow path
model for regional water distribution optimization. Water Resources Re-
search, 45(9), 1–12. doi:10.1029/2009WR007826
Cohon, J. L. (1978). Multiobjective Programming and Planning. doi:10 . 1016 /
S0076-5392(08)60912-1
Cushman, R. M. (1985). Review of ecological eﬀects of rapidly varying ﬂows down-
stream from hydroelectric facilities. North American Journal of Fisheries
Management, 5(December 2014), 330–339. doi:10.1577/1548- 8659(1985)
5<330:ROEEOR>2.0.CO;2
CWE. (2013). West Seti hydropower project in Nepal: Technical evaluation. Kath-
mandu, Nepal.
Davidsen, C. (2015). Hydroeconomic modeling to support integrated water re-
sources management in China (Ph.D Thesis, Denmark Technical Univer-
sity).
Department of Electricity Development. (2015). Issued licenses. Retrieved Septem-
ber 15, 2015, from http://www.doed.gov.np/issued%7B%5C_%7Dlicenses.
php
Department of Hydrology and Meteorology. (2015). Flood Forecasting Project.
Retrieved July 29, 2015, from http://www.dhm.gov.np/
Department of Water Induced Disaster Prevention. (2014). Annual Disaster Re-
view 2013. Government of Nepal Ministry of Irrigation. Kathmandu, Nepal.
Retrieved from http : / / www . dwidp . gov . np / uploads / document / ﬁle /
DWIDP%7B%5C_%7DReview%7B%5C_%7D2013%7B%5C_%7DBook%
7B%5C_%7DAll%7B%5C_%7DPages%7B%5C_%7DFinal.pdf
DesInventar Project Team. (2011). DesInventar - Proﬁle: Nepal. Retrieved August
18, 2015, from http://www.desinventar.net/DesInventar/graphics.jsp
==PAGE:177==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
164
Dhungel, S. K. (2013). Investments in hydropower: Future prospects. In Hy-
dropower investment meeting 2013 (Vol. 1, pp. 1689–1699). Kathmandu,
Nepal: Nepal Electricity Authority. doi:10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.
arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3
Dyson, M., Bergkamp, G., & Scanlon, J. (Eds.). (2003). Flow: The essentials of
environmental ﬂows. Gland, Switzerland: International Union for Conserva-
tion of Nature and Natural Resources. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3
Fang, C., Sharma, R., Favre, R., & Hollema, S. (2007). Food Security Assessment
Mission To Nepal (tech. rep. No. July). Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, World Food Program.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2012). Irrigation water
requirement and water withdrawal by country. Retrieved from http://www.
fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/water%7B%5C_%7Duse%7B%5C_%7Dagr/
IrrigationWaterUse.pdf
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2016). AQUASTAT
database glossary. Retrieved January 11, 2016, from http://www.fao.org/
nr/water/aquastat/data/glossary/search.html
Gabbud, C. & Lane, S. N. (2016). Ecosystem impacts of alpine water intakes for
hydropower: the challenge of sediment management. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Water, 3(1), 41–61. doi:10.1002/wat2.1124
Gautam, D. K. & Dulal, K. (2013). Determination of threshold runoﬀfor ﬂood
warning in nepalese rivers. Journal of Integrated Disaster Risk Management,
3(1), 1–11. doi:10.5595/idrim.2013.0061
Gautam, M. & Acharya, K. (2012, February). Streamﬂow trends in Nepal. Hydro-
logical Sciences Journal, 57(2), 344–357. doi:10.1080/02626667.2011.637042
Gautam, S. (2010). Equitable access and beneﬁt sharing of environmental resources
, goods (tech. rep. No. Policy Brief). UKaid Department for International
Development and International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
Kathmandu, Nepal.
Ghimire, K. (2014). Why West Seti (Draft). Nepal Investment Board. Kathmandu,
Nepal.
Giri, S. (2015a, August). ADB plans to fund 3 power projects. Kathmandu, Nepal.
Retrieved from http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/printedition/news/
2015-08-15/adb-plans-to-fund-3-power-projects.html
Giri, S. (2015b, December). Govt estimates 200mw can be added to grid this year.
Kathmandu, Nepal. Retrieved from http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/
news/2015- 12- 31/govt- estimates- 200mw- can- be- added- to- grid- this-
year.html
==PAGE:178==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
165
Gopal, B. (2013a). Environmental ﬂows: The south asian experience. In Environ-
mental ﬂows an introduction for water resources managers (First, Chap. 7,
pp. 183–197). Delhi, India: National Institute of Ecology. Retrieved from
http://www.aquaticecosystems.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/EFlow-
Prelims.pdf
Gopal, B. (2013b). Methodologies for the assessment of environmental ﬂows. In
Environmental ﬂows an introduction for water resources managers (First,
Chap. 6, pp. 129–182). Delhi, India: National Institute of Ecology.
Hada, R. P. (2001). Kulekhani reservoir: Our operational experience. In B. Hon-
ningsvag, G. Midttomme, K. Repp, K.Vaskinn, & T. Westeren (Eds.), Hy-
dropower in the new millennium: 4th international conference hydropower,
bergen, norway, 20-22 june 2001 (pp. 75–84). CRC Press. Retrieved from
https://books.google.com/books?id=nfGPXqfQ91cC%7B%5C&%7Dpgis=
1
Harou, J. J., Pulido-Velazquez, M., Rosenberg, D. E., Medellín-Azuara, J., Lund,
J. R., & Howitt, R. E. (2009). Hydro-economic models: Concepts, design,
applications, and future prospects. Journal of Hydrology, 375(3-4), 627–643.
doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2009.06.037
Helvetas Swiss Intercooperation. (2011). Nepal’s climate change policies and plans:
Local communities’ perspective Environment and climate series 2011/1. Re-
trieved from http://www.swiss-cooperation.admin.ch/nepal//ressources/
resource%7B%5C_%7Den%7B%5C_%7D208677.pdf
Hoﬀ, H. (2011). Understanding the Nexus. In Background paper for the Bonn 2011
conference: the water, energy and food security nexus. Stockholm, Sweden:
Stockholm Environment Institute.
Hughes, D. A. & Smakhtin, V. U. (1996). Daily ﬂow time series patching or exten-
sion: a spatial interpolation approach based on ﬂow duration curves. Hydro-
logical Sciences Journal, 41(6), 851–871. doi:10.1080/02626669609491555
Hurford, A. P., Huskova, I., Harou, J. J., Wallingford, H. R., Park, H., Lane,
B., & Ox, W. (2013). Using many-objective trade-oﬀanalysis to help dams
promote economic development, protect the poor and enhance ecological
health. Environmental Science and Policy, 38, 72–86. doi:10.1016/j.envsci.
2013.10.003
IBM Corporations. (2011, October). Technote - CPLEX tolerance usage. Retrieved
December 11, 2015, from http://www-01.ibm.com/support/docview.wss?
uid=swg21567945
IBM Corporations. (2014, January). ILOG CPLEX optimization studio 12.6.1.
Retrieved January 5, 2016, from http : / / www - 01 . ibm . com / support /
==PAGE:179==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
166
knowledgecenter/SSSA5P%7B%5C_%7D12.6.1/ilog.odms.cplex.help/
CPLEX/homepages/CPLEX.html?lang=en
International Center for Integrated Mountain Development. (2015). Regional Database
System. Retrieved August 1, 2015, from http://rds.icimod.org/
Ives, J. D., Shrestha, R. B., & Mool, P. K. (2010). Formation of glacial lakes in
the Hindu Kush-Himalayas and GLOF risk assessment. International Centre
for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD). Retrieved from http://
www.unisdr.org/ﬁles/14048%7B%5C_%7DICIMODGLOF.pdf
Japan International Cooperation Agency. (2014). Nationwide master plan study
on storage-type hydroelectric power development in nepal: Strategic Environ-
mental Impact Assessment report. doi:10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2. arXiv:
arXiv:1011.1669v3
Jarvis, A., Reuter, H., Nelson, A., & Guevara, E. (2008). Hole-ﬁlled seamless srtm
data v4. Retrieved July 1, 2015, from http://srtm.csi.cgiar.org
Kabeli Energy Limited. (2013). Environmental Impact Assessment study of Kabeli-
A hydroelectric project (tech. rep. No. October). Kathmandu, Nepal.
Loucks, D. P., Van Beek, E., Stedinger, J. R., Dijkman, J. P., & Villars, M. T.
(2005). Water resources systems planning and management: An introduction
to methods, models and applications. Paris: UNESCO.
Marler, R. T. & Arora, J. S. (2010). The weighted sum method for multi-objective
optimization: New insights. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization,
41(6), 853–862. doi:10.1007/s00158-009-0460-7
Mikosch, T. V., Resnick, S. I., & Robinson, S. M. (2006). Linear Programming:
The simplex method. In Springer series in operations research and ﬁnancial
engineering (Second, Chap. 13, pp. 355–391). New York, U.S.: Springer.
doi:10.1007/0-387-33477-7
Ministry of Energy. (2009). 20-year hydropower development task force report (in
nepali). Government of Nepal.
Ministry of Water Resources. (2001). The hydropower development policy, 2001.
Nalsing Gad Hydropower Development Committee. (2016). Salient features: Nals-
ing Gad hydropower project. Retrieved January 17, 2016, from http://www.
nhpdc.gov.np/salient-features.php
Nepal Electricity Authority. (2014). A Year in Review: Fiscal Year 2013/2014.
Nepal Electricity Authority. Retrieved from http://www.nea.org.np/anual-
report.html
Nepal Electricity Authority. (2015). A year in review: Fiscal year 2014/2015.
Kathmandu, Nepal.
==PAGE:180==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
167
Nepal Electricity Authority. (2016). Powerhouses. Retrieved January 2, 2016, from
http://www.nea.org.np/generation/index.php?page=powerhouse%7B%
5C&%7Dpid=16%7B%5C#%7D
Nepal Hydropower Association. (2009). The Nepal Hydropower Database 2009.
Nepal National Committee of International Committee of Irrigation and Drainage.
(n.d.). Nepal. Retrieved from http://www.icid.org/v%7B%5C_%7Dnepal.
pdf
Ngo, L. L. (2006). Optimising reservoir operation: A case study of the Hoa Binh
reservoir (Ph.D.Thesis, Technical University of Denmark). Retrieved from
http://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/optimising-reservoir-operation(c6a1e1c7-
be25-4af4-a144-941ee1839c66).html
Pereira-cardenal, S. J. (2013). A framework for joint management of regional
water-energy systems (PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark (DTU)).
Poﬀ, N. L., Allan, J. D., Bain, M. B., Karr, J. R., Prestegaard, K. L., Richter,
B. D., . . . Stromberg, J. C. (1997). The natural ﬂow regime: A paradigm
for river conservation and restoration. BioScience, 47(11), 769–784. doi:10.
2307/1313099
Post Report. (2015, June). Tanahu hydropower appoints consultant. Kathmandu,
Nepal. Retrieved from http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2015-
06-30/tanahu-hydropower-appoints-consultant.html
Project Development Department. (2011). Budhi Gandaki hydroelectric project:
Review report. Government of Nepal. Nepal Electric Authority. Kathmandu,
Nepal. Retrieved from http://www.bghep.gov.np/pdf/BGHEP-Review-
Report-2011.pdf
Rai, R., Upadhyay, A., Ojha, C., & Singh, V. (2012). Environmental ﬂows. In The
yamuna river basin (Vol. 66, pp. 357–406). Water Science and Technology
Library. Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-2001-5_12
Rathaur, H. S. (2016, January). Arughat residents unsure of future: Budhi Gan-
daki hydropower project. Dhading, Nepal. Retrieved from http://kathmandupost.
ekantipur.com/news/2016-01-03/arughat-residents-unsure-of-future.html
Richter, B. D., Baumgartner, J. V., Wigington, R., & Braun, D. P. (1997). How
much water does a river need? Freshwater Biology, 37(1), 231–249. doi:10.
1046/j.1365-2427.1997.00153.x
Rijal, N. (2014). Environmental ﬂows in nepal - an evaluation of current practices
and analysis of the upper trishuli -i hydroelectric project narayanhari rijal
(MSc Thesis, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway).
Rijal, N. & Alfredsen, K. (2015). Environmental ﬂows in Nepal - An evaluation
of current practices and an analysis of the Upper Trishuli-I hydroelectric
==PAGE:181==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
168
project. Hydro Nepal: Journal of Water, Energy and Environment, (17), 8–
17.
Rohwer, J., Gerten, D., & Lucht, W. (2006). Development of functional irrigation
types for improved global crop modelling (tech. rep. No. 116). Potsdam Insti-
tute for Climate Impact Research (PIK). Postdam, Germany. doi:10.2312/
PIK.b103-pik1129
Rosenberg, D., Berkes, F., Bodaly, R., Hecky, R., Kelly, C., & Rudd, J. (1997).
Large-scale impacts of hydroelectric development. Environmental Reviews,
5(1), 27–54. doi:10.1139/er-5-1-27
Saltelli, A., Ratto, M., Tarantola, S., & Campolongo, F. (2006). Sensitivity anal-
ysis practices: Strategies for model-based inference. Reliability Engineering
and System Safety, 91(10-11), 1109–1125. doi:10.1016/j.ress.2005.11.014
Searcy, J. (1969). Flow-duration curves (Third). United States Geological Survey
(USGS). doi:10.1002/047147844X.sw321
Shahi, M. (2015). West seti project gets moving after govt nod. Doti, Nepal.
Retrieved from http : / / kathmandupost . ekantipur . com / news / 2015 - 06 -
13/west-seti-project-gets-moving-after-govt-nod.html
Sharma, R. H. & Awal, R. (2013). Hydropower development in Nepal. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 21, 684–693. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.01.013
Sharma, R. D. (n.d.). Kathmandu, Nepal.
Shrestha, A. B., Wake, C. P., Mayewski, P. A., & Dibb, J. E. (1999). Maximum
Temperature Trends in the Himalaya and Its Vicinity : An Analysis Based
on Temperature Records from Nepal for the Period 1971 – 94, 2775–2786.
Shrestha, H. M. (1966). Cadastre of Hydropower resources (Ph.D. Dissertation,
Moscow Power Institute).
Shrestha, M. L. & Shrestha, A. B. (2004). Recent trends and potential climate
change impacts on glacier retreat/lakes in Nepal and potential adaptation. In
Global forum on sustainable development: development and climate change
(November). Paris, Department of Hydrology and Meterology.
Shrestha, S., Khatiwada, M., Babel, M. S., & Parajuli, K. (2014). Impact of Cli-
mate Change on River Flow and Hydropower Production in Kulekhani Hy-
dropower Project of Nepal. Environmental Processes, 1(3), 231–250. doi:10.
1007/s40710-014-0020-z
Singh, B. B. (2016). Land acquisition starts. Jajarkot. Retrieved from http://
kathmandupost . ekantipur . com / printedition / news / 2015 - 01 - 05 / land -
acquisition-starts.html
==PAGE:182==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
169
Singh, D. B. (2013). Storage and pumped storage projects: Demand of the na-
tion. Department of Electricity Development. Retrieved from http://www.
him2013.hidcl.org.np/pdf/Storage-Pumped-Storage-Project-DB-Singh.pdf
Smakhtin, V. U. & Anputhas, M. (2006a). An assessment of environmental ﬂow
requirements of Indian river basins. research report 107. Colombo, Sri Lanka:
International Water Management Institure.
Smakhtin, V. U. & Eriyagama, N. (2008). Developing a software package for global
desktop assessment of environmental ﬂows. Environmental Modelling and
Software, 23, 1396–1406. doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2008.04.002
Smakhtin, V. U. & Shilpakar, R. L. (2005). Planning for environmental water
allocations: An example of hydrology-based assessment in the East Rapti
River, Nepal. Research Report 89. International Water Management Insti-
tute. Colombo, Sri Lanka. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3910/2009.090
Smakhtin, V. U., Shilpakar, R. L., & Hughes, D. a. (2006b). Hydrology-based
assessment of environmental ﬂows: An example from Nepal. Hydrological
Sciences Journal, 51(2), 207–222. doi:10.1623/hysj.51.2.207
Smakhtin, V., Revenga, C., & Doll, P. (2004). A Pilot Global Assessment of En-
vironmental Water Requirements and Scarcity. Water Int. 29(3), 307–317.
doi:10.1080/02508060408691785
Suhardiman, D., Clement, F., & Bharati, L. (2015). Integrated water resources
management in Nepal: key stakeholders’ perceptions and lessons learned.
International Journal of Water Resources Development, (June 2015), 1–17.
doi:10.1080/07900627.2015.1020999
Tanahu Hydropower Limited. (2013). Salient features: Tanahu hydropower project.
Retrieved January 17, 2016, from http://thl.com.np/index.php?nav=salient
Tennant, D. L. (1976). Instream ﬂow regimens for ﬁsh, wildlife, recreation and
related environmental resources. Fisheries, 1(April 2015), 6–10. doi:10.1577/
1548-8446(1976)001<0006:IFRFFW>2.0.CO;2
Thapa, G. (2015). Govt introduces household solar system scheme. Retrieved from
http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.com/news/2015-12-02/govt-introduces-
household-solar-system-scheme.html
Tharme, R. E. (2003). A global perspective on environmental ﬂow assessment:
emerging trends in the development and application of environmental ﬂow
methodologies for rivers. River Research and Applications, 19(5-6), 397–441.
doi:10.1002/rra.736
The Brisbane Declaration. (2007). The Brisbane Declaration: Environmental ﬂows
are essential for freshwater ecosystem health and human well-being. In 10th
international river symposium (pp. 3–6). Brisbane, Australia.
==PAGE:183==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
170
The Himalayan Times. (2016). Load shedding time increases upto 14 hrs a day.
Kathmandu, Nepal. Retrieved from https://thehimalayantimes.com/kathmandu/
now-5050-load-shedding-time-increase-to-12-hrs-a-day/
The Kathmandu Post. (2014, December). Mechanism to project power demand
planned. Kathmandu, Nepal. Retrieved from http://kathmandupost.ekantipur.
com/printedition/news/2015-12-08/mechanism-to-project-power-demand-
planned.html
Water and Energy Commission Secretariat. (2002). Water resources strategy. Kath-
mandu, Nepal. Retrieved from http://www.moen.gov.np/pdf%7B%5C_
%7Dﬁles/water%7B%5C_%7Dresources%7B%5C_%7Dstrategy.pdf
Water and Energy Commission Secretariat. (2005). National water plan - nepal.
Retrieved from http : / / www . moen . gov . np / pdf % 7B % 5C _ %7Dﬁles /
national%7B%5C_%7Dwater%7B%5C_%7Dplan.pdf
Water and Energy Commission Secretariat. (2011). Water resources of Nepal in
the context of climate change. Water and Energy Commission Secretariat
(WECS). Kathmandu, Nepal. Retrieved from http : / / www . moen . gov .
np/pdf%7B%5C_%7Dﬁles/water%7B%5C_%7Dresources%7B%5C_
%7Dstrategy.pdf
Weitz, N., Huber-Lee, A., Nilsson, M., Davis, M., & Hoﬀ, H. (2014). Cross-sectoral
integration in the Sustainable Development Goals: A nexus approach. Stock-
holm Environment Institute. Stockholm, Sweden. Retrieved from https://
www.sei-international.org/mediamanager/documents/Publications/Air-
land-water-resources/SEI-DB-2014-Nexus-SDGs-integration.pdf
Wolfgang, O., Haugstad, A., Mo, B., Gjelsvik, A., Wangensteen, I., & Doorman,
G. (2009, October). Hydro reservoir handling in Norway before and after
deregulation. Energy, 34(10), 1642–1651. doi:10.1016/j.energy.2009.07.025
