==PAGE:1==
MSc Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Integrating line planning and timetabling
Jurgen Hendrikus Franciscus
van den Heuvel (s140022)
Kongens Lyngby, February, 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
This thesis is submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for graduation in the
Master of Science in Engineering in Transport and Logistics at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark.
Author:
Jurgen Hendrikus Franciscus van den Heuvel (s140022)
Supervisor:
Dr. Steven Harrod
Department of Transport
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 116B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.transport.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Learning Objectives
Learning Objectives (general):
An MSc from DTU:
• can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the inter-
action between the various components that make up an issue.
• can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research
at international level to develop ideas and solve problems.
• masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the ca-
pacity to take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a
broader academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety
of possible actions.
• can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes
for solving technological problems.
• can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in
writing.
• is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her
specialist area.
• can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development
and specialisation.
• masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and
has the capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project – including
preparation of timetables, design, solution and documentation.
Learning Objectives (Project Specific):
The candidate(s) from DTU Transport is able to:
• describe the problems of line planning and timetabling and their position in the
railway planning process.
• critically review existing literature on the integration of line planning and time-
tabling in public transport.
• relate existing line planning and timetabling models to business requirements.
• evaluate and assess limitations of existing line planning and timetabling models.
• formulate a new integrated line planning/timetabling model.
• develop an implementation of the problem for a limited real-world case.
• evaluate the results and limitations of the model.
• convey findings in a written report and an oral presentation.
iv
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This thesis addresses the planning phases of line planning and timetabling in railway
planning. Traditionally each are solved independently and consecutively. Only few
studies have investigated the the difficulties and effects of integrating these planning
phases into one, always with focus on passengers.
Here a mathematical optimisation model is formulated for an integrated line plan-
ning and periodic timetabling problem. A cost-optimisation has been chosen to re-
search improvements for passenger operators under public service contractual oblig-
ations. The model includes mixed frequencies of operation for lines and an efficient
cut to limit the impact of higher frequencies. The integrated problem is solved for the
regional network of Sjælland, Denmark, operated by Danske Statsbaner (DSB).
New line plans are found with lower costs compared to current operation. New
routes are suggested for connecting Northern Sjælland with direct connections to the
west and south, giving the possibility for more direct connections to the airport from
western and southern Sjælland.
Keywords: Railway planning, line planning, periodic event scheduling, problem
integration
vi
==PAGE:7==
Resumé
Dette projekt omhandler planlægningsfaserne linjeplanlægning og køreplanlægning
indenfor jernbaneplanlægning. Traditionelt løses hvert problem for sig og sekventi-
elt. Kun få studier har undersøgt vanskeligheder og effekterne af en kombination af
planlægningsfaserne med fokus på passagererne.
En matematisk optimeringsmodel formuleres til integration af linjeplanlægning og
periodisk køreplanlægning. Hovedmålet er økonomisk optimering for at undersøge
forbedringer for passageroperatører, som arbejder under kontrakter baseret på offent-
lig service. Modellen inkluderer variabel frekvens af drift og er udstyrt med en cut som
på effektiv måde begrænser frekvensens indflydelse på løsningstider. Det kombine-
rede problem løses for DSBs regionaltog på Sjælland.
Der genereres nye linjeplaner med lavere omkostninger sammenlignet med dagens
trafik. Nye ruter foreslås for at sammenbinde Kystbanen med resten af Sjælland, hvil-
ket også skaber potentiale for flere direkte forbindelser til og fra lufthavnen.
Nøgleord: Jernbaneplanlægning, linjeplanlægning, periodic event scheduling, pro-
blemkombination
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Contents
1. Introduction
1
2. Line planning
3
3. Timetabling
23
4. Integration of line planning and timetabling
35
5. Line planning and timetabling at DSB
59
6. Conclusion and future extensions
73
A. Results
79
B. Input parameters
98
C. Station abbreviations
104
ix
==PAGE:10==
Acronyms
ilpttp Integrated Line Planning and Timetabling Problem.
lpp Line Planning Problem.
pesp Periodic Event Scheduling Problem.
rscp Rolling Stock Circulation Problem.
vrp Vehicle Routing Problem.
x
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Strategic railway planning
A smoothly operating railway system requires different aspects of the operation to
be thoroughly organised (and planned). Passenger operators will typically work with
a timetable, but the underlying decisions for a timetable are manifold. Most time-
tables are organised in different lines. Rolling stock needs to be appointed to run the
trains and they also require crew. All these different parts of the operation are usually
planned independent of each other and in a sequential order as shown in Figure 1.1,
despite that they are tightly related and highly dependent on each other in the daily
operation.
All of the phases in the planning process can and have been analysed and planned
with combinatorial optimisation. An overview of mathematical models for all ma-
jor stages of railway planning can be found in Caprara, Kroon, Monaci, Peeters, and
Toth (2007). All of the proposed mathematical optimisation models for the individual
problems are proven to be NP-hard. The sequential order decomposes the process and
makes it possible to solve all phases individually by means of optimisation or by using
heuristics to find good solutions. Each phase’s solution services as the input for the
next planning phase. If a solution obtained from a previous phase results in an infeas-
1
==PAGE:12==
Introduction
Network design
Line Planning
Timetabling
Train platforming
Rolling stock circulation
Train unit shunting
Crew scheduling
Figure 1.1.: The sequential planning process in railway operation. With red marking is the
topic of this thesis.
ible problem at the next phase, the previous phase has to be revisited to find a new
(and possibly worse) solution. The complexity of each step gives the impression that
it would be difficult if not impossible to solve the entire operational planning system
or a subset thereof simultaneously.
The sequential approach can be seen as a greedy approach to making the planning
decisions (Schöbel, 2015). It can also be shown that solutions deriving from sequen-
tially solving a subset of these planning phases can be arbitrarily bad compared to
the optimal solution when the problems are solved simultaneously and as such it is
promising to integrate different steps of the planning process into one. Improvement
has been gained by integrating vehicle and crew scheduling for busses as opposed to
traditional sequential planning (Haase, Desaulniers, & Desrosiers, 2001).
The rest of this thesis will propose a model that integrates line planning and time-
tabling in one phase to find better solutions than can be obtained by sequentially solv-
ing the two problems.
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Line planning
The Line Planning Problem (lpp) is the problem of deciding which lines to operate and
with which frequencies. By a line is meant the sequence of stations that are operated
together with its frequency. With a service one specific departure of the line is meant.
Figure 2.1 gives examples of lines. Line 1 runs from Helsingør and stops at all inter-
mediate stations. A line can also cover only part of the trajectory as in lines 2, 3 and
4. A line need not stop at all stations it passes, which is illustrated by line 5.
The frequency tells us how often the same line is operated within a predetermined
time frame. If the time frame is one hour, then the frequency is the number of trains
per hour. Especially in larger networks with many stations¹ the number of possible
lines outnumbers the possibilities to evaluate and most models therefore use a line
pool, a predefined set of well-chosen lines to choose a solution from.
Line plans are usually evaluated either with an economical (operational costs) or
with a passenger-oriented goal. Multi-objective models combining these two approaches
also exist, but it must be noted that the objectives are in direct conflict with each other
(Schachtebeck, Goerigk, & Schöbel, 2012). This makes the choice of weights for the dif-
ferent goals in multi-objective models highly influential on the resulting plans.
Though pure cost-minimising models result in cheaper solutions for the operator,
¹Or halting places when planning bus lines.
3
==PAGE:14==
Line planning
Klampenborg
Hellerup
Østerport
Nørreport
København H
Line 1
Line 2
Line 3
Line 4
Line 5
Figure 2.1.: Five examples of lines on the network between Helsingør and Copenhagen.
these solutions often offer a low or insufficient service level for the passengers making
these models less interesting for passenger service operators. This can be improved
by including constraints ensuring a certain minimum service level, such as operation
frequency between two stations.
In recent years, more focus has been given to passenger-oriented models. Different
targets have been set for passenger service. Some models maximise the number of
direct passengers or minimise the number of transfers passengers have to make. Both
approaches minimise the inconvenience passengers experience when changing trains.
Other models minimise the total travel time of all passengers combined. To limit the
costs, a budget constraint is usually included in passenger-oriented models.
Claessens, van Dijk, and Zwaneveld (1998) have noted that a passenger approach,
which maximises the number of direct passengers, often results in long routes. These
long routes cause resulting timetables to be less robust. But more importantly than
the influence of long routes, they notice the models result in a need for long trains.
This is due to that a smaller part of the route traverses through a densely populated
area with many passengers, even though most of the route runs in remote areas with
4
==PAGE:15==
Line planning
few passengers. To accommodate all passengers the train needs to adapt the capacity
for the busiest part of the line, and thus there is a large underutilisation on most of
the line. This gives high operational costs.
The Claessens et al. model aims at finding lines for different train types, InterCity
(IC), InterRegional (IR) and AglomerativeRegional (AR). Apart from the lines, it also
decides on the length of the trains and takes considerations from the Rolling Stock
Circulation Problem (rscp) into account. It uses the following basic assumptions.
Assumptions (Claessens et al., 1998)
• Lines are symmetric.
• Passenger demand is deterministic.
• Passenger distribution is known.
The first assumption is often used. It means that if a line in one direction is included,
than the same line (i. e. same stopping pattern and frequency) is also operated in the
reverse direction. This provides an even service in both directions and conforms to
most passengers’ expectations. The passenger routes and distribution among different
train classes (InterCity, Regional) are determined with a system-split procedure (see
Bouma & Oltrogge, 1994).
Also Goossens, van Hoesel, and Kroon (2004) use cost-optimisation as the objective
for lpp. The assumptions used include the same as in Claessens et al. (1998) and more.
The main difference is found in the solution method that is chosen to solve the problem.
Again, passenger demand is known and the passengers are distributed among the
different train types beforehand. Due to the deterministic nature of the problem that
is left, the problem can be decomposed into several problems, one for each class of
train. Then for each of these decomposed problems, it can be assumed that a line stops
5
==PAGE:16==
Line planning
Assumptions (Goossens et al., 2004)
• Lines are symmetric.
• Rolling stock is pre-allocated to a specific line.
• Rolling stock for a single line is identical.
• Passenger demand is deterministic.
• Passenger distribution is known.
• Train stops at all intermediate stops.
at all intermediate stations, where stations from other (lower) train classes are ignored.
A different objective is used by Bussieck, Kreuzer, and Zimmermann (1996). Their
model reduces passenger inconvenience, by maximising the number of direct passen-
gers. The same idea is presented in Caprara et al. (2007). Bussieck et al. (1996) focus
on solving the model with a Branch & Cut method and they present several different
valid inequalities that can be added at different stages in the solution process. The
model is applied to the IC and IR network of Deutsche Bahn in Germany.
Assumptions (Bussieck et al., 1996; Caprara et al., 2007)
• Passenger demand is deterministic.
• Passenger distribution known.
• Passengers choose shortest path, either travel time or minimum transfers.
Borndörfer, Grötschel, and Pfetsch (2007) give a new perspective on passenger in-
convenience. They argue that travel time can be correctly estimated, despite the fact
that the timetable is not yet known at this point. The travel time and the operational
costs are used as the objective in their model. The model is solved for a multi-modal
transport network in a larger German city.
In order to estimate travel time, Borndörfer et al. (2007) have to include passenger
6
==PAGE:17==
2.1 A formal definition
Assumptions (Borndörfer et al., 2007; Schöbel & Scholl, 2006)
• Passenger demand is deterministic
• Passengers travel along the fastest route from origin to destination.
routing in the model. This part of the model is rather limited. Passengers are not di-
vided beforehand using the system-split method, but they choose the shortest (fastest)
path within the generated line plan. The demand is again fixed and taken from an
OD-matrix.
The impact of transfers on the travel time are ignored by Borndörfer et al. (2007).
The authors fear that including them makes the model degenerate and too complex
to solve. An attempt to include transfers in the estimation of travel time has however
been made by Schöbel and Scholl (2006). Here a time penalty for each transfer is in-
cluded in the objective function.
In the next part a number of the aforementioned line planning models will be dis-
cussed more deeply. To allow for a technical discussion of different models, we will
first introduce a uniform formal notation, so that different models can be compared
with each other more easily. When models are quoted from the literature the notation
will be adapted to the notation introduced here to ease comparison of the models.
2.1
A formal definition
Given is a transport network G = (V, E) with stations V and connections (rails) E
between the stations. A line l is defined as a path in G and fl is the frequency with
which line l is operated. The frequency is determined within a predefined time interval
T of operation. Each operation of a line l has a capacity kl. Operating a line comes at a
cost of ql. Since the lpp is one of the earliest planning phases, the exact costs cannot be
7
==PAGE:18==
Line planning
known at this stage, but estimates are made based on the length of the line, its capacity
or number of wagons, and the riding time of a line. The costs can also be dependent
on the frequency of operation. A line concept (L, f, k, q) is the collection of all lines
considered with their respective frequencies, capacities and costs.
A feasible line plan must provide enough connections to fulfil the demand of trav-
elling passengers. This can be measured for each connection e ∈E individually or
for each origin-destination pair (v, w) ∈W with positive demand, where W is the
origin-destination matrix. We use we, e ∈E for the number of passengers travelling
along edge e ∈E within time period T and wuv for the number of passengers with
origin u ∈V and destination v ∈V within the time frame T. Alternatively if origin-
destination data is available, the line plan should provide a connection (possibly with
transfers) for every origin-destination pair with positive demand, so that all passen-
gers can travel to their destinations. With the use of an origin destination matrix W,
the weights we of each edge need to be estimated with a traffic assignment model.
As mentioned above most models for the lpp either minimise the costs as their ob-
jective or have a budget constraint to limit the costs. The costs can only be estimated.
We will use ql for the cost of line l if the costs are independent of the frequency of
operation. Otherwise we will use qi for i = (l, fl, kl) ∈L × F × C if the costs are
dependent on frequency and/or the capacity. Using the index i gives the possibility of
including more advanced (non-linear) cost-frequency relations without losing linear-
ity of the model. It can be easily seen that this increases the number of variables from
|L| to |I| = |L| |F| |C|. The costs for a line l are zero if it is not operated (fl = 0).
This leads to the objective (2.1) or the budget constraint (2.2) if the costs are inde-
8
==PAGE:19==
2.1 A formal definition
pendent of frequency and to (2.3) and (2.4) if they are dependent.
min
∑
l∈L
qlfl
(2.1)
∑
l∈L
qlfl ≤B
(2.2)
min
∑
i∈I
qi
(2.3)
∑
i∈I
qi ≤B
(2.4)
where B > 0 is a limit on the budget.
Some models maximise the number of direct passengers for which dlp is used. Let
dlp, l ∈L, p = (u, v) ∈P ⊆V × V
(2.5)
denote the number of direct passengers between origin-destination pair p = (u, v)
travelling with line, l ∈L, i. e. passengers for whom there is one line that goes from
their origin to their destination.
Some constraints are used in nearly all of the line planning models, such as fulfil-
ment of passenger demand. The most basic constraints are given here.
A feasible line plan has enough capacity to carry all passengers, which can be ex-
pressed with constraint (2.6).
∑
l∈L|e∈El
klfl ≥we
∀e ∈E
(2.6)
9
==PAGE:20==
Line planning
The service level is sometimes defined as the frequency of operation. Many pas-
senger operators want (or are required) to offer a minimum frequency of departures
between two stations. The departures do not have to belong to the exact same line. On
the other hand, a maximum frequency of departures from a station and a maximum
frequency along an edge can be imposed to provide a plan in which all chosen lines
can be scheduled and operated even on high dense parts of the network. Enforcing
maximum frequencies can however not guarantee that the resulting line plan is oper-
able, but it filters out many of those plans. In Bussieck et al. (1996) the frequency of
operation along each edge is fixed beforehand.
The frequencies can be set for each edge individually with (2.7).
fmin
e
≤
∑
l∈L|e∈El
fl ≤fmax
e
∀e ∈E
(2.7)
If all lines are operated with a homogeneous fleet with the same capacity, than the
required capacity in constraint (2.6) can also be expressed as a minimum frequency
and thus be modelled with (2.7) with fmin
e
= ⌈we
k ⌉(Schöbel, 2012). In a similar way a
frequency constraint can be applied to stations to limit the number of trains stopping
at a station 2.8.
∑
l∈L|v∈Vl
fl ≤fmax
v
∀v ∈V
(2.8)
Constraint (2.8) still allows for more lines to pass through the station without stopping.
10
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Basic models
2.2
Basic models
2.2.0.1 Caprara et al. (2007)
Caprara et al. (2007) gives a model for the lpp with a multi-criteria objective simultan-
eously maximising the number of direct passengers and minimising the operational
costs. In the model Caprara et al. allow for different capacities for each line. This may
be needed if different rolling stock is available or coupling multiple train units. In
order to represent the costs correctly, the index i ∈I is introduced for the specific
combination of line, capacity, and frequency (as introduced above). Each line l ∈L is
then indexed with i ∈I. The variables xi equal 1 if combination i = (l, fl, kl) is used
and 0 otherwise. The model is repeated here as model 2.2.
The objective (2.9) is to maximise the number of direct passengers while minimising
the operational costs. Here a1 and a2 are chosen weights for the two objectives. Con-
straint (2.10) makes sure only one combination of frequency and capacity is chosen
for every line. (2.11) ensures that all passengers can be carried. Constraint (2.12) lim-
its the number of direct passengers to the available capacity between each origin-
destination pair p ∈P. The last constraint (2.13) makes sure that if there are no pas-
sengers between a pair of stations, that the model does not count any non-existent
direct passengers. (2.14) and (2.15) give the domain of the variables.
The model does not include any operational restrictions. It could be extended with
operational constraints such as 2.7 and 2.8.
2.2.1
Claessens et al. (1998)
The model defined by Claessens et al. (1998) is capable of creating a line plan for dif-
ferent classes of trains. Unlike in Caprara et al.’s model, trains do not have to stop at
11
==PAGE:22==
Line planning
Notation 2.1:
(for model 2.2)
Sets
L
the line pool.
E
the edges of the network graph.
El
{e ∈E | l covers e}.
Ep
{e ∈E | e is on shortest path between the origin and destination of p ∈P}.
P
the origin-destination pairs.
I
the index for combination i = (l, f, k) ∈L × F × C.
Parameters
we
the passenger demand along edge e ∈E.
fi
the frequency of index i ∈I.
ki
the capacity of index i ∈I.
qi
the costs of index i ∈I.
li
the line of index i ∈I.
wp
the passenger demand for origin-destination pair p ∈P.
ρ1, ρ2
weights for the objective components.
Variables
xi ∈B
whether combination i ∈I is chosen.
dlp ∈Z
the number of direct passengers with line l ∈L for the pair p ∈P.
12
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Basic models
Model 2.2: lpp (Caprara et al., 2007)
(with notation 2.1)
max ρ1
∑
l∈L
dlp −ρ2
∑
i∈I
qixi
(2.9)
subject to
∑
i∈I|li=l
xi ≤1
∀l ∈L
(2.10)
∑
i∈I|e∈El
fikixi ≥we
∀e ∈E
(2.11)
∑
p∈P|e∈Ep
dlp ≤
∑
i∈I|li=l
fikixi
∀l ∈L, e ∈El
(2.12)
∑
l∈L|Ep⊂El
dlp ≤wp
∀p ∈P
(2.13)
xi ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈I
(2.14)
dlp ≥0
∀l ∈L, p ∈P
(2.15)
every intermediate station along the way. In order to achieve this, they extend the set
E so that direct edges are inserted between stations of the same class, see an example
in Figure 2.2.
IC
IR
IR
IC
Figure 2.2.: Direct connections between stations of the same class (in red, dashed) are added
to the set E in the Claessens, van Dijk, and Zwaneveld (1998) model. This models
the possibility of not stopping at the IR stations in between.
For the new types the set T is introduced. The model is further flexible in deciding
the length of the trains, counted in number of carriages (nc). notation 2.3 gives an
overview of new notation that is used in model 2.4.
In the model it is assumed that V the set of stations is strictly ordered. This is always
13
==PAGE:24==
Line planning
Notation 2.3:
(for model 2.4)
Sets
T
classes of lines, e. g. IC, IR,….
Ct
the set of possible number of carriages for one train of type t ∈T.
Parameters
nc
the number of cars.
cfixt
fixed costs for running a line of type t ∈T.
ckmt
cost for one carriage of type t ∈T for one km.
trkmt
cost for one train (locomotive) of type t ∈T for one km.
dlt
uv
distance between station u ∈V and v ∈V on line l ∈L of type t ∈T.
ccapt
capacity of one carriage of type t ∈T.
Variables
xlftnc
uv





1
if line l of type t is chosen with frequency f and nc carriages
between station u and v.
0
otherwise.
.
14
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Basic models
possible, as even an alphabetical ordering of the station will suffice.
Model 2.4: lpp (Claessens et al., 1998)
(with notation 2.3)
min
∑
l∈L
∑
t∈T
∑
f∈F
∑
nc∈Ct
∑
u∈V
∑
v∈V |v>u
(
cfixt
⌈
cplt
uvf
⌉
cxltfnc
uv
+ dlt
uvf (ckmtnc + trkmt) xltfnc
uv
)
(2.16)
subject to
∑
l∈L
∑
t∈T
∑
f∈F
∑
nc∈Ct
∑
u∈V
∑
v∈V |v>u
ilt
uveccaptfncxltfnc
uv
≥we
∀e ∈E
(2.17)
fmin
e
≤
∑
l∈L
∑
t∈T
∑
f∈F
∑
nc∈Ct
∑
u∈V
∑
v∈V
v>u
ilt
uvefxltfnc
uv
≤fmax
e
∀e ∈E
(2.18)
∑
f∈F
∑
nc∈Ct
xltfnc
uv
≤1
∀u, v ∈V, v > u
(2.19)
xltfnc
uv
∈B
∀l ∈L, f ∈F, t ∈T,
(2.20)
nc ∈Ct, u, v ∈V
The objective (2.16) minimises the costs. The costs are calculated in three parts:
the fixed costs for including a line, the variable costs per carriage kilometre and the
variable costs per train kilometre.
Constraint (2.17) ensures enough capacity for every edge in the network. This in-
cludes the artificial fast edges between larger stations. This can be done because the
model assumes that the passenger routes are fixed and thus the demand for the fast
connection is known beforehand independent of the resulting line plan.
Constraint (2.18) gives lower and upper bounds on the frequencies of operation.
(2.19) ensures that maximum one combination of line, type, frequency and length is
used between each pair of stations. All variables are binary (2.20).
It can be said that model 2.4 is very flexible in the amount of decisions it can take,
15
==PAGE:26==
Line planning
but it also requires a vast amount of variables: |L| |F| |T| |C| 2(|V | −1). Much of the
authors’ work is devoted to reducing the number of variables and constraints and by
formulating valid inequalities. The model is solved independently for each train type
t ∈T in a hierarchical way.
2.2.2
Minimising travel time
Schöbel and Scholl (2006) propose a new passenger-oriented model where they try
to minimise the total travel time. They also include a time penalty for every transfer.
Since in the line planning phase no precise timetable nor a precise passenger routing
is known, this value can only be estimated. Their problem is modelled with what they
call a change and go graph, which simultaneously models the lines and the passenger
flows. A similar approach is used by Bull, Lusby, and Larsen (2015).
The approach allows for the passenger flows to be dependent on the chosen lines. It
is assumed that passengers will always choose the shortest travel time. This can give
better estimates for the effects of a line plan on passenger behaviour in real-world
cases. The complexity of the problem increases with the new graph structure, and
different solution methods have been proposed by Schöbel and Scholl (2006) and Bull
et al. (2015) based on iterative approaches.
The change & go graph ¯G = ( ¯V , ¯E) is defined to contain the following elements.
The set of nodes consists of a node for every origin and every destination station.
VOD = {(v, 0) | (u, v) ∈W or (v, u) ∈W}
These nodes will function as sources and sinks for passenger flows. It also contains
a node for every station-line combination. If a line goes through a particular station,
16
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Basic models
this is represented by a node in the change & go graph.
VCG = {(v, l) ∈V × L | v ∈Vl}
Now ¯V = VOD∪VCG. The set ¯E contains change edges, go edges and origin-destination
edges: ¯E = Echange ∪Ego ∪EOD. The origin-destination edges model the passengers
arriving at a station by means of any of the lines to go to their destination (sink) or,
in case of an origin, to start their journey (from a source).
EOD = {((v, 0), (v, l)) ∈VOD × VCG} ∪{((v, l), (v, 0)) ∈VCG × VOD}
The change edges model the passengers’ possibility to switch lines at a station, that is
operated by more than one line.
Echange = {((v, l1), (v, l2)) ∈VCG × VCG}
Lastly, the go edges model driving arcs of a line between stations.
Ego = {((u, l), (v, l)) ∈VCG × VCG | (u, v) ∈E}
A small example of a network and the corresponding change & go graph is given in
Figure 2.3.
17
==PAGE:28==
Line planning
A
E
B
C
D
Line 1
Line 2
(a) An example network G = (V, E). All pairs of stations form an origin-destination pair with
positive demand.
A0
A1
B0
B1
E1
E2
D0
D2
C0
C2
(b) A change & go graph ¯G = ( ¯V , ¯E) belonging to the network G above.
Figure 2.3.: An example of a network with four stations and its corresponding change & go
graph. Black denotes the go-arcs, brown the change-arcs, and green is used to con-
nect the sources and sinks of the passenger flows.
18
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Basic models
To present the model, the following notation in notation 2.5 is needed additional to
previously used notation.
Notation 2.5:
(for model 2.6)
Parameters
te
travel time for edge e ∈¯E.
θ
the node-arc incidence matrix of ¯G.
bi
uv

















wuv
if i = (u, 0)
−wuv
if i = (v, 0)
0
else
.
The matrix buv is the composition of the column vectors bi
uv as defined in nota-
tion 2.5. The model is given in model 2.6.
The objective (2.21) minimises the travel time of all passengers. Constraint (2.22)
ensures that all passengers can be transported. (2.23) defines the passenger flows
from source (origin) to sink (destination). Together with the objective this results in a
shortest path routing of passengers. Constraint (2.24) gives a budget limit for the line
plan and (2.25) defines an upper bound on the amount of traffic along each edge. (2.26)
and (2.27) state the variables of the model.
The model is solved using column generation where the sub-problem is used to find
a new line to add to the model. The lines are however not constructed dynamically in
19
==PAGE:30==
Line planning
Model 2.6: lpp with minimum travel time (Schöbel & Scholl, 2006)
min
∑
(u,v)∈W
∑
e∈¯E
texe
uv
(2.21)
subject to
1
kl
∑
(u,v)∈W
xe
uv ≤fl
∀l ∈L, e ∈El
(2.22)
θxe
uv = buv
∀(u, v) ∈W
(2.23)
∑
l∈L
qlfl ≤B
(2.24)
∑
l∈L|e∈El
fl ≤fmax
e
∀e ∈E
(2.25)
xe
uv ∈N0
∀(u, v) ∈W, e ∈¯E
(2.26)
fl ∈N0
∀l ∈L
(2.27)
20
==PAGE:31==
2.3 The line pool
each generation, but are still chosen from a predefined line pool L. This reduces the
pricing problem to evaluating the added value of each of the remaining lines one by
one.
2.3
The line pool
All of the models described thus far used a line pool L to find a line plan. This line pool
is generally constructed by an expert team based on current practice. It is however also
possible to generate a line pool using an optimisation model or heuristic approaches.
This can be beneficial in case a completely new line design is wanted without restrict-
ing the planner to previous line plans. It is beyond the scope of this thesis to include
such a line generating model. The reader is referred to Borndörfer et al. (2007) for an
exact mathematical approach or Bull et al. (2015) for investigating slight changes to
an existing line pool.
21
==PAGE:32==
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Timetabling
The next step in the planning process is the design of a precise timetable. Many dif-
ferent sorts of timetables with different structural properties exist, each with its own
benefits and drawbacks. An overview and analysis of different timetable classes can
be found in Liebchen (2006) and Schittenhelm (2013). Here only the most important
categories will be briefly described.
Timetables can be divided in non-periodic and periodic timetables. In non-periodic
timetables, each trip is scheduled individually. Often there are no particular structures
in non-periodic timetables, but, as Schittenhelm (2013) notes, symmetric non-periodic
timetables do exist. This occurs if every scheduled trip is symmetric in both directions,
but is not scheduled conforming a periodic departure throughout the day. Non-periodic
timetables can be planned according to the varying demand over the day and can
typically utilise available resources effectively.
On the other hand there are periodic timetables, where trips are scheduled with a
fixed period interval, also called a pattern. This pattern can shift throughout the day,
e. g. more trains are run in rush hours, decreasing the interval between two departures.
Periodic timetables can further be subdivided according to the presence or absence of
particular properties into symmetric periodic timetables and integrated fixed interval
timetables (IFIT).
23
==PAGE:34==
Timetabling
Symmetric timetables are build around a symmetry axis. They have the same run-
ning and waiting times in both directions of operation. Transfer times between two
lines are also the same in both directions and the timetables can more easily be planned
according to important transfers. The property of symmetry restricts the number of
possible timetables significantly and can impact the costs and travel time negatively.
Many operators prefer symmetric timetables over non-symmetric timetables nonethe-
less. The symmetry axis of the timetable can be placed anywhere on the network.
Integrated fixed interval timetables are symmetric periodic timetables where the sym-
metry axis is placed at a major station: the transfer hub. All arriving and departing
trains are scheduled to be at the hub at the same time between all lines, allowing for
short transfer times. This class of timetables has been applied in different European
countries, most notably Switzerland (Avelino, te Brömmelstroet, & Hulster, 2006). IFIT
is generally regarded to provide good passenger service. It must be noted though that
IFIT puts a large pressure on track capacity and more importantly station capacity of
the hubs around the meeting time, because all trains have to be present at the hub at
the same time and arrive and leave shortly after each other. IFIT schedules are bene-
ficial for scheduling connection public transport at the hubs.
This thesis will only focus on periodic timetables, mostly because this has become
the standard practice in Europe and is preferred by the operators. As a first start, we
will work with non-symmetric periodic timetables. In the following, an optimisation
model is given that is commonly used in research to create periodic timetables.
3.1
Periodic Event Scheduling
The most widely used problem formulation for finding a periodic timetable in a given
network that is feasible with respect to safety regulations and optimal with respect
24
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Periodic Event Scheduling
to objective criteria is called the Periodic Event Scheduling Problem (pesp). Pesp was
first formulated by Serafini and Ukovich (1989) and later became popular for railway
timetabling (see for example Schrijver & Steenbeek, 1993). The model presented in this
section is taken from Liebchen (2006).
For a model for pesp we have a given transport network G = (V, E). This network
is the same network as was used to find a line plan in chapter 2. Further the lines that
will be operated (the line plan) is assumed to be known at this stage. The timetable is
divided in individual events and it is the goal of pesp to assign a time to each of these
event. Since the timetable is periodic, each event occurs every period at the same time
and it is sufficient to make a timetable for only one time frame T. This means every
event will be assigned a value in [0, T).
If the number of trains operated in the schedule needs to be changed throughout
the day, it can be handled in different ways. i) Different schedules are made for peak
and off-peak hours. This will make the schedule less passenger-friendly and can cause
troubles in planning the rolling stock and crew for the overlap periods. ii) A schedule
is made for off-peak hours. Subsequently additional trains are added for peak hours.
It is not known beforehand if adding the necessary extra trains will be possible. iii) A
schedule is made for peak hours. Some departures are removed for non-peak hours
and may have unbalanced lines in non-peak hours. This will create a feasible solution,
but may be suboptimal for the off-peak hours. In this thesis option iii will be chosen
because of its practical application as well as to limit the problem to finding a feasible
timetable for only one period T.
3.1.1
Event-activity network
pesp models the events and constraints with a graph called an event-activity network.
Events are represented by nodes in the network (N). There are basically two types
25
==PAGE:36==
Timetabling
of events (E): arrival at a station (Earr) and departure (Edep) from a station, thus E is
defined as
E := Earr ∪Edep.
If more than one line services a station, then each line’s arrival is different event and is
modelled with a different node. In the examples that follow below we use the notation
A for an arrival event and D for a departure event.
Constraints of the model are represented by arcs (A) in the event-activity network.
The constraints regulate the time difference between events and this includes all rail-
way specific safety requirements and restrictions. All constraints have a lower bound
(l) and an upper bound (u) for the time it can take.
Driving times
The driving times (or running times) between a departure from a
station until the arrival at the next station is modelled with driving arcs. The driving
time can be fixed if desired (l = u) or a range of allowed driving times can be given if
flexibility in the model is wanted.
Waiting times
With waiting times are meant the dwelling times at stations. These
arcs run from an arrival at a station to the departure from that same station. The
minimum waiting time l is the time needed to let passengers board on and off the
train. The maximum waiting time u is the time that is still regarded as acceptable by
the train company, without letting passengers become impatient.
Safety distance
A distance between two consecutive trains is needed for safe opera-
tion. This distance is influenced mainly by the structure of signal blocks on the railway
network, but also by the properties of the rolling stock used, such as acceleration and
deceleration speed. Rather than expressing the safety requirement as a distance, it can
be converted to a time distance between two trains, the headway. Since the model does
26
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Periodic Event Scheduling
not take all details of the safety distance into account, the minimum headway in the
event-activity network will usually be larger than strictly necessary to guarantee safe
operation.
Let h be the minimum headway between two departures. Only one headway arc
in one direction is needed. The lower bound is exactly the minimum headway h. The
upper bound is T −h and ensures that there is enough headway if the events are
scheduled in reverse order. Headway arcs are placed between departure events from
different lines at the same station after which trains have to use the same track.
The three types of constraints driving, waiting and safety are illustrated in Fig-
ure 3.1.
Transfers
For some stations the operator might want to offer the passengers an
explicit transfer option. The location of transfers is decided beforehand. In order for
the transfer to be effective, the transfer time should not be too large. To ensure that
the trains arrive sufficiently close to each other at the station, transfer arcs can be used
from the arrival at a station from one line to the departure at the same station with
a different line. The lower bound on transfer arcs is the minimum time required for
passengers to change trains. The upper bound is decided by the company and reflects
what is accepted as a transfer time. Figure 3.2 shows the use of the transfer arc.
Balanced service
If different lines partly operate between the same stations, it may
be desired that the lines give a balanced service on the shared section. This can be
achieved by inserting balancing arcs with interval [ T
n , T −T
n ] where n is the num-
ber of lines that need to be balanced. It is assumed that T
n ≥h, because otherwise
the problem becomes infeasible, even without a balanced service. An example of a
balancing arc is given in Figure 3.3.
27
==PAGE:38==
Timetabling
Lejre
Roskilde
Trekroner
Viby Sj
Lejre
Trekroner
Line 1
D
A
[l1, u1]
D
[l2, u2]
A
[l3, u3]
A
D
[l5, u5]
A
[l6, u6]
Line 2
D
[l4, u4]
[h, T −h]
Viby Sj
Roskilde
Figure 3.1.: Modelling the basic constraints of running time (black), dwelling time (blue) and
minimum headways (red). ‘A’ are arrival events and ‘D’ are departure events. li
and ui are lower and upper bounds for the constraint arcs.
Symmetric timetables
Symmetric timetables have become popular by some oper-
ators, such as SBB (Switzerland) and DB (Germany). The property of symmetry means
that any two lines in opposite direction meet at the same point in time, the symmetry
axis s. For a periodic timetable this means that all lines automaticaly also will meet
at a second symmetry s + T
2
mod T (for time period T). An example of a symmetric
periodic timetable with it’s symmetry axes is given in Figure 3.4.
The property of symmetry has the advantage that transfer times are secured to be
equal in both directions. The planner can thus gain more control on these transfer
times and. A special case of the symmetric periodic timetable is the Integrated Fixed
28
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Periodic Event Scheduling
Lejre
Trekroner
Line 1
A
D
[l1, u1]
Line 2
A
D
[l3, u3]
A
[l4, u4]
D
[l5, u5]
[l2, u2]
Viby Sj
Roskilde
Figure 3.2.: Modelling the transfer constraints (purple) for pesp. ‘A’ are arrival events and ‘D’
are departure events. li and ui are lower and upper bounds for the constraint arcs.
Line 1 starts at Roskilde.
Lejre
Roskilde
Trekroner
Line 1
D
A
[l, u]
Line 2
D
A
[l, u]
[ T
2 , T −T
2 ]
Viby Sj
Figure 3.3.: Modelling a balanced service with two different lines.
Interval Timetable (IFIT), where the symmetry axis is placed at a large station, a hubs,
to ensure attractive transfer possibilities at the hub.
On the other hand symmetric periodic timetables tend to be more expensive than
non-symmetric periodic timetables. From an optimisation perspective they can never
become more cost-effective. Symmetric periodic timetables will only be a benefit if
running times in opposite directions are equal or close to each other.
29
==PAGE:40==
Timetabling
Figure 3.4.: Example of a symmetric periodic timetable. Symmetry axes are shown in green. All
lines meet their respective opposite line at the symmetry axis. (from Schittenhelm,
2013)
A symmetric timetable has opposite lines meeting at the symmetry axis at time s.
Each event in the event activity network has a corresponding opposite event on the
opposite line. This is the event mirrored in the symmetry axis. An arrival at station
A corresponds to the departure from station A in the opposite direction. To see how
symmetry can be ensured, see Figure 3.5. Note that it is not known in advance where
the symmetry axis lies. The time distance from an event to the symmetry axis and
its opposite event to the symmetry axis must be the same. This can be expressed by
introducing a new event node for the symmetry axis and activities from the symmetry
event node to each event.
This gives rise to the constraint (Liebchen, 2003).
(πi −πs)
mod T ≤(πs −πj)
mod T
(3.1)
This brings down to
(πi + πj)
mod T ≤0
(3.2)
30
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Formulation
D
A
D
A
D
A
i
j
s
Symmetry axis
Figure 3.5.: Modelling symmetry in a PESP-framework. Red indicates the related events in a
symmetric timetable. Blue are arcs representing the time difference between an
event and the symmetry axis.
for all corresponding symmetry pairs i and j. In reality companies use a small toler-
ance deviating from a strict symmetry, to incorporate for slight differences in running
time for opposite directions. If πi, πj < T then the constraint can only be fulfilled if
πi + πj = T
(3.3)
Constraint (3.3) does not fit in the original constraint of the PESP-framework defined
by Serafini and Ukovich (1989) in (3.4), but they can easily be added as an addition to
PESP.
3.2
Formulation
The original pesp problem was presented by Serafini and Ukovich (1989) and is provided
below.
31
==PAGE:42==
Timetabling
pesp (Serafini & Ukovich, 1989)
Given an event-activity network N = (E, A) and lower and upper bounds for activ-
ities l, u ∈Q|A|, find a solution π ∈[0, T)|E| that fulfils
(πw −πv −la)
mod T ≤ua −la
(3.4)
for all a = (v, w) ∈A.
The modulo operator in (3.4) is not linear. The formulation can be converted into
(3.5) by the introduction of variables za ∈Z, ∀a ∈A, to generate linear constraints,
which can be included in a linear programming framework. This conversion was already
proposed by Serafini and Ukovich themselves.
la ≤πw −πv + Tza ≤ua
∀a = (u, v) ∈A
(3.5)
The model by Serafini and Ukovich (1989) has been adapted to railway-specific pur-
poses. One standard adaptation is given by Liebchen (2006) in model 3.1. Here the
objective is to minimise the gap between the solution value and the lower bound for
each constraint arc. This way the objective minimises the driving times, waiting times
and turnaround times, and thus implicitly the travelling times. All relevant constraints
for railway timetabling are included in the event-activity network N as described in
subsection 3.1.1. The solution to model 3.1 contains the times πi for all events i ∈E.
The times have been discretised into one minute intervals.
Though this formulation of the model is very straightforward and close to the ori-
ginal formulation of pesp by Serafini and Ukovich (1989), Liebchen (2006) showed that
there are other formulations, which are tighter and faster to solve. His most efficient
model is based on node potentials (model 3.2).
32
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Formulation
Model 3.1: pesp (Liebchen, 2006, pesp-ip-π)
min
∑
a=(v,w)∈A
wa (πw −πv −la)
(3.6)
subject to
la ≤πw −πv + Tza ≤ua
∀a = (u, v) ∈A
(3.7)
πv ∈{0, . . . , T −1}
∀v ∈E
(3.8)
za ∈Z
∀a ∈A
(3.9)
This model uses the periodic tension x as variables for each activity rather than a
node potential variable for the events. The uses of cycle bases makes this model tighter
than the straightforward formulation above. If a minimal cycle base can be found, then
this model is faster to solve than the previous, but finding such a (minimal) cycle base
is in itself a NP-hard problem.
The concept of bounding the value of z to ¯z can also be applied in model 3.2. It has
been shown by Liebchen, p. 71 that for both model 3.1 and 3.2 the constraint matrix
is totally unimodular if the parameters l, u, T are integer. This property means that a
linear relaxation of the model results in an integer solution. In 5 this property is used
to relax the variables π of model 3.2 to R in order to speed up the computation.
33
==PAGE:44==
Timetabling
Model 3.2: pesp (Liebchen, 2006, pesp-ip-x-p-box)
Additional notation
Parameters
γCi
The incidence vector for cycle Ci in the cycle base of N.
γCia
=









1
if a ∈Ci and a is a forward arc
−1
if a ∈Ci and a is a backward arc
0
if a ̸∈Ci
¯za
=



1
if ua ≤T
2
if ua −la ≥T
for a ∈A
Variables
xa
= πw −πv + Tza
for a = (v, w) ∈A; v, w ∈E
za
the periodic offset
Model
min
∑
a∈A
ρa(xa −la)
(3.10)
subject to
la ≤xa ≤ua
∀a ∈A
(3.11)
∑
i=1,..,m−n+1
γCiaxa −T
∑
i=1,..,m−n+1
γCiaza = 0
∀a ∈A
(3.12)
za ∈{0, . . . , ¯za} ⊂Z
∀a ∈A
(3.13)
xa ∈Z
∀a ∈A
(3.14)
34
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Integration of line planning and
timetabling
This chapter introduces a new integrated model that combines lpp and pesp into Integ-
rated Line Planning and Timetabling Problem (ilpttp). Previous research on the in-
tegration of line planning and timetabling models for railway scheduling is described.
So far only few papers have been published attempting to describe the problem in its
entirety. A mathematical model is formulated in Schöbel (2015). In Kaspi and Raviv
(2013) the authors also include the routing of passengers and they solve the problem
with an evolutionary metaheuristic. Lastly, a reversed sequential approach has been
proposed by Michaelis and Schöbel (2009) and was solved for a bus scheduling prob-
lem.
4.1
Reversing the planning order
To solve several stages of the planning process and provide better cost-optimal line
plans, Michaelis and Schöbel (2009) use a reversed planning order for scheduling
busses. They start with solving the Vehicle Routing Problem (vrp)¹. They provide
vehicle routes for each of the busses. From this vehicle routing a precise time sched-
¹Similar to the rscp but for road vehicles, rather than rolling stock.
35
==PAGE:46==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
ule is made and lastly the line plan is deduced from the vehicle routing and timetable.
Starting with vehicle routing gives them the advantage that a more concise cost es-
timation can be given than is usually possible in an early line planning phase. The
resulting solutions are therefore often better (i. e. cheaper) when evaluated as a whole
(the three optimisation problems together).
A big difference with the approach in Michaelis and Schöbel (2009) is that they focus
on scheduling busses rather than trains. Busses are operated on the road network and
this network has much fewer (safety) operation conditions than a rail network and
road networks have a much higher capacity measured in number of vehicles per hour.
These differences ensure that for any solution to their vehicle routing problem there
exists a feasible and operable timetable and line plan. This is certainly not the case
when allocating a rolling stock plan on a railway network.
4.2
A metaheuristic approach
Kaspi and Raviv (2013) describe a way to solve three different and dependent problems
at once: line planning, timetabling, and passenger routing. The method is applied to
the Israeli Railways to find a line plan with a periodic timetable. No complete math-
ematical model is given, but an objective is defined. Solutions are generated with an
evolutionary metaheuristic. Evaluation of solutions is based on passenger travel time,
but it is suggested to include partial costs into a multi-criteria objective.
The heuristic approach enables Kaspi and Raviv to find competitive solutions in a
short time. They cannot guarantee optimality of the solution, nor give an optimality
gap. Instead their solutions are compared to current practice at the Israeli Railways
and they are judged by experienced professionals from the Israeli Railways.
With their study, Kaspi and Raviv provide useful new insights and ways to handle
36
==PAGE:47==
4.2 A metaheuristic approach
the complexity that arises when integrating line planning and periodic timetabling.
Even though the authors used a simple shortest-path algorithm for deciding the pas-
senger routes, the methodology allows to incorporate more sophisticated models after
passenger routing. It must however be expected that doing so will slow down the heur-
istic.
The following modelling assumptions are used (quoted from Kaspi & Raviv, 2013,
p. 297).
Assumptions (Kaspi & Raviv, 2013)
• The total demand for journeys is unaffected by the offered service
• The arrival time of the passengers at the origin station is unaffected by the
actual timetable
• The capacity of the trains is not binding.
• All the trains are identical in their maximum speed
• The capacity of the stations is not binding.
• All the railway intersections and interchanges occur at stations (either pas-
senger or operational)
The first assumption is also used by most lpp models in chapter 2. However, this
is not for the purpose of deciding the capacity of trains, but for calculating the total
travel time. This is clarified with the third assumption, where it is stated that the actual
capacity can and will be adjusted to the actual demand on the line.
It can only be assumed that the capacity is irrelevant if it can be guaranteed that
enough capacity can be provided where needed and if the goal of the scheduling is
purely passenger-oriented. Kaspi and Raviv (2013) estimate costs based only on engine
time. Neglecting the number of wagons often leads to wrong estimates of the actual
37
==PAGE:48==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
costs. The impact of resulting schedules on the rolling stock circulation are unknown.
It is also assumed that passengers arrive at their station of departure at a known
time, independent of the actual schedule. This assumption might be valid in (sub)urban
areas where trains have high frequencies of departure. It has however been shown that
even under these conditions and with departures every five minutes, people’s arrivals
are dependent on the departure time (Luethi, Weidmann, & Nash, 2007).
With these assumptions, the purely passenger-oriented objective is given as
T
∑
t=0
∑
(u,v)∈W
wt
uvF(u, v, t)
(4.1)
where wt
uv is the number of passengers travelling from u to v starting their journey
at time t. F(u, v, t) is the travel time for one person travelling from u to v starting at
time t.
The heuristic itself starts by constructing solutions from scratch. It consists of a few
sequential steps. Trains are inserted in the schedule and thereby lines are automatic-
ally added to the line plan. All paths are shortened so no excess time is used. Once a
train has been scheduled, it is not changed any more. If a train cannot be scheduled
it is cancelled. The order of insertion is predefined and the trains are sorted according
to priority. With a fixed order of inserting trains, combined with shortening all path
times to a minimum, the solution might miss out on transfer possibilities especially
between trains with equal priority. To provide a suitable transfer between two trains,
the dwelling time at the station can be increased, but the algorithm has no incentive
to do so at this stage and will always choose to reduce the dwelling time as much as
possible.
Secondly, the fixed order of inserting trains (and thus adding lines) also predefines
part of the outcome. The first train is always scheduled and this line will therefore
38
==PAGE:49==
4.2 A metaheuristic approach
always be present in the solution. The heuristic may easily be missing out on the
optimal solution with this predefined insertion order.
Thirdly, the heuristic inserts as many services as possible until all services either
have been scheduled or cancelled. This can result in more scheduled lines than ne-
cessary to fulfil demands or other constraints, but it does not guarantee a minimum
frequency of operation for each section of the network.
Once all the trains have been scheduled, a network of possible itineraries is gener-
ated for all passengers. Subsequently a shortest-path algorithm chooses one itinerary
for every passenger. On this basis the solution is evaluated. New solutions are found
by spontaneous mutation of previous elite solutions using probability distributions.
The algorithm schedules train paths and thus the start and end of the lines are pre-
determined. With the prioritised scheduling this means that some lines are forced in
the solution. The spontaneous mutation is still free to change which stops are served on
the way. This raises the problem that the heuristic does not guarantee that all stations
are served. The authors do not explain how they handle this situation, but presumably
a penalty with long travelling times are added for passengers at these stations, so that
the problem will not occur in the final solution.
The benefit of the approach lies mainly in evaluating plans only after all three parts
have been solved, so that actual travel times are known and better cost-estimates can
be made. The heuristic can relatively fast change a smaller part in the schedule or line
plan and evaluate the consequences. These benefits are not sufficient to compensate
for the drawback, that some lines are forced in the solution.
39
==PAGE:50==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
4.3
A mathematical model
Schöbel (2015) gives a first attempt to formulate a mathematical model for the simul-
taneous line planning and periodic timetabling problem. To a large extent, this models
consists of Schöbel and Scholl’s 2006 change & go model for line planning. The model
is extended with the basic constraints of pesp for including decisions on timetabling.
The resulting model will be used as a basis for a new model.
Schöbel (2015) uses a passenger-oriented model and the objective formulated for
the integrated problem is the minimisation of travelling time. In order to estimate the
passenger’s travelling time, the underlying change & go graph routes passengers with
a shortest path between origin and destination. The travel times and transfer times are
known from the actual timetable output.
All of the constraints are linear, but the objective is quadratic. This makes solving
the model more complicated, since the quality of the theoretic frameworks for solv-
ing quadratic problems is less elaborate and proven. Choosing a different, but linear,
objective function removes this complication.
Figure 4.1a gives an example of a small transportation network. The network is
operated with three different lines, which all meet in station 2. Passengers have the
possibility to switch trains in station 2, which is represented by the change arcs in
the event-activity network (Figure 4.1b). All activities a ∈Await ∪Achange have a
unique activity preceding it and a unique activity following it. These are notated with
a−and a+. One such possible transfer (a ∈Achange) has been highlighted in blue.
The preceding and following activities a−and a+ are also given in blue.
The set El gives all edges of the transportation network that are covered by line
l ∈L. As an example the set El for line 3 is given in red in Figure 4.1a.
The set Al contains all activities related to line l. For line 3 these are also given in
40
==PAGE:51==
4.3 A mathematical model
Station 1
Station 3
Station 4
Station 2
Station 6
Station 5
e
e′
(a) Example of a transportation network G = (V, E) with six stations and connecting tracks.
Station 2 serves as a transit hub.
Line 1
Station
1 arrival
Station
1 de-
parture
Station
2 arrival
Station
2 de-
parture
Station
6 arrival
Line 2
Station
3 de-
parture
Station
2 arrival
Station
2 de-
parture
Station
6 arrival
Line 3
Station
4 de-
parture
Station
2 arrival
Station
2 de-
parture
Station
5 arrival
wait
drive
a−
wait
change
change
a
drive
drive
wait
drive
drive
wait
drive
a+
(b) Partiala event-activity network for the transportation network G above, operated by three
different lines. Passengers can switch lines in station 2. In blue is a changing activity with
preceding and following activities. Red marks the set E3. Brown gives the set A(2,6) and
green is the set A(1,2),(2,6).
aNot all constraint arcs needed for the timetabling problem are included in this example, but only those
to show the sets defined in notation 4.1
Figure 4.1.: A transportation network example (above) and corresponding event-activity net-
work (taken from Schöbel, 2015).
41
==PAGE:52==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
red in the event-activity network. The sets Ae gives all the driving activities along
edge e in the transportation network. Let us pick e to be the track between stations 2
and 6 (see Figure 4.1a). The corresponding driving edge in brown forms the set Ae.
This means that if several different lines from the line pool travel along edge e (as is
the case here), than all of the driving activities of these lines are included in set Ae.
Lastly, the sets Ae,e′ contains all activities from all possible lines in the line pool that
connect edges e and e′ from the transportation network. These are waiting activities
and transfer activities. Note that Ae,e′ is empty if edges e and e′ are not connected in
the transportation network. An example combination is marked in green in Figure 4.1.
The model presented in model 4.2 is largely based on model 2.6 and model 3.1 for
the line planning and timetabling aspects respectively. The notation is given in nota-
tion 4.1. The variables used are
fl =





1
if line l ∈L is chosen
0
if line l ∈L is not chosen,
(4.2)
πi ∈R ≤T = the time at which event i ∈E is scheduled
(4.3)
za = the periodic offset
(4.4)
xa
uv ∈Z = the number of people from OD-pair (u, v) ∈W using activity a ∈A
(4.5)
The objective (4.6) minimises the time spent on all activities and thus the travelling
time, c. f. (3.6). Note that the objective is quadratic because the number of passengers
for each activity is not known beforehand.
Constraints (4.8) and (4.9) change the variable domains according to the presence
42
==PAGE:53==
4.3 A mathematical model
Notation 4.1:
(for model 4.2 and 4.3)
Sets
G = (V, E)
a transportation network.
N = (E, A)
an event-activity network.
L
a line pool.
Vl
= {u ∈V | u belong to l ∈L}.
El
= {e ∈E | e belongs to l ∈L}.
El
= {i ∈E | i belongs to l ∈L}.
Al
= {a = (i, j) ∈A | i ∈El ∨j ∈El}.
E(f)
= {(l, u, arr) , (l, u, dep) | ∃l ∈L : fl > 0, u ∈Vl}.
A(f)
= {a = (i, j) ∈A | i, j ∈E(f)}.
Ae
=
{
a ∈Adrive | activity a belongs to edge e ∈E
}
.
Ae,e′
=
{
a ∈Await ∪Achange | a−∈Ae ∧a+ ∈Ae′
}
.
Parameters
a−
the activity preceding a ∈A.
a+
the activity following a ∈A.
zmax
an upper bound on the variables za, a ∈A.
buv
the demand of travellers from station u to station v.
buv
=









wuv
if u is an origin station
−wuv
if v is a destination station
0
for other stations
.
we
the demand of travellers along edge e ∈E.
43
==PAGE:54==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
Model 4.2: OD-pair integrated model (Schöbel, 2015)
(with notation 4.1)
min
∑
(u,v)∈OD
∑
a∈A
xa
uv (πi −πj + zaT)
(4.6)
subject to
la (fl + fl′ −1) ≤πj −πi + zaT ≤ua
∀a = (i, j) ∈A : i ∈El, j ∈El′
(4.7)
πi ≤flT
∀i ∈El
(4.8)
za ≤flzmax
∀a ∈Al
(4.9)
Auvxuv = buv
∀(u, v) ∈OD
(4.10)
xa
uv ≤flwuv
∀a ∈Al
(4.11)
fmin
e
≤
∑
l|e∈l
fl ≤fmax
e
∀e ∈E
(4.12)
∑
l∈L
qlfl ≤B
(4.13)
πi ∈R
∀i ∈E
(4.14)
za ∈Z
∀a ∈A
(4.15)
fl ∈B
∀l ∈L
(4.16)
xa
uv ∈Z
∀a ∈A, u, v ∈E, u ̸= v
(4.17)
44
==PAGE:55==
4.3 A mathematical model
or absence of a line. If a line l is not chosen (fl = 0), all events i related to the line
(i ∈El) are fixed to time πi = 0, as well as related periodicity variables za are fixed
to 0. If a line l is chosen (fl > 0), then all events related to the line are restricted to
a time within the planning period T. The upper bound zmax for variables za, a ∈A
can be defined similar to ¯za in (3.10). Note that in Schöbel (2015) a line has a maximum
frequency of 1.
Constraint (4.7) is the pesp constraint ensuring the lower and upper bound feas-
ibility for every activity, c. f. (3.7). It has been adapted so that the constraint is only
restrictive for those lines that are chosen in the solution, which is done by the factor
fl + fl′ −1 on the left hand side. If both lines on either side of activity a ∈A are op-
erated, then fl + fl′ −1 = 1 and the constraint becomes the regular pesp constraint.
If either of the lines is not chosen, or neither is chosen, then fl + fl′ −1 = 0 or −1.
Since πi = 0, ∀i ∈El according to (4.8) and za = 0, ∀a ∈Al according to (4.9), the
inequality is always valid in these cases.
(4.10) defines flow conservation for each origin-destination pair. The constraint is
formulated in matrix-form. (4.11) ensures that no passengers can use an activity a ∈A
belonging to a line l that is not chosen. Otherwise the number of passengers xa
uv can
never be more than the total amount of passengers between u and v (wuv). (4.12) give
a minimum and maximum frequency of operation, c. f. (2.18). (4.13) is a budget con-
straint, c. f. (2.24). (4.14) – (4.17) define the domain of the model.
The model works as follows. As is generally true for pesp models, all events and
activities are generated for the event-activity network N. Because at this point it is
not yet known which lines will be chosen and thus which lines need to be scheduled
in the timetable, all lines from the line pool and their respective events and activities
are included in N. The model decides which lines are needed, and the sets A(f) and
45
==PAGE:56==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
E(f) restrict the event-activity network N to the relevant events and activities.
Model 4.2 includes routing passengers with a shortest-path assignment. Schöbel
(2015) propose a slightly different model that can be used if the passenger routing is
known beforehand, see model 4.3. This model is based on an edge formulation instead
of an origin-destination pair formulation. It includes much fewer variables than the
origin-destination formulation. The new variables are
ca ∈Z
the number of passengers using activity a ∈A.
These replace the variables xa
uv. Further the model has the predefined routes given in
the parameters
ce ∈Z
the number of passengers using edge e ∈E.
ce,e′ ∈Z
the number of passengers using edge e′ directly after edge e.
ce is required to decide the demand on driving activities and ce,e′ the demand on wait-
ing and changing activities.
The objective (4.18) is the same as previous, but the variables xa
uv have been ex-
changed with the new variables ca. The formulation remains quadratic.
The timetabling constraints and the track occupation frequency and budget con-
straints remain the same. Constraints (4.22) – (4.24) replace (4.10) – (4.11). (4.22) en-
sures enough capacity for all passengers along a transport edge e ∈E. The passengers
are distributed along all corresponding activities. (4.23) similarly distributes passen-
gers on the waiting and changing activities. (4.24) limits the number of passengers for
a specific activity to the available capacity.
46
==PAGE:57==
4.3 A mathematical model
dep A
arr B
dep B
arr C
dep C
arr D
Line 1
Line 2
Line 4
Line 3
(a) Example of a line pool where some lines are operated in an optimal solution (blue) and
others are not (dashed).
dep A
arr B
dep B
arr C
dep C
arr D
dep B
arr C
dep C
arr D
dep A
arr B
dep B
arr C
dep C
arr D
Line 1
Line 2
Line 3
Line 4
(b) Event-activity network belonging to the network and line pool above. Arcs represent driv-
ing, waiting, headway and changing arcs. Only changing arcs that can make the journey
faster for passengers are included.
Figure 4.2.: Event-activity network N for the integrated model 4.2. In blue are the events and
activities included in the solution. The dotted events and activities belong to lines
that have not been chosen.
47
==PAGE:58==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
Model 4.3: Activity demand formulation integrated model (Schöbel, 2015)
(with
notation 4.1)
min
∑
l∈L
∑
a=(i,j)∈Al
ca (πi −πj + zaT)
(4.18)
subject to
la (fl + fl′ −1) ≤πj −πi + zaT ≤ua
∀a = (i, j) ∈A : i ∈El, j ∈El′
(4.19)
πi ≤flT
∀i ∈El
(4.20)
za ≤flzmax
∀a ∈Al
(4.21)
ce =
∑
a∈Ae
ca
∀e ∈E
(4.22)
ce,e′ =
∑
a∈Ae,e′
ca
∀e, e′ ∈E, e and e′ adjacent
(4.23)
ca ≤flkl
∀l ∈L, a ∈Al
(4.24)
fmin
e
≤
∑
l|e∈l
fl ≤fmax
e
∀e ∈E
(4.25)
∑
l∈L
qlfl ≤B
(4.26)
πi ∈R
∀i ∈E
(4.27)
za ∈Z
∀a ∈A
(4.28)
fl ∈B
∀l ∈L
(4.29)
ca ∈Z
∀a ∈A
(4.30)
48
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Improving the model
4.4
Improving the model
The model has a couple of limitations that need to be addressed. These points will lead
to a new model that is based on model 4.3.
Firstly, the objective is quadratic. This limits the solver software and theoretical
frameworks that are available. The objective is passenger-oriented. Most European
rail companies providing passenger services are bound by minimum service level re-
quirements stated in governmental contracts, usually in the form of minimum fre-
quencies of departure from each station. These contractual obligations generally re-
quire a higher level of service than is economically competitive. It can therefore be
argued that resulting line plans and timetables are already partly passenger-oriented
in nature.
A cost-minimising objective is interesting for both the operating companies, but
also for governments that hand out large subsidies to the operators. We will estimate
the costs of operation to be completely dependent on the engine time of operated
lines. This includes the time spent on driving, waiting at stations and the time needed
to turn the train around at the end of a line. Possible other costs are neglected. This
gives the objective (4.42) where m is a fixed operating cost per engine minute. m can
then include an estimate of crew costs per used engine minute. Since m is a constant,
it can also be left out, without altering the optimal solution.
min m


∑
a=(i,j)∈Adrive∪Await
(πj −πi + zaT) +
∑
l∈L
∑
a∈Al∩Aturn
lafl


(4.31)
When the objective minimises the costs, the budget constraint (4.26) can be omitted.
Secondly, in model 4.3 every line has a maximum frequency of 1. This is acceptable
if all lines should operate with the same frequency as for example in a dense urban
49
==PAGE:60==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
traffic with one train service every ten minutes for each scheduled line, or in low-
density areas with only one service every hour. In many practical applications it will
however be very limiting if the desired or cost-optimal frequencies vary among lines.
Enlarging the domain for the variables fl, l ∈L from binary to integer would allow
for varying frequencies, but the model is by nature of the pesp component not capable
of handling higher frequencies. For the purpose of timetabling, each line needs its
own events and activities in the event-activity network to be able to correctly model
minimum headway distances and balancing for higher frequencies. Making fl integer
should thus somehow interactively enlarge the underlying graph structure to model
these headway constraints. The current model only works on a fixed graph structure,
where some parts will be effectively omitted if the corresponding line is not chosen,
see Figure 4.1b.
An alternative solution to allow lines with higher frequencies, is to treat these ad-
ditional services as separate lines in the stated line pool, i. e. include a line copy for
each possible service of a base line. It then becomes the modellers responsibility to
add enough copies of the same base line in the line pool to guarantee the model can
choose the optimal frequency for the service. If for example a (base) line l∗between
Copenhagen and Roskilde should be operated four times per hour (fl = 4), the line
pool should replace the line l∗with at least four copies of l∗, i. e. l′, l′′, l′′′, l′′′′, where
l′, l′′, l′′′, and l′′′′ are provide exact copies of the event-activity structure of l∗and each
has a frequency maximum of one.
For this to work the notation for lines and the definition of the line pool L has to
be rewritten formally. Let L∗be the line pool consisting of all base lines. This is the
line pool as it has been defined so far and as it also was used in model 4.3. Now, let
l′, l′′, l′′′, . . . be copies of l∗albeit treated independently and in strict order. The ordered
50
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Improving the model
set Ll∗is defined as
Ll∗=
{
l′, l′′, l′′′, . . .
}
(4.32)
containing all copies of l∗. The size of the set is determined by the modeller as an input
parameter for each base line. The line pool is redefined to contain all copies of all base
lines.
L =
∪
l∗∈L∗
Ll∗
(4.33)
It must be noted that adding copies to the line pool, will increase the model com-
plexity by increasing the event-activity network, but above all it creates unwanted
symmetry in the solutions. Let L contain two equal lines l′ and l′′ to have the pos-
sibility of a base line l∗with frequency 2. Assume that the optimal solution operates
only one of them, but since they are equal, both a solution with fl′ = 1, fl′′ = 0 and
fl′ = 0, fl′′ = 1 are optimal.
This symmetry can be eliminated with a cut constraint by treating the copies in a
strict order, and to include copies in the solution only in that given order. First, define
the set of ordered pairs for a base line l∗as
˜Ll∗=
{(
l′, l′′)
| l′, l′′ ∈Ll∗∧l′ < l′′ ∧∄l′′′ ∈Ll∗: l′′′ < l′′}
.
(4.34)
The set thus contains pairs that are directly consecutive in the given order. Take again
the example with four copies of l∗and let the copies be called l′
1, l′
2, l′
3 and l′
4. This
gives the set ˜Ll∗with the elements (l′
1, l′
2), (l′
2, l′
3), and (l′
3, l′
4).
Lastly, we define
˜L =
∪
l∗∈L∗
˜Ll∗.
(4.35)
51
==PAGE:62==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
With these definitions the cut is given as
fl′ ≥fl′′
∀(l′, l′′) ∈˜L.
(4.36)
This states that for every pair of equal lines, the second line can only be chosen if the
first is also chosen. Take once again the example with four copies. Let us assume that
the optimal solution has a frequency of 2 for the base line l∗, thus two of the copies
are included in the optimal solution. The cut-constraints are fl′
1 ≥fl′
2, fl′
2 ≥fl′
3, and
fl′
3 ≥fl′
4. To get a total frequency of exactly 2, l′
1 and l′
2 have to be chosen.
The constraint (4.36) cuts away the created symmetry without losing any of the
optimal solution. The constraint, including notation, is added to the model to allow
for services with higher frequencies. Computational results of the performance of this
cut are given in section 5.3.
When the same line is operated at a higher frequency, it is also desired to distribute
the services more evenly over the time period, rather than bundling them together.
This can be done with balancing arcs in the event-activity network with lower and up-
per bound of T
n as described in Figure 3.3. But because the model includes the decision
of frequency (or number of copies of the same service), the number n is not known
beforehand, but given in terms of the variables f as
nl =
∑
l∈Ll∗
fl.
(4.37)
Including these bounds in the constraints will result in a non-linear model. To avoid
this, new bounds are defined which are tighter than the corresponding original head-
way arc, though not necessarily completely optimal for equal spacing. Let the upper
bound be T
n where n is chosen to be | ˜Ll∗|, the number of copies of l∗. Note that this
52
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Improving the model
makes the solution dependent on the number of copies included in the line pool.
The spacing is measured with the introduction of a new set of variables hl′,l′′ for
(l′, l′′) ∈˜L. Let us further introduce ϕl′ meaning the departure time from the first
station of service l′, thus ϕl′ = πi with i the first event of service l′. The spacing
between two trains is the time interval between the departure of service l′ (ϕl′) and
the departure of service l′′ (ϕl′′), hence
|ϕl′′ −ϕl′| .
We bound the model by assuming that ϕl′′ > ϕl′, giving the possibility to remove the
absolute value, hence
ϕl′′ −ϕl′.
No optimal value for the objective is lost with this assumption, since there always
exists an optimal solution for which this is true. Because l′′ is exactly the same line
as l′, a solution with ϕl′′ = 10 and ϕl′ = 40 is equal to a solution with ϕl′′ = 40 and
ϕl′ = 10. Now hl′,l′′ is the difference between the predefined desired equal spacing of
l′ and l′′ and the actual spacing in the solution. This gives
hl′,l′′ = τ(l′,l′′) −(ϕl′′ −ϕl′) ≥0
∀(l′, l′′) ∈˜L.
(4.38)
with
τ(l′,l′′) =
T
|Ll∗|
(4.39)
for l′, l′′ copies of l∗.
The new variables h are included in the objective function, so to minimise the gap
between desired departure interval and actual departure interval. A sufficiently low
weight (ρ) is given to this term so that it does not interfere with the line planning
53
==PAGE:64==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
aspect of the integrated model, but only aids the timetabling part in finding better
spaced solutions. The new objective becomes
min m


∑
a=(i,j)∈Adrive∪Await
(πj −πi + zaT) +
∑
l∈L
∑
a∈Al∩Aturn
lafl

+ρ
∑
(l′,l′′)∈˜L
hl′,l′′
(4.40)
As said, in order to keep the model linear, a guess has to be made on the frequency
of a service. Even if this guess is wrong, the resulting solution has a better spread
between services than a model formulation without constraint (4.38). But because the
weight ρ is chosen sufficiently small not to affect the resulting service plan, the model
can also be solved in two steps. In the first step the ilpttp is solved without taking
equal service spacing into account, i. e. ρ = 0. In the next step the resulting solution
is used for generating a new solution with better spacing. In the second step it is also
known with what frequencies each of the unique base lines is operated and thus what
the desired spacing should be. Results for the different approaches will be provided in
section 5.3.
As mentioned before, operators often work under governmental contracts. As part
of the service level definition the contract may state a required number of direct con-
nections between two stations. These are typically more important stations with a
larger distance between them. By a direct connection is meant that passengers can
travel between the two stations without switching trains. It does not entail a fast or
non-stop connection. The requirement leads to the new constraint (4.41) with dmin
uv
the minimum number of direct connections between stations u ∈V and v ∈V .
∑
l∈L|u,v∈Vl
fl ≥dmin
uv
∀(u, v) ∈V 2, u ̸= v
(4.41)
The complete adapted model is given in model 4.5 and the notation used is de-
54
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Improving the model
scribed in notation 4.4. For completeness the entire notation is repeated, including the
elements from model 4.2. The objective and all of the constraints have been discussed
above.
Model 4.5 inherits an important assumption from the underlying lpp model. It is
assumed that passenger demand is deterministic and that the routing of passengers is
known and independent of the chosen line plan. Acceptability of this assumption is
dependent on the applied network. If only one or very few different routing options
exist, this will give no problem. As a consequence all lines must stop at all intermediate
stations. This assumptions is a restriction of constraints (4.46) and (4.47) when using
a predefined distribution of passengers along edges and is needed to provide enough
capacity for all passengers. If non-stop trains should be an option, these constraints
should be replaced by constraints ensuring enough capacity to transport all origin-
destination pairs.
Secondly, the model assumes that all trains have the same capacity. This follows
from constraint (4.48). This assumption can be waived if the capacity parameter k is
replaced by a value that is dependent on the chosen line, e. g. kl to allow for different
capacities for each line. This can be a parameter if rolling stock is pre-allocated to
certain lines, defined by network restrictions such as presence of electrification, or
the capacity kl could be included as a decision variable.
Thirdly, the model assumes unlimited capacity at stations. The model neither in-
cludes restrictions on station capacity or routing through stations and choice of plat-
forms. In practice this often does not affect the viability of the timetable.
²See a formal definition in (4.35).
55
==PAGE:66==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
Notation 4.4: (for model 4.5)
Sets
L
a line pool with the set of possible services (including reduplicated copies).
V
the set of stations.
Vl ⊆V
the set of stations serviced by line l ∈L.
E
the set of edges between stations.
E
the events of the event-activity network.
El ⊆E
the events belonging to line l ∈L.
A
the activities of the event-activity network.
Adrive ⊂A
the driving activities.
Await ⊂A
the waiting activities at stations.
Aturn ⊂A
the turning activities at the end of a service.
Al ⊆A
the activities belonging to service l ∈L.
Le ⊆L
the services using edge e ∈E.
˜L
the set containing all ordered pairs (l′, l′′) ∈L × L
with l′, l′′ copies of the same base line l∗².
56
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Improving the model
Notation 4.4 (continued)
Parameters
T
the time window for scheduling.
la
lower bound for activity a ∈A.
ua
upper bound for activity a ∈A.
fmin
e
minimum number of services along edge e ∈E.
fmax
e
maximum number of services along edge e ∈E.
dmin
uv
minimum number of direct connections between stations u ∈V and v ∈V .
k
the capacity of one train.
zmax
upper limit on the number of time windows any service passes through.
we
the demand of passengers travelling along edge e ∈E.
we,e′
the demand of passengers travelling along edge e ∈E directly followed
by edge e′ ∈E.
m
the costs per minute of operation.
ρ
a (sufficiently low) weight for the multi-criteria objective.
τ(l′,l′′)
the desired interval between the departures of l′ and l′′.
Variables
πi ∈R+
the time for event i ∈E.
za ∈Z+
the periodic offset for activity a ∈A.
fl ∈B
an indicator that is one if service l ∈L is operated and zero otherwise.
ca ∈Z+
the number of people travelling with activity a ∈A.
ϕl ∈R+
the time of the first event of service l ∈L.
hl′,l′′ ∈R+
the difference between the desired interval of departure of services
of l′ and l′′ ∈L and the scheduled interval.
57
==PAGE:68==
Integration of line planning and timetabling
Model 4.5: Adapted integrated line planning and timetabling model ilpttp
(with notation 4.4)
min m


∑
a=(i,j)∈Adrive∪Await
(πj −πi + zaT) +
∑
l∈L
∑
a∈Al∩Aturn
lafl


(4.42)
+ ρ
∑
(l′,l′′)∈˜L
hl′,l′′
subject to
la (fl + fl′ −1) ≤πj −πi + zaT ≤ua
∀a = (i, j) ∈A | i ∈El, j ∈El′
(4.43)
πi ≤flT
∀l ∈L, i ∈El
(4.44)
za ≤flzmax
∀l ∈L, a ∈Al
(4.45)
we =
∑
a∈Ae
ca
∀e ∈E
(4.46)
we,e′ =
∑
a∈Ae,e′
ca
∀e, e′ ∈E, e and e′ adjacent
(4.47)
ca ≤flk
∀l ∈L, a ∈Al
(4.48)
fmin
e
≤
∑
l∈Le
fl ≤fmax
e
∀e ∈E
(4.49)
∑
l∈L|u,v∈Vl
fl ≥dmin
uv
∀(u, v) ∈V 2, u ̸= v
(4.50)
fl′ ≥fl′′
∀(l′, l′′) ∈˜L
(4.51)
hl′,l′′ = τ(l′,l′′) −(ϕl′′ −ϕl) ≥0
∀(l′, l′′) ∈˜L
(4.52)
πi ∈R+
∀i ∈E
(4.53)
za ∈Z+
∀a ∈A
(4.54)
fl ∈B
∀l ∈L
(4.55)
ca ∈Z+
∀a ∈A
(4.56)
hl′,l′′ ∈R+
∀(l′, l′′) ∈˜L
(4.57)
58
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Line planning and timetabling
at DSB
5.1
DSB
DSB is the largest passenger operator in Denmark and it transports 500 000 passengers
per day (DSB, 2014a). DSB started its operations in 1847 and is publicly owned by
the Danish government, but functions semi-autonomous. Under the main heading are
a number of daughter divisions, such as DSB S-tog running the commuter trains in
Copenhagen, and DSB Øresund, which runs international trains to and from Southern
Sweden. The trains run by DSB are divided in three main categories in decreasing
hierarchical order: long-distance trains (lyntog), intercity trains (fjerntog) and regional
trains (regionaltog).
The aforementioned model for integrated line planning and timetabling is applied
to scheduling DSBs regional trains on the island of Sjælland. The network is shown in
Figure 5.1. The core network between Ringsted and Copenhagen / Østerport / Copen-
hagen Airport is operated by both regional trains, intercity trains and long-distance
trains. Apart from these trains operated by DSB, a few international trains to and from
Germany and Sweden as well as freight trains run on this network. For scheduling the
regional trains it is assumed that both trains from other companies as well as the in-
59
==PAGE:70==
Line planning and timetabling at DSB
Figure 5.1.: DSB’s network on Sjælland (2016). In blue are tracks whith regional operation. Yel-
low are intercity trains and red are long-distance express trains. Dark grey tracks
are commuter lines (S-trains) and light grey are local lines not operated by DSB.
(DSB, 2014b)
tercity and long-distance trains have already been scheduled and that their schedules
are fixed. Similar approaches are used at companies and was also used in lpps, such
as Bussieck et al. (1996). When modelling the integrated scheduling problem, these
trains can be included as given input, so that regional trains are scheduled around
these predefined train paths.
The larger part of the regional network consists of double track, with the exception
of the following sections.
60
==PAGE:71==
5.1 DSB
to Ringsted
to Holbæk
to Valby
Trekroner
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Figure 5.2.: The section Valby - Roskilde in detail.
1. Holbæk - Kalundborg: single track
2. Roskilde - Køge - Næstved: single track
3. Vordingborg - Nykøbing Falster / Rødby (German border): single track
4. Valby - Roskilde: quadruple track
The first three will be excluded from the analysis as far as the specific schedules on
the single track parts. Trains with final destinations Kalundborg and Nykøbing Falster
will still be scheduled as far as Holbæk and Vordingborg respectively to include the
trains on the busier parts of the network. For these trains a longer turnaround time
will be used to estimate the time a train spends on the single track section. An example
is shown in Figure 5.3. This way these stations and destinations can still be included
in the line plan.¹
Kalundborg
Holbæk
Roskilde
min 10
min 60
Figure 5.3.: Long turnaround times for modelling the single track sections.
¹No timetable is generated for the single track sections. It is a basic assumption of the model that a
feasible timetable exists.
61
==PAGE:72==
Line planning and timetabling at DSB
Each track of a double track section is used for a single direction only. On the sec-
tion Valby - Roskilde two tracks are reserved for each direction. The choice of track
between Valby and Roskilde is dependent on the stops and the direction of the train.
Trains stopping at Hedehusene and Trekroner are preferred to use the outer tracks
for reasons of lacking platform facilities on the inner tracks. Trains to and from Hol-
bæk/Kalundborg are preferred to run on the outer tracks because of the strategic place-
ment of switches and crossings. The middle tracks are used by trains to and from
Ringsted, including intercity and long-distance trains.
The regional network of Sjælland has 435 origin-destination pairs with positive
demand with approximately 8500 passengers during a peak hour on a busy day. Part
of these passengers can and will take one of the intercity trains that is outside of the
current scope. Some passenger data is missing for stations along the coastal line, which
currently are operated by DSB Øresund.
5.2
Assumptions for implementation
For the following tests and implementation of model 4.5 a few extra assumptions have
been made about the given input. These assumptions are not the restriction of the
chosen model, but are rather used for simplifying purposes.
Symmetry of lines
For each line going in one direction, a reverse line will go in the opposite direction. If
a line from Copenhagen to Ringsted is chosen, than the reverse line from Ringsted to
Copenhagen will also be operated with the exact same stopping pattern. This assump-
tion models a general desire to keep line plans easy and predictable. Passengers will
know that they always can take the same route back.
62
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Tests
With symmetry the number of lines |L| can be reduced to half, by merging both dir-
ections into one line, e. g. Copenhagen - Ringsted - Copenhagen. Hereby the number
of variables fl is also reduced in half.
Fixed running times
The running times are chosen to be fixed. Even if this assumption would not be made,
the result would remain unchanged. Given that all rolling stock is equal and that trains
stop at all intermediate stations, there always exists an optimal solution where trains
run at their maximum speed, i. e. with the lowest running time possible. The same
reasoning holds as in Kaspi and Raviv (2013). Using this knowledge for the input,
fixing the running time the model size and solution space is decreased, without losing
an optimal solution.
Safety headway for station entrance
The event-activity model includes headway arcs for safe operation as described in sub-
section 3.1.1. For most of the network a minimum time of three minutes will be used.
In addition to the standard headway arcs for leaving a station, additional headway
arcs are included to include a safety distance between a train leaving a station and a
train arriving at the same station and in the same direction. An example is given in
Figure 5.4. The added arcs (and constraints) are in accordance with Rail Net Denmark’s
standard safety policy.
5.3
Tests
In the following sections section 5.3 and section 5.4 model results are reported. The
model has been implemented in IBM® ILOG® CPLEX® Optimization Studio 12.6 with
63
==PAGE:74==
Line planning and timetabling at DSB
Line 1
A
D
A
Line 2
A
D
A
Figure 5.4.: All headway arcs (in red) with bounds including additional headway arcs for ent-
ring a station (between arrival and departure event) and headway arcs for leaving
the station (between departure events).
CPLEX® 12.6.3 on Ubuntu 15.04 with an Intel® Core™i5-2450 M @ 2.50 GHz × 4
processor with 5.7GB RAM.
The model is tested with three different independent scenarios focusing on one area
of the network: the coastal line (Helsingør - Copenhagen Airport), the northwest line
(Kalundborg/Holbæk - Copenhagen), and the connections to Fynen and Lolland/Fal-
ster (Nykøbing Falster/Vordingborg/Ringsted - Copenhagen). In each of these scen-
arios, the section is assumed to be a closed independent system. Trains running out-
side of the system definition are included to the extent that they run on the defined
network. At the boundaries of the system they are cut off, neglecting any network
effects they might have on other not-included sections. Thus in these scenarios the
intercity and long-distance trains are left out, and regional trains continuing to out-
side of the current system are shortened, e. g. when looking at the scenario of the
Northwest section to Holbæk, the lines to/from Ringsted are shortened to Roskilde,
which is the last stop of the line still within the borders of the scenario. For calculat-
ing the number of passengers and their travelling time only origin-destination pairs
where both the origin and destination are within the scenario definition are included.
In each of the scenarios enough trains are scheduled to transport all passengers (as
defined above) and to comply with contractual obligations as far as these concern the
limited network of the scenario.
64
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Tests
With the limitations described above, the scenarios can therefore not be implemen-
ted in real life, but they give a tool to evaluate the capabilities and performance of the
model on different data sets.
It is assumed that all regional trains are operated with the Litra MG (IC4) rolling
stock. For each scenario the currently operated line plan (K16) is used as a reference
point and new line possibilities are added to investigate the effects on the solution and
model performance. These are called the extended scenarios. It can be seen that the
chosen line plan remains unchanged after adding the new possibilities for each of the
scenarios, indicating that current line plans are efficient for the individual corridors.
It is expected that in the complete regional network of Sjælland new lines can be
successfully added to generate more cost-effective solutions. This will be investigated
in section 5.4.
It must be noted that large parts of the contractual obligations, such as minimum
frequencies of operation, are based on previously operated line plans and as such these
plans set the minimum standard. It is therefore no surprise that the that current line
plans are optimal under these constraints in each scenario.
Figure 5.5, and Figure A.4 and Figure A.6 in Appendix A, show the generated time-
tables as string line diagrams for each of the three scenarios. It has already been noted
that the line plan remained the same, regardless of the new possibilities for added
lines in the line pool. The larger size of the model does however have an impact on the
quality of the headway distribution and even spacing of equal lines (as formulated by
constraint (4.52)). The model needs more time processing and solving the large event-
activity network that is given as an input, that it will take significantly longer to take
the headway distribution into account in the objective value. The extended line pools
also include more copies of the base lines to allow for higher frequencies of opera-
tion. If the extra copies are not chosen, then the balancing of departures is impacted
65
==PAGE:76==
Line planning and timetabling at DSB
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Coastal line
(a) Coastal line with today’s operating plan.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
22
23
Coastal line
(b) Costal line with extended line pool.
Figure 5.5.: String lines of the timetable results for the coastal line section.
66
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Tests
Instance
|L|
Bin. var
Int. var
Real var
Cons.
Time (s)
Obj.
gap (%)
Coastal
8
8
1249
731
4123
26.40
1148
0.00
Coastal ext
23
23
4324
1411
11 637
300.00
1144.33
0.00
Coastal ext (w/o cut)
11 620
3083.62
1144.33
Coastal ext (2-steps)
99.88
1144.06
Northwest
10
10
1157
543
3494
5.00
1156
0.00
Northwest ext
20
20
3129
937
8320
146.10
1156.65
0.00
Northwest ext (w/o cut)
8305
639.51
1156.65
Northwest ext (2-steps)
6.41
1159
South
9
9
1154
613
3647
6.80
1202.01
0.00
South ext
25
25
5269
1413
13 529
78.50
1202.31
0.00
South ext (w/o cut)
13 514
614.16
1202.31
South ext (2-steps)
25.56
1206
Table 5.1.: Overview of instance properties and results.
negatively.
Here we can see that cut-constraint (4.51) which cuts away a large part of the sym-
metry, that was created by allowing higher frequencies, does indeed speed up the
computation. For each of the extended scenarios, the computational results are com-
pared with and without constraint (4.51).
To overcome this negative impact, the problem is decomposed into two steps, first
optimising the cost term in the objective function (ρ = 0) and subsequently using the
generated line plan for optimising the second term in the objective function to try and
find a better distribution of the trains in the timetable (ρ =
1
1000). For the first part it
has been chosen to accept a relative gap of 0.1% to find a solution faster before solving
the second step of the decomposition. It can be seen that decomposing the problem
into two steps reduces the solution time drastically. The increase of the objective value
in the 2-step method is a direct propagation of the allowed gap in the first step. An
increase can for example be seen on the section Northwest.
67
==PAGE:78==
Line planning and timetabling at DSB
5.4
The entire network
Now the model is applied to the entire network at once. The network is as definecd
in section 5.1 omitting pieces of single track. The model is first solved with a limited
line pool (|Lbasis| = 13²) that reflects current operations. The model is then solved
with a medium extended and a large extended line pool with |L2| = 30 and |L3| = 50
respectively, whith Lbasis ⊂L2 ⊂L3.
The solution values and performance of the three instances are reported in Table 5.2.
The objective value of the solutions found with both L2 and L3 are equal, but the line
plan and timetables differ. As comparison the line plans for L2 and L3 are given in
Figure 5.6. The line plan of Lbasis can be found in section A.4.
Instance
step
|L|
Bin. var
Int. var
Real var
Cons.
Time (s)
Obj.
gap (%)
Lbasis
1
13
13
1305
2137
7616
6.46
2368.50
0.01
2
13
13
1317
2137
7591
248.37
2345.10
0.00
L2
1
30
30
3377
12 461
32 394
10 801.10
2271.50
0.07
2
11
11
1345
2148
7623
1370.04
2113.01
0.00
L3
1
50
50
6713
49 629
113 419
17 488.40
2338.50
0.10
2
11
11
1342
2148
7619
2625.91
2113.05
0.00
Table 5.2.: Model performance for the entire network.
5.4.1
Line plans
The extended line pool makes it possible to find a slightly cheaper plan of operation,
though there is no real difference between the medium size instance and the large
instance of possibilities. The chosen line plans differ, which shows that many equal
optimal solutions exist, not only solutions which differ by shifting (parts of) the time-
table, but also solutions that have different line plans. Figure 5.6 shows that the optimal
²This includes copies for higher frequencies.
68
==PAGE:79==
5.4 The entire network
(a) Generated line plan for L2.
(b) Generated line plan for L3.
Figure 5.6.: Resulting line plans for L2 and L3. Colours indicate the frequency. white dots
indicate the stops of the line.
69
==PAGE:80==
Line planning and timetabling at DSB
line plans generally consist of a variety of long lines, because this will give the least
time a train engine (and crew) are used on turning, shunting etc. Even thoug passenger
optimisation was not a goal of the model, the resulting plans provide direct connec-
tions for many passengers to their destinations, a criterion proposed for many lpps
(chapter 2).
In terms of the objective value of the model the resulting plans for L2 and L3 are
roughly equal. They have both been calculated with IC4 rolling stock for all trains,
which is powered by diesel and can run on all lines. The line plan given in Figure 5.6b
would not be suited for today’s running rolling stock, since it combines the electrified
coastal section, with preferred electric Øresundstog, with the unelectrified northwest
section. The plan is reliant on the proper future functioning of IC4 and can be prob-
lematic if more flexibility is wanted in continued utilisation of current rolling stock.
5.4.2
Headway distribution
For the tests in section 5.3 the model showed that it was capable of spreading the
services of one base line equally over the schedule period. This was done with con-
straint (4.40). The downside of this constraint is that it only distributes services equally
if the entire service is the same, but not if the end destinations are different — if they
are effectively different lines — even though they share the same section and stations.
This results in unbalanced schedules as found in Plan 1 in Figure 5.7 for the Coastal
section.
A first example are lines 6, 22 and 23. line 6 runs from Helsingør to Kastrup Airport
and lines 22 and 23 from Helsingør to Holbæk. These lines share the section Helsingør
- Copenhagen Central. Lines 22/23 depart every 30 minutes, but they are not lined up
with line 6.
The balancing constraint does not balance lines that are shortened versions of other
70
==PAGE:81==
5.4 The entire network
lines either. As an example in Figure 5.7 with lines 1–3 and 6. The first three run from
Nivå to Kastrup Airport and are shorter versions of line 6, which starts in Helsingør. It
could be argued that these four lines together with lines 22/23 should best be balanced
to provide a well-spread and predictable passenger service on the coastal section. It
is however not possible to balance all of these lines on all sections of the network.
Balancing six trains on the coastal line makes it difficult to balance the four trains that
continue to the airport, without enforcing extra waiting time at Copenhagen Cent-
ral on some of the trains. Extra dwelling times would also put more pressure on the
available platforms at Copenhagen Central.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
6
15
18
19
20
22
23
Extended plan 1
Figure 5.7.: String diagram for Extended plan 1 on the line Helsingør - Kastrup Airport.
71
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Conclusion and future
extensions
6.1
Conclusion
The proposed model in model 4.5 gives an integration of the the Line Planning Problem
and the Periodic Event Scheduling Problem (pesp) problems in one formulation. It has
been shown that this gives the possibility of solving the two problems simultaneously,
so the results are feasible solutions for the integrated system. However, because the
line plan is normally fixed when the timetable is scheduled, part of the input para-
meters of pesp are variables in the integrated model, most notably the lines and their
frequencies. Desired inclusions that can easily be added in the pesp model, including
balancing constraints for equal spacing of trains running in the same direction, are
required to be relaxed or entirely left out in the integrated model. The resulting time-
tables are therefore not always competitive with solutions obtained from a sequential
approach.
For the case of balancing constraints, it has been shown that it is possible to include
these in the integrated model linearly by means of an additional constraint and an
additional objective term. The created problem has thus a multi-criteria objective and
depending on the chosen weights, there is a possibility for decomposing and solving
73
==PAGE:84==
Conclusion and future extensions
the model in two steps, providing more favorable solving times.
The biggest benefit of the integrated model is that it guarantees that a found line
plan is in fact operable with a feasible timetable. In the traditional sequential approach
a risk exists of finding line plans which turn out to be infeasible for the pesp definition
and which require the planner to either alter the line pool or to alter the lpp to cut
away this found optimal solution, until a new line plan is found which also is feasible
for pesp.
Model tests showed that results of current practice can be reproduced. It has been
able to find new line plans for DSBs regional network of Sjælland when the Coastal rail
network (Kystbanen) is included and connected to the main regional network. Even
though the model focuses on cost-optimisation, the resulting line plans offer many
passengers direct connections.
6.2
Adaptations and future extensions
6.2.1
Timetable quality
As has been previously discussed, the main concern about the generated solutions is
the quality of the timetables. Trains going in the same direction need to be distrib-
uted more evenly and above all with regular intervals before the timetables would be
taken into use. The current solutions would mean a decrease in passenger line, both
travelling time and waiting time at station before the journey’s start.
The solutions generated in the examples contain various long routes with shared
sections, rather than lines with higher frequencies, which makes proper balancing
impossible. It can be chosen to redefine the balancing constraint to include balancing
of lines on shared sections and to increase the weight ρ in the objective function in
order to emphasise the importance of a balanced timetable in designing a line plan.
74
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Adaptations and future extensions
Because there is quite a lot of symmetry in the solution space, it is possible that an
equal solution, with an equal line plan but with a better timetable, exists. To find these
solutions, either a new criterion for timetable quality has to be defined and included
in the objective of the model, or the resulting solution has to be manipulated manually
by experienced schedulers.
It is hard to define an objective criterion that satisfies the needs for good timetables.
Above all, these criteria, such as equal spacing of trains, depend on the number of
trains that run along the same corridor. This is exactly something that is not yet known
in the integrated problem. Including such a criterion will turn the model non-linear.
6.2.2
Symmetric periodic timetables
DSB has expressed concerns about the lack of symmetry in the timetables, which is de-
sired highly by DSB. Especially for journeys where passengers have to change trains,
symmetry will provide the same changing times in both directions. Symmetry can be
obtained by adding symmetry constraints to the model as described in (3.3).
Instead of ensuring symmetry for every pair of event and corresponding opposite
event in the event-activity network, it is worth considering to include only the start
and end events of a line. If travelling times are fixed or the model chooses the fastest
running time for any driving activity nonetheless, then this method would result in a
symmetric timetable while using much fewer additional constraints. Remind that this
would be a theoretically unsound method and computational results need to show that
it works satisfyingly for the network and rolling stock.
6.2.3
Station capacity
So far, it has been assumed that stations had an unlimited capacity to handle all trains.
This gives no practical problems for most of the network, with the exception of Copen-
75
==PAGE:86==
Conclusion and future extensions
hagen central. The resulting plans rely on many trains turning around at Copenhagen
Central station. Both trains ending at Copenhagen Central and trains coming from
Valby and continuing to the airport have to turn around at Copenhagen Central. Dur-
ing the process of turning, a train will occupy the platform. There is simply insufficient
capacity to handle all these trains turning at Copenhagen. In practice most of these
lines would continue to Østerport and turn around there at the nearby shunting area,
so platforms are not occupied for longer than necessary. To make the plans operable,
the model should include a maximum station capacity, which is enforced for each
moment in time, or at least a maximum number of trains that can turn around at the
station.
76
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
Avelino, F., te Brömmelstroet, M., & Hulster, G. (2006). The Politics of Timetable Plan-
ning: Comparing the Dutch to the Swiss. In Proceedings of the colloquium vervoer-
splanologisch speurwerk 2006. Amsterdam. Retrieved from http://www.infrasite.
nl/images/railpedia/attachments/80282906/80446356.pdf
Borndörfer, R., Grötschel, M., & Pfetsch, M. E. (2007). A Column-Generation Approach
to Line Planning in Public Transport. Transportation Science, 41(1), 123–132.
Bouma, A. & Oltrogge, C. (1994). Linienplanung und Simulation für öffentliche Verkehr-
swege in Praxis und Theorie. ETR. Eisenbahntechnische Rundschau, 43(6), 369–
378. Retrieved from http://cat.inist.fr/?aModele=afficheN%7B%5C&%7Dcpsidt=
3316288
Bull, S. H., Lusby, R., & Larsen, J. (2015). An optimization based method for line plan-
ning to minimize travel time. In Proceedings of the 13th conference on advanced
systems in public transport (caspt) 2015. Rotterdam: Erasmus University.
Bussieck, M. R., Kreuzer, P., & Zimmermann, U. T. (1996). Optimal lines for railway
systems. European Journal of Operational Research, 96(1), 54–63
Caprara, A., Kroon, L. G., Monaci, M., Peeters, M., & Toth, P. (2007). Passenger Rail-
way Optimization. In Handbooks in operations research and management science
(Chap. 3, Vol. 14, 100, pp. 129–187).
Claessens, M., van Dijk, N., & Zwaneveld, P. (1998). Cost optimal allocation of rail
passenger lines. European Journal of Operational Research, 110(3), 474–489.
DSB. (2014a). DSB Hovedtal Rejser 2009-2013. Retrieved from www.dsb.dk
DSB. (2014b). DSB Togruter i Danmark. Retrieved October 16, 2015, from http://www.
dsb.dk/trafikinformation/koreplaner/
Goossens, J.-W., van Hoesel, S., & Kroon, L. (2004). A Branch-and-Cut Approach for
Solving Railway Line-Planning Problems. Transportation Science, 38(3), 379–393
Haase, K., Desaulniers, G., & Desrosiers, J. (2001, August). Simultaneous Vehicle and
Crew Scheduling in Urban Mass Transit Systems. Transportation Science, 35(3),
286–303
Kaspi, M. & Raviv, T. (2013). Service-Oriented Line Planning and Timetabling for Pas-
senger Trains. Transportation Science, 47(3), 295–311.
77
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
Liebchen, C. (2003). Symmetry for Periodic Railway Timetables. Electronic Notes in
Theoretical Computer Science, 92(1), 34–51.
Liebchen, C. (2006). Periodic Timetable Optimization in Public Transport (PhD thesis,
Technische Universität Berlin).
Luethi, M., Weidmann, U. A., & Nash, A. (2007). Passenger arrival rates at public trans-
port stations. In Transportation research board 86th annual meeting.
Michaelis, M. & Schöbel, A. (2009). Integrating line planning, timetabling, and vehicle
scheduling: A customer-oriented heuristic. Public Transport, 1(3), 211–232.
Schachtebeck, M., Goerigk, M., & Schöbel, A. (2012). Dependencies between line plan-
ning, timetabling and delay management: Simulations with the LinTim toolbox. In-
stitut für Numerische und Angewandte Mathematik. Georg-August Universität
Göttingen. Retrieved from http://num.math.uni-goettingen.de/preprints/files/
2011-12.pdf
Schittenhelm, B. (2013). Quantitative Methods for Assessment of Railway Timetables
(PhD thesis, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet).
Schöbel, A. (2012). Line planning in public transportation: Models and methods. OR
Spectrum, 34(3), 491–510
Schöbel, A. (2015). Integration of line planning and timetabling. Some first approaches.
In Conference on advanced systems in public transport (caspt). Rotterdam.
Schöbel, A. & Scholl, S. (2006). Line Planning with Minimal Traveling Time. In L. Kroon
& R. H. Möhring (Eds.), Atmos 2006 - 5th workshop on algorithmic methods and
models for optimization of railways. Dagstuhl seminar proceedings.
Schrijver, A. & Steenbeek, A. (1993). Dienstregelingontwikkeling Nederlandse Spoor-
wegen N.V. Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica. Retrieved from http : / /
homepages.cwi.nl/%7B~%7Dlex/files/rapp1.ps
Serafini, P. & Ukovich, W. (1989, November). A Mathematical Model for Periodic Schedul-
ing Problems. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 2(4), 550–581
Trafikministeriet. (2014). Kontrakt mellem Trafikministeriet og DSB om fjern- og re-
gionaltrafik udført som offentlig service i perioden 2015-2024.
78
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A
Results
A.1
Coastal line
79
==PAGE:90==
Results
1-3
Helsingør
●Snekkersten
●Espergærde
●Humlebæk
4-6
●●Nivå
●●Kokkedal
●●Rungsted Kyst
●●Vedbæk
●●Skodsborg
●●Klampenborg
●●Hellerup
●●Østerport
●●Nørreport
●●●
København H
To Sweden
7-8
Coastal line
To Sweden
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
●
●
●1-3
●
●
●4-6
●
●
●7-8
To Sweden
Thrice per hour
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Frequencies
Thrice per hour
Twice per hour
Once per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
Figure A.1.: Basic service plan used in the coastal rail test.
80
==PAGE:91==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Coastal line
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
22
23
Coastal line
Figure A.2.: (= Figure 5.5) Coastal rail
81
==PAGE:92==
Results
A.2
Northwest line
Kalundborg
Svebølle
Jyderup
Mørkøv
Knabstrup
Regstrup
3 ●
●
●
●
●
●
1-2
●●
Holbæk
●●
Vipperød
●●
Tølløse
●●
Hvalsø
●●
Lejre
3
●●●
København H
Northwest line
1-2
10-11
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Trekroner
Valby
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
10-11
Trekroner
Valby
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Frequencies
Seven times per hour
Twice per hour
Frequencies
Twice per hour
Once per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
Figure A.3.: Basic service plan used in the Northwest rail test.
82
==PAGE:93==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HK
PE
TØ
HV
LJ
RO
TRK
HTÅ
VAL
KH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
Northwest line
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HK
PE
TØ
HV
LJ
RO
TRK
HTÅ
VAL
KH
Station
Time
Service
2
3
4
15
16
17
18
19
20
Northwest line
Figure A.4.: Northwest Sjælland
83
==PAGE:94==
Results
A.3
Southern line
●●●
København H
7-8
Southern line
1-4
5-6
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Trekroner
Valby
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
1-4 ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Trekroner
Valby
Ringsted
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Viby
●●
Borup
●●
Ringsted
5-6 ●●
Glumsø
●
Næstved
●
Lundby
●
Vordingborg
●
Nørre Alslev
●
Twice per hour
Once per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
Four times per hour
Frequencies
Eskilstrup
●
Nykøbing F
●
7-8
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
↓To Hamburg (Germany)
Figure A.5.: Basic service plan used in the Southern rail test.
84
==PAGE:95==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
VO
LU
NÆ
GZ
RG
BO
VY
RO
TRK
HTÅ
VAL
KH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Southern line
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
VO
LU
NÆ
GZ
RG
BO
VY
RO
TRK
HTÅ
VAL
KH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Southern line
Figure A.6.: South Sjælland
85
==PAGE:96==
Results
A.4
Basic instance entire network (Lbasis)
86
==PAGE:97==
Results
4-6
Helsingør
●Snekkersten
●Espergærde
●Humlebæk
1-3
●●Nivå
●●Kokkedal
Kalundborg
Svebølle
Jyderup
Mørkøv
Knabstrup
Regstrup
●●Rungsted Kyst
9 ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●Vedbæk
7-8
●●Skodsborg
●●
Holbæk
●●Klampenborg
●●
Vipperød
●●Hellerup
●●
Tølløse
●
●●Østerport
●●
Hvalsø
●
●●Nørreport
●●
Lejre
9
ic1
ic2
ic3
●●●●●●●●●●
København H
10-11
7-8
To Sweden
Basic plan
10-11
12-13
Roskilde
To Sweden
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Roskilde
To Sweden
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Trekroner
Valby
●
●
●4-6
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●1-3
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●10-11
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Roskilde
To Sweden
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Ringsted
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Trekroner
Valby
●
●
●
●
●
Viby
●
●
Borup
●
●
Ringsted
10-11 ●
ic1
●
ic2
●
ic3
●●
  
Glumsø
●
Næstved
●
Lundby
●
Vordingborg
●
Nørre Alslev
●
Thrice per hour
Frequencies
Eskilstrup
●
Nykøbing F
●
12-13
Once per hour
Thrice per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
Twice per hour
↓To Hamburg (Germany)
Fixed trains (non-regional) once per hour
Figure A.7.: Service plan used as the basic service pool.
87
==PAGE:98==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
VO
LU
NÆ
GZ
RG
BO
VY
RO
Station
Time
Service
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Basic plan
Figure A.8.: String diagram basic solution for the section Vordingborg - Roskilde.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HK
PE
TØ
HV
LJ
RO
Station
Time
Service
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Basic plan
Figure A.9.: String diagram basic solution for the section Holbæk - Roskilde.
88
==PAGE:99==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
RO
TRK
HTÅ
VAL
KH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Basic plan
Figure A.10.: String diagram basic solution for the section Roskilde - Copenhagen.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Basic plan
Figure A.11.: String diagram basic solution for the section Helsingør - Kastrup Airport.
89
==PAGE:100==
Results
A.5
Medium size instance entire network (L2)
90
==PAGE:101==
Results
20-23
6
●
●Helsingør
●
●Snekkersten
●
●Espergærde
●
●Humlebæk
1-3
●
●●Nivå
●
●●Kokkedal
Kalundborg
Svebølle
Jyderup
Mørkøv
Knabstrup
Regstrup
●
●●Rungsted Kyst
18 ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●Vedbæk
19-20
●
●●Skodsborg
●●
Holbæk
●
●●Klampenborg
●●
Vipperød
●
●●Hellerup
●●
Tølløse
●
●●Østerport
●●
Hvalsø
●
●●Nørreport
●●
Lejre
18
ic1
ic2
ic3
15
18 15
●●●●●●●●●●●●
København H
Extended plan 1
19-20
19-20
To Sweden
To Sweden
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
To Sweden
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Trekroner
Valby
●
●
●6
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●1-3
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●15
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●18
●
●
●
●
●
●19-20
●
●
●
●
●
To Sweden
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Trekroner
Valby
Ringsted
●
●
●
●
●
●
17
Viby
●
●●
Borup
●
●●
Ringsted
20-23 ●
ic1
●
ic2
●
ic3
●●
  
●
Glumsø
●●
Næstved
●●
Lundby
●●
Vordingborg
●●
Nørre Alslev
●●
Frequencies
Thrice per hour
Eskilstrup
●●
Nykøbing F
●●
15
17
Thrice per hour
Twice per hour
Once per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional)
↓To Hamburg (Germany)
Fixed trains (non-regional)
Figure A.12.: (= Figure 5.6a) Generated service plan for L2.
91
==PAGE:102==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
VO
LU
NÆ
GZ
RG
BO
VY
RO
Station
Time
Service
15
17
18
19
20
22
23
Extended plan 1
Figure A.13.: String diagram extended plan 1 solution for the section Vordingborg - Roskilde.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HK
PE
TØ
HV
LJ
RO
Station
Time
Service
15
17
18
19
20
22
23
Extended plan 1
Figure A.14.: String diagram extended plan 1 solution for the section Holbæk - Roskilde.
92
==PAGE:103==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
RO
TRK
HTÅ
VAL
KH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
6
15
17
18
19
20
22
23
Extended plan 1
Figure A.15.: String diagram extended plan 1 solution for the section Roskilde - Copenhagen.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
1
2
3
6
15
18
19
20
22
23
Extended plan 1
Figure A.16.: (= Figure 5.7) String diagram extended plan 1 solution for the section Helsingør
- Kastrup Airport.
93
==PAGE:104==
Results
A.6
Large size instance entire network (L3)
94
==PAGE:105==
Results
4-6
●Helsingør
●Snekkersten
●Espergærde
●Humlebæk
48
50
3
●●
●●Nivå
●●
●●Kokkedal
Kalundborg
Svebølle
Jyderup
Mørkøv
Knabstrup
Regstrup
●●
●●Rungsted Kyst
50 ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●Vedbæk
20
48
●●
●●Skodsborg
●●●
Holbæk
●●
●●Klampenborg
●●●
Vipperød
●●
●●Hellerup
●●●
Tølløse
●●
●●Østerport
●●●
Hvalsø
●●
●●Nørreport
●●●
Lejre
20
ic1
ic2
ic3
15
15
●●●●●●●●●●●●●
København H
Extended plan 2
10-11
20
10-11
To Sweden
To Sweden
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
To Sweden
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Trekroner
Valby
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●4-6
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●3
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●10-11
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●15
●
●
●
●
●
●20
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
To Sweden
Roskilde
Hedehusene
Høje Taastrup
Ørestad
Tårnby
Kastrup
Trekroner
Valby
Ringsted
●
Viby
●
●●
Borup
●
●●
Ringsted
10-11 ●
ic1
●
ic2
●
ic3
●●
  
●
Glumsø
●●
Næstved
●●
Lundby
●●
Vordingborg
●●
Nørre Alslev
●●
Frequencies
Thrice per hour
Eskilstrup
●●
Nykøbing F
●●
15
17
Thrice per hour
Twice per hour
Once per hour
Fixed trains (non-regional)
↓To Hamburg (Germany)
Fixed trains (non-regional)
Figure A.17.: (= Figure 5.6b) Generated service plan for L3.
95
==PAGE:106==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
VO
LU
NÆ
GZ
RG
BO
VY
RO
Station
Time
Service
10
11
15
17
20
48
50
Extended plan 2
Figure A.18.: String diagram extended plan 2 solution for the section Vordingborg - Roskilde.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HK
PE
TØ
HV
LJ
RO
Station
Time
Service
10
11
15
17
20
48
50
Extended plan 2
Figure A.19.: String diagram extended plan 2 solution for the section Holbæk - Roskilde.
96
==PAGE:107==
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
RO
TRK
HTÅ
VAL
KH
Station
Time
Service
3
4
5
6
10
11
15
17
20
48
50
Extended plan 2
Figure A.20.: String diagram extended plan 2 solution for the section Roskilde - Copenhagen.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
HG
SQ
GÆ
HUM
NI
OK
RU
VB
SÅ
KL
HL
KK
KN
KH
ØRE
TÅT
CPH
Station
Time
Service
3
4
5
6
10
15
17
20
48
50
Extended plan 2
Figure A.21.: String diagram extended plan 2 solution for the section Helsingør - Kastrup Air-
port.
97
==PAGE:108==
Appendix B
Input parameters
B.1
Frequencies per section
Section
Min.
Helsingør (Hg) - Nivå (Ni)
3
Nivå (Ni) - Copenhagen Central (Kh)
6
Copenhagen Central (Kh)- Kastrup Airport (CPH)
8
Copenhagen Central (Kh) - Roskilde (Ro)
6
Roskilde (Ro) - Holbæk (Hk)
3
Holbæk (Hk) - Kalundborg (Kb)
1
Roskilde (Ro) - Ringsted (Rg)
4
Ringsted (Rg) - Vordingborg (Vo)
2
Vordingborg (Vo) - Nykøbing Falster (Nf)
2
Table B.1.: Minimum frequencies of operation per section (taken from Trafikministeriet, 2014).
98
==PAGE:109==
Input parameters
B.2
Direct connections
Between
Min.
Copenhagen Central (Kh)
Holbæk (Hk)
2
Copenhagen Central (Kh)
Kalundborg
1
Copenhagen Central (Kh)
Nykøbing Falster (Nf)
1
Table B.2.: Minimum number of direct connections between stations (taken from Trafikmin-
isteriet, 2014).
B.3
Line Pools
B.3.1 Coastal line
From
To
No. copies
Helsingør
Copenhagen Airport
3
Nivå
Copenhagen Airport
3
Copenhagen Central
Copenhagen Airport
5
Nivå
Copenhagen Central
4
Helsingør
Nivå
3
Østerport
Copenhagen Airport
5
Table B.3.: Extended line pool used for the coastal section (section A.1).
99
==PAGE:110==
Input parameters
B.3.2 Northwest line
From
To
No. copies
Holbæk
Copenhagen Central
3
Kalundborg
Copenhagen Central
1
Kalundborg
Holbæk
1
Holbæk
Roskilde
3
Roskilde
Copenhagen Central
11
Table B.4.: Line pool used for the southern section (section A.2).
B.3.3 Southern line
From
To
No. copies
Roskilde
Copenhagen Central
9
Ringsted
Copenhagen Central
2
Nykøbing Falster
Copenhagen Central
3
Næstved
Copenhagen Central
2
Vordingborg
Copenhagen Central
2
Nykøbing Falster
Vordingborg
1
Nykøbing Falster
Næstved
1
Nykøbing Falster
Ringsted
1
Ringsted
Roskilde
2
Nykøbing Falster
Roskilde
2
Table B.5.: Line pool used for the northwest section (section A.3).
100
==PAGE:111==
Input parameters
B.3.4 Entire network
From
To
No. copies
Ringsted
Copenhagen Central
2
Nykøbing Falster
Østerport
3
Holbæk
Copenhagen Central
2
Kalundborg
Copenhagen Central
1
Helsingør
Copenhagen Airport
3
Nivå
Copenhagen Airport
3
Copenhagen Central
Copenhagen Airport
2
Roskilde
Copenhagen Central
11
Table B.6.: Line pool used for the basic entire network (section A.4).
101
==PAGE:112==
Input parameters
B.3.5 Extended plan 1
From
To
No. copies
Nivå
Copenhagen Airport
3
Helsingør
Copenhagen Airport
3
Holbæk
Copenhagen Central
2
Kalundborg
Copenhagen Central
1
Ringsted
Copenhagen Airport
2
Nykøbing Falster
Copenhagen Central
2
Nykøbing Falster
Copenhagen Airport
2
Nykøbing Falster
Roskilde
2
Kalundborg
Copenhagen Airport
1
Holbæk
Copenhagen Airport
2
Helsingør
Ringsted
3
Helsingør
Nykøbing Falster
3
Ringsted
Østerport
2
Østerport
Copenhagen Airport
2
Table B.7.: Line pool used for the extended plan 1 (section A.5).
102
==PAGE:113==
Input parameters
B.3.6 Extended plan 2
From
To
No. copies
Nivå
Copenhagen Airport
3
Helsingør
Copenhagen Airport
3
Holbæk
Copenhagen Central
2
Kalundborg
Copenhagen Central
1
Ringsted
Copenhagen Airport
2
Nykøbing Falster
Copenhagen Central
2
Nykøbing Falster
Copenhagen Airport
2
Nykøbing Falster
Roskilde
2
Kalundborg
Copenhagen Airport
1
Holbæk
Copenhagen Airport
2
Helsingør
Ringsted
3
Helsingør
Nykøbing Falster
3
Ringsted
Østerport
2
Helsingør
Holbæk
3
Helsingør
Kalundborg
3
Holbæk
Østerport
2
Kalundborg
Østerport
1
Nivå
Ringsted
3
Nivå
Nykøbing Falster
3
Helsingør
Roskilde
3
Nivå
Holbæk
2
Nivå
Kalundborg
2
Table B.8.: Line pool used for the extended plan 1 (section A.6).
103
==PAGE:114==
Appendix C
Station abbreviations
Abbreviation
Name
BO
Borup
CPH
Copenhagen Airport
EK
Eskilstrup
GT
Gladstrup
GZ
Glumsø
GÆ
Espergærde
HG
Helsingør
HH
Hedehusene
Hk
Holbæk
HL
Hellerup
HTÅ
Høje Taastrup
HUM
Humlebæk
HV
Hvalsø
KB
Kalundborg
KH
Copenhagen Central
KK
Østerport
KL
Klampenborg
KN
Nørreport
LJ
Lejre
Abbreviation
Name
LU
Lundby
NÆ
Næstved
NF
Nykøbing Falster
NI
Nivå
OK
Kokkedal
PE
Vipperød
RO
Roskilde
RT
Regstrup
RU
Rungsted Kyst
SQ
Snekkersten
SÅ
Skodsborg
TØ
Tølløse
TRK
Trekroner
TÅT
Taastrup
VAL
Valby
VB
Vedbæk
VO
Vordingborg
VY
Viby Sjælland
ØRE
Ørestad
Table C.1.: Station abbreviations.
104
