==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers
for Chemical and Bio-sensing
Maria-Louise Witthøft
s103106
Supervisors:
Prof. Erik V. Thomsen & Ph.D. student Mathias Mølgaard
February 24th, 2016
==PAGE:2==
Cover image: A photo of a chip with single LOCOS based CMUTs mounted on a T.O. head.
Photo by Maria-Louise Witthøft.
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology
Ørsteds Plads 345E
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Web: www.nanotech.dtu.dk
Author e-mail: Maria_witthoeft@me.com
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial and final fulfilment for obtaining the degree of Master
of Science in Engineering within the field of Physics and Nanotechnology at the Technical
University of Denmark (Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, DTU). The work has been carried
out in the MEMS Applied Sensors group at DTU Nanotech.
The project carries an official workload of 35 ECTS credits and has been conducted from
the 24th of August 2015 to the 24th of February 2016.
The fabrication of the devices
presented in this thesis, as well as any process optimization has been facilitated using
the clean room at DTU Danchip. The impedance measurements and experimental set-up
have been performed and built in the MEMS-lab at DTU Nanotech. The project has
been supervised by Ph.D. student Mathias Grøndahl Mølgaard and Professor Erik Vilain
Thomsen.
I would like to thank both of them for all their help and advice, as well as the rest of the
MEMS Applied Sensors group - you truly are an amazing team. Finally, a special thanks
to my family, my friends and my boyfriend, Kasper Ingerslev. I could not have done it
without your support and patience.
Maria-Louise Witthøft
Kgs. Lyngby, February 2016
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In recent years, the demand for small, inexpensive, high performance gas sensors has
increased considerably. In particular, the detection of the volatile compound ammonia
has become important, near farmlands and in stables, to prevent animals and personnel
from exposure to concentrations above the permissible limits. To this end, the idea of using
a Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer (CMUT) based gravimetric sensor has
been proposed as a possible detection solution.
In this thesis, a novel process flow based on a double LOCal Oxidation of Silicon (LOCOS)
procedure is presented, to produce a CMUT optimised for the purpose of sensing. Further-
more, a humidity controlled climatic set-up was developed and used to demonstrate that
our CMUTs are capable of a reasonable response in frequency, in the kHz range, when
subjected to a simple perturbation. This confirms that they can be used for gravimetric
detection.
Experiments with varying humidity were performed and important figures of merit for
single LOCOS based CMUTs were obtained. Thus, a minimum Allan deviation of 𝜎𝑦(𝜏) =
1.62 × 10−7 for 27 ms averaging time was shown, resulting in a mass Limit Of Detection
(LOD) for the sensor of 𝛿𝑚LOD = 1.72 ag/μm2 (1𝜎-level confidence). Based on an invest-
igation of two data analysis methods, smoothing the raw data and combining with a spline
function, was chosen over lumped element modelling to procure a sensitivity of 928 ppb/Hz
for the sensor. All obtained figures of merit were considered encouraging, when taking
into account that the single LOCOS based CMUTs tested were not optimised for sensing.
The findings of this work led to the conclusion that the CMUT technology provides a
promising platform for gravimetric detection with room for improvement, to meet the
requirements of an ammonia sensor able to detect between 1−> 25 ppm within a minute.
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The CMUT device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Gas Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Gravimetric Detection - Figures of Merit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Gravimetric Detection of Gases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Historical Review of CMUTs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
Ammonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.7
Aim of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.8
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
CMUT Theory
15
2.1
Capacitive Sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
The Isotropic Plate Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
The Anisotropic Plate Equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Resonance Frequency and Eigenfrequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Process Theory
25
3.1
LOCOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Thermal Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Bump Heights in LOCOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Fabrication
33
4.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Process Flow Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Surface Roughness Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.4
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5
Characterisation
61
5.1
Impedance Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2
Frequency Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.3
Humidity Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.4
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6
Functionalization
79
6.1
Silanization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.2
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7
Conclusion
81
7.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A SOI Process Flow
93
B CMUT Process Flow
95
C Datasheet for Honeywell Sensor
101
D Conversion from RH to PPM
109
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
AFM Atomic Force Microscope.
AOE Advanced Oxide Etching.
APTES (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane.
BAW Bulk Acoustic Wave.
BHF Buffered Hydrofluoric Acid.
CMOS Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor.
CMUT Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer.
COMSOL COMSOL Multiphysics.
DMS Distributed Mass Sensitivity.
DRIE Deep Reactive Ion Etching.
FBAR Film Bulk Acoustic Resonator.
FEM Finite Element Modelling.
HF Hydrofluoric Acid.
HMDS HexaMethylDiSilazane.
IDLH Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health.
LOCOS LOCal Oxidation of Silicon.
LOD Limit Of Detection.
LPCVD Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition.
LSER Linear Salvation Energy Relationship.
MEMS Micro Electro- Mechanical-System.
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acronyms
NEMS Nano Electro- Mechanical-System.
PCA Principal Component Analysis.
PEB Post Exposure Bake.
PEL Permissible Exposure Limit.
ppb parts-per-billion.
ppm parts-per-million.
QCM Quartz Crystal Microbalance.
RH Relative Humidity.
SAW Surface Acoustic Wave.
SMR-FBAR FBAR-Solid Mounted Resonator.
SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
SOI Silicon-On-Insulator.
TMAH TetraMethylAmmonium Hydroxide.
TMS TriMethylSilyl.
VOC Volatile Organic Compound.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
In recent years, silicon technology has advanced at an incredible pace and thus made
a new generation of sensors possible, with the capability to detect smaller masses still.
Today, the technology allows for fabricating large arrays with ease, to integrate electronic
circuits monolithically and fabricate devices with nanoscale dimensions, at low costs and
with high yield.
Based on these possibilities, the demand for small, inexpensive and
high performance sensors required for a variety of gas sensing applications has increased
considerably during the past 10 years.
In particular, the detection of so-called Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) have become
important. VOCs are defined as organic compounds having a vapour pressure of 10 Pa
or more, at 20∘C [1]. Some VOCs are dangerous to human health and some have adverse
effects on the environment. Their high vapour pressures arise from low boiling points,
making the compounds evaporate or sublimate and enter the surrounding air, sometimes in
large amounts. This is particularly problematic indoors, as the concentration can become
up to 10 times higher than outdoors [2]. Thus, in order to protect the environment and
health of those exposed to these undesired gasses, several detection schemes have been
proposed.
This thesis will concentrate on one of these detection methods, namely on developing a
gravimetric gas sensor, based on existing CMUT technology for the detection of ammonia,
NH3. In the following, the CMUT device and the concept of a gas sensor will be introduced.
Furthermore, a walk-through of different sensing methods for gravimetric detection of gases
will be given to provide the scientific background for the work described here. A historical
review of the CMUT device will also be outlined and the compound ammonia will be
introduced. Finally, the aim of the thesis will be presented.
1.1
The CMUT device
A cross-sectional view of a CMUT is displayed in Figure 1.1. It consists of two electrodes;
a fixed bottom substrate situated below a suspended top plate, which is clamped near
the edges. The top plate is deformable within the frame and the electrodes are usually
made from highly conducting silicon. They are separated by a dielectric medium, often
consisting of layers of thermally grown SiO2 and Si3N4, depicted as the blue layer in
Figure 1.1. In the central part of the CMUT, a vacuum gap exists. It effectively creates a
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
Plate
Vacuum gap
Center deﬂection, w0
Oxide post
Bottom electrode
V
Dielectric layer(s)
Figure 1.1: Cross-sectional sketch of a typical CMUT device. It contains a fixed bottom substrate
and top plate which is suspended over a vacuum cavity. The top plate is deformable and together
with the bottom substrate it forms two electrodes separated by an insulating dielectric.
The
drawing is not to scale.
cavity within the device and the insulating layers at the bottom prevent electrical contact
between the plate and the bottom substrate.
When applying a DC voltage, 𝑉DC, to the electrode pair, an attractive, electrostatic force
will deflect the top plate and cause it to be attracted towards the bottom electrode. This
electrostatic force is balanced by mechanical restoring forces, caused by the stiffness of the
top plate, until an equilibrium position is reached. If the applied voltage exceeds a certain
value, the electrostatic force will overcome the mechanical restoring forces, causing the
top plate to snap down to the bottom of the cavity. The voltage where this phenomenon
occurs is known as the pull-in voltage, 𝑉pi. To ensure a linear response in the signal of the
CMUT, as well as a high sensitivity, the bias is usually kept at 80 % of 𝑉pi.
Normally, a CMUT device isn’t based on a single CMUT cell, but consists of several
CMUTs connected in parallel to constitute what is known as an element. Often, multiple
elements are then placed in certain configurations, e.g. side by side in an array to make
a CMUT transducer. By using many CMUT cells in this way, the overall performance of
the device can be significantly improved, by increasing reliability and reducing noise and
motional impedance [3].
The individual CMUT cell may in principle have any shape imaginable, however, the cells
considered in this thesis will be circular. Previously, a lot of work has been done in the
Micro Electro- Mechanical-System (MEMS) Applied Sensors group, using square CMUTs.
Unfortunately, the square CMUTs have proven themselves inferior to the circular ones, as
they display reduced frequency separation of plate modes, which leads to loss in output
pressure [4]. This is one of the main reasons why the work done in the group presently
is mostly based on circular cells. As we shall see in section 2.4, the dimensions of the
individual CMUT cell are important, as they determine the resonance frequency and thus
must be engineered to match the desired operational frequency.
1.2
The Gas Sensor
In Figure 1.2, a principle sketch of an assembled gas sensor is illustrated. As can be seen,
the gas sensor has some essential parts and key terms related to its operation mechanism.
In the following, focus will be on describing these parts and defining the relevant terms.
Beginning on the far left of Figure 1.2, the analyte is displayed. The overall purpose of the
gas sensor is to detect the analyte in question. The analyte in itself is not part of the gas
sensor, but it will be part of the environment in which the sensor is supposed to operate.
==PAGE:13==
1.2. The Gas Sensor
3
Ampliﬁer
Output
Transducer
Biological
rec. element
Analyte
Interface layer
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Figure 1.2: Principle sketch of a gas sensor. It consists mainly of the analyte to be detected, the
biorecognition element, the interface layer and the tranducer, which translates a measuring event
into a physical measurable quantity, labelled ”output” here. The figure is inspired by [5].
In this thesis, the analyte will be NH3. Next, is the biological recognition element. The
biological recognition element serves the purpose of actually detecting the analyte; it is
also known as a receptor. Firstly, it must react with or bind to the analyte, that needs
detection and secondly, it should be chemically inert to other gases in the immediate
environment around the sensor. Needless to say that the selectivity of the sensor to the
analyte should be as high as possible, since this will ease detection [5]. In other words, the
selectivity of the biological recognition element to the analyte is of paramount importance.
This is illustrated on Figure 1.2 by the biological recognition elements only ”accepting”
the triangles binding to them.
Somewhat in the middle of the figure, the interface layer is drawn. It serves the purpose
of ensuring adhesion of the biological recognition element to the surface of the transducer,
especially if the surface of the transducer itself isn’t particularly biocompatible.
The
process of applying this layer onto the transducer is known as functionalization or the
immobilization procedure and will be elaborated on in chapter 6.
To the right of the interface layer on Figure 1.2, the transducer is depicted. The transducer
is the element making sure that the event of an analyte binding to the biological recognition
element is ”translated” into a measurable physical quantity [5]. As described previously,
the transducer in this thesis is a CMUT and the measurable physical quantity will be
a change in resonance frequency caused by a change in mass, when NH3 is bound to
the biological recognition elements on the surface. Lastly, on the far right of Figure 1.2,
the amplifier and the output is displayed. In this thesis, the CMUT is amplified by the
supporting electronics and the output signal is electrical, as described previously.
Measuring an Event
In short terms, the gas sensor works by the analyte coming into contact with the biological
recognition element, which is immobilized on the surface of the transducer. Next, the
analyte will bind to the biological recognition element or react with it. This event will
cause a change of mass, which will result in a shift of the resonating frequency towards
lower frequencies of the transducer. The detection mechanism thus consists of measuring
the frequency shift induced by the mass loading. The principle is illustrated in Figure 1.3.
==PAGE:14==
4
Chapter 1. Introduction
0
2
4
6
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
M
a g n i t u d e  [ a . u ]
F r e q u e n c y  [ a . u ]
F i n a l  s p e c t r u m
I n i t i a l  s p e c t r u m
E f f e c t  o f  m
a s s  l o a d i n g
Figure 1.3: Principle of mass detection by detecting frequency shifts in sensors.
In this way, the transducer translates the event to an electrical output, which can then be
read out and interpreted.
1.3
Gravimetric Detection - Figures of Merit
Before discussing the different gravimetric sensing methods, a few figures of merit must be
defined to provide the basis for comparison and understanding the principles of operation.
In general, the sensitivity of a sensor is defined as the sensor’s output change per measured
quantity change [6]. Thus, for all resonant mass sensors, the sensitivity is the change of
resonant frequency, Δ𝑓, due to a change in mass, Δ𝑚;
𝑆= Δ𝑓
Δ𝑚
(1.1)
The resonator can be modelled as a simple 1D mass/spring/dashpot system (a lumped
linear oscillator) and assuming that the change in mass is small compared to the effective
mass of the resonator, 𝑚eff, the sensitivity, 𝑆, can be expressed as [2]
𝑆= 𝜕𝜔0
𝜕𝑚= −𝜔0
2𝑚eff
(1.2)
So, in order to get a high sensitivity mass sensor, the resonator itself must have a high
eigenfrequency, 𝜔0 and a low effective mass, 𝑚eff. Looking at equation (1.2) it can be seen
that a small shift in resonance frequency 𝜕𝜔0 is directly proportional to the amount of
loaded mass, 𝜕𝑚. This also explains why a small shift in resonance due to noise can limit
the detection. Hence, another requirement for a high sensitivity sensor is low noise. For
gravimetric gas sensors a more descriptive figure of merit for the sensitivity must also be
mentioned. It is known as the Distributed Mass Sensitivity (DMS) and is given by
𝑆DMS = 𝐴𝑆= −𝐴𝜔0
2𝑚eff
(1.3)
where 𝐴is the surface area of the interface layer which is assumed homogeneously covered
with additional mass during detection. 𝑆DMS is then also a measure of the sensitivity of the
==PAGE:15==
1.3. Gravimetric Detection - Figures of Merit
5
resonator, but it takes the distribution of mass into account, making it a good parameter
for comparison between sensors.
In order to describe the gravimetric detection mechanism and the LOD, a general rela-
tionship between the concentration and the mass loading must be found. To this end,
parameters describing the efficiency of gas adsorption into the sensitive interface layer are
needed. One such parameter is the partition coefficient, 𝐾. It models the adsorbing prop-
erties of the interface layer at equilibrium. Based on Linear Salvation Energy Relationship
(LSER) equations providing a semi-empiric relationship between the partition coefficient
and the vapour solvation parameters [7], the distribution of a vapour between the gas
phase and the interface layer on the sensor surface, is given by the ratio of the vapour
concentration in the interface layer, 𝐶𝐼, to the vapour concentration in the gas phase, 𝐶,
𝐾= 𝛿𝐶𝐼
𝛿𝐶
(1.4)
Using the equation for the partition coefficient (1.4), and the volume of the interface layer,
𝑉𝐼, the relationship between the adsorbed mass 𝛿𝑚and the concentration 𝛿𝐶is thus
𝛿𝑚= 𝛿𝐶𝐼𝑉𝐼= 𝐾𝑉𝐼𝛿𝐶= 𝐾𝐴𝑒𝜌𝛿𝐶
(1.5)
where in the last step of equation (1.5), the unit for 𝛿𝐶is changed from g/cm3 to the
unitless parts-per-million (ppm) or parts-per-billion (ppb), using the density, 𝜌, of the gas
in question, in g/cm3, the relation for the volume 𝑉𝐼= 𝑒𝐴, where 𝑒is the thickness of
the interface layer and 𝐴is already defined. Thus, equation (1.5) describes the relation
between the mass resolution and the concentration resolution and will be used later on to
define the LOD in concentration.
The frequency stability of the system in the time domain, that is, of the resonator and
the supporting electronics, can be characterised by the normalized Allan deviation [8],
𝛿Allan = 𝜎𝜔/𝜔0 (𝜏) =
√
√
√
⎷
1
2 (𝑁−1)
𝑁−1
∑
1
(
̄
𝜔𝑖+1 −
̄𝜔𝑖
𝜔0
)
2
(1.6)
where
̄𝜔𝑖is the average angular frequency in the 𝑖th time interval 𝜏and 𝑁is the number
of independent frequency measurements. The Allan deviation is a measure of the stability
in frequency, that is, stability due to noise and not that of systematic errors such as
frequency drift or temperature variations. Thus, a low Allan variance is a sign of a system
with good stability over the measured period. The Allan deviation can be used to define
the theoretical LOD in mass, which is the smallest possible value of 𝛿𝑚that can be
detected. This value will be denoted 𝛿𝑚LOD and is given by,
𝛿𝑚LOD (𝜏) = 2𝑚eff𝜎𝜔/𝜔0 (𝜏)
(1.7)
By isolating 𝜕𝑚in equation (1.2) and comparing it to equation (1.7), it is evident why
the noise is what limits the LOD in mass. Finally, the LOD in concentration, 𝛿𝐶LOD, can
be derived using equation (1.7) with (1.5) and (1.2),
𝛿𝐶LOD = 2𝑚eff𝜎𝜔(𝜏)
𝐾𝐴𝑒𝜌
∝𝛿𝑚LOD (𝜏)
𝐴
(1.8)
where 𝜎𝜔(𝜏) is the Allan deviation (not normalized). The LOD in concentration is thus
proportional to the ratio between the LOD in mass and the surface area of the interface
==PAGE:16==
6
Chapter 1. Introduction
layer. It is a suitable figure of merit, since the information needed to calculate it is readily
found in literature and provides for a good comparison between different gas sensing
solutions.
The last important parameter to be considered is the quality factor, 𝑄.
It is a value
indicating the sharpness of a resonance peak for a given system. The physical definition
of 𝑄is the ratio between the energy stored, 𝑊and the energy lost, Δ𝑊, during one cycle
at resonance:
𝑄= 2𝜋𝑊
Δ𝑊
(1.9)
However, this definition is very general. For the case of slight damping, which can be
described by an effective damping coefficient, 𝑏eff, the quality factor can be written as [6]
𝑄= 𝑚eff𝜔0
𝑏eff
(1.10)
which is the definition which will be used throughout this report. Based on these figures
of merit, a few design-rules for a good gravimetric sensor can be outlined:
• The Allan deviation, 𝛿Allan should be minimized, that is the sensor should have low
frequency noise.
Essentially, the noise limits the LOD for a mass-loading based
resonant sensor through equation (1.2)
• The ratio 𝑚eff/𝐴should be as small as possible; i.e. low effective mass and a big
active surface area
• The partition coefficient 𝐾should be as large as possible, i.e. the interface layer
should be tailored for the gas to prefer that compared to the surroundings, making
the layer more active
• The quality factor 𝑄should be as big as possible, since this means less energy lost
by the system to the surroundings and less noise in measurements
1.4
Gravimetric Detection of Gases
Based on the relevant figures of merit from the previous section, the different methods
employed for gas sensing will be discussed in the following.
Gravimetric detection based on Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM) is one of the oldest
and most widespread methods of mass sensing. Its first use as a gas sensor was described in
1964 by King [9]. Sensors based on QCM are in essence electromechanical oscillators and
in the semiconductor industry, QCM methods are often employed when depositing thin
films in vacuum. Quartz crystals are governed by the piezoelectric effect, so by applying
an alternating current to them, oscillations will be induced. The resonance frequency of
these oscillations will change if the mass is increased, which will happen when thin film is
deposited on the crystal. This frequency change can be quantified and correlated to the
mass using Sauerbrey’s equation, which is defined as
Δ𝑓= −2𝑓2
0Δ𝑚
𝐴√𝜌𝑞𝜇𝑞
(1.11)
where 𝑓0 is the unperturbed resonance frequency, Δ𝑓and Δ𝑚are the changes in frequency
and mass, respectively, 𝐴is the piezoelectrically active crystal area, and 𝜌𝑞and 𝜇𝑞are
==PAGE:17==
1.4. Gravimetric Detection of Gases
7
Si substrate
Piezo ﬁlm
Electrodes
Acoustic 
Bragg mirror
Electrodes
Piezo ﬁlm
Si substrate
Figure 1.4: Structure of a suspended FBAR on the left and an SMR-FBAR on the right. The
FBAR is a suspended over an air cavity, whereas the SMR-FBAR is separated from the substrate
by the Bragg mirror. The figure is adapted from [12].
the density and the shear modulus for quartz. Sauerbrey’s equation only works under
certain assumptions; as the deposited film is treated as an extension of the quartz crystal,
the deposited film must be rigid and distributed evenly, with the ratio Δ𝑓/𝑓< 0.05
[10, 11]. QCMs usually operate at frequencies lower than a few hundreds of MHz due to
limitations on how a quartz crystal can be thinned down. These operating frequencies are
low compared to those obtainable by other methods, and that is the main reason for the
mass sensitivity limitations experienced by QCMs [2].
The QCM sensing principle has inspired many other gravimetric sensing methods. These
include sensors based on Bulk Acoustic Waves (BAWs) and Surface Acoustic Waves (SAWs).
BAW based gas sensors can utilize longitudinal and transverse acoustic waves propagating
in a piezoelectric layer, when an electric field is applied, whereas SAW based sensors let
the waves propagate on the surface. The most common type of waves in the latter case is
the Rayleigh waves, which consist of a combination of longitudinal and transverse waves,
confined at the surface down to a penetration depth on the order of the wavelength.
Film Bulk Acoustic Resonators (FBARs) and FBAR-Solid Mounted Resonators (SMR-
FBARs) are popular examples of sensors which are based on BAW. They can be seen in
Figure 1.4 to the left and right, respectively. The FBAR consists of a thin piezoelectric film
sandwiched by two metallic electrodes, suspended over an acoustic resonant air cavity. The
SMR-FBAR is based on the same principle, but fixed on an acoustic Bragg mirror. The
Bragg mirror has alternating layers with high and low acoustic impedances, effectively
isolating the FBAR from the Si substrate. Both types of sensors has the advantage of
decreased effective thickness of the piezoelectric layers, increasing the resonant frequency
and thus the mass sensitivity during detection. For the SMR-FBAR, no etching of Si
is needed to suspend the thin diaphragm, which mitigates the problem of fragility often
faced when using suspended FBARs [12]. Resonant frequencies of up to 1000 MHz for
FBARs have been obtained, however, the LOD for certain compounds have been reported
as insufficient, due to high frequency noise, induced by the low crystal quality of the
deposited piezoelectric layers [2].
The working principle of the BAW sensor is that an added mass on top of the surface
causes a shift of the BAW frequency. In the case of a longitudinal acoustic wave, the
velocity of the wave, 𝑣= 𝑣𝑧(in the 𝑧-direction) is given by
𝑣𝑧= √𝑐33
𝜌√(1 +
𝑘2
𝑡
1 −𝑘2
𝑡
)
(1.12)
where 𝑐33 is an elastic constant of the piezoelectric material, 𝜌the mass density of the
same and 𝑘𝑡the electro-mechanical coupling factor of the BAW. The FBAR resonant
==PAGE:18==
8
Chapter 1. Introduction
Si substrate
Thin ﬁlm
Interdigital Tranducers
Mechanical wave
Delay line/
Interaction region
Input 
IDT
Output 
IDT
Gas-phase species
Vi
Vo
Film
Figure 1.5: The picture on the left shows the interdigital transducer, placed on the surface of
the SAW sensor and the right picture is a cross-sectional view of a SAW based sensor, showing the
main principle of detection. The figure is inspired by [12].
frequency can thus be described by
𝑓0 = 𝑣𝑧
2ℎ
(1.13)
where ℎis the piezoelectric layer thickness. In words, the frequency depends on the velocity
of the longitudinal wave and through that on the density of the piezoelectric material, 𝜌.
This is why the frequency shifts, when adding additional mass.
Many sensors based on SAW exist, as well. They rely on interdigital transducers. An
interdigital transducer consists of two identical comb-like structures, with interleaving
fingers, placed on the surface of the sensor, as depicted to the left in Figure 1.5. When
an AC voltage is applied, acoustic waves are generated by the combs, at the surface of a
piezoelectric material. These waves travel through a region called the delay line and reach
the output interdigital transducer. Here, the mechanical displacements in the medium
caused by the acoustic waves, will result in a voltage difference. Basically, a mass loading
produces a shift in the wave velocity, 𝑣, which in turn causes a change of the resonant
frequency of the SAW, according to
𝑓0 = 𝑣
𝜆
(1.14)
where 𝜆is the pitch of the interdigital transducer fingers, generating the waves. In SAW
sensors, the waves are localized near the surface, which makes them more sensitive to
surface interactions, ultimately resulting in high sensitivity and low LOD for gravimetric
sensing. Furthermore, SAW sensors are strongly influenced by the piezoelectric crystal
quality - a bad quality material will affect the frequency stability and therefore the mass
resolution. Typical SAW operating frequencies are 30 −500 MHz. An overview of a SAW
based sensor is displayed in Figure 1.5, to the right.
Other sensors worth mentioning are resonators, as used in a MEMS/Nano Electro- -
Mechanical-System (NEMS). These have become very popular in recent years due to their
potential for ultrasensitive mass sensing. The most widely employed type of resonator is
cantilevers. Different transduction techniques exist for detecting movement of the canti-
levers; some use piezoresistive layers, others capacitive, magnetomotive or field-emission
transduction principles. The cantilevers are typically made of Si, Si3N4 or SiO2 and they
can be formed in a vast variety of shapes and dimensions. MEMS/NEMS based sensors
are inherently non-specific, similar to the acoustic sensors mentioned above. Hence, they
need immobilization of the compounds to be detected, using surface functionalization [12].
==PAGE:19==
1.4. Gravimetric Detection of Gases
9
Despite the impressive mass resolution attainable in these sensors, the challenge of pro-
curing sensitive detection and efficient actuation at nano-scale remains. Moreover, low
signals are induced due to the small displacements of such devices, and these can easily be
drowned by parasitic background noise [2]. Lastly, despite their good sensitivity, micro
and nano cantilevers suffer from low quality factors, 𝑄, especially in air, which limits their
resolution.
Finally, a few words about the CMUT used as a sensor. Until recently, the research con-
cerning CMUTs has focused on using them for medical and underwater imaging. However,
Khuri-Yakub’s group at Stanford University has proposed using them for gas sensing in
2011 [13]. Compared to other sensors, the CMUT has shown a number of advantages.
It has a wider bandwidth and is rather flexible design-wise. Furthermore, the impedance
of the plate in the CMUT is low, allowing it to be operated at high frequencies, in the
range of tens of MHz. It is also possible to integrate it with existing Complementary
Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) technology, making it a strong competitor to exist-
ing technologies [14]. Combining this with quality factors in the range of several hundreds,
the CMUTs can provide excellent mass sensitivity and resolution. The improved quality
factor can be explained by the CMUT only interacting with the surrounding medium with
the top of the plate. The rest is sealed by the vacuum cavity, effectively cutting energy
losses. This cavity also helps ease the functionalization steps; normally, one has to protect
certain areas, such as the thin gap between the resonating structure and the electrode in
MEMS sensors, during functionalization. Since the cavity is sealed in a CMUT, the gap is
inherently protected. Moreover, the device is made of 100s to 1000s of resonators connec-
ted in parallel, in a multi-resonator structure. This ensures enhanced reliability compared
to single-resonator systems [13]. In fact, if a CMUT resonator configuration consists of 𝑛
resonators with uncorrelated noise, it can achieve a reduction of motional impedance by
a factor of 𝑛and a factor of 𝑛1/2 in thermal noise [3].
Comparison
In Table 1.1, a comparison of the key figures of merit outlined in section 1.3, is displayed.
A few trends are easily seen; firstly, the Allan deviation, 𝛿Allan increases, when the sensors
are scaled down. In particular, SAW and CMUT devices distinguish themselves with low
values here, meaning that they exhibit low frequency noise and rather stable operational
frequencies. For the CMUT, this can be explained by low Signal-to-Noise Ratios (SNRs)
and high 𝑄-values. In contrast to this, NEMS, which represent the smallest systems in
this comparison, show a comparatively big value of the Allan deviation, which is what
one would expect - a lower effective mass of the resonating system will inevitably make
it more susceptible to frequency noise. Second, Table 1.1 reveals that the best values for
the LOD in concentration (𝛿𝐶LOD ∝𝛿𝑚LOD (𝜏) /𝐴) are also displayed by the SAW and
CMUT devices. For the SAW device, this is explained by its large active surface area,
whereas the combination of low Allan deviation, low effective mass and relatively large
active surface area is the reason for the impressive values experienced when using CMUTs.
Despite the performance of the SAW devices on the concentration LOD displayed in Table
1.1, they exhibit poor mass resolution, which is highly undesirable for gravimetric sensing.
In general, there seems to be a trade-off between active surface area and effective mass, two
parameters which influence the performance of the gas sensor significantly. The CMUT
device seems to have an optimal combination of these parameters. Regarding the size,
sensors such as FBARs, SAWs and the like are small individually, however, when imple-
mented in an array to ensure selectivity in gas detection, on the order of millimetres [13].
==PAGE:20==
10
Chapter 1. Introduction
Sensor
Frequency [MHz]
𝛿Allan
𝛿𝑚LOD (𝜏) /𝐴[ng/cm2]
QCM
5 −30
−
−
SAW
30 −500
10−8
0.03
BAW
900 −1100
10−7
1
MEMS
3
10−7
0.1
NEMS
127
10−6
0.1
CMUT
8 −47.7
10−8
0.003 −0.01
Table 1.1:
Table showing a comparison between the key parameters of the sensing methods
mentioned in the text. The data is taken from [12] and [2].
Based on this and the discussion above, these are some of the main reasons for choosing
the CMUT for the gravimetric gas sensor. In the next section, focus will be on the CMUT
and investigation into the literature, to provide a historical review of the device.
1.5
Historical Review of CMUTs
CMUTs were invented in 1994 by an ultrasonics group at Stanford University lead by
Khuri-Yakub [15]. They developed a non-sealed surface micromacined ultrasonic trans-
ducer operating in air, which was fabricated using a sacrificial release method.
This
method utilizes a sacrificial layer to separate the top and bottom electrode, which can
then be selectively etched away, leaving the top electrode suspended. In this case, the
selective layer was SiO2 and the etch a timed etch using pure Hydrofluoric Acid (HF).
In this first generation of CMUTs the focus of attention was mainly on the fabrication
itself and improving understanding of device operation. 1996 marked the beginning of
the second generation of CMUTs as the first vacuum-sealed devices were fabricated some-
what simultaneously by Eccardt et al. [16] from Siemens and Ladabaum et el. [17] from
Stanford. Eccardt et al. modified a standard CMOS process to procure the CMUTs and
Ladabaum et al. showed that CMUTs are viable as immersion transducers.
The invention of an alternative fabrication method by Huang et al. [18] in 2003 created
possible solutions for many problems faced when micromachining the CMUTs. At this
point in time, research had successfully made surface micromachined CMUTs perform
comparably to piezoelectric transducers, which had dominated the ultrasonic transducer
technology up til then [19, 20, 21]. The new method employed a wafer bonding technique,
in which the transducer membrane and cavity were defined on an Silicon-On-Insulator
(SOI) wafer and on a prime wafer, respectively. Then, using silicon direct bonding, the
two wafers were bonded together to form a transducer. In this way, better control of the
uniformity and gap height was obtained, by eliminating several thin film steps.
In 2011, Park et al. [22] combined the wafer bonding technique with a different method for
defining the cavities, namely a double LOCOS process. In this process, they utilized SiO2
as a partially diffusion blocking layer during the first thermal oxidation, which defines
silicon bumps, where the cavities are supposed to be. Next, they used Si3N4 as a diffusion
inhibiting layer during the second thermal oxidation, which grows the oxide post structures
and defines the cavities. After the LOCOS steps were performed, the CMUT was then
finished using fusion bonding of the wafers. The remarkable about this approach was the
ability of Park et al. to control the uniformity and height of the vacuum gap, securing
==PAGE:21==
1.6. Ammonia
11
a large ratio between gap height and oxide post thickness, ultimately reducing parasitic
capacitance and increasing the electrical breakdown voltage [22].
Today, CMUTs are used for a vast variety of purposes, such as medical imaging and more
recently, as a basis for bio-sensing. The latter will be the foundation for this thesis.
1.6
Ammonia
In the introduction it was mentioned, that the CMUT based gravimetric sensor is to be
used for detecting ammonia gasses. Thus, the following section will provide an introduction
to this compound and the solutions already developed for its detection.
Per definition ammonia can’t be classified as a VOC, but it is very volatile, since it has a
vapour pressure of 857.1 kPa at 20∘C. Ammonia is an irritant and the irritation increases
with concentration. Currently, the Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) is 25 ppm and the
Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health (IDLH) limit is > 500 ppm [23]. Most ammonia
is emitted by direct or indirect human activity. There are three major classes of ammonia
sources; nitrification, a process in which atmospheric nitrogen enters the ecosystem, am-
monification, which is a series of metabolic activities that decompose nitrogen and finally,
combustion, from chemical plants and motor vehicles [23].
In this thesis, focus shall be on one particular application area of ammonia sensors, namely
environmental gas analysis. Especially the agricultural sector is of relevance here, due to
decomposing of organic nitrogen in manure or in leaves and the like. This decomposition
is performed by fungi and bacteria and results in gaseous ammonia, as well as ammonium
ions. The process is called ammonification (1.15) and is often followed by hydrolysis of
ammonia to ammonium (1.16),
R−NH2 + H2O
→
NH3 + R−OH + Energy
(1.15)
NH3 + H2O
→
NH+
4 + OH−
(1.16)
In fact, it is estimated that the worldwide ammonia emission resulting from domestic anim-
als is 20 −35 Tg/year. The smell of ammonia near farmlands when manure is distributed
is well-known and rather unpleasant. As indicated by the numbers mentioned, expos-
ure to high ammonia concentrations can have adverse health effects and thus unhealthy
situations can occur for farmers and animals inside the stables, where concentrations are
highest and sometimes exceed the PEL. This is the main motivation for the ammonia gas
sensor. Of course, it is the application that dictates the concentration levels of interest,
which in turn determines the time resolution required in the equipment.
For environmental gas analysis, the requirements for the gas sensor is outlined in Table
1.2. It is especially the second application, which is of interest, namely performing meas-
urements in stables to protect animals and farmers. As can be seen, the sensor must fulfil
Monitor app.
Detection Limit
Response Time
Temp.
Range
Ambient conditions
0.1 ppb−> 200 ppm
Minutes
0 −40∘C
In stables
1−> 25 ppm
∼1 min
10 −40∘C
Table 1.2: Table showing the requirements for detecting ammonia in stables and under ambient
conditions. Based on information from [23].
==PAGE:22==
12
Chapter 1. Introduction
the detection limit of 1−> 25 ppm, within a minute, when operating at temperatures
between 10 −40∘C for it to be applicable and feasible.
To this end, it is worth briefly discussing the different ammonia sensing principles, which
already exist. One of the most popular detection schemes are metal-oxide gas sensors,
mostly based on SnO2. They operate on the principle of a change in conductance due
to chemisorption of the ammonia molecules onto the sensing layer. Unfortunately, this
type of sensor isn’t selective to one gas in particular and that is the main drawback, since
complex initiatives must be implemented to make the sensor selective. The second type
of sensor worth mentioning is the catalytic ammonia detector. It works by experiencing
a change in the charge carrier concentration in the catalytic metal, when influenced by
ammonia.
This change in carrier concentration is often quantified using a field effect
device, such as a transistor or capacitor. Other techniques are based on optical principles,
such as spectrophotometry, where a specific reaction cases a colouration of the analyte or
adsorption spectroscopy, where the spectrum of light reaching the detector is influenced
by the ammonia gas. Finally, some conducting polymer gas detectors exist. In this thesis,
using polymer layers will also be discussed in chapter 6, although not in the same detection
scheme. For a more thorough walk-through of each individual sensing principle, the reader
is referred to [23].
1.7
Aim of the Thesis
To the best of the author’s knowledge, the idea of using a CMUT based gravimetric sensor
in the field of ammonia detection has not previously been explored. Thus, the primary aim
of the work presented in this thesis is fabricating a double LOCOS based CMUT sensor
in the Danchip clean room, optimized for the purpose of sensing. Furthermore, the goal
is to develop and assemble a simple experimental set-up to prove that our CMUT sensors
can be used as a platform for gravimetric detection. Based on the experiments performed
with the set-up, focus will be on analysing and discussing the results, as well as calculating
important figures of merit for the sensors, such as mass LOD and sensitivity. The results
obtained will also act as the foundation for a discussion about the measurement method
associated with gravimetric detection. The final goal is then to draw conclusions regard-
ing the performance of the CMUTs and to outline future initiatives to enable ammonia
detection.
1.8
Thesis Outline
Here, a short list outlining the thesis will be given. It will provide the reader with an
overview and shortly describe the contents of each chapter.
Chapter 2: CMUT Theory
introduces the theory governing the operation and behaviour
of the CMUTs. The simple parallel plate capacitor model, as well as the more elaborate
iso- and anisotropic models will be described.
Chapter 3: Process Theory
presents important process theory, such as the concepts of
LOCOS and thermal oxidation. Furthermore, an analysis of the bump heights provided
by the LOCOS process will be carried out, as well as simulations in Athena elucidating
its behaviour.
==PAGE:23==
1.8. Thesis Outline
13
Chapter 4: Fabrication
outlines the design for the individual CMUT cell, as well as present
the overall mask design. This is followed by a presentation of the process associated with
the fabrication of the double LOCOS CMUTs.
Chapter 5: Characterisation
presents the characterisation performed using impedance
measurements, as well as the experimental set-up developed for testing CMUTs when
used for gravimetric sensing. Furthermore, the chapter will discuss and analyse the res-
ults obtained from the experiments.
Chapter 6: Functionalization
describes the surface modification process silanization and
will recommend the next steps to be taken towards functionalizing the CMUTs.
Chapter 7: Conclusion & Outlook
concludes the thesis by referring back to the aim of the
project and evaluating the outcome. It will briefly summarize the achievements concerning
fabrication and characterisation and end with an outlook discussing future possibilities.
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER2
CMUT Theory
In this chapter, the concept of capacitive sensing will be developed and the behaviour of the
CMUT modelled using a simple parallel plate capacitor. The model is then expanded to
the more elaborate isotropic and anisotropic plate models taking the deflective behaviour of
the top plate and directional nature of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio into account.
Finally, the concepts of resonance frequency and eigenfrequency are explained.
2.1
Capacitive Sensing
Consider a CMUT modelled using a simple parallel plate capacitor, as in Figure 2.1. It
consists of a top plate, attached to a spring, so movement in the z-direction is possible
and one fixed plate at the bottom. The plate attached to the spring is the top electrode
and the static plate is the bottom electrode. In between the electrodes a vacuum gap of
distance 𝑔vac exists and two dielectric layers of SiO2 and Si3N4, with thickness 𝑔ox and 𝑔ni,
respectively, are deposited on top of the bottom electrode, making the overall gap distance
𝑔tot = 𝑔vac + 𝑔ox + 𝑔ni
(2.1)
Other dielectric layers could also have been employed, and this derivation generalized by
denoting 𝑔ox and 𝑔ni as dielectric layer 1 and 2, but to simplify matters and stay focused
on the materials chosen for this thesis, this will be avoided.
Each of the layers in the CMUT can have a different capacitance, so the overall capacitance
must be modelled as three capacitors in series:
𝐶tot = (
1
𝐶vac +
1
𝐶ox +
1
𝐶ni
)
−1
= ( 𝑔vac
𝜖0𝐴+
𝑔ox
𝜖0𝜖ox𝐴+
𝑔ni
𝜖0𝜖ni𝐴)
−1
= 𝜖0𝐴
𝑔eff
(2.2)
with
𝑔eff = 𝑔vac + 𝑔ox
𝜖ox
+ 𝑔ni
𝜖ni
(2.3)
which is the effective gap distance, although not a quantity measurable in reality [24].
Here, 𝜖0, 𝜖ox and 𝜖ni are the permittivities of vacuum, SiO2 and Si3N4, respectively, and 𝐴
15
==PAGE:26==
16
Chapter 2. CMUT Theory
Spring
Bottom electrode
Top electrode
gvac
gox
gni
Si
Si3N4
SiO2
Figure 2.1: Conceptual sketch of the CMUT modelled as a parallel plate capacitor. The relevant
parameters are also given; 𝑔vac is the vacuum gap, 𝑔ni is the thickness of the nitride layer and
𝑔ox is the thickness of the oxide layer.
is the area of the electrodes. The total potential energy 𝑈tot, of the parallel plate capacitor
is a sum of the electrostatic energy stored, 𝑈e, in the capacitor
𝑈e = 1
2𝐶𝑉2
(2.4)
and the potential energy of the spring system, 𝑈s, modelled with spring constant 𝑘and
displacement 𝑧of the top electrode,
𝑈s = 1
2𝑘𝑧2
(2.5)
When the CMUT is operated, a voltage is applied across the plates of the capacitor. This
gives rise to an attractive, electrostatic force between the plates, pulling them together and
compressing the spring on the top electrode. Thus, the total energy 𝑈tot can be described
as
𝑈tot = 𝑈e + 𝑈s = −1
2𝐶𝑉2 + 1
2𝑘𝑧2
(2.6)
The overall capacitance varies with the displacement, increasing as the vacuum gap (𝑔eff−𝑧)
decreases:
𝐶(𝑧) =
𝜖0𝐴
𝑔eff −𝑧
(2.7)
So the total energy, 𝑈tot, can be rewritten as
𝑈tot = −1
2
𝜖0𝐴
𝑔eff −𝑧𝑉2 + 1
2𝑘𝑧2
(2.8)
Pull-in Voltage
From equation (2.8) it is possible to derive an expression for the pull-in and pull-out
voltages.
At pull-in, the movable part of the parallel plate capacitor touches the top
dielectric layer on the fixed bottom electrode and an equilibrium situation is established.
Hence, an expression for the force is needed, which is found by taking the derivative of
(2.8) with respect to the displacement, 𝑧:
𝐹= −𝜕𝑈tot
𝜕𝑧
= −𝜕
𝜕𝑧(−1
2
𝜖0𝐴
𝑔eff −𝑧𝑉2 + 1
2𝑘𝑧2) = 1
2
𝜖0𝐴
(𝑔eff −𝑧)2 𝑉2 −𝑘𝑧
(2.9)
==PAGE:27==
2.2. The Isotropic Plate Equation
17
At equilibrium 𝐹= 0, so the electrostatic force balances the spring force
1
2
𝜖0𝐴
(𝑔eff −𝑧)2 𝑉2 −𝑘𝑧= 0
(2.10)
using the relative displacement 𝑢= 𝑧/𝑔eff, equation (2.10) can be written as
1
2
𝜖0𝐴
(𝑔eff −𝑢𝑔eff)2 𝑉2 −𝑘𝑢𝑔eff = 0 ↔1
2
𝜖0𝐴
𝑘𝑔3
eff
𝑉2 = 𝑢(1 −𝑢)2
(2.11)
Setting
𝑦= 1
2
𝜖0𝐴
𝑘𝑔3
eff
𝑉2 = 𝑢(1 −𝑢)2
(2.12)
The expression can be plotted to find the maximum relative displacement, as will be done
in Figure 2.4. Solving the equation, the maximum is given by
𝑑
𝑑𝑢(𝑢(1 −𝑢)2) = 0 →𝑢= 1/3
(2.13)
In other words, 𝑧max = 1
3𝑔eff, using 𝑢= 𝑧/𝑔eff. So the maximum deflection is one third of
the effective gap. At the extremum, the value of the voltage is equal to the pull-in voltage,
𝑉= 𝑉pi, so by inserting 𝑢= 1/3 in equation (2.11), 𝑉pi can be determined
𝑦= 1
2
𝜖0𝐴
𝑘𝑔3
eff
𝑉2 = 1
3 (1 −1
3)
2
= 4
27 ↔
𝑉pi = √8
27
𝑘𝑔3
eff
𝜖0𝐴
(2.14)
As can be seen, the pull-in voltage scales with 𝑔3/2
eff , but also with 𝑘1/2 and 𝐴−1/2, so
several parameters can be adjusted to change 𝑉pi.
Pull-out Voltage
In order to separate the two plates form each other again, the voltage has to be lowered.
In general, the CMUT must be operated below 𝑉pi to avoid pull-in. At a certain point,
the plates will separate, and the voltage where this occurs is called the pull-out voltage,
𝑉po. It is given by [25]:
𝑉po = √2𝑘𝑔eff
𝜖0𝐴(𝑔eff −𝑔vac)
(2.15)
because only the insulation layers, namely the SiO2 and the Si3N4, separate the plates at
this point and hence 𝑉po scales with the effective thickness of the insulating layers. Since
𝑉po < 𝑉pi this also reveals that the system displays a hysteresis behaviour.
2.2
The Isotropic Plate Equation
In the previous section, the capacitance of a simple parallel plate model of the CMUT
was presented and the pull-in and pull-out voltages derived from energy considerations.
==PAGE:28==
18
Chapter 2. CMUT Theory
Figure 2.2:
Conceptual sketch of the circular parallel plate model, with relevant parameters
indicated.
ℎis the plate thickness, 𝑎is the plate radius, 𝑔vac is the vacuum gap, 𝑔ni is the
thickness of the nitride layer and 𝑔ox is the thickness of the oxide layer.
In the simple parallel plate model, it was assumed that the top electrode move with
static displacement. This is not the case in real life CMUTs; here, the top electrode will
deflect during operation and hence a more elaborate model must be developed, to take
this behaviour into account. In the following, a circular CMUT cell will be considered, so
the structure consists of two thin, circular plates clamped at the edges, as can be seen in
Figure 2.2. The deflection, 𝑤(𝑥, 𝑦), can be described by the isotropic plate equation [26]:
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥4 + 2
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥2𝜕𝑦2 + 𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑦4 = 𝑝
𝐷
(2.16)
where 𝑝is the applied differential pressure across the plate and 𝐷denominates its isotropic
flexural rigidity, given by
𝐷=
𝐸ℎ3
12 (1 −𝜈2)
(2.17)
where 𝐸is Young’s modulus, 𝜈is Poisson’s ratio and ℎis the thickness of the plate. The
deflection profile for the circular plate of radius 𝑎is easily given in radial coordinates, such
that the deflection a distance 𝑟from the center is
𝑤(𝑟) = 𝑤0 (1 −(𝑟
𝑎)
2
)
2
(2.18)
where 𝑤0 is the center deflection, which for the thin circular plates has an exact solution
given by [26],
𝑤0 = 1
64
𝑎4𝑝
𝐷
(2.19)
It is beneficial to be able to calculate the capacitance for the circular CMUT cell, just like
in equation (2.7) for the parallel plate model. However, in this case, the total capacitance
is an integral over each capacitive contribution,
𝑑𝐶=
𝜖0
𝑔eff −𝑤(𝑟)𝑑𝐴
(2.20)
described in cylindrical coordinates by using the substitution, 𝑑𝐴= 𝑟𝑑𝑟𝑑𝜃,
𝑑𝐶=
𝜖0
𝑔eff −𝑤(𝑟)𝑟𝑑𝑟𝑑𝜃
(2.21)
so the total capacitance is a double integral over the plate radius and the plate surface,
𝐶= ∫
2𝜋
0
∫
𝑎
0
𝜖0
𝑔eff −𝑤(𝑟)𝑟𝑑𝑟𝑑𝜃= 2𝜋𝜖0
𝑔eff
∫
𝑎
0
𝑟
𝑔eff −𝑤(𝑟)
𝑔eff
𝑑𝑟
(2.22)
==PAGE:29==
2.2. The Isotropic Plate Equation
19
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 2
0 . 3
0 . 4
0 . 5
1 . 0
1 . 2
1 . 4
1 . 6
1 . 8
2 . 0
 
N o r m
a l i z e d  c a p a c i t a n c e ,  C / C
0
 P a r a l l e l  p l a t e
 C i r c u l a r  p l a t e
 S q u a r e  p l a t e
N o r m
a l i z e d  d e f l e c t i o n ,  u  =  w
0  / g
e f f
Figure 2.3: Total, normalized capacitance plotted as a function of normalized deflection, for
three different geometries of the parallel plate system. The simple parallel plate system is in-
dicated by the black line and given by 𝐶= 1/ (1 −𝑢), the circular plate is indicated by the
blue line, using equation (2.23) and the square plate is indicated by the red line and given by
𝐶= 1/ (1 −0.296𝑢−0.136𝑢2), based on [26].
using the substitution 𝑢= √𝑤0
𝑔eff (1 −( 𝑟𝑎)
2) and changing the boundaries for 𝑟= 0 →𝑢=
√𝑤0
𝑔eff and 𝑟= 𝑎→𝑢= 0, the capacitance becomes
𝐶= −𝑎2𝜋𝜖0
𝑔eff
√𝑔eff
𝑤0
∫
0
√𝑤0
𝑔eff
1
1 −𝑢2 𝑑𝑢↔
𝐶= 𝑎2𝜋𝜖0
𝑔eff
√𝑔eff
𝑤0
arctanh (√𝑤0
𝑔eff
) = 𝐶0√𝑔eff
𝑤0
arctanh (√𝑤0
𝑔eff
)
(2.23)
where we can identify 𝐶0 = 𝑎2𝜋𝜖0
𝑔eff
as the zero pressure capacitance in the last expression
(2.23). As can be seen, the total capacitance depends on the center deflection, which in
turn scales with the applied pressure across the plate. The total capacitance is plotted in
Figure 2.3 along with the capacitance for the parallel plate model and for a square plate,
for the sake of comparison. The capacitance for the square plate isn’t important for this
thesis in itself, but it does help illustrate how the geometry affects the overall capacitance
and thus performance of the CMUT, especially when compared to the simple parallel plate
system.
Pull-in voltage
In much the same way as in section 2.1, an electrostatic analysis can be performed to yield
the pull-in voltage and to investigate the equilibrium condition. To obtain an expression
for the total force acting on the flexible plate, the energy approach is used again. The
potential energy, 𝑈tot energy has two contributions, assuming that no pressure is applied.
One is the electrostatic energy stored in the system, 𝑈e and the other is the strain energy
in the plate, 𝑈s [26]:
𝑈tot = −𝑈e + 𝑈s = −1
2𝐶𝑉2 + 32𝜋
3
𝐷𝑤2
0
𝑎2
(2.24)
==PAGE:30==
20
Chapter 2. CMUT Theory
using the expression for the total capacitance in equation (2.23) the potential energy
becomes
𝑈tot = −1
2𝐶0√𝑔eff
𝑤0
arctanh (√𝑤0
𝑔eff
) 𝑉2 + 32𝜋
3
𝐷𝑤2
0
𝑎2
(2.25)
To make the calculations easier, the spring constant 𝑘= 2 ⋅32𝜋𝐷/3𝑎2 is introduced, so
the strain energy can be expressed using Hooke’s law, 𝑈𝑠= 1
2𝑘𝑤2
0, yielding
𝑈tot = −1
2𝐶0√𝑔eff
𝑤0
arctanh (√𝑤0
𝑔eff
) 𝑉2 + 1
2𝑘𝑤2
0
(2.26)
The total force is then the derivative of the potential energy 𝑈tot with respect to the center
deflection 𝑤0:
𝐹= −𝛿𝑈
𝛿𝑤0
= −𝑘𝑤0 + 1
4𝐶0𝑉2 1
𝑤0
(
1
1 −𝑤0/𝑔eff
−√𝑔eff
𝑤0
arctanh√𝑤0
𝑔eff
)
(2.27)
At equilibrium, 𝐹= 0 and using the relative displacement 𝑢= 𝑤0/𝑔eff (with 𝑤0 instead
of 𝑧as in the parallel plate case), the above expression can be rearranged to investigate
the pull-in condition
1
4
𝐶0𝑉2
𝑘𝑔eff
=
𝑢2
1
1−𝑢−√1𝑢arctanh√𝑢
(2.28)
Setting
𝑦= 1
4
𝐶0𝑉2
𝑘𝑔eff
=
𝑢2
1
1−𝑢−√1𝑢arctanh√𝑢
(2.29)
the expression can be plotted to find the maximum relative displacement, as in Figure 2.4,
where equation (2.11) for the simple parallel plate model is also displayed for comparison.
The stable condition for both geometries are found to the left of the maxima, indicated
by the shaded areas.
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
 
N o r m
a l i z e d  y
 P a r a l l e l  p l a t e
 C i r c u l a r  p l a t e
u  =  1 / 3
u  =  0 . 4 6 3
R e l a t i v e  d i s p l a c e m
e n t ,  u  =  z / g
e f f
Figure 2.4: A normalized plot of equation (2.11) for the simple parallel plate model and equation
(2.29) for the circular plate model.
As can be seen, the maximum occurs for 𝑢= 1/3 and
𝑢= 0.463, respectively. The stable condition for both cases are found to the left of the lines
indicating the maxima, emphasized by the shaded areas.
==PAGE:31==
2.3. The Anisotropic Plate Equation
21
Solving the equation
𝑑𝐹
𝑑𝑤0
= 0
(2.30)
an expression for the pull-in voltage, 𝑉pi, can be found and inserted into the stable position
condition, 𝐹= 0, using equation (2.27). This can then be solved for 𝑢, yielding the pull-in
distance, 𝑢= 0.463 [26]. Finally, the value for the pull-in distance is inserted into the
expression for the pull-in voltage,
𝑉pi = √89.4459 𝐷𝑔2
eff
𝑎2𝐶0
= √89.4459 𝑔3
eff
𝜖0𝜋𝑎4
𝐸ℎ3
12 (1 −𝜈)2
(2.31)
In words, equation (2.31) describes the pull-in voltage for the case of a circular plate
model, with no applied pressure. It scales with 𝑔3/2
eff , 𝑎−2 and ℎ3/2. Note that it has the
same dependency on 𝑔eff as in the simple parallel plate case, but the remaining geometric
factors scale differently, simply because of the altered geometry of the problem.
2.3
The Anisotropic Plate Equation
In the previous section, the model was expanded to include the deflective behaviour of the
CMUT using the isotropic plate equation. The problem with this approach is that Young’s
modulus and Poisson’s ratio are strongly anisotropic. In fact, it has been shown that the
isotropic approach causes up to 10% deviations in the deflection for a Si plate [26]. Thus,
to model the anisotropy, the stiffness of the plate must be described by a stiffness tensor,
C, of the silicon instead of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio. The relation between
stress and strain is given by Hooke’s law
𝜎= C𝜖↔𝜖= S𝜎
(2.32)
where C = S−1 is the stiffness tensor defined from the compliance tensor, S. For the case
of the circular CMUT with a thin movable top electrode, the stresses in the 𝑧direction can
be ignored and plane stress assumed. Using the Voigt notation, the stress can be written
as
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
𝜎𝑥𝑥
𝜎𝑦𝑦
0
0
0
𝜎𝑥𝑦
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
(2.33)
so Hooke’s law for this case is given by [26]
𝜎= Ceff𝜖↔⎡⎢
⎣
𝜎𝑥𝑥
𝜎𝑦𝑦
𝜎𝑥𝑦
⎤⎥
⎦
= ⎡⎢
⎣
𝑐11
𝑐12
0
𝑐12
𝑐11
0
0
0
𝑐33
⎤⎥
⎦
⎡⎢
⎣
𝜖𝑥𝑥
𝜖𝑦𝑦
𝜖𝑥𝑦
⎤⎥
⎦
(2.34)
where Ceff is an effective stiffness matrix, since only three coefficients, 𝑐11, 𝑐12 and 𝑐33
are needed to describe the silicon diamond lattice, due to symmetry. The coefficients 𝑐11,
𝑐12 and 𝑐33 depend on the coordinate system of the crystal. Normally, the values for
these stiffness coefficients are known in the < 100 > direction. However, in clean room
fabrication, one will normally align the (100) wafer to the primary flat, which is the [110]
==PAGE:32==
22
Chapter 2. CMUT Theory
direction. This means that the wafer coordinate system will be rotated 45∘with respect
to the crystallographic coordinate system, thus requiring new values for the coefficients.
Regarding the circular CMUT cells relevant for this thesis, there is no preferred coordinate
system - the only important factor is for the substrate plane to be of type (100). The
coefficients can be used to solve the generalized anisotropic plate equation given by
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥4 + 𝑘1
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥3𝜕𝑦+ 𝑘2
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥2𝜕𝑦2 + 𝑘3
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥𝜕𝑦3 + 𝑘4
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑦4 =
𝑝
𝐷𝑎
(2.35)
where 𝑘1 −𝑘4 are the plate coefficients and 𝐷𝑎is the flexural rigidity for the anisotropic
case. For a circular Si geometry with alignment to the < 110 > direction, one can show
that the coefficients reduce to the following [26]
𝑘1 = 𝑘3 = 0
(2.36)
𝑘2 = 2 (𝑐12 + 2𝑐33)
𝑐11
(2.37)
𝑘4 = 1
(2.38)
𝐷𝑎= ℎ3𝑐11
12
(2.39)
So the plate equation in (2.35) can be simplified to
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥4 + 𝑘2
𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑥2𝜕𝑦2 + 𝜕4𝑤
𝜕𝑦4 =
𝑝
𝐷𝑎
(2.40)
The solution to this equation for a circular plate is given by equation (2.18) but with a
different center deflection,
𝑤0 =
1
8 (3 + 𝑘2 + 3𝑘4)
𝑎4𝑝
𝐷𝑎
(2.41)
This expression can be used in further investigations of the pull-in voltage.
Pull-in Voltage
Much like the case for the simple parallel plate capacitor and the isotropic case for the
circular CMUT, the pull-in voltage can be derived using energy considerations.
The
equations will be omitted here and the reader referred to [26].
The pull-in voltage is
then given by the same expression as in equation (2.31) but with an effective flexural
rigidity,
𝐷eff = 3 + 𝑘2 + 3𝑘4
8
𝐷𝑎
(2.42)
instead of 𝐷:
𝑉pi = √89.4459(3 + 𝑘2 + 3𝑘4) 𝐷𝑎𝑔3
eff
8𝑎4𝜖0𝜋
(2.43)
For the anisotropic case, the pull-in voltage scales with 𝑔3/2
eff , like the case for the circular
plate described by the isotropic plate equation, and also with 𝑎−2 and ℎ3/2 through
equation (2.39).
==PAGE:33==
2.4. Resonance Frequency and Eigenfrequency
23
Parasitic Capacitance
The CMUTs produced in this thesis are fabricated using wafer-bonding. In relation to
this, the phenomenon of parasitic capacitance is something to be vigilant about, since it
may greatly influence the performance during operation. In general, it appears due to
the proximity of conductors in circuits. For CMUTs, the parasitic capacitance originates
from the supporting oxide post structures and the rim of the cell, thus influencing the
overall capacitance of the active cells.
However, this is usually a secondary parasitic
compared to those originating from outside of the individual CMUT cells in the form of
cabling and external electronics [4]. The parasitic capacitance is an undesirable effect,
but one which cannot be avoided. Furthermore, the effect ”scales” with frequency, so it
can be significantly more pronounced at higher operating frequencies. This is due to the
behaviour of the capacitive reactance; when the frequency is increased, the reactance will
approach 0, and thus resemble a short wire that strongly passes current.
2.4
Resonance Frequency and Eigenfrequency
Two terms are relevant when discussing frequencies in connection with CMUTs; the eigen-
frequency and the resonance frequency. The terms are used interchangeably but physically,
they refer to different concepts. The eigenfrequency of a system is the natural, undamped
frequency at which it will oscillate when no external forces are acting upon it. In other
words, the concept of eigenfrequency assumes no surrounding media, nor any driving or
damping force. In contrast to this, the resonance frequency is the frequency at which a
system will oscillate with greater amplitude given a certain environment; that is when the
system is surrounded by a specific medium and taking external forces, including damping,
into account. The most efficient frequency to operate a CMUT at is thus the resonance
frequency.
In order to determine approximate solutions to the resonance frequencies of the CMUT,
the eigenfrequency must be found beforehand by energy considerations, otherwise known
as the classical Rayleigh-Ritz approach. The resonance frequency in air for a given system
can be found as [27]:
𝜔0 ≈√𝑅(𝑤)
(2.44)
where 𝑅(𝑤) is the Rayleigh quotient. It is a ratio between the potential strain energy
and the kinetic energy of the system in question, in the numerator and denominator,
respectively
𝑅(𝑤) =
𝑈𝑠
∫volume
1
2𝜌𝑤2𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑦𝑑𝑧
(2.45)
where 𝑈𝑠is the potential strain energy of the system, 𝜌is the density and 𝑤the deflection
profile. For the case of a circular CMUT cell, treated in cylindrical coordinates, Rayleigh’s
quotient becomes
𝑅(𝑤) =
∫𝑎
0 (𝑤𝐷∇2∇2𝑤) 2𝜋𝑟𝑑𝑟
∫𝑎
0 (𝜌ℎ𝑤2) 2𝜋𝑟𝑑𝑟
=
∫𝑎
0 𝐷(∇2𝑤)
2 2𝜋𝑟𝑑𝑟
∫𝑎
0 (𝜌ℎ𝑤2) 2𝜋𝑟𝑑𝑟
(2.46)
where 𝑎is the radius of the plate, 𝐷is the flexural rigidity, ℎis the thickness of the plate,
𝜌is the density of Si and ∇is a differential operator. The steps of solving the integrals in
equation (2.46) will be omitted and the result simply stated
𝑅(𝑤) =
64
3
𝜋
𝑎2 𝐷𝑤2
0
1
5𝜋𝑎2ℎ𝜌𝑤2
0
= 320𝐷
3𝑎4ℎ𝜌
(2.47)
==PAGE:34==
24
Chapter 2. CMUT Theory
So the first eigenfrequency in air is
𝜔0 = √320𝐷
3𝑎4ℎ𝜌
(2.48)
Inserting the expression for the flexural rigidity given by equation (2.17), the first eigen-
frequency for the specific case of a circular plate system can be obtained [26]
𝜔0 = √80
9
1
𝜌
𝐸
1 −𝜈2
ℎ
𝑎2
(2.49)
from equation (2.49) it is evident that the eigenfrequency scales with ℎ/𝑎2. This is im-
portant to remember when the eigenfrequency needs adjusting. During fabrication and
when buying wafers, the thickness ℎof the plate is often predetermined, whereas the plate
radius 𝑎is easy to change.
The CMUTs developed in this thesis are to be used for gravimetric gas sensing, as men-
tioned in chapter 1. In gravimetric gas sensing, the analyte is adsorbed directly onto the
functionalized surface of the CMUT, changing the overall resonating mass and thus the ei-
genfrequency. Under the assumption that the CMUT can be modelled as a lumped linear
oscillator, the expression for sensitivity from equation (1.2), can now be rewritten using
the expression for the eigenfrequency for a circular plate system, (2.49), derived above:
𝑆= −√80
9
1
𝜌
𝐸
1 −𝜈2
ℎ
2𝑎2𝑚eff
(2.50)
which is the sensitivity of the CMUT. As can be seen from equation (2.50), the sensitivity
of a CMUT scales with the radius, the plate thickness and the effective mass as ℎ/ (𝑎2𝑚eff).
This concludes the theory relevant for describing the behaviour of the CMUTs.
2.5
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, the behaviour of the CMUT was modelled using a simple parallel plate
capacitor.
Important terms such as pull-in and pull-out voltages were analysed.
The
model was then made more realistic by using the isotropic plate equation, which enables
describing the deflective behaviour of the top plate during operation. Once again, the
pull-in voltage was determined using energy considerations and found to scale with 𝑔3/2
eff ,
𝑎−2 and ℎ3/2. It was then explained how the isotropic approach can cause up to 10%
deviations in the deflection for a Si plate, why the anisotropic plate equation was used to
model the CMUT once more. Finally, the chapter was concluded with an explanation of
parasitic capacitance, as well as the concepts of resonance frequency and eigenfrequency.
Here, the sensitivity was shown to scale with the radius, the plate thickness and the
effective mass as ℎ/ (𝑎2𝑚eff).
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER3
Process Theory
In this chapter, theoretical considerations regarding the fabrication process will be covered.
Furthermore, the bump heights procured by the LOCOS process in Si substrates will be
elucidated and finally, the chapter will be concluded with Athena simulations.
3.1
LOCOS
LOCOS is a process widely employed in the semiconductor fabrication industry. Tradi-
tionally, it was developed for the CMOS technology, to provide lateral isolation and avoid
cross-talk between active devices on the same chip [28]. Today, the process is used for a
variety of purposes, amongst which is the CMUT technology. The isolation is obtained in
the process by selectively oxidizing certain areas and thus growing layers of SiO2 between
the devices. SiO2 is chosen due to its excellent properties as an insulator.
To perform local oxidation of silicon, the areas which are not supposed to be oxidized
are covered with a diffusion-inhibiting layer; that is, a material that blocks the diffusion
of the oxidant.
The most commonly used masking material is silicon nitride, Si3N4.
Its widespread use is due to its capability of withstanding the oxidizing environments,
with high temperatures, for longer periods of time. Normally, silicon nitride is deposited
using a Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) process. Unfortunately, this
introduces high tensile stress in the nitride layer and compressive stress in the underlying
substrate, so to solve that problem, a buffer oxide layer is grown underneath the nitride
(also known as the pad oxide), to relieve the stress. It is grown with compressive stress
to balance the tensile stress in the nitride, thus lowering the overall stress in the wafer.
Today, other masking materials are being utilized, as well.
Thick layers of SiO2 can
partially block the diffusing species during oxidation, although thought must be put into
the masking material being oxidized along with the desired areas, during processing.
A typical LOCOS structure is displayed in Figure 3.1. As can be seen, the transition from
the oxidized area to the fully masked area is not as abrupt, as one might wish. In fact, an
extension of the oxidized area into and underneath the diffusion-blocked area is visible.
This effect is well known as a bird’s beak, simply due to the resemblance of the extension
with a bird’s beak. The effect originates from the oxidizing species diffusing both vertically
and laterally, during oxidation - even below the edge of the masking material, pushing it
upwards.
25
==PAGE:36==
26
Chapter 3. Process Theory
Figure 3.1: Cross-sectional view of a LOCOS structure with a bird’s beak effect visible. As can
be seen, a nitride mask is utilized and poly-Si is deposited on top. The scale bar is 0.4 µm and
the picture is borrowed from [28].
3.2
Thermal Oxidation
The LOCOS process is based on thermal oxidation of Si, a process that produces SiO2 on
top of the Si substrate by either dry (3.1) or wet oxidation (3.2),
Si (s) + O2 (g) →SiO2 (s)
(3.1)
Si (s) + 2H2O (g) →SiO2 (s) + 2H2 (g)
(3.2)
The thermal growth of SiO2 can be described by the Deal-Grove model [29], which is widely
accepted in the industry, although not always completely accurate in its predictions. The
model will not be examined here, it will suffice to say that any oxidation times or oxide
thickness will be calculated using this model and verified whenever necessary with the
Athena simulation software from Silvaco. As will become evident, the thermal oxidation
process is the backbone of the process flow; it creates silicon bumps where the cavities
should be located during the first LOCOS oxidation and defines the cavities and the
post oxide structures during the second LOCOS oxidation. In other words, the thermal
oxidation is essential to be able to fabricate the CMUTs.
Before going into the bump height calculations of the LOCOS process, investigation into
the volumetric difference between Si and SiO2 must be performed, so it can be determined
how the surfaces ”move” in reference to each other. The densities and molecular weights
of Si and SiO2 are given in Table 3.1.
By calculating the volume of 1 mole of Si and SiO2, like so
𝑉Si = 𝑀Si
𝜌Si
= 12.06 cm3 mol−1
(3.3)
Material
𝜌[g cm−3]
𝑀[g mol−1]
Si
2.33
28.09
SiO2
2.27
60.08
Table 3.1: Table showing the densities and molecular weigths of Si and SiO2. Values are from
[28].
==PAGE:37==
3.3. Bump Heights in LOCOS
27
Si
Si3N4
SiO2
Figure 3.2: Illustration of a LOCOS process using Si3N4 as diffusion-inhibiting layer. The pictures
were created in Athena and based on parameter sizes similar to the ones employed in the clean
room process (see Appendix B). As can be seen, a bump is created in the Si substrate going from
the left picture to the right. No Si is consumed beneath the nitride mask, however the bird’s beak
effect is visible.
and
𝑉SiO2 =
𝑀SiO2
𝜌SiO2
= 26.47 cm3 mol−1
(3.4)
the amount of Si consumed in the thermal oxidation process can be found by recognising
that 1 mole of Si is converted to 1 mole of SiO2,
𝑉Si
𝑉SiO2
= 0.456
(3.5)
So the amount of Si consumed is 0.456 times that of SiO2 [30]. However, investigations
done in Athena by Molbech [31] shows that the amount consumed is less than this, 45.3 %
to be exact, due to the simulation model possibly incorporating parameters for the density
and molecular weights that vary with the oxide thickness. The results obtained by Molbech
[31] are not conclusive, but the simulated value of 45.3 % will be used onwards to ensure
a more accurate modelling and processing.
3.3
Bump Heights in LOCOS
This section focuses on how using different diffusion-inhibiting layers against thermal ox-
idation, results in different ”steps” or bumps in the Si substrate. The size of these bumps
needs to be quantified for later use. The LOCOS process utilized in this thesis makes
use of Si3N4 as a diffusion-blocking layer. However, it is also possible to use SiO2 as a
diffusion-blocking layer. Thus, the bump heights in Si will be calculated for both cases,
for reference and comparison.
Si3N4 as diffusion-inhibiting layer
Consider the case of a Si substrate with a thin insulation oxide grown on top. The silicon
nitride will be deposited on top of this and patterned to obtain the LOCOS in specific
areas, as can be seen on Figure 3.2. No Si will be consumed underneath the nitride, as
the diffusion is blocked.
The bump height in the exposed Si areas can be found by considering that the amount of
silicon substrate consumed is 45.3 % of the SiO2 grown in the thermal oxidation process,
==PAGE:38==
28
Chapter 3. Process Theory
described by the Deal-Grove model [29]:
𝑥(𝑡) = −𝐴+ √𝐴2 + 4𝐵(𝑡+ 𝜏)
2
(3.6)
where 𝑥is the thickness of the grown oxide, 𝐵is the parabolic rate constant related to the
oxidant diffusion, and 𝐵/𝐴is the linear rate constant, related to the interface reaction,
from which the constant 𝐴can be found. 𝜏is the time required to grow an initial oxide
of thickness 𝑥0, given by:
𝜏= 𝑥2
0
𝐵+
𝑥0
𝐵/𝐴
(3.7)
such that the bump height (in Si) can be found as
𝑥bump,Si (𝑡) = 0.453
2
⋅(√𝐴2 + 4𝐵(𝑡+ 𝜏) −𝐴)
(3.8)
In the process flow, the insulation oxide thickness, 𝑥0 ∼10 nm, so the contribution to
equation (3.8) through (3.7) is small. To calculate the bump heights obtained by successive
LOCOS processes, one then simply uses equation (3.8) as many times as needed.
SiO2 as diffusion-inhibiting layer
Consider instead the case of using a Si substrate with a relatively thick layer of SiO2 grown
on top, such that the oxide works as a diffusion-inhibiting layer. An oxide layer doesn’t
block oxide growth entirely, but it does decrease the diffusion rate of the diffusing species
and hence the overall oxide growth rate. An overview can be seen in Figure 3.3.
The bump height in Si created by such a process requires a little more information to
be calculated, since, unlike the example with silicon nitride, the thickness of the masking
oxide, 𝑥Mask, will change during the LOCOS oxidation to 𝑥Mask+ox. The change in thickness
for the masking oxide, Δ𝑥ox1, can then be described as
Δ𝑥ox1 = 𝑥Mask+ox −𝑥Mask = √𝐴2 + 4𝐵(𝑡2 + 𝑡1) −𝐴
2
−√𝐴2 + 4𝐵𝑡1 −𝐴
2
(3.9)
Si
SiO2
Figure 3.3: Illustration of a LOCOS process using SiO2 as diffusion-inhibiting layer. The pictures
were created in Athena based on realistic parameters utilized in the process flow developed in [31].
As can be seen, a bump is created in the Si substrate going from left to right. However, the size
of the masking oxide also grows during the second oxidation, consuming some Si underneath the
mask.
==PAGE:39==
3.3. Bump Heights in LOCOS
29
where 𝑡1 is the oxidation time for the masking oxidation and 𝑡2 is the oxidation time
for the actual LOCOS oxidation. The thickness of the oxide in areas with no diffusion-
inhibiting layer, 𝑥ox2 can simply be described by equation (3.6) with 𝜏= 0 and 𝑡= 𝑡2.
Thus, the bump height in Si becomes:
𝑥bump,Si (𝑡) = 0.453 ⋅(𝑥ox2 −Δ𝑥ox1)
= 0.453 ⋅(𝑥ox2 −𝑥Mask+ox + 𝑥Mask)
= 0.453
2
(√𝐴2 + 4𝐵𝑡2 −√𝐴2 + 4𝐵(𝑡2 + 𝑡1) + √𝐴2 + 4𝐵𝑡1 −𝐴)
(3.10)
which is the difference between the thickness of the oxide in areas with no diffusion-
inhibiting layer and the change in thickness for the masking oxide, which essentially be-
comes the new point of reference in the calculation of the bump.
The temporal development of the bump height in Si is calculated using equation (3.10)
for different masking materials, namely Si3N4 and SiO2.
The results are displayed in
Figure 3.4 and based on a wet oxidation at 1100∘C and 0.85 atm for an initial thickness
of the oxide of 1 μm and 2 μm, respectively. The parameters were chosen as such, because
similar values are employed in the process flow in the clean room (see Appendix B).
Furthermore, the bump height development is also plotted on the figure, when using
nitride as a diffusion-inhibiting layer. As can be seen, the bump height achieved using the
nitride mask is considerably larger than the ones obtained when using oxide as masking
material. Moreover, bump heights beyond ∼300 nm for 1 μm oxide and ∼475 nm for
2 μm become highly infeasible for processing, due to decrease of the growth rate and thus
increase in required oxidation time. A reason for the difference in growth rates between
Si3N4 and SiO2 is that no Si is consumed beneath the nitride, whereas the opposite is true
for the oxide.
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 2 0 0
 1  µm
 o x i d e
 2  µm
 o x i d e
 N i t r i d e
B u m
p  h e i g h t ,  X
b u m
p  [ n m
]
O x i d a t i o n  t i m
e ,  t  [ m
i n ]
Figure 3.4: Bump height in Si achieved in the LOCOS process, using wet oxidation at 1100∘C
and 0.85 atm for initial thicknesses of the oxide of 1 µm and 2 µm, respectively. The plot was
made using equation (3.10). The bump height is also depicted when using silicon nitride as a
diffusion-inhibiting layer.
As can be seen, the bump height is considerably larger when using
nitride as diffusion-inhibiting layer, since no silicon is consumed underneath it.
==PAGE:40==
30
Chapter 3. Process Theory
3.4
Simulations
In this section, the simulation software Athena from Silvaco will be used to investigate
different aspects regarding the LOCOS process. Firstly, a simulation elaborating on the
results calculated in Figure 3.4 is carried out. The simulation is carried out for three dif-
ferent diffusion-inhibiting layers, 50 nm Si3N4, 1 μm SiO2 and 2 μm SiO2, in wet oxidation
performed at 1100∘C and 0.85 atm. A bump height of ∼245 nm is aimed for in all three
cases to accentuate the differences between the materials and the results are displayed in
Figure 3.5. As can be seen, the bump profile for nitride approaches that of a step-function,
whereas the usage of oxide masks result in more slanted profiles.
Minor differences between the profile for 1 μm and 2 μm oxide are also evident near the
bottom and the top of the bump; silicon is more readily consumed when using 1 μm oxide
than 2 μm and this results in a slightly more ”rounded” or sloped profile for the 1 μm oxide
case.
In the process flow, the masking material consists of 50 nm nitride on top of a relatively
thin, protective oxide. Therefore, it is interesting to investigate how the thickness of this
protective layer influences the height and appearance of the bump profile. To this end, the
thickness of the oxide layer was varied over a range of realistic values. The result can be
seen in Figure 3.6. As can be seen, the biggest value of the bump height is found for the
thinnest layer of the protective oxide, since the diffusing species have to diffuse through a
thinner layer and thus experience less resistance. As the thickness of the protective oxide
layer increases, the bump profile becomes more slanted. The value chosen for the process
flow was 10 nm.
0 . 0
0 . 5
1 . 0
1 . 5
2 . 0
2 . 5
3 . 0
3 . 5
4 . 0
0 . 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
 
 N i t r i d e
 1 µm
 o x i d e  
 2  µm
 o x i d e
L a t e r a l  p o s i t i o n  o n  s u b s t r a t e ,  [ µm
]
N o r m
a l i z e d  b u m
p  h e i g h t  i n  S i
Figure 3.5:
Athena simulation illustrating the usage of different diffusing-inhibiting layers
(masks), in this case 50 nm Si3N4, 1 µm SiO2 and 2 µm SiO2, in wet oxidation performed at
1100∘C and 0.85 atm. All simulations were carried out to achieve a bump height of ∼245 nm.
Note how the bump profile for nitride approaches that of a step-function, whereas the oxide masks
result in more sloped profiles. Furthermore, the profile for 1 µm oxide is slightly more sloped than
the 2 µm profile, since Si is more readily consumed in the first case.
==PAGE:41==
3.5. Chapter Summary
31
2 . 0
2 . 5
3 . 0
3 . 5
0 . 0 0
0 . 0 5
0 . 1 0
0 . 1 5
0 . 2 0
0 . 2 5
B u m
p  h e i g h t  i n  S i ,  [ µm
]
 1  n m
 1 0  n m
 2 5  n m
 5 0  n m
L a t e r a l  p o s i t i o n  o n  s u b s t r a t e ,  [ µm
]
Figure 3.6: Athena simulation of the bump height after the first LOCOS process, using different
thicknesses for the protective oxide layer beneath 50 nm Si3N4. The simulation is based on wet
oxidation performed at 1100∘C and 0.85 atm. As can be seen, the biggest value for the bump
height is achieved for the thinnest layer of protective oxide, since this provides the least ”resist-
ance” against diffusion. Note how the bump profile becomes more sloped, as the thickness of the
protective oxide layer increases.
3.5
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, the concept behind the LOCOS process was explained. Furthermore, the
thermal oxidation process was briefly introduced. Based on this theory and the Deal-Grove
model in particular, the bump heights created in Si substrates by the LOCOS process
using SiO2 and Si3N4 as diffusion inhibiting layers were quantified. This will provide the
foundation for the process flow, which will be presented in the next chapter. Next, the
Athena simulation software was used to investigate the LOCOS process further. It was
seen that bump heights achieved using a nitride mask are considerably larger than the
ones obtained when using oxide as masking material, since no Si is consumed underneath
the nitride. Finally, it was investigated how the thickness of the protective oxide layer
influences the height and appearance of the bump profile. Here it was shown that the
biggest value of the bump height was found for the thinnest layer of the protective oxide,
due to the diffusing species having to diffuse through a thinner layer.
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER4
Fabrication
In this chapter, the design of the CMUTs as well as the fabrication and measurements
performed in the Danchip clean room will be discussed. The theory behind each processing
step will be included and described to the necessary extent. Finally, a process concerning
surface roughness optimization will be presented.
4.1
Design
Based on the theoretical considerations concerning the LOCOS process and bump heights
elucidated in the previous chapter, the design of the CMUTs and the transducer layout
can now readily be introduced. A bottom-up approach will be employed, starting with
the design of a single CMUT cell, ending up with the overall mask design. It is not within
the scope of this thesis to optimize the design, but simply to present it as designed by
Ph.D.-student Mathias Mølgaard and subsequently fabricate it in the Danchip clean room.
A cross-sectional view of the CMUT cell is illustrated in Figure 4.1. All important dimen-
sions are labelled and the names of the structures will be the ones used throughout the
report. 𝑑cell is the diameter of the individual CMUT cell and 𝑥bond is the bonding space
between each of the cells (only 𝑥bond/2 is depicted in Figure 4.1). 𝑔vac, 𝑔ni and 𝑔ox are the
thickness of the vacuum gap, the insulating nitride and oxide layers, respectively. ℎpost
is the thickness of the oxide post, ℎbump is the height of the bump in Si in the bottom
electrode and 𝑑bump is the diameter of it. Please note that ℎbump = 𝑥bump,Si, as analysed
in section 3.3. Finally, 𝑥int denotes the distance between the Si bump and the oxide posts.
The main variables in this process are linked to each other. 𝑔vac can be altered by varying
the height of ℎpost.
Altering 𝑑cell will in turn affect 𝑉pi, as the latter scales with the
radius as (𝑑cell/2)−2, in both the isotropic and anisotropic case (see sections 2.2 and 2.3).
Furthermore, the height of ℎbump is also an important parameter, as it influences the
parasitic capacitance, see section 2.3. An overview of the values chosen for the parameters
of the CMUT cell can be found in Table 4.1.
The dimensions of the CMUT cell can be justified based on Finite Element Modelling
(FEM) simulations and fabrication grounds.
We shall examine these in the following.
𝑑cell is chosen such that the resonance frequency, 𝑓res = 50 MHz at a DC voltage of 80 %
of 𝑉pi, when verifying the dimensions using a Matlab/COMSOL model, simulating the
performance of the CMUT. The model is developed by Anders Lei from the MEMS Applied
33
==PAGE:44==
34
Chapter 4. Fabrication
hpost
dcell
gvac
gox
hbump
dbump
xbond/2
xint
gni
Figure 4.1: Overview of the CMUT cell, with the relevant dimensions marked. The symbols are
explained in the text.
Sensors group [32]. The frequency is also adjusted to make fabrication of the horizontal
dimensions possible, when using UV-lithography. 𝑔vac is scaled to ensure that 𝑉pi = 110 V,
also using the Matlab/COMSOL model.
For purposes such as medical imaging, it is
critical to control the pull-in and operational voltages, as the CMUTs must comply with
the power supply in medical scanners and the like. For bio-sensing purposes, however, it is
not as critical, especially not in this early stage of the development of the sensors. As the
CMUTs aren’t implemented in any final set-up yet, basically any required voltage can be
applied - within reasonable boundaries, of course. This implies that should the fabricated
CMUTs differ in dimensions from the design values - which they undoubtedly will - it will
not present a big problem. It is simply a matter of characterisation to determine 𝑉pi or
calculating it using equation (2.31).
Regarding the size of the vertical distances, these are highly dictated by the LOCOS
process, used to define the cavities. Thus, the thickness of the oxide posts, ℎpost must
be calculated, before the required thickness of the nitride layer, 𝑔ni, can be determined.
ℎpost is calculated using the following relationship (the equation was originally proposed
by [22], but was faulty. The correct version is stated here)
ℎpost = 𝑔vac + 𝑔ni + ℎbump
0.547
+ 𝑔ox
(4.1)
making it a function of the vacuum gap, the insulation oxide thickness, the bump height
and the nitride thickness. Using the dimensions from Table 4.1 and neglecting the nitride
layer, one obtains
ℎpost = 100 nm + 250 nm
0.547
+ 100 nm = 739.9 nm
(4.2)
The time required to grow an oxide of that thickness using wet oxidation at 1100∘C,
according to equation (3.6), is 1 hour and 15 mins. Looking at Figure 4.2, the thickness
of the nitride required to withstand such a thermal oxidation is slightly less than 20 nm.
However, this is a minimum requirement.
So to include a safety margin, the nitride
thickness is chosen to be 𝑔ni = 50 nm. Thus, the real oxide post thickness can now be
re-calculated
ℎpost = 100 nm + 50 nm + 250 nm
0.547
+ 100 nm = 831.3 nm
(4.3)
==PAGE:45==
4.1. Design
35
Figure 4.2:
Thickness of oxidized nitride as a function of oxidation time, for given different
thermal oxidation conditions. The graph illustrates what thickness of the nitride is necessary to
withstand a certain oxidation time, at a particular temperature and possibly pressure. The graph
is from [34].
The thickness of the oxide post has to be corrected by adding 4% to the thickness. This
is done simply to achieve the correct post oxide thickness based on experience from the
MEMS Applied Sensors group and knowledge about the behaviour of the furnaces at
Danchip. Hence, ℎpost = 864.5 nm and the time required for the thermal oxidation is
1 hour:41 mins.
Proceeding with the remaining parameters in Figure 4.1, 𝑔ox = 100 nm such that when
combined with the thickness of 𝑔ni, it can withstand breakdown; that is the particular
electric field known as the dielectric strength, 𝐸ds, above which the dielectric layer(s)
becomes conductive. The voltage were this occurs is known as the breakdown voltage, 𝑉bd
and it is given by
𝑉bd = 𝐸ds𝑑
(4.4)
where 𝑑= 𝑔eff is the distance between the conductors, in this case the effective gap
distance. For SiO2, the breakdown field is ∼0.5 GV/m for films of a few hundred nm to a
few 𝜇m thick [33]. ℎbump is chosen somewhat arbitrarily, yet not so big that growing the
post oxide becomes unrealistic (see equation (4.1)). Finally, the value of 𝑑bump is chosen
to be as big as possible, without compromising the design rule that 𝑑bump must be a factor
of 2ℎpost smaller than 𝑑cell [22],
𝑑cell = 2ℎpost𝑑bump
(4.5)
Based on this design of the individual CMUT cell, the overall transducer layout can now
be introduced.
Transducer Layout
In section 1.1 it was described how the CMUTs are connected in parallel in elements and
placed side by side to make up transducer arrays. However, there is a multitude of ways to
design these transducer arrays, layout-wise. Hence, three different designs for the arrays
have been chosen, to be fabricated in this thesis. By producing three different kinds, it
should be possible to compare their performance and determine which one is best. The
==PAGE:46==
36
Chapter 4. Fabrication
Parameter
Design value
Unit
𝑑cell
10.8
μm
𝑑bump
5
μm
𝑥int
2.9
μm
𝑥bond
6
μm
𝑔vac
100
nm
𝑔ni
50
nm
𝑔ox
100
nm
ℎpost
865
nm
ℎbump
250
nm
Table 4.1: Table showing an overview of the relevant parameters and sizes for the CMUT cell,
fabricated in this thesis.
three designs are presented in Figure 4.3. In each design, there are four different sized
arrays, 1 × 1, 10 × 10, 32 × 32 and 100 × 100 cells.
To elucidate the differences between the three types of design in the transducer layout and
justify each of their chosen appearances, we need to know their electromechanical beha-
viour. The electromechanical behaviour can be measured using impedance measurements,
which is one of the main characterisation techniques for CMUTs, as will become evident in
chapter 5. One can show, that for a circular contact geometry, such as the one employed
in our CMUT cells, the impedance can be approximated by [35]
𝑍≃𝑅□
8𝜋+
1
𝑠𝐶′𝜋𝑟2
0
(4.6)
where the first term models the series resistance, introduced by the Si electrodes in the
capacitor, and the second term models a fraction of the capacitance of the CMUT cell
itself. Here, 𝑅□is the sheet resistance of the SOI device layer, 𝑠is the complex angular
frequency, 𝐶′ is the capacitance per unit area and 𝑟0 is the radius of the plates. Equation
(4.6) will help reveal what can be seen in an impedance plot for each type of design.
Upon inspection of Figure 4.3, it can be seen that one of the major differences between
design A, B and C is the layout and the coverage degree of the metal layer, on the arrays.
Design A has metal deposited over the greater part of the arrays, except directly on top
of each CMUT cell. Design B has metal deposited in a thin strip around the edges of each
array, but not over the cells themselves or the area in between them. Finally, design C has
metal deposited all over the array. According to experience, design C should work without
problems, as the metal is deposited everywhere and thus provides great electrical contact
between front and backside of the CMUT cells. However, these cells are to be used for
bio-sensing and as such, they need to be functionalized. As will be described in chapter
6, these functionalization schemes work directly on top of Si, making total coverage of
the top surface by metal unwanted and inconvenient. Hence, to test the performance of
CMUTs created with as little metal as possible, design B was created. Design A thus
becomes the compromise between design B and C: it contains more metal on the surface,
than does design B, but not entirely as much as design C.
Using equation (4.6), the discussion of the designs can now be qualified. When character-
ising the CMUTs, the impedance should be dominated by the second, capacitive term in
equation (4.6) and not by the first term describing the series resistance. Thus, the first
==PAGE:47==
4.1. Design
37
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.3: Mask array layout, using three different designs. The red rectangle in each design
outlines where the close-up is taken from. In each close-up, the dark green color illustrates where
the metal is deposited. (a) Design A, in which metal is deposited around each CMUT, (b) Design
B, where the metal is only deposited in a thin strip along the edge of the array and (c) Design C,
in which the metal layer covers the entire CMUT array.
==PAGE:48==
38
Chapter 4. Fabrication
term cannot have a value, that ”drowns out” the second. Based on the specifications for
the SOI wafers, the sheet resistance is given by
𝑅□= 𝜌
𝑡= 0.01 Ωcm
0.5 μm
= 200 Ω/□
(4.7)
where the value of 𝑅□= 200 Ω/□is a worst case scenario value, based on the highest
specified value of resistivity. This will result in the highest possible value of the series
resistance term, namely
𝑅□
8𝜋= 200 Ω/□
8𝜋
= 8 Ω
(4.8)
which will be used for comparison with the second term in the equation (4.6), for the
different designs.
For a design such as Design A, the contact area is limited to the area around each individual
CMUT cell. Let’s approximate it by assuming that a radius of 𝑟0 = 5.4 μm is uncovered
by metal, for a certain area of the wafer. Let’s also assume an operational frequency of
50 MHz and a capacitance per unit area of 8.85 × 10−5F/m2. In that case, the second
term of equation (4.6) will yield
1
𝑠𝐶′𝜋𝑟2
0
=
1
50 × 106Hz ⋅8.85 × 10−5F/m2 ⋅𝜋⋅5.4 × 10−6m ≃25 kΩ
(4.9)
making the capacitive term considerably bigger, than the series resistance term, 25 kΩ ≫
8 Ω. This is what is desired, so design A should produce impedance plots dominated by the
capacitive term. Consider instead a design like design B. Let’s approximate it by assuming
that a radius of 𝑟0 = 0.1 mm is uncovered by metal, for the same area of the wafer, as the
one considered above. This will, relatively speaking, correspond to the difference in metal
coverage, between design A and B. Let’s also assume the rest of the parameters are equal
to those used previously. In this case, the second term of equation (4.6) will be
1
𝑠𝐶′𝜋𝑟2
0
=
1
50 × 106Hz ⋅8.85 × 10−5F/m2 ⋅𝜋⋅0.1 × 10−3m ≃0.7 Ω
(4.10)
and thus the series resistance term will be a bit bigger than the capacitive term, 8 Ω >
0.7 Ω, but not considerably.
For design C, the electrical contact should be excellent,
however, the impedance plots will most likely be dominated by the series resistance term,
as metal covers the entire surface of the design.
Upon characterisation, we should be
able to conclude which of the three designs work better, when both electrical contact and
functionalization have been taken into account; the optimal performance must be when
both electrical contact is reasonable and the functionalization works as intended.
==PAGE:49==
4.1. Design
39
Figure 4.4: Overview of the wafer mask layout. As can be seen, the three different designs are
placed side-by-side in one array, which is then repeated in 3-by-13 configuration. On each side of
the wafer, along the centre line, the alignment marks are placed. Besides the transducer arrays
and alignment marks, different test structures are placed around the wafer for evaluation during
and after fabrication. These test structures are difficult to see in this picture, due to the scale.
==PAGE:50==
40
Chapter 4. Fabrication
4.2
Process Flow Overview
The CMUTs will be fabricated using a double LOCOS process to define the cavities. Using
the LOCOS process for this purpose can be explained by the key requirements of the device.
Firstly, the oxide posts can be made higher than the protruding Si bumps, creating the
desired cavities. Second, by using the LOCOS process based on nitride masking, a more
planar bump is achieved, making control over the gap height easier and thus procuring
uniform pull-in voltage over the device. Third, the thicker oxide posts help increase the
breakdown voltage and decrease the parasitic capacitance [22]. The main steps in the
process flow are briefly outlined below and the corresponding illustration of the wafer
displayed in Figure 4.5. To fabricate the CMUT, the wafer must be subjected to:
1. Thermal oxidation of Si to obtain the pad oxide SiO2-layer
2. Deposition of Si3N4, photolithography for patterning and etching of Si3N4
3. 1st LOCOS oxidation
4. Stripping of Si3N4 mask and underlying SiO2-layer
5. Thermal oxidation of Si to obtain an insulation SiO2-layer and deposition of Si3N4
6. Photolithography for patterning and etching of Si3N4
7. 2nd LOCOS oxidation
8. Bonding of bottom electrode to SOI wafer
9. Removal of handle wafer by etching
10. Patterning and etching of Si and SiO2, followed by deposition and patterning of Al
to define electrical contacts
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Si
SiO2
Si3N2
A l
Figure 4.5: Schematic view of the process flow employed in the double LOCOS process. The
picture is inspired by an original drawn by Mathias Mølgaard.
==PAGE:51==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
41
Furthermore, there is the procedure of thinning down the SOI wafers to fabricate the top
plate of the CMUTs. This process is fairly simple and tested many times over by the
MEMS Applied Sensors group. Thus, it will only briefly be introduced here. The reader
is referred to Appendix A for the process flow in its entirety.
The SOI wafers are thinned down by repeating a cycle consisting of a long thermal wet
oxidation, followed by a strip of the produced oxide in an Buffered Hydrofluoric Acid
(BHF) etch. By doing this twice, the fact that Si is consumed by the thermal oxidation
is utilized to thin down the Si on both sides of the insulator. The amount of Si consumed
will be equal to
𝑥Si = 0.453𝑥SiO2
(4.11)
as explained in section 3.2. The SOI wafers are thinned down simply to make sure that
the correct resonance frequency is obtained, when the bottom electrodes are bonded to
the top plates. In the end, one is left with SOI wafers, which have thinner Si layers than
originally. However, thinning down the wafers in this manner, can introduce significant
amounts of stress and make the wafers bend. In step # 17, this stress will be investigated
and quantified, using curvature measurements.
Returning to the main process of fabricating the CMUTs, each step will be presented as
performed in the clean room and the results discussed along the way, in the following
sections. For a full account of the details concerning each step, the process flow for the
CMUT is enclosed in Appendix B. The step numbers displayed here refer to the same
numbers used in the appendix, to ease comparison.
Step 1 - Preparation and Pad Oxide Oxidation
Step 1 actually consists of 4 sub-steps; wafer selection, RCA clean, SiO2 wet oxidation
and finally, thickness measurements. All steps concern the bottom electrode wafers. 6
4" wafers type OP442 were bought. They are single-side polished, highly boron doped
(𝜌< 0.025 Ω ⋅m) and the surface orientation is along the (100)-plane. Of the 6, only 5 are
supposed to end up as actual CMUT devices. The last wafer will be processed as well, but
not bonded in step # 17 and will function as test wafer for various measurements during
fabrication. In this way, the other 5 wafers will not be compromised by inspection and
the like.
Wafer Cleaning
The RCA clean is a procedure necessitated by the following thermal process. It is per-
formed to avoid contamination of wafers and furnaces and increase the quality of the oxides
grown. It is of paramount importance that the CMUTs contain quality oxides that can
withstand high operational voltages without reaching the breakdown voltage, as described
in section 4.1.
The RCA is the most commonly employed cleaning procedure in the industry and it
consists of two main steps; RCA 1 and RCA 2. RCA 1 consists of H2O, NH4OH and
H2O2 in a (5 ∶1 ∶1) ratio. It is used to remove light organics, particles and metals like
Au, Ag, Ni, Cd, Zn, Co and Cr. The solution is kept at 70∘C and the required processing
time is 10 mins. RCA 2 consists of H2O, HCl and H2O2 in a (5 ∶1 ∶1) ratio. It is used to
remove alkali ions, metal hydroxides (mainly of Al, Fe, Mg, Zn) and residual trace metals
(Cu and Au). Like RCA 1, it is kept at 70∘C and the required processing time is 10 mins.
In between dips in the RCA 1 and RCA 2 solutions, the wafers are immersed in HF, which
==PAGE:52==
42
Chapter 4. Fabrication
serves the purpose of etching away oxide generated by the two RCA solutions. The overall
procedure is outlined below.
1. RCA 1 for 10 mins
2. DI water rinsing
3. HF for 30 s
4. DI water rinsing
5. RCA 2 for 10 mins
6. DI water rinsing
7. HF for 30 s
8. DI water rinsing
9. Spin drying
Thermal Oxidation
After the RCA clean of all wafers and 1 dummy wafer, the lot are ready for the thermal
process. The thermal oxidation will create a pad layer of oxide to be used during the
first LOCOS oxidation.
Its main purpose is to relieve the stress, when silicon nitride
is deposited later on, as described in section 3.1. The thickness of the oxide is not vital,
since this oxide will be removed and replaced by an insulation oxide for the second LOCOS
oxidation in step # 9. In order to avoid contamination of the wafers the cleanest furnace
is used, which is the phosphorous drive-in furnace. Approximately 10 nm of dry SiO2 at
1100∘C is needed, so using the Deal-Grove model [29] an oxidation time of 3 mins and 50 s
should be sufficient. Thus, the recipe DRY1100 is chosen. Afterwards, the wafers will be
annealed for 20 mins in a N2 atmosphere. This should minimize the fixed oxide charge
density [28].
The dummy wafer included in the batch is used to measure the film thickness obtained,
by means of the Filmtek instrument.
The Filmtek estimates the refractive index and
thickness of the oxide by measuring the reflectance spectrum at a normal incidence angle
and at 70∘. By choosing the right model and fitting routine, the data can be extracted.
In this case, a 5-point measurement on SiO2 with a standard Si reference yields an oxide
thickness of ∼24 nm. This is quite a deviation from the desired 10 nm. However, it is
difficult to obtain such a small thickness in the furnace, considering stabilisation time for
the gas flow of O2 before oxidation and the short oxidation time itself - the desirable
thickness is comparable to the size of a native oxide, making it hard to obtain. It is noted
that an oxidation time of ∼14 mins at 1000∘C, using the DRY1000 recipe might make the
overall process more stable and easier to control, to obtain a thickness closer to 10 nm.
Step 2 - Nitride Deposition
After the thermal oxidation, the bottom electrode wafers are ready for silicon nitride,
Si3N4, deposition. Hence, they are transferred directly to the LPCVD furnace. In this
furnace, two different kinds of silicon nitride can be deposited, stoichiometric nitride and
silicon rich nitride. The stoichiometric nitride works better as a diffusion mask compared
to silicon-rich nitride, since it oxidizes more slowly [36]. Furthermore, dense films are
attainable with few defects, which is desirable. In LPCVD source gases of dichlorosilane,
SiCl2H2, and ammonia, NH3, react at low pressure and within the temperature range of
780∘- 845∘C producing the stoichiometric nitride, using the following reaction
3SiCl2H2 + 4NH3 →Si3N4 + 6HCl + 6H2
(4.12)
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
43
In general silicon nitride deposition is controlled by temperature, pressure and reactant
concentration. In practice, it also depends on the actual system used, the gas flow and
the amount of wafers that needs to be processed. Contrary to the thermal oxidation, the
process of silicon nitride deposition is not well described in literature, so the parameters
and recipes must be based on the logbooks and experiences of other users of the (6")
LPCVD furnace. The 4NITDAN recipe was used and the current deposition rate was
2.6 nm ⋅min−1. Thus, a deposition time of 20 mins to deposit 50 nm was chosen.
Once again a dummy wafer had been included in the process and the Filmtek was used to
check the obtained thickness, utilizing a fitting routine based on 5 point measurements on
nitride, with silicon as a reference. The obtained Si3N4 thickness was 55.4 nm, which is a
10.8 % deviation from the desired thickness. This is acceptable, based on the uncertainty
of the process and the fact that the etching time of the nitride can be adjusted easily, in
steps #6 and #8, to take the new thickness into account.
Step 3 - Poly-Si Deposition
Upon nitride deposition, the wafers are transferred to the poly-Si furnace, also known as
LPCVD (6") E2. Here, the Poly recipe is chosen for deposition of 100 nm standard poly-Si.
The source gas is silane, SiH4 and it is pyrolysed at temperatures around 600∘- 620∘C and
pressures around 200- 250 mTorr, using the following reaction [30]
SiH4 →Si + 2H2
(4.13)
Once again, the logbooks are checked to find the current deposition rate, which was
6.2 nm ⋅min−1, so the deposition time was chosen to be ∼16 mins.
Afterwards, the
film thickness was measured in the Filmtek to 101.4 nm, which is satisfactory for masking
purposes.
Step 4 - Photolithography
In order to transfer structures from the masks to the substrate, photolithography must
be performed. Firstly, the wafers are primed with HexaMethylDiSilazane (HMDS), which
promotes adhesion of photoresist to the wafers. In short, the HMDS leaves a monolayer
of TriMethylSilyl (TMS) on the poly-Si surface. This will make the surface hydrophobic
and thus lower the surface tension. 1.5 μm of positive photoresist, type AZ Mir 701 is
then spun onto the wafers. As part of the process performed on the spin track, the wafers
are then soft baked at 90∘C for 1 min. This will evaporate any remaining solvent in the
photoresist.
Afterwards, the wafers are exposed to UV-light (365 nm) through the first mask, called
1LOCOS. The mask is a clear-field, soda-lime glass mask with chromium on one side,
outlining the pattern. The mask is put in hard contact with the wafers in the KS Aligner,
aligned to the flat, since this is the first print, and then exposed to the UV-light for 23 s.
When exposed to the UV-light, the polymer chains within the photoresist will start to
be cut, making the photoresist more soluble in the developer. However, AZ Mir 701 is a
chemically amplified resist and this necessitates a Post Exposure Bake (PEB) at 110∘C
for 1 min, using proximity bake. This will ensure that the process initiated by the UV-
light is finished and make the exposed areas completely soluble. Finally, the wafers are
developed in TetraMethylAmmonium Hydroxide (TMAH) in the TMAH UV-developer,
using the DCH 100mm PEB60s@110C+SP60s recipe. This machine uses a puddle-method
==PAGE:54==
44
Chapter 4. Fabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Visual inspection of wafers upon the photolithography procedure. As can be seen
in picture (a), the array of circles is quite well defined. One defect is found near the alignment
marks in picture (b), but no defects were found near important structures. The scale bar on both
pictures is 100 µm.
to develop the wafers and it takes 1 min per wafer. The method is preferred to others
despite TMAH being toxic, simply to avoid contamination from alkali ions.
Upon development, the wafers are inspected in an optical microscope. As can be seen
in Figure 4.6, one defect was found near the alignment marks, however, no defects were
found near the structures. In general, the structures seemed to be well defined on all the
wafers, so the photolithography was successful.
Step 5 - Poly-Si Mask Etch
In this step, the poly-Si masking has to be etched, to expose the underlying nitride in
the areas defined by the mask. Based on experience from previous projects [36] using wet
isotropic etching resulted in severe under-etching of the poly-Si. This is undesirable and
hence, a dry etching method is chosen. The Deep Reactive Ion Etching (DRIE) equipment
is named ”Pegasus” and based on the Bosch process, which alternates between depositing
a Teflon-like polymer coating on the side walls and etching using ions [28]. A simple poly-
Si etch at 20∘C using 1 cycle of approximately 4 s duration was sufficient to etch through
the poly-Si, of 100 nm thickness. The deposition part of the Bosch process was disabled,
to limit the cycle length. Subsequently, the resist was stripped in a plasma asher.
Step 6 - Nitride Wet Etch
The masking nitride is etched in 180∘C hot phosphoric acid, H3PO4, for 8 mins. At this
temperature, water will boil off the solution and increase the concentration of the acid.
The etching rate at 180∘C is 8.4 nm⋅min−1, while the etching rate of SiO2 is 0.4 nm⋅min−1.
In other words, an advantage of this method is that oxide etches very slowly, compared to
nitride.
To check that the wafers have been etched sufficiently, the color inside the exposed areas
on the center of the wafer, is compared to the color near the alignment marks. In both of
these areas, the pad oxide should be visible. It can be quite difficult to decide, whether
the etch has been successful or not. However, comparison with the dummy wafer that
==PAGE:55==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
45
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: Visual inspection of wafers upon nitride wet etch. It can be difficult to discern whether
or not the nitride is completely etched away in the desired places. However, the color inside the
holes, (a), and next to the alignment marks, (b), looks very similar, indicating a succesful etch.
The scale bar on the left picture, (a), is 10 µm and it is 100 µm on the right picture, (b). The
measurement of radius on (a) yields 2.49 µm which compares well with the target 2.5 µm.
was included in the furnace when the pad oxide was grown in step # 1, proved helpful,
since the color should be somewhat the same. A comparison can be seen in Figure 4.7.
Upon the nitride wet etch, the wafers are cleaned in a 7-up solution, to avoid possible
contamination from potassium ions after KOH in the nitride etching bath.
Step 7 - 1st LOCOS Oxidation
Firstly, the wafers are RCA cleaned, as described in step # 1. They are then transferred
to the phosphorous drive-in furnace and oxidized using the recipe WET1100 for 55 mins,
which means a wet oxidation performed at 1100∘C. The target thickness is 565 nm, since
this will procure the desired bump height of 250 nm upon the 1st LOCOS oxidation. The
thickness is calculated based on section 3.2, i.e. exploiting that the amount of Si consumed
is 0.456 times that of SiO2, yielding
250 nm
0.456 = 548.2 nm
(4.14)
This thickness is then corrected by simulating the process in Athena, which gives the value
564.3 nm ∼565 nm, according to Mathias Mølgaard. Using the Deal-Grove model, the
required oxidation time would be ∼47 min. However, upon checking the logbooks for the
furnace, it turned out that other users had achieved exactly 565 nm using 55 mins. Theory
and practice are rarely the same, so the latter oxidation time was chosen instead. After
oxidation, the acquired thickness was measured on the Filmtek to be 574.56 nm. This was
a little bit too much, but it only accentuates the fact that the performance of the furnaces
vary over time.
Step 8 - Strip Oxide and Nitride
Before the process flow can proceed with preparations for the second LOCOS oxidation,
the oxide and nitride layers must be stripped away by etching. Firstly, the wafers are
immersed in BHF, which is a wet oxide etch.
This will etch away most of the oxide,
==PAGE:56==
46
Chapter 4. Fabrication
Figure 4.8: Picture with 100x magnification showing the arrays with bumps, created by the first
LOCOS process. The scale bar is 10 µm and the radius measurement is 2.36 µm
including if the nitride layers have been oxidized during the 1st LOCOS oxidation. The
wafers are etched for 10 mins, which includes 2 mins of over etching. The BHF is buffered
with ammonium fluoride, NH4F, and the following reaction takes place [30]
SiO2 + 6HF →H2SiF6 + 2H2O
(4.15)
Subsequently, the wafers are etched in the nitride etch, just like in step # 6. The etching
time is once again 8 mins. The nitride etch is followed by a 7 - up clean and finally, any
remaining oxide is removed by a short etch in BHF for 1 min. An easy way to check
whether or not the SiO2 has been completely removed, is by looking at the water droplets
on the wafers after rinse. SiO2 is hydrophilic, whereas Si is hydrophobic, so a successful
etch should make the water droplets drift off.
The wafers are then ready for optical inspection, to ensure that only the Si substrate is
left with the 250 nm bumps. As can be seen in Figure 4.8, the wafers look as expected,
with well defined arrays of circular bumps. Although it is difficult to tell, due to the
poor contrast in Figure 4.8, only the Si substrate is left and can be recognized by the
characteristic grey Si color. To quantify the results after the first LOCOS oxidation, the
bump height was measured with the Dektak in three different places on the test wafer.
The bump height was measured on 5 bumps in each area and then averaged to find a mean
value and the uncertainty. The results are displayed in Table 4.2.
As can be seen in Table 4.2, the achieved bump heights varied a little bit and none
actually hit the target of 250 nm precisely. However, this is to be expected and the results
are quite satisfactory, the uncertainty of the process taken into account. If the bump
heights had been completely off the mark, the second LOCOS oxidation could have been
tweaked accordingly, to oxidise less or more and thus ensure that the target capacitance
and pull-in voltage of the final device are obtained.
Place #
Av. bump height [nm]
1
259 ± 2
2
258 ± 4
3
254 ± 5
Table 4.2: Table showing the measured, averaged bump heights with uncertainties. All measure-
ments were performed on the Dektak XTA profiler.
==PAGE:57==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
47
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Comparison between the first exposure test structure in L - edit and the one obtained
after the first LOCOS oxidation on one of the wafers. As can be seen, the structure produced is
quite close to the desired design from L- edit, so the wafers are well exposed and the exposure time
seems adequate. The scale bar on the right picture, (b) is 50 µm.
Finally, the exposure structures are inspected to make sure that the exposure time during
photolithography was adequate. As can be seen in Figure 4.9 the test structure is well
defined and similar to the target structure on the 1LOCOS mask, as displayed in Figure
4.9(a). In other words, the wafers are well exposed and the exposure time seems to be
optimal.
Step 9 - Insulation Oxidation
Once again, the wafers are RCA cleaned before an insulation layer of SiO2 is grown. The
target thickness of the oxide layer is 100 nm. The recipe was supposed to be Wet1100
for 3 mins:30 s. However, as discussed in step # 1, short oxidation times can be difficult
to control and based on experience from the logbooks at Danchip, it seems like longer
processing times produce oxide thicknesses closer to the desired targets. Based on this,
the recipe Wet1000 was chosen instead for ∼10 mins, where the oxidation time is based
on the Deal-Grove model [29]. The annealing time of 20 mins remained unchanged. Upon
measurement on the dummy wafer on the Filmtek after growth, 99 nm of SiO2 had been
grown. This deviation is considerably smaller than the one experienced at the pad oxid-
ation, described in step # 1. It implies that the presumption of longer processing times
producing better results might be true, although 1 experiment isn’t enough for the results
to be conclusive.
Step 10 - Nitride Deposition
Next, the wafers are transferred directly to the LPCVD furnace.
In the first nitride
deposition, the obtained Si3N4 layer was 10.8 % too thick. The logbooks were consulted
once again, and according to other users, the current deposition rate for stoichiometric
nitride was 2.8 nm ⋅min−1, so the deposition time in the 4NITDAN recipe was changed
to 18 mins to deposit 50 nm, instead of 20 mins like previously.
After deposition, the thickness of the nitride layer was measured on the Filmtek, using the
1𝐿𝑃𝐶𝑉𝐷_𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒_4𝑖𝑛𝑐ℎ_1𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡_𝑠𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑓recipe, which uses a Si reference before measur-
==PAGE:58==
48
Chapter 4. Fabrication
ing the nitride thickness. ∼49.3 nm of Si3N4 had been deposited which is satisfactory -
the deviation is only 1.4% from the target thickness. The result emphasizes that one of
the best ways to optimize a furnace process is to check the logbooks.
Step 11 - Poly-Si Deposition
After nitride deposition, the wafers are transferred to the 6" E2 LPCVD furnace for poly-Si
deposition. The target thickness is 100 nm and according to the logbooks, the deposition
rate for the Poly recipe was 6.7 nm⋅min−1. Hence, the required deposition time is 15 mins,
as opposed to the 13 mins used in prior depositions.
Once again, the thickness of the deposited poly-Si layer is measured on the Filmtek, using
the 1_𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦𝑠𝑖_𝑜𝑛_𝑆𝑖𝑂2_4𝑖𝑛𝑐ℎ_1𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡recipe, which assumes poly-Si deposited on SiO2.
This is done because dummy wafers used for the poly-Si furnace always have thin SiO2
layer grown on them, about 113 nm in thickness. According to the measurements, the
thickness of the poly-Si layer was ∼97 nm, which is only a deviation of ∼3% from the
target thickness.
Step 12 - Photolithography
Subsequently, the wafers must be patterned with the second mask, 2LOCOS. The proced-
ure is the same as in step # 4. However, difficulties with poor development and etching
problems arose several times during the procedure and hence time was invested in determ-
ining the causes, to eliminate them and also in repeating the steps for better results.
1 wafer had to be stripped of the resist after using the spin track, as the nozzle on the
machine had created a rather big ”crease” or ”wrinkle” in the resist, crossing the struc-
tures underneath. This is unacceptable, as the final structures cannot work, if patterned
wrongly. Furthermore, 3 wafers were not developed correctly by the TMAH UV developer.
There may have been a number of reasons for this. Most likely, the resist has been too
thick close to the wafer edge, due to bad deposition on the spin track. If this was indeed
the case, the puddle method cannot provide good results when using the developer, since
the puddle will be thinner near the edges of the wafer and thus saturate quicker. Con-
sidering this and a resist that is too thick, the wafer in question is bound to be under
developed, around the edges. Another cause for the poor development results may have
been poor dispersion over the wafer surface of the puddle, during development. Suppose
that the puddle stops ∼0.5 cm from the wafer edge, during development. This will lead to
the resist not being developed and washed away, around the periphery. Thus, for future
photolithography steps, the wafers must be thoroughly inspected after each step to ensure
proper development and pattern transfer.
Finally, 1 wafer was lost during etching in the ASE, which is a dry etching system, much like
the DRIE Pegasus. Due to the problems with the photolithography, resist remained around
the periphery and was not spotted before etching, since the poly-Si layer underneath had a
slight rosy/red shine, just like the resist. After etching, a ring of poly-Si was left behind on
the wafer, near the periphery, were it wasn’t supposed to be - the 2LOCOS mask mainly
has structures in the middle, so the resist was supposed to be dissolved and washed away
here. An attempt to save the wafer was made, by putting it in the plasma asher, for a
de-scum procedure, which should remove a thin layer of resist all over the wafer. The
hope was that the residual resist was thin, so it could be removed by the procedure and
the wafer etched once again afterwards, without it being so thin in the middle, that the
==PAGE:59==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
49
Figure 4.10: Picture of the wafer, that was lost in the ASE. As can be seen, residual resist is
evident near the periphery, mainly on the right side of the wafer, with poly-Si underneath. In the
middle, the etch has etched down to the nitride layer and around the edges, all the way down to
the insulation oxide.
structures would suffer during the second etch. Unfortunately, the attempt to save the
wafer didn’t work - the resist had indeed become too thin in the middle and thus the
structures were destroyed. A picture can be seen in Figure 4.10.
Upon repeating the photolithography a few times, the 5 remaining wafers (4 device wafers
and 1 test wafer) were successfully aligned and developed. All the exposure tests were
checked, as well, and the wafers were developed adequately.
Step 13 - Poly-Si Mask Etch
For this step, the choice of equipment was originally the DRIE Pegasus, but the machine
was out of use. Instead, the ASE was used with the recipe Continuous Deepetch for a
total of 21 s per wafer, consisting of two etching cycles of 8 s each and one passivation
cycle, of 5 s. This process was longer than the one originally chosen in the process flow. It
was changed because experience from the clean room technicians shows that the plasma
doesn’t have time to stabilize during an etching process with a duration of only 8 s. After
etching the wafers, it became evident that the ASE etches more in the centre of the wafer,
than near the edges.
Furthermore, the etch seems aggressive in comparison with the
DRIE Pegasus, as it started etching into the nitride layer, as well. For this step, it is not
a problem, simply because the nitride has to be etched in the following step, anyway. In
general, however, it is undesirable for an etch to continue into the underlying layers, since
this may affect the end results.
After etching the wafers, the remaining resist was removed in the plasma asher. The front
side of the wafers were then coated again with a new layer of resist, to protect the surface
and structures in the subsequent wet poly-Si etch. The wet poly-Si etch is an isotropic
etch, consisting of a solution of HNO3:H2O:BHF in the ratio (20 ∶20 ∶1). It works by
oxidising the Si, followed by dissolution of SiO2. A new etch was mixed when needed, as
the solution can become quite sluggish when standing around for a few days - it simply
doesn’t oxidise the poly-Si as well as a new solution. The wafers were immersed, one by
one, into the solution and the poly-Si backsides were stripped for 2 mins each. It was easy
to distinguish when the poly-Si layer was etched away, as the underlying nitride layer had
==PAGE:60==
50
Chapter 4. Fabrication
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: Picture showing the alignment marks, (a), and the array, (b), on the measurement
wafer after the etching steps. As can be seen, there is a slight misalignment, but only on the test
wafer. The remaining wafers were well aligned and exposed.
a dark, grey-ish color, compared to the rosy/golden color of the poly-Si. Upon rinsing
with water, the resist was once again stripped from the front side by using the plasma
asher.
Step 14 - Nitride Wet Etch
The nitride mask for the 2nd LOCOS oxidation was then etched away by using the wet
nitride etch again, at 180∘C, for 8 mins. This etch was immediately followed by a 7-up
clean, to hinder possible contamination from potassium ions in the nitride etch. Finally,
the wafers were inspected in the optical microscope. The results can be seen in Figure
4.11.
The pictures of arrays and alignment marks depicted in Figure 4.11 are from the test wafer.
As can be seen, the alignment is a bit off, but luckily the remaining 4 wafers looked well
aligned and the structures exposed satisfactory. It is critical that the wafers be aligned
correctly, for the final device to work as intended.
Step 15 - Poly-Si Mask Strip
The wafers are then stripped of their poly-Si mask on the front side by using the DRIE
Pegasus to perform the etching. 2 cycles of the recipe 100𝑃𝑜𝑙𝑦𝑆𝑖_𝑆𝑂𝐼was used, which
consists of 4 s of etching and 2 s of deposition. The etching was performed at 20∘C. After
etching, each wafer was inspected to make sure that the nitride layer was visible and
the poly-Si mask completely removed. Once again, this inspection was quite easy, as the
nitride layer had a grey color, compared to the rosy/golden color of the poly-Si.
Step 16 - 2nd LOCOS Oxidation
Next, the wafers were RCA cleaned, as described previously. This time, the duration of
the first HF dip was reduced to 15 s and the second dip skipped altogether, to minimize
the etching of the oxide. The wafers were then ready for the 2nd LOCOS oxidation. The
recipe used was Wet1100 for 1 h:40 mins to provide a target thickness of 865 nm, using the
Deal-Grove model and taking the insulation oxide thickness of 100 nm into account.
==PAGE:61==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
51
Place #
Av. cavity
height [nm]
1
70.7 ± 2.9
2
68.7 ± 2.3
Table 4.3: Table showing the measured, averaged cavity heights with uncertainties. All measure-
ments were performed on the Dektak XTA profiler.
After the thermal oxidation, the acquired oxide thickness was measured on the Filmtek
and found to be 785.92 nm on the dummy wafer. This is a considerable deviation from
the desired thickness. The deviation is not critical, but it does affect some important
parameters; 𝑔vac, which will be reduced, effectively lowering 𝑉pi. The cavity height (which
will be the vacuum gap when bonded to the SOI wafers) was measured on the Dektak
profiler, and the results are displayed in Table 4.3.
For an average vacuum gap of 70.7 nm, the pull-in voltage changes to
𝑉pi = √89.4459 𝑔3
eff
𝜖0𝜋𝑎4
𝐸ℎ3
12 (1 −𝜈)2 = 102.5 V
(4.16)
based on the isotropic plate model or 𝑉pi = 71.35 V, using the COMSOL Multiphysics
(COMSOL) model. Comparing these values, the one obtained from COMSOL should be
the most accurate, as the isotropic plate model is too simplistic to account for everything.
The desired values for the gap and the pull-in voltage were 100 nm and 110 V, respectively,
so the acquired parameters deviate from the original design. However, the change in pull-
in voltage is not critical for this first generation of CMUTs to be used for bio-sensing,
as explained in section 4.1 - the voltage supplied to the set-up can simply be adjusted
accordingly.
Step 17 - Wafer Bonding
Successful wafer bonding requires a number of conditions to be met. Firstly, the surfaces
to be mated must be free of contaminants, such as particulates from surroundings, organic
contamination from wafer boxes and the like, and finally, ionic contamination from metal
tweezers and glass containers - all sources which are present in the clean room. When
contaminants are present at the surface, they act like spacers, inhibiting the bonding.
Ultimately, this creates voids; that is, areas which aren’t bonded due to trapped air or
particulates. In order to accommodate the need for the surfaces to be clean, flat and
smooth, the wafers are RCA cleaned once again.
To minimize re-contamination of the wafers after cleaning, they are carried in specific
transport boxes used only for carrying wafers from the RCA cleaning bench to the bonder
and from the bonder to the anneal-bond furnace. Furthermore, the ambient exposure
and handling time is minimized as much as possible, along with using only RCA cleaned
tweezers to handle the wafers. From experience, the following steps must be undertaken,
to achieve successful bonding in the Danchip clean room:
• Before entering the clean room, a new suit, hood and boots must be worn. Two sets
of gloves must be used and a mask covering the mouth entirely must be put on
==PAGE:62==
52
Chapter 4. Fabrication
• The chuck on the bonder and the entire area surrounding it must be cleaned with
ethanol before bonding
• The bonding should preferably be performed early in the morning, with the least
amount of people around as possible. Within the room where the bonder is placed,
only the operator himself should be present
• During bonding, no talking is preferred and definitely not near the wafers. Further-
more, the body of the operator should be kept from the wafers; that is, no leaning
over substrates, open wafer boxes and the like
The wafers in this thesis will be fusion bonded. That is, the bottom electrodes and the top
SOI wafers, which are both silicon substrates, will be fused together to one entity, ideally
with properties like that of single crystalline silicon. Two different types of wafer bonding
exist; hydrophilic and hydrophobic wafer bonding. Hydrophobic wafer bonding is when
two hydrophobic substrates are bonded together. In this case, the hydrophobic nature can
arise from a clean Si substrate or from the surface being hydrogen terminated, as will be
the case if the native oxide is etched away by a HF solution. Hydrophilic bonding happens
between hydrophilic surfaces, such as oxidized silicon substrates. Here, the surfaces will be
joined by hydrogen bonds between the silanol groups (Si−OH) on the oxidized surfaces,
which will have chemisorbed water molecules located on top [37]. The situation is depicted
in Figure 4.12, to the left.
The bonding performed in this thesis will be hydrophilic, simply due to the SOI wafer
having a thin native oxide on top, as well as the bottom electrode having mainly the
insulation oxide exposed. When the wafers are placed in close proximity, at room temper-
ature, hydrogen bonds will form spontaneously between the chemisorbed water molecules
on the wafer surfaces. The situation can be seen in Figure 4.12 to the right and will be
performed in vacuum. After this so-called pre-bonding, the wafers are annealed at elev-
ated temperatures to increase the energy of adhesion, creating covalent bonds. The water
molecules will then desorp and either diffuse through the oxide and react with the silicon
substrate, forming SiO2 and hydrogen, or it will diffuse along the interface, to the outside
[37].
Silicon wafer
OH OH OH OH OH OH OH OH OH OH
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
Silicon wafer
OH OH OH OH OH OH OH OH OH OH
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H bonds
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Silicon wafer
O
Silicon wafer
Si
SiO2
25oC
800oC - 1000oC
Si-O-Si
bonds
Figure 4.12:
Conceptual sketch illustrating hydrophilic fusion bonding between to oxidized
wafers. To the left, the pre-bonding situation at room temperature can be seen. Hydrogen bonds
will form spontaneously between the chemisorbed water molecules. To the right, the wafers are
annealed at elevated temperatures, to increase the bond strength. The figure is adapted from [37].
==PAGE:63==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
53
No.
Combination
Bonded?
Voids
#1
SOI + Bottom substrate
Yes
1 big one
#2
SOI + Bottom substrate
Yes
None
#3
Unthinned SOI+ Bottom substrate
Yes
3 small ones
#4
SOI + Re-oxidized bottom substrate
No
-
Table 4.4: Table summarizing the outcome of the different bonding attempts.
4 combinations of wafers were prepared for bonding. Two of them consisted of a bottom
substrate and an SOI wafer, as produced by the process flows in Appendix B and A, 1
combination had a normal bottom substrate but an SOI top plate, which had not been
thinned down, and finally, the last combination had a normal SOI wafer, but a bottom
electrode which had been re-oxidized, in order to achieve the desired post oxide of 865 nm,
instead of the achieved 785 nm (recall the result in step # 16). The wafers were then
pre-bonded using the EVG NIL with the recipe CMUT, which presses the wafers together
for 5 mins using a force of 1500 N, at 50∘C and vacuum pressure < 10−3mbar. Afterwards,
the wafers were annealed in the anneal furnace for 70 mins at 1100∘C and finally inspected
using an IR-camera.
An overview of the different combinations and the outcome of the bonding is displayed in
Table 4.4. As can be seen, the first 3 combinations were bonded somewhat successfully,
but the combination with the re-oxidized bottom electrode would not bond despite several
attempts. There may be a number of reasons for this, but the most likely are: the surface
roughness of the wafers may be too high, a nitride protrusion caused by the second LOCOS
oxidation could possibly be higher than the post oxide and hinder successful bonding or
the curvature of the wafers is too high. We will examine these possibilities in the following.
Bonding Challenges
First, we investigate the surface roughness of the wafers.
To secure the best possible
conditions for bonding, an RMS surface roughness below 0.5 nm is required according
to [37]. The measurements are performed on an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM). The
microscope is in tapping mode and a new standard tip is used. A surface area of 1 μm×1 μm
is scanned in a 256 × 256 line scan. The image is scanned with a frequency of 0.5 Hz and
in two places on each wafer. To be able to compare roughness measurements on different
wafers, the set-up must be the same every time. It is quite difficult to measure roughness
on a nm scale, since disturbances from other machinery, as well as building work nearby
can affect the measurements significantly.
The surface roughness can be calculated by using the root mean square, 𝑅RMS, which is
calculated using the 𝑛number of absolute values of the profile height, 𝑦𝑖,
𝑅RMS = √1
𝑛
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
𝑦2
𝑖
(4.17)
The 𝑅RMS values will be used for characterisation of the surfaces in this thesis, as that
approach has been used in the MEMS Applied Sensor group before [36]. Thus, the surface
roughness was measured on the wafer not intended for bonding, as well as on the re-
oxidized bottom substrate from combination #4. The results are displayed in Table 4.5.
==PAGE:64==
54
Chapter 4. Fabrication
Place #
Wafer
𝑅RMS [Å]
1
Test wafer
8.51
2
Test wafer
8.46
1
Re-oxidized bottom sub.
7.80
2
Re-oxidized bottom sub.
6.06
Table 4.5: Table showing the measured 𝑅RMS values. The 𝑅RMS values are generally quite high,
when considering the preferred surface roughness of 0.5 nm or less.
Upon inspection of Table 4.5 it is evident that the 𝑅RMS-values are too high on both the
test wafer and the re-oxidized bottom substrate, compared to the requirement. Hence,
the surface roughness may have been a contributing factor in why the re-oxidized bottom
substrate did not bond to the SOI wafer. However, bottom electrodes processed exactly
like the test wafer did bond successfully in combinations #1−3, so despite the fact that a
higher surface roughness means fewer points where the wafer surfaces are in close contact,
the requirement of a roughness below 0.5 nm is not always valid for successful bonding,
but rather based on experiences from [37]. The surface roughness is an important factor,
but correlation does not imply causation.
Next, we investigate the placement of the nitride protrusion compared to the post oxide.
The test wafer, which had not been bonded was once again put in the AFM and surface
profiles across the cavities were measured using a scan size of 10 μm × 10 μm. The result
can be seen on Figure 4.13. It is evident that the nitride protrusion is below the bond-
ing surface of the post oxide. Although this investigation is not performed on the actual
wafers intended for bonding, no systematic pattern can be seen in the voids, so based on
this it is concluded that the nitride protrusion is not what is causing the voids on wafer
combinations #1 −3 or the unsuccessful wafer bonding in combination #4. If they had
been the problem, a pattern should have been visible for all the cells, where the voids
would appear around each protrusion.
- 1 . 0
- 0 . 5
0 . 0
0 . 5
1 . 0
1 . 5
0
5 0
1 0 0
1 5 0
2 0 0
2 5 0
3 0 0
3 5 0
P r o f i l e  [ n m
]
L a t e r a l  [ µm
]
N i t r i d e
p r o t r u s i o n
Figure 4.13: Surface profiles of one of the cavities on the CMUT, as measured on the AFM. As
can be seen, the nitride protrusion is not higher than the post oxide, indicating that it should not
present a problem when bonding in regards to voids.
==PAGE:65==
4.2. Process Flow Overview
55
−35 −30 −25 −20 −15 −10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
−20
−40
Lateral [mm]
Profile [μm]
[ ̄110]
Fit [ ̄110]
[110]
Fit [110]
Figure 4.14: Graph showing the measurements of the wafer curvature on the thinned down SOI
wafer. Also shown are the fits used to extract the radius of curvature, which will be used in the
stress calculations.
Finally, the curvature of the wafers can be investigated and measured on the Dektak
profiler. One of the SOI wafers were chosen, since curvature is usually associated with
the top substrate due to the stress induced by the thin down procedure [36]. The wafer
was placed upside down, resting on 3 small metal spheres to avoid distortion of the wafer
curvature by the vacuum system. Measurements of the curvature was then carried out
by measuring from the primary flat and inwards ([110] direction) and next, by rotating
the wafer 90∘with respect to the primary flat and measuring once again ([ ̄110] direction).
Based on the obtained results, it is possible to fit and extract the radius of curvature of
the thinned down SOI wafer. The data is displayed in Figure 4.14 together with the fit
used, which is a simple least mean squares fit, provided by Mathias Engholm [36].
The radius of curvature can be used together with Stoney’s equation to roughly estimate
the stress in the silicon plate [38],
𝜎𝑓=
𝐸ℎ2
6 (1 −𝜈) 𝑅ℎ𝑓
(4.18)
where 𝜎𝑓is the stress of the thin film, 𝐸is Young’s modulus, ℎis the thickness of the
substrate, 𝜈is Poisson’s ratio, 𝑅is the radius of curvature and ℎ𝑓is the thickness of the
thin film. Assuming that only the buried oxide layer contributes to the wafer bow, because
the Si layer has been thinned down, the results of the calculations can be seen in Table
4.6. The values used are ℎ= 400 μm, 𝐸[110] = 169 GPa, 𝜈[110] = 0.062 and ℎ𝑓= 1 μm
based on the specified thickness of the buried oxide layer of the SOI wafers. The values
for Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio have directional dependency, but since the [110]
and [ ̄110] directions are equivalent, the same values can be used in the calculations. The
estimated stresses are also displayed in Table 4.6.
Place
𝑅sim [m]
𝜎fsim [MPa]
[110]
13.27
362.1
[ ̄110]
13.97
343.9
Table 4.6: Table showing the fitted values for the radius of curvature and thin film stress, for the
thinned down SOI wafer, in two different places. The first column displays the radius of curvature
using the least mean squares fit and the second column the corresponding stress using equation
(4.18).
==PAGE:66==
56
Chapter 4. Fabrication
(a) Combination #1
(b) Combination #2
(c) Combination #3
Figure 4.15: Images of wafer combinations #1 −3 after the handle etch in the ASE. As can be
seen only combination #3 turned out somewhat as expected.
As can be seen, thinning down the wafers does indeed introduce significant amounts of
stress in the substrates, in the order of ∼344 −362 MPa which can be problematic during
bonding. Since some of the wafers turned out to be difficult to bond together, especially
combination #4, this may very well have been a contributing factor.
In conclusion, both the surface roughness and the wafer curvature may have contributed
to the challenges experienced during bonding.
Thus, the following improvements are
suggested: using SOI wafers with less curvature and hence less stress should mitigate the
problem to some extent. Perhaps avoiding thinning down the SOI wafers altogether before
bonding is a solution. Furthermore, the surface roughness following the second LOCOS
oxidation seems high in the post oxide areas. Further investigation into what causes this
during the oxidation should provide helpful insight and potentially reduce the surface
roughness, ultimately improving pre-bonding conditions.
Step 18 - Handle layer and Box Oxide Etch
Next, the wafer combinations #1−3 were immersed in BHF to etch away any oxide which
may have formed on top of the handle layer on the SOI wafers. Afterwards, they were
rinsed thoroughly in water and etched in the ASE one at a time, using the recipe Etchaway
for ∼1 h:10 mins. This etches away the handle layer, which has a thickness around 380 μm.
The important thing in this step was to look through the inspection window of the ASE
during the etch, to check when it was finished and the buried oxide layer reached. The
result is displayed in Figure 4.15.
As can be seen, the etching on combination #1 and #2 turned out rather poorly. Normally,
when the Si handle is etched away, it can be seen leaving the surface of the buried oxide
in a circular manner, almost like ripples in water. This was not observed for either of
these combinations. Instead, the top plate fell off in the middle and the etch continued
into the bottom electrode, as in Figure 4.15(a), where part of the handle layer is present
on the left half and the right half displays the arrays in the bottom substrate, as well as
some of the post oxide. In the case of Figure 4.15(b), the top plate fell off again and the
wafer completely broke. This behaviour could be related to the thinned down SOI wafers,
as combination #3 did not behave like this (combination #3 has an unthinned SOI wafer
on top). Despite this, it is very difficult to explain why combination #1 and #2 behaved
like they did. For combination #3 the Si handle was etched away more successfully, but
unfortunately the top plate ruptured in a few places, when the load lock was opened on
the ASE, to retrieve the wafers. Possibly, the top plate could not endure the pressure
==PAGE:67==
4.3. Surface Roughness Optimization
57
difference between the cavity and the load lock, but it is hard to tell. It would, however,
explain the circular holes evident in the oxide layer on Figure 4.15(c).
At this point, the fabrication had to be stopped, as there was no more time left. Af-
terwards, a thin down of the top plate in a KOH etch was attempted with combination
#3, by Mathias Mølgaard, before the box oxide etch could commence. Unfortunately,
the plate could not withstand the etch, as it was thinner than expected and therefore the
wafer was lost at this step. Thus, the yield for this batch was zero in the end, but luckily
quite a few useful results to remember for the next batch was discovered along the way.
4.3
Surface Roughness Optimization
In section 4.2 it was mentioned that successful bonding requires a surface roughness,
𝑅RMS < 0.5 nm. Although several steps from the main process flow (Appendix B) affect
the surface roughness, it has been the experience of the MEMS Applied Sensors group
that especially the etching steps have a significant impact. Hence, an investigation into
these steps was decided upon, to optimize the surface roughness. The optimization was
carried out during delays in the main fabrication process.
In the current process flow, wet etching is utilized for etching through a Si3N4 layer using
a poly-Si-mask, as discussed in step # 5 −6 and # 13 −14 above. In section 4.2, the
surface roughness of the SiO2 grown after these etching steps was measured and found to
be a factor of ∼1.7 too high, compared to the requirement. This represents a problem
for the bonding step following the second oxidation. Furthermore, the surface roughness
is a cumulative quantity, so reducing roughness in individual steps may improve the over-
all device. The obvious solution to eliminate the wet etching steps and possibly improve
the roughness problem is then dry etching. To investigate this, 3 variations of the same
process is proposed, as outlined in Table 4.7.
Step #
Description
Process # 1
Process # 2
Process # 3
1
1st AFM
⊙
⊙
⊙
2
RCA
⊙
⊙
⊙
3
Wet oxidation
⊙
⊙
⊙
4
2nd AFM
⊙
⊙
⊙
5
Nitride dep.
⊙
⊙
⊙
6
Photolithography
⊙
⊙
⊙
7
AOE
⊙
⊙
⊙
8
BHF
-
⊙
-
9
3rd AFM
⊙
⊙
⊙
10
Plasma ashing
⊙
⊙
-
11
RCA
⊙
⊙
-
12
Wet oxidation
⊙
⊙
-
13
4th AFM
⊙
⊙
-
Table 4.7: Overview of the process optimization regarding surface roughness. 3 different variations
over the same process flow are performed to investigate surface roughness on Si and SiO2 after dry
etching and wet etching, respectively. ⊙means that the step is performed, −means that it is not.
==PAGE:68==
58
Chapter 4. Fabrication
1
4
9
1 3
1 . 6
2 . 0
2 . 4
2 . 8
3 . 2
3 . 6
4 . 0
 P r o c e s s  3
 P r o c e s s  1
 P r o c e s s  2
M
e a n  s u r f a c e  r o u g n e s s ,  R
R M
S  [ Å ]
S t e p  #
Figure 4.16:
Mean surface roughness development through the different processing steps, as
given in Table 4.7. As can be seen, process 2 using BHF provides a lower final surface roughness
compared to process 1, which is purely based on dry etching. Please refer to Figure 4.17 for an
overview of where the measurements are taking place.
Process 1 investigates a sequence where the wet nitride etching steps are substituted for
dry etching using the Advanced Oxide Etching (AOE) equipment in the Danchip clean
room. In this way, the poly-Si masking steps included in the original process flow can
be discarded. Process 2 is almost identical to process 1, however, instead of etching all
the way down to the Si substrate using purely AOE, the dry etching process is stopped
before on a few nm of SiO2 and then wet etched in BHF until the substrate is reached.
Comparing process 1 and 2 should then make it possible to determine whether or not using
a wet etch provides a smoother surface. Finally, process 3 is included to provide a reference
roughness measurement, when using dry etch and stopping on SiO2, after etching through
the nitride layer. It is expected that this be rather difficult compared to wet etching, as
a physical etch is far less selective when stopping on different layers. AFM measurements
of the surface roughness are performed in all 3 processes after each important step, as
indicated in Table 4.7 and outlined in Figure 4.17.
The development of the surface roughness measurements through the different processing
steps is displayed in Figure 4.16. It is evident that process 2 provides the smoothest surface
compared to process 1, since the BHF etch is more ”gentle” than the physical etch, which
literally bombards the surface to dislodge the material in question. This is indeed what
one would expect. In step 13 after the second oxidation, the surface roughness on the
wafer from process 1 is thus 1.7 times as high as the one from process 2, which supports
our conclusion.
Furthermore, the surface roughness on SiO2 in step 9, when stopping after etching through
the nitride layer, is also quite high, ∼2.8 Å.
This is not critical, if dry etching is to
substitute step # 6 in the main process flow (see Appendix B, as the pad oxide will be
removed. However, the value indicates that the solution is not applicable to the original
step # 14, as the second insulation oxide produced will stay in the device and be the
foundation of the cavity. Using dry etch here could then compromise the planarity of Si
bump, making control over the gap height more difficult. This would affect the pull-in
voltage, ultimately making it vary over the individual CMUT cell.
==PAGE:69==
4.3. Surface Roughness Optimization
59
Process 1 
13
9
4
1
7
8
%
Process 2
Si
Si3N4
SiO2
PR
Process 3
%
%
Figure 4.17: Overview of where the surface roughness measurements are taking place in the 3
different process variations, as seen from a cross-sectional view. The grey triangle indicates the tip
of the AFM probe.
The idea of substituting the first nitride wet etching steps has the advantage of simplifying
the original process flow considerably, by making the poly-Si masking steps superfluous.
It would also make the fabrication of the CMUTs faster. A drawback, however, would be
the nitride left on the backside of the wafer, which needs to be removed at some point, in
order not to introduce unnecessary stress. The AOE equipment does not etch the backside
of the wafers, so if the nitride is to be removed, it would be possible, despite the solution
being rather cumbersome. After etching the nitride and the oxide on the front side of the
wafer in the AOE, a thick layer (∼2.2 μm) of a durable resist such as AZ nLOF 2020 could
be spun onto the front side. This would enable the wafer to be immersed in a BHF etch for
just over 1 hour. This should remove the nitride on the backside, without compromising
the features on the front side. However, as is quite obvious from this description, the
solution of substituting the wet etch for a dry, would then have lost its simplicity and no
longer be feasible.
Based on these results and considerations, it is the opinion of the author, that the wet
etching steps remain the best solution, as they are easy to perform in the clean room
to front and backside of the wafer, simultaneously, whilst also procuring a relatively low
surface roughness. If dry etching was to be implemented instead, one would also have to
fabricate an actual CMUT based on this and characterise it, to determine its acoustical
and electrical behaviour. It would then have to be compared to a CMUT based on a
process flow with wet etching steps. It is impossible to predict solely based on theory,
whether or not they will perform similarly, but changing some of the processing steps may
very well affect the device behaviour.
==PAGE:70==
60
Chapter 4. Fabrication
4.4
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, the design of the individual CMUT cell, as well as the overall mask layout
was presented. The appearances of the three different designs were substantiated using an
equation to describe the electromechanical behaviour of the cells. Next, the fabrication in
the clean room was presented. Especially the steps concerning the wafer bonding proved to
be challenging and hence, the surface roughness, the placement of the nitride protrusion in
reference to the post oxide and the wafer curvature were investigated, as possible reasons
for the bonding problems. Two wafer combinations broke after the handle layer etch and
it was difficult to explain why, as that behaviour had not been seen before. Only the
wafer combination without a thinned down SOI top plate made it past the handle layer
etch, suggesting that thinning down the SOI wafers before bonding might make them
too vulnerable. Finally, a process flow investigating surface roughness optimization was
presented. It proved a hypothesis about dry etching resulting in bigger surface roughness
values than wet etching. Moreover, dry etching was rejected as a feasible substitution for
the wet etching steps utilized in the main process flow.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER5
Characterisation
In this chapter, the CMUTs will be characterised using impedance measurements.
To
this end, a brief walk-through of the CMUT equivalent network is necessary. Next, an
experimental set-up for humidity measurements is described and followed by a substantial
analysis of important figures of merit for the sensors.
Lumped Element Modelling
Before going into the experimental set-up as well as the measurements obtained there, it is
relevant to introduce the CMUT equivalent network. This will make it considerably easier
to discuss the performance observed. Basically, the equivalent network has three different
domains; the electrical, the mechanical and the acoustical domain. Together, they can be
used to describe how the CMUT works when used for the classical purpose of imaging,
that is, either in transmit or receive mode. However, in this thesis, the CMUTs will be
used for gravimetric sensing and this renders the acoustical domain unimportant for our
purposes.
The CMUT equivalent network is displayed in 5.1. The electrical domain is composed of
a voltage source and a capacitor and transformation from the electrical to the mechanical
C0
Zec
V
Electrical domain
Mechanical domain
Acoustical domain
b
1/keﬀ
meﬀ
Zac
P
1:TEM
TMA: 1
CMUT
Figure 5.1:
The electrical equivalent circuit of the CMUT. It consists of three different do-
mains; the electrical, the mechanical and the acoustical. The circuit can be used to analyze the
performance of the CMUTs in the impedance measurements.
61
==PAGE:72==
62
Chapter 5. Characterisation
R1
L1
C1
C0
Figure 5.2: This is the circuit as seen by the impedance analyzer, from the electrical terminal,
when the measurements are performed in a low-impedance medium, in this case air.
and further to the acoustical domain is described by the transduction factors 𝑇EM and 𝑇MA,
respectively. The mechanical domain is often described using a simple mass-spring-damper
system, however transforming it into circuit elements simplifies analysis. The spring can
be described by the effective spring constant, 𝑘eff, the mass by the effective mass, 𝑚eff and
the damping factor by 𝑏. Using this, the mechanical elements can be mapped onto an
inductor (kinetic energy storage element), a capacitor (potential energy storage element)
and a resistor (dissipative element). The components are thus given by the following [4],
𝐶1
=
𝑇2
EM
𝑘eff
(5.1)
𝐿1
=
𝑚eff
𝑇2
EM
(5.2)
𝑅1
=
𝑏
𝑇2
EM
(5.3)
𝐶0
=
𝐶(𝜔op)
(5.4)
where 𝐶0 is the capacitance of the electrical domain, operating at frequency 𝜔op. All of
these parameters will be used to characterise the CMUTs in the measurements in the next
section.
The impedance measurements will be performed in air, which is a low-impedance medium,
so the acoustical impedance can be neglected (the acoustic terminals in Figure 5.1 will
be shorted) and the circuit seen by the impedance analyzer will correspond to Figure 5.2.
The impedance in the mechanical domain has three contributions, one from each circuit
element, 𝑍𝑐= 1/ (𝑖𝜔𝐶1), 𝑍𝑙= 𝑖𝜔𝐿1 and 𝑍𝑟= 𝑅1, for the capacitor, the inductor and
resistor, respectively. By plotting these impedance contributions in Figure 5.3 along with
the electrical and total impedances, one can identify two points of interest, which are de-
scriptive when characterising the system; the resonance and the anti-resonance frequency.
The resonance frequency can be identified by the total and mechanical impedances reach-
ing a minimum. At this point, the impedance of the mass and the spring in the mechanical
domain will be of equal magnitude, and a phase shift from −90∘to 90∘will be detectable,
as the system goes from being dominated by the capacitor to being dominated by the
inductor. The next point of interest is the anti-resonance frequency. This point can be
identified by the electrical and mechanical impedances being of equal magnitude. Fur-
thermore, the total impedance should be at a maximum value, whilst a phase shift from
90∘to −90∘should be detectable. The phase shift can be explained by the system going
from being dominated by the inductor in the mechanical system to the capacitor in the
electrical system. The resonance frequency can then be calculated by
==PAGE:73==
5.1. Impedance Measurements
63
2 x 1 0
6
3 x 1 0
6
4 x 1 0
6
5 x 1 0
6
6 x 1 0
6
7 x 1 0
6
1 0
1
1 0
2
1 0
3
1 0
4
1 0
5
 Z
m
e c h a n i c a l
 Z
s p r i n g
 Z
m
a s s
 Z
e l e c t r i c a l
 Z
t o t a l
F
a
F
r e s
I m
p e d a n c e  m
a g n i t u d e ,  | Z |  [Ω]
F r e q u e n c y ,  [ H z ]
Figure 5.3: Double logarithmic plot of the impedance magnitude for the components in the circuit
displayed in Figure 5.2. This is the ideal behaviour which should be exhibited by the CMUT when
characterising it using the impedance analyzer. The values used are 𝐶1 = 20 pF, 𝐶0 = 40 pF,
𝐿1 = 30 µH and 𝑅1 = 0 Ω.
𝜔res = √𝑘
𝑚
↔
𝜔res = √
1
𝐶1𝐿1
(5.5)
𝑓res
=
1
2𝜋√
1
𝐶1𝐿1
(5.6)
A final, important parameter to consider, is the electromechanical coupling coefficient,
traditionally denoted as 𝑘2. It is a descriptor of the efficiency with which the transducer
converts electrical energy into mechanical energy or vice versa. Based on the parameters
defined previously, it is given as [4]
𝑘2 =
1
1 −𝑘eff𝐶/𝑇2
EM
=
1
1 + 𝐶0/𝐶1
(5.7)
Based on equation (5.7), it is evident why the coupling coefficient is a measure of the
quality of the CMUT.
5.1
Impedance Measurements
In order to demonstrate one of the traditional characterisation methods for CMUTs, as
well as being able to discuss performance in terms of pull-in voltage of cells and lumped
element model parameters, measurements were carried out on single LOCOS based CMUT
chips fabricated by Søren E. Diederichsen [39]. This was done simply because the ongoing
fabrication of the CMUTs wasn’t finished at this point during the project. The method
and analysis presented here are however easily transferable to any CMUT device, which
needs characterisation and thus this section entails the same analysis as would have been
carried out for the double LOCOS based CMUTs.
==PAGE:74==
64
Chapter 5. Characterisation
Microscope
Probing stage
Probe
Figure 5.4: The set-up used for the impedance measurements. The microscope in the middle
of the picture is used to align the probe on the CMUT array and the probe is connected to the
impedance analyzer.
The whole set-up is powered by a sourcemeter.
Neither the impedance
analyzer nor the sourcemeter is displayed in this picture.
The impedance measurements were performed in the MEMS-lab at DTU Nanotech using
an Agilent 4294A Precision Impedance Analyzer, which is controlled by a Matlab script
developed by Anders Lei. The set-up is powered by a Keithley 2410 1100 V SourceMeter
and can be seen on Figure 5.4. Firstly, a single-LOCOS based CMUT array is cleaved
in half, using a scriber. The partial array is then probed directly at the contact pads on
the individual elements and the common ground they share, running along the periphery.
The signal is then supplied to the top electrode and ground to the bottom.
On Figure 5.5 the impedance and phase angle imposed by the test CMUT are plotted as a
function of the frequency, at a bias voltage of 180 V. The test was performed by sweeping
the frequency from 1-20 MHz in steps of 25 kHz and allows for a coarse locating of the
resonance frequency. As can be seen, the impedance reaches a minimum value around
10 MHz, where the phase angle simultaneously increases from −90∘to 78∘, indicating the
resonance frequency of the CMUT. Around a frequency of 11-11.5 MHz, the impedance
peaks and the phase angle drops back to −90∘, which corresponds to the anti-resonance
frequency.
As can be seen in Figure 5.6(a) the coupling coefficient increases with bias voltage, with
values in the range of 5−24%. The increase in 𝑘2 can be explained by the spring softening
effect, where the effective spring constant is lowered due to an increase in the electrical
field. At a higher bias voltage, the top plate will be deflected additionally, and thus be
brought closer to the bottom electrode, due to the bigger electrostatic force. This will
further increase the electrostatic force and with it the deflection.
In other words, the
actual deflection is larger than that initially caused by a given bias voltage and this effect
is often modelled as if the spring constant of the top plate is reduced [3].
When the
effective spring constant is lowered, the resonance frequency will decrease as well, since
the top plate is less stiff. This behaviour is displayed in Figure 5.6(b). The values of the
coupling coefficient depicted in Figure 5.6(a) are not as high as one might wish. A high
value of the coupling coefficient is always desired, since this equals an efficient conversion
of electrical energy into mechanical energy, with less energy loss in the shape of heat in
the device. Another important parameter which can be identified from Figure 5.6(a), is
the pull-in voltage. The value of the coupling coefficient increases until the pull-in voltage
is reached, whereupon it drops to values between 5 −10 %. This happens around 205 V,
so this is the value of the pull-in voltage.
In Figure 5.7 the parameters from the lumped element model have been extracted by
==PAGE:75==
5.1. Impedance Measurements
65
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
0
1
2
3
4
5
F r e q u e n c y  [ M
H z ]
I m
p e d a n c e  m
a g n i t u d e ,  | Z |  [ k Ω]
- 1 0 0
- 8 0
- 6 0
- 4 0
- 2 0
0
2 0
4 0
6 0
8 0
P h a s e  a n g l e ,  θ [ °]
Figure 5.5: The impedance and phase angle plotted as a function of the frequency. The bias
voltage used was 180 V.
1 5 0
1 6 0
1 7 0
1 8 0
1 9 0
2 0 0
2 1 0
5
1 0
1 5
2 0
2 5
C o u p l i n g  c o e f f i c i e n t  s q u a r e d  [ %
]
B i a s  v o l t a g e  [ V ]
(a)
1 5 0
1 6 0
1 7 0
1 8 0
1 9 0
2 0 0
2 1 0
7 . 0
7 . 5
8 . 0
8 . 5
9 . 0
9 . 5
1 0 . 0
1 0 . 5
1 1 . 0
1 1 . 5
 R e s o n a n t  f r e q .
 A n t i - r e s o n a n t  f r e q .
F r e q u e n c y  [ M
H z ]
B i a s  v o l t a g e  [ V ]
(b)
Figure 5.6: (a) Coupling coefficient squared as a function of bias voltage. As can be seen, 𝑘2
increases with bias voltage due to the spring softening effect, until the pull-in voltage is reached.
(b) The resonance and antiresonance plotted as a function of bias voltage. As explained in the
text, the resonance frequency decreases with increasing bias voltage due to the spring softening
effect.
==PAGE:76==
66
Chapter 5. Characterisation
1 5 0
1 6 0
1 7 0
1 8 0
1 9 0
2 0 0
2 1 0
2 2 0
4 5
5 0
5 5
6 0
6 5
7 0
 I n d u c t a n c e ,  L
1  [ µH ]
 E l e c t r i c a l  c a p a c i t a n c e ,  C
0  [ p F ]
 C
1
 C
0
 L
1
B i a s  v o l t a g e  [ V ]
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
1 4
1 6
1 8
C a p a c i t a n c e ,  C
1  [ p F ]
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
 
Figure 5.7: Extracted lumped element parameters of the CMUT, as fabricated by [39] plotted
as a function of applied DC bias voltage. The component names correspond to those displayed in
Figure 5.2. The values have been extracted by fitting the Matlab model developed by Anders Lei
to the impedance measurements.
fitting the model to the data and then plotted as a function of the bias voltage. Going
from left to right in Figure 5.7, the mechanical capacitance, 𝐶1, in purple displays the
same behaviour as the coupling coefficient in Figure 5.6(a) and increases until the pull-in
voltage is met. Next, the electrical capacitance, 𝐶0, of the CMUT is depicted in blue and
increases with DC bias as expected. The peak capacitance is seen to be somewhere around
66-67 pF, just prior to pull-in. Finally, the inductance, 𝐿1 is displayed in red. It decreases
until the pull-in voltage is met, whereafter it increases again. This is to be expected,
as 𝑇EM increases with bias voltage, effectively lowering the inductance, as indicated in
equation (5.2).
5.2
Frequency Measurements
The CMUTs fabricated by Søren E. Diederichsen were subjected to some tests, to make
sure that they responded as expected, before implementing them in a more complicated
test set-up. In section 2.2 and 2.4, it was explained how the top plate of the CMUT will
deflect, when a given pressure is applied. It was also explained how a change in mass will
cause a shift in the resonance frequency for a resonator. This can be specified further.
The CMUTs are operated in the first flexural mode, (equation (2.49) is repeated here for
convenience)
𝜔0 = √80
9
1
𝜌
𝐸
1 −𝜈2
ℎ
𝑎2
(5.8)
in this case, the resonance frequency, 𝜔0, which is inversely proportional to the square
root of the density of the plate, will decrease, when experiencing an increase in loaded
mass due to analyte molecules/pressure.
In the first simple test, the CMUT will be acted upon with a heat blower, increasing the
temperature to 50 ∘C. Suppose that the temperature increase will cause the dimensions of
the CMUT to expand linearly, then a detectable shift in the frequency towards lower values
should be evident, as the resonance frequency scales with ℎ/𝑎2 according to equation (5.8).
The frequency response plotted as a function of time is displayed on Figure 5.8. As can be
seen, the act of heating effectively looks like an added ”mass” on the CMUT and produces
==PAGE:77==
5.2. Frequency Measurements
67
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
- 1 . 6
- 1 . 4
- 1 . 2
- 1 . 0
- 0 . 8
- 0 . 6
- 0 . 4
- 0 . 2
0 . 0
0 . 2
F r e q u e n c y  s h i f t ,  δf  [ k H z ]
T i m
e  [ s ]
Figure 5.8: Frequency shift of the CMUT in response to a heating lasting ∼35 s. As expected,
the frequency shifts to a lower value, when the dimensions of the CMUT expand. The red line
indicates the part of the frequency data used for Allan deviation analysis.
a shift in the resonance frequency ranging between ∼1.1 kHz −1.56 kHz. The result is
quite satisfactory and comparing it to results in publications such as [3] and [13], other
research groups seem to obtain frequency shifts of the same order of magnitude as this.
In the introduction, the Allan deviation was briefly introduced as a useful figure of merit
when discussing frequency stability of oscillators (see equation (1.6)). The Allan variance
is convergent for most types of clock noise, but it provides relatively poor statistical
confidence compared to other versions of the Allan variance.
Furthermore, the other
types posses the advantage of being able to distinguish between different types of noise.
Based on these considerations, the most widely employed variance type is known as the
overlapping Allan variance. The overlapping Allan Variance uses overlapping sampling
to improve the confidence interval by increasing the number of degrees of freedom in the
calculation. The method is simply based on using all possible combinations of the data
set and even though the samples aren’t statistically independent, the overall confidence in
the stability estimate is considerably improved. The overlapping Allan variance is given
by [40]
𝜎2
𝑦(𝜏) =
1
2𝑚2(𝑀−2𝑚+ 1)
𝑀−2𝑚+1
∑
𝑗=1
{
𝑗+𝑚−1
∑
𝑖=𝑗
[
̄
𝑦𝑖+𝑚−
̄𝑦𝑖]}
2
(5.9)
where 𝑀is the number of frequency measurements for an averaging time of 𝜏= 𝑚𝜏0
(i.e. effective gate time), with 𝑚as the averaging factor and 𝜏0 as the basic measurement
interval. The result of calculating the overlapping Allan variance is usually expressed as the
overlapping Allan deviation, which is the square root of equation (5.9). The overlapping
Allan deviation is calculated based on the data displayed in Figure 5.8, along the red line.
The result can be seen on Figure 5.9, plotted together with another dataset and both use
the fractional frequencies. The overlapping Allan deviations are plotted with error bars
which indicate the 1𝜎confidence level.
For the dataset sampled when the CMUT was affected by the heat blower the first time
(”Heating 1”), the Allan deviation is computed for various averaging times, at a sampling
rate of ∼225 Hz, to find the optimal value. The CMUT has the lowest Allan deviation
==PAGE:78==
68
Chapter 5. Characterisation
0 . 0 1
0 . 1
1 . 5
2
2 . 5
3
5
1 0
( τm
i n ,  σy , m
i n )  =  0 . 0 2 7  s ,  1 . 6 2 ⋅1 0
- 7
 H e a t i n g  2
 H e a t i n g  1
( τm
i n ,  σy , m
i n )  =  0 . 0 8 9  s ,  5 . 8 8 ⋅1 0
- 7
O v e r l a p p i n g  A l l a n  D e v i a t i o n ,  σy  
A v e r a g i n g  t i m
e ,  τ [ s ]
x  1 0
- 7
τ
1 / 2
τ
0
τ
- 1 / 2
τ
1 / 2
τ
0
τ
- 1 / 2
Figure 5.9: Overlapping Allan deviation based on fractional frequencies for one of the CMUTs.
The error bars indicate the 1𝜎confidence level. Both the black and blue deviations are based on
the CMUT being heated by a heat blower. The straight lines indicate the noise analysis performed
and will be discussed in the text.
of 𝜎𝑦(𝜏) = 1.62 × 10−7 for 27 ms averaging time, which corresponds to a frequency noise
level of ∼1.8 Hz. Based on equation (1.7) from the introduction, the minimum detection
limit of loaded mass per unit area, 𝛿𝑚LOD, can be calculated using
𝛿𝑚LOD (𝜏) = 2𝑚eff𝜎𝜔/𝜔0 (𝜏) = 2𝜌𝑡𝜎𝑦(𝜏)
(5.10)
where the effective mass can be estimated by,
𝑚eff = 𝜌Si𝑡Si + 𝜌Ti𝑡Ti + 𝜌Al𝑡Al = 5.37 × 10−3kg/m2
(5.11)
where 𝜌is density and 𝑡is the thickness of the individual layers making up the plate of
the CMUT. The plate of the CMUTs consists of Si with a thin layer of Ti and Al on top
(20 nm and 400 nm, respectively [39]). Based on this, the mass LOD is given by
𝛿𝑚LOD = 2 × 5.37 × 10−3kg/m2 × 1.62 × 10−7 = 1.72 × 10−9kg/m2
(5.12)
corresponding to 1.72 ag/μm2. Figure 5.9 also displays a dataset based on the CMUT
being heated a second time (”Heating 2”). Here, the lowest Allan deviation is seen for
𝜎𝑦(𝜏) = 5.88 × 10−7 for 89 ms averaging time. This corresponds to a mass detection limit
of 𝛿𝑚LOD = 6.31 ag/μm2.
Park et al. [13] report a mass LOD of 𝛿𝑚LOD = 0.192 ag/μm2 for their CMUTs which
means that it can detect masses 10 times smaller than ours. However, considering that
their plate thickness is thinner (∼0.5 μm) and the fact these CMUTs aren’t optimized for
the purpose of bio-sensing, the result is still acceptable and highly enlightening. Referring
back to table 1.1 these results are not exactly as good as some of those reported in the
literature, but the potential is definitely there, if the design of the CMUTs, as well as the
experimental set-up are optimised.
From Figure 5.9 information about the noise can also be extracted. Three straight lines are
indicated for both of the datasets, namely one corresponding to white FM noise (𝜏−1/2),
==PAGE:79==
5.3. Humidity Measurements
69
one indicating Flicker FM noise (𝜏0) and finally, one outlining random walk FM noise
(𝜏−1/2). For our measurements it is evident that both white FM and Flicker FM noise is
detectable, as the overlapping Allan deviation curves follow these lines fairly reasonably.
However, both curves fit the random walk FM lines poorly, suggesting that this type of
noise isn’t a problem in our set-up or that it is combined with another type of noise. White
FM and Flicker FM noise are both some of the most commonly met noise types, so the
noise analysis seems reasonable [40].
5.3
Humidity Measurements
Based on the previous section, it has been shown that the CMUTs are capable of a reason-
able response, when subjected to some kind of perturbation. Thus, in this section, it will
be described how the CMUTs are implemented in a set-up which can control humidity in
a primitive fashion, whilst procuring us with measurements of the relative humidity and
frequency on the same time.
Ideally, a humidity controlled climatic chamber would have been preferable to conduct
our experiments in. However, one such was not available and hence, a more primitive
solution had to be created. Initially, a styrene box set-up was attempted, but as it turned
out, the box itself would absorb moisture during experiments and make the measurements
unreliable. Thus, using a plastic box instead was decided on.
In Figure 5.11, the final set-up for the humidity measurements is displayed. The CMUT
utilized is the one fabricated by [39]. It is glued and wirebonded onto a T.O. head, which
is then placed inside a plastic box and connected to the impedance analyzer through a
BNC-connector. As close to the sensor as possible, a Honeywell humidity sensor type HIH-
4000-001 (see Appendix C for data sheet) is mounted and supplied by a voltage of 5 V.
The output voltage, 𝑉out, is measured using a multimeter and can be directly converted
to a relative humidity value, 𝑅𝐻(𝑉out) using the following relation
𝑅𝐻(𝑉out) = 𝑉out −0.8
0.031
(5.13)
The sensor has a range of 0 −100 % Relative Humidity (RH) with an accuracy of ±3.5%
RH. Inside the plastic box, a petri dish is placed on top of a small beaker, close to the lid.
In the middle of the lid, a hole is made, to enable injecting boiling water, using a pipette.
The same pipette can be used as a plug in the hole during experiments. Thus, to perform
an experiment with humidity measurements, one simply injects an appropriate amount of
boiling water through the hole, which then lands and spreads over the area of the petri
dish, evaporating and increasing the RH inside the box. To ensure that the plastic box
is properly sealed, parafilm is used around the edges during experiments. Values of the
RH, impedance and frequency can then be logged as needed, using the multimeter and
the impedance analyzer. For experiments where the RH has to be lowered compared to
room humidity, a small amount of silica gel placed inside the plastic box can be used.
During the initial trial experiments, it was discovered that the accuracy of the humidity
sensor is better below RH ≤59%, which has to be kept in mind when analysing the data.
Furthermore, it turned out that RH ≥90% saturates the environment in the plastic box,
making water condense on the surfaces, including that of the CMUT. This lowers its mass
sensitivity and therefore, these RH values are avoided during the measurements.
==PAGE:80==
70
Chapter 5. Characterisation
0
1 0 0
2 0 0
3 0 0
4 0 0
5 0 0
6 0 0
- 1 6
- 1 4
- 1 2
- 1 0
- 8
- 6
- 4
- 2
0
2
F r e q u e n c y  s h i f t  [ k H z ]
T i m
e  [ m
i n ]
Figure 5.10: Frequency drift over time of the experimental set-up. A settling time of around
∼100 mins before the frequency becomes somewhat stable around ∼11 ± 2 kHz is evident. The
frequency drift should be taken into account when discussing results.
Finally, before commencing the actual experiments, a frequency drift test was performed,
to investigate the temporal stability of the set-up. Thus, the impedance analyzer was
programmed to take one measurement each minute, for 10 hours straight, using the CMUT
inside the plastic box, which had the lid on and room humidity inside. The result can be
seen on Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10 reveals that the CMUT has a settling time around ∼100 mins before the
frequency becomes somewhat stable around ∼11±2 kHz. Ideally, all measurements should
be placed along the same frequency shift value, however, changes in the environment such
as temperature and pressure may very well cause some of the fluctuations evident on the
graph. Normally, a reference channel or an uncoated CMUT is used to compensate for
changes in the environment during experiments [3]. In this simple set-up, however, it will
have to suffice to perform the measurements after the ∼100 mins of settling time and to
simply accept a frequency drift of roughly ±2 kHz, when analysing and discussing results.
One-way Measurements
The purpose of this particular experiment was simply to increase the humidity whilst log-
ging values of the RH and the frequency, simultaneously. By inspecting the data obtained
in this way, a frequency shift should be visible, when water vapour contacts the CMUT
surface.
Firstly, the plastic box was vented to ensure that the humidity inside equal that of the
surrounding room. Secondly, a reference measurement was taken, the lid was put on the
plastic box and the box sealed using the parafilm.
Next, 0.5 mL of boiling water was
added and a measurement taken, once the RH had stabilised. Then another 0.5 mL was
added and a new measurement taken, until increasing the RH further using only 0.5 mL
at a time, became impossible. Then the experiment was stopped. This happened around
RH ∼85 %.
The impedance spectra recorded for the lowest and highest value of the RH in the experi-
ment are plotted as a function of the frequency in Figure 5.12.These results are chosen to
==PAGE:81==
5.3. Humidity Measurements
71
Multimeter
Voltage supply
Impedance analyzer
Plastic box
(a)
CMUT
Humidity sensor
Silica gel
Petri dish
(b)
Figure 5.11: (a) Humidity measurement set-up. The plastic box is seen to the right, connected
through a BNC connector and three terminals to the impedance analyzer, multimeter and voltage
supply, respectively. (b) The CMUT is mounted inside the plastic box, close to the humidity sensor
and the petri dish. In the corner, the silica gel is placed in a small container.
9
1 0
1 1
1 2
1 3
0 . 0
0 . 5
1 . 0
1 . 5
2 . 0
2 . 5
F
a
F
r e s
 D a t a  ( 1 )  
 L . E .  F i t  ( 1 )
 S m
o o t h  F i t  ( 1 )
 D a t a  ( 2 )  
 L . E .  F i t  ( 2 )  
 S m
o o t h  F i t  ( 2 )
I m
p e d a n c e  m
a g n i t u d e ,  | Z |  [ k Ω]
F r e q u e n c y  [ M
H z ]
Figure 5.12: Impedance magnitude as a function of frequency for the CMUT. Two measurements
are displayed, one for 28.4 % RH (”Data (1)”) and one for 85.2 % (”Data (2)”). The impedance
spectrum shifts left, when the CMUT is exposed to more humid surroundings. Together with the
raw data, two different fits are plotted, one for each data set. One is a lumped element model fit
(”L.E. Fit (1) and (2)”) and the other is based on the data being smoothed (”Smooth Fit (1) and
(2)”).
==PAGE:82==
72
Chapter 5. Characterisation
accentuate the frequency shift caused by an increase in RH. Although it can be difficult to
tell, the impedance spectrum corresponding to RH = 85.2 % (named ”Data (2)”) is shifted
left compared to the corresponding spectrum for RH = 28.4 % (named ”Data (1)”), which
is exactly what we expect to see. We are interested in the shift in the resonance frequency,
indicated by 𝐹res on Figure 5.12. Normally, a simple analysis of extrema should reveal
𝐹res, as this is experienced for the minimum value of the impedance magnitude. However,
doing this on the raw data yields the exact same value of 𝐹res, suggesting a zero-shift,
𝜕𝑓= 0 Hz. Zooming in on the area around 𝐹res in Figure 5.13(a) reveals what causes this
problem; relatively few data points, providing poor resolution, making it seem like the
minimum is located in the same place for the two data sets, despite their spectra being
shifted relative to each other. Inspecting the area around the anti-resonance frequency,
𝐹a, in Figure 5.12 more closely in Figure 5.13(b) reveals the exact same problem. One
obvious solution to this is to fit a model to the raw data and use the fit as a basis for
finding the minimum.
Two different models were investigated and fitted to the raw data; a lumped element model,
exactly like the one analysed in section 5, and a fit based on the data being smoothed and
connected using a spline function. Both of the fits are plotted together with the raw data
in Figures 5.12 and 5.13. The lumped element model fit is designated ”L.E. Fit (1) and
(2)” in all the aforementioned figures and the spline fit is denoted ”Smooth Fit (1) and
(2)”. The smoothing function utilized is based on local regression using weighted linear
least squares and a second degree polynomial model, whereas the spline function uses a
cubic spline to interpolate between the data points. The lumped element model fit is
performed using the impedance analysis Matlab script, as mentioned previously.
Looking at Figure 5.13, the fits can be compared. Both struggle fitting around 𝐹res and 𝐹a,
which can be explained by the poor resolution of data points, as well as the ”peakedness”
of the impedance spectrum, especially around 𝐹a.
The smooth fit seems to provide a
more accurate fit, than does the lumped element model, when looking at the placement
of the raw data points in Figure 5.13(a). The fit runs somewhat in between the raw data
points, which oscillate back and forth around 𝐹res, with equal amounts of data points on
either side. The lumped element model provides a poor fit at this point. Furthermore, the
smooth fit is placed more accurately near 𝐹a in Figure 5.13(b), than the lumped element
fit, which is shifted significantly more to the left. A simple measure which can be used to
compare the fits is the averaged, absolute sum of differences between the raw data points
and the two fits,
𝐴= 1
𝑛
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1
∣𝑎fit,i −𝑎raw,i ∣
(5.14)
where 𝑎fit,i is the 𝑖th value of the fit corresponding to the 𝑖th raw data point, 𝑎raw,i. The fit
which has the lowest averaged, absolute sum of differences must be the one which provides
the best raw data description. This analysis has been performed for the fits and raw data
in Figure 5.12 and the result can be seen in Table 5.1. It is clearly seen that the smooth fit
has the smallest 𝐴value for both datasets, namely 𝐴= 76.54 and 𝐴= 88.99, as expected.
This confirms that the smooth fit provides a better description of the raw data.
Considering the discussion above, it is evident that one must choose one of the fits when
extracting information about 𝐹res and 𝐹a, since the raw data cannot be used directly.
However, in using the fits to estimate these values throughout the measurements, their
accuracy becomes limited by the accuracy of the fit. It is the opinion of the author that
the smooth fit provides more accurate results than does the lumped element model, as
discussed above. Despite this, the lumped element model is already implemented as the
==PAGE:83==
5.3. Humidity Measurements
73
Comparison
𝐴
Data (1) vs. L.E. Fit (1)
120.8
Data (1) vs. Smooth Fit (1)
76.54
Data (2) vs. L.E. Fit (2)
100.2
Data (2) vs. Smooth Fit (2)
88.99
Table 5.1: Table showing the averaged, absolute sum differences, 𝐴, between the raw data and
the two fits discussed in the text. In both cases the smooth fit provides lower values, suggesting a
better description of the raw data.
main analysis tool on the impedance analyzer and hence provides the most straightforward
way to obtain values of 𝐹res and 𝐹a.
Thus, this is what will be used to analyse the
impedance spectra, as well as obtain lumped element parameters, during the humidity
measurements. For future endeavours, the author suggests using something other than
the impedance analyzer for the measurements, such as a lock-in amplifier, which should
be able to provide measurements with better resolution around the critical areas, such as
𝐹res and 𝐹a. Another alternative would be to coarsely locate the areas of interest using
the impedance analyzer and then performing smaller sweeps around said areas, to obtain
a better resolution.
Frequency shift analysis
Based on Figure 5.12, it is evident that the resonance frequency shifts towards lower values
when increasing the humidity in the box. This behaviour can be confirmed theoretically by
calculating what relative frequency shift to expect, when one monolayer of water adheres
to the surface of the CMUT. For a given change in mass, 𝜕𝑚, the number of molecules
per cm2, 𝑁, can be found as
𝑁= 𝜕𝑚⋅𝑛A
𝐴⋅𝑀
(5.15)
where 𝑛A is Avogadro’s number, 𝐴is the area of the CMUT and 𝑀is the molar mass of
H2O. The equation relating the change in frequency with the change in mass (equation
(1.2), repeated here for convenience) is,
𝜕𝑓= −1
2
𝑓0
𝑚eff
𝜕𝑚
(5.16)
Combining these equations, the relative frequency shift due to one monolayer of water can
be found by
𝜕𝑓
𝑓0
= −1
2
1
𝑚eff
𝑁⋅𝐴⋅𝑀
𝑛A
(5.17)
For our particular CMUT, the effective mass can be estimated by using the value from
equation (5.11) and multiplying by the area of the CMUT, yielding
𝑚eff = 3 × 10−4m × 5 × 10−3m × 5.37 × 10−3kg/m2 = 8.055 μg
(5.18)
==PAGE:84==
74
Chapter 5. Characterisation
1 0 . 1
1 0 . 2
1 0 . 3
1 0 . 4
1 0 . 5
1 0 . 6
0
5 0
1 0 0
1 5 0
2 0 0
2 5 0
 D a t a  ( 1 )
 L . E .  F i t  ( 1 )
 S m
o o t h  F i t  ( 1 )
 D a t a  ( 2 )
 L . E .  F i t  ( 2 )
 S m
o o t h  F i t  ( 2 )
I m
p e d a n c e  m
a g n i t u d e , | Z |  [ Ω]
F r e q u e n c y  [ M
H z ]
(a) Close-up of the area around the resonance frequency indicated by 𝐹res in Figure
5.12. The dashed, grey lines indicate the resonance frequencies.
1 0 . 8 0
1 0 . 8 5
1 0 . 9 0
1 0 . 9 5
1 1 . 0 0
1 1 . 0 5
1 1 . 1 0
1 . 5
2 . 0
2 . 5
 D a t a  ( 1 )
 L . E .  F i t  ( 1 )
 S m
o o t h  F i t  ( 1 )
 D a t a  ( 2 )
 L . E .  F i t  ( 2 )
 S m
o o t h  F i t  ( 2 )
I m
p e d a n c e  m
a g n i t u d e ,  | Z |  [ k Ω]
F r e q u e n c y  [ M
H z ]
(b) Close-up of the area around the anti-resonance frequency indicated by 𝐹a in Figure
5.12. Here, the dashed, grey lines indicate the anti-resonance frequencies.
Figure 5.13: Impedance magnitude as a function of frequency for 28.4 % RH (”Data (1)”) and
for 85.2 % (”Data (2)”). Two different fits are also plotted, one for each data set; the lumped
element model fit (”L.E. Fit (1) and (2)”) and the smoothed fit (”Smooth Fit (1) and (2)”). The
smoothed fit provides better values for both 𝐹res and 𝐹a, as it describes the raw data better than
the lumped element model fit. In both graphs detecting the frequency shift in the raw data is
difficult. .
==PAGE:85==
5.3. Humidity Measurements
75
Since one monolayer of H2O corresponds to ∼1015 molecules per cm2 for (100) Si, the
relative frequency shift becomes
𝜕𝑓
𝑓0
=
−3 × 10−4m × 5 × 10−3m × 1019m−2 × 0.0180153kg/mol
2 × 8.055 × 10−9kg × 6.022 × 1023mol−1
𝜕𝑓
𝑓0
=
−27.85 × 10−6
(5.19)
This result indeed confirms that the frequency is supposed to decrease, when mass is
added to the sensor. Based on that discussion, it is interesting to investigate the number
of molecules at the surface responsible for the change in frequency, displayed in Figure
5.12. Using the smooth fit, the shift in resonance frequency between the two datasets is
𝜕𝑓= 6.4 kHz. This corresponds to a change in mass of
𝜕𝑚
=
−𝜕𝑓⋅2 ⋅𝑚eff
𝑓0
𝜕𝑚
=
−(1.02919 × 107 Hz −1.02983 × 107 Hz) × 2 × 8.055 × 10−9kg
1.02983 × 107 Hz
𝜕𝑚
=
10−11kg ∼10 ng
(5.20)
This change in mass can be used to find the number of H2O molecules bound to the surface
by inserting in equation (5.15),
𝑁
=
10−11kg × 6.022 × 1023mol−1
3 × 10−4m × 5 × 10−3m × 8.055 × 10−9kg
𝑁
=
2.23 × 1020m−2 = 2.23 × 1016cm−2
(5.21)
Dividing this result by the area density of water, it implies that ∼22 monolayers have
been added to the surface of the CMUT after reaching RH ∼85 %. According to [41], one
monolayer of water is (0.25 ± 0.05) nm thick, so for this particular frequency shift a film of
(5.58 ± 1.12) nm thickness can be found on top of the CMUT. This thickness is relatively
small, compared to the dimensions of the CMUT itself. If we had used the frequency shift
obtained for the same dataset using the lumped element model, which is 𝜕𝑓= 15 kHz,
we would have obtained ∼52 monolayers of water instead, resulting in a film thickness of
(13 ± 2.59) nm. This discrepancy once again underlines how dependent the analysis and
interpretation of results is of the model chosen for the fit.
Two-way Measurements
The main purpose of the next experiment was to measure the frequency and RH, as the
humidity in the box was increased gradually and then lowered, afterwards. By procuring
these measurements, it is possible to obtain a sensitivity value for the CMUT used. This
is highly relevant, as the sensitivity is an important figure of merit for a sensor, as pointed
out in section 1.3.
Firstly, the plastic box was vented to ensure that the humidity inside equal that of the
room. Then a reference measurement was taken, silica gel placed inside and the plastic box
closed and sealed. The silica gel lowered the humidity in the box to RH ∼8% and once
stabilised, the RH and frequency was measured. Then boiling water was added one drop
at a time, to ensure slow increase of the RH, enabling more measurements to be taken.
The measurements were taken every time the RH had stabilised. The measurements for
==PAGE:86==
76
Chapter 5. Characterisation
0
5 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
- 1 6 . 0
- 1 4 . 0
- 1 2 . 0
- 1 0 . 0
- 8 . 0
- 6 . 0
- 4 . 0
- 2 . 0
0 . 0
 R a w  d a t a  ( ↑ R H )
 R a w  d a t a  ( ↓ R H )
 1 4 0 4  p p b / H z  ( ↑ R H )
 2 1 7 5  p p b / H z  ( ↓ R H )
F r e q u e n c y  s h i f t  [ k H z ]
H u m
i d i t y  [ p p m
]
Figure 5.14: Frequency shift of the CMUT in response to increase and decrease in water vapour
concentration. Using a linear fit, the sensitivity of the sensor can be obtained. As can be seen, the
sensitivity is greatest when increasing the relative humidity rather than decreasing it.
increasing RH were stopped around 73% RH, as further increase proved impossible due to
the presence of the silica gel - the measurements simply wouldn’t stabilise. It is possible
to increase the RH further in general, but not using one droplet of water at a time; for
higher values, one would have to add bigger volumes of boiling water. When doing this,
however, the RH increases too quickly for us to obtain enough measurements. Thus, when
reaching a RH around 73%, the plastic box was vented quickly and the petri dish with hot
water removed. Once the voltage was stabilised, measurements were taken again, as the
RH decreased, until reaching the reference point again/or when the RH wouldn’t decrease
any further.
In Figure 5.14, the results of above mentioned experiment is plotted.
The frequency
shift of the CMUT is relative to the first reference measurement and in response to the
different water vapour concentrations. The RH has been converted from % to ppm using
the conversion method which can be seen in Appendix D. As expected from theory, the
frequency does decrease (increasing negative frequency shift) as the humidity is increased.
The data has been analysed using a linear fitting routine on the parts displaying linear
behaviour, to obtain the sensitivity when increasing and decreasing the RH. As can be
seen, the sensitivities are 1404 ppb/Hz and 2175 ppb/Hz, suggesting that the sensor is
more sensitive when exposed to increasing RH. This behaviour is observed with many
sensors; complete reversibility can be problematic to establish and in some cases, the
sensor ”reaction” isn’t reversible at all. In this case, the behaviour can be explained by
the water vapour condensing on the surface of the CMUT and not evaporating again, due
to the humid surroundings inside the plastic box, as mentioned previously.
To investigate if better sensitivity values can be obtained, the raw data from Figure 5.14
is smoothed using the same approach as described in section 5.3. Next, it is plotted and
analysed using a linear fit, with the result is displayed in Figure 5.15. As can be seen,
a slight discretization error is present, as some measurements tend to be pooled around
the same frequency shift values. This is due to the resolution on the spline function used.
The discretization error can be reduced to some extent by increasing the resolution on
the spline function, at the cost of increased computational time. It does, however, not
==PAGE:87==
5.3. Humidity Measurements
77
0
5 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
1 5 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0
- 2 0 . 0
- 1 8 . 0
- 1 6 . 0
- 1 4 . 0
- 1 2 . 0
- 1 0 . 0
- 8 . 0
- 6 . 0
- 4 . 0
- 2 . 0
0 . 0
 S m
o o t h e d  d a t a  ( ↑ R H )
 S m
o o t h e d  d a t a  ( ↓ R H )
 9 2 8  p p b / H z  ( ↑ R H )
 1 6 8 3  p p b / H z  ( ↓ R H )
F r e q u e n c y  s h i f t  [ k H z ]
H u m
i d i t y  [ p p m
]
Figure 5.15: Frequency shift of the CMUT in response to increase and decrease in water vapour
concentration. The dataset is the same as displayed in Figure 5.14, but has been smoothed using
smooth and spline functions. In this way, a more linear behaviour is seen, effectively improving
the sensitivities measured. The sensitivity is once again greatest when increasing the humidity.
change the look of Figure 5.15 significantly. Thus, the result displayed here is made with a
reasonable resolution, without making the computational time infeasible for our purposes.
As can be seen on Figure 5.15 the linear fit does indeed provide better sensitivities,
928 ppb/Hz when increasing the RH and 1683 ppb/Hz when decreasing it.
The lower
the value of the sensitivity, the better, as less water vapour can be detected per Hz. Thus,
using the smoothing fit provides better results, as expected, since the linearity of the data
is improved. The sensitivity is improved by 34% when increasing the RH and by ∼23%
when decreasing it.
Comparing the sensitivities obtained when increasing the RH with those obtained by other
groups, Park et Al. [13] report a sensitivity of 135 ppb/Hz for water, which is a factor
of ∼9 −10 better than ours. However, as previously mentioned, these CMUTs aren’t
optimized for bio-sensing and seen in that light, the result is actually quite satisfactory.
Conclusion
Returning to the requirements for the ammonia sensor described in the introduction,
the need was for a sensor able to detect between 1−> 25 ppm within a minute. It is
difficult to predict how the CMUT’s sensitivity for ammonia will be, as ammonia and
H2O are two entirely different compounds. The applicability also depends heavily on the
functionalization scheme chosen. If chosen correctly, it will increase the chemical sensitivity
by promoting selectivity to ammonia (large partition coefficient, 𝐾). However, applying
a functional layer may affect the quality factor of the device, 𝑄, negatively, effectively
lowering the mass LOD and increasing the frequency noise. In this way, choosing the
design of the CMUT is bound to be a trade-off between several parameters.
Regarding the required response time, it is impossible to comment on it with the current
experimental set-up. To investigate it would require an actual climatic chamber, capable
of controlling the exact concentration of analyte more accurately, as well as monitoring the
CMUT response continually over time. The experiments conducted here can be considered
==PAGE:88==
78
Chapter 5. Characterisation
a primitive, steady-state version of that, which unfortunately cannot be used to draw any
such conclusions. For future endeavours, building a more accurate set-up would be the
logical next step.
It is expected, however, that the sensitivity, mass LOD, as well as
frequency noise will improve significantly upon characterisation and testing, when the
fabrication of the double LOCOS-based CMUTs succeeds, as they are optimised for the
purpose of sensing, in contrast to the CMUTs fabricated by [39].
5.4
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, the CMUT equivalent network was introduced, as well as important
lumped element parameters. Next, characterisation of the single LOCOS based CMUTs
using impedance measurements was described. This was followed by a discussion of the
heating tests performed to show that the CMUTs produce a reasonable frequency shift,
when perturbed. The measurements were analysed to obtain values for the minimum Al-
lan deviation, the best of which was 𝜎𝑦(𝜏) = 1.62 × 10−7 for 27 ms averaging time. The
Allan deviation was then used to calculate the mass LOD of 1.72 ag/μm2. Furthermore,
the frequency stability analysis was employed to identify different types of noise. After-
wards, an experimental set-up capable of varying the humidity was introduced. Then two
different data analysis methods were compared; one based on lumped element modelling
and another based on smoothing the raw data and using a spline function. The latter
provided the most reliable results, as it described the raw data better. Using a linear
fitting routine, sensitivities for the sensors of 928 ppb/Hz when increasing the RH and
1683 ppb/Hz when decreasing it were obtained.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER6
Functionalization
This chapter introduces the functionalization aspect of the CMUTs. Despite the fact that
there was not time to perform it in practice, the theory is still included in this thesis for
completeness. Functionalizing the CMUTs is one of the logical next steps.
6.1
Silanization
Surface functionalization is a chemical modification of the electrode surface, to integrate
the biorecognition elements. This surface modification is one of the most critical steps
in the development of a biosensor, with regards to its performance on parameters such
as sensitivity, reproducibility and the response time. The strategy chosen for the surface
modification must ensure that the biological recognition element be immobilized in a stable
way, retain its accessibility for the analyte and its recognition ability. Furthermore, the
interface layer created by the modification must be inert and bio-compatible, so it doesn’t
affect or ruin the underlying sample. These are all considerations to bear in mind, when
choosing surface modification strategy.
For the CMUT, the surface to be modified is a silicon dioxide surface, which will be present
both on the top and bottom of the device after fabrication. It is necessary to coat the
surface with an interface layer that can covalently bind to both the silicon oxide surface
and the NH3 analyte, respectively. In this case, the silicon dioxide will be coated with an
organosilane and the chosen procedure is called silanization.
One of the most widespread functionalization schemes is known as (3-aminopropyl) -
triethoxysilane (APTES) and it has been extensively used for many purposes [5].
A
picture of APTES can be seen to the left in Figure 6.1. The APTES molecule contains
one reactive amino group (–NH2) and three ethoxy groups (–OCH2CH3) placed around
a Si atom. The first step in silanization is hydrolysis of the reactive ethoxy groups on
the APTES molecule, by the surface water on the hydrated SiO2 surface. This forms the
hydroxyl (–OH) groups that can covalently bind to the silanol groups on the surface. This
is followed by the simultaneous condensation of the APTES molecules and physisorption
onto the surface through hydrogen bonding, in this case of APTES onto SiO2. Finally,
by thermally curing the film, further condensation can be promoted, producing covalent
binding of the APTES film across the surface. An overview of the silanization reaction
can be seen in Figure 6.1 [42].
79
==PAGE:90==
80
Chapter 6. Functionalization
Si
NH2
OEt
OEt
EtO
Si
NH2
OH
OH
HO
Condensation
(Oligomerization)
+
Hydrogen bonding
(Physisorption)
Si
NH2
HO
Si
NH2
O
Si
NH2
HO
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
Condensation
(Covalent bonding)
Si
NH2
HO
Si
NH2
O
Si
NH2
HO
O
O
O
O
+ H2O
SiO2
Hydrolysis
(formation of Silanols)
+ H2O
SiO2
Figure 6.1: Principle sketch of a silanization reaction using APTES. The ethoxy groups on the
APTES molecule are hydrolyzed by the water on the hydrated silanol surface. Then, the molecule
is condensed and physisorped onto the surface through hydrogen bonding. Finally, covalent binding
is promoted by thermal curing of the film.
Sometimes using a cross-linker can be a necessary part of the functionalization. If this is
the case, it is put between the biological recognition element and the APTES molecules,
to ensure the stability of the bonds between them [5]. However, the necessity depends
on the case in question, and should it prove superfluous, APTES will be directly bonded
to the biorecognition element. Once the APTES molecules have been properly bound to
the surface, the other end of each molecule can also be functionalized for the following
conjugation with the analyte to be detected.
The author suggests that some initial, more primitive functionalization test be run on
the CMUT chips fabricated by [39], until the next double LOCOS batch is ready. One
easy test would be to deposit HMDS and make the sensors hydrophobic. By mounting
such a functionalized sensor in the humidity set-up as explained in section 5.3, comparison
with a non-functionalized sensor would be easy during experiments. Once such a simple
functionalization can be made to work, experiments with APTES functionalization and
perhaps more ammonia specific coating schemes like polyaniline [23] can be commenced.
6.2
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, some important requirements for surface modifications were introduced.
Furthermore, the silanization process was presented and the functionalization scheme
APTES was explained. Finally, some recommendations regarding future tests on a double
LOCOS CMUT batch was outlined.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER7
Conclusion
In this thesis, the aim was to fabricate double LOCOS based CMUT devices optimized for
the purpose of sensing. It was also the goal to develop an experimental set-up, to prove
that our CMUT sensors can be used as a platform for gravimetric detection. Finally, it
was the intention to use the measurements procured, to calculate important figures of
merit and draw conclusions regarding the performance of the CMUTs, outlining future
initiatives to enable ammonia detection.
The working principle of the CMUT was elucidated by introducing the simple parallel
plate model, which was expended into the more elaborate isotropic and anisotropic plate
models.
Furthermore, the LOCOS process was analysed to obtain expressions for the
bump heights created by said process in Si substrates. This was used as a stepping stone
for Athena simulations, illustrating the differences between using Si3N4 and SiO2 as a
diffusion-inhibiting layer.
The fabrication process of the double LOCOS CMUT sensors was carried out until the
point of handle layer etching. Unfortunately, the wafers couldn’t be processed beyond this,
as 2 combinations broke. Only one combination without a thinned down SOI wafer turned
out somewhat as expected. Despite this, the process was highly educational and it was
discovered that the pre-bonding conditions must be optimized. It was suggested using SOI
wafers with less curvature and stress, potentially by avoiding thinning them down before
bonding. Further investigation into the surface roughness caused by the second LOCOS
oxidation was also deemed necessary. The bonding step itself remains the critical point in
the process flow, when using the wafer bonding method for creating the CMUT devices.
Characterisation using impedance measurements was performed on single LOCOS based
CMUTs fabricated by [39]. It was demonstrated that the CMUTs were capable of reason-
able response in frequency (in the kHz range), when subjected to a simple perturbation,
confirming that our sensors can be used for gravimetric detection. The frequency meas-
urements were investigated using frequency stability analysis, providing a minimum Allan
deviation of 𝜎𝑦(𝜏) = 1.62 × 10−7 for 27 ms averaging time.
Based on this value, the
mass LOD for the sensor was estimated to be 𝛿𝑚LOD = 1.72 ag/μm2. Other groups have
reported detection of masses ∼10 times smaller than this, but taking into account that
the CMUT sensor used wasn’t optimised for sensing, the result is encouraging.
A humidity controlled climatic set-up was developed and the CMUT tested when vary-
ing the humidity. The CMUT responded as expected with a detectable decrease in the
81
==PAGE:92==
82
Chapter 7. Conclusion
resonance frequency for increasing RH. The measurements made it possible to analyse a
frequency shift of 𝜕𝑓= 6.4 kHz and to recalculate it to a corresponding mass of 10 ng, ana-
logous to 22 monolayers of water, with a film thickness of (5.58 ± 1.12) nm. Furthermore,
sensitivities of 1404 ppb/Hz and 2175 ppb/Hz were shown, when increasing and decreasing
the RH, respectively. By exploring different data analysis methods based on lumped ele-
ment modelling and smoothing the raw data combined with a spline, it was concluded that
the latter provided a more truthful description of the raw data. When using this method,
the obtained sensitivities improved by 34% when increasing the RH and by ∼23% when
decreasing it.
Based on these results, it is concluded that the CMUT technology provides a promising
platform for gravimetric detection.
There is still room for improvement, to meet the
requirements of an ammonia sensor able to detect between 1−> 25 ppm within a minute.
However, the road is paved with opportunities to get there; the performance is bound to
improve when the fabrication of the double LOCOS CMUTs succeeds, as these sensors
will be optimised for sensing on important parameters such as quality factor, 𝑄, partition
coefficient, 𝐾, effective mass, 𝑚eff, and Allan deviation, 𝛿Allan.
7.1
Outlook
As outlined in the conclusion, there are several parameters which can be adjusted to
improve the performance of the CMUT. The logical next step, besides a successful fab-
rication process, would be to start functionalizing CMUTs using simple measures, such
as HMDS and later more ammonia specific surface modifications, like APTES combined
with a functional group or the polymer polyaniline [23].
Once this is done, a more elaborate experimental set-up, capable of controlling the con-
centration of analyte accurately, as well as monitoring the CMUT response continually
over time, should be pursued. Such a set-up would enable better characterisation in terms
of obtaining important figures of merit, and key analysis methods within the research field
such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA) could be performed. The result of such an
analysis is displayed in Figure 7.1. In PCA, the transient frequency shifts for different
analytes exhibit distinctive patterns (i.e., fingerprints), such as certain fall and rise time
constants, and can be used to enhance the accuracy of identification of the sensor, which
undoubtedly will be a future challenge.
Figure 7.1: Normalized frequency response for a CMUT for three different analytes; DMMP,
ethanol and water. The analytes exhibit different ”patterns”. Graph taken from [13].
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1] Council of the European Union, “Council Directive 1999/13/EC of 11 March 1999
on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of or-
ganic solvents in certain activities and installations,” Official Journal of the European
Communities, no. 1999/13/EC, 1999.
[2] S. Fanget, S. Hentz, P. Puget, J. Arcamone, M. Matheron, E. Colinet, P. An-
dreucci, L. Duraffourg, E. Myers, and M. Roukes, “Gas Sensors based on Gravimetric
Detection—A Review,” Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 160, pp. 804–821,
dec 2011.
[3] H. J. Lee, K. K. Park, M. Kupnik, Ö. Oralkan, and B. T. Khuri-Yakub, “Chemical Va-
por Detection Using a Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer,” Analytical
Chemistry, vol. 83, pp. 9314–9320, dec 2011.
[4] T. L. Christiansen, Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers for 3D Imaging.
PhD
thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[5] K. Brandt Andersen, M. Dimaki, and W. E. Svendsen, “Introduction to Biosensors,”
in 33321 Nano 2: Nanosystems Engineering, ch. Chapter M, Polyteknisk Forlag,
2012.
[6] S. Schmid, “Nanomechanical Resonators,” in 33321 Nano 2: Nanosystems Engineer-
ing, ch. M1-M3, p. 34, Polyteknisk Forlag, 2012.
[7] J. W. Grate, B. M. Wise, and M. H. Abraham, “Method for Unknown Vapor Char-
acterization and Classification Using a Multivariate Sorption Detector. Initial De-
rivation and Modeling Based on Polymer-Coated Acoustic Wave Sensor Arrays and
Linear Solvation Energy Relationships,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 71, pp. 4544–4553,
oct 1999.
[8] E. Rubiola, “On the Measurement of Frequency and of its Sample Variance with High-
resolution Counters,” Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 76, no. 5, p. 054703, 2005.
[9] J. King, “Piezoelectric Sorption Detector,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 36, no. 9,
pp. 1735 – 1738, 1964.
[10] A. K. Srivastava and P. Sakthivel, “Quartz-crystal microbalance study for character-
izing atomic oxygen in plasma ash tools,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology
A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films, vol. 19, no. 1, p. 97, 2001.
83
==PAGE:94==
84
Bibliography
[11] G. Sauerbrey, “Verwendung von Schwingquarzen zur Wägung dünner Schichten und
zur Mikrowägung,” Zeitschrift für Physik, vol. 155, pp. 206–222, apr 1959.
[12] A. Arnau, Piezoelectric Transducers and Applications. Springer, second ed., 2008.
[13] K. K. Park, H. Lee, M. Kupnik, Ö. Oralkan, J.-P. Ramseyer, H. P. Lang, M. Hegner,
C. Gerber, and B. T. Khuri-Yakub, “Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Trans-
ducer (CMUT) as a Chemical Sensor for DMMP Detection,” Sensors and Actuators
B: Chemical, vol. 160, pp. 1120–1127, dec 2011.
[14] O. Oralkan, A. Ergun, J. Johnson, M. Karaman, U. Demirci, K. Kaviani, T. Lee,
and B. Khuri-Yakub, “Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers:
Next-
generation Arrays for Acoustic Imaging?,” IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferro-
electrics and Frequency Control, vol. 49, pp. 1596–1610, nov 2002.
[15] M. I. Haller and B. T. Khuri-Yakub, “A Surface Micromachined Electrostatic Ultra-
sonic Air Transducer,” Ieee Ultrasonics Symposium, pp. 1241 – 1244, 1994.
[16] P.-C. Eccardt, “Surface Micromachined Ultrasound Transducers in CMOS Techno-
logy,” Proceedings of the IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, vol. 2, pp. 959 – 962, 1996.
[17] I. Ladabaum, X. Jin, H. Soh, F. Pierre, A. Atalar, and B. Khuri-Yakub, “Microfab-
ricated Ultrasonic Transducers: towards Robust Models and Immersion Devices,” in
1996 IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium. Proceedings, vol. 1, pp. 335–338, IEEE, 1996.
[18] A. Ergun, E. Haggstrom, M. Badi, and B. Khuri-Yakub, “Fabricating Capacitive
Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers with Wafer-Bonding Technology,” Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 12, pp. 128–137, apr 2003.
[19] D. Schindel, D. Hutchins, and M. Sayer, “The Design and Characterization of Mi-
cromachined Air-coupled Capacitance Transducers,” IEEE Transactions on Ultrason-
ics, Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, vol. 42, pp. 42–50, jan 1995.
[20] I. Ladabaum and B. Khuri-Yakub, “The Microfabrication of Capacitive Ultrasonic
Transducers,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 295–302,
1998.
[21] A. Caronti, G. Caliano, A. Iula, and M. Pappalardo, “Electrical Impedance Mis-
match in Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers,” in 2000 IEEE Ultra-
sonics Symposium. Proceedings. An International Symposium (Cat. No.00CH37121),
vol. 1, pp. 925–930, IEEE, 2000.
[22] K. K. Park, H. Lee, M. Kupnik, and B. T. Khuri-Yakub, “Fabrication of Capacitive
Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers via Local Oxidation and Direct Wafer Bond-
ing,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 95–103, 2011.
[23] B. Timmer, W. Olthuis, and A. Van Den Berg, “Ammonia Sensors and Their Applic-
ations - A review,” Sensors and Actuators, B: Chemical, vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 666–677,
2005.
[24] S. E. Diederichsen, “Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers:
Theory,
Design, Fabrication and Characterization,” tech. rep., Technical University of Den-
mark, 2014.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
85
[25] E. V. Thomsen, “Capacitive Sensors,” in Course Handbook - Course 33253, pp. 474–
486, Polyteknisk Forlag, first ed., 2011.
[26] M. F. la Cour, T. L. Christiansen, J. A. J. A. Jensen, and E. V. Thomsen, “Elec-
trostatic and Small-Signal Analysis of CMUTs with Circular and Square Anitotropic
Plates,” IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control,
vol. 62, pp. 1563–1579, aug 2015.
[27] S. D. Senturia, Microsystem Design. Springer, 2001.
[28] J. D. Plummer, M. D. Deal, and P. B. Griffin, Silicon VLSI Technology: Fundament-
als, Practice and Modeling. Prentice Hall, 2000.
[29] B. E. Deal and A. S. Grove, “General Relationship for the Thermal Oxidation of
Silicon,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 3770–3778, 1965.
[30] G. S. May and S. M. Sze, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Fabrication. Wiley, wiley
inte ed., 2004.
[31] S. M. Hansen, “Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers Fabricated Using
LOCOS,” tech. rep., Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[32] A. Lei, S. E. Diederichsen, M. F. la Cour, M. B. Stuart, T. L. Christiansen, J. A.
Jensen, and E. V. Thomsen, “Dimensional Scaling for Optimized CMUT Operations,”
in 2014 IEEE International Ultrasonics Symposium, pp. 2595–2598, IEEE, sep 2014.
[33] H. Bartzsch, D. Glöß, P. Frach, M. Gittner, E. Schultheiß, W. Brode, and J. Hartung,
“Electrical insulation properties of sputter-deposited SiO 2 , Si3N4 and Al2O3 films
at room temperature and 400°C,” physica status solidi (a), vol. 206, pp. 514–519, mar
2009.
[34] W. R. Runyan and K. E. Bean, Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Processing Tech-
nology. Addison-Wesley, illustrate ed., 1990.
[35] T. Pedersen, “Corrosion Resistant Capacitive Pressure Sensor,” tech. rep., Technical
University of Denmark, 2006.
[36] M. Engholm, “Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducers for 3-D Medical
Imaging using a LOCOS Based Process,” tech. rep., Technical University of Denmark,
2015.
[37] A. Plößl, “Wafer Direct bonding: Tailoring Adhesion between Brittle Materials,”
Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports, vol. 25, pp. 1–88, mar 1999.
[38] G. Stoney, “The Tension of Metallic Films Deposited by Electrolysis,” Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London Series A-containing Papers of a Mathematical and
Physical Character, vol. 82, no. 553, pp. 172 – 175, 1909.
[39] S. E. Diederichsen, “1-D Linear and 2-D Row-Column CMUT Probes for Medical
Imaging: A Generich Approach.” 2016.
[40] T. Friederichs, “Analysis of Geodetic Time Series Using Allan Variances,” tech. rep.,
Universität Stuttgart, Stuttgart, 2010.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[41] A. Opitz, M. Scherge, S. I.-U. Ahmed, and J. A. Schaefer, “A comparative invest-
igation of thickness measurements of ultra-thin water films by scanning probe tech-
niques,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 101, no. 6, p. 064310, 2007.
[42] M. Zourob, S. Elwary, and A. Turner, Principles of Bacterial Detection : Biosensors,
Recognition Receptors, and Microsystems. Springer, 2008.
[43] Vaisala, “Humidity Conversion Formulas - Calculation Formulas for Humidity,” tech.
rep., Vaisala Oyj, Helsinki, 2013.
==PAGE:97==
List of Figures
1.1
Cross-sectional sketch of a typical CMUT device. It contains a fixed bottom
substrate and top plate which is suspended over a vacuum cavity. The top
plate is deformable and together with the bottom substrate it forms two
electrodes separated by an insulating dielectric. The drawing is not to scale.
2
1.2
Principle sketch of a gas sensor. It consists mainly of the analyte to be
detected, the biorecognition element, the interface layer and the tranducer,
which translates a measuring event into a physical measurable quantity,
labelled ”output” here. The figure is inspired by [5].
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Principle of mass detection by detecting frequency shifts in sensors. . . . . .
4
1.4
Structure of a suspended FBAR on the left and an SMR-FBAR on the right.
The FBAR is a suspended over an air cavity, whereas the SMR-FBAR is
separated from the substrate by the Bragg mirror. The figure is adapted
from [12].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
The picture on the left shows the interdigital transducer, placed on the
surface of the SAW sensor and the right picture is a cross-sectional view of
a SAW based sensor, showing the main principle of detection. The figure is
inspired by [12].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1
Conceptual sketch of the CMUT modelled as a parallel plate capacitor.
The relevant parameters are also given; 𝑔vac is the vacuum gap, 𝑔ni is the
thickness of the nitride layer and 𝑔ox is the thickness of the oxide layer.
. .
16
2.2
Conceptual sketch of the circular parallel plate model, with relevant para-
meters indicated. ℎis the plate thickness, 𝑎is the plate radius, 𝑔vac is the
vacuum gap, 𝑔ni is the thickness of the nitride layer and 𝑔ox is the thickness
of the oxide layer.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Total, normalized capacitance plotted as a function of normalized deflec-
tion, for three different geometries of the parallel plate system. The simple
parallel plate system is indicated by the black line and given by 𝐶=
1/ (1 −𝑢), the circular plate is indicated by the blue line, using equa-
tion (2.23) and the square plate is indicated by the red line and given
by 𝐶= 1/ (1 −0.296𝑢−0.136𝑢2), based on [26].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
87
==PAGE:98==
88
List of Figures
2.4
A normalized plot of equation (2.11) for the simple parallel plate model and
equation (2.29) for the circular plate model. As can be seen, the maximum
occurs for 𝑢= 1/3 and 𝑢= 0.463, respectively.
The stable condition
for both cases are found to the left of the lines indicating the maxima,
emphasized by the shaded areas.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1
Cross-sectional view of a LOCOS structure with a bird’s beak effect visible.
As can be seen, a nitride mask is utilized and poly-Si is deposited on top.
The scale bar is 0.4 μm and the picture is borrowed from [28].
. . . . . . .
26
3.2
Illustration of a LOCOS process using Si3N4 as diffusion-inhibiting layer.
The pictures were created in Athena and based on parameter sizes similar
to the ones employed in the clean room process (see Appendix B). As can
be seen, a bump is created in the Si substrate going from the left picture to
the right. No Si is consumed beneath the nitride mask, however the bird’s
beak effect is visible.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Illustration of a LOCOS process using SiO2 as diffusion-inhibiting layer.
The pictures were created in Athena based on realistic parameters utilized in
the process flow developed in [31]. As can be seen, a bump is created in the
Si substrate going from left to right. However, the size of the masking oxide
also grows during the second oxidation, consuming some Si underneath the
mask.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Bump height in Si achieved in the LOCOS process, using wet oxidation at
1100∘C and 0.85 atm for initial thicknesses of the oxide of 1 μm and 2 μm,
respectively. The plot was made using equation (3.10). The bump height is
also depicted when using silicon nitride as a diffusion-inhibiting layer. As
can be seen, the bump height is considerably larger when using nitride as
diffusion-inhibiting layer, since no silicon is consumed underneath it.
. . .
29
3.5
Athena simulation illustrating the usage of different diffusing-inhibiting lay-
ers (masks), in this case 50 nm Si3N4, 1 μm SiO2 and 2 μm SiO2, in wet
oxidation performed at 1100∘C and 0.85 atm. All simulations were carried
out to achieve a bump height of ∼245 nm. Note how the bump profile for
nitride approaches that of a step-function, whereas the oxide masks result
in more sloped profiles. Furthermore, the profile for 1 μm oxide is slightly
more sloped than the 2 μm profile, since Si is more readily consumed in the
first case.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
Athena simulation of the bump height after the first LOCOS process, using
different thicknesses for the protective oxide layer beneath 50 nm Si3N4.
The simulation is based on wet oxidation performed at 1100∘C and 0.85 atm.
As can be seen, the biggest value for the bump height is achieved for the
thinnest layer of protective oxide, since this provides the least ”resistance”
against diffusion. Note how the bump profile becomes more sloped, as the
thickness of the protective oxide layer increases.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1
Overview of the CMUT cell, with the relevant dimensions marked. The
symbols are explained in the text.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:99==
List of Figures
89
4.2
Thickness of oxidized nitride as a function of oxidation time, for given dif-
ferent thermal oxidation conditions. The graph illustrates what thickness of
the nitride is necessary to withstand a certain oxidation time, at a particular
temperature and possibly pressure. The graph is from [34].
. . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Mask array layout, using three different designs. The red rectangle in each
design outlines where the close-up is taken from. In each close-up, the dark
green color illustrates where the metal is deposited. (a) Design A, in which
metal is deposited around each CMUT, (b) Design B, where the metal is
only deposited in a thin strip along the edge of the array and (c) Design C,
in which the metal layer covers the entire CMUT array.
. . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Overview of the wafer mask layout. As can be seen, the three different
designs are placed side-by-side in one array, which is then repeated in 3-
by-13 configuration. On each side of the wafer, along the centre line, the
alignment marks are placed. Besides the transducer arrays and alignment
marks, different test structures are placed around the wafer for evaluation
during and after fabrication. These test structures are difficult to see in
this picture, due to the scale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Schematic view of the process flow employed in the double LOCOS process.
The picture is inspired by an original drawn by Mathias Mølgaard.
. . . .
40
4.6
Visual inspection of wafers upon the photolithography procedure. As can
be seen in picture (a), the array of circles is quite well defined. One defect
is found near the alignment marks in picture (b), but no defects were found
near important structures. The scale bar on both pictures is 100 μm.
. . .
44
4.7
Visual inspection of wafers upon nitride wet etch. It can be difficult to
discern whether or not the nitride is completely etched away in the desired
places. However, the color inside the holes, (a), and next to the alignment
marks, (b), looks very similar, indicating a succesful etch. The scale bar on
the left picture, (a), is 10 μm and it is 100 μm on the right picture, (b). The
measurement of radius on (a) yields 2.49 μm which compares well with the
target 2.5 μm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.8
Picture with 100x magnification showing the arrays with bumps, created
by the first LOCOS process. The scale bar is 10 μm and the radius meas-
urement is 2.36 μm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.9
Comparison between the first exposure test structure in L - edit and the
one obtained after the first LOCOS oxidation on one of the wafers. As can
be seen, the structure produced is quite close to the desired design from L-
edit, so the wafers are well exposed and the exposure time seems adequate.
The scale bar on the right picture, (b) is 50 μm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.10 Picture of the wafer, that was lost in the ASE. As can be seen, residual
resist is evident near the periphery, mainly on the right side of the wafer,
with poly-Si underneath. In the middle, the etch has etched down to the
nitride layer and around the edges, all the way down to the insulation oxide.
49
4.11 Picture showing the alignment marks, (a), and the array, (b), on the meas-
urement wafer after the etching steps. As can be seen, there is a slight
misalignment, but only on the test wafer. The remaining wafers were well
aligned and exposed.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:100==
90
List of Figures
4.12 Conceptual sketch illustrating hydrophilic fusion bonding between to oxid-
ized wafers. To the left, the pre-bonding situation at room temperature can
be seen. Hydrogen bonds will form spontaneously between the chemisorbed
water molecules. To the right, the wafers are annealed at elevated temper-
atures, to increase the bond strength.
The figure is adapted from [37].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.13 Surface profiles of one of the cavities on the CMUT, as measured on the
AFM. As can be seen, the nitride protrusion is not higher than the post
oxide, indicating that it should not present a problem when bonding in
regards to voids.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.14 Graph showing the measurements of the wafer curvature on the thinned
down SOI wafer.
Also shown are the fits used to extract the radius of
curvature, which will be used in the stress calculations. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.15 Images of wafer combinations #1 −3 after the handle etch in the ASE. As
can be seen only combination #3 turned out somewhat as expected. . . . .
56
4.16 Mean surface roughness development through the different processing steps,
as given in Table 4.7. As can be seen, process 2 using BHF provides a
lower final surface roughness compared to process 1, which is purely based
on dry etching. Please refer to Figure 4.17 for an overview of where the
measurements are taking place. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.17 Overview of where the surface roughness measurements are taking place in
the 3 different process variations, as seen from a cross-sectional view. The
grey triangle indicates the tip of the AFM probe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.1
The electrical equivalent circuit of the CMUT. It consists of three different
domains; the electrical, the mechanical and the acoustical.
The circuit
can be used to analyze the performance of the CMUTs in the impedance
measurements.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
This is the circuit as seen by the impedance analyzer, from the electrical ter-
minal, when the measurements are performed in a low-impedance medium,
in this case air.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Double logarithmic plot of the impedance magnitude for the components in
the circuit displayed in Figure 5.2. This is the ideal behaviour which should
be exhibited by the CMUT when characterising it using the impedance
analyzer. The values used are 𝐶1 = 20 pF, 𝐶0 = 40 pF, 𝐿1 = 30 μH and
𝑅1 = 0 Ω. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
The set-up used for the impedance measurements. The microscope in the
middle of the picture is used to align the probe on the CMUT array and the
probe is connected to the impedance analyzer. The whole set-up is powered
by a sourcemeter. Neither the impedance analyzer nor the sourcemeter is
displayed in this picture.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.5
The impedance and phase angle plotted as a function of the frequency. The
bias voltage used was 180 V.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
==PAGE:101==
List of Figures
91
5.6
(a) Coupling coefficient squared as a function of bias voltage. As can be
seen, 𝑘2 increases with bias voltage due to the spring softening effect, until
the pull-in voltage is reached. (b) The resonance and antiresonance plotted
as a function of bias voltage. As explained in the text, the resonance fre-
quency decreases with increasing bias voltage due to the spring softening
effect.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.7
Extracted lumped element parameters of the CMUT, as fabricated by [39]
plotted as a function of applied DC bias voltage. The component names
correspond to those displayed in Figure 5.2. The values have been extracted
by fitting the Matlab model developed by Anders Lei to the impedance
measurements.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.8
Frequency shift of the CMUT in response to a heating lasting ∼35 s. As
expected, the frequency shifts to a lower value, when the dimensions of the
CMUT expand. The red line indicates the part of the frequency data used
for Allan deviation analysis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.9
Overlapping Allan deviation based on fractional frequencies for one of the
CMUTs. The error bars indicate the 1𝜎confidence level. Both the black and
blue deviations are based on the CMUT being heated by a heat blower. The
straight lines indicate the noise analysis performed and will be discussed in
the text.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.10 Frequency drift over time of the experimental set-up. A settling time of
around ∼100 mins before the frequency becomes somewhat stable around
∼11 ± 2 kHz is evident. The frequency drift should be taken into account
when discussing results.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.11 (a) Humidity measurement set-up. The plastic box is seen to the right,
connected through a BNC connector and three terminals to the impedance
analyzer, multimeter and voltage supply, respectively. (b) The CMUT is
mounted inside the plastic box, close to the humidity sensor and the petri
dish. In the corner, the silica gel is placed in a small container. . . . . . . .
71
5.12 Impedance magnitude as a function of frequency for the CMUT. Two meas-
urements are displayed, one for 28.4 % RH (”Data (1)”) and one for 85.2 %
(”Data (2)”).
The impedance spectrum shifts left, when the CMUT is
exposed to more humid surroundings.
Together with the raw data, two
different fits are plotted, one for each data set. One is a lumped element
model fit (”L.E. Fit (1) and (2)”) and the other is based on the data being
smoothed (”Smooth Fit (1) and (2)”). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.13 Impedance magnitude as a function of frequency for 28.4 % RH (”Data (1)”)
and for 85.2 % (”Data (2)”). Two different fits are also plotted, one for each
data set; the lumped element model fit (”L.E. Fit (1) and (2)”) and the
smoothed fit (”Smooth Fit (1) and (2)”). The smoothed fit provides better
values for both 𝐹res and 𝐹a, as it describes the raw data better than the
lumped element model fit. In both graphs detecting the frequency shift in
the raw data is difficult. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.14 Frequency shift of the CMUT in response to increase and decrease in water
vapour concentration. Using a linear fit, the sensitivity of the sensor can
be obtained. As can be seen, the sensitivity is greatest when increasing the
relative humidity rather than decreasing it.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
==PAGE:102==
92
List of Figures
5.15 Frequency shift of the CMUT in response to increase and decrease in water
vapour concentration. The dataset is the same as displayed in Figure 5.14,
but has been smoothed using smooth and spline functions. In this way, a
more linear behaviour is seen, effectively improving the sensitivities meas-
ured. The sensitivity is once again greatest when increasing the humidity.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.1
Principle sketch of a silanization reaction using APTES. The ethoxy groups
on the APTES molecule are hydrolyzed by the water on the hydrated sil-
anol surface. Then, the molecule is condensed and physisorped onto the
surface through hydrogen bonding. Finally, covalent binding is promoted
by thermal curing of the film.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.1
Normalized frequency response for a CMUT for three different analytes;
DMMP, ethanol and water.
The analytes exhibit different ”patterns”.
Graph taken from [13].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIXA
SOI Process Flow
93
==PAGE:104==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
CMUT – 2xLOCOS nitride 1G 
1G 
24-Jan-16 
S103106@student.dtu.dk 
 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation and oxidation 
SOI 
1.1 Wafer 
selection 
Wafer box 
Use the dedicated vacuum tweezer across from 
the A-stack furnaces  
 
1.2 RCA 
 
 
Remember 1 dummy 
wafer 
1.3 SiO2 wet 
oxidation 
Phosphorus 
Drive-in (A3) 
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat and 
place device wafers equally distributed on either 
side of the test wafer. No spacing between 
wafers. 
Recipe: Wet1100, time: 6h 30 min 
Target thickness: ~1695 nm 
 
Measured thickness on dummy: __nm 
 
Remember 1 dummy 
wafer 
 
Svarer til at 1.5um/2 Si 
er oxideret 
 
(Hvis ikke to oxidationer 
er det 24h:45min ved 
wet1100) 
1.4 Measure 
thickness 
Filmtek 
Measured Thickness: __nm 
Measure on dummy 
wafer 
2 Strip the oxide 
SOI 
2.1 Wet oxide 
etch 
BHF – clean 
(across from 
HMDS oven) 
Etch rate: 78.19 nm/min (75nm/min) 
Etch time: 23min + over etch =25min 
 
 
3 Oxidation (again) 
 
3.1 RCA 
 
 
Remember 1 dummy 
wafer 
3.2 SiO2 wet 
oxidation 
Phosphorus 
Drive-in (A3) 
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat and 
place device wafers equally distributed on either 
side of the test wafer. No spacing between 
wafers. 
Recipe: Wet1100, time: 6h 30 min 
Target thickness: ~1695nm 
 
Measured thickness on dummy: __nm 
 
Remember 1 dummy 
wafer 
 
Svarer til at 1.5um/2 Si 
er oxideret 
4 Strip the oxide 
SOI 
4.1 Wet oxide 
etch 
BHF – clean 
(across from 
HMDS oven) 
Etch rate: 78.19 nm/min (75 nm/min) 
Etch time: 23 min + over etch =25 min 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIXB
CMUT Process Flow
95
==PAGE:106==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
CMUT – 2xLOCOS nitride 1G 
1G 
12-Jan-16 
S103106@student.dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: MLW_2xLOCOS_nitride 
Page 2 of 9 
 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation and Protective Oxidation 
Bottom electrode wafers 
1.1 Wafer 
selection 
Wafer box 
Use the dedicated vacuum tweezers across from 
the A-stack furnaces  
OP442 
1.2 RCA 
 
 
Remember 1 dummy wafer 
1.3 SiO2 dry 
oxidation 
Phosphorus 
Drive-in (A3) 
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat and 
place device wafers equally distributed on either 
side of the test wafer. No spacing between 
wafers. 
Recipe: Dry1100, time: 3 min: 50 s 
Target thickness: ~ 10nm 
 
Measure thickness on dummy: 24.16 nm 
 
Remember 1 dummy wafer 
1.4 Measure 
thickness 
Filmtek 
Measure Thickness: __nm 
Measure on dummy wafer 
2 Nitride Deposition (1.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafers 
2.1 Si3N4 
deposition 
Nitride furnace 
– LPCVD 6” E3 
Deposit nitride 
Recipe: 4nitdan 
Time: 20 min (@ 2.55nm/min) 
Target thickness: 50 nm 
Measure thickness: 
 
55.43 nm (FilmTek) (n=2.0)
Remember 1 dummy 
2.2 Measure 
thickness 
Filmtek 
Measure thickness: __nm 
 
3 PolySi Deposition (1.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafers 
3.1 Polysilicon 
deposition 
Polysilicon 
furnace – LPCVD 
6” E2 
Recipe: Poly 
Time: 16 min 7 s (@6.2 nm/min) 
Target thickness: 100 nm 
Remember 1 dummy 
3.2 Measure 
thickness 
Filmtek 
Measure thickness 
 
101.9 nm (n=4.18)
 
4 Photolithography (1.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
4.1 Prepare 
wafer 
HMDS oven 
 
Or Spin track 
Recipe: 4 
32.5 min 
Faster to use HMDS oven 
than Spin track with many 
wafers. 
Run 2 test wafers to ensure 
resist coverage 
4.2 Coat wafer 
Spin track 
1.5 µm Mir 701 positive resist 
 
4.3 Exposure 
KS aligner 
Align to flat (first print). Hard contact 
Exposure time: 23 s 
Mask: 1LOCOS 
 
4.4 PEB 
TMAH UV 
developer 
PEB 110C 60 s + 60 s puddle 
 
4.5 Develop 
TMAH UV 
developer 
PEB 110C 60 s + 60 s puddle 
 
4.6 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern, alignment marks and exposure 
test-structures 
 
5 Polysilicon Mask Etch (1.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
5.1 Polysilicon 
etch 
DRIE 
DRIE: 2 (1 could do it) cycle(s) of LF SOI recipe. 
Recipe name: Poly etch (20° C), use MACS 
 
==PAGE:107==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
CMUT – 2xLOCOS nitride 1G 
1G 
12-Jan-16 
S103106@student.dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: MLW_2xLOCOS_nitride 
Page 3 of 9 
 
5.2 Strip resist 
Plasma Asher 2 
O2/N2: 250/70 ml/min, 1000 W, 45 min. 
 
6 Nitride Wet Etch (1.LOCOS mask nitride) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
6.1 Nitride etch 
Wet bench 
Wet silicon nitride etch 
H3PO4 @ 180 C (84Å/min) 
Time: ~7 min + a little over etch = 8 min 
All wafers 
6.2 7 up 
7 up 
Clean wafers after wet nitride etch due to 
possible contamination by potassium ions from 
people stripping nitride after KOH 
 
 
6.3 Inspection 
 
Optical microscope 
Check pattern and alignment 
marks 
7 1st LOCOS Oxidation 
Bottom electrode wafer 
7.1 RCA 
RCA bench 
 
Remember dummy wafer 
7.2 SiO2 wet 
oxidation 
Phosphorus 
Drive-in (A3) 
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat and 
place device wafers equally distributed on either 
side of the test wafer. No spacing between 
wafers. 
Recipe: Wet1100, time: 55 min 10 s 
Target thickness: 564.3 nm 
 
Measure thickness on dummy  
1 dummy wafer 
Note time in logbook 
 
 
 
 
8 Strip Oxide and Nitride (1.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
8.1 Wet oxide 
etch 
BHF – clean 
(across from 
HMDS oven) 
Etch rate: 78.19 nm/min (75 nm/min) 
Etch time: 8 min + over etch = 10 min 
 
Compare the target thickness 
to the measured thickness – 
if much higher, adjust the 
etch time. 
8.2 Nitride etch 
Wet bench 
Wet silicon nitride etch 
H3PO4 @ 180 C (84Å/min) 
Time: ~7 min + a little over etch = 8 min 
 
8.3 7up 
7up 
Clean wafers after wet nitride etch due to 
possible contamination by potassium ions from 
people stripping nitride after KOH 
 
8.4 Wet oxide 
etch 
BHF – clean 
(across from 
HMDS oven) 
Etch rate: 78.19 nm/min (75 nm/min) 
Etch time: 1 min 
 
 
8.5 Inspection 
Dektak or AFM 
or Sensofar 
Measure the bump height 
Target height: 250 nm 
Measure height 
 
9 Insulation Oxidation 
Bottom electrode wafer 
9.1  RCA 
RCA bench 
 
Remember dummy wafer 
9.2  SiO2 wet 
oxidation 
Phosphorus 
Drive-in (A3) 
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat and 
place device wafers equally distributed on either 
side of the test wafer. No spacing between 
wafers. 
Recipe: Wet1000, time: 10 min 04 s 
Target thickness: 100 nm (on test wafer) 
 
Measure thickness on dummy 
1 dummy wafer 
Note time in logbook 
 
10 Nitride Deposition (2.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
==PAGE:108==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
CMUT – 2xLOCOS nitride 1G 
1G 
12-Jan-16 
S103106@student.dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: MLW_2xLOCOS_nitride 
Page 4 of 9 
 
10.1 Si3N4 
deposition 
Nitride furnace 
– LPCVD 6” E3 
Deposit nitride 
Recipe: 4nitdan 
Time: 18 min (@ 2.8 nm/min)  
Target thickness: 50 nm 
Remember 1 dummy 
10.2 Measure 
thickness 
Filmtek 
Measure thickness: __nm 
 
11 PolySi Deposition (2.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
11.1 Polysilicon 
deposition 
Polysilicon 
furnace – LPCVD 
6” E2 
Recipe: Poly 
Time: 15 min (@6.8 nm/min) 
Target thickness: 100 nm 
Remember 1 dummy 
11.2 Measure 
thickness 
Filmtek 
Measure thickness: __nm 
 
12 Photolithography (2.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
12.1 Prepare 
wafer 
HMDS oven 
 
Or Spin track 
Recipe: 4 
32.5 min 
Faster to use HMDS oven 
than Spin track with many 
wafers. 
Run 2 test wafers to ensure 
resist coverage 
12.2 Coat wafer 
Spin track 
1.5 µm Mir 701 positive resist 
 
12.3 Exposure 
KS aligner 
Hard contact 
Exposure time: 23 s 
Mask: 2LOCOS 
 
12.4 PEB 
TMAH UV 
developer 
PEB 110C 60 s + 60 s puddle 
 
12.5 Develop 
TMAH UV 
developer 
PEB 110C 60 s + 60 s puddle 
 
12.6 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern, alignment marks and exposure 
test-structures 
 
13 Polysilicon Mask Etch (2.LOCOS) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
13.1 Polysilicon 
etch 
ASE or DRIE 
DRIE: 2 (1 could do it) cycle(s) of LF SOI recipe. 
Recipe name: Poly etch (20° C), use MACS 
 
13.2 Strip resist 
Plasma Asher 2 
O2/N2: 250/70 ml/min, 1000 W, 45 min. 
 
13.3 Coat wafer 
Spin track 
Mir 701 positive resist 
Recipe: 1.5 µm with HMDS 
 
13.4 Polysilicon 
etch 
Wet Poly Etch 
Strip PolySi of backside for 2 min. Front side is 
protected by resist. 
Check that the resist is OK 
right after the etch, before 
the water rinse. 
13.5 Strip resist 
Plasma Asher 2 
O2/N2: 250/70 ml/min, 1000 W, 45 min. 
 
14 Nitride Wet Etch (2.LOCOS mask nitride) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
14.1 Nitride etch 
Wet bench 
Wet silicon nitride etch 
H3PO4 @ 180 C (84Å/min) 
Time: ~ 7 min + a little over etch = 8 min 
All wafers 
14.2 7 up 
7 up 
Clean wafers after wet nitride etch due to 
possible contamination by potassium ions from 
people stripping nitride after KOH 
 
 
14.3 Inspection 
 
Optical microscope 
Check pattern and alignment 
marks 
15 Polysilicon Mask Strip (2.LOCOS front side) 
Bottom electrode wafer 
15.1 Strip 
polysilicon 
ASE or DRIE 
DRIE: 2 cycles of LF SOI recipe. 
Recipe name: Poly etch (20° C) 
 
==PAGE:109==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
CMUT – 2xLOCOS nitride 1G 
1G 
12-Jan-16 
S103106@student.dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: MLW_2xLOCOS_nitride 
Page 5 of 9 
 
mask 
 
16 2nd LOCOS Oxidation 
Bottom electrode wafer 
16.1 RCA 
RCA bench 
Only first BHF for half the time (15 s) + skip the 
second BHF dip 
Remember dummy wafer 
16.2 SiO2 wet 
oxidation 
Phosphorus 
Drive-in (A3) 
Place a test wafer in the center of the boat and 
place device wafers equally distributed on either 
side of the test wafer. No spacing between 
wafers. 
Recipe: Wet1100, time: 2 h 00 min 54 s 
Target thickness: 906nm (on test wafer) 
 
Measure thickness on dummy 
1 dummy wafer 
Note time in logbook 
 
 
 
16.3 Cavity 
height 
Dektak 
Measure cavity height on device wafer test 
structures 
 
16.4 Roughness 
measuremen
t 
AFM 
On a bottom electrode wafer which is not to be 
bonded 
 
17 Wafer Bonding 
All wafers 
17.1 RCA 
RCA bench 
Only first BHF for half the time (15s) 
SOI wafers + bottom 
electrode 
17.2 Fusion 
bonding 
EVG NIL 
Recipe: CMUT 
Transport wafers in dedicated box from RCA. 
Minimize ambient exposure and handling time. 
Use RCA cleaned tweezers 
 
17.3 Inspection 
Infrared camera 
Check for pre-anneal voids 
 
17.4 Annealing 
Anneal-bond 
furnace 
Recipe: Ann1100 
Time: 1h 10 min 
 
17.5 Inspection 
Inferred camera 
Inspect post anneal voids 
 
18 Handle Layer & Box Oxide Etch 
Bonded wafers 
18.1 Si etch 
18.2 
ASE 
Etch handle layer away 
recipe: (prototyping/) etch away 
~1h 05 min to etch 380 µm 
Look through window to 
check during the etch and 
when etching is finished 
18.3 Oxide etch 
BHF 
Etch box oxide away, Time: 15 min, check oxide is 
gone. Blue film on backside to protect oxide. 
 
18.4 RCA 
RCA bench 
 
 
19 Photolithography (Access to bottom electrodes) 
Bonded wafers 
19.1 Coat wafer 
Spin track 
Mir 701 positive resist 
Recipe: 1.5 µm with HMDS 
 
19.2 Exposure 
KS aligner 
Hard contact 
Exposure time: 23 s 
Mask:  Bottom electrode 
 
19.3 Develop 
TMAH UV 
developer 
Recipe: PEB 110C 60 s + 60 s puddle develop 
 
19.4 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern and alignment marks 
 
20 Etch (Access to bottom electrodes) 
Bonded wafers 
20.1 Etch Si 
DRIE-Pegases 
Etch all device layer 
Recipe: 2um_SOI 
Temp: 20° C 
Time: 40 s 
 
==PAGE:110==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
CMUT – 2xLOCOS nitride 1G 
1G 
12-Jan-16 
S103106@student.dtu.dk 
 
Not confidential 
File name: MLW_2xLOCOS_nitride 
Page 6 of 9 
 
20.2 Oxide etch 
AOE 
Recipe: SiO2_res 
Time: 4 x 2 min (@1356 nm oxide) 
Temp: 0° C 
Wait 30 min for temp to 
stabilize 
20.3 Strip resist 
Plasma Asher 2 
O2/N2: 250/70 ml/min, 1000 W, 45 min. 
 
21 Metallization 
Bonded wafers 
21.1 Deposit 
Al+Ti 
Alcatel 
Target Ti thickness: 20 nm 
Target Al thickness: 400 nm 
Think about this thickness if 
no wirebond 
22 Photolithography (Metal electrode etch) 
Bonded wafers 
22.1 Coat wafer 
Spin track 
Mir 701 positive resist 
Recipe: 1.5 µm with HMDS 
 
22.2 Exposure 
KS aligner 
Hard contact 
Exposure time: 23 s 
Mask:  Metal etch 
 
22.3 Develop 
TMAH UV 
developer 
Recipe: PEB 110C 60 s + 60 s puddle develop 
 
22.4 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern and alignment marks 
 
23 Etch Metal Electrode 
Bonded wafers 
23.1 Carrier 
wafer 
Crystal bond555 
Glue device wafers onto 6” dummy wafer using 
crystal bond. Should be soluble in water! 
Buy 6” carrier wafer 
23.2 Al etch 
ICP metal 
Recipe: Al etch 
Temp: 20° C 
Time: 80 s 
Check in microscope if all 
metal is gone 
23.3 Detach 
carrier wafer 
Water 
Remove carrier wafer using DI water 
 
23.4 Strip resist 
Plasma Asher 1 
O2/N2: 250/70 ml/min, 1000 W, 45 min. 
 
24 Photolithography (Plate etch) 
Bonded wafers 
24.1 Coat wafer 
Spin track 
Mir 701 positive resist 
Recipe: 1.5 µm with HMDS 
 
24.2 Exposure 
KS aligner 
Hard contact 
Exposure time: 23 s 
Mask: Plate etch 
 
24.3 Develop 
TMAH UV 
developer 
Recipe: PEB 110C 60 s + 60 s puddle develop 
 
24.4 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern and alignment marks 
 
25 Plate Etch 
Bonded wafers 
25.1 Etch Si 
DRIE-Pegases 
Etch all device layer 
Recipe: 2um_SOI 
Time: 40 s 
Temp: 20° C 
 
25.2 Strip resist 
Plasma Asher 1 
O2/N2: 250/70 ml/min, 1000 W, 45 min. 
 
26 Dicing 
Bonded wafers 
26.1 Coat wafers 
SSE spinner 
10 µm resist 
 
26.2 Dice out 
chips 
Disco Saw 
Dicing out chips 
Disco Saw 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIXC
Datasheet for Honeywell Sensor
101
==PAGE:112==
 
DESCRIPTION 
The HIH-4000 Series Humidity Sensors are designed 
specifically for high volume OEM (Original Equipment 
Manufacturer) users.  
 
Direct input to a controller or other device is made possible by 
this sensor’s near linear voltage output. With a typical current 
draw of only 200 µA, the HIH-4000 Series is often ideally 
suited for low drain, battery operated systems.  
 
Tight sensor interchangeability reduces or eliminates OEM 
production calibration costs. Individual sensor calibration data 
is available. 
 
The HIH-4000 Series delivers instrumentation-quality RH 
(Relative Humidity) sensing performance in a competitively 
priced, solderable SIP (Single In-line Package). 
 
Available in two lead spacing configurations, the RH sensor is 
a laser trimmed, thermoset polymer capacitive sensing 
element with on-chip integrated signal conditioning. 
 
The sensing element's multilayer construction provides 
excellent resistance to most application hazards such as 
wetting, dust, dirt, oils and common environmental chemicals. 
 
FEATURES 
 
Molded thermoset plastic housing 
 
Near linear voltage output vs % RH 
 
Laser trimmed interchangeability 
 
Low power design 
 
Enhanced accuracy 
 
Fast response time 
 
Stable, low drift performance 
 
Chemically resistant 
 
POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS 
 
Refrigeration equipment 
 
HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning) 
equipment 
 
Medical equipment 
 
Drying 
 
Metrology 
 
Battery-powered systems 
 
OEM assemblies 
 
==PAGE:113==
2 
www.honeywell.com/sensing 
Table 1. Performance Specifications (At 5 Vdc supply and 25 ºC [77 ºF] unless otherwise noted.) 
Parameter 
Minimum 
Typical 
Maximum 
Unit 
Specific Note 
Interchangeability (first order curve) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
0% RH to 59% RH 
-5 
– 
5 
% RH 
– 
60% RH to 100% RH 
-8 
– 
8 
% RH 
– 
Accuracy (best fit straight line) 
-3.5 
– 
+3.5 
% RH 
1 
Hysterisis 
– 
3 
– 
% RH 
– 
Repeatability 
– 
±0.5 
– 
% RH 
– 
Settling time 
– 
– 
70 
ms 
– 
Response time (1/e in slow moving air) 
– 
5 
– 
s 
– 
Stability (at 50% RH) 
– 
1.2 
– 
% RH 
– 
Voltage supply 
4 
– 
5.8 
Vdc 
2 
Current supply 
– 
200 
500 
µA 
– 
Voltage output (1st order curve fit) 
VOUT=(VSUPPLY)(0.0062(sensor RH) + 0.16), typical at 25 ºC 
Temperature compensation 
True RH = (Sensor RH)/(1.0546 – 0.00216T), T in ºC 
Output voltage temperature, coefficient at 
50% RH, 5 V 
– 
-4 
– 
mV/ºC 
 
Operating temperature 
-40[-40] 
See Figure 1. 
85[185] 
ºC[ºF] 
– 
Operating humidity 
0 
See Figure 1. 
100 
% RH 
3 
Storage temperature 
-50[-58] 
– 
125[257] 
ºC[ºF] 
– 
Storage humidity 
See Figure 2. 
% RH 
3 
Specific Notes: 
1. Can only be achieved with the supplied slope and offset. 
For HIH-4000-003 and HIH-4000-004 catalog listings only. 
2. Device is calibrated at 5 Vdc and 25 ºC. 
3. Non-condensing environment. 
 
General Notes: 
 Sensor is ratiometric to supply voltage. 
 Extended exposure to >90% RH causes a reversible shift 
of 3% RH. 
 Sensor is light sensitive. For best performance, shield 
sensor from bright light. 
 
FACTORY CALIBRATION DATA 
HIH-4000 Sensors may be ordered with a calibration and data 
printout. See Table 2 and the order guide on the back page. 
 
Table 2. Example Data Printout 
Model 
HIH-4000-003 
Channel 
92 
Wafer 
030996M 
MRP 
337313 
Calculated values at 5 V 
   VOUT at 0% RH 
   VOUT at 75.3% RH 
 
0.826 V 
3.198 V 
Linear output for 3.5% RH 
accuracy at 25 °C 
   Zero offset 
   Slope 
   RH 
 
 
0.826 V 
31.483 mV/%RH 
(VOUT - zero offset)/slope 
(VOUT - 0.826)/0.0315 
Ratiometric response for 
0% RH to 100% RH 
   VOUT 
 
 
VSUPPLY (0.1652 to 0.7952) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
 
 
Honeywell Sensing and Control 
3 
Figure 1. Operating Environment (Non-condensing environment.) 
0%
10%
20%
30%
50%
40%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
-40
20
-20
0
40
60
80
100
Relative Humidity
Temperature ºC
Recommended operating zone
Operating zone limited to <50 hours
No specification zone
 
 
Figure 2. Storage Environment (Non-condensing environment.) 
0%
10%
20%
30%
50%
40%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
-40
20
-20
0
40
60
80
100
120
140
Relative Humidity
Temperature ºC
Recommended storage zone
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
4 
www.honeywell.com/sensing 
Figure 3. Typical Output Voltage vs Relative Humidity (At 25 ºC and 5 V.) 
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Relative Humidity (%RH)
Output Voltage (Vdc)
Sensor Response
Sensor Response
Best Linear Fit
 
 
Figure 4. Typical Output Voltage (BFSL) vs Relative Humidity (At 0 ºC, 70 ºC and 5 V.) 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Relative Humidity (%)
Output Voltage (Vdc)
0 C
70 C
==PAGE:116==
 
 
Honeywell Sensing and Control 
5 
Figure 5. Mounting Dimensions (For reference only. mm/[in]) 
 
12,7 MIN.
[0.50]
  8,59
[0.338]
  1,27
[0.050]
  2,54
[0.100]
 3X  0,38
     [0.015]
  4,17
[0.164]
  4,17
[0.164]
   2,54
 [0.100]
   12,2 MIN.
  [0.48]
  1,91
[0.075]
  8,59
[0.338]
  2,03
[0.080]
 3X  0,38
     [0.015]
HIH-4000-001
HIH-4000-003
HIH-4000-005
HIH-4000-002
HIH-4000-004
  2,54
 [0.100]
  -ve
  +ve
  OUT
  -ve
  +ve
  OUT
  0,89
 [0.035]
 
 
 
Figure 6. Typical Application Circuit 
HIH-40XX
+ Ve
- Ve
OUT
Supply Voltage (5 V)
VOLTAGE OUT
0 V
Minimum
 Load
80 
kOhm
 
ORDER GUIDE 
Catalog Listing 
Description 
HIH-4000-001 
Integrated circuit humidity sensor, 2,54 mm [0.100 in] lead pitch SIP 
HIH-4000-002 
Integrated circuit humidity sensor, 1,27 mm [0.050 in] lead pitch SIP 
HIH-4000-003 
Integrated circuit humidity sensor, 2,54 mm [0.100 in] lead pitch SIP, calibration and data printout 
HIH-4000-004 
Integrated circuit humidity sensor, 1,27 mm [0.050 in] lead pitch SIP, calibration and data printout 
HIH-4000-005 
Equivalent to HIH-4000-001 
 
ADDITIONAL HUMIDITY SENSOR INFORMATION 
See the following associated literature at www.honeywell.com/sensing: 
 Product installation instructions 
 Application sheets: 
– Humidity Sensor Performance Characteristics 
– Humidity Sensor Theory and Behavior 
– Humidity Sensor Moisture and Psychrometrics 
– Thermoset Polymer-based Capacitive Sensors 
 
==PAGE:117==
Sensing and Control 
Honeywell 
1985 Douglas Drive North 
Golden Valley, MN 55422 
www.honeywell.com/sensing 
009017-5-EN   IL50   GLO   Printed in USA 
February 2010 
© 2010 Honeywell International Inc. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
 WARNING 
MISUSE OF DOCUMENTATION 
 
The information presented in this product sheet is for 
reference only. Do not use this document as a product 
installation guide. 
 
Complete installation, operation, and maintenance 
information is provided in the instructions supplied with 
each product. 
Failure to comply with these instructions could result 
in death or serious injury. 
 
WARRANTY/REMEDY 
Honeywell warrants goods of its manufacture as being free of 
defective materials and faulty workmanship. Honeywell’s 
standard product warranty applies unless agreed to otherwise 
by Honeywell in writing; please refer to your order 
acknowledgement or consult your local sales office for specific 
warranty details. If warranted goods are returned to Honeywell 
during the period of coverage, Honeywell will repair or replace, 
at its option, without charge those items it finds defective. The 
foregoing is buyer’s sole remedy and is in lieu of all other 
warranties, expressed or implied, including those of 
merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. In no 
event shall Honeywell be liable for consequential, special, 
or indirect damages. 
While we provide application assistance personally, through 
our literature and the Honeywell web site, it is up to the 
customer to determine the suitability of the product in the 
application. 
Specifications may change without notice. The information we 
supply is believed to be accurate and reliable as of this 
printing. However, we assume no responsibility for its use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 WARNING 
PERSONAL INJURY 
DO NOT USE these products as safety or emergency stop 
devices or in any other application where failure of the 
product could result in personal injury. 
Failure to comply with these instructions could result 
in death or serious injury. 
 
SALES AND SERVICE 
Honeywell serves its customers through a worldwide network 
of sales offices, representatives and distributors. For 
application assistance, current specifications, pricing or name 
of the nearest Authorized Distributor, contact your local sales 
office or: 
E-mail: info.sc@honeywell.com 
Internet: www.honeywell.com/sensing 
Phone and Fax: 
Asia Pacific  
+65 6355-2828 
 
 
+65 6445-3033 Fax 
Europe 
 
+44 (0) 1698 481481 
 
 
+44 (0) 1698 481676 Fax 
Latin America 
+1-305-805-8188 
 
 
+1-305-883-8257 Fax 
USA/Canada  
+1-800-537-6945 
 
 
+1-815-235-6847 
 
 
+1-815-235-6545 Fax 
 
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIXD
Conversion from RH to PPM
When performing sensitivity analysis for the CMUTs it is necessary to convert the RH
from % to ppm, as this is one of the units often used in research when comparing different
sensors. First, the saturation water pressure in (hPa) needs to be calculated using [43]
𝑃𝑤𝑠= 𝐴⋅10
⎛
⎜
⎝
𝑚𝑇
𝑇+ 𝑇𝑛
⎞
⎟
⎠
(D.1)
where 𝐴, 𝑚and 𝑇𝑛are constants depending on the temperature range at which the
measurements are performed. 𝑇is the temperature in ∘C at which the measurements
are taken.
For our experiments the constants associated with the temperature range
−20∘C −50∘C should suffice, so the given values are [43]:
𝐴= 6.116441
(D.2)
𝑚= 7.591386
(D.3)
𝑇𝑛= 240.7263
(D.4)
(D.5)
Next, the water vapour pressure can be calculated from the RH in % as
𝑃𝑤= 𝑃𝑤𝑠
𝑅𝐻
100
(D.6)
which can be inserted into the final conversion equation
𝑃𝑃𝑀=
𝑃𝑤
𝑃𝑡𝑜𝑡−𝑃𝑤
× 106
(D.7)
where 𝑃𝑡𝑜𝑡is the total ambient pressure.
109
