==PAGE:1==
Structural Design in an LCA
Perspective
Christine Collin Hansen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
BYG-M.Sc.-2016-ID: s102910
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Building 118, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk BYG-M.Sc.-2016-ID: s102910
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
A structural design analysis in an LCA (Life Cycle Assessment) perspective
using common tools from the building industry has been carried out.
The
ambition has been to select tools that are easily integrated in the initial design
process by the architects and also easily adapted in the industry. The task has
been to perform real-time analysis of the structural design in a building in order
to create an interactive work process enabling the combination of architectural
and engineering skills in a dynamic design process. The goal has been to create
a tool that would support and enable a sustainable building design and an early
implementation of LCA. The analysis is using the visual platform of Rhino
with the parametric program Grasshopper combined with the ﬁnite element
program Karamba.
The building and structure used for the analysis is the
planned Art Gallery Konsthall Tornedalen. The results of the analysis show
that through diﬀerent steps of optimisation the weight of the structure can
signiﬁcantly reduced. The steel and wooden structures that were designed and
optimised were additionally tested through on-the-ﬂy LCA in the online software
Quantis Suite.
A discussion of the analysis and the results from using the
diﬀerent tools are summing up new ideas, perspectives and recommendations
relating to the continued design process of the case building and in general. A
dynamic design process combining architectural and engineering skills will be
enabled and fueled by the use and further development of tools as the ones used
in this thesis.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is prepared at the Department of Civil Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Civil Engineering.
The ambition has been to combine sustainable building design and early imple-
mentation of Life Cycle thinking in a design process. A parametric design tool,
Grasshopper, is used in order to analyze and compare two construction concepts
e.g. wood and steel as well as suggesting methods for optimizing the Project
Kunsthall Tornedalen by the Finnish architects OOPEAA1. Furthermore Life
Cycle Assesments will be carried out on-the-ﬂy2 during the optimisation.
My ambition is that the ﬁndings in this project will contribute to the further
design process of the case study. The investigated method of designing through
an integrated structural optimisation in the early design phase will enhance the
sustainability of the entire structure.
1The Oﬃce for Peripheral Architecture
2The activity is developed dynamically rather than being a result of something that is
statically predeﬁned
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
I would like to ﬁrst and foremost thank my three supervisors, Lotte Bjerregaard
(DTU BYG), Kristoﬀer Negendahl (DTU BYG) and Morten Birkved (DTU
Management) for guiding and assisting me through the course of this project,
giving me invaluable advice and asking me the right questions to complete this
project.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the architects Anssi Lassila and
Kazunori Yamaguchi from OOPEAA for their time to meet and for providing
the necessary design documentation for this project.
I would like to thank my good friend Henrik Hazard Kampmann (Rambøll)
for discussions of the structural analysis and Ronnie Murray (CF.Architects,
London) for corrections and discussions, providing an architectural view on the
process.
I would like to thank Rasmus Kirstrand and Ida Appel for their loving support
and honest corrections.
Lastly I would like to thank my father for endless helpful discussions as well as
my mother for the many grammatical corrections during this project.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Literature Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Structure of the Report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
6
2.1
Tools in the Building Industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
The Architects’ Design Process and their Tools . . . . . .
7
2.2
Life Cycle Thinking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Modeling in Grasshopper/Karamba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Case Study
14
3.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Konsthall Tornedalen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Design and Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Structural Analysis
20
4.1
Analysis of the Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
The Static System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Loading of the Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Vertical Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.2
Horizontal Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.3
Load Combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.1
Design Checks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.2
Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
4.4.3
Optimisation Step 1. - Basis Frame Design
. . . . . . . .
33
4.4.4
Optimisation Step 2. - Varying Cross Sections
. . . . . .
38
4.4.5
Optimisation Step 3. - Linking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4.6
Optimisation Step 4. - Angles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4.7
Optimisation Step 5. - Frame Distance . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4.8
Optimisation Step 6. - Building Design
. . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4.9
Steel Frame Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.4.10 Wooden Frame Result and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4.11 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
On-the-ﬂy Life Cycle Analysis
60
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2.1
Grasshopper/Karamba & LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2.2
Quantis Suite 2.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
. . .
63
5.3.1
Schemes and Flows in Quantis Suite . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.3.2
Comparison of the Steel and Wood structures . . . . . . .
67
5.3.3
Comparison of the Steel and Wood structures with Roof
Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Discussion
75
6.1
Possibilities and limitations of the developed program
. . . . . .
76
6.1.1
The use of on-the-ﬂy Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . .
77
6.2
Possibilities and limitations of the optimisation process . . . . . .
78
6.3
Relevance for the Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
80
7.0.1
Further Studies & Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
Bibliography
83
Appendix
i
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this chapter the motivation for the report is explained, the problem statement
is deﬁned and the structure of the rest of the report is outlined.
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Motivation
2
1.1
Motivation
Increasing awareness on the commercial and branding value of sustainable mate-
rials and structures in the construction industry has initiated the policy makers
to utilize the commonalities between the Nordic building traditions and deﬁne
a common Nordic framework for a sustainable built environment - the Nordic
Built Programme.
Through research the aim is to develop and demonstrate new concepts for sus-
tainable construction. Increasing the level of sustainability in the built environ-
ment can be done through developing design methods and early design stage
tool [Hansen and Sattrup, 2014]. Investment of knowledge and time is needed in
order to enhance the sustainability of a project as introduced by P. MacLeamy
in 2004 [MacLeamy, 2004]. The aim of bringing construction thinking into the
design process in order to save the overall costs of a project was introduced by
Boyd C. Paulson in 1976. He stated that the expenditures are small in the early
design phase of a project and the typical engineering and design fees amount to
well under 10% of the total construction costs [Paulson, 1976].
This project will revolve around the need for an early knowledge investment
in the design process and how this is possible. The sustainability focus will
be on the load-bearing structure and its contribution to the overall material
consumption of a building. By optimising the primary structural system it is
thought to increase the overall sustainability of the building. Thus an early
investment of engineering resources in the design phase can show economical
and environmental beneﬁts.
With inspiration from the project of Aleksander Probst Otovic [Otovic, 2015],
who created an LCA design tool allowing the user to gain feedback from the
very ﬁrst digital sketch, the foundation and inspiration for this project was
established. Creating a tool giving simultaneous feedback on the use of material
for the load bearing structure would make it possible to decrease the material
consumption and enhance a more sustainable design in the early design stage.
1.2
Literature Study
The term sustainability has been known for centuries, seen as early as 1752 in
German forestry, where wood was the most important raw material at the time.
To ensure the establishment of the forests, a long term perspective plan was
launched and was called sustainability. Later on the publication The Product-
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Literature Study
3
Life Factor [Stahel, 1982] claimed that having a longer use of products would
contribute to a transition towards a sustainable society. It relies on life cycle
thinking and argues for an industry able to handle recycled material, as well as
an ecological industry and a design for disassembly. The principles for ecological
sustainability written by Nebel and Wright in 1996,[Gilbert, 1987] addresses the
issue of resource recycling. They recommend the avoidance of linear waste ﬂows
in society leading to waste dumps on land, in water or in the atmosphere. A
natural extension to this point of view is the concept of circular economy, which
was introduced in 1966 by K. Boulding [Boulding, 2000].
Later on the term sustainability was introduced by the European Union, be-
cause of the increasing consumption of natural resources.
Due to the large
amount of natural resource consumption and waste production in highly devel-
oped regions, the European resource strategy, including the concept of Circular
Economy (CE) started gaining impact. It is seen as a model able to transform
the known and present "take-make-dispose" economy [Grassbauer, 2015]. The
implementation of circular economy and thus improved resource productivity is
recognized in the construction industry as beneﬁcial. The transition to a more
circular economy requires changes throughout the value chains and is also of
concern to the construction industry [Smol et al., 2015]. As the economy is
improving, the social and environmental indicators of sustainable development
are drawing attention to the construction industry. The result is a construction
sector under more scrutiny by the regulators and public than ever [Smol et al.,
2015]. New initiatives such as Ressource City in Næstved, Denmark, focuses on
up-cycling and waste as a resource for new production. The goal is to establish
an industry cluster of green productions beneﬁtting from one another [Lendager,
2014]. A. Zaman describes a zero waste city index which engages in entire cities,
competing on their waste diversion rate as a tool to measure the performance
of their waste management systems [Zaman and Lehmann, 2013].
The tool Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) can succesfully be used in order to create
decisions enhancing sustainable building design and construction. A common
practice is to consider energy comsumption during the period of use, the main
indicator of the environmental impact of a building [Guardigli et al., 2011].
The building material aﬀects the primary energy use and the greenhouse gas
emissions of a building [Dodoo et al., 2012].
Eﬃcient use of resources in order to meet the requirements and needs of present
and future generations whilst minimizing the adverse eﬀects on the natural
environment is of concern. The direct impact from buildings on the environment
can be seen in the extraction and use of raw materials and the emission of
harmful substances throughout the building’s life cycle [Ding, 2014].
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Problem Deﬁnition
4
1.3
Problem Deﬁnition
The theme of this report concerns an optimisation of the way we utilize our re-
sources in the building industry. The construction industry, including housing,
is known to contribute to about 44% of all extracted materials from Earth’s
biological or mineral resources [Roodman and Lenssen, 1994]. In addition, the
construction industry contributes to a third of the total landﬁll waste stream
[Kibert et al., 2002]. Therefore Navid Hossaini argues that the construction
and building industry is in dire need for developing sustainability assessment
frameworks and tools to evaluate and integrate related environmental and so-
cioeconomic impacts [Hossaini et al., 2014].
The main thesis of this report is that it is possible to reduce the environmental
impact of a construction through a dynamic, real-time integrated design process,
using modern design programmes.
The main thesis is divided into three sub-theses:
• It is possible to use existing design tools to facilitate a dynamic design
process, involving both architects and engineers.
• It is possible to create a model featuring structural design of a building
enabling an optimisation of the material eﬃciency.
• It is possible to use an existing LCA tool in the preliminary design process
to document the environmental impacts of the building on-the-ﬂy.
The programs used by the architects are investigated through a limited empirical
study in order to ﬁnd a suitable software platform.
The thesis concerning the creation of a model that can be used to perform a
structural design analysis is developed on the basis of the art gallery, Konsthall
Tornedalen, designed by the architectural oﬃce OOPEAA.
Based on the developed model and optimisation performed on the Konsthall
Tornedalen an LCA tool is used to determine the environmental impact of the
structure.
The above found results will be evaluated and put into perspective through a
discussion.
==PAGE:12==
1.4 Structure of the Report
5
1.4
Structure of the Report
The report consists of ﬁve primary chapters: Introduction, Theory, Case study,
Analysis and Discussion. The introduction, motivation and problem statement
of the report has been presented in the previous sections. The theory chap-
ter introduces the architectural design process (ADP) and its use of diﬀerent
software programs as well as Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) and thinking (LCT).
The case study presents the case for the thesis, provided by OOPEAA, and the
overall Nordic Built Project. The analysis contains two sections: A structural
analysis and a Life Cycle Analysis. The structural analysis analyses the case and
optimises it. The Life Cycle Analysis compares the two optimised structures in
steel and wood. In the discussion the results and the program are discussed as
well as the theory, the relevance of the project and how it can be of use to the
industry.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this chapter the existing design tools and architectural design processes are
investigated empirically in order to ﬁnd a suitable software platform able to
facilitate a dynamic design process, allowing the involvement of both architects
and engineers.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Tools in the Building Industry
7
2.1
Tools in the Building Industry
In this section the architectural design process will be investigated on the basis
of communication with the partners OOPEAA and Vandkunsten involved in the
STED Programme1. The term life cycle analysis and life cycle thinking will be
investigated and a suitable software platform will be explored.
2.1.1
The Architects’ Design Process and their Tools
2.1.1.1
Introduction
The architectural design process has been a subject of discussion through time.
In 1976 Boyd C. Paulson [Paulson, 1976] introduced a curve, describing the
decreasing level of inﬂuence throughout the design process. He showed that the
cost of the project would increase by time. A similar idea was brought forward
by P. MacLeamy in 2004 as can be seen in Figure 2.1 [MacLeamy, 2004].
The illustration in Figure 2.1 shows that early design decisions increase the
possibility to inﬂuence the outcome at a minimal cost. The further into the
project planning, the more costly changes are to implement. MacLeamy thus
advocates for a change in the design process towards an early implementation
of investments in order to reduce the cost of design changes later in the process.
Mary-Ann Knudstrup introduced a more holistic approach to sustainable archi-
tecture through an integrated design process. It is an iterative design process
which focuses on integrating engineering and architectural knowledge in order
to allow the design of sustainable buildings. The process does not ensure an
aesthetic or sustainable solution to a project, but enables designers to control
and consider the many parameters in a project. Thus a more holistic sustainable
solution can be achieved [Knudstrup, 2004].
An iterative and early investment of knowledge is thus important in order to
secure a satisfactory sustainable design as well as decreasing the need for late
and expensive changes.
1Sustainable
Transformation
&
Environmental
Design
Programme,
http://www.stednetwork.org/
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Tools in the Building Industry
8
Figure 2.1: MacLeamy Curve by P. MacLeamy [MacLeamy, 2004]
Curve 1: The ability to impact cost and functional capabilities decreases as the
design proceeds
Curve 2: The cost of design changes increases as the design process progresses
Curve 3: The tranditional design process
Curve 4: The integrated design process
2.1.1.2
The Architectural Design Process of the Partners
The design process for the architectural company OOPEAA was described by
Kazunori Yamaguchi as driven traditionally by hand drawings. The projects are
then followed by CAD drawings, mainly consisting of ArchiCAD and sometimes
AutoCAD. Visualisations are checked by scale models, 3D views in ArchiCAD
or SketchUp. See Appendix A for more detials on the correspondance.
The working process by another partner of the STED program, the architectural
company Vandkunsten, has stated that they also work with hand drawings,
AutoCAD and SketchUp. Furthermore they work with Revit and Rhino. Søren
Nielsen from Vandkunsten emphasized the increasing demand for handling many
diﬀerent programs as the programs develop and supplement each other or work
as plug-ins in relation to each other. He saw the possibilities for implementing
new parameters in the initial design stage such as on-the-ﬂy Life Cycle Analysis
(LCA) as highly useful [Hansen and Sattrup, 2014]. The statement was veriﬁed
by Jan Kauschen2 and it was further added that Vandkunsten try to implement
Revit earlier in the design phase as Revit will continue to allow for extended
analysis such as sun and wind analysis. Furthermore Vandkunsten is using Revit
2Veriﬁed by Jan Kauschen, LCA Expert, Vandkunsten, February 2016
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Tools in the Building Industry
9
to extract quantities in order to conduct quick LCA and LCC assesments. See
Appendix B for more detials on the correspondance.
The architectural companies mentioned have similar work processes in the initial
design stages. They need an intuitive and creative program in order to create
visions for a building. The 3D modeling program SkethUp is thus a reasonable
choice due to its wide range of applications, open source library and support of
third-party plug-ins.
For the project planning the architects used diﬀerent programs, both 2D and
3D, from ArchiCAD and AutoCAD to Revit. ArchiCAD and AutoCAD was
also used in the early design stage. The 3D modeling program Revit, is too spe-
cialised in order to be of use in the initial design phase, although Jan Kauschen
predicts its progressively earlier use throughout a design. In the later project
planning Revit proves useful as it is able to handle several programs, allowing
clash detection tests, economical estimates as well as planning and scheduling
programs can be used.
Revit is thus allowing diﬀerent consultants to work
together on a multi-dimensional platform [Harrison and Zealand, 2015].
The platform and program allowing diﬀerent stakeholders to work together on
a building already exist, such as Revit. A design program allowing optimisation
of e.g. the structural system in the initial design stage is absent. Being able
to create a program allowing for diﬀerent inputs, as the design is being shaped,
is needed. Thus programming is needed to create suitable models for speciﬁc
cases in the early design stage.
The software has improved since 2005, where the holistic approach to sustainable
architecture was described [Hansen and Knudstrup, 2005], thus enabling diﬀer-
ent programs to perform various analyses in the early design stage. Sketchup
has plugins as u-value calculators, daylight factor and solar pattern simulations.
Major design decisions regarding the building’s geometry and thereby struc-
tural layout is made in the initial design phase, typically by architects before
involvement from engineers. In order to enable an integration of the structural
input during the conceptual design a real-time interactive programme is needed
[Mueller and Ochsendorf, 2013].
In order to achieve a more integrated design approach, Caitlin Mueller suggests
that a team of architects and engineers collaboratively develop design alterna-
tives that perform well structurally and achieve the architectural design goals
during the conceptual design. As the design process is often uncertain of the ob-
jectives and constraints at the beginning, an evaluative and iterative approach
is necessary. Having a tool allowing the designers to interact with a computer
algorithm, helping to decide which design to pursue would be a desirable design
method [Mueller and Ochsendorf, 2013].
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Tools in the Building Industry
10
2.1.1.3
3D modeling tools, early design stage and FEM-calculations
In order to optimise the structure, calculations of the structural performance
must be made.
Thus is ﬁnite element method programs needed in order to
carry out the calculations on e.g. the load-bearing structure and in this way
optimise the structural ability and reduce material. Matlab is a programming
software allowing ﬁnite element calculations on 2D and 3D structures, thus
one needs to be familiar with the programme in order to use it as it is not
intuitive for non-programmers. Several commercial programs exist in order to
carry out ﬁnite element analysis on structures. FEM-Design (StruSoft), Robot
Structural Analysis (AutoDesk) or SCIA Engineer are mainly used for analysis
and veriﬁcation of a structure and are thus not ideal tools for the initial design
phase, as they need a structural input to analyse [Mueller and Ochsendorf, 2013].
Deﬁning a construction is time consuming and often with restrictions of the
design conﬁguration, the above mentioned software is thus not directly applica-
ble in the design of a new structural solution. Caitlin Mueller investigates the
possibilite of geometry generation in the early design phase, allowing interactive
user experience, as impact from design changes are seen in the aﬀected structural
performance. The structural performance could be measued in metrics, required
material volume or estimated construction costs [Mueller and Ochsendorf, 2013].
The 3D modeling program Rhino was used by several of the architectural com-
panies in the initial design stage due to its intuitive and restriction-free de-
sign platform. This program, however, allows any sort of 3D structure and is
therefore not specialised for the building sector. When the program is used in
cooporation with the plug-in Grashopper, parametric structures can be built
and easily changed. Grasshopper is a graphical algorithm editor tightly inte-
grated with Rhino’s 3D modeling tool. This program requires no knowledge of
programming and scripting, but allows designers to form geometries by simply
dragging components onto a canvas. Within the plug-in Grasshopper another
program can be fully embedded, Karamba3D. Karamba3D is a ﬁntie element
program working as a plug-in in Grasshopper. As Karamba is fully embedded in
the parametric environment of Grasshopper the parameterised geometric models
are easily combined with ﬁnite element calculations. Karamba is thus providing
accurate analyses of spatial trusses and frames. Thus enabling a structural anal-
ysis tool to be used already in the intial design stage where the geometry can
easily change in Grasshopper and give immediate answers to the construction
feasibility.
By creating a modeling tool Grasshopper permits for analyses on a structure
through Karamba and a quantitative decision making is possible. Useful in-
formation will be gathered and thus forming the basis for discussion and col-
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Life Cycle Thinking
11
laboration between the engineers and architects. The 2D/3D environment and
platform given in Rhino allow for a combination of design and analysis and is
thus a suitable software for this thesis. The practice of making a customized
model for a project has the potential to deﬁne a design as a series of decisions,
systems, and relationships. The visual scripting allows the designer to manage
and develope the design [Krymsky, 2015].
2.2
Life Cycle Thinking
A life cycle analysis considers the process of materials and energy ﬂows, and
quantiﬁes and evaluates their entire lifetime. The conclusions from the SETAC-
triangle underlie the standardization of ISO 14040 for Environmental manage-
ment & Life cycle assessment [Klöpﬀer, 1997].
In this project the life cycle thinking will form the basis for the optimisation
processes in the structural analysis.
Simple life cycle analyses will then be
carried out in Quantis Suite, which is an online life cycle assessment program.
Throughout the structural design process the sustainability input will stem from
optimising the ressources needed for the structure, thus potentially both opti-
mising the ecological sustainability and the economical sustainability.
The organisation theory, science and technology of conducting an LCA was
described in 2002 by Heiskanen as an emerging institutional logic. Life cycle
thinking helps inﬂuence the way our environmental problems are conceptual-
ized [Heiskanen, 2002]. The life cycle thinking is thus implemented in variuos
problems already.
In this project the aim is to decrease the amount of material used in the structure
and hereby reduce CO2. It has been discussed whether carbon footprint can be
a good performance indicator for the environmental performance of a product.
Mark A. J. Huijbregts states that Cumulative Fossil Energy Demand (CED) is
a good indicator and as it correlates well with carbon footprint makes carbon
footprint a good indicator [Huijbregts, 2006]. On the other hand, A. Laurent
states that carbon footprint as an indicator of environmental sustainability in
the design of products needs to be documented on a case-by-case basis [Laurent
et al., 2010].
As this project is a part of the early design stage, broad knowledge is important,
giving indications on where to change the design in order to optimise it. Further
and more detailed studies will be carried out later in the process. Thus the
level of CO2 is assumed to a satisfying performance indicator of the overall
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Modeling in Grasshopper/Karamba
12
sustainability of the structure.
Therefore, the sustainability of the structure will in this project be improved
by decreasing the weight of the structure and thus CO2 levels. This is a conse-
quence of the material saved, the transportation of it and the processes linked
to the material extraction and processing. Through the optimisation process
the structure can be designed for easy prefabrication and hereby assist in sav-
ing time. The sustainable reasonings for optimisation of a structural design can
also be emphasized by economical reasons. Saving material, time and electricity
leads to economical savings as well. By investing time in initial optimisations
of the structure, it is thus possible to minimise the environmental impact and
hereby the economy of the project [MacLeamy, 2004].
2.3
Modeling in Grasshopper/Karamba
The analysis of the structure is performed in several programs, involving Rhino
as the program visualising the structure, Grasshopper as a plug-in in which
the structure is built, Karamba3D where it is analysed and Microsoft Excel
as a program for output and comparison. An output describing whether the
structure meets the requirements is also to be seen in the visual output in
Rhino. A diagram showing the iterative process can be seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The structure of the developed program in Grasshopper/Karamba
The ﬁrst step is to either have a 3D model of a structure compatible with Rhino
or to simply create a structure within the Grasshopper environment. The second
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Conclusion
13
step is the analysis. Here the elements, joints and supports must be assigned,
as well as other information about the structure can be given. The porgram
allow the elements to be assigned with diﬀerent materials, cross sections and
to change the loading of the structure through the Karamba3D tools.
The
analysis is conducted on-the-ﬂy when elements are changed and provides the
user with immediate knowledge of shear, normal, or moment forces as well as
deﬂections etc. The output is seen in step three which consists of the mass of
the structure and the approval of it. Thus the output tells the user whether or
not the requirements are fulﬁlled. If the maximum deﬂection or the structural
capacity are exceeded a warning will be given. The key ﬁgures, such as the
moment, normal and shear forces, are also conducted and exported to Microsoft
Excel. The output is provided in Rhino which is the visual platform for the
structure.
This programme is thus allowing interactive user experience, as real-time output,
gives the user an indication of the impact from the design change. The structural
performance is measured according to the carrying capacity and the material
stiﬀness, on the basis of reducing material.
2.4
Conclusion
The existing design tool Rhino was chosen as a platform for the dynamic design
model as it is known in the industry and due to the well integrated parametric
plug-in tool Grasshopper. Grasshopper with the plug-in Karamba permits a
dynamic interactive design process of the structural design, suitable for the
early design stage, through real-time indications of the structural performance.
Rhino provides a visual platform, Grasshopper a parametric design tool and
Karamba a structural design analysis. The LCA program, Quantis Suite was
chosen due to its availability and simple user interface allowing non-experts to
develop on-the-ﬂy LCAs, thus checking whether the environmental impacts of
the structures are reduced.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Case Study
In this chapter an introduction is given to the design project Konsthall Tornedalen,
which is used as the case for this thesis’ analysis and optimisation investigation.
An introduction to the Finnish Architects OOPEAA who have provided the case
as well as an introduction to the Nordic Built Programme is also presented.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Background
15
3.1
Background
This project is a part of the Nordic Built Programme, a programme by Nordic
Innovation, an institution working to increase co-operation, trade and innovation
in the Nordic countries [Nordic Innovation, 2012].
The programme is comprised of three modules as can be seen in Figure 3.1.
The ﬁrst module, The Charter, deﬁnes the strengths of the Nordic Building
sector and provides a platform for cooperation as well as a common set of
fundamentally Nordic and sustainable values. The second module, The Chal-
lenge, encourages innovation and the development of sustainable, viable and
scalable refurbishment concepts for some of the most common building types
in the Nordic region. The third module, The Change, will bring about wider
change by accelerating and supporting the use of new concepts for sustainable
construction.
Figure 3.1: The Nordic Built Timeline [Otovic, 2015]
This project is a part of the STED programme in the third module. The aim
is to develop generalized design methods based on environmental design and
life cycle thinking. One of the partners involved in the STED project is The
Oﬃce for Peripheral Architecture, OOPEAA, represented by the founder, Anssi
Lassila. The focus of the architectural company is mainly on use and reuse of
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Konsthall Tornedalen
16
local wood as well as a life cycle focus on the building and its elements. This
thesis is based on a case made available by OOPEAA and will be desribed in
the next section.
3.2
Konsthall Tornedalen
OOPEAA has contributed with the drawings and questions relevant to their
design of the planned Art Gallery called Konsthall Tornedalen.
This thesis
emerges from this speciﬁc case from OOPEAA as it investigates the problems
and possibilities connected to parametric design and optimisations through on-
the-ﬂy structural analysis and life cycle thinking.
The Art Gallery Konsthall Tornedalen is situated in the northern part of Sweden
on the border to Finland as can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Konsthall Tornedalen, Tornedalen, Risudden 216, 957 95 Hedenäset, Swe-
den
3.2.1
Design and Construction
The art gallery is designed with wooden frames as the load-bearing structure.
These wooden frames are visible and a part of the characteristic of the building
as seen enhanced by the architectural renderings. The structure can be seen in
Figure 3.3, which shows the visual design thought.
The architectural work for the Art Gallery Kunsthall Tornedalen was developed
around hand drawings and was then followed by CAD drawings and simple
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Konsthall Tornedalen
17
Figure 3.3: Design of Konsthall Tornedalen by OOPEAA architects
SketchUp 3D views. The design in the preliminary stage is thus characterized
by the use of many diﬀerent tools and their diﬀerent purposes. As the design is
in the preliminary stage, the measurements may vary and be changed during the
process. The case is well suited for parametric design due to its rather large size,
making it beneﬁcial to consider material and cost optimisations as well as its
systematic and repetitive truss-like structure. A parametric model performing
analysis based on life cycle thinking, could be of use in the discussions with
the architects in order to suggest diﬀerent options for the material or structural
design and by this enhancing the sustainability of the building.
The overall dimensions used for this project was delivered by the architect in
an AutoCAD ﬁle. The technical drawing of the frames with measurements can
be seen in Figure 3.4 and the rest of the drawings can be seen in Appendix
C. The largest frame has a width of 12 meters and a height of approximately
8 meters. The initial analysis will be based on this frame as it will have the
largest deﬂections and be the determinative frame for the structure.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Konsthall Tornedalen
18
Figure 3.4: Technical details of the frame
The ﬂoor plan of the building can be seen in Figure 3.5. The blue area sym-
bolises the area over which the frame structure needs to span, the building is
approximately 30 meters deep and has a width of approximately 55 meters, de-
pending on the span of the frames. The additional building parts outside oﬀthe
blue area will not be taken into consideration as the construction method is not
shown in the drawings and as it is assumed to have little impact on the overall
result. The frames are not prearranged and can thus not be seen in Figure 3.5.
The number of rows of frames is a parameter and the optimal distance between
the frames will be investigated.
Figure 3.5: Area (blue) of the building over which the frame structure spans
The challenges in the frame structure will be analysed and optimised in order
to ﬁnd the most eﬃcient frame structure material-wise. Acknowledging the op-
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Konsthall Tornedalen
19
timisation possibilities and the importance of improving structures provide the
platform for investigation. An optimisation of the load bearing structure might
not only reduce the material needed for the structure, but also for the overall de-
sign of the building, as one optimisation can have several positive consequences
to it. In order to optimise a structure without loosing the initial design thought,
rough estimates and calculations are needed to argue and compromise the design
for a more material eﬃcient outcome in collaboration with the architects.
The next chapter will discuss the diﬀerent optimisation steps essential to mini-
mizing the needed material. The optimisation of the frame structure is based on
estimates of the building geometry, thus only intended for the preliminary design
stage. The optimisation will help the architects consider materials and design
of the frame as well as the span between them, but should not be considered as
a ﬁnal documentation of the entire building.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Structural Analysis
In this chapter it will be investigated whether it is possible to create a model
featuring the structural design of the case Konsthall Tornedalen and allowing
an optimisation of the material eﬃciency.
During the design analyses both a steel and wooden structure will be investi-
gated and optimised.
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Analysis of the Structure
21
4.1
Analysis of the Structure
This section presents the analysis of the structure and the diﬀerent optimisation
steps. The overall goal of this chapter is to optimise the structure through a life
cycle thought. The mass of the structure is seen as an indicator for the overall
sustainability of the structure. Optimising the structure material-wise results
in designs where less material is needed in the structure to sustain the applied
load. The overall mass of the structure is thus reduced, hereby reducing the raw
material and possibly several other environmental impacts as well.
The structure of the analysis and the developed program can be seen in Fig-
ure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The structure of the developed program in Grasshopper/Karamba
In the ﬁrst step a simple 2D model of the frame structure is created within
the Grasshopper environment. Later the 2D model is extendend and also a 3D
model is conducted. The second step is the analysis, here the diﬀerent frames
are tested in order to ﬁnd the optimal shape and cross sections. The material,
cross sections and the load on the design is easily changed in this step, allowing
real time outputs showing either optimisation or enlargement of the frame. In
step three the results are visualised in the Rhino output and an overview of the
requirements is gained. The output either shows that the structural capacity is
fulﬁlled or it gives a warning. The key ﬁgures are exported to Microsoft Excel
and used for further comparison.
The analysis will consist of several steps in order to achieve a better environ-
mental performance of the structural design. The ﬁrst step explores diﬀerent
==PAGE:29==
4.2 The Static System
22
simple structures usable for the building by only looking at a single frame. The
initial optimisations consist of exploring heights, cross sections and materials.
Further optimisation consists of changing angles and the number of frames to
carry the building. After each step a conclusion is formed and the best solution
is brought forward to the next optimisation step. The many diﬀerent optimi-
sation steps are made possible by the parametric design allowing quick changes
to the design while immediately getting feedback for the mass of the structure
and the carrying capacity and deﬂection levels.
The optimisation steps are conducted for both a wooden and a steel structure.
The architectural design renderings propose a wooden structure, the steel struc-
ture is thus investigated for comparability reasons. Steel is a strong material
and might be better for the rather large spans for the frames and is often used in
truss structures. Additionally steel’s recycling rate is high, allowing an overall
low carbon footprint throughout its lifetime in a structure. Steel is seen as a
good material to compare to wood, which is also known as a sustainable con-
struction material. The discussion of the sustainability of the two materials will
be conducted in chapter 5.
4.2
The Static System
The structural layout with the primary components can be seen in 3D in Fig-
ure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Structural System visualised in 3D
==PAGE:30==
4.2 The Static System
23
The modeling in Rhino is conducted in 2D on a single frame and later in a
frame system as a parametric 3D model as this early design stage has too many
uncertainties and parameters. Furthermore the 2D model is suﬃcient for the
preliminary calculations and investigations as it allows a quick feedback to the
architects. The system modelled in Rhino can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Static System 2D
The model is parametric as it is used for optimisation purposes. Thus the scheme
is shown without measurements. The frames carry the roof and wall structure
of the building. The optimisation has been conducted on 2D frames, the beams
spanning between the frames are therefore not taken into consideration, but are
assumed to transfer horizontal loads throughout the structure thus stabilising it.
Another solution could consist of stabilising walls acting as shells transferring
the loads.
The static system of a simple frame can be seen in Figure 4.4. The upper point is
a hinged connection while the bottom of the columns rest on pinned supports.
The corners are ﬁxed due to equilibrium. Vertical loads are dsitributed and
applied as lineload onto the frames, which transfer the load via the rafters to
the columns and into the supports. Horizontal loads are distributed and applied
as lineloads on the frames as they are transferred from the wall or roof plates to
the rafters or columns and into the supports. Thus the roof and the walls are
distributing the forces to the frames and to the foundation. Hereby, the frames
are not allowed to buckle in the direction of the plane.
Figure 4.4: Simple Frame
Figure 4.5: Advanced Frame
The more advanced frame, which is closer to the design of the architects, can be
seen in Figure 4.5. The advanced frame has hinged connections in the corner,
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Loading of the Structure
24
at the top and where the tilted column meets the roof rafter. The columns are
resting on pinned supports as these supports are less demanding of the founda-
tion as ﬁxed supports. The lower connection of the corner is ﬁxed, creating a
truss-like structure. This connection distributes the load from the wind force
into the rafter and tilted column. Furthermore the intersecting connection of
the two internal beams is ﬁxed due to limitations of the modeling program.
The horizontal wind on the gables is transferred to the columns of the frames
from the facade and into the supports. Calculations in this direction will not be
carried out as it would require a 2D model with walls or wind crosses distributing
the load to the foundation. The given drawings of the structure does not show
which wall elements are stabilising and thus it is assumed to be of concern at a
later stage of the modeling process.
4.3
Loading of the Structure
The load applied is based on the formulas from the Eurocode 1, 0-4 for structural
design, loads, snow loads and wind loads. The Eurocode 1, 0-4 holds special
references and formulas for the diﬀerent European countries, and the formulas
speciﬁc to Sweden and the location of the art gallery has been used. The entire
calculation of the loads can be seen in Appendix D.
The calculation of the wind loads is kept simple in order to meet the needs
of an early design stage where quick indications based on rough estimates are
suﬃcient due to the continuous design changes throughout the process. The
load calculation depending on the dimension of the building is implemented in
the model in Grasshopper in order to change parametrically with the structure.
4.3.1
Vertical Loads
Basic load deﬁnitions for all vertical load actions such as self weight and im-
posed loads are found and listed in accordance to DS/EN 1991-1-3 for General
actions - Snow loads[CEN, 2007b]. The vertical loads acting on this structure
are the natural loads such as snow and wind and the self-weight of the structure.
Imposed loads are not taken into consideration as the roof is only to be accessed
for maintenance purposes.
The category of selfweight was divided into two subcategories: Selfweight, struc-
ture and selfweight, others. Selfweight, structure is including the permanent load
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Loading of the Structure
25
actions from the structural members like beams and columns and is automati-
cally applied through the FEM-program Karamba. Selfweight, others includes
elements that are more easily removed and changed during the time of use, in
this case the diﬀerent roof components. The calculation of the snow loads can
be seen in Appendix D, page 2.
The snow load was calculated accordingly to the snow load shapes for multi-
span roofs1. The altitude above sea level was found through Google Earth2 to be
approximately 50 m. The Table C.1. Altitude - Snow Load Relationships[CEN,
2007b] was used for the climatic region of Sweden/Finland in order to deter-
mine the characteristic value for the snow load. The deﬁnition can be seen in
Figure 4.6. The calculation was initially conducted in Microsoft Excel, but was
later implemented into the parametric design program Grasshopper. The snow
loads change according to the roof angle and was thus automatically taken into
consideration when parameterised.
Figure 4.6: Snow load shape coeﬃcients for multi-span roofs. Figure 5.4 DS/EN 1991-
1-3 p. 24 [CEN, 2007b]
1DSEN 1990 2007, formula 6.10b [CEN, 2007b]
2https://www.google.com/earth/
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Loading of the Structure
26
4.3.2
Horizontal Loads
The horizontal loads acting on the building is due to wind and is listed in
accordance to the DS/EN 1991-1-4[CEN, 2007c] for wind actions.
The peak pressure was found from a simpliﬁed distribution. The building was
split into two sections, one for the column and one for the roof beam, and
the maximum pressure from each section was used for the FEM modeling in
Karamba.
The Eurocode and modelled distributions for the 10 meter high
building are shown in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Distribution of the wind according to the Eurocode vs. the wind forces
modelled in Karamba onto the structure
Suction is not taken into consideration due to the complexity of the building.
The early design stage requires quick estimates, where a full calculation and
understanding of the suction of the building would be too time consuming.
A calculation of the wind loads can be seen Appendix D, page 3.
4.3.3
Load Combinations
In this part, the total load from snow and selfweight working on the roof is
calculated from summarizing the self-weight of the construction and the instal-
lations as well as the natural loads such as snow. The calculations of the total
load consider whether the loads are acting in favour or are unfavourable for the
stability of the construction. Thus the calculations are performed in relation to
the limit state.
==PAGE:34==
4.3 Loading of the Structure
27
The diﬀerent load combinations have been calculated according to the DS/EN
1991-1-0[CEN, 2007a] by the formula:
γG,iGk + γQ,1ψ0,1 +
X
γQ,iψ0,iQk,i
(4.1)
The γ factors used can be seen in Table 4.1:
γGj,sup
1.1
γGj,inf
0.9
γQ,1
1.5
γQ,i
1.5
Table 4.1: γ factors
The values for ψi used can be seen in Table 4.2, following the DS/EN 1991-1-3
Table 4.1 [CEN, 2007b] with recommended values of coeﬃcients for the Nordic
countries, including Sweden:
ψ0
ψ1
ψ2
Wind load, WL
0.3
0.2
0
Snow load, SL
0.7
0.5
0.2
Table 4.2: ψ factors
Four diﬀerent load combinations were developed with varying dominant (D) and
accompanying (A) snow and wind loads. The diﬀerent load combinations can
be seen in Table 4.3:
No.
Combination
Dead load (DL)
Wind load (WL)
Snow load (SL)
-
γ
γ
ψ0
γ · ψ
γ
ψ0
γ · ψ
ULS
DL
1,1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
DL+SL
1,1
0
0
0
1,5
1
1,5
2
DL+SL(D)+WL(A)
1,1
1,5
0,3
0,45
1,5
1
1,5
3
DL+WL(D)
1,1
1,5
1
1,5
0
0
0
SLS
DL + WL + SL
1
1
0
0
0
Table 4.3: Load combinations
A number of load combinations have been developed with varying wind load di-
==PAGE:35==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
28
rection and diﬀerent dominant (D) and accompanying (A) imposed loads. The
combinations chosen for modeling have been marked with bold. The load com-
binations with dominating snow load and dominating wind load were assumed
to be the most critical. The serviceability limit state was checked when the
deﬂection proved determinative of the structures cross sections, stating that
the ultimate limit state was too conservative. The values of the diﬀerent load
combinations can be found in Appendix D, page 4.
4.4
Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
Both the simple and advanced frame structure as previously seen in Figure 4.2
and Figure 4.4, were modelled in Grasshopper and integrated in Rhino’s 3D/2D
modeling view. The structure was then analysed with the use of the Karamba
tools in order to gain knowledge about the characteristics of the structure.
The optimisation was based on the frame with the longest span of 12 meter,
as the architectural drawings depend on this large span for the main hall. The
structure is modelled as a 2D frame structure for optimisation and later as a
3D structure.
The structural thought of the model can be seen in Figure 4.8 and a screenshot
from the Grasshopper model using Karamba can be seen in Figure 4.9.
Figure 4.8: Theory of Karamba Model
Figure 4.8 shows the many diﬀerent input and parameters of the program. The
structure consists of a certain geometry. By deﬁning a topology the geome-
==PAGE:36==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
29
try is made parametric and the materials are changeable as well as are the
releases, cross sections and support conditions. The loads can to some extent
be calculated within the Grasshopper environment and applied, diﬀerent load
combinations can be investigated. The analysis is made by the Karamba soft-
ware. Checking the structure’s carrying capacity and maximum deﬂection is
made through incorporating diﬀerent checks from the litterature into the pro-
gram via Grasshopper. After conducting the analysis and the checks an output
is given for further investigation.
By using the plugin Karamba3D it is possible to exploit the many diﬀerent op-
tions of the Karamba environment. Numbers for deﬂection, mass of the structure
as well as normal, shear and moment forces are quickly extracted. Analysing
the extracted outputs must be done by applying checks. The checks are pro-
grammed in Grasshopper and connected to the Karamba outputs. In this way,
an output is made in Rhino, showing whether or not a solution is within the
carrying capacity of the material or comply with the maximum deﬂection.
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.9: Visual description of the diﬀerent sections of the program and their contributions
==PAGE:38==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
31
4.4.1
Design Checks
4.4.1.1
Deﬂection Check
The capacity is checked for both the steel and wood structure according to the
deﬂection horizontally and vertically.
For the vertical displacement the experience based estimate of limit from the
National Annex DS/EN 1993-1-1 DK NA:2010 [Erhvervs&Byggestyrelsen, 2011]
was used3. The Eurocode states a maximum deﬂection as seen in Equation 4.2
for roofs and exterior walls.
As the spans and heights change throughout the optimisation steps the checks
were incooperated in Grasshopper and changed along with the modiﬁcations.
u(max,y) =
l
200
(4.2)
For the horizontal displacement the experience based estimate of limit from the
National Annex to the Eurocode were used4. The Eurocode states a maximum
deﬂection which can be seen in Equation 4.3 for columns in one storey buildings.
The maximum allowed deﬂection is thus depending on the height of the building.
u(max,x) = H
300
(4.3)
The two checks for vertical and horizontal displacement accordingly is applied
to both steel and wood structures.
4.4.1.2
Capacity Check for Steel
In order to ensure the carrying capacity of the steel frames a check of the
stresses were made, assuring the yield stress was not exceeded. The stresses
were calculated according to Naviers formula, seen in Equation 4.4, in order to
ensure the carrying capacity of the steel.
fy = N
A + M · z
I
(4.4)
3DS EN 1993 1 1 DK NA 2010, p. 5, 7.2.1(1)B Lodret udbøjning
4DS EN 1993 1 1 DK NA 2010, p. 6, 7.2.2(1)B Vandret udbøjning
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
32
4.4.1.3
Capacity Check for Wood
The wooden frames were checked in accordance with the formulas seen below
for carrying capacity, the bending capacity in Equation 4.5 and shear capacity
in Equation 4.6 as well as the check earlier described for deﬂection.
σt,0,d
ft,0,d
+ σm,0,d
fm,d
≤1
(4.5)
τv,d,max
fv,d
≤1
(4.6)
This check is considered suﬃcient due to the orthotrophy of the material as the
modelling conducted in 2D is not allowing a check in the other direction.
Both the checks for wood and steel were implemented in the program and de-
signed to give an output of "Carrying Capacity NOT ok" or "Carrying Capacity
OK" in the 3D output in Rhino.
4.4.2
Optimisation
In this section an optimisation consisting of six steps is conducted for both the
wooden and steel frames.
1. Step: Three basis design, heights and cross sections are investigated
2. Step: The optimisation possibility of diﬀerent cross sections
3. Step: Linking the frames allow further optimisation
4. Step: Optimisation of structural design through changing the angles
5. Step: The distance between the frame rows are optimised
6. Step: Comparison to initial design and suggestion of modiﬁcations
The ﬁrst step investigates three basis design solutions for a single frame. Heights
and cross sections, as well as material is tested for two of the basis solutions. The
second step explores the optimisation possibilities by changing the cross sections
of a single frame. The third optimisation step links the ﬁve frames in each row
==PAGE:40==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
33
together in order to minimize the impact caused from the wind pressure. The
fourth optimisation immerses into the question of the angles between the beam
and column elements. From optimisation step one to four the distance between
the rows of frames are set to be 4 meters, thus the load is distributed over this
area between the frames. The ﬁfth step examines the optimisation potential in
the distance between the row of frames. The sixth and last step takes the initial
design into consideration and suggests further modiﬁcations.
4.4.3
Optimisation Step 1. - Basis Frame Design
The initial optimisation checked which of the frames seen in Figure 4.10 was
most material eﬃcient solution.
The check was made with several diﬀerent
cross sections and heights analysing three diﬀerent designs. In this section the
frame with the largest span length of 12 meters as seen in Figure 3.4 is analysed.
Figure 4.10: The three diﬀerent frames
The ﬁrst design seen in Figure 4.10 is simple and will be used as a reference
point throughout the report. The second design is close to the desired design
by the architects, while the last design to the right is a possible solution, with
a tension cable.
The third solution was discarded as it was not as material
eﬃcient as the second design and its dissimilar look to the architects’ idea. In
Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12 the diﬀerent frames investigated in several diﬀerent
heights can be seen.
The ﬁrst two designs were checked with diﬀerent materials and cross section
combinations for both steel and wood as can be seen in Table 4.4.
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
34
Cross section
Steel
Heights
INP
S255
4 m
6.5 m
8 m
10 m
HE-B
S255
4 m
6.5 m
8 m
10 m
BOX
S255
4 m
6.5 m
8 m
10 m
Material
Wood
Heights
Construction wood
C30
4
6.5 m
8 m
10 m
Glue laminated timber
GL36
4
6.5 m
8 m
10 m
Table 4.4: Cross section, steel and height combinations
The diﬀerent heights of the two basic structures can be seen in Figure 4.11 for
the simple frame and Figure 4.12 for the advanced frame.
Figure 4.11: The four diﬀerent heights of the simple frame modelled
Figure 4.12: The four diﬀerent heights of the advanced frame modelled
4.4.3.1
Steel Frame Optimisation
The simple steel structure loaded with the second load combination (consisting
of dominating snow load and accompanying wind load, DL+SL(D)+WL(A))
showed optimal conditions for the frame height of 10 meters. Although under
the third load combination (consisting of dominating wind load, DL+WL(D))
the horizontal deﬂections became too large, thus a roof height of 6.5 meters
proved to be the best solution, see Table 4.5. The simple solution with a weight
of the entire structure of 116530 kg will be the point of comparison throughout
this optimisation process.
==PAGE:42==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
35
The advanced steel frame proved to have an optimal height at 8 meters with
the second load combination (DL+SL(D)+WL(A)). When the third load com-
bination (DL+WL(D)) was applied the deﬂections turned out too large and a
more material eﬃcient solution could be obtained with the height of 6.5 meters.
The advanced frame showed clear advantages as seen in Table 4.5
The box proﬁles performed suﬃciently when working under the pressure from
the snow load, whereas when the wind load was applied they were not suﬃcient.
The roof height of 6.5 meter was optimal both due to the better wind resistance
and the lesser use of material, as the roof beams were shorter than the ones
for the 8 meter tall frame.
Furthermore, a lower roof height prevents large
snowbanks to build up between the roofs.
Thus, it is seen that the advanced frame is more eﬃcient materialwise when
carrying the same load and is saving 43.7% material compared to the simple
solution. The most material eﬃcient solution for both the simple and the ad-
vanced frame, with cross section characteristics, can be seen in ?? and ??. An
overview of the results can be seen in Table 4.5 and Appendix E.
Figure 4.13: Optimised single frame
Figure 4.14: Optimised advanced frame
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Single Frame
2915
116,530
0
Advanced Frame
1640
65,650
43.7
Total Saving
1270
50,875
43.7
Table 4.5: Steel Frame Results - Step. 1 Basis Frame Design
4.4.3.2
Wood Frame Optimisation
The best solution for the simple wooden frame when subjected to the second
load combination (dominating snow) proved to be the frame with the height of
6.5 meters. When applying the second load combination (dominating wind) the
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
36
frame height of 4 meters turned out to be the most material eﬃcient. Due to
the wooden material being orthotropic the material properties diﬀer along the
three axes of: axial direction (along the grain), the radial direction, and the
circumferential direction.
The FEM-program Karamba is not developed to take these diﬀerent properties
of each axis into consideration, and the program is therefore not 100% correct
when working with several diﬀerent load directions of the wood. The properties
for wood have thus only been deﬁned in one direction and it is assumed to be
suﬃcient for this optimisation task in the early design phase. For more accurate
calculations on wooden structures more advanced FEM-programs must be used,
such as Robot or FEM-Design. The disadvantage of these programs is that they
cannot be implemented in the Rhino/Grashopper environment, thus loosing the
ability to conduct real-time calculations of the changes applied.
The construction wood C30 was discarded as it did not perform as well as the
glue laminated timber at the large spans. Even though large cross sections were
used, the construction wood did not meet the required load carrying capac-
ity. The simple solution with glue laminated timber can be seen in Table 4.6.
With this solution the entire building weighs 64,510 kg, which will be used as a
reference point throughout the optimisation.
Figure 4.15: Optimised single frame
Figure 4.16: Optimised advanced frame
The best solution for the advanced wooden frame turned out to be at a frame
height of 6.5 meter. The advanced solution was the most material eﬃcient with
a ﬂat roof under the third load combination (dominating wind) and best at the
height of 6.5 meter, under the second load combination (dominating snow), as
the ﬂat roof had to have very large beams in order to meet the requirements
for deﬂection, therefore giving a large material consumption. The best solution
thus is having a frame height of 6.5 meter, giving the mass of 49,260 kg for the
entire building. The advanced solution is thus saving 23.6% compared to the
simple solution.
Thus it is seen that the advanced wooden frame is more eﬃcient material-wise
when carrying the same load. The best solution for both the simple and the
==PAGE:44==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
37
advanced frame with cross section characteristics can be seen in Figure 4.15 and
Figure 4.16. An overview of the results can be seen in Table 4.6 and Appendix
F.
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Single Frame
1610
64,510
0
Advanced Frame
1230
49,260
23.6
Total Saving
380
15,255
23.6
Table 4.6: Wood Frame Results - Step. 1 Basis Frame Design
4.4.3.3
Conclusion Step 1.
For both the steel and the wooden frame the advanced solution strongly indi-
cated its optimisation possibilities. The advanced frame is logically using less
material to sustain the same loads as the simple frame as it is beneﬁtting from
the four internal beams stabilising and distributing the load to the ground.
The optimal height revealed to be 6.5 meter for both the wooden and the steel
structure as this height requires less material for the beams and is able to with-
stand the wind pressure with smaller cross sections. A frame height of 8 meter
is arguably bringing more light and openness into the room. Due to the material
saving aspect of the frame structure as well as its repercussions, a frame height
of 6.5 meter was chosen. Reducing the frame height decreases the roof surface
and thus roof material is also saved. In total 26770 kg or 10% of diﬀerent roof
material is saved by having a lower roof height. The roof structure5 and cal-
culations can be seen in the Appendix G, which consists e.g. of plasterboard,
timber and glasswool.
For both the steel and wooden frame solution, the columns connecting the frames
might be counted twice, as the frames can possibly support each other, but at
the moment are added together as single standing frames, making the result
on the safe side. In Figure 3.4 it seems that two frames are supported by one
column, which will be taken into consideration in subsection 4.4.5. Furthermore,
the building is becoming 4.5 meters too wide, spanning 60 meters, as the frame
modelled is 12 meters wide. The architectural drawings in Figure 3.4 show that
the frames have diﬀerent spans, creating a total width of the building of 55.5
meter. This defect in the calculations will be accounted for in subsection 4.4.8.
5The roof structure has been approved by OOPEAA as a possible solution
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
38
4.4.4
Optimisation Step 2. - Varying Cross Sections
This optimisation step investigates the advanced frame with diﬀerent cross sec-
tions for the diﬀerent beam elements as can be seen in Figure 4.17 and Fig-
ure 4.18 for both steel and wood. In the ﬁrst solution the internal beams are
smaller than the outer beams, whereas in the second solution the corner beams
are the same size as the outer beams.
Figure 4.17: Solution 1
Figure 4.18: Solution 2
4.4.4.1
Steel Frame Optimisation
Two other types of steel are tested as stronger steel can carry heavier loads before
permanently deforming. Generally the stronger steel will reduce the amount of
material used, but at the same time it is more costly.
In order to ﬁnd a balanced steel material which is able to carry heavy loads but
is not too costly, the S355 was chosen due to its availability and common use.
The most material eﬃcient solution proved to consist of the INP220 proﬁle for
the outer beams and INP200 for the inner beams at the second solution given
in Figure 4.18. Thus this steel frame has saved 47.3% compared to the initial
simple solution.
The most material eﬃcient result can be seen in Figure 4.19 and Table 4.7 where
it is compared to the last step. The calculations can be seen in Appendix H.
==PAGE:46==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
39
Figure 4.19: The optimised steel frame with speciﬁcations
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
1640
65,650
43.7
Advanced (2)
1535
61,350
47.3
Saved since last step
110
4300
6.5
Total Saving
1380
55,175
47.3
Table 4.7: Steel Frame Results - Step. 2 Varying Cross Sections
4.4.4.2
Wooden Frame Optimisation
For the wooden frame the two diﬀerent solutions seen in Figure 4.17 and Fig-
ure 4.18 showed no signiﬁcant changes. The ﬁrst solution showed a little less
material consumption and was thus chosen due to easing the construction and
the connection of the beams.
The best solution material-wise showed to consist of GL36 90x600 proﬁles for
the outer beams and GL36 90x400 for the internal beams.
This solution is
saving 26.2% compared to the initial simple design.
The most material eﬃcient solution consisting of two diﬀerent cross sections for
the beams can be seen in Figure 4.20. An overview of the results can be seen in
Table 4.8. The calculations can be seen in Appendix I.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
40
Figure 4.20: The optimised wooden frame with speciﬁcations
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
1230
49,260
23.6
Advanced (1)
1190
47,620
26.2
Saved since last step
40
1130
3.3
Total Saving
420
16,890
26.2
Table 4.8: Wood Frame Results - Step. 2 Varying Cross Sections
4.4.4.3
Conclusion Step 2.
By introducing an element speciﬁc approached design focusing on the cross sec-
tion forces a reduction of the material has been possible without compromising
the strength of the frame. It is possible that even further optimisation of the
frame is possible. The two investigated designs seen in Figure 4.17 and Fig-
ure 4.18, both showed good carrying capacities. The ﬁrst solution was the best
for the wooden structure whereas the second solution was better for the steel
structure. The ﬁrst solution is possibly easier to construct in wood whereas for
the steel structure, it should be easy to construct both solutions.
4.4.5
Optimisation Step 3. - Linking
In order to make a more realistic analysis of the eﬀect of the wind load on
the building, the entire row of frames was modelled as they help stabilising the
loaded frame.
The wind load applied to the structure consists of two diﬀerent loads, as ex-
plained in Section 4.3.2. The wind load is applied as seen in Table 4.3 with
dead load but without snow load as the snow load would act in favour of the
==PAGE:48==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
41
construction, minimising the deﬂections performed by the wind.
A scheme of the deﬂection due to wind and dead load can be seen in Figure 4.21.
It is seen that the deﬂections are the largest on the left frame, where the wind is
applied and declines towards the middle frame which only experiences insignif-
icant deﬂections.
Figure 4.21: Wind load on the structure.
4.4.5.1
Steel Frame Optimisation
It is seen that by analysing holistically instead of only on a single frame the
deformations are heavily reduced and smaller beam dimensions are able to take
up the loads. The most material eﬃcient solution for the steel frames proved
to consist of the two cross sections INP200 and INP140 and can be seen in
Figure 4.22.
Modeling the row of steel frames resulted in a lower material
consumption, as the frames relied on the same column in between them. As
this one column was able to take up the load from both frames, the previous
calculations are on the safe side. The total weight of the building was then
approximately 40,770 kg thus the structure has been optimised by 65% since
the initial simple solution. An overview of the results can be seen in Table 4.9.
The calculations can be seen in Appendix J.
Figure 4.22: The optimised steel frame with speciﬁcations
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
42
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
1535
61,355
47.3
Optimised Frames
1020
40,770
65
Saved since last step
515
20,585
33.6
Total Saving
1895
75,760
65
Table 4.9: Steel Frame Results - Step. 3 Linking
4.4.5.2
Wooden Frame Optimisation
The best solution for the wooden frames proved to consist of the two cross section
proﬁles 90x600 and 90x200 and can be seen in Figure 4.23. The total weight
of the building was then approximately 33270 kg wood thus an optimisation of
51.6% has been made since the initial simple design. An overview of the result
can be seen in Table 4.10. The calculations can be seen in Appendix K.
Figure 4.23: The optimised wooden frame with speciﬁcations
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
1190
47,620
26.2
Optimised Frames
830
33,270
51.6
Saved since last step
360
14,350
30.1
Total Saving
780
31,240
51.6
Table 4.10: Wood Frame Results - Step. 3 Linking
==PAGE:50==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
43
4.4.5.3
Conclusion Step 3.
For both the wooden and steel structures the results show that by analysing a
sequence of a structure instead of only a single frame, further optimisations can
be achieved. The wind loads are distributed through one frame to another and
the sequence of frames is more stable. It is possible to optimise every single of
the ﬁve connected frames further which will be discussed in step 6.
4.4.6
Optimisation Step 4. - Angles
In this optimisation step the angles of the internal beams are changed in order
to ﬁnd the optimal shape of the frame. The angles referred to can be seen in
Figure 4.24.
Figure 4.24: The optimisation of the angles
The angles are parameterised in the model by deﬁning the intersecting point
between the internal beam and the roof rafter or the column.
The internal
beams are thus deﬁned to intersect the roof rafter or column at a 1/4 of their
length accordingly. This parameter can then be changed in order for the internal
beams to intersect at e.g. half the length of the beam or column.
By changing the angles of the internal beams both material can be saved and
higher carrying capacity can be obtained. Throughout the optimisation steps
1-3, the angles of the internal beams have been as seen in Figure 4.24.
The diﬀerent optimisation steps towards ﬁnding the most material eﬃcient so-
lution when changing the angles can be seen in Appendix L and M.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
44
4.4.6.1
Steel Frame Optimisation
Two scenarios proved to be interesting for the steel frames. When expanding the
corner, by increasing the space from the intersecting beam to the two corners,
the frames were able to take up the large forces, thus allowing reduced cross
sections.
This solution could add interesting perspectives through the main
hall, but is not as close to the architectural design as the previous and the next
design. The solution can be seen in Figure 4.25.
This solution weighs 1070 kg per frame and is thus saving 73,705 kg in total for
the entire building compared to the initial simple solution.
Figure 4.25: Optimised solution with large corners
By slightly widening the angles, from 7.6◦to 9◦for the upper angle and from
17.7◦to 20.3◦for the lower angle, an optimal solution material-wise was found.
This solution consisting of INP200 and INP120 cross sections agrees well with
the vision of the architechts as well. The solution can be seen in Figure 4.26.
This solution has thus optimised the initial solution by 71.4%. An overview of
the result can be seen in Table 4.11.
Figure 4.26: Final optimised steel solution with speciﬁcations in Step 4.
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
1020
40,770
65
Optimised Frames
970
38,870
66.6
Saved since last step
50
1900
4.7
Total Saving
1940
77,660
66.6
Table 4.11: Steel Frame Results - Step. 4 Angles
==PAGE:52==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
45
4.4.6.2
Wooden Frame Optimisation
The optimal solution material-wise for the wooden frame proved to consist of
the cross sections 115x400 and 90x200 giving an entire weight of the building
of 30130 kg equivalent to an optimisation of 53.3%. An overview of the results
can be seen in Table 4.12.
The design can be seen in Figure 4.27 with the cross section characteristics and
the angles. Thus it is seen that the angles are slightly widened, from 7.6◦to 9◦
for the upper angle and from 17.7◦to 20.3◦for the lower angle.
Figure 4.27: Final optimised wooden solution with speciﬁcations in Step 4.
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
830
33,270
51.6
Optimised Frames
755
30,130
53.3
Saved since last step
80
3140
9.4
Total Saving
860
34,380
53.3
Table 4.12: Wood Frame Results - Step. 4 Angles
4.4.6.3
Conclusion Step 4.
By widening the angles slightly, from 7.6◦to 9◦for the upper angle and from
17.7◦to 20.3◦for the lower angle an optimisation was possible for both the
wood and steel structure. The widened angles made the internal beams able to
transfer more load to the supports, thus decreasing the deﬂections with a use
of smaller cross sections. This design change provided the least optimisation
since the last step of only 4.7% for the steel structure and 9.4% for the wooden
structure.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
46
4.4.7
Optimisation Step 5. - Frame Distance
Optimising the distance between the frames changes the area from which the
frames must carry load and lead to smaller or larger frames, see Figure 3.5. The
number of frames according to the distance between the rows of frames can be
seen in Table 4.13. Note that the length of the building deviates from the initial
30 meters, to gain even numbers. Thus are the solutions with four and eight
meters distance more conservative than the other solutions.
Figure 4.28: 3D structure visualising the distance between the frames
Rows of frames
Dist. between frames
Number of frames
10
3 m
50
8
4 m
40
6
5 m
30
5
6 m
25
4
8 m
20
3
10 m
15
Table 4.13: Distance between the frames according to the building layout
==PAGE:54==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
47
4.4.7.1
Steel Structure Optimisation
From Table 4.14 it is seen that having less frames carrying the load is reducing
the overall material consumption.
Rows of Frames
Distance between Frames
Weight of Structure
[No.]
[m]
[kg]
30
1
86,641
15
2
60,260
10
3
47,963
8
4
42,825
6
5
34,900
5
6
33,217
4
8
31,397
3
10
27,016
Table 4.14: Material used in entire steel structure according to the number of frames
It can be seen from Table 4.14, that the material consumption needed for the
construction is decreasing with the use of fewer and larger frames.
The solution chosen to continue to optimise on is the solution with six meters of
distance between the rows of frames as this is considered a suitable compromise.
Having a frame distance of six meters in the depth between the frames allow for
a reduction in the total amount of materials whilst not disregarding the initial
idea of the architect. Judging by the initial interior renders from the architects
(Figure 3.3) the frames are a part of the interior design and must thus create
a visual eﬀect, at the same time this project seeks to optimise the material use
and must consider longer spans between the frames as a better solution. Thus
is the visual eﬀect compromised in favour of saving material. The most material
eﬃcient steel structure solution can be seen in Figure 4.29.
Figure 4.29: Best steel solution with speciﬁcations for step 5.
The most material eﬃcient solution is thus consisting of the enlarged cross
section proﬁles INP240 and INP100, as the frames are taking up larger loads.
Due to fewer frames in total, the weight of the entire structure is decreased, and
an overview of the result can be seen in Table 4.15 and in Appendix N.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
48
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
970
38,870
66.6
Optimised Frames
1330
33,220
71.5
Saved since last step
-360
5650
14.5
Total Saving
1585
83,310
71.5
Table 4.15: Steel Frame Results - Step. 5 Frame Distance - The overall number of
frames is reduced, increasing the weight of the single frames
4.4.7.2
Wood Structure Optimisation
From Table 4.16 it is seen that having less frames carrying the load, the overall
material use is decreasing for the structure.
Rows of Frames
Distance between Frames
Weight of Structure
[No.]
[m]
[kg]
30
1
74,122
15
2
47,474
10
3
44,075
8
4
30,130
6
5
25,158
5
6
24,973
4
8
22,889
3
10
20,851
Table 4.16: Material used in entire wooden structure according to the number of
frames
As for the steel structure the wooden structure shows a consistent reduction of
material as fewer but larger frames are used. The solution, see Figure 4.30, with
a six meter distance between the frames is considered a suitable compromise.
Figure 4.30: Best wooden solution with speciﬁcations for step 5.
The structure is thus able to take up the load with the cross sections 115x600
for the outer beams and 90x200 for the internal beams, saving in total 61.8%
compared to the initial simple desgin, as can be seen in the overview of the
results in Table 4.17 and in Appendix O.
==PAGE:56==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
49
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Last step
755
30130
53.3
Optimised Frames
999
24975
61.3
Saved since last step
-246
5160
17.1
Total Saving
615
39540
61.3
Table 4.17: Wood Frame Results - Step. 5 Distance - The overall number of frames is
reduced, increasing the weight of the single frames
4.4.7.3
Conclusion Step 5.
Increasing the distance between the rows of frames proved to be more material
eﬃcient, as few but larger cross sectioned frames resulted in optimisations for
the total structure for both wood and steel. The initial drawings (Figure 4.30)
of the main hall of the art gallery reveals a short distance between the frames.
This optimisation step suggests longer distances between the frames in order
to save material for the entire structure. Compromising with the initial design
idea will always be a question of concern between the architect and the engi-
neer. Using a parametric program allows for veriﬁcation and discussion through
instant analysis.
Having short distances between the frames as the architects suggest might inter-
fere with the openings between the rooms and the openings towards the atriums.
Furthermore the number of rows of frames needs to be compatible with the grid
lines6 of the structure ensuring that the frames will not block door openings or
similar.
4.4.8
Optimisation Step 6. - Building Design
The last optimisation step is comparing the initial frame design conducted by
the architects. The initial design by the architects is shown in Figure 3.4, where
the frames have heights diﬀering from 6.7 meters to 7.9 meters and spans from
10.5 meters to 12 meters. A modiﬁcation of the initial design is proposed and
an optimal solution suggested. The results can be seen in Appendix P and Q
for steel and wood respectively.
6A grid system for the structure has not been a part of the material from the architects
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
50
4.4.8.1
Steel Structure Optimisation
The best initial design for the steel structure with changing roof heights can be
seen in Figure 4.31. The weight of the entire building would be approximately
50805 kg which is an optimisation of aproximately 65725 kg of the initial simple
solution. The initial design is not as material eﬃcient and is thus only resulting
in an optimisation of 56.4% compared to the simple initial design solution.
Figure 4.31: Initial design solution from the architects with speciﬁcations
The solution seen in Figure 4.31 is thus not as good as the previous optimisation
steps. The large frame to the far left is weak when exposed to wind and it was
thus modiﬁed in order to meet the needs of the architects with diﬀerent heights,
but also in order to reduce the amount of material.
In the modiﬁed solution, the outer left frame was brought to the same height
as the outer right frame (6.7 m) as can be seen in Figure 3.4, but it still had
a span of 12 meters. This solution revealed more material eﬃcient results and
can be seen in Figure 4.32.
Figure 4.32: Modiﬁed solution close to the design from the architects with speciﬁca-
tions
The comparison of the initial design by the architechts and the modiﬁed solution
can be seen in Table 4.18. By making a slight change to the roof height of the
outer frames, subjected to the wind load, 32% material is saved.
It can thus be concluded that a more robust structure with smaller heights at
the points of application (particularly for wind) is material saving as smaller
cross sections can be used to take up the load. A further improvement point
would be to minimise the cross sections of the three internal frames not directly
subjected to wind. The optimisation would likely depend on the snow loads.
==PAGE:58==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
51
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Initial Design
2030
50,805
56.4
Modiﬁed Design
1385
34,605
70.3
Saved since initial design
650
16,202
31.9
Table 4.18: Steel Frame - The Architects initial design and modiﬁed design
In order to check this solution against the common solution used in the last ﬁve
steps with ﬁve similar frames, the similar frames are adjusted in length in order
to span exactly 55.5 meters in total thus 11.1 meters each. The comparison
frames can be seen in Figure 4.33.
Figure 4.33: Comparative solution with speciﬁcations
The comparison of this optimised structure at 55.5 meters of width and the
modiﬁed design of the architects, (Figure 4.32) can be seen in Table 4.19. This
solution saves another 35.3% material due to the lower roof heights.
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Modiﬁed Initial Design
1385
34,605
70.3
Design Suggestion (11.1m)
1197
29,915
74.3
Saved
188
4690
13.6
Saved since initial design
1690
86,615
74.3
Table 4.19: Steel Frame Results - Step. 6 Final Optimisation
Thus it can be concluded that the smaller frames are material saving as less
material is used for the roof beams and the structure is more stable, better able
to sustain wind pressure and avoid the build up of large snowbanks. Compro-
mising the height of the structure is changing the expression of the building and
would be a point of discussion with the architects.
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
52
4.4.8.2
Wooden Structure Optimisation
The architects’ initial design of the structure with changing roof heights for
wood, can be seen in Figure 4.34. The weight of the entire building would be
approximately 39285 kg, equivalent to a 39% material saving since the initial
simple design.
Figure 4.34: Wood solution close to the architects’ design with speciﬁcations
The same problem occurs for the wooden structure as for the steel structure,
thus the outer frames are too weak when exposed to wind pressure. The outer
left frame is thus given the same height as the outer right frame of 6.7 meters.
This modiﬁed solution provides a better result material-wise. The result can be
seen in Figure 4.35 and Table 4.20.
Figure 4.35: Modiﬁed wood solution close to the architects’ design with speciﬁcations
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Initial Design
1570
39,290
39.1
Modiﬁed Design
1056
26,410
59.1
Saved since initial design
515
38,100
32.8
Table 4.20: Wooden Frame - The architects’ initial design and modiﬁed design
For the wooden structure it can also be concluded that the more robust structure
of the outer frames leads to less material consumption as smaller cross sections
are able to take up the loads.
In order to compare this modiﬁed solution, the last optimised frames must be
modiﬁed to only span 55.5 meters instead of 60 meters. Each frame spans 11.1
meter and the solution can be seen below.
==PAGE:60==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
53
Figure 4.36: Comparison to the wood solution with speciﬁcations
The solution with lower heights is compared to the modiﬁed initial design solu-
tion by the architects in Table 4.21 and can be seen Figure 4.36.
Type
1 Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Modiﬁed Initial Design
1055
26,410
59.1
Design Suggestion (11.1m)
805
20,070
68.9
Saved
195
4905
19.6
Saved since initial design
810
44,445
68.9
Table 4.21: Steel Frame Results - Step. 6 Final Optimisation
The proposed solutions for the wooden structure is not as slender as the ar-
chitectural idea. This is both due to the fact that only 5 rows of frames are
carrying the entire load of the roof structure giving a larger beam cross section.
The cross sections are thin but deep in order to take up the load, thus seen from
the front they seem larger. An alternate and more slender solution is proposed
below in Figure 4.37.
Figure 4.37: A more slender version of the frame structure with speciﬁcations
This solution weighs 28080 kg in total which is an increase of approximaterly
40% compared to the modiﬁed solution. See Appendix Q for further detail.
4.4.8.3
Conclusion Step 6
Even though the best solution material-wise would have been with only 2-3
rows of frames carrying the entire structure, both visual and practical means
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
54
need to be taken into account. For practical reasons the connections and wooden
beams might be hard to design for large structures and visually the architectural
vision needs to be maintained throughout the design optimisation. This would
be through discussing options with the architects throughout the process.
4.4.9
Steel Frame Results and Discussion
From the initial simple design to the ﬁnal optimised design, 74.3% of the material
has been saved.
Type
Single Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Step 0.
2913
116,528
0
Step 1.
1641
65,653
43.7
Step 2.
1534
61,353
47.3
Step 3.
1019
40,768
65.0
Step 4.
970
38,870
66.6
Step 5.
1330
33,220
71.5
Step 6.
1197
29,914
74.3
Table 4.22: Steel Frame Results - Step 1 - 6
The last solution showed the greatest optimisation due to several diﬀerent fac-
tors. It is able to obtain the large loads with smaller cross sections due to its
low height, minimizing the load actions on the roof, and due to the angles and
the design of the frames. The internal angled beams help support the outer
columns when exposed to the wind load and the roof rafters holding the roof
when exposed to snow load.
It is possible that a more optimised solution can be found by further research
as well as changes to the design.
It is also possible that the ﬁnal structure
when fully analysed will weigh more than this ﬁnal optimised solution. This is
a possibility when the connections need to be calculated. The connections in
especially the corners can prove critical if the cross sections are too small for
the number of bolts needed to secure the structure. If the cross sections are too
small for the number of bolts, the bolts will weaken the connection and thus
the entire structure. Requiring a massive connection making it more feasible to
choose a larger cross section. A further and thorough study of the connections
is thus needed and could possibly lead to enlarged cross sections.
The deﬂection proved to be the determinative factor as the stresses were often
well below the yield stress before an acceptable deﬂection was achieved. The
==PAGE:62==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
55
steel strength could thus be optimised and a steel strength of perhaps S275 could
be chosen for further optimisation in order to save money.
A simple calculation of the global warming potential (GWP) factor for steel
has been conducted by using of the database Ökobaudat7. The factor is based
on the production, disposal and recycling potentials and is given by 0.82 kg
CO2-eq.
The material saved has thus positively inﬂuenced the CO2 emissions from the
construction of the building saving 66850 kg CO2 due to the amount of material
saved (Appendix U).
The moment distribution of the ﬁnal optimised solution can be seen in Fig-
ure 4.38 and a visualisation of the deﬂections can be seen in Figure 4.39.
Figure 4.38: Steel frame Moment distribution - Snow load
Figure 4.39: Steel frame Deﬂection - Snow load
By Figure 4.38 and Figure 4.39 a potential for further optimisation can be seen.
The frame subjected to wind shows the largest deﬂections whereas the internal
frames show the largest deﬂections when subjected to snow load.
The frame structure was checked with the program FEM-Design in order to
check the calculations of Normal, Shear and Moment forces. These check can
be seen in Appendix R.
7http://www.oekobaudat.de/datenbank/browser-oekobaudat.html
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
56
4.4.10
Wooden Frame Result and Discussion
From the initial simple design to the ﬁnal optimised design 68.9% of the material
has been saved.
Type
Single Frame
Entire Structure
Saved
-
[kg]
[kg]
[%]
Step 0.
1613
64,512
0
Step 1.
1231
49,257
23.6
Step 2.
1191
47,621
26.2
Step 3.
832
33,271
51.6
Step 4.
753
30,130
53.3
Step 5.
999
24,973
61.3
Step 6.
803
20,069
68.9
Table 4.23: Wood Frame Results - Step 1 - 6
The last solution showed the greatest material eﬃciency due to its low height
and the design of the frames as explained in the previous section. It is possible
that a more optimised solution can be found by further research and changes to
the design. A further investigation of the connections must be carried out for
the wooden structure as well, as they can prove critical if the cross sections are
too small to form the desired connection. A possible connection might be a ﬂitch
connection, see Figure 4.40, with which it is possible to make the connection
invisible.
Figure 4.40: Flitch Connection
The connection needs to be analysed further in order to determine whether the
cross sections are of suﬃcient height to incorporate either of the above mentioned
solutions.
==PAGE:64==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
57
A simple calculation of the global warming potential (GWP) factor for steel has
been conducted by the use of the database Ökobaudat8. The factor is based on
the provision of the raw material, transportation, production, waste treatment
and recycling potentials and is given by -842,74 kg CO2-eq.
The material saved has thus positively inﬂuenced the CO2 emissions from the
construction of the building with -59505 kg CO2. This is due to the wood being
stored in the structure throughout 100 years, thus contributing negatively to
the atmosphere with CO2 (Appendix U).
The moment distribution of the ﬁnal optimised solution can be seen in Fig-
ure 4.41 and a visualisation of the deﬂections can be seen in Figure 4.42.
Figure 4.41: Wood frame Moment distribution - Snow load
Figure 4.42: Wood frame Deﬂection - Snow load
In Figure 4.38 and Figure 4.39 a potential for further optimisation can be seen.
The frame subjected to wind shows the largest deﬂections whereas the internal
frames show the largest deﬂections when subjected to snow load.
8http://www.oekobaudat.de/datenbank/browser-oekobaudat.html
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
58
4.4.11
Conclusion
It proved possible to create a model through Grasshopper allowing real-time op-
timisation on the mateiral eﬃciency of the structural design. Through a struc-
tural model designed parametrically in Grasshopper, it was possible to conduct
real-time analyses by the FEM-tool Karamba. The results were visualised in
Rhino as statements and more detailed resutls were exported to Microsoft Excel
in order to compare diﬀerent solutions. Through six optimisation steps it was
possible to reduce the material consumption for steel by 74.3% and for wood by
68.9%.
The modelled program is tailored for the speciﬁc case and could be used to
facilitate an additional integrated design process combining architectural and
engineering professionals to further reduce the environmental impact, with re-
spect of the design.
Further optimisation of the frames is possible as optimisation is an iterative and
ongoing process. A problem in the early design stage is the lack of knowledge
and quick changes implemented in the design, thus many assumptions of quick
and rough estimates and calculations must be carried out. As the design pro-
gresses the optimisation will progress as well. As the design stage progresses
the increased knowledge of the design and materials allow for 3D optimisation
whereas the early design stages can be satisﬁed with quick estimates based on
2D calculations.
Optimising in 2D must be done with a holistic mindset, thus optimising for
material eﬃciency of the structure and realising the side eﬀects from the op-
timisations. The optimisation could thus be depending on the window sizes,
stating a minimum distance between the frames. Trade oﬀs must also be con-
sidered, as it was seen with the roof height in the optimisation. By reducing the
roof height, the roof surface decreased as well, eventually decreasing the mate-
rial needed for the roof structure. In larger constructions as this one, substantial
optimisations can thus be reached as a consequence of another optimisation.
A risk in connection with optimisations is that the optimised parameter might
inﬂuence others negatively as well. Throughout the dsign phase the optimisa-
tion, the assumptions should lead to objective design decisions based on the
literature and trial and error calculations.
Conducting snow and wind simulation instead of using the Eurocode 1, 0-4,
further optimisations could be possible. Having more accurate loads would lead
to a more realistic investigation of the structure.
==PAGE:66==
4.4 Modelling and Optimisation in Karamba
59
As stated in the beginning of the report this is not a fully conducted structural
analysis thus further studies of the connections etc. need to be checked. For the
optimisation purpose and early design stage it would be too time consuming
to conduct a full structural calculation. Especially for the wooden structure
a FEM-program able to calculate with materials having diﬀerent properties in
diﬀerent directions would be needed.
The beams connecting the rows of frames in the depth of the building is not
taken into consideration, which means the overall weight of the structure will
increase. The atriums are not taken into consideration either, which will lead
to a reduction in material use. Both the connecting material of e.g. walls or
beams as well as the openings for the atriums would be conducted at a later
design stage in 3D and investigated through more advanced calculations.
Further optimisations are thus available by modeling the structure holistically,
optimising all building elements and adding in product and material selection.
As stated by Hansen and Knudstrup [Hansen and Knudstrup, 2005], the co-
operation between the architect and engineer is important in order to gain a
sustainable building.
One of the main issues identiﬁed is to ﬁnd a common
language as the architects often focuse on senses and subjectivity and the engi-
neer on measurable results and objectivity. The investigation performed in this
section would be suﬃcient for initial collaboration between the architects and
engineers in order to minimize the environmental impact of the building.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
On-the-ﬂy Life Cycle
Analysis
In this chapter the simple life cycle assessments carried out on-the-ﬂy1 will be
introduced and the results presented. The environmental impact from the two
structures consisting of either steel or wood will be measured.
1The activity is developed dynamically rather than being a result of something that is
statically predeﬁned
==PAGE:68==
5.1 Introduction
61
5.1
Introduction
In order to carry out on-the-ﬂy life cycle assessments during the optimisation
process, the online software Quantis Suite was used. This software was chosen
due to its availability and simple and easy user interface allowing non-experts
to develop life cycle assessments within a short time.
As previously described in section 2.2, the Global Warming Potential (GWP)
was used as an indicator for the overall sustainability of the structure in the
previous calculations. By using Quantis Suite it was possible to look at ﬁve
diﬀerent impact categories which will be described later on.
For the early design stage a broad knowledge base is needed in order to make
wise decisions. At this stage, indications on where to change the design in order
to optimise it is important as well as indications of the possible optimisation of
e.g. CO2.
Both the wooden and steel structure is analysed in order to discuss the advan-
tages and disadvantages of the two building materials and compare them to one
another. The estimated life cycle assessment carried out in this section is not
a full LCA as it is based on the load-bearing structure of the building, which
was analysed throughout this project. The environmental impacts are consid-
ered whereas the economical and social impacts are not included. The LCA is
used as an indicator for the potential environmental impacts of the structure.
It focuses on the up- and downstream burden of the materials throughout the
life cycle of the structure and its embodied environmental impacts.
The LCA carried out in Quantis Suite is thus not a full life cycle assessment but
a rough estimation giving indcations of the structures’ environmental impact.
The simpliﬁed results will help understand the impacts caused by using steel
and wood respectively.
5.2
Tools
In order to conduct the life cycle assessment, data of the building is needed.
The initial drawings were provided by OOPEAA. The modelled program in
Grasshopper/Karamba is needed for the input to the Quantis Suite 2.0, which
then conducts the LCA. The Grasshopper model allow parametric design devel-
opment and extraction of quantities matching the structural analysed frames,
whereas the online software Quantis Suite, allow quickly conducted life cycle
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Tools
62
assessments without extensive experience or knowledge.
The life cycle assessment is thus not real-time as no proper interface between
the two programs exists. The Grasshopper model indicates whether or not a
structure is suitable for further analysis as it seeks to decrease the material
mass of the structure. Diﬀerent material eﬃcient solutions can be compared
in Quantis Suite as well as comparing diﬀerent materials as wood and steel is
an option, the output from Grasshopper can be extracted and implemented in
Quantis Suite.
5.2.1
Grasshopper/Karamba & LCA
The Grasshopper model is used for extracting the needed quantities to perform
the life cycle assessment. Calculations of the material quantities, lengths of the
elements and e.g. lengths for welding, at the steel structure is incorporated in
the program and then extracted. The roof surface area, the welding length,
the maintenance surface of the beams as well as the mass of the structure is
all parameterised and can thus be extracted for diﬀerent LCA comparison and
made available during the entire process.
5.2.2
Quantis Suite 2.0
The LCA software Quantis Suite is a Life Cycle Assessment or Eco-Design tool
that is easy to use despite of lack of experience. It can be used for simple life
cycle assessments or estimations or for more detailed assessments. The tool is
easy to use due to its drag-and-drop modeling, which is providing a dynamic
analysis and the structural guidance through the steps of the program. The
database for the materials is indexed, but the data source is not clear.
The tool has the following default indicators;
1. Human Health [DALY]
2. Ecosystem quality [PDF.m2.y]
3. Climate change [kg CO2-eq]
4. Resources [MJ]
5. Water withdrawal [m3]
==PAGE:70==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
63
The human health impact is calculated with the unit disability-adjusted life year
(DALY), which is a measure of the health loss due to exposure to contaminants
through the environment. DALY facilitates the comparison between health ef-
fects due to diﬀerent types of risks as e.g. exposure to chemical agents [de Jongh,
2011].
The human health impact category implies the characterization factors of hu-
man toxicity, respiratory, and Ionizing radiations and ozone layer depletion inro
account.[Humbert, 2012]
The ecosystem quality is measured in the Potentially Disappeared Fraction of
species over a certain amount of m2 during a certain amount of year.
The
PDF.m2.y represents the fraction of species disappearing on 1 m2 of earth sur-
face during one year. The ecosystem quality is based on the aquatic and terres-
trial ecotoxicity as well as their acidiﬁcation. The auquatic eutrophication and
land occupation is also taken into consideration[Humbert, 2012].
The gloabl warming CFs (carbon footprints) are given for emissions into the air.
The Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) for a 100-year time horizon are used.
The resource impact category is based on the impacts from mineral extraction
and non-renewable energy consumption. This damage category is expressed in
MJ.
The inventory water withdrawal includes the water use expressed in m3 of water
needed, whether evaporated, consumed or released again downstream. Drink-
ing water, irrigation water and water for industrialized processes are included
[Humbert, 2012].
5.3
On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and
Wood Structure
The on-the-ﬂy LCA analysis of the previously structurally analysed structure
in wood and steel is in this section compared.
The initial advanced design (Figure 4.5) was conducted in four diﬀerent roof
heights. The quantities from the diﬀerent roof heights 4 meters - 6.5 meters -
8 meters and 10 meters was implemented in Quantis Suite in order to compare
the impact the structure had on the roof material. As the roof heights increase,
the roof surface increase as well and more roof material as well as material for
the structure is needed.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
64
The ﬁnal designs for steel and wood is compared in order to gain an under-
standing of their environmental impact. As the LCA is used for comparison of
the two materials, several input factors are discarded as they are equivalent for
both structures.
It is assumed that the wooden and the steel structure have the same insulation
and construction materials.
The building envelope does not depend on the
material of the frame structure and the energy consumption is thus excluded
from the calculation.
The transportation is not included due to lack of knowledge of recycling stations
and production places. As the steel structure in general weighs more than the
wood, this might be a source of error as more trucks are possibly needed for the
steel transportation.
The impacts from the construction phase are set to the same as the installation
of wood and steel frame structures have showed to require identical energy use
[Sandin et al., 2014]. Energy is assumed to be the main impact in the installation
phase whereas the waste material from the packaging will be ignored.
[Frahm, 2010] For both the initial comparison of roof heights and the ﬁnal com-
parison of the most material eﬃcient steel and wooden structure, a full service
life of 100 years is assumed. It is assumed that maintenance of the structure
makes it possible for both types of structures to sustain without replacement.
5.3.1
Schemes and Flows in Quantis Suite
The ﬁve diﬀerent ﬂows taken into consideration for the life cycle assessment is
seen below:
1. Materials
2. Construction
3. Use
4. Deconstruction
5. Recycling
==PAGE:72==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
65
5.3.1.1
Steel Frame
The element ﬂow materials consists of the roof materials, seen in Figure 5.6 and
the steel to the structure. The manufacturing of the steel includes the process
steps; cold rolling, annealing, tempering, inspecting and ﬁnishing, packing coils
or sheets roll maintenance and the welding of the steel. The the steel structure
is assumed to sustain during the life time of the building. The construction
phase consists of the electricity for the construction and is based on a simpliﬁed
estimate of the electricity consumption of the appliances, which can be seen
in Appendix S. The use phase consists of four times intumescent paint of the
steel structure in order to keep it ﬁre resistant throughout its lifetime. The
deconstruction phase include the electricity need to deconstruct the building.
The recycling considers the recycling and disposal of the materials. The steel
is recovered and recycled at a 95% recycling rate, and used as scrap for new
steel products. The energy needed to recycling the steel entails shredding and
melting and is considered to cost 2.9175 kWh/kg 2.
The quantities and speciﬁc materials can be seen in Appendix T. An overview of
the footprints for the ﬁve diﬀerent impact categories for the ﬁnal steel structure
can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Final Steel Construction
2http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/what-is-the-embodied-energy-of-materials.html
==PAGE:73==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
66
5.3.1.2
Wooden Frame
The element ﬂow materials consists of the roof materials, seen in Figure 5.6,
and the amount of glue laminated timber for the frames.
The construction
phase consists of the electricity for the construction and is based on a simpliﬁed
estimate of the electricity consumption of the appliances, which can be seen
in Appendix S. The use phase consists of a wood preservative paint used on
the wooden frame structure four times, in order to maintain it throughout its
lifetime. The deconstruction phase includes the electricity need to deconstruct
the building. The recycling phase consideres the electricity gained from incin-
erating the wooden structure. The woode from the construction and from the
roof material is considered used as biofuel, thus replacing fossil fuel and gaining
energy. It is assumed that by incinerating the wood, 14.9MJ/kg [Morris, 1996].
can be produced. Recovered wood is mainly used to generate district heat and
electricity [Dodoo et al., 2009], where other post recovery options could include
the reuse of the solid wooden material. Furthermore is it possible to reprocess it
as particle boards and pulping it to form paper products. When wood is recov-
ered, less wood needs to be harvested, thus creating a further positive impact on
other projects. The glulam beams and columns could also be recovered instead
of incinerated and thus used in other applications at the end of life. The glue is
not considered to rise further hazardous emmissions.
The visualisation of the ﬁve impact categories for the ﬁnal wood structure can
be seen in Figure 5.2 and further details to the calculations can be seen in
Appendix T.
Figure 5.2: Final Wood Construction
==PAGE:74==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
67
5.3.2
Comparison of the Steel and Wood structures
The comparison of the wooden and steel structure based on their life cycle
assessments, can be seen in Figure 5.3. Here the raw structure, including the
extraction and processing of the material, the construction and use phase, and
the maintenance, as well as the end-of-life stage is seen for both the wooden and
steel structure.
Figure 5.3: Wood structure vs. Steel structure - without roof material
Figure 5.3 shows that the wooden structure is performing better than the steel
structure in all ﬁve impact categories. The climate change impact category is
not as positive as the simpliﬁed impacts calculated in the structural analysis
subsection 4.4.9 and subsection 4.4.10.
The smipliﬁed calculations based on
the available data in the ökobau database, proved the wood structure to have
lesser environmental impact, based on CO2-eq. than the steel structure. The
simpliﬁcated calculation, seen in Appendix U, consisted of both the provision
of the raw material, the transport, production, waste treatment and recycling
potential with thermal recovery. The simpliﬁed calculation showed a negative
result, stating that -59505 kg CO2-eq. is the contribution for the wooden struc-
ture. A net negative value for CO2 emissions, resulting in the negative impact
score for GWP is due to sequestration of carbon and extraction of CO2 from
the atmosphere, by wood [Huijbregts, 2006].
When analysing the structure alone the wood material proved to be the least
environmental impacting material.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
68
5.3.2.1
Comparison of the Initial and Final Design
The initial steel frame design compared to the ﬁnal steel frame design can be
seen in Figure 5.4 and show the expected correlation. As the material is reduced,
all ﬁve impact categories reduces as well.
Figure 5.4: The intial steel frame design compared to the ﬁnal steel structure
The same is applicable for the initial wood frame design compared to the ﬁnal
wood frame design as can be seen in Figure 5.5. As expected is all ﬁve impact
categories reduced as the material of the structure is reduced.
Figure 5.5: The intial wood frame design compared to the ﬁnal wood structure
==PAGE:76==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
69
The ﬁnal steel design show a saving of 70% in all impact categories from the
initial design whereas the wood structure show a saving of approximately 50%.
5.3.3
Comparison of the Steel and Wood structures with
Roof Material
In this section the roof structure is applied to the structure in order to investigate
the impact of the building parts used throughout this study.
5.3.3.1
Roof structure
The roof structure which has been a part of the load calculations and now
applied in Quantis Suite, can be seen in Figure 5.6.
          !      "!  # $   $  % 


 
!"#$%&'
()*+,
&'( )*+$,
-.(/&&
-.(&/01 +$,
 (
( /01 +$,
*0 ,1 

$
2
#+$2
+
$,2+#
345
/ +$,

$   $% 
(& (
(

   /  $  
(&
('
(-

-
3 4 4'/+$546   +7    (      
 ('
( 
( 

'
            
.(0
0
0
(-$&89!          ( # $!    %
.(
<
<
,
0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
.(
<
<
,

4!  =  = > %  $      /+$5
 (
(
(-


         
(0
0
0
(-$&8? @)#?##. /+$5
(
(-.
 (- 
0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
(
( 
(.--


            
 '(0
0
0
(-$&8? @)#?##. /+$5
 '(
(-.
(-

0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
 '(
( 
 (

.
4 = =       /+$5
 ( 
(-
(&
'
&
A$=!% $ B
( 
(
(
,

         
(0
0
0
(-$&8? @)#?##. /+$5
(
(-.
(&
'
0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
(
( 
(


? = /   =  &/+$5
(
( 
(
'
 ? = /   =  &/+$5
(
( 
(
'
0
0

(+(0
0
0
    ! "#$%&
('+&(-'0
0
0
6/ 
#7!!"0
88
#"
HH
G9
(&&#+$,2
<. 5
Figure 5.6: Roof solution
This solution has been approved as a possible solution by the architects, all
though they are considering using wood as the external cladding as well as on
the inside of the ceiling. Diﬀerent possible roof structures could be investigated,
but for the comparisson this solution is assumed suﬃcient.
The roof structure is assumed to be changed three times and the maintenance
of the internal structure to be conducted four times. The life time expectancy
==PAGE:77==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
70
[Frahm, 2010] are conservative and can be discussed but are assumed to generate
suﬃcient results for the comparissons.
The recycling of the roof structure includes the energy needed in the process to
recycle aluminium, tand the avoidance of new production of aluminium. The
wooden material from the roof is incinerated as biofuel, thus contributing to the
energy production. Glass wool insulation is recycled at 75% [Eurima, 2011] rate
and the rest is landﬁlled. The plasterboard is recycled by 95% [Gyprock, 2016]
and the rest is assumed to go into a landﬁll.
A comparisson of the ﬁnal steel and wooden frame including the roof structure
can be seen in Figure 5.7, where the steel structure is normalised.
Figure 5.7: Wood construction vs. Steel construction
The impact of the roof materials is seen in Figure 5.7, as the roof is implemented.
This ﬁgure gives a more holistic view on the building, and shows the large impact
the substructure has on the overall picture.
The wooden structure performs better in all ﬁve impact categories although the
ecosystem quality impact category is almost identical for the two structures.
The wooden structure is around 5% lower than the steel structure in the cli-
mate change impact category. This is due to the similar roof materials used.
The roof material take up a large part of the total environmental impact as
it is changed three times during the life time of the building compared to the
structure, which is not changed. Large improvements can thus be made of the
substructure as well, but would require more time. The other building parts
causes a larger part of the total environmental impact. Conducting a truthfull
LCA is complex, as the two ﬁgures shows, as it can be conducted with a speciﬁc
focus on showing desired results. Even two LCA’s studying the same building
==PAGE:78==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
71
might diﬀer signiﬁcantly [Ottelé et al., 2014].
In Figure 5.8 a comparison of the ﬁnal steel structure and the corresponding
initial construction including roof material (for 25 years) and the equivalent
for the wood structure can be seen. The roof material is not changed in this
investigation, but it shows large optimisation possibilities for the roof structure
as it proves to have large environmental impacts compared to the structure
alone.
Figure 5.8: The ﬁnal raw steel structure compared to the four initial construction
heights with roof structure
==PAGE:79==
5.3 On-the-ﬂy LCA of the Modelled Steel and Wood Structure
72
5.3.3.2
Investigation of the Initial Design Phase - Roof heights
In the initial design phase the frame structure was investigated with chaning
roof heights.
A comparison of the changing roof heights, including the roof
structure is seen in Figure 5.9 for the steel structure and in Figure 5.10 for the
wood structure.
Figure 5.9: The intial four diﬀerent construction heights and the ﬁnal frame design for
the steel structure
Figure 5.10: The intial four diﬀerent construction heights and the ﬁnal frame design
for the wood structure
==PAGE:80==
5.4 Conclusion
73
It is clearly seen that the lower frame height decreases the impact factors and
that the ﬁnal design for both steel and wood even is performing better than
the lowest roof height of 4 meters, requiring less rooﬁng material than the ﬁnal
frame design with a height of 6.5 meters.
5.4
Conclusion
It proved possible to use an existing LCA tool in the preliminary design process
to measure the environmental impacts of the structures. The structural analysis
performed by Grasshopper solely focusing on reducing the material consumption
was tested using Quantis Suite and showed a great correlation between the
reduced material and the reduced environmental impacts.
The developed design method of reducing the structural system’s material con-
sumption based on environmental and life cycle thinking has proved eﬃcient.
Thus the developed tool is in compliance with the aim of the STED programme,
described in section 3.1.
In addition the roof structure was applied to investigate the building in a more
holistic perspective. It proved that the roof, having a shorter lifespan, had a
large environmental impact. Thus further optimisations of the building envelope
is highly recommendable. This would require a higher level of detail and is thus
not a scope of this project. In the detailing process of the building, investigating
material possibilities, wall and roof structures and claddings, it would be highly
recommendable to optimise the secondary structures and conduct LCA on the
entire building.
By the simpliﬁed LCA conducted above, it can be concluded that by optimising
the structural system with a life cycle mindset, striving for a more material
eﬃcient structure, the overall sustainability can be enhanced. Based on the ﬁve
impact categories it is seen that the ﬁnal solutions for both wood and steel causes
smaller environmental impacts than the initial designs. As all ﬁve environmental
impact categories were decreased, it suggests that using the material mass and
hereby the GWP factor or CO2 gives a good indication of the development
the overall sustianability of the structure. This correlates well with Huijbregts,
who stated that the cumulative fosil energy demand (CED) overall was a good
indicator for many environmental problems [Huijbregts, 2006].
A fully conducted LCA will depend on the construction practice, the material
use, geographical location and other uncertainties which has not fully been con-
sidered in this project. The service life period can be of discussion as well as
==PAGE:81==
5.4 Conclusion
74
the materials that are lost during the demolition and recycling process, also will
have CO2 eﬀects over time.
Some of the diﬃculties with conducting an LCA is the large amount of data
required and the lack of availability. Finding intumescent paint used for ﬁre
protecting steel beams was impossible and the solution was to ﬁgure out the
substances and then try to incoporate a corresponding chemical. Furhter inves-
tigation and cooporation with a company would have been needed to ﬁgure out
the exact combination of chemicals in such a paint, but for this project a rough
estimate was assumed suﬃcient.
Without a broader knowledge of life cycle assessments it was possible to gain
insight to the program and create useful results.
Further understanding of
the program will be needed in order to conduct more detailed LCA’s.
The
ﬁve impact categories of the program set by default, are suﬀcient for initial
estimates of the LCA although for a more comprehensive understanding of the
environmental impact of the structure, the diﬀerent impacts included in the
categories could be beneﬁcial to understand and depict. The inddor exposure
to chemicals could be of consideration to this project due to its job at facilitating
art possibly sensitive to some chemicals. Furthermore could use of land be a
concern due to extensive harvest of forestry inﬂuences several other impact
catetegories as ecosystem quality and eutorﬁcation.
Lastly the end-of-life stage is complex due to its high uncertainties including
the processes of the futures [Silvestre et al., 2014]. Waste incineration might
not be an option in 100 years, if energy is produced solely by renewable power
sources. Thus diﬀerent recycling methods for especially wood will be needed
as the energy from using it as a biofuel not will be represented in the life cycle
assessment. This could lead to a better design for dismantling and buildings
designed to adapt to new tenants.
The time dependent uncertainty is thus of concern in general when conducting
an LCA, as the end of life cannot be predicted and might change over time com-
pared to the initial end-of-life scenario. A risk analysis and reliability analysis
would thus be of interest in order to gain a broader perspective of both life time
expectancies and the end-of-life phase.
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 6
Discussion
The work conducted throughout this report, its theory, structural analysis and
Life Cycle Assessments will be discussed. Possibilities and weaknesses will be
discussed on the basis of the theoretical background. The relevance of the results
and how they can be of use to the industry will be discussed towards the end of
the chapter.
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Possibilities and limitations of the developed program
76
6.1
Possibilities and limitations of the developed
program
The developed program in Grasshopper and Karamba have proved suﬃcient for
the initial optimisation task. The complexity of the structural calculations sets
limitations for the program. If quick results are desired for the initial design
stage, the results will also not be as accurate. This is both due to the time
limit and the uncertainties of the structure in the early design phase. At the
later design phase it is possible to conduct a more accurate analysis as more
details are known.
In the initial design stage it is assumed that the results
of an optimisation like the one conducted throughout this study, giving rough
estimates of the optimisation possibilities, are allowing the architects to further
develope their design in a material eﬃcient way.
Further investigations and optimisations are allowed through the developed pro-
gram as the design process progresses.
For a design methodology including
cooporation between architects and engineers this program could show beneﬁ-
cial. The program provide the engineer with real-time optimisation possibilites
and could thus be used during a meeting when discussing diﬀerent possibilities.
Simple results giving an idication of the material eﬃciency would be provided
in an instant and could be used to change the design in a sustainable direction.
In order to use the program a knowledge of structural design is needed. Knowl-
edge of the modelling tool Grasshopper is important but can easily be learned
through the tutorials and discussion forums provided by the supplier. Further-
more is the used software programs either free or inexpensive, and are thus
generally easily available.
The tool has proven able to decrease the global warming potential through
optimisation of the structural design. It could thus be used to provide architects
in the industry with environmental friendly choices during a design process.
The developed design method, using the visual output of Rhino, the parametric
modeling tool of Grashopper and the FEM-tool Karamba allowed for an anal-
ysis of the structural performance material-wise. The method of reducing the
material consumption of a structural system based on environmental and life
cycle thinking is thus in compliance with the STED programme (section 3.1).
==PAGE:84==
6.1 Possibilities and limitations of the developed program
77
6.1.1
The use of on-the-ﬂy Life Cycle Assessment
The Quantis Suite software revealed able to provide quick life cycle assessments
of the diﬀerent solutions investigated. The tool cannot be used through the
modelling program Grasshopper and must thus be conducted on-the-ﬂy as the
optimisation progressed. The tool was easy to navigate and could quickly pro-
vide the needed results.
A real-time LCA tool made in Grasshopper by A. Otovic[Otovic, 2015] was
investigated with the intention of linking it to the structural model conducted
in this study. The tool was based on the surfaces of a building, thus providing
energy consumption from the volume. The two programs were not linkable due
to the two diﬀerent approaches, the structural program developed in this study
did not include the surfaces and was mainly conducted in 2D in order to gain
the suﬃcient results. Furthermore was a lack of understanding of the structure
of the real-time LCA tool an issue in order to make use of it.
A further issue with the real-time LCA tool by A. Otovic was the lack of impact
categories, the Quantis Suite program could provide fast and detailed life cycle
assessments whereas the LCA tool in Grasshopper only conducted the GWP
impact, based on the material used and the energy consumption. The diﬀerent
stages and material options were limited especially the end-of-life stage had very
limited options. By conducting an LCA through Quantis Suite the diﬀerent life
cycle steps were taken into consideration and a large database was available.
The simple LCA tool was considered unnecessary as the developed structural
program, could optimise the material eﬃciency of the structure and thus de-
crease the GWP. The further investigation was then conducted through the use
of LCA’s in Quantis Suite for a more detailed perspective on the structure. In
subsection 2.1.1 it was conﬁrmed that by simply optimising with the intent of
decreasing the material consumption it was possible to decrease the GWP for
the structure. Thus is it suﬃcient to optimise for mateiral eﬃciency and later
on conduct more detailed Life Cycle Assessments.
The results in chapter 5 proved that the structure alone is only a smaller part of
the entire environmental impact from the building, although large savings were
made during the optimisation. The need for improved life time of the building
parts at minimal costs are relevant as well as the demountability allowing the
building parts to be reused and recycled. Enhancing the overall resource utiliza-
tion must be a goal not only in the structural design but for the entire building
and its secondary structural parts as well as interior and cladding.
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Possibilities and limitations of the optimisation process
78
6.2
Possibilities and limitations of the optimisa-
tion process
Developing a tool in order to optimise the structural system of a building in
the early design stage is time consuming and thus not economical feasible for
smaller projects. It proved suitable for the project size given in the case and
would be beneﬁcial for larger projetcts and repetitive projects such as standard
houses.
As the modelling is conducted in Grasshopper which is integrated in Rhino, the
process could show highly relevant for the industry. As stated in subsubsec-
tion 2.1.1.2, the architectural companies are familiar with Rhino and can thus
quickly transfer their designs into Grasshopper, allowing Karamba calculations
on the structure and thus optimisation. As the architects are familiar with the
platform the program could easily be adopted and used, if further developed.
The design phase is divergent as it investigates many possible solutions and is
thus contradictive to the optimisation phase which is convergent as it is aiming
for one solution [Mueller and Ochsendorf, 2013]. This diﬀerence in the design
approach could be of concern when integrating the structural design optimisa-
tions into the design concept developed by the architects.
SkethUp and Revit is used to a large extent in the industry as well and could be
a competition due to their several plug-in programs allowing calculations and
simulations. The beneﬁt of using Grasshopper though, is its parametric design
possibility allowing diﬀerent simulations and calculations in an instant, making
it ideal for optimisation processes.
As the optimised structural design was investigated further through the life
cycle assessments including the roof material, the large optimisation potential
of the building envelope was revealed. Optimising the building envelope, such
as roof and wall structures from a material consumption perspective with the
requirements such as EU energy regulations have the potential to improve the
environmental impact immensily as these parts are changed more often than
the structure. A optimisation of the diﬀerent building parts in one program
would be possible but might be too complex and time consuming while still
being proﬁtable. Even though a holistic view and optimisation af a building is
ideal, the complexity of incorporating the diﬀerent stakeholders and parameters
is diﬃcult. On the other hand it is not suﬃcient to only optimise one parameter.
Due to the parametric program used to model the structure in this study, it
is possible to improve the optimisation possibilities as the design process pro-
==PAGE:86==
6.3 Relevance for the Industry
79
gresses. The building can be expanded and conducted in 3D and more building
parts can be added.
6.3
Relevance for the Industry
As the material consumption has been decreased through optimisation it will
likely also decrease the overall cost of the structure. The economical advantages
of optimising a structure has earlier been proved for both steel [Sahab et al.,
2005] and concrete [Jármai and Farkas, 1999] and is assumed to be the same for
wood structures.
By implementing increased knowledge in the early design stage through coopo-
ration between engineers and architects it would be possible to improve the
overall environmental and economical sustainability of a structure. It would
give the architects the possibility to consider diﬀerent solutions and materials
based on analysis in the early design stage. Though it would only be of use
where architects and engineers work together during the design stage, thus only
relevant for larger projects or larger companies with the resources in-house.
Commisioning and legislation would be one way to increase the awareness on
the possibilities with optimisation in the early design stage. The early design
stage often lack ﬁnancial basis as many designs are put out for competition.
For the achitectural companies the balance of both economical investments and
investment of time is determining for this process of giving a proposal. The case
study used throughout this study was ideal as the competition was completed
and the time to construction was more than a year. By investing more time
and money through this initial design stage, optimisations are possible and the
program modelled could help the decision making throughout this process.
Furthermore would it be possible to use the optimisation as marketing the struc-
ture as the saving of material could be converted into saved CO2 which is an
understandable term for the broader population.
Today it is possible to built forms regardless of their structural performance
[Mueller and Ochsendorf, 2013], whitout consulting the eﬀectiveness of the struc-
ture giving the best structural performance material-wise.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The main thesis of this report was veriﬁed for the speciﬁc case, Konsthall
Tornedalen, as it proved possible to reduce the environmental impact of the
structure, through a dynamic real-time integrated deisgn process carried out
via the parametrical modelling tool Grasshopper.
A limited empirical investigation of the programs used in the industry directed
the choice of program towards using Rhino with the plug-ins Grasshopper and
Karamba. The already existing programs that are widely spread in the industry
proved capable of facilitating a dynamic design process. A futher advantage of
the parametric design program was its visual programming platform allowing
instant result outputs during the design process.
The tailor made structural design model created for the Konsthall Tornedalen
in Grasshopper permitted a real-time reduction of the material consumption.
The parametric design in Grasshopper allowed for extensive investigation of the
structural design with result visualisations in Rhino and exports to Microsoft
Excel.
Quantitative decision making was possible and an optimisation of the structure,
faithful to the initial design was suggested through six optimisation steps. The
six steps including investigation of heights, cross sections, materials, sequencing
of the structure, change of angles and distances resulted in a reduction of the
==PAGE:88==
81
material consumption for steel by 74.3% and for wood by 68.9%.
The clear reduction in material consumption could provide a basis for discussion
and collaboration between construction engineers and architects. By parame-
terising the model in Grasshopper, the model allows for expansion and further
development as the design process progresses. Further requirements and criteria
can be incorporated upon request from the design team. Parametric program-
ming in Grasshopper could advantageously be used in the industry to gain in-
stant knowledge of the optimisation possibilities of a structure. The integration
of the structural input gained from the real-time model in Grasshopper has the
potential to improve the initial concept signiﬁcantly.
It is the experience that the model once created can facilitate a dynamic real-
time design process involving the architects. The process of developing a pro-
gram suitable for a given structure will increase in eﬀectiveness as the engineer
or architect gain experience.
Initially it can be time consuming and involve
pioneering work, but as more projects are investigated the executing designer
will gain more knowledge and an increased understanding of the software and
its possibilities.
It proved possible to use the existing LCA tool Quantis Suite during the pre-
liminary design process in order to document the environmental impacts of the
building on-the-ﬂy. The results from Quantis Suite showed that the design tool
focusing on optimising the mass of the structure was suﬃcient and relevant in
the early design process. This is supported by the fact that there is an extensive
correlation between the mass consumption and the environmental impact.
The life cycle assessment comparisons of the initial raw structure and the ﬁnal
structure, conﬁrmed that by optimising the material eﬃciency, a more envi-
ronmental friendly structure can be designed. The steel structure reduced all
ﬁve impact categories by around 70% from the initial design to the ﬁnal design
whereas the wooden structure had a reduction of approximetaly 48% in all ﬁve
impact categories.
Quantis Suite was also used to test the environmental impact from the roof and
it was found that building parts with shorter lifespans count heavily in the total
calculation of the environmental impact of the building.
An exact LCA is close to impossible to make due to the many uncertainties
associated with the life cycle process. It was clear that further optimisation
possibilites exist for the building envelope, both in terms of material and the
lifespan of the building parts.
The reduction of the material consumption is assumed to be correlated with a
==PAGE:89==
82
reduced prize of the building. In this way the use of these tools will oﬀer the
designers additional space for creative solutions in the design of the building
within a given budget.
7.0.1
Further Studies & Perspectives
The experience gained through this project provides relevant information for
the industry as an optimisation of the structural design and hereby reduction
of the environmental impacts has been proved. Through pioneer projects in the
industry the increase of public awareness and life cycle thinking in the early
structural design stage can be promoted and tested, creating a basis for a more
sustainable building industry in the future. Possible economical savings due to
material savings and early design decision making could be of interest to a low
margin industry.
As the programs and software continue to develop the linking possibilities of
the programs will increase in the future, allowing a broader and more eﬃcient
collaboration between engineers and architects.
Another way to realise structural optimisation integrated in the early design
stage is through legislation. This could either be through legislation of public
building projects or by announcing future requirements for early design focus
on the life cycle of a building and its environmental impact. The legislation
would enhance a better resource utilization and promote a new aestheticism, as
the life cycle thinking becomes a part of the building industry. Public building
projects have already begun to impose themselves with requirements of DGNB
certiﬁcates in order to improve their proﬁle. The DGNB certiﬁcate is granted
after the project phase as all the material components and other impacts on the
environment must be included, thus is the DGNB not necessarily enhancing the
sustainability of a project in the conceptual design phase.
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
[Boulding, 2000] Boulding, K. (2000). The Economic Journal. The Economic
Journal, June 110(464).
[CEN, 2007a] CEN (2007a). Dansk standard Eurocode 0: Projekteringsgrundlag
for bærende konstruktioner Eurocode – Basis of structural design.
Dansk
Standard & European Committee for Standardization, 2. edition.
[CEN, 2007b] CEN (2007b). Dansk standard Eurocode 1: Last påbærende kon-
struktioner – Del 1-3: Generelle laster – Snelast. Dansk Standard & European
Committee for Standardization, 2. edition.
[CEN, 2007c] CEN (2007c). Dansk standard Eurocode 1: Last påbærende kon-
struktioner – Del 1-4: Generelle laster – Vindlast Eurocode 1 : Actions on
structures. Dansk Standard & European Committee for Standardization, 2.
edition.
[de Jongh, 2011] de Jongh, C. (2011). Human health impact of chemical con-
taminants in drinking water – usefulness of the DALY concept Human health
impact of chemical contaminants in drinking water – usefulness of the DALY
concept. (August).
[Ding, 2014] Ding, G. K. C. (2014). Eco-Eﬃcient Construction and Building
Materials. Eco-Eﬃcient Construction and Building Materials, pages 38–62.
[Dodoo et al., 2009] Dodoo, A., Gustavsson, L., and Sathre, R. (2009). Car-
bon implications of end-of-life management of building materials. Resources,
Conservation and Recycling, 53(5):276–286.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
84
[Dodoo et al., 2012] Dodoo, A., Gustavsson, L., and Sathre, R. (2012). Eﬀect
of thermal mass on life cycle primary energy balances of a concrete- and a
wood-frame building. Applied Energy, 92:462–472.
[Erhvervs&Byggestyrelsen, 2011] Erhvervs&Byggestyrelsen (2011).
DS/EN
1993-1-1 DK NA: 2010 Nationalt Anneks til Del 1-1: Generelle regler samt
regler for bygningskonstruktioner.
[Eurima, 2011] Eurima
(2011).
Recycling
of
glass
wool
waste.
http://www.eurima.org/sustainable-construction/recycling.html.
[Frahm, 2010] Frahm, K. J. (2010). Lebensdauer von Bauteilen, Zeitwerte.
[Gilbert, 1987] Gilbert, W. H. (1987). Environmental science: The Way the
World Works. Technical Report 8.
[Grassbauer, 2015] Grassbauer, M. (2015).
Trends in Global Resource Con-
sumption. Technical report, TU Wien, 164.225 Ecology and Sustainable De-
velopment.
[Guardigli et al., 2011] Guardigli, L., Monari, F., and Bragadin, M. A. (2011).
Assessing Environmental Impact of Green Buildings through LCA Methods:
A comparison between Reinforced Concrete and Wood Structures in the Eu-
ropean Context. Procedia Engineering, 21:1199–1206.
[Gyprock, 2016] Gyprock
(2016).
Gyprock
Plasterboard.
http://www.gyprock.com.au/Pages/About-Us/Recycling.aspx.
[Hansen and Sattrup, 2014] Hansen, C. C. and Sattrup, P. A. (2014). Imple-
mentation of LCA through BIM tools in the early architectural design stages
Bachelor Thesis. Technical report, The Technical University of Denmark.
[Hansen and Knudstrup, 2005] Hansen, H. T. R. and Knudstrup, M.-A. (2005).
The Integrated Design Process (IDP) - a more holistic approach to sustain-
able architecture. The 2005 World Sustainable Building Conference, Tokyo,
2005(September):27–29.
[Harrison and Zealand, 2015] Harrison, C. and Zealand, N. (2015). BIM Imple-
mentation in a New Zealand Consulting Quantity Surveying Practice. Inter-
national Journal of Construction Supply Chain Management, 5(1):1–15.
[Heiskanen, 2002] Heiskanen, E. (2002).
The institutional logic of life cycle
thinking. 10:427–437.
[Hossaini et al., 2014] Hossaini, N., Reza, B., Akhtar, S., Sadiq, R., and
Hewage, K. (2014). AHP based life cycle sustainability assessment (LCSA)
framework: a case study of six storey wood frame and concrete frame build-
ings in Vancouver.
Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
(August 2014):1–25.
==PAGE:92==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[Huijbregts, 2006] Huijbregts, M. A. J. (2006). Policy Analysis Is Cumulative
Fossil Energy Demand a Useful Indicator for the Environmental Performance
of Products ? 40(3):641–648.
[Humbert, 2012] Humbert, S. (2012). IMPACT 2002+: User Guide.
[Jármai and Farkas, 1999] Jármai, K. and Farkas, J. (1999). Cost calculation
and optimisation of welded steel structures. Journal of Constructional Steel
Research, 50:115–135.
[Kibert et al., 2002] Kibert, C. J., Sendzimir, J., and Guy, G. B. (2002). Con-
struction Ecology: Nature as the basis for green buildings. pages 7–26.
[Klöpﬀer, 1997] Klöpﬀer, W. (1997). Life Cycle Assessment: From the Begin-
ning to the Current State. 4(4):223–228.
[Knudstrup, 2004] Knudstrup, M.-A. (2004). Integrated Design Process in PBL.
pages 1–12.
[Krymsky, 2015] Krymsky, Y. (2015). The Architecture Software Revolution:
From One Size Fits All to DIY.
http://www.archdaily.com/778619/the-
architecture-software-revolution-from-one-size-ﬁts-all-to-diy.
[Laurent et al., 2010] Laurent, A., Olsen, S. I., and Hauschild, M. Z. (2010).
CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology Carbon footprint as environmen-
tal performance indicator for the manufacturing industry. CIRP Annals -
Manufacturing Technology, 59(1):37–40.
[Lendager, 2014] Lendager, A. (2014). Projekt Ressource City. Næstved Kom-
mune.
[MacLeamy, 2004] MacLeamy, P. (2004).
Integrated Information, and the
Project Lifecycle in Building Design, Construction and Operation. (August).
[Morris, 1996] Morris, J. (1996).
Recycling versus incineration : an energy
conservation analysis. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 3894(95).
[Mueller and Ochsendorf, 2013] Mueller, C. and Ochsendorf, J. (2013). From
Analysis to Design: A New Computational Strategy for Structural Creativity.
Design in Civil and Environmental Engineering, pages 46–56.
[Nordic Innovation, 2012] Nordic
Innovation
(2012).
Nordic
Built.
http://www.nordicinnovation.org/nordicbuilt/.
[Otovic, 2015] Otovic, A. P. (2015). Sustainability as Design Support. Technical
report.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
86
[Ottelé et al., 2014] Ottelé, M., Perini, K., and Haas, E. (2014). Eco-Eﬃcient
Construction and Building Materials. Eco-Eﬃcient Construction and Build-
ing Materials, pages 457–483.
[Paulson, 1976] Paulson, B. C. (1976). Designing to Reduce Construction Costs.
Journal of Construction Division.
[Roodman and Lenssen, 1994] Roodman, D. M. and Lenssen, N. (1994). No
Title. World Watch, 7(6):21.
[Sahab et al., 2005] Sahab, M., a.F. Ashour, and Toropov, V. (2005).
Cost
optimisation of reinforced concrete ﬂat slab buildings. Engineering Structures,
27(3):313–322.
[Sandin et al., 2014] Sandin, G., Peters, G. M., and Svanström, M. (2014). Life
cycle assessment of construction materials:
The inﬂuence of assumptions
in end-of-life modelling.
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment,
19(4):723–731.
[Silvestre et al., 2014] Silvestre, J. D., De Brito, J., and Pinheiro, M. D. (2014).
Environmental impacts and beneﬁts of the end-of-life of building materials -
Calculation rules, results and contribution to a "cradle to cradle" life cycle.
Journal of Cleaner Production, 66:37–45.
[Smol et al., 2015] Smol, M., Kulczycka, J., Henclik, A., Gorazda, K., and
Wzorek, Z. (2015). The possible use of sewage sludge ash (SSA) in the con-
struction industry as a way towards a circular economy. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 95:45–54.
[Stahel, 1982] Stahel, W. R. (1982). Chapter 4 The Product Life Factor. An
Inquiry Into the Nature of Sustainable Societies: The Role of the Private
Sector, pages 72–96.
[Zaman and Lehmann, 2013] Zaman, A. U. and Lehmann, S. (2013). The zero
waste index: A performance measurement tool for waste management systems
in a ’zero waste city’. Journal of Cleaner Production, 50:123–132.
==PAGE:94==
Appendix
• Appendix A: Mail correspondence, Vandkunsten
• Appendix B: Mail correspondence, OOPEAA
• Appendix C: Case Konsthall Tornedalen
• Appendix D: Load Calculations
• Appendix E: Steel Optimisation Step 1.
• Appendix F: Wood Optimisation Step 1.
• Appendix G: Roof Structure
• Appendix H: Steel Optimisation Step 2.
• Appendix I: Wood Optimisation Step 2.
• Appendix J: Steel Optimisation Step 3.
• Appendix K: Wood Optimisation Step 3.
• Appendix L: Steel Optimisation Step 4.
• Appendix M: Wood Optimisation Step 4.
• Appendix N: Steel Optimisation Step 5.
• Appendix O: Wood Optimisation Step 5.
• Appendix P: Steel Optimisation Step 6.
• Appendix Q: Wood Optimisation Step 6.
==PAGE:95==
ii
• Appendix R: FEM-Design Check
• Appendix S: Electricity During Construction
• Appendix T: LCA Quantities Steel & Wood
• Appendix U: Simple GWP Calculation for Steel & Wood
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
 
 
Mailkorrespondance med Vandkunsten siden April 2014 
 
From: Jak@vandkunst.dk 
To: chris_collin@hotmail.com 
Subject: SV: Speciale - LCA 
Date: Tue, 23 Feb 2016 09:04:03 +0000 
 
Hej Christine, 
 
Godt at høre fra dig ;) 
 
Og ja, det er stadigvæk korrekt. Men jeg kan se at vi kommer til at anvende revit 
tidligere i designfasen fremover til og med at revit nu giver mulighed for 
udvidede analyser (project vasari er jo endt, men autodesk er i gang med at 
lancere forskellige plugins til revit som vil give mulighed for sol- og vind analyser 
direkte fra revit, og ellers prøver vi at anvende mulighederne til mængdeudtræk 
fra revit i større omfang for at kunne lave hurtige LCA og LCC vurderinger 
fremover). 
 
Mange hilsner, 
 
Jan 
 
jan schipull kauschen 
arkitekt maa, ph.d. 
 
vandkunsten // krudtløbsvej 14 / dk-1439 københavn k / www.vandkunsten.com / +45 6040 2785 
 
Fra: Christine Collin [mailto:chris_collin@hotmail.com]  
Sendt: 18. februar 2016 12:31 
Til: Jan Kauschen <Jak@vandkunst.dk> 
Emne: RE: SV: Speciale - LCA  
 
Hej Jan 
 
Vi har tidligere kommunikeret ang. et speciale, da Vandkunsten er en del af 
Nordic Built projektet. Jeg endte dog med et samarbejde med OOPEAA gennem 
Lotte Bjerregard på instituttet for BYG på DTU, da de havde et projekt relevant 
for konstruktionsoptimering i den tidlige design fase. 
  
Jeg vil gerne sige tak for dine inputs tidligere da det altid er til stor nytte at høre 
hvad der rører sig i industrien. 
 
Igennem arbejdet til mit bachelor project interviewede jeg Søren Nielsen ang. 
jeres arbejde i 2013 (bl.a. Tanghuset) om jeres anvendelse af programmer og 
ville høre om de udsagn stadig passer eller om I kan tilføje noget nyt. 
iii
Appendix A: Mail correspondence, Vandkunsten
==PAGE:97==
 
Jeg har noteret at I har brugt følgende programmer: 
 
Tidlig design fase: Håndtegning/skitsering, Google SketchUp, AutoCAD, Rhino 
 
Projektering: AutoCAD, Revit  
 
"Søren Nielsen from Vandkunsten emphasized the increasing demand for 
maneuvering many different programs as the programs develop and supplement 
each other or work as plug-ins in relation to each other.  
 
He saw the possibilities for implementing new parameters in the initial design 
stage as on the fly life cycle analysis (LCA) as highly useful." 
 
De bedste hilsner  
 
Christine Collin 
 
From: Jak@vandkunst.dk 
To: chris_collin@hotmail.com 
Subject: SV: Speciale - LCA 
Date: Tue, 28 Oct 2014 13:39:56 +0000 
 
Hej Christine, 
 
Det lyder som et spændende arbejde du skal kaste dig ud i ;) 
 
Der er faktisk temmelige mange ”løse ender” med hensyn til anvendelse af LCA, 
byggeriet og anvendelse på tegnestuer. 
 
Pt har vi en lidt ”paradoxal” situation at LCA endnu ikke er en øvelse som skaber 
værdi hos nogen (undtagen samfundet) – og dermed heller ikke er en 
fakturerbar ydelse endnu. Jeg tror fast på at det ændrer sig om lidt, men for nu 
sætter det sådan set rammerne omkring anvendelsen. 
 
Med DGNB er der kommet meget fokus på emnet, men anvendelsesmulighederne 
og det værktøj som skal anvendes begrænser meget hvad der kan ”læres” af 
disse LCA’er. 
 
Mere generelt kan man sige at tegnestuer mangler et godt værktøj som tillader 
”optimering” af konstruktioner, facadeløsning og giver støtte til materialevalg i 
alt mulige sammenhæng. Her bliver det lidt relevant at lære at man ikke kan 
sammenligne de data man finder i en database eller EPD direkte, men at de skal 
”bindes op” på en funktion. 
 
I de LCA’er jeg selv har lavet kunne jeg mærke at det især var LCI-fasen som har 
kostet utrolig meget tid – dette er i princippet en grund til at tegnestuer ikke kan 
gennemføre mere nøjagtige LCA’er, enten fordi der er for omkostningsfuld 
(mange timer) eller at det tager for lang tid for at kunne anvendes i de tidelige 
faser (konkurrencer varer typisk kun få uger). Så her ligger bestemt en del 
==PAGE:98==
opgaver omkring designet af et bedre værktøj, metoder til hurtig opgørelse af 
mængder, modelberegninger til forskellige typologier osv (jeg arbejder pt selv på 
de her punkter, og vi har også en del konkrete projekter som du vil kunne bruge 
som cases vil jeg mene). 
  
Et andet stor ”gab” er brugsfasen, her findes ingen generiske LCA-data, udover 
energiforbrug i driften og ”udskiftninger”. Det kunne dog være yderst interessant 
at lære mere om forskellige konstruktioner, og det krævede vedligeholdelse 
hvad angår tilførelse af sekundære materialer og arbejdsindsatsen, men også 
miljøpåvirkninger som opstår i anvendelsen (f.eks. kunne jeg lære at 
tanginddækningen på tanghuset ”oxiderede” løbende som medfører en konstant 
udledning af CO2 fra taginddækningen). 
 
Ellers findes der en hel del spørgsmål omkring End-of-Life og det forholdsvis 
begrænsede antal af scenarier vi har pt. Her var det ønskelig at man udviklede en 
slags metode til at tilgodese genanvendelse og en form for vægtning som vil 
prioritere genanvendelse på ”højere” niveauer, for at udskyde recycling 
tidsmæssigt (som igen vil reducere miljøpåvirkninger. Projekter som Upcycle –
House har dertil anvendt en metode som bygger på den økonomiske værdi ting 
har – det er vist ok rent metodisk – fra mit synspunkt bliver der dog ikke taget 
nok hensyn til miljøpåvirkningerne som kunne undgås hvis disse materialer blev 
tilført en anden materialekredsløb (som eksempel kan du tage stålcontainere, 
som nu er huset bærende konstruktion – i stedt kunne man have anvendt nyt 
(eller også gammelt) træ og tilført containeren en recyclingkredsløb hvor den 
erstatter ny-produktionen af stål. Uden at jeg har regnet på det vil jeg mene det 
miljømæssigt vil give en fordel i forhold til den løsning man nu har valgt. ) 
 
Som jeg har hørt kommer der krav om LCA med i den kommende udgave af 
bygningsreglementet, samt at ENS er i gang med at udvikle et nyt værktøj hertil – 
måske kunne det også være en ”point-of-departure” (især siden der ville være 
mange som er helt blank omkring emnet ;) 
 
Jeg ved ikke om det hjælper dig videre i den indledende søgen – og sig til hvis jeg 
kan hjælpe med at få emnet mere konkret. 
 
Du er også velkommen til at komme forbi hos os, så kan vi - måske sammen med 
Søren – finde et emne fra vores hverdag. 
 
Mange hilsner, 
 
jan 
 
jan schipull kauschen 
arkitekt maa 
vandkunsten 
krudtløbsvej 14   dk-1439 københavn k   www.vandkunsten.com   +45 6040 2785 
 
Fra: Christine Collin [mailto:chris_collin@hotmail.com]  
Sendt: 27. oktober 2014 09:54 
Til: Jan Kauschen 
==PAGE:99==
Emne: Speciale - LCA  
 
Hej Jan 
 
Jeg skriver til dig på opfordring af Søren Nielsen da jeg tidligere i forindelse med 
mit bachelorprojekt har haft kontakt med Vandkunsten og Søren.  
 
Jeg skal påbegynde mit speciale i august 2015 og søger derfor nogle emner som 
vil være relevante for industrien at undersøge - jeg er derfor meget interesseret i 
at høre om I har nogle problemstillinger i hverdagen I ikke selv har 
tid/ressourcer til at undersøge nærmere, og i så fald hvilke?  
 
Jeg er selv stadig meget interesseret i LCA'ens muligheder og begrænsninger og 
synes bestemt det kunne være spændende at se nærmere på lovgivningen fx. i 
forhold til de problemstilling der kan opstå i forbindelse med 
konkurrenceforslag og bygherres ønsker/krav eller mangel på samme. Allerhelst 
vil jeg selvfølgelig give mig i kast med noget som kunne være relevant for 
industrien, hvorfor jeg har henvendt mig til Vandkunsten endnu en gang. 
  
Jeg håber du kan give et indspark i forhold til hvad du ser som relevante 
forskningsemner indenfor de kommende år.  
 
Mvh. Christine Collin 
Studerende ved DTU, Msc. Architectural Engineering 
 
From: sn@vandkunst.dk 
To: chris_collin@hotmail.com 
Subject: SV: SV: SV: SV: Interview omhandlende Det moderne Tanghus, Speciale 
Date: Sun, 26 Oct 2014 18:27:36 +0000 
 
Hej Christine 
 
Tak for din mail, og undskyld sent svar. Vi har for nylig ansat Jan Schipull som 
har lavet LCA’en på vores tanghus. Jeg tror at han vil være den allerskarpeste til 
at give et bud på forskningsemner, og sætter ham på cc. Jeg foreslår at du 
kontakter ham! 
 
*søren 
 
Fra: Christine Collin [mailto:chris_collin@hotmail.com]  
Sendt: 20. oktober 2014 13:25 
Til: Søren Nielsen 
Emne: RE: SV: SV: SV: Interview omhandlende Det moderne Tanghus, Speciale 
 
Hej Søren 
  
Endnu en gang tak for hjælpen tilbage i 2013 med mit bachelorprojekt og den 
efterfølgende feedback!  
  
==PAGE:100==
Jeg skal påbegynde mit speciale i august 2015 og søger derfor nogle emner som 
vil være relevante for industrien at undersøge - så hvis I har nogle 
problemstillinger I hverdagen I ikke selv har tid/ressourcer til at undersøge 
nærmere, er jeg meget interesseret I at høre om disse.  
  
Jeg er selv stadig meget interesseret i LCA'ens muligheder og begrænsninger og 
synes bestemt det kunne være spændende at se nærmere på lovgivningen fx. i 
forhold til den problemstilling som du nævner I stod i, (konkurrenceforslag til et 
byggeri i Stockholm, 2013) . Allerhelst vil jeg selvfølgelig give mig i kast med 
noget som kunne være relevant for industrien, hvorfor jeg skriver til dig.  
  
Jeg håber du kan give et indspark i forhold til hvad du ser som relevante 
forskningsemner indenfor de kommende år.  
 
Mvh. Christine Collin 
Studerende ved DTU, Msc. Architectural Engineering 
 
From: sn@vandkunst.dk 
To: chris_collin@hotmail.com 
Subject: SV: SV: SV: Interview omhandlende Det moderne Tanghus 
Date: Mon, 21 Apr 2014 11:06:08 +0000 
 
Hej Christine 
 
Fantastisk opgave! Meget relevant og interessant.  
 
Den er naturligvis et øjebliksbillede, fordi udviklingen går så hurtigt på det felt. I 
forhold til diskussionen om lovgivning kan jeg tilføje, at validiteten af dataene er 
en meget vigtig faktor. Den europæiske produktdeklarationslovgivning er ikke 
fuldt implementeret endnu, men EPD-oplysningerne er nøglen til en mulig 
lovgivning. Så længe man ikke med nogenlunde sikkerhed kan vide f.eks. hvilken 
energisammensætning der ligger til grund for produkterne er der ikke grundlag 
for at stille specifikke krav i lovgivningen.  
 
En anden og mere pragmatisk vej at gå i overgangen til en lovgivning har jeg et 
dagsaktuelt eksempel på . Vi laver nu et konkurrenceforslag til et byggeri i 
Stockholm, hvor kommunen kræver at der laves LCA, men kun på to parametre: 
energi og GWP. Her forudsættes det eksplicit, energisammensætningen er 
udefineret, dvs. det er de øvrige parametre der afgør det. I Jan Schipulls 
undersøgelse af tanghuset var netop energisammensætningen den altafgørende 
faktor som kunne 'relativere' alt andet til ubetydeligheder. Det synliggør, at de 
vigtigste beslutninger vedrørende bæredygtighed slet ike ligger hos designerne, 
men på de store energipolitiske linjer. Det kan derfor være produktivt at sætte 
parantes om energisammensætningen for at vi kan øve os i at tage de rigtige 
beslutninger indenfor det domæne, hvor vi råder som designere. 
 
Fortsæt det fine arbejde. Jeg glæder mig til at læse mere! 
 
*søren 
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mailkorrespondance med OOPEAA, 2016 regarding ADP 
 
From: Kazunori Yamaguchi [mailto:Kazunori.Yamaguchi@oopeaa.com]  
Sent: 10. februar 2016 18:09:34 
To: Christine Collin 
Cc: Anssi Lassila (Anssi.Lassila@oopeaa.com) 
Subject: Re: Regarding the Konsthall Tornedalen project 
 
Hello Christine 
 
Thank you for your contact and sorry for this late reply. 
 
Here is the answer. 
 
1. The project is alway driven by Hand-drawings, followed by Cad drawings, 
mainly ArchiCAD, sometime AutoCAD. 
 
In the process, we check visualisations by scale models, 3D views in ArchiCAD or 
Skechup. 
 
Konsthall began with hand drawings, later developed in AutoCAD. We also 
checked simple views in Sketchup. 
 
2. Please find attached Material list (in Swedish) 
 
3. It looks pretty much like typical detail here. However in Konsthall, we are 
thinking of using wooden cladding on top of  Water proof layer, with the air layer 
in-between. 
 
 Best regards, 
----------------------------------------- 
KAZUNORI YAMAGUCHI 
architect 
kazunori.yamaguchi@oopeaa.com 
+358 (0)46 646 0130 
 
OOPEAA        OFFICE FOR PERIPHERAL ARCHITECTURE 
Helsinki 
office: Eteläinen Hesperiankatu 8 
FI-00100 Helsinki, 358 (0)50 3648305 
www.oopeaa.com 
viii
Appendix B: Mail correspondence, OOPEAA
==PAGE:102==
 
From: Christine Collin <chris_collin@hotmail.com> 
Sent: Monday, February 8, 2016 1:14 PM 
To: Kazunori Yamaguchi 
Cc: Anssi Lassila 
Subject: Regarding the Konsthall Tornedalen project 
  
Dear Kazunori 
 
I hope everything is fine by you! 
 
I am heading towards the last part of my thesis and found, I still have some 
questions for you, that I would be very happy if you could answer.  
 
1. Which programs do you use in the initial design stage of a project (generally 
speaking)? (Google Sketch up? Hand drawings? ArchiCad? etc.)  
Perhaps a short description of your initial design stage of Konsthall Tornedalen? 
 
2. Which materials do you plan on using for the Konsthall Tornedalen? (If you 
already know) 
 
3. I have been using the roof construction you see in the attached file for my 
initial calculations, could this roof construction be a possibility in 
Sweden/Finland in general?  
 
 
Kind regards 
 
Christine Collin 
DTU 
==PAGE:103==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONSTHALL TORNEDALEN / L1
x
Appendix C: Case: Konsthall Tornedalen by OOPEAA
==PAGE:104==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
N ORTH  V IE W
==PAGE:105==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
EN T R AN CE H A LL
==PAGE:106==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
SIT E  PLA N 1 : 80 0
==PAGE:107==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
PLAN  1 :2 0 0
==PAGE:108==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
N ORT H  ELEVAT ION  1 : 20 0
==PAGE:109==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
SOU T H  ELEVAT ION  1 : 20 0
==PAGE:110==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
ELEVAT ION S 1 : 20 0
==PAGE:111==
Hakalankatu 10b, FI-60100 SEINÄJOKI +358 (0)6 414 1225 - Tehtaankatu 29a, FI-00150 HELSINKI +358 (0)50 364 8305
KONS T H A L L  TO R N E D A L E N
S KETC H  1
1 8.0 3 .2 0 1 5
SEC T ION S 1 : 20 0
==PAGE:112==
Basic Load Definitions #O1Thickness [m]
Density [kg/m^
Selfweight, others
g_k,oth
0,90
Aluminium sheet
0,00079
2700
0,021
Timber (475 kg/m3 - zB Sp
0,064
475
0,304
Fibreboard porous bitumin
0,02
250
0,050
Glass wool
0,36
30
0,108
Chipboard (650 kg/m3)
0,022
650
0,143
Plasterboard (900 kg/m3) 
0,03
900
0,270
Imposed loads
q_k
4,40
Snow load
3,71
Wind load
0,6921
* Multiplies with 10 to convert from kg to kN
Planja Steel/aluminium roof
http://www.plannja.dk/plannja/produkter/profiler-i-aluminium/
Roof structure
http://www.baubook.at/phbtk/index_BTR.php?SW=19&lng=1
Roof construction
d
lambda
R
cm
W/mK
m2K/W
Aluminium sheet
0,079
Structure mat PP
1,9
Timber (475 kg/m3 - zB Sp
2,4
Air and Timber
8
Fibreboard porous bitumin
2
0,057
0,351
Glass wool (90%)
0,038
2,632
Timber (10%)
0,12
0,833
Glass wool (90%)
0,038
6,316
Timber (10%)
0,12
2
Chipboard (650 kg/m3)
2,2
0,13
0,169
Vapor barrier PE
0,02
0,5
0
Glass wool (90%)
0,038
1,579
Timber (10%)
0,12
0,5
Plasterboard (900 kg/m3) 
1,5
0,25
0,06
Plasterboard (900 kg/m3) 
1,5
0,25
0,06
Construction Part
59,599
Load CACL. 1              - SELFWEIGHT OF STRUCTURE
24
10
Characteristic values [kN/m2]*
6
xix
Appendix D: Load Calculations
==PAGE:113==
Undrifted load arrangement (I)
Angles
Persistent/transient design situation
s = μi Ce Ct sk
(5.1)
α1_1 =
33,3 °
μ1_1 = 0,71
s1_1 = 1,65
s1_1 = 3,30
l_1 = 7,173
α2_1 = 33,1 °
μ1_2 =0,72
s2_1 = 1,66
s2_1 = 3,33
l_2 = 7,156
Accidental design situation (snow load)
s = μi Ce Ct sAd
(5.2)
α1_2 = 32,7 °
μ2_1 =0,73
s1_2 = 1,69
s1_2 = 3,38
l_3 = 6,241
Accidental design situation (snow drift)
s = μi Sk
(5.3)
α2_2 = 32,7 °
μ2_2 =0,73
s2_2 = 1,69
s2_2 = 3,38
l_4 = 6,226
α1_3 = 33,6 °
μ3_1 =0,70
s1_3 = 1,63
s1_3 = 3,27
l_5 = 6,317
Snow load shape coefficient
μi
α2_3 = 33,7 °
μ3_2 =0,70
s2_3 = 1,63
s2_3 = 3,25
l_6 = 6,309
Characteristic value of snow on the ground
sk =
2,9
kN/m2
α1_4 = 23,4 °
μ4_1 =0,80
s1_4 = 1,86
s1_4 = 3,71
l_7 = 6,539
Design value of exceptional snow load on the ground
sAd =
5,8
kN/m2
α2_4 = 
23,4 °
μ4_2 = 0,80
s2_4 = 1,86
s2_4 = 3,71
l_8 = 6,54
Exposure coefficient
Ce = 
0,8
α1_5 = 
27,2 °
μ5_1 = 0,80
s1_5 = 1,86
s1_5 = 3,71
l_9 = 5,904
Thermal coefficient
Ct =
1
α2_5 = 29,7 °
μ5_2 =0,80
s2_5 = 1,86
s2_5 = 3,71
l_10 = 6,047
Max = 1,86
Max = 3,71
Characteristic value of snow for Sweden (T C.1):
above 30 degrees:
Max = 1,69
Max = 3,38
Design value of exceptional snow load (4.1)
sAd = Cesl sk
Drifted load arrangements (II) 
Case (II)
Altitude above sealevel
A =
52
m
α1_1 =
33,3 °
μ1_1 = 1,60
s1_1 = 3,71
s1_1 = 7,42
s1_1 = 4,64
Figure C.8, Sweden/Finland Snow Load at Sea Level
Z =
3
α2_1 = 33,1 °
μ2_2 =1,60
s2_1 = 3,71
s2_1 = 7,42
s2_1 = 4,64
Coefficient for exceptional snow loads (By national Annex)
Cesl =
2
α1_2 = 32,7 °
μ2_1 =1,60
s1_2 = 3,71
s1_2 = 7,42
s1_2 = 4,64
α2_2 = 32,7 °
μ2_2 =1,60
s2_2 = 3,71
s2_2 = 7,42
s2_2 = 4,64
Snow load shape coefficient (T 5.2)
α1_3 = 33,6 °
μ3_1 =1,60
s1_3 = 3,71
s1_3 = 7,42
s1_3 = 4,64
0 ° ≤ α ≤ 30°     ⇒       μ1 = 0,8
α2_3 = 33,7 °
μ3_2 =1,60
s2_3 = 3,71
s2_3 = 7,42
s2_3 = 4,64
0 ° ≤ α ≤ 30°     ⇒    μ2 =0,8 + 0,8 α/30
α1_4 = 23,4 °
μ4_1 =0,84
s1_4 = 1,95
s1_4 = 3,89
s1_4 = 2,32
α2_4 = 
23,4 °
μ4_2 = 0,98
s2_4 = 2,26
s2_4 = 4,53
s2_4 = 2,32
30 ° ≤ α ≤ 60°   ⇒     μ1 =0,8(60- α)/30
α1_5 = 
27,2 °
μ5_1 = 0,93
s1_5 = 2,15
s1_5 = 4,29
s1_5 = 2,32
30 ° ≤ α ≤ 60°   ⇒      μ2 = 1,6
α2_5 = 29,7 °
μ5_2 =0,84
s2_5 = 1,95
s2_5 = 3,90
s2_5 = 2,32
Max = 3,71
Max = 7,42
Max = 4,64
http://www.steelexpress.co.uk/structuralsteel/RHS.html
Max = 2,26
Max = 4,53
Max = 2,32
http://www.b2bmetal.eu/hea-sections-specification
Combination value
!0 s = #REF! kN/m2
Maximum snow loa
3,71 [kN/m2]
Frequent value
!1 s =
1,45
kN/m2
7,42 [kN/m2]
Quasi-permanent value
!2 s = #REF! kN/m2
Snow load shape coefficients for exceptional snow drifts 
B2 Multi-span roofs 
The shape coefficient given in Figure B1 is determined as the least value of: 
μ1 = 2h/sk
μ1 = 2b3/(ls1 + ls2)
μ1 = 5
Maximum snow loa
SNOW LOAD CALCULATION
beneath 30 degrees:
Snow load shape coefficient PersistenT Design [kN/m2]
Accidential Design [kN/m2]
Length og Element [m]
sk = 0,79 Z + 0,375 + A/336
Snow load shape coefficient PersistenT Design [kN/m2]
Accidential Design [kN/m2]
Accidential Design 2 [kN/m2]
==PAGE:114==
Terrain category
Roughness factor mean wind velocity Wind turbulence Peak velocity pressure Conservative value
Terrain category I
Height, z [m] c_r
Mean wind, V_m
Turbulence intens Eurocode
Modeled
z_0 = 0,01
0
0
0
0
0
0
z_0_II = 0,05
1
0,781756292
15,63512585
0,217147241
385,0247156
560,767089
z_min = 1
2
0,899422339
17,98844678
0,188739166
469,4345776
560,767089
z_max = 200
3
0,968252564
19,36505128
0,175322254
522,0203266
560,767089
4
1,017088386
20,34176772
0,1669041
560,7670888
560,767089
Terrain factor
k_r = 0,169756222
5
1,054968392
21,09936784
0,160911192
591,6426115
560,767089
6
1,085918611
21,71837221
0,156324995
617,4023281
692,126367
Roughness factor
c_r = -
7
1,112086648
22,24173295
0,152646578
639,5555262
692,126367
c_0 = 1
8
1,134754432
22,69508865
0,14959732
659,0222493
692,126367
9
1,154748836
23,09497671
0,147007052
676,4063673
692,126367
Basic wind velocity
s. 18, Note 1-3
10
1,172634439
23,45268877
0,144764827
692,1263673
692,126367
Directional factor
c_dir = 1
692,126367
Surroundings factor
c_surr = 1
692,126367
Basic wind velocity
v_b0 = 20
v_b = 20
Mean wind velocity
v_m
Standard deviation
k_l
1
sig_v
3,395124435
Turbulence intensity
I_v
-
Air density
rho_air
1,25
Peak velocity pressure
-
DSEN 1991-1-4 2007.pdf
WIND LOAD CALCULATION
560.77 
692.13 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
Building height, z [m] 
Wind pressure, qP [N/m2] 
Wind load 
Eurocode 
Modeled 
==PAGE:115==
Codes
Factors
WL
SL
Dead%load
DL
gamma_{Gj,sup}
1,1
chi_0
0,3
0,7
Wind%load
WL
gamma_{Gj,inf}
0,9
chi_1
0,2
0,5
Snow%load
SL
gamma_{Q,1}
1,5
chi_2
0
0,2
gamma_{Q,i}
1,5
(D)%Dominerende
K_FI
1
Combination
DL
WL
SL
Table4A1.4494Design4values4of4actions4for4use4in4the4combination4of4actions4
gamma
gamma
chi_0
factor
gamma
chi_0
factor
ULS
Combination%
DL
1,1
0
0
0
0
0
0
DL+SL
1,1
0
0
0
1,5
1
1,5
Unfavourable% Favourable%
Leading%
Others%
DL+SL(D)+WL
1,1
1,5
0,3
0,45
1,5
1
1,5
Characteristic Gkj,sup 
Gkj,inf 
Qk,1
휓0,iQk,i
DL+WL
1,1
1,5
1
1,5
0
0
0
Frequent
Gkj,sup
Gkj,inf
휓1,1Qk,1
휓2,iQk,i
SLS
1
1
1,5
0,2
0,3
QuasiS
permanent%
Gkj,sup 
Gkj,inf 
휓2,1Qk,1
휓2,iQk,i
Combination
DL
WL
SL
Modeled
DL
1,1
0
0
DL+SL
1,1
0
1,5
X
Load%Combination%1
DL+SL
DL+SL(D)+WL
1,1
0,45
1,5
X
Load%Combination%2
DL+SL(D)+WL
DL+WL(D)
1,1
1,5
0
X
Load%Combination%3
DL+WL(D)
DL+WL
1
1
0
X
SLS
Load%Combination%4
DL+WL
LOAD%COMBINATIONS
Permanent%actions%Gd%
Variable%actions%Qd%
ULS
==PAGE:116==
Fy (Steel)
Max u_v
25,5
0,06
Dist bt. Frame 4m
Simple
Load Case 2
DL+SL(D)+WL
Frame Height 10 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 320
190,3
-158,6
78,5
0,039
OK
1820,8
22,46
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
HE-B 240
188,6
-157,2
77,8
0,046
OK
2242,3
6,5
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 300
188,7
-157,2
77,8
0,033
OK
2224,4
16,43
OK
Best solution INP 320
1 Frame
1820,8 kg
Building
72833 kg
Frame Height 8 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 340
238,4
-158,9
99,2
0,051
OK
1824,3
24,22
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
HE-B 260
236,3
-157,5
98,3
0,058
OK
2250,9
9,0
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 300
237,5
-158,3
98,8
0,054
OK
1997,4
21,07
OK
Best solution INP 340
1 Frame
1824,3 kg
Building
72972 kg
Frame Height 6.5 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 380
308,0
-154,3
112,8
0,046
OK
2111,6
23,15
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
HE-B 300
258,7
-140,1
104,5
0,048
OK
2648,3
7,8
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 400
245,8
-133,1
99,3
0,016
OK
4910,7
6,52
OK
Best solution INP 360
1 Frame
2111,6 kg
Building
84462 kg
Frame Heigt 4 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 500
463,8
-154,6
154,6
0,051
OK
3392,9
16,22
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm]
HE-B 450
458,3
-152,8
152,8
0,046
OK
3996,0
7,7
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm]
[] 400
452,2
-150,7
150,7
0,051
OK
4676,8
12,27
OK
Best solution INP 500
1 Frame
3392,9 kg
Building
135717 kg
Simple Frame - Snow load
SIMPLE FRAME INITIAL OPTIMISATION - HEIGHTS AND CROSS SECTION - STEEL
xxiii
Appendix E: Steel Optimisation Step 1.
==PAGE:117==
Fy (Steel)
Max u_v 
25,5
0,06
Advanced 
Load Case 2
DL+SL(D)
Frame Height 10 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
60,4
-210,1
53,9
0,031
OK
1704,5
24,21
OK
INP 280
57,9
-199,5
54,1
0,010
OK
3128,0
8,6
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
HE-B 160
64,8
-212,2
64,4
0,020
OK
2203,3
19,4
OK
HE-B 220
59,8
-207,9
54,8
0,010
OK
4240,7
6,66
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 200
60,0
-208,1
53,8
0,030
OK
1633,3
21,06
OK
[] 250
58,3
-201,0
53,9
0,0133
OK
2578,9
10,0
OK
Best solutionBOX 200
1 Frame
1633,3 kg
Building
65332 kg
Frame Height 8 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 160
64,3
-206,8
64,1
0,016
OK
1783,5
21,47
OK
INP 260
64,2
-206,2
64,4
0,009
OK
2409,8
13,1
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
HE-B 160
64,8
-212,2
64,4
0,020
OK
2203,3
19,4
OK
HE-B 220
64,9
-213,8
65,2
0,007
OK
3751,1
7,96
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 150
64,2
-206,2
63,9
0,022
OK
1444,7
24,22
OK
[] 250
64,1
-205,4
64,3
0,0094
OK
2281,1
12,1
OK
Best solutionBOX 150
1 Frame
1444,7 kg
Building
57789 kg
Frame Height 6.5 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 220
54,2
-225,2
72,5
0,021
OK
1641,3
23,16
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
HE-B 160
56,1
-232,8
76,9
0,025
OK
2027,6
20,7
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 250
52,3
-220,9
68,2
0,013
OK
2099,2
12,93
OK
Best solutionINP 220
1 Frame
1641,3 kg
Building
65653 kg
Frame Height 4 m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 240
75,4
-357,0
155,9
0,032
OK
1748,5
20,61
OK
HE-B
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
HE-B 160
79,6
-386,0
171,3
0,048
OK
1850,1
24,7
OK
Box []
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 250
73,9
-346,3
150,0
0,027
OK
1915,4
14,85
OK
Best solutionBOX 250
1 Frame
1748,5 kg
Building
69940 kg
ADVANCED FRAME INITIAL OPTIMISATION - HEIGHTS AND CROSS SECTION - STEEL
Advanced Frame - Snow load & Wind load
==PAGE:118==
Frame Height 
10 m
u_h = 0,033
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 500
357,7
-94,3
107,4
0,047596
False
4236,2
6,55
OK
Frame Height
8 m
u_h = 0,027
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 500
238,4
-158,9
99,2
0,025
OK
3803,8
5,31
OK
Frame Height
6,5 m
u_h = 0,022
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 475
132,6
-44,2
51,1
0,018
OK
2913,2
5,79
OK
Frame Height
4 m
u_h = 0,013
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 500
463,8
-154,6
154,6
0,051
False
3392,9
16,22
OK
Best solution INP 475
1 Frame
2913,2 kg
Building
116528 kg
Frame Height 
10 m
u_h = 0,033
Box []
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 340
101,9
-448,1
100,6
0,030
OK
4459,5
6,99
OK
Frame Height
8 m
u_h = 0,027
Box []
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
[] 250
59,0
-245,5
57,2
0,021
OK
2367,8
8,37
OK
Frame Height
6,5 m
u_h = 0,022
INP
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 220
54,2
-225,2
72,5
0,019
OK
1641,3
10,88
OK
Frame Height
4 m
u_h = 0,013
INP
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 425
24,1
-90,6
26,5
0,001
OK
5082,8
0,46
OK
Best solution INP 220
1 Frame
1641,3 kg
Building
65653 kg
Simple Frame - Wind load, tested for ULS & SLS
Advanced Frame - Wind load, tested for ULS & SLS
INITIAL OPTIMISATION - HEIGHTS AND CROSS SECTION - STEEL
==PAGE:119==
SIMPLE FRAME - BEST CASE
Load Case 2
DL+SL(D)+WL
Glulam =
GL36
Load Case 3
DL+WL(D)
Frame Height 6.5 m
u_h = 0,02166667
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
160 x 800
155,6
-59,5
46,9
0,0229
OK
1612,8
Entire Building
64512
kg
ADVANCED FRAME
Frame Height 10 m Angles: 0,75 and 0,25
u_h = 0,03333333
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 800
130,6
-247,5
67,8
0,024
OK
3025,6
Entire Building
121024
kg
Frame Height 8 m
u_h = 0,02666667
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 600
62,3
-212,4
62,4
0,0255
OK
1570,8
Entire Building
62834
kg
Frame Height 6.5 m
u_h = 0,02166667
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 400
43,9
-148,3
55,4
0,0214
OK
1231,4
Entire Building
49257
kg
Frame Height 4 m
u_h = 0,01333333
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 600
75,4
-255,8
73,9
0,0123
OK
1697,8
Entire Building
67913
kg
Best solution 
115x400
1231,4
Optimised since the simple frame
381,4 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
15255,1 kg
ADVANCED FRAME INITIAL OPTIMISATION - HEIGHTS - WOOD
xxvi
Appendix F: Wood Optimisation Step 1.
==PAGE:120==
Roof materials
Height = 4 m Height = 6.5 m Height = 8 m
Height = 10 m
Volume1
Volume2
Volume3
Volume4
Round up values
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
Aluminium sheet
4230
4580
5080
5980
Structure mat PP
33940
36770
40790
48000
Timber (475 kg/m3 - zB Spruce/Fir) rough, technically
67510
73140
81140
95470
Fibreboard porous bituminised (250 kg/m3)
9870
10690
11860
13960
Glass wool
28430
30790
34160
40200
Chipboard (650 kg/m3)
28230
30580
33930
39920
Vapor barrier PE
360
390
430
510
Plasterboard (900 kg/m3) 
53300
57740
64060
75370
Total weight
225870
244680
271450
319410
Material saved when using 6.5 m high roofs compared to 8 meters
26770 kg
10 %
Roof structure
          
          !      "!  # $   $  % 


 
!"#$%&'
()*+,
&'( )*+$,
-.(/&&
-.(&/01 +$,
 (
( /01 +$,
*0 ,1 

$
2
#+$2
+
$,2+#
345
/ +$,

$   $% 
(& (
(

   /  $  
(&
('
(-

-
3 4 4'/+$546   +7    (      
 ('
( 
( 

'
            
.(0
0
0
0
(-$&89!          ( # $!    %
.(
<
<
,
0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
.(
<
<
,

4!  =  = > %  $      /+$5
 (
(
(-


         
(0
0
0
0
(-$&8? @)#?##./+$5
(
(-.
 (- 
0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
(
( 
(.--


            
 '(0
0
0
0
(-$&8? @)#?##./+$5
 '(
(-.
(-

0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
 '(
( 
 (

.
4 = =       /+$5
 ( 
(-
(&
'
&
A$=!% $ B
( 
(
(
,

         
(0
0
0
0
(-$&8? @)#?##./+$5
(
(-.
(&
'
0
0
(-$83 4 4'/+$546   +7   
(
( 
(


? = /   =  &/+$5
(
( 
(
'
 ? = /   =  &/+$5
(
( 
(
'
0
0

(+(0
0
0
    ! "#$%&
('+&(-'0
0
0
6/ 
#7!!"0
88
#"
HH
G9
(&&#+$,2
<.5
xxvii
Appendix G: Roof Structure
==PAGE:121==
Load case 
DL+SL(D)+WL
Vertical Load
6,55 kN/m2
Lineload
26,22 kN/m
Height 
6,5 m
Horisontal Load 1
0,25 kN/m2
Lineload
4,04 kN/m
Max u
0,06 m
Horisontal Load 2
0,31 kN/m2
Lineload
8,98 kN/m
Dist. Bt. fra
4 m
Fy =
25,5 kN/cm2
INP
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 220
69,0
-240,3
67,6
0,035
OK
1457,3
21,68
OK
INP 160
INP 300
83,7
-213,8
66,0
0,019
OK
2136,0
23,12
OK
INP 140
Steel 
Fy =
35,5 kN/cm2
INP
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
67,0
-242,8
68,0
0,045
OK
1300,1
27,27
OK
INP 160
INP 240
73,6
-233,2
66,7
0,031
OK
1538,7
31,11
OK
INP 140
Steel 
Fy =
40 kN/cm2
INP
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
68,3
-241,4
67,8
0,048
OK
1211,1
35,84
OK
INP 140
INP 280
83,9
-212,8
65,9
0,024
OK
1849,7
37,80
OK
INP 120
Minimum material
1211,1
kg
INP 200 + INP 140
Fy = 40 
Decide to use S355 as it is commonly used and not as expensive as the S400
Load case 
DL+WL
Vertical Load
0,99 kN/m2
Lineload 1 =
3,944 kN/m
u_h =
0,021667 m
Horisontal Load 1
0,561 kN/m2
Lineload 2 =
8,976 kN/m
Horisontal Load 2
0,64 kN/m2
Lineload 3 =
18,44 kN/m
Steel 
Fy =
35,5 kN/cm2
INP
Bending moment Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 220
41,7
-181,1
70,5
0,021
OK
1534
10,39
OK
INP 200
1 Frame
1533,8 kg
Building
61353 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
107,5 kg
Optimised since last step in total
4299,8 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
1379 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
55175 kg
Snow load
Advanced Frame - Two Cross Section - STEEL
Wind load (ULS and SLS)
xxviii
Appendix H: Steel Optimisation Step 2.
==PAGE:122==
Load case 
DL+SL(D)+WL
Vertical Load
6,55 kN/m2
Lineload
23,5 kN/m
Height 
6,5 m
Horisontal Load 1
0,25 kN/m2
Lineload
4 kN/m
Max u
0,06 m
Horisontal Load 2
0,31 kN/m2
Lineload
9 kN/m
Dist. Bt. frames
4 m
Solution 1
Mass
Solution 2
Mass
[kg]
[kg]
1
140 x 400
1
140 x 400
90 x 400
90 x 400
2
115 x 600
2
115 x 600
160 x 200
160 x 200
3
140 x 367
3
140 x 367
140 x 433
140 x 433
Frame Height 6.5 m
Angles: 0,75 and 0,25
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 600
88,3
-186,9
70,9
0,0144
OK
1124,5
90 x 200
140 x 400
80,9
-196,4
66,3
0,0250
OK
960,7
90 x 200
115 x 400
62,7
-219,4
62,2
0,020
OK
1089,7
90 x 400
Load case 
Vertical Load
0,99 kN/m2
Lineload 1 =
3,944 kN/m
u_h =
0,021667 m
Horisontal Load 1
0,561 kN/m2
Lineload 2 =
8,976 kN/m
Horisontal Load 2
0,64 kN/m2
Lineload 3 =
18,44 kN/m
Frame Height 6.5 m
Angles: 0,75 and 0,25
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 600
46,6
-122,7
51,1
0,0166
OK
1190,5
90 x 400
Entire Building
47621
kg
Best solution 
90x600 + 90x400
1190,5
Optimised since last step
40,9 kg
Optimised since last step, total
1636,0 kg
Optimised since the simple frame
422,3 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
16891,1 kg
Solution No. 1 is the best
Advanced Frame - Two Cross Section - WOOD
Wind load ULS & SLS
DL+WL & DL + WL(D)
Cross Sections
5952
Not possible
6877
7008
Cross Sections
6235,0
6702,0
Snow load
xxix
Appendix I: Wood Optimisation Step 2.
==PAGE:123==
Steel 
Fy =
35,5
kN/cm2
u_v = 0,06
u_h = 0,021667
SNOW LOAD
DL+WL(D)+WL
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass Max stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 260
65,4
-264,4
73,7
0,028
OK
8770,4
11,36
OK
INP 180
INP 240
64,5
-259,6
73,8
0,029
OK
8489,0
14,31
OK
INP 200
Best solution
INP240 + INP200
8489,0 kg
Building
67912 kg
Pr. Frame
1697,8 kg
ULS    
DL+WL(D)
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass Max stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 180
22,1
-86,8
53,6
-
-
4602,1
27,50
OK
INP 100
Best solution
INP160 + INP100
4602,1 kg
Building
36817 kg
Pr. Frame
920,4 kg
SLS      
DL+WL
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass Max stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
36,7
-130,9
40,8
0,022
OK
5096,0
14,43
OK
INP 140
Best solution
INP160 + INP100
5096,0 kg
Building
40768 kg
Pr. Frame
1019,2 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
514,6 kg
Optimised since last step in total
20584,6 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
1894 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
75759 kg
WIND LOAD
SNOW LOAD
Advanced Frame - Sequence - STEEL
xxx
Appendix J: Steel Optimisation Step 3.
==PAGE:124==
u_v = 0,06
u_h = 0,021667
SNOW LOAD
DL+WL(D)+WL
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 600
83,6
-183,9
62,6
0,0155
OK
4158,9
90 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
4158,9 kg
Building
33271 kg
Pr. Frame
831,8 kg
ULS    
DL+WL(D)
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 600
69,5
-130,7
62,6
-
-
4158,9
90 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
4158,9 kg
Building
33271 kg
Pr. Frame
831,8 kg
SLS      
DL+WL
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 600
41,2
-91,7
62,6
0,015
OK
4158,9
90 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
4158,9 kg
Building
33271 kg
Pr. Frame
831,8 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
358,7 kg
Optimised since last step in total
14349,6 kg
Optimised since the simple frame
781,0 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
31240,8 kg
Advanced Frame - Sequence - WOOD
WIND LOAD
SNOW LOAD
xxxi
Appendix K: Wood Optimisation Step 3.
==PAGE:125==
Steel 
Fy =
35,5
kN/cm2
u_h = 0,021667
u_v = 0,6
Load case 2 DL+SL(D)+WL
Vertical Load
6,55 kN/m2
Lineload
23,5 kN/m
Height 
6,5 m
Horisontal Load 1
0,25 kN/m2
Lineload
4 kN/m
Frames
5
Horisontal Load 2
0,31 kN/m2
Lineload
9 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 180
49,5
-191,6
58,5
0,0344
OK
3884,8
32,32
OK
INP 100
Best solution
INP180 + INP100
3884,8 kg
Building
31079 kg
Pr. Frame
777,0 kg
Load case 3 DL+WL(D) ULS
Vertical Load
0,99 kN/m2
Lineload 1 =
3,944 kN/m
DL+WL SLS
Horisontal Load 1
0,561 kN/m2
Lineload 2 =
8,976 kN/m
Horisontal Load 2
0,64 kN/m2
Lineload 3 =
18,44 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Ok for snow and wind
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
36,7
-130,9
40,8
0,0215
OK
4858,3
16,17
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP200 + INP120
4858,3 kg
Building
38867 kg
Pr. Frame
971,7 kg
Angles: 0,5 and 0,5
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
30,4
-107,9
22,2
0,0215
OK
5353,1
13,00
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP200 + INP120
5353,1 kg
Building
42825 kg
Pr. Frame
1070,6 kg
Angles: 0,6 and 0,4
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
33,6
-115,7
28,4
0,0210
OK
5103,2
14,43
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP200 + INP120
5103,2 kg
Building
40825 kg
Pr. Frame
1020,6 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
47,5 kg
Optimised since last step in total
1901,4 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
1942 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
77661 kg
Best solution
INP200 + INP120
WIND LOAD
SNOW LOAD
Advanced Frame - Angle Optimization - STEEL
xxxii
Appendix L: Steel Optimisation Step 4.
==PAGE:126==
Load case 
DL+SL(D)+WL & DL+WL(D)
Vertical Load
6,55 kN/m2
Lineload
23,5 kN/m
Height 
6,5 m
Horisontal Load 1
0,25 kN/m2
Lineload
4 kN/m
Max u
0,021666667 m
Horisontal Load 2
0,31 kN/m2
Lineload
9 kN/m
Frames
5
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 400
59,2
-166,1
58,6
0,0193
OK
3766,3
90 x 200
Best solution
115x400 + 90x200
3766,3 kg
Building
30130 kg
Pr. Frame
753,3 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
78,5 kg
Optimised since last step in total
3140,8 kg
Optimised since the simple frame
859,5 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
34381,6 kg
Angles: 0,5 and 0,5
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 400
43,6
-75,5
30,8
0,0128
OK
4346,6
90 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
4346,6 kg
Building
34773 kg
Pr. Frame
869,3 kg
Advanced Frame - Angle Optimisation - WOOD
Advanced Frame - SNOW LOAD & WIND LOAD
xxxiii
Appendix M: Wood Optimisation Step 4.
==PAGE:127==
Fy =
35,5
kN/cm2
u_v = 0,06
u_h = 0,021667
Load case 
DL+SL(D)+WL
Vertical Lineload
17,61 kN/m
Height 
6,5 m
Horisontal Lineload
3,03 kN/m
Dist bt. Frames
1
Horisontal Lineload
6,42 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 100
11,2
-44,9
14,6
0,0504
OK
1786,9
33,50
OK
INP 80
Best solution
INP100 + INP80
1786,9 kg
Pr. Frame
357,4 kg
Dist bt. Frames
2
Vertical Lineload
11,74 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
2,02 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
4,28 kN/m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 140
23,4
-92,2
29,2
0,0354
OK
2619,0
29,64
OK
INP 80
Best solution
INP140 + INP80
2619,0 kg
Pr. Frame
523,8 kg
Dist bt. Frames
3
Vertical Lineload
17,61 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
3,03 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
6,42 kN/m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 160
34,6
-137,6
43,7
0,0317
OK
3693,5
30,84
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP160 + INP120
3693,5 kg
Pr. Frame
738,7 kg
Vertical Lineload
23,5 kN/m
Dist bt. Frames
4
Horisontal Lineload
4 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
8,55 kN/m
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 180
47,1
-183,7
58,2
0,0298
OK
4248,2
30,66
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP180 + INP120
4248,2 kg
Pr. Frame
849,6 kg
Dist bt. Frames
5
Vertical Lineload
29,35 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
5,05 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
10,7 kN/m
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
60,3
-228,9
72,7
0,0278
OK
4858,3
29,76
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP200 + INP120
4858,3 kg
Pr. Frame
971,7 kg
Dist bt. Frames
6
Vertical Lineload
35,21 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
6,06 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
12,83 kN/m
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 220
72,7
-273,8
87,2
0,0260
OK
5877,9
28,08
OK
INP 140
Best solution
INP220 + INP140
5877,9 kg
Pr. Frame
1175,6 kg
Advanced Frame - SNOW LOAD
Advanced Frame - Frame distance Optimisation - Steel
xxxiv
Appendix N: Steel Optimisation Step 5.
==PAGE:128==
Fy =
35,5
kN/cm2
u_v = 0,06
u_h = 0,021667
Load case 
DL+WL(D)
Vertical Lineload
0,986 kN/m
Height 
6,5 m
Horisontal Lineload
2,244 kN/m
Dist bt. Frames
1
Horisontal Lineload
4,612 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
INP
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 140
7,4
-27,4
5,3
0,0176
OK
2888,0
9,18
OK
INP 80
Best solution
INP140 + INP80
2888,0 kg
Pr. Frame
577,6 kg
Dist bt. Frames
2
Vertical Lineload
1,972 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
4,488 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
9,22 kN/m
INP
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 160
14,4
-53,7
10,4
0,0211
OK
4017,3
7,97
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP160 + INP120
4017,3 kg
Pr. Frame
803,5 kg
Dist bt. Frames
3
Vertical Lineload
2,958 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
6,73 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
13,84 kN/m
INP
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
22,9
-80,6
17,2
0,0178
OK
4796,3
28,008394
OK
INP 80
Best solution
INP200 + INP80
4796,3 kg
Pr. Frame
959,3 kg
Dist bt. Frames
4
Vertical Lineload
3,944 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
8,976 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
18,44 kN/m
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 200
30,4
-107,9
22,2
0,0215
OK
5353,1
13,00
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP200 + INP120
5353,1 kg
Pr. Frame
1070,6 kg
Dist bt. Frames
5
Vertical Lineload
4,93 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
11,22 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
23,06 kN/m
INP
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 220
37,8
-133,2
28,6
0,0210
OK
5816,6
25,71
OK
INP 100
Best solution
INP220 + INP100
5816,6 kg
Pr. Frame
1163,3 kg
Dist bt. Frames
6
Vertical Lineload
5,916 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
13,464 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
27,67 kN/m
INP
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 240
44,4
-157,2
34,6
0,0195
OK
6643,5
30,40
OK
INP 100
Best solution
INP240 + INP100
6643,5 kg
Pr. Frame
1328,7 kg
Advanced Frame - Frame distance Optimisation - Steel
Advanced Frame - WIND LOAD
==PAGE:129==
Dist bt. Frames
8
Vertical Lineload
7,888 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
17,952 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
36,89 kN/m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 260
59,0
-208,5
46,1
0,0195
OK
7849,2
24,78
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP260 + INP120
7849,2 kg
Pr. Frame
1569,8 kg
Dist bt. Frames
10
Vertical Lineload
9,86 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
22,44 kN/m
Angles: 0,3 and 0,7
Horisontal Lineload
46,12 kN/m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 260
74,4
-264,3
55,8
0,0216
OK
9005,4
10,37
OK
INP 180
Best solution
INP260 + INP180
9005,4 kg
Pr. Frame
1801,1 kg
60
d (depth of building)
30 m
Number of frames in section
5 -
Rows of frames Dist. frames
Weight of 1 seq.
Weight of structure
[No.]
[m]
[kg]
[kg]
30,0
1
2888
86641
15,0
2
4017
60260
10,0
3
4796
47963
8,0
4
5353
42825
6,0
5
5817
34900
5,0
6
6643
33217
4,0
8
7849
31397
3,0
10
9005
27016
A distance of 6 meters between the frames are chosen
Optimised since last step per frame
-357,0 kg
Optimised since last step in total
5649,4 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
1584 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
83310 kg
Best solution
INP240 + INP100
Advanced Frame - WIND LOAD
Advanced Frame - Frame distance Optimization - Steel
SOLUTION
==PAGE:130==
u_v = 0,06
u_h = 0,021667
Load case 
DL+SL(D)+WL
Vertical Lineload
17,61 kN/m
Height 
6,5 m
Horisontal Lineload
3,03 kN/m
Dist bt. Frames
1
Horisontal Lineload
6,42 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
INP 100
11,2
-44,9
14,6
0,0504
False
1786,9
INP 80
Best solution
INP100 + INP80
1786,9 kg
Pr. Frame
357,4 kg
Dist bt. Frames
2
Vertical Lineload
11,74 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
2,02 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
4,28 kN/m
INP
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
INP 140
23,4
-92,2
29,2
0,0354
OK
2619,0
INP 80
Best solution
INP140 + INP80
2619,0 kg
Pr. Frame
523,8 kg
Dist bt. Frames
3
Vertical Lineload
17,61 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
3,03 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
6,42 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 400
47,2
-135,0
45,0
0,0215
OK
715,6
90 x 200
Best solution
INP160 + INP120
715,6 kg
Pr. Frame
143,1 kg
Vertical Lineload
23,5 kN/m
Dist bt. Frames
4
Horisontal Lineload
4 kN/m
Angles: 0,7 and 0,3
Horisontal Lineload
8,55 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 400
64,5
-149,1
60,3
0,0243
False
841,6
90 x 200
Best solution
INP180 + INP120
841,6 kg
Pr. Frame
168,3 kg
Dist bt. Frames
5
Vertical Lineload
29,35 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
5,05 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
10,7 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 400
64,0
-242,6
57,5
0,0201
OK
1103,6
90 x 400
Best solution
INP200 + INP120
1103,6 kg
Pr. Frame
220,7 kg
Dist bt. Frames
6
Vertical Lineload
35,21 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
6,06 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
12,83 kN/m
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
INP 220
72,7
-273,8
87,2
0,0260
OK
5877,9
INP 140
Best solution
INP220 + INP140
5877,9 kg
Pr. Frame
1175,6 kg
Advanced Frame - Frame distance Optimisation - Wood
Advanced Frame - SNOW LOAD
xxxvii
Appendix O: Wood Optimisation Step 5.
==PAGE:131==
u_v = 0,06
u_h = 0,021667
Load case 
DL+WL(D)
Height 
6,5 m
Vertical Lineload
0,986 kN/m
Dist bt. Frames
1
Horisontal Lineload
2,244 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
4,612 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115x200
8,7
-38,9
15,0
0,0209
OK
2470,7
90x200
Best solution
115x200 + 90x200
2470,7 kg
Pr. Frame
494,1 kg
Dist bt. Frames
2
Vertical Lineload
1,972 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
4,488 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
9,22 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90x400
20,2
-62,0
27,1
0,0175
OK
3164,9
90x200
Best solution
90x400 + 90x200
3164,9 kg
Pr. Frame
633,0 kg
Dist bt. Frames
3
Vertical Lineload
2,958 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
6,73 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
13,84 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 400
25,6
-102,7
39,7
0,0154
OK
4407,5
90 x 400
Best solution
90x400 + 90x200
4407,5 kg
Pr. Frame
881,5 kg
Dist bt. Frames
4
Vertical Lineload
3,944 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
8,976 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
18,44 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 400
59,2
-166,1
58,6
0,0193
OK
3766,3
90 x 200
Best solution
115x400 + 90x200
3766,3 kg
Pr. Frame
753,3 kg
Dist bt. Frames
5
Vertical Lineload
4,93 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
11,22 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
23,06 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 600
51,3
-121,2
63,6
0,0212
OK
4193,0
90 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
4193,0 kg
Pr. Frame
838,6 kg
Dist bt. Frames
6
Vertical Lineload
5,916 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
13,464 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
27,67 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 600
63,4
-138,8
74,2
0,0211
OK
4994,5
90 x 200
Best solution
115x600 + 90x200
4994,5 kg
Pr. Frame
998,9 kg
Advanced Frame - Frame distance Optimisation - Wood
Advanced Frame - WIND LOAD
==PAGE:132==
Dist bt. Frames
8
Vertical Lineload
7,888 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
17,952 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
36,89 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 600
88,5
-179,3
84,5
0,0215
OK
5722,2
140 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
5722,2 kg
Pr. Frame
1144,4 kg
Dist bt. Frames
10
Vertical Lineload
9,86 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
22,44 kN/m
Horisontal Lineload
46,12 kN/m
BOX
Bending moment 
Normal force
Shear force Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 800
117,6
-193,2
97,4
0,0147
OK
6950,4
140 x 200
Best solution
15x800 + 140x200
6950,4 kg
Pr. Frame
1390,1 kg
60
d (depth of building)
30 m
Number of frames in section
5 -
Rows of frames Dist. frames
Weight of 1 seq.
Weight of structure
[No.]
[m]
[kg]
[kg]
30,0
1
2471
74122
15,0
2
3165
47474
10,0
3
4407
44075
8,0
4
3766
30130
6,0
5
4193
25158
5,0
6
4995
24973
4,0
8
5722
22889
3,0
10
6950
20851
A distance of 6 meters between the frames are chosen
Optimised since last step per frame
-27,2 kg
Optimised since last step in total
13894,2 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
1914 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
91555 kg
Best solution
115x600 + 90x200
Advanced Frame - WIND LOAD
SOLUTION
Advanced Frame - Frame distance Optimization - Wood
==PAGE:133==
Steel 
Fy =
35,5
kN/cm2
u_v = 0,06
u_h = 0,021667
Load case 
DL+SL(D)+WL
Load case 
DL+WL(D)
Frames
5
Dist bt. Frame
6
u_h = 0,02633333
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 280
91,8
-338,6
87,9
0,0254
OK
10160,9
12,44
OK
INP 220
Best solution
INP280 + INP200
10160,9 kg
Per Frame
2032,2 kg, Entire B.
50804,5304 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
-703,5 kg
Optimised since last step in total
-17587,2 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
881 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
65723 kg
u_h = 0,02233333
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 240
61,6
-215,9
66,3
0,0222
OK
6920,6
13,09
OK
INP 160
Best solution
INP280 + INP200
6920,6 kg
Per Frame
1384,1 kg, Entire B.
34602,9651 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
-55,4 kg
Optimised since last step in total
-1385,6 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
1529 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
81925 kg
Comparison to similar frames of 11.1 m each
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max Stress
Check
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
[kN/cm2]
INP 240
51,1
-182,4
58,2
0,0201
OK
5982,8
20,84
OK
INP 120
Best solution
INP280 + INP200
5982,8 kg
Per Frame
1196,6 kg, Entire B.
29913,8406 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
132,1 kg
Optimised since last step in total
3303,5 kg
Optimised since initial design per frame
1717 kg
Optimised since initial design in total
86614 kg
INITIAL DESIGN BY THE ARCHITECHTS - STEEL
INITIAL DESIGN BY THE ARCHITECHTS - MODIFIED
OPTIMISED DESIGN
xl
Appendix P: Steel Optimisation Step 6.
==PAGE:134==
0
INP 475
1 Frame
2913 kg
Structure
116528 kg
Index 
100 %
Final optimisation and comparison 
1
1 Frame
1641 kg
6
1 Frame
1197 kg
INP 220
Structure
65653 kg
Structure
29914 kg
 11.1 meter span
1 Frame
1272 kg
1 Frame
188 kg
Structure
50875 kg
Structure
4689 kg
Saved since initial simple frame
43,7 %
Saved in total
86614 kg
Saved from architecture modified
13,6 %
2
1 Frame
1534 kg
Saved since initial simple frame
74,3 %
Structure
61353 kg
-
1 Frame
2032 kg
1 Frame
107 kg
ARCH
Structure
50805 kg
Architects solution
Structure
4300 kg
Saved in total
55175 kg
1 Frame
881 kg
Saved since last step
6,5 %
Structure
65723 kg
Saved since initial simple frame
47,3 %
Saved since initial simple frame
56,4 %
3
1 Frame
1019 kg
-
1 Frame
1384 kg
Structure
40768 kg
MODIFIED
Structure
34603 kg
Architects solution modified
1 Frame
515 kg
1 Frame
648 kg
Structure
20585 kg
Structure
16202 kg
Saved in total
75759 kg
Saved since initial arch solution
31,9 %
Saved since last step
33,6 %
Saved since initial simple frame
70,3 %
Saved since initial simple frame
65,0 %
4
1 Frame
970 kg
Type
Single Frame
Saved
Structure
38870 kg
-
[kg]
[%]
Step 0
2913
116528
0
1 Frame
50 kg
Step 1
1641
65653
43,7
Structure
1898 kg
Step 2
1534
61353
47,3
Saved in total
77658 kg
Step 3
1019
40768
65,0
Saved since last step
4,7
Step 4
970
38870
66,6
Saved since initial simple frame
66,6 %
Step 5
1330
33220
71,5
Step 6
1197
29914
74,3
5
1 Frame
1330 kg
Structure
33220 kg
1 Frame
-360 kg
Structure
5650 kg
Saved in total
83308 kg
Saved since last step
14,5 %
Saved since initial simple frame
71,5 %
OPTIMISATION OVERVIEW - STEEL
The initial design by the architect
Optimisation and Comparison
Optimisation - Angles
Optimisation - Distance between frames
Optimisation - Initial
Entire Structure
[kg]
Optimisation - Two Cross Sections
Optimisation - Sequence
Optimisation of the initial design by the Architect
==PAGE:135==
Wood
u = 0,06
u = 0,0263
Load case 
DL+SL(D)+WL
Load case 
DL+WL(D)
Frames
5
Dist bt. Fram
6
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
140 x 600
105,1
-265,1
95,6
0,021068
OK
7856,9
115 x 400
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
7856,9 kg
Building
39285 kg
Pr. Frame
1571,4 kg
The real solution is not as good due to the large and rather tall frame distributing the wind
Optimised since last step per frame
-572,5 kg
Optimised since last step in total
-14312,1 kg
Optimised since the simple frame
41,4 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
25227,3 kg
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 600
79,5
-152,3
74,3
0,0215
OK
5282,0
115 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
5282,0 kg
Building
26410 kg
Pr. Frame
1056,4 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
515,0 kg
Optimised since last step in total
12874,7 kg
Optimised since the simple frame
556,4 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
38102,0 kg
Comparison to similar frames of 11.1 m each
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
90 x 600
67,6
-131,5
64,4
0,0214
OK
4013,8
90 x 200
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
4013,8 kg
Building
20069 kg
Pr. Frame
802,8 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
196,1 kg
Optimised since last step in total
4903,5 kg
Optimised since the simple frame
810,0 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
44443,0 kg
Bending moment 
Normal force Shear force
Deflection
Check
Mass
Max M [kNm]
Max N [kN]
Max V [kN]
Max u [m]
[kg]
115 x 400
50,0
-182,1
56,0
0,0209
OK
5616,2
140 x 333
Best solution
90x600 + 90x200
5616,2 kg
Building
28081 kg
Pr. Frame
1123,2 kg
Optimised since last step per frame
-320,5 kg
Optimised since last step in total
-8011,8 kg
Optimised since the simple frame
489,6 kg
Optimised since the simple frame, total
36431,1 kg
OPTIMISED DESIGN
INITIAL DESIGN BY THE ARCHITECHTS - WOOD
SLENDER DESIGN
INITIAL DESIGN BY THE ARCHITECHTS - MODIFIED
xlii
Appendix Q: Wood Optimisation Step 6.
==PAGE:136==
0
1 Frame
1613 kg
Final optimisation and comparison 
Structure
64512 kg
6
1 Frame
803 kg
Index 
100 %
Structure
20069 kg
 11.1 meter span
1
1 Frame
1231 kg
Structure
49257 kg
1 Frame
196 kg
Structure
4903 kg
1 Frame
381 kg
Saved in total
44443 kg
Structure
15255 kg
Saved since last step
19,6 %
Saved since initial simple frame
68,9 %
Saved in total
23,6 %
-
1 Frame
1571 kg
2
1 Frame
1191 kg
ARCH
Structure
39285 kg
Architects solution
Structure
47621 kg
1 Frame
41 kg
1 Frame
41 kg
Structure
25227 kg
Structure
1636 kg
Saved since intial simple frame
39,1 %
Saved in total
16891 kg
Saved since last step
3,3 %
-
1 Frame
1056 kg
Saved since initial simple frame
26,2 %
MODIFIED
Structure
26410 kg
Architects solution modified
3
1 Frame
832 kg
1 Frame
515 kg
Structure
33271 kg
Structure
12875 kg
Saved in total
38102 kg
1 Frame
359 kg
Saved since last step
32,8 %
Structure
14350 kg
Saved since initial frame
59,1 %
Saved in total
31241 kg
Saved since last step
30,1 %
Type
Single Frame
Saved
Saved since initial frame
51,6 %
-
[kg]
[%]
Step 0
1613
64512
0
4
1 Frame
753 kg
Step 1
1231
49257
23,6
Structure
30130 kg
Step 2
1191
47621
26,2
Step 3
832
33271
51,6
1 Frame
79 kg
Step 4
753
30130
53,3
Structure
3141 kg
Step 5
999
24973
61,3
Saved in total
34382 kg
Step 6
803
20069
68,9
Saved since last step
9,4 %
Saved since initial simple frame
53,3 %
5
1 Frame
999 kg
7
1 Frame
1123 kg
Structure
24973 kg
SLENDER
Structure
28081 kg
1 Frame
-246 kg
1 Frame
-320 kg
Structure
5158 kg
Structure
-8012 kg
Saved in total
39539 kg
Saved in total
36431 kg
Saved since last step
17,1 %
Saved since last step
-39,9 %
Saved since initial frame
61,3 %
Saved since initial frame
56,5 %
Optimering
Optimering - Angles
Optimisation - Distance bt. Frames
The initial design by the architect
Optimisation of the initial design by the Architect
OPTIMISATION OVERVIEW - WOOD
[kg]
Entire Structure
Optimisation and Comparison
Optimisation - Initial
Optimisation - Two Cross Sections
Optimisation - Sequence
==PAGE:137==
 
 
 
 
 
FEM-DESIGN CHECK 
 
 
Shear Forces in FEM-Design 
Shear Forces in Karamba 
 
 
 
xliv
Appendix R: FEM-Design Check
==PAGE:138==
 
 
Moment Forces in FEM-Design 
 
Moment Forces in Karamba 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
Watts
Hours per day Monthly kWh estimat
Tool, grinder
370 -
Tool, electric chain saw
1200 -
Tool, circular saw
1320
1,5
59,4
Tool, cordless tool battry charger
6
8
1,44
Tool, drill
360
6
64,8
Tool, belt sander
900 -
Tool, pad sander
360 -
Tool, scroll saw
420 -
Tool, soldering gun
600
3
54
Radio
15
8
3,6
Total
183,24 kWh
Estimation of Electricity used during Construction
xlvi
Appendix S: Electricity During Construction
==PAGE:140==
Density
Height d
Volume1
Volume2
Volume3
Volume4
Volume1
Volume2
Volume3
Volume4
[kg/m3]
[cm]
[m]
[m3]
[m3]
[m3]
[m3]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
Aluminium sheet
2712
0,079
0,00079
4,678
5,068
5,623
6,616
12688
13745
15249
17943
Structure mat PP
905
1,9
0,019
112,52
121,89
135,23
159,12
101829
110315
122383
144008
Timber (475 kg/m3 - zB Spruce/Fir) rough, technically
475
7,2
0,072
426,4
461,9
512,4
603,0
202532
219410
243414
286424
Fibreboard porous bituminised (250 kg/m3)
250
2
0,02
118,44
128,31
142,35
167,50
29610
32078
35587
41875
Glass wool
40
36
0,36
2131,9
2309,6
2562,2
3015,0
85277
92383
102490
120600
Chipboard (650 kg/m3)
650
2,2
0,022
130,28
141,14
156,58
184,25
84685
91742
101778
119762
Vapor barrier PE
910
0,02
0,0002
1,184
1,283
1,423
1,675
1078
1168
1295
1524
Plasterboard (900 kg/m3) 
900
3
0,03
177,66
192,47
213,52
251,25
159894
173219
192169
226124
Steel (from recycled steel): 6-15MJ (1,665 to 4,170 watt-hours).
http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/what-is-the-embodied-energy-of-materials.html
Welding
Weight
2917,5 Wh/kg
6200 m
69940 kg
66443 kg
193850
kWh
2,9175 kWh/kg
6900 m
79140 kg
75183 kg
219350
kWh
Aluminium: 11.35-17MJ (3,150 to 4,750 watt-hours)
7600 m
86460 kg
82137 kg
239630
kWh
3,95 kWh/kg
8700 m
169450 kg
160978 kg
469650
kWh
Density 
Energy pr. kg
Heat Value
Energy-from-waste facility
Weight
Volume
[kg/m3]
MJ/kg
[MJ]
[kWh]
EFW [kJ/kg]
kJ
kWh
50570 kg
112,4 m3
450
14,9
753324
209260
7072
357631040
99340
38550 kg
85,7 m3
450
14,9
574266
159520
7072
272625600
75730
62835 kg
139,6 m3
450
14,9
936032
260010
7072
444369120
123440
121025 kg
268,9 m3
450
14,9
1802869
500800
7072
855888800
237750
Energy pr. kg
MJ/cord
 kg/cord 
1 kJ = [kWh]
1 MJ = [kWh]
(lb/cord)
 kg/cord 
(millions Btu/cord)
(MJ/cord)
MJ/kg
Conversion:
1055,06
0,4536
0,000277778 0,277777778
Norway Pine
2670
1211,112
17,1
18041,526
14,9
http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/wood-combustion-heat-d_372.html
Paint of steel beams and columns
m2
10 L/ 70m2
L
kg
kg/100 y
Surface area 1 (h = 4 m)
85
1,2
12,1
16,9
67,5
Surface area 2 (h = 6.5 m)
80
1,1
11,4
15,9
63,5
Surface area 3 (h = 8 m)
115
1,6
16,4
22,8
91,3
Surface area 4 (h = 10 m)
185
2,6
26,4
36,7
146,9
Weight of Dry Cord 
Recoverable Heat Value of Cord (Dry 
Wood)
LCA INPUT TO THE FOUR INITIAL FRAMES
STEEL
Recycling potential (95 %)
Energy
WOOD
EFW facility material energy equivalent to steam-electric 
power fuel energy (kJ/kg)
J. Morris/Journal of Hazardous Materials 47 (1996) 277-293
xlvii
Appendix T: LCA Quantities Steel & Wood
==PAGE:141==
Volume1
Volume2
Volume3
Volume4
http://www.eurima.org/sustainable-construction/recycling.html
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
http://www.gyprock.com.au/Pages/About-Us/Recycling.aspx
Wood to incineration
285147
308907
342711
403245
Recycling Aluminum
11421
12366
13716
16146
Recycling Glass wool
63968
69278
76860
90450
Recycling Plasterboard
151905
164559
182571
214804,5
Disposal Structure Mat + Vapor
102900
111480
123660
145530
Landfill Plaster board
7995
8661
9609
11306
Landfill Alu
1269
1374
1524
1794
Energy to recycle aluminium
45110
48850
54180
63780
Recycling Weight
Volume
[kg/m3]
MJ/kg
[MJ]
[kWh]
EFW [kJ/kg]
kJ
kWh
285147 kg
634 m3
450
14,9
4247738
1179930
7072
2016559584
560160
308907 kg
686 m3
450
14,9
4601683
1278250
7072
2184590304
606830
342711 kg
762 m3
450
14,9
5105250
1418120
7072
2423652192
673240
403245 kg
896 m3
450
14,9
6007004
1668610
7072
2851748640
792150
Recycling
Recycling Phase
==PAGE:142==
Surface area 2 (h = 6.5 m)
1826,1 m2
Roof construction
Height d
Volume
Weight
Weight
100 years
100 years
[cm]
[m]
[m3]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[m3]
Aluminium sheet
0,079
0,00079
1,443
3912
3910
11730
4
Structure mat PP
1,9
0,019
34,696
31400
31400
94200
104
Timber (475 kg/m3 - zB Spruce/Fir) rough, technically
7,2
0,072
131,481
62453
62450
187350
394
Fibreboard porous bituminised (250 kg/m3)
2
0,02
36,522
9131
9130
27390
110
Glass wool
36
0,36
657,403
26296
26300
78900
1972
Chipboard (650 kg/m3)
2,2
0,022
40,175
26114
26110
78330
121
Vapor barrier PE
0,02
0,0002
0,365
332
330
990
1
Plasterboard (900 kg/m3) 
3
0,03
54,784
49305
49310
147930
164
Weight
Welding
23283 kg
4400 m3
22119 kg
1745198470
kWh
Density 
Energy pr. kg
Heat Value
Energy-from-waste facility
Weight
Volume
[kg/m3]
MJ/kg
[MJ]
[kWh]
EFW [kJ/kg]
kJ
kWh
263763 kg
586 m3
450
14,9
3929188
1091440
7072
1865331936
518150
Recycling of roof materials
Material
[kg]
Paint
m2
10 L/ 70m2
L
kg
kg/ 100 y
1,39 kg /l
Wood to incineration
263763
74,5
1,1
10,6
14,8
59,2
Recycling Aluminum
10557
Recycling Glass wool
59175
Recycling Plasterboard
140533,5
Energy pr. kg
MJ/cord
 kg/cord 
Landfill of Structure mat and Vapor barrier
95190
(lb/cord)
 kg/cord 
(millions Btu/cord)
(MJ/cord)
MJ/kg
1055,06
0,4536
Landfill plaster
7397
Norway Pine
2670
1211,112
17,1
18041,526
14,9
Energy to recycle aluminium
41700,15 kWh
1 kJ = [kWh]
1 MJ = [kWh]
Avoided aluminium production
10557 kg
http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/wood-combustion-heat-d_372.html
0,000277778 0,27777778
http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/what-is-the-embodied-energy-of-materials.html
Aluminium: 11.35-17MJ (3,150 to 4,750 watt-hours)
Steel (from recycled steel): 6-15MJ (1,665 to 4,170 watt-hours).
Average
3,95 kWh/kg
2,9175 kWh/kg
Recycling potential (95 %)
Energy
Weight of Dry Cord 
Recoverable Heat Value of Cord (Dry 
Recyccling of steel from the structure
Recycling of wood frOm the roof structure
Optimised Steel Solution LCA Input
==PAGE:143==
Surface area 2 (h = 6.5 m)
1826,1 m2
Roof construction
Height d
Volume
Weight
Weight
100 years
100 years
[cm]
[m]
[m3]
[kg]
[kg]
[kg]
[m3]
Aluminium sheet
0,079
0,00079
1,443
3912
3910
11730
4
Structure mat PP
1,9
0,019
34,696
31400
31400
94200
104
Timber (475 kg/m3 - zB Spruce/Fir) rough, technically
7,2
0,072
131,481
62453
62450
187350
394
Fibreboard porous bituminised (250 kg/m3)
2
0,02
36,522
9131
9130
27390
110
Glass wool
36
0,36
657,403
26296
26300
78900
1972
Chipboard (650 kg/m3)
2,2
0,022
40,175
26114
26110
78330
121
Vapor barrier PE
0,02
0,0002
0,365
332
330
990
1
Plasterboard (900 kg/m3) 
3
0,03
54,784
49305
49310
147930
164
Density 
Energy pr. kg
Heat Value
Energy-from-waste facility
Weight
Volume
[kg/m3]
MJ/kg
[MJ]
[kWh]
EFW [kJ/kg]
kJ
kWh
20069 kg
45 m3
450
14,9
298961
83040
7072
141928142,4
39420
Density 
Energy pr. kg
Heat Value
Energy-from-waste facility
Weight
Volume
[kg/m3]
MJ/kg
[MJ]
[kWh]
EFW [kJ/kg]
kJ
kWh
263763 kg
586 m3
450
14,9
3929188
1091440
7072
1865331936
518150
Recycling of roof materials
Material
[kg]
Paint
m2
10 L/ 70m2
L
kg
kg/ 100 y
1,39 kg /l
Wood to incineration
263763
213
3,0
30,4
42,3
169,2
Recycling Aluminum
10557
Recycling Glass wool
59175
Recycling Plasterboard
140533,5
Energy pr. kg
MJ/cord
 kg/cord 
Landfill of Structure mat and Vapor barrier
95190
(lb/cord)
 kg/cord 
(millions Btu/cord)
(MJ/cord)
MJ/kg
1055,06
0,4536
Landfill plaster
7397
Norway Pine
2670
1211,112
17,1
18041,526
14,9
Energy to recycle aluminium
41700,15 kWh
1 kJ = [kWh]
1 MJ = [kWh]
Avoided aluminium production
10557 kg
http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/wood-combustion-heat-d_372.html
0,000277778 0,27777778
http://www.lowtechmagazine.com/what-is-the-embodied-energy-of-materials.html
Aluminium :11.35-17MJ (3,150 to 4,750 watt-hours)
Average
3,95 kWh/kg
Recycling of wood fRom the roof structure
Recoverable Heat Value of Cord 
Weight of Dry Cord 
Recycling of wood from the structure
Optimised Wood Solution LCA Input
==PAGE:144==
http://www.oekobaudat.de/datenbank/browser-oekobaudat.html
Prozess-Datensatz: Stahlprofil (de)
Herstellung
Beseitigung Recyclingpotential GWP Faktor
Globales Erwärmungspotenzial (GWP)
A1-A3
C4
D
 [kg CO2-Äqv.]
1,024
0,0008872
-0,2056
0,81929
Saved steel in total
86614 kg
Recycling potential (95%)
82283 kg
kg CO2 saved
67413 kg CO2
Simple Global Warming Potential Calculation - Steel
li
Appendix U: Simple GWP Calculation for Steel &
Wood
==PAGE:145==
Density 
Weight
Volume
[kg/m3]
43999 kg
98 m3
450
http://www.forum-holzbau.ch/pdf/moetzl_oekologische.pdf
Prozess-Datensatz: Brettschichtholz - Sonderformen (Durchschnitt DE) (de) ökobaudat.de
Globales Erwärmungspotenzial (GWP)
 kg CO2-Äqv.
Rohstoffbereitstellung (A1)
-749
Transport (A2)
19,1
Herstellung (A3)
83,7
Herstellung (A1-A3)
-646
Transport (C2)
0,46
Abfallbehandlung (C3)
815
Recyclingpotential therm. Verwertung (Standardszenario) (D)
-366
Recyclingpotential stoffl. Verwertung (D)
GWP kg CO2 eq.
-842,74
Saved wood in total
44443 kg
Recycling potential (95%)
43999 kg
kg CO2 saved
-82398,521 kg CO2 eq.
WOOD
Simple Global Warming Potential Calculation - Wood
