==PAGE:1==
Materials and Surface Engineering 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
Influence of de-icing salts on corrosion 
performance of automotive materials 
Francesca Cavezza 
s135581 
Supervisors: 
Prof. Rajan Ambat 
Dr. Ine Schoukens (Toyota Motor Europe) 
M. Sc. Thesis 
Kongens Lyngby, February 2016 
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
De-icing salts are commonly used on European roads during winter. These salts are based
on NaCl, CaCl2, MgCl2 or a mixture of them. The selection of the salt is dependent on the
local climate, and legislation of each country. As a consequence, the chemical composition
of de-icing mixture is very different within Europe. This represents an important challenge
for the automotive industry since the corrosion behavior of automotive panels and parts is
intricately linked to the chemistry of the environment on the roads. The aim of this thesis is to
investigate the inﬂuence of de-icing salts on the corrosion performance of automotive materi-
als. The material chosen were: galvannealed steel, dual phase steel and AA6016(T4). For this
purpose, Open Circuit Potential (OCP) and Potentiodynamic measurements were performed.
In addition, the results obtained were combined with SEM/EDS and compositional depth
proﬁling using Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectrometry (GDOES). Electrochemical
analysis showed a clear inﬂuence of the type of de-icing salt on the corrosion current densities
of AA6016(T4) and galvannealed steel. Surface analysis on AA6016(T4) conﬁrms that differ-
ences in corrosion mechanism are existing. Moreover, a special setup was developed to study
the solubility of the different salts as a function of temperature and humidity.
1
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
The present thesis has been performed at Toyota Motor Europe within the division Material
Engineering. I would ﬁrst and foremost like to thank Dr. Ine Schoukens and Dr. Jose Cerezo
from Toyota Motor Europe, for their patience, motivation, enthusiasm and knowledge. This
work would not have been possible without their constant guidance.
I would also like to thank my supervisor Pr. Rajan Ambat for providing the necessary support
and criticism along the way.
My sincere gratitude also goes to Veronique Vandenberghe, my manager in Toyota Motor
Europe, for offering me the internship opportunity and for her encouragement and practical
advice.
I would also like to thank Dr. Visweswara Chakravarthi Gudla for his help with the SEM/EDS
and GDOES during my stay in Denmark.
Inﬁne, il mio piú sentito rigraziamento va ai miei genitori ed a mia sorella, per avermi sostuento
in ogni mia scelta.
Lyngby, 3 February 2016
Franesca Cavezza
3
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
7
1.1
Introduction and research aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Literature Review
11
2.1
Automotive materials and corrosion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.1
Material used in a car
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.2
Dual Phase steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.3
Galvanized steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.4
Alluminum alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Most common corrosion protection methods used in a vehicle . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
De-icing salts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Introduction to the experimental techniques
27
3.1
Electrochemical measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.1
Electrochemical cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.2
Open circuit potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.1.3
Potentiodynamic measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Surface analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Scanning electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spetroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Materials and methods
35
4.1
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Electrochemical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Optical microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GD-OES)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Inﬂuence of relative humidity and temperature on salts dissolution . . . . . . .
37
5
==PAGE:7==
5
Results and Discussion
39
5.1
Characterization of untreated samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Electrochemical analysis for dual phase steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Electrochemical analysis for galvannealed steel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Electrochemical and surface analysis of AA6016(T4)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5
Eletrochemical analyis: comparison of different metals corrosion . . . . . . . .
58
5.6
Inﬂuence of relative humidity and temperature on salts solubility . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusions
63
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
The inﬂuence of the chloride solution on the corrosion performance . . . . . .
63
6.3
The inﬂuence of temperature and humidity on the solubility of the different salts 63
6.4
Conclusions of industrial relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.5
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
==PAGE:8==
1 Introduction
1.1
Introduction and research aim
In automotive industry corrosion is considered as one of the most critical issues from quality
point of view. The reason for this is that, if corrosion is touching the structural parts in the
underbody of a car, the safety of its passengers might be affected. As a consequence automotive
industry is spending a large amount of money on this topic Only in USA, the total annual
direct cost of corrosion in the automotive industry was estimated at $23.4 billion in total. In
particular $14.46 billion is attributed to corrosion-related depreciation of vehicles, another
$6.45 billion is spent on repairs and maintenance made necessary by corrosion. Additionally,
$2.56 billion represents increased manufacturing costs from corrosion engineering and the
use of corrosion-resistant materials [1].
The corrosion performance of a vehicle part or panel is highly inﬂuenced by three groups of
parameters: the selected material, the design of the part and the environmental conditions
(Figure 1.1). In this last group not only the temperature and humidity are of importance also
the chemicals used on the roads and the soil composition play a key role in the corrosion
performance of the car. Among these parameters the de-icing salts used on the roads to keep
them snow and ice-free are the biggest threat to the corrosion performance of a car and have
lead in the past few years to the recall of a high number of vehicles all over the world [2]. In
order to prevent corrosion to happen to the vehicle automotive industry is trying to select and
develop highly corrosion resistant materials. This is however not an easy task as a large variety
of de-icing salts are used from which each of them can lead to another kind of interaction with
the different automotive materials.
The aim of this thesis is to study the inﬂuence of the different types of de-icing salts used in
Europe on the corrosion behaviour of a selection of automotive metals.
1.2
Approach
Cyclic corrosion testing is the most commonly used test in the automotive industry. This
test aims at miming the ﬁeld conditions in a controlled laboratory environment. According
7
==PAGE:9==
Figure 1.1 – Main factors inﬂuencing corrosion in a vehicle.
to the standard followed each CCT has its own cycles. However, in general it consists of an
alternation of wet and dry conditions while a salt, usually NaCl, is sprayed over the specimens.
The CCT has the advantage of carrying out the "‘real"’ ﬁeld experiments within a shorter time.
However, the evaluation method can be done only ex-situ, making it impossible to monitor the
corrosion mechanism while the test is in process. Moreover, due to contamination problem, it
is not always possible in a cyclic corrosion cabinet to use more than one salt. As the aim of
this thesis is to study the inﬂuence of the type of de-icing salt on the corrosion behavior of the
automotive metals, CCT cannot be used in this thesis and an alternative approach (Figure 1.2)
had to be used.
An alternative method to the CCT was found in a combination of more academic electro-
chemical methods, like open circuit potential and potentiodynamic with surface analysis
techniques, like SEM-EDX and GDOES, to analyse the surface of the samples before and after
exposure. The use of more academic electrochemical techniques allows us not only to vary
the type of de-icing salts, it also allows to get a better overview of the corrosion rates of the
different materials. On the other hand the combination of the electrochemical techniques
with surface analysis techniques enables to detect how the surface is changing due to the
exposure to the different salts and as a consequence to get a better insight in the corrosion
mechanism of the different materials.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.2 – Schematic overview of the outline of the thesis.
Additionally, some tests have been performed on the selected de-icers to study the inﬂuence
of temperature and humidity variations on the corrosion of a generic metal covered with
different salts.
The metals used in this thesis are: galvannealed steel, dual phase steel and an Al alloy (AA6xxx).
The selection of the metal has been done based on which materials are employed for which
parts in a vehicle and in which extent the part considered is prone to corrosion due to de-icing
salts.
1.3
Outline
This thesis is divided into six chapters. In the ﬁrst chapter a general introduction to the prob-
lem and aim of this thesis is given together with an explanation of the followed approach. The
second chapter gives an overview of corrosion in automotive, materials used in automotive
and the use and type of de-icing salts in Europe. Based on this the different materials and
de-icing salts investigated during this thesis were selected. Chapter 3 presents the different ex-
perimental techniques used throughout the thesis, while chapter 4 provides the more detailed
information of the actual experimental setups. In chapter 5 the results obtained by following
the above explained approach are shown and discussed. Finally, the main conclusions of this
work are summarized in chapter 6 and some suggestions for future work are given.
9
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
2 Literature Review
The following chapter gives a brief overview of the metal and de-icing salts used in the experi-
mental part of this thesis. The de-icing salts have been chosen according to the most used in
Europe while the metals considering which parts are more prone to corrosion.
2.1
Automotive materials and corrosion
For simplicity it has been decided to divide the corrosion related issues in two categories:
“cosmetic corrosion” , which affects only the aesthetics of the car and “damaging corrosion”
which may lead to the malfunction of speciﬁc parts affecting the safety of the vehicle and its
passengers.
To better differentiate the two kinds of corrosion cited above, the vehicle should be divided in
two main parts (shown in Figure 2.1):
• the upperbody:
– the body in white, (BIW) representing the body parts of the car including all the
components that are welded or adhesive bonded before going through a painting
line [3]
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1 – Toyota Rav4 117 D-4D, (a) upperbody and (b) underbody + parts . Pictures taken
from A2Mac1 database.
11
==PAGE:13==
– doors, lid, fenders, bumpers and all those external components belonging to the
body but not attached to the body in white
• the underbody + parts:
– chassis
– parts of the powertrain that are in contact with the external environment.
While the upperbody is more susceptible to cosmetic corrosion, the corrosion in the under-
body will not only affect the aesthetic of the car but will also affect its functionality.
2.1.1
Material used in a car
Table 2.1 shows an overview of the main materials used in a vehicle and the major areas of
application for each. As can be seen, steel is used in much larger quantities than any other
material. However, high strength steels and advanced high strength steels, on account of their
signiﬁcantly higher strength, are now replacing plain carbon steels in several body structure
and chassis applications.
Material
Percentage of vehicle weight
Major area of application
Steel
55
body structure, body panel
engine and transmission
components, suspension components,
driveline compoents
Cast iron
9
Engine components, brakes, suspension components
Aluminum
8.5
Engine block, wheel, radiator
Copper
1.5
Wiring, electrical components
Polymer and polymer matrix composites
9
Interior components,
electrical and electronic components
under-the-hood components
fuel line components
Elastomer
4
Tires, trimes, gaskets
Glass
3
Glazing
Other
10
Carpets, ﬂuids, lubricants, etc.
Table 2.1 – Material distribution in typical automobiles [4].
To reduce weight even aluminum alloys and polymer matrix composites have seen an escala-
tion. Indeed, the European automotive industry has more than doubled the average amount of
aluminum used in passenger cars during the last decade and will do even more in the coming
years [5]. Much of the growth in the use of cast aluminum and aluminum alloys has occurred
at the expense of cast iron in engine and transmission components and copper-based alloys
in radiators; moreover aluminum alloys, because of their lower density compared to steel
are also making inroads in body panels and structures. The growth in the use of polymer
matrix composites has also occurred due to their lower density. Among the polymer matrix
composites, glass ﬁber composites are nowadays selected for most interior application, but
they are also found in some exterior body panel or structural applications [4]. However, an
12
==PAGE:14==
overview of non-metallic materials is out of context for this study. In the next section the focus
will be upon the class of metals that have been used in this work.
2.1.2
Dual Phase steel
Steel has evolved over the years from mild steel in early 1900s to high strength low-alloy (HSLA)
steels in the late 1970s and the ﬁrst generation of advanced high strength steels (AHSS) in the
1990s. It is an extremely important material for the car industry as in a typical car it accounts
1084 kg in average [6]. Recent approaches to improve the properties of steel have been based
on developing steel microstructures of higher strength in order to reduce component section
size and weight. Therefore in the last two decades dramatic changes in the composition,
strength, ductility and processing approach to steel manufacturing have been seen.
Figure 2.2 – Tensile strength vs total elongation of the steel commonly used in the car industry
[6]
Figure 2.2 shows a spectrum of the steel categories that have been developed during the years.
The chart reﬂects the inverse relationship between strength and ductility. At the low end of the
strength spectrum there are the interstitial free (IF) and mild steels. These steels are very soft
and formable and are mostly used in outer body applications. In the middle the conventional
grades of HSS including interstitial free high-strength (IF-HS), isotropic (IS), bake-hardenable
(BH), and high-strength low alloy steels (HSLA) can be found. They have a higher strength
compared to traditional steels but their ductility is much lower. At the end the advanced
high strength steels (AHSS) including dual phase (DP), complex phase (CP), transformation
induced plasticity (TRIP), and martensitic steel (MS) can be found. Because of their properties
AHSS are used in many automotive structural application [6]. Dual phase steels, in particular,
are used in the automotive industry because they exhibit high elongation and tensile strength.
Moreover they have low carbon content which beneﬁt the weldability. As the name suggest
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3 – Micrograph of a dual-phase steel quenched from 800◦C. The white phase is ferrite
and the remainder is a mixture of martensite and a small amount of retained austenite [7].
DP steels are composed of two phases: normally a ferrite matrix and a dispersed second phase
of martensite, retained austenite and/or bainite (see Figure 2.3).
DP steels are mainly used in the car body for safety parts e.g. bumpers, B-pillars, side impact
beams, etc. [8]. More details can be found in Table 2.2 in which the components made of DP
steel from different car manufacturers are summarized.
Since HSS components are designed to have a lower thickness attack by corrosion, and thereby
loss of material resulting in further thickness reduction, is even more detrimental to the
structural integrity of the car bodies than for normal steels. Although a number of studies
have shown beneﬁcial mechanical properties of DP steels, corrosion behaviours of the steels
have rarely been discussed.
Figure 2.4 shows the Pourbaix diagram of iron in water in which can be seen at which pH
and potential it corrodes. Sakar et al. [11] have studied the corrosion behavior of DP steel
in a 3.5% NaCl solution with respect to the variation in the morphology. From this study it
was concluded that increasing the amount of martensite improves the mechanical properties
but has an adverse effect on the corrosion of DP steel. Osòrio et al. [12] investigated the
corrosion response of low carbon heat-treated steel in 0.5 M NaCl by using electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy. According to their study DP steel corrodes due to the existence of
a number of microgalvanic corrosion cells, in which ferrite and perlite or martensite grains
form microanode and microcathode regions, respectively.
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4 – Potential-pH diagram for pure Fe in water [10].
15
==PAGE:17==
Producer
Components
General Motors
Wheel disc and rimsm bumper reinforcments, face bars, jack post
water pump pulleys
Hoesch-Estel
Wheel disc, plate brake backing
Inland Steel
Panels for doors, deck (boot), lids, centre pillars
windshield frames, wheelhouses
Jones and Laughlin
Bumper face bar, bumper reinforcments, rear suspension, wheels,
alternator fan blades, steering column reinforcment
Kawasaky
Stylised wheel disc, door and hood panels and fenders
Nippon steel
Bumper stay/facing door impact bars, frame sections
NKK
Outer and inner panels, beam and pumper reinforcments
Sumitomo Metal Industries Ltd
Outer autobody panels
Teksid acciai
Stylised wheel discs
US Steel
Parts in cars, trucks, buses, farm equipment,
industrial handling units, heavy constructions units
Table 2.2 – Range of automotive components build from DP steels (from different manufactur-
ers) [9].
2.1.3
Galvanized steel
Nowadays up to 90% of the body panel content of a typical European vehicle consists of zinc-
coated steel [13]. Table 2.3 shows the preferred coating type by different car manufacturers.
Coating Type
Manufacturer
Hot dip galvanized
Volvo (inner panels), PSA, Audi (inner)
Galvannealed
Honda, Toyota, Ford
Electrogalvanized
BMW, Fiat, Renault, Audi and Juagar
Duplex/alloy
Nissan, GM Opel
Table 2.3 – Use of different coating types by major car manufacturers [13].
Galvanized steel is steel that has been coated with zinc in order to prevent corrosion. Zinc
has a more negative electrode potential than steel in most environments, therefore when
defects develop in the outermost zinc coating the underlying steel is protected by the sacriﬁcial
corrosion of zinc. Compared to other steel coated products produced by electro-processes,
galvanized steel is inexpensive. By itself, the zinc coating is brittle, and not easily formed.
However, when bonded to sheet steel, the ductility of the steel compensates for the brittleness
of the coating.
When the galvanizing process is combined with annealing it results in galvannealed coatings
(GA) in which a fully alloyed coating containing Fe and Zn intermetallic phases is produced
[14]. The coating contains also a small amount of Al which is spread more uniformly through
the coating thickness than in the case of galvanized steel. Like conventional galvanizing,
16
==PAGE:18==
“galvannealing” also protects the sheet steel from corrosion; in addition, having a rough,
porous surface, the galvannealed coating assists paint to adhere to the steel and it improves
the spot welding performance of the steel sheet.
Depending on serveral factors GA is composed of one or more of the three possible iron zinc
phases (Table 2.4). It is also important for good appearance and press formability that the top
zeta layer contains not less than about 5% iron or there will be a risk of free zinc at the surface.
Figure 2.5 shows a micrograph of a cross section of a galvannealed coating. The three alloy
phase layers are clearly distinguishable: the high-iron gamma layer next to the steel substrate,
the delta layer and the zeta layer next to the surface. The chemistry of the steel substrate may
be divided into two classes: low-carbon steel and interstitial-free steel. Low carbon steel is a
plain steel, where small amounts of carbon are dissolved interstitially into the iron base metal.
Interstitial-free steel is a class of steel where the carbon is precipitated out of the iron matrix
as a complex carbide-nitride compound of various additives [15].
The lifetime of a zinc coating depends on its slow and homogeneous consumption and
decreases if it is dissolved, mainly when the substrate is exposed [17]. Figure 2.6 shows the
Pourbaix diagram for zinc in water: at the alkaline pH values the zinc dissolves very quickly
with the evolution of hydrogen since the initial corrosion potential lies below the potential for
hydrogen evolution and the metal cannot be considered stable in that medium [18].
2.1.4
Alluminum alloys
Aluminum is being used for automotive applications due to a number of beneﬁts:
• it has an high potential for weight saving, improving vehicle fuel efﬁciency and handling
characteristics, while reducing at the same time the total greenhouse gas emission
throughout the life of the vehicle
• therefore it will absorb the same amount of crash energy as steel, at just over half the
weight
• the metal is easily and widely recycled, saving energy and raw materials [19].
Different aluminum alloys are used to produce the various automotive parts required to
manufacture a vehicle because different applications require a different combination of
properties. AlMgSi (AA6X X X ) are the only alloys used for outer body panel application. The
material is usually supplied in the annealed and solution heat treated condition (T4 temper),
which improves the formability. On the other hand AlMg (AA5X X X ) alloys are used for inner
and structural applications.
Aluminum is a very reactive metal with a high afﬁnity for oxygen. However, the metal is highly
resistant to most atmospheres and chemicals. This resistance is due to the inert and protective
character of the aluminum oxide ﬁlm, which forms on the metal surface and which rapidly
reforms if damaged. The oxide ﬁlm on aluminum attains a thickness of about 3 nm on freshly
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.5 – Cross-sectin of galvanneal coating showing the gamma (G), delta (d) and zeta (z)
alloy layers [16].
Alloy Layer
% Fe
% Al
Zeta (ζ) FeZn13
5.2−6.1
0.7
Delta (δ) FeZn10
7.0−11.5
3.7
Gamma (Γ) Fe3Zn10
15.8−27.7
1.4
Table 2.4 – Iron-zinc phases in galvanneal steel coating [15].
Figure 2.6 – Potential-pH diagram for pure zinc in water [17].
18
==PAGE:20==
exposed metal in a few seconds; it inhibits corrosion because it is resistant to dissolution and
a good insulator [10]. From the Pourbaix diagram of aluminum in water (Figure 2.7) it can
be seen how the metal corrodes only at low and high pH values and does not corrode for pH
values between 3.9 and 8.6 . Indeed, in this range there is passivity due to the formation of
hydrargillite (Al2O3 ·3H2O) and immunity at very negative potentials regardless of the pH.
Figure 2.7 – Potential-pH diagram for pure Al in water [10].
2.2
Most common corrosion protection methods used in a vehicle
There are several ways in which a vehicle is protected against corrosion. The most common
protection methods are:
Automotive body panel coatings A general model of an automotive coating system is a sub-
strate on which different layers are applied as shown in Figure 2.8. There are three
different kinds of coatings that are applied to protect the surface: metallic, inorganic
and organic. Some of the different metallic coatings (including the zinc layers) have
been already discussed in the previous sections.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.8 – Schematic cross section of a complete automotive coating system [20].
Phosphate coating Its application consists of degreasing in mild alkaline baths fol-
lowed by the phosphating treatment. This treatment leads to the formation of
a phosphate crystal layer with a total weight of about 2−5 g/m2. The chemical
composition and the crystallographic structure of this layer depend on the compo-
sition of the substrate and the phosphating bath. After phosphating the material is
given a standard chromate rinse.
Organic coatings The general organic coating consists of the electro-dip (ED) coat
which is the ﬁrst layer closest to the substrate providing the substrate with a
general corrosion resistance. On top of the ED coat a primer surface (PS) is applied
in order to smoothen the surface and give it a ﬂat structure. The primer provides
the system with some color and increases the mechanical stability. The base-coat
(BC) brings color to the product and provides some UV-protection as does the
clear coat (CC). The main purpose of the CC, however, is to even out the surface
and provide the ﬁnal ﬁnish to the product.
Wax or sealers Many sections of the automobile contain joints and hem ﬂanges. The penetra-
tion of electrocoating in these areas is rather difﬁcult and not optimal as the electrocoat-
ing is deposited under an electric ﬁeld. These areas act as a Faraday cage preventing its
deposition. The most common solutions consist of the addition of wax in the cavity and
the use of an appropriate sealer to prevent the entry of water and contaminants such as
mud or road debris. Sealers are resins (epoxy or PVC) and act as a barrier by excluding
the corrosive environment (hydrophobic). Adhesives are often added in hem ﬂanges to
ﬁll in the gap. Wax and sealants are applied by hands or with robots. The design of a car
plays a role and a sort of guideline with suitable geometries is suggested to improve the
corrosion resistance, in particular with optimization of the ED coat penetration but also
with preventing water and mud entrapment. As a result, the addition of wax, sealant and
20
==PAGE:22==
adhesive have allowed a major improvement in the lifetime of vehicles and are common
practice nowadays. The wax is usually added after the full paint process while the sealer
is applied immediately after the ED-coating [3].
Plastic covers The most delicate part of the underbody, such as the engine, suspension
members, car ﬂoor, are usually protected through a plastic cover as a protection against
both corrosion and stone chipping; moreover the cover improves the aerodynamic
properties of the vehicle. The plastic used is usually PVC.
Underbody coating (UBC) The underbody coating is a plastisol type of material (a suspen-
sion of PVC particles in a liquid plasticizer) which is applied to the underbody in a
spraying process. After spraying it is made to foam and harden in a curing oven together
with a primer surface. Usually a vinyl chloride plastisol is used. However due to the
environmental impact the automotive companies are looking for new kind of resins
[21].
2.3
De-icing salts
The use of chemical products is necessary in order to ensure good road conditions during
winter in temperate climates. The ideal snow/ice control chemical should depress the freezing
point of water, melt snow/ice and penetrate through till the snow/road interface. The success
of these chemicals depends on parameters such as the road surface temperature, the applica-
tion rate, the moisture/water present, and the applied concentration. The chemical system
should be non-lubricating to avoid slipperiness, available as cheap bulk chemical, easy to
store, apply and handle, nontoxic to people, animals and plants and not damage infrastructure
and vehicles. For chemical snow/ice control it is possible to differentiate between de-icing
and anti-icing agents.
Anti-icing agents are used as a preventive maintenance strategy to inhibit the bond formation
between the ice and the road surface. It modiﬁes the snow grain structure to reduce the level
of compaction. Anti-icing processes generally use brines (a solution of water with salts), which
act instantly; however, it demands a good judgment of timing. The anti-icing agent should be
distributed a few hours before precipitation begins and therefore its application depends on
well performing weather forecast systems. De-icing agents, instead, are applied after the snow
has already accumulated at the road surface. The de-icing operations are the only option for
an unexpected weather change or in case of lack of a proper planning; nonetheless, they are
time consuming and require more chemicals and equipment compared to anti-icing, since
with the latter the material usually stays longer at the road surface [22].
Several water-soluble inorganic salts and organic compounds are used as de-icers. The most
widely used road de-icer is sodium chloride because of the good cost/effectiveness however,
as will be seen in the next section, other salts are used as well [24].
21
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.9 – Phase diagram for NaCl + H2O (a), with guideline of the lowest temperature of
practical use (b) [23].
Water that contains dissolved substances always has a lower freezing point than pure water, as
a consequence any soluble substance will have some de-icing properties. How far the freezing
point of water is lowered by a solute depends only on the concentration of the particles
independently of its nature. This behavior is called a colligative property. The solubility of
each de-icing substance at the ﬁnal solution temperature determines how many particles
can go into solution. This is the ultimate limit on the lowest freezing point attainable. When
a salt dissolves to form positive and negative ions, each ion counts as a dissolved particle.
Ionic compounds, such as sodium chloride (NaCl) and calcium chloride (CaCl2) are efﬁcient
de-icers because they dissociate into positive and negative ions and if dissolving they form
more particles (two for NaCl and three for CaCl2); organic molecules such as ethylene glycol
(C2H6O2) does not dissociate and dissolves as one particle. This means that three molecules
of dissolved ethylene glycol are needed to lower the freezing point by the same amount as one
molecule of calcium chloride [25]. To see the maximum, theoretical, freezing point that can
be reached with different substances a phase diagram can be used. The eutectic temperature
showed in the phase diagram in Figure 2.9 (a) is the lowest freezing temperature that can be
achieved for water by adding a given substance to it. The freezing point of the solution formed
between the chemical substance and water will decrease with an increasing concentration
down to the eutectic point of the substance while a further increase in concentration will lead
to precipitation. Melting of snow or ice occurs whenever the freezing point of the brine is lower
than the temperature of the surrounding. The greater the difference between the ambient
temperature and the eutectic temperature, the higher will be the rate of melting. In Figure
2.9 (a) the eutectic temperature is obtained at -21.1◦C. This corresponds to a concentration of
23.3 wt%. However the eutectic temperature is not the minimum working temperature for
de-icers. As a general guideline the lowest temperature of practical use is the temperature at
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.10 – Main de-icing salts used in different European countries.
half the concentration of the eutectic as shown in Figure 2.9 (b) [22].
Types of de-icing salts
Many products both inorganic and organic can be used as de-icers. The selection of the
speciﬁc de-icing salt is done based on both climatic region and on important parameters as
the size of the population, road network length and trafﬁc statistics. Figure 2.10 shows the
main salts which are used in different European countries. It is clear that the majority of the
countries use chloride salts. However chemicals, such as urea, ethylene glycol, and methanol-
based glycols are used, even though primarily on airport runways and/or for airplane de-icing
[22].
Roadsalt or sodium chloride is the most commonly used snow and ice control chemical. It
has a low cost/efﬁciency ratio and is provided as rock salt, sea salt, vacuum salt or brine. It
can be used as a dry solid, a damp solid or brine depending on local conditions and operating
procedures [24]. The particle size distribution has an inﬂuence on the efﬁciency of the product
and it changes from one country to another in Europe. Fine particles start to act more quickly,
coarser materials gives however a wider spread. Usually sodium chloride is supplied in bulk
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.11 – Phase diagram for different de-icing chemicals [26].
and to ensure that the salt remains free ﬂowing in storage an anti-caking agent is used (usually
a hexacyanoferrate salt, either sodium or potassium). Sodium chloride needs humidity to
form a solution. The process of dissolving is endothermic with further cooling of the road
surface as a consequence. Therefore dry conditions, wind chill, trafﬁc density, cloud cover and
ambient temperature can affect the melting capacity of this salt [22]. Even though the eutectic
point of sodium chloride is -21.1◦C, in practice, sodium chloride is efﬁcient down to around -8
◦C and becomes ineffective at -15 ◦C [24].
Calcium chloride is a by-product of soda manufacturing. Figure 2.11 shows that the eutectic
point is -55 ◦C , however it is efﬁcient down to -35 ◦C. It can be used in solid state or brine
with CaCl2 concentrations varying between 15% and 32% depending on the conditions. The
most commonly used solution is a 26% brine. As the price is 6 times higher than the common
salt it is usually only used as pre-wetting agent for sodium chloride. Unlike sodium chloride,
dissolving calcium chloride is exothermic which means that heat is evolved and assesses the
ice/snow melting process. Due to the high hygroscopicity it is supplied in sacks tightly sealed
to avoid storage problems. Indeed if exposed to moisture, calcium chloride hexahydrate is
formed rending the product useless for winter road maintenance [26]. Moreover its great
hygroscopicity allows it to absorb the humidity from the air and ice. However, this causes the
road surface to remain wet for considerably longer time, which may affect the friction of the
road surfaces [22].
24
==PAGE:26==
The third type of chloride salt used on roads is magnesium chloride. It is mainly a by-product
of potash manufacturing and it is used as solution [26]. From Figure 2.11 it can be seen that
the eutectic point is at -33 ◦C (21.6 wt%). It is mainly used at temperatures below −9◦C and
has a working temperature down to around -15◦C. It dissolves under exothermic conditions,
however its melting capacity is about 40% higher than that of calcium chloride [22]. Moreover
due to its hygroscopicity, just as CaCl2, MgCl2 can result in wet and slippery roads through
moisture absorption and it has also been associated with reduced brake efﬁciency in some
motor vehicles [26].
Calcium and magnesium chloride are both more expensive than NaCl and due to their hygro-
scopicity they are believed to be more corrosive. For this reasons in countries like Sweden and
Belgium, calcium chloride has been banned as de-icing salt [22]. Figure 2.11 shows the phase
diagram of different de-icers like NaCl, CaCl2 and MgCl2 . From this ﬁgure it can be deduced
that for road temperatures between 0 ◦C and the eutectic temperature, a solution of MgCl2
will refreeze at a lower concentration than the corresponding concentrations of either NaCl or
CaCl2. At lower concentrations than its eutectic concentration, the slope of the MgCl2 curve is
higher than those of both CaCl2 and NaCl which means that MgCl2 brines can reach the same
freezing temperature of the other two chlorides with a lower amount of material. At about
5wt% the corresponding temperature for all of them is about –3◦C. Between this temperature
and 0◦C, all three brines have about the same refreeze characteristics [26].
To summarize, both CaCl2 and MgCl2 are more effective at lower temperatures than NaCl,
however, they are more expensive, more difﬁcult to handle and may results in a more slippery
roads and increased corrosion due to their high hygroscopicity compared to NaCl. However
both CaCl2 and MgCl2 are often used as brine solutions for anti-icing and pre-wetting agent
for NaCl at temperatures below -8◦C , where NaCl becomes insufﬁcient [22].
Organic de-icers are said to be more effective than salts at breaking the bond between pave-
ment and snow, allowing an easier snow removal. Furthermore from some studies emerged
that organic based materials are stored in the surface pores of the pavement, helping in dis-
bonding the snow and possibly prolonging the period of effective de-icing [25]. However, the
drawback of organic chemicals, besides the higher price of the products, is that they are usually
less stable. This means that a higher caution is required for storage and as a consequence they
are only used in very speciﬁc ﬁelds such as aviation.
Among organic agents acetate-based deicing chemicals represent the principal alternatives
to chloride-based materials. The two primary acetate-based compounds include calcium
magnesium acetate (CMA) and potassium acetate (KAc) [22]. CMA was the result of an FHWA
(Federal Highways Administration, USA) effort to ﬁnd a low corrosion biodegradable substitute
for roadsalts. Although CMA meets the project objectives, it is relatively costly to produce. The
eutectic point of CMA is -27.5 ◦C(32.5 wt%, see Figure 2.11). The advantages are that CMA
keeps the snow lighter and drier, improves traction and does not move off the road surface
as easily as salt. Moreover it has low toxicity, is highly degradable and, since animals are less
25
==PAGE:27==
attracted by CMA compared to the salts, it may reduce animal-related accident [22]. However,
it does not melt ice or packed snow as quickly as salt. To obtain a comparable level of efﬁciency
2–3 kg of CMA would be needed for every kg of salt, and considering the higher price it is
unlikely that CMA will be widely used as substitute of chlorides [27]. From corrosion point
of view, CMA is considered to have a low corrosivity towards metals. Electrochemical and
weight loss tests indicated that bridge structural metals, including steel, cast iron, aluminum,
and galvanized steel corroded considerably less in CMA solutions than in NaCl solutions [28].
Although CMA may show a lower corrosivity towards metals, it does react with concrete and
may have negative effects on the infrastructures. Lee et al. [29] conducted a study on the
effect of various de-icing chemicals on pavement concrete deterioration; NaCl, CaCl2, MgCl2,
CMA, Ca-acetate and Mg-acetate were involved in this experiment. CMA showed the most
aggressive degradation of concrete.
Potassium acetate is produced from acetic acid and potassium carbonate. The eutectic point
is -60 ◦C (49wt%, see Figure 2.11) thus it performs more quickly than CMA. It is however more
expensive and it is used at airports and as liquid deicer in ﬁxed spray system installed on larger
bridge decks .
26
==PAGE:28==
3 Introduction to the experimental
techniques
Corrosion testing is vital in the development of materials with acceptable anti-corrosion
properties. The most common used laboratory testing method in the automotive industry is
the cyclic corrosion testing (CCT). CCT was developed as an attempt to mimic the corrosion
behavior observed in ﬁeld conditions; more accurately by ranging temperature and humidity.
Generally, the cycle consists of a humid phase, with chlorides present, and a low humidity
phase allowing the samples to dry. With CCT the corrosion is evaluated qualitatively by
recording the extent and location of corrosion and quantitatively by measuring weight changes
and pit depths. Nowadays most of the automotive manufactures have their own standard for
CCT [30].
Although CCT allows partial reproduction of ﬁeld conditions, it has some limitations. It is a
time consuming test, as for most of the standards the test duration is not less than twenty-eight
days. Moreover the lack of continuous monitoring during the test, limits the possibility of fully
understanding the mechanism behind the corrosion process as CCT specimens are inspected
only ex-situ. To measure weight-loss and pit depths additional treatments as water-rinsing
or acid pickling are needed after the CCT has been completed. These operations are highly
dependent on the operator and may change the corroded surfaces providing misleading results.
For these reasons complementary electrochemical analysis (EC) is required. Electrochemical
analysis is based on the application/control of potentials and currents of the studied material,
in order to follow up the cathodic and anodic reaction when the metal is immersed in a
solution. By manipulating and measuring these two variables several types of experiments
are possible. However, in order to understand the mechanism of corrosion, electrochemical
methods alone are not sufﬁcient. It requires an understanding of composition and structure
of the surface where corrosion takes place. To do so, surface analysis is needed.
In the following section, the electrochemical methods and surface analytical techniques used
in the experimental part will be described.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1 – Basic set-up of a three elctrodes cell .
3.1
Electrochemical measurements
3.1.1
Electrochemical cell
An electrochemical cell is used to follow up the potential and current from electrochemical
reactions or induce chemical reactions by the input of electrochemical signals. The most com-
monly used electrochemical set-up is the three-electrode system (Figure 3.1) which consists
of a working electrode(W.E.), a reference electrode (R.E.) and a counter electrode(C.E.).
The working electrode is the material tested, while the reference electrode is used to measure
the working electrode potential. A reference electrode should have a constant electrochemical
potential as long as no current ﬂows through it.The most common reference electrodes are
the saturated calomel (SCE) and the silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) electrode. In order to
minimize the impact of the electrolyte resistance on the potential of the working electrode a
third electrode, called counter electrode, used to measure current, is rewired .
The electrochemical cell schematically illustrated in Figure 3.1, is connected to a potentiostat
which allows to measure and ramp the applied potential in a controlled manner and to
measure the resulting current.
3.1.2
Open circuit potential
The open circuit potential (OCP) is the potential of the working electrode relative to the
reference electrode when immersed in the electrolyte and no potential or current is applied. It
is a DC (direct current) scan which provides a representation of the summation of half cell
reactions occurring between the given electrolyte and substrate, and offers insight into the
activeness or passivity of a given material.
In order to understand the OCP, it has to be considered that there are two types of reactions
taking place on a metal in contact with an electrolyte: an anodic reaction (oxidation of the
metal) and one (or more) cathodic reactions. At the open circuit potential no net current is
ﬂowing from or to the metal, so the anodic and cathodic current densities are equal. During
the OCP measurements it takes a certain amount of time, dependent upon the sample and
electrolyte, for a specimen to reach a stable potential called corrosion potential (Ecorr ) (Figure
3.2). The OCP gives an indication of how noble or active a metal is in a given environment.
28
==PAGE:30==
In general, a more positive OCP means that the metal can be expected to be more resistant
to corrosion in that particular electrolyte than one with a more negative corrosion potential.
Thus, most metals can be ranked according to resistance to corrosion based on OCPs [31].
Figure 3.2 – Potential-log current density diagram for determination of the Ecorr in a case with
hydrogen develompent as cathodic reaction and iron dissolution as anodic reaction.
3.1.3
Potentiodynamic measurements
Potentiodynamic measurements are a DC test, which provides information on the corrosion
kinetics. In this test the potential is varied over a wide range and the resulting current is
measured. In the OCP it has been seen that no external current is supplied to the working
electrode; if, by means of the potentiostat, another arbitrary potential is applied, an external
current is ﬂowing, which is the difference between the anodic and the cathodic current at
this potential. If the logarithm of the measured current is drawn as a function of potential a
polarization curve is obtained (circle markers in Figure 3.3) [32]. To quantify the corrosion rate
the corrosion current density (Icorr ) is used and can be identiﬁed as the interception point
between the anodic and cathodic polarization curve (Figure 3.3).
3.2
Surface analysis
3.2.1
Scanning electron microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a powerful technique because it allows to study the
surface morphology and composition at a high magniﬁcation. With the SEM an electron
beam is generated by a suitable source which consists of a ﬁlament or a ﬁeld emission gun.
The electron beam is accelerated by a high potential thereby allowing the electrons to be
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.3 – Anodic and cathodic polarization curves.
easily drawn away from the source. The electrons are released and accelerated by applying
an electrical ﬁeld, and the direction of the electron beam is controlled by shielding the ﬁla-
ment.The SEM instrument is operated in vacuum, in order to minimize the collisions between
the beam and species in the chamber. Figure 3.5 illustrates the interaction volume which is
the 3-dimensional space in which primary-beam electrons have sufﬁcient energy to interact
with the specimen. As an electron travels through the interaction volume, it is said to scatter:
it loses energy and changes direction in the event of an atomic interaction. The scattering can
be either elastic or inelastic. Inelastic scattering events result in the generation of secondary
electrons (SE), Auger electrons, and x-rays while elastic scattering events generates backscat-
tered electrons (BSE). Secondary electrons are low energy electrons which can be formed by
collision with the nucleus or by ejection of loosely bound electrons from the sample atoms (
Figure 3.4). Because SE posses very low energy, only those very close to the surface can escape
to produce a detectable signal. Thus, the signal is generated to a depth of less than 100nm
(Figure 3.5). On the other hand, backscattered electrons are high-energy electrons that are
ejected by an elastic collision of an incident electron, typically with a sample atom’s nucleus
(Figure 3.4). In a SEM, the image generated by SE provides insight in topological features of
the specimen. BSE electrons, on the other hand, generate an image of the atomic number
distribution as the efﬁciency with which BSE are generated strongly depend on the average
atomic number.
Finally also X-rays are generated due to the interaction of the primary beam with the substrate
material. As the energy of these X-rays is characteristic for the atoms present at the surface
they can be used to identify and quantify the elements present.To do so an energy dispersive
X-rays detector is required.
Like SEM, EDS has also some limitations: it is not possible to detect elements with a low atomic
number. Moreover some atoms have an overlapping in the energy peak that may results in
30
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.4 – Various modes of electron emission from incident x-rays or electrons.
Figure 3.5 – Interaction volume between the electron beam and the specimen [16].
31
==PAGE:33==
the detection of the wrong element. Depth resolution for EDS is 2-5µm, depending on the
atomic weight of the sample. Spatial resolution for EDS in SEM is ≈2µm (Figure 3.5), where
the analyzed particles should be greater than 2µm in order to obtain proper quantiﬁcation
without overlapping with the interaction volume of another constituent. Element maps can
also be generated using EDS, where x-ray intensities are measured while the beam is rastered
over a speciﬁed area of the sample. The resulting image is a brightness intensity map showing
points of high concentration, and low concentration of a speciﬁc element. Element maps can
be used to qualitatively determine which phases contain which elements, or quantitatively
produce phase fractions if the individual phases have been properly characterized [16].
It should be noted that since the sample should be conductive in order for it to be charged. To
prevent charging on non-conductive samples, the samples can be covered with a thin layer of
a conductive material like carbon, platinum-palladium or gold [33].
3.2.2
Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spetroscopy
Glow Discharge Spectroscopy (GDS) is a technique which provides direct bulk analysis and
depth proﬁling analysis of solids. Glow discharge optical emission spectrometry (GDOES) is a
particular type of GDS using a glow discharge source in combination with one or more optical
spectrometers. Compared to SEM-EDS, the GDOES has different advantages:
• it allows the determination of all elements, including H, with a very low detection limits
(0.1-50ppm)
• it provides a complete and detailed sample-composition proﬁle at depths ranging from
less than 10 nm to more than 100 µm
• it does not require any sample preparation
• it is a rapid technique.
The most common source used in glow discharge analysis is the Grimm source, schematically
represented in Figure 3.6 (a). In the Grimm source a hollow copper tube is used as an anode.
The sputtering of the sample occurs in the region opposite to the hollow of the anode. The
copper tube is ﬁlled with argon at low pressure and a potential difference is applied between
the sample and the hollow copper anode. The sample is negatively charged and thus becomes
the cathode. Due to the potential difference a glow discharge is formed. Electrons leave the
negatively charged sample surface and ﬂow though the plasma towards the anode. In the
plasma these electrons collide with the argon atoms, producing positive argon ions and high
energy metastable argon atoms. The argon ions are attracted by the sample surface which is
negatively charged. Therefore the Ar+ ions impinge on the surface with sufﬁcient energy to
remove atoms (Figure 3.6 (b)). The ions formed and photons released in the negative glow can
be analyzed by mass spectrometry and optical emission spectroscopy, respectively, as each
spectrum is characteristic for a speciﬁc element [35].
32
==PAGE:34==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6 – (a)-schematic diagram of the Grimm-type glow discharge. (b)-fundamental
processes occurring in a glow discharge plasma neutral. He argon metastable, He+ argon ions.
Note that Ar and He can both be used in this process [34].
The proﬁle obtained in Figure 3.7 (a) shows the intensity as a function of the sputtering time.
This means that in a ﬁrst step it is only obtained a qualitative information. However, when a
calibration is done, it is possible to obtain also quantitative data (Figure 3.7 (b)).
33
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7 – Typical GDEOS depth proﬁle qualitative (a) and quantitative (b).
34
==PAGE:36==
4 Materials and methods
4.1
Materials
During this study three different materials were investigated: galvanealed steel, dual phase
steel and aluminum alloy AA6016(T4). For all the tests the samples were cleaned ultrasonically
for 10 minutes in ethanol and dried with compressed air before being tested. In order to
simulate as much as possible the production conditions no extra cleaning or etching treat-
ments were carried out. For some of the experiments cross sections of the materials were
analyzed. To do so the samples were cold mounted in a mixture of 25 parts by weight of Struers
EpoFix Resin and 3 parts by weight of Struers EpoFix Hardener. Subsequently, the samples
were polished mechanically till 3µm and in a ﬁnal step the sample was polished with Struers
OP-Chem.
4.2
Electrochemical analysis
The electrochemical analysis of the materials consisted in measuring the OCP as function of
time and carrying out potentiodynamic measurements. For both types of tests a standard
three-electrode setup was used. In this setup an Ag/AgCl electrode was used as reference
electrode while a Pt-mesh (2.54*2.54 cm) was used as a counter electrode. The exposed area of
the samples was 1.0 cm2. The potentiostat used is a Solartron Electrochemical potentiostat
(1250 frequency response analyser and SI1286 Electrochemical interface) in combination with
the CorrWare for version 2.80 software.
The experiments are carried out in four different salt solutions: NaCl (3wt%), CaCl2 (3wt%),
MgCl2(3wt%) and (NaCl+MgCl2 (5:1))(3wt%). Additionally, a commercial de-icing salt based
on NaCl, provided by ESCO De-Icing Salt, was used in order to corroborate the validity of the
results obtained with pure salts. The commercial salt was delivered as granules from which a
3wt% solution was prepared. All the solutions have been prepared dissolving the speciﬁc salt
in de-ionized water.
For the ﬁrst series of experiments the open circuit potential was measured during 2 hours. The
interval time between two measurements was 1 second. The measurement was carried out at
35
==PAGE:37==
room temperature in a non-stirred solution. To ensure reproducibility, the measurement was
repeated three times for each metal-electrolyte combination.
Prior to the potentiodynamic experiments the OCP was measured till a stable value was
reached (15 minutes for galvannealed steel and AA6016(T4) and 2 hours for dual phase steel).
In all cases the start and stop potential were deﬁned versus the measured OCP. The starting
potential was set at -0.2 V vs OCP for galvanneald steel and dual phase steel and -0.3 V vs OCP
for AA6016(T4), while the ﬁnal potential was set at +0.3 V vs OCP for all the tested materials.
The scan rate used was 1 mV/s. Based on these measurements the corrosion current densities
were calculated using the current at which there is intersection of the anodic and cathodic
lines. Like for the OCP measurements the experiment was carried out three times per metal-
electrolyte combination in a non-stirred solution at room temperature.
4.3
Optical microscopy
In order to see the dual phase micro-structure the sample was cold mounted grinded and
polished following the same procedure as described in Section 4.1. After polishing, the sample
was etched with a 2% Nital solution and studied under the optical microscope (Nikon Eclipse
L150 ) at a magniﬁcation of 100 times.
4.4
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
During this study two different electron microscopes were used. First of all a JEOL 6480 LA
SEM was used to make images of the untreated surface of the AA6016(T4) and of the cross
sections of the galvannealed steel. For the elemental analysis of the samples a JEOL EX-94300
EDX detector was used. To avoid charging of the embedded samples, they are covered with a
thin layer of gold. This layer was applied with a JFC-1300 JEOL sputter coater equipped with a
Cressington MTM-20 thickness controller. Besides also images were made of the AA6016(T4)
surface after 1.5 hours of exposure in three different solutions: NaCl (3 wt.%), MgCl2(3 wt.%)
and CaCal2(3 wt.%). For this analysis a Quanta 200FEG MKII, FEI ﬁeld emission SEM was used
in combination with an Oxford Instrument INCA energy dispersive X-ray (EDS) analyser in
order to obtain elemental information. Images and EDX measurements were carried out at
different magniﬁcations. Therefore, the magniﬁcation has been mentioned for every image
and is accompanied by a scale bar.
4.5
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GD-OES)
In-depth elemental proﬁles were recorded by GDOES using a Horiba-Jobin Yvon GD-2 proﬁler.
The instrument was equipped with a standard 4 mm diameter anode, a polychromator with 28
acquiring channels, an rf-generator (13.56 MHz) and Quantum XP software. An Ar pressure of
650 Pa and an applied rf-power of 40 W were employed as source conditions for the analyses.
The instrument was equipped with a 0.5 m polychromator with a nitrogen purged optical path.
36
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1 – Schematic of the set-up described in Section 4.6.
Besides untreated samples of galvannealed steel and AA6016(T4) also samples of AA6016(T4)
after 12 hours of immersion in different electrolytes were analyzed.
4.6
Inﬂuence of relative humidity and temperature on salts dissolu-
tion
In order to study the inﬂuence of humidity and temperature on the dissolution of different salts
an additional experiment has been carried out. For this measurement two metals, one used as
reference (stainless steel) and the other as working electrode (galvannealed steel), have been
cold mounted following the same procedure as described in Section 4.1. The electrode size
was 12 by 12 mm and the distance between the two electrodes was kept as small as possible.
Subsequently 0.01g of dry salt has been spread over the surface. Finally the samples were
exposed to a changing humidity in a CTS T-40 environmental chamber. The starting relative
humidity was set to 40 RH. Each 40 minutes the relative humidity was increased by 10% until a
37
==PAGE:39==
relative humidity of 90% was reached. Consecutively the relative humidity is again decreased,
with the same step interval and duration, till a relative humidity of 40% was reached again.
At the end of each humidity step the current ﬂowing between the two electrodes has been
recorded with a multimeter (Voltcraft Digital-Multmeter, accuracy ±2.5%). The procedure
described above has been repeated four times for four different temperatures: 15◦C, 23◦C,
30◦C and 45◦C . A schematic drawing and a picture of the setup can be found in Figure 4.1.
38
==PAGE:40==
5 Results and Discussion
5.1
Characterization of untreated samples
The characterization for different metals has been carried out on as received samples in order
to better understand the mechanisms behind the corrosion process. The micrograph of the
dual phase steel obtained by optical microscope is presented in Figure 5.1 and reveals the
presence of martensite islands (needle-like dark phase) embedded in a ferrite matrix (light
phase).
The characterization for galvannealed steel has been carried out with a combination of SEM
and GDOES analysis. From the SEM cross section (Figure 5.2) it is seen that a uniform zinc
layer with an average thickness of around 7.5 µm was deposited on the steel. The GDOES
depth proﬁles for Zn, Fe and Al are represented in Figure 5.3. At approximately 40 seconds
the Zn intensity drops to zero while Fe reaches its maximum intensity. Therefore, in this
area, the interface between the Zn layer and the steel substrate can be located. Moreover, at
approximately 20 seconds a change in the Zn proﬁle’s slope may indicate the transition from
the high-iron γ layer to the δ layer (see Section 2.1.3). On the other hand, the broadening of
the interphase can also be attributed to the roughness induced by the ion sputtering during
the GDOES analysis.
Based on the SEM pictures of the as received AA6016(T4) surface two distinct types of particles
can be distinguished at the surface: large black particles (marked with A on Figure 5.2 (a))
and tiny grey script-like features (marked with B on Figure 5.2 (a)). With the assistance of
EDS analysis (Figure 5.2 (b-c)) the features’ composition was identiﬁed. Particle A contains
Mg and Si, while particle B contains Fe and Si. These observations are in accordance with
literature. It is known that the main components of heat treatable AA6xxx series alloy are Mg
and Si, and AA6xxx derives its strength from the precipitation hardening phase, Mg2Si [36].
Iron, on the other hand, does not contribute to any properties, and is found only as impurity.
Its presence as intermetallic is due to the low solubility of iron in aluminum. From the GDOES
depth proﬁles (Figure 5.5) it can be seen that the concentration of Mg and Si is higher during
the ﬁrst sputtering seconds than in the bulk of the metal. This enrichment of magnesium
particles at the surface can be explained by the heat treatment which is enhancing the element
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.1 – Optical micrograph for dual phase steel showing the ferrite phase (marked with A)
and the martensite phase (marked with B).
Figure 5.2 – SEM micrograph of the galvannealed steel cross section showing the zinc layer
thickness.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.3 – GDOES depth proﬁle for galvannealed steel as received sample.
diffusion [37]- [38].
5.2
Electrochemical analysis for dual phase steel
To understand the inﬂuence of different salts on the corrosion behaviour of dual phase steel
both OCP and potentiodynamic polarisation measurements have been carried out. A similar
evolution of the OCP (Figure 5.6 (a)) is visible when immersed in the different electrolytes.
Starting from a potential of -0.4/-0.5 VAg/AgCl the potential is decreasing towards a value of
-0.55/-0.65 VAg/AgCl before a stable potential is reached after 80 minutes. An average potential
value for the different salts is reported in Figure 5.6 (b) in which it can be seen that all the
values are around -0.6 VAg/AgCl. The initial decrease in the potential observed for the samples
immersed in the different electrolytes may be due to the dissolution of small amounts of
oxides present on the surface as contaminations.
From Figure 5.6 it can be noticed small differences for the OCP trend in NaCl, CaCl2 and
blended solution. On the other hand, in MgCl2 a slightly higher potential is measured. How-
ever the differences among the different salts can be neglected, as they are comparable with
the maximum standard deviation seen for the stable potential (0.015 V ).
Potentiodynamic measurements (Figure 5.7 (a)) show an overlap of the anodic branches. For
all the curves only an active part is present, due to the nature of the oxide layer which is
unstable. When looking at the different corrosion current densities in Figure 5.7 (b), the dual
phase steel does not show variations as a function of the different salts. Therefore it can be
concluded that, according to electrochemical measurements, the type of de-icing salt is not
inﬂuencing the corrosion behaviour of the dual phase steel.
5.3
Electrochemical analysis for galvannealed steel
The OCP (Figure 5.8 (a)) evolution as function of time for GA shows a similar trend for the
different chloride solutions studied. The potential drops from -0.75/-0.8 V Ag/AgCl to a stable
potential of -0.85/0.9 V Ag/AgCl after 2 hours. An overlapping in the OCP trend can be noticed
for all the chloride solutions, except for the blended solution. For this particular solution,
the potential is shifted towards more noble values. However, this is again not signiﬁcant, as
41
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.4 – (a) SEM micrograph of AA6016(T4). (b) EDS composition analysis and spectra for
the position marked with A in (a). (c) EDS composition analysis and spectra for the position
marked with B in (a).
42
==PAGE:44==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5 – GDOES depth proﬁle for AA6016(T4) qualitative (a) and quantitative (b).
43
==PAGE:45==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6 – Open circuit potential (a) and average potential values (b) for dual phase steel in
different solutions.
44
==PAGE:46==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7 – Potentiodynamic polarization curves (a) and corrosion current density values (b)
for dual phase steel in different solutions.
45
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8 – Open circuit potential (a) and average potential values (b) for galvannealed steel
in different solutions.
46
==PAGE:48==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.9 – Potentiodynamic polarization curves (a) and corrosion current density values (b),
for galvannealed steel in different solutions. In Figure (c) the difference between the highest
and the lowest value for corrosion current density has been pointed out.
47
==PAGE:49==
the standard deviation for the average stable potential in the blended solution is 0.019V. The
average stable potentials for galvannealed steel in different salts are presented in Figure 5.8
(b). It can be noticed that for the different salts all the values are around -0.87 V Ag/AgCl.
Potentiodynamic measurements (Figure 5.9 (a)) show that for the blended solution and CaCl2
the corrosion potential is shifted to more positive potentials. However, when looking at the
anodic branch, the curves are overlapping. From the same curves it can be seen how galvan-
nealed steel fails to form a passive layer under all the studied conditions. This was expected
since zinc passivates only at high pH values (see Pourbaix diagram in Section 2.1.3). The
most signiﬁcant differences between the electrochemical behaviour of galvannealed steel as a
function of the chloride solution are seen in the corrosion current densities (Figure 5.9 (b)).
It is possible to distinguish three different groups: NaCl and the commercial salts (with the
lowest corrosion current densities) followed by CaCl2 and ﬁnally the blended solution and
MgCl2 with the highest corrosion current densities. The ratio among the corrosion current
densities for MgCl2 and NaCl is more than 5.5 (Figure 5.9 (c)).
Prosek et al. [39] studied the corrosion of zinc in the same chloride media. In their study
the samples were exposed, after exposition to different dry salts, for 28 days at 80 % RH. To
measure the corrosivity a combination of wet mass gains measurements and XRD and FTIR of
the corrosion products was employed. However, from their work the corrosivity of the ions
was increasing in the following order: Mg2+ <Ca2+ < Na2+. According to their study the main
factor determining the differences in corrosion grade was the tendency of cations to hydrolyse
causing a drop of pH in the surface electrolyte. The corrosion rate of zinc in the presence
of calcium and magnesium decreased due to the promotion of simonkolleite formation and
prevention of carbonate formation at pH below 8 and blocking of cathodic areas. The results
found from Prosek et al. are in disagreement with the outcome of this work. However it has
to be considered that the experiments performed by Prosek et al. were carried out on pure
zinc panels with dry salts with different chloride surface concentrations and with a relative
humidity of 80%, while in this work the salts were used in a liquid solution on galvannealed
steel.
5.4
Electrochemical and surface analysis of AA6016(T4)
The OCP of AA6016 as a function of the chloride solution (Figure 5.10(a)) shows that regardless
of the salt, all the curves reach the same stable potential after the ﬁrst minutes of immersion.
The presence of spikes along all the measurements is due to the passive nature of the alu-
minium. When the potential drops a pit is forming, by locally dissolving the oxide layer. Since
the aluminum oxide in neutral solution is very stable, it will reform again heading to a rapid
increase in potential. When looking at the OCP, it can be seen that NaCl, the commercial salt
and the blended solution are overlapping, while it has a slightly higher potential when im-
mersed in CaCl2 or MgCl2. However, the differences between the maximum and the minimum
potential is comparable with the maximum scattering values. Therefore, for all the salts, the
trend is reproducible, with an average potential value of -0.67VAg/AgCl (Figure 5.10 (b)).
Potentiodynamic measurements (Figure 5.11 (a)) for AA6016(T4) show a very reproducible
behavior of the anodic branch when immersed in the different salts. After an active part,
corresponding to the oxide layer dissolution, a nearly constant current density is reached,
which correspond to the passive region. Despite the overlapping of the anodic part of the
curves, there are still some important differences in the corrosion current densities (Figure 5.11
48
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.10 – Open circuit potential (a) and average potential values (b) for AA6016 in different
solutions.
49
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11 – Potentiodynamic polarization curves (a) and corrosion corrosion current density
values (b) for AA6016 in different solutions.
50
==PAGE:52==
(b)). NaCl shows the lowest corrosion current density followed by MgCl2, CaCl2, commercial
salt and the blended solution. It is interesting to notice that, despite the fact that a very similar
behavior is expected for the NaCl and commercial salt, the corrosion current density is three
times higher in the commercial salt solution than in the pure NaCl solution.
Another important difference in corrosion current density can be seen when comparing the
blended solution with the NaCl and MgCl2 solutions. Although the blended solution is made
of mostly NaCl with 20% of MgCl2 it has a corrosion current density that is 2.5 times higher
than NaCl and 2 times higher than MgCl2.
To get a better understanding of the effect of the cations on the corrosion of the AA6016(T4),
surface analysis has been carried out after exposure of AA6016(T4) to the selected salts.
SEM/EDS after 1.5 hours of exposure to a NaCl solution conﬁrms that pitting is occurring. The
pitting is present both as isolated pits (Figure 5.12 (a)) or as pitting corrosion in a preferred
crystallographic direction (Figure 5.12(b)). Yasuda et al. [40] studied pitting of aluminum
single crystals on low index surfaces. They concluded that the pitting potential and the pitting
density on aluminum depends on the surface orientation. The {001}- plane has the highest
pitting potential and lowest pitting density while the {111}-plane has the lowest pitting poten-
tial and highest pitting density. A micrograph of an isolated pit at high magniﬁcation is shown
in Figure 5.12(b). In the case of exposure of the aluminum in sodium chloride several isolated
pits are found in which NaCl salt deposits and crystallizes (Figure 5.12 (c)-(f )).
After exposure to 3 wt.% CaCl2 AA6016(T4) is still showing pitting in preferential directions
(Figure 5.13 (a)-(b)) and isolated pits (Figure 5.13 (c)-(d)). However, the amount of crystallo-
graphically oriented pits is larger than for the NaCl exposed specimen. On the other hand, less
isolated pits are found. Moreover it is seen that the Fe-containg particles present at the surface
are acting as an important catalysator for corrosion (Figure5.14). Eckerman et al.[41] studied
the effect of Fe-containing particles on the corrosion of the Al-Mg-Si alloy. After exposure
of AA6111 alloy for 30 minutes to a 1M NaCl solution, they observed trenching around the
Fe-containing intermetallics. The latter have been considered as cathodically active sites,
while the Mg2Si particles are shown to behave as anodically active sites with dissolution of Mg
as a consequence. However, from their studies, they concluded that while the Mg2Si particles
were anodically active since the ﬁrst minutes of immersion, it takes longer for the Fe particles
to become cathodically active.
Finally, SEM/EDS analysis of the aluminum alloy exposed to MgCl2 showed important differ-
ences compared to the samples immersed in NaCl or CaCl2: pitting corrosion is occurring in
less extend. Some crystallographic pits can still be noted ((Figure 5.15 (c)-(d)), however, the
general trend is showing the presence of corrosion deposits all over the surface (Figure 5.15
(a)-(b)-(c)). EDS mapping (Figure 5.16) shows that the deposits are rich in oxygen but, apart
from that, they do not show any predominant composition. In Figure 5.16 (a) some chloride
deposition can be found in the middle of the oxygen rich area, while Mg and Si are distributed
homogeneously.
To further analyze the surface composition after corrosion GDOES has been carried out on
both untreated samples and samples immersed for 12 hours in the different solutions (Fig-
ure 5.17). For all the conditions, the oxygen proﬁle shows an increase in the intensity until
a maximum is reached after approximately 1.2 s of sputtering. After this peak the value is
dropping until it reaches a stable value after approximately 2 seconds of sputtering. Based on
51
==PAGE:53==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.12 – SEM micrographs and EDS analysis spectra for AA6016(T4) after 1.5 hours
exposure in 3 wt.% NaCl.
52
==PAGE:54==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.13 – SEM micrographs for AA6016(T4) after 1.5 hours exposure in 3 wt.% CaCl2.
53
==PAGE:55==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14 – SEM micrographs and EDS elemental mapping for AA6016(T4) after 1.5 hours
exposeure in 3 wt.% CaCl2 showing: (a) Fe precipitates and (b) Fe-Si precipitates (marked with
red circles).
54
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.15 – SEM micrographs for AA6016(T4) after 1.5 hours exposure in 3 wt.% MgCl2.
55
==PAGE:57==
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.16 – SEM micrographs for AA6016(T4) after 1.5 hours exposure in 3 wt.% MgCl2.
56
==PAGE:58==
the oxygen depth proﬁles’ slope for the different samples it is possible to identify, the interface
between the oxide layer and the bulk aluminum. As the oxygen proﬁle is very similar for
all the studied conditions it is not expected that a signiﬁcant change in the thickness of the
oxide layer is occurring when comparing the untreated samples with the corroded one. In
addition to the oxygen proﬁle, the proﬁles for the different cations in which the aluminum
has been exposed are presented. When looking at the proﬁles obtained for the untreated
samples (Figure 5.17 (a))it can be seen that Ca, Mg and Na are already present. While the
presence of Mg is due to the AA6016 microstructure (see Section 5.1) both Na and Ca may be
present due to contamination coming from the rolling process. After correlating the obtained
intensities to weight percentages through a calibration of the equipment, it is seen that only
Mg is present in signiﬁcant quantities (Figure 5.18). Moreover for Mg big differences can be
noted from one sample to another: the amount of magnesium is increasing in the following
way: wt.%NaCl<wt.%CaCl2<wt.%untreated< wt.%MgCl2.
Eckermann et al. [41] studied the inﬂuence of the Mg2Si dissolution processes during corro-
sion of a Al-Mg-Si alloy. By using a combination of open circuit potential measurements in
1M NaCl solution and surface analysis they concluded that the corrosion process is the result
of a signiﬁcant depletion of Mg regardless of the aging condition of the alloy. These results
would explain the drop in magnesium in the proﬁles of the samples exposed the calcium and
sodium chloride when compared with the results of the untreated sample. On the other hand,
for the alloy exposed toMgCl2 the amount of Mg is higher than in the untreated sample. This
would suggest not only that the sample is corroding less due to the selective dissolution of
magnesium, but even that Mg cations are embedded into the oxide layer.
A combination of electrochemical and surface analysis clearly showed that the cations play
a role in the corrosion of AA6016(T4).The different corrosivity of CaCl2 when compared to
NaCl is conﬁrmed from the measurements done: a difference in corrosion current density
(Figure 5.19 (b)), the trenching around cathodic side inCaCl2 (Figure 5.14) and the difference
in Mg depletion (Figure 5.18) conﬁrm a more severe corrosion in CaCl2 media when compared
to NaCl media. The difference in corrosion potential in the two solutions can be explained
based on the obtained GDOES results. It is known that magnesium has a lower potential
than aluminium. As a consequence when more magnesium is added to the aluminium the
potential of the aluminium will be shifting towards lower potential. From the GDOES analysis
it is seen that more magnesium has been selectively dissolved into the electrolyte solution,
leading to a higher corrosion potential of AA6016(T4) in CaCl2 than in NaCl (Figure 5.18).
Finally the inﬂuence of Mg2+ on the corrosion behaviour of AA6016(T4) will be discussed.
First of all the potentiodynamic measurements show that in MgCl2 the corrosion current
density is higher than NaCl but lower than the one inCaCl2. The latter result is in accordance
with the SEM/EDS results which shows a higher amount of pitting corrosion for the aluminum
alloy when exposed to CaCl2 . This is also conﬁrmed by the GDOES depth proﬁles if the
occurred pitting is seen as the dissolution of magnesium from the Mg2Si particles.
Only few studies have been carried out on the role of Mg2+ ions on the corrosion of aluminum
alloy. Collazo et al. [42] studied the inﬂuence of Mg2+ ions on AA2024(T3). Their results
showed that the Mg ions were acting as inhibitor slowing down the Mg dealloying of S phase
particle (Al2CuMg). However it was not hypothesized how this mechanism could happen. This
study is in accordance with the results found in this thesis when combining electrochemical
57
==PAGE:59==
with the surface analysis. However, when comparing electrochemical analysis and surface
analysis for the samples immersed in NaCl and MgCl2 the results seem conﬂicting. From the
surface analysis it is shown that in MgCl2, AA6016(T4) shows lower pitting corrosion than
NaCl. However the higher corrosion current density (Figure 5.11) in MgCl2 when compared to
NaCl may be due to uniform corrosion, as from the SEM/EDS different oxygen rich deposits
where found spread over the surface (Figure 5.16).
Lastly, based on the same principle as used for the difference in corrosion potential in NaCl
and CaCl2 solutions, a correlation can be seen between the slightly lower potential of alu-
minum in MgCl2 media than in the other media and the high amount of magnesium found in
the oxide through the GDOES.
5.5
Eletrochemical analyis: comparison of different metals corro-
sion
In this section the results from the electrochemical analysis analysis for different metals are
compared. When looking at the potential values from the OCP (Figure5.19 (a)), it can be
seen that, regardless of the salt, dual phase steel is behaving the noblest while galvannealed
steel has the least noble behavior. These results, for all three metals, are in accordance with
the available literature on the corrosion behavior of the same classes of material in NaCl
[43, 41, 44]. It becomes more interesting when looking at the comparison of the corrosion
current densities for the different metals (Figure 5.19). Dual phase steel shows a very low
corrosion current density regardless of the type of de-icing salt to which it is exposed, while
the corrosion current density of galvannealed steel and aluminium is clearly impacted by the
type of de-icing salt. When comparing AA6016 with galvannealed steel, the blended solution
is among the most corrosive media for both materials while NaCl is the least corrosive. On the
other hand it is seen that for the galvannealed steel there is no signiﬁcant difference between
the behavior in the NaCl solution and the commercial salt solution, while for AA6016(T4) a
signiﬁcant difference in corrosion current density is seen for both salts. To understand this
difference in behaviour a better insight in the actual composition of the commercial salt is
needed. From the surface analysis after electrochemical exposure for AA6016 it became clear
that the cation in the de-icing salt is mainly inﬂuencing the selective dissolution behaviour of
the magnesium present in the Mg2Si particles. For galvannealed steel and dual phase steel
further research is required in order to understand the observed behaviour. For galvannealed
is estimated that the cation of the de-icing salt is inﬂuencing the type of corrosion product
formed and as a consequence is inﬂuencing the eventual blocking of the cathodic sites by the
deposition of corrosion products.
5.6
Inﬂuence of relative humidity and temperature on salts solubil-
ity
In the previous part of this chapter only bulk liquid solutions have been considered. However,
even if the salt is deposited on a dry surface it may cause corrosion. Different relative humidity
and temperatures values change the ability of the salt to absorb water from the environment,
leading to the formation of a conductive electrolyte ﬁlm on the surface. In order to study the
inﬂuence of humidity and temperature on the dissolution of different salts the setup described
in Section 3.6 was used. The test was carried out in two steps. In a ﬁrst step the relative
58
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.17 – GDOES depth proﬁle for AA6016(T4) untreated (a) and after 12 hours immersion
in: NaCl (b), CaCl2 (c) and MgCl2 (d).
59
==PAGE:61==
Figure 5.18 – Maximum concentration of Mg, Ca and Na for AA6016(T4) in different solutions
from the GDOES proﬁles shown in Figure 5.17.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.19 – Overall potential from the OCP (a) and corrosion current densities from the
potentiodynamic measurements (b).
60
==PAGE:62==
humidity was increased from 40% till 90%. When 90% was reached the relative humidity was
again decreased until 40%. Just before each increase in humidity the current was measured as
an indication of the dissolution of the salt. The results are summarized in 5.20.
Regardless of the temperature, the deliquescence relative humidity (DRH), which is the rel-
ative humidity at which a salt starts being liquid and is indicated by the moment at which
a current is ﬂowing, has the following order: DRHCaCl2<DRHMgCl2< DRHblended< DRHNaCl
<DRHCommercial.
CaCl2 starts dissolving already at 40% RH for all the studied temperatures, while the commer-
cial salt is not dissolving at all at 15◦C and for higher temperatures it only dissolves at 90%
RH. When comparing NaCl and the commercial salt it can be seen that the pure salt starts
dissolving at lower RH values (80% at 15◦C and 45◦C and 70% at 23◦C). However, even if the
two salts should have the same composition, the commercial salt has a bigger grain size which
may affect the salt dissolution. Another inﬂuence on the DRH may come from the anti-caking
agent that is usually added to the de-icing salts to ease storage and use as mentioned in 2.3.
The blended solution, consisting of NaCl with 20% MgCl2, has a DRH which is closer to MgCl2
than to NaCl for all temperatures. This shows that, even if MgCl2 is present only in small
percentages, the dissolution behavior of the mixed salt is more inﬂuenced by MgCl2 than by
NaCl.
For all the different salts, once they start dissolving, increasing the relative humidity from 40%
to 90% leads to a change in the current. In particular, it is possible to distinguish two different
trends: at 15◦C and 23◦C the current is increasing when increasing the humidity values while
at 45◦C there is an opposite behavior. This is due to the fact that at 45◦C, once the liquid ﬁlm
is formed, it starts to dry out with time because of the high temperature.
When looking at the results of the second stage of this experiment, in which the relative hu-
midity is gradually decreased again, it is seen that for the same RH values at 15◦C and 23◦C
the current is remaining at higher values for the descending part than for the ascending part.
This means that when, starting from a dissolved salt, the recrystallization of the salt will start
to occur at a lower relative humidity than the earlier observed DRH. At 45 ◦C the descending
curves show lower values than the ascending curves. However, as already mentioned, it has to
be considered that the liquid ﬁlm is drying out due to the long exposure time.
As mentioned above the hygroscopicity of the salt is increasing when going from CaCl2, to
MgCl2 and NaCl which is in accordance with literature [45]. Besides it is also shown that also
the temperature has an important inﬂuence on the dissolution of the salts. This is crucial for
the automotive metals exposed to de-icing salts, as a car can move from one environmental
conditions to another, very different one, in few hours. Secondly, it might be that the car is not
washed regularly allowing the salt for long time present on the metal surface. In this case a
high enough relative humidity might cause the salt to dissolve again and as a consequence the
metal will corrode further.
61
==PAGE:63==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.20 – Current as function of RH for different de-icing salts at: (a)15◦C, (b) 23◦C, (c)45◦
C. Following the arrow direction is possible to move from the starting point to the ending point
of the experiment.
62
==PAGE:64==
6 Conclusions
6.1
Introduction
This thesis is devoted to the study of the inﬂuence of different chloride salts used as road
de-icers on the corrosion performance of AA6016(T4), galvannealed steel and dual phase steel.
Five different solutions based on NaCl, MgCl2 and CaCl2 at wt. 3% concentration were used.
Electrochemical analysis was combined with surface analysis to have further understanding of
the corrosion mechanism as a function of the chloride solution. The electrochemical analysis
was performed by means of Open Circuit Potential and Potentiodynamic measurements.
Additionally, SEM/EDS and GDOES were implemented on AA6016 (T4) after exposition to
NaCl, CaCl2 and MgCl2. Furthermore, a special setup was developed to study the solubility of
the different salts as a function of the temperature and humidity.
The following paragraphs give an overview of the new insights that were obtained in this work
6.2
The inﬂuence of the chloride solution on the corrosion perfor-
mance
Electrochemical analysis has shown important differences in the corrosion performance
of AA6016 and galvannealed steel, but not in the case of dual phase steel. In the case
of galvannealed steel, the corrosion current densities were higher for MgCl2 followed by
(NaCl+MgCl2)(5:1), CaCl2, commercial salt and NaCl. The difference between the corrosion
current densities for MgCl2 was 5.84 times higher than for NaCl. On the other hand, for
AA6016, the corrosion current densities in blended solution was approximately 3 times higher
than NaCl. Surface analysis indicated that the amount and morphology of the resulting pits
changed as a function of the chloride solution.
6.3
The inﬂuence of temperature and humidity on the solubility of
the different salts
Firstly, regardless of the temperature, CaCl2 is the salt which dissolves at the lowest relative
humidity, followed by MgCl2, (NaCl+MgCl2)(5:1), NaCl and ﬁnally the commercial salt. An-
other relevant result is that lowering the temperature increases the relative humidity at which
a salt starts dissolving. Finally for 15◦C and 23◦C was found that once the salt is dissolved, it
will recrystallize at lower relative humidity level than the one at which it dissolved.
63
==PAGE:65==
6.4
Conclusions of industrial relevance
Nowadays, the automotive manufacturers are using a cyclic corrosion test (CCT) to evaluate
the materials corrosion resistance. In this test NaCl is the salt that is mainly used. The results
presented in this work, highlight some considerations that need to be taken into account for
the development of the new generations of CCT.Based on the results in this work it is seen that
NaCl is in general the mildest corrosive agent for the different metals under investigation. As
MgCl2 and CaCl2 are also frequently used as de-icer in Europe and as it has been shown that
they are more aggressive than NaCl it would be recommended to include this types of salts
also in the evaluations during materials development.
Finally also the inﬂuence of the relative humidity on the solubility of the salts is also shown
to be very critical. In combination with the fact that surface analysis after exposure to the
different salts has shown that salt might be deposited in the pits it became clear that the ﬁeld
conditions are more severe than initially expected by the automotive industry.
6.5
Future works
Understanding the role of the chloride cations in the corrosion of different metals represent a
new and interesting area of research. In this work the ﬁrst steps to understand the inﬂuences
of the different chloride cations on the corrosion behaviour of different automotive metals
are made. However, to come to a full understanding of what is happening in ﬁeld conditions
and to understand the inﬂuence of the cations on the corrosion behaviour of the automotive
metals some extra work is needed.
First of all this thesis focused mostly on the differences in corrosion behavior of AA6016(T4).
But also for galvannealed steel, which is extensively used in car bodies and parts, some major
inﬂuences of the type of de-icing salts were observed. Also here it would be recommended
to analyze the surface after exposure to the different salt solutions like it was done for the
aluminum alloy. By doing so the automotive industry can get important insight in the corrosion
behavior of this material which might be used in solving ﬁeld issues.
Secondly, the use of large solution volumes is one of the main issues in trying to connect
the classical electrochemical analysis with the ﬁeld conditions, where the materials are only
exposed to a thin ﬁlm of electrolyte. To overcome that problem it would be very interesting
to continue the investigation of the temperature and relative humidity on the corrosion
behaviour of the different metals by carrying out classic electrochemical measurements inside
a humidity chamber. By doing so a clear understanding of the inﬂuence of the humidity and
temperature on the corrosion performance of automotive metals as a function of the de-icing
salt can be gained. Besides, the implementation of such a system, for which, the beneﬁts of
the CCT and of the electrochemical analysis are combined would give a powerful additional
tool for the automotive manufacturers to test and develop new, corrosion-resistant, materials.
64
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1] J. P. Gerhardus H. Kich, Michiel P.H. Brongers, Neil G. Thompson, Y. Paul Virmani, “Corro-
sion Costs and Preventive Strategies in the United States,” tech. rep., NACE INTERNA-
TIONAL, 2002.
[2] “Odi, ofﬁce defect investigation (usa).,” 2016.
[3] P. R. Hannour, F., “Corrosion and its manifestation in automotive structures.”
[4] J. Rowe, Advanced Materials in Automotive Engineering. Woodhead Publishing in Materi-
als, Elsevier Science, 2012.
[5] J. Hirsch, “Automotive trends in aluminum, the european perspective: Part one,” 2005.
[6] M. Demeri, Advanced High-Strength Steels: Science, Technology, and Applications. A S M
International, Incorporated, 2013.
[7] “Mictrographs library, dissemination of it for the promotion of materials science (doit-
poms), university of cambridge,” 2003.
[8] Y. Granbom, Structure and mechanical properties of dual phase steels. PhD thesis, Royal
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 2010.
[9] D. E. F. Moreno, Inﬂuence of Microstructure on the Corrosion Performance of DP steels.
PhD thesis, Technische Universiteit Delft, Delft, 2014.
[10] P. Marcus, Corrosion Mechanisms in Theory and Practice, Third Edition. Corrosion
Technology, CRC Press, 2011.
[11] P. P. Sarkar, P. Kumar, M. K. Manna, and P. C. Chakraborti, “Microstructural inﬂuence on
the electrochemical corrosion behaviour of dual-phase steels in 3 . 5 % NaCl solution,”
Materials Letters, vol. 59, pp. 2488–2491, 2005.
[12] W. R. Osório, L. C. Peixoto, L. R. Garcia, and A. Garcia, “Electrochemical corrosion re-
sponse of a low carbon heat treated steel in a nacl solution,” Materials and Corrosion,
vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 804–812, 2009.
[13] A. Pritzel, S. M. Manhabosco, J. S. Rodrigues, and L. F. P. Dick, “Surface & Coatings
Technology Comparative study of the corrosion behavior of galvanized , galvannealed
and Zn55Al coated interstitial free steels,” Surface & Coatings Technology, vol. 279, pp. 150–
160, 2015.
65
==PAGE:67==
[14] A. Marder, “The metallurgy of zinc-coated steel,” Progress in Materials Science, vol. 45,
no. 3, pp. 191 – 271, 2000.
[15] J. M. Long, D. A. Haynes, and P. D. Hodgson, “CHARACTERISATION OF GALVANNEAL
COATINGS ON STRIP STEEL,” Materials Forum, vol. 27, pp. 62–67, 2004.
[16] “Galvoinfonote, galvanneal – differences from galvanize,” 2009.
[17] G. Davies, Materials for Automobile Bodies. Butterworth Heinemann, Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2012.
[18] S. R. Yeomans, “Preface,” in Galvanized Steel Reinforcement in Concrete (S. R. Yeomans,
ed.), pp. xi – xii, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 2004.
[19] M. Bloeck, Aluminium sheet for automotive applications. Woodhead Publishing Limited,
2012.
[20] J. Karlsson, “Corrosion Mechanisms under Organic Coatings,” Master’s thesis,
CHALMERS UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY, Goteborg, Sweden, 2011.
[21] U. O. Ayumi Takata, “Post PVC Sound Insulating Underbody Coating,” SAE technical
paper series, no. 724, 2002.
[22] M. Öhman, “A sirvey on chemical de-icing materials including statistics on the worldwide
use of chloride-based substances-2nd edition,” Tech. Rep. KIMAB-2013-255, Swerea
KIMAB, Kista, Sweden, June 2013.
[23] Y. Chung, Introduction to Materials Science and Engineering. Taylor & Francis, 2006.
[24] L. H. Sandra Krzan, Gudan Olbeg, “Cost 344, Improvements to snow and ice control
on European roads,” tech. rep., European Cooperation in the ﬁeld of of Scientiﬁc and
Technical Research (COST)., 2002.
[25] E. Weiner, Applications of Environmental Chemistry: A Practical Guide for Environmental
Professionals. CRC Press, 2010.
[26] W. A. Nixon, R. G. Alger, R. M. Balgowan, J. P. Burkhardt, R. Decker, G. B. Gilﬁllan, S. N.
Goodman, R. L. Hanneman, D. Kroeger, J. E. Meredith, R. J. Nelson, and G. B. Gilﬁllan,
“Sixth International Symposium on Snow Removal and Ice Control Technology,” (Spokane,
Washington), 2004.
[27] C. H. L. S. Watson, L. Central, F. Regional, T. Authority, E. X. D. Irector, R. E. Skinner, J. B.
Barker, T. Authority, M. W. Behrens, T. Dot, A. D. Biehler, P. Dot, L. L. Brown, M. Dot,
A. P. Canby, S. Transportation, P. Partnership, A. K. Kanafani, C. Engineering, H. E. Lin-
nenkohl, and G. Dot, “Guidelines for the Selection of Snow and Ice Control Materials
to Mitigate Environmental Impacts,” tech. rep., Transportation Research Board of the
National Academies, 2007.
[28] Y. L. Xianming Shi, Laura Fay, Zhengxian Yang, Tuan Anh Ngueyen, “Corrosion of Deiciers
to Metals in Transportation Infrastructure: Introduction and Recent Developments.,”
tech. rep., Corrosion and Sustainable Infrastructure Laboratory, Wester Transportation
Insitute, Montana State University, Bozeman, Mt, Usa.
66
==PAGE:68==
[29] T. Committee, “SNOW AND ICE DATABOOK 2014,” 2014.
[30] J. Åslund, Release rates and environmental impact of zinc-nickel coatings in the automo-
tive industry. PhD thesis, KTH, Stockholm, 2006.
[31] B. Bouffard, “Corrosion Characteristics And Mechanical Properties Of Aluminum Coat-
ings Applied By The Cold Spray Process, school = Bucknell University year = 2011„”
Master’s thesis.
[32] E. Bardal, Corrosion and Protection. Engineering Materials and Processes, Springer
London, 2007.
[33] I. Schoukens, Electrochemical activity of a new generation of hot dip aluminium coatings
on steel. PhD thesis, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, 2013.
[34] C. Q. jr, “PARTICLE BEAM GLOW DISCHARGE SPECTROSCOPY AS A TOOL FOR SPECIA-
TION AND METALLOMICS ANALYSIS ,” Master’s thesis, Clemson University, 2011.
[35] P. Marcus and F. Mansfeld, Analytical Methods In Corrosion Science and Engineering.
Corrosion Technology, CRC Press, 2005.
[36] F. Eckermann, Microscopic Structural and Electrochemical Aspects of Al-Mg-Si Corrosion.
PhD thesis, SWISS FEDERAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY ZURICH, 2008.
[37] J. Kertesz, L; Kojnok and A. Szasz, “THE DETERMINATION OF Mg SURFACE ENRICH-
MENT IN HEAT TREATED A1MgSi ALLOYS USING THE SXES METHOD,” Acta physica
Scientiarum Hungaricae, vol. 49, pp. 1–6, 1980.
[38] T. T. Sasaki, F. R. Elsayed, T. Nakata, T. Ohkubo, S. Kamado, and K. Hono, “Acta Materialia
Strong and ductile heat-treatable Mg – Sn – Zn – Al wrought alloys,” Acta Materialia,
vol. 99, pp. 176–186, 2015.
[39] T. Prosek, “Effect of Cations on Corrosion of Zinc and Carbon Steel Covered with Chlo-
ride Deposits under Atmospheric Conditions under atmospheric conditions,”Corrosion
Science, no. August 2015, 2007.
[40] M. Yasuda, F. Weinberg, and D. Tromans, “Pitting Corrosion of Al and Al-Cu Single
Crystals,” vol. 137, no. 12, 1990.
[41] F. Eckermann, T. Suter, P. J. Uggowitzer, A. Afseth, and P. Schmutz, “Electrochimica Acta
The inﬂuence of MgSi particle reactivity and dissolution processes on corrosion in Al –
Mg – Si alloys,” Electrochimica Acta, vol. 54, pp. 844–855, 2008.
[42] A. Collazo, X. Nóvoa, and C. Pérez, “The role of mg2+ ions in the corrosion behaviour
of aa2024-t3 aluminium alloys immersed in chloride-containing environments,” Elec-
trochimica Acta, vol. 124, pp. 17 – 26, 2014. {ELECTROCHEMICAL} {METHODS} {IN}
{CORROSION} {RESEARCHSelection} of papers from the 10th International Symposium
(EMCR 2012) 18-23 November 2012, Maragogi, Brazil.
[43] F. M. Queiroz and I. Costa, “Electrochemical , chemical and morphological characteri-
zation of galvannealed steel coating,” Surface & Coatings Technology, vol. 201, pp. 7024–
7035, 2007.
67
==PAGE:69==
[44] D. Enrique and F. Moreno, Inﬂuence of Microstructure on the Corrosion Performance of
DP steels door. PhD thesis, TU DELFT, 2014.
[45] K. Mittal, Particles on Surfaces 1: Detection, Adhesion, and Removal. Springer US, 2012.
68
