==PAGE:1==
i 
 
      
 
 
Continuous supervision of 
overhead catenary systems 
Master thesis study 
 
Brian Vig Olesen, S125204 
2/14/2016 
 
 
Supervisor 
Steven Harrod 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
      
==PAGE:2==
ii 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
iii 
 
 Preface 
The following report is the result of the master thesis study “continuous supervision of overhead 
catenary systems” and has been conducted at The Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in the 
five-month period of September 2015 to February 2016, equivalent to 30 ETCS credits. 
Although only supervised from DTU, the focus and goal of this thesis has all the way through 
been intended for the specific use for Railnet Denmark as well. As such there will perhaps be 
elements within this report which would not be included if the sole focus would be towards one 
specific part. A university report, especially at the Master of Science level, will typically be very 
theoretic and apply focus on the thoroughness and explanation of the theory. A company report 
will typically focus more on the results and which specific gains the conclusion provides. 
This report attempt to aim toward both requirements but where time has come short or it has been 
impossible to obtain both goals the focus has been placed towards the application part and have 
followed the result orientated path.  
 
The thesis has been supervised by Steven Harrod at DTU, to whom I owe big thanks for the 
guidance, comments, counselling and just simple patience throughout the project period. 
 
Great thanks also to the people within Railnet Denmark who have helped with answering all my 
questions along the way. All the people within Teknisk Drift, kørestrøm. Dritan Cero for 
accepting and inviting me in in the first place, but also answering questions regarding 
PantoInspect. Hans Johan Friis Nielsen, Lasse Lenschau Johansen, Michael Dalgaard Jensen and 
Henning Veddelbo Hansen for all of your patience and standing up to all my questions. To the rest 
of the department in general for allowing me to draw on your knowledge from day to day and just 
opening up and accepting me into your work day routines. 
On the track side a big thanks to Bo Nielsen for helping me grasp the rules and regulation on the 
tracks and Peter Juel Jensen for answering questions regarding IRISsys and track maintenance. 
 
My colleagues at Atkins Denmark. Jesper Henrichsen and Vagn Preben Eriksen, both for allowing 
me to preserve a desk in the office, but also for answering questions. Nhan Nguyen for answers 
regarding Norway, Christian Werner Hansen for answers regarding Køge Bugt banen and 
bouncing of ideas. Henrik Næsted Nielsen for being available to bounce of silly ideas (some did 
prove useful), and Robin Bogø for both joining the ideas as well as being available for answering 
questions from his own time within TDK. Leif Larsen for all his knowledge regarding the railway 
“world” in Denmark, and all his input regarding all the old failures. 
 
Thanks also to all the people at PantoInspect, Australian Rail, Karma, Seimens and all the others I 
properly have forgotten to include. 
 
Big thanks to family and friends for the support throughout the period. 
 
Finally my colleague Ninna Vork Andersen, to whom I owe a big gratitude. Proof reading the 
thesis, helping me to sort through at least some of the worst inconsistencies, terrible spellings and 
just putting a few smiles on the day in the final couple of weeks.  
It really has been an invaluable help and support.  
 
 
Brian Vig Olesen 
Ballerup, 14 February 2016 
==PAGE:4==
iv 
 
English abstract 
In this project, which is conducted as a master thesis for concluding the program for a Master of 
Science in transportation and logistics engineering, specialising in railway technology at DTU 
transport is performed an analysis of the need for more continuous monitoring of overhead 
catenary system in Denmark, focusing on the Copenhagen urban lines. 
The initial focus has been directed at, by a transition from an interval-based setup onto continuous 
monitoring, both to reduce the amount of breakdowns, while optimising the replacement and thus 
the life cycle costs for overhead catenary system in general and wire specifically. 
Along the way, it has been disclosed that there are little continuous wear of the wire, so a 
transition towards a more continuous monitoring at this basis would only lead to more data and 
added costs, but not be able to improve the life cycle cost significantly. 
There exists interval based measurement data for the past roughly ten years. The use of this, 
however, is far from ideal, why this thesis has investigated the possibilities for further 
development of this and has provided recommendations in this direction, so the maintenance 
processes can be improved. 
 
In Chapter 3, focus is now adapted and directed more specifically against the basis of historical 
error data to uncover the causes and try to prevent recurrences. 
It has turned out that the causes of errors can typically be identified, especially retrospectively. 
Conversely, it has also been uncovered that the errors that occur in and around the overhead 
catenary system and the consequences of these apparently hit at random. Nor is it always the case 
that the breakdown in the end occurs at the same location where the initial error has occurred why 
there has been identified a requirement for a more extended error detection. 
 
Within chapter 4 there, on this basis, has been performed an extensive research of both suppliers 
and literature concerning future as well as already available surveillance equipment as well as 
attempted to create an overview of the data analysis tools are also available, or appears to be 
undergoing development. 
 
Chapter 5 covers a case study of Copenhagen urban lines.  
Initially within the chapter there is, based on the historical crash data, generated, set up and 
presented a model used to analyse and highlight the need for different monitoring and data 
processing depending on the type of damage to be discussed and prevented 
This output from the data model is combined with the overview of current and future supervision 
equipment presents partly recommendations towards which equipment should be considered. 
Partly analyses the possibilities of preventing crashes and comes with an estimate of the amount 
of crashes, which can be prevented in case the proposed equipment is implemented. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
v 
 
The chapter continues into a section regarding data analysis, highlighting that the research and 
development regarding data analysis seems to lag a bit after the development of equipment. 
Explaining that the implementation of the proposed equipment is capable of alerting about 
impending or developing errors, but there is still a requirement for human involvement in the 
assessment process of the errors and the subsequent process concerning preventing it from 
escalating. 
 
The chapter concludes with a cost estimate that includes a brief overview of unit prices for each of 
the recommended monitoring equipment. 
In addition, insight into some of the considerations that should be made, in case it is intended to 
implement monitoring equipment and therefore embark on preparing a business case, including 
some of the considerations that should be taken into account when performing  a cost-benefit 
analysis. Emphasising the difference between whether it is carried out with a focus on internal 
cost-benefit of TDK, focusing on Rail Net Denmark auspices, or with a societal perspective. 
During the course of this process has also revealed the regularity requirements with associated 
bonus and penalties Rail Net Denmark are weighed against. 
 
Chapter 6 contains a general summation and perspectives of primarily the information covered in 
Chapter 5, but also with reference to the previous chapters. 
This summary includes recommendations about the various supervision equipment to prevent 
breakdowns.  
It is within this section also proposed to replace the surge protectors for a regenerative model. The 
current equipment has previously been considered a single usage part and something that naturally 
generates breakdown. 
In addition, this chapter summarise and perspectivate at the apparent decline in the number of 
errors, the regularity requirements Railnet Denmark are weighed against, as well as the apparent 
challenge of locating equipment owned by Railnet Denmark onto DSB S-train. 
 
Chapter 7 provides a brief summary of the way of this thesis, a short listing of recommendations 
to Railnet Denmark as well as a handful of suggestions for future research. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
vi 
 
Dansk resumé 
I dette projekt, som er udført som kandidatspeciale til afslutning af uddannelsen til civilingeniør i 
transport og logistik med speciale i jernbaneteknologi på DTU transport bliver der udført en 
analyse af behovet for mere kontinuert overvågning af køreledningsanlægget i Danmark, med 
fokus på S-banen i København.  
Det indledende fokus har været rettet imod, ved hjælp af en transition fra interval baseret til 
kontinuert overvågning, både at reducere mængden af nedbrud, samtidig med at optimere 
udskiftningen af og derved levetidsomkostningerne for køreledningsanlægget generelt og 
køretråden specifikt. 
Undervejs er det blevet afdækket, at der ikke er ret meget løbende slidtage på køretråden, hvorfor 
en overgang til mere kontinuert overvågning på den baggrund blot vil medføre mere data og flere 
omkostninger, men ikke være i stand til at forbedre levetidsøkonomien væsentligt. 
Der forefindes interval baseret måledata for de seneste knap 10 år. Dette benyttes dog langt fra 
optimalt, hvorfor der er undersøgt muligheder for udvikling af dette og givet anbefalinger i denne 
retning, således vedligeholdelsesprocesserne kan forbedres. 
 
Fokus er herefter i kapitel 3 blevet tilpasset og rettet mere specifikt imod, på grundlag af 
historiske fejldata, at afdække fejlårsager og forsøge at forhindre gentagelser. 
Det har her vist sig at fejlårsagerne typisk kan afdækkes, ikke mindst retrospektivt. 
Omvendt er også afdækket at de fejl der opstår på og omkring anlægget, samt konsekvenserne 
deraf, tilsyneladende rammer fuldstændig tilfældigt. Det er heller ikke altid at nedbruddet i sidste 
ende sker der hvor fejlen oprindeligt er opstået, hvorfor der er identificeret et behov for en mere 
udvidet fejldetektering. 
 
På basis heraf er der i kapitel4 blevet udført en omfattende research af både leverandører og 
litteratur omhandlende fremtidigt samt allerede tilgængeligt overvågningsudstyr samt forsøgt at 
skabe overblik over de data analyseværktøjer der også er tilgængelige, eller lader til at være 
undervejs.  
 
Kapitel 5 omfatter en stor case studie af Københavns S-bane, hvor der indledningsvist, på 
baggrund af de historiske nedbrudsdata, opstilles og benyttes en model til at analysere og 
fremhæve behovet for forskelligt overvågningsudstyr samt for databehandling afhængig af typen 
af skader der ønskes behandlet og forhindret. 
Dette output fra datamodellen kombineres med overblikket over nuværende og kommende udstyr 
og kommer dels med anbefalinger omkring hvilket udstyr der bør fokuseres på, dels analyserer 
mulighederne for at forhindre nedbrud samt kommer med et estimat på mængden af nedbrud der 
kan forhindres i fald det foreslåede udstyr implementeres. 
 
Kapitlet fortsætter over i et afsnit omkring dataanalyser hvor det fremhæves, at selve analysedelen 
lader til at halte en smule efter udviklingen af udstyr, hvorfor implementeringen af det foreslåede 
udstyr nok kan alarmere omkring forestående eller udviklende fejl, men at der stadig er et behov 
for menneskelig involvering i vurderingsprocessen af fejlen samt den efterfølgende proces 
omkring at forhindre den i at eskalere. 
==PAGE:7==
vii 
 
 
Kapitlet afrundes med et omkostningsestimat der dels indeholder en kort oversigt over 
enhedspriserne for enkelte af de anbefalede overvågningsudstyr. 
Derudover indblik i nogle af de overvejelser der bør gøres, i fald man ønsker at implementere 
overvågningsudstyret og derfor giver sig i kast med at udarbejde en business case, herunder nogle 
af de overvejelser man bør gøre sig ift. en cost-benefit analyse. Herunder en fremhævelse af 
forskellen på, om den udføres med fokus på den interne cost-benefit for teknisk drift, kørestrøm, 
med fokus på Banedanmark regi, eller med et samfundsmæssigt perspektiv. 
Undervejs i denne proces er også blevet afdækket de regularitetskrav med tilhørende bod- og 
bonusordninger som Banedanmarks drift af S-banen holdes op imod. 
 
Kapitel 6 indeholder et generel summering og perspektivering over primært de informationer 
afdækket i kapitel 5, men også med reference til de forgående kapitler. 
Heri sammenfattes anbefalingerne omkring de forskellige overvågningsudstyr til at forhindre 
nedbrud. Der foreslås her også udskiftning af enkeltstående udstyr, overspændingsafledere 
(katode sikringer), til en regenerativ model. Udstyr som tidligere blot har været anset som en 
sliddel, og naturlig del af nedbrudsprocessen 
Derudover opsummeres og perspektiveres der i dette kapitel over den tilsyneladende nedgang af 
antallet af fejl, regularitetskravene Banedanmark holdes op imod, samt udfordringen af en 
placering af udstyr ejet af Banedanmark på DSBs S-tog. 
 
Kapitel 7 indeholder et kort resumé af vejen for denne afhandling, en kort oplistning af 
anbefalinger til Banedanmark samt en lille håndfuld forslag til fremtidigt forskning. 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
viii 
 
==PAGE:9==
ix 
 
INDEX 
1. 
Introduction 
1 
1.1. 
Initial background and idea for thesis 
1 
1.2. 
Initial meeting and information from Railnet Denmark 
2 
1.3. 
Rules and regulations 
4 
 Rules and regulations in Denmark 
4 
 Rules and regulations in other Nordic countries (SE & N) 
6 
 Rules and regulations in the UK 
7 
2. 
Current maintenance / supervision setup 
9 
2.1. 
Measurement runs 
9 
2.2. 
PantoInspect 
11 
 Historic of PantoInspect 
11 
 Tracking using RFID 
14 
 Data analysis 
15 
 Experience from DSB S-train 
17 
 Summation and future development 
17 
2.3. 
IRISsys 
18 
 Using IRISsys to plan maintenance 
19 
 Ideas for IRISsys development 
25 
3. 
Analysis of OCS failures 
35 
3.1. 
Actual break downs 
35 
 Damages 2006 - 2015 
36 
 Error division 
38 
3.2. 
Potential break downs 
40 
 Grouping of pantograph errors 
40 
 Electrical arching 
44 
 OCS project or adjustments 
45 
 Track project or adjustments 
46 
3.3. 
Summation and future development 
47 
4. 
Overview of supervision systems 
49 
4.1. 
Literature overview regarding multiple areas 
49 
4.2. 
Rolling stock based systems 
51 
 Static measurements 
51 
 Dynamic measurements 
54 
4.3. 
Line side based systems 
58 
 Monitoring of rolling stock equipment 
58 
 Monitoring of OCS and contact wire 
62 
4.4. 
Manual measurements 
63 
4.5. 
Summation 
64 
5. 
Case study, Copenhagen urban lines 
67 
==PAGE:10==
x 
 
5.1. 
Model for data collection 
67 
 Model setup 
69 
 Model output 
71 
5.2. 
Detection possibilities 
76 
 Output data model / error detection possibilities (options) 
76 
 Error prevention 
83 
 Summation 
85 
5.3. 
Data analysis 
86 
5.4. 
Cost estimates 
87 
 Cost of equipment 
88 
 Cost-Benefit analysis 
91 
 Summation 
99 
6. 
Summary and perspectives 
101 
6.1. 
Error prevention 
101 
 PantoInspect 
101 
 Pantograph force monitoring 
102 
 Arch detection 
103 
 Line side movement monitoring 
103 
 Static measurements 
104 
 Short circuit, specific locations 
105 
6.2. 
Data process 
106 
6.3. 
Other considerations 
106 
 Errors declination 
106 
 Cost factors 
107 
 Placement of equipment 
108 
7. 
Conclusion and future work 
111 
7.1. 
Progression of thesis 
111 
 Data quality and further analysis 
112 
7.2. 
Recommendation for Railnet Denmark: 
112 
 Current interval based setup 
113 
 Future continuous supervision 
113 
 Finishing remarks 
114 
7.3. 
Future research work will consist off … 
114 
 Data process / image analysis 
114 
 Analysis of rolling stock movement 
115 
 Statistical prediction of error placement and time 
115 
8. 
References 
117 
9. 
List of tables 
121 
10. 
List of figures 
122 
11. 
Appendixes 
124 
11.1. 
Learning objectives 
124 
==PAGE:11==
xi 
 
11.2. 
Abbreviations 
127 
11.3. 
BN1-82; inspection types 
129 
11.4. 
Grouping of errors 
131 
11.5. 
IRISsys Legend 
135 
11.6. 
Pantograph errors 
141 
11.7. 
Data collection model 
145 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
xii 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
1 
 
1. 
Introduction 
1.1. 
Initial background and idea for thesis 
The background and the original thought for this thesis arose from the idea that it should be possible 
to make a continuous supervision of the catenary system. The idea was to identify a system, which 
should hopefully be able to fulfil a dual purpose. Being usable for doing life cycle assessment of 
the contact wire as well as being able to catch incident both happening in the act, and prevent these 
from escalating to large-scale failures. 
 
These initial ideas revolved around applying a statistical view on the collected data, an idea to place 
the data on top of each other to be able to track the development and / or disparities. 
Using the current interval based data to track the increments in the wear development of the contact 
wire, and set up a model for a more continuous data collection. Those continuous measurements 
should be used to track and predict the wear and development of contact wire and pantograph more 
precisely to use for a more optimised plan for replacement. 
At the same time using the equipment and data to track the movement and the development within 
the OCS to be able to predict or at least pinpoint possible error prone locations and thereby prevent 
breakdowns. 
 
My learning objectives, as stipulated in the appendix, are writing based on the above initial goal. 
As the development of this thesis progressed, it will come apparent that the pursue of the data and 
the information discovered has led to a different path and goal.  
It has always been apparent, that receiving permission for installation and testing of equipment on 
the railway takes a long time. Such a process can easily take 2-3 years, why this has never been a 
==PAGE:14==
2 
 
part of the scope of work within this thesis. It has been from the beginning been intended as an 
academic approach to review the current setup. 
 
The initial idea and hope was that this case study could be used for other cities domestic and abroad 
with similar size and setups. An additional hope was that it could be argued scalable and thereby 
useable in considerations for long distance line as well.  
1.2. 
Initial meeting and information from Railnet Denmark 
During the initial meetings with Railnet Denmark, it was asserted that the main and more or less 
the only wear of the OCS was considered to be on the contact wire.  
As the Copenhagen urban lines had more rolling stock and a more frequent operation, this produced 
more wear, and a higher requirement for maintenance, and only the urban lines currently have so 
much traffic that the actual wear demanded replacement from time to time. None of the long 
distance routes had currently had an extent of wear that had deemed a need for a replacement of the 
wire.  
At the same time it was argued, that the vast majority of errors either happened during or just after 
a project has been at a location adjusting either the track or the wire system. There are close to no 
errors during normal operations. The assertion were that if something has been mounted within the 
OCS for five years without failures, then it would most likely never fail. 
 
This initial meeting with Railnet Denmark confirmed that they are currently performing an interval-
based supervision of the OCS, and has been doing so for the last many years. 
In 2009, the decision to supplement their interval-based setup was made, and roughly, three years 
ago the interval-based setup were supplemented with PantoInspect, which is currently in operation. 
PantoInspect is conducting continuous supervision of condition and wear of the pantographs 
passing its location.  
==PAGE:15==
3 
 
TDK has since been considering an add-on of at least two different kinds of setup for their 
supervision and maintenance going forward. A few years ago they conducted an internal study into 
the field, where they considered complementing PantoInspect with a combination of the PANDAS 
system and GoPro camera [Bogø 2013]. Both of these were considered to be placed on the rolling 
stock. 
Currently they have learned about and have made some initial ideas and investigations into adding 
system from SelectraVision to their portfolio of supervision tools.  
One of TDKs pursues has been to get some sort of video feed into the mix, in order to quickly 
visually review the interface between the contact wire and pantograph during operations.  
As it would provide the possibility to review a video of the OCS instead of having to go out into 
the track and visually inspect all the components each time an issue arose, this can also be used to 
easing the workload of the GFS as an added bonus. 
Another driver behind these considerations has been to get a tool to help document wire placement 
after a project.  
“After a project is finished there is performed a measurement of the equipment. In most cases, this 
is performed on foot either with small manual equipment, or from work machine at low speed with 
a dummy pantograph. Neither of these options are able to proper simulate the actual conditions of 
a train running at line speed during normal operation.” 
 
Talking to the people within TDK throughout the work of this thesis has revealed that their main 
focus behind both the investigation into further implementation of a continuous supervision system, 
but also day to day routines are not so much the internal economy or the risk of the fines due to the 
agreement with the Danish government. Their main concern, their driving force, are maintaining 
the train operation through a focus on further diminishing of the errors which can end up causing 
delays or cancellation within the system. 
==PAGE:16==
4 
 
They are also working with an apparent awareness, that they will not be getting any compliments 
from above for saving one or two million Danish kroner if the result are breakdowns across half the 
country. The political system, both higher up in the hierarchy at Railnet Denmark, but also at the 
ministry of Transportation dose, at least at some level, seem focused on the prevention of errors. 
1.3. 
Rules and regulations 
This section is a comparison of rules and regulations in Denmark held up against other close 
comparable countries. 
 
Rules and regulations in Denmark 
In Denmark the relevant norms for the railway regulations are found at Railnet Denmark’s 
homepage [Banedanmark 2008].  
The railway norms (Banenormer, BN) are a way to implement European Norms (EN-norms) and 
international railway norms, Technical Specifications for Interoperability (TSIs), into the Danish 
railway setup, as displayed in Figure 1. 
==PAGE:17==
5 
 
Figure 1 display there are three levels of Danish railway norms, with BN1-norms being the top tier, 
containing primarily safety and functionality related conditions, which require regulatory approval 
from Trafikstyrelsen, the Danish governance concerning safety regulations.  
 
Figure 1  - danish railway norm system; [Reenberg & Rasmussen 2007, fig.11–2–1] 
 
BN2 and BN3 level norms require approval from Railnet Denmark as the infrastructure owner 
and/or the responsible infrastructure manager.  
The supervision and maintenance of the catenary system are defined within the Danish railway 
norm BN1-82 [Banedanmark 2011]. This is used to ensure both safe and continuous operations 
without (to many) accidents or breakdowns, that applies to the current regulations regarding 
electrical and rail net safety and regularity, while also attempting to take the overall cost factor into 
considerations. 
In Denmark, within the scope of BN1-82, the supervision and maintenance of the overhead catenary 
system is based mainly on a fixed interval inspection setup.  
==PAGE:18==
6 
 
The norm at the present version and state contains six different types of inspections and maintenance 
activities setup to ensure a proper maintenance standard. The English paraphrasing of these can be 
found in the appendix 11.3 BN1-82; inspection types. 
 
Among these activities are the requirement for measurement runs with some sort of measuring unit. 
These are required to be performed at least once per year for static measurement and once every 
other year for dynamic measurements. The nature of these will be elaborated in section 2.1 
Measurement runs, but shortly explained static measures are the specific location and geometry of 
the wire, without anything touching it, while dynamic measures has the pantograph connected and 
measure the forces of the pantograph as well as the movement of the wires. 
All these measurement data are in Denmark gathered and reviewed within a system called IRISsys. 
 
Rules and regulations in other Nordic countries (SE & N) 
The Swedish norms and regulations are gathered in a database on Trafikverket’s homepage 
[Trafikverket n.d.]. Document TDOK 2014:0728 [Trafikverket & Haglund 2010] is the main norm 
for the Swedish rules of maintenance of their OCS system.  
The vast majority of the rules and regulation relevant for the Norwegian rail sector are placed easily 
accessible at a public wiki site [Jernbaneverket n.d.] 
 
One of the opening statements made in the Danish regulatory norm is, that it among others is based 
on experience from other Scandinavian countries.  
Although difficult to trace the specific inspiration as well finding the original source, looking at the 
rules and regulation for Norway and Sweden it is quite easy to spot the similarities between the 
three countries.  
==PAGE:19==
7 
 
All three countries subscribe to the principle of running a mainly interval based supervision and 
maintenance scheme. All of the countries also use measurement trains running interval base 
inspections. 
Sweden uses a system called Optram to review their data, which at a glance seems quite similar to 
IRISsys. 
 
Rules and regulations in the UK 
Like Denmark, the UK also have an infrastructure manager, responsible for their railways, called 
Network Rail (NR). 
Like in Denmark, the UK operates with a set of internal rules at different levels, and again level one 
is top-level tier, moving downwards through the numbering, next to the normal set of EU norms. 
These standards and requirements, both the BS EN and the NR-standards can be found in online 
databases, e.g. IHS standards store [IHS 2015]. 
 
Unlike the setup in the Scandinavian countries the UK are running a mainly risk based maintenance.  
The main level one (L1) norm used in the UK for maintenance is “Asset Management Policy for 
Electrical Power assets” [Network Rail 2011]. This norm does describe inspections of OLE 
components at regular interval in accordance with a L2 norm [Network Rail 2011, p.11 E&P-4]. 
Further down in the norm, it does however describes the replacement of contact wire, when its 
safety factor drops below 2.0 [Network Rail 2011, p.13 E&P-10].  
The main L2 norm is named Risk based maintenance, and all of the requirements for maintenance 
within it simply operates based on probabilities [Network Rail 2015a, p.8]. Explaining to plan the 
maintenance to comply with a specific probabilistic threshold of breakdowns. 
 
So where the Nordic countries run their maintenance scheme on a primarily interval based setup, 
the UK is running their setup as a primarily risk based maintenance for the OLE.  
==PAGE:20==
8 
 
In the UK, they do still run an inspection train through the line, but it has not been possible to locate 
the specific requirements for such operations. The only requirements are for a measurement train to 
run through the line within the four weeks prior to planned geometry adjustment [Network Rail 
2015a, p.18]. All work has to be in accordance with proper work instructions which can be found 
in a L3 norm [Network Rail 2015b]. 
 
UK does also apply more or less an accounting system between the infrastructure owner and the 
operators; with specific listings of who is to pay for which types of errors and breakdowns. 
Where the Scandinavian countries in general, and at least Denmark in specific, seems to have a lot 
of cooperation’s between the infrastructure manager and the operators, there seems to be a lot more 
“cold air” and separation between the different parties in the UK.  
 
In Denmark, an especially on the Copenhagen urban lines, the opinion is, that there is no reason to 
begin throwing mud back and forth; supervision systems should only be used as a preventive tool 
to reduce errors, not to place blame. There still is a lot of opinions and talk about working together 
to achieve a common goal and maintain proper operations. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
9 
 
2. 
Current maintenance / supervision setup 
The maintenance and supervision setup within Railnet Denmark has developed quite substantially 
within the last decade or so. It was for a long time, and still is an internal division within Railnet 
Denmark that is responsible for the maintenance. 
Were the same workers originally also were responsible for the quality assurance of their own work, 
this has for the last approximately ten years been split out into a separate job position, the GFS, 
placed elsewhere within the organisation. 
Likewise has the procedures and requirement for documentation of actual performed maintenance 
been tightened. This has helped both the QSE to keep a close watch on the progress, but also the 
work crew to follow the progress and helped them by highlighting the required need for a revisit to 
adhere to the specified maintenance interval. 
Alongside, or perhaps because of the increased focus on, the changes to the maintenance setup, also 
the use of more automated processes has looked at over the recent years. The requirement and use 
of measurement trains has been systemised, and continuous supervision of the pantographs has been 
implemented with the installation of PantoInspect. 
2.1. 
Measurement runs 
Railnet Denmark are currently getting measurements of the OCS twice per year. These are divided 
between a static measurement and a dynamic measurement, typically spaced so one is performed in 
the spring and the other in the autumn.  
The static measurement is an investigation of the actual static placement of the wires. These 
measurement are typically performed without the pantograph being raised and having interface with 
the contact wire, thereby getting measurement of the idle state of the wire. Included in this 
==PAGE:22==
10 
 
measurement are the stagger and the relative height of the contact wire compared to the track and 
contact wire thickness.  
During the dynamic measurement run the pantograph is raised and can interact with the catenary 
system. Thus, all the dynamic movements of the wires and other components within the OCS can 
be reviewed and recorded.  The dynamic run is typically carried out with a fixed speed, typically 
the allowed line speed, throughout the system. This should result in the deliverance of data that can 
be considered comparable with a normal train operation. However, at stations, this setup will miss 
the specific movements of the wires during acceleration/deceleration of the trains, as it will continue 
through the station at a constant speed. 
The measurement run has to be performed during daylight. It is only performed with a single 
pantograph, thereby not experiencing the wave effect for the second pantograph. The uplift force of 
the pantograph has to be specific 70 N, most likely leading to frequent adjustment.  
These are all examples of other requirements that in the end can lead to the output of the data 
delivering a misleading result.  
Especially the area of the pantograph uplift does pose a discrepancy, as the maintenance crew of 
DSB S-train adjust their pantograph to 80N to be in accordance with their specific type certificate 
for their rolling stock [Jacobsen 2015]. 
Wind and temperature effect on the wire are other areas and examples, which can lead to deviations 
of the measurements, this time especially during the static run. 
 
On the Copenhagen urban lines, the contact wire in the utmost centre of the system has an expected 
life cycle of 10-15 years before it has to be replaced. In other parts of the system, the life cycle just 
increases. On most parts of the system, the wires and components are inspected and maintained at 
least once a year.  
==PAGE:23==
11 
 
According to experience, many of the failures of the contact wires are not caused by wear or 
deterioration of the wire itself. Instead it is often external causes that affect the overhead catenary 
system as a whole, which  in the end adds up and end by tearing down the wire or causing other 
failures [Kiessling et al. 2009, pp.909–910], [Cero, 2015].  
This indicate that although the measurement run can be used to give an overview of the placement 
and the wear of the wire, it can seldom be used to prevent the actual event of the wires falling down. 
2.2. 
PantoInspect 
In 2009 Railnet Denmark decided to enter into a partnership with an external company to pursue 
the development of PantoInspect [PantoInspect n.d.].  
The idea behind the project was a mainly preventive use. To enable the monitoring of, and be able 
to catch, damaged pantographs, removing them from normal operation and sending them for a 
service check, prior to inflicting damage onto the catenary system and thereby causing delays.  
 
Historic of PantoInspect 
PantoInspect were inserted into operation in the beginning of 2011. The first approximately 2 years 
were considered a grace period where the system was still undergoing development and being 
tweaked. In the end of 2012, the system was handed over to Rail Net Denmark and officially entered 
into service. From this point, data could be considered more valid and trustworthy. 
When first inserted into operation, approximately half the breakdowns was considered to be due to 
errors on the pantograph [Loiborg 2012], and the system should thereby help to improve the 
continuity and regularity of the train operations, by reducing the amount of breakdowns.  
The system was quickly viewed as an success, helping to quickly identify and rectify errors; as 
mentioned in this article [Simonsen 2012a] it helped identify problems with some misaligned 
equipment. The same article does however also mention the apparent issue with the lack of specific 
==PAGE:24==
12 
 
location of the errors, as well as mention the possibility to add more scanners to help assist with the 
location process. 
 
At the beginning, the system consisted of a couple of scanners placed at the Boulevard tunnel on 
the Copenhagen Urban lines. 
The two initial scanners has later been supplied with another one at Dalshøj to cover the 
Copenhagen urban circle line, as well as a couple of scanners at Glostrup station to cover the long 
distance1 lines.  
The scanners takes NIR-images (near infrared) as well as laser scans of the top of the pantograph. 
The laser scans are digitalised and automatically analysed through a computer, programmed to flag 
issues and generate an alarm if certain threshold values are exceeded. The NIR-images are available 
as a visual aid to manually assessing the wear of the carbon strips. 
 
Figure 2 shows an example of the NIR-images as well as the processed laser scan of a defective 
carbon strip on top of a pantograph. This is a picture from an error report, currently public available 
on PantoInspects homepage [PantoInspect 2012]. 
From the NIR-image (top part), there is a clear part of the carbon strip missing in the left hand of 
the pantograph.  
The laser scan display alarms regarding the same issue, elaborating that the missing part is 11 mm. 
deep close to 15 cm. of width.  
                                                 
1 Fjernbanen 
==PAGE:25==
13 
 
 
Figure 2 – PantoInspect, example of NIR and laser scan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
14 
 
At current procedure, alarms, generated by the system, are sent to OCK-OC who are then to assess 
the alarm. If they evaluate there is an issue, they will dispatch a notice to the train operator to lower 
the pantograph or simply to stop the train, notify the traffic and place a request for a technician if 
necessary. From the delivery of the alarm, all the following procedures and steps are manually, 
performed through human interactions as well as rely on their evaluation of the specific situation. 
 
Tracking using RFID 
When initially developed, the system did not contain a proper way to track the specific train.  
At this initial stage, the only available data was the current train number, which changes each time 
the train passes PantoInspect, depending on route the train is currently on, as well as the specific 
placement in the time schedule for the day.  
It was back then required to contact the operator to receive a match between train number and litra 
number. This was then followed by a detective work, which consisted of combining the multiple 
error reports with different train numbers into covering the same litra (train) ID. Some trains, 
especially at rush hours, also consist of multiple train sets, and thereby multiple litra numbers. This 
identification process did cost some time and made it difficult to track the development across the 
train fleet, why a unique identifier was needed [Loiborg 2012]. 
In 2012, an agreement was made to retrofit the entire Copenhagen urban train fleet with RFID tags.  
An internal Railnet Denmark report from late 2013 [Bogø 2013] mentions that the work is currently 
being carried out so, without a specific record, it can be assumed to have been implemented in early 
2014. 
The RFID chips carries the train set litra information, making the unique identification on at least 
train set level a lot easier. The direction of the train can then easily be used to identify and dictate 
which specific pantograph is in question. 
 
==PAGE:27==
15 
 
Having now roughly two years of experience with the combination of PantoInspect and RFID 
tagged trains, Rail Net Denmark are currently working on setting up requirements for all trains 
running in Denmark to have RFID tags mounted, to ensure a quick, clearly and uniquely 
identification of trains (motor carriages), also on the long distance lines.  
One of the issues with transferring the requirement of RFID tags to the long distance lines are, that 
there are no European standard for the RFID technology. Sweden and Germany each have their 
own standard, which are not compatible, and thereby cannot work together.  
 
Data analysis 
PantoInspect can at present state deliver progressive development of a single pantograph over time. 
It can also be used to analyse and flag if there are many reoccurring incidences of damages on 
pantographs; damages placed on different train sets, but spaced relative closely together and with 
too many similarities to be occurring at random.  
The latter analysis however currently has to be performed manually it is not automated. This has to 
be done by sorting through all the errors generated attempting to match similar looking error types, 
and then at some level ensure the occurrence has happened on the same rail section. If all those 
criterias are met, the damages can be presumed relating to the same source of error.   
 
 
==PAGE:28==
16 
 
Figure 3 shows such an example, with one train having a damage in the first pantograph while 
another train set had a damage to the second one. Both damages are placed relative in the middle of 
the carbon strip, and of very similar appearances. 
 
Figure 3 – Multiple train sets with similar damage 
These types of multiple damages on different train sets can indicate a possible issue with the 
pantograph / catenary interface somewhere on the line, but cannot pinpoint where on the line the 
issue might be occurring, and thereby still rely somewhat on knowledge or guess working. The 
following story from a Danish newspaper [Simonsen 2012b] illustrate the issue quite nicely. A case 
during the winter 2013/2014 produced multiple similar damages. Due to the season, earlier reported 
icicles on or around the wires on a specific line section where suspected to be the cause. The real 
issue were placed inside a tunnel on an entirely different line segment. In this case, the issue of 
==PAGE:29==
17 
 
multiple similar damages were quickly identified, but the location turned out to be difficult to 
pinpoint. 
If an along line measurements or another type of tracker where to be installed, there would be a 
possibility to combine the different type of data streams to attempt to pinpoint where damages on 
the pantographs occurs. 
 
Experience from DSB S-train 
On the Copenhagen urban lines, the operator, DSB S-train, maintenance crew, has been allowed a 
back door access to the system. That way they can use it to monitor their own equipment. They also 
have an allowance to cancel out and supress further alarms on the specific train unit, although at 
their own risk, in order to optimise their maintenance schedule. 
The experience with PantoInspect from the maintenance crew from DSB S-train are mainly 
positive. Measurements are very rewarding, and can be useful for both incident prevention as well 
as maintenance planning. Experience is that the carbon wear measurement, or the estimate of the 
residual thickness of the goods of carbon strips are three mm. off. In general, there are three mm 
additional material left in the pantograph than what the automated setup within PantoInspect 
estimates. 
 
Summation and future development 
Based on their current experience Railnet Denmark has identified a few needed or at least nice to 
have option to develop and add on to PantoInspect. 
They see a required need for a system, which contains some further data processing. Preferably a 
system that generates alarms when possible errors are detected. In addition, an ability for quick 
processing of the amount of error alarms. Preferably, a system capable of weeding out the false 
alarms automatically, only displaying the real, potential, threats to the OCS. 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
18 
 
2.3. 
IRISsys 
All the data from the measurement runs from the railways in Denmark are loaded into a system 
called IRISsys, provided by the company Erdman [Erdmann n.d.].  
IRISsys consists of a large database where all the raw data are gathered. The system is able to 
understand and translate a large variety of different data formats. As long as the data stream is 
properly formatted, the current setup within IRISsys should be able to gather and process the data. 
Beside the database, IRISsys also consist of a graphical viewer, where the data are illustrated to 
give the user a quick overview. 
 
IRISsys does not consist of just one finished system, but is instead a compilation of systems. A 
mainframe where the most basic systems are contained and then many possible add-ons from either 
third party or developed by or in collaboration between the individual users and Erdmann. 
This setup does allow the initial cost to be kept low, but also opens up for some large development 
cost for the individual users, attempting to plan and develop add-ons that possibly already exists. 
Erdmann do link to a brochure [Erdmann 2014] on their webpage which provide a quick overview 
of some of the possible add-ons. This does properly not display all possibilities, and the question 
remains how many others already exist and are ready for easy picking? 
 
IRISsys is not limited to the data from the overhead catenary system but also include all 
measurements from track location, ultrasonic defects etc. 
Besides the graphical interface, it is possible to export the data onto a spreadsheet. This will produce 
an endless amount of rows, with data points for each 25 cm to review and analyse. As this dataset 
just contain many numbers, exporting the information and looking into these, does require a certain 
amount of knowledge of the data, as well as a comprehensive overview and idea of which 
==PAGE:31==
19 
 
information are important. If there is no such initial insight it will just be an overwhelming dataflow 
that will not make any sense. 
 
Using IRISsys to plan maintenance 
As explained in earlier section, there is performed a measurement run twice a year on the on the 
OCS, thereby, in theory, also delivering data to analyse twice a year.  
2.3.1.1. Challenges and error sources 
There are however some issues. Firstly, the measurements are divided between static and dynamic 
runs, which provide different types of data sets.  
As it can be seen from the example in Figure 4, there can be quite large areas with data missing.  
For Legend to IRISsys, see appendix 11.5 IRISsys Legend. 
 
 
Figure 4 - 2 km illustrative section from IRISsys 
==PAGE:32==
20 
 
In the instance there is a section of roughly, one kilometre without information of stagger and wire 
thickness. As the contractor making the measurement are only required to provide data for 95% of 
the main electrified lines, the missing data parts can be expected, but it does hamper the analysis 
that the user in TDK would like to perform afterwards a bit. 
 
Besides the issues with missing data for up to 5% of the electrified lines, there has in previously 
occasions been issues with receiving proper formatted or usable data at all. Some of the older 
measurements runs are more or less missing. The data could either not be imported into the system 
or the information could not be trusted due to misalignments between the data and the actual 
equipment locations.  
 
The location of the measurements are performed based on GPS locations as well as manually 
resetting the distance measurement when passing line side markers along the track at speed. As with 
all other location devices, this can lead to some inconsistencies within the dataset. The requirements 
set for the measurement contractor does allow for location errors of up to ten meters in the 
longitudinal direction, which in theory can add up to location errors of up to 20 m. This can add 
quite some inaccuracies into the analysis and overview as well. An illustration of this can be seen 
in Figure 5. As it has the wire stagger for two different runs displayed, it is obvious that the location 
of the fastening is not placed 100% at the same location. In this case the stagger does follow the 
same pattern between the masts, why it is easier to identify the location of the individual masts and 
thereby the inconsistencies. If it were a similar case with the wire thickness instead, the location of 
the individual masts would not be as clearly visible and the inconsistencies would be much more 
difficult to discover. 
 
==PAGE:33==
21 
 
 
Figure 5 - Stagger development, GPS placement off 
Besides illustrating inconsistencies in the GPS location and again some lack of data, Figure 5 does 
also serve to illustrate where IRISsys does have its advantages. In this case, compared to Figure 4, 
there is added an additional row, which contains the stagger information from a previous 
measurement run. Thereby it is possible to see the development in the wire, in this case over a 
period of eight years. In the case of the stagger, if there are any changes, they should mainly occur 
on the curvature of the track, where the tracks are usually installed with a cant. If the cant changes, 
either by normal tracks settlements, due to a track tampering or due to an intentional change, the 
stagger can quickly become out of place. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
22 
 
An example of too large a stagger can be seen from Figure 6, based on a recent update of a track on 
the Danish long distance lines.  
 
Figure 6 - Danish long distance track, stagger to large 
 Here the documentation showed that the track should be placed with a cant of 90 mm through the 
curve. The reality turned out to have a cant of around 115 mm, due to either an old track adjustment 
or a specific update of the cant where the need of update of catenary had been missed. This had 
moved the stagger at the mast up towards 400 mm, exceeding the maximum allowed stagger of 250 
mm allowed for specific track type and line speed. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
23 
 
2.3.1.2. Usable features 
Figure 7 displays some of the good examples where the data within IRISsys can be used for 
maintenance.  
 
Figure 7 - Wire thickness development 
Like with Figure 5, there is inserted an additional row. This time just displaying the average wire 
thickness. In this instance, the data can be used to follow the deterioration of the wire, and thereby 
to schedule replacement prior to reaching a too large decay.  
 
If boundary values within the data in IRISsys are exceeded or values seems too large, it is required 
to go out into the field and do a manual measure, to verify the data within IRISsys. 
If the large values, for instance staggers, are confirmed, you do an evaluation to see, whether stagger 
effect and blowout between the masts are ok, or the large stagger at the mast creates an issue and 
need to be modified.  
If there is a need for modification, a project is then defined to rectify the issue. If very large 
deviations and risk for tear downs, the repair is created as an emergency work order. The traffic will 
==PAGE:36==
24 
 
then be shut down or deviated around the location, with delayed or cancelled trains as result, and a 
crew is send to the location to fix the problem.  
 
At the current setup, performing those types of checks within IRISsys requires a manual run through 
each of the individual branch lines one by one, making marks at areas where there might be an 
issue, and matching these with the distinct wires.  
Contact wires will as minimum be replaced as half a tension length / one tension length at a time, 
so if the issue is deterioration along the wire it is normally required to be either be quite uniform, 
or with some very extreme spots prior to it being set for replacement.  
2.3.1.3. Summation and future development  
There are only measurement campaign going back to 2007, with an average of two measurement 
runs per year. There is none from 2011, and only one for each of 2009 and 2012. 
Even though there seems to be a requirement to deliver images as well, they seems very scarce and 
random available, especially from the older data and therefore cannot be expected to be useful in 
the hunt for information. 
 
Still the available data seems, if not sufficient, so at least capable of presenting an overview of the 
development. 
Within this overview is does also seem apparent that the initial claim from Railnet Denmark can be 
confirmed. Even though there are wear of the contact wire, it does seem to develop at a pace were 
the yearly measurement runs in most cases could provide sufficient data.  
 
The current experience with IRISsys within TDK are that they see no need for further data. There 
is however a requirement for some sort of computing or data processing tool to help systemise and 
sort through the data. 
==PAGE:37==
25 
 
 Ideas for IRISsys development 
The use of IRISsys within Railnet Denmark has followed two different paths.  
The trackside of the company has had a previous student worker with great interest in improving 
the manual workload required for their maintenance. First writing a master thesis regarding the 
issue, and afterwards being employed at Railnet Denmark, working within the field for the last 
approximately five years to help further improve the area, has provided lots of insight and 
knowledge. This has meant great leaps has been made towards using the data for maintenance 
planning and improvement of the overall conditions for the track maintenance. 
 
The catenary side unfortunately has not followed the same development. Whether it is through lack 
of time, focus or interest is somewhat uncertain. 
No matter the reason, the current setup only collects data more or less at the absolute minimum 
requirement set by the maintenance standard BN1-82 [Banedanmark 2011, sec.13.3.1]. The current 
setup also makes it a very difficult and/or time-consuming task to use the programme, and the result 
is, that although the data is collected, it is only being very scarcely used for the maintenance 
planning. 
The residing IRISsys super user within Railnet Denmark, the aforementioned previous student 
worker, has presented a similar opinion to the one expressed by TDK. He explained, “There are a 
decent amount of data within IRISsys, also for the OCS system. The issue is mainly setting up a 
proper analysis” [Jensen 2015]. He has at later meetings elaborated this viewpoint as well displayed 
some of the current options on the track side of the system, which are a great step further in the 
development and usage for maintenance.  
Some of these track tools seems easily convertible to apply to the OCS data as well, but requires 
someone to specify the requirements for the output. 
 
==PAGE:38==
26 
 
As explained in the introduction section regarding IRISsys, the brochure from Erdmann [Erdmann 
2014] does show a lot of available data analysis tools, which must be assumed to be developed by 
Erdmann in collaboration with some of their other IRISsys users. 
Some of the available tools could properly be easily implemented and used with great advantage in 
Denmark as well.  
 
Having only briefly used the IRISsys programme this thesis will not claim to be able to deliver all 
the answers.  
Even though some basic understanding of both the data structure setup, the viewer options and the 
statistical possibilities has been reached, the in-depth knowledge still only comes from extensive 
use. This knowledge would still be required to develop and setup the specific requirements and 
coding needed for development of the specific topics. 
The brief use of the programme has however still uncovered what seems to be some very low 
hanging fruits for easy picking, as well as some more advanced possible developments that could 
be considered in the longer run. As such, some seems to be easy to implement while others properly 
require a more lengthy development prior to being available. Time and cost requirements as well as 
realism for implementation has not been investigated and will be left for someone else to consider. 
 
Although some understanding of the programme is met, the list below should still be considered 
and viewed on the same level as the result of an extensive brainstorm.  
2.3.2.1. Reports / information regarding data received. 
First improvement is simply regarding the notice of data received from the contractor after a 
measurement run.  
Currently the TDK only receives a report telling how many meters of run has been completed per 
day, and how much of the imported data on stagger, wire heights and wire wear respectively are 
==PAGE:39==
27 
 
considered valid, as well as if it meet the required percentage threshold for the delivery as illustrated 
on Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8 – IRISsys, report from measurement run; showing amount assigned and accepted kilometre 
On the track side, the contractor are obligated to deliver a maximum deviation list, containing all 
maximum deviations on the route as well as a class four error list containing all class four errors 
which are the level where maintenance has to be initiated.  
Even though those reports received on the track also leave a lot of room for improvement, they 
would still be a great leap in the right direction, as they would at least generate a very quick 
overview of potential trouble areas. 
As the temperature and wind conditions can impose a large influence on the wire positions, a record 
of those type weather conditions would also be something to consider. Temperature can allow the 
wires to move up to half a metre, and the cantilevers to be placed in large angles to either side of 
the mast, where the wind conditions can inflict blowouts to a larger or lesser extent,. At least to 
create an additional reference point when comparing the measurements afterwards. 
2.3.2.2. Report generation / statistical processing of data 
The current setup seems to be missing some improved search parameters as well as report 
generation tools. All data are shown graphically, which is fine to generate the understanding of the 
data, but for a quick overview, having to scroll through the graphical images is to slow and time 
consuming.  
 
==PAGE:40==
28 
 
The current setup needs a report generation tool. An area where it is possible to define, or there are 
some predefined, search parameter, and then get an output report, which quickly display all 
locations containing parameters larger/smaller than defined within the search parameters.  
 
Some of these overview and search parameters could be: 
 Average wire thickness from km xxx to km yyy 
 Minimum wire thickness 
 Wire heights  
 Wire grading (elaborated as an example in section 2.3.2.9) 
 Line sections (or just spot wise) with staggers exceeding specified boundary values. 
 
Although requiring some additional calculation time, the possibility to get a complete overview 
from a single report or a network overview should also be considered, as it would make it an easier 
task to do the assessment of the health of the catenary system.  
2.3.2.3. Multiple available diagrams 
Currently there is only one standard diagram available within IRISsys for the static measurement 
for the contact wire / catenary system. There are a few other diagrams, but they are setup to work 
with either older data or dynamic measurement data. 
There are different type certificates on the Copenhagen urban lines and the long distance lines for 
the OCS, with different allowance and requirements, mainly due to different speeds but also due to 
material and historical reasons. For example allowed stagger on the Copenhagen urban lines are +/- 
350 mm, where the long distance lines allow +/- 200 mm on straight line and +/- 250 mm. in curves. 
Using a single diagram with single boundary values for the colour coding (see appendix 
11.5IRISsys Legend) will either set the bar to high, hiding potential errors on the long distance 
lines, or the bar to low, highlighting to many irrelevant things within the urban system. 
==PAGE:41==
29 
 
It would be beneficial at least with a standard diagram for the urban lines and another for long 
distance lines. Boundary values within each should then be set up differently to match type 
certificate for the individual type of system for a better and more quickly overview. 
2.3.2.4. Insert (new) alignment data into programme 
The track norm BN2-93 [Jacobsen & Fischer-Nielsen 2011b, fig.12.1–1] does set requirements that 
all OCS (all well as other) alignments, must be placed so they are able to absorb some tolerances 
from lateral as well as height adjustment compared to the tracks original alignment.  
Track tampering can however, in extreme cases, slowly but steadily end up moving the track further 
and further away from its original alignment without anybody really noticing it. Maintenance of the 
OCS can do similar adjustments to the contact wire placements, as both these adjustments are made 
relative to the current situation and not with reference to the original alignment.  
If at some point one of the department decided to return its equipment to the original alignment, it 
could risk leading to large gaps and serious miss-alignment between the components. 
 
Inserting all the old alignment data would be a herculean task and this thesis is not making the 
argument of pursuing an inclusion of those. However, all new alignments or remodelling of track 
or catenary will require some sort of measurements to confirm the placement prior to the project 
being handed over to the operation departments within Railnet Denmark. Those data should easily 
be imported into the system, and marked with a date as well as highlighted to be original alignment 
data. That way Railnet Denmark have an easy accessible record of the placement of the system, and 
are able to afterwards make comparison between actual placement and constructed placement; see 
overlay below. 
==PAGE:42==
30 
 
2.3.2.5. Map location 
All measurement-runs are GPS located with x, y and z coordinates. Getting just a mast number or 
a kilometre marking can make it difficult to figure out the specific placement or the location, at least 
for a person not used to working with the track locations used for internal references.  
Erdmann does offer an integration with Google Earth, which would make it a lot easier and faster 
to pinpoint the exact location when discussing a specific area or mast location. The case regarding 
wire grading elaborated later on in section 2.3.2.9, can be used as an example to illustrate this. 
From the kilometre marking, the rough location of the problem were known. It was still unknown 
whether the specific location of the wire dropping was due to a known structure in the area, or 
placed just outside this. It was required to look up the specific wire drawings and then the layout 
drawings to be able establish the exact location. A GPS integration would provide the location 
instantaneously. 
2.3.2.6. Overlay between OCS data and track data 
The option contains the possibility to overlay OCS data on top on of the track data. Switching 
between the different data sets should automatically generate an updated display of stagger, wire 
heights etc. between the data sets shown.  
The intent behind this is it is possible to both compare current data placements, but also going back 
and compare against the older data and see the development. Current vs. old placement will of 
course help display how much the contact wire or the track has been moved compared to the original 
alignment (old placement). Overlaying current OCS data on old track data can quickly display 
whether a replacement of track onto original alignment can cause issues, and of course vice versa. 
2.3.2.7. 3D-placement and viewing of data 
As all data are recorded and inserted relative to each other, it should be considered whether a 3D-
viewer could make an improvement. Often being able to view the different items 3D or isometric 
==PAGE:43==
31 
 
in relation to each other, can help gain a better understanding of their mutual locations as well as 
possible highlight if something is really off between them.  
Once again, this area should perhaps have been taken in different paces. At remodelling or new 
construction, an entire 3D model might be available from the consultancy and ready to load into the 
program, as displayed in Figure 9.  
 
Figure 9 - Example of 3D track & OCS model 
2.3.2.8. Overlay between current and old OCS data 
Although the heading seems similar to the previous, this area relates to comparing the OCS data. 
Creating some sort of report function to be able to report on the statistical development of the wire(s) 
between the measurements runs.  
It is possible to insert an additional bar to display the same wire from two different runs, similar to 
illustrated earlier in Figure 7. However, getting a report function that could calculate the average 
wire wear or able to set a specific level (e.g. 9.2 mm) and getting a report saying that 25% of the 
wire is below the threshold and hold op against a similar report from a previous run would be a 
huge advantage.  
==PAGE:44==
32 
 
Adding some sort of statistical measurement or overlay between the data as well, that would make 
it possible to compare the development at individual locations over the years. This would help the 
planning of the maintenance, as it would be able to deliver location and wire specific wear 
developments 
2.3.2.9. Warnings at wire height change 
There are set up boundary values for the minimum wire heights. It is required at the current setup 
to be observant, as the colour coding cover multiple type certificates, and minimum height are 
different on the 200 km/h long distance lines compared to the rest, why the colour allowance will 
be different from track section to track track section, but it is at least covered. 
What is not covered is the wire grading as well as the change of grading. Figure 10 shows an 
example of a sudden 250-300 mm drop of wire heights. Over a short distance of 50 m. The most 
probable cause must be assumed a faulty adjustment at some point. 
 
 
Figure 10 - Sudden wire height change 
==PAGE:45==
33 
 
As no alarms are generated, errors of this type are currently impossible to catch without someone 
sitting and meticulously reviewing all the electrified track data. 
As wire heights are obviously known, and the distance is familiar, it should be quite a simple task 
to use the change of wire height as well as distance, and calculate at least the average grading of the 
wire. Creating a proper boundary values should then be able to highlight these types of error prior 
to them causing issues within the operation. 
Again, a report generation tool used to highlight these types of anomalies can be very proficient.  
 
With the grading example above, a suggestion could be to set up requirements as displayed in Figure 
11. 
 
Figure 11 – IRISsys, suggested calculation and report process for wire grading 
 
 The requirement for the wire section should be seen as a continuous process. With 0.25 m 
sectioning between the measurements, the first calculation should look at 0.00 m -25.00 m, 
Investigate wire: 
section of 25 m length
Calculate: 
average wire grading
Combine: 
interlinked sections
Highlight: 
grading above of 1:400
==PAGE:46==
34 
 
and the second at 0.25 m- 25.25 m. The length requirement is attempted defined to weed out 
any small local errors. 
 Wire grading: Based on defined length and change of wire heights this grading should be 
calculated.  
 Combining section: This are to eliminate getting a 300 pages report, display that m. 0.00-
25.00; 0.25-25.25; 0.50-25.50 etc. has errors. Instead, they should be combined to display: 
m. 0.00 – 150.50 has a grading issue.  
A secondary coding level could perhaps set a definition that requires distances longer than 
50 m. without grading issues, in order to break an interlinking chain. 
 The highlight grading of 1:400 is the set parameter within the type certificate for 120 km/h 
on the Copenhagen urban lines.  
It is of course also based on this set parameter the whole gradient calculation is performed. 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
35 
 
3. 
Analysis of OCS failures 
This section contain analysis of the actual historic breakdowns on the Copenhagen urban lines.  
It also contains a look into the “shadow numbers”, i.e. the potential breakdowns that are discovered 
either through existing tools or through sheer luck prior to causing breakdowns to the system. This 
section will attempt to give an overview of the (major) breakdowns concerning the OCS and high 
voltage system on the urban lines. 
3.1. 
Actual break downs 
These data are based solely on TDKs internal incident overview sheet2 as well as the information 
this sheet uses as deeper references.  
 
The incident sheet has it initial information dating from 2004 going forward to today. However the 
first 2-2½ years are very scares with information, only displaying the amount of delayed trains, the 
period of time for the incident as well as linking to a copy showing a quickly timeline of the incident 
development, seen from the perspective of the coupler3.  
End of 2005 introduces remarks into the sheet, which in a few words mention the incidents main 
concern, which is kept within the sheet going forward.  
The second half of 2006 introduces an additional report, from the operation manager4. Within these 
D-raps,5 the incidents are broken down and described in much more details, many times including 
photographs to further elaborate the extent of the damages or the reasoning behind possible causes. 
                                                 
2 Hændelsesovervigt køreledning strømaftager 
3 Koblingsleder OCK-OC /DcHK,  
4 Driftleder  
5 Driftleder rapport (D-rap) 
==PAGE:48==
36 
 
From these reports, it is possible to return to the incident afterwards and attempt to determine the 
causes as well as apply hindsight to make educated estimate / best guesses on possibilities of 
detection and possible prevention of the incident. 
From initiation in 2006 until mid-2011 these D-rap has been produced on roughly half the noted 
incidents on the Copenhagen urban lines. From second half of 2011 going forward there are (with 
a few exceptions) produced a D-rap for all incidents within the sheet.  
 
Damages 2006 - 2015 
Due to the setup and available data within the incident overview sheet, only data concerning 
incidents from the last ten years (2006 – 2015) has been reviewed. 
Figure 12 shows the total amount of incidents on the OCS as well as the electrical power supply 
that TDK have recorded in the overview sheet within the last 10 years.  
 
Figure 12 - TDK recorded incidents 2006 - 2015 
Figure 13 shows an overview similar to Figure 12, just including only incidents where there has 
been developed a D-rap. enabling the possibility to interpret it afterwards. 
==PAGE:49==
37 
 
 
Figure 13 - TDK recorded incidents 2006 - 2015; D-rap only 
 
Comparing these two figures, Figure 12 shows that there are only 189 noted incidents over the 
course of the last decade, or an average of below twenty per year, while Figure 13 only displays 
101 incidents over the same decade.  
 
It is a small sample so it is dangerous to draw any definitive conclusion, but looking at Figure 12 
the amount of incidents seems to be declining in the most recent years, compared to 10 years ago.  
This change does however have possibilities to derive from many different smaller changes within 
TDK.  
The position of GFS was created in 2005, with the sole responsibility to inspect the health of all the 
wires and the OCS, to ensure proper maintenance were performed. Prior to this, the work crew 
responsible for the maintenance were also responsible for controlling their own work. 
==PAGE:50==
38 
 
There has been introduced a change at some point around the year 2010 – 2011, at which point TDK 
began noting all small errors and potential failures within the overview sheet, including producing 
D-rap for all of the cases. The background were properly to create a grander overview.  
The maintenance manual BN1-82 were introduced for the first time in the beginning of 2012. The 
maintenance work and inspection in itself were not changed along with this, but it did publicly 
highlight the requirements. A bit later the information was also transferred into a SAP-system, 
increasing the visualisation of the maintenance cycle, as well as highlighting when intervals were 
getting closed to been surpassed. Once again, a change that did not set additional requirements but 
set focus on and highlighted if the requirements were not being met.  
In the years 2011 - 2015, there has been a single wire replacement of approximately 15% of the 
wires on the Copenhagen urban lines. Beside this, also larger maintenance works has been 
undertaken, which replace longer section of wires, thus increasing the overall average lifetime level 
of the contact wires. 
A change in staffing around beginning-mid 2013 seems to have introduced a slight different 
approach to which errors should be noted within the overview sheet. 
All of the above situations has one way or another imposed changes to the amount of errors within 
the sheet. Best estimation is that the numbers of actual errors has been decreasing over the recent 
few years. Whether the amount or rate of decrease has followed the rate indicated on the graph is 
somewhat more uncertain. 
 
Error division 
From the incidents containing a D-rap the actual cause of the different incidents has been broken 
further down. In this process, it has also been attempted to group the incidents, in order to create an 
overview of the main causes behind the failures.  
==PAGE:51==
39 
 
The definition and names of each group has been chosen mainly to insure both embracing as many 
of the incidents as possible, while also creating some separation between the incidents. Further 
focus has been on keeping the amount of groups at a reasonable number.  
Description of group definition and type of errors can be found in the appendix 11.4 Grouping of 
errors. 
 
Figure 14 display the subdivision of the breakdowns within these groups. From this figure, it is 
visible that the majority of the breakdowns occur from either failures within the wires, from errors 
to the line side equipment or due to some failures at the pantograph causing damages to the overhead 
lines.  
 
Figure 14 - Overview of errors 
The project and maintenance group are also responsible for a decent quantity of the errors.  
Short circuits does produce some errors, but a large part of this group are actually components, 
which are meant to fail, but are just malfunctioning incorrectly. 
==PAGE:52==
40 
 
Wire blowouts, trees and branches getting into the wires as well as arching and excessive wire wear 
are only responsible for a minor amount of the previous breakdowns within the Copenhagen urban 
lines. 
3.2. 
Potential break downs 
There seems to be no noted record, and especially no easy overview of the near misses or the 
potential breakdowns from the recent years. Some information are available and as well, as people 
internally in Railnet Denmark and TDK with a lot of knowledge ready at hand. 
 
Grouping of pantograph errors 
Since being placed into operations, PantoInspect has been reporting roughly 50 genuine alarms per 
year, highlighting pantograph on trains in operation with damages to a lesser or greater extent.  
 
Coherent responses from TDK, the people from PantoInspect and the maintenance crew from DSB 
S-train tells that there are one or two incidents per year, where multiple pantographs receives similar 
damages from something within the OCS thus linking them together. In most cases, due to 
PantoInspect these errors now ends up being caught prior to causing an actual break down of the 
system.  
Performing the linkage between the damages does however require a large detective work prior to 
being uncovered. Looking through older NIR-images and data to identify the date and time when 
the error first became visible. Attempting and hopefully succeeding in identifying the route pattern 
of the trains when getting their damages, the specific route section responsible for the damages can 
then be estimated. This route section then has to be inspected either on foot, from a cab run or from 
a work machine to attempt to locate the specific cause of error within the system. 
 
==PAGE:53==
41 
 
A recent example of this kind of grouping errors produced roughly 20-30 pantographs with smaller 
damages to their carbon strips over a period of roughly a month.  
In this case, the front pantograph received the larger portion of the damage each time, while the 
remaining ones passed more or less unharmed.  
While the initial damages to the pantographs where only minuscule, at least some did eventually 
develop to form a canyon that caught the wire, preventing it from continuing its sideways movement 
along with the stagger of the wire. Figure 15 shows a pantograph with damage from the incident. 
 
Figure 15 – Pantograph damage, assumed 3 days development 
Damage on the image is assumed to be after three days of running and further developments of the 
localised wear.  
In the appendix 11.6 Pantograph errors, a more detailed development of the damage on the 
pantograph can be seen. 
 
Further hampering the following investigation process, not all the passing trains seems to have 
received damage, as well as at least initially the damages had taken between a half and a whole 
week to develop from a small nick to pass the threshold for an alarm event at PantoInspect scans. 
==PAGE:54==
42 
 
Figure 16 shows one of the pantographs from the incident, after the damage had developed and 
become very critical. 
 
Figure 16 - Damage pantograph carbon strip 
Containing a very visible nick, and a steep edge to the right that the wire could not cross, the carbon 
strip has been worn more or less through to the aluminium frame. Had the contact wire been allowed 
to get through the carbon strip it would only have been a brief time window prior to it also having 
worked its way through the aluminium frame, causing a pantograph failure and a large breakdown 
somewhere in the system. 
 
After some detective work the probable line section responsible for the errors where determined.  
While taking a walk on the line the pair of cross droppers displayed in Figure 17 where found at a  
Mid-point anchor. One side was sacking dangerously, getting very close to the dropper wire getting 
below the contact wire. The other side were left frayed at the catenary, knocked loose from its mount 
to the contact wire. Suspected to initially having looked similar to the first one. 
==PAGE:55==
43 
 
 
Due to the look and nature of these cross droppers, they were assumed the likely cause of the 
multiple errors to the passing pantographs.  
When the cross droppers were properly adjusted the errors has stopped occurring proving the 
assumptions are likely correct, but there still are some trial and error involved in the current method.  
 
Like the example above, the main part of these types of damages to the pantographs are now being 
caught prior to evolving and causing a larger malfunction and thereby more seldom develop into 
causing delays or actual cancellation for the passengers. Due to this, they are not part of the delay 
statistics, are omitted from the incident sheet and thereby not part of the breakdown statistics. 
 
Figure 17 - Cross droppers, potential pantograph damages 
==PAGE:56==
44 
 
As this detective work of tracking the location of the errors does take time, these errors do cause 
nuisance as well as unnecessary additional work and costs for both Rail Net Denmark and DSB S-
train maintenance. Time and cost that could be reduced if an automated detection where placed into 
operation. 
These damages do also pose a threat of causing a teardown and delays at some point.  
 
Electrical arching 
Another area of currently not recorded potential breakdowns are the electrical arching between the 
contact wire and the pantograph. At least some of the reasoning behind the lack of records properly 
has to be found in the fact, that it is extremely difficult to locate the exact location of the arching. It 
is more or less a requirement for someone to observe the actual occurrence, then note down the 
specific location as well as operating condition and the speculate on the likely cause. 
 
Random or evenly distributed arching only produces increased wear and is not as such dangerous 
by itself. Repeatedly arching at the same location will cause a spot wise excessive wear, that both 
poses the risk of burning through wire at a very narrow point while the remaining wire are more or 
less new, as well as it can be very difficult to spot the error during the normal inspections. 
A small dent in the contact wire or a not properly adjusted wire clamp can be all it takes to cause 
the occurrence and re-occurring of arching. An improper placement of the tracks and/or a wrongful 
adjustment of the OCS, resulting in too quick changes of the contact wire heights or a contact wire 
with a spot wise decrease of its flexibility, which lead to the pantograph losing the proper connection 
to the contact wire, can be similar factors. 
 
Areas around Ishøj and Jersey on the Køge Bugt branch line are known for having excessive 
arching. Some attempts has been made with inserting a damper in a few of the droppers in the wire 
==PAGE:57==
45 
 
system to cancel out the longitudinal waves in the wires. While this solution has reduced the arching, 
it has still not been completely eliminated.  
 
Through the tunnel between Copenhagen central station and Østerport there is also a re-occurring 
issue with electrical arches. When departing the station and accelerating up to line speed, the trains 
often generates electrical arching. It is especially bad if the acceleration is made at full throttle.  
The suspected reason is a bit more known in this case. Since the contact wire is placed in a fixed 
mount it loses some of its flexibility. The acceleration forces as well as the increasing wind 
resistance create movement of the pantograph. The inflexibility of the contact wire due to its mount 
does not allow the contact wire to fluctuate along with the pantograph, which then leads to shortly 
loss of connection.  
A possibility is to drive the line section with a decreased acceleration, but the specific section is the 
busiest in Denmark, and has already more or less exceeded its capacity. Especially with a few 
delays, it will be difficult to argue to the operator to hurry up and catch up while using less than full 
throttle during the accelerations. 
TDK are currently in dialog with an external contractor to measure the line to attempt to locate or 
at least disclose the specific cause of these incidents [Clausen 2015]. The current intent are to place 
some force measurement tools to the pantograph head, measure the force movements and thereby 
be able to deduct the location and the cause of the errors.  
 
OCS project or adjustments  
There are maintenance crew are out on the track almost every night; inspecting, greasing and 
perhaps making minuscule adjustment to contact wire and the OCS.  
Small areas or large parts of the wire worn thin, or a required need for a line speed upgrade;  
larger projects involving the removal of old masts and placing of new ones, might be at new 
locations and perhaps even include new locations for the mid-point anchor or the terminations; these 
==PAGE:58==
46 
 
can be other examples requiring someone either to make adjustments or a replacement of the wires 
but perhaps also the remaining parts of the OCS. All can, planned or unplanned, generate changes 
to the static placement; stagger, heights, grading of contact wire. 
During all these types of adjustments there are always a potential risk, that something gets placed 
in a slightly off position or some small details are being missed, thus leading to the wires being out 
of intended position and perhaps in the end resulting in damages and perhaps even breakdown of 
the wire system. 
 
Track project or adjustments 
As it is with the catenary system, the track division inside Railnet Denmark from time to time have 
requirements for adjusting the track. These adjustments can be due to speed upgrades, where 
especially the cant in the curves can be changed quite significantly. It can also be smaller track 
adjustments including tampering of the ballast underneath the tracks.  
Like with the catenary, the track division of course also have rules and regulations to adhere to.  
In BN2-38 the maximum allowed deviation to the cant are shown to be as low as 2-3 mm at the 
time after the remodelling [Jacobsen & Fischer-Nielsen 2011a, fig.11.3.2–1]. In BN2-93 the 
allowed height and lateral tolerances can be found, which both are as low as an 30 mm. interval 
[Jacobsen & Fischer-Nielsen 2011b, fig.12.3–1]. 
The allowed height and lateral tolerances for the track after a track tampering are respectively 100 
mm and 15 mm [Jacobsen & Fischer-Nielsen 2011b, fig.12.1–1] and comes from the same rules.  
In the same figure in BN2-93, where the tolerances for track tampering can be found, the second 
half tells that all other stakeholders has to take height tolerances of +/- 100 mm and lateral tolerances 
of +/- 50 mm into account when looking at their own equipment, so assuming the track adjustments 
are made within tolerances there should be no issues.  
 
==PAGE:59==
47 
 
According to TDK, there seems to be a possible issue with track work being carried out between 
data measurement run. It does not always seem possible to catch the minor adjustment made to the 
track. These changes can end up having large effects on placement of contact wire. So what is the 
reason? 
Within BN2-93  there is a note telling that all tolerances are to be viewed are relative to the original 
project design placements of the tracks[Jacobsen & Fischer-Nielsen 2011b, fig.12.1–1]. In many 
cases these original information are very old, and only available as paper copies placed in an 
archive. When a track tampering is planned it is usually done by looking at present track location, 
and then adjusted relatively to the surrounding track location to smooth out the height differences 
and the small irregular curvature changes of the track [Jensen 2015]. Similar are maintenance and 
adjustments to the catenary and contact wire made relative to the current track location and not the 
old designed location.  
On a day-to-day routine, this seems like a reasonable and sound choice, but it does run the risk of 
not having the overview of the current location of the components. If a major adjustment are then 
made to the track, either moving them back onto the old designed location, or changing the cant, 
assuming the wires are still correctly placed according to design location, then there is a risk of 
making adjustment resulting in too large a stagger on the contact wire.  
3.3. 
Summation and future development 
To catch all these type of errors, there is a requirement for some supervision systems capable of 
tracking the errors as they develop, and flag it prior to them becoming an issue and creating 
damages.  
There are many different types of supervision systems and even more producers on the market, so 
first requirement will be to create an overview of the possibilities. 
 
==PAGE:60==
48 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
49 
 
4. 
Overview of supervision systems 
This section will contain an overview of the literature regarding continuous maintenance.  
Literature that involves both line side and rolling stock based equipment as well as just 
explain/elaborate reasoning behind the need for continuous supervision. 
 
It will also look into the current systems on the market to monitor the catenary system one way or 
the other. The focus will be on either rolling stock based or line side based equipment.  
Within both areas the focus will be on equipment that can perform either a fully automated or at 
least some sort of semi-automated data collection while maintaining a fully and normal operation 
of the scheduled timetable.  
In cases where a supervision setup is able to provide multiple types of measurements or can be 
mounted both line side and on rolling stock, it will be explained in details within one subcategory, 
and just be briefly mentioned within the other relevant subcategory. 
 
This monitoring will in some parts also include the monitoring of the interface between the rolling 
stock and the overhead catenary system, as issues or failures in the interface between the pantograph 
and the contact wire can be found as the initiator for many of the subsequent failures on the OCS.  
Finally will be a small section to provide a brief overview of some of the manual collection method 
available and useable. 
4.1. 
Literature overview regarding multiple areas 
The focus on generating a continuous supervision system of the overhead catenary system have 
picked up speed in the last decade or so. Especially Japanese research and development seems to 
be steaming ahead and getting close to having a finished system. 
==PAGE:62==
50 
 
 
Recently, a large collection of stakeholders within European train industry, have met up in a joint 
venture to test and develop a system that looks into the rolling stock infrastructure interface 
[EUROPAC 2007]. This project began January 2015 and is set to proceed the following 3 years. 
Already prior to this joint venture, research and development have been undergoing, especially in 
countries like Italy and Spain, and also in the northern part of Europe, research is being performed 
and products developed. 
 
The focus on continuous decay of the contact wire and the rest of the OCS is not new. Research 
from the mid to late 70s showed both focus on the decay, and the realisation that the failure rate of 
the contact wire are not linear. Instead they show an increasing failure rate as the wear of the wire 
increases, telling the importance of replacing the wire and components while some life expectancy 
is still available [Kiessling et al. 2009, p.909]. Looking at the contact wire in the UK standard of 
today, they operate with a safety factor of 2.0 for scheduling replacement, as well as a 1.5 factor 
where it must be removed from service and decommissioned [Network Rail 2011, p.13]. This 
suggests that all though old, the research from yesteryear is still considered viable, at least in some 
places, and should be taken into account when planning the maintenance.  
 
The wear of the overhead catenary system consists from multiple elements of influences. 
The pantograph movement along the contact wire is one of those. This movement is influenced by 
both the specific static force, the aerodynamic shape of the pantograph and the specific speed the 
train is moving [Möller et al. n.d.]. With this knowledge it would be very difficult trying to calculate 
or just estimate the wear based on a single or few runs of a measurement train a couple of times per 
year. Such a measurement train will typically be set up and perhaps even re-aligned within short 
timespans, to ensure the optimum conditions for the measurement run. This make sense towards 
==PAGE:63==
51 
 
gaining optimum measuring of the OCS, but the re-calibration does also pose a threat, as it risk not 
reflecting the actual driving patterns or the different wear of the pantograph, dampers, wheels etc. 
installed on the normal rolling stock.  
In his paper [Usuda 2008] makes a similar argument. Looking at a closed area, he argues that several 
different pantographs pass through it, all at different velocities, thus setting a required need of a 
complete sample size of all passing pantographs in order to properly assess the induced wear from 
the pantographs to the overhead system.  
 
Even though setting up line side can help monitor all, or at least a vast majority, of the rolling stock, 
the problem with such a setup is that it is only able to monitor the interface at a specific location. 
This warrant an installation of a large amount of line side monitoring equipment to monitor 
everything, alternatively still risk failures at other locations that will be unmonitored.  
 
The other option is to equip the rolling stock with supervision equipment, thereby having the 
monitoring traveling the lines along with the rolling stock and the interface needed to monitor. 
This can prove a costly method, as equipping all rolling stocks require a very large purchase of 
equipment and a large amount of maintenance as well as it will produce a vast amount of data 
required to be processed. 
4.2. 
Rolling stock based systems 
 
Static measurements 
Static measurements are where the contact wire is untouched and thereby kept in its “idle” stage, 
i.e. where only the natural forces such as temperature changes, different wind speeds and directions 
etc. has an influence on the current setup.  
==PAGE:64==
52 
 
It is of course possible to walk out on the line, shutting down the train operation as well as the 
power, and make manual measurements using hand worn tools or small trolleys along the track and 
wires. This, however, will quickly prove to be a cumbersome and time-consuming task, and is 
simply not possible to perform at decent intervals on just a semi-frequently operated line. It is 
therefore required to find similar but a lot quicker methods to carry out the measurements. 
One such method, at least for measurement of the wire wear, is using laser (or similar light based) 
technology as explained by [Chugui et al. 2008]. Their method will use a laser to illuminate the 
underside of the contact wire, and a camera to detect the illumination. The system will then be able 
to detect the area of underside surface of the contact wire. Knowing the dimensions and the shape 
or the contact wire will then allow determination of the wire wear. 
Most type of systems are, alongside the measurement of wear, also able to determine the stagger 
and height of the contact wire. These type of optical systems comes in different kinds of shades and 
setups [Borromeo & Aparicio 2002], with different pros and cons for the specific type.  
Despite the small pitfalls within each type, they all still have the vast advantage, which they, with 
very small margins of errors, can produce an apparent endless stream of pictures and measurements 
at (close to) operation speed. That way they can be used to optimise the measurement process, as 
they require very small windows, if any, of operation downtime to produce the required data. 
The use of these types of system are already deployed or undergoing development and deployment 
across many countries, being placed either on in-service vehicles or on measurement trains. 
While making measurement in intervals spaced as close as 10 mm [Chugui et al. 2008] still expect 
the error of the estimated remaining thickness of the wire to be less than 0.2 mm.  
Looking at the MEDES system deployed by RENFE in Spain taking 250 images per second 
[Borromeo et al. 2003], found the error of wire thickness measurement to be around +/- 5% at the 
largest wire height (6.4 m), with an increasing accuracy as the contact wire height were lowered. 
[Borromeo et al. 2003, p.169] explain how using a laser and overlapping cameras as equipment, it 
==PAGE:65==
53 
 
is a matter of knowledge of the type of contact wire (size and shape) and basic geometry for the 
system to be able to automatically calculate the wear.  
These types of systems face a challenge when closing in to the largest point of the wire. As the 
calculation of the wear is done only by assessing the surface area, the system will not be able to 
distinguish whether the wear is closing in to or already has surpassed and moving away from the 
widest surface area point, at around roughly 50% wear. As the typical requirements, is to replace 
the wire at around 20% wear, the system should hopefully never be faced with this challenge. 
Excessive induced wear from arching can speed up the process, thus introducing the issue with 
wires at close to 50% wear. 
One of the suppliers of this type of equipment is Mermec group [Mermec n.d.]. With their 
SelectraVision system Cat-VW, displayed Figure 18,  they argue the ability to measure the 
placement of the contact 
wire with an accuracy within 
10 mm. as well as accuracy 
of the wear within 0,1 mm. 
This with wire heights up to 
8 m as well as performing 
measurement with running 
speeds up to 360 km/h 
[SelectraVision n.d.].  
 
As the running of electrical trains involve a transfer of large amount of energy, there is a possibility 
of this transfer going wrong, and the components absorbing the energy and overheating instead of 
transferring the energy it is supposed to.  
Figure 18 – SelectraVision Cat-VW 
==PAGE:66==
54 
 
A thermographic measurement of pantograph, in relation to the contact wire interface can therefore 
be a key component to monitor and prevent overheating failures of the pantograph. 
In 2006 [Landi et al. 2006] conducted a research on the Italian high speed line between Florence 
and Rome, into the pantograph-catenary interaction. Using infrared cameras, they attempted to 
quantify the connection quality, using Hough transformation algorithm to detect the proper frame 
for extraction of a still photo from a video feed and to improve the tracking of the heat development. 
According to [Kiessling et al. 2009, p.947] Germany and Norway are also conducting temperature 
measurement of pantograph and line side equipment along their lines. Whether these measurements 
are performed automatically or manually, and the equipment is mounted on the rolling stock or line 
side is not further elaborated. 
This type of equipment can be placed either on the rolling stock or as line side. Arguments both for 
and against both placements can quickly be made.  
Placed on the rolling stock, you will be required to monitor 100% of the pantograph to guard against 
individual failures, as you have no way of knowing which will fail next time.  
Placed line side, you will have to space them close together, as the errors can at random due to very 
local changing conditions, as well as occur many kilometres from next inspection point if only a 
few monitors are placed within a large rail network. 
 
Dynamic measurements 
Dynamic measurements contain the movement of the wire while the pantograph have an electrical 
connection. A vital part of the dynamic measurements is the contact force between the pantograph 
and the contact wire. A too low contact force will result in an insufficient contact surface, which 
will lead to electrical arching and an increased wear of the contact wire [Kiessling et al. 2009, p.938; 
Eurailtest n.d.]. A too high contact force will also result in an increase of wear of the moving parts 
where the wires are attached and the masts, as well as risking entanglement between the wires 
==PAGE:67==
55 
 
[Eurailtest n.d.]. It is therefore important to ensure a proper connection as well as a proper adjusted 
uplift force between the contact wire and the current collector. 
It is known that the contact force of the pantograph is the sum of the static and aerodynamic forces 
effected by the speed of travel, added with the dynamic force [Möller et al. n.d.]. Instead of making 
a continuous measurement of the pantograph uplift force during running operation, having to 
combine this with the current running speed, a simpler setup is a measurement of the pantograph 
lateral movement. This can be performed by mounting accelerometers to the carriage and the 
pantograph. According to both simulations and test runs on the Italian high speed lines, looking for 
sudden movement in the data from the pantograph dynamic response can then be used to infer the 
presence of defects in the overhead line [Collina et al. 2007].  
 
Alongside their development and tests of lineside temperature measuring devices [Amari et al. 
2012] (see description in later paragraph), JR East (Japanese Rail) has also developed and tested 
rolling stock based equipment to monitor the pantograph movement and its interface with the 
contact wire [Waki 2010], see 
Figure 19.  
The system uses an accelerometer 
to 
detect 
the 
pantographs 
movement and an UV sensor to 
detect 
any 
electrical 
arcs 
developing 
between 
the 
pantograph and the contact wire 
due to loss of proper contact 
between the two. Furthermore is attached a video recording device as well as a GPS locator so 
Figure 19 - JR East, vehicle mounted measurement system 
==PAGE:68==
56 
 
geostationary location as well as video feed and still images of possible faults are continuously 
being transmitted and are ready at hand if required for investigation. 
With a data amount of up to 10 GB per running hour, such system requires large amount of data 
storage as well as quick and stable data connections.  
With currently tested running speeds up to 110 km/h back in 2010, this could prove a system close 
to ready for implementation on a larger scale.  
 
The Pantograph damage assessment system (PANDAS) developed in cooperation between Serco 
Rail [Serco n.d.] and Transmission Dynamics [Transmission Dynamics n.d.], is another example 
that works very similar to the system developed by the Japanese.  
The PANDAS is comprised of two main components, a module placed on the pantograph and a 
receiver placed within the carriage, see Figure 20. This system logs and stores the 100 largest event 
of the day, with GPS-location, 
timestamp and impact forces on 
the 
pantograph. 
Using 
Bluetooth communication with 
the train as well as access to the 
mobile GRPS network, this 
system will activate an alarm in 
both the driver’s cabin and at the 
operation centre if the set limits 
is exceeded and an event is possible. The system is being tested in Australia [Izydorczyk et al. 2014] 
and has previously been tested in the UK as well. In the UK it is currently being deployed on 
routinely operating tilting trains on the West coast main line [Daadbin et al. 2012]. These test, and 
this implementation has revealed the possibility to easily locate hot spots with many incidents and 
Figure 20 – PANDAS, mounted on train 
==PAGE:69==
57 
 
thereby areas in need of maintenance, helping making the transformation from interval maintenance 
to predictive maintenance [Daadbin & Rosinski 2010; Ning et al. 2010, pp.573–578]. 
 
Australian Rail technology (ART) have also recently developed the Pantograph collision detection 
system (PCDS), a system similar to the two above systems [Australian Rail Technology n.d.].  
The PCDS at current setup consists of two boxes placed on top of the carriage, containing solar 
cells and a few small battery cells placed within, as well as of course GPS and GSM radio for 
location and communication. There will also be placed two accelerometers on the pantograph to 
monitor the pantographs dynamic movements while in operation, sending live information as soon 
as an incident occur. It can with relative ease be sent in to operation without interrupting the rest of 
the rolling stock setup.  
This PCDS is currently placed upon two rolling stocks in operations in the Sydney area as a test 
cycle. 
Whether the solar panels and battery cells would be sufficient for operations in areas with fewer 
hours of sunlight will need further investigation. 
 
In realisation of the issues with the interaction between pantograph and contact wires, the train 
manufacturer Alstom back in 2006 decided to manufacture their own monitoring system [Tanarro 
& Fuerte 2011]. Alstom’s system consist of a combination of both a touchless measurement device 
and a dynamic device to measure the pantographs lateral movements. Prior to being officially 
released, it has been tested on three different types of lines in Spain; both on high speed, commuter 
trains and in the Barcelona metro system. 
 
During the testing on the commuter trains, a considerable savings of wear on the pantograph carbon 
strips were achieved. Due to optimisation of the static uplift contact force the carbon contact strip 
==PAGE:70==
58 
 
went from being replaced once every other week to once every other month. If this result is 
transferable, using these types of system could constitute a significant savings for the operator. 
Alstom has officially launched their pantograph system under the name TrackTracer along with 
similar type equipment at the train fair InnoTrans in 2014 [Middle East Association 2014]. 
4.3. 
Line side based systems 
Still maintaining the focus on the interface between the OCS and the rolling stock, the line side 
equipment can be divided into two main subgroups, which however still are interlinked. One group 
that focus on the equipment, mainly the pantograph, placed on the rolling stock. The other group 
with a focus on monitoring the OCS and the contact wire.  
 
Monitoring of rolling stock equipment 
As briefly touched in the earlier paragraph [Möller et al. n.d.] explains the theory behind measuring 
pantograph contact force, and mention the possibility of using the contact wire uplift as an indication 
of the contact force applied from the pantograph.  
Instead of, or as supplement to, making dynamic measurement of the pantograph movement, the 
setup can be reverted, measuring the contact wire uplift thereby ensuring the correct uplift force 
from the passing pantographs. 
==PAGE:71==
59 
 
Such a setup can be seen placed near Oslo in Norway, where Jernbaneverket has a fixed line side 
equipment placed on one of the cantilevers, that measures uplift of the pantograph each time one 
passes the location [Kiessling et al. 2009, p.939]. This device measure the specific uplift by using 
an optical cable to make the 
measurement and transfer the 
data to a collector box placed 
at the pole. Deutsche Bahn in 
Germany [Kiessling et al. 
2009, p.939], and SBB in 
Switzerland [SBB n.d.] have 
similar devices like Siemens 
PMS [Siemens AG 2012] 
placed along the lines, using 
a pulley and a potentiometer to measure the uplift in the contact wire between the adjacent 
cantilevers where the device is mounted, see Figure 21. 
These types of system for monitoring of pantograph uplift are also mounted on both normal speed 
and high-speed lines in other countries like France, Belgium, Spain, Italy, Korea, Japan etc.  
 
In Spain a touchless inspection system to monitor contact wire uplift at pantograph passing has been 
undergoing development in recent years [Luna Vazquez et al. 2010]. This system operates similar 
to the pantograph inspection system (see later paragraph). Mounted in a mast they send an infrared 
light across the tracks onto a receiver plate mounted in the opposite mast, keeping the relevant 
contact wire on focus. Their measurements as well as simulation runs of test setup shows a deviation 
of less than 4 mm from the expected result. Larger contact wire deviation will thereby flag 
pantographs running with a wrongfully adjusted uplift force, either too high or too low.  
Figure 21 - SBB, pantograph uplift device 
==PAGE:72==
60 
 
Such small margin of errors could make the system a viable tool and option at some point in the 
future.  
With their current test setup, they do however only focus on wire movement, ignoring wind, train 
speed, direction, temperature impact etc. They also do not seem to take the possibility of multiple 
pantographs into account. Al these exemptions of outside influences does raise a flag, and should 
put the use of such a system on hold until the majority of those are included as factors and the 
system is still able to deliver current results. 
 
To prevent too much wear of the contact wire, the pantograph are typically fitted with a strip of 
material. Materials such as carbon, graphite or similar, that have the capability to conduct the current 
but is also soft enough that the majority of the wear due to friction between the contact wire and the 
pantograph happens within this strip. The ability to inflict wear mainly on the rolling stock, thereby 
saving the components of the OCS is, at least from the infrastructure manager point of view, an 
attractive feature. It does raise the issue of having to closely monitor the wear of the pantograph 
surface, typically using a pantograph monitoring system [Kiessling et al. 2009, p.945], as a wear 
through or just uneven wear can cause teardowns or wires and have huge impacts to the railway 
network operations as a whole.  
To prevent disturbance of normal operations, a requirement for these type of systems are that they 
are able to operate and monitor with trains at normal line speed. Having to scan the passing 
pantograph at a split second, and be able to assess both the evenness but also the remaining height 
of the soft contact strip, taking movement as well as external natural forces into account. 
 
Using a 3D scanner [Judek & Jarzebowicz 2014] attempts to set up an data analysis algorithm to 
help further automate the process of estimating the remaining carbon strips and in reverse the wear 
of the strip. 
==PAGE:73==
61 
 
Their research shows the main difficulties within the algorithm are taking different pantograph 
heights as well as the movements, tilt, rotation and yaw, into account. Their simulation does show 
the ability to estimate normal wear as well as larger size defects on the strip and generate alarms as 
an automated analysis. There are still defects that are too small for the system to detect by itself, 
even though they do pose a potential risk. This research does take these type systems a step further 
in the right direction, but still warrant further development prior to being able to have a fully 
automated system up and running.  
 
The group of pantograph 
inspection 
contain 
manufacturers such as 
Swedish Sensys [Sensys 
n.d.] 
and 
Danish 
PantoInspect, see Figure 
22 [PantoInspect n.d.], 
Both offering similar 
products containing a 
touchless supervision system of the passing pantographs.  
Where available, the trains (motor carriages) are identified using RFID tags, so precise knowledge 
of train ID and pantograph type is recorded if needed for later use. 
Both systems take live images of the pantographs shape and their collector strips, generating 
automated alarms if there are any potential risks or issues, being vital parts missing from the 
pantograph or deep nicks or just wear-through on the collector strips.  
Part of the data delivery, at least from PantoInspect, is also an estimation of the uplift force the 
pantograph place on the wire.  
Figure 22 - PantoInspect, at Boulevard tunnellen 
==PAGE:74==
62 
 
However, this estimation is done only by looking at the wire elevation when the pantograph is 
passing at the specific location. It does not take either train speed or the wave effect from multiple 
pantographs into account. At a running speed of 200 km/h, the difference in uplift between the first 
and second pantograph can be up to 3.5 cm [Möller et al. n.d.], so the information from the system 
is to be perceived as a rough estimation only.  
 
Monitoring of OCS and contact wire 
Within this area, we see equipment that will monitor the static OCS and generate an alarm if too 
sudden movement or too large forces are applied to the system. 
 
One type is Siemens contact line monitoring system Sicat CMS [Bechmann 2008; Siemens AG 
2008]. This operate by placing a measuring device at the contact and catenary wire tensioning 
equipment, continuously monitoring the tensile forces within the wires. Any sudden movements or 
change of tensile force within the wire indicates the risk of a pantograph being entangled with the 
wires and will trigger the alarm. 
 
In areas exposed to high wind speeds a device to measure wind deflection of the contact wire as 
seen in Norway [Kiessling et al. 2009, p.943] can prove useful. It will monitor the deflection of the 
contact wire relevant to track centreline and activate an alarm when the stagger of the contact wire 
exceed the threshold of the pantographs allowed operation reach, thereby prompting the operator to 
stop the train operations on the line section prior to a passing train tearing down the wires. The 
correct placement of such a measurement setup will be vital, as a wrongful location can place it in 
the lee of other obstacles, thereby artificially reducing the wind pressure and the deflection of the 
wire, making the measurement obsolete. 
 
==PAGE:75==
63 
 
Just like the risk of defects with too high temperature on the pantograph, there is a similar risk if 
the temperature of the line side equipment gets too high.  
Alongside their test with train mounted contact line equipment [Waki 2010], JR East also tested the 
possibility of monitoring the temperature changes in some of the line side equipment. The 
measurement equipment was mounted in mast and on the OLE and the data was then transferred to 
the passing in-service rolling stock [Amari et al. 2012]. The main idea behind this setup was an 
attempt to monitor areas, such as the compression joint and the tensioning equipment, which are 
out of reach for the inspection train, and thereby at present have to be manually inspected, with very 
long intervals between data points as the result. 
4.4. 
Manual measurements 
Most, if not all, of the different methods mentioned in the above sections are of course also possible 
to go out and perform as manual measurements. Simple cost calculation will however quickly show 
the futility in performing such tasks manually and dictate a more automated setup. 
There can still be areas where it would make sense to perform the manual task of inspecting and 
measuring the overhead catenary system. Areas where the measurement train or trains in general 
seldom comes by or cannot perform an inspection. This can be the contact wire over switches that 
are only very infrequently in use. The droppers and the catenary wire can also be difficult to inspect 
by automatic, as the contact wire in most case will be placed so it prevent a clear line of sight.  
The connection between the cantilever and the mast, or any other mast mounted equipment, which 
can prove very difficult to measure from a passing train. This could both be the specific joints used 
for mounting the equipment, but also moving parts themselves, ballast weight and/or the wire tensile 
force can prove difficult to test. 
When a maintenance trolley is going through the track could be another example of where the use 
of manual measurement is useful. Here the maintenance crew will already be at hand performing 
the planned maintenance task. At the same time, it would make sense for them to make visual 
==PAGE:76==
64 
 
inspections, as well as measurement of both contact wire wear, stagger, wire heights etc. at least on 
a sample basis, to confirm it is still at a correct placement. 
 
As good as the automated systems are they can still be flawed or hit areas where they for some 
reason are not able to deliver a proper and trustworthy measurement.  
Also there will be areas of track system where the ordinary rolling stock seldom run through and 
thereby are not able to deliver continuously updated measurements.  
Proper mounted cameras on a passing train could perhaps be used for at least visual inspection of 
mast mounted line side equipment. 
4.5. 
Summation 
Many things and many systems are in development. Not many finished products are ready for 
turnkey implementation. Furthermore, many similar systems exist within the different categories, 
so choosing the proper equipment for the current situation as well as considering future 
contingencies can prove a futile task. 
 
As the research from [Judek & Jarzebowicz 2014] explains regarding the pantograph inspection 
system. These type of systems does still have some issues with the data process, requiring manual 
interactions and assessment especially with detecting the smaller defects. This issue does still make 
the process resource heavy as well as add an element of risk.  
As documented in the test setup of uplift measurement in Germany by [Möller et al. n.d.]. A line 
side system can process a large amount of data, and only produce a small amount, automatically 
ignoring a vast amount of data. Having a success rate of defect detection among the alarms of above 
80% a calibrated system combined with a back-office data processing software can prove a very 
viable option and not having any system add a much larger potential risk, where the fault-prone 
system is still much to prefer.  
==PAGE:77==
65 
 
 
However the issue remains, that it will only be able to monitor interfaces at the specific location, 
either warranting an installation of large amount of line side monitoring equipment to monitor 
everything or risking failures at other locations that will be unmonitored.  
On the other hand, it can prove a costly method to attempt to equip all rolling stocks with measuring 
equipment. It would require a very large purchase of equipment, a large amount of maintenance as 
well as it would produce a vast amount of data required to be processed. 
A combination of strategically placed line side equipment and rolling stock based equipment placed 
on a minor portion of the rolling stock does seem like the optimal solution at this stage. 
 
As demonstrated from the test on Spanish commuter trains, using accelerometers to optimise the 
pantograph force uplift can produce large savings in pantograph carbon strip wear [Tanarro & 
Fuerte 2011], as a side effect to reducing the wear of the contact wire.  
Similar can be found an additional gain from the pantograph inspection system for the operator side 
of the railway, if the available information within these systems are shared. The operators 
maintenance crew will thereby receive progressive updates regarding the wear development and 
thereby life time expectancy of the current collector equipment, without having to use time making 
100% visual inspections during regular service.  
One could hope that those kind of synergies, where both parties stood to gain from installing a 
continuous surveillance system would be enough to lead to a common ground. A ground large 
enough were an agreement could be made to install a system for the common good and joint 
benefits.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
66 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
67 
 
5. 
Case study, Copenhagen urban lines 
This section will present the model used to identify requirements for data collection, within the 
different groups of errors.  
It will then apply the model to identify requirement for supervision systems. 
In the Detection possibilities section the output of the data collection model will be combined with 
some of the detection equipment identified inOverview of supervision systems, and attempt to give 
an estimate on which equipment is required, as well, as how many of the errors can it possibly 
prevent. 
Data analysis section will summarise on the requirements for data analysis tools required for a 
continuous supervision.  
Lastly Cost estimates will the cost of a few of the identified possible solutions and give provide the 
overview of the main factors required for performing a CBA, to make the estimate whether all this 
supervision makes sense seen from financial perspective. 
5.1. 
Model for data collection 
The idea behind the data collection model is to look into and hopefully create a system or a setup 
that is able to decrease the amount of errors occurring. It should either improve some of the areas 
of supervision and/or error prevention or at least improve the condition under which the potential 
errors has to be spotted and make error prevention easier. 
 
The intent of this data collection model is to focus on preventing or reducing the amount of errors. 
This is more or less an adoption of the intent from TDK to improve the operability of the 
Copenhagen urban lines. This is done by, at least from the catenary viewpoint, reducing the amount 
of actual and potential errors that are occurring. 
==PAGE:80==
68 
 
A breakdown will, regardless of responsibility or who in the end will pay for the delays, still cause 
decreased operability and be a nuisance for the passengers. It will therefore qualify to the attempt 
to cancel out that specific error. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
69 
 
 
Model setup 
The requirements for the model is to identify the ability of the different types of detection systems 
required to detect and prevent the different kind of errors and potential breakdowns. 
The goal for the selection of equipment must mainly be to prevent damages from happening in the 
first place or to limit the amount of damages.  
Where damages have already or must be presumed to occur no matter the installed system, there is 
little gain from just detecting the failures a few minutes earlier, if the detection itself does not at 
least prevent further damages. 
 
Looking at the actual breakdowns from Figure 14 - Overview of errors p. 39, as well as the different 
potential breakdowns from section 3.2 Potential break downs, it should now be possible to attempt 
identifying the different types of detection systems required to identify the different kinds of errors. 
 
The model will focus on the last ten years of failures as well as the identified potential failures, 
which in most cases still overlap or fit in the categories of the actual failures.  
It will then utilise one or more of the identified detection solutions, as well as set up requirements 
for the measurement intervals and the way to report potential or actual errors. 
As the cause analysis of the current failures has revealed actual and potential failures of very 
different types, the detection and data collection almost certainly will have to be different to match. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
70 
 
Table 1 - Data collection model is set up and thought as flow chart to evaluate the type, location 
and development speed of the specific error, and then match the detection type and type of alarm to 
provide proper measures to diminish the amount of errors.  
Table 1 - Data collection model 
 
At the top level, with the failures you are required to pick a category in each box.  Going through 
the next levels of detection type, data transmittal and data processing / alarm generation, the similar 
level line should then match. 
If you have a failure type at a specific location, the detection also just need to be location specific 
and there is no additional requirement for GPS / track specific location. 
Similar, if the failure happens over a (short) time interval, the detection only need to be interval 
based with regularly data transmission and a daily error report generation. 
 
If an event happens truly random on both location and time, odds of catching and preventing the 
error with only location specific interval based supervision are very slim. In this case, you will be 
==PAGE:83==
71 
 
required to insert continuous monitoring of the whole network, to ensure catching the errors. On 
top of this, the measurement are then required to have a live transmittal and an instant data 
processing and alarm generation. If any of these steps fails or happen at a slower pace, the error will 
go undetected for at least some time, and chances for it developing at creating a wider range of 
errors increases. 
On the other hand, if an error always happens at a specific known location, and only after a specific 
event, there is no reason to monitor the whole network with continuous measurements. It will of 
course catch the errors, but it will also generate many data and have purchased a lot of equipment 
that will be proven unnecessary. The events and the measures have to align. 
 
For all the supervision systems that are reviewed and considered it is at this level assumed they 
already have or can be fitted with some sort of location device build into it. Either GPS location or 
for line side equipment a hard coded line placement. All systems are assumed to be connected and 
able to transfer their recordings live. 
It is also assumed some sort of back end office solution is either available or possible to develop to 
quickly sort through the alarms. 
 
 
Model output 
As the setup and appearances of the model output will be similar, only a few selected examples has 
been chosen to be displayed as part of the actual report.  
A more extensive and wider variety that covers the vast part of the actual and potential breakdowns 
can be found in the appendix 11.7 Data collection model. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
72 
 
Table 2 - Data collection model, pantograph causing damages 
 
Table 2 display the data collection model for pantograph inflicted failures. 
This group contains failures produced by often erroneous or damaged pantographs. Pantographs 
causing 
a 
tear 
down 
within 
the 
system. 
Based on the last ten years historic, the failures themselves seems to be happening at instant as well 
as at random locations.  The actual location of the damage of the pantograph as well as the time it 
have been in operation prior to generating an actual failure are somewhat more elusive.  
A supervision system will be required a continuous coverage of the whole network, and be able to 
generate and transmit alarms at an instant pace on order to match the pattern of the actual damages 
to 
the 
wires. 
Damages to the pantograph can be detected over a period prior to actual teardowns, but the period 
is both unknown, as well as can be argued to cover either a lengthy period or a just a few seconds, 
requiring (close to) instant detection. 
==PAGE:85==
73 
 
Among the main detection options are the pantograph force movement monitoring as well as a live 
video feed to display and quickly assess the possible issues to cover the actual damages. A 
pantograph wear monitoring can help detect the issues prior to them actually evolving into an 
incident with traffic disturbance.  
A pantograph seldom falls apart on its own. It will often either hit something or be hit by something, 
causing 
the 
initial 
damage, 
which 
can 
then 
evolve.  
This can be anything from smaller or larger object within the OCS to hitting a bird in flight. A force 
detection system will be able to catch most of these issues. The wear measurement can help monitor 
and alarm when the damage reach a critical extent. 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
74 
 
Table 3 - Data collection model, failures due to arching or wire thickness 
 
Table 3 display the data collection model for arching of wires and measurement of wire thickness. 
Arching and wire thickness contains a small handful of errors caused by more or less localised 
excessive wear of the contact wire. 
A few areas are known to be prone for arching but otherwise the locations seems to either happen 
random, or have a specific underlying cause. 
Some of the known locations are areas on Køge Bugt Banen as well as at acceleration through the 
central part of Copenhagen, where the contact wire is fixated in an overhead rail, and thereby 
missing its dynamic flexibility. 
Through a specific breakdown a few years ago, it can be estimated that the normal, relative new 
contact wire can withstand roughly 5.000 -10.000 localised electrical arching prior to being worn 
to 
collapse. 
The actual case had approximately 250 train passages a day, with an average of three pantograph 
per train, and estimated 1-2 weeks prior to falling. 
==PAGE:87==
75 
 
Depending on location, arching therefore could sufficiently be monitored on an interval basis, but 
it should still be at least daily, especially at location with intense traffic. 
Detection equipment would be required either to be able to detect the arching, alternatively should 
be able to measure the wire thickness. 
The system should be required to generate reports displaying the progressing wire wear at the 
specific locations. 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
76 
 
5.2. 
Detection possibilities 
 
Output data model / error detection possibilities (options) 
Combining the output of the data collection model with all the actual errors from Figure 14 - 
Overview of errors, should provide an overview of the possibilities of detecting and preventing 
those errors from occurring. 
It should be noted that these overviews and the following analysis are only based on the amount of 
the actual failures, as the potential failures are identified, but very difficult to quantify. 
 
The error cause categories are the same as those displayed in Figure 14 - Overview of errors p.39 
in an earlier section. The key for error and detection numbering can be found in Figure 23 
 
Figure 23  - Overview, key for errors causes and detection possibilities 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
77 
 
Table 4 shows the overview of all the error causes as well as the possible detections for each error. 
Table 4 - All errors, primary and secondary detections 
 
The different error causes are placed on the individual rows, and the of detection options are to be 
found in the columns. The table is to be reviewed as a matrix. The squares where an error and a 
detection option cross, displays the amount a specific errors a specific of type of supervision 
equipment is able to detect.  
Detection options has been divided into primary that will be able to detect the errors and/or prevent 
damages from escalating and secondarily which only might be able to detect or prevent escalation. 
Within Table 4 there has been allowed and counted multiple detection options for each individual 
error. 
Table 5 shows a similar image of that of Table 4. Table 5 just only have the primarily detection 
errors included.  
Table 5 - All errors, primary detections only 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
78 
 
Figure 24 display the same numbering as shown in Table 5, now just displayed as a pie chart for 
quick overview and presentation.  
 
Figure 24 - All error and primary detections, percentage overview 
As it can be seen in Figure 24, especially the video option, the lineside supervision of wire 
movement and the pantograph force detection stands out as options that should be investigated 
further.  
 
Looking closer into the data, it can be found that all errors warranting detection with some sort of 
pantograph force detection, it would make equal sense to include a video feed to receive live images. 
Those two categories more or less cover each other. As argued previously, a live video feed alone 
could prove difficult to use for error prevention on its own, whereas the collision between 
pantograph and an object should be caught by the force detection system.  
Only having a force detection system, will provide an alarm, but at the same time demand the driver 
to stop and exit the train to manually inspect whether it is safe to proceed operation. This would 
==PAGE:91==
79 
 
hinder at least some failures, but would still generate delays, as this manual inspection of the 
pantograph would be time consuming and disturb the timetable.  
Based on these arguments, the video option will be removed moving forward in the analysis.  
 
Referring back to Table 5 it can be difficult to decide which errors should be the focus of the 
supervision. Looking at the data model output, the pace of error development is included within the 
model, and can be used as a decider.  
Errors happening after a specific event can perhaps be prevented, but should properly have other 
measures for detection and prevention than a constant and continuous supervision. With errors, 
happening at an instant it would on the other hand make sense to at least consider a continuous 
supervision. Errors happening over time fall into a middle category and has a more case-by-case 
consideration. 
Table 6 is a summation from the data model output. It is displaying the development pace of the 
different types of errors. 
From Table 6 it can be seen, that at least errors during project and maintenance as well as errors 
somehow correlated and happening after projects should not be in focus of the continuous 
supervision. 
Table 6 – Error type, pace of development 
==PAGE:92==
80 
 
Wire thickness and normal wire wear does not happen overnight. It can be considered sufficient 
when included in the yearly measurement runs. In the few incidents where it could make sense to 
make a continuous wire wear measurement, it is usually due to an excessive wear and the data 
shows that these are already included where it would make sense to look into electric arch 
developments. 
 
Electrical arching itself is a bit more difficult to decide as this can happen over a shorter period. As 
explained in the output from the model at Table 3 p.74, experience tells, that it takes roughly 5.000-
10.000 arching to burn through a relative new wire. However, in very busy stretches of the network, 
this can still occur over a very short time span of a week or so. As measurement trains only runs 
once per half a year, it can quickly prove to be to infrequent if only relying on those measurements. 
On the other hand, the referred case in the model output was an extreme one, including a faulty 
remodelling in an unfortunate place with high-density traffic, and will as such properly seldom 
happen again.  
At normal operation and proper instalment, the arching must be expected to be quite a factor smaller, 
and the error history does only display a history of four errors within the last decade. 
As explained under the section regarding potential failures, the issue with arching does pose a 
hidden but sincere treat towards the wear, even though it is not producing that many obvious 
failures. Due to these hidden potential arguments could be made to consider including this error 
cause within the further analysis. At least as a nice-to-have option. 
 
Looking back at Figure 14 - Overview of errors p.39, it does seem obvious to focus on preventing 
or reducing errors due to failures from the wires, pantograph and line side equipment, as those three 
groups contains more than half the failures.  
 
==PAGE:93==
81 
 
Wire blowouts has previously mainly happened on the Køge Bugt branch line, which is to undergo 
reconstruction in the near future. The issues with blowouts on that line section must afterwards 
assumed to be resolved, and the amount of future errors within the group more or less cancelled 
out. For this reason, it will be ignored going forward. 
 
The issues with Power failures and short circuits are 
mainly with equipment that is supposed to fail but has just 
not been failing properly, see Figure 25. Their failures are 
causing delays no matter what, but their malfunctioning 
does pose a risk of causing additional delays.  
It could be possible to install supervision equipment to 
monitor and report which surge protector is failing, but the 
question will properly quickly arise whether the gain of 
installing and supervising 300-350 surge protector can ever come close to the potential reward.  
It is the argument of this thesis that a supervision will simply not fit the bill, as other options will 
give a better operation at same cost, why this grouping will not be included going forward. 
The alternative option will be presented in the section 6.1.6.1 Surge protectors later in the thesis. 
 
It is very difficult to guard against object being picked up and moved over longer distances into the 
wires by the wind. The larger branches or trees falling over are somewhat easier to rectify, as this 
is simply a question of trimming the trees in a far enough distance to the track and line side 
equipment. However doing this can quickly turn into a dual edged sword, as removing to much of 
the trees and their branches along the lines just opens up a corridor, which enhances the probability 
of smaller objects being carried into the wires by the wind. 
Figure 25 - blown surge protector 
==PAGE:94==
82 
 
Another issue with trimming can be the regulations on the area. It is often an undesired attribute to 
cut down the trees and create too large, too wide of a barren corridor through the landscape simply 
due to a railway line. Wanting to create a wider corridor and trimming the vegetation further away 
from the railway line could result in breaching the boundary of the land ownership and forcing 
Railnet Denmark to purchase or expropriate a larger amount of landmasses surrounding their 
railways.  
As there has only been four failures due to trees or tree branches within the wires over the last 
decade on the Copenhagen urban lines in Denmark , this failure type has for now been disregarded 
going forward. 
 
Summarising on all the above, errors caused by wire, pantograph and line side failures should be 
included in a further analysis of continuous supervision systems.  
Errors due to arching are at least a nice to have option, and will be included with that taken into 
account. 
With a chosen focus on these four failure types, Figure 26 display the division between the possible 
solutions for detection and prevention. 
 
Figure 26 - Prevention methods vs. Wire, pantograph, lineside failures & arching 
==PAGE:95==
83 
 
 
Error prevention 
Figure 26 display that the option of some sort of force detection on the pantograph with additional 
live video feed supplemented with a lineside supervision system would have prevented a great deal 
of the errors within those four chosen group of errors.  
As Railnet Denmark already has a pantograph wear detection system in operation, the failures 
possible to prevent from this should obviously be included as well. Even though it is only showing 
the ability to prevent roughly 8% of the errors it would not make sense to exclude equipment already 
purchased and in operation. 
It should be remembered that the above display is performed only based on the actual errors. Even 
though arch detection also only hits 8%, it is still residing as part of the shadow numbers.  
Once again, the argument will therefore be to proceed with the arch detection included in the 
analysis, but have it remaining as a nice to have option.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
84 
 
Figure 27 shows the summary of the four types of prevention as a stacked pile diagram, displayed 
against the total amount of failures within each error category.  
 
 
Figure 27 - Error prevention possibilities, actual amount of errors 
It should be noted that a few of the errors are covered by multiple detection categories, and the 
amount of possible prevention t artificially are a bit high. This is best displayed at errors with things 
blown into the wires, where the prevention seems to surpass the actual amount of errors.  
Error type 1, wire blowout, has two errors with multiple detection covers; one covered by detection 
type 24 & 27, and one by 24, 27 & 28. 
Error type 4 and 5 both has one error, each covered by two detection options. 
Deducting those double detection categories, it should be noted, that out of the 96 errors within the 
overview, an amount of 60 failures, or roughly 60%, could be claimed possible to detect and either 
prevented completely or reduced the escalation and consequence of the errors. 
 
==PAGE:97==
85 
 
As none of the old failures has been recorded or monitored while happening, the precise cause and 
development of all these are more or less unknown. Instead, they have been investigated afterwards; 
determining the likely cause and development based on extensive experience, knowledge and 
applied use of hindsight. Although this process can be used to fairly certain determine the most 
likely cause, it can seldom be used as an argument for 100% proof of cause. Although the above 
detection possibilities would most likely be able to detect and provide data for the linked errors, it 
would likewise be foolish to attempt to claim a 100% success rate for either prevention or escalation.  
The 60% should properly be roughly halved to 25-30% to give a realistic idea for possibilities of 
prevention and/or escalation of the failures.  
 
However, looking back at the numbers, it should be remembered, that those 97 failures used to 
provide the division between errors as well as the percentile of detections were a partial selection 
for the reason they were documented.  
Within the last decade, which this investigation focus on, there has been roughly double the amount 
of recorded errors (189). Further an unknown amount of potential errors that luckily were caught 
prior to developing into real errors causing damages and delays within the railnet system. 
Within those two groups there can also be estimated a similar detection and prevention rate.  
 
Summation 
There are some different groupings of errors. A few of them stand out as pretty large and significant, 
and therefore make sense to focus on. 
Similar when matching those large grouping of errors with the possible detection and prevention 
systems. Only a few systems are required to cover the large quantity of errors occurring. 
 
A pantograph force movement detection system combined with a live video feed, which will help 
detect the main part of the errors when the pantograph hits something in operations and risk being 
==PAGE:98==
86 
 
damaged. It can be considered to include the option of arch detection, to highlight troublesome areas 
prone for electrical arching and thereby excessive wear of the contact wire.  
 
Line side supervision equipment measuring rapid / large wire movement, would detect sudden 
movements of the wires. This include both wires dropping to the ground and wires being suddenly 
hit with an extensive force, either from a tree falling into it, or collisions with a pantograph or 
similar. 
 
Some sort of automated static measurement equipment to use after projects could be considered as 
well. Among the arguments are the ability to ensure proper data of the location of the wires after a 
remodelling project has been undertaken.  
If wire thickness were included in such a setup, it could reduce or perhaps even remove the potential 
necessity of an arch detection system, as wire thickness would then be assumed performed on a 
regular, at least weekly, basis. 
5.3. 
Data analysis  
Now returning to the part of the requirements for the analysis of the data. It is easily done to set up 
and collect a large quantity of data, but if it then requires manual interaction to process and analyse 
the data, it will create more problems or at least the same amount that it is solving. Having a constant 
flow of data from possible multiple sources in a continuous system will definitely not help this 
process.  
 
PantoInspect can at present state deliver alarms for damaged or defective pantograph. There are 
however still, some amount of false alarms between the genuine ones. It is currently not possible 
for the system to automatically assess and compare multiple damages to flag potential 
reoccurrences.  
==PAGE:99==
87 
 
Similar issues can be found with systems like PANDAS or other force detection devices. They are 
able to generate alarms but then require human interaction to review the alarms and assess proper 
action. The question is whether there will be a quick enough response time to prevent break downs, 
especially in these cases where the damages happens more or less instant? 
 
There is a required need for a system, which include data processing. A system that is able to 
generate alarms as well as process them at the same instant the possible errors are detected. 
However, preferably a system also capable of weeding out the false alarms automatically, only 
displaying the real, potential, treats.  
Such a system seemingly does not exist at present. It is at least not connected to or available for the 
solutions reviewed within this thesis. 
[Shing & Pascoschi 2006] does describe a system of how to break down a vast amount of data. 
Making it a lot more automated in cleaning and clearing up faulty measurements and aligning data 
to be used for further statistical data processing.  
Their initial data is based on static measurement, placement, of contact wire, done by image 
recognition and triangulation during a measurement train run through the Hong Kong metro line, 
similar to Railnet Denmark received data for IRISsys. The process does however still take some 
time, and do require at least some human interactions, so it could not, at the time of the article, be 
viewed as an automated process that were useable for a continuous data flow.  
5.4. 
Cost estimates 
The cost of each break down quickly amounts to DKK 2-300.000 just for Railnet Denmark alone 
[Loiborg 2012]. Adding the value of material damage at DSB and especially the large factor of the 
society value of all the delayed passenger will quickly increase this with a factor 10 or more.  
Other errors, even though not causing an actual tear down quickly cost a similar amount of money, 
either as delays or of cost of chasing down the error. Back in 2012, an expansion element inside a 
==PAGE:100==
88 
 
tunnel had gotten loose and begun creating damages to the passing pantographs. Even though it in 
this case did not cause an actual tear down to the OCS, all of traffic had to be cancelled for a period 
to chase down the culprit. As this investigation had to be performed manually from a work machine, 
the cost climbed quickly, and ended up in a few hundreds of thousand Danish kroner, only for the 
machinery and man-hours used to chase down and fix the problem.  
 
Besides evaluating, the output from data model on its ability to prevent errors, and added evaluation 
can come in the form of a cost parameter. 
The large-scale model can be a cost-benefit analysis. A smaller scale of evaluation model can be a 
simple calculation of the cost of required equipment setup against amount of errors it can prevent.  
This assumes all errors will cost the same. 
 
Having to assess the possibility of implementing one or more of the supervision system, more or 
less a whole business case will be required for either each individual system or for the combination 
of the systems. 
As this will be quite a substantial task, requiring a lot of input not at hand, the actual calculation 
will not be performed within this thesis. 
Instead the known information will be presented. Listed will also be some of the additional needed 
requirements for information as well as some of the considerations required prior to performing the 
actual calculation and presenting it within a business case. 
 
 
Cost of equipment 
As identified in the end of section Error! Reference source not found. - Detection possibilities 
Error! Reference source not found., it could be considered investing in some sort of combined 
==PAGE:101==
89 
 
pantograph force detection equipment, with the addition of a live video feed. The arching detection 
would be an added possibility but is not a necessity. 
Line side supervision of the wire movement should also be part of the consideration of added 
equipment. 
Some sort of measurement equipment for stagger, wire height and wire wear can be considered. 
This should be for the use partly to document the placement of the wires after projects, partly to 
document the wear of the wires. The addition of wire wear through such a device would more or 
less remove any intent, at least in regards to wire wear, behind the requirement for arch detection. 
Purchase of such devices does require the use of the data, or it will not provide any benefit. 
5.4.1.1. Force detection 
Among the force detection systems are devices like PANDAS and PDCS, which both are placed 
into service. Neither does, at least for now, offer the ability of video surveillance nor arch detection. 
Japan Rail (JR East) had in 2010 a prototype in operation, featuring all the required options of 
movement, video feed and arch detection [Waki 2010]. A lecture from a 2013 conference 
[Yamamoto 2013] does display the continuous intent of getting the equipment into service, but 
whether it has actual succeeded or what the price would be for their type of equipment it has not 
been possible to disclose. 
An old internal report from 2013, Railnet Denmark and TDK has estimated the cost of the PANDAS 
system to roughly €25.000, (approximately DKK 185.000,-), per piece [Bogø 2013]. A recent 
inquiry to ART regarding their PCDS system [Australian Rail Technology n.d.], has put a quoted 
purchase price per piece of roughly AUD$13.000-14.500, (DKK 60.000-70.000,-),   depending on 
the amount of purchased equipment.  
As camera equipment and a video feed do not require much, assuming the cost of the equipment 
from Japanese rail somewhere in the same ballpark as the above should at least be able to provide 
a decent estimate of the potential cost.  
==PAGE:102==
90 
 
5.4.1.2. Line side equipment 
Among the line side equipment, Siemens Sicat CMS system does stand out to cover the 
requirements. 
Cost estimates on their equipment are unfortunately still pending. 
 
The measuring equipment to be mounted in the mast and used for the lineside monitoring is not that 
expensive by itself. The main cost factor is all the communication cables required to connect the 
monitoring equipment with the monitoring central.  
A large decider regarding the cost factor for the line side equipment will therefore be the placement 
of the cabinets, and all the communication cable.  
 
If considerations are leaning towards investigating in the instalment of line side equipment, it would 
be recommend seeking counselling from some sort of planning group, as an optimisation of the 
placement and routing of the wires will be able to inflict largely on the final cost quota for the setup. 
5.4.1.3. Measurement after projects & interval supervision 
For measurements after projects and for use of internal supervision, there is a wider range of options. 
Disregarding the manual ones, there still are at least a handful of options left on the market. A quote 
to TDK roughly 5 years ago placed the cost of one of the smaller SelectraVision at €400-500.000,- 
(DKK 3.00 – 3.75 mill) and below €1.000.000,- (DKK7.5 mill) per piece for an all options 
equipment.  
A recent inquiry has placed a purchase price of roughly €150.000,- for their CAT-VW equipment 
[SelectraVision n.d.], still requiring added cost for the installation of the equipment. This is 
estimated to require three weeks of intensive work from a service and maintenance crew from the 
supplier, so the old price quote can properly still be used for price estimations. 
==PAGE:103==
91 
 
 
Cost-Benefit analysis 
The CBA attempts to list all negative, the cost factors, against all gains, the benefits factors, translate 
them all to a monetary value and then see whether the result will present a positive or negative value 
over the evaluation period. Looking deeper into the possibilities of adding data is where it can get 
comprehensive and somewhat difficult to follow, as valuation of pollution, cost of additional travel 
time and different valuation of time gains often can be difficult to grasp.  
The CBA should just be viewed as an easy way to analyse the total cost of a project and weigh it 
against the possible benefits of it. With all numbers converted into a monetised value, it also helps 
making an easy comparison across different projects, making it possible to select the project with 
the most viable profitability. 
 
Some considerations and decisions are required prior to performing the actual calculations. One of 
these decisions are at which level the analysis should look, and thereby which cost and benefits 
should be included. A decision to review cost and benefit on a societal level will inflict a much 
different set of factors than making a comparison only within Railnet Denmark of TDK. 
Among the cost considerations are the purchase price of equipment, the cost of additional 
maintenance due to added equipment and the cost of running and performing the analysis of the 
additional data.  
Depending on how you view the above headings and which level of details are required, cost of 
training and perhaps recruiting of additional staff can be added as well. 
Among the expected benefits are fewer breakdowns, resulting in a lower cost of replacing the 
equipment. Saved cost of GFS and work crew using time on the track to locate errors, and a 
decreased wear of pantographs and OCS are also areas, which are obvious to include as benefits. 
When incident causing delays or cancelled trains occur, Railnet Denmark can be penalised for errors 
that belongs to their area of responsibility.  
==PAGE:104==
92 
 
DSB and Railnet Denmark are required to maintain a certain level of operations, and breakdowns 
works against this, so these cost should be included in the CBA as well. 
 
Deciding to perform a CBA with focus on cost and benefits for one department, Teknisk drift – 
Kørestrøm within Railnet Denmark, will most properly be the quickest and easiest one to perform, 
as it will require the fewest amount of parameters. However, the question quickly arises whether it 
will produce a feasible result, especially trying to locate the gains, which in this case is the potential 
cost savings. 
Figure 28 displays a subdivision of the errors in year 2015 within the division of technical 
operations. 
 
Figure 28 – Amount of errors, technical operation 2015, subdivided between week and divisions 
As highlighted with a red continuous running line, the electrical subdivision in general only amounts 
for a tiny portion of the total errors caused by divisions within technical operations. 
==PAGE:105==
93 
 
These effects are translated into punctuality, which are measured across Railnet Denmark (CPH 
urban lines) as a combined company with vast difficulties of performing a divisional or sectional 
breakdown of the financial consequences. 
A major breakdown on the catenary system in one month can go un-penalised if no other incidents 
occurs, while a very minor incident, only causing a handful of trains delays the next month can put 
the punctuality just under the lower threshold and thereby result in a penalty.  
This setup does seems to warrant making the cost-benefit analysis at least on the company level. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:106==
94 
 
The system of operability is currently set up, so Railnet Denmark have a certain ribbon of 
punctuality they are required to adhere to. Dropping below the threshold of 97.0% will result in a 
penalty. Getting above the upper threshold of the ribbon at 97.75% will generate a bonus. 
Table 7 display the regularity for the year 2015, missing December. As can be seen, only the month 
of September drops below a regularity of 97%.  
Table 7 – Regularity data for DSB S-train, 2015, including Railnet Denmark responsibility 
 
Both October and November, even though displaying approximately 20.000 affected train arrivals, 
remain comfortably above the threshold, and March, with roughly 12.000 late arrivals, have a high 
enough regularity to generate a bonus. 
 
Based on similar tables, Figure 29 display the train regularity on the Copenhagen urban lines, within 
Railnet Denmark as a combined company for the years 2013 – 2015 (December 2015 still missing), 
with the lower and upper threshold boundaries displayed as red lines. 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
95 
 
 
Figure 29 - Train regularity, CPH urban lines 2013-2015, whole Railnet Denmark 
As visible from the figure it is a very few month where Railnet Denmark ends up being penalised 
for the irregularity. 
Beside the one month in 2015, two month in 2014 and three month in 2013 also dropped below the 
threshold value, resulting in penalties. 
 
The subject of identifying the amount of delayed trains can however be even further complicated. 
When major breakdowns occurs, Railnet Denmark, in collaboration with the operator(s), can choose 
to alter or deviate from the normal timetable, and instead activating and alternate one, which can 
include fewer trains and/or trains turning around in the middle of their normal operating route, 
replacing the remaining route with bus operation [Bach 2015]. 
This timetable replacement can be planned and effectuated from the following day on the 
Copenhagen urban lines. 
By replacing the normal timetable with a temporary one, the punctuality will be measured against 
the new timetable, hiding some of the potential delayed or cancelled trains a normal operating 
==PAGE:108==
96 
 
timetable would have generated, and thereby de facto increasing punctuality and removing some of 
the potential cost in form of penalties.  
 
Figure 30 displays the amount of delayed train arrivals in the last three years. The displayed delays 
are only from error code S750 and subsequent group numbers S751, S752, S755, covering electrical 
power on the urban lines, still missing December 2015. 
 
 
Figure 30 – affected trains at station arrival, only error codes S75x, electrical power 
Although a very small sample size, the graph does seem to display a small downward tendency. A 
R2 value of 0.36 for the best regression fit with an exponential function is however not something 
that should be used for making any meaningful predictions. For that, the fit of the regression line is 
simply too far off.  
Regardless of the trend, the total amount of affected trains per year are not excessive. 
Out of the approximately 14.000 affected train arrivals on 2014, roughly 5.000 amounted to a single 
event in September. A blown surge protector at Nordhavn station, in the most inner part of the 
==PAGE:109==
97 
 
network, during morning rush hour, ended up causing cancellations and delays until late afternoon 
the same day. 
Referring back to Figure 29, even such an event, and with those roughly 5.000 affected arrival, the 
month as a total still generated a regularity that resulted in a bonus. 
 
Table 8 display the actual amount of penalties and bonuses for the combined Railnet Denmark for 
the year 2015, lacking the month of December.  
Table 8 - Railnet Denmark, bonus and penalties 2015, missing December, all amounts in DDK 
 
In the top left corner are the actual penalties and bonuses for the regularity subdivided within each 
month. Only penalty is for September. The table on the top left are penalties for clearing the track 
too late after it has been closed off for maintenance, using the same monthly subdivision. 
Result is displayed at the bottom. 
As displayed, the penalties are very minuscule, and the total amount is a large bonus of close to 1.4 
million Danish kroner 
The question is how large an incentive this setup impose. 
==PAGE:110==
98 
 
 
Making a business case covering solely internal cost and gains the above headings would properly 
cover the main areas of these.  
 
Moving from an internal business view to a societal perspective will add a large amount of monetary 
values. One of the largest cost at a breakdown, and thereby the potential gain from preventing 
breakdowns will be in the face of cost of delays. 
In 2005 there were performed a study of the Danish value of time (VoT). At that time it were 
calculated that for business travel, the hourly rate VoT where at DKK 338,- and for work or other 
types of travel the rate was at DKK 80,- [Fosgerau et al. 2007]. Additional travel or waiting time in 
form of delays amounted to double these values.  
Beside all the visual (easy accessible) cost, considerations of the cost to the branding of DSB and 
Railnet Denmark could perhaps be considered included. What is the cost of customer satisfaction? 
The cost the public opinion regarding a two-hour breakdown in central Copenhagen during rush 
hour compared against having to rebuild the brand with (new) commercials. DSB has previously 
used a lot of money on TV airtime on branding. 
The idea of the branding loss can be perceived very meta level. It can however also be viewed as a 
potential transition away from public transport onto other modes of transportation, due to the 
inconsistencies of the timetable irregular delays are causing. This transition would result in fewer 
passengers and a decrease of passenger revenue. 
Moving people away from rail would properly also mean at least some of them taking personal 
transportation in the like of own cars instead. This would lead to an increase of noise and air 
pollution / carbon dioxide emissions, which, on societal level, is considered an additional cost.  
 
==PAGE:111==
99 
 
Looking at things in this societal perspective, the result of causing a half an hour delay during rush 
hour can now quickly amount to several tens of million Danish kroner and the potential savings of 
preventing a breakdown are of course equal in size.  
 
Summation 
It would be relative simple to just multiply the amount of equipment with the estimated cost per 
equipment to get a slum cost, and then use this to decide which equipment to purchase. 
In order to get a proper evaluation, some sort of common evaluation would be required.  
The purchase cost has to be evaluated against the gains it can produce. This does highlight the first 
set of problem. As the errors happens at random location and time, it is very difficult to assess the 
potential gains. The same type of error can at one time happen in the inner part of the city, during 
or just prior to rush hour, thereby causing a massive delay, while the next one happens close to the 
end of a line during a weekend, causing close to no disturbances at all. 
There can be performed a statistical analysis and attempt to estimate the risk a failures at the critical 
location and time slots but with the few available data, is it even possible to create a model, which 
can deliver a probable and feasible result?  
Attempts can be made to draw on data from either the Danish long distance line, or cities in other 
countries with similar setup. This does however pose the threat of contaminating the data as there 
are bound to be differences between the setups; being either difference in the maintenance of wires 
and/or rolling stock, plain different rolling stock and running speed and so on. All factors which 
could impose outside influences and require contingency measures, all adding up to extending the 
statistical uncertainties. 
 
Performing a CBA based on only internal gain and cost within Railnet Denmark will quickly lead 
to the result of not making any changes. The incentive is just not present at that level, as the potential 
==PAGE:112==
100 
 
savings, even if possible to avoid all future breakdowns will not come anywhere near to match the 
cost of purchasing, operating and maintaining additional equipment. 
If an argument for purchasing and installing new equipment were to be made on basis of a CBA, 
this would most likely need to include the societal impacts and effects in order to ever hoping on 
producing a positive result from the analysis.  
Softer arguments regarding the intent to improve the regularity and the level of service can be used. 
This however should also show up with similar effect in a CBA, at least one performed on societal 
level, as this would translate into fewer delays and cancellations and thereby show a positive effect 
through the diminished cost of wasted time for the passengers. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:113==
101 
 
6. 
Summary and perspectives 
This summary will deliver the main and extended overview regarding supervision systems within 
this thesis. 
It will more or less summarise on all the previously presented information, as well as presenting a 
few new points, perspectives and things to consider. 
6.1. 
Error prevention 
Among some of the considerations within the section is the requirements of needed supervision. 
There are at present 576 wires on the Copenhagen urban lines, and approximately 250 pantographs 
on the combined fleet of S-trains. Line side supervision thereby requires 2,5 times more equipment 
than supervising through pantograph for the supervision to have a complete coverage of the urban 
lines.  
 
PantoInspect 
The PantoInspect equipment’s primary use is measurement of wear and documentation of errors on 
the passing pantograph. Through highlighting of these issues, it can be used to catch damages. 
As the used is primarily for documentation of pantograph errors and wear, there seems to be no real 
need for adding additional equipment on the Copenhagen urban lines. Measurement of wear and 
tear are more than sufficiently performed with the current setup. 
Indications are that the original scanners at Boulevard tunnellen are getting old, or at least not 
producing scans and images at the same level as the newer ones installed later on, why an argument 
to replace or upgrade those two original scanners to new standard would seems relevant.  
On long distance lines, it would make sense to make instalment in close proximity to the borders, 
to be able to better document the maintenance level of arriving foreign equipment. A couple of 
==PAGE:114==
102 
 
installations mid country to further document the development as well as catching some of the 
internal Danish traffic on branch lines or shorter trips could be considered as well. 
It would likely still not detect many breakdowns, but at least be able to forward some of the main 
as well as residual cost of the breakdown to the operators afterwards. Perhaps through awareness of 
the monitoring equipment and the apparent risk of additional cost, maybe even through sharing the 
wear information like on the urban lines, it could help the operators to raise their level of 
maintenance, hence reducing damages and breakdowns that way around. 
 
Pantograph force monitoring 
A pantograph force movement detection system combined with a live video feed, which will help 
detect the main part of the errors when the pantograph hits something in operations and risk being 
damaged. It can be considered to include the option of arch detection, to highlight troublesome areas 
prone for electrical arching and thereby excessive wear of the contact wire.  
As there already are established a live video feed with 8 surveillance cameras producing and 
transferring images from within the carriages of the S-train [Jacobsen 2015], the ability to make 
large data transfer must be considered available at current date. Either utilising this current setup or 
installing a similar parallel one seems like a fairly easy and straightforward task if a supervision 
system containing video feed were installed. 
As errors seems to happen at random, and it is also random which train and pantograph that gets 
effected, an installation on the complete fleet of S-trains, with approximately 250 pantographs, 
should be considered, in order for the prevention to take on its full effect. A less comprehensive 
instalment can of course be considered, but at the risk of missing the vital error in the end causing 
the large damage and the breakdown. 
Some of the reason behind this apparent randomness of the errors can be the rolling stock cars with 
different adjustment of the suspension, drivers with a different pattern of acceleration or some 
running a tad higher speed than others. 
==PAGE:115==
103 
 
These factors can all be an influence of why not all pantographs are being damaged by small errors 
or deviations of the equipment in the OCS. 
None of these causes has been investigated within this thesis, and is just mentioned to cover some 
of the random factors. The question also remains, that even if it was investigated and differences 
discovered within some of the above, would it be possible to remove cancel out those causes, 
thereby eliminating the risk of randomness, or would it only help bring awareness to the random 
factor, without being able to make an impact. 
 
Arch detection 
There are issues with electrical arching on the urban lines, so some sort of arch detection system 
might be considered. As arching mainly produces excessive wear, which only causes errors to 
develop over time, the detection system should only be considered as part of one of the other 
systems.  
The development of the wear does happens over a longer period of time and the amount of actual 
errors on basis of arching are small, so there are no indication warranting a measurement or 
detection system on its own. 
 
Line side movement monitoring 
Line side supervision equipment measuring rapid / large wire movement, would detect sudden 
movements of the wires. This include both wires dropping to the ground, but also wires being 
suddenly hit with an extensive force, either from a tree falling into it, or collisions with a pantograph 
or similar. 
Again, these are damages at randomised locations, so if the intent is to catch all potential errors, it 
will be required to cover the whole network of 576 separate wires. 
An error at the central part of Copenhagen, between Skelbæk and Svanemøllen will shut down the 
entire train operation, as more or less all lines go through these tracks, where the tracks a bit farther 
out are only used by one or two of the routes. It could be a reasonable argument to have a full 
==PAGE:116==
104 
 
supervision in the inner part of the city, whereas the focus on the tracks outside these areas, or 
outside Valby station could be argued disregarded, as an error in these parts of the network would 
at least only affect the operation of a single line. From the old documents accessed, the inner retains 
and sets a requirements supervision of roughly 80 wires, with an additional 20 wires attached in the 
fixed mount inside the tunnel. 
On a side note talking to Siemens regarding their Sicat CMS system, they would not recommend, 
going out and retrofitting the current equipment with a supervision system. In their opinion, it will 
be too expensive to perform such a task on its own. Instead, they would recommend planning and 
installing supervision whenever the wires are due for a replacement, or at a remodelling project like 
the one performed at Køge Bugt branch line. 
 
Static measurements 
Automated static measurement equipment to use after projects might be considered. Among the 
arguments are the ability to ensure proper data of the location of the wires after a remodelling project 
has been undertaken. If monitor devices are purchased and installed, it can be inserted into normal 
operation as well, providing interval based data. Depending on amount of data included in the setup 
it might prove possible to replace the measurement trains required within BN1-82, otherwise the 
data would at least work as a supplement to this. 
If wire thickness were included in such a setup, it could reduce or perhaps even remove the potential 
necessity of an arch detection system, as wire thickness would then be assumed performed on a 
regular, at least weekly, basis. 
 
As this type of equipment only requires running on an interval basis as well as during or after 
completion of remodelling projects, the requirement for equipment purchase will be relative small 
in numbering. In theory, a single device would suffice, but this would present the risk of being left 
==PAGE:117==
105 
 
at the workshop for a large refurbishment of the rolling stock at a critical time. Purchasing and 
equipping two different trainsets should reduce the risk of in-availability to a bare minimum. 
 
Short circuit, specific locations 
6.1.6.1. Surge protectors 
If a power surge exceed the threshold limit and the surge protector is blown, it is currently required 
to go out into the track to locate and replace the component prior to being able to resume the train 
operations. If desired it should be possible to install some sort of monitor equipment. Installing 
supervision equipment will however still not prevent the errors, only offer the possibility of a fixed 
location, and perhaps provide a bit faster timeframe for the repair. 
Consideration should instead be made towards, purchase if available otherwise, look into 
developing some surge protectors with regenerative abilities (like VLD cabinets).  
If installing a surge protector with regenerative abilities, this component will still be able to 
disconnect the power when the limit is exceeded, thereby protecting the OCS. Due to its 
regenerative ability it would be able to reconnect the power supply as soon as the exceeded voltage 
has passed, thus enabling a much faster resumed operation. 
With such equipment installed, the previous mentioned example in 2014 during morning rush hours 
at Nordhavn station would perhaps have been resolved in half an hour, and allowed for normal train 
operation to be resumed prior to also causing delays and cancellations during the evening rush hours 
as well. 
Even though no current D-rap displaying issues with surge protector in 2015, talking to people 
within TDK reveals they still seems to be blowing as well as causing issues from time to time. 
==PAGE:118==
106 
 
6.1.6.2. Supervision at bridges 
Even though not part of the actual breakdowns, the people within TDK have told stories, that 
pigeons sitting on the catenary coming in and out of bridges can actually cause both short circuits 
but also in the end cause burning through the wires and thereby a breakdown of the catenary. 
It could therefore be worth considering having some spot wise supervision at the bridges. This could 
be simply inserting cameras pointing at the proper location, so the operators in OCK-OC has the 
ability to quickly review the bridges if the system continues to report short circuit at line sections 
where bridges are located.  
6.2. 
Data process 
Left standing are the need for a proper data analysis, which still requires development.  
There are literature displaying some ideas, but currently it does not seem to be a finished product, 
ready to apply. Least of all to apply to a large continuous lump of data, which a continuous 
supervision system would deliver. 
The remaining question is, when a proper data setup will be ready, and is it ever going to be possible 
to eliminate the requirement for human interaction, thereby automating the entire process? 
Only time will tell concerning this… 
6.3. 
Other considerations 
 
Errors declination 
The position of GFS within Railnet Denmark was initiated back in 2005 to put a more systematic 
focus on the maintenance as well as remove the inspection of the maintenance from the maintenance 
crew themselves. The BN1-82 were initiated in 2013, where also PantoInspect were entered into 
service.  
Both the initiatives of GFS and BN1-82 has helped systemise the supervision and maintenance 
setup. PantoInspect has these later years simultaneously helped place focus on the wear of the 
==PAGE:119==
107 
 
pantograph, and helped decrease issues caused by pantograph wear. The result is an apparent 
decrease in the amount of errors and especially these last year has presumably produced some big 
decreases. 
The amount of delayed train arrivals, visualised in Figure 30 seems to be dropping as well. 
 
This does leave the question of whether the problem is cancelling itself out. 
Has there previously been a backlog of the maintenance level, which is now being caught up, and 
thereby decreasing the amount of errors? In addition, if this is the case, is there a need for more or 
better supervision? 
The other perspective is, that some procedures has been changed, removing some of the recordings.  
Third option is that PantoInspect has made an impact and is helping by highlighting the apparent 
issues with damaged pantographs. This were similar to the good old days, but unlike then the 
damaged pantographs are now being removed from service prior to causing too much damage. 
Although labour intensive it is possible to manually track down and rectify the errors within the 
OCS prior to it causing more damages and ending in an actual break down with delayed trains. 
The truth can be any of the above options. Best guess is that real life is a combination with all of 
the options included. 
 
Cost factors 
Besides the problems with establishing proper estimates for gains for the CBA, that section also 
highlighted another important issue to consider.  
Returning to the introduction of this thesis, it was mentioned that there seem to be a political 
awareness and at least some focus on the prevention of delays. 
Looking back at the CBA section, and especially Table 8 - Railnet Denmark, bonus and penalties 
2015, missing December, all amounts in DDK, there seems to be some discrepancies.   
==PAGE:120==
108 
 
How does a claim to focus on delay prevention match up against the current setup regarding 
regularity towards which Railnet Denmark are currently being measured. As this setup seems very 
seldom to produce an actual cost, the question is whether the setup are, or should be, considered 
sufficient. Either the answer is that current regularity is acceptable, why no additional measures or 
attempt to hinder errors need to be pursued. The other option is that regularity has not been 
acceptable, which imply the setup of the measurements at some level are flawed, since it is not 
inflicting any penalties nor giving any incentives to reduce the current amount of errors. 
Another thing to consider is the actual size of the amounts. Does getting a penalty of DKK 62.500,- 
for causing roughly 24.500 delayed train arrivals in September 2015 amount to anything, in the 
grander picture. A cynic would properly fire a couple of people employed within the division 
responsible for generating these cost reports and then claimed to have produced a profit. 
 
Another, although known, issue is with the possibility of cancelling and rescheduling of the trains 
when larger breakdowns occur. Even though within the scope of the traffic agreements, this solution 
does pose the possibility to induce delays and large nuisance for the passengers, without these 
further delays being translated into incentives for Railnet Denmark.  
 
Placement of equipment 
The actual placement of the equipment does warrant some considerations and thoughts as well. 
Especially if a decision regarding purchase of rolling stock based equipment are made.  
Even though there has been and still seems to be a close cooperation between Railnet Denmark and 
DSB, this equipment is still required to be on top of the trains who in reality belong to another 
company. This will naturally raise some issues and the division between train operator and 
infrastructure owner/manager put the issue of interface in focus. This interface can quickly cause 
legal issues or debacle regarding the responsibility for the interruption and who is to blame.  
==PAGE:121==
109 
 
Who is responsible for the equipment if it ends up causing damages, or even worse injuries? Who 
is to insure it and who is to perform the maintenance, and when should maintenance be performed?  
Further, the infrastructure manager would like a continuous supervision of their system, but this 
requires the rolling stock with mounted measurement equipment to be running the line at decent 
intervals.  
All these questions and many more, does need answering and will require a lot of coordination in 
the process forward. 
Is it even plausible to attempt to enter into such a setup? 
 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
110 
 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
111 
 
7. 
Conclusion and future work 
7.1. 
Progression of thesis 
The path of this thesis and in the end the discoveries and findings has strayed quite substantially 
from the original idea and the path set out in the beginning when the learning objectives were 
formulated. 
Even though not due to wear breakdowns does still occur. So having reached this initial conclusion 
regarding the wear, the focus of the thesis shifted towards investigating the reason behind the 
failures in an attempt to find ways to reduce these. 
Following the path of the information available but also chasing the interesting aspects only border 
lining the setup of the original idea, has led to some very interesting discoveries regarding the 
regularity setup. Discoveries properly left untouched if the straight and narrow path set out in the 
beginning had been followed. 
 
In the introduction part to this thesis, in the section “Initial meeting and information from Railnet 
Denmark”, were presented two assertions regarding no wire wear and damages happening in 
conjunction with projects. 
 
The assertion from Railnet Denmark regarding no substantial wear of the wires, or at least none that 
warrant a more continuous supervision than what is already in place has largely been found to be 
correctly. Beside excessive spot wise wear due to electrical arching, there is no prove of wear, which 
would require a more extensive monitoring. For the normal wear of the contact wire, and even more 
so the other parts, the current setup with interval based supervision is sufficient. 
 
==PAGE:124==
112 
 
The assertion that damages or breakdowns mainly happens during or just after projects cannot be 
found proven. From the data available, the past roughly ten years of historic errors does seems to 
paint a picture showing errors happening both at random, but also some errors happening due to 
fatigue, corrosion or other long term wear related issues.  
 
Data quality and further analysis 
A re-occurring theme throughout the work of the thesis have been with the quality and validity of 
the data. 
Is illustrated with Figure 5 regarding IRISsys, the location can change with up to 25 m. between the 
individual measurements. Rumours and old thesis work within the field tells it has been much 
worse, but still the fact remain; it can prove very difficult have to do a spot wise comparison of 
excessive wear, especially if performed through an automated process, if the location can shift 25 
m from one measurement to the next. 
Referring to the amount of damages, procedures seems to have changed at least a couple of times 
over the period of the last decade containing data. There can be many reasons for doing so, but 
especially with such a small sample size, it makes it next to impossible to make any sort of valuable 
statistical predictions regarding tendencies or trends. 
7.2. 
Recommendation for Railnet Denmark: 
Even though the current setup with interval-based supervision seems sufficient, the use of the 
available data can be vastly improved.  
A couple of potential detection system types has been identified for the use to reduce these sudden 
damages.  
==PAGE:125==
113 
 
 
Current interval based setup 
7.2.1.1. IRISsys 
At most, areas there are sufficient data within IRISsys. For most, at least initial, uses for planning 
of maintenance, the sought after functions are also available on the deep structure, back end of the 
system, for instance with the “Raster Data” setup. 
There does seem to be intent and willingness to help from the IRISsys super users, but the track 
division does has its focus towards track maintenance. To be able to utilise the data for the OCS it 
therefore requires someone within the section of TDK to proper define the requirements for the 
output of the data. When these definitions are in place, moving forward and getting the actual report 
generation coded into the software does appear as a simple task.  
7.2.1.2. Surge protector 
Replace current on-time only surge protectors with a similar regenerative version. It is currently 
unknown, whether the suggested regenerative component currently exist on the market. It is a fairly 
regular component, used on other railways as well and the technology of regenerative fuses are not 
new discoveries either, so either they are already available somewhere, or there must be an assumed 
demand for it, why it would make sense for a company to initiate the development. 
 
Future continuous supervision 
This thesis has not been able to provide all the answers, but hopefully it has disclosed at least some 
of the market and given some ideas of what to look for. 
Also, good or bad, has been disclosed some of the things required to consider when/if building a 
business model for new equipment. 
Recommendation would be to closely monitor the development of equipment on the market, and 
keep an eye on especially Japan. 
 
==PAGE:126==
114 
 
 JR East Pantograph monitoring equipment, which include live video and arch detection, 
more or less fits the bill for needed setup in Denmark, at least on the Copenhagen urban 
lines.  
 Consider some line side monitoring equipment, like Siemens CMS or similar, at least for 
the inner part of the city. 
 Other than perhaps refurbishing or replacing the original scanners, there seems no need for 
additional PantoInspect scanners. At least not on the Copenhagen urban lines.  
On the long distance lines, it seems reasonable installing a scanner at each border crossing. 
It could be considered upgrading, so scanning both inbound and outbound traffic. Perhaps 
considerations to supplement with a few in-land scanners, mid Funen and in Jutland, to also 
inspect regional traffic. 
 
Finishing remarks 
Setting aside [Kiessling et al. 2009], Contact lines for electric railways, as well as a few references 
to different suppliers. A lot of the research and knowledge within this thesis are based on scientific 
articles and research papers, both as direct references visible in the reference list but some also as 
background knowledge not quoted within this thesis. 
Much of this information are only located and available through different scientific databases, and 
has only been available to the author of this thesis through the connection at DTU. 
If further and deeper research into the field is considered, it would be highly recommendable to 
obtain access to those types of databases 
7.3. 
Future research work will consist off … 
 
Data process / image analysis 
A look into improving the data process or analysis of data stream. 
==PAGE:127==
115 
 
PantoInspect are some of the way; their system can recognise errors on its own. There still seems 
to be missing a link making it able to scan through all the errors and joining the ones with similar 
damages. At current, alarms also has to be manually assessed.  
Is it possible to develop a setup to remove the requirement for human interaction completely, 
making it a fully automated process, from damage is detected to informing the locomotive driver to 
lower the pantograph and seek out maintenance? 
 
Analysis of rolling stock movement 
The current damages seems to be happening at random. An issue mentioned in the thesis are 
regarding different patterns of acceleration, but also the randomness of adjustment of the rolling 
stock. This randomness factor currently sets a requirement to monitor the entire fleet, alternatively 
risk missing the important incident in the end generating the damage and causing delays. 
Is it possible to not only identify these factors, but also develop a setup for maintenance and/or 
driving to eliminate or at least reduce these randomness factors? Thus, also reducing the demand 
for supervision? 
 
Statistical prediction of error placement and time 
In section 5.4.3, summation of cost estimates, are set up a claim and highlighted an interesting 
conundrum.  
There are simply too few recorded incidents on the Copenhagen urban lines to attempt any proper 
statistical prediction of time and / or placement of errors. 
Is it possible to include information from other sources, both other line segments both within 
Denmark but perhaps also outside Danish borders, and based on a larger sample size make any 
predictions. Alternatively, will the differences of the influencing factors, as claimed, be so large 
that it will only lead to data contamination and extent the statistical uncertainties in such a degree 
that nothing can be inferred from the result? 
==PAGE:128==
116 
 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
117 
 
8. 
References 
Amari, S., Waki, H. & Ideno, I., 2012. Development of an Overhead Contact Line Equipment 
Monitoring System. JR East Technical Review, (22). Available at: 
http://trid.trb.org/view/2012/C/1343643 [Accessed November 3, 2015]. 
Atkins Danmark, 2001. Kørestrømsanlæg Vejledning for dynamisk af- prøvning af 
køreledningsanlæg på Fjernbanen Bilag til AAB-montage. 
Australian Rail Technology, Pantograph Collision Detection System. Available at: http://ar-
tech.com.au/pantograph-collision-detection-system/ [Accessed November 5, 2015]. 
Bach, D., 2015. Interview. 
Banedanmark, 2011. BN1-82. Available at: 
http://www.bane.dk/visSideforloebBeholder.asp?artikelID=15153 [Accessed September 14, 
2015]. 
Banedanmark, 2008. Tekniske normer og regler. Available at: 
http://www.bane.dk/visBanenormer.asp?artikelID=6639 [Accessed November 12, 2015]. 
Bechmann, J., 2008. Überwachungseinrichtung für Oberleitungskettenwerke. Eb - Elektrische 
Bahnen, 106(8-9), pp.400 – 407. Available at: http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/254198213 
[Accessed November 3, 2015]. 
Bogø, R., 2013. Måling af køreledningsanlæg, 
Borromeo, S. & Aparicio, J.L., 2002. Automatic systems for wear measurement of contact wire in 
railways. In IEEE 2002 28th Annual Conference of the Industrial Electronics Society. 
IECON 02. IEEE, pp. 2700–2705. Available at: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=1182821 [Accessed 
November 9, 2015]. 
Borromeo, S., Aparicio, J.L. & M, M.P., 2003. MEDES: contact wire wear measuring system 
used by the Spanish National Railway (RENFE). Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part F (Journal of Rail and Rapid Transit), 217(F3), pp.167 – 175. 
Chugui, Y. V. et al., 2008. Laser Remote Inspection of Live Contact Wire for Railways. Key 
Engineering Materials, 381-382(381-382), pp.211–214. Available at: 
http://www.scientific.net/KEM.381-382.211 [Accessed November 9, 2015]. 
Clausen, C.S., 2015. Talk. 
Collina, A. et al., 2007. Impact of overhead line irregularity on current collection and diagnostics 
based on the measurement of pantograph dynamics. Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part F: Journal of Rail and Rapid Transit, 221(4), pp.547–559. 
Available at: http://pif.sagepub.com/content/221/4/547.refs [Accessed October 1, 2015]. 
Daadbin, A. & Rosinski, J., 2010. Development, Testing and Implementation of the Pantograph 
Damage Assessment System (PANDAS). In 12th International Conference on Computer 
System Design and Operation in Railways and Other Transit Systems. Available at: 
http://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=967999 [Accessed November 9, 2015]. 
Daadbin, A., Rosinski, J. & Smurthwaite, D., 2012. Online monitoring of essential components 
helps urban transport management and increases the safety of rail transport. In Wit 
==PAGE:130==
118 
 
Transactions on the Built Environment. pp. 541–552. Available at: 
http://library.witpress.com/viewpaper.asp?pcode=UT12-046-1 [Accessed November 9, 
2015]. 
Erdmann, ERDMANN Software | IRISSYS. Available at: 
http://www.erdmannsoftware.com/index.php?article_id=19&clang=1 [Accessed December 
23, 2015]. 
Erdmann, 2014. IRISSYS - A System Solution to Optimize The Maintenance Process © 2014. 
Available at: 
http://www.erdmannsoftware.com/files/irissys_brochure_general_2014_eng.pdf [Accessed 
November 16, 2015]. 
Eurailtest, Rail system interface. Available at: 
http://www.eurailtest.com/export/sites/default/data/en_data/media/downloads/qualification_d
u_captage_GB.pdf [Accessed November 4, 2015]. 
EUROPAC, 2007. Overhead line measuring system. Available at: 
http://www.uic.org/europac/IMG/pdf/EUROPAC-UIC-D08-dissemination_D42.pdf 
[Accessed September 21, 2015]. 
Fosgerau, M., Hjorth, K. & Lyk-Jensen, S.V., 2007. The Danish Value of Time Study, 
IHS, 2015. IHS Standards Store | Engineering & Technical Information. Available at: 
https://global.ihs.com/ [Accessed September 28, 2015]. 
Izydorczyk, C., Luxton, M. & Mcconnell, M., 2014. VALUES @ METRO SPECIAL EDITION 
SUPER SCREEN. , (June), pp.1–13. Available at: 
http://www.jrdltd.co.uk/Datasheets/Pandas-Metro.pdf. 
Jacobsen, B. & Fischer-Nielsen, N., 2011a. Banenorm BN1-38-4. , pp.1–51. 
Jacobsen, B. & Fischer-Nielsen, N., 2011b. Banenorm BN2-93-1. , pp.1–30. 
Jacobsen, K.B., 2015. Interview. 
Jensen, P.J., 2015. Talk. 
Jernbaneverket, Teknisk regelverk - mainpage. Available at: https://trv.jbv.no/wiki/Forside 
[Accessed September 28, 2015]. 
Judek, S. & Jarzebowicz, L., 2014. Algorithm for automatic wear estimation of railway contact 
strips based on 3D scanning results. In 2014 International Conference and Exposition on 
Electrical and Power Engineering (EPE). IEEE, pp. 724–729. Available at: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=6970004 [Accessed 
November 9, 2015]. 
Kiessling, F. et al., 2009. Contact Lines for Electrical Railways 2nd editio., Publicis Publishing. 
Landi, A., Menconi, L. & Sani, L., 2006. Hough transform and thermo-vision for monitoring 
pantograph-catenary system. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part F: 
Journal of Rail and Rapid Transit, 220(4), pp.435–447. Available at: 
http://pif.sagepub.com/lookup/doi/10.1243/0954409JRRT41 [Accessed September 24, 
2015]. 
Loiborg, C., 2012. Sensorer skal sikre færre nedrevne køreledninger | Ingeniøren. Ingeniøren. 
Available at: http://ing.dk/artikel/sensorer-skal-sikre-faerre-nedrevne-koreledninger-126550 
[Accessed January 22, 2016]. 
==PAGE:131==
119 
 
Luna Vazquez, C.A., Mazo Quintas, M. & Marron Romera, M., 2010. Non-contact sensor for 
monitoring catenary-pantograph interaction. In 2010 IEEE International Symposium on 
Industrial Electronics. IEEE, pp. 482–487. Available at: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=5637852 [Accessed 
November 4, 2015]. 
Mermec, MERMEC GROUP. Available at: http://www.mermecgroup.com/ [Accessed September 
17, 2015]. 
Middle East Association, 2014. Alstom launches trains, railway management tools. Available at: 
http://the-mea.co.uk/news/alstom-launches-trains-railway-management-tools [Accessed 
November 9, 2015]. 
Möller, H., Maly, H. & Sarnes, B., Stationary uplift measurement as a diagnostic tool for 
pantograph monitoring, Available at: http://www.railway-research.org/IMG/pdf/038.pdf. 
Network Rail, 2011. NR/L1/ELP/27000 ISSUE 1. Available at: 
http://specs4.ihserc.com/Document/Document/ViewDoc?docid=XFRQTEAAAAAAAAAA 
[Accessed September 28, 2015]. 
Network Rail, 2015a. NR/L2/ELP/21087 ISSUE 6. Available at: 
http://specs4.ihserc.com/Document/Document/ViewDoc?docid=JHFQJFAAAAAAAAAA 
[Accessed September 28, 2015]. 
Network Rail, 2015b. NR/L3/ELP/27237 ISSUE 10. , p.643. Available at: 
http://specs4.ihserc.com/Document/Document/ViewDoc?docid=ABSBLFAAAAAAAAAA 
[Accessed September 24, 2015]. 
Ning, B., Brebbia, C.A. & Tomii, N., 2010. Computers in Railways 12, WIT Press. Available at: 
https://books.google.com/books?id=43YgMiUx7ooC&pgis=1 [Accessed November 9, 
2015]. 
PantoInspect, 2012. Example Error-report. , p.3. Available at: 
http://www.pantoinspect.dk/upl/website/technique/CriticalalarmreportMissingcarbon.pdf 
[Accessed January 23, 2016]. 
PantoInspect, PantoInspect. Available at: http://www.pantoinspect.dk/ [Accessed November 3, 
2015]. 
Reenberg, P. & Rasmussen, T., 2007. Banenorm , BN2-1-1. 
SBB, Wayside train monitoring systems. Available at: 
http://www.sbb.ch/content/dam/sbb/en/pdf/en_mobile/Safety.pdf [Accessed November 4, 
2015]. 
SelectraVision, SelectraVision -Cat-VW. Available at: 
http://www.selectravision.com/download/cat-v_vw_depliant_a4_lr.pdf [Accessed September 
17, 2015]. 
Sensys, Sensys Gatso Group - Start. Available at: http://www.sensys.se/ [Accessed November 3, 
2015]. 
Serco, Unattended Pantograph Monitoring Systems. Available at: 
https://www.serco.com/markets/transport/rail/railtechnicalservices/unattendedpms [Accessed 
November 9, 2015]. 
Shing, A.W.C. & Pascoschi, G., 2006. Contact Wire Wear Measurement and Data Management. , 
pp.182 – 187. 
==PAGE:132==
120 
 
Siemens AG, 2008. Sicat CMS - catenary monitoring system. Available at: 
http://www.siemens.com/press/en/pressrelease/?press=/en/pressrelease/2008/mobility/imo20
0809050.htm&content[]=IM&content[]=TS&content[]=ICMOL&content[]=MO [Accessed 
November 3, 2015]. 
Siemens AG, 2012. Sicat PMS - Pantograph Monitoring System. Available at: 
http://www.mobility.siemens.com/mobility/global/en/rail-solutions/rail-
electrification/contact-lines/monitoring-systems/pages/pantograph-monitoring-system.aspx 
[Accessed November 4, 2015]. 
Simonsen, T.R., 2012a. Fejl på S-togs-nettet blev hurtigt fundet af dansk fotosystem - se hvordan | 
Ingeniøren. Ingeniøren. Available at: http://ing.dk/artikel/fejl-pa-s-togs-nettet-blev-hurtigt-
fundet-af-dansk-fotosystem-se-hvordan-128678 [Accessed January 22, 2016]. 
Simonsen, T.R., 2012b. Istapper narrede Banedanmark før S-togs-sammenbrud | Ingeniøren. 
Ingeniøren. Available at: http://ing.dk/artikel/istapper-narrede-banedanmark-s-togs-
sammenbrud-134860 [Accessed January 22, 2016]. 
Tanarro, F. & Fuerte, V., 2011. OHMS - Real-time analysis of the pantograph catenary interaction 
to reduce maintenance costs. In 5th IET Conference on Railway Condition Monitoring and 
Non-Destructive Testing (RCM 2011). IET, pp. 5A2–5A2. Available at: http://digital-
library.theiet.org/content/conferences/10.1049/cp.2011.0600 [Accessed September 18, 
2015]. 
Trafikverket, Styrande och stödjande dokument. Available at: http://trvdokument.trafikverket.se/ 
[Accessed November 12, 2015]. 
Trafikverket & Haglund, C., 2010. BVS 1807.33 - Underhåll, Förebyggande underhåll av 
högspänningsledningar. , p.68. 
Transmission Dynamics, Pantograph Damage Assessment System. Available at: 
http://www.jrdltd.co.uk/pantograph.html [Accessed November 5, 2015]. 
Usuda, T., 2008. The Pantograph Contact Force Measurement Method in Overhead Catenary 
System. 8th World Congress on Railway Research, p.8. Available at: http://www.railway-
research.org/IMG/pdf/s.1.4.3.4.pdf. 
Waki, H., 2010. Monitoring of Contact Line Equipment by Trains in Operation. JR East 
Technical Review, 17. Available at: http://trid.trb.org/view/2010/C/1100440 [Accessed 
November 3, 2015]. 
Yamamoto, H., 2013. Use of Monitoring Technologies for Inspection of Overhead Catenary 
System. Available at: c:\Users\oles2506\Dropbox\Kandidatspeciale\Research\Articles\very 
late\ [Accessed February 6, 2016]. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:133==
121 
 
9. 
List of tables 
Table 1 - Data collection model ...................................................................................................... 70 
Table 2 - Data collection model, pantograph causing damages ...................................................... 72 
Table 3 - Data collection model, failures due to arching or wire thickness .................................... 74 
Table 4 - All errors, primary and secondary detections .................................................................. 77 
Table 5 - All errors, primary detections only .................................................................................. 77 
Table 6 – Error type, pace of development ..................................................................................... 79 
Table 7 – Regularity data for DSB S-train, 2015, including Railnet Denmark responsibility ........ 94 
Table 8 - Railnet Denmark, bonus and penalties 2015, missing December, all amounts in DDK . 97 
Table 9 - Data collection model, wire failures .............................................................................. 145 
Table 10 - Data collection model, pantograph causing damages .................................................. 146 
Table 11 - Data collection model, line side failures ...................................................................... 147 
Table 12 - Data collection model, trees / branches blown into wires ........................................... 148 
Table 13 - Data collection model, wire blowout ........................................................................... 149 
Table 14 - Data collection model, power failures due to blown surge protector .......................... 150 
Table 15 - Data collection model, failures after project / contractor / maintenance ..................... 151 
Table 16 - Data collection model, errors after projects ................................................................. 152 
Table 17 - Data collection model, failures due to arching or wire thickness ................................ 153 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
122 
 
10. List of figures 
Figure 1  - danish railway norm system; [Reenberg & Rasmussen 2007, fig.11–2–1] .................... 5 
Figure 2 – PantoInspect, example of NIR and laser scan  ............................................................... 13 
Figure 3 – Multiple train sets with similar damage ......................................................................... 16 
Figure 4 - 2 km illustrative section from IRISsys ........................................................................... 19 
Figure 5 - Stagger development, GPS placement off ...................................................................... 21 
Figure 6 - Danish long distance track, stagger to large ................................................................... 22 
Figure 7 - Wire thickness development ........................................................................................... 23 
Figure 8 – IRISsys, report from measurement run; showing amount assigned and accepted 
kilometre .......................................................................................................................................... 27 
Figure 9 - Example of 3D track & OCS model ............................................................................... 31 
Figure 10 - Sudden wire height change ........................................................................................... 32 
Figure 11 – IRISsys, suggested calculation and report process for wire grading ........................... 33 
Figure 12 - TDK recorded incidents 2006 - 2015 ........................................................................... 36 
Figure 13 - TDK recorded incidents 2006 - 2015; D-rap only ........................................................ 37 
Figure 14 - Overview of errors ........................................................................................................ 39 
Figure 15 – Pantograph damage, assumed 3 days development ..................................................... 41 
Figure 16 - Damage pantograph carbon strip .................................................................................. 42 
Figure 17 - Cross droppers, potential pantograph damages ............................................................ 43 
Figure 18 – SelectraVision Cat-VW ............................................................................................... 53 
Figure 19 - JR East, vehicle mounted measurement system ........................................................... 55 
Figure 20 – PANDAS, mounted on train ........................................................................................ 56 
Figure 21 - SBB, pantograph uplift device ..................................................................................... 59 
Figure 22 - PantoInspect, at Boulevard tunnellen ........................................................................... 61 
==PAGE:135==
123 
 
Figure 23  - Overview, key for errors causes and detection possibilities ........................................ 76 
Figure 24 - All error and primary detections, percentage overview ............................................... 78 
Figure 25 - blown surge protector ................................................................................................... 81 
Figure 26 - Prevention methods vs. Wire, pantograph, lineside failures & arching ....................... 82 
Figure 27 - Error prevention possibilities, actual amount of errors ................................................ 84 
Figure 28 – Amount of errors, technical operation 2015, subdivided between week and divisions
 ......................................................................................................................................................... 92 
Figure 29 - Train regularity, CPH urban lines 2013-2015, whole Railnet Denmark ...................... 95 
Figure 30 – affected trains at station arrival, only error codes S75x, electrical power ................... 96 
Figure 31 - IRISsys, DK_Hastighed ............................................................................................. 135 
Figure 32 - IRISsys, DK_Temperatur-omgivelser ........................................................................ 135 
Figure 33 - IRISsys, DK_Køretrådsbilleder .................................................................................. 136 
Figure 34 - IRISsys, DK_Køretrådshøjde ..................................................................................... 136 
Figure 35 – IRISsys, DK_Køretrådstykkelse (min 1-4) ................................................................ 137 
Figure 36 - IRISsys, DK_Køretrådstykkelse (gns 1-4) ................................................................. 137 
Figure 37 - IRISSsys, zigzag ......................................................................................................... 138 
Figure 38 - IRISsys, DK_Overhøjde ............................................................................................. 138 
Figure 39 - IRISsys, DK_Kurver (pilhøjde).................................................................................. 139 
Figure 40 – Pantograph damage, Day -1, no visible damages ...................................................... 141 
Figure 41 - Pantograph damage, Day 0, first damage discovered, no error report ....................... 141 
Figure 42 - Pantograph damage, Day +1, damage development, no error report ......................... 142 
Figure 43 - Pantograph damage, Day +3, First alarm, abnormal wear on one strip ..................... 142 
Figure 44 - Pantograph damage, Day +6, alarm both strips .......................................................... 143 
Figure 45 - Pantograph damage, Day +21, Different train, similar damage ................................. 143 
 
==PAGE:136==
124 
 
11. Appendixes 
11.1. 
Learning objectives 
Study number 
S125204 
Name 
Brian Vig Olesen 
Title 
Continuous supervision of overhead catenary system. 
 
Learning Objectives (Generel): 
An MSc from DTU:  
 
can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between 
the various components that make up an issue  
 
can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at 
international level to develop ideas and solve problems  
 
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to take 
a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic and societal 
perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions  
 
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving 
technological problems  
 
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing  
 
is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area.  
 
can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and 
specialisation  
 
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity 
to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, 
design, solution and documentation  
Learning Objectives (Project Specific): 
The Candidate conducting this thesis is able to:  
 
Describe Danish technical norms (banenormer) and TSIs which are relevant for supervision 
and maintenance of overhead catenary systems, as well as compare with requirements for 
supervision and maintenance of overhead catenary systems in comparable countries like 
Sweden, Norway and England. 
 
Present knowledge of and are able to describe rolling stock based as well as fixed/line side 
based systems that can be used for continuous supervision of the overhead catenary system. 
 
Perform a cause analysis of catenary failures. 
 
Analyse the current available data for catenary failures. 
 
Create a model for data collection to be used to ensure sufficient amount of data to be able 
to perform a continuous supervision. 
 
On a case study of Copenhagen suburban rail system (Københavns S-bane), give an estimate 
of the required equipment. 
 
Compare cost and perform an estimate of cost reduction/ increase of implementing a 
continuous supervision system on the Copenhagen Suburban rail system. 
 
Write a technical report in an understandable, well structured and well documented form as 
well as an oral presentation 
 
 
Blooms Taxonomy ”Action Verbs”: 
==PAGE:137==
125 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:138==
126 
 
 
 
==PAGE:139==
127 
 
11.2. 
Abbreviations 
BDK 
 
Bane Danmark (Railnet Denmark, infrastructure manager/owner in 
Denmark) 
CBA 
 
Cost benefit analysis 
D-rap 
 
Driftlederrapport; report from operation management. Used to 
describe incidents/breakdowns in more details. 
GFS 
 
Geografisk Fagspecialist – specific job description within Railnet 
Denmark. 
Irissys 
 
The International Railway Inspection and Services System 
OCK-OC 
 
Overvågning center kørestrøm - omformer centralen; supervision 
center for high voltage 
OCS 
 
Overhead Catenary System 
OLE 
 
Overhead line equipment, same as OCS 
PVA 
 
Påvirkede ankomster; Affected arrivals, train arrivals being 3 or more 
minutes delayed at the target stations compared to timetable.  
On S-banen all station are target or measurable stations. 
PVT 
 
Påvirkede tog; Affected trains. Numbers of affected trains. One PVT 
can cover several PVAs, as it can have delays from start to finish or 
route. 
TDK 
 
Teknisk Drift Kørestrøm (Technical operation, Traction power; a 
department within Railnet Denmark) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:140==
128 
 
 
 
==PAGE:141==
129 
 
11.3. 
BN1-82; inspection types 
Type 1 Visual inspection of all the electrical components performed by person(s) walking through 
the lines on foot, noting if they spot problems or issues with the system. 
Type 2 Inspection of the overhead catenary systems general condition with regard to electrical 
safety, efficiency and regularity. This work is required to be done from machinery, typically a 
yellow work machine (trolley). 
Type 3 Inspections, which are defined within BN1-82, are an inspection train running on the track. 
This is further divided into a static as well as a dynamic measurement of the overhead catenary 
lines. Besides setting the target for intervals, BN1-82 does not set specific requirements for the 
inspection train. The current requirements dictates a static measurement at least once a year and a 
dynamic measurement at least once every other year [Banedanmark 2011, p.41; Atkins Danmark 
2001]. 
In Denmark the work with these inspections are placed at an external contractor, typically through 
a tendering process every few years.   
Type 4 Preventive inspection and scheduled maintenance. It can contain correction of errors 
identified during type 1 through 3 inspections. 
Type 5 only addresses inspections and maintenance set by the different suppliers to maintain 
warranties on their components and products, and the intervals are thereby more or less governed 
from the suppliers’ requirements. 
Type 6 deals with a stricter or increased supervision and is only initiated on case-to-case basis. 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
130 
 
 
 
==PAGE:143==
131 
 
11.4. 
Grouping of errors 
Wire failures 
This grouping covers all failures to the wires as well as the immediate fastening of the wires. This 
includes but is not limited to droppers, clamps, fastening at the steady arm etc.  
Included in this group are also a number of wire splitters and in span insulators6 that caused the 
failures, but had traces of older unknown damages. 
 
Pantograph causing damages 
This section primarily include damaged pantographs that inflict damages onto the system. Damages 
and errors to the pantograph are normally either nicks or missing parts or carbon strip, or other 
missing parts or the pantograph construction for instance its horn. 
 
The reason behind these damages can be multiple, and many can be co-related to or even caused by 
damages within the OCS, linking the initial cause back to the wires. 
Some of the known outside causes that has happened are for instance a moving train hitting a bird 
in flight, or a driver moving the train to far on a siding or stabling track hitting an insulator at the 
fastening of the contact wire.  
Depending on specific impact point these will likely cause some damage to the pantograph. If not 
discovered early enough this damage can then end up tearing down the OCS.  
 
 
 
                                                 
6 Stræknings siolatorer 
 
==PAGE:144==
132 
 
Line side failures 
A large amount of the failures in this group is to anchor insulators somewhere in the cantilever 
fastening to the mast or the cantilever falling of the mast.  
Bridge mount adjustments, either causing the mount itself or the wires to drop out and being hit by 
the pantograph of passing trains also accounts for a large portion. 
 
Wind + things entangled in the wires 
This grouping contains mainly trees, tree branches falling, or being blown into the wires.  
These are either causing immediate failures or delays, or resulting in errors when a train passes the 
area and the pantograph hits the object. 
 
Wire blowout 
Some of the equipment and facilities for the OCS is getting old. Increased line speeds and a 
remodelled track with higher cant on the line of today than when the equipment initially were 
installed and entered into service. Mast distances placed further apart than what is the standard of 
today and perhaps more extreme wind conditions than when originally planned. All these factors 
combined does lead towards an increased change of the wires having a blowout, where the 
combination of a strong wind from a specific direction, combined with a higher speed and cant 
forces the contact wire outside the pantograph gauge. Especially the line towards Køge have at least 
in the last decade or so been affected by this phenomenon. 
Beside Køge Bugt banen, there has been a few other occasions, where the wires have gotten outside 
the pantograph gauge and the pantograph have ended above the contact wire causing a tear down. 
These have been suspected due to blowouts as well, but none proven conclusively.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:145==
133 
 
Power failures / short circuit 
This grouping contains errors where blown surge protectors7 have not worked properly, thereby 
generating delays or more lengthy delays than necessary. The intent of the surge protector is to blow 
up, but also for it in that case to fall apart and have a very visible damage, which have not always 
worked. 
Also included are incidents where there has been a power loss for unknown reasons, and short 
circuit or fires in the wires or cable ditches alongside the track are causing delays. 
 
Project / contractor /maintenance responsibility 
Grouping are errors mainly caused by maintenance crew working on or around the actual area of 
the catenary, or during remodelling projects of the OCS. 
This includes masts being hit by machinery during removal of vegetation; trains entering areas that 
are or has recently been closed, hitting the earthing equipment in the wires or components not 
mounted correctly. 
 
Errors in this group can more or less be writing of as human errors of different kind of nature. 
 
Arching / wire thickness 
This small grouping contains errors where there either on very specific locations has been 
continuous arching between the contact wire and the passing pantographs or errors where the wires 
has proven very thin, way pass the normal thickness or wear and wire has dropped due to burning 
through the contact wire.  
 
                                                 
7 Overspændingsafleder; katode sikring 
==PAGE:146==
134 
 
Others 
Contains the remainder of the errors.  
Included are natural forces like storms causing damages and shutting down the entire network or 
lightning strikes causing damages. 
Contractors working outside the area dropping things into the vicinity of the OCS or (model)planes 
being caught in the wires are also some of the causes included within this group. 
 
 
==PAGE:147==
135 
 
11.5. 
IRISsys Legend 
Below is the overview of the different graphs displayed from IRISsys. These should be sorted in 
same/similar order as the graphical lines within IRISsys.  
 
 
Figure 31 - IRISsys, DK_Hastighed 
Running speed of the measurement train, divided and colour coded within different speed intervals. 
 
 
Figure 32 - IRISsys, DK_Temperatur-omgivelser 
Temperature. Only divided whether measurement are considered valid (blue) or invalid (grey). 
 
==PAGE:148==
136 
 
 
Figure 33 - IRISsys, DK_Køretrådsbilleder 
Pictures of contact wire and/or catenary. Only divided whether measurement are considered valid 
(blue) or invalid (grey). 
 
 
Figure 34 - IRISsys, DK_Køretrådshøjde 
Contact wire height. 
==PAGE:149==
137 
 
 
Figure 35 – IRISsys, DK_Køretrådstykkelse (min 1-4) 
 
Wire thickness: Green > 10.2 mm, Blue: 9.2-10.1 mm (Class III), Red < 9.1 mm (Class IV) 
 
 
Figure 36 - IRISsys, DK_Køretrådstykkelse (gns 1-4) 
 
Wire thickness: Green > 10.2 mm, Blue: 9.2-10.1 mm (Class III), Red < 9.1 mm (Class IV) 
 
==PAGE:150==
138 
 
 
Figure 37 - IRISSsys, zigzag 
 
Wire Stagger (all are +/-): Green < 300 mm, Yellow 300-400 mm, Red > 400 mm; (Copenhagen 
Urban Rail allows stagger to +/- 350mm) 
 
 
Figure 38 - IRISsys, DK_Overhøjde 
 
 
==PAGE:151==
139 
 
 
Figure 39 - IRISsys, DK_Kurver (pilhøjde) 
 
 
==PAGE:152==
140 
 
 
 
==PAGE:153==
141 
 
11.6. 
Pantograph errors 
Developments. 
 
Figure 40 – Pantograph damage, Day -1, no visible damages 
 
Figure 41 - Pantograph damage, Day 0, first damage discovered, no error report 
==PAGE:154==
142 
 
 
Figure 42 - Pantograph damage, Day +1, damage development, no error report 
 
Figure 43 - Pantograph damage, Day +3, First alarm, abnormal wear on one strip 
 
==PAGE:155==
143 
 
 
Figure 44 - Pantograph damage, Day +6, alarm both strips 
 
 
Figure 45 - Pantograph damage, Day +21, Different train, similar damage 
 
 
==PAGE:156==
144 
 
 
 
==PAGE:157==
145 
 
11.7. 
Data collection model 
 
Table 9 - Data collection model, wire failures 
 
The wire failure group contains components vital to either keeping the wires in the air or at least to 
keep them at the correct location. Failures will prevent maintaining a proper train operation.  
Based on the last ten years historic, failures seems to be happening at instant as well as at random 
locations.  
A supervision system will have to match this, having a continuous coverage of the whole network, 
and be able to generate and transmit alarms at an instant pace. 
Among the main detection options are line side supervision and a pantograph force movement 
monitoring as well as a live video feed to display and quickly assess the possible issues.  
A supervision system monitoring wire failures will properly not be able to prevent many failures, 
but the instant alarms should help prevent an escalation by stopping (other) trains from entering the 
area, as well as provide a quick location of the error, thus reducing the total downtime and 
improving the operability. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:158==
146 
 
Table 10 - Data collection model, pantograph causing damages 
 
This group contains failures produced by often erroneous or damaged pantographs. Pantographs 
causing 
a 
tear 
down 
within 
the 
system. 
Based on the last ten years historic, the failures themselves seems to be happening at instant as well 
as at random locations.  The actual location of the damage of the pantograph as well as the time it 
have been in operation prior to generating an actual failure are somewhat more elusive.  
A supervision system will be required a continuous coverage of the whole network, and be able to 
generate and transmit alarms at an instant pace on order to match the pattern of the actual damages 
to 
the 
wires. 
Damages to the pantograph can be detected over a period prior to actual teardowns, but the period 
is both unknown, as well as can be argued to cover either a lengthy period or a just a few seconds, 
requiring (close to) instant detection. 
Among the main detection options are the pantograph force movement monitoring as well as a live 
video feed to display and quickly assess the possible issues to cover the actual damages. A 
pantograph wear monitoring can help detect the issues prior to them actually evolving into an 
incident with traffic disturbance.  
A pantograph seldom falls apart on its own. It will often either hit something or be hit by something, 
causing 
the 
initial 
damage, 
which 
can 
then 
evolve.  
This can be anything from smaller or larger object within the OCS to hitting a bird in flight. A force 
detection system will be able to catch most of these issues. The wear measurement can help monitor 
and alarm when the damage reach a critical extent. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:159==
147 
 
Table 11 - Data collection model, line side failures 
 
The line side failures consist in large part of failures at anchor insulators within the cantilevers or 
failures to bridge mounts getting loose themselves, being knocked loose or losing the grip of the 
wire, in the end causing things to be inside the pantograph gauge and hit by the passing trains. 
A few incidents with longer time wear, but mainly incidents reported as instant failures. Locations 
at random. 
For the few failures happening over time, an interval-based measurement could be sufficient, but as 
by far the largest group has errors happening more or less instantaneously, this should set the 
standard for the group, and thereby require continuous supervision and instant alarms. 
Among the main detectors will be a pantograph force detection to locate the areas where things are 
being run into and video to confirm the issues, as well as line side supervision to monitor sudden 
failures 
at 
anchor 
insulators.  
As the line side detection systems will be monitoring a fixed location or wire segment, their built-
in location would be at least sufficient to generate an approximate location. 
Where the line side supervision properly only will be able to prevent an escalation of the issues, the 
pantograph monitoring and video system hopefully should be able to prevent issues to evolve into 
failures in the first place.  
 
==PAGE:160==
148 
 
Table 12 - Data collection model, trees / branches blown into wires 
 
This group consist of only four incidents over the last decade. All incidents involves either trees or 
tree branches hitting or being entangled in the wires. Some caused an immediate damage to the 
system; others posed as a risk or did evolve to being hit by a passing train, thereby generating 
consequential damages within the system.  
This type of event will properly happen either during or in the aftermath of a storm. Similar it could 
be argued that 
the main risk is 
at 
locations 
with 
trees or large vegetation.  
However, it is seldom possible to predict the event and especially the outcome of a storm, and 
thereby difficult to schedule maintenance or measurement in the closing of the storm. 
Likewise, cutting trees to far away from the rail area, you would create an open field, which would 
allow the wind to carry debris over larger distances. A narrow corridor would in the other hand both 
dampen the wind turbulence and easier catch the debris, preventing the items being carried over 
long distance. 
A line side supervision could perhaps catch the items being entangled. However as this would 
happen during a storm it would require the system to be able to separate normal wind pressure and 
smaller 
debris 
from 
the 
larger 
one 
being 
caught 
in 
the 
wires.  
A pantograph force movement and live video feed would catch issues where the pantograph hits the 
actual tree or tree branch within the wire, thus generating an alarm.   
Whether even an instant alarm and live video feed would be sufficient to prevent the case to evolve 
to an actual incident with wire damages is a bit harder to predict.  
 
==PAGE:161==
149 
 
Table 13 - Data collection model, wire blowout 
 
The wire blowouts consist of errors where the wind condition, mast distances and running speed 
combined exceeded the design limits, causing the wires to get outside the pantograph gauge thereby 
allowing the pantograph to get on top of the wire.  
It can be argued that the incidents only happen at specific events with certain wind conditions. The 
actual event does however happens at an instant, and question is whether it is desirable to run with 
a lower speed, causing delays due to longer running time, if measurements could prove it 
unnecessary? 
Location has been put at the whole network; the vast majority of the incidents does belongs on Køge 
Bugt banen, which is about to undergo remodelling, hopefully solving the issues all together. 
Possible supervision systems could be continuous stagger measurement, perhaps combined with 
live video feed, and line side wind deflection measurements at key risk locations. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:162==
150 
 
Table 14 - Data collection model, power failures due to blown surge protector 
 
This group contain different types of power failures and short circuit within the system. Among 
those are a group of surge protectors that disconnect, as they should at too large a current, but do 
not blow properly, making them difficult to spot and exchange afterwards.  
The power system is currently already supervised, but it is only able to locate malfunctions within 
each transformer station or coupler, some covering 5 – 10 km of tracks. The surge protectors are 
placed in the mast at intervals of 700 – 800 m.  
It is impossible to predict when the fuse will blow. The locations are on the other hand, at least to 
some extent, known. Spot wise supervision should be enough to locate errors, but it still require a 
system either able to report the errors more or less instant or display a clear visual locator as aid at 
the location. 
As the system of blowing the protector is working correctly, a supervision system would only 
benefit to ease the location of the blown surge protector, thereby be able to more quickly reconnect 
the system and resume operation. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:163==
151 
 
Table 15 - Data collection model, failures after project / contractor / maintenance 
 
This grouping are errors mainly caused by maintenance crew working on or around the actual area 
of the catenary or during remodeling projects of the OCS. 
This includes masts being hit by machinery during removal of vegetation; trains entering areas that 
are or has recently been closed, hitting the earthing equipment in the wires or components not 
mounted correctly. 
Even though they location wise are spaced out random, they will happen during or due to a specific 
event, set place at a specific location.  
Errors in this group can more or less be writing of as human errors of different kind of nature, and 
are as such difficult to plan any measures against. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:164==
152 
 
Table 16 - Data collection model, errors after projects 
 
The above collection model look at the potential errors after a project. Being either a track update, 
a track tampering or a project containing actual changes to the OCS. 
The main focus in this instance will be to ensure that the location of the track and OCS still match 
after the project is finished, as well as ensure it also still fulfils the requirements of the type 
certificate with regards to stagger, wire heights, change in wire heights etc. The required equipment 
will therefore be need the ability to do either manual or automated static measurements of the 
contact wire. 
Although the fulfilment does not by itself promise no future incidents, it does at least provide some 
insurance to whether it is feasible operating at the planned speed.  
As the idea is to document and verify the new location, there should not be any rush as such to 
transmit the data or generate alarms. Of course, if errors does appear, it would be nice to know prior 
to getting an actual event on the track, but it must be assumed that the contractor has done the job 
properly in the first place. 
As displayed in the collection model, the line section of the project is known. It is however still 
required to do the measurement and relate them to the actual track location, so GPS coordinates 
and/or track locations would still be required. 
As all data can, at least at some point, prove to be useful, there seems to be no justification why 
these types of measurement are not converted and saved alongside the remaining measurement data 
within IRISsys. It would be the argument of this thesis to convert and include these types of 
measurement as well.  
 
==PAGE:165==
153 
 
Table 17 - Data collection model, failures due to arching or wire thickness 
 
Arching and wire thickness contains a small handful of errors caused by more or less localised 
excessive wear of the contact wire. 
A few areas are known to be prone for arching but otherwise the locations seems to either happen 
random, or have a specific underlying cause. 
Some of the known locations are areas on Køge Bugt Banen as well as at acceleration through the 
central part of Copenhagen, where the contact wire is fixated in an overhead rail, and thereby 
missing its dynamic flexibility. 
Through a specific breakdown a few years ago, it can be estimated that the normal, relative new 
contact wire can withstand roughly 5.000 -10.000 localised electrical arching prior to being worn 
to 
collapse. 
The actual case had approximately 250 train passages a day, with an average of three pantograph 
per train, and estimated 1-2 weeks prior to falling. 
Depending on location, arching therefore could sufficiently be monitored on an interval basis, but 
it should still be at least daily, especially at location with intense traffic.  
Detection equipment would be required either to be able to detect the arching, alternatively should 
be able to measure the wire thickness. 
The system should be required to generate reports displaying the progressing wire wear at the 
specific locations.  
 
