==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Development of a game for hand- and
eye coordination in children rehabilitation.
Analysis, implementation and testing.
Anna Maria Walach (s121540)
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In the era of personal computers, game consoles, Internet and incoming virtual reality
headsets, many children with motor impairments are still forced to travel to thera-
pists and specialists few times a week to attend rehabilitation meetings. The lack
of motivation to continue extensive rehabilitation causes significant drop-out among
8-10 yo children with cerebral palsy, who do not come back to the therapy, until after
few years [33].
Many new commercial motion-tracking devices, that could be used for creating
rehabilitation game, have been recently introduced to the market. Providing children
with home-based solution, using equipment that can be used by all members of the
family could probably increase motivation to train every day.
The main goal of this project is to perform an analysis and feasibility study on
building a prototype of hand-eye coordination game for children with cerebral palsy,
controlled by motion-tracking device.
It can be achieved by first performing a detailed CP study, with focus on which age
group and CP severity level can be the best recipient of the application. Then, using
factors and parameters obtained from this part, the analysis of available motion-
tracking controllers will be performed to find the optimal solution. Later, one or
more prototypes will be prepared, controlled by previously picked device and tested
on children. The results will be evaluated to check if the analysis assumptions were
correct or not.
This approach allows to discover if latest inexpensive mainstream and indie1 de-
vices could be used successfully in CP rehabilitations projects.
1Also: independent; not belonging to major or more commercial company[24]
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements
for acquiring a Master degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, February 8, 2016
Anna Maria Walach (s121540)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I am very grateful to all my friends for constant mental support not only during
this project, but also throughout the whole studies. I am especially thankful to my
partner and my family for constant inspiration and motivation.
I would like to say thank you to my supervisor Rasmus Paulsen, who strongly
motivated me to pursue my ideas and helped in keeping this thesis going in a right
direction. Huge thanks also goes to my advisers Mikkel Damgaard Olsen and Gud-
mundur Einarsson for a lot of meaningful feedback and help.
I also want to express my appreciation to Amalie Mørch and other therapists from
Helene Elsass Center, who helped me to better understand the needs of children with
CP and were willing to listen to and evaluate my ideas.
A great ’thank you’ also goes to all of my test subjects, who were so willing to
play the game and provide with feedback.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Project outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Requirements analysis
7
2.1
Cerebral Palsy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Similar projects and accessible games guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Prioritization of the features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Analysis of the hardware
17
3.1
Devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Design and implementation
25
4.1
Initial design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Development process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Iterative testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Implementation details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Results
39
5.1
Test protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Therapist feedback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusions
49
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A
New devices
53
A.1 Intel RealSense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.2 VR controllers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.3 Microsoft HoloLens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B
Code
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Problem statement
There are children suffering from different types of physical impairments, which signif-
icantly lowers their quality of life. Cerebral palsy (CP) is the most common children
movement disorder, affecting on average 1.5 to 4 per 1000 infants [11].
Cerebral palsy (CP) is a term used to describe a group of neurological disorders
that affects children and has negative impact on muscular coordination and body
movement [6]. It may cause symptoms like ataxia 1, limb weakness, difficulties swal-
lowing, speaking or making precise movements. Those symptoms may vary in type
and severity among individuals, depending on which parts of the brain have been
affected by the disease.
CP is not curable, but rehabilitation, medication and surgeries can greatly improve
both the quality of life and motor skills of the affected children. It is important to
start the treatment as early as possible, so the children can enjoy near-normal life as
adults.
The treatment, depending on symptoms and severity of the CP may consist of
classic physical therapy, occupational therapy, recreational therapy, that improves
both physical and cognitive skills, speech and language therapy and many different,
depending on the child’s needs. It may be combined with oral medication, used to
relax stiff, contracted, or overactive muscles. Surgeries may be performed in order
to help with orthopedic problems or to cut nerves to reduce chronic pain and severe
spasticity[6, 7].
1.2
Motivation
Different types of physical therapy are important part of supportive treatments. For
some time already the modern healthcare started including serious games[61]. Serious
game is a term for a broad genre of video games that are designed for purpose other
than pure entertainment, e.g.
learning, rehabilitation, information spreading.
In
medicine they are used as a part of educational process [17], mental therapies [1, 78],
or rehabilitation [48, 79].
1ataxia - the loss of full control of bodily movements.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Shalev Malki - disabled patient in Israel, using a virtual reality system
to control a video game, that forces him to use atrophied muscles. From
Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, 2006.
Results of such experiments are promising - subjects are more willing to participate
in exercises when enjoying the game[80]. Enjoyment is an important factor in children
rehabilitation, who often lack motivation or perseverance to perform exercise every
day.
This seems to lead to the conclusion, that serious game can be a great solution
for children with cerebral palsy, who often require repeated physical rehabilitation.
Creating appropriate software is a complicated problem, but greater challenge is find-
ing the appropriate control mechanism. Unfortunately, casual computer controllers
- mouse, keyboard, pad - are only useful when the game focus on training cognitive
skills, not physical. The controller used in physical rehabilitation should encourage
and allow movements similar to natural and do not require pushing any buttons. Ex-
pensive dedicated devices could be used (e.g. Geomagic Touch[15] - 1000$), but for
a lot of parents that is a great expense, while such device cannot be utilized in any
other way than rehabilitation. What is important, a lot of commercial, affordable
motion trackers for games and everyday computer use has been introduced in last
years. Although they usually show smaller precision than dedicated devices, their
availability, price and possibility of using for many different applications draws a
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Related work
3
strong attention to such solution.
Motion tracking is a hot topic in modern gaming. The fascination started with
Wii Remote [44] in 2006, which allows detection of arm movements with a wand-like
controller. The industry presented more and more products with similar functional-
ities. It was followed by similar in construction PlayStation Move[65] and Microsoft
Kinect [38], camera-based solution detecting movement of the whole body.
Growing crowdfunding popularity allowed smaller developers to take part in the
technology race - that’s how Sixense TrueMotion (now Razer Hydra)[64] was funded.
Other companies choose a startup path by getting a funding from investors, resulting
in Thalmic Labs’ Myo armband [69] or Leap Motion[31] from the company of the
same name.
Using motion-tracking device could help in designing serious games for the reha-
bilitation, reducing the need for supervision from the therapists and also increasing
the naturalness of the movements performed.
1.3
Related work
A number of similar studies has been already performed, testing the possibility to
enrich children therapy with games using different type of motion controllers:
Li et al. [33] describe in details a process and results of designing a tabletop game
for physical rehabilitation of children with CP. The important part of their study
is that they focused on working closely with both children and therapists. Firstly,
together with the therapists they identified all movements used in the rehabilitation
(e.g. wrist extension, finger abduction). Then an analogue prototype was built and
presented to children. Based on received feedback, the final version was implemented
and tested, yielding promising results, both in opinions of therapist and children.
During the design phase, an important problem was mentioned - compensation
movements performed by child to avoid doing the desired (by therapist) ones. It is
Figure 1.2: Geomagic Touch - haptic device for dedicated use with modelling and
medical software.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
important to constrain, in hardware and software, the possibility of such ’cheating’.
Peper et al. [50] presented an article about design and testing of a games for
bimanual training, using new feedback method. All games were using a dedicated
controller and visual (Lissajous) feedback. Three different tests were performed four
times during training period, but no significant results on a group level were found.
Bryanton et al. [5] implemented and tested a VR game for ankle rehabilitation
(for children with CP). The aim of this study was to check if it is possible to create a
game that allows children to both train at home and strongly encourage them to do
so. Only one training session took place, where both conventional and VR exercises
were performed. Feedback was gathered from children, therapists and parents, who
were observing the game.
It was observed that children were much more excited
and motivated to perform game-based exercise than normal one and seemed to be
motivated to do this at home as well. Also, although the number of repetition was
greater in conventional exercises, range of the movement and a time of hold in maximal
position was significantly larger in VR exercise, which is a encouraging result.
Luna-Olivia et al. [35] performed the study, where they tested influence of virtual
reality games controlled by low cost console on children with CP. They used already
existing games to test the theory of positive impact of playing virtual reality games on
children psychomotor status. The results showed statistically significant improvement
after training period, that remain even after stopping this additional exercise.
Based on mentioned articles, it is possible to assume that using video games
in rehabilitation will become more and more popular with development of the new
consoles and controllers. It has been already shown that children with disorders like
CP have very specific needs and the game should be created in cooperation with both
children and therapists to achieve the desired goal.
A lot of sources are focusing on either designing the perfect game or building the
appropriate controller device, while not many of them focus on comparison of existing
devices. As mentioned earlier, the market is full of interesting motion trackers, that
could be used in rehabilitation and it is important to not only focus on pure software
development, but also perform an analysis of available devices.
1.4
Project outline
As mentioned, recently a lot of new motion-tracking devices entered the market. Some
of them may be actually more successful and cheaper solutions for creating coordina-
tion games than current, popular devices (e.g. Microsoft Kinect or Wii Remote [35,
61, 59]. It would be very desirable, if the game and device can also be used for casual
physical rehabilitation.
The main goal of this project is to perform an analysis and feasibility study on
building a prototype of hand-eye coordination game for children with cerebral palsy,
controlled by motion-tracking device.
In this thesis, it will be achieved by first performing a detailed CP study, with focus
on which age group and CP severity level can be the best recipient of the application.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Project outline
5
Then, using factors and parameters obtained from this part, the analysis of available
motion-tracking controllers will be performed to find the optimal solution.
Later,
a game prototype based on previously established requirements and design choice
will be created. It will be built using rapid prototyping method through early and
continuous feedback. The results will be evaluated to check if the analysis assumptions
were correct or not.
This approach allows to discover if the latest inexpensive mainstream and indie2
devices could be used successfully in CP rehabilitations projects.
2Also: independent; not belonging to major or more commercial company[24]
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Requirements analysis
This chapter contains identification of expected requirements and constrains for the
game design and controller analysis. They will be identified from following categories:
• cerebral palsy and its rehabilitation process
• related works and general accessible games guidelines
• implementation- and development-related requirements
2.1
Cerebral Palsy (based on [6, 11, 73, 37, 7])
The essential part of analysing the possible solutions is to have a well established
understanding of the cerebral palsy disorder: what the symptoms and different types
are and how to diagnose and treat it. Each section will be summed up with conclusions
about the section’s influence on the game design and controller’s choice.
2.1.1
Diagnosing process
The diagnosis is based on observations of the child development in first years of its
life. Growing infants have a lot of milestones connected to its development in different
spheres: social communication, cognitive, physical. Checking if children meet the
milestones suitable for their age is the most important part of the CP diagnosis and
usually results in detecting the disorder during first 2 years of their life. However, if
the CP is not severe, the symptoms often may not be properly classified until the age
of 4,5, up to even 10, which is also caused by the fact, that CP is not progressive. In
other words it doesn’t get worse with the time.
Once the particular child development has been classified as somehow delayed,
further diagnostic, neuroimaging tools are used, i.e. ultrasounds, computed tomogra-
phy, MRI or EEG. It helps to exclude other disorders, that gives symptoms similar
to CP.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Requirements analysis
Concluded with
Children are usually diagnosed in first years of their lives, so it is possibles to start
the therapy very early. Therefore, diagnostic process has no significant influence on
game requirements or target group.
2.1.2
Different forms and symptoms
The different forms of CP differs in range, type and localisation of child’s movements
disorder:
• spastic - most common type, resulting in stiff muscles and awkward movement.
• dyskinetic - the symptoms of this type are slow and uncontrollable writhing or
jerky movements of the limbs. It may also cause children grimace, drool, have
troubles in straight sitting or walking. It may even damaged physical ability to
hear, speak or control the breathing.
• ataxic - detrimental for balance and depth perception, influencing coordination
and walking skills. Results in difficulties with precise or voluntary movements.
• mixed - when the symptoms of the child comes from a different groups, e.g.
both spastic and ataxic problems.
Depending on how much of the body is affected, the following subcategories can
also be distinguished for plegia (paralysis) and paresis (weakness of the muscles):
• hemi - when half of the body is affected, i.e. whole left side (arm, hand, leg).
• di - when the disorder mostly influence leg muscles.
• quadri - the most severe form, when all four limbs are affected. Usually caused
by widespread brain damage or malformation, typically results also in intellec-
tual disability and seizures.
There are other conditions, that may be associated with CP, including:
• mental impairment - affects 30%-50% of children with CP
• seisures - up to 50% of children with CP
• delayed growth and development - affects children with moderate to severe CP
• spinal deformities
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Cerebral Palsy
9
Concluded with
Although the game is not expected to be intellectually demanding, it should not be
dedicated to children with severe intellectual disability. Also, children with seizures
should not be a part of the target group, as flashing game screens may cause a
seizures attack. Because the game may be controlled with hand and eye movement
tracking devices, some sight conditions like strabismus (crossed-eyes) or severe arm
impairments exclude children, that suffers these symptoms, from the target group.
2.1.3
Treatment
As described earlier in chapter 1, CP is incurable, non progressive disease and all the
treatments are focused on symptoms. The following type of therapies are applied:
• physical therapy - the most important type of therapy, focusing on improving
functional mobility, strengthening the muscles and preventing bent joints.
• occupational therapy - therapy that aims to help the child to live a normal life,
targeting daily activities in home, school, out in public or at work. This therapy
does not only improves physical skills, strength or coordination, but also tries
to help with difficulties in problem solving, decision making and similar.
• recreational therapy - by encouraging participation in recreational activities (e.g.
art or cultural), this kind of therapy helps to expand physical and cognitive skills,
resulting in a raise of the child self-esteem, speech and emotional well-being.
• speech and language therapy - therapy that focuses on improving the mechanical
aspect of speech and the ability to communicate
• therapy using music, play, horses riding - different types of supportive therapy
can be helpful, depending on the child’s predispositions and interests.
Also, alternative medicine slowly becomes a supportive part of the treatment
process with therapies like acupuncture or chiropractic care.
Medicines are occasionally used in order relax tight muscles and reduce muscle
spasms. There may be additional drugs for treatments of seizures, if they appear.
It is important to mention that antispasmodics (muscle relaxants) are not good for
children still developing and may result in child being lethargic, losing concentration
and having problems at school. The general recommendation is to only use them if
the benefits can overcome side effects.
When CP is in a severe form, surgery may be needed to correct various orthopedic
(e.g. scoliosis, tendon disorders) and mobility (significant muscle tightness) problems.
Physical therapy, such as serious games, are used along with the medication in order
to either postpone surgery to older age or even avoid it completely.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Requirements analysis
Concluded with
It is important to include in a serious game not only the elements of physical, but
also recreational therapy. Developing cognitive skills of child with CP is as important
as the physical part of rehabilitation.
2.1.4
Summary
This subsection summarizes the discussion of cerebral palsy influence on the game
design and target group.
Target group:
• severity level - light to mild, so that the person is physically able to control the
device
• disqualifying symptoms - strabismus, mild and severe intellectual disability
• expected age - from 8 to 12 years old, motivated by:
– therapy should be started as early as possible, but also late enough so the
child is properly diagnosed and able to control the game.
– increasing the age range would cause problems with game design, because
game expectations are different for different age groups
– the largest drop-out in the therapy is observed among 8-10 year old children
[33]
Game design:
• game should focus on both psychical and cognitive aspects
• game should be adjusted to age of participants
• game controllers reactivity should be adjusted to the physical and mental abil-
ities of the subjects
2.2
Similar projects and accessible games guidelines
This section is an overview of projects and researches that has been focusing on creat-
ing and/or testing games for children with motor disabilities. This discussion aims to
identify requirements for hardware, clues for game design and overall project guide-
lines, based on other solutions’ experience and general guidelines for the accessible
games development. The analysis will focus on the outcome of the project and the
process of game design. Furthermore, it will also target methodologies and tools used
for everything that plays important role in developing meaningful results from these
studies (i.e. evaluating tools or testing session protocols).
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Similar projects and accessible games guidelines
11
2.2.1
Classification systems
One of the main problem in comparing different rehabilitation solutions is their use
of various clinical scales and scores [4]. In the literature, the following systems are
commonly used:
• GMFCS (Gross Motor Function Classification System) score - very popular
score used to evaluate gross motor skills, like sitting and walking. The system
categorize the skills into 5 different levels. For example, level one is a person
who can run, jamp, walk outside and climb the stairs without any help, but has
decreased balance, speed and coordination. Level 3 usually requires a manual
wheelchair or assistive mobility devices. Level 5 is an impairment in all areas of
motor function and cannot sit, stand or walk independently - even with adaptive
equipment[18].
• GMFM (Gross Motor Function Measure) - similar to GMFCS, but more com-
plex, containing (depending on version) up to 83 individual tasks that have to
be evaluated to get the final score. Also, this system assumes that the result
may change with age and progress of therapy. Such tracking is not possible in
GMFCS (for children with CP), which is much more coarse evaluation.
• MACS score (Manual Ability Classification System) - 5-level score similar to
GMFCS, but dedicated to ability to handle objects. For example, level 4 means
a child can easily handle only a few objects, and always requires help from the
others, e.g. with preparation.
• AMPS (Assessment of Motor and Process Skills) - AMPS is a popular score used
to evaluate the quality of performance of personal or instrumental activities of
daily living [2]. It consists of over 120 tasks, testing motor, process and social
interaction skills[2].
• 10MWT (10 Meter Walk Test) - simple test to assess the walking speed on a
short distance, usually 6, 8, 10 or 12 meters. Used to track the progress of
physical rehabilitation[62].
Concluded with
There is a variety of tests developed for people with cerebral palsy, and most of them
is relevant for this project. The most interesting one is probably MACS, because
of hand-focused nature of this project.
The final choice will probably depend on
therapists decisions, target tests groups and chosen test protocols.
2.2.2
Initial game requirements
Gathering game requirements is an important part of developing the medical game.
Each game needs to have specified aim, i.e. what kind of outcome is expected from
playing it. It should be clearly and unambiguously defined to guide design decisions.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Requirements analysis
In order to gather game requirements, knowledge of the standard therapy method
is a key factor. In [17] and [33] researches spend a lot of time consulting the therapists
to acquire knowledge about which movements should be translated into the game to
optimize the therapeutic effect. Interviews with the physicians and children were also
important to discover and restrict number of compensation movements1 - game should
support controlling with proper movements and also refuse accepting the ’cheating’
moves (e.g. not accepting upper body movement when arm extension is expected).
Concluded with
In order to create a game with optimal therapeutic usage, the following activities
should be performed:
• Consulting physicians about details of the therapy that is about to be imple-
mented in the game
• Observations of therapy examples
• Trials with children
2.2.3
Accessible games guidelines
A number of different organizations have developed different guidelines for accessibil-
ity, focusing on following areas of skill: motor, cognitive, vision, hearing and some-
times speech. Examples can be BBC guidelines [3] or widely used Game Accessibility
Guidelines [14]. They contain many suggestions about controlling schemas, graphic
interface structure and look, which are highly relevant especially for developing games
for children with CP.
Because the topic of serious games in CP rehabilitation has existed in the literature
for more than 10 years now, researches have developed specific guidelines for designing
such games. In Hernandez et al. [21] has gathered guidelines from many different
studies created by experts in game design and accessibility. This was done in order to
create a unified set of suggestions for creating games for people with motor disabilities.
They are as follows:
• avoid fast pace - game shouldn’t be too fast, so that the player has appropriate
time for reaction
• do not require precise timing - also mentioned in [3, 14].
Game should not
require precise movement correlated with timing.
• provide a simple control scheme - also mentioned in [3, 14]. Controls should not
have too many buttons. Ideally control should be possible using a single button
and a movement joystick.
1compensation movement happens when subject achieves the goal without performing the desired
movement(e.g. leaning forward instead of extending the arm to catch the ball).
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Similar projects and accessible games guidelines
13
• do not require multiple simultaneous actions - it should not be required to use
more than one control at a time or over the time
• avoid repeated inputs (button mashing) - Game should not require fast and
consecutive pressing of control. It should also prevent duplicate presses that
may be caused by involuntary muscle spasms
• automate the player’s input - this approach is helpful in reducing the number of
buttons and simplifying the controlling by anticipating player’s reactions, e.g.
by using ”walk” command for ”jump” when it is required.
During their research, the focus was on creating action-based game for children
with CP. Hernandez et al. discovered that although action-based games are in con-
flict with most of the rules described above it is still possible to create a game for
motor impaired children, simply by reformulating the guidelines and following these
recommendations in design:
• simplify level geometry - reduces the need for careful timing
• simplify level flow - makes game more friendly to children with visual-spatial
reasoning problems (around 83% of CP children [30])
• reduce consequences of errors - allows introduction of some precise and rapid
actions while not punishing the player hard for failing them
• limit available actions - reduces the complexity of control inputs and the number
of decisions a player needs to make
• remove the need for precise positioning and timing - reduces the demands on
the player’s manual ability and visual-motor integration
• make the game state stable - gameplay requires less attention and less visual-
spatial reasoning skills
• balance for effort - the game adjusts the rewards for player’s gross motor skills
based on effort and not absolute values
Concluded with
As described, guidelines for creating different types of games for children with motor
impairments is a well-known topic in the literature. The recommendations described
in last section, together with input from the therapist, should be the main base for
game development.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Requirements analysis
2.2.4
Development-related constrains
Although some of the projects uses games developed for healthy children [35], most of
the researches aims to develop their own games. There is a great variety of tools that
can be used for developing and fast prototyping, depending on what platform the
game is developed for. It is possible to implement the games from the scratch, using
graphic libraries like OpenGL or DirectX, but for the purpose of research it’s a much
better idea to use the high-level frameworks, that although may sacrifice performance
and customization, but allow for more rapid prototyping.
This problem is discussed in this chapter, because some game development tools
have explicit support offered by the devices. After choosing the appropriate develop-
ment tool in this section, it may be expected from the device to have explicit support
for it.
Unfortunately, most of the academic literature do not mention what kind of frame-
works they used for developing the games. Those are some of the mentioned tools
used in serious games developed for CP rehabilitation:
• Unity3D [72] - used in [21]. Unity3D is well-known development platform for
creating games in 2D and 3D. It is also recognized for it’s support for serious
game developers [28]. It allows cross-platform development for Macs, PCs, mo-
bile phones and websites. There is a simplified version available for free and
paid professional one. It supports implementation in C# and JavaScript.
• Web-based solutions - some of the projects (e.g. [59]) decide to implement their
games as a web-technologies. This cross-platform solutions highly increase the
access to the application, but also requires some trade-offs, mostly optimization-
wise.
• non-game-related technologies, e.g. d-flow ([50]). Some of the technologies used
in others projects are not part of usual game development pipeline and are
standardized towards use with non-standard controllers.
Another possible solution in game industry is the Unreal Engine 4[75]. It is a suite
of game development tools that also support broad range of platforms. It is available
for free with a 5% license fee on released games. It is written in C++. The problem
with this solution is a high entry level due to high complexity of programming model.
Concluded with
Unity3D seems to be the best solution for fast prototyping, because of low entry
level, high possibility of customization and a huge number of different target devices,
projects and frameworks supporting it.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Summary
15
2.2.5
Devices
The devices used for motion tracking in projects can be divided into three categories:
custom camera-based technologies ([5]), custom motion tracking devices([5, 50, 21])
and commercial motion tracking devices ([20, 59, 35, 43]). It is important to mention,
that ”motion tracking” not only applies to detecting based on the movement seen in
video stream, but also on the input coming from physical machines, like bicycles or
devices that you keep in your hand or on your body while moving.
Concluded with
Custom devices have problems with gaining popularity, because there is no established
manufacture process and each device is more or less hand-made for individual user
requests. Using commercially available devices allows to move the problem of support
to third parties and guarantees easy access to devices in most countries. That is the
reason behind the decision to use a commercial solution, instead of inventing a new
one from scratch.
2.2.6
Testing protocols
Depending on the time availability and aims of the research, some of the projects only
perform one or two test sessions with children, while others have weeks or months long
testing periods, usually starting by measuring child progress during normal therapy,
followed by normal therapy supported with playing game at home and ended with
normal therapy again, to check if in the end of this period the results from playing
the game persist.
Concluded with
Because of the short project duration, the testing will only include one-time sessions.
The game is expected to be enjoyable by a child and considered to be a good reha-
bilitation tool by the therapist, whose opinions can be obtained during single test
sessions.
2.3
Summary
Based on the conclusions above, it is now possible to decide what features are required
from the controllers and what their respective importance level is.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Requirements analysis
2.4
Prioritization of the features
The chosen device is expected to have a defined set of features - but not all of them
have equal priority. The MoSCoW analysis[42] will be used to determine which fea-
tures are most important. It is usually used in deciding on priorities of requirements
with stakeholders, but can be applied to any requirements-related problem. It segre-
gates features in four different groups:
• must have - features, that are critical for success of the project
• should have - features, that are usually as important as critical, but not having
them won’t fail the project
• could have - features, that are desirable and usually can be easily obtained
• would like, but won’t get - features that are least critical and not in any way
decisive
Now it is possible to group the requirements acquired from this chapter as follow-
ing:
• Must have
– detailed gesture recognition supported out-of-the-box
– price not bigger than 300$
– acceptable documentation and any kind of support for Unity
– high comfort of usage in means of wearing/handling and range
– be available for customer use
– excellent precision
• Should have
– excellent documentation
– support for Unity provided by the manufacturer
– worldwide availability
– community significant in size
– acceptable precision
• Could have
– physical feedback
– price lower than 200$
• Won’t have
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis of the
hardware
This chapter contains description and comparison of commercially available motion
controllers. It will start with the detailed specification of each device and finish with
analysis using criteria acquired in sec. 2.4.
3.1
Devices
The devices for evaluation were picked based on their accessibility for testing. Devices
listed below are all available for commercial use and have prices lower than 300$ per
piece. The following devices will be evaluated:
3.1.1
Wii Remote - based on [44, 77, 45]
Figure 3.1: Wii
Remote
by
Nintendo.
Image source [44].
The Wii Remote (Wiimote) device is an
absolute pioneer in the wireless motion
tracking for gaming. It was released in
2006 by Nintendo for their new Wii Con-
sole, but the concept was invented as
early as in 2001 by a company commis-
sioned by Nintendo.
The important part of Wii Remote
set is a Sensor Bar, containing ten in-
frared LEDs, five next to each end, with
the outermost lights pointing a little bit
more to the outside, and the inner ones
- to the inside. The Wiimote acts like a
remote controller, as the motion detec-
tion requires the controller to point at
Sensor Bar. The device contains optical
sensor and by detecting the position of
two sources of light (left and right edge)
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Analysis of the hardware
is able to calculate the distance from SensorBar and its own position. It sends the
data to console via Bluetooth. The device optimal range is up to 5 meters from the
Sensor Bar. It also includes accelerometer, as well as vibration and audio feedback.
The latest versions (Wii Remote Plus, to which Wii Remote can be upgraded) also
contain gyroscope. The controller has eight buttons and a control pad. The design
includes a wrist strap. It secures the device, which prevents it from accidental throw-
ing during quick, energetic movements. Due to wand-like design, the device does not
offer gesture recognition.
The documentation and SDK is available upon registration and acceptance from
the Nintendo, so it was not possible to estimate its quality. There is no official plugin
for Unity from Nintendo and those delivered by community are of poor quality.
The device is available worldwide by both online and retail shops.
3.1.2
PlayStation Move - based on [65, 53]
Figure 3.2: Play Station Move (left) and
Play Station Eye (right) by
Sony
Computer
Entertain-
ment. Image source: [76].
PlayStation Move (with its important
component, PlayStation Eye or PlaySta-
tion Camera) is a product by Sony Com-
puter Entertainment and was designed
for the PlayStation 3 as an answer to
Nintendo Wii Remote in 2009.
Simi-
lar in shape, as can be seen in figure
3.2, PlayStation Move is a wand-like con-
troller communicating through a Blue-
tooth 2.0. The most important part of
its design is the orb on the top of it,
which can glow in different colors. The
color is picked by the software to pro-
vide best distinction from the rest of the
scene. Known size of the orb allows to
precisely evaluate the distance and pro-
vide the position in all three dimensions.
The simple sphere shape-based calcula-
tion allows high precision and accuracy.
PlayStation Move also contains accelerometer, gyroscope and even terrestrial mag-
netic field sensor to correct against drift caused by inertial sensors. Internal temper-
ature sensor was also used in order to correct other sensor readings based on temper-
ature effects. The sensors allows to estimate players position even if the orb is not
visible to camera at the moment. The wand also has 8 buttons. It provides vibration
feedback and visual one - from the orb.
Sony offers acceptable documentation and explicit support for Unity. However,
obviously they do not provide any gesture recognition. Developers have access to
button presses, position data and raw data.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Devices
19
The price is very low and the product is available worldwide to be purchased both
online and in retail stores.
3.1.3
Microsoft Kinect - based on [38, 29, 39]
Figure 3.3: Microsoft Kinect for XBox
One. Image source: [38].
The Microsoft Kinect is a series of
motion tracking products for Microsoft
Xbox consoles. The first Kinect was re-
leased in 2010, and two years later its
second version for Xbox One entered the
market.
The device uses significantly differ-
ent technology than its main competi-
tors - Wii Remote and PlayStation Move.
As shown in the figure 3.3, Kinect does
not have any controllers - it is a cam-
era based solution, in which the motion
tracking is performed by only processing
the image of a moving person, who does not wear any type of calibration devices. The
latest Kinect sensor contains 1080p camera, infrared emitter, infrared depth sensor,
accelerometer and microphone array. These features allow motion recognition in a
0.5 to 4.5 meter range from the Kinect with 4-centimetre cube precision and voice
recognition. The sensor detects movement of the whole body with recognizing up to
20 joints.
Microsoft Kinect has an excellent documentation, explicit support for Unity and
SDKs for C++, C# and Visual Basic .Net. It has an acceptable price and is available
worldwide in both online and retail shops.
Currently, Microsoft Kinect does not provide gesture recognition, but there are
promising official demos showing the software upgrade providing such features. Un-
fortunately, it is not expected to enter the market for the next few years.
3.1.4
Creative Senz3D - based on [8, 9, 63]
Figure 3.4: Creative
Senz3D.
Image
source: [26].
Creative Senz3D is a product released by
Creative Technologies Ltd. in 2013. It is
the predecessor of Intel RealSense cam-
era and is not longer actively supported.
Senz3D contains laser for scene illu-
mination, depth sensor for gesture recog-
nition, HD camera for video capturing
and dual array microphones. It allows
detecting hand and head gestures as well
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Analysis of the hardware
as face recognition and to some extent also voice recognition. The preferred range is
20 to 50 cm.
Because the project is discontinued, it is extremely hard to obtain the SDK via
official ways. It means that there is also no up-to-date documentation. There is no
support for Unity, but the OpenCV library, popular solution for image recognitions,
has a wrapper for it.
The device has an acceptable price and is sold by few online sellers.
3.1.5
Myo - based on [69, 68, 70]
Figure 3.5: Myo armband by Thalmic
Labs. Image source: [69].
Myo is an armband, released by Thalmic
Labs at the beginning of 2015, with
developer access starting in 2014.
It
achieves detailed gesture recognition us-
ing unique technology in this industry,
which is detecting the electrical impulses
sent to the muscles (electromyography -
EMG).
The device contains 8 EMG sensors,
accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetome-
ter and provides feedback with vibration.
It uses Bluetooth 4.0 LE for communica-
tion.
It has excellent documentation and explicit Unity support. It offers raw data from
the sensors and is also able to detect five unique gestures, like fist, waving in and out,
spread fingers or tapping. It has a little higher than average price and is available
worldwide by online order and in some shops in North America.
3.1.6
Leap Motion - based on [31, 74, 32]
Figure 3.6: Leap Motion by Leap Motion
Inc. Image source: [31].
Leap Motion is a camera-based device
dedicated to palm movement tracking.
Although the idea behind the technology
was first developed in 2008, the product
was only released to developers in 2012
and entered the market in 2013. How-
ever, the device did not sell as well as
expected. In 2014 the company released
second version of software for developers
use and started combining its product
with VR, which is the main commercial
usage up to date.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Evaluation
21
The device is a small box, as shown in fig. 3.6. It contains two infrared cameras
and three infrared LEDs. The field of view is a hemisphere, with range up to 1 m.
Leap Motion has an excellent documentation and a significant developer commu-
nity, involved in many projects, including medical field. It has an explicit support
for Unity and SDK supporting most of popular modern languages (JS, C#, C++,
Java, Python, Objective-C). The support for Unity also includes examples of how to
connect it with Oculus Rift. The data sent through SDK is the position of detected
joints, but also detection of simple gestures like tapping, swiping.
The device has a low price and is available worldwide: with shipment from the
producer and in retail and online shops across four continents.
3.1.7
Sphero 2.0 - based on [67, 49]
Figure 3.7: Sphero 2.0 by Sphero. Image
source: [66].
The Sphero is a spherical robot toy,
which prototype was first shown in 2010.
The version 2.0 was released in 2013
by Orbotix (now Sphero).
The device
is a sealed ball, containing gyroscope,
accelerometer, electric motor allowing
speed to up 7.3 km/h, LEDs and and
polycarbonate shell.
Sphero is controlled with a mobile
app through Bluetooth.
The app al-
lows moving the ball around, changing
its color and shaking it. Sphero can be
used as a motion detector using the gy-
roscope and accelerometer.
It can be used with any device that
can connect to it through Bluetooth. It has excellent documentation and support for
Unity, however only for mobiles. It has an average price and is available worldwide
through online shopping. It does not offer gesture recognition.
3.2
Evaluation
The evaluation will have following criteria, grouped from MoSCoW analysis(sec. 2.4):
• Critical requirements:
– precision: high/medium/low
– range: good/poor/not applicable
– gesture recognition: available/not available
• Important requirements:
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Analysis of the hardware
– price: low (<75$), average (75-150$), high (>150$)
– documentation: good, average, poor, available upon registration
– support for Unity: available, have partial, not available
– availability: great (both online and retail shops around the world), good
(worldwide shipment and some retail shops), average (worldwide ship-
ment), poor (shipment to only few countries).
– community: good (>1000 question on Stack Overflow and own Dev Fo-
rum), average (1000-500 questions on Stack Overflow and own Dev Forum),
poor (<500 questions on Stack Overflow and own Dev Forum).
• Useful features:
– feedback: available/not available
The summary of the analysis is described in tables 3.1 and 3.2.
3.2.1
Comments
Although most of the criteria has been explained in previous section, some of the
experimentally evaluated results needs further explanations.
3.2.1.1
Precision
Precision was evaluated by testing all of the devices and observing two factors - delay
and accuracy of movement. Senz3D and Leap Motion received average grade because
of high detection threshold and problems with hand detections. The Sphero device
received the same rating because of low accuracy.
3.2.1.2
Range
The Leap Motion is the only device who received ”poor” range evaluation. While
playing with the device it is easy to remove the hand from the device’s field of view,
instead of reaching for an object. The FOV is small and except for small gestures, no
broader movements can be made.
3.3
Conclusions
The devices PS Move and Myo have similar, very high number of positively evalu-
ated factors. The final choice for the device will be Myo, because built-in gesture
recognition have higher priority than price lower than 200$.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Conclusions
23
Table 3.1: The summary of analysis of the devices, part 1.
Criterion:
Wii Remote
PS Move
Microsoft Kinect
precision
!high
!high
!high
range
!good
!good
!good
gesture recognition
×not available
×not available
×not available
price
!low
!low
♢average
documentation
♢after registration
♢average
!good
support for Unity
×not available
!available
!available
availability
!great
!great
!great
community
♢average
!good
!good
feedback
!vibration & audio
!vibration
×none
Table 3.2: The summary of analysis of the devices, part 2.
Criterion:
Senz3D
Myo
Leap Motion
Sphero 2.0
precision
♢medium
!high
♢medium
♢medium
range
!good
N/A
×poor
!good
gesture recognition
×not available
!available
!available
×not available
price
×high
×high
♢average
♢average
documentation
×poor
!good
!good
!good
support for Unity
×not available
!available
!available
♢have partial
availability
♢average
!good
!great
!good
community
×poor
♢average
♢average
×poor
feedback
×none
!vibration
×none
!vibration & light
==PAGE:34==
24
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Design and
implementation
This chapter will describe the design process, carrying out iterative testing and the
implementation details.
4.1
Initial design
The initial design for the game was an outcome of a few suggestions:
• the armband tracks the movement similar to natural forearm activity and does
not project well to 2D paths,
• it is important to have cognitive elements that can relate to a daily routine, like
color recognition or using familiar objects,
• the game should focus on hand-eye coordination, so as a natural consequence,
the idea of something appearing and the need to catch it/shoot it emerged.
Based on the above guidelines, the concept of The Battle of Rainbow Bridge was
created, shown in figure 4.1. In the game, the player is a wizard, who has got a magical
wand. He needs to protect a city behind him from being reached and attacked by a
number of flying monsters. There are different type of monsters and the player needs
to use different spells to be able to destroy them. In the game, the player gradually
learns new spells, one per each level. Also, at the beginning of the game, there is only
one type of monster and the number of types increase with each level. The movement
of a wand is similar to movement of a forearm with elbow resting on the desk.
4.1.1
Dictionary and mechanics
• Asteroid - see: Monster
• Failures - counter for failed attempts in destroying Monsters, increments when
Monsters disappear without being destroyed. Does not influence the game.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Design and implementation
Figure 4.1: The early concept of a game view. Number one is the wand, number
two - the laser ray, number three - the monsters.
• Gate - an object from which the Monsters are spawn. It has a circular shape
and is rotating counter-clockwise. There are 15 gates in the game, three rows
with five each. Not appearing in the initial version of the game.
• Laser - a long object fired from the Wand using gesture, able to destroy the
Monster if it is of the same colour as it. Laser ray is emitted with following
gestures: wave in (blue), spread fingers (magenta), wave out (green), double
tap (yellow), fist (red), as shown in picture 4.2.
• Level - the game contains 5 levels, each one unlocking new gesture, so in first
level player can only use one of them and on last one - all five. Each level is
started with zero Successes and Failures.
• Monster - a rock-like, rotating object that is created in one of the Gates and will
stay there, slowly growing. It will be destroyed if shot by a player with Laser
or will disappear after fixed amount of time. If former, it counts as Success, if
latter, counts as Failure. In the initial design, monsters were travelling in the
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Development process
27
Figure 4.2: Different gestures recognized by game and their respective laser ray
colors. Starting from left top - wave in, spread fingers, wave out, double
tap and fist. Gestures images from [69], colouring by author.
player’s direction after spawning in random places and disappearing in front of
him, if not destroyed.
• Successes - counter for successfully destroyed Monsters. If reaches appropriate
number, player advances to next Level
• Wand - an object, that can be wave around by the player. When player uses
different gestures, Wand can shoot with different coloured Lasers.
4.2
Development process
The development method is an important factor in software creation. It has to be
adjusted to project requirements, environment, budget, schedule and development
team. It is necessary to be aware of what are the specific project conditions in order
to follow appropriate development process.
In case of this project, the following
opportunities and difficulties are expected:
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Design and implementation
• initial requirements are well-known from the disorder description and related
work
• it may not be possible to test it with children with cerebral palsy
• there is a possibility of consulting the results with therapist
• there is an easy access to healthy children and adults willing to test the game
• the goal of the project is to create a game that is enjoyable and can be used for
a coordination training and as a supportive method in physical therapy
The following preconditions means that it is fairly easy to built a functioning proto-
type, but estimating its playability is hard without observing the players. Using Agile
approach and iterative testing allows to gradually upgrade the game with required
features. Repeated process of analysis, design, implementation and testing may stop
the game from developing too complicated mechanic and unclear rules. Constant
testing even with healthy people, but who are not involved in the topic and have a
fresh approach, provides unique feedback. This way requires the game to be playable
and testable at each step of progress. This development method supports delivering
testable iterations often. Such pipeline also helps to determine what players like and
results in better, more enjoyable product.
Choosing the Agile development method is the reason for fairly simple initial
design that was later developed based on the feedback from tests.
4.3
Iterative testing
In this section the results of the iterative testing process will be described. Each
test contains the description of current state of the game implementation, what was
the testing group, what was the feedback from testing group after playing and what
design decisions were made based on the feedback.
4.3.1
Testing of alpha version
State of the game: The game supports controlling with one Myo device. It allows
to shoot different colours lasers with different gestures. All asteroids are the same
color and they respond to any kind of laser. The background is an image. Basic
UI counts successes and informs about Myo status (synchronized, connected etc.).
Game is buggy, has stack overflow problems and allows accumulating not-destroyed
asteroids in player’s scene view.
Testing group: three male adults, under 30 yo, with the supervision of author
Testing feedback:
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Iterative testing
29
• background and ground should be 3D structures to allow better depth recogni-
tion
• the scene should have better lights
• making the controls more advanced may result in more interesting game
• missiles should be faster
• using two hands for controlling seems to be an interesting idea
Design decisions:
• background should be substituted with a skybox and a terrain with proper
lightening
• the velocity of missiles should be increased
• one hand should be now responsible for gestures and one for steering
Figure 4.3: The alpha version of the game.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Design and implementation
4.3.2
Testing of beta version (children)
State of the game: The game support controlling with two Myo devices - one for
waving the wand and one for casting the spells with gestures. Laser rays have better
contrast. Asteroids have different colors and reacts only to lasers of appropriate color.
The background is now 3D terrain with skybox. The aiming device has been intro-
duced (green sight that gets red if on line with any target). The UI shows available
gestures and their colors. Not destroyed asteroids now explode in front of the player.
Objects like lasers and asteroids have time-based destructors to avoid the stack over-
flow. Levelling up mechanism has been implemented.
Testing group: two girls, 9 years old and one adult, without supervision of au-
thor
Testing feedback:
• aiming mechanism still too hard
• two hands-based control works fine and even allows cooperative play
• there are problem with calibrating the device and detecting the gestures
Design decisions:
• the aiming mechanism should be changed to whack-a-mole - monsters should
appeared at predefines places on the 2D plane and do not move.
4.3.3
Testing of beta version (adults)
State of the game: Same as in version for children.
Testing group: 2 males, under 30 yo, with supervision of author
Testing feedback:
• aiming problem persists
• some gestures are not recognized as easily as the others
• game was easily completed in a few minutes
Design decisions:
• same as in children testing
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Iterative testing
31
Figure 4.4: The beta version of the game - training screen.
Figure 4.5: The beta version of the game - casual screen view on third level.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Design and implementation
4.3.4
Testing of version 1.0
State of the game: The ”gate” concept was invented - now the screen contains 15
gates that are spawning monsters. Monsters are spawned in the center of the gate
and grow in size for specific amount of time and disappear, if not destroyed. Single
monster is never larger in size than a gate. The statistic tool was added, counting
how many and what kind of monsters were killed on each level. At the beginning
of the game, game requires name, age and trial number, which is used for creating
a file with player’s statistics. Number of spawned minions per level and time differ-
ences in spawning had been individualized per level. This version works by default
with 2 Myos. This version also includes sounds and background music. This version
was tested in debug mode, which means that the game was slow and had low FPS rate.
Testing group: 1 boy (9yo), 1 male adult
Testing feedback:
• there is problem with centering the wand
• too many asteroids appear on the screen
• second hand (steering hand) does not require to be synchronized
• asteroids live too short
Design decisions:
• adjust number of asteroids appearing in final levels
4.3.5
Testing of version 1.0.1
State of the game: The number of asteroids for all levels has been adjusted (low-
ered). This version was also tested in debug mode, which means that the game was
slow and had low FPS rate.
Testing group: 4 girls (6,8,10,11 yo), 1 male adult
Testing feedback:
• the armband may require additional support (a band) for better fitting smaller
arms
• asteroids seems to have appropriate or too short, depending on subject, length
of life
• sometimes it is not easy to remember appropriate gesture for appropriate color
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Iterative testing
33
Figure 4.6: Version 1.0. The gates are spawning monsters, that are staying at the
same place and only growing in size for defined amount of time before
disappearing.
• the keyboard-based recentering does not seem to be natural
• some subject has perceived wand movements not to be natural
• the 6 yo was the only one whom hand was too small to detect the gestures
Design decisions:
• put recentering mechanism as a gesture of steering hand
• display small information on asteroid about which gesture to use
4.3.6
Testing of version 1.0.1
State of the game: This version was tested in release mode, which means that the
game was at normal speed and had high FPS rate.
Testing group: 1 male adult
Testing feedback:
• the game is fast and responsive
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Design and implementation
• the armband is not detecting the fist correctly
Design decisions:
• investigate the detection issue
4.4
Implementation details
As mentioned earlier (2.2.4), Unity framework was used to develop the game.
It
allows to create and place most of the game objects using the graphical editor. The
controllers are added as objects’ components and written in C#. The view of the
editor with final version of game can be seen in the figure 4.7.
Following game objects are part of the scene:
• Wand - wand have following children: staff model, box and pointer. Each game
object here, except for the model, has its own controller. Wand controller is
responsible for moving it around by using the spatial data from Myo. Box con-
troller emits the laser ray based on gestured also detected from Myo. Pointer’s
controller is responsible for changing its color when pointer collide with asteroid.
Figure 4.7: The Unity graphical editor, showing game in version 1.0.1.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Implementation details
35
• Gates - this object groups the fifteen gates and their models. Each gate consist
of few sub objects responsible for creating particles effects, displaying texture
or rotating.
• Monsters - object for gathering all the Monsters created during the game. Each
Monster has a controller responsible for appropriate handling the destroying
process and Monster’s rotation.
• Terrain - the 3D structure with mountain landscape, being the background of
the game
• Skybox - 6-parts skybox is picturing a sunset as a part of the background
• SceneGUI - this object displays information about status regarding Myo arm-
bands, e.g. if they are connected or need synchronization.
• Canvas - a main object for storing the rest of UI, like message boxes, gestures
indicates and buttons.
• Lights - there are two sources of light, one directional and one ambient.
• Main Camera - the camera is placed behind the player, guaranteeing full view
of wand and gates.
These objects have controller-like functionalities and are not visible to the player:
• Event System - object created for automatic handling of the input (mouse,
keyboard)
• Game Controller - main object responsible for controlling the game flow (see
section 4.4.1).
4.4.1
Game flow
The game flow is shown in figure 4.8. It is mostly implemented in the Game Controller.
Here is the detailed description of the order:
1. create the components - some of the components, like audio sources or data
structures needs to be created at the start of the game
2. display registration form - registration form consists of name, age and the trial
number. It is used for identifying the final results file.
3. collect data, initiate components in positive stay, display message - the data from
registration form is being collected and saved. The data structures that store
the information about level difficulties, active gestures and color assignments
are initialized and it is possible to now use the wand with all the gestures. The
short instruction is also displayed.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Design and implementation
Figure 4.8: The Unity graphical editor, showing game in version 1.0.1.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Implementation details
37
4. launch next level, using predefined level - each level has assigned specific values
about monsters’ count, spawn time, allowed gestures and similar. When new
level is started, all those values are read and applied.
5. player shots a laser ray - player performs a gesture and emits a laser fires from
wand. Colour of the laser depends on gesture made.
6. does the laser hit the asteroid of the same colour? - when laser is fired, game
controller checks if it collides with any of the asteroids. If true, and the colour
of the asteroid is the same as the color of laser, asteroid is destroyed. If false,
nothing happens and the laser will disappear in a few seconds.
7. asteroid is destroyed - if player successfully destroys an asteroid, it counts as a
success.
8. have enough asteroids been destroyed?
- the game loop checks if number of
asteroids required to advance to next level has been destroyed. If yes, player
advances. If no, the game continues.
9. was it the last level? - before advancing to the next level, game checks if it was
a final level. If true, it goes to step 10. If false, it goes to step 4. and launches
next level.
10. display win message - informs user about successfully completing the game.
11. play again? - player can choose to restart the game or end it.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Results
The results presented in this chapter will describe the data gathered during testing
sessions and the feedback received from the therapist. The former quantifies how
enjoyable the game is and if there are any significant problems with the gameplay.
The latter shows how significant the therapeutic influence of the game is and if it
fulfils the assigned rehabilitation goals.
5.1
Test protocol
Each test followed this protocol:
1. Introduce the armband and game concepts to the subjects (the players of the
game).
2. The subject puts on two armbands.
3. If necessary, sizing clips are mounted on armband and additional bands are
mounted around Myo to stabilize it in place.
4. The subject performs a gesture for synchronizing the armband with software.
Generally, the Myo should use the default calibration profile without need for
an additional calibration.
5. If the synchronization fails, individual calibration profile is made for that person.
It means that the subject performs and records four gestures (wave in, out,
spread, fist) and the software generates individual profile based on the recorded
responses.
6. The subject tests the armband gestures with Spotify Music Player. Each com-
mand is started with double tap gesture, that unlocks the device. Then the
following commands are tested: turn on/off(spread fingers), change the track
(wave in, out) or adjust the volume (fist with rotation).
7. When the subject feels comfortable with the device and the device is warmed-
up, which means it can properly detect all the gestures, the game is launched
and the subject is introduced to the rules.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Results
8. The game is started and the subject is not interrupted until the third level
is completed. There, he or she is asked for a brief feedback. Then the game
continues or is stopped, if there is a time restriction.
9. If there is no time restriction, the subject is playing until finishing the game
and then the final feedback is gathered.
5.2
Test results
The data contain results of three test sessions, one with version 1.0 and two with
version 1.0.1. In the newer version asteroids do not appear as often in higher levels.
Two of those test sessions are described in section 4.3.
The results are divided into two groups - children (tables 5.1-5.4) and adults
(tables 5.5 - 5.9). Each table contains information about number of successes and
failures (see sec. 4.1.1), time in full minutes spend on each level and accuracies in
percentages per level and per color respectively. Each result is also described with an
age of participant and individual letter coding (A, L, E, M, K, T, P, O, B) identifying
the subject. All test subjects were playing the game only once and the data is result
of the first trial. However, some of the children (M,E) and all of the adults were
observing someone else playing the game before. If possible, all of the subjects were
using the default calibration and not using any additional bands to tighten the Myo
on the arm. Exceptions are M and E, who both had their own calibration profiles for
the gesture hand and additional band on top of Myo to stabilize it in place. Adults
P, A and B were playing on faster, release version and the others, including children,
were playing on debug version with significantly lower FPS rate.
The average accuracies for each level and each color were calculated and are pre-
sented in the table 5.10.
5.3
Therapist feedback
The game was consulted with the therapist three times:
• during the analysis phase, to decide on importance of different aspects (cogni-
tive, physical)
• while presenting the initial design
• final presentation of version 1.0.1
During the first two sessions it was suggested that training cognitive skills and en-
gagement are important parts of the game. This suggestions were incorporated in
the design requirements.
The final feedback mentioned the importance of including more relevant gestures
to achieve better effects with physical therapy. The proposed movements are shown
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Discussion
41
Figure 5.1: Different types of hand movement suggested in physical rehabilitation
for CP. Picture from [56] .
in the image 5.1. The therapist suggested that more focus should be put on extension
of the wrist than on flexion. Other movements, like ulnar and radial deviation and
supination and pronation, should be included.
The extension and flexion movement are incorporated in the game as the wave
in and wave out gestures and performing them in vertical axis instead of horizontal
is correctly detected by the armband. The ulnar/radial deviation may be hard to
implement with Myo, because the immediate rotation of palm (without moving the
arm) is not unambiguously detected by the armband. Supination and pronation are
already used in different software for Myo and can be easily detected with rotation
measurement.
The value of a game as a hand-eye and bimanual coordination exercise was grated
very high, with the suggestion of incorporating flexible choice of colors to adjust to
individual child needs.
5.4
Discussion
This section will focus on analysing the results and experiences gathered during tests.
5.4.1
Test results
The test results are promising. Most of the test subjects had no problem with accom-
plishing the game in less than 15 minutes and with missing not more the 2/3 of the
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Results
asteroids, while doing it on the first run and with no previous experience with the
Myo arm band. All of the subjects described the game as enjoyable and seemed to
be engaged in playing. They were also happy to provide a feedback.
The average accuracy is getting lower with level in the adults group and is getting
lower with level up to level 4 and then increase again for children. In both groups
yellow has significantly lower accuracy than any other color. It was observed that
subjects usually had problem in proper executing of this gesture during game. This
statistics show that if the color appears for which a person has problem to perform
a gesture, it distracts the player and hinders his overall results. It is because he try
to focus on improving with the failing gesture and misses other asteroids. It can be
clearly seen in the subject P (table 5.7). The fist was not properly detected each
time and it has worsen the results of the whole level, making the accuracy of the level
to be 71%, with previous level accuracies not lower than 94%. The results suggest
that the most problematic gesture for majority of testing group is the double tap.
The question raises, why is this particular gesture not detected during the game if it
was detected during training with Spotify? Further research with larger test group is
required, but there are few possible explanations:
• group-specific factor - problem with the yellow gesture can be specific for this
group and won’t be observed in broader testing. This can be estimated with
testing on larger group.
• learning factor - players are playing the game for a first time and also for the
first time using the Myo device. The confusion may accumulate across levels
and then, when the player is required to use a not so standard move as just
waving the hand, he/she gets confused and fails to execute the gesture properly.
It can be proven if the same subjects will replay the game a few times, gaining
proficiency in both playing and using the armband. If low score for the yellow
gesture persist, this hypothesis is not true.
• armband factor - the problems may be caused by faulty software of the arm-
band, that is not able to properly detect the gestures, even though subjects are
performing them correctly. This hypothesis can be proven by further testing on
broader group. If the problem persists in large group, it means it’s the armband
factor. More on how Myo handles the gestures is also described in section 5.4.3.
If we compare the results from game version 1.0 (subjects A and K) and 1.0.1 (the
rest) it is probably safe to assume that the change was positive, because other kids
improved their scores by 80 to 170%. However, one adult scored worse on 1.0.1. It
can be connected to the test being performed on slower, debug version, as one of the
feedback given later by that person was ”not enough responsiveness”.
While comparing the results of children and adults, it is clearly seen that children
on average performs much worse than adults. This result may suggest that the game
should be tested more on children to be better adjusted to their level of skills. There
is also another explanation: children in general have less experience with games and
==PAGE:53==
5.4 Discussion
43
new challenges than adults and those perform worse on the first trial. Also, usually
children learn faster than adults. If few trials were performed, children could finish
with better average accuracies, therefore further research is needed to establish the
reason behind worse results.
The tests also pointed out some of the game restrictions. One of test subjects,
an adult not included in the final results, was colorblind and it was impossible for
him to differentiate between the asteroid colors. However, when told the colors of the
asteroid, he had 83% accuracy in the two levels he played. It shows that adjusting the
colors or introducing different shapes of asteroids should eliminate this restriction.
5.4.2
Test protocol
It was not possible to gather information about how many gestures were physically
performed and how many of them was properly detected by the armband.
This
information could be concluded from the subject’s observation and number of failures.
Usually the number of not detected gestures was high at the start of the game, when
subjects were getting used to the armband and the device itself was warming up. It
was getting lower at the final levels, with small peaks at the beginning of levels, when
the subject was learning new gesture. There were cases were some of the subjects
were not able to force the device to detect one of the gestures most of the time, but
the gestures were different among subjects, e.g. one person had problem with spread
gesture and another one with double tap.
Another conclusion from the tests is that the data gathered during the sessions
was lacking some essential information. The logging tool should include all possible
statistics and their importance can be estimated in later processing. One of the lacking
informations is how many laser rays were actually shot. It is worth mentioning, that
because of how the armband threshold the signals, it is not possible to emit a constant
fire of shots. However, it still would be a valuable information to compare number
of all rays shot with the number of successes. It should be incorporated in the next
version of the game.
Also, the time logging should be performed in seconds, not
minutes.
5.4.3
Using the armband
Throughout the project, the armband was tested on group of around 20 different
people in age range 6-40 and with different arm sizes. The following observations
were made:
• armband can be worn by children up to 8 years old, if sizing clips are used and
the armband is additionally stabilized (e.g. with ribbon).
• the 6yo girl’s arm was too small for it. Some of the highly obese subjects had
too large arm. The supported perimeter of the arm is from around 16 cm to 27
cm.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results
• some of the testing subjects were testing the game few times in different stages
and there was one case where the armband was working during first test session,
but on the next one the person was not able to calibrate the device. It may
had been caused by the device being previously tested by 4 different people in
a short time, and thus discalibrating the software.
Using the armband is intuitive and precisely reflects the arm spatial movements,
especially if the arm is straight. The gestures works better with the arm bent in the
elbow and requires some time to master it. It is caused by the fact that Myo detects
the gesture properly if the pose is hold for a short amount of time (around half of
a second based on my experience), but most people were making flick movements
during first encounters with the armband, which resulted in armband not detecting
the gestures properly. It is not difficult to accustom to this time requirement, but
depending on person this process may take one level of game or a whole session. In
general, Myo rewards fast, but steady movements.
It sometimes happened that the armband was not reflecting the arm position
correctly after few minutes of training, and the wand started to point in a different
direction than the arm. It is possible to reposition it to the center position with a
keyboard shortcut. It was suggested that it may be useful to introduce the recentering
as a gesture on a movement arm, but it would cause some restriction to the game.
Right now, with the two armband solution, the gesture-responsible Myo needs to be
calibrated and synchronized, while for the movement-responsible Myo there is no such
restriction, because it is only using it’s IMU and not the EMG sensors. Providing
a gesture control in a movement-responsible arm could lead to confusion and also
restrict some of the younger children from playing, because they usually already
require individual calibration for the gesture arm.
There are two different solutions to the recentering problem:
• gesture on the motion hand - this solution was mentioned above. It assumes
that one gesture (e.g. spread fingers), performed by movement-responsible hand
is responsible for recentering. The downside of this solution is that now this
arm need to be calibrated and synchronized.
• any key on the keyboard - instead of pressing one key, which is hard to find
while playing, it is possible to implement the option that pushing any key will
recenter the wand. The disadvantage of this solution is that a third controlling
device is introduced, that children need to remember about, and that may be
too much.
5.4.4
Therapist’s feedback
Most of the changes suggested by the therapist can be easily incorporated and offers
a significant value to the software, because this way it can be used for both physi-
cal rehabilitation and coordination training. Some of the movements unfortunately
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Discussion
45
cannot be easily detected with the armband, which is a great disadvantage of the
device.
During discussions about the game, it was noted that there is a need to prepare a
setup for the therapist to allow choosing appropriate gesture and colors for different
level before distributing the game to particular child. Each child has different diffi-
culties and may also have different visual disabilities, so such solution could increase
target group of the game.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results
Notation: Each level is described as number successes/failures. Time is given in full
minutes. ’Acc.’ stands for accuracy.
Children - results
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/6
-
-
-
-
5/6
45%
1
2
5/9
5/12
-
-
-
10/21
32%
3
3
3/19
9/22
3/21
-
-
15/62
19%
6
4
9/32
3/29
1/33
7/35
-
20/129
13%
6
5
1/35
4/36
5/48
3/45
12/38
25/202
11%
8
Sum:
23/101
21/99
9/102
10/80
12/38
75/414
15%
24
Acc.:
19%
18%
9%
11%
24%
15%
-
-
Table 5.1: The results of a test subject A, age 9, game version 1.0, debug version.
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/10
-
-
-
-
5/10
33%
1
2
5/7
5/17
-
-
-
10/24
29%
3
3
6/6
2/4
7/5
-
-
15/15
50%
3
4
5/6
9/11
4/15
2/15
-
20/47
30%
4
5
2/8
5/8
6/10
5/7
7/8
25/41
38%
4
Sum:
23/37
21/40
17/30
7/22
7/8
75/137
35%
15
Acc.:
38%
34%
36%
32%
24%
35%
-
-
Table 5.2: The results of a test subject L, age 11, game version 1.0.1, debug version.
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/6
-
-
-
-
5/6
45%
1
2
5/1
5/4
-
-
-
10/5
67%
1
3
6/13
6/15
3/15
-
-
15/43
26%
5
4
6/15
6/10
6/13
2/26
-
20/64
24%
5
5
5/20
7/15
2/22
4/13
7/16
25/86
23%
6
Sum:
27/55
24/44
11/50
6/39
7/16
75/204
27%
18
Acc.:
33%
35%
18%
13%
30%
27%
-
-
Table 5.3: The results of a test subject E, age 10, game version 1.0.1, debug version.
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/2
-
-
-
-
5/2
71%
1
2
4/3
6/2
-
-
-
10/5
67%
1
3
6/4
4/3
5/1
-
-
15/8
65%
2
4
6/10
8/14
3/13
3/20
-
20/57
26%
4
5
4/7
7/5
6/0
0/15
8/10
25/37
40%
4
Sum:
25/26
25/24
14/14
3/35
8/10
75/109
41%
12
Acc.:
49%
51%
50%
8%
44%
41%
-
-
Table 5.4: The results of a test subject M, age 8, game version 1.0.1, debug version.
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Discussion
47
Notation: Each level is described as number successes/failures. Time is given in full
minutes. ’Acc.’ stands for accuracy.
Adults - results - part 1
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/1
-
-
-
-
5/1
83%
1
2
3/6
7/10
-
-
-
10/16
38%
1
3
7/4
2/7
6/4
-
-
15/15
50%
2
4
5/7
1/11
7/11
7/12
-
20/51
28%
4
5
2/10
4/18
3/15
3/20
13/16
25/79
24%
2
Sum:
22/28
14/46
16/30
10/32
13/16
75/152
33%
10
Acc.:
44%
23%
35%
24%
44%
33%
-
-
Table 5.5: The results of a test subject K, age 35, game version 1.0, debug version.
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/8
-
-
-
-
5/8
38%
2
2
7/13
3/11
-
-
-
10/24
29%
3
3
5/7
4/7
6/3
-
-
15/17
47%
2
4
3/11
5/17
5/17
7/17
-
20/62
24%
5
5
3/18
3/19
0/23
12/20
7/21
25/101
20%
7
Sum:
23/57
15/54
11/43
19/37
7/21
75/212
26%
19
Acc.:
29%
22%
20%
34%
25%
26%
-
-
Table 5.6: The results of a test subject T, age 44, game version 1.0.1, debug version.
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/0
-
-
-
-
5/0
100%
1
2
5/0
5/0
-
-
-
10/0
100%
1
3
5/0
4/0
6/1
-
-
15/1
94%
1
4
2/0
3/1
7/0
8/0
-
20/1
95%
1
5
6/2
6/2
6/1
4/3
3/2
25/10
71%
2
Sum:
23/2
18/3
19/2
12/3
3/2
75/12
86%
6
Acc.:
92%
86%
90%
80%
60%
86%
-
-
Table 5.7: The results of a test subject P, age 28, game version 1.0.1, release version.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results
Notation: Each level is described as number successes/failures. Time is given in full
minutes. ’Acc.’ stands for accuracy.
Adults - results - part 2
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/2
-
-
-
-
5/2
71%
1
2
4/4
6/9
-
-
-
10/13
43%
2
3
3/6
5/8
7/9
-
-
15/23
39%
3
Sum:
12/12
11/17
7/9
-
-
30/38
44%
6
Acc.:
50%
39%
44%
-
-
44%
-
-
Table 5.8: The results of a test subject O, age 25, game version 1.0.1, release version.
Level:
Blue
Magenta
Green
Yellow
Red
Sum:
Acc.:
Time:
1
5/2
-
-
-
-
5/2
71%
1
2
3/5
7/2
-
-
-
10/7
59%
1
3
1/0
9/1
5/0
-
-
15/1
94%
1
Sum:
9/7
16/3
5/0
-
-
20/10
67%
3
Acc.:
56%
84%
100%
-
-
67%
-
-
Table 5.9: The results of a test subject B, age 26, game version 1.0.1, release version.
Average accuracy per:
Children:
Adults:
All:
Game
29.5%
47.3 %
41.6%
Level 1
48.5%
72.6%
61.9%
Level 2
48.8%
53.8%
51.6%
Level 3
40%
64.8%
53.8%
Level 4
23.3%
49%
34.3%
Level 5
28%
38.3%
32.4%
Blue
34.8%
52.2%
45.6%
Magenta
34.5%
50.8%
43.6%
Green
28.3%
67.8%
44.7%
Yellow
16.8%
46%
29.3%
Red
30.5%
36.3%
33%
Table 5.10: The average accuracies of levels and colors divided by age group.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions
In summary, the project has gone according to expectation and implemented all
of the identified requirements.
The created game can be used for both hand-eye
and bimanual coordination exercises. It is a functional solution, although not easily
adjustable by people with no programming background. The Myo controllers, chosen
as a result of detailed analysis, proved to be an appropriate choice.
The analysis of devices provided a meaningful state-of-the-art overview and fa-
cilitated a constructive discussion. Some of the lesser-known devices described and
rejected in this study may, however, be useful in other, similar projects.
It is, most likely, the first study showing the usage of a Myo armband in CP
therapy - and one of the first in the topic of physical rehabilitation.
During the
research to this thesis, only one other study using Myo was found. This project was
used for stroke rehabilitation and in it Myo was not used as independent device, but
it was connected to self-made glove for more precise detection [34]. The experience
and conclusions from working with Myo can be definitely beneficial for future studies
in the topic.
It is worth noting that overall set (2 armbands) was more expensive then initial
threshold of 300$ with the total cost of 400$, but it was motivated by the decision
to incorporate a bimanual coordination training to the project, which was not initial
requirement. The game can also work with only one armband, that is supporting
both gestures and movement.
The test results show that the game is appropriate for dedicated age group (8-12
yo). It is both enjoyable and not too hard to accomplish. The therapist evaluated
it positively as a tool for bimanual and hand-eye coordination and even suggested a
few new features for making it more useful for physical rehabilitation.
6.1
Future work
The future work for this thesis should focus on two areas. Firstly, many different
devices for hand motion tracking were recently released or are about to be released to
the market. It seems that with some of them it is possible to achieve better tracking
and better development support than with any of the devices described before. Second
area of improvement is of course extending the game functionalities, mostly by making
it easier to edit for non-programmers.
These two vectors of development will be
described in following sections.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Conclusions
6.1.1
New devices
Many new motion tracking devices will be introduced to the market in 2016. In order
to keep this study relevant, I decided to perform a short analysis, using similar criteria
as in chapter 3 and analyse some of those devices, that can be used for hand motion
capture. This overview is described in appendix A.
6.1.2
Game extensions
The game right now is a working, mostly bug-free, stand-alone product that can be
used without any setup, but it still requires a lot of improvements to be used as a
valuable therapeutic product. The following features should be implemented:
• setup interface for therapist - as described in 5.4.4, it is necessary to provide
a configuration tool for a therapist. It could allow him/her to configure the
instance of a game to a child needs, i.e. picking appropriate movements from a
broad movements list and colours,
• grinding system - to encourage children to play the game often, the game should
incorporate mechanisms also known from mainstream games that encourages
players to log in for hundreds of hours of play. Grinding is the term describing
a repetitive action performed many times in order to e.g.
advance a level,
improve the in-game character statistics or collect valuable in-game items [13].
Incorporating grinding as a way to upgrade the visuals (wand, monsters, gates)
may positively influence the amount of time child is willing to spend on a game
and greatly increase the game’s life span,
• plot - for now, the game do not have any type of advanced plot. A proposed
improvement would be including new backgrounds, neutral heroes and some
cutscenes to show the wizard’s adventures through the kingdom, where he is
saving people from monster-spawning gates.
This could potentially increase
time spent on the game as child determinacy to play and finish the game in-
creases.
6.1.3
Porting the controller
Although this study emphasizes on implementing a new game, the possibility of using
existing ones should also be considered. Creating a new game, that reaches beyond
the stages of a prototype, requires a team, time and money. Not many rehabilita-
tion centers or projects have funds and possibilities to assemble a professional game
development team.
Therefore, it should be considered to, rather than developing
new, small and often unfinished game, focus on porting the controller to existing
ones. Many existing game focus on developing cognitive skills and fulfil most of the
requirements for games for children with cerebral palsy, but have complex control-
ling schema. Creating a software adapter that simplifies this schema and only offers
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Summary
51
simple, motion- and gesture-based interface for controlling is much less time and re-
source consuming for a developer. Creating such tool with the possibility of dynamic
adjustments could open for children with CP the whole world of games, that were
previously not accessible but game. It is definitely a topic that should be considered
and further investigated.
6.2
Summary
The problem of using serious games in CP can be solved in many ways. The method
described in this thesis - developing game using commercial motion tracking device -
is definitely an affordable solution, but very dependent on device manufactures. This
issue may be confronted with another approach: creating a framework for developing
serious games controlled by generic features of motion tracking to avoid hardware
dependency. Unfortunately, this solution requires a lot of resources to deliver even
a working prototype. Finally, the most promising course seems to be focusing on
porting the controllers to existing games. Removal of a controller from the market
will then only result in adjusting the adapter to a new one and not the whole game.
Therefore, this solution is not so hardware dependent, but also do not require many
resources to create and maintain.
All in all, with the rapid development of many new devices, it seems redundant to
create new, CP-specific, devices. The researchers in the area should instead focus on
existing opportunities. This project is one of such examples, showing the benefits and
restrictions of Myo armband while sharing the observations from the development of
coordination game.
Hopefully, thanks to this implementation approach, soon all children with motor
impairments could enjoy affordable serious games therapy in the comfort of their own
homes.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
New devices
Many new motion tracking devices will be introduced to the market in 2016. In order
to keep this study relevant, I decided to perform a short analysis, using similar criteria
as in chapter 3 and analyse some of those devices, that can be used for hand motion
capture.
A.1
Intel RealSense
Intel Real Sense is a platform consisting of different cameras and libraries allowing
motion tracking, gesture, face and voice recognition [60]. Each device has an infrared
camera, infrared laser projector, normal camera and array of microphones. There are
three types of cameras, with distinct specifications and applications:
• Front F200 - dedicated for use with desktops and laptops. It has the range of
detection of around 0.2-1.2m and uses USB 3.0 interface. It has FullHD camera.
It is mostly designed to be used for video conferencing, gaming, gesture- and
speech-based interaction, face recognition, augmented reality and 3D scanning.
It was first released in March 2015 as a part of a notebook series and was later
available also as as a stand-alone developer kit.
• Rear R200 - dedicated for use with tablets and 2-in-1. It has exactly the same
specification as F200, but the software is prepared to work within longer range
(up to 3-4 meters indoors and even more outdoors). It offers depth-enhanced
photography and video with face detection, measurements and tracking. It was
released in May 2015 [27].
• SR300 - front camera, not yet released (expected: January 2016). It is suppose
to replace the F200 model, offering even more features with greater precision,
like person and object recognition or cursor mode.
Although the device was already released last year, there is a great issue with
availability. The development kit (stand-alone device) for F200 was only released in
middle of October 2015 and quickly become unavailable. At the time of developing
the application, the R200 was also out of the stock.
The SR300 model was only
announced in December 2015, and is not yet available to buy.
==PAGE:64==
54
A New devices
Figure A.1: The comparison of features of three Intel RealSense cameras, provided
by producer [25].
==PAGE:65==
A.2 VR controllers
55
The documentation of the Intel Real Sense project is excellent.
The platform
offers explicit support for Unity and supports languages like Java, C# and C++. It
supports built-in gesture recognition and a lot more of high-level features for better
interaction experience, as shown in figure A.1.
The price of a single camera is acceptable (99$ for a stand-alone version). Re-
alSense cameras are also being incorporated in laptop and tablets, which highly in-
crease its value for potential customer, because it becomes something more than just
a rehabilitation device, but can be used by a whole family for a range of different
purposes.
A.2
VR controllers
The virtual reality (VR) headsets are one of the most anticipated technology in year
2016. The VR headset is a type of a head-mounted display with wide field of view and
built in headphones, that allows to experience the virtual reality, using head tracking
for 360 degrees experience. First dedicated, commercial devices, like Oculus Rift [46],
HTC Vive [22] or Sony’s Project Morpheus [51] are expected to be released through
the 2016 and many companies try to enter this growing industry by introducing new
controllers. The VR experience cannot be truly fulfilling with casual console pads -
users expect to be able to move around and naturally interact with VR objects. That
leads to invention of many devices that are suppose to be helpful in achieving this goal.
Disclaimer: Most of the devices described in next sections are, as for January
2016, available either only for preordering, as a developer’s kits or are yet to be re-
leased for preorders. As such, the final products may vary or be not released at all in
the form described below. However, I decided it is important to point out main trends
in one of the fastest developing branch of game controllers, which seems to be in great
relevance to this project. Even though the price range for the prototypes sometimes
highly exceed the threshold established at the beginning of this project (300$).
Some of the companies started introducing devices that allow running on spot.
Virtuix Omni and Cyberith started separately developing a very similar products,
consisting of treadmill platform and a harness construction that let the player walk,
run, sit, strafe or go backwards [57, 10]. The price range for this item is around 700
to 1400$, depending on the company and the version of a product. Although this
device cannot be directly use in projects similar to mine, it can offer a great help in
other types of cerebral palsy treatment and increase overall engagement in game that
otherwise mostly focuses on hands coordination.
The other interesting trend is of course the hand movement capturing. Almost all
of the VR vendors have chosen to develop their own controllers [71] and many new
companies decided to come up with their own solutions:
==PAGE:66==
56
A New devices
Figure A.2: Starting from top:
HTC Vive, Facebook’s Oculus Rift and Sony’s
Project Morpheus (PlayStation VR). Image source: [58].
A.2.1
Oculus Touch
Figure A.3: Oculus
Touch.
Image
source: [46].
Oculis Touch is a wireless hand grip,
which movement is detected by a pair
of cameras tracking lights embedded in
the controller. The device has a set of
buttons and a small joystick.
It gath-
ered very positive reviews during its pre-
sentation at Consumer Electronic Show
(CES) 2016, where the authors described
the pair of controllers as being very com-
fortable and functional [19, 47]. It will
be released in second half of the year and
the price is not yet known [46]. It can
probably be used for project similar to
mine, that focus more on coordination than physical rehabilitation, but it does not
support any advance gesture recognition and the number of buttons may be difficult
to handle by a child with CP.
==PAGE:67==
A.2 VR controllers
57
A.2.2
HTC Vive controllers
Figure A.4: HTC Vive controllers.
Im-
age source: [46].
HTC Vive is using two cameras that are
set up in the room to track the over-
all body movement and relative posi-
tion of controllers to the body.
The
controllers are dedicated for more pre-
cise movement tracking.
They have a
wand-like style, are quite big in size
and do not offer any gesture recogni-
tion.
However they seems to have
a superior precision and accuracy [22].
The controllers are expected to be re-
leased together with the headset in
April
2016
and
the
price
of
either
headset or controllers are yet unknown
[23].
A.2.3
Sony’s Morpheus controllers
As for CES 2016 presentation, which was one of the most important event in the
industry, Sony declared that PlayStation VR will be working with Play Station Move
controllers, that were described in detail in section 3.1.2 [52].
A.2.4
PrioVR
The Yei Technology company created 17-sensor suit for detailed motion tracking with-
out using any camera-based solutions. The sensors are placed on key points of the
body to capture the movement with precision allowing to use it for professional mo-
tion capture, as the producer claims [55]. Although two of the sensors are placed
on wrists, the detection of hand movements is provided by two self-made controllers,
with action buttons, trigger and joysticks, that are connected by a wire with the suit.
Such solution do not support gesture recognition, but company pledge to also deliver
a special gloves, however much after releasing the suit and there are no details about
the gloves’ specification. The suits is supposed to be delivered to developers and
Kickstarter backupers sometime this year and is available for preorder with a price
of 1200$. Such suit is not strictly following the expectation set for the controller in
this project, but still may be an interesting solution for less gesture-focused projects
for children with CP.
==PAGE:68==
58
A New devices
Figure A.5: PrioVR suit. Starting from left - person in a suit, generated model and
the character in a sample zombie game. Small picture describes the
locations of sensors. Image source: [54].
A.2.5
Gloveone
A Spain-based company, which in last year successfully funded its Kickstarter project,
is about to release in next months gloves that offer independent finger tracking, hand
tracking and haptic feedback. Each glove contains a set of actuators, one per fin-
gertip and five in the palm, that allow to recreate the sense of touch for the user.
It communicates through Bluetooth and can be used with Leap Motion (3.1.6) for
detailed hand tracking. It has contact areas on thumb, index and middle finger for
additional gesture recognition. The price of a single glove is 199€ [16]. Its unique
selling point is a realistic haptic feedback, but it is hard to estimate if it can cover
up for not great field-of-view of Leap Motion device. Real haptic feedback may be a
useful tool in CP rehabilitation. Also, the glove seems to be a very natural device to
use, but the flexibility may be restricted by the camera used for tracking.
A.2.6
Manus VR
This glove does not offer a haptic feedback, but is suppose to be compatible with
motion tracking devices offered by VR headset producers, like HTC Vive’s Valve
Lighthouse System. It seems to support a detailed gesture recognition. The expected
price of developer’s kit (two gloves) is 279$ and it will be shipped in the Q4 of 2016
[36]. The consumer version release date is not yet known. This device is very promis-
==PAGE:69==
A.3 Microsoft HoloLens
59
Figure A.6: Gloveone VR. The picture is showing all details of the glove’s construc-
tion. Image source: [16].
ing in term of substituting Myo in this project, especially with the price that seems to
be more than affordable, promising accuracy and SDK released under LGPL license,
which means it is open source and available for extensions.
A.2.7
Dexmo
Dexmo Classic and Dexmo F2 are mechanical exoskeletons for capturing the hand
motion and offering force feedback (only the latter model), created by Dexta Robotics.
They had a campaign for their product on Kickstarter in November 2015, but can-
celled it after two weeks.
The solution that they offer seems to be able to very
precisely track and detect gestures, but the promised force feedback may only be
included for thumb and index finger in the prototype. The suggest price is in range
100-200$ which is more than acceptable[12]. The Dexmo F2 will probably be a nice
solution to use in my project, as providing the haptic feedback may have positive
influence on speed of learning.
A.3
Microsoft HoloLens
Figure A.8: Microsoft HoloLens. Image
source: [40].
Microsoft HoloLens is a VR headset
that mostly focuses its application on
augmented reality, by creating a ”holo-
grams” on the glasses’ screen that blend
==PAGE:70==
60
A New devices
Figure A.7: Dexmo Classic(left) and Dexmo F2(right) by Dexta Robotics. Image
source: [12].
with the environment. A HoleLens is supposed to have a normal camera, depth cam-
era, microphone array and inertial measurement unit. It is a wireless device that is
available for preorder for developers for a cost of 3000$. It is expected to be released
in Q1 2016, but the commercial release date is not yet known. The device is expected
to detected gestures and hand motion performed in front of it [40, 41]. Although
the device is extremely expensive, the usage of augmented reality could have a very
positive influence for child engagement in a game. Even though, the precision could
probably be comparable or even worse than in some of the competitive solutions,
which are offered for much smaller price.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Code
The code for this project can be find in this Github repository.
It is also included as a .zip file appendix to this thesis.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Fernando Fernández-Aranda et all. “Video games as a complementary ther-
apy tool in mental disorders: PlayMancer, a European multicentre study.” In:
Journal of mental health (Abingdon, England) 21.4 (August 2012), pp. 364–74.
issn: 1360-0567. doi: 10.3109/09638237.2012.664302. url: http://www.
pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3433177%5C&tool=
pmcentrez%5C&rendertype=abstract.
[2]
AMPS. url: http : / / www . innovativeotsolutions . com / content / amps/
(visited on January 11, 2016).
[3]
BBC. BBC - Future Media Standards & Guidelines - Accessible Games Standard
v1.0. url: http://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/futuremedia/accessibility/
games.shtml (visited on October 8, 2015).
[4]
B Bonnechère et al. “Can serious games be incorporated with conventional treat-
ment of children with cerebral palsy? A review.” In: Research in developmental
disabilities 35.8 (August 2014), pp. 1899–913. issn: 1873-3379. doi: 10.1016/j.
ridd.2014.04.016. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24794289.
[5]
C Bryanton et al. “Feasibility, motivation, and selective motor control: virtual
reality compared to conventional home exercise in children with cerebral palsy.”
In: Cyberpsychology & behavior : the impact of the Internet, multimedia and
virtual reality on behavior and society 9.2 (April 2006), pp. 123–8. issn: 1094-
9313. doi: 10.1089/cpb.2006.9.123. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16640463.
[6]
Cerebral Palsy: Hope Through Research: National Institute of Neurological Dis-
orders and Stroke (NINDS). url: http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/
cerebral%5C_palsy/detail%5C_cerebral%5C_palsy.htm (visited on Septem-
ber 5, 2015).
[7]
CerebralPalsy.org. The Ultimate Resource for Everything CP | CerebralPalsy.org.
url: http://cerebralpalsy.org/ (visited on September 16, 2015).
[8]
Creative Senz3D : Product Parts. url: http://support.creative.com/kb/
ShowArticle.aspx?sid=119832 (visited on January 15, 2016).
[9]
Creative Senz3D - Web Cameras - Creative Labs (Pan Euro). url: http://
en.europe.creative.com/p/web- cameras/creative- senz3d (visited on
January 15, 2016).
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[10]
Cyberith | Reality is not enough…. url: http://cyberith.com/ (visited on
January 28, 2016).
[11]
Data and Statistics | Cerebral Palsy | NCBDDD | CDC. url: http://www.cdc.
gov/ncbddd/cp/data.html (visited on September 5, 2015).
[12]
Dexta Robotics. url: http://www.dextarobotics.com/products.php?div=
dexmo (visited on January 27, 2016).
[13]
Gamasutra - Rethinking the MMO. url: http://www.gamasutra.com/view/
feature/1583/rethinking%7B%5C_%7Dthe%7B%5C_%7Dmmo.php?page=3
(visited on February 1, 2016).
[14]
Game accessibility guidelines. url: http://gameaccessibilityguidelines.
com/ (visited on October 8, 2015).
[15]
Geomagic. Geomagic Touch Overview. url: http://www.geomagic.com/en/
products/phantom-omni/overview (visited on January 7, 2016).
[16]
Gloveone: Feel Virtual Reality. url: https://www.gloveonevr.com/ (visited
on January 27, 2016).
[17]
M Graafland, J M Schraagen, and M P Schijven. “Systematic review of serious
games for medical education and surgical skills training.” In: The British journal
of surgery 99.10 (October 2012), pp. 1322–30. issn: 1365-2168. doi: 10.1002/
bjs.8819. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22961509.
[18]
Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS). url: https://www.
cerebralpalsy.org.au/what-is-cerebral-palsy/severity-of-cerebral-
palsy/gross- motor- function- classification- system/ (visited on Jan-
uary 11, 2016).
[19]
Hands On With the Oculus Rift and Oculus Touch Controllers | PCMag.com.
url: http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2497577,00.asp (visited on
January 28, 2016).
[20]
Martin Henschke, David Hobbs, and Brett Wilkinson. Developing serious games
for children with cerebral palsy: Case study and pilot trial. 2012. doi: 10.1145/
2414536.2414574. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2414536.2414574
(visited on September 9, 2015).
[21]
Hamilton A. Hernandez et al. “Designing action-based exergames for children
with cerebral palsy”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press,
April 2013, p. 1261. isbn: 9781450318990. doi: 10.1145/2470654.2466164.
url: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2470654.2466164.
[22]
HTC Vive first impressions: Gaming on the second-gen Vive Pre headset. url:
http://www.wareable.com/vr/htc-vive-review (visited on January 27,
2016).
[23]
HTC VIVE HOME. url: https://www.htcvive.com/us/ (visited on Jan-
uary 28, 2016).
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[24]
indie - definition of indie in English from the Oxford dictionary. url: http:
//www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/indie (visited on
February 8, 2016).
[25]
Intel® RealSense™SDK 2015 R5 Documentation. url: https://software.
intel.com/sites/landingpage/realsense/camera-sdk/v1.1/documentation/
html/index.html?doc%7B%5C_%7Dmanuals%7B%5C_%7Dsdk%7B%5C_%7Dalgorithms.
html (visited on January 26, 2016).
[26]
Interview: SoftKinetic Aims to Help Us Reach into Virtual Worlds - Road to
VR. url: http://www.roadtovr.com/softkinetic-aims-help-us-reach-
virtual-worlds-interview/ (visited on February 2, 2016).
[27]
Introducing the Intel® RealSense™R200 Camera (world facing) | Intel® Devel-
oper Zone. url: https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/realsense-
r200-camera (visited on January 26, 2016).
[28]
Davey Jackson. Unity-authored projects win top honors at serious games and
virtual reality conferences. url: http://blogs.unity3d.com/2012/04/26/
unity- authored- projects- win- top- honors- at- serious- games- and-
virtual-reality-conferences-2/ (visited on October 11, 2015).
[29]
Kinect hardware. url: https://dev.windows.com/en-us/kinect/hardware
(visited on January 15, 2016).
[30]
Nikos Kozeis et al. “Visual function and visual perception in cerebral palsied
children”. In: Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics 27.1 (January 2007), pp. 44–
53. issn: 0275-5408. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-1313.2006.00413.x. url: http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17239189.
[31]
Leap Motion. Leap Motion. 2013. url: https://www.leapmotion.com/ (visited
on September 9, 2015).
[32]
Leap Motion | Control Your Computer With Hand Motions | Popular Science.
url: http://www.popsci.com/technology/article/2013-07/will-these-
guys-kill-computer-interface-we-know-it (visited on January 14, 2016).
[33]
Ying Li, Willem Fontijn, and Panos Markopoulos. A Tangible Tabletop Game
Supporting Therapy of Children with Cerebral Palsy. Vol. 5294. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, January
2008, pp. 182–193. isbn: 978-3-540-88321-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-88322-
7. url: http://www.researchgate.net/publication/221276166%5C_A%5C_
Tangible%5C_Tabletop%5C_Game%5C_Supporting%5C_Therapy%5C_of%5C_
Children%5C_with%5C_Cerebral%5C_Palsy.
[34]
Rastislav Lipovsky and Hugo Alexandre Ferreira. “Hand therapist: A rehabil-
itation approach based on wearable technology and video gaming”. English.
In: 2015 IEEE 4th Portuguese Meeting on Bioengineering (ENBENG). IEEE,
February 2015, pp. 1–2. isbn: 978-1-4799-8269-1. doi: 10.1109/ENBENG.2015.
7088817. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/articleDetails.jsp?arnumber=
7088817.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[35]
Laura Luna-Oliva et al. “Kinect Xbox 360 as a therapeutic modality for chil-
dren with cerebral palsy in a school environment: A preliminary study”. In:
NeuroRehabilitation 33.4 (January 2013), pp. 513–521. issn: 10538135. doi: 10.
3233/NRE-131001. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24018364.
[36]
Manus VR - The virtual reality dataglove for consumers. url: https://manus-
vr.com/ (visited on January 27, 2016).
[37]
MedicineNet. Cerebral Palsy Symptoms, Causes, Treatment - How is cerebral
palsy treated? - MedicineNet. url: http://www.medicinenet.com/cerebral%
5C_palsy/page8.htm (visited on September 16, 2015).
[38]
Microsoft. Kinect for Xbox One | Xbox.com. url: http://www.xbox.com/en-
US/xbox-one/accessories/kinect-for-xbox-one (visited on January 6,
2016).
[39]
Microsoft Handpose. url: http://www.fastcodesign.com/3045347/microsofts-
handpose-wants-to-make-gesture-controls-something-you-actually-
like (visited on November 5, 2015).
[40]
Microsoft HoloLens | Official Site. url: https : / / www . microsoft . com /
microsoft-hololens/en-us (visited on January 28, 2016).
[41]
Microsoft HoloLens UK release date, price, specs & games rumours - New
Product - PC Advisor. url: http://www.pcadvisor.co.uk/new-product/
wearable-tech/microsoft-hololens-release-date-price-specs-rumours-
uk-development-edition-3616014/ (visited on January 28, 2016).
[42]
MoSCoW Analysis (6.1.5.2). International Institute of Business Analysis, 2009.
isbn: 978-0-9811292-1-1.
[43]
Biel Moyà Alcover et al. “Use of serious games for motivational balance re-
habilitation of cerebral palsy patients”. In: The proceedings of the 13th inter-
national ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility - AS-
SETS ’11. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, October 2011, p. 297. isbn:
9781450309202. doi: 10.1145/2049536.2049615. url: http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=2049536.2049615.
[44]
Nintendo. What is Wii U? url: http://www.nintendo.com/wiiu/what-is-
wiiu (visited on January 6, 2016).
[45]
Nintendo and PixArt Team Up. url: http://www.nintendoworldreport.com/
news/11557/nintendo-and-pixart-team-up (visited on January 15, 2016).
[46]
Oculus. Oculus Web Page. url: https://www.oculus.com/en-us/ (visited on
January 28, 2016).
[47]
Oculus Touch hands-on: Worth the wait? url: http://www.technobuffalo.
com/2016/01/11/oculus-touch-hands-on-worth-the-wait/ (visited on
January 28, 2016).
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
[48]
L. Omelina et al. Serious games for physical rehabilitation: Designing highly
configurable and adaptable games. 2012. url: http://www.icdvrat.reading.
ac.uk/2012/papers/ICDVRAT2012%5C_S06N5%5C_Omelina%5C_etal.pdf
(visited on September 9, 2015).
[49]
Orbotix Sphero review. url: http : / / www . engadget . com / 2011 / 12 / 19 /
orbotix-sphero-review/ (visited on January 18, 2016).
[50]
C. (Lieke) E. Peper et al. “Bimanual training for children with cerebral palsy:
Exploring the effects of Lissajous-based computer gaming”. In: Developmental
Neurorehabilitation 16.4 (August 2013), pp. 255–265. issn: 1751-8423. doi: 10.
3109/17518423.2012.760116. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
23477428.
[51]
PlayStation VR. url: https://www.playstation.com/en- us/explore/
playstation-vr/ (visited on January 27, 2016).
[52]
PlayStation VR review - hands on, price & release date rumours | Expert Re-
views. url: http://www.expertreviews.co.uk/games/1403574/playstation-
vr-review-hands-on-price-release-date-rumours (visited on January 28,
2016).
[53]
PLAYSTATION®MOVE MOTION CONTROLLER. url: http://scei.co.
jp/corporate/release/100311e.html (visited on January 15, 2016).
[54]
PrioVR - Fully-Immersed Virtual Reality Gaming Suit. url: http://makerflux.
com/priovr-fully-immersed-virtual-reality-gaming-suit/ (visited on
February 2, 2016).
[55]
PrioVR // Suit Up. Game On. url: http://www.priovr.com/ (visited on
January 27, 2016).
[56]
Producing Different Trajectories | Coastal Breeze News. url: http://www.
coastalbreezenews.com/2015/06/11/producing-different-trajectories/
(visited on February 1, 2016).
[57]
Products | Virtuix Omni. url: http://www.virtuix.com/products/ (visited
on January 27, 2016).
[58]
Project Morpheus vs HTC Vive vs Oculus Rift | PlayStation 4. url: http:
//ps4daily.com/2015/03/project-morpheus-vs-htc-vive-vs-oculus-
rift/ (visited on February 2, 2016).
[59]
Ahmad Qamar, Mohamed Abdur Rahman, and Saleh Basalamah. Adding In-
verse Kinematics for Providing Live Feedback in a Serious Game-based Reha-
bilitation System. 2014. doi: 10.1109/ISMS.2014.43. url: http://ijssst.
info/Vol-15/No-3/data/3857a215.pdf (visited on October 11, 2015).
[60]
RealSense - Get Started with RealSense Technology | Intel® Developer Zone.
url: https://software.intel.com/en-us/realsense/devkit (visited on
January 26, 2016).
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
[61]
P. Rego, P.M. Moreira, and L.P. Reis. “Serious games for rehabilitation: A
survey and a classification towards a taxonomy”. In: Information Systems and
Technologies (CISTI), 2010 5th Iberian Conference on. July 2010, pp. 1–6. url:
http://www.researchgate.net/publication/224169708%5C_Serious%5C_
games%5C_for%5C_rehabilitation%5C_A%5C_survey%5C_and%5C_a%5C_
classification%5C_towards%5C_a%5C_taxonomy.
[62]
Rehab Measures - 10 Meter Walk Test. url: http://www.rehabmeasures.org/
Lists/RehabMeasures/DispForm.aspx?ID=901 (visited on January 12, 2016).
[63]
Senz3D and Intel Perceptual Computing SDK — OpenCV 2.4.12.0 documenta-
tion. url: http://docs.opencv.org/2.4/doc/user%7B%5C_%7Dguide/ug%
7B%5C_%7Dintelperc.html (visited on January 15, 2016).
[64]
Sixense. Razer Hydra. url: http://sixense.com/razerhydra (visited on
January 6, 2016).
[65]
Sony. PlayStation®Move. url: https : / / www . playstation . com / en - us /
explore/accessories/playstation-move/ (visited on January 6, 2016).
[66]
Sphero 2.0. url: https://www.coolgift.com/en/Sphero- 20 (visited on
February 2, 2016).
[67]
Sphero 2.0 | Connected Toy for iOS, Android, and Windows. url: http://www.
sphero.com/sphero (visited on January 18, 2016).
[68]
Tech Specs | Myo Gesture Control Armband. url: https://www.myo.com/
techspecs (visited on January 15, 2016).
[69]
Thalmic Labs. Myo Gesture Control Armband. url: https://www.myo.com/
(visited on January 6, 2016).
[70]
Thalmic Labs Myo armband hits consumer release, for sale on Amazon | IT
Business. url: http : / / www . itbusiness . ca / news / thalmic - labs - myo -
armband-hits-consumer-release-for-sale-on-amazon/54056 (visited on
January 15, 2016).
[71]
#Trending: Next-gen VR controllers. url: http://www.wareable.com/vr/
trending-next-gen-vr-controllers-1492 (visited on January 28, 2016).
[72]
Unity - Game Engine. url: https://unity3d.com/ (visited on October 11,
2015).
[73]
WebMD. Cerebral Palsy - Symptoms, Causes, Diagnosis and Treatment of Cere-
bral Palsy. url: http://www.webmd.com/children/tc/cerebral- palsy-
topic-overview (visited on September 16, 2015).
[74]
Frank Weichert et al. “Analysis of the accuracy and robustness of the leap mo-
tion controller.” In: Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 13.5 (January 2013), pp. 6380–
93. issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s130506380. url: http://www.pubmedcentral.
nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3690061%7B%5C&%7Dtool=pmcentrez%
7B%5C&%7Drendertype=abstract.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
69
[75]
What is Unreal Engine 4. url: https://www.unrealengine.com/what-is-
unreal-engine-4 (visited on February 2, 2016).
[76]
What’s Next for Playstation 4 and Sony with John Koller | GotGame. url:
https://gotgame.com/2014/01/23/whats-next-for-playstation-4-and-
sony-with-john-koller/ (visited on February 2, 2016).
[77]
Wii.Nintendo.com - In-Depth Regional Wii Coverage. url: http://web.archive.
org/web/20080212080618/http://wii.nintendo.com/controller.jsp (vis-
ited on January 15, 2016).
[78]
Nathan Wilkinson, Rebecca P Ang, and Dion H Goh. “Online video game ther-
apy for mental health concerns: a review.” In: The International journal of
social psychiatry 54.4 (July 2008), pp. 370–82. issn: 0020-7640. url: http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18720897.
[79]
Susie R Wood et al. “Motivating, game-based stroke rehabilitation: a brief re-
port.” In: Topics in stroke rehabilitation 10.2 (January 2003), pp. 134–40. issn:
1074-9357. doi: 10.1310/WB09-PFYJ-7XRN-RU6W. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/13680522.
[80]
Maja Wrzesien and Mariano Alcañiz Raya. “Learning in serious virtual worlds:
Evaluation of learning effectiveness and appeal to students in the E-Junior
project”. In: Computers & Education 55.1 (August 2010), pp. 178–187. issn:
03601315. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2010 . 01 . 003. url: http : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360131510000060.
==PAGE:80==
