==PAGE:1==
Heralded single photon source
using four-wave mixing
Erik Nicolai Christensen
Supervisors: Karsten Rottwitt and Mario A. Usuga Castaneda
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis deals with constructing a heralded single photon source based on in ﬁber
four-wave mixing. Single photon sources are of increasing interest especially in quantum
information sciences such as quantum computing and quantum key distribution. In-ﬁber
degenerate four-wave mixing creates photon pairs symmetrically in frequency around
the pump.
These photon pairs can carry quantum encoded information, but noise
photons from spontaneous Raman scattering are also generated. In this thesis degenerate
stimulated four-wave mixing is experimentally demonstrated at high pump power for
three highly nonlinear ﬁbers. Pump leakage is found to manageable using three narrow
band arrayed waveguide gratings with only 1/20 coincidence counts stemming from
pump leakage. It is found that spontaneous Raman scattering is a signiﬁcant source of
noise, but is shown to be reduced by 30% by cooling the ﬁber with dry ice, and further
reduction is achieved by ﬁltering side bands.
i
==PAGE:4==
Resume
Dette kandidat speciale omhandler konstruktionen af en anmeldt enkelt foton kilde
baseret på ﬁrebølgeblanding i optisk ﬁber. Enkelt foton kilder har stigende interesse
grundet en mængde af brugs muligheder inden for kvanteinformationsvidenskaberne så
som kvantecomputere og kvantenøglekryptering. Firebølgeblanding i ﬁber laver fotonpar
symmetrisk omkring pumpe laseren i frekvens. Disse fotonpar kan bruges til at bære
kvante information, men i ﬁberen dannes også støj fotoner fra spontan Raman spredning.
Stimuleret ﬁrebølgeblanding er eksperimentielt demonstreret ved høj pumpe laser eﬀekt
i tre højst ikke-lineære ﬁbere. Residuale pumpefotoner er blevet kraftig reduceret ved
hjælp af tre opstillede bølgeledergittere, som betyder at kun 1/20 samtidige detektor
klik er fra residuale pumpefotoner. Ydermere er det bekræftet at den spontane Raman
spredning udgør en betydelig kilde til støj. Spontan Raman spredning er reduceret med
30% ved nedkøling af den optiske ﬁber with hjælp af tøris, og yderligere reduktion er
opnået ved at ﬁltere sidebånd.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis deals with the experimental demonstration of a heralded single photon source
in ﬁber using the nonlinear optical process four-wave mixing.
The work has been performed in a time span from the 24th of August 2015 to the 7th
of February at the department of Photonics engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark, and contribute 30 ETCS point to my M.Sc. in Physics and Nanotechnology.
The supervisor was Professor Karsten Rottwitt, and Postdoc Mario A. Usuga Castaneda.
I would like to thank Søren Friis for, especially in the beginning of the project, helping
me come to grips with the theoretical aspects of four-wave mixing and phase matching. I
would also like to thank Jesper Bjerge Christensen for helpful sparring on both nonlinear
eﬀects and quantum optics. Furthermore a big thanks to Davide Bacco for taking time
out of his busy schedule to help me troubleshoot the detectors and setup.
Also a
large thanks to Mario, for guiding me through the project, suggesting literature, and
providing feedback and suggestion for the setup. Finally thanks to Karsten Rottwitt, I
have enjoyed writing both my B.Sc and M.Sc thesis with him and I hope to continue
working in the group.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Nonlinear wave equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Four-wave mixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Quantum description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Raman scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Brillioun scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Single photon source characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5.1
Coincidence to accidental ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5.2
Second order coherence function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Single photon sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.1
Deterministic sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6.2
Probabilistic sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Simulations
13
3.1
Four-wave mixing simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Raman spectrum simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Coincidence to accidental ratio simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Experimental components
18
4.1
General experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Pump noise ﬂoor ﬁltering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Arrayed waveguide grating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Fiber Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4.1
Stimulated Brillouin scattering measurement
. . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4.2
Stimulated Brillouin scattering suppresion . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4.3
Fiber parametric gain measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
4.5
Choice of ﬁlters and ﬁber
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5.1
Coupling to polarization maintaining ﬁber
. . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.6
Single photon detector characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6.1
Dark count measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6.2
Detector eﬃciency characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.7
Optical path length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Results
32
5.1
One channel detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Coincidence to accidental ratio measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Discussion
38
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Conclusion and outlook
39
7.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
v
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
List of abbreviations
AWG Arrayed waveguide grating
BPF Band pass ﬁlter
CW Continuous wave
CAR Coincidence to accidental ratio
EDFA Erbium doped ﬁber ampliﬁer
FBG Fiber Bragg grating
FWHM Full width half maximum
FWM Four-wave mixing
HNLF Highly nonlinear ﬁber
NV Nitrogen Vacancies
OM Optical modulator
OSA Optical spectrum Analyzer
PC Polarization controller
PM Polarization maintaining
QD Quantum dot
QKD Quantum key distribution
SBS Stimulated Brillioun scattering
sFWM Spontaneous four-wave mixing
SPD Single photon detector
SpRS Spontaneous Raman scattering
TBPF Tunable band pass ﬁlter
TLS Tunable laser source
VOA Variable optical attenuator
ZDW Zero dispersion wavelength
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
2.1
Diagram of parametric down conversion, showing the conservation of en-
ergy and momentum.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1
Diagram of degenerate four-wave mixing, two pump photons are annihi-
lated and a signal and idler photon are created symmetrically around the
pump in frequency.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Gain spectrum of all three candidate ﬁbers at λp = 1555.8 nm and
γPpL = 0.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Raman gain coeﬃcient of a silica ﬁber at room temperature, cooled with
dry ice, and ﬁnally cooled with liquid nitrogen. The pump wavelength is
1555.8 nm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
plot of the Raman spectrum at 300 K and 200 K, and FWM in ﬁberc at
λp = 1555.8 nm, and λp = 1545 nm, with λ0 = 1545 nm . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
CAR simulation, with dν=1.03 MHz, τint=60 s, and χ = 1, Raman gain
coeﬃcient = 0.0035W −1km−1, detector eﬃciencies 2.2% and 1.5%.
. .
17
4.1
The general setup for CAR measurements, PC: polarization controller,
HNLF: highly nonlinear ﬁber, AWG: arrayed waveguide grating, FBG,
ﬁber Bragg grating, SPD: single photon detector
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Diagram of the FBG characterization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Reﬂectance of the FBG with peak reﬂectance at 1555.8 nm. . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Power spectrum of the pump laser at 1555.8 nm, with and without the
FBG ﬁltering. Notice the OSA hits its noise ﬂoor.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
Transmission spectrum for all 3 × 8 channels for the three AWGs.
. . .
20
4.6
Diagram of the measuring setup for the AWGs, TLS: tunable laser source. 20
4.7
Diagram of the parametric gain measurement setup. . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.8
Peak SBS power as a function of pump power.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.9
The back reﬂected power spectrum from the ﬁber under test. . . . . . .
22
4.10 Signal gain for 3 pump wavelengths for ﬁbera One in the anomalous dis-
persion regime, one in the normal and at the the ZDW.
. . . . . . . . .
24
4.11 Simulation of signal gain in ﬁbera.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
vii
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF FIGURES
4.12 Signal gain for three pump wavelengths for ﬁberb One in the anormolous
dispersion regime, one in the normal and at the ZDW. . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.13 Simulation of signal gain in ﬁberb.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.14 Signal gain for ﬁberc, both measurements are taken in the anomalous
dispersion regime.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.15 Simulation of signal gain in ﬁberc.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.16 Transmission spectrum of four channels with two identical AWGs in series,
and the FBG ﬁltered pump at 1555.8 nm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.17 Diagram of the PM ﬁber polarization alignment setup . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.18 Demonstration of FWM in ﬁberc, the pump is at 1550 nm and the signal
at 1555.8 nm, the idler appears at 1544.2 nm.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.19 Dark counts for SPD004 and SPD005 for a range of deadtimes plottet on
a logarithmic y-axis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.20 Diagram of the eﬃciency setup. PM: Power meter
. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.21 Diagram of the optical path measurement setup. OM is optical modula-
tor, PC polarization controller, PD is a photo diode.
. . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1
Diagram of the setup for measuring the counts in channel 4, with -120
dB pump extinction.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Counts in channel 4 measured before and after the ﬁber. . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Counts is channel 4 at T=300K and T=200K. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.4
Coincidence counts at 300 K, shown with a linear an quadratic ﬁt. . . .
35
5.5
Coincidence count and accidental coincident counts at T=200K.
. . . .
35
5.6
Coincidence counts after AWG side band ﬁltering at t=300 K.
. . . . .
35
5.7
Coincidence counts and pump leakage at T=300K. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.8
Actual transmission spectrum of channel 3 and channel 7 of the AWG .
36
5.9
Transmission spectrum of the applied tunable bandpass ﬁlter, and the
spectrum of the AWG ﬁltered with the TBPF in channel 3. . . . . . . .
37
5.10 Transmission spectrum of the applied tunable bandpass ﬁlter, and the
spectrum of the AWG ﬁltered with the TBPF in channel 7. . . . . . . .
37
viii
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Single photon source are of increasing interest for a number of applications with the
growth of quantum information science. [1] Possible applications utilizing quantum pro-
cessing is e.g. shor’s quantum algorithm for factorizing a large integer into primes [2], or
Grovers algorithm for searching in unstructured data bases. [3] Photons are especially
of interest as so-called qubits, due to being weakly interaction with the environment,
and traveling at the speed of light. This is ideal for quantum key distribution (QKD),
which require bright sources of single photons. Here encryption keys can be exchanged
using single photons, which then enables the exchange of data over a classical chan-
nel. Using single photons to transmit quantum states makes eavesdropping attempts
readily detectable in the channel when using protocols such as BB84. Single photon
sources are already available commercially for QKD, but these are often based on atten-
uated coherent sources, which potentially makes them vulnerable to number splitting
attacks. [4]
As of now a number of platforms are being investigated for use as single photon sources,
such as individual atoms [5], nitrogen vacancies in diamond [6] , and quantum dots [7].
The ﬁrst Heralded single photon sources have been based on the χ(2) non linear materials
to generate photon pairs. [8] [9] Several source based on theχ(3) nonlinearity have been
demonstrated in ﬁber, at both 1.55 µm [10] [11], and at visible wavelengths [12]
In the this project the goal is to build an eﬃcient heralded single photon in ﬁber using
four-wave mixing at 1.55 µm.
Generating photon pairs in ﬁber at 1.55 µm, has the
advantage of having low coupling and propagation loss to ﬁber.
A major challenge
is noise photons from spontaneous Raman scattering, and ﬁltering of residual pump
photons.
Chapter 2 Here the theory of the predominant nonlinear eﬀects Spontanous Raman
scattering and four-wave mixing are presented and relevant equations derived or
cited.
The coincidence to accidental ratio is introduced, and the second order
coherence function is explained. Moreover an overview of the state of the art in
single photon sources is presented and accompanied by a brief discussion of the
ﬁelds of use for single photon sources.
Chapter 3 Numerical simulations of four-wave mixing and Raman scattering is per-
formed, and simulation of the coincidence to accidental ratio is performed.
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 4 Characterization and description of experimental equipment and compo-
nents, including ﬁlters, single photon detectors, and high pump power parametric
gain measurements of the highly nonlinear ﬁbers.
Chapter 5 Presentation of the results
Chapter 6 A comprehensive discussion of the results and perspective improvements.
Chapter 7 Conclusion and outlook
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Nonlinear wave equation
To describe four-wave mixing the starting point is usually the nonlinear wave equation.
To derive this one starts with Maxwell’s equations [13]
∇× E(r, t) = −∂tB(r, t),
(2.1)
∇× H(r, t) = J(r, t) + ∂tD(r, t),
(2.2)
∇· D(r, t) = ρf(r, t),
(2.3)
∇· B(r, t) = 0,
(2.4)
where H is the magnetic ﬁeld vector and E is the electric ﬁeld vector. D and B are
the electric and magnetic ﬂux densities, respectively. ρf is the free charge, and J the
current density vector. In optical ﬁber no free charges are present so ρf=0 and J=0.
Furthermore we have the constitutive relations which are given by [13]
D(r, t) = ϵ0E(r, t) + P (r, t),
(2.5)
B(r, t) = µ0H(r, t) + M(r, t).
(2.6)
Here we have M as the magnetic polarization and P the induced electric polarization
which has the unit of elctric dipole moment per unit volume, ϵ0 is the vacuum permabiliy,
and µ0 is the vacuum permativity. In nonmagnetic material such as optical silica ﬁber
M=0.
By taking the curl and on both sides in equation (2.1) and inserting equation (2.2) on
the right side we arrive at [13]
∇× ∇E(r, t) + 1
c2 ∂2
t E(r, t) = −µ0∂2
t P (r, t),
(2.7)
where c is introduced through c2 =
1
µ0ϵ0
Describing the induced polarization can be expanded in a power series of the electric
ﬁeld. A full description would require the susceptibility to be a tensor, but here it is
assumed the light is linearly polarized [13]
3
==PAGE:14==
2.2. FOUR-WAVE MIXING
P = ϵ0

χ(1)E + χ(2)EE + χ(3)EEE + ...

,
(2.8)
The quadratic term is responsible for nonlinear eﬀects such as sum-frequency generation,
and second-harmonic generation. The cubic term gives rise to eﬀects such as the optical
Kerr eﬀect, Raman scattering, Brillouin scattering, and four-wave mixing (FWM). Silica
glass is a centro-symmetric material, and due to this symmetry the second order eﬀect
is not present in an optical silica ﬁber. In the case of an isotropic material with ϵ(1) =
1 + χ(1), we can utilize that ∇· ϵE = 0 and arrive at the nonlinear wave equation [13]
∇2E −ϵ(1)
c2
∂2E
t2
=
1
ϵ0c2
∂2P NL
∂t2
.
(2.9)
Here PNL is the nonlinear response of the material, which in the case of an optical silica
ﬁber is the third order susceptibility. The nonlinear response acts as a source term. For
PNL = 0 the equation would simply describe propagation of the electric ﬁeld.
2.2
Four-wave mixing
The following is a classical description of FWM. Here we consider the co-propagating
non-degenerate case with pump waves ωp and ωq and signal and idler waves ωs, ωi.
Furthermore it is a assumed that the waves are co-polarized, such that the ﬁelds can be
treated as scalars the electric ﬁeld can be written as [13]
E(x, y, z, t) = 1
2 ˆx
X
j=p,q,s,i
F(x, y)Aj(z, t) exp[i(βjz −ωjt)] + c.c.
(2.10)
Here Fj(x, y) is the transverse ﬁeld distribution, which in the following is assumed to be
the same for all waves and Aj(z, t) is the slowly varying envelope of the ﬁeld, c.c. is the
complex conjugate, and βj is the propagation constant for the respective waves. Since
our material mainly has a contribution from the third-order polarization, then we can
rewrite the non linear polarization as
PNL = ϵ0χ(3)EEE.
(2.11)
In our case degenerate four-wave mixing is considered, which means two pumps of the
same wavelength ωp = ωq interact with the signal and idler photon. For the FWM
process to occur there has to be conservation of energy and momentum, such that
2ωp = ωs + ωi,
(2.12)
and
∆β = βs + βi −2βp = 0,
(2.13)
with ωj being the angular frequency of the waves and ∆β the linear phase mismatch.
The subscripts, p, s, and i, denote the pump, signal, and idler. By substituting (2.11)
4
==PAGE:15==
2.2. FOUR-WAVE MIXING
and (2.10) into the wave equation (2.9), assuming quasi-Continuous wave, and neglecting
time dependence, the amplitude Aj(z) can be described by [14]
dAp
dz = iγ[(|Ap|2) + 2(|As| + |Ai|2))Ap + 2AsAiA∗
p exp(i∆βz)]
(2.14)
dAs
dz = iγ[(|As|2) + 2(|Ai| + |Ap|2))As + A∗
i A2
p exp(−i∆βz)]
(2.15)
dAi
dz = iγ[(|Ai|2) + 2(|As| + |Ap|2))Ai + A∗
sA2
p exp(−i∆βz)].
(2.16)
where γ = 2πn2/λAeﬀis the nonlinear coeﬃcient, Aeﬀis the eﬀective mode area which is
inversely related to the spatial mode distribution F(x, y), and n2 is the intensity depen-
dent refractive index. The ﬁrst term in the equations represent self phase modulation
and the second term cross-phase modulation. The last term determine the transfer of
energy between the waves. The phase matching can be described [14]
κ = ∆β + 2γPp.
(2.17)
Here it is assumed that Ps ≪Pp. The second term is the nonlinear phase mismatch.
Optimal phase matching is achieved when κ = 0. To describe the phase matching a
Taylor expansion of the propagation constant β(ω) around the zero dispersion frequency
can be made. By neglecting the fourth-order dispersion β4 it can be written as [15]
∆β = −λ2
p
2πcD +
 
λ3
p
2π2c2 D +
λ4
p
4π2c2
dD
dλ
!
(ωp −ω0)(ωp −ωs)2,
(2.18)
where λp, (ωp −ωs), D and c are the pump wavelength, the detuning, the dispersion
parameter and the speed of light, respectively. The power of the signal and idler can be
described for stimulated FWM in the undepleted pump regime as [14]
Ps(L) = Ps(0)
 
1 +
γPp
g
sinh(gL)
2!
,
(2.19)
Pi(L) = Ps(0)
γPp
g
sinh2(gL)
2
,
(2.20)
where is the parametric gain given as
g =
s
(2γPp)2 −(∆β + 2γPp
2
)2.
(2.21)
From this the signal gain is easily calculated to be
Gs = Ps(L)
Ps(0) = 1 +
γPp
g
sinh(gL)2

(2.22)
2.2.1
Quantum description
Spontanous FWM (sFWM) is usually treated in a semi-classical way, with the pump
wave being treated classically and the signal and idler being described using creation
and annihilation operators. This is possible since the strong pump interacts with the
5
==PAGE:16==
2.3. RAMAN SCATTERING
vacuum ﬂuctuations, and is therefore undepleted and virtually constant in power. The
interaction Hamiltonian has the form [16]
Hint = b(ˆa†
sˆa†
i + ˆasˆai),
(2.23)
where b is a parameter determining interaction strength. This is among others dependent
on the nonlinear index, eﬀective modal area, pump power, and interaction length. The
ﬁrst term describes pairwise annihilation of a signal and idler photon, while the second
term corresponds to a pairwise creation of signal and idler photons. The output state
generated in this approach is [16]
|ψ⟩∝|vac⟩+ α|1, 1⟩s,i + α2|2, 2⟩s,i + ...,
(2.24)
where |α|2 is the average number of photon pairs per temporal mode [16]. |vac⟩is the
vacuum state, |n, n⟩s,i describes the number of photons in the signal and idler. If single
photon pairs are the goal it is necessary to operate in a regime where α|1, 1⟩is the
dominant term. At high pair generation rates the higher order terms dominate and
the source is no longer in the single photon regime. This means that sources based on
FWM have an upper limit in terms of brightness. The average photon number can be
described as [15]
⟨Is⟩= ⟨Ii⟩= 4γ2P 2
p
g2
sinh2(gL) ≈(γPpL)2,
(2.25)
where the parametric gain is as deﬁned in (2.21), and the approximation is made in the
limit of perfect phase matching. Usually the upper limit in FWM based single photon
sources is γPpL = 0.1, since at higher power the multi-photon states starts to dominate.
2.3
Raman scattering
Raman scattering is a χ(3) eﬀect present in silica ﬁbers, which will give rise to noise
photons. The eﬀect does not require phase matching so it is present regardless of the
ﬁber dispersion properties. Raman scattering is the interaction between light and the
microscopic vibrations in the material lattice. In the quantum picture these vibrations
are called phonons. The Raman interaction consist of the Stokes and anti-Stokes scat-
tering.
The anti-Stokes scattering consists of two optical waves interacting with an
existing lattice phonon resulting in a scattered photon with a higher energy compared
to the incident photon. The anti-Stokes interaction requires an existing phonon present
in the lattice. The Stokes scattering does not require a phonon in the lattice, but a
phonon will be created in the scattering event, such that the scattered light will have
a lower energy compared to the incident photon. The rate of Stokes scattered photons
are proportional to [17]
N =
(
n(Ωph)
Ωph > 0,
n(Ωph) + 1
Ωph < 0,
(2.26)
Here Ωph > 0 is the anti-Stokes side, and Ωph < 0 is the Stokes side. The phonon
population can be described by a Boltzman distribution such that the mean number of
phonons is [17]
n(Ωph) =
1
exp(ℏ|Ωph|/(kBT)) −1,
(2.27)
6
==PAGE:17==
2.4. BRILLIOUN SCATTERING
where ℏis the reduced Planck constant, Ωph the frequency detuning, kB Boltzman
constant, and T temperature.
When creating the photon pairs the goal is to place
the signal and idler at wavelengths with good phase-matching and little spontanous
Raman scattering. To investigate the optimum wavelengths both the degenerate four-
wave mixing spectrum and the Raman spectrum is simulated in chapter 2. The Raman
spectrum of silica is well known [18], but to be more ﬂexible a numerical model was
constructed on the basis the work done by Hollenbeck et al. Here the raman response
function is modeled in an intermediate broadening model, with it being [19]
hR(t) =
13
X
i=1
A
′
i
ων,i
exp(−γit) exp(Γ2
i t2/4) sin(ων,it)θ(t),
(2.28)
with γi being the Lorentzian linewidth for mode i, Γi is the Gaussian linewidth for mode
i, ων,i is the center frequency for mode i, A
′
i is the amplitude for the i’th mode, and lastly
θ(t) is the unit step function to ensure causality. This function have then been ﬁtted
to the measured spectrum, for the speciﬁc parameters used see Hollenbeck et al. [19].
Using the response function it is possible to simulate the Raman gain coeﬃcient [13]
gR(ω) = 2fRγIm[˜hR(ω)],
(2.29)
for all wavelengths of interest. Here fR = 0.18 which is the fractional contribution to
PNL from the delayed Raman response, γ the nonlinear coeﬃcient, and Im represent the
imaginary part of the response function.
2.4
Brillioun scattering
In the classical picture Brillouin scattering is a type of inelastic scattering similar to
Raman, but the light scatters on the low frequency acoustic phonons in the ﬁber. The
process involves three waves the pump, the acoustic phonon and the Stokes scattered
ﬁeld which due to energy conservation will be frequency shifted with respect to the
pump by the phonon frequency. In standard silica ﬁber the Stokes wave will be shifted
by 11.1 Ghz [20] A key feature of Brillouin scattering is that the Stokes wave will be
traveling backwards compared to the pump propagation. This is due to the maximum
amount of scattering occurring when the wave vector mismatch is zero. Which is easily
realized when the propagation constants are [20]
ka = kp −ks,
(2.30)
with subscripts a, p and s denoting phonon, pump and Stokes waves. In silica ﬁber the
acoustic wave velocity is several orders of magnitude lower than the Stokes and pump
waves, which means the Stokes and pump waves should counter propagate for minimum
phase mismatch.
2.5
Single photon source characteristics
The following section is a brief overview of the diﬀerent ﬁgures of merit used to charac-
terize heralded single photon sources.
7
==PAGE:18==
2.5. SINGLE PHOTON SOURCE CHARACTERISTICS
2.5.1
Coincidence to accidental ratio
When generating and subsequently detecting photon pairs, the usual intended use is to
use either the signal or idler to herald the other. Therefore the photons are detected in
separate detectors and the number of counts coinciding in time from the two detectors
is measured. The coincidence window has a ﬁnite size to take into account detector
jitter. In this window accidental coincidence counts from noise photons such as dark
counts, spontaneous Raman scattering, and pump leakage can occur. The coincidence
to accidental ratio (CAR) is then deﬁned as the true counts divided by the accidental
counts
CAR = Craw −A
A
.
(2.31)
Where Craw is the raw coincidence measurement including the accidentals, and A is the
number of accidental coincidence counts. A low CAR will result in a high error rate in
e.g. quantum communications protocols. [21]
2.5.2
Second order coherence function
The second order coherence function is an often used measurement to determine if the
source is operating in the single photon regime, since it provides information on the
probability of multi-photon emission of the source. At a ﬁxed position the second order
quantum coherence function is deﬁned as [22]
g(2)(τ) = ⟨ˆE(−)(t) ˆE(−)(t + τ) ˆE(+)(t + τ) ˆE(+)(t)⟩
⟨ˆE(−)(t) ˆE(+)(t)⟩⟨ˆE(−)(t + τ) ˆE(+)(t + τ)⟩
,
(2.32)
where τ is the time diﬀerence, and ˆE(+) is the single-mode quantized electric ﬁeld deﬁned
as [22]
ˆE+(x) = i ℏω
2ϵ0V
1/2
ˆa exp(i(k · r −ωt))
(2.33)
where k is the wave vector, V is volume, ˆa the annihilation operator, ℏthe reduced
Planck constant, and ω the angular frequency. inserting the quantized ﬁeld from equa-
tion (2.33) into equation (2.32), it can be shown that it reduces to [22]
g(2)(τ) = ⟨ˆa†ˆa†ˆaˆa⟩
⟨ˆa†ˆa⟩2
= ⟨ˆn(ˆn −1)⟩
⟨ˆn⟩2
(2.34)
= 1 + ⟨(∆ˆn)⟩2 −⟨ˆn⟩
⟨ˆn2⟩
,
(2.35)
where ˆn = ˆa†ˆa is the number operator , ⟨ˆn⟩the average photon number, and ⟨∆ˆn⟩2 the
variance, when assuming a number state and τ = 0 [22]
g(2)(0) =
(
0
n = 0, 1
1 −1
n
n ≥2
(2.36)
which means for a perfect single photon source the second order coherence function
function will be zero, and for multi-photon states g(2)(0) > 0
8
==PAGE:19==
2.6. SINGLE PHOTON SOURCES
2.6
Single photon sources
The following section is a brief introduction to the progress made in the ﬁeld of single
photon sources. Several distinct approaches exist which I will try to give a brief overview
of by weighting the advantages and disadvantages of each approach.
Extra focus is
put into detailing the state-of-the-art in the probabilistic approach using parametric
conversion for creating heralded single photons in ﬁber.
The ideal single photon source would be a perfect on demand source, where pure in-
distinguishable single photons would be generated instantly with 100% eﬃciency at the
push of a button in a well deﬁned spatial mode.
2.6.1
Deterministic sources
Most of the deterministic sources rely on a two-level system which is excited by an
external perturbation,often a short laser pulse resonant with the two-level system.
Atoms and ions
Atoms and ions have the distinct advantage that if suspended in the same environment
optical transitions will be the same. This means photon indistinguishability is achieved.
The drawbacks to this approach is the challenge of trapping the ions or atoms in place,
and also making them emit into a single optical mode. The atom itself will emit in any
direction making collecting and using the emitted photon diﬃcult. As of now, atoms
such as Caesium and Rubidium have been used extensively in single photon research,
[5] [23] since they display the 2- or 3 level structure needed for eﬀective generation
of indistinguishable photons. To overcome the directional emission problem a cavity
resonator is usually employed.
Utilizing cavity quantum electrodynamics near unity
single photon generation eﬃciency in to a single cavity mode has been reported using
high ﬁnesse mirrors. [24] Trapping and cooling the neutral atom cloud is done using a
magnetic-optical trap. The atoms are then released such that the photons pass through
the optical cavity. This limits the atom cavity interaction time to the order of hundreds
of microseconds. [1] Other schemes use an atomic fountain with a turning point inside
the cavity to maximize the time the atoms spend in the cavity. Ions are much simpler
to trap and manipulate inside the cavity, e.g. using a radio frequency ion trap. This
eliminates the issues of multi-atom eﬀects in the cavity, but the ion trapping can be
eﬀected by the mirrors employed, thus a larger mirror separation is needed which in
turn weakens the cavity coupling.
Both the neutral atom and ion approach gives a
low chance of multi-photon emission and high indistinguishability, but lack in photon
brightness due to the diﬃculty in coupling the generated photons out of the cavity
structure. [16] Furthermore, ions emit mainly in the ultraviolet regime, a wavelength
unsuitable for quantum communications.
Colour centers in diamond
Several types of defects in diamond have been investigated, especially the optical tran-
sition properties. The most common defect used is the nitrogen-vacancy (NV). This
9
==PAGE:20==
2.6. SINGLE PHOTON SOURCES
defect consists of a nitrogen replacing a carbon atom in the diamond lattice structure,
and adjacent to the nitrogen a carbon atom is missing in the lattice. The NV centers
also have very interesting magnetic properties which have been proposed as a way to
measure very small magnetic ﬁelds [25], since the photoluminesense is dependent on the
spin state of the NV center. For single photon generation the NV centers has a distinct
advantage compared to atoms and ions since they do not require cryogenic cooling due
the stable lattice structure of diamond. In bulk diamond the out coupling of the light
has been a major problem due to the high refractive index of diamond resulting in total
internal reﬂection.
Several optical structures have been investigated for enhancing coupling out from both
bulk diamond and diamond nano-crystals.
The nano-crystals have been coupled to
plasmonic gap modes between silver nano wires [26], and also to gold nano particles
[27] enhancing emission by a factor of 10. Structures in bulk diamond have also been
attempted, but are somewhat diﬃcult to achieve since the structuring techniques are
not as readily available in diamond as it is in silicon or other similar semiconductor
platforms. Successful structures include diamond nano pillars [6], and a structured solid
immersion lens which has shown to increase outcoupling by a factor of 10. Furthermore
a photon rate as high as 1.0 × 106 counts/s has been reported [28]. The immersion lens
has the further advantage that the structuring is far away from the NV center, such
that it does not cause spectral broadening.
Quantum dots
Quantum dots (QD) are created using highly lattice mismatched semiconductor com-
pounds. In the so-called Stranski-Krastanow regime the surface forms small islands due
to the strain from the lattice mismatch. In this way a variety of QDs can be formed, but
the method oﬀers little control over where the QDs are placed, and the QDs formed will
vary in size and therefore optical resonance. In QDs excitonic eﬀect are prevalent due
to the close conﬁnement of charges. Therefore the Hamiltonian describing the system
must also include a Coulomb term to the describe the Coulomb interaction between
the carriers, and an exchange term which spin interaction between the carriers and the
lattice. [16] These excitonic states can be used to produce single photons [16]
The QD is a good candidate for producing single photons since it posses optically ex-
citable discrete transitions.
These transitions can have very large internal quantum
eﬃciency, but as with the diamond out coupling into a well deﬁned spatial mode can
be challenging. Several structures to overcome this problem have been proposed, from
pillar microcavities [29], photonic crystal cavities [30], to microdisk cavities [7], where
the QDs couple to the whispering gallery modes. QDs can have problems with rapid
detuning due to lattice vibrations, and many experiments use helium cooling to prevent
this. Some experiments have been done at room temperature [31]. Furthermore the
wavelength of the single photons are often unsuitable for transmission in optical ﬁber,
but this has been proposed to be solved by frequency conversion. [32]
10
==PAGE:21==
2.6. SINGLE PHOTON SOURCES
Idler
Signal
Pump
Pump
Idler
Signal
Figure 2.1: Diagram of parametric down conversion, showing the conservation of energy
and momentum.
2.6.2
Probabilistic sources
Probabilistic sources are inherently random. This is usually compensated by creating
the photon pairwise, such that one photon can be used to herald the other.
Spontaneous parametric downconversion
Spontaneous parametric downconversion has for the last couple of decades been the
weapon of choice for generating photon pairs. [1] It has also been used for generating
squeezed states. [33] The photon pairs are generated using a non-centrosymmetric crys-
tal such as potassium dideuterium phosphate or lithium iodate which have large χ(2)
nonlinearities. For the process to to be eﬀective both energy and momentum have to
be conserved meaning ℏωp = ℏωs + ℏωs and kp = ki + ks as is sketched in ﬁgure. 2.1
A lot of work has been done in bulk crystal, where sources have achieved high spectral
purity [34], but suﬀers from low heralding rates. With the introduction of periodically-
poled crystals the heralding rate has increased signiﬁcantly with Bocquillon et al. [8]
reporting a heralding rate of 80000 counts per second. A problem with these setups
can be freespace nature of them, and that the spatial output has little overlap with
ﬁber modes making it diﬃcult to couple into an optical ﬁber. Furthermore dispersion
parameter depends on angle of the incident pump light. Work to make χ(2) active wave
guides has been done which showed highly indistinguishable photons, and Gaussian
mode proﬁles enabling coupling to ﬁber [35] and also g(2) as low as 0.004 [9].
Heralded single photons using four-wave mixing
Heralded single photon sources generated from FWM take advantage of the χ(3) non-
linearity which is much weaker than χ(2), but it is feasible due to the longer interaction
length of ﬁbers. The major challenges in in-ﬁber photon pair generation using FWM is
suppressing Raman noise photons, and tailoring dispersion to achieve phase matching at
the desired wavelength. The spatial conﬁnement of all photons also means that eﬃcient
ﬁltering is necessary to remove residual pump and Raman noise. Initially work was done
in photonic crystal ﬁber, since these enabled eﬃcient FWM in the visible wavelength
regime, where traditional silicon single photon detectors are available, by shifting the
zero dispersion wavelength (ZDW). [36] Similar work has been done in both polarization
maintaining microstructured ﬁber and dispersion shifted ﬁber with CAR of 1000 and
400 [12] [37], where the former employed large detuning to avoid the Raman peak, and
the latter employed liquid helium cooling to suppress Raman noise. Work with liquid
11
==PAGE:22==
2.6. SINGLE PHOTON SOURCES
nitrogen cooling has also been done, where a g(2)(0) = 0.06 and a heralding eﬃciency
60% was achieved [38], and in a later paper 80 % due to improved ﬁltering. [39]
Another approach is to create single photon pairs on-chip using slow light eﬀects which
increases the eﬀective nonlinearity making pair generation feasible on much shorter
distances, Clark and coworkers achieved a CAR of 63 and a g(2)(0) of 0.06 in a GaInP
device. [40] This approach suﬀers from fairly high out coupling loss and can be hampered
by loss in the chip from free carriers and two-photon absorption.
The advantage of using FWM in ﬁber is easy coupling to existing ﬁber. Furthermore
dispersion engineering is well developed enabling photon pair generation in the crucial
1.55 µm wavelength regime.
12
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Simulations
3.1
Four-wave mixing simulation
Several key parameters are of interest when aiming to do eﬀective FWM in ﬁber. In our
case the goal is to generate photons pair via the degenerate four-wave mixing. FWM can
be done in several conﬁguration, including both phase conjugation and bragg scattering.
For simplicity I limit this thesis to degenerate FWM, while other types of FWM will be
touched upon in the discussion and outlook. In degenerate FWM the signal and idler
are generated pairwise symmetric in frequency around the pump, as is seen in Figure
3.1.
To get an idea of the parametric gain bandwidth it is simulated using equations (2.18),
(2.21), and (2.22) to do this pump wavelength, pump power, ﬁber length, nonlinear
coeﬃcient and dispersion parameters need to be known for each ﬁber. At our disposal
we have three diﬀerent ﬁbers, but we are limited to certain pump laser wavelengths
due to the availability of ﬁber bragg grating (FBG) for pump sideband ﬁltering. These
simulations will be done at λp = 1555.8 nm, and at a pump power such for each ﬁber
γPpL = 0.1.
From ﬁgure 3.2 it seen that ﬁbera and ﬁberb has the largest gain bandwidth with FWHM
of 17 nm and 20 nm respectively, while ﬁberc only has 7.7 nm. To achieve γPpL = 0.1,
ﬁbera and ﬁberc is pumped with ≈20 mW of power, while ﬁberb due to the lower
ω
ω
ωi
s
p
Figure 3.1: Diagram of degenerate four-wave mixing, two pump photons are annihilated
and a signal and idler photon are created symmetrically around the pump in frequency.
13
==PAGE:24==
3.2. RAMAN SPECTRUM SIMULATION
Figure 3.2: Gain spectrum of all three candidate ﬁbers at λp = 1555.8 nm and γPpL =
0.1
nonlinear coeﬃcient and shorter length has to be pumped at 126 mW. This amount of
power would require an erbium ampliﬁer with the laser that is available, which would
require extra ﬁltering to remove ampliﬁer side bands. The gain spectrum of the ﬁbers
are characterized in chapter 4 and compared to gain simulations.
3.2
Raman spectrum simulation
When generating photon pairs using FWM in ﬁber, spontaneous Raman scattering
(SpRS) become a major source of noise photons due to the large bandwidth of Raman
gain in silica. To evaluate which approach to use for minimizing the Raman noise the
SpRS spectrum is simulated using equation (2.28) as a response function. The Raman
photon ﬂux is then given by combining (2.27), and (2.29) multiplying by the ﬁber length
and pump power.
ISpRS(ω) = PpL|gR|N
(3.1)
From ﬁgure 3.3 it is seen that in order to have the lowest amount of SpRS the photon
pairs should preferably be created at a detuning Ω< 1THz, or at a detuning beyond 15
THz. Phase matching using the degenerate pump scheme is diﬃcult to achieve beyond
15 Thz, since it would require a very ﬂat dispersion slope, furthermore it has the added
disadvantage of separating signal and idler by 30 THz.
If the pump is at 1550 nm
this would bring the stokes side photon beyond 1685 nm, which is not in the optimal
transmission window due to more loss in the silica ﬁber. Achieving phase matching close
to the pump for a detuning Ω< 1 THz is generally simpler as is seen from simulations
of the diﬀerent ﬁber candidates. The SpRS is signiﬁcantly higher compared to Ω> 15
14
==PAGE:25==
3.3. COINCIDENCE TO ACCIDENTAL RATIO SIMULATION
Figure 3.3: Raman gain coeﬃcient of a silica ﬁber at room temperature, cooled with
dry ice, and ﬁnally cooled with liquid nitrogen. The pump wavelength is 1555.8 nm.
THz, but as is seen in ﬁgure 3.3, this can be reduced by cooling the ﬁber. Furthermore
since the phonon distribution depends on the inverse exponential of the frequency the
cooling is mainly eﬀective at low detuning on the stokes side.
With liquid nitrogen
cooling, the SpRS is reduced by about 80 % and with dry ice cooling by about 30 %
compared to the room temperature value for Ω< 1 THz. A disadvantage of obtaining
photon pairs close to the pump in frequency is the added demands on ﬁltering to prevent
pump leakage into the signal and idler channels, which will be discussed further in the
chapter on ﬁltering.
In ﬁgure 3.4 the rate of SpRS and average photon number for FWM is plotted for
a degenerate pump at the zero dispersion wavelength of ﬁberc and 10.8 nm into the
anomalous dispersion regime. It is seen that achieving photon pair generation beyond
the Raman peak in this conﬁguration is not possible with this ﬁber. The simulation
does not include higher order terms of dispersion which could widen the FWM gain
spectrum, but the accuracy of the simulation is investigated in the experimental part of
the thesis. A possible way to enhance the gain bandwidth would be to use a ﬁber with
a very ﬂat dispersion curve.
3.3
Coincidence to accidental ratio simulation
In the limit of γP0L ≪1 and for narrow ﬁlters close to the center of the window in which
there is phase matching and assuming co-polarization, the photon ﬂux of the signal and
idler side can be described [17]
Iu = ∆ν(|γP0L|2 + P0L|gR|N(Ωu,p)),
(3.2)
where I is the photon ﬂux u = s, i for either signal or idler, and ∆ν =
R |Hu(ω)|2
2π
dω where
Hu(ω) is the ﬁlter transmission function. The ﬁrst term describes the contribution to
the photon ﬂux from the FWM, and the second term describes the contribution from
the SpRS for both the signal and idler side. Assuming we have integration time τint and
the photon rates have Poisson probability distributions. The total number of accidental
coincidence counts can be written as [37]
Nacc = τwinτintri(t)rs(t) = τwinτint[ηi(Ipair + IR,i) + rdark][ηs(Ipair + IR,s) + rdark]. (3.3)
15
==PAGE:26==
3.3. COINCIDENCE TO ACCIDENTAL RATIO SIMULATION
Figure 3.4: plot of the Raman spectrum at 300 K and 200 K, and FWM in ﬁberc at
λp = 1555.8 nm, and λp = 1545 nm, with λ0 = 1545 nm
With rdark being the dark count rate, Ipair the ﬁrst term of (3.2), IR,u being second
term, and τwin the coincidence window, ηu is the detector eﬃciency including the loss in
the signal and idler channels. The CAR for a CW laser can then be described by [37]
CARcw = ηiηsIpairτintχ
Nacc
.
(3.4)
Here χ is the fraction of coincidences that falls within the coincidence window, which in
our case is assumed to be χ = 1, since a window of 4.86 ns is used. The CAR simulation
does not take into account pump leakage, and furthermore assumes that the ﬁltering
and Raman gain is identical on the Stokes and anti-Stokes sides. It is seen on ﬁgure
3.5 that the optimal CAR is at γPpL = 0.04 The top point of the curve move further
down in power for higher detector eﬃciency. While the maximum CAR increases with
decreasing Raman gain coeﬃcient, and decreasing coincidence window. Having a high
CAR at lower powers is also desirable since at low pump power the source is operating
further in the single photon regime, meaning a lower g(2)(0), therefore low loss ﬁlters
and high eﬃciency detectors are of interest. A low Raman gain coeﬃcient and as small
a coincidence window as possible without losing true coincidence pairs is optimal.
16
==PAGE:27==
3.3. COINCIDENCE TO ACCIDENTAL RATIO SIMULATION
Figure 3.5: CAR simulation, with dν=1.03 MHz, τint=60 s, and χ = 1, Raman gain
coeﬃcient = 0.0035W −1km−1, detector eﬃciencies 2.2% and 1.5%.
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 4
Experimental components
4.1
General experimental setup
In ﬁgure 4.1 the general setup for the CAR measurement is drawn. To generate the
FWM an Ando AQ4321D tunable laser source is used. Pump side band ﬁltering is done
using a FBG with center wavelength 1555.8 nm, together with a circulator. The loss
through this ﬁltering is 2.2 dB. The highly nonlinear ﬁber (HNLF) is coupled to an
arrayed waveguide grating (AWG), which isolates the signal and idler wavelengths by
40 dB. Each channel is then ﬁltered further using an AWG on each, resulting in 80 dB
side band rejection on signal and idler side. The signal and idler photons are detected
by two IDquantique ID230 single photon detectors, which are connected to an ID801
time to digital converter. The counts are registered on a computer and recorded in the
ID801s software.
In the following the central equipment and components are described and characterized.
4.2
Pump noise ﬂoor ﬁltering
The detectors are sensitive to power levels on the order of -130 dBm. This means extra
care has to be taken in eliminating spurious counts from pump leakage or side bands
in the pump spectrum which at high power experiments would become negligible, but
Figure 4.1: The general setup for CAR measurements, PC: polarization controller,
HNLF: highly nonlinear ﬁber, AWG: arrayed waveguide grating, FBG, ﬁber Bragg grat-
ing, SPD: single photon detector
18
==PAGE:29==
4.2. PUMP NOISE FLOOR FILTERING
Figure 4.2: Diagram of the FBG characterization.
Figure 4.3: Reﬂectance of the FBG with
peak reﬂectance at 1555.8 nm.
Figure 4.4:
Power spectrum of the
pump laser at 1555.8 nm, with and
without the FBG ﬁltering. Notice the
OSA hits its noise ﬂoor.
here can have signiﬁcant impact on the experiment. To prevent photon leakage from the
pump noise ﬂoor in the detected photons, a large degree of noise ﬂoor extinction must
be achieved either by using a high quality laser or by external ﬁltering. To determine the
side band rejection the Ando AQ4321D laser is characterized by using an Ando AQ6317B
optical spectrum analyser (OSA). The laser was ﬁber coupled directly to the OSA, then
tuned to the desired pump wavelength and a wavelength sweep was performed with the
OSA.
To characterize the reﬂectance of the FBG it is connected to port 2 of the circulator.
The tunable laser is connected to port 1 and the OSA is connected to port 3, as is seen
on ﬁgure 4.2. The circulator works such that the input light from port 1 exits port
2, and input light from port 2 (the reﬂected light from the FBG) exits port 3. The
tunable laser source (TLS) is tuned synchronously with the OSA over the wavelengths
of interest.
In ﬁgure 4.3 the FBG reﬂectance spectrum is shown. The full width half maximum
19
==PAGE:30==
4.3. ARRAYED WAVEGUIDE GRATING
Figure 4.5: Transmission spectrum for
all 3 × 8 channels for the three AWGs.
Figure 4.6: Diagram of the measuring
setup for the AWGs, TLS: tunable laser
source.
(FWHM) of the grating is here measured to be 0.5 nm, but this is an artifact from the
limited resolution of the TLS measurements, which has a resolution of 0.5 nm. It is also
seen that the isolation from the center wavelength to the side bands is on the order of
-30 to -40 dB. It is easily realized that the FBG with the circulator can be employed as
narrow band pass ﬁlter, as seen in ﬁgure 4.2, but now with the pump laser tuned to the
center wavelength of the FBG. In ﬁgure 4.4 the ﬁltered and unﬁltered pump spectrum
is seen. Notice the increased side band rejection in the ﬁltered spectrum. The ﬁltered
measurement does not show the -30 dB side band rejection which was expected, but this
is due to a limited dynamic range on the OSA which means the noise ﬂoor is reached.
Through the circulator and FBG a loss of 2.2 dB is measured at the peak wavelength.
The need for side band rejection is limits our pump laser wavelengths to wavelengths
where FBGs are available.
4.3
Arrayed waveguide grating
In order to measure both CAR and second order coherence spatial separation of the
signal and idler photons are necessary. Furthermore pump extinction is crucial for a
high CAR. For this task three AWGs are employed. The AWGs contain one input port
and eight output ports. The transmission of each port was measured using a TLS synced
to an OSA as seen in ﬁgure 4.6. To minimize the loss the AWG setups were dismantled
such that the ﬁber connectors could be inspected and cleaned. After this the TLS is
measured directly with the OSA to ascertain the loss in each channel. This was repeated
for all three AWGs.
On table 4.1 the peak wavelength of each channel is displayed.
From the data seen in ﬁgure 4.5 the peak transmission wavelength, full width half
maximum (FWHM) and loss was obtained. Both the loss and FWHM of the AWGs
aﬀect the CAR we can expect to achieve. The peak wavelength of the channels are of
interest when determining which pump wavelength to use. As is seen on ﬁgure 4.5, and
in table 4.1 the channels from AWG2 are slightly shifted by about 0.3 nm, and especially
channel 3 from AWG2 has signiﬁcantly more loss compared to the rest. The extinction
ratio of each channel is -40 dB, and all channels have a FWHM of 0.7 nm,
20
==PAGE:31==
4.4. FIBER CHARACTERIZATION
Table 4.1: Peak transmission wavelength for all channels for the three AWGs.
All
wavelengths in nanometers.
λ1
λ2
λ3
λ4
λ5
λ6
λ7
λ8
AWG1
1549
1550.6
1552.2
1553.8
1555.4
1557.1
1558.7
1560.3
AWG2
1549.3
1550.9
1552.5
1554
1555.7
1557.3
1558.9
1560.3
AWG3
1549
1550.6
1552.2
1553.8
1555.4
1557.1
1558.7
1560.3
Figure 4.7: Diagram of the parametric gain measurement setup.
4.4
Fiber Characterization
When performing in ﬁber FWM the nonlinear coeﬃcient, loss, and dispersion parameters
are important. In our inventory three ﬁbers are available which are investigated in the
classical regime to see if the parameters provided by the manufacturer are accurate.
Furthermore these are compared to simulations. The dispersion properties are measured
by investigating the parametric gain at diﬀerent wavelengths.
The setup for measuring parametric gain is as seen in Figure 4.7. The pump laser is a
Santec TLS-80 tunable CW laser which is phase modulated by a Photline modulator.
The pump is then ampliﬁed by an IPG photonics erbium doped ﬁber ampliﬁer (EDFA).
The pump is coupled into the HNLF with the signal through a coupler. After the ﬁber
a variable optical attenuator is connected to the OSA. The band pass ﬁlter (BPF) is
there to ﬁlter out background from the EDFA, and the polarization controllers (PC) on
the signal and pump arms are to co-polarize the pump and signal.
Three ﬁbers are characterized in the setup the relevant parameters provided by the
manufacturer is summarized Table in 4.2
4.4.1
Stimulated Brillouin scattering measurement
When attempting to measure the parametric gain of the optical ﬁbers it was discovered
only a limited amount of optical power was able to propagate through the ﬁber, and the
gain achieved with this power was not enough to measure a recognizable gain spectrum.
Since a narrow linewidth tunable Santec TLS-80 CW laser is used as a pump stimulated
Brillouin (SBS) scattering is the likely culprit.
21
==PAGE:32==
4.4. FIBER CHARACTERIZATION
Table 4.2: Datasheet for the ﬁbers under test
α
L
D
DSlope
ZDW
γ
[dB/km]
L [m]
[ps/(nm km)]
[ps/(nm2 km)]
[nm]
[(W km)−1]
Fibera
0.8
401
-0.16
0.018
1558.8
11.9
Fiberb
0.27
200
*
0.053
1554
4.79
Fiberc
0.8
398
0.14
0.03
1545
10.7
Figure 4.8: Peak SBS power as a func-
tion of pump power.
Figure 4.9: The back reﬂected power
spectrum from the ﬁber under test.
Fibera was incorporated into the diagram shown on ﬁgure 4.7. The OSA was applied to
the output port labeled SBS, and the spectrum was measured with a high OSA resolution
of 0.02 nm. On ﬁgure 4.9 back scattered light from the ﬁber is seen at increasing pump
powers. The left peak is at the pump wavelength and is most likely Rayleigh scattering
or Fresnel reﬂections from the ﬁber interface. The peak shifted down in wavelength is
the Stokes wave which has been generated through SBS. The frequency shift is measured
to be 8 Ghz, which is close to the expected shift of 11.1 Ghz [20]. The slight mismatch
could be due to the limited resolution of the OSA, or a slight deviation in the ﬁber from
the reference used.
To determine the growth of SBS the peak powers of the Stokes peak is plotted in ﬁgure
4.8. It is seen that the SBS becomes signiﬁcant at ≈80 mW of pump power. At this
point any extra pump power will be almost totally reﬂected as a Stokes wave. Using
the code developed in chapter 3 a total pump power of about 160 mW is necessary to
achieve 2 dB of gain, which means one would need about 3 dB of SBS suppression. For
ﬁberc a similar level of SBS was observed, while ﬁberb had a higher threshold due to
the smaller nonlinear parameter.
4.4.2
Stimulated Brillouin scattering suppresion
Several methods to suppress SBS can be employed. Simply using a pulsed laser would
move the threshold for the SBS further up in power. Other possible methods include
straining or heating the ﬁber [41], and phase modulation of the pump.
The approach we are using is to modulate the phase of the pump.
Using a phase
22
==PAGE:33==
4.4. FIBER CHARACTERIZATION
modulator with an input of four RF signals as shown an ﬁgure 4.7. The frequency setup
was an in house build working as one unit which enabled easy control of the frequencies.
The frequencies used as a starting point were obtained from [14] and were approximately
100, 310, 920, and 2700 Mhz.
In practice the SBS is minimized by setting the EDFA to output 28 dBm which is well
above the SBS threshold. The SBS output port is monitored using a power meter or
OSA, and the frequencies and polarization is adjusted to minimize the power measured
in the SBS port. Alternatively the power output at the end of the ﬁber was simply
monitored and maximized. The variable attenuator (VOA) at the ﬁber end before the
OSA is a precaution since the OSA can only handle ≈100 mW of power. The VOA was
set to 10 dB attenuation. In ﬁbera about 3.5 dB of SBS suppression is reached.
4.4.3
Fiber parametric gain measurement
With the SBS suppressed it is possible to couple enough pump power into the ﬁber to
measure the gain of the stimulated FWM.
The tunable pump laser is adjusted to the desired wavelength, the SBS suppresion is
applied as described.
The Ando AQ4321D signal laser is launched with a power of
1 mW before entering the 90/10 coupler.
To maximize the FMW the signal should
be co-polarized with the pump by adjusting the polarization controller in the signal
arm, as seen in ﬁgure 4.7. In nonpolarization maintaining ﬁber the polarization will
drift, but the signal polarization can still be adjusted for maximum FWM. The degree
of FWM is simply ascertained by monitoring the increase in the idler power. Three
measurements are now taken: A TLS sweep from 1520 nm to 1620 nm with the pump
laser turned on, a regular OSA sweep with the signal turned oﬀto measure the pump
spectrum, and a TLS sweep with the pump laser turned oﬀto measure the signal power.
An optimization of polarization was not done every time the signal laser was turned
on and oﬀsince it was found to be stable in terms of polarization. A range of these
measurements were then done for several diﬀerent pump wavelengths on both the normal
and anomalous dispersion sides of the zero dispersion wavelength, for each ﬁber. Fiberc
was only measured in the anomalous regime since the SBS suppression had to be used
by another group. The gain is calculated as Gs = Ps
pump on
Ps
pump oﬀ. The ﬁgures showing the
gain measurements still retains the pump power.
As mentioned Table 4.2 shows the ﬁber parameter for all three ﬁbers, as provided by
the manufacturer. Especially of interest is the accuracy of the dispersion parameters as
this determines the optimal wavelength for degenerate FWM.
In ﬁgures 4.10, 4.12 and 4.14 the gain spectrums of ﬁbera, ﬁberb and ﬁberc, respectively,
are seen. Notice on all three ﬁgures the gain is reduced or even negative on the far anti-
Stokes side. This is most likely due to the inﬂuence of stimulated Raman scattering,
which absorbs on the anti-Stokes side and emits on the Stokes side.
In ﬁgure 4.11, the simulated gain spectrum for ﬁbera is shown for the same wavelengths
as the ones used in making ﬁgure 4.10. The pump power for both is 180 mW. The
simulated gain is slightly larger compared to the measurements, this is likely due to the
simulation not taking stimulated Raman scattering and propagation loss into account.
23
==PAGE:34==
4.4. FIBER CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 4.10:
Signal gain for 3 pump
wavelengths
for
ﬁbera
One
in
the
anomalous dispersion regime, one in the
normal and at the the ZDW.
Figure 4.11: Simulation of signal gain
in ﬁbera.
Figure 4.12: Signal gain for three pump
wavelengths for ﬁberb One in the anor-
molous dispersion regime, one in the
normal and at the ZDW.
Figure 4.13: Simulation of signal gain
in ﬁberb.
24
==PAGE:35==
4.4. FIBER CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 4.14: Signal gain for ﬁberc, both
measurements are taken in the anoma-
lous dispersion regime.
Figure 4.15: Simulation of signal gain
in ﬁberc.
The gain band width of the simulations in ﬁgure 4.11 and the measurements on ﬁg-
ure 4.10 corresponds well with each other. Notice the shape of the gain spectrum of
the pump placed at 1562.1 nm, which is on the anomalous dispersion side, having the
characteristic side lobes in both the simulation and the measurements. The lobes have
about 0.5 dB higher gain compared to the pump at 1556.1 nm, which is on the normal
dispersion side. This is expected since the negative linear phase mismatch cancels with
the positive nonlinear phase mismatch. The pump placed at 1559.9 nm displays a wide
gain bandwidth as expected so close to the ZDW.
The gain measurement and simulations for ﬁberb is shown in ﬁgure 4.12 and ﬁgure 4.13.
The pump power used was 446 mW. The SBS was not as problematic due to the lower
nonlinear coeﬃcient in the ﬁber, see table 4.2, but signiﬁcantly more pump power had
to be utilized to achieve gain large enough to measure. The gain was about 0.5 dB,
which corresponds well with the 0.5 dB seen in the simulations. The gain bandwidth of
the pump wavelengths 1556.3 nm and 1550.2 nm corresponds well with the simulations,
but the simulation with the pump at 1554.2 nm has a bandwidth of 60 nm more than
in the simulation. This is due to the approximation to neglect β4 is no longer valid at
large bandwidths. This in practice means the simulation becomes inaccurate with the
pump closer than 0.5 nm to the zero dispersion. The wide spectrum again indicates the
pump is close to the ZDW which ﬁts with the expected λ0 = 1554.2 nm.
In ﬁgure 4.14 and 4.15 the measured and simulated gain spectrums are seen, respectively.
The pump wavelengths used are 1549.7 nm and 1555.1 nm, and with a ZDW of 1545 nm
this places both measurements in the anomalous dispersion regime. Again the simulation
describes the gain band width with good accuracy. In ﬁgure 4.14 about 0.5 dB less gain
is observed at a pump wavelength of 1555.1 nm compared to the measurement at 1549.7
nm.
All three ﬁbers behaved as expected from the simulations, furthermore the eﬀect of
stimulated Raman scattering is seen on all gain spectra.
For ﬁbera and ﬁberb the
transition from normal to anomalous dispersion is evident in the change in gain spectra
at the expected ZDW. Fiberc behaves according to simulations for the two measurements
in the anomalous regime.
25
==PAGE:36==
4.5. CHOICE OF FILTERS AND FIBER
Figure 4.16: Transmission spectrum of four channels with two identical AWGs in series,
and the FBG ﬁltered pump at 1555.8 nm.
4.5
Choice of ﬁlters and ﬁber
As is evident from the previous sections the choice of ﬁber and ﬁlters depends on the
components available. It is of course required that a laser is available at the desired
wavelength and the single photon detectors are sensitive at the wavelength. The three
main problems here is the wavelength has to be close ZDW of the ﬁber preferably
in the anomalous dispersion regime. Furthermore the two channels for separating the
signal and idler photon has to be placed symmetrically in frequency around the pump
wavelength to ensure the photons detected are from the same photon pair generation
event. Lastly, side band ﬁltering of the laser has to be available at this wavelength.
Since the signal and idler are not separated very far in frequency and since the detectors
are very sensitive the ﬁltering has to be very narrow band and with a high extinction
ratio.
In ﬁgure 4.16 the FBG ﬁltered pump spectrum is seen. Also shown is the transmission
spectrum of the AWG ﬁltering channels. It is seen that channel 4 and channel 6 looks
to overlap slightly with the pump side bands, which results in pump leakage into the
detectors. It was later found that only channel 6 exhibited signiﬁcant pump leakage.
Channel 3 and Channel 7 are chosen due to lower pump leakage. The pump is not
perfectly centered between the channels, but within the FWHM of the channels. The
peak wavelengths of channel 3 and channel 7 are at 1552.2 nm and 1558.8 nm, The
pump wavelength is ﬁxed at 1555.8 nm due to the ﬁltering restraints. Fiberb has a
ZDW of 1554 nm, but requires about a factor 6 more pump power for the equivalent
photon pair generation due to shorter length, and lower nonlinear coeﬃcient. Fibera has
a ZDW at 1558.8 which would put the pump in the normal dispersion regime, at low
pump powers this has smaller signiﬁcance since the nonlinear phase mismatch is small.
Fiberc has a ZDW at 1545 nm, which would put the pump in the anomalous dispersion
regime albeit 10.8 nm from the ZDW, the ﬁber is also polarization maintaining (PM)
due to birefringence. The gain simulation puts channel 3 and channel 7 at the edge of
the gain bandwidth, but an added beneﬁt is that the FWM will only be generated in
one maintained polarization, while for ﬁbera and ﬁberb FWM will be generated in both
26
==PAGE:37==
4.5. CHOICE OF FILTERS AND FIBER
Figure 4.17: Diagram of the PM ﬁber
polarization alignment setup
Figure 4.18: Demonstration of FWM in
ﬁberc, the pump is at 1550 nm and the
signal at 1555.8 nm, the idler appears
at 1544.2 nm.
polarization. In all ﬁbers the SpRS will be generated in all polarizations. This makes it
possible to ﬁlter part of the SpRS using a simple polarization ﬁlter. Fiberc was chosen
after these considerations.
4.5.1
Coupling to polarization maintaining ﬁber
Coupling to a PM ﬁber is usually done by knowing if the fast or slow axis is aligned
with the tap on the ﬁber connector, then using a polarization dependent beamsplitter
to determine which polarization axis the light is traveling in. In this the ﬁber alignment
of the axis in relation to the connector tap is unknown, but the dispersion properties
of both axis are known. The fast axis has a ZDW at 1610 nm, which means only poor
phase matching is achievable at the wavelength of interest. The slow axis has a ZDW
of 1545 nm. To align the signal and pump with the slow axis,the setup on ﬁgure 4.17
is used.
80 mW of pump power is launched into the ﬁber, at 1550 nm.
The band
pass ﬁlter is there to suppress EDFA noise which makes the idler less pronounced. The
signal is launched at 1555.8 nm, and at -12 dBm of power. The attenuator is set to 10
dB to prevent saturating the OSA. Polarization of the pump and signal is adjusted for
maximum idler power.
In ﬁgure 4.18 the eﬀect of FWM is easily seen. The idler appears symmetrically around
the pump compared to signal. The idler is now monitored using the OSA and maximized
by adjusting polarization. Since the maximum parametric gain is in the slow axis at this
wavelength, and when the signal and pump are co-polarized. Therefore the signal and
pump are co-polarized on the slow axis when the parametric gain is maximized. The
polarization controllers were adjusted to see if there were two conﬁgurations with high
parametric gain, but it was not found.
27
==PAGE:38==
4.6. SINGLE PHOTON DETECTOR CHARACTERIZATION
4.6
Single photon detector characterization
To measure the single photons, two detectors of the type ID230 from IDquantique are
acquired.
The detectors are avalanche photo diodes operated in Geiger mode.
The
semiconductor used is InGaAs/InP, which has band gaps that enable detection from
900-1700 nm. The detectors are reverse biased, such that when a photon creates an
electron-hole pair in the depletion zone, this triggers an avalanche of electrons, such
that a high current can be measured. Subsequently the avalanche is quenched, and the
detector is reset. To accurately characterize the heralded single photon source a good
understanding of the single photon detectors (SPD) is necessary. The key parameters
are:
Eﬃciency
Dark count is the intrinsic noise in the system. It is due to the detector material, but
spurious light from outside the experiment also has to be taken into account.
Timing jitter is the uncertainty in the time tagging of the photon arrival.
Dead time is the time after a detection event it takes before the detector can detect
another event.
After pulsing is another detection event after the photon quenching has been per-
formed. This is due to trapped carriers in crystal defect or interfaces. This gives
rise to false counts.
Spectral Range is the wavelength range in which the detector is sensitive to incoming
light. Often the eﬃciency will vary over the range.
Photon number resolving ability to resolve photon number state, e.g. distinguish
between |1⟩and |2⟩states.
The detectors have as mentioned a spectral range of 900-1700 nm, they are non-photon
number resolving, and is rate for an after pulsing of 5% at a dead time of 20 µs The
timing jitter is rated as 250 ps. The two SPDs will from here be called SPD004 and
SPD005. The eﬃciency and dark counts are characterized in the following
4.6.1
Dark count measurement
The dark count or dark current is the intrinsic noise ﬂoor in the device. During mea-
surements another added noise will come from spurious light coupled into the ﬁber or
device. The dark counts are measured for both detectors at a range of eﬃciencies and
dead times. The eﬃciency and dead time is readily adjustable in the control software
which comes with the detector. The detectors are ﬁber coupled with a proprietary large
area multimode ﬁber which have a large numerical aperture and therefore spurious light
28
==PAGE:39==
4.6. SINGLE PHOTON DETECTOR CHARACTERIZATION
Figure 4.19: Dark counts for SPD004 and SPD005 for a range of deadtimes plottet on
a logarithmic y-axis.
Tunable
CW laser
PM
50/50
Counter
SPD
VOA
Figure 4.20: Diagram of the eﬃciency setup. PM: Power meter
from the light ﬁxtures can easily be coupled on the detector. Even with dark caps on
the ﬁbers ends the detectors detect 2000 counts/s. Therefore the dark count measure-
ment is taken with the lights oﬀ. Some light from the computer screen and diodes on
equipment might still be a problem, but these will also be present during experiments.
The measurements were done with an integration time of 60 s.
In ﬁgure 4.19 the dark count measurement of both detectors are seen. Both detectors
behave in a similar fashion with 25-100 counts/s of dark counts at all eﬃciencies with
dead time about 10 µs to 100 µs. At short dead times on the order of 4 µs the 25 % and
20% eﬃciency settings display a high number of dark counts. With the detector at 25 %
and 2 µs it has almost 250000 counts/s, which in practice makes this setting of limited
use. For short dead times the detector performs best with low eﬃciency.
4.6.2
Detector eﬃciency characterization
For testing the detector eﬃciency the calibrated light source method is used as described
by Hadﬁeld [42] The method uses a calibrated light source that is attenuated to a suitable
level using a precisely known attenuation. The rate of incident photons is then given as
Rincident = P hc
λ where P is the power after attenuation, h planck’s constant, c the speed
of light, and λ the wavelength. the mean photon per time interval can be described as
µ = Rincidentτ,
(4.1)
29
==PAGE:40==
4.7. OPTICAL PATH LENGTH
Display eﬃciency
Calculated eﬃciency 004
Calculated eﬃciency 005
25 %
0.2547
0.2401
20%
0.2079
0.2053
15%
0.1578
0.1532
10%
0.1120
0.1046
Table 4.3: Measured eﬃciency of the SPD’s at deadtime 5 µs and wavelength 1550 nm.
where the time interval τ for a CW source is the dead time of the detector.
The
detected rate in the limit of µη << 1 with η being the detector eﬃciency and corrected
for deadtime and dark counts is [42]
R
′
detected = Rdetected
Rincident
=

Rdetected
1 −Rdetectedτ −
D
1 −Dτ

.
(4.2)
The eﬃciency is given by the corrected detection rate divided by the incident rate [42]
η = R
′
detected
Rincident
=

Rdetected
1 −Rdetectedτ −
D
1 −Dτ

/µ.
(4.3)
It is worth noting that this model does not take after pulsing into account, which
will induce extra counts making the eﬃciency of the detectors artiﬁcially high. The
setup used is seen in ﬁgure 4.20. The source used is the ANDO AQ4321D laser. The
attenuation used is a combination of variable and non-variable attenuators.
The 3
dB coupler is characterized at the wavelength of interest.
The power meter used is
an FPM-600. The attenuation is measured in two parts, since the power meter has a
limited dynamic range. The total power after attenuation for the SPD004 measurements
is -121.77 dBm, and for SPD005 it is -122.36 dBm. The dead time is set to 5 µs and the
wavelength is at 1550 nm, since this is the wavelength our power meter is calibrated for.
The eﬃciency of both detectors has a good correspondence with the values given by the
manufacturer. The eﬃciency measured here is of course for the 1550 nm wavelength.
The measurements of signal and idler are in the range of 1552-1558 nm. According to
the spectral response of the detector provided by the manufacturer, this is close enough
to have an eﬀect of maximum 0.5 % loss of eﬃciency.
4.7
Optical path length
When measuring coincidence counts from the photon pairs it is crucial that the optical
path lengths of the signal and idler channels are the same. To ensure that this was
the case all AWGs were opened and the ﬁber pigtails measured with ruler. A length
diﬀerence of 25 cm was discovered and evened out by cutting and splicing a ﬁber to
compensate in the other channel. To make sure that chromatic dispersion did not aﬀect
our time of arrival a setup was build to measure optical path length for both channels.
The optical path length insiee the HNLF for both signal and idler wavelength is also
measured using this method to ensure that photon pairs created in the beginning of the
ﬁber does not experience a signiﬁcant oﬀset in the time of arrival, between signal and
idler, compared to the photon pairs created at the end of the ﬁber.
30
==PAGE:41==
4.7. OPTICAL PATH LENGTH
Figure 4.21: Diagram of the optical path measurement setup. OM is optical modulator,
PC polarization controller, PD is a photo diode.
The setup is seen in ﬁgure 4.21. The tunable CW laser is amplitude modulated using
the optical modulator (OM). The PC is there to optimize the polarization since the
OM is sensitive to polarization. The RF generator is set to 20 MHz to ensure that the
pulses are short enough. The pure RF signal is fed to the oscilloscope as a reference.
The CW laser is set to the wavelength of interest, either signal or idler, and the photo
diode then picks up the modulated optical signal, which it feeds to the oscilloscope.
This results in two signals: the reference and the optical signal. The latter is shifted
in time compared to the reference. This time shift is of course the delay through the
whole system including electronics and coaxial cables. The time shift is recorded and
the device under test is changed to the other arm, either signal or idler, again the delay
compared to the reference is recorded. The delay of each arm is found to be within 1 ns
of each other, since coincidence windows employed are 4.86 ns wide the photons should
be well within this including the timing jitter. To sanity check the method 5 m of optical
cable was added to the device under test which should result in t = s/csilica = 25ns shift
in pulse compared to the reference, which it did. Another approach to determine optical
path length diﬀerence would be to look at the histogram of time of arrival diﬀerence
between the two channels, which if the photon created from FWM was signiﬁcant should
be visible as a peak, were as the Raman photons would be evenly distributed, but no
such peak was visible.
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5
Results
5.1
One channel detection
The photon count from sFWM should depend quadratically on pump power as seen
in equations (2.25) and (3.2), while SpRS should be linear in pump power as seen the
second term in equation (3.2). Pump leakage will of course be linear in pump power.
So if the sFWM photons are the dominant contribution to the photon counts in our
detector, then the counts should grow quadratically with pump power. To investigate
whether sFWM, SpRS or pump leakage is the main source of photons count the setup
as seen in ﬁgure 5.1 is build. The pump is ﬁltered via a FBG and a circulator, with of
wavelength of 1555.8 nm. The pump light is progated through ﬁberc and connected to
channel 4 of the AWG. All three AWG are connected in series in channel 4. According to
our simulations channel 4 should be well withing the gain bandwidth of the sFWM. This
is then connected to SPD005 and the time tagger. To ensure that the power launched
into the ﬁber and the power left after propagating through the ﬁber is known, the power
is adjusted on the pump laser and is measured with a power meter for all powers, both
before and after the ﬁber. All measurements are taken with SPD005 set to to 10 %
eﬃciency and a dead time of 2 µs.
The low eﬃciency is partially to minimize after
pulsing and since the measurement is to see if the counts grow in a quadratic fashion a
low eﬃciency is an advantage since it will contribute to operating in the linear regime of
the detector. 19 measurements are taking with pump power and counts recorded with
an integration time of 30 seconds.
In ﬁgure 5.2, the photon counts as a function of power is displayed for the pump prop-
agating through the ﬁber, and for the ﬁltered pump directly plugged into the AWGs
bypassing the ﬁber. It is seen that the counts that the fraction of counts from pump
leakage in the measurement with the HNLF, is 1/450. By elimination we can conclude
that the counts are almost exclusive coming from nonlinear eﬀects such as SpRS or
sFWM. It is also seen that the pump leakage measurement is linear in power as ex-
pected. The HNLF measurement in ﬁgure 5.2 is almost completely linear as well, with
the counts dropping of a little bit due to detector saturation. This indicates that SpRS
dominates our counts.
To combat the SpRS and increase the sFWM, the pump power is increased by a factor
of 10, and the ﬁber spool is put in a styrofoam box with packets of dry ice with a
32
==PAGE:43==
5.1. ONE CHANNEL DETECTION
Figure 5.1: Diagram of the setup for measuring the counts in channel 4, with -120 dB
pump extinction.
Figure 5.2: Counts in channel 4 mea-
sured before and after the ﬁber.
Figure 5.3:
Counts is channel 4 at
T=300K and T=200K.
33
==PAGE:44==
5.2. COINCIDENCE TO ACCIDENTAL RATIO MEASUREMENT
temperature of 200 K. As described in the Raman theory section this should remove
SpRS by decreasing the phonon population in the material. To make sure the ﬁber is in
thermal equilibrium with the dry ice, the temperature monitored with a thermometer.
To ensure that the SPD is operating in the linear regime, the VOA is set to 10 dB
of attenuation. Measurements are taken using the same method as before. The ﬁber
is again removed from the dry ice, and when in thermal equilibrium another series of
measurements are taken at room temperature. The thermal gradient could be directly
monitored in the counts, which fell as the ﬁber was cooling oﬀand would reach a stable
level when the ﬁber had reached thermal equilibrium.
In ﬁgure 5.3 the photon counts as a function of pump power is plotted with a linear ﬁt,
for both 300 K and 200 K. Even with higher power and signiﬁcant SpRS suppression
no quadratic behavior is observed in the data. With the cooling applied a ≈30% drop
in photon counts for the same pump power is observed. This is the same reduction as
was expected for pure SpRS, which indicates that all our counts could be due to SpRS.
Since it is known that the PM-HNLF has got an unfavorable dispersion for the fast
axis, the pump polarization was turned, and a drop from 50000 c/s counts to 48000
c/s is observed. This indicates that only 4% of the counts are from sFWM assuming
total extinction of FWM. The ﬁber did not have polarization dependent loss, but it as
unknown if the ﬁber has polarization dependent Raman gain due to dopants. [43]
5.2
Coincidence to accidental ratio measurement
The setup is build a shown in ﬁgure 4.1 for conducting the CAR measurement signal and
idler are in channel 3 and channel 7. The pump laser is adjusted to 1555.8 nm, and the
side bands are ﬁltered using the FBG and circulator. The ﬁltered pump is propagated
through the ﬁber, and the generated signal and idler photons are separated spatially in
the ﬁrst AWG. To further remove pump leakage in both signal and idler arm, another
AWG is placed in each channel. The last AWGs act only in their capacity as band pass
ﬁlters. The heavily ﬁltered signal and idler sides are connected to the single photon
detectors, which in turn are connected to the time tagger. All counts are recorded in
the ID801s software.
In the previous experiment all three AWGs were arranged in one channel resulting in -
120 dB pump rejection. Each channel now only have two AWGs resulting in -80 dB pmp
rejection. To ascertain the amount of coincidence counts coming from pump leakage a
measurement is taken bypassing the ﬁber. The power measurement is adjusted for loss
in the ﬁber such that the power level is the same as it would be at the end of the ﬁber.
Coincidence counts are recorded with a coincidence window of 4.86 ns, and with an
integration time of 60 s.
In ﬁgure 5.4 raw coincidence counts are shown as a function of pump power, with
the ﬁber at room temperature. As shown the coincidence counts exhibit a quadratic
dependence on the pump power. While this initially was assumed to be an indication
of photon pairs from sFWM dominating the coincidence counts, it was discovered that
if pump leakage or SpRS dominates the counts, eﬀects which are both linear in pump
power, the coincidence counts will grow in a quadratic fashion with the pump power.
This is evident from equation (3.3) which describes the accidental counts.
34
==PAGE:45==
5.2. COINCIDENCE TO ACCIDENTAL RATIO MEASUREMENT
Figure 5.4: Coincidence counts at 300
K, shown with a linear an quadratic ﬁt.
Figure 5.5: Coincidence count and ac-
cidental coincident counts at T=200K.
Figure 5.6:
Coincidence counts after
AWG side band ﬁltering at t=300 K.
Figure 5.7:
Coincidence counts and
pump leakage at T=300K.
35
==PAGE:46==
5.2. COINCIDENCE TO ACCIDENTAL RATIO MEASUREMENT
Figure 5.8: Actual transmission spectrum of channel 3 and channel 7 of the AWG
In ﬁgure 5.6 the coincidence counts from pump leakage and from the pump propagating
through the PM-HNLF are seen. The coincidence counts from pump leakage is about
1/20 out of the raw coincidence counts. Notice also that at 0.05 mW of pump power
the growth in coincidence counts drops, this is due the detector saturating and leaving
the linear regime.
Having established that pump leakage is reasonably small the ﬁber is cooled using dry
ice to remove SpRS. Again the ﬁber is put between two packets of dry ice in a styrofoam
box, and the temperature is checked using a thermometer. To check how many of the
coincidence counts are accidental counts the signal arm is delayed by 5 m, which result
in a 25 ns delay, which is well outside the coincidence window of 4.86 ns. Photon pairs
generated by the sFWM should be delayed such that none of the pairs generated together
result in coincidence counts.
In ﬁgure 5.5 the coincidence counts, and accidental counts from the dry ice cooled ﬁber
is shown. A drop in the coincidences compared to the room temperature is observed,
but the delayed arm measurement has the same amount of coincidence counts as the
no-delay measurement meaning CAR ≈0, and since the pump leakage is low, this leads
to the conclusion that the accidental counts are dominated by the SpRS.
The very high amount of SpRS was discovered to be due to hitherto unknown trans-
mission bands of the AWGs, as shown in ﬁgure 5.8. These bands are due to the nature
of the AWG, which rely on a path diﬀerence to apply a phase shift, then relying on
interference to sort the wavelengths. This interference eﬀect is periodic in wavelength
and in our case results in a transmission window every 30 nm. Since the gain extends
beyond 15 Thz on the Stokes sides then both channels will have experienced a tremen-
dous amount of SpRS leaking in the channels. To ﬁlter out the side channels of the
AWGs, two tunable band pass ﬁlters (TBPF) are employed, one in each channel, with a
FWHM of 5 nm, and a peak wavelength loss of 2 dB. In ﬁgures 5.9 and 5.10 the TBPF
ﬁlter transmission spectrums are shown, and the transmission spectrum of two AWGs
in series with a TBPF. This gives an -40 dB attenuation of the AWG side bands. The
small drops in the transmission spectrums are artifacts from the TLS measurement with
36
==PAGE:47==
5.2. COINCIDENCE TO ACCIDENTAL RATIO MEASUREMENT
Figure 5.9: Transmission spectrum of
the applied tunable bandpass ﬁlter, and
the spectrum of the AWG ﬁltered with
the TBPF in channel 3.
Figure 5.10: Transmission spectrum of
the applied tunable bandpass ﬁlter, and
the spectrum of the AWG ﬁltered with
the TBPF in channel 7.
the OSA. With this ﬁltering a new CAR measurement is performed at 300 K with an
integration time of 60s. In ﬁgure 5.6 the coincidence counts are plotted, compared to
ﬁgure5.7 the coincidence counts have dropped by a factor of about 10, with the new
measurement having a peak coincidence count of 225 compared to 2105. The drop in
coincidence counts are partially due to 2 dB extra loss in each arm from the ﬁltering, but
most are from the removed SpRS. A delayed arm measurement of the coincidence counts
is done to obtain the accidental counts. It was found to be identical to the coincidence
counts with zero delay, resulting in a CAR of 0. Unfortunately further experiments were
not possible due to time restrictions.
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Discussion
In chapter 4 the stimulated FWM is demonstrated and shows good correspondence with
the simulation performed in chapter 3. This indicates that we have a good control and
understanding of the phase matching and that we are generating FWM at the AWG
ﬁltering channels for the signal and idler. In chapter 3, the CAR simulations showed
that, to a point, higher pump power resulted in higher CAR, and the maximum pump
power for operating in the single photon regime in ﬁberc was 20 mW. The highest pump
power that has been used experimentally is 0.5 mW, due to the detector saturation.
The number of photon pairs from FWM scales with (γPpL)2, and SpRS and pump
leakage scales linearly. Then the pump power might have been too low for the FWM
to dominate either in total counts or coincidence counts. In chapter 1 it is described
how the photon pairs are generated symmetrically around the pump in frequency due
to energy conservation, since the signal and idler channels are detuned by 0.5 nm from
the optimal frequency placement, some of the signal and idler photons originate from
diﬀerent photon pairs, which reduces true coincidence counts. In chapter 5 it was seen
that pump leakage was a negligible part of the total counts and the coincidence counts
with it being 1/450 and 1/20 of the counts, respectively. An estimation that 4% of
the photon counts were from FWM indicated that SpRS was seen to account for the
majority of the counts. Side channels in the AWGs were discovered, and as seen from
the broad SpRS spectrum simulated in chapter 3, several of these side band channel
are in the main Raman peak indicating they are responsible for the dominance of SpRS
counts. Filtering of the side bands caused the coincidence count to drop by a factor of
10, indication the side bands were at fault.
38
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 7
Conclusion and outlook
7.1
Conclusion
In this thesis the generation of heralded single photons have been explored numerically
and experimentally. The nonlinear wave equation was derived from maxwells equations
and the degenerate FWM rate equations, the parametric gain were derived. Further-
more the CAR and second order coherence function were introduced in describing the
the heralded single photon source. The SpRS, FWM and CAR were numerically an-
alyzed to ascertain optimal pump placement, and pump power. It is concluded that
degenerate FWM with signal and idler at less than 1 THz detuning is the most feasi-
ble route. Experimentally the parametric gain of three ﬁbers are measured for a range
of wavelengths and compared to numerical simulations. Good agreement is observed.
Furthermore ﬁltering components were characterized and the eﬃciency and dark counts
were measured for the single photon detectors. Pump leakage was characterized and
a signiﬁcant reduction was achieved using narrow band ﬁltering with it accounting for
1/20 coincidence counts. SpRS was found to be a large contributor to noise, and was
reduced through dry ice ﬁber cooling by 30%, and even further by added side band
ﬁltering.
7.2
Outlook
To improve the experiment the obvious route as also discussed in the earlier is to increase
the pump power, to increase the photon pair generation, which would improve CAR.
Since the channels are slightly detuned from the optimal peak wavelength, then either
moving the pump wavelength, by acquiring a FBG, for pump side band ﬁltering, at a
better wavelength, or moving the channels slightly. The SpRS could also be suppressed
further by using liquid nitrogen instead of dry ice, since this would remove 80% of the
SpRS compared to 30% for the dry ice. In the polarization maintaining ﬁber phase
matching is not achieved on the fast axis, therefore the photon pairs are generated in on
the slow axis. The SpRS is generated in all polarizations and the cross-polarized photons
can be removed by a polarization ﬁlter. Looking further a two pump conﬁguration in a
birefringent or a few moded ﬁber could open up possibilities in moving the signal and
idler beyond the Raman peak using a more advanced phase matching techniques.
39
==PAGE:50==
Bibliography
[1] M. D. Eisaman, J. Fan, A. Migdall, and S. V. Polyakov.
Invited Review Ar-
ticle:
Single-photon sources and detectors.
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments,
82(7):071101, 2011.
[2] Peter W. Shor. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete
logaritms on a quantum computer. 1995.
[3] Lov K. Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search. 1996.
[4] Artur K. Ekert. Quantum cryptography based on bell’s theorem. Physical review
letters, 67, 1991.
[5] Takao Aoki, a. S. Parkins, D. J. Alton, C. a. Regal, Barak Dayan, E. Ostby, K. J.
Vahala, and H. J. Kimble. Eﬃcient routing of single photons by one atom and a
microtoroidal cavity. Physical Review Letters, 102(8):2–5, 2009.
[6] Thomas M. Babinec, Birgit J. M. Hausmann, Mughees Khan, Yinan Zhang, Jeron-
imo R. Maze, Philip R. Hemmer, and Marko Loncar. A diamond nanowire single-
photon source. Nature Nanotechnology, 5(3):195–199, 2010.
[7] Kartik Srinivasan and Oskar Painter. Linear and nonlinear optical spectroscopy
of a strongly coupled microdisk–quantum dot system. Nature, 450(7171):862–865,
2007.
[8] E. Bocquillon, C. Couteau, M. Razavi, R. Laﬂamme, and G. Weihs. Coherence mea-
sures for heralded single-photon sources. Physical Review A - Atomic, Molecular,
and Optical Physics, 79(3):1–4, 2009.
[9] Stephan Krapick, Harald Herrmann, Benjamin Brecht, Viktor Quiring, Hubertus
Suche, and Christine Silberhorn. A highly eﬃcient integrated two-color source for
heralded single photons.
2013 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics Europe
and International Quantum Electronics Conference, CLEO/Europe-IQEC 2013,
033010, 2013.
[10] X Y Li, J Chen, P Voss, J Sharping, and P Kumar. All-ﬁber photon-pair source
for quantum communications: Improved generation of correlated photons. Opt.\
Exp., 12(16):3737–3744, 2004.
[11] Lei Yang, Xiaoxin Ma, Xueshi Guo, Liang Cui, and Xiaoying Li. Charactering
ﬁber-based source of heralded single photons. 2011 International Conference on
Multimedia Technology, ICMT 2011, 053843:2034–2036, 2011.
40
==PAGE:51==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] Jingyun Fan and Alan Migdall. A broadband high spectral brightness ﬁber-based
two-photon source. Optics express, 15(6):2915–2920, 2007.
[13] Govind Agrawal. Nonlinear Fiber Optics. New York, page 467, 2001.
[14] J. Hansryd, P. A. Andrekson, M. Westlund, J. Li, and P. O. Hedekvist. Fiber-based
optical parametric ampliﬁers and their applications.
IEEE Journal on Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics, 8(3):506–520, 2002.
[15] K.-I. Harada, H. Takesue, H. Fukuda, T. Tsuchizawa, T. Watanabe, K. Yamada,
Y. Tokura, and S.-I. Itabashi. Frequency and Polarization Characteristics of Cor-
related Photon-Pair Generation Using a Silicon Wire Waveguide. IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 16(1):325–331, 2010.
[16] Alan Migdall. Single photon generation and detection: experimental methods in
the physical sciences. 2013.
[17] Q. Lin, F. Yaman, and Govind P. Agrawal.
Photon-pair generation in optical
ﬁbers through four-wave mixing: Role of Raman scattering and pump polarization.
Physical Review A, 75(2):023803, 2007.
[18] R. H. Stolen, J. P. Gordon, W. J. Tomlinson, and H. a. Haus. Raman response
function of silica-core ﬁbers. Journal of the Optical Society of America B, 6(6):1159–
1166, 1989.
[19] D Hollenbeck and C D Cantrell. Multiple-vibrational-mode model for ﬁber-optic
Raman gain spectrum and response function. J Opt Soc Am B, 19(12):2886–2892,
2002.
[20] Christopher Duﬀy. Stimulated Brillouin Scattering In Monomode Optical Fibres
For Sensing And Signal Processing Applications. 4(January):10–19, 1994.
[21] Hiroki Takesue and Kyo Inoue. 1.5-Microm Band Quantum-Correlated Photon Pair
Generation in Dispersion-Shifted Fiber: Suppression of Noise Photons By Cooling
Fiber. Optics express, 13(20):7832–7839, 2005.
[22] Christopher Gerry and Peter Knight. Introductory quantum optics. 3, 2008.
[23] M. Hijlkema, B. Weber, H. P. Specht, S. C. Webster, a. Kuhn, and G. Rempe. A
single-photon server with just one atom. Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
Europe - Technical Digest, pages 253–255, 2007.
[24] Peter B R Nisbet-Jones, Jerome Dilley, Daniel Ljunggren, and Axel Kuhn. Highly
eﬃcient source for indistinguishable single photons of controlled shape. New Journal
of Physics, 13, 2011.
[25] H.J. Mamin, M. Kim, M.M. Sherwood, C.T. Rettner, K. Ohno, D.D. Awschalom,
and D. Rugar. Nanoscale nuclear magnetic resonance with a nitrogen-vacancy spin
sensor. Science, 339, 2013.
[26] Shailesh Kumar, Alexander Huck, and Ulrik L. Andersen. Eﬃcient coupling of a
single diamond color center to propagating plasmonic gap modes. Nano Letters,
13(3):1221–1225, 2013.
41
==PAGE:52==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] Stefan Schietinger, Michael Barth, Thomas Aichele, and Oliver Benson. Plasmon-
enhanced single photon emission from a nanoassembled metal-diamond hybrid
structure at room temperature. Nano letters, 9(4):1694–1698, 2009.
[28] Mohammad Jamali, Ilja Gerhardt, Mohammad Rezai, Karsten Frenner, Helmut
Fedder, and Jörg Wrachtrup. Microscopic diamond solid-immersion-lenses fabri-
cated around single defect centers by focused ion beam milling. Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments, 85(12):123703, 2014.
[29] A. Dousse, L. Lanco, J. Suﬀczyński, E. Semenova, A. Miard, A. Lemaître, I. Sagnes,
C. Roblin, J. Bloch, and P. Senellart.
Controlled Light-Matter Coupling for a
Single Quantum Dot Embedded in a Pillar Microcavity Using Far-Field Optical
Lithography. Physical Review Letters, 101(26):267404, 2008.
[30] Hyochul Kim, Deepak Sridharan, Thomas C Shen, Glenn S Solomon, and Edo
Waks. Strong coupling between two quantum dots and a photonic crystal cavity
using magnetic ﬁeld tuning. Optics Express, 19(3):2589, 2011.
[31] Mark J. Holmes, Kihyun Choi, Satoshi Kako, Munetaka Arita, and Yasuhiko
Arakawa. Room-temperature triggered single photon emission from a III-nitride
site-controlled nanowire quantum dot. Nano Letters, 14(2):982–986, 2014.
[32] Leo Yu, Chandra M. Natarajan, Tomoyuki Horikiri, Carsten Langrock, Jason S.
Pelc, Michael G. Tanner, Eisuke Abe, Sebastian Maier, Christian Schneider, Sven
Höﬂing, Martin Kamp, Robert H. Hadﬁeld, Martin M. Fejer, and Yoshihisa Ya-
mamoto. Two-photon interference at telecom wavelengths for time-bin-encoded sin-
gle photons from quantum-dot spin qubits. Nature Communications, 6(May):8955,
2015.
[33] Yun Zhang, Hai Wang, Xiaoying Li, Jietai Jing, Changde Xie, and Kunchi Peng. Ex-
perimental generation of bright two-mode quadrature squeezed light from a narrow-
band nondegenerate optical parametric ampliﬁer. Physical Review A, 62(2):1–4,
2000.
[34] Peter J. Mosley, JeﬀS. Lundeen, Brian J. Smith, Piotr Wasylczyk, Alfred B. U’Ren,
Christine Silberhorn, and Ian A. Walmsley. Heralded generation of ultrafast single
photons in pure quantum states. Physical Review Letters, 100(13):1–4, 2008.
[35] Georg Harder, Vahid Ansari, Benjamin Brecht, Thomas Dirmeier, Christoph Mar-
quardt, and Christine Silberhorn. An optimized photon pair source for quantum
circuits. Optics Express, 21(12):13975, 2013.
[36] J. Fulconis, O. Alibart, W.J. Wadsworth, P.St.J. Russell, and J.G. Rarity. High
brightness single mode source of correlated photon pairs using a photonic crystal
ﬁber. Optics Express, 13, 2005.
[37] Shellee D Dyer, Burm Baek, and Sae Woo Nam. High-brightness, low-noise, all-ﬁber
photon pair source. Optics express, 17(12):10290–7, 2009.
[38] Qiang Zhou, Wei Zhang, Jie-rong Cheng, Yi-dong Huang, and Jiang-de Peng. Prop-
erties of optical ﬁber based synchronous heralded single photon sources at 1.5 µm.
Physics Letters A, 375(24):2274–2277, 2011.
42
==PAGE:53==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[39] Peng-Xiang Wang, Qiang Zhou, Wei Zhang, Yi-Dong Huang, and Jiang-De Peng.
High-Quality Fiber-Based Heralded Single-Photon Source at 1.5 µm.
Chinese
Physics Letters, 29(5):054215, 2012.
[40] Alex S Clark, Chad Husko, Matthew J Collins, Gaelle Lehoucq, Stéphane Xavier,
Alfredo De Rossi, Sylvain Combrié, Chunle Xiong, and Benjamin J Eggleton. Her-
alded single-photon source in a III-V photonic crystal. Optics letters, 38(5):649–51,
2013.
[41] J Hansryd, F Dross, M Westlund, P A Andrekson, and S N Knudsen. Increase
of the SBS threshold in a short highly nonlinear ﬁber by applying a temperature
distribution. Journal of Lightwave Technology, 19(11):1691–1697, 2001.
[42] Robert H. Hadﬁeld. Single-photon detectors for optical quantum information ap-
plications. Nature Photonics, 3(12):696–705, 2009.
[43] Karsten Rottwitt, Jake Bromage, Andrew J. Stentz, Lufeng Leng, Malcolm E.
Lines, and Henrik Smith. Scaling of the Raman gain coeﬃcient: Applications to
germanosilicate ﬁbers. Journal of Lightwave Technology, 21(7):1652–1662, 2003.
1
