==PAGE:1==
Advancing facilitation
of large workshops
Master thesis by Linn Elster Jensen
Design and Innovation
==PAGE:2==
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Advancing facilitation 
of large workshops 
 
Official title: Advancing co-creation processes through digital support of facilitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master thesis in Design and Innovation 
By: Linn Elster Jensen, s102991 
Supervisor: Balder Onarheim  
 
Technical University of Denmark  
Department of Management Engineering, building 424,  
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark  
 
February 29, 2016 
 
 
 
1 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:5==
Abstract 
Facilitating creative workshop with a large number of participants is a complex job
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
demanding careful practical planning, management of timing and manipulation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the constraints that obstructs the participants. A delimitation of the concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘workshop’ to a productive, hands-on process has been the starting point of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigation of how this complex job can be supported. An attempt is made to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answer the question of what good facilitation includes, and how this can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standardized without limiting the facilitator by suggesting specific methods or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
schedules for the workshop. The design of such system has been investigated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following
the
Double
Diamond
Process
Model,
a
linear
design process, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combination with an iterative verification of initial ideas in the sense of tests with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
target segment, i.e. facilitators. In this thesis, a product that combines an engineering
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
mind-set with creative problem solving is suggested under the name Work Face.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Work Face is a web application for planning, executing and optimizing workshops
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
offering a change of the current workflow. By advancing sporadic and manual tasks
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into a structured and consistent process, Work Face lightens the workload and stress
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the facilitator. Work Face shows a potential to improve the experience from the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participant’s point of view by allowing groups to work at various pace and by helping
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the facilitator to assist the groups that most critically needs stimuli in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proceed. This dissertation thoroughly describes the design process that lead to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design of Work Face from the initial empirical and theoretical research, over the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development of multiple concept proposals to the detailing of Work Face and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
præsentation of a prototype.  
 
Resumé 
At facilitere en kreativ workshop med et stort antal deltagere er en kompleks opgave,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
som stiller krav til nøje planlægning, tidsstyring og manipulation af de rammer, der
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sættes for deltagerne. En afgrænsning af begrebet ‘workshop’ som en produktive og
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
praktisk proces, har været udgangspunktet for at udforske mulighederne for at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understøtte denne komplekse opgave. Det er forsøgt at besvare spørgsmålet “hvad
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
er god facilitering?”, og hvordan dette kan standardiseres uden at begrænse
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitatoren
ved
at
foreslå
konkrete
metoder
og
forløb
for
en
workshop.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Udforskningen af et sådan design er forløbet efter the Double Diamond procesmodel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i kombination med en iterativ validering af umiddelbare ideer med målgruppen,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitatorer. I dette projekt foreslås et produkt under navnet Work Face, som
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forbinder en ingeniør-tankegang med kreativ problemløsning. Work Face er en
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
web-applikation til planlægning, eksekvering and optimering af workshops, som kan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ændre den nuværende arbejdsgang. Ved at forfine sporadiske and manuelle opgaver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
til en struktureret og konsistent proces, kan Work Face lette den arbejdsbyrde og det
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stress, der hviler på en facilitator. Work Face har potentiale til at også at forbedre
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
oplevelsen for deltagerne ved at tillade grupperne at arbejde i forskellige tempi og
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
ved at hjælpe facilitatoren til at assistere de grupper, som mest kritiske har brug for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stimulans for at kunne fortsætte. Denne afhandling er en grundig gennemgang af
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
den designproces der har ført til designet af Work Face fra den indledende empiriske
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
og teoretiske research, over udviklingen af en række mulige koncepter til en
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
detaljering af Work Face og præsentationen af en prototype.  
 
 
3 
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgement  
I wish to thank all the kind people who have contributed to this project. First of all, a special thank must
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
be directed at Assistant Professor, Balder Onarheim for his dedicated supervision and discussions on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
both process and solution.  
 
In my empirical work, I was able to collect data at a series of workshops under the auspices of both
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copenhagen Institute of NeuroCreativity (CINC ) with Balder Onarheim and Morten Friis-Olivarius,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
Co-cept
with Carl Thrane and Balder Onarheim, and Villads Keiding under Technical University of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
Denmark. Further, I would like to thank the experienced facilitators that enlightened me about their
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work and pains: Mads Bonne, Ulla Tønner, Ronni Tino Pedersen and Jeppe Jensen.  
 
Without Emil Bunk, Carl Thrane, Bo Mouridsen and Simon Borrit, kick-starting the ideation phase for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this project would have been difficult. Those four helped developing a wider range of concepts, and for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
those inputs I am grateful. 
  
Thanks to Balder Onarheim and Philip Cash for raising the opportunity to test an early prototype of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshop planner with a large group of students and collect feedback for an improved product. 
  
Further, three highly skilled and professional facilitators took time to validate the prototype of Work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Face and share their ideas for improvements. Diana Velasco, Jesper Frederiksen and Alisan Atvur thank
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
you for the feedback and the motivating words. 
 
Lastly, several resources at Nodes have contributed with knowledge on digital development and design.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special thanks should be directed at Søren Clausen, graphical designer, for the help on design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mock-ups of Work Face to the landing page, to Dennis Haulund Nielsen for advice on front-end
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development and for building a simple web app prototype, and to Rasmus Ebbesen for a thorough
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
review of Work Face's server and backend structure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Copenhagen Institute of NeuroCreativity: ​http://www.neurocreativity.dk/  
2 Co-cept: ideation management tool, ​http://co-cept.dk/  
 
 
4 
==PAGE:7==
Table of content 
 
1 Introduction 
8
 
1.1 Project description 
9 
1.2 Vision
9 
1.3 Introduction
9 
1.4 Methodology
11 
 
2 Discover
12 
  ​2.1 Initial delimitation of the concept ‘workshop’
13 
  ​2.2 Why co-creation, how co-creation?
13 
  ​2.3 Idea verification I: landing page-test of initial idea
15 
  ​2.4 Literature review: how to facilitate properly 
17 
  ​2.5 A take from private companies: certified facilitators
19 
  ​2.6 Alternatives and substitutes: existing products
21 
  ​2.7 Empirical research: workshop observations
24 
  ​2.8 Empirical research: background interviews
27 
 
3 Define
30 
  ​3.1 Main theoretical derivatives 
31 
  ​3.2 Derivatives from reviewing certifications
31 
  ​3.3 Two underlying conditions for the design
31 
  ​3.4 Main problem: the facilitator cannot be everywhere at once
32 
  ​3.5 Design criteria for the solution 
32 
  ​3.6 Delimiting the concept of ‘Workshops’
33 
  ​3.7 Idea verification II: prototype of a workshop planner
36 
 
4 Develop
40 
  ​4.1 Fixation
41 
  ​4.2 ‘Assumption Dumption’ 
41 
  ​4.3 Dividing the workflow into subsystems
42 
  ​4.4 Ideation workshop
43 
  ​4.5 Single-handed ideation brainstorms within the subsystems
47 
  ​4.6 Conceptualization
48 
  ​4.7 Drawings of the four concepts
50 
  ​4.8 Mapping unique experience and limitations 
51 
  ​4.9 Assessment against weighted design criteria
52 
  ​4.10 The persona’s perception of the concepts
53 
  ​4.11 The chosen concept: concept C, also known as Work Face
54 
  ​4.12 Results from the initial idea verifications
54 
 
5 Deliver, detailing Work Face
59 
  ​5.1 Recapitulate: So, what is Work Face?
60 
  ​5.2 System design: before, during and after 
60 
  ​5.3 Design specifications
61 
  ​5.4 Platform discussion: native app or web app?
63 
  ​5.5 Prototyping
65 
  ​5.6 Technical clarification of how to collect photos
71 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:8==
  ​5.7 Technical clarification on managing time and groups
71 
 
6 Further work, Discussion, Conclusion and Reflection
75 
  ​6.1 Future work
76 
  ​6.2 Discussion 
78 
  ​6.3 Conclusion
81 
  ​6.4 Reflection upon the process
82 
 
References
84 
 
List of tables 
Table 1: Substitutes for planning 
Table 2: Substitutes during execution 
Table 3: Envisioned alternatives to aid facilitation 
Table 4: Overview panel of attended WSs 
Table 5: Summarizing table of quotes 
Table 6: Overview panel of the interviewees 
Table 7: Summarizing table of key derivatives 
Table 8: Design criteria 
Table 9: Assessing concepts against weighted design criteria 
Table 10: Assessment in the light of the personas 
Table 11: Design specifications: planning  
Table 12: pros and cons for native applications and web app 
 
List of images 
Image 1: Illustration of the Design Council double diamond process model 
Image 2: Sanders’ design research matrix 
Image 3: Literature review  
Image 4: Evocative photos from the attended WSs 
Image 5: Evocative illustrations to the Copenhagen Municipality-WS 
Image 6: Evocative illustrations to the Dong Energy-WS 
Image 7: Evocative illustrations to the Designit-WS 
Image 8: The Co-creation Paradigm 
Image 9: Division of the workshop workflow into subsystems and activities 
Image 10: Screenshot of the folder containing the sorted documentation from ideation workshop 
Image 11: Miniatures of the comic stripes describing the workflow of each concept 
Image 12: section of the graph of activities over time 
Image 13: Diagram of traffic generated from each referrer websites 
Image 14: Section of the service blueprint visualizing the workflow through the system 
Image 15: section of the blueprint representing the planning activities in the system 
Image 16: Section of flowchart 
Image 17: Overview of exercises. The first view in the system 
Image 18: Create exercise with introduction and step 1 
Image 19: create workshop, by implementing existing exercises 
Image 20: Facilitator dashboard 
Image 21: Entities of the system: a step belongs to an exercise, exercises are combined into workshops
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with unique IDs 
Image 22: Exchange of data from the groups to server and further on to the facilitator dashboard
 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
Glossary 
A couple of terms are frequently used throughout this thesis and besides the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduction given to the terms directly in the text, a glossary can be found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
here:  
 
Exercise​: An exercise is a given specifically named activity or method with a
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
certain output. This can be a certain brainstorm method, such as ’Negative
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
brainstorming’ or a concrete activity towards a prioritizing of eg. ideas or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts.  
 
Central time management​: This is a way of administrating time during a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshop in order to meet the deadlines in the schedule. The facilitator starts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and stops time collectively for all participants.  
 
Props​: Props are all the physical requisitions needed in an exercises, e.g. sticky
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notes, pencils, clay, paper etc.  
 
Workshop planner​: The workshop planner a part of the system in which the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator sets up exercises and workshops. The entire schedule is planned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
here.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Project description  
This thesis is an investigation of how the complex work of facilitating successful workshops can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supported, particularly when the workshop (prospectively, WS) involves a great number of participants.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Approaching this investigation raises a fundamental question of what good facilitation is, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presupposes a delimitation of the concept ‘workshop’. Further, developing an understanding of the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficulties associated with such WSs is an underlying goal of the project. Understanding the activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
carried out before, during and after is the foundation for proposing a tool or a series of tools that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
enhances the experience for the facilitator, who will be of primary concern throughout the thesis.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Empirical findings as well as a review of literature on facilitating co-creation will be brought into play in
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the exploration of opportunities to design an improved dynamic amongst the elements within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation of the participant’s work in a WS.  
 
1.2 Vision 
Putting the project description into motion, a more tangible vision for a ‘good solution’ helps setting the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
direction of the design process. The vision for the project is based on three objectives: 
 
1.
Easing the work and stress load on the facilitator by providing an overview and tools to assist in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the administration of participants and their process and enable collective design intervention. 
 
2.
Improve participants’ impressions of the WS by providing a smooth and safe process through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the WS. 
 
3.
Improving the outcome of the WS.  
 
1.3 Introduction 
This dissertation concerns the development of a product that combines an engineering mind-set with
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creative problem solving. A product that aims at structuring and standardizing a process, which to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
many epitomizes chaos and disorder. Over the last couple of years, I have had the opportunity to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
facilitate a number of WSs, mainly under the auspices of my education, with various degrees of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
success. Challenges with regards to planning and management during the WS have been the source of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some frustration. At the end of it all, one can only hope to have provided sufficient assistance to those
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the 10 groups needing it the most during the WS. I have been left with tables loaded with post-it
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notes and clay and a pending puzzle in sorting the post-its and decode which activity or exercise (that
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being a specific brainstorm method, discussion prioritization task and the like) each of the post-its
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
belongs to. The motivation for carrying out this project as my final thesis lies within personal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences of WSs as well as those of my peers and other more experienced facilitators. Prior to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formalizing the project, the opportunities for such project were explored and a preliminary survey of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the existing solutions, research revealed no obvious solutions offering the kind of support that I was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
looking for. In response, the present thesis seeks new possibilities for supporting the facilitator’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complex job. 
  
This project begins with is an initial definition of the type of WSs this thesis concerns, as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding of WSs varies considerably. The term ‘creative WS’ is then introduced covering the series
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
of hands-on, problem-solving and productive activities taking place in the relevant WSs. Further, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
thorough understanding of such WSs was obtained through observations, interviews and actual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation of WSs from my side. As the empirical work showed that a distinction had to be made
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:12==
between WSs involving few participants and a large number of participants, focus throughout the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design process was placed on the later. Such WSs include more than 20 participants who will most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
likely be split into smaller groups of 4-6 people. The challenges found in the research (in conjunction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with theoretical derivatives on the differences between co-creation processes with and without the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support from a facilitator), represent the foundation for a number of design criteria. These are the
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements that a suggested solution will have to live up to in order to propose a valid solution. The
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
criteria include the handling of a dynamically editable schedule for the WS and distribution of the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instructions telling participants how to proceed during the WS. Further, they touch upon a more flexible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
time management system that allows participants to work at different pace while still meeting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
timetable. The system should attempt to motivate the participants to be extroverted and share their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work across the groups during the WS. A feasible way of collecting documentation of the groups’ work
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was a criterion for the process that lies after the WS. Finally, a means to support the facilitator’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
self-improvement through evaluations proved to be an essential part of such system. 
  
The suggested solution, Work Face, is a web application for planning, executing and optimizing WSs.
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is a result from the design process; a combination of linear consecutive phases and testing initial
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas continuously. From the outset, building preto and prototypes has contributed to an early
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
validation of hypotheses and a more well conceived solution. Work Face has the potential to change the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current workflow, advancing sporadic and manual tasks towards a structured and consistent process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Work Face sums up to a strong tool that facilitates both planning, execution and self-development.
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, Work Face is ​not a substitution of the human, empathic and stimulating facilitator. Rather it is an
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
extension of the facilitator, a tool for him or her to perform better. 
  
In the continued thesis, the theoretical field of co-creation, the sparse amount of existing alternative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions and practices of facilitation will be explored. This introduction is interrupted by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
description of the first initial idea verification or the activities towards obtaining verification. The second
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section will summarize the initial research findings in order to develop a set of requirements for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
continuing design of solutions. Again, the verification of an initial idea interrupts this section. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiatives carried out to exhaust the possibilities within the requirements are dealt with in the third
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section. This includes an ideation and a conceptualization phase as well as an assessment of the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts with a final selection in mind. Finally, the concept, Work Face, is elaborated and the design of
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
the prototype and the collected feedback presented.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Methodology 
The Double Diamond Process model (Design Council, 2005) is the basis of the design process in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thesis. The double diamond suggests a rather linear approach, however the approach in this thesis has
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aimed at a more iterative process where testing and feedback loops provide on-going validations of the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design. The double diamond process model depicts a four-stage model based in the two fundamental
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ways of thinking: divergent and convergent (image 1).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Image 1: Illustration of the Design Council double diamond process model 
 
Discover is the initial divergent phase in which research is carried out. A literature review of how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-creation theory perceives facilitation along with a series of qualitative interviews and observations
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent the sources to knowledge about the field. The ​define stage follows up on the research from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘discover’ and converges this into more concrete objectives to fulfil in the project. This work includes the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development of archetypes of facilitators (​personas​), fictional cases of WSs (​workshopas​) and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
definition of a set of design criteria. ​Develop is the second divergent stage, and this is where ideation,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conceptualization and assessment is taking place. This is where the design of possible solutions that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can meet the defined criteria is explored. Design Council proposes that testing and feedback loops are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities, which take place within the ​deliver stage. In this project, developing and verifying ideas have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
played a crucial role throughout the entire process. Consequently, testing is not an activity limited to
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ‘deliver’ stage. The emphasis within the deliver stage, thus, has been detailing the final concepts;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iterations of prototyping and collecting feedback to further finalize the concept.  
 
Shuffling rapid development and thorough research is more in line with the effectuation model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Sarasvathy, 2008), a model that emphasizes the importance of moving fast within entrepreneurship. A
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
prototype offers a means to easily explain a product to the target segment and collect their initial
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback before going into actual development. In this thesis, those two approaches are combined and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used side-by-side, thereby providing an iterative twist to the linear double diamond process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
2 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Initial delimitation of the concept ‘workshop’ 
To begin it is essential to present a basic definition of the term workshop (WS) for this project. WSs may
 
     
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
take multiple forms and have multiple purposes depending on the context. Looking up the word
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘workshop’, the emphasis is typically on hands-on work, cooperation, and to some extent on creative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem solving (Gyldendal - Den Store Danske, 2016 and Wikipedia, 2015). Here, within this thesis this
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same focus is followed, where productive tasks and creative problem solving are key factors for what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be referred to as a ‘creative workshop’​. ​The following is an attempt to narrow down the concept of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such WSs: 
 
●
Creativity as defined by Mumford (2003) involves the creation of something novel and useful. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same way creative WSs strive to produce concrete outputs, namely ideas, concepts, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototypes to meet a certain need or solve a problem.  
 
●
The WS will contain a number of creative methods or exercises and the nature of the method or
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercise may vary greatly. The common denominator is that the participants actively contribute
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to the outcome (whether in terms of ideas, concepts, prototypes, etc).  
 
●
The participants and the facilitator are present in a common location and work face-to-face. 
 
●
The WS is a distilled and focused process with a limited duration and a specific goal. 
 
Such WSs can deal with both disruptive and continuous design. In disruptive WSs, the creation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
radically new ideas or concepts is pursued. However, continuous WSs deal with the progression of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current resources or products. Although the creative methods embedded in the two scenarios might
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vary greatly, the processes of running and facilitating the WSs, are alike.  
 
2.2 Why co‐creation, how co‐creation? 
Co-creation has come to be accepted as an advantageous paradigm for designing valuable goods and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
services. Siono (2006) argues that today’s design challenges are moving from the application of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology in a well-defined product area toward a complex system design and a question of how the
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
application of various technologies affect and innovate its context. Sanders and Stappers (2008)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
express this claim more simply by stating that the practice is changing ‘from a product perspective to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
purpose perspective’. According to Soini (2006), this increasing complexity forces the designer to enable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collaboration between the designer, the user and the client. Another aspect is the business benefits
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associated with performing co-creation. Hsiao et al. shows that the sense of achievement occurring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when the user is allowed to have a say in the design, increases customer loyalty and satisfaction (Hsiao
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
et al., 2015). The key question that emerges from this analysis is: how do we stage this collaboration
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into practice? Most literature seem to conclude on the results of specific design methods or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
physiological studies on ‘collaboration’. It seems, however, that the very low-practical management of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the collaboration interventions is poorly assigned in the literature.  
 
 
Extensive literature on successful co-creation has been published . Within this literature, the common
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
perception is that the designer (or design researcher) should lead and guide the innovative process and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empower the participants at different levels of the creative process to contribute and innovate (Sanders
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Stappers, 2008, Soini, 2006). Advocating for Schön’s original text on the reflective practitioner
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cameron (2009) emphasizes the unique approach and critical reflection upon each intervention in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design process The reflection upon heuristic derivatives from earlier experience is a valuable key to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
13 
==PAGE:16==
future improved performances. As demonstrated by Onarheim and Cash (2015), existing literature
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either presents a top-down approach to the high level theoretical aspects of collaborative design or a
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
bottom-up anecdotal review of non-generic cases. This reflects a lack of literature addressing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
tangible challenges in performing successful co-creation.This thesis, therefore, aims to discover the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practicalities of facilitation. In other words, what constitutes ​good ​facilitation, which are the critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problems related to facilitation, and how can effective facilitation be supported?  
 
2.2.1 Co‐creation, co‐design, participatory design... 
Co-creation is the chosen design framework. Meanwhile, other terms can be used interchangeably,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including co-design and participatory design. Participatory design is the overall mindset covering design
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
processes within the right side of Sanders’ design research matrix (Sanders, 2006) (image 2).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Participatory design term covering process, where researchers or designers invite the people who will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
benefit from design into the design process as partners (Sanders, 2006). However, in this thesis,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-creation is the underlying paradigm. Further, a WS is the certain intervention, a means to constitute
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
co-creation in practice. Sanders and Stappers (2008) aim at distinguishing co-design and co-creation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however the proposed differences appear insignificant. For the purpose of this thesis, such distinction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is not discussed. 
 
 
Image 2: Sanders’ design research matrix  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interruption: first idea verification 
 
 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Idea verification I: landing page‐test of initial idea 
Early in the process, an initial idea was tested by developing a pretotype of a concept named Work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
3
Face. At this point, sufficient knowledge enabled the proposal of the outline for a concept. The aim at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
this stage was to test the potential of a support system for facilitators. A few WSs had already been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
observed and the outline of some of the difficulties associated with WSs were beginning to emerge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Could this idea attract the interest from the intended target group? Could the idea constitute the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
foundation of a more well developed concept? In response to these questions, the pretotype, a landing
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
page , was launched to verify some working hypotheses early in the process. More data from WSs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
interviews was collected as the landing page went live to obtain more knowledge. 
 
2.3.1 A Landing‐page  
Klein (2013) writes about landing pages and the ‘landing-page test’ as a way of testing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product/market fit of with a less resources than actually building the product. The purpose of the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
landing page is to generate visitors to the site and track the number of visitors and the conversion rate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(the share of visitors subscribing for more information). This measure provides an indication of how the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
latent potential. Do visitors want to sign up for to follow the development of this system and be notified
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when launch-ready? And is the system worthy of the effort of a continuous design. 
 
2.3.1 The concept: Work Face 
In this section, the concept of the Work Face is described following the definition of a concept having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
both a need-dimension (the idea ​with​) as well as a technical realization dimension (the idea ​in​). (This
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach was taught in the course 42062 Arenas and Concepts, (DTU, 2013a)). 
  
The idea ​with Work Face: Work Face is an application that improves the facilitation of WSs, primarily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from a facilitator’s point of view. It visualises participants’ progression and helps sorting the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documentation properly. The difference that matters to the facilitator is the insight into whether the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
groups are stalling, or if they understand the given tasks and gets through the schedule in a timely
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
manner. Otherwise, it is a hard task to obtain this overview, often requiring several facilitators, or
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alternatively that the facilitator takes on a very managing role to control time and the progression of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the WS.  
 
The idea ​in Work Face: All groups and the facilitator are equipped with a tablet running the application.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
The facilitator sets up the exercises and defines the time frames in the application and publishes the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
schedule to all the tablets given to the WS participants. As a group member presses ‘play’, the time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
starts running for the first exercise. Pressing ‘done’, the next exercise and time frame begins. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator’s tablet collects the data from all the tablets, and if one group spends more time on an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercise than was prescribed, the indication of the group’s progression will change from green to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
yellow to red. Further, participants can take photos of their ongoing work (sticky notes, idea evaluations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
etc.) , and the application sorts the documentation according to the group and the relevant exercise. 
 
3 Pretotype: Pretotyping is the step before prototyping. The terms is developed by Alberto Savoia in 2009 while he
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was working at Google as Engineering Director and Innovation Agitator. The essence of the term is to make sure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
you are building the right​ it​ before you build​ ​it ​right​ (Pretotype.org, 2015).  
4 Landing page: In Online marketing, a single web page that displays the main attractions of a product. The general
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
goal of a landing page is to convert site visitors into sales or leads (Wikipedia, 2015) 
 
 
15 
==PAGE:18==
2.3.3 Creating and promoting the landing‐page
 
Mock-ups of two screen views were designed (see appendix 1) and photoshopped into an iPad
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template to give the audience the feeling of a real existing application. The landing page was created in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the free online framework, Launchrock, and hosted within their domain at ​work-face.launchrock.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(see appendix 2 for a copy of the landingpage). Launchrock has made an integration with the open
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
source web analytics software, ​piwik​, which enables tracking of visitors and referrer websites (the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
websites generating traffic to the landing page). Launchrock itself has a fully functional sign-up form
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
which keeps track of the e-mail addresses that have been signed up for the page.  
 
CINC helped promoting the landing page in order to generate audience from relevant communities.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following channels were used: 
 
●
Facebook-pages (CINC , CIID , Creativity Gym , and Balder Onarheim) 
5
6
7
●
LinkedIn (CINC ) 
8
●
Instagram (Balder Onarheim) 
●
Twitter (CINC ).  
9
 
2.3.4 Results 
The main purpose of the landing page test was to investigate the extent to which the proposed idea
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appear interesting to the visitors. The main target of investigation is the conversion rate - i.e. the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
percentage of visitors who become subscribers by entering their email address in the input field. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
landing page was published on Aug 28, 2015 and data was collected on Jan 22 2016 where 142 people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had visited the page, and 23 of them had signed up. The data is more thoroughly addressed in section
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
4.12.1, where the conversion rate of 16,2% is evaluated as a promising figure that indicates a potential
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
for further development of Work Face.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interruption done: continuing research 
 
 
 
 
5 ​CINC, facebook: ​https://www.facebook.com/neurocreativity?fref=ts  
6 CIID: Copenhagen Institute of Interaction Design, facebook: 
https://www.facebook.com/groups/309559742496826/?fref=ts  
7 Creativity Gym, organization teaching and training creativity, facebook: 
https://www.facebook.com/CreativityGymCPH?fref=ts  
8 CINC, linkedIn: 
https://www.linkedin.com/company/copenhagen-institute-of-neurocreativity-cinc-?trk=prof-following-co
mpany-logo  
9 CINC, Twitter: ​https://twitter.com/neurocreativity  
 
 
16 
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Literature review: how to facilitate properly  
In this section a review of the literature on the ‘good facilitation’ of co-creation is carried out.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-creation represents the fundamental design framework, and in this section the meaning of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘successful facilitation’ of a co-creation intervention is explored through a theoretical approach. 
2.4.1 Procedure 
Conducting the initial literature review posed a number of challenges, both with regards to delimiting
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the search area and finding relevant literature in this field. Initially, assumptions on the sorts of articles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to aim for were established such as studies of approaches for guiding groups towards a creative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
output. Gradually the field was narrowed down to empirical studies regarding facilitation that have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
direct positive or negative impact on the co-creation intervention​. By following references and citations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from articles found on Google Scholar, the first three useful results were located. In order to properly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uncover the research area, a structured search was executed by recording all results in a spreadsheet.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
The criteria for the literature search, variations on these criteria and target journals are to be found in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appendix 3. The criteria were established from the knowledge on utilized terms and previously found
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
articles. Search within all variations of a term produced thousands of results. Therefore, the search was
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
narrowed down by looking at specific journals in the fields of design processes. In the appendix, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
number of valuable results within each combination of terms and journal are displayed. Several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
abstracts were surveyed within each search result, but only the most relevant articles have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
included for discussion. The number of successful hits was limited. Five articles are discussed in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present review. Attempts were undertaken to broaden the research area. Thus, samples were made
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within ‘technology aided facilitation’, ‘mobile learning’ and ‘group facilitation’, only to reveal irrelevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results on the quality of groups’ or students’ performance.  
 
Despite sustained and structured attempts to locate articles on good and poor facilitation, the number
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of relevant articles I found were extremely limited. Similarly to the findings of Onarheim and Cash
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2015), I concluded that little research has been published on these matters. Most studies investigate
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the quality of the outcome when using various tools and creative methods. Yet, little attention has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paid to how these tools and methods are practically facilitated, and how this facilitation affected the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nature of the study being conducted. The literature, I draw on, in this thesis is divided between results
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
from the initial sporadic search on Google Scholar and the structured search. Thus, neither the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sporadic approach nor the structured approach could have been applied exclusively. The structured
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
search did, however, establish a belief that search has been conducted within the correct focus. 
 
2.4.2 The review 
Below, the literature review is illustrated (image 3). The illustration takes it starting point in the orange
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
circle. Each included article is introduced in the circle directly attached to the center, followed by quotes
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from these articles, which forms the basis of the conclusion highlighted in the solid grey circles. 
 
●
Kramer et al (2001) and Isaksen (1998) are included to emphasise the importance of a facilitator
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
in order to successfully execute brainstorming. 
 
●
Hengst (2005) points out 3 main aspects of facilitation and notes which of these aspects can be
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
handled by practitioners or tools and which require a facilitator.  
 
 
17 
==PAGE:20==
●
Mumford (2001) is included to establish an understanding of how common knowledge models
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
enable groups to collaborate more effectively .  
 
Image 3: Literature review  
10 ​Common models: knowledge possessed by all team members about tasks, teammates’ roles, equipment and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance expectations (Mumford et al., 2001) 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:21==
2.5 A take from private companies: certified facilitators 
As the scientific theoretical framework appears inadequate in terms of tangible guidance for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation, research within popular and business management literature was covered. This material
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
depends upon heuristics and not upon scientific validation, meaning that these are based on practical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiences of successful facilitation. As a result, the present study has a strong practical emphasis
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
based on the straightforward application of methodologies.  
 
2.5.1 IAF Core Competencies 
Hogan (2005) gives an introduction to the process of practical facilitation and identifies details of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specific physical layouts and instruments used to facilitate a collegial and positive atmosphere. She
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
further refers to the common set of principles developed by the International Association of Facilitators
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IAF).
In
2003, IAF constituted their IAF Core Competencies (appendix 4) which today is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well-established framework for educating facilitators (Hogan, 2005). The Core Competencies constitute
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the foundation of the Certified Professional Facilitator-certification (CPF) provided by IAF (IAF-world,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2051). The six Core Competencies A to F, propose ways for how to apply facilitation before, during and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
after a session: 
 
●
Competencies ​A to B focus on understanding the client and participants prior to the session.
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessing client’s and participant’s needs to apply appropriate processes in each individual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
case.  
 
●
Competency ​C deals with the promotion of a constructive environment during the session by
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
applying participatory processes, identifying assumptions, encouraging creative thinking and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
avoiding criticism.  
 
●
Competency ​D suggests that the facilitator should stimulate the participants during the session.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Providing guidance to keep the participants on the right track, and vary the pace of activities is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
among the facilitator’s core tasks.  
 
●
Competencies ​E to F address the professional obligations that rely on the facilitator. The
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator’s professionalism lies within his or her ability to distinguish process from content and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ability to reflect upon his or hers own process. The facilitator is responsible for self
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evaluation and maintenance of the acquired skills.  
 
The competencies suggested by IAF will be kept in mind during the design of a support system.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Designing in line with these guidelines will increase the chance of acceptance within a wider facilitation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
community.  
 
2.5.2 Other certifications 
Given the IAF’s 6 Core Competencies’ widespread acceptance, I have chosen to go into depth with this
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specific certification. It should be added that IAF’s 6 Core Competencies appear as the first result in
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Google search for “facilitation certification”. Other certifications proposing valuable views do exist, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a brief review is included below:  
 
 
19 
==PAGE:22==
2.5.2.1 ‘Focus on Facilitation Certification’ 
The American agency, de Bono Consulting, base their certifications on Edward de Bono’s
thinking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
tools. These include lateral thinking for creative problem solving and the de Bono’s (1985) ‘six thinking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hats approach’. The six thinking hats is a tool to ensure that all aspects of human thinking is applied in
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
solid decision making as opposed to ​original rigid argumentation in decision making. The six hats
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represents parallel thinking with regards to objective information, intuition, creativity, cautious,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
optimism and management (De Bono, 1985). The ‘Focus on Facilitation Certification’ ​offered by de Bono
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consulting “...​enhances your ability to insert Lateral Thinking and Power of Perception within the Six Thinking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hats framework. You will be prepared to transfer this ability to participants so they get more power from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each hat” (de Bono Consulting, 2015). A certification in the six thinking hats is a requirement prior to the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
‘Focus on Facilitation Certification’. Thus, one specific methodology is the main application in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation certification and does not take into account the format of creative WSs in general. 
 
2.5.1.2 VINCA certification 
VINCA certification ​is an upcoming certification based on VINCA, a visual alphabet for describing,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
planning and evaluating ​innovation and learning processes. Besides training in VINCA, the certification
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
covers knowledge on innovation processes, co-creation and facilitation of processes (VINCA, 2015). Very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
little information is available on this certification to date, but it appears to cover co-creation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interventions more broadly.  
 
2.5.1.3 Process Iceberg® Facilitation Methodology 
The global accreditation organization, APMG-international™Facilitation, offers a certification in Tony
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Mann’s Process, Iceberg® Facilitation Methodology (APMG-International, 2015). This approach focuses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on applying the correct methods for the task/issue based on three parameters: Convergent vs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divergent thinking, open-ended vs. narrow scope and small vs. big degree of uncertainty of the issue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and organization. The three main competencies possessed by the facilitator are: ​“Active striving to keep
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the momentum going, Checking understanding so that people are engaged, ​and Selecting the appropriate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model or tool to take things forward” ​(APMG-International, 2015). The perception of the facilitator is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar to the CPF-certification described above: the facilitator stimulates the process and a correct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
momentum but does not posses knowledge about the subject. Focus for the the Process Iceberg®
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Facilitation Methodology certification is mainly on solving current issues, defining the main causes for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the problem at hand, setting criteria for the solution, generate solutions, and finally settling upon
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
action plans (APMG-International, 2015). 
 
 
 
 
11 Edward de Bono (1933): ​physician, psychologist, author, inventor and consultant​. Most well known work: the 
book ‘The six thinking hats’ from 1985 and the term lateral thinking (direct and creative problem solving) 
(Wikipedia, 2015) 
 
 
20 
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Alternatives and substitutes: existing products 
2.6.1 Substitutes for planning and execution 
During the empirical studies, attention has been drawn to tools that today, support the facilitation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WSs. Within the interviews, knowledge has been collected on tools utilized for ​planning the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interventions (table 1). This pertains to planning exercises, formatting instructions and evaluating the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercises in order to try and subsequently improve them.  
 
Table 1: Substitutes for planning 
Plan exercise 
Setup instruction 
Evaluation 
 
Exel 
 
Printed handout 
 
Exel  
 
Google sheet 
 
Powerpoint 
 
Google sheet 
 
Powerpoint 
 
Keynote 
 
Notebook 
 
Keynote 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition, tools directly applied in the ​execution of WSs are presented in table 2. These regards very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
low-practical
physical
tools
to
help
with
distributing
instructions, managing time, visualizing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
progression and documenting the work (e.g. ideas, problems etc.).  
 
Table 2: Substitutes during execution 
Distribute instruction 
Time management 
Visualization of progression 
Documentation 
 
Printed 
handout 
 
Smartphone 
digital watch  
 
Printed handout 
(turn pages)  
Camera 
 
Keynote 
 
Stop watch 
 
Keynote 
Notebook 
 
Powerpoint 
 
 
 
Powerpoint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
==PAGE:24==
2.6.2 Envisioned alternatives 
In meetings with experts (Mads Bonne and Jeppe Jensen), attention has been drawn to systems which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could overlap in some way with the system developing here (based on Work Face). Those systems are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capable of managing sub elements of facilitation such as distributing content or documenting creative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processes (table 3). Those systems are not seen in use but are envisioned to support work related to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation. 
 
2.6.2.1 Learning management system (LMS) 
Systems to facilitate communication in context of learning communities such as specific courses in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
universities or online. The tool is meant for sharing content (lectures, reading material, etc.),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communicating and keeping track of courses, competences and grades. Such tools often provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different levels of access depending on the user’s role (teacher or student). This category also covers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mass Open Online Courses (so called MOOCs), which are online courses in themselves. Those systems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allow the teacher to follow the students’ progression by displaying which lectures have been attended,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and which assignments have been submitted by the student.  
 
2.6.2.2 Documentation of creative work 
Certain systems enable a smart way of documenting brainstorming, prioritization etc. Some systems
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support virtual collaboration and record the process going on here, while applications such as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Posi-it app turn physical work into digital work.  
 
2.6.2.3 File sharing 
Systems to share files amongst amongst members of a large group. Several systems have gained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
ground over the last few years. Google Drive and Dropbox are currently among the most important
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
players. The systems facilitate the download from and upload to folders shared with co-workers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simultaneous work is supported in some cases, but the workspace is mostly a textedit space without
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
illusions like sticky notes etc.  
 
In mapping alternative platforms, systems to facilitate remote collaboration in virtual rooms are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
excluded. The aim in this thesis is not establish such virtual ‘venue’. Paper4everyone and Murally do, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fact, provide such room but they are included due to other elements as shown in the table. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
==PAGE:25==
Table 3: Envisioned alternatives to aid facilitation 
Distribute instruction 
Management 
Visualization of 
progression 
 
Documentation 
Google Drive 
(online 
document 
management) 
 
Sharepoint 
(document 
and 
knowledge 
management 
system) 
Coursera  
(online course 
distribution) 
 
Paper4everyone 
(digital pen and 
paper) 
Dropbox 
(Cloud storage 
of documents) 
 
Moodle 
(learning 
management 
system) 
 
Google Classroom 
(learning 
management tool) 
 
Post-it plus app 
(digitalizing 
post-its) 
 
Moodle 
(learning 
management 
system) 
 
Google 
Classroom 
(learning 
management 
tool) 
 
 
Murally (virtual 
space and 
digitalize sticky  
notes) 
 
 
Sharepoint 
(document and 
knowledge 
management 
system) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Google 
Classroom 
(learning 
management 
tool) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coursera  
(online course 
distribution) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Systems mentioned in this paragraph: 
 
●
Coursera (Coursera, 2015) 
●
Dropbox (Dropbox, 2015) 
●
Google Classroom (Google Classroom, 2015) 
●
Google Drive (Google Drive, 2015) 
●
Moodle (Moodle, 2015) 
●
Murally (Murally, 2015) 
●
Paper4everyone (Paper4everyone, 2015) 
●
Post-it® Plus (Post-it plus, 2015) 
●
SharePoint LMS (SharePoint LMS, 2015) 
 
 
23 
==PAGE:26==
2.7 Empirical research: workshop observations 
In the following section, the empirical research is addressed. Both interviews and WS-observations
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have contributed to the understanding of the dynamics and structures of WSs and the process of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation in broader terms.  
 
The workshop atmosphere 
 
The WS atmosphere is an essential element in the experience of a WS but cannot be grasped within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
a data collection. Therefore, this is (in conjunction with image 4 below) an attempt to describe the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
atmosphere.  
 
In the open space hosting the WS, there is an intense atmosphere, it is a bit noisy and chaotic. Time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
seems to be flying by and tables are cluttered with paper and pens. The room trembles with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
striving for success. But it is not all picture perfect, and the challenge of trying to be creative on
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demand,seems like it is written on a few of the faces in the room. Especially in a large group of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
participants, it is also not uncommon to see some participants visibility disinterested in the work at
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hand . In cases where the participants let themselves indulge to the WS, there will often be laughter
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but also deep concentration.  
 
 
 
 
Image 4: Evocative photos from the attended WSs (horizontally from left top corner: B, A, A, B, D) 
 
 
24 
==PAGE:27==
2.7.1 Attended workshops 
All the WSs described below were taking place independently of this research project and were not set
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up specifically for the purpose of observation for research . The data was collected at different levels;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(co-)facilitator, participant and observer. Focus is mainly on the key learnings related to facilitation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whereas, less emphasis is placed on describing the process, exercises and outcome of the WSs. Table 4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
below presents an overview of the attended WSs, whereas appendix 5 elaborates each of these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interventions. 
 
Table 4: Overview panel of attended WSs 
WS 
Name 
Date 
No. of 
facilitators 
No. of 
partici- 
pants 
No. of 
groups 
Own role 
Instructions 
Timing 
A 
Playing a “bad 
idea”-game 
(UpsideDown) 
16 Oct 14 
12 Mar 15 
24 Mar 15 
3 
30-40 
7 
Facilitator 
Gameboard 
Gamebook 
(+oral) 
Central 
time man.  
12
+ groups 
control 
B 
Akademiet for 
Talentfulde 
unge 
4 Aug 15 
4 
200 
40 
Co- 
facilitator 
 
Handouts  
Central 
time man. 
C 
Digital 
ideation 
management 
17 Aug 15 
2 
7 
1-3-4 
Participant 
 
Oral 
Central 
time man.  
D 
Innovations- 
workshop 
16 Sep 15 
2 
80 
20 
Observer 
Oral + 
Handouts 
(method- 
cards) 
Central 
time man.  
 
2.7.2 Method 
During the work on documenting the first WS, three main topics appeared to cover most statements:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Instructions’, ‘Management, timing and follow-up’ and ‘Participants and atmosphere’. Subsequently, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
three topics were utilized to structure the documentation of the following WSs. This may have caused
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
omission of important observations, however, this has not been experienced. The above three topic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
areas have helped keep a focus during the observations and has made the documentation easier.  
 
Looking across the entire set of data, however, it proved too simplistic to have everything categorized
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those three topics. In the appendix every finding is formulated in a single sentence (the ‘quote’) and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
elaborated further in a few lines. The quotes are meant to be comprehensive on their own and provide
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an easy overview of the findings. When collecting all the quotes across all WSs into the below table, new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themes were discovered, enabling a more nuanced understanding of WSs. These themes are as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
follows: ‘Instructions’, ‘Progression’, ‘Dynamics and work pace’, ‘Evaluations’, ‘Participants’, ‘Subject’, ‘Idea
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
quality’ and ‘Props’. Props are all the physical requisitions needed in the exercises to, e.g. sticky notes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pencils, clay, paper etc. All ‘quotes’ are collected in tabel 5.  
 
12 Central time management: time management is centralized at the facilitator. The facilitator starts and stops time
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collectively for all participants.  
 
 
25 
==PAGE:28==
2.7.3 Workshop findings 
Table 5: Summarizing table of quotes  
Theme 
WS 
Key derivative quotes 
No. of 
quotes 
Instructions 
A 
It is difficult to get complex instructions to stand alone 
7 
 
B 
It is difficult to meet the sufficient degree of detail in instructions. 
 
 
D 
Written Instructions are difficult to make stand on their own.  
 
 
B 
Everyone should be able to see the instructions at all times​.  
 
 
D 
The handout should contain the same information as the oral
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instruction.  
 
 
D 
Handouts were not a simple guide on why and how to do  
 
 
C 
Lack of handout resulted only oral instructions and gave rise to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussion.  
 
Progression 
A 
Gamified rules, goals and winning seem to be drivers for motivation.  
5 
 
C 
The limited number of participants (9) allowed the facilitators to know
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where everyone was in the process all the time. 
 
 
C 
Obstructions were introduced gradually, forcing the participants in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the right direction 
 
 
A 
Centralized time management may be efficient but can disrupt the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feeling of flow. 
 
 
C 
When facilitators join in on the exercises, the session may go over
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their allotted time.  
 
 
B 
It seems there are two ways of getting a status from each group:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
interrupting one by one or interrupting everyone at once. 
 
Dynamics 
and work 
pace 
A 
Playing an actual game makes the WS become less dynamic.  
5 
B 
Centralized
time
management
allows
little
flexibility
to
meet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences in work pace. 
 
 
D 
Centralized time management allows little room for difference in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work pace between groups. 
 
 
B 
When facilitating a WS, be prepared for changes. 
 
 
D 
WKs are dynamic; in need of time activities are left out.  
 
Evaluation 
A 
Evaluation is valuable, but a non-standardized methods makes it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficult to do efficient evaluations. 
1 
 
 
26 
==PAGE:29==
Participants 
A 
Engineers tend to be critical realists. 
7 
 
D 
When
different
qualifications
occur,
make
sure
everyone
can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribute.  
 
 
B 
Teenagers tend to be reticent. 
 
 
C 
A handpicked audience is a fortunate situation for facilitators.  
 
 
B 
Leaving room for summarizing in between tasks can give inspiration 
 
 
A 
One bad vibe can disrupt the energy in the entire group.  
 
 
B 
A good team spirit in one group spreads to other groups, especially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those sitting close by.  
 
Subject 
B 
If not working with specific project, chose a simple and relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subject.  
1 
Idea quality 
C 
Limited time can still trigger valuable ideas. 
1 
Props 
D 
Introduce the relevant tools at the relevant time.  
1 
 
2.8 Empirical research: background interviews 
In order to gain insider knowledge on facilitating WSs, a series of interviews have been conducted with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experts within different fields within the area. The interviews have had the structure of informal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conversations and in some cases, were based on a list of questions. The semi structured interviews
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have been conducted throughout the discovery phase. The panel below (table 6), provides an overview
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the interviewees. The full documentation on interviews can be seen in appendix 6. 
 
Table 6: Overview panel of the interviewees 
Interview  
Name 
Profile 
Date 
A 
Mads 
Bonne 
Innovation and process at consultancy within the educational 
institutions. Experience in facilitating WSs engaging teachers, 
other educators and students. 
Sep 4 2015 
B 
Ronni 
Tino 
Petersen 
Lead Community Advisor & Managing Director at a community 
management agency. Experience in planning and managing 
smaller WSs. 
Sep 14 2015 
C 
Ulla 
Tønner 
Lab agent and co-creation facilitator at innovation 
consultancy. Has extensive experience in facilitating large WSs 
and first-hand insight to the use of digital tools in this setting.  
Sep 18 2015 
D 
Jeppe 
Jensen 
M.Sc. in Information Technology from AAU with a thesis in
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
digital knowledge sharing. Former teaching student with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience in using tablets as part of teaching in elementary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school.  
Oct 12 2015 
 
 
27 
==PAGE:30==
2.8.1 Interview findings 
As in the review of the WSs, the ‘quotes’ are collected in a table (table 7) and organised according to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
themes. Elaborations on each quote can be found in the appendix.  
 
Table 7: Summarizing table of key derivatives 
Theme 
Inter-
view 
Key derivative quotes 
No. of 
quotes 
Feedback on 
initial idea, 
Work Face 
A 
Such tool could actually become a tool for the facilitator’s own
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
development process 
2 
A 
Such tool might even radically change the format of some WSs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
if presentations could somehow be supported continuously
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the WS 
 
Dynamics 
A 
Always be under-structured but over-prepared 
2 
 
B 
Sometimes the prepared inspirational talks become stale, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then we have to change the plan 
 
Guidance 
A 
There is a fine line between monitoring and guiding co-creation 
1 
Management 
A 
The more people, the more management is needed 
1 
Instructions 
A 
Handouts cannot stand alone 
2 
 
C 
Try not to be the shouting lady by the use of “objective” 
mediators such as slideshows to display rules 
 
Work pace 
C 
Often the format is set up as rounds of games, and groups are 
allowed to work at different pace 
1 
Documentation 
A 
We always have the participants document their own work by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taking photos, but it a hassle to get a structure on this part.  
1 
Human factors 
A 
If you told them, there will be a break at 15:15, they will do a
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
break at 15:15 
3 
 
A 
Human contact is important to handle the social issues in a WS 
 
 
B 
The hierarchical structure of the client’s organization can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influence the WS and can be hard to tackle.  
 
Low-practical 
challenges 
C 
It is often an issue to get access to a sufficient number of iPads 
2 
C 
You might need a helper dedicated to assist the groups with 
the digital devices 
 
Digitizing the 
process 
C 
The use of digital aids has to be rooted in a problem 
4 
D 
It requires great commitment from all parties to introduce a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
digital tool 
 
 
 
28 
==PAGE:31==
 
D 
Evaluation and documentation should be automated 
 
 
D 
Different access levels support each user and enhances the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform’s utility. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
3 Define 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
==PAGE:33==
In this section, research is summarized into a set of design criteria. These criteria constitute the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objectives that a suggested solution will have to meet to in order to propose a valid solution. Defining
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the scope of tool to be designed relies, first and foremost, on the WS observations and interviews. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
main derivatives from the literature research are passed on into the definition of the design criteria. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addition, the main conclusions from the review of certifications offered by the industry are brought into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
play. 
 
3.1 Main theoretical derivatives  
Overall, both Kramer et.al. (2001) and Isaksen et.al. (1998) emphasize the crucial element of leadership
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and guidance when striving for fruitful creative collaboration. Hengst et al. (2005) argues that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator has an essential part in translating elements in reality to modeling concepts. This indicates a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
need to apply specific rules and guidance to simplify the reality.  
 
3.2 Derivatives from reviewing certifications 
Without being in conflict with theory, the IAF’s 6 Core Competencies prescribe more practical elements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of facilitation. IAF asks the facilitator to plan the WS before the session and apply stimuli and guidance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the session. This is similar to what Onarheim and Biskjaer (2015) would call constraint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manipulation. Here the facilitator would balance the constraints of the challenge; removing, introducing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and revisioning obstructions in order to create a space within which participants are capable of and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comfortable with contributing to the creative problem solving. Besides prescribing the facilitator’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obligations before and during the WS, IAF adds a level of self-evaluation to maintain and improve the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation skills.  
3.3 Two underlying conditions for the design 
Before describing the needs, two points about the goal for this system to be designed, have to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emphasized. 
 
3.3.1 Support system rather than substitution of facilitator  
Reviewing the empirical research, there is no doubt that the tool to be designed, is not a substitution of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
the facilitator but a support system for the facilitator. Eliminating the opportunity to consult an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empathic and stimulating individual for clarification and assistance is not perceived an option for this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design.  
 
3.3.2 One size does not fit all workshops 
The design proposed in this thesis will not aim at forcing a WS-template onto the facilitator. Each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator has unique approaches to the creative methods utilized in the WS, and they use various
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
boundary objects (Star, 1989) such as building, drawings, video etc. to initiate discussions and facilitate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the communication of ideas. Therefore, trying to apply the same standard for all WSs would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
counterproductive. Hence, the aim is to design a standard template that can host various processes
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and be of use regardless of the specific creative project at hand.  
 
 
 
 
31 
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Main problem: the facilitator cannot be everywhere at once 
Revisiting the observations and interviews in the light of the previously described theory and practice,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the overall need seems to be: 
 
The facilitator should be able to be everywhere at once 
 
While working with large numbers of participants, this is not possible, and this fact constitutes the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
justification of an aid to help the facilitator become more omnipresent. The following design criteria
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aim to concretize this omnipresence and present assessable requirements. 
 
3.5 Design criteria for the solution  
All the collected data has been thoroughly sorted in order to summarize a set of design criteria (table 8)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are the requirements for the design of the system to support facilitation. The criteria represent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the recurring findings from the empirical work and, as such, they represent tangible criteria for ‘good
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation’. These criteria will throughout the next phases be determining of focus for brainstorms and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept assessment. 
 
Table 8: Design criteria 
Criteria 
WS / interview 
Total no. of 
instances 
Workshops are dynamic and the opportunity to edit the 
schedule continuously (also during the WS) must be supported 
Ws: 
Intv.:  
A,B,D 
A,B 
5 
Guides/instructions on the exercises should be available and 
possible to consult continuously  
WS:  
Intv.:  
B,C,D 
C 
4 
Invitation to share, speak up and contribute in plenum should 
be emphasized to counteract the (potential) reticence of the 
audience  
WS: 
Int.: 
A,B,C 
B 
4 
The variation in the pace of work should be allowed 
WS: 
Intv.: 
B,D 
C 
3 
Evaluation could be established as a way for the facilitator to 
develop and progress  
WS: 
Intv.: 
A 
A 
2 
Documentation could be supported more easily  
Intv: 
A,D 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
==PAGE:35==
3.6 Delimiting the concept of ‘Workshops’ 
The empirical research serves as the basis for further delimiting this thesis to deal with WSs involving a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
large number of participants- i.e. ‘large WSs’. It has been found that the differences between small WSs
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with less than 10 participants and large WSs with more than 20 participants, are too significant to have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a single platform to assist with both. In addition to the initial definition in section 2.1, the additional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following criteria applies: 
 
●
More than 20 participants  
 
●
The large group is split into smaller groups that work synchronously but separately  
 
●
The facilitator does not contribute to the creative content but focuses solely on facilitating the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WS 
 
3.6.1 Workshopa: personas for workshops 
To further illustrate the perception of WSs that applies in this thesis, three fictional WSs are described,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
like personas , here called ​workshopas​. Instead of focusing on the key user as when working personas,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
the workshopas represent the key type of WSs that this design targets. A brief summary of the three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
WSs is given below, whereas the full description of the goal, exercises and participants are elaborated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in appendix 7:  
 
1.
The Municipality of Copenhagen is reviewing areas with capacity challenges in a series of WSs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
facilitated by Anders, consultant at Rambøll. 25 stakeholders who utilize the roads in different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ways are brought together for 6 hours to stage an interdisciplinary discussion about the area
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and generate possible actions. Anders instructs the participants to acknowledge one another’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point of view during the idea generation in a kind of role play. In addition, scenario cards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represent different traffic scenarios as introduction for debate. The participants work in groups
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 5-6 people. The image series below (image 5) visualize the theme of the WS, the location and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the work situation.  
 
 
 
 
Image 5: Evocative illustrations to the Copenhagen Municipality-WS 
 
 
 
13 Persona: A persona is an archetype of a user summarizing the collected data from the resarch, thereby they are 
realistic presentations of the key users (Usability, 2016: 
http://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/personas.html​) 
 
 
33 
==PAGE:36==
2.
Dong Energy attempts to optimize the customer journey across all the products involving touch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
points between the customer and Dong. Lise from the innovation bureau, Futu, is facilitating a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
3-hour WS with 70 participants. With the basis in personas developed by Lise and the Dong
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy management, the participants are to obtain a common understanding of the customer's
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
needs and problems. In groups of 4-5 people, the participants brainstorm on initiatives that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could benefit the customers. Image 6 visualizes the location and the atmosphere at the WS.  
 
 
 
Image 6: Evocative illustrations to the Dong Energy-WS 
 
 
3.
The design agency, Designit, is about to innovate the home edition of the Falck first aid kit and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has invited 125 people to help them kickstart the ideation. Ambulance men, civilian users and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designers from Designit are to brainstorm, co-create, and prototype new ideas for the kit within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the quick and dirty WS facilitated by Anna, designer at Designit. 24 groups are set out to explore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the solution space within 2 hours. Image 7 visualize the product, location and atmosphere at
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the WS. 
 
 
 
Image 7: Evocative illustrations to the Designit-WS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
==PAGE:37==
3.6.2 Personas: Anders, Lise and Anna 
In addition to the three workshopas, the facilitator of each workshopa is described in a persona with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the background in the four research interviews described in section 2.8. However, fictional information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is added to provide a more holistic image of the facilitators. The three personas, Anders, Lise and Anna
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aim to pose a more detailed facilitator than presented through the interviews. The interviewees all
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work in the agency industry and work with rapidly changing projects, these conditions have also been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the starting point for developing the personas. See the full persona descriptions in appendix 8. A brief
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
introduction is given here: 
 
 
 
Anders Bergkvist, 39 years, Consultant in Department for Road Transport, Rambøll 
●
11 years of experience within process management and user involvement. 
●
Has a structured approach to planning and evaluating his WSs.  
●
Preferred methods: stimuli cards, serious role play and building blocks as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
he is often works with city planning.  
 
Lise Albrecht, 34 year, co-creator and project manager, Futu Innovation Bureau 
●
5 years of experience within co-creation, service design and WS facilitation.  
●
Not highly tech savvy and feels compelled to have a printed handout for 
the exercise but prefers oral instructions.  
●
Preferred methods: Personas and brainstorms. 
 
 
Anna Lykkegaard, 29, designer at Designit  
●
2 years of experience within product design and co-creation. 
●
Uses presentation template for planning WS.  
●
Preferred methods: Various brainstorm methods and various kinds of 
templates for the participants to fill in. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interruption: second idea verification 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
==PAGE:38==
3.7 Idea verification II: prototype of a workshop planner 
3.7.1 Assumptions 
This paragraph is based on a few assumptions:  
 
●
The initial concept, Work Face, is continuously a premise for this prototype. The landing page
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and this prototype present two subsystems of the same concept and are to co-exist, hence,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this is not a substitution but an extension of Work Face. 
 
●
This prototype of a WS planner state, builds upon the assumption that the overall system
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allow users to enter at different levels. This means that the participants of a given WS have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
access to certain data in the systems, whereas the facilitator can go also edit the data. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator can set up the WS and subsequently collect the documentation, whilst the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants do not have access to these things. 
 
3.7.2 Test with students from DTU 
An opportunity arose for testing another partial concept of the potential tool, the module where the WS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is planned. Here, the facilitator configures the exercises and combines them into courses of WSs. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the test, an imitation of the WS planner was built in Excel. The opportunity came along in connection
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a course at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 42081 Staging co-creation (DTU, 2015). The
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
course focus on providing methods to obtain active involvement of actors in the innovation process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through co-creation interventions such as WSs (DTU, 2015). Within the course, 60 students have to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perform a series of WSs. This comprised an opportunity to have a great number of actors interact with
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and comment on the concept. In addition, the large number of data collected from this prototype can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potentially add a quantitative foundation of facilitators’ needs for the development of the final product.
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See the prototype here: ​https://goo.gl/kfNsOf​, or in appendix 9. (Start by filling in information about an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercise, then import it in the ‘workshop sheet’ by typing yes or no at the relevant exercise number). 
 
3.7.3 A spreadsheet to create exercises and combine WSs 
Structure of the spreadsheet:  
There are three kinds of sheets in the document:  
●
10 exercise sheets for typing in each exercise and the evaluations associated with the exercise  
●
1 workshop sheets that collects the original exercises and constitutes the schedule of the WS 
●
1 evaluation sheet that collects all evaluations attached to the original exercises  
 
The idea ​with the WS planner: The point is that the facilitator develops an arbitrary number of exercises
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the exercise sheets. All are potential content in a WS. The description includes a specification of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
purpose, the steps to perform within the exercise, the time each step will take, the involved props and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the mode of exercise. The mode determines whether the purpose of the exercise is to ‘create comfort’,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
‘stage discussion’ or for the participants to ‘develop together’ (Onarheim and Cash, 2015). Prior to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WS, the facilitator puts together a schedule consisting of a suitable number of exercises. After the WS,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the facilitator can evaluate each exercise and note down the actual performance - how long did each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
step actually take etc. This is, in other words, the baglock and self-evaluation tool mentioned in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interview with Mads Bonne, section 2.8. 
 
The idea ​in ​the the WS planner: The Excel document contains 10 exercise sheets for describing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercises - one exercise per sheet. In the ‘workshop sheet’, all the exercises can be called by applying a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
yes/no label across the exercises 1-10. If ‘yes’ is selected , the exercise is included in the WS, thereby
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:39==
counted in the total time for the WS. Next to the original description in the exercise sheets, an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evaluation panel can be filled according to the actual experience of the exercise. The evaluations are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collected in the evaluation sheet. In the evaluation sheet, the actual run time and assessment are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
displayed.  
 
3.7.4 What to test: meeting mine and teachers’ needs for a test 
Philip Cash and Balder Onarheim, who teach the course, had some requirements for such a WS planner
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
in order for the students to meet the requirements of the course curriculum. In addition, I had some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
hypotheses that I wanted to test. 
3.7.4.1 ​My hypotheses: 
●
Step by step-instruction: Looking at the planner in context of Work Face, a key feature is a step
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
by step-instruction of the exercises. To monitor the process of a WS using Work Face, requires
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
that the exercises are stepwise set up in order to follow the participants’ progressions in detail.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The step by step-instruction is displayed to the participants. The participants will have to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicate the completion of one step before being presented with the next step. The test will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provide insight to how this part works, whether it is too cumbersome for the facilitator to type
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in, or if it is a proper format to describe the exercise.  
 
●
Library: The Excel sheet contains 10 exercise sheets which is far too many exercises for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
short WSs that the students were organizing. However, by allowing such high number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercises, the facilitator can type in an entire portfolio, a library, of exercises and put together
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
an arbitrary WSs from this library. The test can give an idea about the iterative work in planning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a WS: removing and adding exercises until it seems perfect.  
 
●
Evaluations: An assumption is that the evaluation benefits the facilitator, and therefore he or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
she is motivated to evaluate the exercises and WSs in order to enhance own skills and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performances. The test can deny or confirm this assumption, and maybe it turns out that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
evaluation in its present form is too extensive.  
 
3.7.4.2 Teachers’ criteria: 
Balder and Philip teach a co-creation paradigm (see image 8) in the course. This is an assessment and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspective tool for co-creation interventions with the following four continua (Onarheim and Cash,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2015):  
 
●
Disempowered to empowered refers to the balance of power between the user and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designer, and is a “measure” of the extent to which the user acts as a subject or as a designer.  
 
●
Future to now is a continuum describing the context in which the co-creation intervention is
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based. Is the starting point current behaviors, possibilities and norms, or is it imagined
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scenarios in the future? 
 
●
Continuous to discreet describes the extent to which the co-creation intervention is one of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
series of interventions (eg. a study of behavior and habits) or if one intervention constitutes the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
only intervention in the process. 
 
 
 
 
37 
==PAGE:40==
●
Local to global is a scale describing the size of the population that the co-creation intervention
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is applied to, for instance, to an individual or to an entire country? This is first and foremost a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
reflection on the deployment and the results of a method rather than a selection criteria of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
which method to deploy. 
 
By rating the exercises on these four axes, it becomes evident to the facilitator how the co-creation is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
staged. In the image below, the arrow illustrates that the setup can be deliberately changed from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervention to intervention, if desired. The description in the exercise sheets includes a rating with
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
regards to this paradigm on a scale from 1 to 5 for each of the continua. Likewise, the evaluation panel
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also includes such a rating, clarifying potential differences in the facilitator’s perception of the exercise
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prior to the WS and retrospectively. It is important to note, however, that the scale is relative and there
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
is no guide on how to apply a concrete value.  
 
 
Image 8: The Co-creation Paradigm (Staging co-creation (DTU,2015)) 
 
 
3.7.5 Compromises: UX and UI design 
Given that this is a prototype done in Excel, the design of the interface is severely limited. The user
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience (UX) is far from optimum or intuitive, and a final version would be coded as a custom
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
program and not be developed in an Excel document. In an ideal scenario, the exercises could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dragged and dropped into an area representing the WS instead of the yes/no label in the ‘workshop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sheet’. Having the user shifting back and forth between multiple sheets is not ideal, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cumbersome function in manually labeling yes/no is unnecessarily confusing. In an attempt to control
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the risk of the users breaking the calls amongst the sheets, very few cells are editable for the students.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, this causes some potential confusions. To make sure that the students are not limited while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
performing the exercises, they have 12 steps available for each exercise. This is only an option for them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to be very detailed, but it is not a requirement to type in 12 steps. The students can type in as many or
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as few steps as they like, but it may appear rather intimidating in its current 12-step form. These are a
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
couple of examples on the poor UX related to the Excel document. With regard to graphical user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interface (UI) design, limited styling is available in Excel, and this is not the main focus in the prototype.  
 
 
 
 
38 
==PAGE:41==
3.7.6 Results: questionnaire and interviews 
The students are all first time users and are all provided their own Excel document which constituted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
part of the hand in for the course. They received little information beforehand. Hopefully, every student
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will use it as he or she see fit and from there develop an opinion about its functionality. A questionnaire
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
was distributed among the students as they rounded off the course. In addition, a handful of students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
was interviewed to provide more qualitative aspects to the study. In short, the spreadsheet proved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rather cumbersome in practice . This result appeared to be associated with the lack of introduction to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the prototype and sense of ownership of this complex spreadsheet. It is also possible that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spreadsheet proved too ambitious in attempting to resemble an overly advanced workflow, given the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purpose of the course which was to organize WSs with less than 10 participants and of short duration
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and.  
 
 
 
 
 
Interruption done 
 
 
 
 
39 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
4 Develop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Fixation 
During this design process, two initial ideas have already been developed. Now, focus shifts to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exploring and assessing the solution space. Therefore, the initial ideas are put aside for now in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to uncover the full potential of a facilitation supportation tool. The results of the landing page-test for
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Work Face and the study on the WS planner prototype will be addressed in section 4.12. 
 
This is, however, easier said than done, and effort must be put into releasing the unavoidable fixation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that has emerged from the work with the initial ideas (Smith, 2003).  
 
The dogma for the initial ideas was a ​digital ​tool. This fixation will be challenged, as the criteria for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following ideation phase is that at least one concept will be non-digital.  
 
Appendix 10 addresses the initial design strategy for overcoming these fixations and exploring the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution space, counting ‘Assumption Dumption’, ‘Ideation WS’ along various brainstorms. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appendix, I have developed a subjective evaluation of the value of the output from each activity. These
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
values are according to an ascending scale: ‘Minimal value’, ‘Minor value’, ‘Moderate value’, ‘Significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value’, ‘Severe value’. 
 
4.2 ‘Assumption Dumption’  
Both explicit and tacit assumptions can pose barriers to creativity (Brown, 2006). In particular, the tacit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assumptions are important to map out and thereby avoid unconscious inhibition of ideas due to an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unnamed assumption (valid or invalid). The creative ability is perceived to be strongly associated with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ability to gain access to associations (Gruszka and Necka, 2002 and Smith, 2003). As a result
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
imposing unnecessary limitation based on invalid assumptions can obstruct the creative process. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
method ‘Assumptions Dumption’ was introduced in the course 42641 Applied Creativity, Technical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University of Denmark (DTU, 2013b). In ‘Assumption Dumption’, the designer or a group of designers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
explicate all the assumptions present in a project by writing them down. Subsequently, a discussion on
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
each of the assumptions determines whether the assumption is true or false.  
 
4.2.1 Explicating and assessing assumptions  
Initially, all conceivable assumptions about the project were noted on each their post-it. Having an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
external partner for discussion turned out to be crucial to explicate assumptions, as the tacit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assumptions are by definition, unknowingly present assumptions. My partner and I discussed the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
project, and each time, I seemed to take anything for granted, my partner pointed this out to me and
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the assumption was written down. Most assumptions had developed out of the initial ideas of Work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Face, both the execution module and the WS planner and responded directly to the functionality of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those platforms.  
 
Subsequently, the pile of revealed assumptions was divided into two categories: the true assumptions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the false assumptions (see appendix 11). The further development attempts to unsettle these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invalid assumptions. The valid assumptions constitutes a constraint map that scopes the further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development.  
 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:44==
4.2.2 Value of the output: minor value  
This is an subjective assessment of the valid and invalid assumptions and it is possible that the revealed
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
assumptions do not include the entire set of constraints adapted in the project. However, the aim was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to explicate the assumptions embedded in how this support system is represented and this has in fact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
drawn attention to some of the assumption of questionable validity. In revisiting the ‘true’ assumptions,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they vastly repeat the design criteria from table 8, section 3.5. This may serve as a validation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
assumptions but also initiates a reflection of my own ability to explicate the tacit assumptions. 
 
4.3 Dividing the workflow into subsystems 
Facilitating a WS is a workflow constituted from more consecutive subsystems. An attempt was made to
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distinguish these subsystems in order to enable delimited work within each of the systems. 
 
4.3.1 Mapping chronology and prioritizing activities 
The subsystems build upon the design criteria settled in the define section (table 8, section 3.5). Hence,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the subsystems should be understood as a chronological sorting of the activities that a good facilitator
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
should undertake. There are three main systems: ‘Before’, ‘During’ and ‘After’ the WS.  
 
Reviewing the activities, some appear more critical than others. Those core activities are marked with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stars in image 9 below. The critical activities are the core functionality supported by the system. This is
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
either due to being a precondition for the further course of activities in the system (such as setting up
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercises and WSs) or due to being fundamental for the goal and progression of the WS itself (such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribute descriptions and manage time).  
 
 
Image 9: Division of the workshop workflow into subsystems and activities. Star marked activities 
constitute the skeleton of the solution.  
 
 
42 
==PAGE:45==
4.3.2 Value of the output: moderate value 
Dividing the WS workflow into subsystems and pointing out the activities within those subsystems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clarified the timing of each activity and thereby helped to formulate clusters of functionality within the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overall system. Assessing the critical activities helps to develop guidelines to the design a supporting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
system by pointing out the initial points of focus. A holistic system will, of course, need to take all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
activities into account. Yet,, having the critical activities settled, the design of the remaining activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may become more obvious and manageable.  
 
4.4 Ideation workshop 
Doing ideation and conceptualization single-handedly is a difficult task to manage because of lack of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peer inspiration and the ‘constraining effects of the initial ideas’ proves difficult to work around (Smith,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003). To overcome this barrier to new ideas called for an ideation WS engaging externals to kick-start
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the ideation process. The goal was to obtain more diverse ideas and concepts than a single person can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
achieve independently. In the following section, the key take-aways from the WS are addressed. All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related documentation on the conducted work can be found in appendix 12.  
 
4.4.1 Participants  
Through participation in the WS B on ​digital ideation management (section 2.7), I found that having a
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
handpicked audience is a favorable situation for the facilitator. People familiar with facilitating and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participating in WSs found it easier to grasp the format of this type of WSs, and contribute to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussions than those seen in other WSs who lacked this familiarity with WSs. I therefore sent a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
personal message to 10 people with the hope of getting a positive response from five-six of them. Five
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people accepted the invitation, and the schedule of the WS was planned according to this number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants. However, on the day of the planned WS, three people had to cancel, and only two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substitutes were found. Fortunately, four participants was exactly the lower limit of participants for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
planned WS.  
 
4.4.2 Schedule summary 
The WS was a three hour after-work session with focus on the rapid generation of new ideas and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts. The Excel WS planner prototype was used for planning, while a slideshow was used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
present the agenda and details of exercises carried out within the WS. The step by step-instructions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formulated in the WS planner were copy-pasted into the presentation which meant that I only had to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
formulate the instructions once (see appendix 13 (in Danish)). The WS program was as follows: 
 
1.
Onboard the participants to the project and the ​kind of WSs to deal with: Introducing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
reference ​workshopa​, Lise’s facilitation of a WS at Dong Energy. 
 
2.
Staging a discussion on challenges: Brainstorming on Lise’s challenges and completion of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template on for four selected challenges: Why do the challenges occur, what are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consequences, and a top level analysis of the challenge.  
 
3.
Develop possible solutions to three prioritized challenges: Brainstorming solutions for each of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the challenges and sharing the ideas in pairs.  
 
 
 
43 
==PAGE:46==
4.
Develop concepts that consider all three challenges: Working on conceptualization in pairs. One
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pair working on a purely analogue concept, one on a digital concept.  
 
4.4.3 Products from the workshop: the derived challenges and concepts 
4.4.3.1 Lise’s challenges in the Dong Energy WS 
In the initial brainstorm on Lise’s challenges, each participant could only share and add two challenges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the pile of challenges. As they shared, the challenges were grouped into clusters of similar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges. For each cluster, a predefined template was filled in (see appendix 12, page 3-6). The four
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges touched upon the following topics: 
 
●
How to motivate everyone?  
 
●
How to assure a comparable output from every group? 
 
●
How can a structured documentation be assured? 
 
●
How can one create the proper scene for creativity or innovative thinking? How can one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assure that everyone is not just in their usual mindset? 
 
Amongst these challenges, both new and recurring issue, compared to the design criteria (table 8,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section 3.5), are addressed. The challenge regarding a comparable output resembles the design criteria
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
on distributing instructions to ensure a common set of ‘rules’ for the output. The challenge regarding
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structured documentation resembles the design criteria on smarter documentation. Thus, those two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
criteria are confirmed by the participants in the WS. The remaining two challenges stress some of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social challenges in a WS and have not previously been addressed. They are not at all necessarily
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
negligible but are difficult to account for in a generic, standardized tool. 
 
4.4.3.2 The analouge and the digital concepts  
The two resulting concepts had different preconditions: one pair had to design an analogue concept,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whereas the other pair had to design a digital concept. The quick drawings of the concepts can be seen
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in appendix 12, page 9-10. Both concepts show unexplored potential that will be carried on in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further ideation. 
 
●
Analogue concept: portable cardboard walls 
The analogue concept took its starting point in a physical ‘wall’ at which sticky notes, drawings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and other productions can be put up. Further, the idea was to enable participants to take the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘wall’ with them back home and mount it at their office as a giant sticky note.  
 
●
Digital concept: random selection of digital post-its to overcome internal hierarchy 
The digital concept aimed at overcoming the hierarchy that often appears within the groups at a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
WS. By designing a platform for digital post-its amongst which a random selection depicts the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
post-it to be presented, the platform becomes an objective moderator with the power to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribute speaking time equally among the group members.  
 
  
 
 
44 
==PAGE:47==
4.4.4 Testing hypotheses in the workshop 
In addition to exploring diverse ideas, the WS offered a setting within which I could test some of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
hypotheses that the initial ideas about the execution module of Work Face and the planner built upon.  
 
 
4.4.4.1 Workshop planner: limitations  
The Excel prototype of the WS planner was used to plan the WS activities imposing a thorough
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
consideration on each exercise, in other words how to work through it step by step and what purpose it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
serves. The step by step-instructions were copy pasted directly into the slide show that presented the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agenda and exercises. Those two in combination proved to be a very strong tool. However, some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
limitations of the WS planner revealed in the usage:  
 
●
Not-exercise related elements are not possible to include in the schedule. If this tool should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
a stand-alone planning tool, both breaks and presentations should be possible to include. 
 
●
In case every group should not receive the same instructions, the tool does not support a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
distinction among such instructions. 
 
●
A complete list of props as a grocery list is not possible to extract. 
 
●
It is not possible to edit the order of exercises.  
 
●
Real time, eg. 13:00-13:15, cannot be typed in, only the duration of 15 minutes can be set, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when​ these 15 minutes occur in the schedule cannot be indicated.  
 
●
Images cannot be added to a description to visualise examples or material  
 
 
4.4.4.2 Continuous documentation as part of the instructions 
A low fidelity test on how the envisioned documentation flow could work was integrated in the WS. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Work Face, the proposed solution is to have the participants document their own work by taking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
photos continuously throughout the WS. A separate step in an exercise tells the participants to take
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these photos. During the ideation WS, I told the participants to place the result of an exercise in front of
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them and take a photo with their phone. After the WS, all documentation was send by email, and each
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
photo was named by exercise and author. Of course the limited number of participants and exercises
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
made the task of labeling each photo manageable, but it would be done automatically within a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
market-ready system. The overview of the documentation is quite satisfying, and it only took a brief
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
moment. Now everything is placed in one folder sorting the photos by exercise and author (see image
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
==PAGE:48==
 
Image 10: Screenshot of the folder containing the sorted documentation from ideation workshop 
 
4.4.5 Other key takeaways from the workshop 
●
As both concluded from the empirical research and as the groups queried themselves, some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people are more comfortable with speaking up, while others were more reticent to do so. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this situation, it was manageable given the possible face to face interaction with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants and the option to rearrange groups and motivate the more reticent participants to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
speak. It gets more difficult as the number of participants increases and are split into more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
groups.  
 
●
It was difficult to transform the participants’ mindsets to work with a generic tool. Several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
attempts had to be made in order to have participants think beyond concrete exercises to solve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the issues of motivation, documentation etc. Afterwards, a participant commented: ​“Through it
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
all, I had Lises challenges in mind, and I kept thinking, how can these be solved in this specific
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instance” ​(Bo Mouridsen )​. The Dong Energy workshopa was both a good way to pose an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
example but also a limitation: “We had been working with small bits and pieces of the challenges
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through it all, and I did not catch the point of thinking in big and general patterns all of a sudden”
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
(Emil Bunk )​. So the message should have been emphasized or an extra exercise should have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
been planned to build up to the conceptualization.  
 
●
Despite the limitation it proposed, the workshopa handout was a good medium to convey the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
type of WSs this project deals with. This was when the three workshopa (section 3.6.1) were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiated to explicate the tacit knowledge that pose a fundamental premise for the project.  
 
4.4.6 Value of output: Severe value 
Overall the value of this ideation WS is priceless. Both the actual concepts that the participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generated and the validation of the hypotheses with regards to Work Face are significant inputs for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further development.  
14 Bo Mouridsen: Graphical designer at Nodes Aps, 27 years, WS participant 
15 Emil Bunk: User Experience Advisor at Nodes Aps, 25 year, WS participant 
 
 
46 
==PAGE:49==
4.5 Single‐handed ideation brainstorms within the subsystems 
Going forward, beyond developing a successful ideation, the WS provided comfortable motivation to do
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
move on. This section address various degrees of success of carrying out different brainstorm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods. Both new and well-known explorative approaches were tried out to uncover the solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
space. The main emphasize has been on the three activities marked with stars in the ‘During Workshop’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsystem (image 9, section 4.3.1): Provide instructions, Time management and Enable documentation.  
 
4.5.1 The Anti‐problem 
The anti-problem is method introduced by Gray et al. in the game review ‘Gamestorming: a playbook
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
for innovators, rulebreakers, and changemakers’ (Gray et al., 2010). It aims at solving the opposite
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem than the actual problem and is intended to release a fixated perception of the problem and its
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions. This method is in its purpose similar to Dix’s Bad Ideas (Dix et al., 2006) that aims to release
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the often self-imposed constraint: to generate the best possible solutions to a problem. In ‘Bad Ideas’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the goal is still to solve the original problem but in the worst possible way. Personally, I am vastly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
familiar with Bad Ideas and challenged myself to try a new approach. 
 
The troublesome part is the formulate the ‘right’ anti-problem. Taking ‘time management’ as an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
example which originally concerns having all groups working somewhat synchronously, the tempting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anti-problem is: ‘how to ensure that no one is doing the same exercise at the same time?’. The solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to this problem would soon be to have no time management at all. Such proposal is not a valid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
solution. Instead, reflecting upon the issue of time management being that people lose track of time,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revealed a more appropriate anti-problem: ‘How to ensure the most efficient loss of sense of time?’ 
 
With regards to Instructions, the anti-problem was thought out on basis of instructions' ability to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure a common set of rules ensuring a comparable outcome across groups. Hence, the anti problem
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
came to be: ‘How to ensure the most divergent output across groups?’ 
 
The purpose of documentation is to facilitate recapitulation or further work on of the products from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the WS, and an opposite activity would be: ‘How to ensure that everything produced at the WS, is gone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to waste?’ 
 
For each anti-problem, possible solutions was generated in a period of a 5-7 minutes. 
 
4.5.1.1 Value of the output: minor value 
Following Gray’s instructions, the output from the Anti-problem are any new insights on the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem. Since the anti-problems sprung from thoroughly analysed problems to begin with, the vast
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
majority of the insights from performing the Anti-problem method were already known. Insights such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as ‘easy distribution of instructions should be supported’ and ‘documentation should be sorted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
properly’ were existing findings already. The fact that the findings were repeating themselves became
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clear
by
the
time
solutions
were
found
for
the
anti-problems
regarding
instructions
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documentation. Hence, performing the method with regards to the third issue, time management,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seemed redundant. In appendix 14, the product from the Anti-problem method can be found. 
 
 
 
47 
==PAGE:50==
4.5.2 Brainstorm on solutions without constraints  
After the somewhat inadequate outcome of the Anti-problem approach and a brief attempt to to Bad
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Ideas with a similar result, I attempted to grapple with some of the ideas that were swirling around in
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
my head.  
 
Within the three core functionalities: instructions, documentation and time management 5-7 minutes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
brainstorms were performed. The ideas are sorted according to digital and analogue idas.  
 
4.5.2.1 Value of the output: moderate value 
Thinking of all possible and feasible solutions was more fruitful than the Anti-problem and Bad Ideas.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The aim was to generate solutions within both digital and analogue paradigms and to avoid the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
temptation to judge the ideas before the pen went to the paper. However, an attempt was made to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differentiate the ideas from the concepts from the ideation WS and from the execution module and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
planner module in Work Face. In appendix 15, the products from the brainstorm are structured.  
 
4.5.3 Overall reflection upon the ideation 
Generating ideas for an undefined overall concept is a highly open and under-constrained task.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Onarheim and Biskjaer (2015), seven meta-categories of constraints influence our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creativity, among these are the individual, technical and processual constraints (Onarheim and Biskjaer,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2015). Naturally, my personal habits and ambitions play a dominant role in shaping the outcome as I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
was not working with co-investigators who could offer a counterpoint to my approach. The lack of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technical specifications for the concept at this point of the process entails the solutions space to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wide and under constraint. Moving on to the conceptualization phase was a needed change.  
 
4.6 Conceptualization 
In the following section, the initiatives carried out to distill the ideas into a selection of concepts are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
addressed.  
 
4.6.1 Assessing the pool of ideas  
Initially, the pool of ideas generated at the WS and during single-handed ideation had to be sorted and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prioritized prior to synthesizing concepts. The two concepts from the WS: the cardboard walls and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘random selection of digital post-its’ were determined to constitute the foundation of two concepts. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas from the individual brainstorm posed inputs to the concepts to form more holistic concepts. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas from the brainstorm were assessed by plotting them into a matrix with two axes: digital vs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
analogue and interesting vs. trivial (appendix 16).  
4.6.1.1 Value of output: significant value 
The prioritization facilitated a better overview of the pool of ideas. Sorting out interesting ideas and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distinguishing analogue and digital solutions, enabled further development.  
 
 
 
48 
==PAGE:51==
4.6.2 Conceptualization through free idea parring  
This is done to obtain actual concepts. From the beginning of the ideation phase, the goal had been to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obtain at least three concepts of which at least one had to be analog. The basis of three concepts had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evolved, in the back of the mind, throughout the ideation phase: the ‘wall’, the ‘random selection of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
digital post-its’ and, of course, a concept taking after Work Face. None of these cover the entire set of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design criteria (table 8, section 3.5) on their own in the present form and should be further detailed and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
modified. The interesting ideas in the assessment matrix were included in the concepts. Initial drawings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the three concepts made up the first overview of the functionality (appendix 17).  
 
A.
‘Cardboard walls’: The first concept builds on top of the physical ‘wall’ from the ideation WS. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wall is a platform for collecting documentation from a WS. Now, the walls, made of cardboard,
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be detached from the stand and affixed to any given surface by peeling of the back of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cardboard which will expose a sticky surface. Instructions are provided as physical handouts
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
along with other aides such as scissors, tape, post-its, etc. The facilitator will manage time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centrally by turning off the light above the wall.  
 
B.
‘Digital posit-its’: The second concept build upon the ‘random selection of digital post-its’. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept grew into a platform tailored for digital post-it notes. Post-its are created in the app,
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the entire pool of post-its exists in the app, visible to the facilitator as well. The system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
randomly selects the post-it to be presented and while one user is presenting, the others can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cluster their post-its to the presented one. Time slots are set for every post-it session, and when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time is up, all screens in the team go black, and the ability to edit the post-it is disabled.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instructions exists outside the app and are provided as handouts.  
 
C.
‘Process control’: The third concept proposes a focused process management tool that closely
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
resembles Work Face. The facilitator sets up the exercises and instructions in an integrated part
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the app (similar to the Excel prototype of the WS planner) and distributes it to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants. One of the main differences from Work Face is change from facilitator-owned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
devices to participant-owned devices (that being tablet, desktops or smartphones). The change
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was made due to the fact that a facilitator rarely has access to 50 iPads for distribution. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system guides the participants though all exercises, and asks them to document their work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
continuously. Time slots are assigned to each exercise and managed in the app where the time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumption is displayed to the facilitator. All images are sorted by group and exercise at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
end of the WS.  
 
A fourth concept emerged as the above concepts took form. Recalling the existing tools that today
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perform some of the desired jobs, raised an opportunity for a fourth concept describing a very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
structured workflow using those tools:  
 
D.
‘Optimum workflow’: A spreadsheet can handle low-practical planning and description of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercises, while a manually formatted handout or slide show can communicate schedule and
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercises. Handwritten or otherwise conducted notes can be transmitted into the spreadsheet,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling evaluations and improvements. This product is suited for an experienced facilitator
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who already has a workflow. The further design of such system would be the design of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suggested templates and optimized workflows including documentation.  
4.6.2.1 Value of the output: severe value 
At this point four concrete concepts were established enabling an assess according the design criteria
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the concepts between. Having obtained four concepts is crucial to the further design process.  
 
 
49 
==PAGE:52==
 
4.7 Drawings of the four concepts 
To further explicate the concepts, the use scenarios of each concept were described in the format of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comic stripes or story boards as shown in miniatures in image 11 below (see appendix 18 for full size).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These display the process that takes place over the limited period of time within which the WS takes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
place. In particular, the services that are offered ​during ​the WS are visualized.  
 
 
A: Cardboard walls - portable physical 
documentation of the workshop 
 
B: Digital post-its - overcoming the social 
hierarchies in groups 
C: Process control (WorkFace) - connecting 
devices 
 
D: Optimum workflow - structured workflow by 
the use of existing products 
Image 11: Miniatures of the comic stripes describing the workflow of each concept 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
==PAGE:53==
4.8 Mapping unique experience and limitations  
Before going into a numeric weighting of the concepts, a qualitative assessment of the unique
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience and the limitations associated with each concept is carried out. The design of the final
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system is the design of a service to facilitators. According to Copenhagen Institute of Interaction Design
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Stickdorn and Schneider, 2011), service design is about offering a unique experience to the user. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
limitations are, so far, only seen in the light of the service, whereas technical limitations will be dealt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with later.  
 
Concept A: Cardboard walls - portable physical documentation of the workshop 
Unique experience 
The system offers a sympathetic product, that makes the progression within
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the WS evident. The walls are portable, allowing the participants to take the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documentation with them. This may contribute to a strong sense of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ownership and commitment to the conducted work.  
Limitations 
The facilitator has to consider the format of the documentation. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documentation must be possible to hang on the wall.  
 
Concept B: Digital post-its - overcoming the social hierarchies in groups 
Unique experience 
The system helps overcoming the social hierarchies within a group due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the random selection. Putting together clusters directly in the system, seem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an intuitive action that imitates the real nature of post-its.  
Limitations 
The format of the digital post-its are very limiting. The exercises in the WS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has to be suitable for use of post-its.  
 
Concept C: Process control (WorkFace) - connecting devices 
Unique experience 
The system offers a empty shell that allows the facilitator to perform a great
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
variety of exercises. Time management is flexible allowing groups to work at
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
different paces. 
Limitations 
The
system
does
not
to
any
great
extent
emphasize sharing and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribution among the participants.  
 
 Concept D: Optimum workflow - structured workflow by the use of existing products 
Unique experience 
The optimization of existing tools binds together a familiar workflow and
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
well-known tools.  
Limitations 
The system does not integrate the separate parts and is not a bespoke WS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
system.  
 
 
 
51 
==PAGE:54==
4.9 Assessment against weighted design criteria 
A more systematic assessment of the concepts was done by ranking the concepts against weighted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design criteria (table 8, section 3.5). This method takes inspiration from the weighted objective method
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Cross, 2008). This approach weights design objectives in relation to one another and assesses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functions against those. In the assessment table (table 9), the design criteria are accompanied by a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
weighting equivalent to the number of research instances the criteria appeared in (table 8, section 3.5).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This indicates the importance of the concepts meeting each criteria giving the most important criteria
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the most weight. The four concepts are ranked against the design criteria on a scale from 1-5, 5 being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
the most positive, and the total score of the concepts is the average relative score.  
 
It is important to note that even though the ranking is a systematic assessment, it is not objective. Any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 
kind of weighting or grading of this kind is done on the basis of a subjective perception of the concept.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
The ranking is consistent but the result may differ depending on the reviewer.  
 
Table 9: Assessing concepts against weighted design criteria 
Weight 
Criteria 
A 
Cardboard 
walls 
B 
Digital 
post-its 
C  
Process 
control 
D 
Optimum 
workflow 
5 
Workshops are dynamic and the opportunity to edit 
the schedule continuously (also during the WS) must 
be supported 
2 
2 
5 
2 
4 
Guides/instructions on the exercises should be 
available and possible to consult continuously  
5 
5 
5 
5 
4 
Invitation to share, speak up and contribute in 
plenum should be emphasized to counteract the 
(potential) reticence of the audience  
1 
6 
1 
1 
3 
The flexibility in work pace should be allowed 
1 
1 
5 
1 
2 
Evaluation could be established as a way for the 
facilitator to develop and progress  
1 
1 
5 
5 
2 
Documentation could be supported more easily  
5 
6 
6 
1 
 
Total score (weighted sum/6) 
8.2 
11.8 
14.3 
8.2 
 
 
According to this assessment, concept C, Progress Control, closely resembling Work Face, is the concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
that matches the design criteria the best. However, concept B, Digital post-its, adds up close to concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C and does a significantly better job in motivating the group members to share. When moving into the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further development of any concept all aspects should be covered sufficiently.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
==PAGE:55==
4.10 The persona’s perception of the concepts 
Yet an assessment compare the four concepts to the needs and preferences of the personas: Anders,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lise and Anna. This assessment is the personas’ (believed) perception and opinion on the four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts. At the bottom of table 10, their favorites are listed, indicating C as common denominator.  
 
Table 10: Assessment in the light of the personas 
 
 
 
Anders Berg,  
Rambøl 
 
 
Lise Albrecht,  
FUTU 
Anna 
Lykkegaard,  
Designit 
A  
(walls) 
The walls are cumbersome 
to transport and set up. 
Most of Anders’ exercises 
can be used with the wall 
and the bag of props is fine 
for the stimuli cards. 
However, in cases of 
physical building the walls 
fall short.  
The idea behind and the 
design of the wall is 
sympathetic. Collecting the 
documentation of the wall 
would be a great help, and 
they would be a suitable 
place to develop the 
storyboard for the pitch 
movies.  
Most of Anna’s WSs take place 
in-house and the walls could 
stay at the office. The walls 
are fine for most exercises 
including printed templates.  
B 
(digital 
post-its) 
Post-its are not the best 
format for many of Anders’ 
exercise and is a vast 
constraint. The element of 
overcoming hierarchies is 
not his main concern.  
The format of post-its is too 
limiting and is not suitable 
for all exercises, even though 
overcoming the hierarchies 
in the groups is important to 
Lise.  
Anna likes post-its but still 
finds this concept too limiting 
despite the value in 
overcoming some unfavorable 
dynamics in the groups.  
C  
(process 
control) 
This constitutes a proposal 
on a very structured 
process, that eases sorting 
the documentation. The 
system makes it redundant 
to start the groups in shifts 
and it enables him to 
develop his own skills.  
The concept offers taking 
care of the process from 
beginning to end. Lise is 
mostly concerned about the 
complexity of having all 
participant and her self use 
the digital system. The 
system would allow her to be 
less strict with timings.  
The time management system 
allows the groups to be more 
flexible and the 
documentation flow supports 
her own idea to ask 
participants take photos.  
 
D  
(optimum 
workflow) 
Using those tools is aligned 
with Anders’ current work 
flow. It does not significantly 
improve the workflow but it 
is comfortable.  
The proposed process 
involves a workflow that is 
not natural to Lise and does 
not offer any great value in 
return for changing the 
workflow.  
Anna prefers to use only one 
tool and even though the 
process resemble her current 
flow, it does not offer crucial 
value.  
2 preferred 
concepts 
C and D 
A and C 
A and C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:56==
4.11 The chosen concept: concept C, also known as Work Face 
Reviewing the concepts with regards to both the design criteria and the personas, indicates that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts resembling Work Face is the most promising concept. At at this point it was ultimately decided
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
that the further development will continue the design of this concept. “Work Face” will continuously be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the working title of the product. 
 
The main difference from concepts C to Work Face is the change of device ownership. During the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews, the idea of a facilitator holding a 50 piece iPad kit, proved to be unrealistic . Therefore, in
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
concept C, the participants work from their privately owned devices. This require a review of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
distribution, the platform and the access of the system.  
 
4.12 Results from the initial idea verifications 
The results from the two initial idea verifications pose valuable inputs to the further design of Work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Face. Where the above described assessments are of a theoretical nature, the results from the idea
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verifications constitutes practical experiences with Work Face. 
 
4.12.1 Results from the landing page test 
Work Face was tested amongst an audience not biased by knowing me or the project beforehand. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results will reveal the potential of Work Face with regards to further development. The landing page for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Work Face was launched 28 Aug 2015, and the data from launrock.com was collected January 22nd
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2016, se appendix 19.  
 
4.12.1.1 Number of visits and conversion rate 
The purpose of the landing page was to investigate the extent to which visitors find it worth subscribing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
for news on Work Face. Therefore, the first numbers to look at are the number of visits and the number
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of subscriptions. Over the landing page’s lifetime (28 Aug 2016 - 22 Jan 2016), the page has had 142
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unique visits , thus only counting requiring visitors once. The list of subscriptions counts 23 emails (see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
appendix 20). This results is a conversion rate of 16,20%. According to a blog post by the founder of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
WordStream , Larry Kim, a conversion rate higher than 11,45% is only obtained by top 10% of landing
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17
pages (Kim, 2015). At first glance Work Face’s conversion rate sounds as though it has immense
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential. Personally, I believe it to be an indication of the narrow dedicated niche this product targets.
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142 visitors are not an overwhelmingly large amount of visitors, but a seemingly engaged audience as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
so many of them are willing to subscribe for this unknown platform. Browsing the list of subscriptions,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a couple of obviously user, creativity, experience and innovation centered domains can be found:  
 
●
hyperisland.com: Swedish creative educational institution with emphasis on digital experiences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(HyperIsland, 2015). 
 
●
bang-olufsen.dk: Danish highend sound perfectionist striving for magical experiences (Bang &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Olufsen, 2015)  
 
16 Among the 142 visits, I myself have contributed with a handful of visits, this has no negative impact on the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conversion rate, though.  
17 WordStream: Online marketing software developers, a Google Premier SMB partner (WordStream, 2015) 
 
 
54 
==PAGE:57==
●
dna.co.nz: New Zealand customer experience ageny that designs brands, products and services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(DNA, 2015). 
 
●
saatchi.no: Norwegian, creative digital agency with a 360 degree perspective on the business
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and expereince (Saatchi & Saatchi, 2015).  
 
Without knowledge about about the motivation for each of these people to sign up, they seem to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the very audience that this product aims to target. As with the amount of literature, WS facilitation is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
subject that matters to a limited audience but apparently, if you reach these people they will likely
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commit to discover more. 
 
4.12.1.2 Reach: Facebook generates the most traffic 
This leads to a discussion about how well the landing page has reached into the target segment. Recall
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the distribution channels:  
 
●
Facebook-pages (CINC, CIID, Creativity Gym, and Balder Onarheim) 
●
Instagram (Balder Onarheim) 
●
LinkedIn (CINC) 
●
Twitter (CINC) 
 
Posts were sent out in the days around 28 Aug 2015 when the landing page was launched. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
promotion is reflected in the log of activities over time as the number of visits peaked on the launch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
day. On this day alone, 46 unique visitors visited the page which is a significantly higher number than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
on any other day throughout the period (image 12).  
 
 
Image 12: section of the graph of activities over time (source: Launchrock.com) 
 
Looking at the referrer websites and the traffic that each of them generates, Facebook is by far the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strongest referrer. Summing up the contribution from both computer (www.facebook.com) and from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mobile devices (m.facebook.com), Facebook generates 43,66% of the traffic to the landing page (image
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13).  
 
Image 13: Diagram of traffic generated from each referrer websites (source: launchrock.com) 
 
 
55 
==PAGE:58==
 
The Facebook post from CINC alone reached 210 people, while the reach of the remaining facebook
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
channels are unknown. The high percentage of traffic generated from Facebook indicates that though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the other channels were relevant to the target segment as well, Facebook is the audience’s preferred
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
platform. In order to obtain a greater reach in term, an improved effort should be targeted towards
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Facebook to have the awareness spread as ripples in the water. This requires more thorough
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge about social media strategies and community management than possessed at this point.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drawing attention through the use of Google Adword
and publishing blog post in other relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
forums may be part of the further strategy.  
 
4.12.1.3 Conclusion 
The point of the landing page test was to investigate the potential of the initial idea. Given the rather
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high conversion rate, the idea proves a potential to be brought into the further work, despite a limited
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
visitor basis. None of the audience has submitted more concrete feedback on the design.  
 
4.12.2 Results from the Excel prototype of the workshop planner  
As Work Face’s better half, the planner module in the shape of an Excel spreadsheet was tested in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
course Staging co-creation at DTU in November to December 2015. In January 2016, a questionnaire
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
was send out and a series of interviews was performed soon after collecting the data from the the
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaire.  
 
The questionnaire was organized in Google Forms, one of Google Drive’s free tools meant for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaires, quizzes and the like. The interviews relied on the anonymous results from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaire and were designed to investigate the cause of the answers in the questionnaire.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Documentation can be found in appendix 21 on the results of the questionnaire and 22 for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews. 60 students were given the opportunity to answer the questionnaire, 11 (18%) respondents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
filled it in. Seven students consented to participate in the follow-up interviews. 
 
4.12.2.1 The prototype overall 
Overall, the prototype appeared to be confusing for the students, and though 36,4% expressed that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype made good sense, 54,5% found it confusing. During the interviews, it was revealed that the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
students had experienced a lack of introduction to the prototype or ‘template’ as they referred it. The
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structure of the exercise sheets, the evaluations and the co-creation paradigm, in particular, had been a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
hassle for them to make sense of in addition to the rather cumbersome Excel format that made it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
unintuitive to work with. In addition to the Excel prototype, the students were to develop their own
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template for setting up and running WSs. This template, of course, gained more focal than the Excel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spreadsheet, but this resulted in a bureaucratic approach to the prototype as it was not filled in until
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
after the execution of the WSs, right before the final handin in the course. 
 
4.12.2.2 The purpose of the tool 
Reviewing the probability that the students will make use of a similar framework in future work, most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of them (63,6 %) state that ‘maybe’ they would. Asking them in the questionnaire ‘why’ and ‘why not’,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interviewees proved to have obtained a positive attitude towards the idea and stated that the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structured workflow emphasized in the prototype is what makes it appealing. The idea of using the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 Google Adwords: online advertising service provided by Google (Google, 2015)  
 
 
56 
==PAGE:59==
system as a database or library of exercise was perceived a value in planning of future WSs as the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercises would be possible to combine in any thinkable way.  
 
4.12.2.3 Step by step intructions, the most important element 
From the questionnaire, there seems to be consensus about the step by step instructions (called
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
descriptions in the prototype and questionnaire) as the most important descriptive element of an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exercise. However, I was puzzled by the fact, that these guides were never used in the WSs, as copy
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pasting the instructions into a Word document or PowerPoint had proven to be an easy way of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
composing a handout or presentation. The degree of difficulty in filling them in, did not seem to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
obstruct the students, as 54,5% said that it was not troublesome some fill in the stepwise instructions.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The main reason for not making use of the instructions was found to be the late completion of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
template, the WSs were already past tense by then. In addition, all interviewees envisioned the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator to orally instruct the participants as they focused on small WSs (less than 10 participants). In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such situations an oral instruction is the most common approach, and their own templates were all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designed to meet this scenario. When asking about how the format could be adapted to a scenario with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
a higher number of participants in which the participants would receive the written instructions, many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
commented that it would have to be unambiguously clear what is shown to the participants. They all
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
believed that the formulation would have to be different if it is be shown to the participants.  
 
4.12.2.4 The students’ own templates 
When asking about the differences between the Excel prototype and their own templates, several of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interviewees found that these two products were rather similar. However, their templates were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
customized to their needs and they understood them far better as a result. Allowing the facilitator a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
high degree of freedom to influence his or her own template was of great importance to obtain a sense
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
of ownership (Stine Dahl-Petersen and Camilla Arndt Hansen, appendix 22).  
 
4.12.2.5 The workflow in planning a workshop 
In general, for the purpose of the co-creation course, what the students missed was the early planning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase: ‘what is the goal of the WS?’ then ‘how can this be obtain through a series of exercises?’, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
then ‘how are these exercises executed?’. The prototype concerns the last part of the planning and can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
only to some degree assist with the very initial planning by determining the mode of the exercise
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(create comfort, stage discussion, develop together). However, more experienced facilitators may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more familiar with this workflow.  
 
4.12.2.6 Conclusion: complicated format muddled the potential for a good work tool 
The interviews left a more positive image of the students perception of the prototype than the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaire. Clarifying the aim of the Excel sheet showed that the students own templates resembled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Excel document largely, however (to the students) in more comprehensive manners. The interviews
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
showed that the way the prototype was introduced in the course was perceived inadequate. Within the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviews, points were made on how to improve the usability and comprehensibility through a simpler
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
and more explanatory design.  
 
 
 
57 
==PAGE:60==
4.12.2.7 
On another note, initial wireframes (appendix 23) visualizing how the actual product could be designed,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were shown to the students. When removing the constraining framework that Excel constitutes, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students envisioned a great potential for a good design. I could feel their renewed enthusiasm for the
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product as we discussed opportunities and improvements. Concrete suggestions counts: 
 
●
Dividing each step into modules that could be collapsed and expanded to provide the illusion of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a short list of information to complete.  
 
●
Displaying mandatory input fields and hiding advanced settings in collapsed module.  
 
●
Include facilitator notes for each step which will not be displayed to participants.  
 
●
More filters to narrow down a search for specific exercises, such as the suitable number of
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
5 Deliver, detailing Work Face 
 
 
 
 
 
59 
==PAGE:62==
5.1 Recapitulate: So, what is Work Face? 
By now, small pieces of the system have been introduced throughout this report. Before going into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
further detailing the system, a brief recapitulation may be in place.  
 
Work Face is a digital system that digitises parts of facilitating a WS. Work Face is not a substitution of
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
the facilitator, but an extension that helps the facilitator manage planning, time management,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instruction distribution, documentation and self-improvement. The system aims at pushing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator towards a structured and well documented process. During a WS, the facilitator is provided
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
an overview of how the groups are progressing. The groups will hopefully experience a more flexible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
process where they receive the needed stimulation from the facilitator and can take the command of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their own process to a greater extent.  
 
5.2 System design: before, during and after  
As the process have been more iterative than straightforward, more activities have been going on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simultaneously. While collecting data from the two initial idea verifications, system design, design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specification and wireframes were initiated. This concurrent work was an attempt to have all elements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-develop and take on the same direction. To thoroughly think through the envisioned workflow
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within the system and the services it provides, a service blueprint was drawn (see appendix 24, and
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section image 14). The service blueprint was found a suitable format as this is capable of displaying
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
several aspects of the systems simultaneously in separate swimlanes (Stickdorn and Schneider, 2011).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall, the blueprint divides the activities into the four phases of facilitating a WS: before, during and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
after and a phase where the participants enter the system. The main focus of this blueprint are the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator’s and participant’s activities (the solid orange and blue boxes). These activities trigger the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touch points with the system and causes actions in other parts of the system. A touch point between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the user and the system happens when the line of interaction is crossed by the black arrows. Again, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
front stage or the frontend is split into a facilitator part and a participant part representing an interface
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
for facilitator and participant, respectively. The backstage represents the activities going on in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
backend which are invisible to the user.  
 
 
 
 
 
Image 14: Section of the service blueprint visualizing the workflow through the system  
 
 
60 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
Due to the possibly highly complex system, Work Face constitutes, the blueprint is deliberately vastly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understated and simplified. Much of the activities during planning are black boxed but will be unfolded
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the later sections. As the blueprint developed, a more coherent and well thought system unveiled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
along with a set of design specifications.  
5.3 Design specifications 
The blueprint constituted the coherent overview that enabled a more detailed set of specification for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the design. The blueprint was the first high level overview of the system to be designed, whereas the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design specification go into more detail on how this system is obtained.  
 
The design specifications build upon the early high level criteria from table 8, section 3.5, and extends
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them into more tangible guidelines for the full scope. Further, the criteria take their basis in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recurring three phases of facilitating a WS: before, during and after. ‘Before’ is generally defined by
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
planning the WSs. Not all specifications have been mentioned earlier but are the product of thinking
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the envisioned workflow during the development of the blueprint. The specifications elaborate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the desired functionality within each of the phases and describe the user’s actions from both the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator’s and participant’s points of view during the WS. The full set of specifications can be seen in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appendix 25. Here in table 11, only the design criteria for planning are included as planning is a critical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
activity for the following flow in the system. Planning is vastly reduced in the blueprint, and these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifications aim to uncover what happens within this activity. Hence, the focal point of the following
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifications and flowchart revolves around the section of the blueprint shown below (image 15). 
 
 
 
Image 15: section of the blueprint representing the planning activities in the system 
 
 
 
 
61 
==PAGE:64==
Table 11: Design specifications: planning  
Create exercise 
●
Create a new exercise and store it in the system-library  
●
Name the exercise 
●
Add description of the exercise (optimally as consecutive steps) 
●
Categorize in which stage of the WS, the exercise is suitable: create comfort / stage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
discussion / develop together (another labeling may be needed to accomplish common
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding) 
●
Add timings, preferably for each step, at least for the entire exercise 
●
Add a suited number of participants  
●
Add the purpose of the exercise: both with regards to the design and the participants 
●
Add predefined modules for eg. documentation or sharing as steps in the instruction (these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
include accessing media such as camera) 
●
Repeat a series of steps as part of the instruction 
●
Add images to a description or a step in the description 
●
Add needed props (post-it block, paper, pens, clay, templates etc.) 
●
Add notes as free text 
●
Import complete exercises from a user generated in-app marketplace  
19
 
Create workshop 
●
Create a new WS and store in the system-library  
●
Select the prefered exercises 
●
Select an arbitrary order of the exercises 
●
Add real-time timings to the exercises 
●
Add breaks, presentation or other activities not related to the exercises 
●
Retrieve a complete plan of the WS including timed schedule and total duration 
●
Retrieve a complete list of props needed for the WS 
●
Format the appearance of the schedule into a decent UI for the participants 
 
5.3.1 Lack of motivation for sharing: yet a brainstorm 
In table 10 the four resulting concepts from the ideation phase were assessed against the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design criteria from table 8, section 3.5. From this assessment it appeared that motivating sharing was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
an element lacking in Work Face, whereas the system ‘Random selection of digital post-its’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accomplished this sharing element far better by monitoring who should present his or her idea.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, a brainstorm regarding this element alone was performed. Wikipedia’s random article
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
search
proposed an element of random stimuli in the brainstorm. Hence, random articles on statues,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
dictators, turbans etc. stimulated more remote associations to solve the sharing issue. In appendix 26,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the generated ideas are assessed with regards to two parameters: interesting versus do-able ideas. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas that are both do-able and interesting are summed to the following two points that easily can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-exist in the system: 
 
●
A standard module when enabled, adds a predefined step in the instructions telling the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants to share their conducted work.  
19 The in-app Marketplace is not explored further during the system design, but is addressed as part of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the business strategy in appendix 10.  
20 Wikipedia Random article is found in the left side menu at https://en.wikipedia.org 
 
 
62 
==PAGE:65==
●
An opportunity to randomize the sharing and let the system select the participants to present.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here, the internal hierarchy in a group will partially be overcome.  
 
5.4 Platform discussion: native app or web app? 
Initially Work Face was thought to be a native applications running seamlessly on iOS and Android.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the choice of platform is a relevant discussion to bring up. Off hand, pros and cons are
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
numerous for both a web application running in a browser and native applications downloaded from
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the app stores. In table 12, a non-exhaustive list of pros and cons is presented:  
 
Table 12: pros and cons for native applications and web app 
 
Pros 
Cons 
Native app 
●
Standard conventions set guidelines for 
design that meets users’ expectations 
dependant on the operation system (iOS 
and Android). 
●
User experience can be optimal for both 
Android and iOS.  
●
Push notifications easily enabled. 
●
Once installed, continuous use is obvious. 
●
Offline mode can be supported. 
●
Faster performance due to local caching 
in-app 
●
Better performance on transitions and 
animations  
●
Include native support for device hardware 
and sensors (eg. camera) 
●
Must be distributed through app 
stores and require installation. 
●
In case of in-app purchases, Apple 
takes 30% of the revenue. 
●
If desktop usage is desired this 
requires development from scratch.  
 
Web app 
●
The same line of code can be run on both 
Android and iOS.  
●
No dependence on distribution through 
app stores. 
●
Requires no installation. 
●
One location of code deployment. 
●
No cut on revenue from in-app purchases.  
●
Can be run on desktop with less effort  
●
User experience does not follow 
conventions for neither Android or 
iOS.  
●
Do not include native support for 
device hardware and sensors making 
supportation troublesome in some 
cases.  
 
None of these arguments is a determining cause for the choice of digital platform. What matters the
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most, are the user scenarios and situations that the app will be involved in. The choice of platform
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should always be product dependant and support the richest possible experience. Native apps are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prefered in the case of continuous use that justifies the high entry barrier inherent in going to the app
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
store and download a static element to your smartphone or tablet. On the other hand, a web
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application is suitable for rapidly changing information and discontinuous use cases.  
 
 
 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:66==
5.4.1 Scenario 1: to the facilitator a web application seems appropriate 
The facilitator needs a proper screen size and work conditions to operate in the WS planner (preferably
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a desktop). During the WS, the facilitator will need a lighter device displaying the progression of each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
group. It is important that the facilitator can circulate among the groups and that the device does not
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appear an entrenchment between facilitator and participants. An iPad would be less intrusive to carry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around than a desktop but with a more proper screen size compared to a smartphone.  
 
The frequent use of the iPad during execution of the WS appeals to the design of a native app, whereas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
the planning process more points to a web application. Doing a proper responsiveness
of the website
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
21
allow access from both desktop and mobile devices.  
 
5.4.2 Scenario 2: the participant may prefer a web application 
The participants may attend very few WSs on an annual basis and may feel resistance towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
downloading a native app. Further, in the WS they will often have to sit 4-6 people around a single
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
screen to read the instructions. The desktop has a suitable screen size, and may be the least intrusive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience among common devices. In addition, the screen can be put in an upright position that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
allows all team members to have a decent view of the screen. This points highly to a web application.  
 
5.4.3 Choosing the web as the platform for the application is not a total bliss 
Choosing to design for the web instead of for specific operating systems on the mobile devices, is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
without drawbacks. According to a leading mobile analytics company, Flurry, 90% of the time spent on
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mobile devices is spent on apps, whereas only 10% of the time is spent in a browser (Yahoo, 2016). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
trend that more and more experiences are customized to the individual operating system is solid. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time, Work Face may have to provide both web app and native apps to not be run over by other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
players.  
 
An immediate consequence of the web app choice is the complication of the documentation aspect.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When the participants do not access the WS schedule and instruction from a native app on mobile
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
device, linking photos to a common collection of photos sorted by group and exercise becomes more
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complicated. Accessing the camera through a web app is possible on both on desktop and mobile, but
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the flow of how this should be done may be complicated. This is dealt with in section 5.6..  
 
 
 
21 ​Responsive website: A design approach taking different screen sizes into account during design of the interface.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This means having the design adapt to smartphone and tablet screens in addition to desktop screens.  
 
 
64 
==PAGE:67==
5.5 Prototyping 
Having obtained a solid understanding and opinion of how Work Face works as an overall system,
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initiating the prototype, was a logical next step. Focus remained on the WS planner, as this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chronologically is the first touch point between user and system, and setting up exercises and WSs is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
requisite for using the system at all. Further, this appeared the most complicated part of the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and every decision will leave traces in any other part of the system.  
 
The work on the prototype has been an iterative process where feedback from students and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
professional facilitators have raised new possibilities, limitations and changes in the workflow.  
 
5.5.1 Flowchart: a dynamic tool 
A flowchart aims to map out the way a user will move around in the system (Klein, 2013). In this case,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that meant mapping out the links between exercises and WSs and planning navigation (see appendix
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27). The Flowchart attempts to open the black box of ‘planning’ in the service blueprint (image 15). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
flowchart was not a static document but a dynamic drawing that changed as the wireframe design
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
revealed new links and deleted others. A section of the flowchart is seen in image 16.  
 
 
Image 16: Section of flowchart 
 
5.5.2 Level of detail in the wireframes 
Mocking up the system in wireframes means taking even more decisions on the navigation, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
features and buttons in the system but not deciding on the graphical design identity (Klein, 2013). To
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Klein, a proper wireframe is at a higher level of abstraction than an interactive prototype which she
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceives as the next stage. However, in my personal experience having the non-initiated user review a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
set of wireframes, requires the wireframes to be fairly detailed and presentable. Showing the user too
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
high level wireframes, will in worst case result in your user’s misunderstanding of the product and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
useless feedback. The goal of the initiated wireframes were therefore an interactive prototype.  
 
The wireframes are drawn in Sketch, a vector based designed tool, specifically designed for UI and UX
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design (Sketch, 2016). ‘Create exercise’ and ‘Create workshop’ are the places to build exercises and WSs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each module, consists of a continuous series of inputs. The inputs were thought of as the smallest units
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the system. Before drawing the wireframes in Sketch, all inputs or modules were hand-drawn in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
==PAGE:68==
small pieces of paper that could be puzzled around in rows until a satisfying flow was obtained (see
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
appendix 28).  
 
5.5.3 Source of inspiration: following known patterns 
Doing good design often means building upon known conventions or analogies that the user is used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
navigate in. Therefore, when initiating the wireframe design, several sources of inspiration were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigated (see appendix 29). The flow of composing an exercise is highly inspired by the modules in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Google Forms, whereas the overview is inspired by managing files in folders such as done in Google
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Drive, and organizing music by placing songs in a play lists. Looking further into music organization,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DJ-software
confirmed the design of filtering, sorting and categorizing which already emerged in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
wireframes.  
 
5.5.4 Improvements: feedback from target group 
The design of the wireframes with all its features and functions were based in all the empirical research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and knowledge obtained up until this point. However, the only way to know if the product is still
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
offering an advantage to the facilitators is to test it and involve the target users. Balder Onarheim
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assisted in finding a handful of highly experienced facilitators whereof three facilitators could find the
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time to meet, Diana Velasco from Innovation House, Jesper Bartroff Frederiksen from About Ideas and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alisan Atvur from Novo Nordisk (see appendix 30).  
 
The three test sessions were first and foremost informal talks about the project and a review of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
clickable prototype of the wireframes as they looked at the time (see appendix 31 for screen dumps of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the main pages). In addition to the wireframes, a Google Form document resembling the flow in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating exercises with actual input fields, was setup (visit it at:​http://goo.gl/forms/G8kt0mwAMa​). 
However, having spent one to one and a half hour talking about and clicking through the prototype, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
repeat all the discussions with the basis in the Google Form seemed like overkill. Therefore the result of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the three test sessions is a review and discussing of the wireframes. Overall, positive feedback
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dominated the talks and all three test subjects gave the product a good reception. They all found the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
product valuable and interesting. The immediate response from Alisan Atvur was: 
 
“This is awesome and so promising, and I’m super excited that you are working on such tool. I can’t wait to
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
play around with your first real prototype” 
 
This was a valuable recognition and a contribution to motivation. Going over the interviews, more
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive feedback and constructive criticism is found. The following points recurred, and the specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvements were subsequently implemented in the wireframes (see appendix 32 for the changes):  
 
●
The categorization of the three ‘Modes’: Warm up, Stage discussion and Develop together, was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an inadequate framing. Neither the label ‘mode’ nor the three options communicated clearly.  
○
The result is that ‘Mode’ is now called ‘Workshop phase’ with the four options: Warm up,
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Opening, Middle, Closing.  
 
●
Indicating the number of participants as a single value was too limiting, and should be turned
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into a collection of predefined ranges.  
○
The result is that the facilitator now has to choose from the following ranges 8: 1-5,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-10, 11-15, 16-20, 21-30, 31-40, 41-50, 50+.  
22 By DJ-software is meant software that enables DJs to manage and even create music and plan tracks for an entire 
set. The included tools are Beatport Pro (Beatport Pro, 2016) and Rekordbox (Rekordbox, 2016)  
 
 
66 
==PAGE:69==
 
●
‘Add evaluation’ to an exercise was too formal and should rather be called ‘Add comment’. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
history in all comments is desirably saved.  
○
The result is that the evaluation is now called ‘Comments’ and these are structured as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
growing log of comments, all starting with a timestamp. The comments are visible at all
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
times in the exercise as part of the site panel. Solving the comments this way lead to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
omission of comments in each step of an exercise.  
 
●
The ‘Create exercise’ module was still somewhat intimidating due to the loads of information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available. Even though only the mandatory inputs were visible, while everything else was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collapsed, the user could not foresee whether mandatory inputs were hidden.  
○
The result is that only mandatory inputs and the two standard modules ‘Sharing’ and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Documentation’ is displayed. The rest is hidden behind a single line saying ‘Add images
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
and other nice stuff’. 
 
●
The flexible time management included in Work Face during execution was perceived a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strength and should be a premise rather than an option.  
○
The result is that the option ‘Do not allow exceedance of time’, is now left out.  
 
●
At the top of both ‘Create exercise’ and ‘Create workshop’ the first module was called ‘Basic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information’. This was a poor label and should rather be called ‘Introduction’. So it is called now. 
 
●
In ‘Create workshop’, more emphasis should be put on the time table and the duration. 
○
The result is that the duration is now written in a bigger font and placed in the top of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the site panel.  
 
●
The possibility of modifying an exercise and save two versions should be more obvious.  
○
The result is that the ‘Make a copy’ is now available from the overview of both exercises
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and WSs, and not as a choice once the modification are ​done​.  
 
●
Using Work Face in the execution of WSs was associated with some reluctance to be dependant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on wifi and computers. The schedule should be possible to print.  
○
The result is that the schedule can be exported to pdf. 
 
4.5.5 Final prototype 
In image 17-19, the main pages of the web app are shown, however, the wireframes deserve more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attention and can be explored following this link: ​https://invis.io/SW60QW4QA​,. The prototype is set up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
using Invison app, a tool that turns png, gif or jpeg files into a clickable prototype by adding links
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
between the images (Invision app, 2016). By clicking any white space in the prototype, blue areas will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reveal the active areas. Start at ‘Creating exercise’, then return to the overview which will now have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
content. The wireframes are drawn in standard desktop HD format (1440 pixels wide) in Sketch,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however dependent on the viewer's screen, the window, in which the prototype is explored, may have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
to be scaled down to eg. 90%. It should be mentioned here, that the flow for participants and facilitator
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the WS and ‘Documentation & Statistics’-module were designed after conducting the test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sessions, hence wireframes for these modules were not commented on during the tests.  
 
 
67 
==PAGE:70==
 
Image 17: Overview of exercises. The first view in the system 
 
 
Image 18: Create exercise with introduction and step 1. Only mandatory inputs are displayed. Add as 
many steps you like 
 
 
68 
==PAGE:71==
 
Image 19: create workshop, by implementing existing exercises. Edit the order by dragging exercises up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and down in the left site panel. Duration, full schedule and props are listed in the right site panel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
==PAGE:72==
5.5.6 Interface for participants and facilitator during workshops 
In the service blueprint, emphasis was put on describing the different touch points between users and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system. Here, the whole planning element was reduced to a single touch point, whereas the following
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
wireframe design vastly addressed this touch point. Returning to the execution of the actual WS, is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
satisfactory round-off of the system design. Thus, the following is an investigation of the execution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
module and the link between the planner module and the execution.  
 
5.5.6.1The participants’ workflow in the workshop situation 
The participant’s workflow is accompanied by mock ups in appendix 33. The idea is, that once the WS is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
about to start, and all stakeholders are gathered, the participants go to to a simple generic web address
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
(URL), this could be workface.com/workshop or the like. The following are the main actions: 
 
1.
The only call to action is a large input field demanding a unique code. These are group-IDs that
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
the system generates when the facilitator press ‘Run workshop’ in the planner module.  
 
2.
Once an accurate ID is entered, the WS is unlocked, and by pressing ‘Start’, the group receives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the instructions to the first step in the first exercise.  
 
3.
Each step has its own view, and by the end of each step, the group will press ‘next’, and the next
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
step is displayed.  
 
4.
The system will provide notifications with visual icon and sound when the time limit of the step
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is approaching.  
 
5.
When documentation is required, a button opening the camera will occur.  
 
If the groups need help, they can indicate this by pressing ‘Ask for help’. The group number is then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
added to the facilitators help list at the dashboard (image 20). 
 
5.5.6.1 The facilitator dashboard in the workshop situation 
While the participants work on the exercises, the facilitator should be acting as a moderator and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
assistant. The groups will need different stimuli at different times and will stagnate or run smoothly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
asynchronously. Therefore, the dashboard should provide a quick overview from which the facilitator
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
can easily decode the various progressions and which groups to assist (image 20).  
 
 
 
 
70 
==PAGE:73==
 
Image 20: Facilitator dashboard  
 
 
In the initial mock up of Work Face for the landing page, appendix 1, the overview of all groups was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limited, due to the visualization of all groups appearing in a single line. Browsing through more than 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
groups would easily become a hassle. Now, the dashboard allows more groups to be visible at once. In
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addition, a visualization of the progression through the schedule is included in the left site panel, while
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the help list is relocated to right site panel. In case all groups have to stop working momentarily, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator can press ‘pause’ and all timings will be paused until the facilitator starts the time again. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the lower left corner, it is possible to revisit or generate new codes in case of human or systematic
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failures. As a very important feature, the ‘Edit schedule’ is what enables the facilitator to act according
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to changes. This an acknowledgement of the fact that plan and reality is not always one to one. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented changes are immediately pushed to the participants who are automatically provided the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
right schedule and instructions. 
 
5.5.7 Documentation and statistics  
Finally, the ‘Documentation & Statistics’ module aim at collecting data on all activities during the WS and
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
display them in the sense of sorted photos, diagrams and graphs afterwards (see appendix 34). All the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
photos taken by the groups as documentation for the exercises or steps is collected in this module.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These photos are sorted by group and exercise, and the facilitator can shift between a view having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
‘Exercises’ as the primary filter and a view having ‘Groups’ as primary filter.  
 
 
The system saves a static version of how the schedule, the instruction and associated timings looked in
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the event of the WS, hence these informations are not editable from the ‘Documentation & Statistics’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
module. The facilitator is allowed insight into how the estimated timings and the actual timings differ
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with regards to the overall schedule and exercises and with regards to the individual steps. This allows
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
==PAGE:74==
the facilitator to optimize the allocated timings from one WS to another using the same exercises. For
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each exercise, the system displays how many groups needed help for the individual steps. This is an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
indicator of how well the written instructions enable the participants to work independently.  
 
The entire module can be explored in the clickable prototype at this link: ​https://invis.io/SW60QW4QA​. 
 
5.6 Technical clarification of how to collect photos 
Following the choice of platform, documentation became an important aspect to address. Now, as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
primary device is likely a desktop and not a smartphone, collecting photos of the groups’ work becomes
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a more difficult task. There are two plausible solutions.  
 
1.
Instead of opening the camera, photos from a local library are uploading to the system. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would allow the participant to take the photos with any device and upload them through the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
web application on the desktop. This solution may interrupt the workflow during the WS, as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants will have to both store the photos in a library accessible from the desktop and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
upload it subsequently. This may take several minutes.  
 
2.
Alternatively, the idea about opening the camera in the app, and uploading the images directly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to a cloud, could still be valid. The desktop camera is accessible through a web application, and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
though it may be awkward, the participants can take the photo with their desktop. In any event,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however, the web app should be designed responsively and therefore be accessible on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
smartphone or tablet. By typing in the same group-ID on such device, the group will run the WS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on two devices simultaneously. The two devices will have to synchronize and be at the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
step at all times. This will result in instant access to both a convenient camera and the cloud
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
storage at once. The phone or tablet will then always be a mirror of the desktop and vise versa,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but the group will have to log into two devices and more synchronization has to be done in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
backend. 
 
The second option seems the most attractive solution. A quick prototype of a camera running from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
browser on a smartphone can be explored by opening this link on a smartphone in, preferebly in
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Google or Chrome: ​http://codepen.io/dennishn/full/dGzqwd/ . It may be considered whether the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23
opportunity to upload photos from a local library should be implemented as well.  
 
5.7 Technical clarification on managing time and groups 
An overall review of the system with Rasmus Ebbesen, backend developer at Nodes Aps, provided
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insight into the feasibility of the actual development.  
 
The planner module, including creating exercises, building WSs etc, is a manageable task seen from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
backend perspective. As long as the version control is kept at the level of making copies of exercises or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WSs as new individual items, this is a clear structure. The complicated part lies within the execution of
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the WS. Keeping track of each group’s progression, visualizing same progression in the facilitator
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard and notifying participants about remaining time are amongst the most complex tasks to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manage. Working with web applications, makes local caching of timestamps on the device itself more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficult than in native apps. The system must continuously know which WS to run, which group is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
running it, the time of start, the duration of the step and the number of steps in an exercise. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
addition, it must constantly know how much has passed since the start of the step and calculate the
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 ​The prototype is developed by Dennis Haulund Nielsen, lead front-end developer at Nodes Aps.  
 
 
72 
==PAGE:75==
remaining time. In case of the facilitator making use of the ‘pause’ button in the dashboard, the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
must know when time was paused, subtract the time that passed before the break and calculate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remaining time of the step after the break when time is started again. A plausible solution to this time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
puzzle is as stated here: 
 
●
The smallest entity of what is being saved in the backend is ‘a step’. Each step belongs to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
certain exercise and is associated with a certain duration. The exercises are build into WSs, and
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all WSs are assigned a unique ID (see the structure in image 21).  
 
 
Image 21: Entities of the system: a step belongs to an exercise, exercises are combined into workshops 
with unique IDs 
 
●
When the participants type in their group-ID, the system knows which WS to unlock and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
redirects the group to a URL siginified by the workshop-ID, workface.com/workshop_id=XX. At
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this point, the group and the WS are connected, and the server knows under which group-ID to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
store the activities.  
 
●
The server will now check for updates on the group’s progression every 10 seconds (or even
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more often), and save any response as a set of: workshop, group, exercise, step, real-time start
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and amount of remaining time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
==PAGE:76==
●
This allows the data on the facilitator dashboard to be updated every 10 seconds as well. Image
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 aims at visualizing the exchange of data.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Image 22: Exchange of data from the groups to server and further on to the facilitator dashboard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
6 Further work, Discussion, Conclusion and Reflection 
 
 
 
 
 
75 
==PAGE:78==
6.1 Future work 
At this point Work Face is more than just a vague idea, but there is still a lot of work to done until a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
launch ready product comes at hand.  
 
6.1.1 User feedback: Second round with landing page subscribers  
Since the initial landing page test, section 2.3, Work Face has grown into a more well thought out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
system that emphasizes planning as much as execution. It is an obvious opportunity to make use of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collection of subscribers from the landing page. These people have expressed their interest by signing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up. To test their continuous interest would be an interesting comparison.  
 
6.1.2 Determining an roadmap starting from a solid MVP  
The current wireframes represent an advanced system and to develop everything at once, could easily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prove to be an unwise decision as wrong assumptions would give rise to severe double work. Instead,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determining a roadmap starting from a solid Minimum Viable Product (MVP) (Klein, 2013), will allow a
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
gradual validation or rejection of the hypothesis embedded in Work Face. To sort the functionality into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a roadmap requires careful consideration and a solid perception of the development strategy.  
 
6.1.3 Iterations: Build, test, improve 
Having defined the MVP, further development should be carried out as an iterative process of building,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
testing and improving. Starting out with prototypes of elementary fractions and define separate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsystems would simplify the scope and minimize risks. This includes foreseeing obstacles and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possibly change parts of the design to easen the development. To test those emerging prototypes in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
‘safe’ environment with selected users who are aware of being part of the beta test, would constitute
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the best conditions for collecting feedback and continuously improve the system.  
 
6.1.4 Responsive design: Google Material Design and Angular 
A more practical future task is to ensure the responsiveness of the design. For now, the wireframes are
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
targeted towards a desktop screen. To meet the optimal use case, the website must have a responsive
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
design. It cannot be ruled out that this gives rise to fundamental changes in the navigation. However,
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taking this into consideration from the start is easier and more efficient than implementing it later.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Google’s design guides, Material Design, represents some solid grids, behaviors and repositioning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patterns . In addition, if building the frontend in Angular , following Google Material Design is well
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24
25
supported and templates can be found for integrating most of those patterns. 
 
6.1.5 Business perspectives 
The business perspectives have not been addressed up until this point. However, future work must
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explore those opportunities in depth. 
24 ​Google Material Design, guides for responsive design of websites: 
https://www.google.com/design/spec/layout/responsive-ui.html#responsive-ui-breakpoints  
25 ​Angular: Web application framework primarily maintained by Google aiming at optimising web apps written in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HTML: ​https://angularjs.org/  
 
 
76 
==PAGE:79==
  
6.1.5.1 Initial target group: freemium/premium  
Throughout this thesis, the target group kept in view has been facilitators such as represented by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
three personas, Lise, Anders and Anna, working for agencies. This is rather narrow niche of possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
customers, but as proven with the landing page, this is a dedicated target group. The immediate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
strategy is to operate with different levels of subscriptions: a free subscription with a limit of how many
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
exercises or WSs the user can create (freemium), and a payed subscription that supports unlimited
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
amounts of exercises and WSs (premium). This is a well known strategy that companies such as Invision
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
app, Dropbox and Spotify work from.  
 
6.1.5.2 Marketplace: trade of exercises and workshops 
In addition, to pick up an unexplored section in the wireframes, the Marketplace is part of the strategy.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
The strategy for this is to create a platform for facilitators to share their best work. Other facilitators
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can examine the content here and pay per exercise or maybe even full WSs that they would like to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
include in their own library. This aspect was briefly touched in the test sessions, and Alisan Atvur
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressed the following interest: ​“I love David Grey’s Gamebook, because I get a whole collection of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
methods. I don’t think I would buy a single exercise. But if I could buy a collection or an entire workshop, I
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
would likely do it”. 
 
6.1.5.3 Broaden business: corporations and schools 
Looking into internal usage in larger corporations and schools could pose an opportunity for a more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
broad-based business perspective. Large companies may have a few people dedicated and skilled to
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
drive creative problem solving and innovation but a lot of people performing it as part of their job.
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Work Face could potentially constitute a common knowledge bank on how to obtain good results. Such
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach presupposes a subscription plan for corporations supporting shared accounts. Another
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspective can potentially be found in schools. Group work in elementary school and high school has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
evolved greatly in the Danish school system. It would be a great opportunity to target teachers who
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
have acknowledged the digital era and can accommodate to include iPads and desktops in their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
teaching. Again, approaching this market requires modifications as the system currently is vastly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
customized to the WS facilitation use case.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77 
==PAGE:80==
6.2 Discussion  
6.2.1 Meeting the design criteria 
First and foremost, a discussion of Work Face should be a reflection of how well (if at all) the six design
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
criteria are met. In the following, the accomplishment of each criterion is assessed.  
 
 
1.
Workshops are dynamic and the opportunity to edit the schedule continuously (also during the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshop) must be supported 
 
With current work practice in mind it seems clumsy to take actions according to the unforeseeable
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
course of a workshop once the hand-out and the schedule is printed in black and white. And while the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other concepts generated during conceptualization (the cardboard walls, digital post-its and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
optimum workflow of existing products) did not really address this issue, Work Face presented a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
potential way to redress this problem. Later, an attempt has been made to solidly support changes in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the workshop schedule. Running the workshop online opens an opportunity to update the schedule as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
needed. The ‘Edit schedule’ option at the facilitator dashboard is the direct means to meet this criterion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and help to ensure that the participants are always presented the updated schedule.  
 
2.
Guides/instructions on the exercises should be available and possible to consult continuously 
 
Setting up exercises and workshops in Work Face relies upon consecutive descriptions of steps
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
displayed on desktop screens to the participants in the event of the workshop. Each group will at all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
times be faced with the relevant instruction according to their own progression. A potential gap here is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
the risk of stagnation. A group requiring the facilitator’s assistance in a certain step may be forced to
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
await the proper guidance before moving on to the next step. This gap poses a risk of significant delay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
and frustration. As highlighted in the literature review, the qualified facilitator’s first job is to guide and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
ask stimulating questions in order to ensure the participants’ proper process (Isaksen, 1998). With the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dashboard displaying tracked time and a helper’s list, Work Face offers a tool for the facilitator to
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
decode which groups needs this stimulation. As such, Work Face provides the opportunity for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator to monitor the groups better and thereby offer the right assistance.  
 
3.
Invitation to share, speak up and contribute in plenum should be emphasized to meet the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reticence of the audience  
 
The definition of ‘sharing’ has changed slightly over the period. Originally, it was sharing across groups,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
allowing the groups to gain insights into each other’s work. However, this is a specific activity that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
individual facilitator will have to plan for. What Work Face can do is promoting internal sharing within
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the group by offering default steps of the instructions telling the group members to share their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted work. Work Face is a tool into which the facilitator can add his or hers own content, not a
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
tool telling the facilitator ​what to add. The lack of guidance or templates may put sharing across groups
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the background, given that no one is specifically telling the facilitator to incorporate this.  
 
4.
The variation in the pace of work should be allowed 
 
One of the cornerstones in the execution module is the monitoring of progression and the groups’ time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumption for each step. Thus, it is clearly intended to perform a flexible time management under
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the assumption that this will improve the participants’ experience of the workshop. However, there is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
certain risk associated with the flexible time management, which is the risk of a workshop going
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
78 
==PAGE:81==
severely over time if the respect for time schedules is given up completely. On the other hand, statistics
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the time consumption proposes a unique opportunity to continuously improve the timings.  
 
5.
Evaluation could be established as a way for the facilitator to develop and progress  
 
According to the Core Competencies provided by International Association of Facilitators (appendix 4),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a good facilitator aims at improving his or her own performance continuously. The systematic collection
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of data constitutes an opportunity to do a more focused effort based on more than a gut feeling. Fully
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
utilized, the available evaluation methods can enhance several aspects of the workshop, timings as well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as instructions. In addition to statistics and doing modifications, the growing log of comments attached
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to exercises develops a more efficient and reliable system than one based on loose paper notes placed
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
here and there. 
 
6.
Documentation could be supported more easily 
 
The process of documentation suffers slightly from the choice of platform. The system is capable of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sorting documentation and extracting photos across groups and exercises, and this can provide help
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the follow-up work for the facilitator. However, feeding the documentation into the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proves challenging, given the nature of the web application, and this should definitely be subject to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extensive testing in a real workshop-setting.  
 
6.2.2 Review of the initial vision  
An important discussion with regards to Work Face is the following: although the criteria aim to impose
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some of the elements that make ‘good facilitation’ possible, the workshop will never be better than the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator. If the facilitator is incapable of planning a series of meaningful exercises, and does he or she
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not know how to sufficiently stimulate the groups in a given situation, Work Face cannot improve those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skills. Work Face is not a theoretical framework that imposes primers and guides on how to compose
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and facilitate the perfect workshop (including elements of psychiatry and creativity theories). Rather,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Work Face is a practical tool that enables a facilitator to make use of the methods and artifacts he or
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
she feels comfortable with, and allows the facilitator to compose the kind of workshop he or she finds
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suitable. Accordingly, this builds up to a review of the overall vision for this thesis:  
 
1.
Easing the work and stress load on the facilitator by providing an overview and tools to assist in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the administration of participants and their process and enable collective design intervention. 
 
2.
Improve participants’ impressions of the workshop by providing a smooth and safe process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
through the workshop. 
 
3.
Improving the outcome of the workshop.  
 
The starting point was to introduce a system supporting better work practices and with the further aim
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of also enabling the facilitator to be a better facilitator. I have found that Work Face does, in fact, live up
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the primary vision of a supporting system for the facilitator. The above-discussed design criteria are
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainly intended to fulfill this vision. Looking at the second vision of an improved participant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience, the hope is that the decisions made in the design process satisfy not only the facilitator but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the participants too. The flexible time management, the all-time relevant and present instructions, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the facilitator’s improved overview of the groups’ progression are designed with a special view to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
improve the experience for the participants. However, it is still up to the facilitator how well the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constraint manipulation and the stimulation are carried out. Now, the tertiary vision of improving the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outcome is interesting, for the exact reason that Work Face does not propose the perfect workshop.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
==PAGE:82==
Yet, it is not unreasonable to include ‘best practice’ guidelines such as done by Grey et.al. in the context
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Gamestorming, where a process towards fruitful creative work is suggested (Gray et al., 2010:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1). Offering prefabricated exercises and workshops could be another way to educate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitators and thereby give a degree of security for the outcome of the workshop. Throughout this
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thesis, I have placed emphasis on accommodating vision 1 and 2, but also hope to contribute to the
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
third. Despite the fact that a better output cannot be guaranteed, insinuating good practices and habits
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can prime the facilitator and thereby raise the likelihood of a successful and improved workshop.  
 
6.2.3 Barriers 
Finally, there is a discussion regarding barriers for the commissioning of Work Face. On one hand, all
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the procedures on how facilitators currently work stand as the existing and to some extent functional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
way of approaching workshop facilitation. These practices include individual preferences, refined habits
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the well-known procedure of planning and executing. On the other hand, Work Face stands as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
unique opportunity to improve workflow and the effects of facilitation, but also as an interruption of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the status quo business as usual situation. To some facilitators, even the digital nature of the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would impede its widespread use. Using the persona Lise’s experience as an example, not everyone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feels comfortable with this technological development. To others, like Diana Velasco (prototype tester,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appendix 30), progressive disclosure is the way forward to win her over. If the system proves clumsy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
and heavy she will lose interest in all of its potential benefits. Another obvious barrier is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transmission of all existing collections of exercises and workshops that the structured facilitator has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed. Feeding this content into Work Face can be a cumbersome task, which might cause
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resistance. Another tester of the prototype, Jesper Bartroff Frederiksen, acknowledged the necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work in such transmission but stated: “​There is so many cool things in this. I would really like to use it! Yes, I
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
would have to spend a couple of days transmitting my already existing collections into this system, but that I
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
would just have to do​”. Supporting import of content from e.g. Excel can be a way to overcome this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
specific entry barrier. Some entry barriers can be handled within the design of the system. Others, like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the hesitation towards technology, are embedded within the DNA of the system and are harder to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce through an improved design.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Conclusion 
Through a delimitation and thorough investigation of the concept ‘workshops’, this thesis has enabled a
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
design of a web application that supports the facilitator’s job in planning, executing and improving
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshops. The concept was delimited to a term ‘creative workshops’ that involves collaborative,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hands-on, problem solving and productive activities. In addition, it is a premise in this thesis, that all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants and the facilitator are physically present together in a common location and that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
workshop has a limited duration and a specific goal. Empirical work revealed the need for a further
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
delimitation of ‘large workshops’ involving more than 20 participants split into smaller groups. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitator must be excluded from the actual productive work and focus solely on the task of facilitation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developing a set of ‘workshopas’, factional cases of realistic workshops, and personas, archetypes of
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitators facilitating the ‘workshopas’, helped concretize the definition of a workshop and a facilitator. 
  
A literature review showed the lack of concrete patterns for good facilitation within the co-creation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literature. However, most literature emphasises that stimulation and guidance in general terms will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve the outcome of the co-creation intervention. Looking at the facilitation certifications offered by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the industry, more direct suggestions about the behaviour of the facilitator were revealed. This counts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thorough planning and a targeted effort to advance own abilities to facilitate. Several of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certifications address the specific content in the workshop in terms of named methods and processes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Such specific guidelines on the content were never the intention of Work Face, as the whish is to give
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the facilitator free rein to determine his own content. 
  
My research shows that some alternatives exist and are being used today. Those are primarily products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
handling a single task such as Excel used for planning, and PowerPoint communicating instructions and
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
schedules. Other products may cover several tasks including a learning management system capable of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
distributing exercises, managing a class’ hand-ins and possibilities to observe the progression of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning over time. This is however not an integrated part of the learning situation itself. 
  
Empirical research counting qualitative interviews and participating in workshops (as an observer,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participant and facilitator), provided rich insights into the dynamics of workshops. This data played the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
central role in defining the design criteria regarding the processes before, during and after. The criteria
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constituted an attempt to ask for a more omnipresent facilitator, as the main source of frustration was
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the facilitator preferably should be everywhere at once. The criteria ask for the handling of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
dynamically editable schedule, a way of supporting different work pace among groups and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribution system for instructions to participants. Further, the criteria touched upon motivating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extroverted behavior such as the sharing of findings across groups. Finally, the possibility to collect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documentation on the groups’ work in an efficient way and the possibility to support a more extensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
self-improvement process were investigated. 
  
The exploration of the solution opportunities within the criteria led to four different concepts with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unique advantages and disadvantages. All concepts performed fairly well on distributing instructions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and handling documentation. The critical issues appeared to be flexible time management allowing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
various work pace, the dynamically editable schedule, the motivation to share across groups and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
self-improvement process. An extensive assessment showed that a digital application supporting a
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
highly structured workflow, Work Face, did a slightly better job overall. Comparing the concepts to the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
personas’ preferences also revealed a leaning towards Work Face. 
  
Earlier in the process, two rounds of idea verification demonstrated the potential of Work Face. Work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Face in its very initial shape was tested by launching a landing page promoting the execution system for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
running workshops. The results showed that 16% of visitors had submitted their email addresses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expressing their interest in following the development of Work Face further. The base for calculating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 
==PAGE:84==
the conversion rate was 142 - a rather low number of visitors. My findings indicate that Work Face
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
targets a narrow audience but one that is highly engaged and committed to follow new initiatives
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within their field. The second test was on the planner module. A prototype was built in an Excel spread
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sheet and distributed in a course concerning co-creation at the Technical University of Denmark. The
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students were to use the Excel spread sheet in the planning of the workshops they had to perform
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the course. This drove home the potential of Work Face as a great support system for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitators. However, it emphasized the need of a simplistic appearance and reveals the inadequacies
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Excel as a format. The system must be build as an individual program from scratch. 
  
Mapping out the entire system of Work Face and going into details of the design in terms of flowcharts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and wireframes have now resulted in a design that provides a better experience for the facilitator
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
through a structured work process. The primary vision of easing the facilitator’s workload and stress is
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
met by converting cumbersome, laborious and inconsistent tasks into a structured and standardized
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
process. Motivating facilitators to explore the features of the system will hopefully prime them to take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on good habits, which will likely enhance the overall experience of the workshop for the participants as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well. This would help to achieve the secondary vision of an improved participant experience. Work Face
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provides a tool that, if used as intended, could contribute to better outcomes from workshops.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Theoretically, Work Face meets both the visions set up for this thesis and the design criteria specifying a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
valid solution. However, in-depth testing of prototypes in actual workshop settings is still needed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verify the hypotheses that Work Face builds upon. Furthermore, there is still work to be done in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determining a Minimum Viable Product for the first iteration on programming, designing for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsive web application and discovering the business opportunities for Work Face.  
 
6.4 Reflection upon the process 
6.4.1 Great value in combining the double diamond with iterations 
Working according to the combination of the linear double diamond process model and the iterative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verification of ideas has been an exciting and varied process. I have the most experience in working
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a linear approach and have been challenged and motivated by the interruptions of the productive
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work in designing the landing page and building the spreadsheet workshop planner. In addition, those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preto- and prototypes have contributed important feedback to obtain a better solution.  
 
6.4.2 Challenges and benefits of working independently  
The fact that this thesis has been carried out by a single individual working has been both a challenge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
but has also proven fruitful. On the one hand, the flexibility and the freedom in working independently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has given me the flexibility to take the project where I wanted it to go in the pace that I felt comfortable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
with. On the other hand, the lack of immediate qualified discussions has been frustrating at times. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this regard, having a passionate, reliable and accessible supervisor has been indispensable and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
premise for the success of working alone.  
 
6.4.3 The sweet spot: I need constraints 
In completing this research I have learned much from reflecting upon my own sweet spot of creativity
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Onarheim and Biskjaer, 2015). During the research phase, while defining scope and doing the analyses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the research, I felt comfortable with the scope and aims of the project. It was during those periods
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
where the two idea verifications were carried out. Arriving at the ideation and conceptualization phase,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however, proved to be a frustrating period. In addition to the unconstrained nature of the ideation
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
==PAGE:85==
phase, the fixating effect of the initial ideas had good hold on me. Upon settling the concept, I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
developed a better framework for the development. Thus, a very concrete learning from doing this
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
thesis is the recognition that I perform better and feel more creative under constraints. In future work,
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
working with collaborators during this phase could possible make the ideation phase a more rewarding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
place to be. Alternatively, imposing and manipulating constraints could be helpful in stimulating my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
own creativity.  
 
6.4.4 The timetable: go for milestones and a buffer 
In appendix 35 the original and the reversed project plan can be found. The original plan had a very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
detailed day-by-day predictive format and a significant buffer at the end. Already at the very initial
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase, the literature review appeared to be a more extensive work than initially anticipated. Around
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, logistics had caused a minor delay, and the reversed timetable was set up. Now, time from
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the buffer was integrated into the actual plan. Planning future projects, the day-by-day approach from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beginning to end seems to me overly structured. Instead, I would operate with the overall milestones,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
and only plan the daily events in limited intervals. Having a buffer, on the hand, proved valuable and is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
an approach that I plan to bring on into future projects.  
 
6.4.5 The field itself: I hope to have become a better facilitator 
Working with a dedicated focus on this project for seven months has contributed knowledge to the
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
field of facilitation. There is a great shift from having facilitated a handful of workshops, slightly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
precipitately, to having spent hours studying facilitation and designed a tool supporting ‘good
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitation’. As a result of this process, I have become more aware of the facilitator’s role in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
co-creation intervention. This newfound awareness is of great value to me the in pursing my planned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
career goals. I feel confident that possessing this knowledge will make me a more valuable facilitator
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
being more attuned to the process and the possible ways to facilitate this process. On the other hand,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this knowledge can pose an obstacle if over-theorising when planning workshops in the future, a fine
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
balance that I have yet to fully attain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
==PAGE:86==
References 
Articles 
Brown, DAVID C. 2006. “Assumptions in Design and Design Rationale.” In ​Workshop on Design Rationale: 
Problems and Progress. Design Computing and Cognition​. Vol. 6.  
Cameron, M. 2009. “Review Essays: Donald A. Schon, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals 
Think in Action. New York: Basic Books, 1983.  
Design Council. 2005. “A Study of the Design Process.” Design Council. 
Dix, Alan, Tom Ormerod, Michael Twidale, Corina Sas, Paula Alexandra Gomes da Silva, and Lorna 
McKnight. 2006. “Why Bad Ideas Are a Good Idea”. 
Gruszka, Aleksandra, and Edward Necka. 2002. “Priming and Acceptance of Close and Remote 
Associations by Creative and Less Creative People.” ​Creativity Research Journal  
Hengst, Marielle den. 2005. “Collaborative Modeling of Processes: What Facilitation Support Does a 
Group Need?” ​AMCIS 2005 Proceedings 
Hsiao, Wen-Bin, Ming-Chuan Chiu, Chih-Yuan Chu, and Wei-Fan Chen. 2015. “A Systematic Service 
Design Methodology to Achieve Mass Personalisation.” ​International Journal of Agile Systems and 
Management  
Kramer, Thomas J., Gerard P. Fleming, and Scott M. Mannis. 2001. “Improving Face-To-Face 
Brainstorming Through Modeling and Facilitation.” ​Small Group Research  
Mumford, Michael D. 2003. “Where Have We Been, Where Are We Going? Taking Stock in Creativity 
Research.” ​Creativity Research Journal  
Mumford, Michael D., Jack M. Feldman, Michael B. Hein, and Dennis J. Nagao. 2001. “Tradeoffs 
between Ideas and Structure: Individual versus Group Performance in Creative Problem Solving.” 
The Journal of Creative Behavior 
Onarheim, Balder, and Michael Mose Biskjaer. 2015. “Balancing Constraints and the Sweet Spot as 
Coming Topics for Creativity Research.” ​Creativity in Design: Understanding, Capturing, Supporting 
Onarheim, Balder, and Philip Cash. 2015. “Bridging the Perspectives on User Involvement Methods.” 
Work in Progress 
Sanders, Elizabeth B.-N. 2006. “Design Research in 2006.” ​Design Research Quarterly​ 2006 
Sanders, Elizabeth B.-N., and Pieter Jan Stappers. 2008. “Co-Creation and the New Landscapes of 
Design.” ​Co-Design  
Soini, Katja. 2006. “Industrial Designers as Facilitators: How to Enable Collaboration in Multidisciplinary 
Workshops.” In ​Proceedings of Connecting-A Conference on the Multivocality of Design History & 
Design Studies​.  
Star, Susan Leigh. 1989. “The Structure of 111 Structured Solutions: Boundary Objects and 
Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving.” ​Distributed Artifidal Intelligence​. 
 
Books 
Cross, Nigel. 2008. ​Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product Design​. 4th ed. Chichester, 
England ; Hoboken, NJ: J. Wiley. 
 
 
84 
==PAGE:87==
De Bono, Edward. 1985. ​Six Thinking Hats​. 1st Back Bay pbk. ed., rev. and updated. Boston: Back Bay 
Books. 
Gray, David, Sunni Brown, and James Macanufo. 2010. ​Gamestorming: A Playbook for Innovators, 
Rulebreakers, and Changemakers​. Beijing: O’Reilly. 
Hogan, Christine. 2005. ​Practical Facilitation: A Toolkit of Techniques​. Kogan Page Publishers. 
Isaksen, Scott G. 1998. ​A Review of Brainstorming Research: Six Critical Issues for Inquiry​. Creative 
Research Unit, Creative Problem Solving Group-Buffalo. 
Klein, Laura. 2013. ​UX for Lean Startups: Faster, Smarter User Experience Research and Design​. Farnham: 
O’Reilly. 
Sarasvathy, Saras D. 2008. ​Effectuation: Elements of Entrepreneurial Expertise​. New Horizons in 
Entrepreneurship. Cheltenham, Glos, UK ; Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar. 
Smith, Steven M. 2003. “The Constraining Effects of Initial Ideas.” In ​Group Creativity: Innovation through 
Collaboration​, edited by P. B. Paulus and B. A. Nijstad, 15–31. New York, NY, US: Oxford University 
Press. 
Stickdorn, Marc, and Jakob Schneider, eds. 2011. ​This Is Service Design Thinking: Basics - Tools - Cases​. 2. 
pr. Amsterdam: BIS Publ. 
 
Websites 
APMG-International. 2015. “Facilitation Certification.” 
http://www.apmg-international.com/facilitation.aspx. 
Bang & Olufsen. 2015. “The Bang & Olufsen Story Started in 1925. It Has Evolved Ever Since!” ​The Bang 
& Olufsen Story Started in 1925. - Bang & Olufsen​. http://www.bang-olufsen.com/da/story. 
Beatport Pro. 2016. “Beatport Pro.” ​Beatport Pro​. 
http://djtechtools.com/2014/04/14/first-look-beatport-pro-for-mac-dj-library-management-softwa
re/. 
Copenhagen Institute of Interaction Design. 2015. “CIID Facebook.” ​Facebook​. 
https://www.facebook.com/groups/309559742496826/?fref=ts. 
Copenhagen Institute of NeuroCreativity. 2015. “CINC linkedIn.” ​LinkedIn​. 
https://www.linkedin.com/company/copenhagen-institute-of-neurocreativity-cinc-?trk=prof-follow
ing-company-logo. 
Copenhagen Institute of NeuroCreativity. 2015. “CINC Twitter.” ​Twitter​. 
https://twitter.com/neurocreativity. 
Copenhagen Institute of NeuroCreativity. 2015c. “Facebook CINC.” ​Facebook​. 
https://www.facebook.com/neurocreativity?fref=ts. 
Coursera. 2015. “Coursera.” ​Coursera​. https://www.coursera.org/. 
Creativity Gym. 2015. “Creativity Gym Facebook.” ​Facebook​. 
https://www.facebook.com/CreativityGymCPH?fref=ts. 
de Bono Consulting. 2015. “De Bono Consulting Certification - Focus on Facilitation Certification.” 
http://www.debonoconsulting.com/Focus_on_Facilitation_Certifications.asp. 
DNA. 2015. “DNA, What We Do.” http://dna.co.nz/#!/what-we-do/disciplines-and-services/. 
Dropbox. 2015. “Dropbox.” ​Dropbox​. https://www.dropbox.com/. 
 
 
85 
==PAGE:88==
Google Adwords. 2015. “Google Adwords.” (http://www.google.com/adwords/). 
Google Classroom. 2015. “Google Classroom.” ​Google Classroom​. 
https://classroom.google.com/u/0/ineligible. 
Google Drive. 2015. “Google Drive.” ​Google Drive​. https://www.google.com/intl/en_uk/drive/. 
Gyldendal - Den Store Danske. 2016. “Workshop | Gyldendal - Den Store Danske.” 
http://denstoredanske.dk/Sprog,_religion_og_filosofi/Sprog/Fremmedord/w-wå/workshop. 
HyperIsland. 2015. “The Story.” ​Hyper Island​. https://www.hyperisland.com/about. 
IAF-world. 2015. “IAF Certified Profissional Facilitator.” https://www.iaf-world.org/site/professional/cpf. 
Kim, Larry. 2015. “Everything You Know About Conversion Rate Optimization Is Wrong.” ​WordStream​. 
February 19. http://www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2014/03/17/what-is-a-good-conversion-rate 
Launchrock. 2015. “Launchrock.” ​Launchrock​. https://www.launchrock.com/ 
Moodle. 2015. “Moodle.” ​Moodle​. https://moodle.org/?lang=da. 
Murally. 2015. “Murally.” ​Murally​. https://mural.ly/. 
Paper4everyone. 2015. “Paper4everyone.” ​Paper4everyone​. 
https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1991486552/paper4everyone-write-show-share. 
Post-it plus. 2015. “Post-It plus.” ​Post-It plus​. http://www.post-it.com/3M/en_US/post-it/ideas/plus-app/. 
Pretotype.org. 2015. “Pretotyping.org.” ​Pretotyping.org​. http://www.pretotyping.org/. 
Rekordbox. 2016. “Rekordbox.” ​Rekordbox​. 
http://www.pioneerdj.com/en/product/software/rekordbox/software/overview/. 
Saatchi & Saatchi. 2015. “Saatchi & Saatchi | Contact Us.” ​Saatchi & Saatchi​. https://saatchi.no/contact/. 
SharePoint LMS. 2015. “SharePoint LMS.” ​SharePoint LMS​. http://www.sharepointlms.com/. 
VINCA. 2015. “VINCA Certificering.” 
https://www.dropbox.com/s/k3lz4lex8e85i8b/VINCA%20folder.pdf?dl=0. 
Wikipedia. 2015a. “Landing Page.” ​Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia​. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Landing_page&oldid=679951209. 
Wikipedia. 2015b. “Edward de Bono.” ​Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia​. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edward_de_Bono&oldid=682060669. 
Wikipedia. 2015. “Workshop (disambiguation).” ​Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia​. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Workshop_(disambiguation)&oldid=689805217. 
WordStream. 2015. “WordStream - Online Advertising Made Easy.” 
Yahoo. 2016. “Seven Years Into The Mobile Revolution: Content Is King… Again.” ​Yahoo Developer 
Network​. 
http://yahoodevelopers.tumblr.com/post/127636051988/seven-years-into-the-mobile-revolution-
content-is. 
 
Programs  
Invision app. 2016. ​Invision App​. http://www.invisionapp.com/. 
Sketch. 2016. ​Sketch​ (version 3.5). https://www.sketchapp.com/. 
 
 
 
86 
==PAGE:89==
Courses 
DTU. 2013a. “42062 Arenas and Concepts.” ​DTU Course Base 2014/2015; 42062 Arenas and Concepts​. 
http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/42062.aspx?menulanguage=en-gb. 
DTU. 2013b. “42641 Applied Creativity.” ​DTU Course Base 2013/2014; 42641 Applied Creativity​. 
http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/2013-2014/42641.aspx?menulanguage=en-GB. 
DTU. 2015. “42081 Staging Co-Creation.” ​DTU Course Base 2014/2015; 42081 Staging Co-Creation​. 
http://www.kurser.dtu.dk/42081.aspx?menulanguage=en-GB. 
 
 
 
87 
