==PAGE:1==
Modified Block Copolymers for partly
hydrophilic structures
Master Thesis at DTU Nanotech, in connection with
DTU's Flexible Master Program
March, 31st 2016
written by Lars Schulte, Student Number 140320
Supervisor: Senior Scientist Sokol Ndoni
==PAGE:2==
This Thesis was done during October 2015 to March 2016
as a part time “job”, equalling around 3 months of work, worth
15 ECTs in accordance to the Flexible Master Program
from DTU.
I wish I had a bit more time...
==PAGE:3==
Abstract:
Everyone dealing only remotely with semiconductor will inevitable have heard about Moore's law.
It states that the number of transistors in dense integrated circuits doubles roughly every two years.
Named after Gordon E. Moore, who issued that observation in the mid 60s, which held nicely true 
so far. To do so, finer and finer structures are needed. With classical UV-Lithography having a 
limitation due to the wavelength of the light used, this method has limitations. This means, for 
reducing the structure size, new ways of patterning must be found for this to continue at some point.
For certain patterns, especially lines or dotted structures, these could be thin films of highly ordered 
block-copolymer systems.
Latest with the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2010 was awarded to Andre Geim and Konstantin 
Novoselov, this two-dimensional material has attracted wider interest. By itself, Graphene has no 
band gap, making it unmodified not interesting for semiconductor applications. The introduction of 
a band gap is possible, by introducing well aligned and controlled small holes into the material. This
again, might turn the attention to block-copolymer systems for fast introduction of small scale 
modifications over larger surface areas.
Like with UV-Lithograpy and UV-light, block-copolymer systems come with their own limitations.
To reduce feature size, the chain length of the polymer has to be reduced as well. With a given 
system, this can only be done so far until the order in the polymer introduced by phase segregation 
breaks down at room temperature. If one wants to create even smaller features, the polymer system 
has to be changed with another, having a stronger segregation between the two blocks, still enabling
phase separation at working temperature for shorter Polymers. Long range order and pattern transfer
are the big challenges there.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First I want to thank my supervisor, Senior Scientist Sokol Ndoni, for the support in starting with 
the Flexible Master program at DTU, as well as with writing the Thesis. Without him, it would 
never have happened.
Martin E. Vigild, Bachelordekan at DTU, helped a lot in the starting phase by naming the right 
contact persons from DTUs efteruddannelse. 
Also thanks to Katja Jankova Atanasova, who was maybe more convinced I should start to continue
studying than myself, and was a great support in making that decision. 
Thanks to all my colleagues, but especially to S. Rasappa, Post Doc at DTU Nanotech, for helping 
me with part of my SEM imaging and giving me the possibility to have some of my samples etched,
as well as simply being a good colleague and friend. 
Not to forget Jon Trifol Guzman, and Ada-Ioana Bunea, who both gave feed back to the parts of the 
Thesis I send them. I only wish I had the time to implement the suggestions properly.
Thanks also to all the other people who would have been ready to read it, but there is only so much 
feed back I can incorporate, I fear.
For running the TGA, when I safely wanted to use the DSC, and our machine was down, a thanks to
Kim Chi Szabo from Institute of Chemical engineering, Danish Polymer Centre.
A great thanks for all my friends for just being who they are and the support they gave me.
A thanks (and an apology) for all the people I forgot to mention at this point.
Most importantly, a great thanks to my Mum. Without you, all of this would not be possible, and for
being overbearing when I had the tendency to let hear from myself while being busy.
Lastly, I wish my father would be still alive to see this, as without him, I would not be here.
==PAGE:5==
1.
Introduction
p.1
2.
Theory
p.3
2.1 Phase separation in Bulk
p.5
2.2 Phase separation in thin films
p.5
2.2.1 Uses of ordered thin films
p5
2.2.2 Thin films and surfaces
p.6
2.2.2.1 Neutral surfaces
p.7
2.2.2.2 Graphoepitaxy
p.7
2.2.2.3 Solvent annealing
p.7
2.2.3 Plasma etching
p.8
3. Material and Methods
p.8
3.1 Characterisation of Polymers
p.8
3.1.1 SEC/GPC
p.9
3.1.2 NMR
p.10
3.1.3 FTIR
p.10
3.1.4 TEM
p.11
3.1.5 SEM
p.11
3.1.6 TGA
p.12
3.1.7 DSC
p.12
3.1.8 Rheology
p.12
3.1.9 Microtoming
p.13
3.2. Synthesis
p.14
3.2.1 Hydroxylation of 1,2-PB
p.14
3.2.2 Cross-linking using S2Cl2
p.15
4. Results and Discussion
p.16
4.1 The starting material
p.16
4.2 Modification of the material
p.21
4.3 Characterisation of
p.23
the modified materials
4.3.1 FTIR
p.23
4.3.2 SEC
p.24
4.3.3 Rheology
p.24
4.3.4 TGA and DSC
p.26
4.4 Direct observation of structures
p.29
==PAGE:6==
4.4.1 Electron microscopy study in bulk
p.29
4.4.1.1 TEM
p.29
4.4.1.2 SEM and bulk morphology
p.34
4.4.2 Electron microscopy on thin films 
p.36
4.4.2.1 Creation of thin films
p.36
4.4.2.2 Investigation of thin films
p.37
4.5 Conclusion
p.43
5. Appendix
p.45
5.1 Used equipment
p.45
5.2 Used chemicals
p.46
5.3 Additional Data
p.47
5.3.1 Rheology (heat first, then cool)
p.47
5.3.2 SEC in THF of BD19OH
p.48
List of citations
p.49
==PAGE:7==
Used Abbreviations
ATR:
Attenuated total reflection
BD/BDa: 
Polymer made up from 1,2-Polybutadiene (B) and Polydimethylsiloxane (D) 
block-copolymer (PB-b-PDMS)
BD(a) OH:
BD polymer, with hydroxylized Polybutadiene part (PBOH-b-PDMS)
BD-x:
Cross-linked polymer (at room temperature using S2Cl2 vapour)
BD-x-e:
Cross-linked and etched polymer (PDMS removed by tBAF in THF)
BD-s-:
Polymer was shear aligned before cross-linking
BCP:
Block-Copolymer
DSC:
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
FTIR:
Fourier Transformed Infrared Spectroscopy
GPC/SEC:
Gelpermeation Chromatography / Size Exclusion Chromatography
LS: 
Light scattering
PDI:
Polydispersity Index
PB:
(1,2-)Polybutadiene
PBOH:
Hydroxylized PB
PI: 
Polyisoprene
PIOH:
Hydroxylized PI
PDMS: 
Polydimethylsiloxane
RI: 
Refractive Index
RIE:
Reactive Ion Etching
SEM:
Scanning Electron Microscopy
tBAF:
Tetrabutyl ammoniumfluoride
TEM:
Transmission Electron Microscopy
TGA:
Thermogravimetric Analysis
==PAGE:8==
Tg:
Glass Transition Temperature
Tm: 
Melting temperature 
TODT:
Order to Disorder Transition Temperature
TOOT:
Order to Order Transition Temperatures
HEX: 
Hexagonally Packed Cylinders
GYR: 
Gyroid
LAM:
Lammelae
BCC: 
Body Centred Cubic (spheres)
w%: 
Weight percent
For chemicals
9-BBN:
9-Borabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane, (solution in THF 0,5 mol/l)
MeOH:
Methanol
THF:
Tetrahydrofurane
TMANO:
Trimethylamine N-oxide dihydrate
m.p. Water:
Water, cleaned with a millipore membrane
0
==PAGE:9==
1.Introduction
Polymers are intriguing materials, and in the world we live today, there is hardly any area where 
polymers cannot be found. They come with very different properties, from very soft to oily 
materials to hard and brittle. Most of them are insulators, a property exploited in electrical 
installations. Many of them are easily brought into shape, enabling cost effective and fast 
production of a variety of things, just thinking of common used items like plastic bags, disposable 
cups, water bottles, fishing lines, textiles, but also more special ones like polyamides, of which the 
best known by its trade name is Kevlar, used in bullet proof vests.
As the word Polymer suggests, they are made of many (“poly”) building units, in the easiest case 
only one, repeated all along one polymer chain. Depending on the type of  building block(s) used, 
they have different properties. The most important ones are the Glass transition temperature (Tg) 
and their melting temperature, if applicable. The glass transition temperature is the temperature, in 
which a polymer transforms from its frozen state (glassy state) to its not frozen state.
Like glass, which is not a crystalline material, it gets solid under its Tg and viscous soft if heated 
over it.
Unlike Glass, a polymer can also be partly or fully crystalline, in which case it also has a melting 
point, which is the temperature the crystalline part is turned amorphous. 
The Tg of different polymers span a wide range, from 150K (around -123C) for 
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), better known as silicone, and a melting point of around 218-236 K, 
while Polystyrene (PS) has a Tg at 373K (100C), and a melting point of 513K, if crystalline.1 Other 
materials do exceed the values of PS.
As there is a multitude of polymeric materials outside, they can be classified after their general 
behaviour into one of the three groups:
-Thermoplasts: These materials are hard (usually at room temperature), but can be heated, and then 
easily brought to any shape, which they will keep when cooled down again. Polystyrene is a 
common used Thermoplast, others are Polypropylene (PP), Polyethylene (PE) and 
Polyethylenetherephthalate (PET), just to name some.
-Elastomers are relative soft materials, which can be stretched but return to their shape when the 
stress is released. They are usually weakly cross-linked to keep their shape. Silicone hoses or 
sealing is an example for this class, but they are also involved in car tyres and so on.
-Thermosets are the opposite of thermoplasts: Once brought into shape, they are cross-linked, so 
their shape can normally not be changed without destroying it. One of the early examples of this is 
Bakelite, made from Phenol and Formaldehyde.
As there is nothing that hinders one to use more than one building block in a Polymer, this opens up
even more possibilities. Doing so, a copolymer is created, of which there are again different types.
-In random copolymers, the different building blocks are distributed randomly in the polymer chain,
 like ABABBABAABBBAABA etc., where A and B represent the two different building blocks.
1
==PAGE:10==
-Alternating copolymers have a chain made up by alternating the building blocks like ABABABA,  
and
-Block-copolymers have the different building blocks organized block wise separated from each      
other, like BBBBBBBBBAAAA
And the last is the one I am interested in. Everyone who has ever eaten a soup very likely 
encountered the view of fat eyes swimming on top of the water surface, as oil and water do not mix.
The same is usually true for different types of polymers, and by organizing them into separate 
blocks but linking these blocks together, block-copolymers are now forced to segregate on a very 
small scale, as they no longer can create large Volumes containing only one type of polymer.
If the different chains of the polymers are very close in length with each other, so to say a low 
molecular weight distribution, this can give rise to very regular structures, which can be exploited in
the bulk material or as thin films on surfaces. The latter is interesting, as this pattern can be 
transferred to the material underneath. 
Of, course, if one block, or both of them is too short, then they will mix again at room temperature, 
as they loose the ability to segregate into separate domains under these conditions.
But as the feature size of the segregated structures is dependent on the polymer chain length, you 
need to make them shorter, if you want to have finer structures. If the polymer system you are using
can not be applied for the desired feature size, then you either have to take another type of 
copolymer or modify one of the blocks of the existing one, which will turn it into a different BCP.
The aim of this thesis is to take already existing polymers – 1,2-Polybutadiene-b-PDMS – which are
over or at their order to disorder transition temperature (TODT)at room temperature, and modify the 
1,2-PB part to enhance the segregation in the system in order to increase the TODT enough to obtain a
useful material which enables smaller feature sizes than possible with the starting material.
2
==PAGE:11==
2. Theory
The Diblock-Copolymer Phases
As just mentioned, as long as the different blocks of a BCP are immiscible, they are forced to 
segregate,2–5while at the same time being bound to each other. This makes them to separate in a 
microscopic scale, and not on a larger scale like oil in water. If the molecular weight distribution of 
the material is low enough, this gives rise to very regular structures. One of the important properties
of a Block-Copolymer is its order to disorder transition temperature (TODT). Above the TODT the 
system will loose its phase segregation and become disordered. Why does it do that?
As the interfacial tension between the two Blocks is the driving force for their segregation, the 
system tries to reduce the interfacial area, but by doing so will stretch the polymer chains, which 
will have to fill the whole domain. As long as the enthalpic energy gained by phase separation is 
higher than the entropic penalty for the de-mixing, the system will segregate. This also is a reason 
that increasing the inter-facial tension usually increases the domain spacing except close to the 
ODT.6,7This also explains the existence of the TODT itself, and is the reason for an eventual order-to 
order transition temperatures – the temperature the order changes from one type (like lamellae) to 
another (like Gyroid). Logically, the domain spacing generally will increase with 
increasing polymer length, as you have to contain longer parts of the chain in one block. 
In the strong segregation regime, the domain spacing increases with about N2/3.4,8,9
 
Figure 1: The Phase Diagram of Diblock Copolymers, taken from 3
L: Lammellar, H: Hexagonal Cylinders,QIm3m: BCC spheres, QIa3d: bicontinous 
Ia3d cubic ((Double)gyroid), CPS: Close packed spheres; DIS: Disordered
3
==PAGE:12==
The χeff*N at the TODT is 10,5 (10,495)3 for symmetric polymers (f1=f2=0,5). As the χeff  can be 
(simplified) assumed as  α/T + β,4,10 it can be seen that  χ is temperature dependent, and is 
decreasing with increasing temperature. The Phase Diagram of a diblock-copolymer melt (Fig.1) 
shows 4 different equilibrium phases: Lamellae, hexagonally packed cylinders, (double) gyroid and 
block centred cubic spheres, disregarding the very small region of close packed spheres. It also 
shows, that the χ*N at the TODT  is not constant, but lowest at f=0,5, and rising with increasing 
unequal Volume fraction of the blocks. A narrow molecular weight distribution and strong 
segregation regime is assumed to be given in this case. The weak segregation regime occurs from  
χ*N~12 for such a symmetrical BCP, which is pretty close to 10,5, so close to its TODT.3 The main 
point here is, that in the weak segregation regime, the Blocks in the BCP system are still separated, 
but with decreased order, making this region less useful for patterning.11 
Interestingly, as polymers in the weak segregation regime are relatively hard to come by, BCPs can 
be made to be weakly segregating for experiments by adding a neutral solvent, even that this has its 
issues.7  
Apart from these two, an intermediate segregation regime does exist, but as there are no well 
defined parameters set for them, they are generally a bit vague,3yet more investigation has been 
made since.9 It is located at around  χ*N 15-60.6 But looking through literature, its existence is often
ignored, even in newer publications.12 Another issue with creating order in a BCP system is 
introduced, when the Tg of one (or both) of the blocks is too close to the TODT ,as proper phase 
segregation is extremely slow if it is done too close to the Tg of one of the Blocks.13
4
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Phase separation in Bulk
As I am interested in well ordered structures, the weak segregation regime is relative uninteresting.
This leaves the already mentioned 4 equilibrium structures: BCC, HEX, GYR and LAM. The 
ordering is relative simple, as long as you can go high enough over the TG, a TODT being 40C over 
the TG is insufficient.13 As we are in the bulk, the contact surfaces of the BCP can be neglected for 
many applications, while for some they become very important, as they determine the alignment of 
the very surface of the system.14 
The formed equilibrium structures are shown in Figure 2.
Fig.2: Equilibrium structures in a diblock-copolymer melt.
      
         Taken from15
2.2 Phase separation in thin films
2.2.1 Uses of ordered thin films
As already hinted in the last chapter, in the area of contact between polymer and substrate, the 
substrate defines pretty much of the morphology of the thin polymer layer right on top of it.14
Obviously, this and the creation of a really even thin film is challenging. But there are good reasons 
to do so anyway. As a well defined BCP can give rise to very regular structures, it can do so in a 
thin film as well 11,15. If you want to pattern an area in the nm scale – especially with lines or 
hexagonal arranged dots or holes – fast, self organizing thin films of BCPs are a way of choice.
E-beam lithography,16 a technique enabling direct writing of features in the nm scale, is a very 
5
==PAGE:14==
versatile but pretty slow method for larger areas. “Normal” lithography – meaning the use of resists 
and masks to create a pattern usually via UV irradiation – is faster, but for this to work, the mask 
has to be created, and due to the wavelength is still limited in feature size .15 One also might use 
plasma and masks to create a structure in a given substrate.17,18 And for this, BCPs can come into 
play again.15,19–21 They are interesting as templates for bit patterned media (like magnetic hard disk 
drives),22 as well as trying to use them to create semi conducting materials from graphene, by 
patterning it.23–26 
So there is good reason to make the effort.
 
2.2.2 Thin films and surfaces
Thin films are a bit more tricky: As the two blocks of the BCP are incompatible, they inevitably will
have different free surface energies. As with a thin film being thin with respect to its characteristic 
length scale is meant, you have a thickness in the range of a few tens of nm usually. Comparing the 
surface Area to the Volume of a given amount of polymer, the first is large, and so the free surface 
energy of the surfaces become a crucial factor. Also the air or vacuum on top of a film can not be 
neglected. In many cases, this can give problems: Often, what one wants are features perpendicular 
to the surface, while the surface(s) given prefer one of the blocks, and as such forcing them to align 
parallel to it. There are different ways to resolve that matter.
When using spin coating to cover, the used solvent can make the difference between good coverage 
and de-wetting.27
The thickness of the thin film is important, especially with respect to the periodic length of its 
structure.  By making the film (n +/- 1/4)Lo in thickness on a good neutral surface, perpendicular 
orientation was reported, using a PS-b-PMMA BCP, while a substrate considered to being slightly 
off the best neutral interface showed perpendicular order when nLo is respected, while parallel 
orientation shows at (n+1/2)Lo.28
In another paper, the optimum thickness for perpendicular lammellae domains was reported to be 
around Lo, and this also fitted to the formation of perpendicular cylinders, which was said to be 
optimal slightly below Lo.29  
If the periodic length is not respected in the film thickness, this might lead to holes and islands in 
the polymer film.28,30 
If you want to have a parallel orientated structure, the thickness is just as important to avoid de-
wetting of the film. For symmetric BCPs the thickness should be n*Lo, while for asymmetric BCPs 
this would change to (2n+1)*(Lo/2) [aka Lo*(n+1/2].30–32 
Figure 3: Sketches of the symmetric, and asymmetric BCP film between surfaces. The one on the right 
shows a not well compatible film thickness/slit combination. They are drawn like in trenches for 
graphoepitaxy.
6
n*Lo
symmetric
(n+1/2)*Lo
asymmetric
unlikely
Lo
stress...
==PAGE:15==
2.2.2.1 Neutral surfaces
If the preference of one of the blocks to the surface can direct the film to form parallel structures 
with respect to the latter, a material that has no preference towards one of the blocks might just 
make the difference. Usually, the substrate one wants to pattern, often Si, is set along with its 
properties, but it can be covered with a very thin layer of a fitting material. This might be chemicals
anchored to the substrate,33 or random Copolymers,30,33–35 often made up from the two building 
blocks of the used BCP system. In case of Si, the surface always has OH groups on it, which can be 
easily reacted with for example Siliciumchlorides (-SiCl), and suitable molecules fixed in that way. 
In the case of neutral polymer surfaces, they are usually fixed to the surface by introducing a few 
-OH groups to them and annealing at elevated temperature (like 140 C or more) under vacuum.35,36 
By splitting off water, they will be fixed to the substrate, by reacting with its OH groups. A neutral 
polymer must be neutral to the BCP system it is covered with, and so it must reflect its properties.29 
A symmetric BCP needs, quite easily, a surface with a free energy right between them, it is more 
complicated with asymmetric compositions. Of course, when transferring the pattern later to the 
substrate, it first has to be transferred through the neutral brush layer, too. 
Another issue with the choice of the BCP system might be the etching contrast in your method of 
pattern transfer.18,20,36,37 To gain long range order where needed, it can be heat annealed, which works
properly only if being high enough above the Tg of both of the blocks.13 Another option is solvent 
annealing, as the solvent vapours can bring down the Tg to a more reasonable value and accelerate 
ordering, while at the same time being more indifferent to the surface.24,38,39
2.2.2.2 Graphoepitaxy
For a useful pattern transfer, long range order of the film is desired. As mentioned, this can be aided
by annealing the film, but this might not be enough or one might have control over the direction of 
the order. In this case, the substrate can be patterned with shapes, like trenches, which help to align 
the polymer structures in the desired direction.40–42 For doing so their sizing – like a channel width –
often has to respect the characteristic length scale of the features of the BCP, as it should be a 
multiple of it, else one will introduce frustration to the system.12,30,43,44 Again, the question if both 
sides of a trench wet the same block or a different block is an issue to be taken into consideration 
when deciding its dimensions.43 As the patterns for graphoepitaxy are way bigger than the BCP 
features, they can be made relatively easy with common patterning methods. The patterning can be 
either topographical (graphoepitaxy), or by patterning the surface chemically (chemoepitaxy), in the
latter changing the surface free energy locally. See also Figure 3. 
2.2.2.3 Solvent annealing
But what if I can't modify my substrate chemically to create a neutral surface, as this would destroy 
the material I want to pattern, like with Graphene? This can be circumvented by using a cross-
linkable neutral layer, if needed.29 Graphene is a 2D material, which means a material with just one 
7
==PAGE:16==
atom layer of thickness.23 Naturally, it is a conductor, but when patterned, a semi conductor can be 
created.25 Logically, by attaching a neutral surface chemically, the graphene would be gone, as it 
usually is fixed covalently to the substrate, while just adding an unattached layer very likely will not
hold when adding and annealing the BCP. So the free surface energy of the graphene will be best 
left just as it is. Graphoepitaxy might be applied, but deposition and complete removal of the shapes
without damaging the graphene might be challenging. But graphene being one large covalently 
connected atomic layer thick film is resistant to solvents, so solvent annealing can be a way out of 
this, as the vapours of the right solvent(s) are capable of annealing BCPs irrespectively to the 
substrate surface. Interestingly, by applying the fitting solvent(s) the same BCP might be capable of 
enabling different patterns.12,24,27,38,39 
It seems that also the difference in evaporation of solvent between the two blocks can help to align 
it.34 So if one wants to avoid introducing neutral surfaces, this might be possible.  
2.2.3 Plasma etching
To transfer a BCP pattern to a substrate, Plasma is a common way to do it.17,36,37,45–48 
Generally, a plasma is made of ionized Atoms in a gaseous phase,17 and as such very reactive to 
most materials. Many polymers are just made of C, H, and maybe O and N, and often do not have 
very different etching rates (etching contrast) in plasmas.18 This might be overcome by removing 
one block before plasma exposure, like degrading with UV or by selectively introducing heavier 
Atoms into one of the polymeric domains.15 One common polymer having another Atom than the 
most common ones are silicones, made up of a backbone of [-Si-O-], which introduces some 
interesting features. Its etching rate in a plasma containing Fluoride is usually high, and when 
reacting with oxygen plasma it produces Si-oxide, which offers a high resistance to this 
plasma.17,20,37,45
This can be applied to create a hard mask from PDMS containing using oxygen plasma, after 
eventually removing a possible PDMS surface layer by fluorine plasma. This was the main for 
choosing PDMS as one of the blocks in the used BCP, apart from the expected high χ.
3. Material and Methods
3.1 Characterisation of Polymers
The starting material as well as the modified material has to be characterized to make shure, it is the
material wanted, and to determine any structure formed by it in bulk or thin film.
8
==PAGE:17==
3.1.1 SEC/GPC
SEC (Size exclusion chromatography) or GPC (Gel permeation chromatography) are different 
names for the same method. It is based on a porous material with small pores in a column, through 
which the analyte is passing in a mobile phase. In difference to HPLC (High performance liquid 
chromatography), in SEC the separation is not happening via the affinity difference of the analyte 
towards the stationary phase, but only by the size of the analyte. This means, the mobile phase must
be a good solvent, and the stationary phase material must not have any particular interaction with 
the analyte, which solely is separated via different dwell times in the pores of the column material.
With the light scattering (LS) signal intensity is depending on the polymer solution as
I LS=k LS∗( dn
dc )
2
∗M∗c
and the refractive index (RI) like I(RI)=k RI∗( dn
dc )∗c .
it is possible to calibrate the system using a standard solution with known concentration and dn/dc, 
and such attain the k values for RI and LS. And this gives us the molecular weight of an unknown 
material, as long as we know the injected concentration and Volume.49
M=K ´∗(LS)/(RI) and K´=
K RI
[ K LS∗( dn
dc )]
Unfortunately, this is only really true for homopolymers, the calibration for BCPs would be more 
complicated, if one wants to obtain realistic molecular weight information. The Polydispersity 
Index (PDI),  calculated as PDI=Mw/Mn will give realistic values, though. With:
Mw=∑((ni∗Mi)∗M i)
∑(ni∗M i)
 and    Mn=∑(ni∗M i)
∑(ni)
The other option is using one detector, most likely the RI, and by running several different 
molecular weights of a polymer standard, like PS, create a calibration curve showing molecular 
weight vs. retention time. All values from this curve will give the result of a material having the 
same hydrodynamic volume/separation as the used standard.
9
==PAGE:18==
3.1.2 NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance)
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool to identify and quantify 
chemical compounds. It is based on the fact, that an atomic nucleus from an atom with odd mass or 
odd atomic number has a spin angular momentum and a magnetic moment. So this includes 1H, as 
well as 2D and 13C, but not 12C. These different spin states have different energy levels, and as the 
nuclei with the odd mass/atomic number have one unpaired spin, this can can switch between one 
energy level and the other. In an NMR, for this to happen, the Atom is immersed into a magnetic 
field, in which it can either align with or against the external magnetic field. As the energy absorbed
is typical for one type of nucleus, the absorbed energy is characteristic for it.
For the most sample case, the 1H, it is as, as it only has two possible spins:
 Eabsorbed=E−1
2 state−E+1
2 state=h ν
Even between  1H and  2D the energy differs enough to be able to distinguish these two nuclei in an 
NMR experiment, the reason for the use of deuterated solvents. In such an experiment, the sample 
is immersed into a strong magnetic field, so they have to align in it, and then are subjected to 
another field, changing its spin. The energies for this are then recorded – of the range the nuclei of 
choice is in. So far, this would give us only the information of the type of Atom (here 1H). As the 
chemical environment makes a small difference by shielding the atom investigated, its response will
be slightly different, depending on its neighbouring atoms. As this energy variation for the same 
molecule is again different for different strength of applied static magnetic fields, they are different 
for a 100MHz NMR and a 400MHz machine. By introducing the chemical shift, in which the shift 
of the Atom in Hz is divided by the spectrometer frequency in MHz as
 δ=
(shift [Hz])
(spectrometer frequency[ MHz]) one can make this independent of the magnetic field 
strength of the used instrument. The shift of TMS (Tetramethylsilane) is defined as 0, and all the 
other chemical shifts are related to that in ppm. Usually, the shifts recorded are on the positive side.
In this case, only 1D 1H NMR is recorded. As one H in one position will result in the same peak 
area as one H in an other position, this can be used to quantify them to each other. For those 
interested, there is lot of literature available on this topic, like.50
3.1.3 FTIR (Fourier Transformed Infra Red spectroscopy)
FTIR is a technique based on infrared light being absorbed from different parts of the given 
molecule. Different types of bonds absorb the infrared spectra at small range(s) of wavelength(s) 
typical for it. This does not only give information of the bond present, but can also give structural 
information.
10
==PAGE:19==
Usually, the wavelength is given in [cm-1], and called wave number: ν=
1
λ(cm)
The term “Fourier Transformed” indicates the way used to detect the amount of energy absorbed at 
every wavelength by introducing a beam splitter creating an interferogram, which has to undergo a 
fourier transformation to extract the desired information.
The samples were measured on an ATR (attenuated total reflection) crystal, which does not need 
any sample preparation like preparing samples in films from pressed KBr, provided one can fit the 
sample on a flat crystal surface and have good contact to it, as this set up measures only directly 
over the crystal.
 
3.1.4 TEM (Transmission electron microscopy)
In TEM, a sample is subjected to an electron beam, and the electrons which have passed through the
sample are recorded. For this, you need a sample thin enough to be transparent to electrons – in the 
case of polymers I usually achieve good results in the range from 70 to 100nm thickness.
The method applied was Bright Field TEM, in which the sample is illuminated with a parallel beam 
over a larger area over the sample. Contrast is mainly made via Z-contrast, Based on the atomic 
number, as heavier Atoms scatter more electrons, or thickness and density contrast.
As polymers usually are made up from light elements close to each other in Z-number, block 
copolymers often do not have enough contrast on their own. To acquire images, one of the blocks is 
selectively stained with a heavier element, like OsO4. OsO4  sublimates, and is usually delivered in 
aqueous solutions. The sample is exposed to the water/OsO4 vapour, which is reacting with the 
sample.51 Apart from being oxidative, OsO4 also is toxic. 
3.1.5 SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy)
Where an SEM is looking through the sample, and illuminates the observed area all at the same 
time, in an SEM the beam is condensed to a small spot, and the sample scanned with this beam spot 
by spot, so the detector only gets information from one small spot at a time. This can also be done 
in a TEM, then called Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM). 
The incoming incident beam interacts with the sample matter, and while the original beam looses 
energy to it due to scattering events, it emits secondary electrons from the sample material. If these 
secondary electrons (SE) are on or very close to the sample surface, they can leave the sample and 
reach the detector, where they are recorded. As they are coming from the very surface of a sample, 
they mainly carry topological information.
The other type of detector often used would be the back scattering detector (BSD), which records 
the beam electrons which are scattered back from the sample after one or multiple scattering events.
This type of electron generally has a higher energy as the SE, and they also come from a larger 
interaction Volume, and as such, the resolution is lower. But as heavy Atoms scatter more than 
lighter ones, this gives more Z-contrast than the SE. 
As I am looking for rather small sized patterns, the secondary electrons were detected here.
11
==PAGE:20==
Two different types of detector were used: The “standard” SE detector, which is placed sidewards 
over the sample, an ETD (Everhart-Thornley Detector), or the “In the lens detector”, which actually
is placed in the lens, and as such right over the sample. As looking on a sample from top or from the
side can give different views on the same topography, they will provide slightly different 
information/contrast.
The images taken from the cross-linked and starting material were taken using the Quanta FEG, 
while the coated films only could be directly investigated with the Supra1, maybe as the latter has 
en ETD and an in the lens detector.
3.1.6 TGA (Thermogravimetric Analysis)
A TGA machine heats a sample in a flow of gas, in this case Nitrogen, while very precisely 
determining the mass of the sample. The resulting information is a graph in lost mass – either in mg 
or in % from starting weight (or a derivation from it) vs. temperature. The sample holders are made 
of an inert material, like Pt, as it should not influence the measurement.
As I am dealing with a polymer rich in OH groups, one of the interesting points will be to see at 
what temperature it begins to loose water due to cross-linking as well as when the polymer degrades
completely. Another thing might be the detection of eventual persistent rests of solvent.
The temperature the sample starts to loose mass, which it must do so in gaseous form, is important 
before starting a DSC using hermetic sealed pans to avoid instrument contamination by escaping 
vapour.
3.1.7 DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimetry)
In a DSC, the instrument measures the needed energy to heat or cool a sample for a given 
temperature step in comparison to an inert material, like an empty pan. By adding a known amount 
of sample, the energy released or taken up can be normalized per g (or mg). As heating over the Tg 
will consume energy, this is one good way to access it. In case of a semi-crystalline material also 
the melting temperature (and amount) can measured. As this is often made in sealed pans, one 
should avoid to burst them by heating to a decomposition temperature, as mentioned with the TGA.
12
==PAGE:21==
3.1.8 Rheology
Rheology measurements on polymers are quite common. In the case of the here described BCPs, 
the exact values are – with the exception of the temperature – less interesting, than the relation of 
G´to G´´. The measurement is performed by placing polymer between the plates, where one of them
is applying a shear force with a given frequency, and the other is recording the response through the
polymer between them. 
G´ is called the Dynamic storage modulus, while G´´is the dynamic loss modulus.
The storage modulus are the elastic contributions measuring the energy storage, while the loss 
modulus is a viscous contribution of energy dissipation.52 
Clearly, a lamellae polymer between the plates is moved relatively easy, as it can align well, so 
polymer part A never has to cross polymer B when moving, which makes this system very soft. 
Typically, G´ and G´´ are very close to each other, and generally rather low in values. On the other 
side, a polymer forming the bicontinous Gyroid structure will be much harder to move, as the 
blocks of one type can not simply slide through the same type freely endlessly. In this case, the G´ 
is much higer than the G´´, and the values are much higher in general. In HEX and BCC, G´usually 
is higher than G´´, if less pronounced than in the Gyroid system. The overall look of the 
temperature ramp is also different.
 
3.1.9. Microtoming
An ultramicrotome is a device to create thin slices of relative soft materials, for their observation in 
TEM. As knives were used 35 degree diamond knives from Diatome, with or without water trough. 
A microtome might be cooled to enable the cutting of samples too soft at room temperature, this 
would be called a cryo ultramicrotome. 
A good cut is important to minimize artefacts from the cutting and the blade, and to be able to 
produce thin enough samples (here 100nm and below) in thickness.
13
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Synthesis
3.2.1 Hydroxylation of 1,2-PB
The first reaction which can turn C=C Bonds into alcoholic groups which came into mind was 
epoxidation of the C=C double bond followed by acid catalyzed hydrolysis. Looking at the 
literature, it soon tuned up, that the common ways of epoxidation never come close to 100% 
conversion, with the exception of PB rich in 1,4 C=C,53 and the problem of gelling in the process, 
which would result in an unusable polymer in this case.53–56 It also seems, that 1,4-PB is much more 
reactive towards epoxidating agents than 1,2-PB, of which the PB part here is made of to around 
90%.53,55
As I was not the first person having this issue, a much more controlled way of turning C=C groups 
to C-C-OH had been developed already long since. This type of reaction also allows to go to 100% 
conversion of double bonds while maintaining a low PDI. It is based on organic hydroboranes 
easily being added to C=C bonds, and their controlled oxidation using either alkaline 
hydrogenperoxide alone or a combination of it with milder organic oxidizing agents.
After looking through some papers using this type of reaction,51,57–60 a method close to the different 
recipes was applied.  
Effectively, 1,2 times the amount of 9-BBN with respect to double bonds in the polymer were used, 
adding the 9-BBN solution in THF (0,5 mol/l) at -15C to the polymer dissolved in dry THF, and 
then allowed to warm up to room temperature. The reaction was carried on for 24h. TMANO was 
dissolved in water to a concentration of 2,1 mmol/ml and degassed by bubbling with Nitrogen prior 
to addition to the polymer reaction. The rate of TMANO to 9-BBN was 2:1. While adding, the 
reaction was kept on ice, and after completion warmed up to room temperature and stirred for 
another 24h. To complete the reaction, first degassed 6 mol/l KOH in water was added (KOH:C=C 
close to 1:1), followed by 30% hydrogen peroxide solution to a 1:1 ratio to 9-BBN, adding rather a 
little more peroxide than less. This was done while on ice. All steps were done under Argon, with 
THF distilled from purple Benzophenone/Sodium. Water was filtered through a millipore 
membrane prior to use.
Fig.4: Reaction scheme of 1,2-PB, drawn after60 
14
==PAGE:23==
3.2.2 Cross-linking using S2Cl2
One of the papers found when looking for the hydroxylation of 1,2-PB used this material to cross-
link produced breath figures stable enough to create a free standing film just by exposing it to the 
vapour of sulfurmonochloride to cross link its polyisoprene domain. The same was tried here with a
BD polymer with known morphology, BD10, to see if it can withstand the etching of PDMS with 
tBAF (tetrabutyl Ammoniumfluoride) in THF without collapsing.58  As it did create a stable enough 
1,2-PB network to allow etching and imaging, this method was applied to the unmodified starting 
material so imaging in SEM or TEM is possible to proof or disproof directly the lack of structure at 
room temperature besides with Rheology.
Fig.5: Reaction scheme for Polyisoprene, drawn after58
PB should undergo a similar reaction
15
==PAGE:24==
4. Results and Discussion
4.1 The starting Material
Two already existing polymers were used, one named BD19, which was made be my earlier, and 
another called BDa5, synthesize by a former Ph.d. Student, Anton Berthold.
A third polymer, BD10, was not modified, but used for comparison reasons, and a 1,2-PB 
homopolymer, which was hydroxylized for comparison reasons. Both of them were synthesized by 
me earlier. The synthesis is described here.61 Except for the BD10, which was polymerized at -40C, 
all the other were initiated at -40C (or below) and then warmed up to -20C to finish 1,2-PB 
polymerization.
Normally, the molecular weight of the first block, here 1,2-PB, is analysed using SEC, but in this 
case it was done via NMR from a polymer after the second block, PDMS, had been removed by 
tBAF in THF. As this polymer is rather low in molecular weight, the peaks from the initiator are 
well accessible. See also Figure 7.
The PDI of the material was determined by SEC.
 
Tab.1: Short overview of the starting material. The morphology at RT has been
 checked by Rheology earlier, and was proven via SEM and TEM during this work
Rheology is a relative easy and fast way to get the first clue of the kind of structure(s) formed at 
which temperature, as well as it can provide a hint at eventual glass transition temperatures. In this 
case, it was mainly used to see if the material really has any structure at room temperature. If this 
would be the case, no modification would be necessary. The Rheology trace of BD10, a polymer 
with hexagonally packed cylinders of PDMS in a matrix of 1,2-PB is plotted for comparison.
It does not show any TODT, but signs of cross-linking at elevated temperatures instead, not 
completely unexpected for a 1,2-PB containing polymer, even with the oven of the rheometer being 
flushed with nitrogen during the run.
16
Mn in kg/mol
w%
PDI
morphology 
PB
PDMS
PB
PDMS
3.98
2.53
61.1
38.9
1.09 ~RT
3.24
3.18
50.5
49.5
1.05 under RT
7.1
3.37
67.8
32.2
1.08
HEX
TODT [C]
==PAGE:25==
Figure.6: The Rheology traces of the starting materials. BD19 Clearly is disordered at room temperature 
(21C measured), while BDa5 might be at its TODT there. The BD10 shows HEX from around RT to roughly 125C.
It also shows sings of cross-linking at higher temperature.
17
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
1000000
BDa5
 G'  Pa
 G"  Pa
T in C
[Pa]
-5.00E+01 0.00E+00 5.00E+01 1.00E+02 1.50E+02 2.00E+02 2.50E+02 3.00E+02
1.00E+03
1.00E+04
1.00E+05
1.00E+06
BD10 tempramp, 2,5C/min
 
G
'
 
G
"
T in C
Pa
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1
10
100
1000
BD19
 G'  Pa
 G"  Pa
T in C
[Pa]
==PAGE:26==
As mentioned, the molecular weight of BDa5 and BD19 was determined via NMR. Figure 7 shows
the NMR trace of BDa5, untreated. As the peak at around 0.8ppm is made of solely by the two CH3 
groups of the initiator attached to the PB part of the polymer, they can be used to calculate the Mn 
of the polymer. This only works as long as the polymer chains are relatively short, as the area of this
peak will diminish with increasing length. As the two multiple peaks at around 5ppm can be 
assigned to different H from the 1,2-PB and 1,4-PB. the ratio between those two forms can be 
calculated. The PB part of this polymer contains around 90% of 1,2-Polybutadiene. The peak from 
PDMS comes close to 0 ppm. The peak at 7.26 ppm originates from the solvent, CDCl3, or more 
correct from small amounts of CHCl3 in it. For determining Mn of the PB part, the PDMS was 
removed using tBAF in THF.
Fig.7: The NMR and the corresponding peaks. To calculate the Mn, the CH3 groups from the Initiator  (0.8 pm) – 
2 per polymer chain – can be used. With a longer polymer, the area of this peak would be too small to make useful
calculations.
As these two polymers are suitable candidates for trying to induce structure by changing one of 
their blocks, they were used to be modified. So far, not shown is the 1,2-PB with around 2,8kg/mol, 
as it is a homopolymer with no phase segregation.
To get a direct proof of the existence – or the lack thereof – at ambient temperature, small amounts 
from BDa5, BD19 and BD10 were taken as is, or in the case of BD10 sheared by pressing through a
syringe needle with an outer diameter of 1,2mm, and exposed to S2Cl2 vapour over night. These 
cross-linked samples turned brightly yellow, solid (and stinky). After evacuation and flushing with 
THF to remove the leftover S2Cl2, the pieces were etched in a 0,5 mol/l tBAF solution in THF for 2 
days. After flushing thoroughly with THF and THF/MeOH mixtures, the pieces were dried and 
observed either in SEM, or (after microtoming at room temperature) with TEM. The only visible 
18
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
NMR of BDa5
BDa5
ppm
Intensity
==PAGE:27==
change during etching might be a colour change to a more brownish yellow.
 
Fig.8: 
The sheared BD10 after cross-
linking with S2Cl2. The pieces
turned solid an brittle.
To directly access any eventual structure at ambient temperature, BDa5 and BD10 (not sheared 
before cross-linking) have been microtomed and investigated with TEM, while the sheared BD10 
and BD19 were investigated using a SEM.
 
BD10-x-e: Porous BD10 after etching.
Scale bar: 0,2µm
BDa5-x-e: BDa5 after etching
Scale bar 50nm
BDa5-x-e: BDa5 after etching
Scale bar 20nm
Fig.9: BD10 and BDa5 cross-linked and etched. There clearly is structure in the BD10 sample, even that it lacks order.
The BDa5 might have some structure, but not clear and not really ordered. It might be just at its TODT, which could 
put it in the weak segregation regime. 
The TEM images show a clear structure in the case of BD10, which proofs the possibility to use 
S2Cl2 for these materials to create nanoporous materials at room temperature for structural 
investigation in electron microscopy, even that I guess that this is old news. The poor order of BD10
might result from it being not too far from the Tg of 1,2-PB at room temperature.
For the SEM investigation, the BD19 was prepared like the BDa5 for TEM, apart from the 
microtoming, while the BD10 was squeezed through a cannula with an outer diameter of 1,2mm, to 
shear align the polymer prior to cross-linking. This worked as expected, the outer side of the 
material being aligned parallel to the cannula wall, while the middle, which did not experience the 
shear force, actually more aligned perpendicular to it. In SEM, no structure from BD19 could be 
seen. (Fig.11)
19
==PAGE:28==
Fig.10: Edge vs. central orientation of sheared BD10. The outside is aligned parallel to the cannula wall, the middle is 
not. Comparing with the rather unordered polymer seen in TEM without shearing, it also greatly induce alignment.
A nice example of hexagonal aligned cylinders.
Fig.11: BD19, cross linked and etched in SEM. No structure is visible.
After characterization of the starting materials with Rheology and electron microscopy, it can be 
concluded that BD19 has no structure at room temperature, while BDa5 might have some kind of 
separation, but clearly not a strongly ordered one, as could be expected in the strong segregation 
regime. It might be in the weak segregation regime, just at around its TODT. 
When tilting the glass containing polymer, BDa5 and BD19 are clearly following the gravity and 
flow, while BD10 is a sticky and very viscous substance at room temperature, which does not flow 
visibly, another good indication of lost phase segregation.
20
==PAGE:29==
4.2. Modification of the material
The route of modification was already lined out in chapter 3.2.1. It was done using 9-BBN, an 
organic hydroborane, and followed oxidation with TMANO and hydrogen peroxide in alkaline 
medium. The precipitation was done using a mixture of 800ml m.p. water, 80 ml MeOH and a little 
KOH (2,6g). As this gave no real precipitation, Na2SO4 [12g/500ml] was added, to aid separation.
After letting it rest over night, the solution was filtered, and the filtrate taken up in MeOH – which 
formed a milk white solution – and precipitated with m.p. water. After this was done several times. 
it was put under vacuum, to dry out most of the water. Once rather dry, methanol was added and 
slowly distilled almost to dryness again, to remove any remains of Borates, as suggested in 
literature.57
After drying again under vacuum, this was repeated to surely avoid cross-linking of the polymer 
due to Boric acid. A short overview of the synthesis is given below (Tab.2 ). Drying the polymer 
under vacuum was rather slow, and the precipitation obviously was not complete.
Tab.2: Overview of the hydroxylation of PB.
As this type of reaction is very efficient in turning C=C groups to C-C-OH, a conversion close to 
100% is not unrealistic.
21
BD19
BDa5
1,2-PB 2,8K
used Polymer
1.9
1.9
0.6076 [g]
THF
26.4
48.8
5.4 [g]
n (C=C)
0.0178
0.0211
0.0113 [mol]
9BBN needed
0.0213
0.0253
0.0135 [mol]
0,5 mol/l in THF
42.6
50
27 [ml]
taken
50
50
27 [ml]
reaction time
24h, RT
24h, RT
24h, RT
TMANO (2:1 to 9BBN)
2.1 mol/l
2.1 mol/l
2,1 mol/l
in water
taken in ml
24
24
13 [ml]
reaction time
24h, RT
24h, RT
24h, RT
KOH 6N
3
3.5
1.9 [ml]
30% hydrogen perroxide
2.2
2.6
1.4 [ml]
1.82
1.26
0.5473 [g]
yielded polymer (after 
drying to weight constant)
==PAGE:30==
Tab.3:  The composition of the new polymer, assuming 
100% double bond conversion
This would be the new material, if the reaction proceeded as planned, see Tab.3 . The preferred 
proceeding would be to run an NMR, as there it would be possible to directly access the ratio of OH
modified PB and compare with the PDMS. Unfortunately, it turned up that the polymer can be 
dissolved in basically any concentration of THF and a clear solution obtained, provided it is wetted 
with MeOH first. In pure THF, a piece of polymer still remained undissolved after 2 days. As 
already mentioned, it can be brought into solution using pure Methanol, where it must form some 
kind of micelles, as it forms a stable white solution. For the starting material, MeOH is a none 
solvent. As it turned up to be insoluble in a variety of solvents which are available for NMR, FTIR 
was done instead. 
After drying, the polymer no longer is a viscous flowing substance, instead it created a solid, 
slightly milky polymer at room temperature.
22
BD19
BDa5
PB (NMR) kg/mol
3.24
3.98
[w%] PB
50.5
61.1
[w%] PDMS
49.5
38.9
PDMS (kg/mol calc.)
3.18
2.53
total weight, kg/mol
6.42
6.51
PDI, BCP unmodified
1.05
1.09
For 100% conversion
[w%] PBOH
57.6
67.7
[w%] PDMS
42.4
32.3
7.49
7.84
total weight, 
modified [kg/mol]
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Characterisation of the modified materials
4.3.1 FTIR
The first characterization after drying was checking for residual double bonds using FTIR.
Fig.12: FTIR of hydroxylated PB containing polymers. the PB 2.8K is a not modified Polybutadiene Polymer.
The broad peak with its maximum at around 3350cm-1 are OH groups showing hydrogen bonding.
The signals arising from C=C groups in the PB 2.8K sample are completely absent.
The FTIR Graph from Fig.12 contains the three hydroxylized polymers, and the unmodified PB 
2.8K as a reference. The most noticeable new, broad peak with a maxima around 3350cm-1 is the O-
H stretch, which is typical for OH groups, when they are hydrogen bonded. Without it, the OH 
groups would give rise to a peak around 3600cm-1.50 The second important peaks are the peaks 
missing in the modified samples compared to 1,2-Polybutadiene. Monosubstituted C=C double 
bonds (like the ones from 1,2-PB) should give rise to two strong peaks, one around 1000cm-1, the 
other around 900cm-1 due to out of plane bending of C-H. The one at around 1000cm-1 from the PB 
sample overlaps with the PDMS peak in the BCPs, but the one around 900 cm-1 is clearly gone in 
the OH containing material. The same counts for the peak at around 1650 cm-1 (C=C stretching) and 
around 3100cm-1(C-H stretching of =C-H). With a lack of peaks in the region from 1500-2000cm-1, 
no C=O groups are present, as these would give rise to strong peaks between 1650-1850cm-1 due to 
C=O stretching. This excludes any further oxidation of groups by hydrogenperoxide.50 With the 
C=C peaks completely missing, the conversion of double bonds must be close to 100%.
23
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
FTIR of modified polymer
PB 2.8K
BD19OH
BDa5OH
PBOH 
cm-1
%T
==PAGE:32==
4.3.2 SEC
Usually, one of the next important properties that has to be checked is the molecular weight 
distribution. Unfortunately, it tuned out that this polymer cannot be dissolved in pure THF, but well 
in THF with methanol in it. As the SEC system, that should be set up for being used with such a 
mixture as mobile phase, had multiple issues, the polymer could not be run with SEC. Still, as this 
polymer stays in solution in almost any amount of THF, if wetted with alcohol first, an attempt was 
made to run it in an existing system, using THF with 1% of Triethylamine as solvent. The solution 
was filtered through a 0,2µm filter (PTFE, Whatman) prior to injection. As the polymer showed up 
at the exclusion Volume of the system, giving a huge refractive index and an out of scale light 
scattering signal, this was not tried again. Still, it was a clear sign of the formation of micellar 
structures of this polymer in THF. Still, running the modified polymer to check its Polydispersity 
would have been really helpful, as a broadened molecular weight distribution might lead to a less 
defined structure. The run done in THF is in the appendix.
4.3.3 Rheology
As mentioned earlier, rheology is a good way to access information about the behaviour of a 
material at different temperatures. As the slit of the rheometer used is not horizontal, but vertical, 
the samples of this polymer tended to fall out before the gap could be closed, as it is a not sticky 
material. By adding a drop of methanol, a good contact could be made, even that this means that the
sample holder had to be heated to around 90 degrees to evaporate all MeOH in a reasonable time 
under a flow of nitrogen to avoid oxidation. More than one run was made, the first two starting at 
room temperature, ramping up to 200-250°C, and then ramping down again, which should help to 
align its structure. The sample was kept so it could be investigated with electron microscopy. At 
higher temperatures, there are indications of possible cross-linking of material, a cause for the rising
values. Considering the annealing temperatures from random copolymers to a Si substrate by 
dehydrating double bonds reported to be 140°C or more,35 this would not be completely unexpected.
After ending the run, the polymer stuck to the Al plates from the rheometer, very likely linking to 
hydroxyl groups from the surface. The rest which remained on the Al could be neither dissolved in 
alcohol, nor in THF or a mixture of it and had to be removed mechanically, even that it did swell 
considerably in the solvents. An indication of a low degree of cross linking. The difference to the 
BCPs I used to run so far is the existence of OH groups and the resulting hydrogen bonding, which 
might increase the G´ and G´´ compared to polymers without it. To obtain a nicer result from 
rheology, the last run was started at somewhat under 200C, ramped down and then ramped up 
again, to have the least interference of cross linking. The result is shown in Fig.13 . It strongly 
indicates the introduction of structure above room temperature. From the look of the curve, 
BDa5OH might be HEX, which would fit to its composition of 67,7% PBOH by weight. From its 
composition, BD19OH with 57,6 % by weight, this polymer would be very likely a lammellar 
material, but very close to the Gyroid window, which would fit to the sudden rise of  especially G´ 
after around 75°C. In BDa5OH it is interesting to see that the modulus generally slowly starts to 
drop a bit before 100°C.  
24
==PAGE:33==
Fig.13: Rheology traces of the hydroxylized polymers. The sample was first heated fast to bit under 200°C, then 
ramped down to around RT (blue curves), and then ramped up again (red curve). The rise in the curve of BDa5OH 
over 200°C might indicate cross-linking, supported by the material behaviour towards solvents after the end of run. 
There clearly seems to be some structure now.
25
0.00E+00
5.00E+01
1.00E+02
1.50E+02
2.00E+02
2.50E+02
1.00E+03
1.00E+04
1.00E+05
1.00E+06
BD19OH1 cool-heat 
 G' cool
 G" cool
G´heat
G´´heat
T in C
[Pa]
0.00E+00
5.00E+01
1.00E+02
1.50E+02
2.00E+02
2.50E+02
1.00E+03
1.00E+04
1.00E+05
1.00E+06
1.00E+07
BDa5OH cool-heat
 G' cool
 G" cool
 G' heat
 G" heat
T in C
[Pa]
==PAGE:34==
4.3.4 TGA and DSC
After the rheology data suggests the introduction of structure by hydroxylation of the polymer, the 
next step is to check the existence of eventual glass transition temperatures or melting points due to 
crystallization. This is done using Differential scanning calorimetry. To make shure that the sample 
does not contaminate the DSC, a thermogravimetric analysis was done first. The TGA also will 
provide information about the thermal stability of the material.
Fig.14: The TGAs of BD19OH and BDa5OH, overview (top) and first weight loss (bottom) with a heating ramp at
20°C/minute. The first loss of weight is a bit over 50°C. As this seems to be a bit low to dehydrate the polymers, this
could be remnants of solvents – mainly alcohol or/and water – still in the sample after evacuating for days at room
temperature, most likely due to H-Bonding.
26
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
TGA BD19OH and BDa5OH 20C/min
BD19OH
BDa5OH
T in C
w% remaining
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
80
85
90
95
100
TGA BD19OH and BDa5OH 20C/min
BD19OH
BDa5OH
T in C
w% remaining
==PAGE:35==
To run this polymer with DSC like this would mean to stop at around 60°C, which would not give 
any useful information, as reports indicate a melting point around 49°C for a fully modified 1,2-
PB.57 Unfortunately, this paper provides the information of the polydispersity index of the starting 
material, but not the molecular weight, as far as I could see. The same paper reported melting points
for 1,2-PBOH [Tm: 49°C], and Polyisoprene PIOH [Tm 58°C] for full conversion. In the text an 
increase in Tg is mentioned to be expected “because of an increase in inter- and intrahydrogen 
bonding” when increasing the amount of OH groups in the polymer chain, ending up at full 
conversion. As else in the text only the melting temperature is mentioned, and not the glass 
transition, I am not shure if this is due to a spelling mistake, and should be Tm. The other 
interesting thing is the comparison with a paper investigating the hydroxylation of the PI from 
Polystyrene – b – Polyisoprene block copolymers.51 They reported that the Tm of a PS-PIOH 
polymer with a total Mn of 1,12*104 g/mol and a PS weight fraction of 41% of PS (around 
6,6kg/mol PIOH block) led to a melting point of 105°C, very close to the Tg of PS at 100.
Interestingly, that temperature is close to the little dent in the rheology trace of BDa5OH, 
coincidence for shure.
In DSC, they distinguished the two by observing the endothermal peak in the first cycle, containing 
both the Tg and Tm, while the second heating cycle, due to the slow speed of crystallization in this 
polymer, contained the typical jump for a Tg only, measured as 95°C from the PS. TEM 
micrographs were shown from the PS-b-PIOH BCPs, which were stained with OsO4, showing 
structure in the polymer system. They also showed spherulites in this BCP, after drying at 70°C for 
a day under vacuum, using Polarizing optical microscopy. There seems to be crystallization, not a 
Tg.
So it seems that 1,2-PBOH is a partly crystalline polymer, with a slow speed of crystallization, but 
if it can be compared to the PS-b-PIOH (which also is said to be partly crystalline), it still should be
possible to obtain a good phase separation, as shown with TEM.51 
27
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-1.3
-1.2
-1.1
-1
-0.9
-0.8
-0.7
DSC BD19OH1 - 10C/min
Cycle1
Cycle3
T in C
W/g
==PAGE:36==
Fig.15: The DSC Data for BD19OH and BDa5OH. In both cases, an endothermic drop can be seen,
which is more pronounced in the first cycle than in the third. Exotherm is up in these graphs.
The gathered DSC values for my polymer was interesting. Before starting DSC, the polymer was 
dried at 110°C under a flow of nitrogen to heat out eventual residual solvent and ensure safe 
ramping in the DSC to 100°C. The cycle 1 shows a more pronounced step than cycle 3. 
As the Value of a Tg should be constant in both cycles, a slow crystallisation would be the 
explanation for this behaviour, as the first cycle would destroy it and . From the shape of the curve, 
it looks closer to a Tg to me, though. 
Fig.16: DSC Data from the two different articles mentioned. 
In a) the polymer is a pure PIOH, with (F) being fully converted to the OH form. A-E have different degree og 
hydroxylation, increasing from A to E. Taken from.57
Graph b), which is taken from51 shows the melting of the crystalline PIOH part of a PS-b-PIOH BCP, leaving in the 
second heating cycle only the Tg of the PS, as crystallisation is too slow to form again in the time between the cycles.
28
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-1.3
-1.2
-1.1
-1
-0.9
-0.8
-0.7
-0.6
 DSC - BDa5OH - 10C/min 
Cycle 1
Cycle 3
T in C
W/g
a
b
==PAGE:37==
In Fig.16 the DSC traces of the both articles are shown.51,57 The interesting part in b) is the 
disappearance of the melting peak, leaving only the Tg from PS in the second heating cycle. As the 
crystallisation is slow, the time between the runs is too short for the re-formation of crystallinity.
Graph a) shows a PI homopolymer with increasing degree of hydroxylation, with F being totally 
transformed to PIOH. Interestingly, the shape of the peak from a) – melting temperatures – are 
looking more like the Tg from Graph b), and not the melting peak.  
Using the weak dent in the 3rd cycle in the analysis software, the middle point of it was determined 
as 60,2°C for BD19OH and 64,2°C for BDa5OH. Using the first cycle would have provided a more 
pronounce step there, though.
 
4.4. Direct observation of structures
As the rheology gives a strong hint at structure, direct proof is need. The first interesting to see 
would be the equilibrium structure. As I did not had any small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) at 
hand, the option left was imaging with electron microscopy.
4.4.1 Electron microscopy study in bulk 
4.4.1.1 TEM
For the first attempt to observe structure, three different sets of samples were microtomed:
The already shown BD10-x-e (cross-linked and etched) and BDa5-x-e ( Fig.9 ), as well as BDa5OH
and BD19OH after the first rheometer run, and as such expected to have a low degree of cross-
linking.  
The attempt to cross-link BD19OH and BDa5OH with S2Cl2 over night failed for this purpose. The 
latter did not work, as the polymer was too soft for microtoming at room temperature afterwards. It 
did no longer dissolve in MeOH, THF or a mixture thereof, but during etching it formed a soft, 
gelly lump on the wall of the vessel. Even when extending the exposure time to sulfurmonochloride
to over the week end, the effect was the same. 
As some cross-linking was expected in BD19OH and BDa5OH, a diamond blade with a water 
trough was used for microtoming. The big advantage of this type of blade to a dry one is the 
reduced friction while cutting, as the polymer will swim on the water surface easily, while pushing 
it over a dry diamond can be seriously hampered by interaction with the slice of polymer.
Microtoming the BDa5OH did proceed normal, while the BD19OH clearly became larger while on 
the water surface. Still, it could be transferred.
29
==PAGE:38==
As polymers are often poor in contrast by themselves in TEM, some of the slices were placed in a 
special holder, given with this to a vacuum tight glass, and evacuated, to remove any residues of 
water. After this, it was exposed 30 minutes to TiCl4 vapour, by adding a little of the liquid to the 
same glass under an Atmosphere of dry argon. As TiCl4  is highly reactive towards water and 
alcohols, it was hoped to react with the OH groups of the PBOH only. The downside of this system 
is the reactivity of Ti-alcoholates towards water, ultimately forming Titaniumoxide. To slow this 
down, the samples were stored in a closed jar with a drying agent (silica gel). Still, there was no 
fundamental difference in TEM with or without TiCl4 exposure with respect of observing a regular 
structure.
Fig.17: BDa5OH after rheology, exposed 30 minutes to TiCl4 vapour no real nice structure, but a patchy pattern can be
seen (a and b, top), while c and d are the same polymer not exposed to TiCl4. None shows a real nice structure.
30
a
b
c
d
==PAGE:39==
The BD19OH which visibly increased its size while on the water, clearly was a different matter.
They showed no significant difference with or without exposure to the Titaniumtetrachloride, even 
without, it clearly had gained contrast. Note also the existence of two different looking patterns in 
Fig. 18b.
Fig.18: BD19OH after rheology and microtoming using a wet blade. As this sample did swell on the water, the visible
structure might be induced by the solvent – mainly swelling PBOH. Most of the parts look like a), but a few areas can
be found like in b). It does not look like any of the equilibrium morphologies on first sight.
As this structure might be induced by the water of the blade, the next samples were microtomed 
using a dry blade. Samples were either solvent casted and dried first in the fume hood, then under 
vacuum, or were taken from the run of the rheometer (heat-cool cycle). As PS-PIOH has been 
reported to be stained with OsO4,51 different times of staining were applied, using a 4% solution in 
water. The times used were 7,5h and 17h. As this is an aqueous solution, it contained 96% of water, 
and having the pieces with a thickness of around 100nm one could imagine some kind of solvent 
annealing happening while staining. The result was, that in the 17h exposure time, many pieces got 
too flexible and “melted” to the bars of the TEM grid. See also
picture to the right. Still, most of the pieces after 7h staining could
still be observed in TEM. It did not show any fine ordered
structures. The big difference in the PS-b-PIOH reported and the
polymer here is the PS having a Tg at around +100°C, while the
one of PDMS is far below room temperature. As water swells the
PBOH part, there is nothing that can keep the structure as it is in
the dry state. As even polymer solutions dissolved in a neutral
solvent can induce a structure when a specific solvent is added,62
so the structure here might be more a water/PBOH-b-PDMS
system, trapped by quickly drying at room temperature when
removing from the staining chamber.
31
a
b
Fig.19: A piece after 17h of 
exposure to water/OsO4 vapour
==PAGE:40==
Which now left me with an issue: The sample can not be stained, due to the water coming along 
with the Osmiumtetroxide, but having some heavier atoms in one of the blocks would be favourable
for TEM imaging. The only one giving some pictures cam from the rheometer, maybe stabilized by 
some cross linking during the run.
32
Fig.20 : The solvent casted and 7h OsO4 stained polymer. Left BD19OH, right BDa5OH
The structure (or the lack of it) is most likely water induced. 
Underneath: One of the few images from samples annealed for 17,h. The sample 
was prepared from BD19OH after rheology.  
==PAGE:41==
As this polymer has a high affinity to glass, it was solvent casted from a 30% MeOH/70% THF 
solution, containing around 5% by weight to the PBOH polymer block of SnCl2*2H2O onto a PP 
substrate. This salt was chosen as it has a melting point around 37-38°C, a quite high solubility in 
alcohol, both properties which might keep it from crystallizing inside the polymer and help to 
enrich it in the PBOH part. The so casted films were dried in the fume hood and annealed with 
water vapour for 1,5h, then dried under a flow of nitrogen, first at room temperature, then at 60°C 
for 1,5h, after which the samples were still soft from annealing. To dry them further, they were first 
evacuated at RT for 3,5h, then evacuation was continued at 70°C for around 1h. The same 
procedure of evacuation was repeated the next day. The resulting film was stable, and easily 
detached from the polymer. These samples were microtomed for TEM investigation.
Along with it, a sample spin coated on a PP hydrophilized with air Plasma, was supposed to be 
microtomed, to see the cross-section in TEM, but the PP turned out to be too soft at room 
temperature for slicing. 
33
Fig.21: Picture a) and b) (top) BDa5OH, with 5% SnCl2*2H2O, c) and d) (bottom) BD19OH prepared the same way 
by solvent casting. There is structure, but not perfectly aligned. Also the surface is not really flat after microtoming 
at RT.
a
b
c
d
==PAGE:42==
The TEM micrographs made show the support of some structure again. This might be either due to 
the semi-crystalline behaviour of the PBOH block, as crystallization is a strong force trying to 
reorganize the BDOH part of the polymer, and as such might come into conflict with the phase 
organization due to phase segregation, leading to some structure trying to satisfy both.
One of the closest matches to the observed structures found in the literature are relatively short PS-
b-PI polymers, the Tg of the PS being too close to the TODT of the BCP system for proper 
annealing (see picture below).13 As the polymer here (PBOH-b-PDMS) starts to loose weight soon 
after a reaching 100°C in TGA, even if the first loss is attributed to the loss of remaining solvent 
one can't go too high in temperature for annealing, unless one wants to risk cross-linking. The OH 
bonding of the PBOH might make annealing more slow, too. The best would be annealing far over 
the melting point of the polymer, followed by rapid cooling and imaging to lower the chance of 
crystallization.
Fig.22: A TEM micrograph from.13 A TODT at around 130C is reported for 
this polymer, too low to allow proper annealing, leading to a less 
precisely aligned structure.
4.4.1.2 SEM and bulk morphology
As etching is not possible with the modified polymer, the only way to see any structure by SEM 
would be the creation of surface topography following the structure. The first attempt was to expose
a relative thin slice of polymer with TiCl4 vapour either for 1h or over night, and hope that this 
would introduce Ti on the PBOH surface only. It did create some small structures on the thinner 
part, or some tubular like structures, depending on the exposure time. As this might be a general 
effect towards OH containing polymer, the PBOH homopolymer was made and subjected to the 
same treatment. Prior to exposure to the vapour, the samples were vacuum dried at room 
temperature. The exposure was done under Argon.
34
==PAGE:43==
 
Fig.23:BDa5OH after rheology,exposed for 1h to TiCl4 a); b)
also BDa5OH, but exposed over night, and c)
a film of PBOH homopolymer after 5hours of exposure to TiCl4. 
As can be clearly seen in Fig.23 the PBOH homopolymer also produced fine structures by TiCl4 
exposure, the effect seen on the BCP is most likely a general behaviour of this chemical towards 
PBOH material.
Another try to use SEM for a bulk structure was done by using the plasma source available to me, 
which normally is used to hydrophilize polymer surfaces. The only plasma it can make is from air, 
and it might be not too strong. Apart from one sample made from sheared and cross-linked BD10, 
with known structure which was exposed for one minute, PBOH-b-PDMS block copolymers were 
exposed for 2minutes, 4 minutes and 8 minutes. After the first minute, the rest of the time was done 
in 30s, with a 30s break to avoid overheating. The only result of this under SEM was a polymer 
with no visible microstructure. This might be because of the plasma source being too weak for this 
purpose, or the air plasma (80% nitrogen and only 20% oxygen) did not create any Siliconoxides 
from PDMS with enhanced etch resistance. 
35
a
b
c
==PAGE:44==
4.4.2 Electron microscopy on thin films
As this polymer has only one block keeping the structure stable at room temperature, and even this 
might loose the ability at a bit over 60°C after DSC data, the polymer might not be useful in the 
bulk, unless it could be cross-linked. But as it was not designed for bulk use from the start, but for 
the use in thin films, it does not matter to much. The same might count for the bad ordering of the 
structure in bulk, as in a thin film the substrate surface and eventual solvents for annealing become 
more important for ordering. 
The only one try to spin-coat a PP with plasma hydrophilized surface was too soft to be 
microtomed, all of the relevant investigation was done by SEM. As a substrate, pieces of Si wafers 
were used as a standard. Here, the microscope was the Supra1. 
4.4.2.1 Creation of thin films
As mentioned earlier, the thickness of the film is important for the separation. Preferring 
perpendicular orientation, the optimum film thickness would be around the periodic length scale of
the material structure – which means in the range of ten to few tens of nm, even that films with 
more than one layer can have the first layer aligned differently than the second layer.21 
The first step to a nice structured film is the right choice of solvent. Dissolving the BDOH polymers
in THF with only 10% methanol resulted in very uneven and despite the concentration rather thick 
films. 25% or 30% MeOH in THF were a huge improvement, while 1-Hexanol with MeOH ended 
in a  partly de-wetted surface layer. 
Haing a solvent system that gives nice covering, the right parameters for spin-coating have to be 
found to obtain the right film thickness. In this case, the spin-coating parameters were kept constant 
with a top speed of 3200 rpm, held for 30s and an acceleration of 650 rpm/s. Following the example
of my colleges, the whole surface of the substrate was covered with a thin film of liquid, and then 
the coater started. The other option would be to start rotating the sample and adding the liquid on 
the spinning film through a hole in the lid of the spin-coater.
Keeping the setting for the coater constant leaves only the variation of the polymer solutions 
concentration. For a start, concentrations of 1:200 and 1:300 were chosen, where 1:200 means 1g of
polymer on 200ml of solvent. This soon turned out to be too concentrated still, as it did not form a  
monolayer for these two polymers, even that it produced structure on the surface using BD19OH. 
The only way of investigating the structure was using SEM. As it turned out, the Quanta 200 FEG 
was not a good choice for trying to image thin films without deposition of Au, as this only would 
result in charging. The Zeiss Supra1 on the other hand, is known from my college S. Rasappa, that 
it can be used to investigate directly the spun coated films from PS-b-PDMS BCPs, provided it is 
not sputtered, but left as it is, as long as there is no PDMS surface layer on the top of the film. If a 
PDMS layer is on top, it will lead only to charging. In that case, one can look the cross-section of a 
freshly broken film on Si, tilted by 15° with respect to the incoming electron beam. The visible 
difference between these two instruments it the existence of an in the Lens Detector in the Supra 1, 
which lacks in the Quanta FEG and is usually used for imaging. If there is another reason for the 
Supra 1 to work without any sample pre-treatment, while the other instrument does not is in 
question.
36
==PAGE:45==
4.4.2.2  Investigation of thin films
As already mentioned, the thin films produced were investigated as they were using SEM, except 
one set of samples, which were treated like PS-b-PDMS films, using Reactive Ion Etching (RIE), 
allowing to use fluorine containing plasma to etch PDMS and oxygen plasma to etch carbon based 
polymer while creating Si-oxides from PDMS, courtesy to S. Rasappa. The method used was 
similar to the one applied here.37 
The samples were prepared as followed: The polymer was dissolved in the appropriate amount of 
solvent, and left to go properly in solution for a few hours, best over night. Failing to do so will give
increased resistance in the next step, which was to press the solution with a syringe through a 0,2µm
filter (Whatman, PTFE). The filtered solution was spin coated on a solvent cleaned piece of Si-
wafer as described. Using compressed air to blow eventual dust off the wafer surface right before 
adding the solvent will reduce the imperfections created that way. The surface was left as is, no 
neutral polymers, graphoepitaxy or other modifications were applied before coating. The only 
annealing planned to do, if possible, was solvent annealing.
The first attempt of coating was made from a 25%MeOH/THF solution, in this particular case 
adding around 80,µl of the solution (1:200) on the already spinning piece of wafer. The samples 
were tried to anneal with MeOH vapour for 0,5, 1 and 2h, even that it turned out to be not the best 
solvent: The surface quickly got colourful, and almost as quickly seemed to be generally wet. For 
this sample, a saturated atmosphere of methanol was too much.
These samples were tried to image using the Quanta FEG, uncoated, but the results were poor. 
Fig.24: BD19OH as spin casted (1:200; 25% MeOH/THF) left, right the same after 1h of exposure to MeOH vapour.
The only visible effect in this microscope is an increasing unevenness /de-wetting of the film
For the next samples, the content of methanol in the THF was reduced to 10%. Already when 
filtering the solution this made a difference, as the resistance was higher than compared to 25% of 
MeOH. Nevertheless,  a 1:100 solution was used to coat the next wafers. They were investigated 
37
==PAGE:46==
with SEM, this time the Zeiss Supra1, with S. Rasappa taking the images. The top view only 
showed uneven film thickness, while the cross-sectional samples did reveal structure after spin-
coating, which changed after being exposed to 1-Hexanol vapour for 30 minutes. Change does not 
mean better, though. The film thickness on the nice spots was measured around 27-30nm.
Sample as covered (1:100; 10% MeOH)
30 minutes of 1-Hexanol vapour
BDa5OH
BDa5OH
BD19OH
BD19OH
Fig.25: As coated and 30 minutes annealed in 1-Hexanol vapour. The coating is uneven (mark the top left image)
and the best structure would be the unanealed BD19OH one (bottom left).
38
==PAGE:47==
Sample as covered (1:100; 10% MeOH),
Plasma etched (RIE)
30 minutes of 1-Hexanol vapour
Plasma etched (RIE)
BDa5OH
BDa5OH
BD19OH
BD19OH
Fig.26: The same samples from before, after reactive ion 
etching (RIE). First, the surface layer of PDMS was 
removed by fluorine plasma, then the PBOH was removed
by oxygen plasma, while the PDMS was oxidized to 
Siliconoxide.  Etching and imaging courtesy to S. 
Rasappa.
Generally, the coverage was uneven, de-wetting 
increasing with annealing.
BD19OH
Thanks to my colleague S. Rasappa, these samples were etched using dry etch in the RIE, and 
imaged with the Supra1. BDa5OH shows no proper structure whatsoever, which might be an 
indication of 10%MeOH in THF being a bad solvent for coating for this polymer. This is supported 
39
==PAGE:48==
by uneven film thickness and de-wetting in these samples. Still, the BD19OH shows some kind of 
standing cylinders/particles originating from a very bad ordered hexagonal packing. After 30 
minutes exposure to 1-Hexanol, this structure begins to change, away from perpendicular cylinders. 
The picture in the bottom right shows the annealed BD19OH surface with large patches of de-
wetting, which only worsens under annealing.
The conclusion from these first tries is that this solvent mixture is not suited to be used in coating 
with these polymers, and 1-Hexanol is the wrong solvent for trying to anneal perpendicular 
cylinders created by BD19OH and promotes de-wetting. And that I had to be trained on the Supra 1 
SEM.
The solvent mixture for solvent casting was changed to 20% of MeOH in THF. The first effect was 
the easier filtration though a 0,2µm filter. It was diluted to 1:200 and 1:300, and spun on Si wafer.
As this was just an attempt to find the right conditions for spin coating, only BD19OH was used, as 
it showed the most promising structure so far. Optically, this film resulted in an even, blackish grey 
covering on the wafer, much better than before. Still, images revealed uneven film thickness, so the 
next solution contained 30% of MeOH. For spin-coating a 1:200 solution was applied for both 
polymers. Apart from some thicker stripes, optically it again looked like a nice film. The stripes 
might come from a too concentrated solution, though.
As a slow, common solvent is not the best annealing solvents, two quite extreme ones were tried:
Water and n-Heptane, each should interact mainly with one of the two blocks. The time was kept at 
30 minutes.
40
==PAGE:49==
BD19OH 1:300, water annealed
BD19OH 1:300, n-Heptane annealed
There is a step with thicker and thinner polymer!
The thinner part shows the nicer structure – but even the 
thicker has some patches with visible structuring.
Fig.27: Despite 30% of MeOH/THF and 1:300 dilution, the film thickness is uneven and too thick.
The result is, that both show structure, but it only shows in patches. The other parts might be 
covered by a PDMS layer. In general, the film is uneven and too thick. This made a test with 
different solutions necessary. In the SEM, the samples are very beam sensitive, so imaging has to be
done quickly, and there is some tendency to charging. 
41
==PAGE:50==
BD19OH, from 30%MeOH/THF, annealed with water for 30 min.
1:400
1:400, in some patches structure can be seen
1:500
1:500
1:700, the original film is relative even – beam damage
1:800, not annealed. the surface looks more uneven than 
1:700. Same problem with beam damage.
Fig.28: Different concentrations of BD19OH spin-coated on Si wafer, annealed with water vapour for 30 minutes,
         imaged in the Supra1 as is. The 1:700 image shows beam damage from focusing. Before this, the film is 
         smooth with no visible structure, most likely a PDMS layer. 1:800 has a more uneven film than 1:700
         Not shown 1:600 and 1:400 & 1:600 with theaddition of 5% SnCl2*2H2O to PBOH [w%]
42
==PAGE:51==
A series of of dilutions from BD19OH in 30%MeOH/THF was made and spin coated. The 
concentrations used were 1:400, 1:500, 1:600, 1:700, and 1:800 of which three are shown on top 
(Fig.28 ). There might have been some condensation of water on the polymers except for 1:700, as 
1:400 and 1:500 show some spotty structure. It might also be from the coating, though. The 1:700 
shows an even surface, which is extremely susceptible for beam damage, as clearly shown in the 
image. This might be the best guess for a proper, even thin film so far. As there is no visible 
structure, and the sample is beam sensitive, a PDMS top layer is likely. The only way to see 
structure would be RIE or the imaging of a cross section. Interestingly, the surface of the (not 
annealed) 1:800 sample is less flat than the 1:700 one. None of the solutions gave a perfect even 
film, but 1:700 came closest.
Also tried were 1:400 and 1:600 but adding 5% SnCl2*2H2O by weight to PBOH. There was no 
visible effect, except that it might have attracted even more water than without. (Not shown)
4.5 Conclusion
Where do I stand now? Using rheology and electron microscopy, the material before modification 
has no structure in the case of BD19 and might be right at the TODT for BDa5. As a comparison for 
the electron microscopy sample preparation, BD10 was used. Sulfurmonochloride did cross-link the
BD polymers well enough to keep the structure after etching with tBAF. 
The polymer was modified by using organoborane and oxidizing agents (TMANO and hydrogen 
peroxide) to introduce one OH group per diene unimer. FTIR showed the complete absence of 
Carbon-Carbon double bonds, and the introduction of OH groups. As the precipitation of the 
modified material was incomplete, the yield can not be used to check the degree of modification by 
weight measurement. For NMR a solvent for both blocks would have to be found – so this result is 
lacking. TGA has been applied to check the thermal stability, also with respect to eventual water 
abstraction, leading to cross-linking at elevated temperature. Rheology measurements indicate 
structure at elevated temperature, and show signs of cross-linking at higher temperature, fitting to 
corresponding TGA mass loss. DSC shows an endothermal event at around 60°C, stronger in 
heating cycle1 than in cycle3. Literature reports of PBOH being a slowly crystallizing polymer with
a melting point at 49°C at full conversion, not exactly fitting to my result temperature wise. No 
molecular weight was reported, and the same paper stated PIOH had a Tm at 58, while another 
paper investigating PS-b-PIOH reported melting point at around 105°C for the same polymer type, 
so my measured temperature might not be too surprising after all. (see chapter 4.3.4 for more). 
The TEM showed relative poorly ordered structure in both of the polymers in bulk, which might 
have to do with the lack of annealing high enough over the Tm, or the existence of the competition 
between organization of the polymer with the crystallisation and the phase segregation between the 
two polymer blocks. OH bonding in the PBOH part could make organization of the structure a slow 
process, even at elevated temperatures. Shearing, up to 110°C by “hand” between two glasses was 
not possible as the polymer was too stiff and slippery, so samples from the rheometer were 
investigated. Most of the samples came into contact with water during their preparation for 
microscopy, and this also might have left its traces in the morphology. With the result as it is, no 
realistic characteristic length scale can be determined. On could make an estimation, but only based 
on a not really nicely ordered material. Trying so anyway on the etched BD19OH film varied the 
43
==PAGE:52==
length scale between (sub) 10nm and 40nm (and more), mainly being between 20 and 30nm.
The Silicon oxide resulting from oxidized PDMS is also using some of its volume in the process.
Last baut not least, one of the images from BD19OH had two clearly different structures in one 
picture (Fig.18). 
For the thin film formation, the right solvent or solvent mixture has yet to be found, with 
30%MeOH in THF showing the best results for coating so far. For BD19OH, the existence of 
perpendicular aligned cylinders could be proven, but even film formation and good alignment has 
still to be induced. In the case of BDa5OH, the MeOH/THF solvent mix used for coating does not 
result in any good structure and film formation at all.
The absence of a SEC system, being able to run the hydroxylized BCPs, is really bad news, as for 
proper phase segregation a low molecular weight distribution is needed. The only indirect hint for 
BD19OH is the formation of a quite nice pattern in the thin film, which is lacking for BDa5OH.
The principle, that hydroxylation can induce phase segregation in these low molecular weight 
block-copolymers has been shown by creating patterns in thin film and phase segregation in bulk, 
even if the latter looks not too well ordered in TEM. 
SAXS (Small Angle X-ray Scattering) at different temperatures would be an interesting alternative 
method for structure determination. 
Further prospect
For larger scale application, the method of hydroboration of 1,2-PB in a PB containing BCP is very 
likely not applicable. A relative similar polymer, and industrially available, would be 
Polyvinylalcohol. This is usually derived from Polyvinylacetate via hydrolysis of the acetate group.
As it does not form a stabilized anion, this polymer is not obtained via anionic polymerization, but 
other ways can be used which might be more favourable for large scale BCP synthesis. If one wants
to have the option of forming Siliconoxicarbide during oxygenplasma treatment, PDMS would be 
the choice of the other block, unless a sidegroup modified polymer might be applicable for this 
purpose. The question is, if Polyvinylalcohol can be produced with acceptable PDI. Maybe a 
polymer without crystallinity and OH groups that can produce the same feature sizes might make 
things a bit easier, though, especially with respect to annealing.   
44
==PAGE:53==
5 Appendix
5.1 Used equipment
DSC:
Q200, TA Instruments
Heating ramp 10°C/min
FTIR:
Spectrum 100, Perkin Elmer; with attached ATR
Microtome:
Leica Ultracut UCT
used with Diamond knifes from Diatome, 35°
Institute of chemical engineering, DPC
NMR:
 
 
400 MHz NMR, Bruker; Institute for Chemistry
(not operated by me)
Rheometer:
Solids Analyzer RSA II; Rheometrics
Ramp: 2,5°C/min, 1 rad/s, strain 1%
SEC:
Columns: 
2* Mixed D PLGel
Detectors: 
Viscotek RALLS Detector 
and
Viscotek Differential Refractometer/Viscosimeter
Data connection:
Viscotek Data Manager DM400
Flow: 0,5ml/min
45
==PAGE:54==
SEM:
Quanta 200 ESEM FEG; FEI (“Quanta FEG”); DTU CEN
Zeiss Supra1;  DTU Danchip.
Spin-coater:
Spin 150; ?
TEM:
Tecnai T20 G2; FEI; located at DTU CEN
TGA:
Discovery TGA; TA Instruments; DTU KT/DPC
Heating ramp 20°C/min
Software:
WinDrawChem V.1.6.2 (reactions, except hydroxylation)
ACDlabs/Chemsketch V 12.01 (the hydroxylation)
5.2 Used chemicals
Abbr.
Name
supplier
order Nr.
CAS Nr.
9-BBN
9-Borabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane, 
(solution in THF 0,5 mol/l)
Sigmaaldrich
151076
280-64-8
(Hep)
Heptane
Sigmaaldrich
34873
142-82-5
1-Hexanol
Sigmaaldrich
H13303
111-27-3
H2O2
Hydrogen peroxide, 30% in
water
Sigmaaldrich
216763
7722-84-1
MeOH
Methanol
Sigmaaldrich
34860
67-56-1
SnCl2*2H2O
Tin(II) chloride dihydrate
Sigmaaldrich
31669
10025-69-1
S2Cl2
Sulfurmonochloride
Sigmaaldrich
157759
10025-67-9
THF
Tetrahydrofuran
Sigmaaldrich
34865
109-99-9
TMANO
Trimethylamine N-oxide 
dihydrate
Sigmaaldrich
92277
62637-93-8
46
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Additional Data
5.3.1 Rheology (heat and then cool)
Figure AP1: The Rheology of the modified polymers when first slowly ramped to high temperature, and then ramped 
down. The little rise in the end of the heating step of BDa5OH looks like there could be the start of some cross-linking. 
47
0.00E+00
5.00E+01
1.00E+02
1.50E+02
2.00E+02
2.50E+02
3.00E+02
1.00E+04
1.00E+05
1.00E+06
BD19OH1 rheology 2 heat and cool
 G'
 G"
 G' cool
 G" cool
T in C
[Pa]
0.00E+00
5.00E+01
1.00E+02
1.50E+02
2.00E+02
1.00E+03
1.00E+04
1.00E+05
1.00E+06
BDa5OH1 Rheology 2 heat & cool
 G'
 G"
 G' cool
 G" cool
T in C
[Pa]
==PAGE:56==
5.3.2 SEC in THF of BD19OH
Fig.A2: BD19OH in THF SEC with 1%Triethylamine. A relative normal RI peak – more accurate 
two peaks close to each other and one out of scale LS peak around exclusion Volume of the columns.
Clear sign of some aggregation. Filtered with a 0,2µm filter prior to injection. 
48
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
BD19OH SEC THF 1%TEA
RI(mV)
LS(mV)
V in ml
[mV]
==PAGE:57==
List of citations
1. Mark, J. E. Polymer Data Handbook. (Oxford University Press, Inc., 1999).
2. Leibler, L. Theory of Microphase Separation in Block Copolymers. Macromolecules 13, 1602–
1617 (1980).
3. Matsen, M. W. & Bates, F. S. Unifying Weak- and Strong-Segregation Block Copolymer 
Theories. Macromolecules 29, 1091–1098 (1996).
4. Sinturel, C., Bates, F. S. & Hillmyer, M. A. High χ–Low N Block Polymers: How Far Can We 
Go? ACS Macro Lett. 4, 1044–1050 (2015).
5. Chu, J. H., Rangarajan, P., Adams, J. L. & Register, R. A. Morphologies of strongly segregated 
polystyrene-poly(dimethylsiloxane) diblock copolymers. Polymer 36, 1569–1575 (1995).
6. Matsen, M. W. & Bates, F. S. Block copolymer microstructures in the intermediate-segregation 
regime. J. Chem. Phys. 106, 2436–2448 (1997).
7. Bates, F. S. & Fredrickson, G. H. Block Copolymer Thermodynamics: Theory and Experiment. 
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 41, 525–557 (1990).
8. Ren, Y., Lodge, T. P. & Hillmyer, M. A. Effect of Selective Perfluoroalkylation on the 
Segregation Strength of Polystyrene−1,2-Polybutadiene Block Copolymers. Macromolecules 35, 
3889–3894 (2002).
9. Rahman, S. S. A., Kawaguchi, D. & Matsushita, Y. Microphase-Separated Structures of Poly(4-
tert-butylstyrene-block-4-tert-butoxystyrene) upon Gradual Changes in Segregation Strength 
through Hydrolysis Reaction. Macromolecules 44, 2799–2807 (2011).
10.
Ren, Y., Lodge, T. P. & Hillmyer, M. A. Effect of Selective Perfluoroalkylation on the 
Segregation Strength of Polystyrene−1,2-Polybutadiene Block Copolymers. Macromolecules 35, 
3889–3894 (2002).
11.
Wan, L. et al. The Limits of Lamellae-Forming PS-b-PMMA Block Copolymers for 
Lithography. ACS Nano 9, 7506–7514 (2015).
12.
Choi, E. et al. Substrate-Independent Lamellar Orientation in High-Molecular-Weight 
Polystyrene-b-poly(methyl methacrylate) Films: Neutral Solvent Vapor and Thermal Annealing 
49
==PAGE:58==
Effect. Macromolecules 47, 3969–3977 (2014).
13.
Han, C. D. et al. Effect of Volume Fraction on the Order-Disorder Transition in Low 
Molecular Weight Polystyrene-block-Polyisoprene Copolymers. 1. Order-Disorder Transition 
Temperature Determined by Rheological Measurements. Macromolecules 28, 5043–5062 (1995).
14.
Li, L. et al. Gyroid Nanoporous Membranes with Tunable Permeability. ACS Nano 5, 7754–
7766 (2011).
15.
Park, C., Yoon, J. & Thomas, E. L. Enabling nanotechnology with self assembled block 
copolymer patterns. Polymer 44, 6725–6760 (2003).
16.
Acikgoz, C., Hempenius, M. A., Huskens, J. & Vancso, G. J. Polymers in conventional and 
alternative lithography for the fabrication of nanostructures. Eur. Polym. J. 47, 2033–2052 
(2011).
17.
Denes, F. S. & Manolache, S. Macromolecular plasma-chemistry: an emerging field of 
polymer science. Prog. Polym. Sci. 29, 815–885 (2004).
18.
Vesel, A. & Semenic, T. Etching Rates of Different Polymers in Oxygen Plasma. Mater. 
Tehnol. 46, 227–231 (2012).
19.
Li, T., Wang, Z., Schulte, L., Hansen, O. & Ndoni, S. Fast & scalable pattern transfer via 
block copolymer nanolithography. RSC Adv. 5, 102619–102624 (2015).
20.
Hartney, M. A., Chiang, J. N., Hess, D. W. & Soane, D. S. Oxide formation during plasma 
etching of silicon containing resists. 
‐
Appl. Phys. Lett. 54, 1510–1512 (1989).
21.
Gong, J. et al. Rapid structural reorganization in thin films of block copolymer self-
assembly. Soft Matter 8, 3570–3575 (2012).
22.
Griffiths, R. A. et al. Directed self-assembly of block copolymers for use in bit patterned 
media fabrication. J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 46, 503001 (2013).
23.
Mi, H. et al. Creating periodic local strain in monolayer graphene with nanopillars patterned
by self-assembled block copolymer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 143107 (2015).
24.
Li, T., Wang, Z., Schulte, L. & Ndoni, S. Substrate tolerant direct block copolymer 
nanolithography. Nanoscale 8, 136–140 (2015).
25.
Dvorak, M., Oswald, W. & Wu, Z. Bandgap Opening by Patterning Graphene. Sci. Rep. 3, 
(2013).
50
==PAGE:59==
26.
Cui, X. Y. et al. Magic numbers of nanoholes in graphene: Tunable magnetism and 
semiconductivity. Phys. Rev. B 84, 125410 (2011).
27.
Li, T., Wang, Z., Schulte, L., Hansen, O. & Ndoni, S. Fast & scalable pattern transfer via 
block copolymer nanolithography. RSC Adv. 5, 102619–102624 (2015).
28.
Suh, H. S., Kang, H., Nealey, P. F. & Char, K. Thickness Dependence of Neutral Parameter 
Windows for Perpendicularly Oriented Block Copolymer Thin Films. Macromolecules 43, 4744–
4751 (2010).
29.
Han, E., Stuen, K. O., La, Y.-H., Nealey, P. F. & Gopalan, P. Effect of Composition of 
Substrate-Modifying Random Copolymers on the Orientation of Symmetric and Asymmetric 
Diblock Copolymer Domains. Macromolecules 41, 9090–9097 (2008).
30.
Hamley, I. W. Ordering in thin films of block copolymers: Fundamentals to potential 
applications. Prog. Polym. Sci. 34, 1161–1210 (2009).
31.
Darling, S. B. Directing the self-assembly of block copolymers. Prog. Polym. Sci. 32, 1152–
1204 (2007).
32.
Walton, D. G., Kellogg, G. J., Mayes, A. M., Lambooy, P. & Russell, T. P. A Free Energy 
Model for Confined Diblock Copolymers. Macromolecules 27, 6225–6228 (1994).
33.
Hawker, C. J. & Russell, T. P. Block Copolymer Lithography: Merging ‘Bottom-Up’ with 
‘Top-Down’ Processes. MRS Bull. 30, 952–966 (2005).
34.
Kim, J. K., Yang, S. Y., Lee, Y. & Kim, Y. Functional nanomaterials based on block 
copolymer self-assembly. Prog. Polym. Sci. 35, 1325–1349 (2010).
35.
Mansky, P., Liu, Y., Huang, E., Russell, T. P. & Hawker, C. Controlling Polymer-Surface 
Interactions with Random Copolymer Brushes. Science 275, 1458–1460 (1997).
36.
Borah, D. et al. Plasma etch technologies for the development of ultra-small feature size 
transistor devices. J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 44, 174012 (2011).
37.
Rasappa, S. et al. Sub-15nm Silicon Lines Fabrication via PS-b-PDMS Block Copolymer 
Lithography. J. Nanomater. J. Nanomater. 2013, 2013, e831274 (2013).
38.
Paik, M. Y. et al. Reversible Morphology Control in Block Copolymer Films via Solvent 
Vapor Processing: An in Situ GISAXS Study. Macromolecules 43, 4253–4260 (2010).
39.
Chavis, M. A., Smilgies, D.-M., Wiesner, U. B. & Ober, C. K. Widely Tunable 
51
==PAGE:60==
Morphologies in Block Copolymer Thin Films Through Solvent Vapor Annealing Using 
Mixtures of Selective Solvents. Adv. Funct. Mater. 25, 3057–3065 (2015).
40.
Ouk Kim, S. et al. Epitaxial self-assembly of block copolymers on lithographically defined 
nanopatterned substrates. Nature 424, 411–414 (2003).
41.
Segalman, R. A., Hexemer, A. & Kramer, E. J. Effects of Lateral Confinement on Order in 
Spherical Domain Block Copolymer Thin Films. Macromolecules 36, 6831–6839 (2003).
42.
Cheng, J. y., Ross, C. a., Thomas, E. l., Smith, H. i. & Vancso, G. j. Templated Self-
Assembly of Block Copolymers: Effect of Substrate Topography. Adv. Mater. 15, 1599–1602 
(2003).
43.
Koneripalli, N. et al. Confinement-Induced Morphological Changes in Diblock Copolymer 
Films. Langmuir 12, 6681–6690 (1996).
44.
Perego, M., Andreozzi, A., Vellei, A., Lupi, F. F. & Seguini, G. Collective behavior of block 
copolymer thin films within periodic topographical structures. Nanotechnology 24, 245301 
(2013).
45.
Fleury, G. et al. Development and integration of systems with enhanced resolutions based on
Si-containing block copolymers for line space applications. in 9425, 94250Z–94250Z–9 (2015).
46.
Rasappa, S. et al. Fabrication of a sub-10 nm silicon nanowire based ethanol sensor using 
block copolymer lithography. Nanotechnology 24, 065503 (2013).
47.
Arias-Zapata, J. et al. High throughput sub-10 nm metallic particles organization on 
templates made by block copolymer self-assembly and nanoimprint. Microelectron. Eng. 141, 
155–159 (2015).
48.
Park, S.-M. et al. Sub-10 nm Nanofabrication via Nanoimprint Directed Self-Assembly of 
Block Copolymers. Acs Nano 5, 8523–8531 (2011).
49.
Wen, J., Arakawa, T. & Philo, J. S. Size-Exclusion Chromatography with On-Line Light-
Scattering, Absorbance, and Refractive Index Detectors for Studying Proteins and Their 
Interactions. Anal. Biochem. 240, 155–166 (1996).
50.
Lampman, G. M., Pavia, D. L., Kriz, G. S. & Vyvyan, J. R. Spectroscopy. (Brooks/Cole, 
CENGAGE Learning, 2010).
51.
Lee, K. M. & Han, C. D. Order−Disorder Transition Induced by the Hydroxylation of 
52
==PAGE:61==
Homogeneous Polystyrene-block-polyisoprene Copolymer. Macromolecules 35, 760–769 (2002).
52.
Shenoy, A. V. in Rheology of Filled Polymer Systems 54–111 (Springer Netherlands, 1999).
53.
Kurusu, Y., Masuyama, Y. & Miyamoto, M. Reactivity and Microstructure in the 
Epoxidation of Polybutadiene. Polym. J. 26, 1163–1169 (1994).
54.
Abdullin, M. I., Basyrov, A. A., Kukovinets, O. S., Glazyrin, A. B. & Khamidullina, G. I. 
Epoxidation of syndiotactic 1,2-polybutadiene with peracids. Polym. Sci. Ser. B 55, 349–354 
(2013).
55.
Grubbs, R. B., Broz, M. E., Dean, J. M. & Bates, F. S. Selectively Epoxidized 
Polyisoprene−Polybutadiene Block Copolymers. Macromolecules 33, 2308–2310 (2000).
56.
Serrano, E. et al. Synthesis and Characterization of Epoxidized Styrene-Butadiene Block 
Copolymers as Templates for Nanostructured Thermosets. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 205, 987–996
(2004).
57.
Chung, T. C., Raate, M., Berluche, E. & Schulz, D. N. Synthesis of functional hydrocarbon 
polymers with well-defined molecular structures. Macromolecules 21, 1903–1907 (1988).
58.
Li, L. et al. Fabrication of robust micro-patterned polymeric films via static breath-figure 
process and vulcanization. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 354, 758–764 (2011).
59.
Mao, G. et al. Molecular Design, Synthesis, and Characterization of Liquid Crystal−Coil 
Diblock Copolymers with Azobenzene Side Groups. Macromolecules 30, 2556–2567 (1997).
60.
Kempe, M. D., Kornfield, J. A., Ober, C. K. & Smith, S. D. Synthesis and Phase Behavior of
Side-Group Liquid Crystalline Polymers in Nematic Solvents. Macromolecules 37, 3569–3575 
(2004).
61.
Schulte, L. et al. Nanoporous materials from stable and metastable structures of 1,2-PB-b-
PDMS block copolymers. Polymer 52, 422–429 (2011).
62.
Fuse, C., Okabe, S., Sugihara, S., Aoshima, S. & Shibayama, M. Water-Induced Self-
Assembling of Solvent-Sensitive Block Copolymer. Macromolecules 37, 7791–7798 (2004).
53
