==PAGE:1==
Investigating the Electrochemical Reduction of
Carbon Dioxide using In Situ Mass Spectrometry
Masters Thesis in Chemical Engineering
Anvendelse af In Situ Massespektrometri til Undersøgelse af
Elektrokatalytisk Reduktion af Kuldioxid
Specialeraport i Kemiteknik
Søren Bertelsen Scott
Supervisors:
Prof. Ib Chorkendorﬀ
DTU Physics
Daniel Bøndergaard Trimarco
DTU Physics
February 14, 2016
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Theoretical modeling, method development, and preliminary results are presented for the ap-
plication of a new type of in-situ mass spectrometry, the “sniﬀer,” to carbon dioxide reduction
(CO2RR) and closely related carbon monoxide reduction (CORR) electrochemistry. As the goal
is to elucidate mechanistic aspects of the CO2RR, a holistic motivation for industrial CO2RR is
presented, followed by an in-depth literature review of present understanding and disagreements
with regard to the CO2RR mechanism. The time response and sensitivity of the sniﬀer are in-
vestigated theoretically and compared to the established technology, diﬀerential electrochemical
mass spectrometry (DEMS), using models of mass transport in the working volume and through
the membrane of the sniﬀer chip. It is found that, while for insoluble gases the sniﬀer is approxi-
mately 1000 times more sensitive than DEMS with similar time responses, for less volatile species
such as liquid CO2RR products the time responses in a stagnant electrolyte and the sensitivity
in a ﬂow setup are worse than in DEMS. Experimental considerations of sniﬀer chip stability,
electrolyte behavior, and ohmic drop in the small electrochemical working volume of the sniﬀer
setup are discussed with a combination of calculations and experiments. Finally, preliminary
results are presented for CORR on two electrocatalysts, oxide derived copper and nickel-doped
molybdenum disulﬁde. A transient methane signal is observed on the molybdenum disulﬁde
samples, but may be due to copper contamination. It nonetheless demonstrates the usefulness
of the sniﬀer for measuring time-dependent product distribution changes in electrochemistry.
i
==PAGE:3==
Foreword
The project
This thesis is in partial fulﬁllment of my Master’s degree in Chemical and Biochemical Engineer-
ing. As an honor’s student, I had the opportunity to join research at the Center for Individual
Nanoparticle Functionality (CINF), with professor Ib Chorkendorﬀas my supervisor, from day
one of my master’s degree. I am grateful to Ib for this opportunity, as well as all of the other
professors, staﬀ, post docs, and PhD students at CINF who welcomed me warmly into the group.
The project described in this report took place over approximately one semester, with the oﬃcial
dates being August 24, 2015 through February 14, 2016. The initial project formulation, titled
“Investigation of Carbon Dioxide Reduction Mechanisms on Nanostructured Electrocatalysts”,
was proposed by Daniel Trimarco, Anders Bodin, and Bela Sebok. During the project, however,
it became clear that the focus would be primarily on developing electrocatalysis research methods
on Daniel’s sniﬀer setup, and so the title was changed to “Investigating the Electrochemical
Reduction of Carbon Dioxide using In Situ Mass Spectrometry,” and Daniel was added as a
co-supervisor.
I wish to thank Kim Degn Jensen, Arnau Verdaguer Casadevall, and Erlend Bertheussen for help
and advice in the electrochemistry lab, Anders Bodin and Bela Sebok for samples, and professors
Ole Hansen, Sebastian Horch, and Ifan Stephens for conversation and insight. I especially wish
to thank my co-supervisor Daniel Trimarco, an excellent and passionate mentor and teacher,
who developed the sniﬀer chip and its setup, and with whom I have worked closely for this
entire project. Daniel and I worked together on most of the experimental work presented in this
report, in large part because the sniﬀer setup is easiest to operate with two people. I did all of
the data analysis, modeling, and, of course, writing, on my own.
I have participated in several research projects during my master’s degree as part of the honor’s
program. Research not directly related to the thesis project is described brieﬂy in Appendix E.
Writing style
As the end of this project began to near and writing could no longer be put oﬀ, I began to think
of how to organize the thesis, and brieﬂy considered three possibilities:
Traditional - i.e., with Introduction, Theory, Methods, Results, Discussion, and Conclusion.
This is probably what examiners are most used to reading and - I suppose - the way a very
ii
==PAGE:4==
well-planned, well-executed project without unexpected changes of direction should naturally
organize itself. Considering how much I have learned over the past ﬁve months, I am grateful
that this has not been such a project.
Chronological - i.e., Taking you, the reader, through the project in the same order that I expe-
rienced it. Since our methods developed so much during the course of the project, this type of
organization might make it clearest to what degree I “knew what I was doing” when a speciﬁc
measurement was made or model was developed. Otherwise, though, I think a thesis with this
kind of organization would be painful to read.
Narrative - i.e., written in such a way that one section ﬂows into the next in a logically satisfying
way. Ideas, models, and experiments are presented neither neatly separated, nor in the chaotic
order that I went through them, but in an order that “makes sense” and tells a story.
I settled on a narrative style, because I personally have a huge preference for research articles,
reviews, and textbooks that are written as a narrative. However, this is also the most challenging
organizational type, as what order “makes sense” is a bit subjective. I hope that I have pulled
it oﬀand that you ﬁnd the report an easy, even enjoyable, read. I have really enjoyed writing
it, even during the past few low-sleep days.
One disadvantage to a narrative style of writing is that it can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd a particular
bit of information.
In an attempt to minimize this diﬃculty, I have made extensive use of
cross-references, whenever possible to the lowest organizational level of the report (subsection).
I have also included several organizational aids: a list of tables and ﬁgures, a list of symbols and
abbreviations, and, obviously, a table of contents. To reconcile the report’s organization with
chronology, I have also included a timeline in Appendix A. To make the connection between
experimental methods and results clear, a brief clearly marked methods summary is included at
the start of each results section.
I also chose to use an informal writing style, using choosing to use the words “I” or “we” rather
than forcing the passive voice, and occasionally using contractions like “can’t”. I know that
there are many scientists and engineers who oppose this style, but my philosophy on it is that
the way we talk and the way we write should only be as diﬀerent as they need to be.
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
1.1
Three-electrode setup and potential scales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.2
Volcanoes plots for OER and CO2RR from literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
1.3
Proposed CO2RR mechanisms on copper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
1.4
Tafel plots and pH dependence for ethylene and methane, from literature
. . . .
32
1.5
Sniﬀer chip and sniﬀer setup valve diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.1
Schematic diagrams comparing DEMS and the sniﬀer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
2.2
Diagrams of the mass transport mechanism in DEMS and the sniﬀer . . . . . . .
48
2.3
Time response model for H2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
2.4
Comparison of analytical and numerical steady state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
2.5
Time response modeling of ethanol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
2.6
Signal shape and working distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
2.7
Theoretical collection eﬃciencies in a ﬂow system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
2.8
Comparison of the sensitivity of the sniﬀer and DEMS under various conditions .
64
3.1
Plot of QMS signals vs time over the course of an entire experiment
. . . . . . .
68
3.2
Contact angle change on sniﬀer chip due to 0.1M KOH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.3
Possible mechanism of FDTS etching and chip membrane breaching in base . . .
70
3.4
Equilibrium pH,CO2 partial pressure, and dissolved carbon concentration . . . .
74
3.5
Buﬀer capacity and conductivity of carbonate electrolytes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
3.6
Theoretical pH changes during electrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
3.7
Ohmic drop model and model experiment setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
3.8
Results of ohmic drop model experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
iv
==PAGE:6==
3.9
Ohmic drop and electrode arrangement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
3.10 Schematic of current distribution problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
3.11 Electrode arrangement and ohmic drop in the new cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
3.12 EC-MS data showing counter-ground loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.13 Experimental determination of response time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
3.14 Electrode arrangement and ohmic drop in the new cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
3.15 Anti-bubble measures: CE pipe and plasma treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
3.16 Potentiostat noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
3.17 Electrodepositing Cu on glassy carbon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
3.18 OD Cu on glassy carbon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
3.19 ED Cu photograph and capacitance measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
3.20 Reducing the Cu2O surface layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
3.21 Surface electrochemistry of copper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
3.22 Underpotential HER during surface reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
4.1
Hydrogen and ethylene detection on OD Cu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
4.2
Relative faradaic eﬃciencies at various potentials for H2 and C2H4 on OD Cu . . 108
4.3
CO-dependent hydrogen desorption during anodic scan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
4.4
Relative hydrogen and methane intensities for the ﬁrst Ni:MoS2 sample vs potential112
4.5
Relative hydrogen and methane intensities for the second Ni:MoS2 sample vs
potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
A.1 Project Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
1.1
Global Carbon Fluxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
The economics of possible CO2 reduction products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Electrochemical half-reactions and standard reduction potentials
. . . . . . . . .
14
2.1
Molecular properties and response times in DEMS and the sniﬀer . . . . . . . . .
53
2.2
Parameters used for DEMS and sniﬀer modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Symbols
Symbol
Signiﬁcance
SI units
introduced
α
System parameter relating evaporation rate to
diﬀusion rate
-
Section 2.3
a
carbonic acid concentration
mol/m3
Section 3.1
β
System parameter relating convection to diﬀu-
sion
-
Section 2.4
b
bicarbonate concentration
mol/m3
Section 3.1
C
Laplace transform of non-dimensionalized con-
centration
-
Appendix D
c
analyte concentration
mol/m3
Section 2.1
c
carbonate concentration
mol/m3
Section 3.1
c0
concentration scale
mol/m3
Section 2.3
d
dissolved carbon dioxide, i.e. CO2(aq) concen-
tration
mol/m3
Section 3.1
D
diﬀusion coeﬃcient
m2/s
Section 2.2
Dk
Knudsen diﬀusion coeﬃcient
m2/s
Section 2.2
dp
pore diameter
m
Section 2.2
dc
diameter of channel between WE and RE in elec-
trochemical cell
m
3.2
ϵ
aspect ratio of working volume
-
Section 2.4
E
electrode potential
V
Section 1.2
E◦
Standard reduction potential vs SHE
V
Section 2.1
E◦′
Standard reduction potential at a given pH, con-
stant on RHE scale for PCET reactions
V
Section 2.1
E
dissolved carbonic and CO2 concentration, i.e.
a + b + c + d
mol/m3
Section 3.1
F
Faraday’s constant
C/mol
Section 1.2
F
ﬂow rate
m3/s
Section 2.4
F
dissolved carbonic concentration, i.e. a + b + c
mol/m3
Section 3.1
G
free energy
J/mol
Appendix B.1
H
enthalpy
J/mol
Appendix B.1
h
mass transfer coeﬃcient
m/s
Section 2.2
* The quantities marked in asterisks could also be thought of as dimensionless, giving a rela-
tionship between activities rather than concentrations and/or pressures.
vii
==PAGE:9==
i
index representing e.g. molecular species.
-
1.2
I
current
A
Section 1.2
J
current density
A/m2
Section 1.2
Ji,0
exchange current density
A/m2
Section 1.2
j0
distributed ﬂux through sniﬀer membrane to
QMS
mol/(m2s)
Section 2.2
jA
ﬂux density of analyte through membrane
mol/(m2s)
Section 2.2
κ
conductivity
S/m
Section 3.1
Ka
acid dissociation constant
mol/m3*
Section 1.2
Keq
equilibrium constant for CO2 + H2O
−−→
H2CO3
-
Section 3.1
Kh
Henry’s constant
Pa/(mol/m3)*
Section 2.2
KH
dimensionless
Henry’s
constant,
equal
to
Kh/(RT)
-
Section 2.2
L
working distance
m
Section 2.3
Lp
pore length
m
Section 2.2
lc
length of channel from WE to RE in electro-
chemical cell
m
Section 3.2
µ
ion mobility
m2/(Vs)
Section 3.1
M
Molecular mass
kg/mol
Section 1.1
M
mass number, e.g. M18 means m/z=18 signal in
QMS
-
Section 1.3
m
mass
kg
Section 1.1
η
overpotential
V
Section 1.2
η◦′
Thermodynamic overpotential
V
Section 1.2
N
collection eﬃciency
-
Section 2.1
Nm
membrane collection eﬃciency
-
Section 2.1
Nv
vacuum system collection eﬃciency
-
Section 2.1
NA
Avogadro’s number
mol−1
Section 1.3
viii
==PAGE:10==
n
number of electrons transfered
-
Section 1.2
p
CO2 partial pressure
Pa
Section 3.1
pA
analyte partial pressue
Pa
Section 2.1
pW
water partial pressure
Pa
Section 2.1
pm
pressure behind sniﬀer chip membrane
Pa
Section 2.2
Q0
total ﬂux to QMS
mol/s
Section 2.1
Qel
ﬂux from electrode
mol/s
Section 2.1
QA
analyte ﬂux across membrane
mol/s
Section 2.1
QC
analyte ﬂux to QMS
mol/s
Section 2.1
QW
water ﬂux across membrane
mol/s
Chapter 2.1
R
gas constant
J/(mol*K)
Chapter 1.2
Rohm
ohmic drop resistance
Ω
Section 3.2
S
entropy
J/(mol*K)
Appendix B.1
s
potassium concentration
mol/m3
Section 3.1
s
Laplace transform variable
-
Appendix D
T
temperature
K
Section 1.2
t
time
s
Section 2.3
t0
time scale
s
Section 2.3
tR
response time
s
Section 2.3
v0
convective velocity
m/s
Section 2.4
w
width of collection volume parallel to ﬂow
m
Section 2.4
w2
width of collection volume perpendicular to ﬂow
m
Section 2.4
x
distance from membrane
m
Section 2.3
x
proton concentration
mol/m3
Section 1.2
y
distance from start of membrane parallel to ﬂow
m
Section 2.3
y
hydroxide concentration
mol/m2
Section 3.1
z
ionic charge
-
Section 3.1
ix
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
CA
Chronoamperometry (constant potential)
CCS
Carbon Capture and Storage
CE
Counter Electrode
CO2RR
Carbon Dioxide Reduction Reaction
CORR
Carbon Monoxide Reduction Reaction
CP
Chronopotenitiometry (constant current)
CV
Cyclic Voltammetry
DEMS
Diﬀerential Electrochemical Mass Spectrometry
EC-MS
electrochemical measurements coupled to mass spectrometry measurements
ED Cu
rough electro-deposited copper
FDTS
Perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane
FE
Faradaic Eﬃciency
GC
Glassy carbon
GC-TCD
gas chromatography with thermal conductivity detection
GC-FID
gas chromatography with ﬂame ionization detection
HER
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
HOR
Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction
HS
head-space (i.e. headspace sampler)
OCV
Open Circuit Voltage
OD Cu
Oxide-derived copper
ODE
Ordinary Diﬀerential Equation
OER
Oxygen Evolution Reaction
ORR
Oxygen Reduction Reaction
PEIS
Potentiostatic Electrical Impedence Spectroscopy
PCTFE
Polychlorotrifluoroethylene
QMS
Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
RE
Reference Electrode
RHE
Reversible Hydrogen Electrode
SHE
Standard Hydrogen Electrode
WE
Working Electrode
x
==PAGE:12==
Contents
1
Background and Introduction
1
1.1
Closing the anthropogenic carbon cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Carbon dioxide reduction electrocatalysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.3
In situ mass spectrometry and the sniﬀer chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
2
Model comparison of in situ mass spectrometries
43
2.1
Advantages and disadvantages of diﬀerential pumping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
2.2
Mass transfer coeﬃcients in DEMS and the sniﬀer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.3
Time constants and sensitivity in a stagnant system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2.4
Sensitivity in a ﬂow system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3
Experimental considerations and method development
67
3.1
Electrolyte considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.2
Ohmic drop and resistance in the three-electrode system . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
3.3
Working distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
3.4
Other experimental considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
3.5
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
4
Experimental Results and Discussion
106
4.1
Oxide-Derived copper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
4.2
Polycrystalline copper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
4.3
Nickel-doped Molybdenum Sulﬁde
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
5
Conclusion
114
xi
==PAGE:13==
Appendices
118
A Project time line
119
B Raw data and calculations
121
C Diﬀerential equation implementation in Matlab
130
D Analytical solution to stagnant diﬀusion problem
132
E Other research during Honors Program
136
Bibliography
139
xii
==PAGE:14==
1.
Background and Introduction
For much of my project I have been focused on what happens in a very small volume of electrolyte
with a porous membrane on one side and an electrode drawing current on the other side. The idea
is to study what happens on the surface of the electrode by measuring what comes out through
the membrane.
My project, more than anything else, has been bringing the understanding
and control of this system up to a point where we can begin to elucidate the mechanism of
complicated electrochemical reactions.
Before getting into the details of what happens in that small volume, though, I will zoom way
out.
For the electrochemical reaction we are most interested in studying is carbon dioxide
reduction, and the reason for that is a phenomenon now occurring on a planetary scale. As the
science of climate change is beyond the scope of this report, the motivation for electrochemical
reduction of carbon dioxide presented below will start with the already-existing oﬃcial global
policy to reduce and subsequently eliminate net emissions of carbon dioxide.
This will be followed by a review of what is already known about the mechanism of electrochem-
ical carbon dioxide reduction, with special focus on the thermodynamics and pH-dependence of
elementary steps. Other electrochemical reactions that may become important to the mitigation
of climate change - the electrolyzer and fuel cell reactions - will be discussed as well to illustrate
concepts important for carbon dioxide reduction.
Finally, I will zoom back in to that small volume, which is a feature of a powerful tool to better
understand carbon dioxide reduction and other chemical reactions. I will brieﬂy discuss the
history of this tool, in-situ mass spectrometry, before introducing our version of it, the sniﬀer
setup.
1.1
Closing the anthropogenic carbon cycle
The Paris Agreement, adopted unanimously on December 12th 2015 by the 21st conference of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, establishes a mechanism based
on voluntary national contributions to achieve global goals of climate change mitigation and
adaptation, most importantly to limit global warming to less 2.0◦C, and if possible less than
1.5◦C, above preindustrial temperatures. Article 4.1 of the Paris Agreement also includes the
goal of achieving “a balance between anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of
greenhouse gases in the second half of this century.”1 This means that the governments of nearly
1
==PAGE:15==
every country in the world are committed to balancing humanity’s contribution to the carbon
cycle. How this can be accomplished is, of course, not spelled out in the Paris Agreement, but is
left as a problem for the present and upcoming generations of scientists, engineers, policymakers,
businesspeople, and citizens to solve.
The anthropogenic contribution to Earth’s carbon cycle is at present dominated by the release
of carbon dioxide into the air by combustion of fossil fuels, cement production, and land use
change.2
In 2014, carbon was released to the atmosphere by combustion of fossil fuels and
cement production at a rate of 9.8±0.5 GtC/yr and by land use change, primarily deforestation,
at a rate of 1.1±0.5 GtC/yr, for a total of 10.9±1.0 GtC/yr.3
The unit 1 GtC/yr = 1012 kg carbon per year corresponds to 3.66·1012 kg CO2 per year, or,
for 7 billion people, approximately 1.4 kg CO2 per person per day.
Purely for the sake of
comparison, a person exhales on average about 1.0 kg CO2 per day, corresponding worldwide to
0.7 GtC/yr, or well under 10% of the carbon released to the atmosphere due to human activity.
Human respiration, of course, forms a closed cycle with the photosynthesis by which our food
is produced - the sustainability of agricultural practices being another issue - and will not be
considered part of the anthropogenic contribution to the carbon cycle. For further comparison,
the exchanges due to photosynthesis, respiration, and solvation in the “natural” and balanced
carbon cycle between the air and land and between the air and oceans, respectively, are 120
GtC/yr and 90 GtC/yr.4 Anthropogenic carbon emissions are a perturbation of this natural,
net neutral, carbon cycle. Table 1.1 summarizes the global anthropogenic carbon ﬂuxes.
Of the approximately 11 GtC released in 2014, 3.9 GtC/yr accumulated in the atmosphere, while
the rest was taken up by the ocean or by terrestrial ecosystems.3 An accumulation of 1 GtC in
the atmosphere leads to an increase of atmospheric CO2 content of 0.47 ppm, and in 2015 the
year-averaged atmospheric CO2 content reached 400 ppm, a drastic change from about 280 ppm
before the industrial revolution.5,6 The distinction between carbon emissions and the carbon
that accumulates in the atmosphere is relevant in the context of the wording in article 4.1 of the
Paris Agreement, as follows: To balance the anthropogenic contribution to the carbon cycle, we
need reductions of anthropogenic carbon sources together with new anthropogenic carbon sinks
that sum to the full ≈11 GtC/yr currently emitted, rather than just the ≈4 GtC/yr that stays
in the atmosphere.
Balancing the anthropogenic contribution to the carbon cycle will most likely be accomplished
by a combination of three strategies:
(1) Decarbonization, i.e. quitting the carbon cycle
(2) Carbon Capture and Storage, i.e. sinking the carbon cycle
2
==PAGE:16==
(3) Carbon Recycling, i.e. closing the carbon cycle
The opportunities and challenges of each strategy will be discussed below.
1.1.1
Decarbonization (quit it)
As the majority of human carbon dioxide emissions are due to energy generation, the main
focus of decarbonization eﬀorts is to improve energy eﬃciency and reduce the carbon intensity
of energy generation.2
Hydroelectric, nuclear, solar, and wind energy, among others, are used to generate electricity
without emitting carbon dioxide. The rapid and continuing drop in price of electricity generated
by silicon photovoltaics, which at about USD $0.06 per kWh is now competitive with electricity
generation from fossil fuels,12 is especially encouraging. However, there are severe diﬃculties
with fully replacing fossil fuels with carbon-free energy sources. All major carbon-free energy
sources can only produce heat, which has limited use, and electricity, which has to be used
immediately.
This is a serious problem since, apart from hydroelectricity, of which there is
limited capacity, and nuclear, which suﬀers safety concerns and unpopularity, these energy
sources are intermittent. Presently, in areas with signiﬁcant renewable energy penetration such
as Denmark, Germany, and California, supply and demand of electricity are matched primarily
by gas and coal plants designed to start up quickly and sell to so-called “balance markets.”13
Despite numerous recent and expected innovations in grid technology and economics which will
help accommodate larger penetration by intermittent energy sources, a grid based primarily on
intermittent renewable energy sources is not feasible without energy storage capacity. There are
a number of well-developed and developing energy storage technologies - such as pumped hydro,
compressed air, batteries, redox ﬂow batteries, and ﬂywheels - which ﬁnd niche use in today’s
electrical grids, but suﬀer severe limitations in terms of scalability, versatility, and/or maximum
storage time.14
By far the most desirable energy storage medium with regards to storage capacity and versa-
tility would be a chemical fuel. In a decarbonized economy, that fuel would almost deﬁnitely
be hydrogen (a carbon-based energy storage medium will be considered below, under carbon
recycling). Hydrogen can be produced electrochemically from water in an electrolyzer, with the
overall process given by Reaction 1.1, at times of excess electricity generation and consumed
electrochemically in a fuel cell by the reverse reaction, regenerating the electricity at times
of high demand. Alternatively, solar energy could be used directly to produce hydrogen in a
photoelectrochemical process.15,16
2 H2O −−→2 H2 + O2
(1.1)
3
==PAGE:17==
Carbon ﬂux, (+)source or (-)sink
Amount / [GtC/yr]
Year [citation]
Carbon cycle overview
Air-land natural exchange
±120
20074
Air-ocean natural exchange
±90
20074
Anthropogenic emissions (by carbon)
+11
20143
(all GHG’s by carbon content of CO2-equivalent)
+13
20102
Fate of anthropogenic emissions
Net ocean uptake
-4
20143
Net land uptake
-3
20143
Accumulated in atmosphere
4
20143,6
Anthropogenic emissions by sector (100%=13 GtC/yr)
Electricity generation
3.3 (25%)
20102
Agriculture and land-use change (deforestation)
3.2 (24%)
20102
Industry (direct)
2.8 (21%)
20102
Transportation
1.9 (14%)
20102
Buildings
0.9 (6%)
20102
Other
1.4 (10%)
20102
Carbon in industrial reactions, CO2 as ultimate biproduct
Steel, 2 Fe2O3 + 3 C −−→4 Fe + 3 CO2
0.27
20147
Plastics, (CH2)2n + 3nO2 −−→2nCO2 + 2nH2O
0.26
20138
Cement calcination, CaCO3 −−→CaO + CO2
0.18
20109
Fertilizer, 3 CH4 + 6 H2O + 4 N2 −−→8 NH3 + 3 CO2
0.067
201410
Aluminium, 2 Al2O3 + 3 C −−→4 Al + 3 CO2
0.018
201411
Total carbon as industrial reactant
0.79
Table 1.1: Global carbon ﬂuxes. Most have been converted from carbon dioxide ﬂuxes according
to molecular mass. The data from Reference 2 are given, not in terms of carbon or carbon dioxide
ﬂux, but by total green house gas emissions converted to the equivalent mass of CO2 emissions
based on the green house gas’s global warming potential. These data were converted to carbon
ﬂux as if they were CO2 emissions. The bottom section of the table shows the minimum non-
energy carbon usage, and thus ultimately carbon emissions, of the most important carbon-using
industrial processes, calculated based on global production and the stoichiometry of the simpliﬁed
reaction shown, as described in Appendix B.2. 4
==PAGE:18==
Germany and Japan have already begun making signiﬁcant investments in grid-level hydrogen
storage.13,14,17
Chemical storage of renewable energy also allows for its use as a renewable
transportation fuel. In 2010, 25% of global emissions were associated with electricity generation,
while another 14% came from transportation.2 Vehicles powered by electrical energy stored in
hydrogen, batteries, or a combination allow for the removal of transportation emissions through
the decarbonization of electricity generation.18
The main limitations to the viability of hydrogen energy storage on a world scale are related to
the catalysis of the four electrochemical half-reactions involved - two for electrolyzers and two for
fuel cells - which are discussed in Subsection 1.2.2. Round-trip eﬃciencies with current catalysts
are only 30-40% in commercial systems including an alkaline electrolyzer and PEM fuel cell.19
Additionally, the requirement of platinum to catalyze three of the four electrochemical half-
reactions means that one year’s global production of platinum can only provide about 0.5 TW
(terawatts) of peak capacity.20,21 This is a severe limitation in the context of an average world
energy consumption (in 2012) of 18 TW22 and a total world private vehicle ﬂeet peak power of
about 40 TW.20 Recent technical developments, as well as theoretical and experimental progress
in electrocatalysis gives reason to hope that round-trip eﬃciencies for hydrogen energy storage
will come up and required catalyst loadings will come down in the future, but energy storage
and fuel production remain a signiﬁcant hindrance to full decarbonization.
Perhaps the largest obstacle to full decarbonization, though, is that we do not only emit carbon
for energy .
We also generate CO2 as a chemical biproduct in a number of key industrial
processes. Fossil fuels are used as an electron source for the reduction of iron ore in the steel
industry; the reduction via steam reforming, the water-gas shift reaction, and the Haber-Bosch
process of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia for fertilizers; and the electrochemical reduction of
aluminium ore. In each case, the product is CO2. CO2 is also released from calcium carbonate
(limestone) in the production of cement, a signiﬁcant source of anthropogenic CO2 is unique
as the carbon is not oxidized but merely released from carbonate in the calcination reaction.
Additionally, CO2 is inevitably the ﬁnal product at the end of the life cycle of petrochemical
products, most importantly plastics. These ﬁve non-energy industrial CO2 sources are listed
in the bottom section of Table 1.1. The raw data and calculations used to obtain these values
is described in Appendix B.2. The assumptions involved mean that the total emissions due
to carbon as an industrial reactant reported in Table 1.1 is an underestimation. Thus, more
than 0.8 GtC/yr, or 7% of total emissions is due to industrial processes that would remain
even with the full decarbonization of energy. In some industries, such as ammonia, fossil fuel
reactants could be replaced with electrochemically generated hydrogen, but in other industries
the elimination of carbon would be nearly impossible.
Thus, while decarbonization will likely be the strategy that contributes most to the UN goal of
5
==PAGE:19==
achieving a balance between sources and sinks, full decarbonization would be extremely diﬃcult.
1.1.2
Carbon capture and storage (sink it)
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) describes a set of technologies by which carbon dioxide
produced by anthropogenic point sources is separated from other gases and pumped underground
where it is eﬀectively removed from the carbon cycle. CCS is often considered an essential part
of viable global strategies to mitigate climate change.23
There are at present 15 large-scale carbon capture and storage projects in operation worldwide
which together sink a total of 7.6 MtC/yr, or 28 megatons of CO2 per year, and announced
projects will increase this to about 22 projects removing 11 MtC/yr within the next eighteen
months.24 This will only be about 0.1% of global CO2 emissions, which, as stated previously
are currently around 11 GtC/yr. While there is immense capacity for growth in CCS, there are
also major limitations to its use in balancing anthropogenic emissions in the long term.
Carbon capture and storage is, of course, not strictly sustainable, as CO2 is accumulated in
underground reservoirs while non-renewable resources are consumed. There are also safety con-
cerns with respect to CO2 leakage. However, existing CCS projects show no sign of leakage, and
there are enough appropriate geological locations like deep saline formations to store hundreds
of years of human CO2 emissions at the current rate.25–27 There is also the problem that current
technologies can only be applied to point sources and only even then only capture 80-90% of
the CO2, making it impossible to fully balance anthropogenic sources and sinks of carbon by
combining CCS with fossil fuel use. However, a balance can be achieved if CCS is combined
with bioenergy.
Bio-Energy with Carbon Capture and Storage (BECCS), if implemented on a large scale, would
be a remarkable tool for stablizing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration, and even lowering
it to pre-industrial levels. In BECCS, carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere by natural
photosynthesis to produce biomass, which is then combusted in a power plant, and the resulting
carbon dioxide is captured and stored underground.
This has the net result of generating
electricity while moving carbon dioxide from the air to the ground. However, in addition to high
cost, BECCS is restricted by land use. In the best cases, high-yield biomass like short-rotation
forestry can yield about 10 tonnes of dry matter per year per hectare,28,29 of which about 50%
is carbon,30 corresponding to 500 tC/km2yr. To remove the entire 11 GtC/yr of human emissions,
this would require require 2.2·107 km2 or 15% of the world’s land area, about 1.5 times the total
area currently used for crop production≈1.5·107 km2,2 and twice the total area deforested since
the start of the 1800’s, ≈1.0·107 km2.31 No where near that amount of land can be diverted
6
==PAGE:20==
from agriculture while the human population requires an ever-increasing global food production.
BECCS, even if made economically viable by carbon taxes or other incentives, can thus feasibly
only balance a small portion of present carbon emissions; probably less, even, than the 0.8GtC/yr
due to direct industrial use of carbon that would remain, as described above, even if energy use
were fully decarbonized.
The most important limitation to the widespread implementation of CCS - biofuels aside -
is the cost. The cost of separating, transporting, and storing the carbon dioxide make CCS
economically prohibitive under current incentives except in very select cases. The cost of carbon
capture and storage has been predicted to range from about $110/tC, or about USD $30 per tonne
CO2, for industries like cement and hydrogen production with nearly pure CO2 streams25,32 to
$220/tC for CCS from power plant ﬂue gases.33 If passed on to energy consumers this corresponds
cost of electricity generated at a coal-ﬁred power plant being about 50% higher with CCS, and
CCS wold consume 25% of the primary energy.33
The high cost of carbon capture and storage is in part due to the lack of a valuable product when
carbon is simply pumped underground. Indeed, eight out of the ten CCS projects scheduled to
enter operation in 2016 and 2017 are in fact enhanced oil recovery (EOR) projects,34 in which
CO2 is pumped into a geological formation to facilitate the extraction of oil while trapping the
CO2. EOR thus, in eﬀect, provides value to the CO2, enabling the economic viability of its
capture. Enhanced oil recovery followed by combustion of the oil and capture of the resulting
CO2 to be used for EOR elsewhere is emphatically not a sustainable cycle.
There are the
obvious reasons that a non-renewable resource is still consumed and that carbon capture will
always be less than 100% eﬃcient. But CCS-EOR is also unsustainable because CO2 has a
lower volumetric carbon density, ≈300 kgC/m3 at 500 bar, than does the oil that it replaces,
≈750 kgC/m3 at 1 bar.35
A sustainable way to add value to carbon capture would be to recycle the carbon dioxide rather
than sequestering it. This is the philosophy behind the third strategy.
1.1.3
Carbon recycling (close it)
Several of the diﬃculties of decarbonization and CCS described above can be summarized as
follows: (1) The intermittancy of renewable energy sources and diversity of energy uses will
require versatile energy storage at immense scale, (2) carbon is consumed and CO2 is produced
not just for energy production but also in the chemical reactions of important industrial pro-
cesses, and (3) the economics of carbon capture and storage are severely handicapped by the
lack of a valuable product.
7
==PAGE:21==
These diﬃculties all point to a common “missing piece” of the anthropogenic carbon cycle: car-
bon recycling, based on conversion of CO2 to fuels and chemicals using renewable energy. A
liquid carbon-based fuel produced from CO2 during times of excess renewable electricity genera-
tion would be more versatile than any existing energy storage technology, energetic upconversion
of CO2 would enable carbon recycling in the industries that require carbon, and the economics
of carbon capture would be improved by producing a valuable product rather than one that
needs to be pumped underground.
CO2 is the most oxidized form of carbon, with oxidation state +4, and so conversion of CO2 into
any product other than carbonate minerals involves transfer of electrons to carbon, reducing
its oxidation state.
The family of reactions by which CO2 is converted to a more reduced
product is called, for electrochemical processes, “CO2 reduction” or, since the extra electrons are
accompanied by protons in the form of hydrogen, for thermal processes,“CO2 hydrogenation.”
In order for the production and, ultimately, combustion, of CO2 reduction/hydrogenation prod-
ucts to represent a closed cycle, the ultimate source of electrons for the reduction of CO2 must
be water (H2O), as H2O is formed when a hydrogenated carbon project is combusted. CO2
reduction/hydrogenation thus follows the general formula
xCO2 + yH2O −−→product + zO2 .
(1.2)
There are pathways in the existing chemical industry, all thermally activated, that could be
used for CO2 hydrogenation, using hydrogen (H2) as the reductant.36,37 CO2 can be reduced
to carbon monoxide (CO) by the reverse water gas shift reaction, Reaction 1.3 below. If the
water is removed and excess hydrogen is used, the product gas is a mixture of H2 and CO
called syngas. Syngas can be used as the precursor to methanol by Reaction 1.4, “methanol
syhthesis,” on a Cu/ZnO catalyst; to methane by Reaction 1.5, “methanation,” on a Ni catalyst;
or to multi-carbon hydrocarbons by Reaction 1.6, the “Fischer-Tropsch” reaction, on an Fe or
Co catalyst.
CO2 + H2 −−→CO + H2O
(1.3)
CO + 2 H2 −−→CH3OH
(1.4)
CO + 3 H2 −−→CH4 + H2O
(1.5)
nCO + (2n + 1)H2 −−→CnH2n + 2 + nH2O
(1.6)
In order for CO2 hydrogenation by the above reactions to be a renewable process, the hydrogen
must come from water-splitting using renewable energy (Reaction 1.1), giving an overall reaction
corresponding to Reaction 1.2.
Compared to thermal processe, direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 has a number of ad-
vantages. It would would combine the electrochemical water-splitting and subsequent thermal
8
==PAGE:22==
hydrogenation into a single electrochemical process. Electrochemical CO2 reduction could also
possibly run at or near room temperature and ambient pressure, in contrast to the industrial
hydrogenation reactions listed above, which are carried out at high temperatures and pressures.
A CO2 electroreduction plant, unlike a CO2 hydrogenation plant based on thermal processes,
could start and stop quickly and adjust production to match overproduction of electricity from
renewable sources or to maximize proﬁtability according to the instantaneous price of electric-
ity. Fuel production by electrochemical CO2 reduction could also be decentralized, unlike the
thermal counterpart, which is constrained by the pressure and temperature requirements to
large-scale plants.
Direct electrochemical reduction of CO2 also has important advantages over hydrogen energy
storage.
The volumetric energy density and ease of transport of carbon-based fuels is one.
Another is due to the platinum catalysts needed for interconversion of electrical energy and
hydrogen energy, which are, as mentioned in Subsection 1.1.1, a likely limitation to its scala-
bility. Of the four electrochemical half-reactions required in a hydrogen energy storage system,
an energy storage system based on CO2 electroreduction only necessarily requires the oxygen
evolution reaction (OER, described in Subsection 1.2.2), and thus does not necessarily need any
platinum.
Carbon recycling could have the potential to make carbon capture from industrial sources eco-
nomically viable.
Table 1.2 shows a list of possible CO2 reduction/hydrogenation products,
together with the price (second column) and volume of current global consumption (third col-
umn), both stated in terms of carbon content. The raw data and calculations used to obtain
the values in these two columns are described in Appendix B.2.
If the capture of CO2 from ﬂue gas costs $200 per tonne carbon, and the cost of conversion is not
considered, technology converting CO2 into any of the products listed except for methane, i.e.
synthetic natural gas, would make carbon capture economically proﬁtable under current prices.
To estimate the minimum cost of conversion of CO2 to each of the products using renewable
energy, the price of the minimum required energy has been calculated assuming renewable
electricity at $0.05/kWh. The minimum energy required (third column) was taken to be the
standard free energy change per carbon atom, i.e. 1/x times that per product, of the applicable
version of Reaction 1.2, which was calculated using the standard free energies of formation in
reference 35. The price of this energy (fourth column) was calculated by dividing by carbon’s
molecular mass, multiplying by $0.05/kWh, and performing the necessary unit conversions to
get the units USD per tonne carbon.
Of the compounds included in Table 1.2, methane and methanol are not worth the cost of
carbon capture plus the minimum energy cost at $0.05/kWh, and ethanol is only barely worth
9
==PAGE:23==
compound, fourmula
global consumption /
price /
∆G◦
CO2/
energy price /
[MtC/yr]
[USD$/tC]
[kJ/molC]
[USD$/tC]
formic acid, CHOOH
0.19
3800
285
330
methanol, CH3OH
24
750
703
820
methane, CH4
1,700*
160*
818
950
acetaldehyde, CH3CHO
0.69
1840
567
656
ethanol, CH3CH2OH
38
1030
663
766
ethylene, C2H4
120
1400
666
770
Table 1.2: Simple carbon reduction/hydrogenation products. Columns 1 and 2 show the size
of the global markets for each carbon product in megatons carbon per year and its price in
US dollars per ton carbon, for sources see Appendix B.2. *These values are for natural gas.
The third column is the thermodynamic free energy cost (on a carbon basis) of producing each
product from CO2 and H2O, with O2 as the only biproduct, i.e. Reaction 1.2. These values (in
kilojoule per mol carbon) are calculated from the free energies of formation of the pure reactants
and products in their standard states at 25◦C, see Appendix B.1. The energy price is the cost
of that free energy per tonne of carbon assuming the energy comes from electricity priced at
$0.05/kWh, which is an optimistic average price for utility-scale solar PV electricity.12
the cost. Ethylene, acetaldehyde, and especially formic acid, however, yield a proﬁt under these
assumptions. It is notable that of the products considered, it is those most often thought of as
energy carriers that are the least proﬁtable.
Ethylene, acetaldehyde, and formic acid are primarily used as industrial chemical precursors,
and are themselves non-trivial to produce from fossil fuel feedstocks. Ethylene, for example,
a key molecule in the chemical industries with a global production of 120 MtC/yr, is used to
produce polymers and ethylene glycol and is itself produced from light hydrocarbons in a highly
energy demanding and unselective process involving repeated cycles of steam cracking at 750-
950◦C followed by quenching, distillation, and recompression.38 Formic acid, the most proﬁtable
compound in Table 1.2, but with a relatively small global volume of about 190 ktC/yr, is used
in various industries including food production, textiles, and pharmaceuticals; and is produced
mostly by carboxylation of methanol to methyl formate and subsequent hydrolysis.37
If, indeed, catalytic CO2 reduction can enable greater selectivity than traditional industrial
processes, the dramatic diﬀerence in proﬁtability between diﬀerent CO2 reduction products will
clearly provide an advantage, at least in the early CO2 recycling market, to electroreduction
over thermal hydrogenation. If CO2 recycling is to play a major role in a future sustainable
10
==PAGE:24==
energy cycles, however, CO2 reduction to energy carriers will also have to become economically
feasible. As ethanol is the only traditional energy carrier included that is worth even the price
of its minimum energy requirement at $0.05/kWh, and further costs in terms of capital and the
inevitable excess energy requirement needed to drive the reaction will make CO2 recycling much
more expensive, this may seem like a far oﬀprospect.
However, the situation will likely change for the better. As carbon permits or taxation increase
the cost of venting CO2, this will provide additional incentive to sequester or use the carbon
dioxide. And if renewable electricity generation technologies continue their current trajectory of
falling costs and increasing market penetration, electricity may become eﬀectively free whenever
the sun is shining and the wind is blowing.
With this section, I hope to have given an overview of human carbon usage and how it is likely to
change, for change it must! In particular, I hope to have convinced you that CO2 recycling and,
especially, CO2 electroreduction can and should play an important role in the future’s closed
anthropogenic carbon cycle. The next section will discuss the thermodynamics, catalysis, and
present mechanistic understanding of CO2 electroreduction.
1.2
Carbon dioxide reduction electrocatalysis
An ideal renewable fuels plant based on the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide would
take carbon dioxide and water in, perhaps add some recycled base or acid, ﬂow the water
and bubble the carbon dioxide through small volumes between two electrodes with rates and
distributions such that pure ethylene bubbles up or pure formic acid or ethanol ﬂows out. In this
ideal factory, the catalysts would be cheap and the only energy cost would be that of electrical
power equal to the minimum energy given in Table 1.2 times the molar rate of CO2 reduction.
A second-generation plant might be able to change between ethylene and ethanol production
with the ﬂip of a switch.
In the case of ethylene production, a membrane between the electrodes would keep it separated
from the oxygen generated in the other half of the reaction. This kind of built-in separation
is a unique aspect of electrochemical reactions: they are made up of two half-reactions, one
consuming and one releasing electrons, called the cathodic and anodic reactions, respectively.
The two half-reactions can each be studied seperately, and the surface promoting a half-reaction,
called an electrocatalyst, can be developed seperately from the electrocatalyst for the other half-
reaction with which it will eventually be coupled. As the economic viability, and thus the energy
eﬃciency of a carbon dioxide electroreduction process will depend on how much excess energy
is going to each electrode, which in turn depends on the activity of the electrocatalyst, this
11
==PAGE:25==
necessitates conceptual and practical tools for measuring the amount of energy wasted in one
half-reaction at a time. The conceptual tools are thermodynamic potentials and potential scales,
discussed below. The practical tools are reference electrodes (RE), counter electrodes (CE), and
potentiostats, described brieﬂy here.
Together with the working electrode (WE), the CE and RE make up the three-electrode setup.
In this setup, illustrated in ﬁgure 1.1a, the potentiostat can control the potential of WE with
respect to RE, as measured by the voltmeter on the diagram, by applying a voltage between
WE and CE. It is the resulting current between CE and WE through the solution that all three
electrodes are immersed in, called the electrolyte, and the required absolute potential to move
this current across the surface of the WE, that brings WE to the right potential vs RE. No current
is passed through RE, which is designed to have a very stable absolute electrical potential, as will
be described below. The electronics inside the potentiostat manage all this, giving (usually) a
smoothly-controlled potential diﬀerence between WE and RE. The current between WE and CE,
which is negative when electrons are going to the WE from the potentiostat (cathodic current)
and positive when electrons are going from the WE to the potentiostat (anodic current), is
recorded together with the potential between WE and RE. The potentiostat of course doesn’t
know anything about what the current is going to, and so some kind of chemical analysis is
needed to say whether it is carbon dioxide reduction and if so what product is being formed
(Section 1.3), but the potential of the WE is all that is needed to know how much energy the
electrode is wasting per electron for a particular reaction, if that reaction is taking place.
It turns out that the carbon dioxide reduction reaction, especially to more reduced products like
ethylene, ethanol, and methane, is very energy ineﬃcient on known electrocatalysts. Catalysts
for the carbon dioxide reaction will be discussed shortly, but only after a discussion of the
conceptual tools needed to understand its energetics, namely thermodynamic potentials and
potential scales.
1.2.1
Standard reduction potentials on the SHE and RHE scales
This subsection will discuss the energetics and potential scales relevant for the carbon dioxide
reduction reaction in what may seem like excessive detail, since the concepts are non-trivial,
important, and, I think, sometimes confused in the literature.
Reaction 1.7 is a general carbon dioxide electroreduction half-reaction (CO2RR). In a sustainable
energy infrastructure, this reaction would occur together with the oxidation of water to molecular
oxygen, called the oxygen evolution reaction or OER and shown in Reaction 1.8. This leads to
12
==PAGE:26==
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.1: (a) Schematic diagram of a 3-electrode setup, showing a simpliﬁed operating prin-
ciple. A potential diﬀerence is measured between the working electrode (WE) and reference
electrode (RE), and current is measured between WE and the counter electrode (CE). The po-
tentiostat can control the potential of WE with respect RE by forcing current between WE
and CE while ensuring that no current is passed through RE. (b) Equilibrium potentials on an
absolute scale for the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), silver/silver chloride reference elec-
trode (Ag/AgCl), and the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) at three pH’s. The RHE is the
thermodynamically relevant scale for the CO2 reduction reaction, with e.g. E◦′ for reduction to
ethylene 0.08V on the RHE scale.
an overall reaction in the form of Reaction 1.9.
xCO2 + nH+ + ne−−−→product + y1H2O
(1.7)
2 H2O −−→O2 + 4 H+ + 4 e−
(1.8)
xCO2 + y2H2O −−→product + zO2
(1.9)
A number of relevant CO2RRs to speciﬁc products are listed in Table 1.3 together with their
standard reduction potentials, the deﬁnition and application of which will be explained over the
next several paragraphs.
In this report, the phrases standard reduction potential, standard potential, and thermodynamic
potential will be used interchangeably, and symbolized by E◦. The thermodynamic potential is
related to, but not the same as, the equilibrium potential, which is the electrical potential at
which a half-reaction with perfect electrocatalysis will proceed forwards and backwards at equal
rates. Speciﬁcally, the thermodynamic potential is deﬁned as the equilibrium potential for a
speciﬁc set of conditions, namely standard conditions, in which each reactant and product is
at unit activity.39 Unit activity is deﬁned for an aqueous species (solute), in a rather abstract
way, as a concentration 1 mol per liter (1 M) but without any solute-solute interactions, i.e.
inﬁnite dilution extrapolated to 1 M. For gases, unit activity is similarly deﬁned as inﬁnitely
small pressure extrapolated to 1 bar. To a good approximation, the activity of a solute when it
is not very concentrated is its concentration divided by 1 M; and to a very good approximation,
13
==PAGE:27==
Half-reaction
E◦/ V
Name, Abbreviation
2 H+ + 2 e– −−→H2
0
Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, HER
H2 −−→2 H+ + 2 e–
-
Hydrogen Oxidation Reaction, HOR
O2 + 4 H+ + 4 e– −−→2 H2O
1.23
Oxygen Reduction Reaction, ORR
2 H2O −−→O2 + 4 H+ + 4 e–
-
Oxygen Evolution Reaction, OER
xCO2 + nH+ + ne– −−→Product + yH2O
-
CO2 Reduction Reaction, CO2RR
CO2 + 2 H+ + 2 e– −−→HCOOH(aq)
-0.20
formic acid
CO2 + 2 H+ + 2 e– −−→CO(g) + H2O
-0.10
carbon monoxide
CO2 + 6 H+ + 6 e– −−→CH3OH(aq) + H2O
0.03
methanol
CO2 + 8 H+ + 8 e– −−→CH4(g) + 2 H2O
0.17
methane
2 CO2 + 2 H+ + 2 e– −−→(COOH)2(aq)
-0.48
oxalic acid
2 CO2 + 8 H+ + 8 e– −−→CH3COOH(aq) + 2 H2O
0.11
acetic acid
2 CO2 + 10 H+ + 10 e– −−→CH3CHO(aq) + 3 H2O
0.06
acetaldehyde
2 CO2 + 12 H+ + 12 e– −−→CH3CH2OH(aq) + 3 H2O
0.09
ethanol
2 CO2 + 12 H+ + 12 e– −−→C2H4(g) + 4 H2O
0.08
ethylene
3 CO2 + 18 H+ + 18 e– −−→C3H8O(aq) + 5 H2O
0.10
propanol
xCO + nH+ + ne– −−→Product + yH2O
-
CO Reduction Reaction, CORR
CO + 6 H+ + 6 e– −−→CH4(g) + H2O
0.26
methane
2 CO + 8 H+ + 8 e– −−→C2H4(g) + 2 H2O
0.12
ethylene
Table 1.3: Electrochemical half-reactions. Standard reduction potentials were calculated from
thermodynamic data in References35,39,40 as described in the text. States: H2, O2, CO2, and
CO are gases; H2O is a liquid; H+ is an aqueous ion; and all others are speciﬁed
14
==PAGE:28==
the activity of a gas is its partial pressure divided by one bar. The activity of pure solids and
liquids is deﬁned to be 1.
In general, the equilibrium potential is related to the thermodynamic potential by the Nernst
equation,41
E = E◦−RT
nF ln
 Y
i
(aνi
i )
!
,
(1.10)
where R is the gas constant, T is the thermodynamic temperature, F is Faraday’s constant, n is
the number of electrons transfered, i represents each chemical species (except electrons), ai is its
activity, and νi is its stoichiometric coeﬃcient (positive for products and negative for reactants)
when the half-reaction is written as a reduction reaction.
For reversible half-reactions, ie. reactions for which the electrocatalysis on an electrode actually
is approximately perfect and there is a potential range at which the reaction runs at appreciable
rates in both directions, the absolute potential of that electrode is well-deﬁned. Thus, reversible
reactions can be used to deﬁne potential scales. Reference electrodes are simply devices that
contain an electrode in electrical contact with the reactant, product, and, if necessary, cata-
lyst for a reversible electrochemical reaction; and a glass frit or membrane enabling electrical
contact with the outside electrolyte. Practical reference electrodes, like the silver-silver chloride
(Ag/AgCl) RE, are designed to have pure condensed-phase or saturated reactants and products,
so that the activities remain constant even if a little bit of current ends up being drawn, giving
a stable equilibrium potential. A reference electrode can be used to deﬁne a potential scale, as
the potential of any other electrode placed in the same electrolyte can be measured against that
of an RE simply by a voltmeter.
The standard potential scale is that of the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE), in which there is
unit activity H2 and H+ in equilibrium via the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and hydrogen
evolution reaction (HER), included in Table 1.3. The standard reduction potential for HER is
thus by deﬁnition zero. The equilibrium potential for AgCl + e– −−→Ag + Cl– in an Ag/AgCl
reference electrode is 0.196V, as can be measured by a voltmeter between an Ag/AgCl RE and
an SHE.41
The standard reduction potential for reversible reactions can be measured directly, using a ref-
erence electrode and the Nernst equation. For irreversible reactions, which do not run in both
directions at appreciable rates at any potential, the thermodynamic potential has to be calcu-
lated from thermodynamic properties of the reactants and products. All of the half-reactions
listed in Table 1.3 requiring more than two electron transfers are irreversible with all known
catalysts, and their standard potentials were calculated for each half-reaction as follows:
Consider a hypothetical electrochemical cell in which CO2RR takes place at the cathode, and
15
==PAGE:29==
the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) takes place at the anode, with all reactants and products
on both side at unit activity, and perfect electrocatlysts. Such a cell has the overall reaction
xCO2 + n
2 H
2 −−→product + yH2O .
(1.11)
This is the hydrogenation reaction, and so such an electrochemical cell would do the equivalent
of reducing CO2 by reaction with hydrogen in the gas phase, as described in the previous section.
The potential diﬀerence at standard conditions across this electrochemical cell when no current
is drawn, called the cell potential or open circuit voltage (OCV), is E◦
cat −E◦
an. This is related
to the standard free energy change, ∆G◦, of the overall reaction by41
E◦
cat −E◦
an = −∆G◦
nF .
(1.12)
The anode of this CO2RR-HOR cell matches the deﬁnition of the SHE, and so E◦
an above is
by deﬁnition zero on an SHE scale.
Thus, Equation 1.12 can be used directly to calculate
the standard reduction potentials of each speciﬁc CO2RR. To calculate the standard reduction
potentials in Table 1.3, the standard molar free energy change for Reaction 1.11 was calculated
from tabulated standard free energies of formation,35,39 and the result was divided by (−nF).
The standard reduction potential depends on the standard state used.
For example, if the
reactant is taken to be dissolved CO2 instead of gaseous CO2, the standard reduction potential
shifts positive by 85 mVx/n, where x is the number of reactant CO2 molecules and n is the
number of electrons transfered. In Table 1.3, CO2 is considered a gas, H2O a liquid, H+ an
aqueous ion, and the state of the product is speciﬁed (for more detail, see Appendix B.1). While
the table presented here is generally in very good agreement with similar tables presented in the
literature, slight diﬀerences among them may result from the choices of standard state.42–45
It is notable that the standard potentials for CO2 reduction to any of the wide variety of products
considered, with the exception of oxalic acid, are all rather close to zero. This of course does not
mean that CO2 reduction is energetically cheap. Since the potentials are given on an SHE scale,
they represent the cell potential of a cell carrying out the hydrogenation reaction, Reaction 1.11.
The potentials in Table 1.3 thus represent a situation in which all of the thermodynamic “hard
work” is already done by production of the hydrogen. In a sustainable carbon energy cycle,
the overall reaction for CO2 conversion has to be Reaction 1.9, in which water is the electron
source. The minimum cell potential needed to reduce CO2 while oxidizing water is calculated
by subtracting the CO2RR potential from the OER potential of 1.23 V. This, of course, only
gives the thermodynamic potential, and not the actual potential needed to drive the two highly
irreversible half-reactions.
Another notable characteristic of Table 1.3 is that the number of electrons and protons trans-
fered is identical in each reaction, and an even number. This underpins the analogy between
16
==PAGE:30==
CO2 reduction and CO2 hydrogenation, as the addition of a two protons and two electrons is
equivalent to the addition of a hydrogen molecule. It also means that all of the standard po-
tentials are invariant with respect to pH on the Reversible Hydrogen Electrode (RHE) scale, an
important concept for CO2RR electrocatalysis explained in the following paragraphs.
Whereas on the SHE scale, potentials are referenced to that of an electrode (the SHE) under unit
activity H2, i.e. 1 bar, and unit activity H+, i.e. pH=0 since by deﬁnition pH = −log(a(H+));
on the RHE scale, potentials are referenced to that of an electrode (the RHE) under unit activity
H2, but under the same pH as the actual electrode being measured.41 Thus, while the reversible
potential of hydrogen evolution under 1 bar H2 is dependent on pH on the SHE scale, it is
deﬁned to always be zero on the RHE scale. The potential of a reversible hydrogen electrode on
the SHE scale, ESHE(RHE), varies with pH according to the Nernst equation (Equation 1.10).
ESHE(RHE) = 0 −RT
2F ln
 a(H2)
a2(H+)

= RT
F ln
 a(H+)

= −RT ln(10)
F
pH = −59[mV] · pH ,
(1.13)
where I have held a(H2)=1 and used the deﬁnition pH=−log10 (a(H+)). At room temperature,
RT ln(10)
F
= 59mV is the Nernst constant or Nernst slope. This equation shows that, at pH > 0,
the RHE lies at a negative potential on the SHE scale. At pH=7, ESHE(RHE)=−0.414V, and
at pH=14, ESHE(RHE) = −0.828V. At pH > 0, potentials are thus numerically more positive
when stated on the RHE scale than on the SHE scale. For instance, at pH=14 and 1 bar H2, the
equilibrium potential of hydrogen evolution is -0.828V on the SHE scale, but 0V on the RHE
scale. The equation to convert from potential on the SHE scale to potential on the RHE scale is
ERHE = ESHE + RT ln(10)
F
pH = ESHE + 59[mV] · pH .
(1.14)
The SHE and RHE scales are equivalent at pH=0.
If the pH on both sides of the CO2RR-HOR cell described above is increased from zero (where
a(H+) = 1) to some other value, the potential of the anode (the hydrogen electrode) will decrease
to -59mV·pH on the SHE scale, and remain equal to zero on the RHE scale. However, the overall
reaction, Reaction 1.11, does not involve the consumption or production of protons, so ∆G
remains constant independent of pH, and, by Equation 1.12, so does the diﬀerence in potential
between the cathode and the anode. Thus, the cathode reaction, here CO2RR, decreases by
-59mV·pH on the SHE scale, and so remains constant on the RHE scale. This is a common
feature of all electrochemical half-reactions in which the stoichiometric coeﬃcients for electrons
and protons are the same: the ‘thermodynamic potential’ on an RHE scale is independent of
pH.
The deﬁnition of ‘thermodynamic potential’ of course has to be modiﬁed slightly to make sense
on an RHE scale, as the activity of H+ can be diﬀerent from unity. The symbol E◦′ will therefore
17
==PAGE:31==
be used to indicate this modiﬁed thermodynamic potential, which is the equilibrium potential
of a half-reaction relative the RHE with all species other than H+ at unit activity. For reactions
with equal stoichiometric coeﬃcients for electrons and protons,
E◦′
RHE = E◦
SHE .
(1.15)
It is with this in mind that all of the reactions in Table 1.3 are written with the fully protonated
product. The standard reduction potentials given are equal to both E◦
SHE and E◦′
RHE.
If formate (HCOO–) was taken to be a CO2RR product instead of formic acid (HCOOH), for
example, two electrons but only one proton would be transferred. This, while accurately describ-
ing the reaction that takes place in neutral or basic solution, would break the pH independence
of E◦′
RHE. Thermodynamically, CO2 reduction to formate is best understood as CO2 reduction
to formic acid (which is pH-independent on the RHE scale) followed by deprotonation of formic
acid. The inﬂuence of the deprotonation of a neutral acid HA on the overall thermodynamic
potential of the CO2RR to its conjugate base A– can be taken into account using Equation 1.12
and considering the standard free energy change associated with the deprotonation at a given
pH, ∆deprotG◦′. Here, the notation ∆hydG(P) is the free energy change during hydration of CO2
according to Reaction 1.11 to form product P, E◦′
RHE(P) is the thermodynamic potential on the
RHE scale for CO2 reduction to P according to Reaction 1.7, and Ka is the acid dissociation
constant of HA.
∆hydG◦′(A−) = ∆hydG◦′(HA) + ∆deprotG◦′ = −nFERHE(HA) + RT ln
a(H+)
Ka

(1.16)
E◦′
RHE(A−) = −∆G◦′(A−)
nF
= E◦′
RHE(HA) −RT
nF ln
a(H+)
Ka

(1.17)
= E◦′
RHE(HA) + RT ln(10)
nF
(pH −pKa)
(1.18)
Or, using E◦′
RHE(HA) = −0.20[V], pKa = 3.75, and n = 2 for the CO2RR to formic acid,
E◦′
RHE(CHOO−) = −0.31[V ] + 59[mV]
2
pH .
(1.19)
The thermodynamic potential for CO2 reduction to formate is pH-dependent on both the SHE
and RHE scale. It increases with pH (with 1/2 the Nernst slope) on the RHE scale, making
CO2 reduction to formate easier at higher pH when compared to a fully proton-coupled reactions
such as HER; but it decreases with pH (also with 1/2 Nernst slope) on the SHE scale, making
CO2 reduction to formate harder at higher pH when compared to a reduction reaction that
does not consume any protons. For the thermodynamic potential of CO2 reduction to acetate,
a similar equation holds, but with a 1/8 Nernst slope increase with pH on the RHE scale, and a
7/8 Nernst slope decrease with pH on the SHE scale, reﬂecting the ratio of protons to electrons.
Only if there are no proton transfers is the thermodynamic potential for a product constant on
18
==PAGE:32==
an SHE scale with respect to pH. This is the case for oxalate, (CO2)2
2–, the fully deprotonated
form of oxalic acid. The thermodynamic potential of oxalate formation on both scales is:
E◦′
RHE
 (CO2)2
2−
= E◦′
RHE ((CO2H)2) + RT ln(10)
2F
(pH −pKa1) + RT ln(10)
2F
(pH −pKa2)
(1.20)
= −0.62[V] + 59[mV]pH
(1.21)
E◦
SHE
 (CO2)2
2−
= E◦′
RHE
 (CO2)2
2−
−RT ln(10)
F
pH = −0.62[V]
(1.22)
A similar treatment can also reveal the pH dependence if it is a charged version of CO2 (i.e.
bicarbonate, HCO3
–, or carbonate, CO3
2–) that is reduced rather than CO2. Fortunately though
for this complication, experiments showing mass-transport limitations indicate that it is CO2
and not bicarbonate or carbonate that is reduced on the catalysts studied.42
Commonly used practical reference electrodes, such as Ag/AgCl do not involve protons in their
reactions, and so they have a constant potential on the SHE scale, and a variable potential on
the RHE scale. For a reference electrode RE, for example Ag/AgCl,
ERHE = ERE + ESHE(RE) + RT ln(10)
F
pH ,
(1.23)
ERHE = EAgCl + 0.196[V] + 59[mV]pH .
(1.24)
Where EAgCl is the potential as measured using an Ag/AgCl RE. This equation, illustrated
schematically in Figure 1.1b several pages ago, is essential for interconversion between the RHE
scale, which is the thermodynamically relevant scale, and reference electrodes that are more
convenient to actually use in a three-electrode setup.
From now on, if the potential scale is not explicitly stated by a subscript or otherwise, all elec-
trical potentials (E) will be on the RHE scale.
As described below, CO is a key intermediate in CO2 reduction, and experiments described in
this report will investigate the reduction of CO rather than CO2. The standard reduction poten-
tials of CO reduction reactions (CORRs) can be easily calculated from the standard reduction
potential of the corresponding CO2RR using Equation 1.12. Here, n refers to the number of elec-
trons transferred in the CORR, CO2→CO represents reaction CO2+2 H++2 e– −−→CO+H2O,
E◦′(rxn) is the thermodynamic potential for the electrochemical half-reaction represented by rxn,
and ∆G(rxn) is the standard molar free energy change of the overall reaction when that half-
19
==PAGE:33==
reaction is coupled with HOR.
∆G◦(CORR) = ∆G◦(CO2RR) −∆G◦(CO2→CO)
(1.25)
−nFE◦(CORR) = −(n + 2)FE◦(CO2RR) −(−2FE◦(CO2→CO))
(1.26)
E◦(CORR) =

1 + 2
n

E◦(CO2RR) −2
nE◦(CO2→CO)
(1.27)
Standard reduction potentials for CORR, thus calculated, are included in Table 1.3 for a few
products relevant to this report. These thermodynamic potentials are also constant with respect
to pH on the RHE scale.
1.2.2
Overpotentials and limiting steps
The ﬁeld of CO2 electroreduction owes much to the pioneering research of Yoshio Hori and
coworkers.42,46–48 In 2008, Hori reviewed this and much of the other research up to that point
on CO2 reduction on metal electrodes in Reference 42. One important result of this research is
that pure metals can be placed in four groups based on their CO2 reduction behavior, speciﬁcally
the major products formed in 1 bar CO2-saturated 0.1M aqueous KHCO3 (pH=6.8) when -5
mA/cm2 of total current is passed.47 (1) Heavier metals with full d-shells, including (ordered here
by position on the periodic table) Cd, Hg, In, Tl, Sn, Pb, and Bi, produce HCOO– at very high
faradaic eﬃciencies (FE, the portion of the current passed going to a particular electrochemical
reaction) but typically require very negative potentials (ESHE ≤1.5V, ERHE ≤1.1V) to reach
-5 mA/cm2. (2) Pd, Ag, Au, Zn, and Ga produce CO as the primary CO2 reduction product at
varying overpotentials, together with varying amounts of hydrogen. (3) Cu uniquely produces
signiﬁcant amounts of CO2RR products requiring more than two electrons, which will collectively
be called “higher products,” at high relatively high FE. Of the -5 mA/cm2, ≈70% goes to higher
products, and ≈80% goes to CO2RR including CO and HCOO–, with the rest of the current
going to HER. However, copper requires a potential of ESHE = −1.44V or ERHE = −1.05V to
reach -5 mA/cm2, and has much lower FE for higher products and total CO2RR at more positive
potentials.43 (4) All pure metals not mentioned above produce negligible (i.e. <5% FE) CO2
reduction products under the described conditions, instead directing nearly all of the current to
HER.
Here, some concepts useful for understanding the selectivity and activity of electrocatalysts will
be presented and discussed with regards to the relatively well-understood water electrolyzer half-
reactions (HER and OER) and hydrogen fuel cell half-reactions (HOR and the oxygen reduction
reaction, ORR). The concepts described here will then be applied to the CO2RR.
20
==PAGE:34==
Comparing the potentials needed to drive the CO2RR in Hori’s experiments to the thermody-
namic potentials listed in Table 1.3, it is clear that there are very large overpotentials, deﬁned
as the diﬀerence between the thermodynamic potential and the actual potential when running
the reaction, η =
E −E◦′. The energy eﬃciency of electrochemical processes in which electrical
energy is converted to chemical energy (symbolized EL for electrolyzer) and in which chemical
energy is converted to electrical energy (symbolized FC for electrolyzer) are, respectively,
EﬀEL = ∆E◦
∆E =
|E◦
cat −E◦
an|
|E◦
cat −E◦an| + ηcat + ηan
, and
(1.28)
EﬀFC = ∆E
∆E◦= |E◦
cat −E◦
an| −(ηcat + ηan)
|E◦
cat −E◦an|
,
(1.29)
where “cat” stands for cathode and “an” stands for anode. (In using the standard reduction
potentials I’ve implicitly made the assumption that the products and reactants of the overall
reaction are at unit activity. To be rigorously correct E◦should be adjusted to the equilib-
rium potentials reﬂecting the actual states and activities of the products and reactants under
operation.)
High energy eﬃciency thus depends on low overpotentials.
In the previous section, we only considered the thermodynamic potentials for chemical reac-
tions.
Understanding and thinking in terms of thermodynamic potentials, however, is also
relevant when considering overpotentials: the overpotential for a multi-electron process can be
understood in terms of the thermodynamic potentials of the individual steps, one of which ends
up being limiting. The diﬀerence between the thermodynamic potential of the limiting step and
the thermodynamic potential of the overall reaction has been called the limiting potential or the
“thermodynamic overpotential,”49 which I’ll symbolize η◦′.
The actual overpotential will of course depend on the current drawn, and is a function of the
microkinetic rates of each of the steps of the reaction, which can be treated by transition state
theory and/or Marcus theory of electron transfer.41,50 As a simple treatment of the kinetics, the
current density for a reaction increases exponentially with the overpotential applied in excess of
the thermodynamic overpotential by
Ji = J0,i exp

α F
RT (η −η◦′)

,
(1.30)
which is the Tafel relationship41 applied just to the limiting step. J0,i is the exchange current
density of the limiting step, which is the theoretical current going to the forward and backward
reactions under equilibrium and at the thermodynamic potential for the step. The measured
current under such conditions is, of course, zero, since anodic and cathodic currents are drawn
at equal rates. The Tafel equation thus only describes the reaction rate in one direction at
21
==PAGE:35==
a time, and for the Tafel equation to describe the overall current, there must be no product
present. J0,i is a function of the concentrations (including of bound intermediates) immediately
at the electrode surface. The Tafel relationship is a form of the Arrhenius equation, where J0,i
is a pre-exponential factor and αF(η −η◦′) is the activation energy for the rate-determining
step. The constant α, called the transfer coeﬃcient, is thus the ratio of the resulting change in
activation energy for the limiting electron transfer reaction to a given change in electron energy.
For highly irreversible reactions, the thermodynamic overpotential is a good estimate of the
overpotential at which a reaction starts to occur at an appreciable rate. The corresponding
potential is loosely called the ’onset potential.’
As a well-understood example of the limiting potential in multi-step electrochemical reactions,
consider the oxygen reduction and oxygen evolution reactions (ORR and OER).
The overpotentials of ORR and OER can be understood as the diﬀerence between the overall
thermodynamic potential of 1.23V and the thermodynamic potential of the limiting single elec-
tron transfer step, which is the step with the highest thermodynamic potential for OER and the
lowest thermodynamic potential for ORR.49,51–53 The OER/ORR reaction on the most-studied
electrocatalysts, various transition-metal oxides for OER, and Pt and its alloys for ORR, consists
of four steps, according to the following scheme, written here in the OER direction:52
H2O −−→∗OH + H+ + e−
(1.31a)
∗OH −−→∗O + H+ + e−
(1.31b)
∗O + H2O −−→∗OOH + H+ + e−
(1.31c)
∗OOH −−→O2 + H+ + e−
(1.31d)
Here the symbol ∗indicates an intermediate bound to the surface. As bound reaction interme-
diates are extremely diﬃcult to measure and characterize, the thermodynamic potentials of the
above steps can’t be measured directly, but have to be calculated from the free energies of the
products and reactants. Furthermore, the free energies of the bound intermediates themselves
generally have to be calculated theoretically. The ability of density functional theory (DFT), a
quantum-mechanical method of modelling the ground state of compounds and periodic struc-
tures, to calculate the free energy of such bound intermediates, as well as transition states, is
one of the most important developments leading to recent breakthroughs in our understanding
of heterogeneous catalysis, including electrocatalysis, most notably through the work of Jens
Nørskov and coworkers.50
With the free energies of the bound intermediates appearing in Reactions 1.31 calculated by
DFT, the free energies of each step can be calculated for a given catalyst surface. The thermo-
22
==PAGE:36==
dynamic overpotentials for OER and ORR are then:49
η◦′(OER) = 1
F max

∆1.31G◦′
−1.23[V] and
(1.32)
η◦′(ORR) = 1.23[V] −1
F min

∆1.31G◦′
.
(1.33)
Since there are three binding energies that can vary (those of OOH, O, and OH to the surface),
there should in principle be enough degrees of freedom to make every ∆1.31G◦′ equal to 1.23V
times F for some catalyst, giving zero thermodynamic overpotential. However, when the energies
of the bound intermediates are calculated across a wide range of catalysts, it turns out that the
three binding energies are highly correlated. This is a general phenomenon in heterogeneous
catalysis, called scaling relations.50 Scaling relations reduce the number of degrees of freedom
for catalytic systems, and for systems such as OER/ORR, where scaling relations hold for all
intermediates (as they all bind to the surface through the same element, oxygen), scaling relations
reduce the number of degrees of freedom to one. In particular, the diﬀerence between the free
energies of ∗OH+H2O and ∗OOH+2 H+ is approximately constant, since ∗OH and ∗OOH both
bind to the surface via an oxygen single bond. The diﬀerence in free energies is approximately
3.2V times F across all families of catalysts, including both oxide OER catalysts54 and metallic
ORR catalysts.55 This means that the sum of the thermodynamic potentials of the two steps
between those two intermediates is
E◦′(1.31b) + E◦′(1.31c) ≈3.2[V] .
(1.34)
The thermodynamic potentials for the four steps in Reaction Scheme 1.31 add up to (through
use of Equation 1.12)
X
i
E◦′(1.31i) = 4 · E◦′(ORR) = 4 · 1.23[V] = 4.92[V] ,
(1.35)
so the sum of the other two steps is
E◦′(1.31a) + E◦′(1.31d) ≈4.92[V] −3.2[V] ≈1.7[V] .
(1.36)
Equation 1.34 implies that the smallest possible maximum thermodynamic potential of the steps
in Reactions 1.31 is 1.6V, approximately giving the best, i.e. most negative, onset potential for
OER. The condition for this best-possible thermodynamic overpotential is that E◦′(1.31b) =
E◦′(1.31c), which depends on the free energy of ∗O with respect to ∗OH and ∗OOH (∗O scales
with the other intermediates, but with a diﬀerent slope) and is best satisﬁed on the surfaces
of transition-metal oxides. Similarly, Equation 1.36 implies that the largest possible minimum
thermodynamic potential of the steps in Reactions 1.31 is 0.85V, approximately giving the best,
i.e. most positive, onset potential for ORR. The condition, that E◦′(1.31a) = E◦′(1.31d), depends
on the free energy ∗OH and ∗OOH with respect to H2O and O2 and is best satisﬁed on the
23
==PAGE:37==
surfaces of platinum alloys. In both cases, the best-acheivable thermodynamic overpotential
assuming the mechanism in Reactions 1.31, and given the scaling relations, is
η◦′
min(ORR) = η◦′
min(OER) ≈
E◦′(ORR) −3.2[V]
2
 ≈0.35[V] .
(1.37)
A plot of the potential required for OER at a given current for various catalysts against the
diﬀerence in binding energy of ∗O and ∗OH, or any descriptor with which that quantity scales,
thus forms a “V” shape with a minimum near 0.35V. Such plots are usually drawn with overpo-
tential increasing in the downwards direction, such that the optimum catalyst is on top. They
are called “Volcano plots” for their shape. Due to the Tafel equation (Equation 1.30), a plot of
the logarithm of the current density at a given potential against the descriptor shows the same
volcano shape. A volcano plot for OER, taken from Reference 54, is shown in ﬁgure 1.2a.
The hydrogen evolution and hydrogen oxidation reactions (HER and HOR), in contrast to OR-
R/OER, only involve two electron transfers. One degree of freedom is thus enough to guarantee
that a catalyst with zero thermodynamic overpotential can exist. This degree of freedom, reﬂect-
ing the mechanism of HER/HOR, is the free energy of ∗H, and the condition for thermodynamic
overpotential is, since the equilibrium potential is 0V by deﬁnition of the SHE/RHE scales,49,56
G(∗H) = 1
2G(H2)
(1.38)
Pt comes very close to this condition with G(∗H)/F −1/2G(H2) ≈0.07V,57 placing it on the
top of the volcano and making it a reversible catalyst for HER/HOR.
The CO2 reduction reaction is much more complicated, involving many possible products and
even more possible reaction mechanisms and intermediates. Engineering of a catalyst that se-
lectively produces one product, for example ethylene, with zero thermodynamic overpotential,
would require tuning the binding energy of many intermediates (up to 11 for ethylene, for ex-
ample, which requires 12 proton and electron transfers to two CO2 molecules). Scaling relations
such as those that exist for the bound intermediates in OER/ORR would clearly render re-
versible CO2 reduction catalysis impossible.
Not all CO2RR intermediates necessarily scale
with each other however, since they can bind to the surface in several diﬀerent ways. As, in
general, scaling relations hold for intermediates that bind through the same element but not for
binding through diﬀerent elements there are up to three degrees of freedom in CO2RR, one for
the binding strength through C, one for O, and one for H.58
Another possible complication of CO2RR comes from the possibility of decoupled proton and
electron transfers, discussed here:
The thermodynamic overpotentials for OER and ORR are independent of pH, and so the onset
potentials for both process are independent of pH on an RHE scale, just as is the overall ther-
modynamic potential. This is because every electron transfer step in the mechanism (Reactions
24
==PAGE:38==
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.2: Volcano plots for (a) OER, taken from Reference 54, and (b) CO2RR, taken from
Reference 59
.
1.31) is a concerted proton-electron transfer (CPET), in which the transfer of the electron to
the intermediate from the surface occurs simultaneously with the transfer of a proton to the
intermediate from the electrolyte. This is not necessarily the case in other reactions and mech-
anisms, even for electrochemical reactions in which the total numbers of protons and electrons
transfered are equal. In other words, not all proton-coupled electron transfers (PCETs) are
CPETs. The electron and proton transfers can occur separately, or even, for a multiple PCET
process, out of order.
Importantly, if the electron transfer step giving rise to the limiting potential is not a CPET,
then the onset potential will not be independent of pH on the RHE scale.
Marc Koper, in Reference 60, suggests that CPETs are energetically more favorable than decou-
pled proton and electron transfers when the intermediates are tightly bound to a metal surface.
In that case, a decoupled mechanism would result in a charged intermediate, requiring the en-
ergy of creating a dipole between the intermediate and its mirror charge in the metal surface.
Decoupled mechanisms are more important when the intermediates are less tightly bound, as
the charged intermediates resulting from decoupled mechanisms can then be stabilized by the
electrolyte; and when charge localization on the catalyst can screen the intermediates, as is the
case on oxides surfaces, and especially in enzymes, which are speciﬁcally evolved to stabilize
such intermediates.
25
==PAGE:39==
Which intermediates the carbon dioxide reduction reaction proceeds through, which scaling
relations govern its activity on electrocatalytic surfaces, and whether the key steps are concerted
proton-electron transfers are all matters of heated debate. Answers to these questions may enable
the design of better electrocatalysts and processes, and thus represent crucial steps towards
economically viable CO2 recycling. The next subsections attempt to sort through the existing
disagreements in the ﬁeld and describe what is known today.
1.2.3
CO2 reduction to HCOOH and CO on metal surfaces
Of the CO2RRs listed in Table 1.3, the simplest are carbon dioxide reduction to carbon monoxide
(CO) and to formic acid (HCOOH), which involve transfer of two electrons and two protons to
one CO2 molecule. While CO2 reduction to higher products creates more excitement in the
ﬁeld, these two simplest CO2RRs are important in understanding the initial steps, and could
be, in themselves, economically important. As mentioned in the previous section, industrial
gas-phase processes for hydrogenation of CO to higher products is well-established, and the
economic analysis in Table 1.2 indicates that HCOOH can be by far the most proﬁtable product
in the early stages of a CO2RR industry. Indeed, the two-electron reductions of CO2 to CO and
HCOOH are by far the most technologically mature of the CO2RRs. Reaction cells based on gas
diﬀusion electrodes with high current densities, faradaic eﬃciencies, and conversion rates, have
been designed for CO2 reduction both to CO61 and to HCOOH,62 using silver and tin catalysts,
respectively. The energy eﬃciency, however, is severely limited by high overpotentials.
As these CO2RRs only involve two electron transfers, and thus only one bound intermediate
(in a CPET pathway, at least), there should, in principle, exist a reversible catalyst for each of
them, by the same reasoning as above for HER/HOR. In each case, though, a good reversible
catalyst has proved elusive.
The onset potential of CO2 reduction to the ﬁrst observed product shows a volcano relation
with the DFT-calculated CO binding energy of the surface of transition metals, as reported by
Kuhl et al.59 Their volcano plot is shown in Figure 1.2b. Silver and zinc lie to the right of
the optimum (binding energy greater than -0.4eV, i.e. weaker binding), and produce CO as the
ﬁrst and primary product. Gold lies at the top of the volcano, and produces CO in observable
quantities as its ﬁrst CO2RR product at -0.25V vs RHE, an overpotential of 0.15V compared
to the standard reduction potential. To the left of the optimum (stronger-binding), the onset
for CO2RR falls again. Copper, the metal included in the study with the second most positive
onset potential for CO2RR, binds CO with -0.6eV and shows its ﬁrst CO2RR product, also
CO, at -0.4V vs RHE.59,63 Fe, Ni and Pt, which bind CO stronger, have onsets for CO2RR at
even lower potentials and produce, not CO, but methane and/or methanol as the ﬁrst observed
26
==PAGE:40==
product. The onset potential for formation of higher products on these metals is actually similar
to that for copper, but this had not been observed before Kuhl et al’s study due to very high
HER currents compared to CO2RR currents.
Kuhl et al explain the volcano relation as follows: the binding energy of the bound intermediate,
probably ∗CO2H (see level 1 of Figure 1.2.4), scales with CO binding energy. Thus, at weak CO
binding energy, binding energy of the intermediate is also weak (more positive), meaning it has
a high free energy and that the ﬁrst electron transfer to CO2 therefore has a thermodynamic
potential more negative than the overall reduction potential, giving rise to a thermodynamic
overpotential.
After the ﬁrst electron transfer, the second electron transfer is downhill.
As
binding energy is increased, the thermodynamic potentials become more equal, lowering the
thermodynamic overpotential. Before reaching the binding energy at which the two steps each
have a thermodynamic potential equal to the overall thermodynamic potential, however, the
desorption of the product, CO, a non-electrochemical step, becomes limiting. The slope on the
left side of the volcano is thus not due to a thermodynamic overpotential in the production
of CO2 but a kinetic limitation to its desorption, and to the thermodynamic overpotential of
its reduction to higher products, which also increases with stronger binding,58 since further
reduction is also a way to clear CO from the surface.
Thus, even though there are only two electron-transfer steps, a third, desorption step, with an
energy that scales with that of the electron-transfer steps, precludes the existence of a simple
reversible catalysis. Gold, while showing a relatively low overpotential for CO2RR to CO, is
far from being a reversible catalyst, as it requires an overpotential on the order of 0.6V for the
reverse reaction, the oxidation of CO to CO2.64
As mentioned above, heavy p-block metals and Hg reduce CO2 to formic acid at high faradaic
eﬃciencies at very large overpotentials. The overpotentials are so large that the ﬁrst electron
transfer to CO2 has been hypothesized to result in the solvated radical anion CO2
·–(aq), a
reaction with a thermodynamic potential of -1.9V vs SHE.65 This is supported by the observation
that metals that produce formic acid in aqueous media produce oxalic acid, C2H2O4, in aprotic
solvents where the coupling reaction of CO2
·– is promoted.42 The principle that a reversible
catalyst should exist for two-electron processes depends on a bound intermediate after the ﬁrst
electron transfer with a tunable energy, and so clearly doesn’t apply if the only intermediate is
solvated. However, progress has been made on other metals which do bind the intermediate.
The kinetics of the reverse reaction, formic acid oxidation, have been studied in detail on plat-
inum, which binds formate through either one or both oxygen atoms.66 In part due to a better
understanding of the formate oxidation reaction mechanism, a reversible catalyst has recently
been developed: Pd-Pt surface alloys which catalyze both the forward and back reaction at
27
==PAGE:41==
relatively low overpotentials.67 This system still suﬀers complications of CO poisoning, inability
to achieve high current densities due to changes in the surface at large overpotentials, and high
cost of the catalytic materials.
Of the two one-carbon two-electron products, CO has received by far the most attention in
the context of mechanistic studies of CO2 reduction.
This is in part because CO, and not
formic acid, can be reduced further on copper,48 indicating that CO2RR proceeds via CO as an
intermediate, as discussed below. This indicates that an industrial process could include two
separated electrochemical unit operations, the ﬁrst of which reduces CO2 to CO at relatively
high eﬃciency, and the second of which reduces CO further to higher products. This would save
energy on the ﬁrst two electrons for CO2RR. It also indicates that studying CORR provides
insight relevant for CO2RR. This is good news, as CO is easier in some ways to study, as
described in Section 3.1
1.2.4
CO2 and CO reduction to higher products on copper surfaces
Ever since Hori’s discovery in 1985 that CO2 is reduced to hydrocarbons with relatively large
Faradaic eﬃciencies,46 many researchers have put a lot of eﬀort into elucidating the reaction
mechanism of CO2RR on Cu. However, after three decades of work, there is still little agreement.
A number of mechanistic proposals by several research groups, based both on experimental and
theoretical studies, are represented in Figure 1.2.4. To simplify the ﬁgure, I have attempted
to group mechanistic proposals that are consistent with each other, also considering which re-
search groups have supported or accepted each other’s proposed mechanisms. Three mechanisms
emerge from the literature, which I will name “Classic”, “Stanford”, and “Leiden,” represented
by black, red, and blue, respectively in Figure 1.2.4.
The Classic mechanism was proposed
by Hori based on his own and other early research in the ﬁeld.42,48 The Stanford mechanism
includes a one-carbon (C1) pathway and initial C-C coupling mechanism proposed, based on
DFT calculations, by the group of Jens Nørskov68,69 and supported by experimental work by
the group of Tom Jaramillo;59 and a two-carbon (C2) pathway proposed, based on experimental
observations, by the Jaramillo group.43 The Leiden mechanism was proposed by the group of
Marc Koper45 based on a combination of experimental observations and theoretical calculations,
with much of the C1 pathway coming from Nie et al.70 Note that the devision of mechanis-
tic proposals in Figure 1.2.4 is not at all absolute - there are disagreements between authors
contributing to a reaction scheme represented by a single color, and the groupings could well
have been made diﬀerently. Furthermore, I do not claim to accurately represent the currently
held views of any particular researcher, as my own interpretation inevitably plays a role when
reading their publications and of course I do not know what they are thinking right now.
28
==PAGE:42==
Figure 1.3: Possible mechanistic pathways of CO2 reduction to C1 and C2 products on poly-
crystalline copper, grouped into three self-consistent reaction schemes, roughly representing three
schools of thought in the ﬁeld. Black: “Classic” mechanism (Hori and coworkers), Red: “Stan-
ford” mechanism (Jaramillo and Nørskov groups), Blue: “Leiden” mechanism (Koper group).
For details see the text.
Arrowheads represent proposed limiting steps.
Concerted proton-
electron transfers are represented by solid lines going down one level. Horizontal lines involve
no electron transfer. Dotted lines involve no proton transfer. Dash-dotted lines are coupling
reactions involving neither proton nor electron transfers. Double lines are not elementary steps
but involve transfer of multiple electrons. The number on the vertical axis is total number of
electrons transferred to, and the number on the horizontal axis is the the number of carbons in,
an intermediate or product.
29
==PAGE:43==
I have drawn the intermediates in 1.2.4 in a way that consistently gives each carbon atom a
valency of 4, even though this sometimes diﬀers slightly from the way the intermediate was
drawn when proposed. The formal oxidation of each carbon atom is deﬁned as the sum of the
contribution from each of the four bonds: C-H bonds count -1, C-O bonds count +1, C-C bonds
and C-surface bonds count 0, and an unbound electron pair counts -1. A dotted bond counts
as exactly half a bond. The number on the vertical axis is the number of electrons transferred
to the intermediate, which is four times the number of carbon atoms minus the total oxidation
state of the intermediate. The total oxidation state of the intermediate is taken to be the sum of
the oxidation states of the carbon atoms plus the number of surface-oxygen bonds, representing
the fact that bound oxygen has to be reductively cleared from the surface to complete a catalytic
cycle.68 Note that these rules are only a formalism which actual charge distribution does not
rigorously obey. Intermediates are generally referred to using the name of their desorbed state.
For a bound intermediate to desorb, a pair of bonds to the surface are replaced by an additional
bond in the molecule, enabling tautomerization if a C-C double bond is formed adjacent to
an OH group.43 If an intermediate with an odd total oxidation state were to desorb from the
surface without an electron transfer, it would form a free radical.
All proposed mechanisms agree that CO2RR to higher products proceeds through a CO inter-
mediate, based on experimental observations that CO is reduced to higher products on copper
with approximately the same overpotentials and product distribution as CO2.48 The mecha-
nisms also agree that the ﬁrst electron transfer to CO2 is the limiting step in CO2RR to CO
and that ∗COOH is the key intermediate on the way to CO, but there is some uncertainty on
whether ∗COOH is arrived at by CPET or a decoupled pathway. As formate cannot be reduced
further on copper, CO2RR to formate is thought to proceed via another intermediate, most
likely the CO2∗– radical anion stablized by binding to the surface via oxygen.45
The mechanisms disagree about the ﬁrst electron transfer to CO, which is the third electron
transfer in CO2RR. In 2010, Peterson et al presented DFT calculations showing that, of the 3-
electron 1-carbon intermediates considered, ∗CO reduction to bound formyl (∗CHO), the third
intermediate from the left on level 3 of Figure 1.2.4, has the most positive thermodynamic
potential, and thus becomes open ﬁrst.68
This is the rate-limiting step of CO reduction to
1-carbon products in the Stanford mechanism. Once the thermodynamic overpotential needed
to reduce ∗CO to ∗CHO is overcome, the DFT calculations predict that all of the remaining
steps to CH4 along the red C1 pathway to methane in Figure 1.2.4 are thermodynamically
downhill on copper. Notably, the pathway goes through adsorbed methoxy (at step 6), which
could, by electron transfer, form either CH4(g)+∗O or CH3OH(aq), but Peterson et al calculate
a free energy diﬀerence between the two of 0.27eV, favoring methane release. At that time,
in 2010, no CO2 or CO reduction to methanol had been observed on Cu. Two years later,
30
==PAGE:44==
Kuhl et al used more sensitive methods than those previousy used to quantify CO2 reduction
products, and did observe small amounts of methanol. At -1.15V vs RHE, the peak potential for
methanol formation, methane had a faradaic eﬃciency (FE) of 40% and methanol had FE≈0.1%,
a selectivity ratio of ≈400.43 Later, Kuhl et al observed methane and methanol on formation
on a number of metals, and saw that the onset potentials for methane and methanol formation
are closely correlated across metals, supporting a mechanism in which methanol and methane
share a common limiting step.59
As described above, the thermodynamic overpotential for a reaction path on diﬀerent catalysts
follows a volcano relationship when plotted against a descriptor, i.e. any quantity or set of
quantaties with which the binding energies of the bound intermediates scale. As all of the pro-
posed rate-limiting steps, to products other than formate, proposed in Figure 1.2.4 are between
intermediates bound via carbon, the binding energy of ∗CO can be used as a descriptor. A
theoretical volcano relationship between the limiting potential of CO2RR to higher products
and ∗CO, based on DFT-calculated scaling relations and a pathway through the ∗CHO interme-
diate, i.e. the Stanford mechanism, predicts that the best (i.e. most positive) limiting potential
is -0.6V vs RHE, and that copper is at the top of the volcano.71 This is in somewhat good
agreement with the experimentally measured onset potentials for higher products, shown in red
in Figure 1.2b, taken from Kuhl et al.59
There are, however, experimental observations which the Stanford C1 mechanism does not
explain. The ﬁrst is that during CO2 and CO reduction, copper surfaces are deactivated by
deposition of graphitic carbon (coking), ﬁrst shown in 1989.72 This observation led Hori et al to
propose a mechanism by which one active pathway of CO reduction, to ethylene, proceeds via
bound carbon atoms.48 Much later, it was shown that coking does not occur on mesocrystalline
Cu surfaces selective for ethylene production over methane,73 indicating that a coking precursor
should, instead, exist on the pathway to methane.
The second is that when formaldahyde (∗H2CO) is reduced rather than CO2, methanol is the
primary product.74 This is inconsistent with the loosely-bound formaldehyde being an interme-
diate on the pathway to methane, as proposed by Peterson et al. To reconcile this observation
with the prediction that the pathway through ∗CHO and ∗CH2O, Nie et al considered the ki-
netics of ∗CO reduction to ∗CHO and ∗COH (the second proposed intermediate from the left
on step 3 of Figure 1.2.4), rather than just thermodynamics.70 Their calculations, also based
on DFT, conﬁrmed that ∗CO reduction to ∗CHO is thermodymically prefered but showed that
reduction to ∗COH is kinetically preferred due to a much smaller activation barrier for the pro-
ton transfer. Nie et al proposed that CO reduction to CH4 proceeds via ∗COH and ∗C. Their
proposed mechanism is shown as the C1 portion of the Leiden mechanism in Figure 1.2.4.
31
==PAGE:45==
Another area of contention is the coupling reaction(s) leading to multi-carbon products. An es-
sential observation that proposed C-C mechanisms should explain is the diﬀerent pH dependence
of ethylene formation vs methane formation.
Hori et al studied CO reduction on Cu in several buﬀer solutions spanning a pH range of 6 to
12, and measured the production rate for methane and ethylene at a number of potentials.48
When the measurements of partial current density towards ethanol, taken over this wide range
of pH, are included in a single Tafel plot on the SHE scale, a straight line emerges. This is
equivalent to saying that the potential on the SHE scale required for a given current is constant
with respect to pH, and thus the overpotential on the RHE scale decreases with increasing pH.
From Figure 1.4a, taken from of Reference 48, and using Equation 1.14 and E◦′ for the CO2RR
to ethylene from Table 1.3, the overpotential required for a C2H4 partial current of 0.1 mA/cm2
on Cu is
η0.1(C2H4) = 1.32[V] −RT ln(10)
F
pH .
(1.39)
In contrast, the potential needed for a given methane partial current density shows much less pH
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.4: Tafel plots, taken from Hori et al (1997), Reference.48 Measurements were made
over a pH range of 6 to 12. Diﬀerent marker types represent diﬀerent types of buﬀers. (a) plots
the logarithm of the partial current density going towards ethylene against applied potential on
the SHE scale. (b) plots the logarithm of the partial current density going towards methane,
plus the pH, against applied potential on the SHE scale.
dependence on an RHE scale, and thus pH-dependent on the SHE scale. Hori et al treated their
32
==PAGE:46==
observations in the framework of decoupled electron transfers, and explained the pH dependence
of the potential on an SHE scale needed to reach a given CH4 partial current density in terms
of the Tafel equation with an excange current density (J0,i in Equation 1.30) proportional to
proton concentration. Substituting J0 =B[H+] into the Tafel equation for the overall reaction,
they arrive at
log(J(CH4)) + pH = −αm
F
RT ln(10)(ESHE −E◦′) + log(B) ,
(1.40)
where αm is the transfer coeﬃcient for methane. A plot of the logarithm of the methane partial
current density plus the pH against potential on the SHE scale, also taken from Hori et al48 and
shown in Figure 1.4b, supports this equation. If J(CH4) vs potential is independent on an RHE
scale, then, by substituting J0,i =A exp(η◦′) and η=E◦′ −E into Equation 1.30,
log(J(CH4)) = −αm
F
RT ln(10)(E −E◦′) + log(A) ,
(1.41)
By comparison, Equation 1.40 rewritten to an RHE scale, by substitution of Equation 1.14,
reads
log(J(CH4)) = (αm −1)pH −αm
F
RT ln(10)(E −E◦′) + log(B) .
(1.42)
Thus, the two are equivalent statements only if α = 1. Hori et al ﬁt the data with αm = 1.33,
indicating that methane production partial current density at a given potential vs RHE increases
a factor of 101.33−1 ≈2.1 when the pH increases by one unit, and the overpotential needed for
a given methane partial current density should decrease αm−1
αm
RT ln(10)
F
= 15mV per pH unit
increase.
In contrast, the overpotential needed for a given ethylene partial current density
decreases RT ln(10)
F
=59mV per pH unit increase.
As the exact pH of each data point in Figure 1.4b is not reported, it is unclear whether the data
would form an acceptably straight line, ﬁt with a diﬀerent value of α, if plotted as log(J(CH4))
vs E−E◦′ on an RHE scale. To the best of my knowledge, no pH dependence study of methane
formation rate as thorough as Hori et al’s (in 1997) has been reported since. Most recent publi-
cations assume that methane formation rate is pH-independent on the RHE scale and cite this
study, even though this seems, by the analysis presented here, to be a slight misinterpretation.
Hori et al hypothesize that the C1 and C2 pathways split early in the CO2 reduction mechanism,
before the C-C coupling reaction. Based on Equation 1.40, they propose that the rate-limiting
step for methane formation comes immediately after a reversible proton-coupled electron trans-
fer, as shown by the black dotted arrow going from level 3 to level 4 in Figure 1.2.4. Their
proposed C2 pathway procedes via ∗C, and the proposed coupling mechanism is between ∗CH2
and CO by a means similar to the mechanism of the Fischer-Tropsch reaction (Reaction 1.6),
with ∗CO inserting itself between the surface and ∗CH2; or by direct coupling of ∗CH2 units to
33
==PAGE:47==
form ethylene. The lack of pH dependence on the SHE scale for multi-carbon product formation
is explained by elementary steps involving ∗H or ∗H2
+ + e–, rather than solvated protons.48
The conceptualization of electrochemical reactions occurring via concerted proton-electron trans-
fer steps, with the proton coming from solution - and with it the increased use of the RHE scale
- seems to have grown since Hori’s proposed mechanism. Whereas Hori was most pressed to
explain the pH dependence of methane formation on the SHE scale, more recently proposed
mechanisms focus more on the challenge of explaining the pH dependence of ethylene formation
on the RHE scale.
The Koper group has proposed, based on experimental observations as well as theoretical cal-
culations, two coupling mechanisms explaining the pH dependence of ethylene formation and
its diﬀerent partial current densities on Cu single crystals of diﬀerent surfaces.74–77 The most
important on polycrystalline copper, which occurs preferentially on the (100) surface of Cu,
is the reductive dimerization of CO to ∗C2O2
–, involving an electron transfer but no proton
transfer. This is represented by the dotted blue arrow from level 2 to level 5 in Figure 1.2.4.
This is proposed to be the limiting step for ethylene formation. That the thermodynamic over-
potential is set by a proton-decoupled electron transfer step is consistent with the observed pH
independence on the SHE scale (see section 1.2.2).
In the mechanism outlined by Kortlever et al, ∗C2O2
– is protonated and then further reduced
in concerted proton-electron transfer steps.45 The intermediates proposed are based in part on
the observation that acetaldehyde is reduced to ethanol but not to ethylene..75 This forms the
C2 portion of the Leiden mechanism in Figure 1.2.4.
Montoya et al et al proposed, based on DFT calculations, a ∗CO dimerization step that does not
involve an electron transfer as indicated by the red dot-dashed arrow from level 2 to level 4 in
Figure 1.2.4.78 They explain that this step is activated by a charged water layer at the electrode
surface, thus setting the overpotential required for in CO2 reduction to C2 products, despite
not involving an electron transfer. The lack of a proton transfer in a potential-activated step
would, they claim, also explain the pH dependence of C2 product formation on the RHE scale.
It should be noted that the DFT methods used in this study and others by the Nørskov group
are fundamentally limited to treating the thermodynamics of coupled proton-electron transfers
and to the RHE scale due to the use of a “Computational Hydrogen Electrode,” which treats
the free energy of a proton plus an electron as equal to 1/2 the free energy of a H2 molecule
rather than attempting to represent pH and electrical potential, extremely challenging problems
in DFT.51
After the CO dimerization, Montoya et al calculate that a CPET step to ∗COCOH, which is the
intermediate farthest to the right on level ﬁve of Figure 1.2.4. The rest of the Stanford C2 mech-
34
==PAGE:48==
anism is based on experimental observations by Kuhl et al that glyoxal, acetate, glycoaldehyde,
acetaldehyde, and ethylene glycol are all minor products of CO2 reduction on Cu.43
In summary of the discussion so far, almost nothing is agreed upon in the mechanism of CO2
reduction to higher products on copper besides the progression through a bound CO intermedi-
ate, and that the rate-limiting step occurs shortly thereafter. This is remarkable for a reaction
that has been studied for three decades and has a much potential industrial and environmental
importance as CO2RR. There is a lot of room for good science. Recently, the CO2RR ﬁeld
has found renewed excitement over copper, due to the (re-)discovery of nanostructured copper
surfaces that seem to catalyze CO2RR and especially CORR by a diﬀerent pathway than the
ﬂat polycrystalline copper (pc Cu) discussed thus far.
Koga et al produced nanostructured copper in 1989 by oxidizing a copper elctrode in air at
350◦C and subsequent reduction in H2,79 and their study was later described in English by Hori
et al.48 The resulting roughness factor, deﬁned as the ratio of electrochemical surface area to
projected surface area (referred to as geometrical surface area), was over 100. While no liquid
products are described, this catalyst, unlike ﬂat copper, produced ethane (C2H6) with ≈1%
Faradaic eﬃciency (FE) during CO2 reduction at a geometrical current density of 5 mA/cm2.
Li and Kanan reported a similar catalyst, formed by electroreduction of 3 µm thick layers of
Cu2O, with a roughness factor of ≈480, which also produced C2H6, with FE≈5% during CO2
reduction at 5 mA/cm2, which it reaches at -0.7V vs RHE.80 Li and Kanan also measured CO
and HCOOH, and observed that, remarkably, the roughened copper reduced CO2 at much
higher FE at much lower overpotentials than untreated polycrystalline copper (pc Cu). In a
subsequent report, they showed that the same catalyst, as well as one reduced in H2, both of
which they named “oxide derived copper,” or “OD Cu,” reduced CO to ethanol with high FE
at low overpotentials in basic electrolyte, the electroreduced catalyst reaching 40% FE towards
ethanol at -0.3V vs RHE.81
OD Cu is remarkable not only for its high CO2 and CO reduction Faradaic eﬃciencies at
low overpotentials, but also for its selectivity towards multi-carbon products in CO reduction.
Ethanol, acetate, ethane, ethylene, and propanol were observed in appreciable quantities but no
methanol or methane were detected. Studies of Cu nanoparticles82 and Cu nanostructured by
another means73 have shown enhanced selectivity relative to pc Cu for ethylene over methane,
but not to nearly the degree that OD Cu favors two-carbon products, and require approximately
the same overpotentials as pc Cu. The diﬀerences between CO reduction on pc Cu and on OD
Cu (and these other nanostructured catalysts) are not yet fully understood, but are the result
of a change in distribution of catalytic surface sites, of a new type of surface site not present
on Cu, and/or of the porosity of OD Cu. Li and Kanan hypothesized that the CORR activity
35
==PAGE:49==
on OD Cu is due to highly active sites stabilized in the grain boundaries between crystallites in
OD Cu. Our group showed, by measuring the temperature at which CO desorbs from OD Cu in
vacuum, that there is a type of surface site that binds CO more strongly than the sites on ﬂat
pc Cu.83 Mass transport through OD Cu’s porous structure also inﬂuenced the experimental
results, however, and a mikrokinetic model which I developed was needed to resolve the two
eﬀects (see Appendix E.1). A stronger (more negative) CO binding energy might stabilize a key
intermediate on the C2 pathway such as ∗C2O2
– with respect to CO, depending on the scaling
relations. It may also increase the likelyhood of C-C coupling by creating an extremely high
coverage of CO at the grain boundaries. These speculations, however, cannot explain the result
that OD Cu has a lower overpotential, i.e. more positive onset potential, for CO2RR to CO than
does polycrystalline Cu, int he context of the volcano plot in Figure 1.2b, which indicates that
weaker CO binding, not stronger, should improve the onset potential for CO2RR to CO.59,80
Others have hypothesized that the activity of OD Cu is not due to an intrinsically diﬀerent
surface, but instead to extreme conditions in the porous structure under electrolysis caused by
mass-transport eﬀects, for example the buildup of extremely high pH within the pores.45 This
type of eﬀect will be discussed with regards to our setup and results in Subsections 3.1.3 and
4.3.2
The selectivity for ethanol over ethylene during CO reduction is also a major diﬀerence between
OD Cu and polycrystalline copper. At -0.3V vs RHE, FE is 40% for ethanol but less than
1% for ethylene, with an additional 15% FE going to acetate. Bertheussen et al showed that
acetaldehyde is also a product of CO reduction on OD Cu, and that it is further reduced to
ethanol. They also showed that acetate is not a direct electrochemical product but a result of
the disproportionation reaction of acetaldehyde to ethanol and acetate which occurs in alkali.84
This indicates that a mechanistic pathway to ethanol, via acetaldehyde, and with a diﬀerent
rate-limiting step than the pathway to ethylene, opens up at low overpotentials on OD Cu but
not on pc Cu.
Of all the proposed pathways shown in Figure 1.2.4, no combination can fully explain the obser-
vations on both pc Cu and OD Cu. Much work therefore remains to be done on understanding
the mechanism of CO2 and CO reduction on copper. A better understanding of this mechanism
might enable the optimization of catalyst surface structure and operating conditions for an in-
dustrial electrochemical CO2 reduction process using copper. It will also inform the search for
and design of even better catalysts.
36
==PAGE:50==
1.2.5
Other catalysts
While the largest body of mechanistic work on CO2 electroreduction has focused on copper
surfaces and other metal surfaces, there has also been considerable research in other families
of catalysts for the CO2RR, including oxides, chalcogenides, clusters, organic polymers, func-
tionalized graphene, immobilized metal-ligand complexes, and immobilized enzymes. A review
describing these many diverse types of catalysts can be found in Reference 44. One non-metallic
catalyst relevant to our group’s research is mentioned brieﬂy here.
A DFT study by Chan et al predicted that layered materials, particularly the chalcogenides MoS2
and MoSe2, could “break the scaling relations” by binding diﬀerent intermediates to diﬀerent
types of binding sites, and thus reduce CO2 to CO at better (i.e. more positive) onset potentials
than bare metal surfaces.85 They predicted that S-terminated MoS2 could reduce CO2 to CO
at onset potentials positive of -0.2V vs RHE, the best onset potential under the scaling relations
and approximately that of gold, though the eﬀect was sensitive to hydrogen coverage; and,
based on a CO2RR mechanism proceeding through ∗CHO, i.e. the Stanford mechanism, that
Mo-terminated MoS2 would reduce CO2 to higher products at potentials positive of -0.6V vs
RHE, the best under the scaling rations and approximately that of copper.59,71 Chan et al also
predicted that doping MoS2 with Ni to form Mo-terminated edges with Ni substitutions would
further improve onset potential.
At the same time and independently of the theoretical study, molybdenum sulﬁde was shown
to reduce CO2 to CO in water mixed with 4 mol% (≈25% by volume) ionic liquid (EMIM-BF4)
with an onset potential of ≈0V vs RHE (≈0.1V overpotential), which is better than that for
gold, and a Faradiac eﬃciency at -0.6V vs RHE of 80%.86
The FE at low overpotentials is
low due to the fact that MoS2 is also a good catalyst for HER.87 The ionic liquid may act
to partially suppress HER, and also may act to promote CO2RR catalysis. CO2 reduction to
higher products on MoS2 has, to the best of my knowledge, not been reported.
This report will include preliminary studies of three CO2 reduction catalysts: OD Cu, pc Cu,
and Ni:MoS2 nanoparticles - using a new type of product detection technology, which we refer
to as the “sniﬀer chip.” This technology, we believe, will prove a powerful tool for elucidating
electrocatalytic mechanisms and thus resolving some of the disagreements described above.
The emphasis of the rest of the report, however, will be on developing and understanding the
experimental setup and procedures needed to measure CO2 and CO reduction using the sniﬀer
chip. The background, design, and operation of the sniﬀer chip are described in the next section.
37
==PAGE:51==
1.3
In situ mass spectrometry and the sniﬀer chip
Of the many studies of CO2RR activity and selectivity named in the previous sections, the vast
majority utilize batch electrolysis experiments in which each measurement at a diﬀerent potential
involved an hour or more of electrolysis and then subsequent measurement of the products. This
is disadvantageous, not only because it is highly time-consuming and thus limits the obtainable
resolution in potential for Faradaic eﬃciency measurements, but also because any information
on time-dependent phenomena is lost. During a batch electrolysis at constant potential, the only
time-resolved measurement is that of electrical current. Product concentrations are measured
at the end of the experiment. Gaseous products, accumulated in the head space above the elec-
trolyte during electrolysis, are usually quantiﬁed by gas chromatography (GC) coupled to either
ﬂame ionization detection (FID) or thermal conductivity detection (TCD).84 Liquid products
have been measured by techniques such as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC),82
nuclear magnetic residence spectroscopy (NMR),43 and heated head-space (HS) GC-FID..84 Av-
erage partial current densities are then calculated by multiplying the measured concentration by
the volume and by nF, and dividing by the electrode area and by the electrolysis time. There
is no way to tell whether the primary product distribution changes over time, whether certain
products are formed transiently, or whether products are formed constantly but then reduced
further or reacted in the electrolyte.
This is not a unique problem for CO2RR, nor is it a new problem in the ﬁeld of electrochemistry.
The method developed for time resolved and chemically resolved electrochemistry is in-situ mass
spectrometry.
1.3.1
Diﬀerential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS)
Mass spectrometry is a chemical analysis technique that involves ionization of an analyte, sepa-
ration of the ions by mass to charge ratio m/z, and detection.88 There are a number of diﬀerent
types of mass utilizing diﬀerent ionization and mass separation techniques. Our setup, like most
in-situ electrochemical mass spectrometry, utilizes a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) with
electron impact ionization. In a QMS, the ion beam passes between four parallel rods. Su-
perimposed DC and radio-frequency AC voltages applied to the bars are able to stabilize the
trajectory of ions with a certain m/z, allowing them through to the detector, while rejecting all
other ions. Electron impact ionization involves bombarding an analyte gas with free electrons
accelerated through, in our case, 70 V. The energy transfered to an analyte molecule after the
impact event causes an electron in the molecule to be ejected, and often causes the molecule
to fragment. Nearly all molecular and fragment ions formed under these conditions from small
38
==PAGE:52==
molecules like those we expect from CORR have a single positive charge, meaning m =m/z.
m/z values The distribution of fragments formed by a given molecule serves as a “ﬁngerprint”
enabling its identiﬁcation in a plot of signal against m/z, called a mass spectrum. A QMS can
also be set to monitor the signal at one or more masses over time. In this thesis m/z values will
be indicated with a capital M. For example M2 indicates a fragment with two atomic mass units
per fundamental charge, which we usually attribute to H2, and “mass-time” plots will be shown
plotting the signal at given M values against time.
The pressure in the space at which electron impact ionization occurs has to be less than approx-
imately 10−5mbar for signals to respond linearly.89 Above that, space-charge eﬀects perturb
the trajectory of the ions, making quantiﬁcation diﬃcult. This pressure is maintained by a
turbo-molecular pump (turbo pump). For comparison, atmospheric pressure is ≈1000mbar and
the vapor pressure of an aqueous electrolyte is ≈30 mbar. The challenge of performing mass
spectrometry in situ during electrochemistry is thus a challenge of designing a liquid-vacuum
interface that can enable a well-deﬁned ﬂow of volatile molecules, which provides information
on the electrode reaction, from the electrolyte to the QMS while maintaining that pressure
diﬀerence.
In-situ electrochemical mass spectrometry was ﬁrst reported in 1971.90 In this ﬁrst design, a
porous Teﬂon membrane formed in a glass frit separates the electrolyte from the large vacuum
chamber of the QMS. The vacuum chamber is pumped down, and then sealed oﬀfrom the
pump. The rate of increase of a particular signal in the mass spectrum is then proportional to
the rate at which the molecule giving rise to that signal enters the vacuum chamber. This is
an integrative technique, as the signal represents an accumulation of the production rate. The
method was used to detect gases such as O2 and NO formed in electrocehmical reactions.
A major improvement was made in 1984 when an intervening vacuum chamber with its own
turbo pump was added.91 This intermediate volume, called the diaphragm, is separated from
the electrolyte by a porous Teﬂon membrane tightened onto a glass frit, and if sealed oﬀwould
gradually ﬁll with molecules degassing or evaporating from the electrolyte.
The diaphragm
turbo pump, however, pumps away most of the evaporated molecules, clearing the diaphragm
with a very fast time constant.
The QMS chamber, which samples the diaphrgam through
a slit, thus sees a snapshot of what is coming oﬀthe electrolyte.
This method was called
diﬀerential electrochemical mass spectrometry or DEMS, in contrast to the earlier, integrative,
electrochemical mass spectrometry. In addition to gaseous products, they were also able to see
methanol, at its cracking fragment m/z=31, when milimolar solutions of methanol were placed
on the membrane.
Since then, the vacuum system has not changed much, whereas advances have gradually been
39
==PAGE:53==
made in the design of the electrochemistry setup placed on top of the DEMS setup. Early exper-
iments were done exclusively with the working electrode deposited onto the Teﬂon membrane at
the liquid-vacuum interface.91,92 This setup gives a very fast time response, as electrochemical
products do not need to diﬀuse through the electrolyte. The reference and counter electrodes
in this setup are in separate compartments from the WE, connected by capillaries. After that,
a thin-layer cell enabled the study of ﬂat electrodes.93 This cell placed the WE directly across
from the membrane and multiple capillaries to the CE were arranged in a circle around the WE
to allow for uniform current distribution accross the WE (discussed further in Subsection 3.2.2).
The next major development was the advent of a dual thin layer ﬂow cell which placed the WE
and CE opposite each other and separated by an ion-permeable membrane, with the volume be-
tween the WE and the membrane (the working volume) upstream of the liquid-vacuum interface
membrane (the collection volume).94 This enabled parallel-plate geometry while preventing the
crossover of WE and CE products. Both the working volume and collection volume were kept
small, with heights of about 50 µm. A number of slight variations of the dual thin layer ﬂow
cell have been presented since, with several reviewed in Reference 92 and a new one speciﬁcally
designed for CO2RR on copper described in Reference 95.
Of the experimental results mentioned in the previous sections, only those from the Koper
group use in-situ mass spectrometry, which they refer to as on-line mass spectrometry or
OLEMS.45,74–76,96 Their setup involves submersing the liquid-vacuum interface into a stirred
beaker of electrolyte, and then placing the WE about 10 µm from it.97 This setup facilitates
working with delicate samples like single crystals. With this setup, they were able to monitor
CO2RR products while scanning the potential at 1 mV/s, enabling key observations in the
CO2RR mechanism to be made during relatively short experiments - for example, that ethylene
is produced preferentially on Cu (100) with a peak potential of -0.4 V vs RHE at pH=13.75
1.3.2
The sniﬀer chip
One disadvantage of DEMS is that the vast majority, approximately 99.9%, of what makes
it into the diaphragm volume, which has a pressure of ≈1 mbar, is simply pumped out by
the diaphragm turbo pump and does not make it to the ionization chamber.91,98 This extra
pumping stage, referred to as diﬀerential pumping, thus decreases sensitivity by up to a factor
of 103.
The rationale for the diﬀerential pumping, as mentioned above, is to ensure that the residence
time in the diaphragm is short, such that the QMS sees an instantaneous picture of the gas and
vapor coming from the working volume. With the vacuum-liquid interface used, the diﬀerential
pumping is also necessary to protect the QMS from seeing too high pressures, but this could also
40
==PAGE:54==
be done by modifying the porosity characteristics of the Teﬂon membrane at the liquid-vacuum
interface.
An alternate way to ensure a small time constant in the intermediate volume is to make that
volume very small.
Our group at DTU has a tradition of designing very small volumes for
the study of thermal heterogeneous catalysts and photocatalysts.89 The DTU microreactor is
fabricated from a silicon wafer using standard clean-room techniques to have a reaction chamber
with a volume of 240 nl as well as channels for inlet and outlet gases. The portion of the outlet
gas that ﬂows to a QMS for analysis is controlled by a narrow capillary etched into the chip which
allows between 1014 and 1015 molecules through per second. Daniel Trimarco, a co-advisor on
this report, developed a device based on the DTU microreactor to simultaneously play the role of
the liquid-vacuum interface and diaphragm in DEMS, but with no need for diﬀerential pumping
due to the small volume. The device, called the sniﬀer chip, is described in detail in Reference
99. The internal volume of the sniﬀer chip, called the sniﬀer chamber or simply the chamber,
is at 1 bar. The membrane of the sniﬀer chip consists of a perforated silicon membrane, with
holes about 3 µm in diameter and 15 µm long, much wider and shorter than the pores through
the Gortex Teﬂon membranes used in DEMS. The membrane is covered in a hydrophobic FDTS
coating, and surface tension is enough to prevent electrolyte from passing through the membrane
(discussed further in Subsection 3.1.1). When the membrane is covered in an electrolyte, which
has a total vapor pressure signiﬁcantly less than 1 bar, the pressure diﬀerence is made up by
a carrier gas, usually helium.
The only outlet gas ﬂow from the sniﬀer chamber is to the
QMS, and this ﬂow rate is controlled by a narrow capillary just like the microreactor, having a
value of Q0 ≈1015 molecules per second. The time resulting residence time in the sniﬀer chip
is ≈0.5s, compared to a very similar measured response time in a conventional DEMS setup
with a deposited electrode of ≈1s.91 In the next chapter, however, I will show that the time
response in a thin-layer setup is in most cases dominated by diﬀusion through the electrolyte
and evaporation across the membrane, not the vacuum system.
A photograph of a used sniﬀer chip and a valve diagram of the sniﬀer setup are shown in Figure
1.5.
The sniﬀer chip was assumed to be about 1000 times more sensitive than conventional DEMS for
all products with a vapor pressure since, under stagnant conditions, every molecule produced at
the electrode was thought to end up at the ionization chamber, rather than 99.9% being pumped
away in the diaphragm.
The next chapter will present a set of theoretical models to test this assumption, analyzing the
sniﬀer chip’s strengths and weaknesses as an analytical tool to an extent not done before.
41
==PAGE:55==
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.5: (a) photograph of a used sniﬀer chip, with my ﬁngers to indicate the scale. (b)
Sniﬀer setup valve diagram. The sniﬀer chip (not to scale) is bottom center. The capillary to the
QMS and the carrier gas channel are connected to the gas/vacuum system via an interface block
(not shown) and sealed with o-rings. The U-shaped carrier gas channel of the chip is regulated
by the pressure controller (PC) downstream and a ﬂow controller (FC) upstream. The buﬀer
volume allows the turbo pump on the far right to pump down the chip without being damaged
by allowing air in the volume between the chip capillary and the QMS valve to expand by a
factor of 1000, lowering the the pressure from 1 bar to 1 millibar, which can then be pumped
down through the needle or through the gate valve on the far right. The buﬀer volume can also
be used to pump down the inlet gas line to the left of the sniﬀer chip. Pressure is monitored in
the QMS and in the buﬀer volume by ion guages (IG). A future, commercial, iteration of the
setup will only require one turbo pump, considerably reducing the cost.
42
==PAGE:56==
2.
Model comparison of in situ mass spectrometries
In the previous chapter, we zoomed in from the global challenge of closing the anthropogenic
carbon cycle, via an argument that CO2 electroreduction catalysis is the way to meet this chal-
lenge, through a discussion of the framework in which CO2 electroreduction can be understood
followed immediately by a review revealing that it in fact is not very well understood yet, and
into a new experimental setup based on the sniﬀer chip that we hope will help the ﬁeld progress.
The chapter ended with a speculation that the sniﬀer should always be about 1000 times more
sensitive than DEMS, the established technology.
The claimed factor 1000 improvement in sensitivity of the sniﬀer over DEMS, validated for H2,
O2, and CO2 in acid by water electrolysis and ∗CO oxidation (“CO stripping”) experiments,99
is based on the fact that in DEMS approximately 99.9% of what goes through the membrane
is lost to diﬀerential pumping, whereas in the sniﬀer everything makes it to the QMS. There
is another implicit assumption in this argument, namely that the amount of analyte making it
through the membrane is the same in the sniﬀer and in DEMS. It had, in fact, been assumed
that all of the analyte made it through the membrane, at least in a stagnant electrolyte where
the analyte has no where else to go.
From the start of the project, I suspected that this assumption did not quite hold, even in the
case of a stagnant electrolyte. Formate, for example, which has virtually no vapor pressure in
neutral or basic electrolytes, would just accumulate until partial current density towards formate
reached zero for some reason, perhaps the depletion of water, which does evaporate through the
membrane. In a ﬂow system, some of the analyte for less volatile compounds would ﬂow past the
membrane, though it wasn’t clear how much, and whether it would eﬀect the relative sensitivity
of the sniﬀer chip and DEMS. The factor 1000 and with it presumably the assumption of 100%
membrane collection eﬃciency clearly did hold in the case of insoluble gases like H2 in a stagnant
system, and we did not see exactly where or how the transition would work, nor, importantly,
how it would eﬀect our sensitivity towards interesting CO2 reduction products of intermediate
volatility such as ethanol. We all wished to understand the system better.
This chapter will examine the relative sensitivities of the sniﬀer and DEMS, further investi-
gate what we can and cannot expect from the sniﬀer chip, and propose improvements. These
modeling results are important for technological development, but also because knowing what
sensitivity to expect for diﬀerent products is essential to correctly interpreting the results of
CO2RR experiments.
This is a purely theoretical chapter, with results being based on a simple models of the vacuum
43
==PAGE:57==
system and slightly less simple models of the small volume of electrolyte above the sniﬀer or
DEMS membrane, i.e.
the working volume.
When possible, numerical solutions, analytical
solutions, and/or thought experiments will be compared, but comparison of the modeling to
actual experiments will not come until Section 3.3 in the next chapter.
2.1
Advantages and disadvantages of diﬀerential pumping
For a simple conceptual consideration of the sensitivity of the sniﬀer relative to DEMS, it
is easiest to start with a ﬂow system.
I will take the ﬁgure of merit for sniﬀer and DEMS
sensitivity in a ﬂow system to be the portion of the molecule of interest, the analyte, produced
at the electrode that makes it to the QMS chamber. This is assumed to be proportional to the
mass signal for a given partial current density, and thus inversely proportional to the detection
limit.
This ﬁgure of merit will be called the collection eﬃciency, N.
The collection eﬃciency can
be broken up into two parts: the portion of the analyte that crosses the membrane, called the
membrane eﬃciency Nm; and the portion of the analyte crossing the membrane that then makes
it to the QMS, the vacuum eﬃciency Nv.
Calling the ﬂux (in mol/s) of analyte produced at the electrode, crossing the membrane, and
reaching the QMS Qel, QA, and QC, respectively, these deﬁnitions read:
Nm = QA
Qel
(2.1)
Nv = QC
QA
(2.2)
N = NmNv = QC
Qel
(2.3)
Figure 2.1 shows a schematic of both systems. They are conceptually quite similar, the only
immediately obvious diﬀerence between the two being that, while gas is pumped out of the
intermediate volume in DEMS, a carrier gas is let in to the intermediate volume in the sniﬀer.
The total ﬂux to the QMS, Q0, is identical in the two setups, being regulated by the diﬀerential
pumping speed in DEMS and by the capillary leaving the chamber in the sniﬀer.
To separate the problems of diﬀusion, evaporation, and diﬀerential pumping, I came up with
two scenarios in which the problem could be simpliﬁed:
1. An insoluble gas, all of which diﬀuses to and degases through the membrane in both sniﬀer
and DEMS. As an approximation, one could use H2.
44
==PAGE:58==
Figure 2.1: Schematic diagram of the vacuum system of (a) DEMS, in which with diﬀerential
pumping lowers the pressure of the intermediate volume, i.e.
the diaphragm to 1 mbar by
removing 99.9% of solvent and analyte alike coming through the membrane (b) the sniﬀer chip,
in which a carrier gas brings the pressure in the intermediate volume, i.e. the sniﬀer chamber, up
to one bar. Red arrows represent analyte, green represent solvent, and black represent combined
ﬂuxes. c0 = Qel
F
and Q0 are identical in the two systems. The diagrams are not to scale.
2. An analyte chemically identical to the solvent, but somehow identiﬁable in the QMS. The
mole fraction of this analyte in the vapor evaporating through the membrane of either system
is identical to its mole fraction on the liquid side of the membrane. As an approximation, one
could consider isotopically labeled water, such as H2
18O. This could be the actual case in an
experiment involving ORR of 18O2. Note that it is emphatically not an isotopic eﬀect that I
am interested in with this choice of analyte. I will pretend that H2
18O is completely identical
to the water it is solvated in, other than that it gives a separate signal in the QMS.
2.1.1
Case 1: insoluble gas
For a fast-diﬀusing, fast-evaporating gas like H2, the membrane eﬃciency, Nm, approaches 1.
Looking at Figure 2.1a, the total molar ﬂux into the diaphragm is the solvent ﬂux, QW (W for
water), plus the analyte ﬂux, QA. Of this total molar ﬂux, Q0 goes to mass spectrometer. The
vacuum collection eﬃciency is
Nv =
Q0
QA + QW
DEMS
(2.4)
The molar rate of water evaporation through the membrane, QW , is calculated for both DEMS
and for the sniﬀer in the next section. The result is that the water ﬂux, assuming an electrode
area of 1 cm2, is about 2.5µmol/s or 1.5·1018 molecules per second, whereas Q0 is set to 1015
molecules per second. Assuming that a small amount of analyte is generated compared to the
45
==PAGE:59==
water evaporation rate, i.e. QA ≪QW , the vacuum eﬃciency, and thus the total collection
eﬃciency for an insoluble gas, is indeed on the order of ≈10−3. Meanwhile, Nm = 1, giving
N = NmNv =
Q0
QA + QW
≈10−3 .
DEMS
(2.5)
For the sniﬀer, the vacuum eﬃciency Nv is always equal to 1, so the overall eﬃciency is
N = NmNv = 1 .
sniﬀer
(2.6)
In this case, the sniﬀer clearly is ≈1000 times more sensitive than DEMS.
2.1.2
Case 2: labled water
In the case of an analyte with the same volatility as solvent, like H2
18O, the analyte’s mole
fraction in the liquid and gas phases will be equal, as will its molar contribution to the ﬂux
across the membrane. Using the symbols from Figure 2.1, and xA for mole fraction analyte,
pA
pW + pA
=
QA
QW + QA
=
c0
cW + c0
= xA .
(2.7)
In the DEMS setup, the total pressure in the diaphragm is pW +pA, and so the ﬂux to the QMS
is
QC = Q0
pA
pA + pW
= Q0xA .
DEMS
(2.8)
By substitution into the deﬁnition of the total eﬃciency N,
N = QC
Qel
= Q0
Qel
xA .
DEMS
(2.9)
In the case of the sniﬀer, Equation 2.7 also holds, but the total pressure in the intermediate
volume, rather than pA + pW , is pA + pW + pHe, which is set to 1 bar by a pressure controller
regulating the helium ﬂow.
QC = Q0
pA
pA + pW + pHe
sniﬀer
(2.10)
Comparing with Equation 2.8, the sniﬀer ﬂux diﬀers by a factor
pA + pW
pA + pW + pHe
= pvap
1bar ≈0.030 .
sniﬀer
(2.11)
Where I have used a vapor pressure of 30 mbar for water at room temperature. The result for
the overall eﬃciency is:
N = QC
Qel
≈0.030 Q0
Qel
xA
sniﬀer
(2.12)
46
==PAGE:60==
In this case, the sniﬀer is ≈30 times less sensitive than DEMS.
This realization took us surprise. Going from H2 to H2
18O shifts the relative sensitivity towards
conventional DEMS by four and a half orders of magnitude!
Since Nv is 1 for the sniﬀer in both cases and ≈10−3 for DEMS in both cases, the diﬀerence
must be due to a 4.5 order of magnitude relative change Nm. It may seem counterintuitive that
the portion of the analyte that passes through the membrane is smaller in the sniﬀer chip than in
DEMS, as the sniﬀer membrane is much more permeable than the DEMS membrane. However,
the transport rate across the membrane is limited in the sniﬀer chip due to the fact that the
only outlet is the relatively slow ﬂow through the capillary to the QMS, whereas in DEMS mass
transport, there is about 1000 times higher outlet ﬂow, through the diﬀerential pumping. This
explains 3 of the 4.5 orders of magnitude of change in relative Nm. Th last 1.5 are explained
by the “diluting” eﬀect of the carrier gas in the sniﬀer chip. Diﬀerential pumping thus has the
advantage, for compounds with low membrane eﬃciencies, of requiring no carrier gas.
This thought experiment provides us with two points of comparison. However, prediction of the
the sensitivity of the sniﬀer chip for CO2RR products and intermediates, most of which have
intermediate volatility between H2 and H2
18O requires a more general model.
The strategy for development of such a model will be as follows: (1) examine the transport
mechanism at the liquid-gas interphase and calculate the mass transport coeﬃcients; (2) set
up and solve a system of diﬀerential equations for a stagnant system using the mass transport
coeﬃcients, and calculate the expected time response for an electrochemical pulse; and (3) set
up and solve the more complex set of diﬀerential equations for a system with ﬂow, and calculate
the expected collection eﬃciencies.
2.2
Mass transfer coeﬃcients in DEMS and the sniﬀer
To design a quantitative model of membrane collection eﬃciency, we need to understand the
mass transfer at the liquid-vacuum or liquid-gas interface. This understanding will take the form
of a mass transfer coeﬃcient h, deﬁned here as the ratio of the molar ﬂux density of analyte
across the interface to the concentration of analyte in the liquid at that point on the interface
h ≡
j(x)
c(x, 0)
units:
mol/(m2s)
mol/m3
= m/s
(2.13)
Figure 2.2 shows proposed mechanisms of mass transfer at the liquid-gas interface of (a) conven-
tional DEMS and (b) the sniﬀer chip, discussed separately below. After deriving an expression
47
==PAGE:61==
for each mass transfer coeﬃcient, each will be applied to the solvent, water, to calculate the
water evaporation rate at the membranes in the two systems.
Both mass transfer models will make use of the equilibrium constant between a dissolved species
and its gas or vapor, known as the Henry’s law constant or simply Henry’s constant. For non-
ideal solutions, the Henry’s constant is a function of concentration.
Here, however, we will
assume dilute solutions and use the limiting Henry’s constant, which is extrapolated to inﬁnite
dilution. Several forms of the Henry’s constant are tabulated and used in the literature. Two
forms will be used in this report, with the second, nondimensional version used exclusively in
this chapter.
Kh =
lim
c(aq)→0
p(g)
c(aq)
units:
Pa
mol/m3
(2.14)
KH = Kh
RT =
lim
c(aq)→0
c(g)
c(aq)
units:
−
(2.15)
Here, the proportionality RT between the two constants makes use of the ideal gas law p = cRT.
Henry’s-law constants are discussed further in Appendix B.1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Schematic diagram of the proposed mass transfer mechanisms. (a) In conventional
DEMS, the water miniscus at the liquid side of each pore in the porous teﬂon (Gortex) membrane
is at equilibrium with its vapor. The vapor, meanwhile diﬀuses through the pore by Knudsen
diﬀusion. (b) in the sniﬀer chip, electrolyte at each point along the membrane is at local equilib-
rium with the gas in the sniﬀer chamber below it. This gas, meanwhile, is convectively transfered
to the capillary to the QMS
2.2.1
DEMS
In DEMS, a porous Teﬂon membrane separates the liquid from the low vacuum of ≈1 mbar in
the diaphram. The pores are dp ≈20 nm in diameter and Lp ≈100 µm long.92 The electrolyte
is prevented from breaching the membrane by a high contact angle with Teﬂon, a hydrophobic
48
==PAGE:62==
material, which would place a tremendous force back out of the membrane on an advancing
electrolyte meniscus. Analyte at the miniscus is able to equilibrate with the gas. The gas at the
liquid end of a pore in the membrane will have a pressure approximately equal to water’s vapor
pressure, 30 mbar at 298.15K. At this pressure, the mean free path is on the order of 100µm. A
comparison of the mean free path with the pore diameter shows that the diﬀusion is well in the
Knudsen regime.
The Knudsen diﬀusion constant in the a pore is100
Dk = 3
dp
r
8
π
RT
M ,
(2.16)
where M is the molar mass of the analyte. Applying Fick’s ﬁrst law and making the approxi-
mation that the diﬀusion is to vacuum rather than to 1 mbar, the molar ﬂux density of analyte
through a pore is
jpore = −Dk
∂c(g)
∂y
≈Dk
c(g)(x, 0)
Lp
= KH
Dk
Lp
c(aq)(x, 0) .
(2.17)
Taking into account the parts of the membrane that are not pores, the averaged molar ﬂux
density through the membrane at position x is
j(x) = φjpore = KH
φDk
Lp
c(aq)(x, 0)
(2.18)
where φ is the porosity of the membrane, approximately 0.5.92 The mass transfer coeﬃcient is
thus, from Equation 2.13,
h = KH
φDk
Lp
= KH
φdp
3Lp
r
8
π
RT
M
(2.19)
This model of mass transfer assumes equilibrium at the electrolyte meniscus. This assumption
may not be completely accurate, as there are simultaneously convection of electrolyte to the
evaporation front from the liquid side, and fast Knudsen diﬀusion from the gas-phase side.
2.2.2
Sniﬀer
Mass transport of gas away from the gas-liquid interface is due to the ﬂow of gas through the
capillary at a molar ﬂux of Q0. This involves convection of gas across the liquid-gas interface,
and diﬀusion throughout the volume occuring on a approximately the same time scale. This
would be very diﬃcult to model, so I will make a rather large assumption in my derivation of
a mass-transfer number: all points on the membrane contribute uniformly to Q0, and lateral
transport across the membrane in the gas phase is ignored. This allows the deﬁnition of a ﬂux
49
==PAGE:63==
density of gas j0 = Q0/Am, part of which is due to analyte. The mole fraction of species i in
the gas at a particular point is
pi(x)
pm
= RTc(g)(x)
pm
= KH
RTc(aq)(x, 0)
pm
,
(2.20)
where pm is the pressure behind the membrane, i.e. chamber pressure; the molar ﬂux density
through point ex is
j(x) = pi(x)
pm
j0 = KH
RTQ0
PmAm
c(aq)(x, 0) ;
(2.21)
and the mass transfer coeﬃcient is
h = KH
RTQ0
pmAm
(2.22)
2.2.3
Water ﬂux
Having derived expressions for the mass transfer coeﬃcients, we can test them to calculate the
ﬂux of water through the membranes. This is an especially important parameter in DEMS, as
it determines the amount of diﬀerential pumping needed.
The water ﬂux is related to the mass transfer coeﬃcient for water by:
QW = AmjW = AmcW h
(2.23)
The following relationship will be used for both systems to rewrite the henry’s-law coeﬃcient in
terms of water’s vapor pressure:
KHcW = c(gas)
W
= pvap(T)
RT
(2.24)
The water ﬂuxes will be calculated here using the parameters dp = 20 nm, Lp = 100µ m,
Q0 =
1
NA · 1015 s−1, T = 298.15 K, M = 18 g/mol, pm,sniﬀer = 1 bar, and Am = 1 cm2.
DEMS:
QW = AmcW h = AmcW KH
φdp
3Lp
r
8
π
RT
M
(2.25)
= Am
Pvap(T)
RT
φdp
3Lp
r
8
π
RT
M
(2.26)
= 2.43 · 10−6[mol/s]
(2.27)
NAQW = 1.46 · 1018[s−1]
(2.28)
MW
ρW
QW = 46.2[nl/s]
(2.29)
This water evaporation rate for DEMS is in good agreement, adjusted for membrane area, with
values from the literature and calculations based instead on the pumping speed.92,98
50
==PAGE:64==
Sniﬀer:
QW = AmcW h = cW KH
RTQ0
pm
(2.30)
= pvap(T)
pm
Q0
(2.31)
= 5.2133 · 10−11[mol/s]
(2.32)
NAQW = 3.14 · 1013[s−1]
(2.33)
MW
ρW
QW = 0.94[pl/s]
(2.34)
Thus, water evaporates from DEMS about 40,000 times faster than from the sniﬀer setup.
2.3
Time constants and sensitivity in a stagnant system
A fast time response is one of the most important features of in-situ mass spectrometry, as
it opens up the possibility of observing time-dependent changes in product distribution. As
mentioned before, both conventional DEMS and the sniﬀer have a vacuum-system time response
on the order of 0.5-1s. This section will model the electrolyte time response, using the mass
transfer coeﬃcients derived in the previous section together with Fick’s second law for diﬀusion.
2.3.1
Model
Here I develop the mathematical model which will be used to describe concentration in the
working volume and time-dependent ﬂux through the membrane when the electrolyte is stagnant
and the electrode is directly opposite the membrane, and apply the model to a step-function
pulse of analyte production at the electrode. One spatial dimension, x, will be used, with x = 0
at the membrane and x = L at the electrode.
Fick’s second law holds within the working volume.
∂c
∂t = D ∂2c
∂x2 .
(2.35a)
Fick’s ﬁrst law applied at the membrane is
D ∂c
∂x

x=0
= hc ,
(2.35b)
where h is the mass transfer coeﬃcient discussed in the previous section. The concentration
gradient is positive as ﬂux is towards the negative x direction. We consider a pulse of analyte
51
==PAGE:65==
production at the electrode (x = L) lasting from time t = 0 to t = t1. Fick’s ﬁrst law reads
D ∂c
∂x

0≤t≤t1
x=L
= J
nF = Qel .
(2.35c)
Finally, when the pulse is oﬀ, there is zero ﬂux through the electrode and Fick’s law reads
∂c
∂x

t<0 or t1<t
x=L
= 0 .
(2.35d)
Together these four equations describe the system and its boundary conditions.
An analytical solution is easily obtained in the assumption of steady state during the pulse.
∂c
∂t = D ∂2c
∂x2 = 0
⇒
c = a + bx
(2.36)
D ∂c
∂x

x=L
= Qel
⇒
b = Qel
D
(2.37)
D ∂c
∂x

x=0
= hc
⇒
c(0) = a = Db
h = Qel
h
(2.38)
c = Qel
h + Qel
D x
(2.39)
This solution describes a constant molar ﬂux Qel going in the negative x from the electrode to
the membrane and evaporating through the membrane.
Before solving the time-dependent system, I make use of a technique called non-dimensionalization.
This involves deﬁning scales for each of the dimensional variables such that the equations become
as simple as possible when the variables are measured, non-dimensionally, on these scales.
A good set of non-dimensional variables for this system is
ˆx = x/x0 = x/L ,
(2.40a)
ˆt = t/t0 = t/
L2
D

, and
(2.40b)
ˆc = c/c0 = c/

Qel
L
D

,
(2.40c)
where x0 = L, t0 = L2/D, and c0 = Qel L
D are the length, time, and concentration scales,
respectively. This is a good set of non-dimensional variables because, when substituted in to
Equations 2.35, there is only one constant left.
∂ˆc
∂ˆt = ∂2ˆc
∂ˆx2
(2.41a)
∂ˆc
∂ˆx

ˆx=1
= αˆc
(2.41b)
∂ˆc
∂ˆx

ˆt≤0
ˆx=0
= 1
(2.41c)
∂ˆc
∂ˆx

ˆt<0 or ˆt>ˆt1
ˆx=0
= 0
(2.41d)
52
==PAGE:66==
Compound, system
D / [m2/s]
KH
h / [m/s]
α
tR,an = L2
2D + L
h /[s]
H2, DEMS
4.5·10−9
52
3.1
69000
1.11
H2, sniﬀer
4.5·10−9
52
1.1·10−4
2.5
2.03
O2, DEMS
2.1·10−9
31
0.46
22000
2.38
O2, sniﬀer
2.1·10−9
31
6.4·10−5
3.1
3.94
C2H4, DEMS
1.9·10−9
8.6
0.14
7300
2.67
C2H4, sniﬀer
1.9·10−9
8.6
1.8·10−5
0.95
8.33
ethanol, DEMS
1.2·10−9
1.9·10−4
2.3·10−6
0.19
46.3
ethanol, sniﬀer
1.2·10−9
1.9·10−4
3.9·10−10
3.2·10−5
253000
Table 2.1: Diﬀusion coeﬃcient, Henry’s-law constant, mass transfer coeﬃcient, system param-
eter α, and response time expected at L = 100 µm from the analytical solution (Appendix D) all
for a few compounds in the DEMS and sniﬀer systems. All system parameters used are given in
Table 2.2
This single system parameter, α, describes the ratio between characteristic evaporation rate h,
and diﬀusion rate D/L. The diﬀerences between the sniﬀer and DEMS, as far as the working
volume is concerned, lie in this parameter.
α = Lh
D
(2.42)
α = L
DKH
RTQ0
P0Am
sniﬀer
(2.43)
α = L
DkH
φDk
Lp
= L
DKH
φdp
3Lp
r
8
π
RT
M
DEMS
(2.44)
The steady state solution can also be written in terms of these non-dimensional variables. It is
ˆc = 1
α + ˆx
(2.45)
The values of the system parameter α for a hydrogen and for ethanol compounds of interest are
included in Table 2.1. A working distance of L = 100 µm was used.
Now, the model for the working volume in a stagnant system is ready to solve. The system
can be solved analytically, using a Laplace transform, as described in Appendix D.
By an
approximative technique, the analytical solution predicts, to ﬁrst order, an exponential decay in
ﬂux across the membrane with a time constant
tR = L2
2D + L
h
(2.46)
53
==PAGE:67==
Corresponding to a non-dimensional time constant of
ˆtR = 1
2 + 1
α
(2.47)
In the non-dimensionalization, I chose a diﬀusion-based time scale. In fact, an evaporation-
based time scale with t′
0 = L/h could have been chosen with equal validity. Then the system
parameter α−1 would have appeared in Fick’s second law, and the above equation would have
read ˆt′
R = α
2 + 1.
The remaining focus here will be on the numerical solution.
To solve the system given by Equations 2.41d numerically, I use the method of lines, whereby
ˆx is discretized, and for each one of the ﬁnite (here, 100) included ˆx values, an ordinary dif-
ferential equation (ODE) relates the rate of change of the concentration at a given time at to
the concentrations at that and the other ˆx’s at that time. The resulting set of ODE’s is solved
numerically in Matlab. For more details, see Appendix C.
2.3.2
Case 1: Diﬀusion-limited
When the system parameter α is high, evaporation is fast compared to diﬀusion and the problem
becomes diﬀusion-limited. The system has been modeled before under the assumption of pure
diﬀusion limitation.98 Here, the results of the numerical model described above are presented
for the analyte H2, which, especially in DEMS, approach a purely diﬀusional model.
Figure 2.3 shows a heat map of the concentration as a function of time and position, as well as a
plot of the resulting molar ﬂux to the QMS, for the case of an H2 pulse in both DEMS and the
sniﬀer. Qel corresponds to 2.5 mA/cm2 going toward H2 production. All system parameters used
in these calculations, other than the compound-dependent ones, were those given in Table 2.2.
The system parameter α was calculated, the non-dimensional system was solved numerically
in Matlab, and the resulting concentration proﬁle was dimensioinalized according to Equations
2.40. The ﬂux through the membrane was obtained from the concentration proﬁle by applying
Fick’s ﬁrst law to the two points nearest the membrane, as described in Appendix C.
The signal onset when the pulse started and the signal decay are not quite exponential, but show
extra rounding towards the top of the pulse. The signal onset and signal decay were nonetheless
ﬁt with the exponential curves y = A exp(−t/tR) and y = A(1 −exp(−t/tR), respectively,
and the ﬁtted response times tR, indicated in the ﬁgure, are in excellent agreement with those
predicted by the approximate analytical solution, shown in the last column of Table 2.1.
The pulses modeled in Figure 2.3 were started at 1 on the non-dimensional scale t0 = L2/D, here
2.2 s; and lasted 7 on this non-dimensional scale, here 15.5 s. This length of time was chosen,
54
==PAGE:68==
[!ht]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.3: Top: Heat plots of H2 concentration for (a) conventional DEMS and (b) the sniﬀer
setup, for an HER current 2.5 mA/cm2 in a stagnant electrolyte. The horizontal and vertical
axes give time from the start of the pulse and distance from the electrode (with the liquid-
gas interface at the top), respectively. A vertical cross-section of the heat map represents the
concentration proﬁle at a given time. Note the diﬀerent time and concentration scales. Bottom:
The corresponding ﬂux of H2 to the quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) chamber as a function
of time in (c) conventional DEMS and (d) the sniﬀer setup. The dotted lines are exponential ﬁts
of the onset and decay of the pulse, with the ﬁtted time constant indicated.
as it seemed adequate to reach steady state. To test whether steady state was reached, and to
validate the numerical solution against the analytical solution for steady state, the concentration
proﬁle at the timestep immediately before the pulse was stopped was plotted together with the
analytical steady-state solution for each case in Figure 2.4. In DEMS, the steady state is clearly
reached, and involves negligible concentration at the membrane.
In the sniﬀer, the volume
nearest the electrode (at x = 100 µm) has not fully reached steady state, but the straight line
55
==PAGE:69==
at the membrane (x = 0) indicates that the ﬂux through the membrane, and thus the signal,
has reached steady-state value. There is a signiﬁcant H2 concentration at the membrane at
steady state in the sniﬀer, meaning that a purely diﬀusion-limited is inadequate here. The time
constant also makes the importance of evaporation clear, as it is almost double the time constant
expected for a purely diﬀusion-limited system. Thus, evaporation limitation is important in the
sniﬀer even for the most volatile products.
The slightly longer response time, however, is in contrast to a much higher signal in the sniﬀer,
as indicated by the
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: Comparison of analytical steady-state concentration proﬁle (dotted line) with the
concentration proﬁle immediately before the pulse was turned oﬀ(solid curve) in the numerical
solution presented in Figure 2.3 for H2 in (a) conventional DEMS and (b) the sniﬀer setup
2.3.3
Case 2: Evaporation-limited
For small values of alpha, the system is expected to be evaporation-limited. This is the case
for ethanol. Figure 2.5 shows the concentration heat maps and the resulting signal proﬁles for
ethanol. The pulse time was 14L/h in each case. The onset and decay of the signal are almost
perfectly ﬁt by exponential curves this time, and time constants are much larger in both systems,
especially the sniﬀer. Again, the time constants are in excellent agreement with those predicted
by the analytical solution, given in Table 2.1.
The sniﬀer setup would have a colossal time constant of 250,000, or more than two days. Under
this model, and at 2.5mA/cm2 partial current density towards ethanol, steady state would be
reached with an ethanol concentration of 50 mol/l. The concentration of pure ethanol is 17 mol/l,
so this is of course impossible. However, the model is expected to hold for short timescales, so a
56
==PAGE:70==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.5: Top: Heat plots of ethanol concentration for (a) conventional DEMS and (b) the
sniﬀer setup, for an CO2RR reduction current to ethanol of 2.5 mA/cm2 in a stagnant electrolyte.
The horizontal and vertical axes give time from the start of the pulse and distance from the
electrode (with the liquid-gas interface at the top), respectively.
A vertical cross-section of
the heat map represents the concentration proﬁle at a given time.
Note the diﬀerent time
and concentration scales. Bottom: The corresponding ﬂux of ethanol to the quadrupole mass
spectrometer (QMS) chamber as a function of time in (a) conventional DEMS and (b) the sniﬀer
setup. The dotted lines are exponential ﬁts of the onset and decay of the pulse, with the ﬁtted
time constant indicated. Note the diﬀerent ﬂux scales.
better ﬁgure of merit may be how long the sniﬀer setup takes to give the signal that DEMS gives
at steady state, which it approaches with a time constant of 46 seconds. At a current density
of 2.5mA/cm2, it takes the sniﬀer 700s to reach a point where the ﬂux across the membrane and
to the QMS is 1.5 pmol/s, the steady-state value in DEMS, which looses approximately 99.9%
of the signal to diﬀerential pumping (Equation 2.4). This is bad news for the sniﬀer, especially
since practical issues described in the next chapter make it very diﬃcult to run electrolysis for
57
==PAGE:71==
that long.
2.3.4
Inﬂuence of working distance
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: Inﬂuence of working distance on shape of signal to QMS during an electrochemical
pulse for (a) a diﬀusion-limited case (H2 in DEMS) and (b) an evaporation-limited case (ethanol
in the sniﬀer).
The diﬀusion time scale t0 = L2
D increases with L squared, whereas the evaporation time scale
t′
0 = t0/α = L
h increases linearly with L. Thus, the eﬀect of working distance is more pronounced
in diﬀusion-limited cases. This was simulated, and the results are shown in Figure 2.6.
To see how this eﬀects pulse size and shape in diﬀusion-controlled and evaporation-controlled
scenarios, H2 in DEMS (purely diﬀusion-limited) and ethanol in the sniﬀer (purely evaporation-
limited) were modeled at diﬀerent working distance.
At the shortest distance used, 25µm,
the pulse time was set to 7L2/D for the diﬀusion-limited case and 14L/h for the evaporation-
limited case. The same pulse duration on an absolute time scale was used for the other distances.
As expected, working distance has a more pronounced eﬀect when the system is evaporation-
limited.
2.4
Sensitivity in a ﬂow system
As the modeling presented in the previous section of ethanol production in the sniﬀer setup made
clear, and a discussion of working volume pH in the next chapter will further comment on, the
composition of the electrolyte in the working volume is not stable in a stagnant system. Having
a ﬂow ensures that the electrolyte is constantly refreshed. It also avoids long time response
58
==PAGE:72==
for slowly-evaporating compounds like ethanol, as the ﬂow sets the time response; though this
comes at the expense of sensitivity. Separation of the working volume and collection volume
also allows for a more ideal geometry regarding the working and counter electrodes.
In this section, the sensitivity of DEMS and the sniﬀer chip in a ﬂow system are compared for
diﬀerent compounds and conditions, and suggestions are made on how to improve the sniﬀer’s
sensitivity towards slow-evaporating compounds.
2.4.1
Model
This section will use the coordinate system indicated in the schematic diargrams in Figure 2.2
of Section 2.2, with x gong from 0 at the membrane to L at the electrode, and y going from 0
to w across the electrode and parallel to electrolyte ﬂow. The z direction, of which the model is
independent, goes from 0 to w2.
The continuity equation for concentration in a ﬂuid under convection is100
 ∂
∂t + ⃗v · ∇

c = D∇2c + r ,
(2.48)
where ⃗v is the convective velocity of the solvent at a given point and r is the net rate of
generation. Here, r = 0 except at the electrode surface and membrane surfaces. To simplify the
model, I will assume that
⃗v = v0⃗x ,
(2.49)
meaning that the velocity proﬁle is uniform. This assumption is, of course, false. The Reynold’s
number in this system, taking, as an example, a ﬂow rate of F = 1 µl/s, a working distance of
L = 100 µm, and a membrane width of w2 = 0.5 cm is
Re = v0LρW
µW
= FρW
w2µW
=
1[µl/s] · 1000[kg/m3]
0.5[cm] · 8.90·10−4[Pa·s] = 0.22 ,
(2.50)
where ρW and µW are the density and viscocity of water, and I have made the substitution
v0 = F/(Lw2).
This Reynold’s number places the ﬂow in the Stokes ﬂow regime, where a
parabolic ﬂow proﬁle is expected.
However, as the diﬀerences between a uniform and parabollic ﬂow proﬁle are expected to aﬀect
the sniﬀer and DEMS in the same way, and the primary aim of this model is to compare the sniﬀer
to DEMS, this assumption should not have a large eﬀect the conclusions of the model, while it
greatly simpliﬁes the implementation. I will also assume that concentration is independent of z
position, and treat the system in steady state.
59
==PAGE:73==
The mass transport equation then becomes
v0
∂c
∂y = D
 ∂2c
∂y2 + ∂2c
∂x2

.
(2.51a)
Another assumption made here is that the analyte is uniformly distributed in the electrolyte
when it reaches the collection volume. A model described in Reference 92 indicates that this is
not the case for dual thin-layer ﬂow cell. However, this also simpliﬁes the implementation and
is expected to eﬀect the sniﬀer and DEMS in the same way.
The concentration at y = 0 is thus taken to be c0 = Qel/F. Mass transport at the membrane is
treated in the same way as for a stagnant system. The boundary conditions are then:
c = c0,
y = 0
(2.51b)
D ∂c
∂x = hc,
x = 0 and 0 < y < w
(2.51c)
D ∂c
∂x = 0,
x = L or (x = 0 and (y < 0 or y > w))
(2.51d)
As in the model of a stagnant system, I will non-dimensionalize the system described in Equa-
tions 2.51. The scales will be
ˆc = c/c0
(2.52a)
ˆx = x/w
(2.52b)
ˆy = y/L
(2.52c)
The mass-transport equation is non-dimensionalized to give
β ∂ˆc
∂ˆy = ϵ2 ∂2ˆc
∂ˆy2 + ∂2ˆc
∂ˆx2
(2.53)
where β = v0w2
DL describes the relative importance of convection and diﬀusion and ϵ = L
w is the
aspect ratio of the collection volume. The equation can be simpliﬁed by realizing that the aspect
ratio is very small, i.e. ϵ ≪1. This removes the second derivative in ˆy. The full, non-dimensional
system for the working volume is thus:
β ∂ˆc
∂ˆy = ∂2ˆc
∂ˆx2
(2.54a)
ˆc = 1,
ˆy = 0
(2.54b)
∂ˆc
∂ˆx = αˆc,
ˆx = 0
(2.54c)
∂ˆc
∂ˆx = 0,
ˆx = 1
(2.54d)
It depends only on two non-dimensional parameters:
α = hL
D
(2.55)
β = v0w2
DL
(2.56)
60
==PAGE:74==
To calculate the overall collection eﬃciency for a given analyte and set of conditions, the following
procedure will be used:
1. Calculate the mass transfer coeﬃcient using Equation 2.19 (DEMS) or 2.22 (sniﬀer);
2. Calculate α and β using Equations 2.55 and 2.56
3. Solve non-dimensional system for the concentration proﬁle by the method of lines, discretizing
in ˆx and treating ˆy as the “time variable.”
4. Calculate the membrane eﬃciency and membrane ﬂux from the numerical solution using
Nm = 1 −
Z 1
0
ˆc(ˆx, 1)dˆx
(2.57)
and
QA = NmQel .
(2.58)
5. For DEMS, calculate the vapor pressure of water for the temperature given, the water ﬂux
from Equation 2.26, and the vacuum eﬃciency Nv by
Nv =
Q0
QA + QW
.
(2.59)
For the sniﬀer, Nv = 1.
6. Return the total eﬃciency
N = NmNv .
(2.60)
For more details on the implementation, see Appendix C. The parameters used for modeling
results presented below, when not explicitly stated otherwise, are given in Table 2.2.
2.4.2
Results: The importance of Henry’s Law constants
The diﬀerence, on the membrane side, between the sniﬀer and conventional DEMS, is in the
parameter α. Of the analyte properties aﬀecting α, by far the most important one is the Henry’s
law constant KH. It is the diﬀerent values of KH that give rise to the 4.5 order of magnitude
diﬀerence in relative sensitivity advantage arrived at in the thought experiment in section 2.1,
which compared H2 and H2
18O. The most important question for us is: how does the sniﬀer fair
for compounds, like CO2 reduction products, with Henry’s constants between these two cases.
The most useful plot is thus one of eﬃciency vs Henry’s constant. Such a plot is shown in Figure
2.7b. The membrane collection eﬃciency, vacuum collection eﬃciency, and overall collection
61
==PAGE:75==
parameter
value
SI unit
description/justiﬁcation
L
100e-6
m
100µm is a typical thickness of electrolyte above membrane
in thin-layer cell, and our typical working distance in the
sniﬀer setup.
w
5e-3
m
Width of membrane parallel and perpendicular to ﬂow,
respectively. A square membrane is used for simplicity.
Am = ww2 = 0.25cm2 is about the same as that in our
setup (though the sniﬀer membrane is circular).
w2
5e-3
m
F
1.0e-9
m3/s
1 µl/s is at the low end of the ﬂow rates reliably achievable
with typical DEMS technology92
dp
20e-9
m
Typical speciﬁcations (pore diameter, pore length, and
porosity, respectively) for DEMS Gortex membranes.92
Lp
100e-6
m
φ
0.50
-
Q0
1.66e-9
mol/s
Molecular ﬂux to the quadrupole mass spectrometer, equal
to 1015 molecules per second. Above this ﬂux, space-charge
eﬀects make QMS signals diﬃcult to quantify.
Qel
2.6e-9
mol/s
Molar ﬂux of analyte from the electrode. This value corre-
sponds to J = 2.5mA/cm2 with n = 2 and Ael = 0.2cm2
T
298.15
K
Standard temperature of 25◦C
Pm,sniﬀer
1e5
Pa
The pressure behind the sniﬀer membrane is kept to 1 bar
to avoid hydrostatic pressure across the membrane, which
can force electrolyte through
Pm,DEMS
1e2
Pa
The pressure behind the Gortex membrane in DEMS is kept
around 1 mbar by diﬀerential pumping
M
46.0e-3
kg/mol
Molar mass, diﬀusion constant in water, and limiting
Henry’s-law constant for ethanol.
D
2.27e-9
m2/s
KH
1.92e-4
-
Table 2.2: Parameters used for DEMS and sniﬀer modeling
62
==PAGE:76==
eﬃciency are shown on a log scale vs the dimensionless Herny’s-law constant, also on a log scale.
The henry’s-law constant for several compounds of interest are indicated. The ratio of the sniﬀer
of sniﬀer to DEMS collection eﬃciencies for a variety of conditions are shown as a function of
the Henry’s-law constant, also on a log-log plots, in Figure 2.8a, b, and c. The ratio of sniﬀer
to DEMS overall eﬃciency from Figure 2.7b is identical to the red trace in Figure 2.8a and the
black traces in Figure 2.8b and c, whereas the other traces represent the eﬀect of changing a
system parameter.
Each point on the membrane eﬃciency curve was obtained via a numerical simulation of the
diﬀusion and evaporation during electrolyte convection through the working volume. An example
of a such numerical solution is shown as a heat map in Figure 2.7a.
These results agree with the thought experiment in Section 2.1. The sniﬀer chip is approximately
three orders of magnitude more sensitive than DEMS for insoluble gases, and approximately 30
times less sensitive than DEMS for analytes with volatility comparable to the solvent. Unfortu-
nately for our ambitions, under these conditions the intersection, where the sniﬀer and DEMS
are equally sensitive, is at a dimensionless Henry’s constant of around 0.01, above the Henry’s
constant of alcohol and aldehyde potential CO2RR products and intermediates.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: (a) Heat map showing a numerical solution to system 2.54, redimensioned. Elec-
trolyte ﬂows in from the left. Note that the x and y axes do not have the same length scale. (b)
Log-log plots of DEMS (dotted curves) and sniﬀer (solid vurves) collection eﬃciencies vs Henry’s
constant. All other parameters are taken from Table 2.2. Red indicates membrane eﬃciency
(Nm), blue indicates vacuum eﬃciency (Nv), and black indicates overall collection eﬃciency
N = NmNv. As Nv = 1 for the sniﬀer, the red solid curve is under the black solid curve.
2.4.3
Inﬂuence of ﬂow rate, temperature, and pressure
63
==PAGE:77==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.8: Log-log plots of the ratio of sniﬀer collection eﬃciency to DEMS collection eﬃciency
vs Henry’s constant for various parameters. In (a), each trace represents a diﬀerent ﬂow rate,
as indicated by the legend. (b), Sniﬀer-chip pressure. (c), Temperature. In (d), the collection
eﬃciency for ethanol of DEMS and the sniﬀer are plotted as a function of temperature.
All parameters not explicitly varied are as given in Table 2.2. The Henry’s constants for various
relevant molecules are indicated. Each point of each trace is calculated via a numerical simula-
tions of diﬀusion and evaporation through the membrane of each setup, as described in the text.
One way to improve the sensitivity of the sniﬀer chip towards less volatile products could simply
be to change the conditions under which it operates. Three conditions are explored here: ﬂow
rate, sniﬀer-chip pressure, and temperature at the interface.
Flow rate
If the ﬂow rate is decreased, this favors the sniﬀer, as shown in Figure 2.8a. The entire slope
64
==PAGE:78==
of transition between the two extremes shifts towards lower Henry’s constants. This is because,
with more time in the collection volume, a larger portion of the analyte evaporates.
While
this favors both setups, the diﬀerence is more pronounced for the sniﬀer, which has lover Nm.
The sniﬀer and DEMS are equally sensitive to ethanol at a ﬂow rate of about 10 nl/s. This
is lower than the lowest possible ﬂow rate for DEMS, in which water evaporates at a rate of
approximately 40 nl/s. It would also be very diﬃcult to achieve controllably in practice, give
poor time resolution, and the electrochemistry would cause changes in the electrolyte, including
upconcentration of products and pH changes, similar to in a stagnant system.
Sniﬀer chamber pressure
If the pressure of inside the sniﬀer chip pm is lowered, this improves the mass transfer coeﬃcient
of the sniﬀer chip, as seen in Equation 2.22, improving the membrane collection eﬃciency. If pm
is lowered to 30 mbar, approximately the vapor pressure of water at 25◦C, the sniﬀer and DEMS
are equally sensitive towards low-volatility compounds. This result makes complete sense with
the thought experiment in Section 2.1, since it is dilution of the combined vapor pressure of
solute and analyte to 1 bar that made the sniﬀer worse than DEMS at detecting H2
18O. That
the model reproduces this result of the thought experiments is remarkable, as it is not obvious
anywhere in the input equations.
The fact that the sniﬀer can be at least as good as DEMS for any compound if the chip pressure
can be lowered to 30 mbar is intriguing, also, from a technology development perspective. The
downside for CO2RR and CORR experiments is that a 30 mbar chip would complicate using a
gas-saturated electrolyte. At present, we saturate our electrolyte during experiments by changing
the He carrier gas to the gas of interest (see the Valve diagram in Figure 1.5 of Subsection 1.3.2).
This would no longer be an option, as a carrier gas would not be needed to supplement the
electrolyte vapor pressure in a 30 mbar chip. If the electrolyte is presaturated, it will outgas in
the collection chamber to a pressure greater than 30 mbar, either necessitating active removal
of gas by the pressure controller - essentially, diﬀerential pumping - or making it harder to
quantify QMS signals due to the variable ﬂux through the capillary, which is proportional to
the sniﬀer-chip pressure.98
There are many other cases, however, where the extra sensitivity would be beneﬁcial and not
problematic, so we are looking into developing a 30 mbar chip. At present, the pressure in
the chips cannot be substantially lower than 1 bar, as the hydrostatic pressure would force the
electrolyte through the membrane (see Section 3.1.1). A 30 mbar chip could, however, be made
if a Teﬂon membrane can be bound to the silicon chip, though this may require the development
of a challenging new fabrication technique.
Temperature
65
==PAGE:79==
The ﬁnal parameter investigated was temperature. The eﬀect of temperature is two-fold. First,
it increases the water evaporation rate, thus decreasing the DEMS vacuum eﬃciency. Secondly,
it increases the analyte Henry’s constant, improving membrane eﬃciency in both setups but
moreso in the sniﬀer setup. The eﬀect on water’s vapor pressure is implemented as
pvap(T) = p◦exp
∆vapS◦
R

exp

−∆vapH◦
RT

.
(2.61)
This is the only eﬀect on the traces in Figure 2.8c, which show an advantage to the sniﬀer for a
given (constant) Henry’s law constant due to the decrease vacuum eﬃciency of DEMS.
The eﬀect of temperature on the Henry’s-law is given by
KH(T) = KH(T ◦) exp

−∆solH◦
R
 1
T ◦−1
T

.
(2.62)
Where T ◦is 25◦C, the temperature at which Henry’s constants are usually tabulated, and
∆solH◦is the standard enthalpy of solution of the gas or vapor (a negative number).
The combined eﬀect can be seen, for ethanol, in Figure 2.8d. Heating the sniﬀer chip up to 70◦
would improve the sensitivity of the sniﬀer chip by about 1.5 orders of magnitude, whereas it
would have a negative eﬀect on the sensitivity of DEMS.
We plan to utilize this technique to improve sensitivity. The interface block on which we mount
the sniﬀer chip is designed to be heated. In the present, stagnant, setup, heating would come
with the complication that the working volume and the electrode would also be heated, but in
the future a ﬂow cell could inslulate the working volume while heating the collection volume.
In summary for this chapter, a set of models have been put forward to evaluate the sensitivity
and time response of the the sniﬀer setup, especially compared to the established technoogy,
DEMS. The sniﬀer’s advantages come from the very small intermediate volume in the chip,
which among other things gives a very high time response of the vacuum system while avoiding
diﬀerential pumping, which drops the sensitivity by a factor of 1000 in DEMS. The disadvantage
of the sniﬀer setup is much lower mass transfer coeﬃcients for analyte across the membrane.
The eﬀect is that, for analytes of low volatility, the sniﬀer is up to 30 times less sensitive than
DEMS, despite the vacuum. In a stagnant system, the low mass transfer coeﬃcient gives rise
to longer time responses, such that it would take over two days to reach steady during ethanol
production at the electrode and a working distance of 100 µm. The sniﬀer is, however, 1000
times more sensitive than DEMS for insoluble gases, and the sensitivity for less soluble products
may be improved by lowering the pressure inside the chip or heating the chip.
66
==PAGE:80==
3.
Experimental considerations and method development
It was the ambition at the start of my master’s project to use the sniﬀer setup to make quantita-
tive studies of well-characterized catalyst systems, and to use the high sensitivity and fast time
response to draw conclusions about the mechanism of CO2 and CO reduction. We are a lot closer
to that point today than at the beginning of my project. However, a number of unanticipated
limitations and practical considerations meant that my project became less about catalysis and
more about the challenges of combining electrochemistry with in situ mass spectrometry.
This chapter will describe the practical considerations and steps taken towards making mean-
ingful electrochemistry coupled to mass spectrometry measurements (EC-MS) on CO2 and CO
reduction with the sniﬀer setup. A combination of models, experiments, and design ideas will
be presented.
The considerations described in this chapter motivated the further development of the setup
as well as the development of experimental methods, which were ultimately used to gather the
preliminary results presented in the next chapter. As method development and experiments
in practice proceeded in parallel, the methods used vary from experiment to experiments more
than they would in an ideal study.. The time line in Appendix A attempts to deconvolute this
process, making it clear which methods were used, and which practical problems still unsolved,
during each measurement.
3.1
Electrolyte considerations
Nearly all CO2 reduction studies are done in CO2-purged electrolytes, which are brought from
alkali to moderate pH by the carbonic acid equilibrium, as described below in Subsection 3.1.2.
CO reduction studies, however, can be done at any pH, as CO is kinetically inert and the
solubility of CO is relatively pH-independent. This is an advantage since C-C coupling during
CORR is promoted, relative to hydrogen evolution, at high pH (as described in Subsection
1.2.4). We chose therefore to focus on CORR experiments in alkali, with 0.1M KOH as our
electrolyte, a common electrolyte used in the literature for CO reduction.81,84 CO saturation
was accomplished by ﬂowing it as the carrier gas behind the sniﬀer membrane, simply by opening
the valve to CO in the inlet gas manifold (Figure 1.5 of Subsection 1.3.2), closing the valve to
our default carrier gas He, and correspondingly adjusting the ﬂow controllers.
Unfortunately, sniﬀer chips are not stable in 0.1M KOH, and so we switched to an alkaline
67
==PAGE:81==
Figure 3.1: QMS signal at several masses versus time for a typical sniﬀer-chip experiment.
This particular experiment, conducted 1. Dec 2015, is the ﬁrst experiment during which we
unequivocally observed electrochemically produced hydrocarbons in the sniﬀer setup. The elec-
trode is oxide-derived copper (OD Cu). Events during the experiment are indicated, as well as
explanations for changes in signals. The membrane breaches after 1.0 hours under 0.1M KOH,
a remarkably reproducible irritation (see text).
carbonate buﬀer, as described below. Carbonate buﬀers, ubiquitous in the CO2RR literature,
have a complex chemistry due to the fact that CO2 hydrates to form carbonic acid, H2CO3,
which can then release one or both protons, making the solubility of CO2 highly pH-dependent.
A detailed description of this system, which is important for understanding the activity of
carbon species and of H+ at the electrode, will be presented later in this section. Finally, this
will be combined with a model of ion migration and used to predict the expected behavior of
our carbonate buﬀer under electrochemical experiments in the sniﬀer setup.
3.1.1
Chip stability
The most common failure mechanism of sniﬀer chips is breaching of the membrane. A sniﬀer
chip membrane is a 15µm-thick silicon layer perforated with holes 3 µm in diameter.99 The
outer and inner surfaces of the membrane and the walls of the holes are coated in perﬂuorode-
cyltrichlorosilane (FDTS, shown in Figure 3.3a), a hydrophobic material with a contact angle
with water of θC = 110◦. The force per area due to this contact angle on a water front in the
holes can be calculated as ∆pc = −cos(θC)
dh
γs = 0.33 bar (where dh is the hole diameter and
γs is the surface tension), and this has been veriﬁed experimentally as the critical breaching
pressure.98 When this pressure is exceeded, water enters the chamber behind the membrane
and presumably forms a meniscus in the capillary to the QMS, resulting in an extremely high
water signal and an increased pressure in the QMS chamber. Chips breached in this manner
68
==PAGE:82==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Sniﬀer chip installed on the interface bloc with two droplets, one on the part of
the chip that is exposed to electrolyte when the cell is mounted and one on a part of the chip
that has not seen electrolyte. View from (a) top and (b) side. Exposure to KOH increases the
hydrophilicity of the chip.
can generally be used again as soon as the FDTS coating has dried.
In KOH, the membrane breaches even without exceeding the critical pressure diﬀerence.
A
typical experiment on the sniﬀer setup with 0.1M KOH electrolyte is shown in Figure 3.1. The
membrane breaches at 1.45 hours, after being under KOH electrolyte for a total of 0.96 hours.
This time, called the breaching time tB, is remarkably reproducible. The breaching times of ﬁve
chips under the same electrolyte during similar experiments varied from 1 hour by only 5%:
tB = 60 ± 3[min]
(3.1)
After breaching under KOH, sniﬀer chips could generally not be reused. Rinsing a breached chip
in milli-Q and allowing it to dry occasionally revived it, but usually the chip breached again
immediately whenever water was applied subsequently. Sometimes after breaching a chip would
become blocked, and the pressure and signal in the QMS would fall oﬀas if a the valve was closed.
Presumably this is due to clogging of the capillary by salt deposited by the electrolyte, supporting
our understanding of a breaching mechanism which involves an evaporating electrolyte front in
the capillary. Even before breaching, chips were visibly altered by the KOH, as shown in Figure
3.2. The contact angle of a drop of water placed on part of the chip that had seen 0.1M KOH
was less than 90◦. This indicates that KOH etches the FDTS coating. FDTS is bound to the
69
==PAGE:83==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: (a) Gas-phase deposition reaction, followed by hypothesized degredation reactions
of FDTS coating with a basic electrolyte. Each reaction is a neucleophile substitution. The
limiting step, hydrolysis, is ﬁrst-order with OH– activity, as described in the text. If FDTS units
are multiply bound to the surface, then the observed ﬁrst-order dependence indicates that it is
hydrolysis of the ﬁrst Si-O-Si bond that is rate-limiting. (b) Schematic diagram of the etching
process. The water front is positioned right on the FDTS etching front such that θC = 90◦.
silicon surface via a silicon-oxygen-silicon bond. This bond is formed in the fabrication process
during a molecular vapor deposition step by a gas-phase nucleophile substitution reaction, the
ﬁrst reaction in Figure 3.3a. The subsequent reactions are hypothesized reactions leading to the
degradation of the coating. Replacement of Cl–, a weak nucleophile, by OH–, is likely quite fast,
and thus it is the hydrolysis step in which a SiO– group is replaced by OH–, that is the limiting
step during FDTS etching. Note that this reaction scheme is simpliﬁed, as FDTS can form up
to three Si-O-Si bonds with the surface during the fabrication, in which case all nucleophilic
substitutions with the electrolyte during etching are hydrolysis steps.
Figure 3.3b shows a mechanism by which, despite the hydrophobicity of the FDTS coating,
electrolyte can work its way into the membrane. The meniscus during this process is ﬂat, as
there is no hydrostatic force to balance, and is thus positioned on the FDTS etching front in
such a way as to balance the Si (< 90◦) and FDITS (> 90◦) contact angles, giving θC = 90◦.
FDTS is thus etched only at the front in a zipper-like fashion. If the ﬁrst or (as drawn in Figure
3.3) only hydrolysis step in FDTS removal is rate-limiting, then the velocity of the etching front
is directly proportional to the rate constant for the hydrolysis reaction and the concentration of
OH– ions. This explains the high reproducibility of the breaching time. As the supply of chips
was running low and our frustration with the short window in which to conduct experiments
was growing, we had to switch to a diﬀerent electrolyte.
Our 0.1 M KOH electrolytes have a measured pH of 12.8, the diﬀerence from 13.0 being due
to a combination of non-unity activity coeﬃcients35 and water adsorption by the KOH pellets
from which it is prepared, increasing their eﬀective molar mass. We wished to keep the pH as
70
==PAGE:84==
high as possible to maintain selectivity towards C2 products, but needed to lower it to extend
chip life time. Due to the ﬁrst-order dependence on hydroxide concentration, a drop of one unit
in pH is expected to increase the breaching time of the chips by a factor of 10, while increasing
the onset potential for C2 product formation by 60mV relative to HER. At the same time we
needed to maintain or even increase the electrical conductivity of the solution, as the maximum
potential that the potentiostat could supply to the counter electrode limited our studies at that
time to ≲1mA.
As a compromise, we decided on a 1M buﬀer at pH= 12. The ﬁnal deprotonation of phosphoric
acid has a pKa of 12.3, making phosphate an obvious choice for a buﬀer at pH=12. However,
phosphate has been reported to increase selectivity for HER over CO reduction relative to
carbonate at a given pH,48 and a phosphate salt would add an additional possible source of
impurities. We therefore decided to use a 1.0 potassium carbonate buﬀer at pH=12, as this
could be prepared using only gaseous carbon dioxide and the same potassium hydroxide reagent
used in our lab to prepare KOH solutions. The buﬀer was prepared by saturating 1.0M KOH
with CO2 and then titrating from pH=7.8 to pH=12.0 with 1.0M KOH.
After switching to the new electrolyte (rather late in the master’s project, see Appendix A),
breaching time increased from 1 hr ±3 minutes (5 measurements) to 6.2, 12.5, and 6.3 hours for
the three chips breached so far under this electrolyte. The chip that lasted a total of 12.5 hours
was rinsed in milliQ water between experiments, the ﬁnal and longest of which lasted 6.3 hours.
The ratio of hydroxide activity between the old (pH=12.8) and new (pH=12.0) electrolytes is
100.8 = 6.3, in excellent agreement with the observed increase in breaching time. (The precision
of this agreement is fortuitous, as measurements with our pH meter can vary about ±0.05.)
Despite the excellent agreement between the hypothesized breaching mechanism and the ob-
served chip breaching times in two diﬀerent electrolytes, there are still some things we do not
completely understand about the phenomenon. The breaching mechanism proposed here does
not explain why chips can sometimes be revived and used again after a breach, nor does it
explain why rinsing in milli-Q water should sometimes “restart the clock.”
With the new electrolyte, chip stability is no longer a major limitation to our experimentation,
and electrical resistance is also less of a problem. The question is then how this electrolyte
behaves under electrochemistry.
3.1.2
Potassium hydroxide - carbon dioxide equilibrium
Most studies of carbon dioxide reduction in aqueous electrolyte use a carbonate buﬀer saturated
with CO2. The CO2 concentration, ionic strength, pH, and buﬀer capacity of such electrolytes
71
==PAGE:85==
are all related through equilibrium of dissolved CO2 with carbonic acid (H2CO3), bicarbonate
(HCO3
–), and carbonate (CO3
2−), which will be collectively referred to here as carbonic species.
While the choice of cation in such has an eﬀect on the Helmholz layer at the electrode and
thus on the kinetics of electrochemical reactions,101 the cation is a spectator with regards the
carbonic equilibrium. The cation will be assumed here to be K+, as we used in our experiment.
An aqueous solution containing K+ and carbonic species at equilibrium with CO2, which will
subsequently be referred to as a “K-CO2 solution”, involves the following eight species. The
concentration or pressure of each species is given a one-letter abbreviation to simplify the ap-
pearance of the following equations.
s = cK+,
x = cH+,
y = cOH−,
p = pCO2(g),
d = cCO2(aq),
a = cH2CO3,
b = cHCO3
−,
c = cCO3
2−
(3.2)
Five elementary reactions can be written relating the species in a K-CO2 solution. In addition
to the equilibrium equations, there is the condition of overall charge neutrality, which can also
be arrived at by considering the possible origins of each species. These six equations, together
with the corresponding reactions, are shown in System 3.3.
H2O ←−→H+ + OH−
xy = Kw = 10−14.0[M]2
(3.3a)
CO2(aq) ←−→CO2(g)
p
d = Kh = 29.6[bar/M]
(3.3b)
CO2(aq) + H2O ←−→H2CO3
a
d = Keq = 1.7 · 10−3
(3.3c)
H2CO3 ←−→CO3
−+ H+
bx
a = Ka1 = 10−3.6[M]
(3.3d)
HCO3
−←−→CO3
2−+ H+
cx
b = Ka2 = 10−10.3[M]
(3.3e)
X
i
zici = 0
s + x −y −b −2c = 0
(3.3f)
Equilibrium constants were calculated from free energies of formation as described in Appendix
B.1.
It will be assumed here that activity coeﬃcients are 1.
With eight variables and six
equations, there are two degrees of freedom in the system. In his review on CO2 reduction,42
Hori described the system in terms of bicarbonate concentration and either CO2 partial pressure
or carbonate/bicarbonate ratio. When preparing solutions, and in electrochemical processes,
however, these are not the most relevant choices of independent variables.
K-CO2 solutions can be prepared in two ways: In the ﬁrst, which is most often used in our lab, a
KOH solution is prepared and then purged with CO2. In principle, a range of K-CO2 solutions
could be obtained if the partial pressure of CO2 in the purging gas was varied (in practice, we
always use 1 bar CO2, giving a saturated K-CO2 solution). In this case, the obvious independent
72
==PAGE:86==
variables are K+ concentration, s (which is the starting KOH concentration) and CO2 partial
pressure, p. When these two are used as independent variables, this will be called s-p conditions.
(Here, s stands for solution “strength” and p, of course, stands for partial pressure.)
In the second, the carbonate buﬀer os formed by dissolving a combination of KOH, KHCO3,
and/or K2CO3, which equilibrate, and closing the solution oﬀfrom the atmosphere, as other-
wise it will slowly equilibrate with the atmospheric CO2 concentration of 400ppm. Here, the
controlled parameters are the K+ concentration and total dissolved carbon species, which will
be called E for “everything”.
E = d + a + b + c
(3.4)
Use of these two independent variables will be called s-E conditions.
The s-p and s-E conditions are relevant, respectively for experimental/technological systems
where the solution is open to and equilibrated with a gas, and when the solution is closed
oﬀor not allowed time to equilibrate with a gas. If very fast perturbation is made on a K-
CO2 system, a third set of conditions might become relevant. As the rate constants for the
CO2(aq) + H2O ←−→H2CO3 interconversion are quite slow compared to acid-base equilibria,?
at short time scales the it is the total carbonic concentration, which excludes CO2(aq) and will
be called F for “fast”, which is be conserved, together with K+ concentration.
F = a + b + c
(3.5)
Use of s and F as independent variables will be called s-F conditions.
To determine the full composition of a K-CO2 electrolyte given two parameters, System 3.3
needs to be solved. For each set of conditions, the system can be reduced to one equation in x
and the independent variables by substitution of y, b, and c in Equation 3.3f.
The equations to solve are:
s + x −Kw
x −Ka1x + 2Ka2Ka1
x2
Keq
Kh
p = 0
s-p
(3.6)
s + x −Kw
x −
Ka1x + 2Ka2Ka1
x2 + Ka1x + Ka2Ka1
F = 0
s-F
(3.7)
s + x −Kw
x −
KeqKa1x + 2KeqKa2Ka1
x2 + Keqx2 + KeqKa1x + KeqKa2Ka1
E = 0
s-E
(3.8)
Before feeding Equation 3.6, 3.8, or 3.7 to a numerical solver, the substution x = 10−pHM is
made. The equation is then solved for pH. With the value obtained for pH, x is back-calculated,
and then y, a, b, c, d, and p are easily obtained from the other equations in System 3.3 and the
deﬁnition of E or F.
The K-CO2 electolyte system is depicted in Figure 3.4. pH is shown as a function of (a) K+
concentration and CO2 partial pressure (s-p conditions) and (c) as a function of K+ concentration
73
==PAGE:87==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.4: Description of K-CO2 electrolyte system. The independent parameters are taken
to be (top) potassium concentration and equilibrium CO2 partial pressure (s-p conditions) and
(bottom) potassium concentration and total dissolved carbon species concentration (s-E condi-
tions). The resulting pH for the respective equilibrium systems is plotted as a contour in (a)
and(c). The contour plots in (b) and (d) are inverses of each other, with (b) total dissolved car-
bon species concentration plotted against s and p and (d) equilibrium pressure plotted against
s and E. The dotted lines on each plot represent (right) CO2-saturated solutions and (left)
solutions equilibrated with 400ppm atmospheric CO2
and total carbonate concentration (s-E conditions). Figure 3.4a reproduces some well-known
characteristics of carbonic equilibrium, for instance that pure CO2-saturated water has a pH
of 3.9, pure water in equilibrium with the atmosphere (400ppm or 0.4 mbar CO2) has a pH of
about 5.7, and the commonly used electrolyte of 0.1M KOH saturated with CO2 has a pH of
6.8. Figure 3.4c shows that pH is quite sensitive to both s and E when K+ concentration is
approximately equal to the total dissolved carbon concentration.
74
==PAGE:88==
Figure 3.4b and d relate the s-p system to the s-E system: (b) shows E as a function of s
and p while (d) shows p as a function of s and E. Figure 3.4b shows that the concentration
of dissolved carbon increases both with CO2 partial pressure and with K+ concentration. Two
turns or “waves” are observed, where E is slightly depressed (the contours pushed up and to
the right). Comparing to (a) shows that these two waves correspond to pH≈10 and pH≈6,
matching pKa of bicarbonate, −log(Ka2) = 10.3, and the eﬀective pKa of carbon dioxide,
−log(Ka1Keq) = 6.3, where interconversion between dissolved carbon species takes the place of
additional dissolution. Comparing (c) and (d) shows that to maintain a strongly basic solution,
extremely low CO2 partial pressures are needed, as even relatively concentrated base will be
titrated to a moderate pH by the atmosphere’s CO2 if allowed to equilibrate.
As described in the previous section, we use an electrolyte prepared by saturating 1.0M KOH
with CO2 and then titrating to pH=12 with 1.0M KOH. 1.0M KOH (solution 0) saturated with
CO2 (solution 1) has a measured pH of 7.8, in agreement with Figure 3.4a. It has E1 = 1.03 M,
from Figure 3.4b. The ﬁnal solution (solution 2) has s = 1 and pH= 12. The resulting value
of E can be read from Figure 3.4c or, resolution failing, calculated from Equation 3.8 to be (by
chance) E2 = 0.500. To dilute E1 to E2, the volume has to be increased by a factor of 2.06.
Experimentally, 200ml of solution 1 was titrated to pH=12 with 213.5ml of solution 0. This is
a volume increase of a factor (200 + 213.5)/200 = 2.07, an extra experimental validation of the
equilibrium model described here.
Two ﬁgures of merit for an electrochemical electrolyte are the electrical conductivity (Sections
3.2) and buﬀer capacity (Subsection 3.1.3).
Buﬀer capacity BC is a measure of the stability of the pH of a solution. It is conventionally
deﬁned as the ratio of an inﬁnitesimal molar addition of strong base (or removal of strong acid)
per volume to the resulting inﬁnitesimal change in pH. In the K-CO3 system, that means that
BC =
∂s
∂pH
(3.9)
with p, F, or E held constant, depending on the equilibrium conditions. This is straightforward
to calculate numerically from Equation 3.6, 3.8, or 3.7. The results are shown in Figure 3.5a for
s-p conditions and 3.5c for s-E conditions.
The buﬀer capacity, as seen in (a) is higher for higher solution strength s and, at low s it is
higher higher CO2 partial pressure p. At high s the buﬀer capacity is higher at low p, with the
increase occurring when the pH is near bicarbonate’s pKa. The richest information, however,
is seen under s-E conditions. Here, for a constant solution strength s, buﬀer capacity takes a
big dip when around the equivalence point E = s. To the right of this line, the solution is
buﬀered by CO2-HCO3
– and to the left of this line, the pH is so high (see Figure 3.4c) that
75
==PAGE:89==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.5: Two ﬁgures of merit for K-CO2 electrolytes, plotted on two diﬀerent equilibrium
systems. The independent parameters are taken to be (top) potassium concentration and equi-
librium CO2 partial pressure (s-p conditions) and (bottom) potassium concentration and total
dissolved carbon species concentration (s-E conditions). The resulting buﬀer capacity (deﬁned
as
∂s
∂pH, see text) for the respective equilibrium systems is plotted as a contour in (a) and(c).
The electrical conductivities are plotted in (b) and (d). The dotted lines on each plot represent
(right) CO2-saturated solutions and (left) solutions equilibrated with 400ppm atmospheric CO2
water has signiﬁcant buﬀer capacity. At constant s, the local maximum in buﬀer capacity due
to HCO3
–-CO3
2– is relatively small but clearly visible at higher s, at bicarbonates’s pKa of 10.3
by comparison with Figure 3.4c. At constant E, a more conventional titration curve can be
made out from Figure 3.5c, with (at high E) local maxima in buﬀer capacity corresponding to
both acid-base equilibria.
The electrical conductivity κ of a solution is deﬁned as the ratio of the resulting electrical current
ﬂux at a point in the solution to the applied electric ﬁeld at that point.41 Conductivity thus
76
==PAGE:90==
has SI units (A/m2)/(V/m) = S/m. As the current is carried by ions, the conductivity can be
expressed in terms of conductivity due to each ionic species.
κ =
⃗J
⃗E
=
X
i
κi
(3.10)
The conductivity due to a particular ion is its mobility (µi), which is the ratio of its drift velocity
to the applied electric ﬁeld, times its concentration and its molar charge.
κi = F|zi|ciµi
(3.11)
The conductivity for a K-CO2 solution is thus:
κ = F
 sµK + xµH + yµOH + bµHCO3 + 2cµCO3

(3.12)
The logarithm of the conductivity, thus calculated, is plotted in Figure 3.5 on both the s-p (b)
and s-E (d) axes. The conductivity, as seen in (a), is, like buﬀer capacity, primarily determined
by the solution strength (K+ concentration), with CO2 partial pressure playing a role when
solution strength is low. Interestingly, (d) shows that for a constant potassium concentration,
the conductivity decreases just before s = E. To the right of this wave, HCO3
– is the primary
anion.
To the left of this wave, the more conductive CO3
2– and subsequently OH– are the
primary anions.
While buﬀer capacity and conductivity provide clues as to how an electrolyte will behave under a
current - higher buﬀer capacity means more stable pH, higher conductivity means less potential
drop through the solution at a given current - they are static properties of an electrolyte with
a speciﬁed composition. In the next section, the concepts presented here will be used to model
how an electrolyte changes during electrolysis.
This is important to CO2 reduction, as the properties of the electrolyte at and, for a porous
electrocatalyst, in the electrode surface inﬂuence its CO2RR and CORR activity and selectivity.
3.1.3
pH change during electrolysis
During HER, CO2RR, and CORR, protons are consumed at the electrode. If these protons are
not replaced, by transport or generation through acid-base equilibrium, at the same rate at which
they are consumed, the pH at the electrode will increase. This, together with the transport of
ions carrying the electrical current (called migration), and reaction in the case of CO2RR, will
change the concentrations of the carbonic species. Models of CO2RR including equilibrium and
migration eﬀects have been presented before for various applications.102–104 Here, a relatively
simple model is presented which is speciﬁcally set up to describe CORR and/or HER in the
77
==PAGE:91==
sniﬀer setup (though CO2RR could be included with a small modiﬁcation), where a very small
working volume is in contact with the electrode. The model may also be informative for CORR
and HER in bulk systems with a well-deﬁned diﬀusion volume at the electrode surface.
If L is the working distance (the distance between the electrode and the sniﬀer-chip membrane),
or the diﬀusion-layer thickness and Ael is the electrode area, then the working volume, or
diﬀusion volume, is Vd = AelL. This model will rest on the assumption that the concentration
of each species remains uniform throughout the working volume. This assumption is clearly
false for the sniﬀer chip setup, where the channel to the counter electrode is located nearest
a particular part of the electrode, removing symmetry in a system that will not have time
to equilibrate by diﬀusion (for more on this see Section 3.2.2). However, the model will still
illustrate important aspects of the electrolyte systems.
If a constant proton-consuming current I is applied at the electrode, then an equal ﬂux of
charge into the volume is required to maintain charge neutrality. The corresponding molar ﬂux
of elementary charges divided by the working volume, a type of “charge concentration time
derivative” is:
˙cq = 1
F
I
Vd
=
J
FL
(3.13)
The portion of the current, and thus of this charge concentration time derivative, carried by each
individual ionic species, is proportional to its contribution to the total electrolyte conductivity,
given by Equation 3.11. The rate of change of its concentration due to ionic migration (IM) is
dci
dt

IM
= ˙cq,i
zi
= κi
κ
˙cq
zi
=
|zi| ciµi
P
j |zj| cjµj
˙cq
zi
(3.14)
The presence of a factor |zi|
zi ensures that migration will tend to increase the concentration of
cationic species while decreasing the concentration of anionic species, as needed to compensate
for the consumption of (cationic) protons.
Equation 3.14 is valid for each ion, including protons, but it does not tell the whole story, and
this is where the modeling gets tricky. Protons, for example, not only migrate due to the electric
ﬁeld, but also get released and consumed in acid-base equilibria, and at the same time pick up
electrons at the electrode to turn into other species. In order to make a set of ordinary diﬀerential
equations (ODEs) governing the concentrations, the model would need the rate constants for each
acid dissociation and base protonation reaction, and then the ODE system would be incredibly
stiﬀand computationally heavy since the acid-base reactions are so much faster than anything
else. It is much nicer to just let equilibrium relations hold at every time, but then it is impossible
to keep track of the time derivatives of each ion. The trick is to ﬁnd a set of quantities which
are conserved under the equilibrium and electrochemical reactions, use them to calculate all the
concentrations at any point in time, and keep track of their time derivatives with ODEs. The
78
==PAGE:92==
options for those to quantities, it turns out, are precisely the equilibrium conditions discussed
in the previous subsection, namely: s-p (K+ concentration and CO2 partial pressure), s-E (K+
concentration and total dissolved carbon species concentration), or s-F (K+ concentration and
total carbonic concentration.)
For an electrolysis current with a duration on the scale of seconds, the s-E equilibrium should
be used in base and the s-F equilibrium should be used in acid. This is because Reaction 3.3c
has a forward rate constant at 25◦C of k = 0.026s−1, and so CO2 is only slowly brought in to
equilibrium (with a characteristic time of k−1 = 38s), whereas the elementary reaction
CO2(aq) + OH−←−→HCO3
−
b
dy = KeqKa1
Kw
(3.15)
has a forward rate constant of k′ = 8400s−1M−1, giving a characteristic for equilibration of CO2
of (k′y)−1 <1s at pH>10.1.105
For the s-E equilibrium, an ODE function using s and E to calculate their time derivatives uses
the following equations: Equation 3.8 with the substitution x = 10−pH to solve numerically for
pH and thus x; Equations 3.3 to calculate b, c, and y; Equation 3.12 to calculate κ; and ﬁnally,
to calculate the time derivatives (from Equation 3.14):
ds
dt = sµK
κ
J
L
(3.16)
dE
dt = −bµHCO3 −cµCO3
κ
J
L
(3.17)
After the ODEs are solved numerically for s and E, each ion concentration is then calculated
again at each time to obtain the full time-dependent description of the system.
Two numerical solutions are shown in Figure 3.6. In each case, L = 100µm, a typical working
distance for the sniﬀer, J = 5mA/cm2, a typical current density for studying CORR to hydro-
carbons on copper, with much of the current going to HER). The simulations were run for 60
seconds of electrolysis. Hydrolysis in two diﬀerent elctrolytes was simulated.
The ﬁrst electrolyte, CO2-saturated 0.1M KHCO3, a commonly used electrolyte, was modeled
using start conditions s0 = 0.1M and E0 = 0.134M, as calculated from the s-p equilibrium.
This electrolyte starts in the regime where reaction of CO2 is slow by both Reactions 3.3c
and 3.15, and so should be started under s-F equilibrium conditions. However, pH increases
quickly during electrolysis (more quickly, in fact, when simulated with s-F conditions than s-E
conditions), decreasing the characteristic time of Reaction 3.15 and thus bringing the system
to s-E conditions.
To avoid the complication of designing a smooth transition between the
conditions, which become identical anyway at high pH as d≈0, pure s-E results are shown.
The pH increases as one would expect from a titration curve, with slower increase when there are
comparable concentrations of both species in an eﬀective acid-base pair (CO2(aq) and HCO3
–,
79
==PAGE:93==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: Change in pH and ion concentrations in the working volume during a proton-
consuming reaction, in this case HER at 5mA/cm2. A working distance of 100µm was used. (a)
The starting buﬀer is 0.1M KOH saturated with CO2, the solution most commonly used during
CO2 reduction studies. (b) The starting buﬀer is 1.0M KOH titrated to pH=12 with CO2, which
we used for our later CO reduction experiments, as described in the text. For comparison, 0.1M
KOH start electrolyte only changes pH from 13 to 13.25 under the same conditions for the same
time (60s).
and then HCO3
– and CO3
2–). Simultaneously with this titration eﬀect, there is an increase in
K+ and net decrease in carbonic species due to migration in the electric ﬁeld imposed by the
HER/CORR current. It is remarkable that the expected increase in pH is calculated even when
nothing in the model design or input directly “tells” it that protons are being consumed at the
electrode. This can be understood as follows: by forcing s and E to act as if under a current, and
at the same time demanding charge neutrality (through Equation 3.8), we leave the model “no
other choice” than proton consumption, besides the equivalent one of hydroxide production. It
is also remarkable that the pH of a buﬀer solution increases from 6.8 to 13, and its composition
changes drastically, over just 60 seconds of electrolysis.
The same simulation was done for 0.1M KOH (simply by setting s0 = 0.1 and E0 = 0) and
0.1M HClO4 (by setting s0 = −0.1, E0 = 0, and replacing µK with µClO4). These solutions,
surprisingly, showed a much higher degree of pH stability. The 0.1M KOH only increased pH
from 13 to 13.25 over the course of a simulated 60s at 5mA/s2, and the pH of 0.1M HClO4,
similarly, only dropped from 1 to 0.76. The small change in pH for these electrolytes, despite a
lack of any buﬀer capacity besides that of water, can be explained by the fact that it is primarily
OH– and H+, respectively, that carry the electrical current in these electrolytes, due to their high
mobility compared to the respective counter ions and the lack of other ions competing for the
current. If protons are consumed at the electrode, but the charge is compensated by transport of
80
==PAGE:94==
protons to, or, equivalently, hydroxide ions away from, the working volume, then the pH remains
stable. In this sense, a buﬀer, though good at stabilizing pH in bulk systems, to a large extent
“gets in the way” in this kind of small-volume electrochemical system, exacerbating rather than
alleviating pH changes under electrolysis.
The second electrolyte modeled in Figure 3.6 is the electrolyte which we used for our latter
experiments to improve sniﬀer chip stability while maintaining relatively high pH and high elec-
trical conductivity, namely 1.0M KOH titrated to pH=12 with KOH. This has start conditions
of s0 = 1.0M and E0 = 1.06M. Qualitatively, it resembles the ﬁrst buﬀer, just started around
30s. The pH increases from 12.0 to 13.4 over the course of the 60 seconds, a huge amount
compared to 0.1M KOH, which only increased by 0.25 pH units. The electrolyte is thus poor at
stablizing pH during electrochemistry. This may not be a problem, however, in context of the
goal of observing and characterizing hydrocarbon production, so long as we are aware of and
understand the pH change taking place. As described previously, high pH improves the onset
potential, on an RHE scale, of CO reduction reactions involving C-C coupling. An electrolyte
that gives us a high pH during stagnant-electrolyte electrolysis measurements, which is when we
want to see CORR products at the highest possible partial current densities; but a moderate pH
when the electrolyte is ﬂowing and/or the electrode is resting or cycling at moderate potentials,
which is when the sniﬀer chip gets the majority of its electrolyte exposure; may in fact be an
ideal situation.
3.2
Ohmic drop and resistance in the three-electrode system
Early in the project, we were unable to perform reliable electrochemical measurements because
of extremely high ohmic drop. As described in the start of Section 1.2, a potentiostat uses
the current resulting from an applied potential between the working and counter electrode to
control the potential of the working electrode (WE) against the reference electrode (RE). In
order for this potential diﬀerence to describe overpotentials on an SHE or RHE scales, discussed
in Subsection 1.2.1, this potential diﬀerence has to be due to the diﬀerence in energy between
an electron in the electrode and an electron in a molecule or bound intermediate, and not due
to the electric ﬁelds required to push current through the electrolyte. The eﬀect of electrolyte
resistance can be compensated for by the potentiostat, via a measurement of the “ohmic drop,”
which will be explained below, but only at 85%, as full or over-compensation leads to a positive
feedback loop in the electronics of the potentiostat, causing instability.
The problem was most pronounced during potential scanning, for example in cyclic voltammetry
(CV), and most pronounced in less conductive electrolytes.
Solution resistance is inversely
81
==PAGE:95==
proportional to conductivity κ, described in Section 3.1.2. Experiments in 0.1M HClO4 (κ = 2.7
S/m, ohmic drop measured to be around 3.5 kΩ) thus suﬀered less solution resistance than the
same type of experiment in 0.1M KOH (κ = 4.2 S/m, 6 kΩ). Some early fundamental studies of
our setup (Section 3.3) were therefore done in HClO4
We were also able to circumvent the problem somewhat by doing pulsed and/or constant-current
experiments. Even when we did not need to know the potential of the working electrode, however,
solution resistance caused problems when attempting processes that draw high currents, as we
would max out the compliance voltage of the potentiostat and cause strange behavior of the
counter electrode, described below. This was a serious problem as most CO2RR products are
formed at low faradaic eﬃciencies, meaning that to be sensitive to the product, we need to go
to potentials where large total currents are drawn, most of which goes to HER.
Getting reliable control and measurement of working-electrode potential EWE was our ﬁrst pri-
ority.
In order do this, we ﬁrst needed to better understand, on a fundamental level, the
phenomenon of ohmic drop.
3.2.1
Model experiment 1: resistors in series
Figure 3.7: Diagram of the salt-bridge experiment to educate ourselves on ohmic drop
Our initial, naive, understanding of ohmic drop was that it is the electrical resistance between
WE and CE, or between WE and RE, though we were not sure which. Most explanations of
the phenomenon only consider the case where the reference electrode is directly in between the
working and counter electrodes,41 and did not prove helpful in understanding the phenomenon
82
==PAGE:96==
in more complex geometries like we were forced to use, working in a small enclosed volume.
To understand ohmic drop in a more general sense, we designed a model experiment to test it.
Six beakers ﬁlled with 0.1M HClO4 were connected in series by lens paper soaked in the same
electrolyte, forming salt bridges, as shown schematically in Figure 3.7. The electrodes were
platinum wire (WE and CE) and Ag/AgCl (RE). Ohmic drop was measured by two techniques:
current interrupt (CI) and potentiostatic electrical impedance spectrometry (PEIS)
Measurements were made for four sets of arrangements:
(1) WE and CE at opposite ends, positions 1 and 6, respectively; and RE at a variable position
in between.
(2) WE and RE at positions 1 and 6, respectively; CE at a variable position in between them
(3) RE and CE at positions 1 and 6, respectively; WE at a variable position, and
(4) RE and CE together at 1, WE at a variable position
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: (a) Results of the salt-bridge experiment (b) Results of salt-bridge experiment
when the working electrod is in the middle, and CE and RE at positions 1 and 6, respectively.
Ohmic drop is very small, and shows a volcano-like relationship with position, the highest ohmic
drop being with WE in the middle..
Large ohmic drop, changing on the order of 1500 Ωper salt bridge or 2000 Ωfor the salt bridge to
the RE, which was longer as we wished to keep the RE in a piranha-clean beaker which happened
to be larger (see Section 3.4.3 regarding cleanliness), were observed in arrangements (1), (2),
and (4), as plotted in Figure 3.8a. Ohmic drop is clearly neither the electrical resistance between
83
==PAGE:97==
WE and CE, as this doe not change as RE is moved in arrangement (1); nor is it the electrical
resistance between WE and RE, as this does not change when as CE is moved in arrangement
(2). Instead, ohmic drop is given by the “overlap” of those two resistances. Mathematically,
this can be expressed as
Rohm =
1
Itot
Z RE
WE
I(x)dRel(x)
(3.18)
In one dimension, x is position along that dimension - the number of sat bridges in this model
experiment. In three dimensions, x should be understood as a surface perpendicular to the
current. dRel is an increase in electrical resistance along this dimension, and Itot is the measured
current between the working and the counter electrode.
This equation explains why, when WE is between RE and CE, there is only a very small re-
sistance, on the order of 0-5 Ωas shown in Figure 3.8b, as there is never any current between
WE and RE. It is thus the resistance overlap of the WE-RE and WE-CE paths that gives rise
to ohmic drop. The maximum of this small ohmic drop came when WE was exactly between
CE and RE, for which I do not have an explanation. Ohmic drop in the model experiment is
explained schematically in Figure 3.9b
This understanding also explained the origin of our ohmic drop. In the initial electrode arrange-
ment, we had both RE and CE in the same cavity built into the cell, which was connected to the
working volume via a small channel dc = 1 mm in diameter and lc = 1 cm in length. The ohmic
drop is due to this channel and to the thin layer of electrolyte between the working electrode
and the channel. The minimum distance from the working electrode to channel is dt = 2 mm,
where the subscript stands for thin layer. The resistance due to this thin layer is approximately
proportional to dt and inversely proportional to the working distance L and the eﬀective width
of the path between WE and the the channel, wt. While a careful consideration of the continuum
version of Ohm’s law would be needed to prove a correct value of wt, wt = 2.5 mm, half the
diameter of the WE, seems reasonable, and ﬁts with experimental results presented in Section
3.3. The ohmic drop in this arrangement is thus
Rohm = Rchannel + Rthin layer = 1
κ
 4lc
πd2c
+ dt
wtL

= A + B
L
(3.19)
Where, in 0.1 M HClO A = 3050 Ωand B = 0.19 Ωm. When we place the cell in a beaker,
essentially letting L approach inﬁnity, the ohmic drop as measured by impedance spectroscopy
is 3100 ± 50 Ω, in good agreement with this model.
The realization that it is the resistance overlap of the WE-CE and WE-RE paths that gives rise
to ohmic drop led us to rearrange the electrodes such that CE and RE are on opposite sides of
the WE, as shown in Figure 3.10
84
==PAGE:98==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9:
(a) Schematic diagram of the electrochemical cell in the original arrangement,
indicating the sources of ohmic drop: the overlap of the current paths from WE to CE and WE
to RE. (b) Schematic explaining the observed ohmic drop in the four series of salt-bridge model
experiments described in the text.
3.2.2
Model experiment 2: current distribution
Figure 3.10: Schematic of the electrochemical volume in the electrochemical cell of the sniﬀer
setup as seen (left) from below and (right) from in front for an arrangement in which the RE
and CE are through capillaries on opposite sides of WE. The points 1, 2, 3, and 4 form a model
circuit which will be discussed in the text.
Switching to an arrangement in which the reference and counter electrodes are on opposite sides
of the working electrodes was successful in eliminating ohmic drop, which was on the order of
1-2 Ohms. This was immensely important in being able to make experimental progress, but
it got us thinking about another problem, namely whether potential and current distribution
would be uniform over the working electrode.
85
==PAGE:99==
The right side of Figure 3.10 includes a model circuit with two points on the electrode and two
points in the electrolyte, just beyond the layer of electrolyte whose structure is inﬂuenced by
the potential of the working electrode, the Helmholz layer.41 Since the WE is a conductor, the
potentials on its surface are equal, i.e. E1 = E2. Thus, if current is drawn from point 3,
Vhelm,1 = Vhelm,2 + IR
(3.20)
where R is the electrical resistance between points 3 and 4. From this very simple model, it is
clear that the voltage across the double layer would change immensely over the electrode surface
if there was uniform current distribution. This is a problem, as it means that diﬀerent parts of
the electrode will act diﬀerently during our experiments, making results diﬃcult to interpret.
To test this, we designed a second model experiment. A long platinum wire was hung horizontally
into a large beaker, and connected to the WE lead. A gold wire was placed near one end of the
platinum wire and connected to the CE lead. An Ag/AgCl reference electrode was placed near
the opposite end. The beaker was ﬁlled with a very very dilute electrolyte, 0.1mM HClO4 in
milli-Q water, to imitate the high resistance in the working volume of the sniﬀer setup. The Pt
wire was ﬁrst set to open circuit potential, and then to gradually more negative potentials until
bubbles were observed due to HER. The location of the bubbles was noted.
At the ﬁrst potential where bubbles were observed, very small bubbles initially formed all along
the wire, but then only the bubbles nearest the CE continued to grow. When the potential was
lowered once more, a steady stream of bubbles came from the very end of the Pt electrode. If
extrapolated to the sniﬀer setup, this experiment would indicate that all of the current drawn
in our experiments comes from the end of WE closest to the CE.
This interpretation is however uncertain, as the mechanism of resistance is diﬀerent. In the case
of the Pt wire, it may be a mass transport eﬀect, making the pH on the surface of the Pt wire
more basic further away from CE, and not due to the eﬀect of diﬀerent solution resistances to
diﬀerent parts of the wire. However, mas transport eﬀects are also likely to cause asymmetry in
the sniﬀer setup.
To partially alleviate the eﬀects of current, potential, and mass transport asymmetry, we de-
signed a new cell with two CE openings on opposite sides, inspired by literature attempts to
establish a uniform current distribution.92 Figure 3.11a shows a schematic of current distribu-
tion with this arrangement. The cost of a better current distribution is, however, ohmic drop,
as some of the current lines are along the path from WE to RE. The ohmic drop in our new cell
with a nominal working distance of 100 µm is measured to be about 150Ωin 1.0M KOH titrated
to pH=12 with CO2.
86
==PAGE:100==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.11: (a) Hypothesized current distribution in new electrode arrangement, with counter
electrodes on either side of the working electrode. Compared to a setup with RE opposite one
CE, a better current distribution is acheived at the cost of ohmic drop (b) Photograph of the
new cell with CEs mounted. An explanation for the use of the two CE “pipes” is given in Section
3.4.1. The RE, not installed here, goes in a capillary in the back.
3.2.3
Counter electrode - ground loop
Working in 0.1M KOH, the electrolyte used during this project with the lowest conductivity,
we observed a strange phenomenon. Hydrogen evolution was often observed, as a signal at M2,
at potentials very positive compared to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). This had us
very confused, and doubting our reference electrodes even right after calibrating them against
an RHE in a beaker.
The key to understandinig the problem came when, at one point, after some electrolyte had
leaked around the sides of the sniﬀer, a signal at M2 was observed even when zero current was
drawn. The M2 signal was still there even after disconnecting the working electrode and reference
electrode.
Only when the counter electrode was disconnected did the M2 signal disappear.
Hydrogen is thus evolved due to a CE-ground loop. Current comes from the potentiostat through
the counter electrode, via electrolysis by the counter and sniﬀer, through the interface block and
the vacuum setup, through the electronics in the walls, and to the potentiostat again. That this
was possible came as a surprise, but the only alternative explanation is HER by a unidirectional
current in an open circuit.
Figure 3.12 shows an example of this process. When experimenting on roughened copper, there
87
==PAGE:101==
Figure 3.12: Reduction of copper oxide layer by cycling to progressively more negative poten-
tials. Current (blue) and CE potential (red) are both plotted against WE potential. Whenever,
during a few of the ﬁrst cycles, the CE potential exceeded 7V, a sharp M2 signal was seen due
to a counter-ground loop via HER on the sniﬀer chip.
This is in contrast to the “genuine”
working-electrode HER seen later in the QMS when potentials are negative of RHE, whcih is
-0.98V with an Ag/AgCl RE in the electrolyte used here.
was always a layer of CuO2 that had to be reduced before we could get to lower potentials (see
Section 3.5.2). In the ﬁnal experiments, this was done simply by chronopotentiometry with a
constant current of 0.5mA, which we knew that the system could draw without exceeding the
potentiostat’s maximum voltage between the CE and WE (compliance voltage), 20 V. However,
in earlier experiments, to see what was going on, we started cycling the potential at open circuit,
and then gradually moved the potential cycling to lower and lower ranges, reducing the Cu2O
layer along the way. Knowing that the CE causes problems, both due to the CE-ground loop
and due to the compliance voltage, we plotted the CE potential (red) vs RE together with the
current (blue) against WE potential. Whenever the current drops below about -0.6 mA, the CE
potential has to increase to above about 7V due to the resistance between the CE and WE. As
a side note referring to the discussion above, this resistance is not ohmic drop, as it is not along
88
==PAGE:102==
the path between WE and RE. Whenever the CE exceeds this threshhold voltage, a sharp signal
is seen at M2. This is in contrast to the wider signals seen at M2 during “genuine” HER on the
working electrode at sub-RHE potentials, arrived at later - towards the right on the mass spec
and the left on the current-potential plot - which have shapes that follow the current during
cycling. Due to the sharpness of the peaks, the hydrogen must be evolved on the sniﬀer chip,
as electrochemistry on the liquid-vacuum interface is known from DEMS to give very fast time
responses.91
The CE-ground loop was solved by electrically insulating the sniﬀer chip and avoiding electrolyte
spills. The latter was helped along immensely by a method of making the Teﬂon brodering the
working volume hydrophilic, as described in Subsection 3.4.1.
3.3
Working distance
As made clear in Section 2.3.4, the working distance has a large impact on the time response.
To deconvolute dynamical electrochemical eﬀects from rates of diﬀusion through the working
volume, we need to have a very well-characterized working distance.
The working distance
in both the old and new iterations of our cell are, however, set by Teﬂon spacers, which are
compressible, and may not give the same working distance every time we mount the cell. We
needed a way to measure the working distance.
A set of experiments aimed at correlating time response with working distance through mea-
surement of ohmic drop is presented here. The discussion will be in the context of the modeling
presented in Section 2.3.
3.3.1
Time response vs ohmic drop
The sample used for time response measurements was 100nm Pt sputtered on a glassy carbon
disk. The sample was mounted in a Teﬂon u-cup which was then aligned with the bottom of
the electrochemical cell, itself a block of Teﬂon. The cell was then mounted on the sniﬀer chip
with an intervening Teﬂon spacer of variable thickness. Measurements were made on spacers of
nominal thickness 100 µm, 50 µm, and 25 µm. 100 µm spacers were also stacked to give nominal
working distances of 200 µm and 300 µm. The cell was initially fastened loosely by screw clamps
(for a photograph including the screw clamps, see Figure 3.15b), and after the measurement, for
additional data points, the screw clamps were tightened, compressing the spacers and decreasing
the working distance.
89
==PAGE:103==
For these measurements, to have a well-deﬁned ohmic drop with a clear working-distance poten-
tial, we placed both the reference and counter in a cavity in the cell separated from the working
electrode by a narrow channel, as described above and shown in Figure 3.9a. Ohmic drop was
measured before by Potentiostatic Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (PEIS) taken at
open circuit voltage, as implemented by the EC Lab software. Ohmic drop was measured before
and after each set of electrochemical experiments. We compensated for the ohmic drop during
electrochemical experiments at 85%.
For the electrochemical measurements, at ﬁrst, we used constant-current measurements. We
found, however, that the measured potential approached a steady value from open circuit due
to capacitance on around the same timescale as the response times we wished to measure. As
the current was constant, this potential change could not be explained IRohm, and so reﬂected
a changing value of E on the electrode. We observed that the M2 or M32 signal followed that
potential change. The initial capacitive charging as a sample is ramped up to a potential at which
there is faradaic current means that a constant-current measurement is, in fact, not the best way
to get a constant rate HER or OER on short time scales. In constant potential measurements, a
huge spike in current due to capacitance is observed at the onset of a potential step, but settles
to a stable current on a timescale shorter than that of the time response we aim to measure.
We found the potential, vs the Ag/AgCl electrode, at which the current was -10 µA/cm2 for HER
and +20 µA/cm2 for OER. Three pulses were made at each potential, with a duration between
45 s and 3 minutes depending on the time response at that nominal working distance. After
each pulse, the electrode rested at open-circuit voltage for the same duration so that full decay
in signal could be recorded before the onset of the next pulse.
M2 (H2), M4 (He, carrier gas), M18 (H2O, solvent), M28 (N2, air), M32 (O2), and M44 (CO2,
breath testing) were recorded, with the M2 and M32 containing the data of interest and the
others included to monitor the system for the reason indicated.
The time response for O2 and H2 was determined at each working distance by ﬁtting either the
rise or fall of each pulse with an exponential curve, as shown in Figure 3.13.
According to the analytical solution to the equations of diﬀusion in the working volume and
evaporation through the membrane presented in Appendix D and veriﬁed numerically in Section
2.3, the response time tR is related to the working distance L by
tR = L2
2D + L
h ,
(3.21)
where D is the diﬀusion constant of the compound of interest and h is its mass transfer coeﬃcient
across the membrane of the sniﬀer chip, determined by Equation 2.22 of Subsection 2.2.2. The
diﬀusion constants and mass transfer coeﬃcients for H2 and O2 are listed in Table 2.1.
90
==PAGE:104==
Figure 3.13: (left) Three electrochemical pulses of OER on a Pt electrode. The applied potential
was a step function. (right) The time constant, resulting primarily from diﬀusion through the
working volume and evaporation through the membrane, was determined by ﬁtting the rise or
fall (depicted) of the signal with an exponential curve.
The ohmic drop, meanwhile, is
Rohm = A + B
L ,
(3.22)
where A and B are parameters representing the geometry of the setup as indicated above in
Equation 3.19. By isolation of L and substitution, the expected relationship between response
time and ohmic drop is
tR =
B2
2D(Rohm −A)2 +
B
h(Rohm −A) .
(3.23)
Figure 3.14a shows the experimentally measured time responses plotted against resistance, to-
gether with this theoretical curve. Vertical error bars represent the standard deviation of the
values obtained from ﬁtting three pulses. Horizontal error bars represent the diﬀerence between
the ohmic drop measurements before and after the electrochemical experiment. The ﬁtting pro-
cedure is a source of a lot of the error. The time resolution is not very good, with one to two
seconds between data points. Especially on the fast pulses, there are not many data points to ﬁt,
and the ﬁtted response time is very sensitive to whether I include a point before the pulse was
turned oﬀor after the pulse ended (the script for ﬁtting the data is described in Appendix C).
Though the error for each measurement is large, the agreement between theory and experiment
is good.
As mentioned above, a “bulk” measurement of resistance in the channel was also made by placing
the bottom of the cell in a deep petri dish. In this case, tR is in principle inﬁnite. To include
this point in the trend, Figure 3.14b plots t−1/2
R
against Rohm. The theoretical curve in this case
91
==PAGE:105==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.14: (a) Hypothesized current distribution in new electrode arrangement, with counter
electrodes on either side of the working electrode. Compared to a setup with RE opposite one
CE, a better current distribution is acheived at the cost of ohmic drop (b) Photograph of the
new cell with CEs mounted. An explanation for the use of the two CE “pipes” is given in Section
3.4.1. The RE, not installed here, goes in a capillary in the back.
is given by
t−1/2
R
=
√
2D
B
(Rohm −A)
r
1
1 + 2α−1 ,
(3.24)
where α = hL
D =
hB
D(Rohm−A) is the system parameter from Section 2.3. α is large when diﬀusion
is more important, and so in a purely diﬀusion-limited scenario, a plot of t−1/2
R
against Rohm
should give a straight line with slope
√
2D
B . While the data points look like they could be ﬁt by
a straight line, a line of this slope would predict faster response times than observed. In any
case, the match between theory and experiment here is a little bit tainted by the fact that one
of the parameters (wt in Equation 3.19) was set somewhat arbitrarily. The measured resistances
also indicate larger working distances than the nominal distances set by the Teﬂon spacers. For
example, the smallest nominal distance used during this study was 50 µm with a measured
resistance of 4800 Ω. This resistance, however, by Equation 3.22, corresponds to a working
distance of 108 µm. This could indicate that the Teﬂon membrane is not entirely ﬂat, or that
the u-cup is indented in the block, though we try to avoid this by aligning under an optical
microscope.
We also observed the expected compressibility of the Teﬂon membranes. The measured resis-
tance at a nominal working distance of 100 µm with the screws tightened (4600 Ω) gives a
calculated working distance of 125 µm, compared to 140 µm before the screws are tightened
(4400 Ω).
All this emphasizes the importance of having additional ways to control and calibrate for the
92
==PAGE:106==
working distance before we can make strong conclusions about time-dependent product obser-
vations. The theoretical and experimental agreement on time response and working distance,
however, indicates that we fully understand the processes in the working volume.
An improvement could be made by using spacers made out of a less compressible material. We
prefer Teﬂon largely because it can be washed in piranha (see Section 3.4.3), but spacers made
out of another, piranha-washable but less compressible material like Polychlorotriﬂuoroethylene
(PTCFE), the material our new electrochemical cell is made of, may improve our control of the
working distance. Also, a more reproducible mounting procedure would help.
3.4
Other experimental considerations
This report would not be at all representative of how I have spent my time the past semester
without a section on bubbles, noise, screws, and contamination. This is that section. I will,
nonetheless, keep it short.
3.4.1
Bubbles, hydrophilicity, and mounting of the cell
In our setup, bubbles ruin experiments. We often notice while doing pulses that the time response
on the signal decay is much worse than it can and should be, even though the time response on
the signal rise is good. This is attributed to a bubble somewhere adjacent to the working volume
acting as a reservoir of gases such as hydrogen produced at the electrode. Sometimes it seems
that that bubble “pops,” by a mechanism that we do not understand, giving an M2 signal even
while the electrode and electrolyte are resting. This is seen at 4400s in Figure 4.1 and at 1800s
in Fiugre 4.5, both in the next Chapter. Sometimes the air signal ﬂuctuates unexpectedly, and
sometimes periodic spikes in the potential are observed and attributed to bubbles coming up
through the sniﬀer chip.
To avoid the problem of bubbles in between the sniﬀer chip and the Teﬂon cell (in or adjacent the
working volume), we usually mounted the cell with a drop of electrolyte covering the WE and
the channels to the RE and CE. Due to Teﬂon’s hydrophobicity, the cell had to be completely
bubble-free when we mounted it, or the bubbles would be nearly impossible to remove again,
necessitating the disassembly and reassembly of the cell.
We were thus helped along immensely by a method of making the Teﬂon bordering the working
volume, both the U-cup and the electrochemical cell, hydrophilic. Exposure to an argon plasma
in a setup intended for preparation of microscopy samples lowered the contactact angle, as seen
93
==PAGE:107==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.15: (a) A piece of Teﬂon is made hydrophilic by plasma treatment, with the optimum
exposure time approximately 20 s.
(b) Sniﬀer setup with electrochemical cell (white Teﬂon
block) as it looked in December. The red, white, and blue leads going to the cell connect the
WE, RE, and CE, respectively. The blue cables are pneumatic transmission lines for controlling
the valves. The sniﬀer chip is under the cell, which is held in place by screw clamps, and the
working distance is formed by a Teﬂon spacer between them. The sniﬀer inlet gas manifold is to
the left (see Figure 1.5 in Subsection 1.3.2)
in Figure 3.15a for a piece of scrap Teﬂon. This enabled us to mount the cell while dry and then
ﬂow electrolyte in, ﬁlling the working volume. After this, we are generally able to run without
bubbles for a while.
Finally, for much of the project, the counter electrode was fed down through a capillary to
border the working volume. This was done to minimize solution resistance between WE and
CE. However, as our model experiment in Subsection 3.2.2 indicated, most or all of the elec-
trochemical reaction (OER and HER, to match the current needed at the WE) that occurs is
likely to occur on the tip of the CE closest to WE. If a bubble nucleates at this spot, it cuts
the counter oﬀelectrically from the other two electrodes. This forced us to cut oﬀmost pulses
prematurely, as seen in Figure 4.1 of the next chapter, where most electrolysis steps lasted less
than 10 seconds, compared to a desired time of 60 s.
This problem was solved by the installation of a separate counter electrode, which we refer to
as the “CE pipe,” with a wide cross-sectional area and thus low solution resistance. The CE
pipe, shown on the setup in Figure 3.15b, eliminated the problem of counter electrode bubbles.
We stuck with the concept of a CE pipe in the new cell, where we have two counter electrodes
(Figure 3.11b).
Initial experiments with a new electrochemical cell and interface block that were ﬁnished in
94
==PAGE:108==
January indicate that a number of the problems with mounting have been ﬁxed.
The old
cell (ﬁg 3.15b) was held down by screw clamps which were unweildly and installation often
risked pressing down on the working volume, leading to a non-uniform working distance or
even damaging the electrode. The new cell, in contrast, (ﬁgure 3.11b has a built-in fastening
mechanism, based on screws that are threaded into the interface block and carefully-designed
spacers.
The cell is expected to be more stable and less bubble-prone, and operate with a
more reproducible working distance. One of our next steps is to test this, repeating the time
response vs working distance study described in Section 3.3, with the objective of maintaining
a well-characterized working distance down to 25 µm or lower.
A downside to the new cell and interface block system, however, is that the cell cannot be
removed quickly, in the case that the membrane breaches, for example.
3.4.2
Potentiostat noise
This subsection will describe a very frustrating problem that turned out to have a very simple
solution.
At the start of this chapter, I described the reasons for switching from 0.1M KOH to 1.0M pH=12
carbonate buﬀer: improved chip stability and higher electrical conductivity with minimal loss
of catalytic activity. The higher electrical conductivity was expected to, if anything, improve
potential control and reduce noise in the setup. To our surprise, it had the opposite eﬀect. The
high noise and poor potential control in the 1.0M electrolyte was especially pronounced at low
currents, and smooth current-potential (J-V) curves were obtained after the onset of HER. A
CV on blank glassy carbon is showin in Figure 3.16. The reference and working electrodes were
opposite each other for this measurement, and ohmic drop as measured by PEIS was ≈2Ω.
Interestingly, constant-current measurements such as open-circuit voltage (OCV zero current)
and chronopotentiometry (CP, constant current) gave little to no noise, whereas chronoamper-
ometry (CA, constant potential) with the potential set to the initial measured OCV gave a
tremendous amount of noise, with the CE potential oscillating between its outer bounds of ±10
V vs RE at a frequency of 300 Hz. Additionally, the noise observed during potential sweeps was
on both the potential and current axes.
This can be understood in terms of the discussion around Figure 1.1a at the beginning of
Chapter 1.2. The potentiostat controls the working electrode potential by inducing the current
necessary to put it at that potential, and this process involves a feedback loop.
Constant-
current measurements, on the other hand, do not involve as complex a feedback loop. If there is
a capacitance-resistance combination in the system with a similar time constant to that of the
95
==PAGE:109==
Figure 3.16: After switching from 0.1M KOH to 1.0M potassium carbonate buﬀer, pH=12, we
began experiencing serious problems with potential control. This noise was especially pronounced
when there was low current. We later learned that it could be ﬁxed simply by lowering the
bandwidth.
potentiostat’s feedback loop for potential control at a given potential, the system can oscillate
out of control.
After being frustrated with the problem for almost a week, we considered
manually adjusting the system’s time constant by applying a resistor and a capacitor in series
on the counter electrode lead. It was at that point that a colleague with more electrochemical
experience pointed out that we could have the potentiostat automatically do just that through
the EC Lab software that controls it, by adjusting the bandwidth. Indeed, setting the bandwidth
down from 5 to 2 solved the problem.
3.4.3
Keeping things clean
Our lab has a culture of high cleanliness due to a large body of single-crystal electrochemical
studies, which are extremely sensitive to the least bit of contamination. Cleanliness was also
96
==PAGE:110==
very important for us. Our ﬁrst concern was avoiding platinum contamination, as even a small
amount of platinum could have activity for HER surpassing the activity of the rest of the
sample for CO2RR, which has to compete with HER. Thus, after using a platinum electrode, all
of our equipment that possibly could be placed in aqua regia - electrochemical cell, glassware,
u-cup, teﬂon tubing - was placed in aqua regia, a 3:1 mixture of concentrated hydrochloric acid
and concentrated nitric acid able to dissolve the noble metals gold and platinum. Whenever
we switched sample type without having used platinum, everything was put in piranha, a 3:1
mixture of concentrated sulfuric acid and 30% H2O solution, which is very eﬀective at oxidizing
away organic residues and dissolving non-precious metals.
When going from copper to Ni:MoS2, clenliness was especially important, as the Ni:MoS2 sam-
ples come from CINF’s cluster source, a vacuum system capable of depositing size-selected
nanoparticles. The Ni:MoS2 loadings are typically very small (25% of a monolayer as measured
by deposition current), and as higher products have never been detected from CO2RR or CORR
on Ni:MoS2 before, seeing even a little bit would be an interesting result. Trace amounts of cop-
per contamination, less than can be seen in x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) have been
shown to produce signiﬁcant amounts of hydrocarbons, primarily methane, in the context of
studying less active catalysts.106
We were not completely successful in avoiding cross-contamination, and some of the Ni:MoS2
showed trace amounts of Cu as described below. Assuming that the piranha cleaning is eﬀective,
there are two possible sources of the contamination: the glassy carbon discs and the mounting
blocks. The glassy carbon disks were recycled by polishing on a cloth with isopropanol and
diamond paste, and then sonicating in ultra-pure (18.2 MΩcm) miliQ water. After observing
copper contamination the ﬁrst time, I used a new polishing cloth and added the step of cleaning
overnight in diluted aqua regia. before sonicating in miliQ water. Glassy carbon disks cleaned
this way showed no copper by XPS or ion-scattering spectroscopy (ISS) before deposition, but
when examined again after EC-MS testing, a small Cu 2p peak could be observed.
The only thing that could have touched the surface of the sample that had not been in piranha
or aqua regia is the mounting blocks, which are resin blocks with concentric circular indents of
the right diameter to place a glassy carbon disk (5 mm in diameter) upside down such that only
the outer edge of the front surface touches the resin, and press a U-cup over it. The resin is
destroyed in piranha or aqua regia. We plan to get mounting blocks made in Teﬂon or PCTFE
which can be piranha-cleaned to avoid future cross-contamination.
97
==PAGE:111==
3.5
Sample preparation
Early in the project, I had the idea of making a sample producing CO reduction products that
could be measured both in a batch electrolysis experiment and in the sniﬀer setup. This would
give a direct point of comparison with which to evaluate the sniﬀer’s sensitivity. In order to
be measured in the sniﬀer setup, a sample had to be on a disk 5 mm in diameter which ﬁts
inside a U-cup which, in turn, ﬁts inside the electrochemical cell of the sniﬀer setup. In order
to give quantiﬁable results in the bulk system, a sample had to be able to reduce CO with high
partial current densities, as most samples tested in the bulk system are 1 cm2, or about ﬁve
times as large. As a sample that we hoped would satisfy both of these conditions, I focused on
depositing roughened copper on a glassy carbon disks. These eﬀorts, described brieﬂy below,
proved unfruitful, however, as the copper layers would consistently ﬂake oﬀof the glassy carbon
disk at some point in the process.
To circumvent this problem, we used copper disks of exactly the same size, fashioned by the
workshop, as the starting substrate. This proved successful, and we were able to make two
types of roughened copper, electrodeposited copper (ED Cu) and oxide-derived copper (OD
Cu). These will also be described shortly.
As mentioned before, we managed to make meaningful EC-MS measurements and see hydrocar-
bons on three types of samples on the sniﬀer chip, as presented in the next chapter:
(1) OD Cu
(2) pc Cu
(3) Ni:MoS2
Of these, the third, nickel-doped molybdenum sulﬁde nanoparticles on glassy carbon, was syn-
thesized and characterized by Anders Bodin and Bela Sebok using CINF’s cluster source. A
nickel-molybdenum target was bombarded by ions in a magnetron sputter source, after which
the dislodged atoms and ions entered the agglomeration zone, where there was a small partial
pressure of hydrogen sulﬁde H2S. The nickel-doped molybdenum sulﬁde nanoparticles resulting
from the reaction in the agglomeration zone were separated according to mass in a quadrupole
mass spectrometer before being deposited on the substrate, in our case a glassy carbon (GC)
disk.
The second of the three samples, polycrystalline copper, ready as prepared by the workshop.
before each experiments, it was w polishing on a cloth with diamond paste and isoproponal, and
sonicated in milli-Q water.
98
==PAGE:112==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.17: (a) Cu electrodeposition at high current. The working electrode is in the white
Teﬂon U-cup. A disadvantage of the sample having to be mounted in the U-cup (to allow for
insertion in the electrochemical cell of the sniﬀer setup) is that it is challenging to angle the
sample in a way that it does not accumulate bubbles (b) the resulting copper is ﬂaky due to
poor adhesion.
Thus, this section will describe the development and insights gained up to successfully producing
a CORR-active OD Cu sample for the sniﬀer setup
3.5.1
Roughened copper on glassy carbon
As copper, a relatively unreactive metal, was not expected to stick to the surface of the GC
disk very well, a wetting layer of Ti was sputtered ﬁrst. I sputtered 5nm of Ti (180W for 5
minutes at 10mTorr, as calibrated on our sputter chamber) followed by 100nm of Cu (180W for
15 minutes at 4 mTorr). This was then used as the substrate for electrodeposition
According to a recipe used previously in our lab for electrodeposition, a solution was prepared
of 110 mM CuSO4, 380 mM (NH4)2SO4, and 160 mM citric acid was prepared. The solution
had a measured pH of 1.5. The GC disk with a copper layer was mounted in a u-cup, and the
u-cup was hung into the solution, which was purged with Ar. This is shown in Figure 3.17a
A constant current of -24 mA/cm2 was applied immediately after immersing the electrode, so as
to avoid the dissolution of the sputtered Cu into the solution (see Figure 3.21b below. The
electrodeposition was continued for 15 minutes.
99
==PAGE:113==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.18: (a) Film yielded by deposition of Cu from a pH=4 solution at 0 V vs RHE. (b)
The ﬁlm after oxidation in air at 500C for 2 hours, as seen through an optical microscope.
Under these conditions, the deposition of Cu is mass-transport limited, and the majority of
the current goes to HER. It is the high HER current during deposition that causes the copper
electrodeposited this way to be nanostructured.
Samples prepared this way would always ﬂake oﬀduring electrolysis in the bulk setup due to
pressure from behind caused by evolved hydrogen.
The copper surface of samples prepared by this electrodeposition technique were ﬂaky due to
poor adhesion between the sputtered copper and the carbon substrate. They also had roughness
features much greater than 100µm, precluding their use in the sniﬀer setup.
An attempt was also made to deposit a smooth layer of copper, which could then be oxidized
and reduced afterwards. A wetting layer of Ti followed by Cu was sputtered onto the glassy
carbon disk as described above. A spot was picked on the pourbaix diagram (Figure 3.21b)
where Cu would deposit at appreciable rates without hydrogen evolution. The chosen operating
condtions were pH=4, ERHE. The solution described above was titrated to from pH=1.5 to
pH=4 with 0.1 M KOH. By equation 1.23 relating the potential vs RHE to the potential vs an
RE, this is -0.43V vs the Ag/AgCl electrode used. Deposition under these conditions drew ≈3.5
mA/cm2. The deposition was continued for about 8 minutes until a total charge of 2.67 C had
been passed, the amount of charge needed to electrodeposite a 3µm thick layer of Cu, which is
approximately the thickness of the porous layer in OD Cu.81 The layer thus deposited, shown
in Figure 3.18a, was then oxidized in the oven at 500◦C for 2 hr. The resulting ﬁlm, as seen
through an optical microscope, is shown in Figure 3.18b. The copper oxide layer has almost
100
==PAGE:114==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.19:
(a) Photograph of an electrode prepared by electrodeposition of copper on a
copper disk. (b) Cycles at 10, 20, and 50 mV per second in a bulk setup before electrolysis
(blue) and in the sniﬀer setup after electrolysis (red)
completely separated from the glassy carbon.
It was thus concluded that the aﬃnity of copper for glassy carbon is too low to prepare a
roughened copper sample on glassy carbon. We instead had some copper disks fabricated.
3.5.2
Roughened copper on copper disks
I electrodeposited Cu on a copper disk by the ﬁrst method described above, i.e. from a pH=1.5
solution at 24 mA/cm2 to form roughened copper. A photograph of the resulting electrode surface
is shown in Figure 3.19a.
The sample was ﬁrst tested in a bulk setup. CV’s taken in the electrolyte, 0.1M KOH, under
argon at diﬀerent scan rates are shown in blue in Figure 3.19b. After the potential cycling, the
cell was purged with CO for a CORR experiment. The electrolysis was run at -0.3 V vs RHE until
a total of -3 C of charge had passed, which took about 4 hr. GC-FID and GC-TCD were used to
detect and quantify CORR products, and a heated headspace sampler was used to extract and
measure volatile liquids (HS-GC-FID). The results, according to the calibration curves made
by Erlend Bertheussen, mean that 10% Faradaic eﬃciency went to ethanol. Ethylene was the
CORR product detected with the second-highest FE at only 0.03%. As NMR was not performed,
the possibility of signiﬁcant amounts of acetate cannot be excluded.
101
==PAGE:115==
Figure 3.20: Current (blue) and CE potential (red) during potential cycling of ED Cu in the
sniﬀer setup. The surface reactions are indicated, and shown schematically in Figure 3.21
After the electrolysis, the sample, in the U-cup, was left submerged in milli-Q overnight and
then mounted in the sniﬀer cell. Ohmic drop was measured in the 0.1M KOH electrolyte to be
close to zero, as expected from the electrode arrangement (CE and RE opposite each other).
We began the sniﬀer experiment by cycling in a potential range near OCV, and then expanded
the potential range. This cycling, shown in Figure 3.20, shows what looks like a strong Faradaic
current in cathodic potentials. The ﬁrst time we observed this, we also observed a signal at
M2 due to the counter-ground loop discussed in Section 3.2.3, and thus took it for HER, not
understanding how our RE was so out of calibration. Of course, the RE is ﬁne, and the current
observed is not HER but reduction of a Cu2O surface layer that had formed overnight. The
redox peaks observed at 0.45 (cathodic sweep) and 0.5 (anodic sweep) are due to cycling between
Cu(I) and Cu(II) (speciﬁcally, Cu2O and Cu(OH)2), in agreement with the Pourbaix diagram
in Figure 3.21b and with a full CV of Cu given in Reference 82. The processes occuring during
this cycling is illustrated in Figure 3.21a. The redox peaks grew with each cycle, possibly due
to cleaning or to roughening of the surface, and the cathodic current due to reduction of the
underlying Cu2O layer decreased. When it was safe to do so, i.e. no risk of forcing the CE to
potentials at which it activated the CE-ground loop, we lowered the potential range, gradually
reaching RHE potential.
After the CV’s had stabilized, we took a CV at 10, 20, and 50 mV/s, just had been done in the
102
==PAGE:116==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.21: (a) Schematic diagram of the process in 3.20. The Cu(I/II) redox peak is cycled
through, while net cathodic current goes to shrinking the Cu2O layer in favor of metallic copper.
(b) Pourbaix diagram of Cu, taken from the Wikipedia Commons. The black arrow indicates
the region cycled in Figure
bulk setup. These CV’s are plotted in red in Figure 3.19b. The red and blue curves, despite
the strange behavior of the potentiostat at the end points in the sniﬀer setup, are clearly of the
same type of electrode. It appears that the surface area dropped by a factor of ≈2. This could
have occurred during the 4 hour electrolysis experiment in bulk, or by damage of the sample
through transfer or through oxidizing and reducing again.
After collecting these CV’s, we changed the carrier gas from He to CO, and began a series
of pulses at progressively more negative potentials, resting at 0V vs RHE in between pulses.
This type of pulsing, implemented as chronoamperometry (CA), became our choice method
of studying CORR for the following reasons.
The results are directly comparable to batch
experiments, which also hold a constant potential for each data point, just for a much longer
time.
The rest in between gives us time to ﬂush the system, removing bubbles etc.
The
expected response time is most easily accounted for in this type of experiment as compared to
a chronopotentiometric (CP) technique, as described in Section 3.3.
No CORR reduction products were observed on ED Cu during any pulse in the potential range
-0.2 to -0.5 V vs RHE. We were not able to go to more negative potentials due to the high HER
current from the roughened surface. This is not surprising, considering the very small ethylene
FE and the fact that the sniﬀer is relatively insensitive to ethanol. Despite this disappointment,
103
==PAGE:117==
the experiments on ED Cu represented a huge leap in progress, in large part because the chal-
lenges involved up to performing measurements on the more active OD Cu are similar to those
we solved for ED Cu.
Oxide-derived copper electrodes were synthesized by oxidizing a 5 mm Cu disk at 500◦C for 2
hr. The result was a black disk with Cu2O on all surfaces. The Cu2O was scraped oﬀthe back
of the disk to ensure electrical contact, and the disk was mounted in a u-cup. Reduction of the
thick Cu2O layer was generally done in bulk, as we were working in 0.1M KOH and so only had
a limited time to do experiments once the electrochemical cell was mounted on the sniﬀer setup
(Subsection 3.1.1). Nonetheless, layer of surface oxide formed during sample transfer which had
to be reduced as described above for ED Cu. Growing conﬁdent that we knew what we were
doing, we started reducing the oxide layer by a CP method, in which a constant of -0.5 mA was
drawn until the potential stabilized under RHE potential. We often observed hydrogen, as a
signal at M2, before the potential reached potential dropped to RHE, as shown in Figure 3.22.
This has been observed multiple times and we are conﬁdent that it is not an artifact of the setup
(such as a CE-ground loop). We do not have an explanation for this phenomenon.
After this procedure, the OD Cu sample was ready for CORR testing.
104
==PAGE:118==
Figure 3.22: Hydrogen signal (top) and electrode potentials (bottom) during chronopotentio-
metric (constant-current) reduction of the surface oxide layer. The two data ﬁles were aligned
manually according to their absolute start times. Hydrogen evolution is observed before the WE
potential reaches the equilibrium potential for HER. The spikes in the CE potential are due to
bubbles at the tip of the CE, as described in Subsection 3.4.1
105
==PAGE:119==
4.
Experimental Results and Discussion
As emphasized before, most of this project has been about understanding and controlling elec-
trochemistry in the small volume between the working electrode and the sniﬀer chip membrane.
It has thus been more development than research. It is only now that we are becoming able to
do controlled, careful, reproducible experiments.
The results presented below were picked up along the way. They are not quantiﬁed, not repro-
duced, and only somewhat controlled. While these experimental results are very preliminary,
the demonstrate the usefulness of the sniﬀer chip as a tool for understanding the carbon dioxide
reduction reaction, and perhaps are already beginning to shed some new mechanistic insight on
the reaction.
4.1
Oxide-Derived copper
As described in Section 1.2.4, nanostructured copper produced by reduction of Cu2O layers (OD
Cu) show high CORR activity, primarily to C2 products, at low overpotential. Our preparation
of such samples was described at the end of the previous chapter.
4.1.1
Methods
Electrolyte: 0.1M KOH
Carrier gas: CO
Reference electrode: Ag/AgCl, calibrated against an RHE in the same electrolyte
Sample: Oxide-derived copper, formed by heating a polished copper disk to 500◦C in air for two
hours and subsequent electroreduction.
Masses monitored: M2 (H2), M4 (He, carrier gas), M15 (CH4), M18 (H2O, solvent), M27
(C2H4), M28 (N2, CO), M32 (O2, air), M31 (ethanol), M43 (acetaldehyde), and M44 (CO2,
breath testing)
Electrochemical procedure: CP (reduction of surface), CV (capacitance), CV (to observe CO
poisoning while carrier gas is switched), CA (pulses). In this case, pulses were made out of
order, as we were racing against time before the membrane breached and wished to collect the
most important data points ﬁrst.
106
==PAGE:120==
Figure 4.1: M2 (hydrogen) and M27 (ethylene) during electrocal pulses on an OD Cu sample,
a subset of the mass-time plot shown at the beginning of Section 3.1.1. Pulses were set for one
minute but most were cut oﬀshort due to loss of electrical contact with the counter electrode.
The potentials used during each pulse and the time at which the pulse was shut oﬀare indicated.
The slow response time in the signal decay during each pulse is most likely due to one or more
hydrogen bubbles in or adjacent to the working electrode, as is the sharp signal in M2 at 4400s.
4.1.2
Results
After mounting of the electrochemical cell, in situ reduction of the surface oxide layer, and
switching of the carrier gas from He to CO, the sniﬀer chip had been exposed to 0.1M KOH
for about 45 minutes, and we knew that the membrane would soon breach. We therefore chose
potentials for each pulse under the assumption that each data point would be our last. The
signals at M2 and M27 are plotted against time in Figure 4.1. The potential of each pulse
is indicated, together with the total current passed during the pulse.
Electrical contact to
the counter electrode was lost for all points with a more negative potential than -0.35V vs
RHE, cutting the pulse short. The exact moment at which each electrochemical pulse ended
is indicated by a vertical line. There was also clearly a persistant bubble somewhere near the
working electrode, preventing the background signal of H2 from coming down to a low baseline
after each pulse until we ﬂush electrolyte. The M2 signal at 4400s is attributed to part of this
bubble reaching the membrane.
107
==PAGE:121==
Figure 4.2: Pseudo-quantiﬁcation of ethylene (right) and hydrogen (left) faradaic eﬃciencies
during 1-minute potential pulsing with intervening rest at 0 V vs RHE. The height of the bars is
proportional to the integrated QMS signal divided by the total charge passed during the pulse.
In the middle, for comparision, results from Reference 81 on OD Cu are included. In the middle
plot, the blue portion of the bar represents ethylene faradaic eﬃciency, and the diﬀerence between
the top of the bar and 100% is the hydrogen faradaic eﬃciency. No other hydrocarbon signals
were observed.
Ethylene was observed at each potential negative of -0.25 V vs RHE. In an attempt to say
something quantitative about the data, and without having done calibration experiments, I
integrated the ethylene signal for each data point and divided the result by the total current
passed during that pulse. This ratio is proportional to the Faradaic eﬃciency, in the assumption
that detection scales linearly with production, though this assumption may not be true in the
case of a bubble in the system acting as a reservoir for ethylene. The results are shown to the
left in Figure 4.2. The same procedure was also used for the hydrogen signal, and the result is
shown on the right of Figure 4.2. For comparison with the literature, a Faradaic eﬃciency plot
from Reference 81 has been included. The solid bars represent electro-reduced OD Cu and are
thus most comparable with our sample.
While we still have a lot of work to do to develop a reliably quantiﬁable setup and procedure,
note that we performed electrolysis for less than one minute for each data point, whereas in
conventional methods more than an hour is needed for such a measurement.
4.2
Polycrystalline copper
Polycrystalline copper is the most studied CO2RR catalyst, and existning knowledge of its
mechanism for CO2RR and CORR is described extensively in Section 1.2.4.
108
==PAGE:122==
4.2.1
Methods
Electrolyte: 1.0 M KOH to pH=12 with CO2
Carrier gas: CO
Reference electrode: Ag/AgCl, calibrated against an RHE in the same electrolyte
Sample: Polished polycrystalline copper disk
Masses monitored: M2 (H2), M4 (He, carrier gas), M15 (CH4), M18 (H2O, solvent), M27
(C2H4), M28 (N2, CO), M32 (O2, air), M31 (ethanol), M43 (acetaldehyde), and M44 (CO2,
breath testing)
Electrochemical procedure: CV (capacitance), CV (to observe CO poisoning while carrier gas
is switched), CA (pulses). Pulses start at -0.5V vs RHE and proceed towards lower potentials
at increments of 50mV, with rest at 0V vs RHE between each pulse
4.2.2
Results
At the stage of development during these measurements, it took about 10-15 minutes to switch
out carrier gas in the sniﬀer setup. During this time, we typically cycled potential in a range
around RHE with the cathodic scan negative enough to give a quantiﬁable M2 signal in the
QMS.
During this cycling for polycrystalline copper, we saw a double-peak feature emerge with the
arrival of CO, as shown in Figure 4.3. CV’s with He as the carrier gas give an M2 signal once
per cycle, at the cathodic sweep where negative current is also observed, attributed to hydrogen
evolution (HER). As the carrier gas is switched to CO, HER is partly suppressed due to partial
coverage of the surface, but a new M2 peak comes, such that there are two M2 signals per cycle.
The second M2 peak occurs during the anodic sweep. This was the case scanning both at 50
mV/s and at 20 mV/s. Based on the slower scan rate, this secondary hydrogen signal comes at
+0.15 V vs RHE.
We attribute this to an adsorbed hydrogenated carbon species that forms at potentials cathodic
of RHE and decomposes when the potential is increased, releasing the hydrogen. This is one of
our most exciting observations yet, as, if there is indeed a bound hydrogenated species, it could
provide mechanistic insight on CORR on copper. As a very preliminary interpretation, the result
indicates that conversion of ∗CO to the next intermediate is not the rate-determining step. If it
were the rate-determining step, then as soon as this intermediate formed it would react further.
109
==PAGE:123==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Double peak observed in M2 signal during CV when CO is dosed. This may be
due to the decay of a hydrogenated carbon-containing surface species during the anodic scan.
(a) scanning at 50 mV/s while switching carrier gas from He to CO (b) scanning at 20 mV/s a
little bit later
Of the mechanism groupings in Figure 1.2.4, only the Classic mechanism, shown in black and
due to Hori and coworkers, has an initial step after ∗CO which is not the rate-determining step.
This is, of course, not at all a conclusive argument. For example, the adsorbate giving rise to
the secondary signal might not be one on the pathway to higher products. We will have to
reproduce and investigate the phenomenon further.
After studying is double peak, I tested for CORR activity using potential steps.
The ﬁrst
hydrocarbon, ethylene, was observed at -0.75 V vs RHE. This was, unfortunately, also the last
potential step in the experiment, as a bubble formed during this step which broke electrical
contact between WE and CE and could not be removed. These problems were largely solved by
the time we got to studying Ni:MoS2, the ﬁnal catalyst for which results are presented here.
4.3
Nickel-doped Molybdenum Sulﬁde
As described in Section 1.2.5, Nickel-doped molybdenmum sulﬁde hase been predicted theoret-
ically to reduce CO2 and CO to hydrocarbons. Samples synthesized in the cluster source were
tested on the sniﬀer setup.
110
==PAGE:124==
4.3.1
Methods
Electrolyte: 1.0M KOH to pH=12 with CO2
Carrier gas: CO
Reference electrode: Ag/AgCl, calibrated against an RHE in the same electrolyte
Sample: Ni-doped MoS2 nanoparticles were synthesized in a cluster source. They were deposited
directly on a polished glassy carbon disk with a coverage of about 25%, calculated assuming it
forms a monolayer on top of a ﬂat carbon surface. At least one of the Ni:MoS2 samples showed
a trace amount of Cu contamination after the experiments, and so there is doubt about whether
it is Ni:MoS2 or copper that produces the observed hydrocarbons.
Masses monitored: M2 (H2), M4 (He, carrier gas), M15 (CH4), M18 (H2O, solvent), M27
(C2H4), M28 (N2, CO), M32 (O2, air), M31 (ethanol), M43 (acetaldehyde), and M44 (CO2,
breath testing)
Electrochemical procedure: CV (capacitance), CV (to observe CO poisoning while carrier gas
is switched), CA (pulses). Pulses start at -0.5V vs RHE and proceed towards lower potentials
at increments of 100mV at ﬁrst, and then 50mV, with rest at 0V vs RHE between each pulse.
4.3.2
Results
Results obtained on two diﬀerent samples are shown in Figures 4.4 and 4.5.
Both show a
signiﬁcant amount of methane production, as seen in the signal at M15, and one shows a small
amount of ethylene production, as indicated by the signal at M27. The most remarkable thing
about the signals is that methane and hydrogen show diﬀerent time-dependencies during the
pulse. Whereas hydrogen is produced for the entire duration of the pulse and decays after the
pulse has turned oﬀ(with a very slow time constant, indicating there is a bubble in or near
the working volume), methane signal begins to decay almost immediately. This was the case
on both samples, indicating that the short-lived methane signal is reproducible. In both cases,
methane production peaked at -0.95 to -0.1 V vs RHE.
We initially were very excited over the methane signal, as it would (to the best of our knowledge)
be the ﬁrst sighting of hydrocarbons produced from CO2RR or CORR on MoS2, which up until
now has only been predicted theoretically. However, copper contamination was observed by
XPS on one of the samples after the experiments, indicating cross-contamination (discussed in
Subsection 3.4.3). The same XPS spectrum showed no molybdenmum, indicating degradation
of the catalyst under testing conditions. These observations cast doubt on whether the activity
111
==PAGE:125==
Figure 4.4: (left) Signals for M2 (hydrogen), M27 (ethylene), and M15 (methane) during 1-
minute potential pulsing with intervening rest at 0 V vs RHE. The potential is shown by the
black curve, read on the left axis. (right) integration of the peaks for hydrogen, methane, and
ethylene plotted against the potential of the pulse. The total current passed is also indicated as
black dots.
Figure 4.5: Similar to the Figure 4.4, but on a diﬀerent sample, demonstrating reproducibility.
Potentials were only held 20s this time in an attempt to investigate the transient nature of the
signal, but overall signals were lower. Potentials were staircased up and down.
112
==PAGE:126==
comes from the catalyst of interest. However, a blank GC disk handled in exactly the same way
as these two samples did not show any methane production, as would be expected if it were due
to contamination.
The observation of a transient methane production signal, with a rapid decay, is exciting re-
gardless of what the actual catalyst is, as it may provide insight on the reaction mechanism.
Our hypothesis is that it is due to the reduction of a monolayer of adsorbed CO, whereas new
CO cannot adsorb under the conditions during electrolysis. It cannot, however, at this point be
ruled out that it is an artifact of the setup. There are two ways that this could be the case:
The ﬁrst is mass transport.
A very similar system of diﬀerential equations to those solved
in Section 2.3 and Appendix D would govern the concentration of CO in the working volume
during an electrochemical pulse. I have not yet modeled this system, but will soon. A comparison
with the results on OD Cu, however, indicates that mass transport is not the explanation, as,
under the same relevant conditions, ethylene production continues for the entire duration of the
pulse, especially clear for the pulse at -0.35V vs RHE (Figure 4.1). Additionally, the shape of
the methane signal is similar at each potential, whereas mass transport eﬀects would be more
pronounced when there is a higher production rate.
The second comes from the pH modeling (done subsequently) presented in Section 3.1.3. The
pH is expected to change during electrolysis on the same time scale as the methane signal
(ﬁgure 3.6b in Subsection 3.1.3). As the reference electrode sets a constant potential on an SHE
scale, and the potentiostat sets the working electrode to a constant potential vs the reference
electrode, this means that the potential of the working electrode on an RHE scale increases over
time, lowering the overpotential. In principle, the shape of the signal for an RHE-dependent
electrical process could be predicted by using the pH model of Subsection 3.1.3 via convolution
with the measured response time. This has not been done yet, but there is an experimental
reason to doubt that the decay in the methane signal is due to pH. If methane production rate
is pH-independent on an RHE scale, as is the interpretation of most authors, then it should
show the same response to a changing pH as the hydrogen signal, which it does not. If, on
the other hand, the interpretation of the pH dependence on the SHE presented by Hori et al48
presented in Subsection 1.2.4 is correct, methane production should, for a given potential on the
RHE scale, increase with pH. In other words, for a constant potential on the SHE scale, as is
the case in these experiments, methane signal should decay less than hydrogen signal for a given
increase in pH, not more. Thus, we have high hopes that it is a kinetic phenomenon observed
here.
113
==PAGE:127==
5.
Conclusion
A new technology, the sniﬀer, has been put to the test by investigating what may become one
of the most important reactions for a sustainable humanity. It is hard to imagine achieving net
carbon neutrality without some form of industrial carbon recycling, and CO2 electroreduction
(CO2RR) has some signiﬁcant advantages over competing possibilities. Despite the reaction’s
importance, after three decades of work little is agreed upon with regards to how the electrore-
duction of carbon dioxide proceeds to any products other than carbon monoxide or formic acid.
The ﬁeld has been slowed down by the complexity of the reaction and the diﬃculty of experi-
ments. By applying a new and powerful technology to the study of CO2 reduction we hope to
help move the ﬁeld along.
In order to reach the point where the sniﬀer chip can be used to elucidate the mechanism
of CO2 reduction and thus inform the development of better catalysts, a much more detailed
understanding of its strengths and limitations was required.
The sniﬀer chip is a means of
coupling mass spectrometry to electrochemistry to combine chemical sensitivity with control
and measurement of potential and current even on fast timescales. Its developers showed that
the sniﬀer is three orders of magnitude more sensitive than the similar established technology,
diﬀerential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS), at detecting gases such as O2, H2, and
CO. In this report, a model based on diﬀusion in the working volume and mass transfer across
the membrane showed that the sensitivity of the sniﬀer chip is in fact highly dependent on the
volatility of the analyte studied, and much moreso than DEMS, the key parameter being the
Henry’s law constant. For compounds of intermediate volatility such as alcohols and aldehydes,
which are important products and intermediates of CO2RR, the sniﬀer is actually less sensitive
than DEMS. The sniﬀer could be improved in its sensitivity towards less volatile products by
decreasing the pressure inside the chip or increasing the temperature.
The understanding of the sniﬀer chip and its setup was also developed with respect to practical
considerations such as chip stability, working distance and time response, ohmic drop, and pH
changes in the working volume. Practical problems were understood and solved one at a time,
bringing the technology to the point where now it can in fact be used to make controlled,
fast, and highly sensitive measurements of the gaseous products formed during electrochemistry
on catalysts relevant for CO2RR. Preliminary results on the closely-related carbon monoxide
reduction reaction (CORR) on oxide-derived copper (OD Cu), polycrystalline copper (pc Cu),
and nickel-doped molybdenum sulﬁde (Ni:MoS2) were presented in this report.
Ethylene was observed at low overpotentials on OD Cu, as expected, even though the less volatile
114
==PAGE:128==
compound ethanol is known to be formed in much greater amounts. Experiments on pc Cu
revealed a hydrogen desorption phenomenon occuring around +0.15 V vs RHE during the anodic
sweep of CVs when the electrolyte was saturated with CO. As this hydrogen signal was only
observed when CO was present, it is likely due to a hydrogenated carbonaceous adsorbate. If this
adsorbate is an intermediate in the CORR, it would indicate that the ﬁrst step of reduction from
CO is not the potential-limiting step. Finally, a quickly-decaying methane signal was observed
on catalysts that were nominally Ni:MoS2, though characterization afterwards indicates that
copper contamination may have been the active catalyst. As the hydrogen signal does not follow
the same decay as the methane signal, and as the decay of the methane signal does not seem
dependent on its size, the phenomenon is likely not due to pH change or mass transport, though
new calculations based on models presented in this report, as well as additional experiments,
will be needed to conclusively say that the time-dependence of the methane signal is due to
the kinetics of the reaction. Our hypothesis is that the methane signal is due to the reduction
of CO already at the catalyst surface, while new CO is somehow prevented from binding the
surface during the electrolysis. If this is the case, a method of increasing the faradaic eﬃciency
of CO reduction could be to quickly cycle the potential. This highlights one of the strengths
of electrochemistry that is rarely utilized: potential is a relatively easily controlled dynamic
system parameter. While thermally activated industrial process involving pressure swings or
repeated heating and quenching are extremely energy intensive, accomplishing the same in an
electrochemical process by using potential might be easy.
Our next steps will be improving the stability and reproducibility of the system, including de-
velopment of a general experimental routine to reliably measure and compare diﬀerent catalysts;
and calibrating such that signals can be quantiﬁed on absolute scales and converted to Faradaic
eﬃciencies.
The ability to quickly detect sub-monolayer levels of chemical products under catalytically rel-
evant electrochemical conditions as enabled by the sniﬀer is a new ability in the ﬁeld of electro-
catalysis. This master’s project has shown that it will become a powerful tool in understanding
the carbon dioxide reduction reaction.
115
==PAGE:129==
Philosophical Afterword
I consider myself extremely lucky to ﬁnd myself writing a report on the project I am writing on,
working in the ﬁeld that I am working in, and doing so in the company of those I am surrounded
by. It has been a bumpy and confusing path at times to get here, but I think I am luckier than
most in my ability to say with certainty “I am doing what I want to with my career.”
I cannot imagine a more exciting career than being a scientist, particularly in the ﬁeld of
catalysis. Working in this ﬁeld puts us simultaneously in a race with the best minds around
the world to do things that have never been done before, and in a race against time to save our
burning planet. It may be cliche to say, but my daily work during this thesis has made me feel
“part of something big’.’
We live in an exciting time.
Humanity has been a species in expansion for thousands and
thousands of years, and it is now, in our lifetimes, that that expansion hits its upper limit.
Exponential growth, be it in population, wealth, or energy consumption, is fundamentally un-
sustainable in a ﬁnite system. Extrapolating from present doubling rates, it is easy to calculate
that in a very short time compared to the history of our species’ expansion, human beings would,
even without all our possessions, physically ﬁll the entire land area of the earth, and consume
more energy than the entire output of the sun. But the upper limit we have hit now is more
subtle. We are changing the composition of our atmosphere, and this aﬀects the climate in a
way that is making it harder for us to live where we live.
Many assume that science and technology will save us, and allow us to continue our expansion.
Science and technology have done so before. Why should this time be diﬀerent? Predictions
of mass starvation in the last centuries were thwarted by the invention of synthetic fertilizers
and the systematic breeding of more fruitful crops. Won’t predictions of climate catastrophe
be thwarted by solar panels and electric cars and pumping carbon underground and controlling
the clouds to shade the earth as needed? Won’t science and technology save us so that we can
continue our expansion towards the point where no one can move their elbows and we start
building photovoltaic shells around stars? Given what humanity has been able to do so far to
fuel its expansion, I have no doubt that such a trajectory is possible. But I think what makes
this time diﬀerent is that we realize we have a choice. Humanity does not need to be a species
in expansion.
It is my dream to live through the peaceful peak of world population, the peak of world energy
use, and the peak of world economic production. It is my dream to see the start of the transition
to a humanity that learns to live sustainably and enjoy the fruits of its accomplishments without
recklessly pushing forward. Imagine a world with the beneﬁts of electricity, modern medicine,
116
==PAGE:130==
and bullet trains, but with less than a billion people and as green as when we found it. A
world in which our remaining, perhaps unshakable, restlessness goes towards art and sport and,
perhaps, ﬁguring out how to get to exoplanets rather than towards an endless chase to become
richer.
The present limit on our expansion is, however, too close to avoid. People, including myself, can
not and will not change their lifestyles and materialistic expectations overnight to the degree
that would be needed to live sustainably without new technologies. We need to lift the ceiling
one more time to avoid crashing into it. But we need to do so while completely aware that the
next ceiling will come sooner and be heavier than the last, that every ceiling we lift makes the
building less stable, and that we are not necessarily better oﬀat the next level. We need to grow
now in a way that enables the end of growth. The science and technology that comes out of the
global challenge of climate change must be part of the foundation for a steady-state humanity.
I hope that this report, the work it represents, and the work I follow it with, will make at least
a small contribution on the path to a sustainable humanity.
117
==PAGE:131==
Appendices
118
==PAGE:132==
A.
Project time line
The project’s original dates were August 24, 2015 - Jan 24, 2016 according to new rules at DTU.
In practice however, I did not start until September 9 when I got back to Denmark from the
USA, where I had just done a project in the Jaramillo group at Stanford, attended the SUNCAT
summer school there together with a number of colleagues from DTU, and visited my family on
the East Coast on the way back.
The hand-in date was later moved back three weeks, due primarily to a stretch of inﬂuenza.
The thesis spilled a little bit over the new deadline as well.
The time-line on the next page chronologically summarizes everything that’s happened both
in the lab and on the computer between those dates. I have tried to indicate which problems
we were dealing with, and which problems we had solved, when particular measurements were
made.
It has been an extremely full semester for me.
119
==PAGE:133==
Figure A.1
120
==PAGE:134==
B.
Raw data and calculations
B.1
Thermodynamics
In this report, I have made repeated use of thermodynamic calculations for speciﬁc standard
reduction potentials (Section 1.2), Henry’s law constants (Section 2.3), equilibrium constants
(Section 3.1.2), and even the minimum energy cost of CO2RR products (Table 1.2). Here I’ll
outline the methodology behind those calculations, cite my sources for raw data, and then explain
the calculation of the Henry’s constant for labeled water dissolved in water. The answer to that
is obvious in retrospect, but I had to puzzle my way through a bit of statistical thermodynamics
to get to it.
B.1.1
Deﬁnitions, discussion
The principle behind most of the calculations has been to utilize the fact that enthalpy, H,
entropy, S, and free energy, G = H −TS, are state functions.
This makes their changes
over a reaction rxn, ∆rxnH, ∆rxnS, and ∆rxnG, additive, in the sense that, if rxn1 followed
by rxn2 is equivalent to rxn, then ∆rxnH = ∆rxn1H + ∆rxn2H, and the same for S and G.
Taking advantage of this fact, the scientiﬁc community has adopted the convention of tabulating
thermodynamic data on pure substances in terms of their enthalpy and free energy of formation,
∆fH and ∆fG for the, often theoretical, reaction by which a compound is formed from pure
elements in their standard states. For example, ∆fH and ∆fG for ethanol are the enthalpy and
free energy changes, respectively, for the reaction:
2 C(graphite) + 1
2O2(gas,1bar) + 3 H2(gas,1bar) −−→CH3CH2OH ,
(B.1)
∆H = ∆fH◦(ethanol) , ∆G = ∆fG◦(ethanol)
(B.2)
∆fH and ∆fG are by deﬁnition zero for pure elements in their standard states, which are the
lowest-energy states at standard conditions (i.e.
1 bar and 25◦C), for example graphite for
carbon.
Where the ◦means standard conditions and that all the products and reactants are in their
standard states, which means either pure or (for gasses) 1 bar but with molecules acting as if
there was no pressure or (for dissolved species) 1 M = 103mol/m3 but with molecules acting as
they would if they were inﬁnitely dilute. These annoyingly abstract deﬁnitions are practical
because then experiments determining thermodynamic quantities can be unambiguously done
121
==PAGE:135==
under dilute conditions, and then just multiplied up to 1 M, ignoring the fact that at higher
concentrations the dissolved molecules interact with each other. When necessary, an activity
coeﬃcient γ captures the ratio between the concentration something is “acting” based on linear
extrapolation of how it acts when it’s very dilute and the actual concentration. This has not
been necessary in this report, as things have been relatively dilute and other sources of error
have been much larger; but activity coeﬃcients will be necessary once we build our factory to
make valuable and highly concentrated products from CO2. I’ll leave out the ◦whenever it’s not
ambiguous. As for temperature, it’s a beneﬁt of electrochemistry that it works at 25◦C, and so
we don’t need to deviate from standard conditions. The one time I do consider a temperature
dependence, in the end of Section 2.4, I assume that ∆H and ∆S stay at their values at 25◦C,
and only consider the temperature dependence from ∆G = ∆H −T∆S. Again, this works for
now, but I know I’ll have to treat this more rigorously (using the change in heat capacity, ∆Cp,
for example) before we build our factory.
As another side note, entropy could very well be tabulated this way, and if one ever needs the
entropy for a standard formation reaction, it’s just ∆fS = 1/T(∆fH −∆fG), but unlike enthalpy
and free energy (ignoring the implications of special relativity), entropy actually has an easily-
deﬁned absolute scale, which people prefer to use when tabulating standard thermodynamic
data. This absolute scale is deﬁned such that any pure substance as a perfect crystal at 0 K
has zero entropy, and the entropy at a given temperature is deﬁned in terms of the heat added
to bring the substance from that perfect frozen state to a given temperature, with the disorder
that inevitably brings:
S(T) =
Z T
T ′=0
δQ
T ′
(B.3)
There’s some really cool statistics - or you could say it lies in the deﬁnition of temperature, but
that’s a philosophical discussion - that make this give the same quantity as another deﬁnition
of entropy,
nS = kB ln(W) ,
(B.4)
where W is the total number of microstates (which exact molecule is in which exact state)
that could give rise to the observed macrostate (how many molecules are in each state), the
macrostate being a function of temperature and pressure. The molar amount n is there to keep
the “per mol” in the dimensions of S, J/(mol*K).
Anyway, back to reaction free energies. If you wanted to, say, calculate the energy of the reaction
forming ethanol from carbon dioxide and water,
2 CO2 + 3 H2O −−→CH3CH2OH + 3 O2
rxnA,
(B.5)
you just add up the free energies of formation the products and subtract the free energies of the
122
==PAGE:136==
reactants. This is because the above equation is equivalent to
1
2 C + 1
2O2 + 3 H2 −−→CH3CH2OH
(B.6)
−2
C + O2 −−→CO2
(B.7)
−3
H2 + 1
2O2 −−→H2O
(B.8)
Thus,
∆rxnAG = ∆fG(ethanol) −2∆fG(CO2) −3∆fG(H2O) .
(B.9)
In general, for reaction rxn,
∆rxnG =
X
i
νi∆fG(i) ,
(B.10)
where i represents each species in the reaction, νi is its stoichiometric coeﬃcient (positive for
products, negative for reactants), and ∆fG(i) is its free energy of formation. In the formation
of ethanol from water, ν was 1 for ethanol, 3 for O2 (but ∆fG(O2) = 0), -2 for CO2, and -3 for
H2O.
Once you have the free energy of a reaction, you also have its equilibrium constant. It actually
comes directly from the deﬁnition of entropy as S = kB ln(W) and of free energy as G = H −TS,
which I’ll end up demonstrating in a bit when I discuss the Henry’s constant of H2
18O:
Krxn = exp

−∆rxnG
RT

.
(B.11)
The Henry’s law constant Kh for a compound i is just the equilibrium constant for
i(aq) −−→i(g)
∆G = −∆solvG(i) ,
(B.12)
where ∆solvG(i) is the free energy change for the reverse reaction. Thus,
Kh(i) = exp
∆solvG(i)
RT

.
(B.13)
I have used a lowercase subscript h for Henry’s law constants given by this equation, which are in
standard activity units, and numerically approximately equivalent to the ratio of partial pressure
to solution concentration in bar/M. I have used an uppercase subscript H for the non-dimensional
Henry’s law constants,
KH = c(g)
c(aq) = c(g)
p(g)Kh = Kh
RT
(B.14)
Finally, to extend the power of these free energies of formations into the world of electrochem-
istry, I have simply used the deﬁnitions
∆fG◦(H+) = 0
deﬁned
(B.15)
123
==PAGE:137==
and
∆SHEG◦= 0 ,
deﬁned
(B.16)
where SHE stands for the reaction
2 H+ + 2 e−−−→H2 .
(B.17)
Since K = 1 at ∆G = 0, this also serves to deﬁne the zero free energy point oﬀthe electrons, i.e
the free energy of electrons is zero when pH=0 and p(H2)=1 bar, which are the conditions in
a standard hydrogen electrode, SHE. An electron on a catalytic surface in an SHE deﬁnes the
standard state of electrons. If a voltmeter reads E when connected to the SHE, that means that
the free electrons have a free energy of FE.
From these two deﬁnitions, and by ﬁnding reactions with measurable equilibrium constants (like
KW for H2O ←−→H+ + OH–), and reversible electrochemical reactions, and using the additive
nature of free energy changes, the free energy of formation of every pure, dissolved, and ionic
species can be determined, like a jigsaw puzzle. With these, the standard free energy change of
any reaction, including electrochemical half-reactions, can be calculated.
The standard reduction potential for an electrochemical half-reaction cat (for cathode) is deﬁned
as
E◦(cat) = ∆catG◦
nF
,
(B.18)
where nF is the charge passed per mole of reaction and ∆catG◦is calculated from the free
energies of formation, with the above deﬁnitions.
This framework to think about thermochemistry and electrochemistry is diﬀerently stated but
equivalent to that presented in Section 1.2.1.
The framework also covers acids. The acid dissociation constant an acid HA is the equilibrium
constant for
HA −−→A−+ H+ ,
Ka .
(B.19)
Since∆fG◦(H+) = 0, They can be calculated using free energies of formation as
Ka = exp

−∆fG◦(A−) −∆fG◦(HA)
RT

(B.20)
In Equation 1.16 of Subsection 1.2.1, I make use of ∆deprotG◦′, which is the free energy change
for the deprotonation reaction not under standard conditions, but at a given pH, as indicated
by the ′. This free energy change corresponds to an equilibrium constant ignoring the protons,
namely
K′
a = a(A−)
a(AH) =
Ka
a(H+) .
(B.21)
124
==PAGE:138==
Thus, using Equation B.11,
∆deprotG◦′ = −RT ln

Ka
a(H+)

= RT ln(10)(pKa −pH)
(B.22)
from the deﬁnitions pH= −log10(a(H+)) and pKa = −log10(Ka).
B.1.2
References
The Henry’s-law constants for all substances other than H2
18O come from the database published
by Sanders et al, Reference 40.
Almost all of the free energies of formation used come from the Handbook of Chemistry and
Physics, Reference 35.
There were a few that I couldn’t ﬁnd there, speciﬁcally aqueous salvation energies. I got the
free energy of formation for aqueous solvation energies for acetic acid and formic acid came from
Reference 39
The standard free energies of formation of aqueous ethanol, acetaldehyde, and methanol were
calculated from the gas-phase free energy of formation from 35 and the Henry’s-law constant
from 40 by
∆fG(i(aq)) = ∆fG(i(g)) + ∆solvG(i) = ∆fG(i(g)) + RT ln(Kh)
(B.23)
One formation energy that proved a bit tricky was that of carbonic acid, H2CO3, which I used
in Section refsec:equilibrium. The tabulated value in the Handbook of Chemistry and Physics as
well as other sources is actually ∆fG(CO2(aq)) + ∆fG(H2O) = −623 kJ/mol. However, I found
the equilibrium constant Keq for
CO2(aq) + H2O −−→H2CO3
(B.24)
in Reference 105. The actual free energy of formation for H2CO3 is
∆fG(H2CO3) = ∆fG(CO2(aq)) + ∆fG(H2O) −RT ln(Keq) = −607[kJ/mol] .
(B.25)
The diﬀusion constants used in this report came from Reference 107 via Wikipedia. The ion
mobilities came from Reference 41.
B.1.3
KH for H2
18O
In Section 2.1, I use H2
18O as an example molecule to argue that conventional DEMS must be
more sensitive than the sniﬀer under certain conditions. The point of using H2
18O was, as I
125
==PAGE:139==
emphasize, not to discuss an isotope eﬀect, but, on the contrary, to have something identical to
water in every sense but that the mass spec sees it as something diﬀerent. It helps to have a
concrete example, and H2
18O was the best I could think of. Since I used H2
18O in the thought
experiment, I had to plug its properties into the quantitative model to see if it checked out. The
self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient of water is 2.30·10−9m2/s,107 and I actually used 18 g/mol as the mass.
I wanted to calculate the Henry’s constant on my own to make sure I understood it.
To calculate the Henry’s law constant Kh, I went after ∆solvG(H2
18O), which is the free energy
change in the reaction
H2
18O(g) −−→H2
18O(aq),
(B.26)
which can be broken up into two reactions
H2
18O(g) −−→H2
18O(l) , andH2
18O(l) −−→H2
18O(aq) .
(B.27)
The ﬁrst is the exact same as the condensation of water, and so has free energy −∆vapG(H2O).
The second must have ∆mixH = 0, since the H2
18O does not, it is assumed, change chemical
environment by surrounding itself with H2O. So
∆solvG(H2
18O) = −∆vapG(H2O) −T∆mixS
(B.28)
As mentioned above, the entropy of a system is
nS = kB ln(W) .
(B.29)
Here, we’re interested just in the part of that comes from mixing H2
18O into H2O. If there are
NW molecules of water and N molecules of H2
18O to begin with, then there are
Wmix = (NW + N)!
N!NW !
(B.30)
ways to arrange them. Thus,
nSmix = kB ln(Wmix) = kB ln
(NW + N)!
N!NW !

(B.31)
Using Stirling’s approximation for logarithms of factorials, this becomes
nSmix = kB ((NW + N)(ln(NW + N) −1) −N(ln(N) −1) −NW (ln(NW ) −1))
(B.32)
= kB ((NW + N) ln(NW + N) −N ln(N) −NW ln(NW ))
(B.33)
To get Kh, we need ∆solveG to represent standard state, i.e. 1M H2
18O in H2O. It is thus the
126
==PAGE:140==
addition of some more H2
18O that is interesting.
Smix = d
dnnSmix
(B.34)
= NA
d
dN kB ((NW + N)(ln(NW + N) −1) −N(ln(N) −1) −NW (ln(NW ) −1))
(B.35)
= R (1 + ln(NW + N) −(1 + ln(N)))
(B.36)
= R ln
NW + N
N

(B.37)
Now, since we’re at standard state with respect to H2
18O, the ratio NW + N/N is just the molar
concentration of water, which is ρW /MW = 55.6 M, divided by 1 M. Calling this ratio r,
Smix = R ln(r) = R ln(55.6) = 33.4 [J/mol·K]
(B.38)
Finally, going back to Kh,
Kh = exp
Gsolv
RT

= exp
−∆vapG(H2O) −T∆mixS
RT

(B.39)
= pvap(T)
p◦
· r−1
(B.40)
In other words, the Henry’s constant of water in water is just the vapor pressure of water scaled
down to account for the new deﬁnition of standard state, 1 M. The Henry’s constant of H2
18O
is or Kh = 5.8·10−4 bar/M, and KH = RTKh = 2.3e −05. This is the lowest KH of any of the
compounds considered, about 1/10 that of ethanol.
B.2
Economics
This section will describe the raw data and calculations behind the bottom part of Table 1.1
and the ﬁrst two columns of Table 1.2.
B.2.1
non-energy carbon emissions
Table 1.1 includes a section describing industrial non-energy carbon emissions. The sources for
the raw data are indicated in the table. The amounts of emissions reported for steel, plastics,
ammonia, and aluminium production are based on the respective annual production from the
indicated citation and the assumption of 100% atom eﬀeiciency for the (simpliﬁed) equations
given in the table. The emissions for cement production are based on the emissions reported
in the citation together with the statement, in the same citation, that 50% of emissions in
127
==PAGE:141==
cement production are from the calcination reaction.
The emissions for plastic assumed an
average nominal chemical formula of CH2 and no recycling. Globally, less than 10% of plastic is
currently recycled, though this could increase.8 The assumption used of 100% atom eﬃciency
together with the omission of other, minor, carbon-using industries, such as the production of
other metals from ores, mean that the total emissions due to carbon as an industrial reactant
reported in Table 1.1 is an underestimation.
B.2.2
Proﬁtability of CO2 reduction
I was not able to ﬁnd any single good reference for the size of the global volume for possible
CO2RR products, as this data tends to be proprietary and beyond a student’s budget. I got
the data by brute-force googling, picky towards getting global numbers rather than local, but
without too much concern for cite-ability. Nonetheless, here are the sources I found.
Quantity and price were in each case converted to MtC/yr and USD/tC using molar mass, unit
system conversions, density, and/or energy density
Formic acid: Data from CEH marketing report via wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Formic\_acid. Production: “720,000 tonnes/annum”,
Price: “$800/tonne in Western Europe to $1250/tonne in the United States.”
Methanol:
Production: “In 2013, global methanol demand is expected to reach 65 million metric tons.”
from http://www.methanol.org/Methanol-Basics/The-Methanol-Industry.aspx
Price: “300 USD/t in Europe, 275 in US, Asia” from https://www.methanex.com/our-business/
pricing
methane
Production: world natural gas production is 3500e9 cubic meters/yr, from https://yearbook.
enerdata.net/world-natural-gas-production.html
Price: at 2.28/MBtu from Henry hub https://ycharts.com/indicators/natural_gas_spot_
price
acetaldehyde
Production: “World Acetaldehyde Market to Reach 1.26 Million Tons by 2012” from http:
//www.prweb.com/releases/acetaldehyde/acetic_acid/prweb1553564.htm
128
==PAGE:142==
Price: 0.455 USD/tonne in 2007, from http://www.icis.com/chemicals/channel-info-chemicals-a-z/
ethanol
Production: 24.57 billion gallons/year read oﬀchart at http://www.afdc.energy.gov/data/
10331
Price: 1.61 $/gal, from http://www.dtnprogressivefarmer.com/dtnag/common/link.do?symbolicName=
RENEWABLE_FUELS_PAGE_FREE
ethylene
Production: 141e6 tonnes/year, from Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethylene#
Production
Price: USD 1200/tonne, from http://www.platts.com/news-feature/2015/petrochemicals/
pgpi/ethylene
129
==PAGE:143==
C.
Diﬀerential equation implementation in Matlab
The method of lines was used to solve Systems 2.41d and 2.54. This involves discretization in
one dimension and solution of a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations (ODEs) in the other. In
each case, a discretization of N = 30 proved suﬃcient, with increasing N beyond this causing
negligible change in results. N = 100 was used to generate the heat maps included in the report.
The following description is for System 2.41d, but ﬂow system is solved in a nearly identical
fashion. Here, capital letters will be used instead of hats to indicate non-dimensional variables A
vector is input called C, where C(1) is the non-dimensional concentration nearest the membrane
and C(N) is the non-dimensional concentration nearest the electrode. The ODE function returns
a vector dC/dT, which is the (non-dimensional) time derivative of C. In this form, it is equal to
the second derivative of C in X The key to the discritization is to estimate the second derivative
as follows:
dC(n)
dT
= d2C(n)
dX2
= C(n −1) −2C(n) + C(n + 1)
(∆X)2
,
(C.1)
where ∆X = 1/N is the non-dimensional spatial increment between the pieces of the vector.
This equation works for every point except for C(1) and C(N), as there is no C(0) or C(N +1) to
plug in. This is where the boundary conditions come in. The ﬁrst derivatives at the membrane
and at the electrode are used to set C(0) and C(N + 1) so that the time derivatives of C(1) and
C(N) can be calculated by the equation above. The boundary conditions are implemented as
C(1) −C(0)
∆X
= αC(1)
⇒
C(0) = C(1)(1 −α∆X)
(C.2)
and
C(N + 1) −C(N)
∆X
= 1
⇒
C(N + 1) = C(N) + ∆X
(C.3)
when the pulse is on or
C(N + 1) −C(N)
∆X
= 0
⇒
C(N + 1) = C(N)
(C.4)
when the pulse is oﬀ.
With C(0) and C(N + 1) thus deﬁned via the boundary conditions, the vector dC/dT is calcu-
lated and returned.
Matlab has powerful built-in functions for solving ordinary diﬀerential equations given a function
relating a vector to its derivative. The one used here was ode15s.
The MatLab script for this ODE function is shown below. All of the scripts used for modeling
and for data processing in this report are available upon request.
130
==PAGE:144==
————————————————-
function [dCdt] = diﬀusionODE (t,C,Inputs)
% this returns the rate of change of the non-dimensionalized concentration
% proﬁle present between the electrode at x=1 and the sniﬀer chip at x=0
%% unpack inputs
alpha = Inputs1;
% alpha = hL/D is the parameter describing the system.
bFun = Inputs2;
b = bFun(t);
% b=1 when pulse is on and b=0 when pulse is oﬀ
%(note that t is measured on the scale of t0 = D/Lˆ2)
%% get second derivative
N = length(C);
dx = 1/(N+1);
% distance between segments
C0 = C(1)*(1-alpha*dx);
% such that, at x=0, dc/dx = alpha*c
CL = C(end)+ b*dx;
% such that, at x=1, dc/dx = 1 when pulse is on and 0 when
pulse is oﬀ
Cminus = [C0; C(1:end-1)];
%vector of C (n-1)
Cplus = [C(2:end); CL];
%vector of C (n+1)
d2Cdx2 = (Cminus - 2*C + Cplus) / dxˆ2;
%% Fick law, nondimensionalized
dCdt = d2Cdx2;
%dc/dt = dˆ2c/dxˆ2
———————————————–
131
==PAGE:145==
D.
Analytical solution to stagnant diﬀusion problem
After, at a group meeting, I presented an initial numerical solution to the problem of the diﬀu-
sion and evaporation in the static electrolyte of the working volume during an electrochemical
pulse (Section 2.3), professor Ole Hansen immediately pointed out that the problem could be
solved analytically. Shortly after, he sent me a well-written pdf with the full solution to the
problem by two analytical methods: Laplace transform and separation of variables. I had never
studied Laplace transforms before, but was able to learn, following professor Hansen’s example,
the principle behind them, for this example at least. I have adapted the Laplace transform
analytical solution here. Compared to the original derivation, the one presented here is simpler
in appearance due to non-dimensionalization and to reversing the direction of the x-axis, such
that the sniﬀer membrane is at x = 0.
To make the problem slightly simpler than in Section 2.3, only the start of the pulse will be
considered. There is assumed to be no analyte present at the start. Fick’s second law and the
boundary conditions are then:
∂ˆc
∂ˆt = ∂2ˆc
∂ˆx2
(D.1)
ˆc = 0 ,
ˆt = 0
(D.2)
∂ˆc
∂ˆx = αˆc
ˆx = 0
(D.3)
∂ˆc
∂ˆx = 1 ,
ˆx = 1 and ˆt > 0
(D.4)
where non-dimensional variables ˆx, ˆt, and ˆc are related to the dimensional variables by
ˆx = x/x0 = x/L ,
(D.5)
ˆt = t/t0 = t/
L2
D

, and
(D.6)
ˆc = c/c0 = c/

Qel
L
D

,
(D.7)
and the non-dimensional system parameter is
α = Lh
D .
(D.8)
To solve this system, we make use of the Laplace transform, L, deﬁned for a function f(t) as:
L{f}(s) =
Z ∞
0
exp(−ts)dt
(D.9)
The Laplace transform is cool because it turns diﬀerential equations in t into polynomials in s.
In a system of partial diﬀerential equations like this, it polynomials out one of the variables,
132
==PAGE:146==
so that there are only derivatives in one variable. In other words, it turns it into a system
of ordinary diﬀerential equations, which is easier to solve. Applying the Laplace transform to
Equation D.1 gives:
L
∂ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)
∂ˆt

(s) = L
∂2ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)
∂ˆx2

(s)
(D.10)
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts)∂ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)
∂ˆt
dˆt =
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts)∂2ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)
∂ˆx2
dˆt
(D.11)
The partial derivative in ˆx can come out of the integral sign, because the integral is in ˆt. The
expression on the left, however, requires integration by parts.
exp(−ˆts)ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)
∞
ˆt=0 + s
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts)ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)dˆt = ∂2
∂ˆx2
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts)ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)dˆt
(D.12)
Deﬁning C(x, s) = F{ˆc(ˆx, ˆt)}(s), and using the symbol ′ to represent
∂
∂ˆx,
−ˆc(ˆx, 0) + sC(ˆx, s) = C′′ .
(D.13)
Applying the ﬁrst boundary condition,
sC(ˆx, s) = C′′ .
(D.14)
Notice what happened: a ﬁrst-order derivative in ˆt has become a ﬁrst-order polynomial in s,
and the diﬀerential equation is only in ˆx. What C and s mean is anyone’s guess, but we can do
math on them and then transform them back to ˆc and ˆt.
The general solution to Equation D.14 can be written in terms of exponentials in √sˆx and
−√sˆx, but the subsequent math turns out to be easier by writing it in terms of the hyperbolic
sine and cosine, which are linear combinations of those two exponentials. Thus,
C(ˆx, s) = A cosh(√sˆx) + B sinh(√sˆx)
(D.15)
To determine the constants A and B, we need the other boundary conditions, and we need them
Laplace-transformed. The second boundary condition transforms nicely as
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts) ∂ˆc
∂ˆxdˆt =
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts)αˆcdˆt
ˆx = 0
(D.16)
C′(0, s) = αC(0, s)
(D.17)
The ﬁnal boundary condition transforms as
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts) ∂ˆc
∂ˆxdˆt =
Z ∞
0
exp(−ˆts)dˆt
ˆx = 1
(D.18)
C′(1, s) = 1
s
(D.19)
133
==PAGE:147==
C′ in terms of A and B from Equation D.15 is, by diﬀerentiation in ˆx,
C′(ˆx, s) = A√s sinh(√sˆx) + B√s cosh(√sˆx)
(D.20)
The two boundary conditions are thus
B√s = αA ,
and
(D.21)
A√s sinh(√s) + B√s cosh(√s) = 1
s .
(D.22)
Solving for A and B, and putting them back in D.15,
C(ˆx, s) = α sinh(√sˆx) + √s cosh(√sˆx)
αs√s cosh(√s) + s2 sinh(√s) ,
(D.23)
which is not especially elegant. Luckily, we can settle for a nice expression C(0, s) (and thus,
by transforming it back, ˆc(0, ˆt)) since the measured signal is proportional to the concentration
at the membrane. Setting ˆx = 0 above,
C(0, s) =
1
αs cosh(√s) + s√s sinh(√s)
(D.24)
This is a bit less ugly, but still not nice enough to easily transform back to useful variables. In
the approximation of small s (which I don’t know what means physically), the Taylor expansion
of sinh and cosh can be used. cosh and sinh work like cos and sin in diﬀerentiation and thus
also Taylor polynomials except that everything is positive, instead of alternating positive and
negative, so, using the second-order expansion,
sinh z = z
and
(D.25)
cosh z = 1 + z2
2 .
(D.26)
Applying these with z = √s gives
C(0, s) ≈
1
αs
 1 + s
2

+ s√s(√s) =
2
2αs + (2 + α) s2
(D.27)
Or, writing it in a way that anticipates how it’ll be transformed back,
C(0, s) ≈1
αs ·
1
1 + ˆtRs ,
(D.28)
where
ˆtR = 1
2 + 1
α .
(D.29)
The two parts of the right side of Equation D.28 are each, in themselves, Laplace transforms of
simple functions, as can be checked by the deﬁnition in Equation D.9:
L
 1
α

(s) = 1
αs
(D.30)
L
 1
ˆtR
exp

−
ˆt
ˆtR

(s) =
1
1 + ˆtRs
(D.31)
134
==PAGE:148==
There is also a rule for Laplace transforms that says that the Laplace transform of the convolution
of two functions is the product of their individual Laplace transformations. In other words,
L
Z t
t′=0
f(t −t′)g(t′)dt′

(s) = L{f}(s)L{g}(s)
(D.32)
Applying this backwards on Equation D.28,
ˆc(0, ˆt) =
Z ˆt
ˆt′=0
1
αˆtR
exp

−
ˆt′
ˆtR

dˆt′
(D.33)
=
1
αˆtR
ˆtR exp
 ˆt′
ˆtR

ˆt
0
(D.34)
= 1
α

1 −exp
 ˆt
ˆtR

(D.35)
And, there you have it. The concentration at the membrane, and thus the signal, rises with an
exponential approach to the steady state value with a non-dimensional time constant ˆtR = 1
2 + 1
α.
Redimensionalizing this time constant according to Equations D.6 and D.8 gives
tR = L2
2D + L
h ,
(D.36)
which matches both the numerical solutions in Section 2.3 and the experiments in Section 3.3.
135
==PAGE:149==
E.
Other research during Honors Program
This master’s project is deﬁnitely the most intense, challenging, and rewarding research that I
have participated in so far, but other research in the ﬁeld of renewable energy catalysis that I’ve
had the chance to work on deserve a brief mention. Three projects not directly related to this
thesis, all of which I have worked on actively at some point since starting my master’s degree,
are described here.
E.1
TPD modelling
As mentioned in Section 1.2.4, nanostructured copper including oxide-derived copper (OD Cu)
show diﬀerent product selectivities than ﬂat polycrystalline copper (pc Cu). OD Cu is especially
remarkable in its ability to catalyze CO reduction to ethanol at low overpotentials, and it has
been proposed that this activity is due to a special type of surface site stabilized by grain
boundaries.81
To probe these sites, our group performed CO temperature-programmed desorption (TPD)
experiments on OD Cu.83 These experiments involve placing a sample in vacuum, cooling it to
liquid nitrogen temperature, exposing it to CO, gradually heating it up and measuring the CO
absorbing. To avoid surface contamination, our samples were actually reduced in H2 in the same
vacuum chamber. A high-temperature CO desorption not present in pc Cu was observed in the
OD Cu samples, and its area correlated loosely with the CO reduction activity of diﬀerently-
prepared samples.
We were in doubt, however, whether the CO desorbing later in the TPD experiments was due
to a surface site with strong CO binding, or due to a mass-transport eﬀect of CO through the
porous structure of OD Cu. Ib suggested modeling this one-dimensionally with a cylindrical
pore and the kinetic rates of desorption and readsorption. I implemented this model in Matlab,
discretization in the dimension along the pore to set it up as a system of ordinary diﬀerential
equations.
The numerical simulations showed that, while the eﬀect of mass transport and readsorption in
the pores was pronounced, the TPDs were best ﬁt when a surface site was included that binds
CO stronger than the sites in pc Cu. It was found that a small amount of this site could cause
a relatively large signal in the TPD. Only a small amount of CO is dosed before starting the
experiment, leaving the bottom of the pores unoccupied, and when CO starts desorbing from
136
==PAGE:150==
the weaker bound sites, it ﬁlls the strong-binding sites all the way into the pore. The signal
strength thus depended, not only on the abundance of strong-binding sites, but also on the
pore dimensions. When the CO electroreduction activity was plotted against the abundance
of strong-binding site that best ﬁt the TPDs in the simulations, a much stronger correlation
emerged than when the activity had been plot against the area of a Gaussian ﬁt of the high-
temperature feature. A detailed description of the modeling and these results is in the SI of
Reference 83
E.2
Stanford visit
As an honor’s student, I was required to include “a signiﬁcant international element” in my
master’s degree. On Ib’s advice, I asked professor Tom Jaramillo at Stanford if I could join his
group during the summer. I ended up spending two months, July and August of 2015, working in
the Jarmillo group together with Maria Escudaro Escrbano and Alaina Strickler on Gold-Nickel
core-shell nanoparticles for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER).
While at Stanford, I learned rotating-disk electrochemistry and measured the OER activity
of nanoparticles that Alaina synthesized. A number of them were highly active for OER in
0.1M KOH, and the activity varied a lot between samples, but varying synthesis conditiosn
made them hard to compare. I came up with a way to normalize the surface area based on
the observed nanoparticle diameter in TEM images taken by Alaina of the gold nanoparticles
and the assumption of uniform coverage. Under these assumptions, the total NiO surface area
loading could be calculated, and the OER activity converted to a turn-over frequency (ToF).
When normalized this way, the sample activity shows a clear correlation with shell thickness,
the thinnest shells of nickel on gold being the most active on a ToF basis.
I followed this work up in October by implementing a GUI in the scripts I had used for data
processing and making the code more transparent, so that those still working on the project can
use it.
Immediately after my project at Stanford, I attended the SUNCAT Summer School together
with a number of colleagues from DTU.
E.3
JCAP
After getting my bachelor’s degree chemistry from the University of Copenhagen in June 2013,
I knew I needed a change. At that point I really wanted move back to the united states, where
137
==PAGE:151==
I have lived much of my life. I also knew that I wanted to go West if possible, and I knew I
wanted to work in energy. My bachelor’s thesis, on zinc-binding protein in rice, hat put me
in a group of plat science biochemists, many of whom worked on understanding the details of
natural photosynthesis. That is undoubtedly part of the reason that as soon as a google search
happened to turn up the Joint Center for Artiﬁcial Photosynthesis, I was set. I spent a year at
JCAP in Berkeley under the US Department of Energy’s Student Undergraduate Laboratory
Internsuip (SULI) program. It was, incidentally, while at JCAP that I learned about CINF,
when Brian Seger gave a talk at JCAP’s other campus, at CalTech. That was when I decided to
come back to Denmark and join prof. Ib Chorkendorﬀ’s group, starting with the CINF summer
school that year (2014).
While at JCAP, I worked on bismuth vanadate (BiVO4), a yellow oxide semiconductor that
has received a lot of interest as a photoanode material for solar water splitting. My research
for most of the year involved trying to dope BiVO4 with antimony to lower its bandgap, as a
theorist in our group predicted it would. The system was, however, not stable with regards to
phase separation, and that research proved unfruitful. In the ﬁnal months, however, I worked
on a project with Jason Cooper involving the role of hydrogen in BiVO4. Hydrogen is known to
improve the electron mobility in bismuth vanadate. Jason and I (mostly Jason) combined a wide
array of experimental techniques including photoelectrochemical testing, XPS, NMR, EPR, and
photoluminescence (PL) to show that, rather than inducing oxygen vacancies as is conventionally
believed, hydrogen actually acts to passivate them. My largest personal contribution was to write
data processing scripts (the ﬁrst useful code I had written) in Matlab to calibrate the PL spectra
and deconvolute the eﬀect of a ﬁlter spectrum from the signal.
After I left, the project was delayed a number of times. While at Stanford this summer, just
across the Bay from Berkeley, I worked with Jason on moving the paper along. In August, I
wrote a ﬁrst draft of the manuscript, after Jason had made all of the ﬁgures. I read through,
providing comments, and did some literature research for the paper again in December. The
paper seems to have gotten stuck again temporarily, waiting for a better EPR measurement,
but we plan to submit to JACS soon.
138
==PAGE:152==
Bibliography
1 United Nations. Adoption of the Paris Agreement. 21932(December):32, 2015.
2 IPCC Panel. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. 2014.
3 C. Le Qu´er´e, R. Moriarty, R. M. Andrew, J. G. Canadell, S. Sitch, J. I. Korsbakken,
P. Friedlingstein, G. P. Peters, R. J. Andres, T. A. Boden, R. A. Houghton, J. I. House, R. F.
Keeling, P. Tans, A. Arneth, D. C. E. Bakker, L. Barbero, L. Bopp, J. Chang, F. Chevallier,
L. P. Chini, P. Ciais, M. Fader, R. A. Feely, T. Gkritzalis, I. Harris, J. Hauck, T. Ilyina, A. K.
Jain, E. Kato, V. Kitidis, K. Klein Goldewijk, C. Koven, P. Landsch¨utzer, S. K. Lauvset,
N. Lef`evre, A. Lenton, I. D. Lima, N. Metzl, F. Millero, D. R. Munro, A. Murata, J. E. M. S.
Nabel, S. Nakaoka, Y. Nojiri, K. O’Brien, A. Olsen, T. Ono, F. F. P´erez, B. Pfeil, D. Pier-
rot, B. Poulter, G. Rehder, C. R¨odenbeck, S. Saito, U. Schuster, J. Schwinger, R. S´ef´erian,
T. Steinhoﬀ, B. D. Stocker, A. J. Sutton, T. Takahashi, B. Tilbrook, I. T. van der Laan-
Luijkx, G. R. van der Werf, S. van Heuven, D. Vandemark, N. Viovy, A. Wiltshire, S. Zaehle,
and N. Zeng. Global Carbon Budget 2015. Earth System Science Data, 7(2):349–396, 2015.
4 R A Houghton. Balancing the Global Carbon Budget. Annual Review Of Earth And Planetary
Sciences, 35(1):313–347, 2007.
5 a. P. Ballantyne, C. B. Alden, J. B. Miller, P. P. Tans, and J. W. C. White. Increase in
observed net carbon dioxide uptake by land and oceans during the past 50 years. Nature,
488(7409):70–72, 2012.
6 Ed Dlugokencky and Pieter Tans. Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide, 2015.
7 World Steel Association. World Steel in Figures 2015. 2015.
8 Gaelle Gourmelon. Global Plastic Production Rises, Recycling Lags. Worldwide Institute
Vital Signs, pages 1–7, 2015.
9 M. Fischedick, J. Roy, A. Abdel-Aziz, A. Acquaye, J. M. Allwood, J.-P. Ceron, Y. Geng,
H. Kheshgi, A. Lanza, D. Perczyk, L. Price, E. Santalla, C. Sheinbaum, and K. Tanaka. 2014:
Industry. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working
Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
pages 739–810, 2014.
10 DAVID J. (Haldor Topsoe) BRAY and STEPHANIE M. KING JOHAN J¨ONSSON. A new
industry benchmark for ammonia production, 2014.
139
==PAGE:153==
11 International Aluminium Institute.
World Aluminium: Primary Aluminium Production,
2015.
12 Mark Bolinger and Joachim Seel. Utility-Scale Solar 2014. Technical report, 2015.
13 Eric Martinot. Power Grid Integration and Balancing of Renewables: Cases of Germany,
California, Denmark, 2015.
14 U.S. Department of Energy. Grid Energy Storage. Technical Report December, 2013.
15 Nathan S Lewis and Daniel G Nocera. Powering the planet: Chemical challenges in solar
energy utilization. PNAS, 104(42), 2007.
16 Roel van de Krol and Micheal Gr¨atzel. Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production. Springer,
New York, 2012.
17 Jason Deign. Japan Makes a Big Bet on the Hydrogen Economy, 2015.
18 Alain Le Duigou and Aimen Smatti. On the comparison and the complementarity of batteries
and fuel cells for electric driving. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 39(31):17873–
17883, 2014.
19 Matthew A. Pellow, Christopher J. M. Emmott, Charles J. Barnhart, and Sally M. Ben-
son. Hydrogen or batteries for grid storage? A net energy analysis. Energy Environ. Sci.,
8(7):1938–1952, 2015.
20 Peter C. K. Vesborg and Thomas F. Jaramillo. Addressing the terawatt challenge: scalability
in the supply of chemical elements for renewable energy. RSC Advances, 2(21):7933, 2012.
21 E. Kemppainen, A. Bodin, B. Sebok, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, B. Mei, D. Bae, P. C. K.
Vesborg, J. Halme, O. Hansen, P. D. Lund, and I. Chorkendorﬀ. Scalability and feasibility
of photoelectrochemical H ¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ evolution: the ultimate limit of Pt nanoparticle as
an HER catalyst. Energy Environ. Sci., 8(10):2991–2999, 2015.
22 IEA. Key World Energy Statistics 2014. Technical report, 2014.
23 Intergovernmentntal Panel on Climate Change. Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. Tech-
nical report, 2005.
24 Global CCS Institute. The global status of CCS. Technical report, 2013.
25 Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. Carbon Capture and Storage.
26 ENGO network on CCS. Closing the gap on climate: Why CCS is a vital part of the solution.
Technical Report December, 2015.
140
==PAGE:154==
27 North American Carbon Atlas Partnership.
The North American Carbon Storage Atlas.
2012.
28 Niclas Scott Bentsen and Claus Felby. Biomass for energy in the European Union - a review
of bioenergy resource assessments. Biotechnology for biofuels, 5(1):25, 2012.
29 Mustafa Babiker, Angelo Gurgel, Sergey Paltsev, and John Reilly. MIT Joint Program on
the Science and Policy of Global Change Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis. System,
(157), 2008.
30 Sean C. Thomas and Adam R. Martin. Carbon content of tree tissues: A synthesis. Forests,
3(2):332–352, 2012.
31 R.M. Martin, D. Kneeland, D. Brooks, and R. Matta. State of the World’s Forests. Technical
report, 2012.
32 Duncan Leeson, Jamie Fairclough, Camille Petit, and Paul Fennell. A Systematic Review of
Current Technology and Cost for Industrial Carbon Capture. Technical Report November,
2014.
33 International Energy Agency. Cost and Performance of Carbon Dioxide Capture from Power
Generation. Technical report, 2011.
34 Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute. Large Scale CCS Projects.
35 W. M. Haynes, Thomas J. Bruno, and David R. Lide, editors. Handbook of Chemistry and
Physics, 96th Edition. CRC Press, 96 edition, 2015.
36 Ib Corkendorf and J W Niemantsverdriet. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinetics. 2003.
37 Marc Eckert, Gerald Fleischmann, Reinhard Jira, Hermann M. Bolt, and Klaus Golka. Ull-
mann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry. WILEY-VCH Verlag, 2007.
38 Ludwig Kniel, Karl Stork, and Olaf Winter. Ethylene - A Keystone to the Petrochemical
Industry. New York : M. Dekker, 1980.
39 A. J. Bard, R. Parsons, and J. Jordan. Standard potentials in aqueous solution. Marcel
Dekker Inc, New York, 1985.
40 Rolf Sander. Compilation of Henry’s law Constants for Inorganic and Organic Species of
Potential Importance in Environmental Chemistry. Database, 20:107, 1999.
41 Allen J Bard and Larry R Faulkner. Electrochemical methods : fundamentals and applications.
Wiley, New York, 2nd edition, 2001.
141
==PAGE:155==
42 Y Hori. Electrochemical CO2 Reduction on Metal Electrodes. In Modern Aspects of Elec-
trochemistry, number 42, pages 89–189. 2008.
43 K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram, and T. F. Jaramillo. New Insights into the Electro-
chemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide on Metallic Copper Surfaces. Energy & Environmental
Science, 5:7050–7059, 2012.
44 Jinli Qiao, Yuyu Liu, Feng Hong, and Jiujun Zhang. A review of catalysts for the electrore-
duction of carbon dioxide to produce low-carbon fuels, volume 43. 2014.
45 Ruud Kortlever, Jing Shen, Klaas Jan P. Schouten, Federico Calle-Vallejo, and Marc T. M.
Koper. Catalysts and Reaction Pathways for the Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Diox-
ide. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, pages 4073–4082, 2015.
46 Yoshio Hori, Katsuhei Kikuchi, and Shin Suzuki. Production of CO and CH4 in electrochem-
ical reduction of CO2 at metal electrodes in aqueous hydrogencarbonate solution. Chemistry
Letters, (11):1695–1698, 1985.
47 Yoshio Hori, Hidetoshi Wakebe, Toshio Tsukamoto, and Osamu Koga. Electrocatalytic pro-
cess of CO selectivity in electrochemical reduction of CO2 at metal electrodes in aqueous
media. Electrochimica Acta, 39(11-12):1833–1839, 1994.
48 Y. Hori, R. Takahashi, Y. Yoshinami, and A. Murata. Electrochemical Reduction of CO at
a Copper Electrode. J. Phys. Chem. B, 101(36):7075–7081, 1997.
49 Marc T M Koper. Thermodynamic theory of multi-electron transfer reactions: Implications
for electrocatalysis. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 660(2):254, 2011.
50 Jens K. Nørskov, Felix Studt, Frank Abild-Pedersen, and Thomas Bligaard. Fundamental
Concepts in Heterogeneous Catalysis. 2014.
51 J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard, and
H. J´onsson. Origin of the overpotential for oxygen reduction at a fuel-cell cathode. Journal
of Physical Chemistry B, 108(46):17886–17892, 2004.
52 J. Rossmeisl, Z.-W. Qu, H. Zhu, G.-J. Kroes, and J.K. Nørskov. Electrolysis of water on
oxide surfaces. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 607(1-2):83–89, 2007.
53 Feng Tian and Alfred B. Anderson. Eﬀective reversible potential, energy loss, and over-
potential on platinum fuel cell cathodes. Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 115:4076–4088,
2011.
142
==PAGE:156==
54 Isabela C. Man, Hai-Yan Su, Federico Calle-Vallejo, Heine A. Hansen, Jos´e I. Mart´ınez, Ni-
lay G. Inoglu, John Kitchin, Thomas F. Jaramillo, Jens K. Nørskov, and Jan Rossmeisl. Uni-
versality in Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysis on Oxide Surfaces. ChemCatChem, 3(7):1159–
1165, 2011.
55 Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan, Heine Anton Hansen, Jan Rossmeisl, and Jens K.
Nørskov. Universality in Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalysis on Metal Surfaces. ACS Catal-
ysis, (1), 2012.
56 ROGER PARSONS. THE RATE OF ELECTROLYTIC HYDROGEN EVOLUTION AND
THE HEAT OF ADSORPTION OF HYDROGEN. Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958(54):1053–
1063, 1958.
57 JeﬀGreeley, Thomas F. Jaramillo, Jacob Bonde, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Jens K. Nørskov.
Computational high-throughput screening of electrocatalytic materials for hydrogen evolu-
tion. Nature Materials, 5(11):909–913, 2006.
58 Andrew A. Peterson and Jens K. N??rskov. Activity descriptors for CO 2 electroreduction to
methane on transition-metal catalysts. Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 3(2):251–258,
2012.
59 Kendra P. Kuhl, Toru Hatsukade, Etosha R. Cave, David N. Abram, Jakob Kibsgaard, and
Thomas F. Jaramillo. Electrocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide to methane and methanol
on transition metal surfaces.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 136(40):14107–
14113, 2014.
60 Marc T. M. Koper. Theory of multiple proton-electron transfer reactions and its implications
for electrocatalysis. Chemical Science, 4(7):2710, 2013.
61 Huei Ru Q Jhong, Fikile R. Brushett, and Paul J A Kenis. The eﬀects of catalyst layer
deposition methodology on electrode performance. Advanced Energy Materials, 3(5):589–
599, 2013.
62 Devin T. Whipple, Eryn C. Finke, and Paul J. a. Kenis. Microﬂuidic Reactor for the Elec-
trochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide: The Eﬀect of pH. Electrochemical and Solid-State
Letters, 13(9):B109, 2010.
63 Yoshio Hori, Akira Murata, and Ryutaro Takahashi.
Formation of hydrocarbons in the
electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide at a copper electrode in aqueous solution. Journal
of the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 1: Physical Chemistry in Condensed Phases,
85(8):2309, 1989.
143
==PAGE:157==
64 Paramaconi Rodriguez, Daniela Plana, David J. Fermin, and Marc T M Koper. New insights
into the catalytic activity of gold nanoparticles for CO oxidation in electrochemical media.
Journal of Catalysis, 311:182–189, 2014.
65 W. Paik, T.N. Andersen, and H. Eyring.
Kinetic studies of the electrolytic reduction of
carbon dioxide on the mercury electrode. Electrochimica Acta, 14(12):1217–1232, 1969.
66 Jiyong Joo, Taro Uchida, Angel Cuesta, Marc T M Koper, and Masatoshi Osawa. Importance
of Acid-Base Equilibrium in Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Formic Acid on Platinum Impor-
tance of Acid-Base Equilibrium in Electrocatalytic Oxi- dation of Formic Acid on Platinum.
(c):4–7, 2013.
67 Ruud Kortlever, Collin Balemans, Youngkook Kwon, and Marc T.M. Koper. Electrochemical
CO2 reduction to formic acid on a Pd-based formic acid oxidation catalyst. Catalysis Today,
244:58–62, 2015.
68 Andrew a. Peterson, Frank Abild-Pedersen, Felix Studt, Jan Rossmeisl, and Jens K. Nørskov.
How copper catalyzes the electroreduction of carbon dioxide into hydrocarbon fuels. Energy
& Environmental Science, 3(9):1311, 2010.
69 Joseph H. Montoya, Chuan Shi, Karen Chan, and Jens K. Nørskov. Theoretical Insights
into a CO Dimerization Mechanism in CO ¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ Electroreduction. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry Letters, pages 2032–2037, 2015.
70 Xiaowa Nie, Monica R. Esopi, Michael J. Janik, and Aravind Asthagiri. Selectivity of CO2
reduction on copper electrodes: The role of the kinetics of elementary steps. Angewandte
Chemie - International Edition, 52(9):2459–2462, 2013.
71 Chuan Shi, Heine a Hansen, Adam C Lausche, and Jens K Nørskov. Trends in electrochem-
ical CO2 reduction activity for open and close-packed metal surfaces. Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics, 16(10):4720–7, 2014.
72 D W DeWulf, T Jin, and A J Bard. Electrochemical and surface studies of carbon dioxide
reduction to methane and ethylene at copper electrodes in aqueous solutions. J. Electrochem.
Soc., 136(6):6–8, 1989.
73 Chung Shou Chen, Albertus D. Handoko, Jane Hui Wan, Liang Ma, Dan Ren, and Boon Siang
Yeo. Stable and selective electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to ethylene on copper
mesocrystals. Catal. Sci. Technol., 5(1):161–168, 2015.
74 K. J. P. Schouten, Y. Kwon, C. J. M. van der Ham, Z. Qin, and M. T. M. Koper. A new
mechanism for the selectivity to C1 and C2 species in the electrochemical reduction of carbon
dioxide on copper electrodes. Chemical Science, 2(10):1902, 2011.
144
==PAGE:158==
75 Klaas Jan P Schouten, Zisheng Qin, Elena P´erez Gallent, and Marc T M Koper.
Two
pathways for the formation of ethylene in CO reduction on single-crystal copper electrodes.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 134(24):9864–9867, 2012.
76 Klaas Jan P Schouten, Elena P??rez Gallent, and Marc T M Koper. The inﬂuence of pH on
the reduction of CO and CO2 to hydrocarbons on copper electrodes. Journal of Electroana-
lytical Chemistry, 716:53–57, 2013.
77 Federico Calle-Vallejo and Marc T M Koper. Theoretical considerations on the electroreduc-
tion of CO to C2 Species on Cu(100) electrodes. Angewandte Chemie - International Edition,
52(28):7282–7285, 2013.
78 Joseph H. Montoya, Andrew A. Peterson, and Jens K. Nørskov. Insights into C-C Coupling
in CO2 Electroreduction on Copper Electrodes. ChemCatChem, 5(3):737–742, 2013.
79 Y.; Koga, O.; Nakama, K.; Murata, A.; Hori. Eﬀects of surface state of copper electrode on
the selectivity of electrochemical reduction of CO2. Denki Kagaku, 57(1137), 1989.
80 Christina W. Li and Matthew W. Kanan. CO2 reduction at low overpotential on Cu elec-
trodes resulting from the reduction of thick Cu2O ﬁlms. Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 134(17):7231–7234, 2012.
81 Christina W Li, Jim Ciston, and Matthew W Kanan. Electroreduction of carbon monoxide
to liquid fuel on oxide-derived nanocrystalline copper. Nature, 508(7497):504–7, 2014.
82 Wei Tang, Andrew a. Peterson, Ana Soﬁa Varela, Zarko P. Jovanov, Lone Bech, William J.
Durand, Søren Dahl, Jens K. Nørskov, and Ib Chorkendorﬀ.
The importance of surface
morphology in controlling the selectivity of polycrystalline copper for CO2 electroreduction.
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 14(1):76, 2012.
83 Arnau Verdaguer-Casadevall, Christina W. Li, Tobias P. Johansson, Soren B. Scott, Joseph T
McKeown, Mukul Kumar, Ifan E. L. Stephens, Matthew W. Kanan, and Ib Chorkendorﬀ.
Probing the active surface sites for CO reduction on oxide-derived copper electrocatalysts.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, pages 9808–9811, 2015.
84 E. Bertheussen, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, D. Ravasio, J.H. Montoya, D.B. Trimarco, C. Roy,
S. Meier, J. Wendland, J.K. Nørskov, I.E.L. Stephens, and I. Chorkendorﬀ. Acetaldehyde as
an Intermediate in the Electroreduction of Carbon Monoxide to Ethanol on Oxide-derived
Copper. Angew. Chem. Int. Edit., Accepted:1–6, 2015.
85 Karen Chan, Charlie Tsai, Heine A. Hansen, and Jens K. N??rskov. Molybdenum sulﬁdes
and selenides as possible electrocatalysts for CO 2 reduction. ChemCatChem, 6(7):1899–1905,
2014.
145
==PAGE:159==
86 Mohammad Asadi, Bijandra Kumar, Amirhossein Behranginia, Brian a Rosen, Artem
Baskin, Nikita Repnin, Davide Pisasale, Patrick Phillips, Wei Zhu, Richard Haasch, Robert F
Klie, Petr Kr´al, Jeremiah Abiade, and Amin Salehi-Khojin. Robust carbon dioxide reduction
on molybdenum disulphide edges. Nat. Com., 5:4470, 2014.
87 Thomas F Jaramillo, Kristina P Jørgensen, Jacob Bonde, Jane H Nielsen, Sebastian Horch,
and Ib Chorkendorﬀ. Identiﬁcation of active edge sites for electrochemical H2 evolution from
MoS2 nanocatalysts. Science (New York, N.Y.), 317(July):100–102, 2007.
88 Daniel C. Haris. Quantitative Chemical Analysis. W H Freeman and Company, New York,
2010.
89 Toke R. Henriksen, Jakob L. Olsen, Peter Vesborg, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Ole Hansen. Highly
sensitive silicon microreactor for catalyst testing. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 80(12),
2009.
90 S Bruckenstein and RR Gadde. Use of a porous electrode for in situ mass spectrometric
determination of volatile electrode reaction products.
Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 93(3):1966–1967, 1971.
91 O. Wolter and J. Heitbaum. Diﬀerential Electrochemical Mass Spectroscopy (DEMS) - A
New Method for the Sutdy of Electrode Processes. 6:2–6, 1984.
92 Helmut Baltruschat. Diﬀerential electrochemical mass spectrometry. Journal of the American
Society for Mass Spectrometry, 15(12):1693–1706, 2004.
93 Thomas Hartung and Helmut Baltruschat. Diﬀerential Electrochemical Mass Spectrome-
try Using Smooth Electrodes: Adsorption and H/D-Exchange Reactions of Benzene on Pt.
Langmuir, 6(11):953–957, 1990.
94 Zenonas Jusys, Horst Massong, and Helmut Baltruschat. A New Approach for Simultaneous
DEMS and EQCM: Electro-oxidation of Adsorbed CO on Pt and Pt-Ru. Journal of The
Electrochemical Society, 146(3):1093, 1999.
95 Ezra L. Clark, Meenesh R. Singh, Youngkook Kwon, and Alexis T. Bell. Diﬀerential Elec-
trochemical Mass Spectrometer Cell Design for Online Quantiﬁcation of Products Pro-
duced during Electrochemical Reduction of CO ¡sub¿2¡/sub¿. Analytical Chemistry, page
150723133616002, 2015.
96 Jing Shen, Ruud Kortlever, Recep Kas, Yuvraj Y. Birdja, Oscar Diaz-Morales, Youngkook
Kwon, Isis Ledezma-Yanez, Klaas Jan P. Schouten, Guido Mul, and Marc T. M. Koper. Elec-
trocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide and methane at an immobilized
cobalt protoporphyrin. Nature Communications, 6:8177, 2015.
146
==PAGE:160==
97 A. H. Wonders, T. H M Housmans, V. Rosca, and M. T M Koper. On-line mass spectrome-
try system for measurements at single-crystal electrodes in hanging meniscus conﬁguration.
Journal of Applied Electrochemistry, 36(11):1215–1221, 2006.
98 Daniel Bøndergaard Trimarco. Development of a liquid phase detector for electrochemical
products. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
99 Daniel B. Trimarco, Thomas Pedersen, Ole Hansen, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Peter C. K. Ves-
borg. Fast and sensitive method for detecting volatile species in liquids. Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments, 86(7):075006, 2015.
100 R. B. Bird, W E Stewart, and E N Lightfoot. Transport Phenomena. John Wiley and Sons,
2 edition, 2007.
101 Akira Murata and Yoshio Hori. Product selectivity aﬀected by cationic species in electro-
chemical reduction of CO2 and CO at a Cu electrode., 1991.
102 Yoshio Hori and Shin Suzuki. Electrolytic reduction of bicarbonate ion at a mercury electrode.
Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 130(12):2387–2390, 1983.
103 Charles Delacourt, Paul L. Ridgway, and John Newman. Mathematical Modeling of CO[sub
2] Reduction to CO in Aqueous Electrolytes.
Journal of The Electrochemical Society,
157(12):B1902, 2010.
104 Kunna Wu, Erik Birgersson, Byoungsu Kim, Paul J A Kenis, and Iftekhar A Karimi. Modeling
and Experimental Validation of Electrochemical Reduction of CO 2 to CO in a Microﬂuidic
Cell, volume 162. Elsevier, 2015.
105 B. R. W. Pinsent, L. Pearson, and F. J. W. Roughton. The kinetics of combination of carbon
dioxide with hydroxide ions. Transactions of the Faraday Society, 1(1512):1512–1520, 1956.
106 Yanwei Lum, Youngkook Kwon, Peter Lobaccaro, Le Chen, Ezra Lee Clark, Alexis T. Bell,
and Joel W. Ager. Trace Levels of Copper in Carbon Materials Show Signiﬁcant Electro-
chemical CO2 Reduction Activity. ACS Catalysis, 6(1):202–209, 2016.
107 E. L. Cussler. Diﬀusion: Mass Transfer in Fluid Systems (2nd ed.). Cambridge University
Press, New York, 1997.
147
