==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Material characterization of a 
electrodeposited steel coating
Jacob Obitsø Nielsen 
February 2016
==PAGE:2==
Preface
The impression of writing this master thesis has been a steep learning curve of both
knowledge and practical experience. The project had not been possible without
professor Per Møller making the connection between my interest in surface tech-
nology and A.H. Nichro Haardchrom A/S development of a somewhat unknown
coating. The hours devoted to learning new methods, preparing samples, operating
instruments, plotting and analysing data has provided much understanding of how
to structure a scientiﬁc project. A quote that has provided focus and made the
mountain of results manageable is by the Chinese philosopher Laozi.
A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step.
The identiﬁcation of the state of carbon has lead to many sleepless night along
with countless frustrating hours searching for a technique being able to provide the
missing piece of the puzzle. The thesis and results were presented to professors
in material science and chemistry from DTU and KU in search for counsel. Some
comfort has been found in neither could suggest an approach to identify the carbon.
My interest in materials and especially surface technology have been enhanced for
each article read, each dataset analysed and each results found. The interdisciplinar-
ity required to comprehend the interactions between the material characteristic and
its mechanical properties has reinforced my curiosity towards research.
Author: Jacob Obitsø Nielsen
Date
Supervisor: Per Møller
Date
Examiner: Lars Pleth Nielsen
Date
- i -
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project; ”Material characterization of electrodeposited steel coating”, is a mas-
ter thesis written by Jacob Obitsø Nielsen. It is the ﬁnal project towards achieving
a M. Sc. degree in materials engineering at the Technical University og Denmark,
Department of Mechanical Engineering. The Thesis has been handing in on the 22
of February 2016.
This thesis takes on the assignment of a material characterization of a reinvented
steel coating developed in a collaboration by the Technical University of Denmark
and A.H. Nichro Haardchrom A/S. The technical area the coating is designed to ex-
plore are especially bearings and repairing of worn-out machinery. An examination
of the coating by scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy
have revealed the morphology as column like build up by nano sized ferrite grains.
An phase analysis by X-ray diﬀraction and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy have
detected ferrite, β-Fe2O3 and an unidentiﬁed carbide along with the state of carbon.
The chemical composition examined by glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
showed and impurity free coating.
The alterations of the coating after annealing at various temperatures has been
examined along the impact on the hardness. The carbide cohenite and the oxide
magnetite are ﬁrst detected by XRD after annealing at 315 ◦C along which a change
in the morphology. The hardness proﬁle is similar to that of age hardened steel.
- ii -
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
A great number of people has anticipated in the progress of this thesis, all of which
has my gratitude. My special thanks goes especially to my supervisor professor
Per Møller for suggesting the thesis and making the necessary arrangements for
it to proceed. The many hours spend in his oﬃce discussing the results and how
to proceed with the experimental work have been indispensable. His encouraging
appearance and method of coaching have inspired the willingness to spend extra
hours in the oﬃce throughout of the thesis.
My gratitude goes to Niels Christian Ek Probst at A. H. Nichro Haardchrom
A/S for plating the samples used in this thesis and for passing on his knowledge
about the process. His hard work on developing and optimizing the coating the past
years has provided the foundation necessary to ensure the positive outcome of this
thesis.
My appreciation goes to Associate Professor Karen Pantleon for her opinion
on the XRD and TEM results and for her work on the line proﬁle analysis. Her
knowledge related to XRD has provided invaluable assistance for the phase analysis
and in the experimental methods.
The PhD. Student Felix Lampert has followed the project from the sideline from
start to end and has been an great sparring partner in discussion of the experimental
results and how to proceed with the project. His help in reading one of the ﬁnal
draft provided structure and many useful comments in interpretation of results.
The technical staﬀof DTU have oﬀered their help and expertise throughout
the project. Especially Laboratory Engineering Flemming Bjerg Grumsen, who has
teach me to use the XRD instrument, has provided invaluable assistances through-
out the project. Many hours was spend analysis the XRD patterns in collaboration
before the phase transformations in the coating were fully understood. His techni-
cal experience in operating SEM and TEM has been an inspiration and his ease in
accomplish technical demanding task has put a smile on my lip several times during
the thesis. Furthermore has Laboratory Technician Rolf Jensen assisted in GDOES
measurements and sample preparation. Academic Laboratory Senior Metallogra-
pher Steﬀen S. Munch has provided valuable information in sample preparation and
etching.
Many thanks to Process Specialist Jonas Michael-Lindhard at DanChip DTU
for teaching me to use the XPS instrument and being willing to proofreading the
sections related to XPS.
Last but not least my gratitude goes to Sasha Isabelle Bisschop who has provide
me with the encouragement and support needed to keep focus throughout the thesis.
- iii -
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
BSC
Back scattered electrons
bcc
Body-centered cubic
bct
Body-centered tetragonal
CCD
Charge coupled device
Cps
Counts per seconds
DSC
Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry
DTU
The Technical University of Denmark
EDS
Energy dispersive spectroscopy
fcc
Face-centered cubic
FEG
Field emission gun
FIB
Focused ion beam
FWHM
Full width half maximum
GDOES
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
∆G
Gibbs free energy
HCD
High current density
ICDD
International Centre for Diﬀraction Data
Int.
Integrated
IR
Infrared spectroscopy
LCD
Low current density
LOM
Light optical microscope
MS
Mass spectrometry
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMR
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
p.d.u.
Procedure deﬁned unit
PDF
Powder diﬀraction ﬁle
SEM
Scanning electron microscope
SE
Secondary electrons
TEM
Transmission electron microscope
TGA
Thermogravimetric analysis
XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD
X-ray diﬀraction
- iv -
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Scope of the project
2
3
Theory
3
3.1
Electrolytic plating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.2
Strengthening mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Iron-carbon alloys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.4
X-ray diﬀraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Electron microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.6
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Literature Review
16
4.1
Treatment parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Transmission electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Experimental setup
26
5.1
The plating process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Heat treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Hardness measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.5
Light optical microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.6
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.7
X-ray diﬀraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.8
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.9
Scanning electron microscope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.10 Transmission electron microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Results
37
6.1
Light optical microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Scanning electron microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
X-ray diﬀraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.5
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.6
Transmission electron microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.7
Hardness measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7
Discussion
80
7.1
Discussion of results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.2
Chemical reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7.3
Industrial applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8
Conclusion
88
9
Future experiments
89
10 References
91
- v -
==PAGE:7==
A Appendix
94
A.1 Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.2 Hardness measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A.3 X-ray diﬀraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.4 Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.5 Transmission electron microscope dark-ﬁeld micrograph . . . . . . . .
99
A.6 Thermogravimetric analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
- vi -
==PAGE:8==
1
INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Steel is one of the world’s most essential materials [1]. With steel, it is possible to
create huge buildings or tiny parts for precision instruments. Steels are alloys of
iron and other elements, primarily carbon, widely used because of their high ten-
sile strengths, low costs and inﬁnitely recyclability. Steel is used in shipbuilding,
pipelines, mining, oﬀshore construction, aerospace, automobiles and heavy equip-
ment.
In many applications it is required to enhanced the properties of steel. It is possible
to increase the hardness of steel by a heat treatment or to make steel corrosion re-
sistance using alloying elements like nickel, chromium, molybdenum and vanadium
among others. Harden and stainless steel are considerably more expensive compared
to carbon steel and for some application it would be meaningless to consider. Many
technological problems can be solved solely by altering the surface of a workpiece by
a coating or a chemical conversion. Some of the improvements accessible by surface
treatment are wear resistance, corrosion resistance, biocompatibility and decorative
appearance among others. The catalogue of techniques able to enhance a surface
is long and diverse [32]. Choosing the correct treatment depends on the workpiece
and required properties. The understanding and acknowledgement of desirable and
undesirable properties of a surface treatment have equal importance in order to nar-
row down the technical applications it can resolve.
Electrochemical plating of iron has primarily been used in connection with repairing
of worn-out machine components [32]. A steel coating with a hardness around 750
HV can be applied at 50 ◦C by electroplating using an electrolyte containing FeSO4
and an organic acid. The steel coating is impurity free and can be applied on several
construction materials such as steel, aluminium, copper, brass and nickel. Extensive
research, with several articles published, was performed in Japan concerning pro-
cess optimization and material characterization of the steel coating [25] [15] [27] [13].
The hardness of the coating was interpreted to arise from the microstructure be-
ing in the state of tempered martensite, based on X-ray diﬀraction patterns [27] [19].
The steel coating must be considered prosperous because of the environmental
friendly electrolyte and it can be applied to a variety of materials at low tempera-
ture. Furthermore is has a hardness of 750 HV and no impurities. The steel coating
is being reinvented in a collaboration of The Technical University of Denmark and
A.H. Nichro Haardchrom A/S. The past three year the treatment process has been
investigated, but a material characterization has not been performed. A material
characterization, of a somewhat unknown material, can be compared to solving a
jigsaw puzzle. The various pieces are found using diﬀerent techniques and the en-
tirety of the motif is established by comparing and combining all of the results. It
is necessary to understand how each instrument operates in order to comprehend,
analyse and avoid over-interpretation of the various results.
- 1 -
==PAGE:9==
2
SCOPE OF THE PROJECT
2
Scope of the project
To optimize a surface treatment it is essential to understand interactions between
the treatment process, material properties and material characteristic. The treat-
ment process is related to the deposition of the coating, as the chemical composition
of the electrolyte, anode material, process parameters among others. The material
properties correlates to the coatings mechanical properties as wear resistance, corro-
sion resistance, tribological properties and refractive index et cetera. The material
characteristic is related to the morphology, chemical composition and phases in the
coating.
The workload required to conduct a wholesome investigation of the three cate-
gorise and their interactions are beyond the scope of a master thesis. It was decided
to conﬁne the subject to a material characterization, and use a treatment process
with a manageable electrolyte providing consistent coatings.
The main objectives that needs to be fulﬁlled are listed below.
• A literature review on electrodeposited steel coatings.
• Deﬁne the morphology of the coating.
• Deﬁne the chemical composition of the coating.
• Deﬁne phases in the coating.
• Deﬁne alterations in the morphology, chemical composition and phases in the coating
after an annealing process.
• Relate the alterations to changes in the hardness of the coating.
• Recommend improvements for the treatment process, based on results and literature
review.
• Propose technical areas where the coating can be applied.
The report is build up in chapters starting with a theory section in order to
understand the results presented in the literature review and in the result section.
The theory section is followed by a literature review where published results about
electrodeposited steel coatings are summarised. Afterwards a section with the ex-
perimental setup with a detailed description of the instrumental conﬁguration and
its objectives. Then a result section where measurements and their outcome are
presented, followed by a discussion section of the results and a proposal of technical
areas where the coating can be applied. Afterwards a conclusion that summarize
the ﬁndings in relation to the main objectives followed by a section where future
experiments are proposed.
- 2 -
==PAGE:10==
3
THEORY
3
Theory
3.1
Electrolytic plating
Electrolytic plating is a widely used process for depositing metals upon a workpiece
to change the surface properties [32]. The process uses electric current to reduced
dissolved metal ions in the electrolyte which nucleates at the workpiece surface.
The nucleated atoms will build up a coating consisting of the reduced atoms in
the electrolyte and other impurities if the electrolyte has been contaminated. The
principle of a typical setup for an electrolytic cell along with the simpliﬁed anode
and cathode reactions is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: A illustration of an electroplating setup.
Multiple components are used in the electrolytic cell as seen on the illustration
in Figure 1. The metal source for the coating is supplied from the two metal anodes
and metal ions in the electrolyte. The electric current is supplied from the anode to
the cathode by an external power supply. The coating is deposited on the cathode
as stated in the reaction equations in Figure 1. The voltage between the anode
and cathode is measured by an voltmeter which is normally build into the power
supply. Both pure metals and alloys can be deposited onto a workpiece [32]. The
geometry of the anode and cathode needs to be considered to obtain a uniform
material distribution. The material distribution when plating on a square panel as
seen in Figure 1 is an uneven distribution with a thicker coating on the edge. A
current thief or current screen can be applied close to the workpiece to obtain a
more uniform deposit.
There are several factors that interact with the charge transport in the electrolyte
and inﬂuence the deposition. The interface between the workpiece and electrolyte is
called the double layer [32]. The charged surface of the workpiece may absorb ions,
solvent dipoles and other molecules by either van der Walls or Columbic interactions.
The double layer acts as an inhibitor and hinders the cathodic process.
The overpotential is a complex parameter which can be separated into the terms:
charge transfer overpotential, diﬀusion overpotential and crystallization overpoten-
tial. The charge transfer overpotential is the rate electrons are transferred from the
surface of the workpiece to the metal ions in the electrolyte. The charge transfer
overpotential can be adjusted by the applied voltage. The concentration overpoten-
tial is deﬁned as the deviation from the equilibrium potential. The concentration
- 3 -
==PAGE:11==
3
THEORY
proﬁle as a function of the distance (δ) from the electrolyte/workpiece interface is
illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Illustration of the concentration proﬁle near the surface of the workpiece. Figure modiﬁed from [32].
Where C0 is the equilibrium concentration when no current is applied and iL
is the limiting current. The reaction zone will be depleted and the deposition will
be interrupted without a continues diﬀusion of new metal ions towards the elec-
trolyte/workpiece interface.
The limiting current has to be avoided since it can
lead to hydrogen and hydroxid development by a parallel process as described in
Equation 1 [32].
2H2O + 2e−→H2 + 2OH−
(1)
The formation of OH−will rise the pH-value in the diﬀusion zone which can
inﬂuence the deposition.
Figure 3: Illustration of the possible types of polycrystalline electrodeposits as a function of J/CMeZ+ and inhibition
intensity. Figure modiﬁed from [43].
The crystallization overpotential is related to the nucleation and growth of the
deposit at the atomic level. The deposits morphology is depending on the inhibition
intensity and ratio between the cathodic current density and the metal ions concen-
tration as illustrated in Figure 3, where possible types of polycrystalline growth is
shown [43].
- 4 -
==PAGE:12==
3
THEORY
3.2
Strengthening mechanism
The hardness of a material has a variety of meanings depending on the industry in
which it is used. For metallurgist it means resistance towards plastic deformation
[8]. A specimen will before plastic deformation have undergone elastic deformation,
meaning the specimen will return to its original shape when the applied force is
lifted. Plastic deformation is irreversible, meaning it will not return to its original
shape when the applied force is lifted.
Plastic deformation of crystalline materials takes place by the movement of dis-
locations along crystal planes under the inﬂuence of an applied stress [22]. There
are two types of dislocations called edge and screw, which can be identiﬁed by their
Burgers vector. Both edge and screw dislocations are line defects that cannot end
inside a crystal. A dislocation line either closes on itself to form a loop, end at the
free surface of a crystal or end in a node. The movement of dislocations is restricted
almost entirely to glide in its slip plane at low temperatures where diﬀusion is lim-
ited. An edge dislocation can move out of its slip plane at elevated temperatures
by a process called climb. The stress required for dislocation movement usually in-
creases during plastic deformation, as the dislocations become increasingly hindered
by obstacles.
An adequate description of the mechanisms involved in obstacle strengthening
are beyond the scope of this project. A short introduction of some defects and their
interactions with dislocations are given below.
The interaction of strain ﬁelds between an interstitial or substitutional atom and
a dislocation hinders movement by pinning dislocations.
A grain boundary discontinues further movement for a dislocation by changing
its slip plane. The Hall-Petch relation shown in Equation 2 describes the critical
resolved shear stress σGB dependence on the grain size d.
σGB = σ0 + ky · d−1/2
(2)
Where σ0 is a materials constant for the starting stress for dislocation movement
and ky is a strengthening coeﬃcient. The critical resolved shear stress increase when
the grain size is decreased as described in Equation 2.
Precipitation hardening are nucleation of particles, in general particles of a sec-
ond phase, that intersect slip planes in a random fashion. The precipitates can be
either coherent, semi-coherent or in-coherent to the parent phase. A coherent inter-
face with a slight mismatch leads to a coherency strain in the adjoining lattice as
shown in Figure 4 (b). A semi-coherent interface is shown in Figure 4 (c).
The dislocations must either cut through the precipitates or penetrate the array
by bowing between the obstacles. The change in yield stress of a supersaturated
material as a function of ageing time and particle size can be seen in Figure 5.
The precipitations coarsens at the elevated temperature which leads to a lowering
in the yield stress. The number of precipitates decreases and their size and spacing
increases, and eventually an equilibrium structure is established.
Disruption of dislocation movement by non-metallic particle as oxides or carbides
is called dispersion hardening and utilizes the same mechanisms as precipitation
hardening.
- 5 -
==PAGE:13==
3
THEORY
Figure 4: Illustration of the states in the formation of the equilibrium precipitates.
(a) A supersaturated solid
solution. (b) A transition precipitate phase. (c) A equilibrium phase with a parent phase. Figure modiﬁed from [7].
Figure 5: Illustration of the yield stress as a function of ageing time. Figure from [22].
3.3
Iron-carbon alloys
The scope of this section is to give the reader the basic knowledge about iron-carbon
alloys to understand the analysis and results in the following sections.
The carbon atom is seen as an interstitial due to its is much smaller radius
compared to the iron atom [37]. Two diﬀerent phase-diagrams is used depending
on the carbon content of the alloy as shown in Figure 6.
The thermodynamic
stable phase diagram is used when dealing with cast irons and the metastable phase
diagram is used for steels. The term steel is for Fe-C alloys with a carbon content
between 0.008 to 2.14 wt%. The maximum solubility of carbon in the ferrite phase
is 0.022 wt% at 727 ◦C. In the austenite phase the solubility increase to 2.14 wt% at
1147 ◦C. The increased solubility of carbon in austenite is due to the face centered
cubic (fcc) crystal structure having having more space available per interstitial,
compared to ferrites body centered cubic (bcc) crystal structure [37]. Steel at room
temperature with a carbon content of 1 wt% will consist of both ferrite and cementite
in a heterogeneous system.
It is not the scope of this section or paper to discuss martensitic transformation
theory or theory of the other phase transformations connected to martensite. A
short description of the hardening mechanism of martensite is described as the fol-
lowing. A solution-treated iron-carbon alloy is quenched to room temperature. The
quenching results in insuﬃcient time allowed for precipitation and a supersaturated
- 6 -
==PAGE:14==
3
THEORY
Figure 6: Iron-carbon phase diagram. (a) thermodynamic stable, (b) metastable. Figure modiﬁed from [3].
solid solution is obtained. Suﬃcient thermal energy available for precipitate nucle-
ation to occur are introduced by subsequent annealing around 150 ◦C. Initially, a
ﬁne dispersion of numerous small precipitates are formed, but with increasing ageing
time at the elevated temperature, the precipitation coarsens. The number of precip-
itates decreases and their size and spacing increases, and eventually an equilibrium
structure is established.
The crystallographic data of martensite, transitions carbides and other phases
related is shown in Table 1. The iron-carbon martensite is a body-centered tetrago-
Table 1: Crystallography data of martensite and other Fe-C phases. Table modiﬁed from [9]
Phase
Formula
Structure
Lattice parameters [˚A]
Martensite (α’)
Fe
bct
a = 2.866 - 0.013 wt% C
c = 2.866 + 0.116 wt% C
Ferrite (α)
Fe
bcc
a = 2.866
Austenite (γ)
Fe
fcc
a = 3.555 + 0.044 wt% C
ϵ-carbide
Fe2C
hexagonal
a = 2.752
c = 4.353
Cementite (θ)
Fe3C
orthorhombic
a = 4.523
b = 5.088
c = 6.743
Cohenite
Fe3C
orthorhombic
a = 5.091
b = 6.743
c = 4.526
nal (bct) crystal structure with the interstitial carbon atoms randomly distributed
over the c-type octahedral interstices. The ageing and tempering behaviour of iron-
carbon martensite has been examined in the past 70 years and ﬁve stages of struc-
tural changes are distinguished upon tempering [9] [30] [16].
1. Transformation of retained austenite into martensite between -180 to 100 ◦C.
2. Redistribution of carbon atoms on ageing below 100 ◦C.
3. Precipitation of transition carbides (ϵ/η) between 80 and 200 ◦C.
- 7 -
==PAGE:15==
3
THEORY
4. Decomposition of retained austenite between 240 and 320 ◦C.
5. Conversion of ϵ/η carbides into cementite between 260 and 350 ◦C
The hardness of iron-carbon martensite as a function of ageing time and tem-
pering temperature have been examined and are shown in Figure 7 and 8 [9].
Figure 7: Hardness vs ageing time. Pure iron car-
bonized to 1.13 wt% carbon. Quenched from 842 ◦C
in brine (10 wt% NaCl in water). Figure from [9].
Figure 8:
Hardness vs tempering temperature.
Specimens was tempered for 1 hour at the indicated
temperature. Pure iron carbonized to 1.13 wt% car-
bon. Quenched from 842 ◦C in brine (10 wt% NaCl
in water). Figure from [9].
At room temperature the hardness of the martensite increases by the two ﬁrst
stages of structural changes as shown in Figure 7. After 25 hours at room temper-
ature the hardness stagnates and does not decrease for the rest of the experiment.
A plateau around 950 HV is reached at 60 ◦C after 10 hours, followed by a fur-
ther increase to around 1000 HV after 70 hour. The increase in hardness for both
specimens are attributable to a clustering process. Clustering leads to areas with a
high carbon content and coherency strains are building up in the lattice and cause
an increase in hardness. The hardness is constant for the rest of the experiment
because the temperature is not high enough for transition carbides to nucleate.
The eﬀect of the tempering temperatures is seen in Figure 8. At 100 ◦C the
maximum hardness is reached and above this temperature the hardness decreases
linearly.
The precipitation of coherent ϵ/η-carbides is attributed the maximum
hardness. Above this temperature the decrease in hardness is though to be due a
decrease in the stress ﬁelds as a consequence of a coherent to incoherent transition
of the carbides. At higher temperatures a decrease in hardness is due to the de-
compositions of retained austenite and conversion of the carbides to cementite. The
maximum hardness of tempered martensite is approximately equal to the hardness
of aged martensite at 60 ◦C.
The X-ray diﬀraction patterns for two martensitic specimens that have been aged
at room temperature for 3.5 years or tempered for 1 hour at 132 ◦C are shown in
Figure 9 [40]. Peaks of {100}ϵ/{101}η and {102}ϵ/{121}η carbides are seen for both
specimens. This indicates that given enough time ϵ/η-carbides can precipitate below
the temperatures indicated in the third stage of structural changes for martensite.
The peak intensity of {200}γ and {220}γ are identical in both specimens, which
suggest the amount of retained austenite is similar when tempering at 132 ◦C or
ageing at room temperature. The {002}α′ and {112}α′ is observed as a shoulder at
lower ◦2θ of the {200}α/{200}α′ and {211}α/{211}α′ peaks for the aged specimen.
- 8 -
==PAGE:16==
3
THEORY
Figure 9: X-ray diﬀraction patterns (synchrotron radiation, λ = 0.189821 nm). FeC 3.5 with 1.13 wt% carbon and
FeC tempered with 1.09 wt% carbon is prepared from pure iron. FeC 3.5 has been aged at room temperature for
3.5 years and FeC tempered has been tempered at 132 ◦C for 1 hour. Figure from [40].
For the tempered specimen these shoulders are not as evident and it was calculated
that 85% of martensite was transformed.
3.4
X-ray diﬀraction
Except otherwise mentioned the theory in this section is from [44]. X-ray diﬀraction
(XRD) is a common method for determining the crystal structure of materials [44].
XRD identiﬁes chemical compounds from their crystalline structure.
X-rays are
electromagnetic waves with a much shorter wavelength compared to visible light.
The method is based on wave interferences where two waves travelling in the same
direction can either reinforce or cancel each other depending on their phase. A single
atom scatters an incident beam of X-rays in all directions in space [10]. A large
number of atoms arranged in a perfectly periodic array in three dimensions to form
a crystal diﬀracts X-rays in relatively few directions. The periodic arrangement of
atoms causes constructive interference of the scattered X-rays in directions predicted
by the Bragg’s law. The diﬀerence the measured intensity between scattering by a
single atom and diﬀraction from a crystal lattice are illustrated in Figure 10.
Figure 10: Illustration of (a) x-ray scattering by an atom and its measured signal, (b) x-ray diﬀraction by a crystal
and its measured signal. Figure modiﬁed from [10].
- 9 -
==PAGE:17==
3
THEORY
The crystallographic planes in a specimen can be calculated using Bragg’s law
by measuring the angles and intensity of the diﬀracted beam. An illustration of
Bragg’s law is shown in Figure 11 and the equation is shown in Equation 3.
Figure 11: Diﬀraction by crystal planes following Bragg’s law. Figure from [17].
nλ = 2d · sin(θ)
(3)
Where d is the spacing between the parallel crystal planes, θ is the X-ray incident
angle, n is an integer and λ is the wavelength of the X-ray. The possible diﬀraction
planes in a crystalline structure are named according to their Miller indices (hkl).
Multiple phases can exist in a material and each of these phases will have an
speciﬁc XRD proﬁle depending on their crystal structure. The position and intensity
of multiple peaks are compared against diﬀraction patterns found in a XRD pattern
database to identify their phase. The database used is maintained by the Inter-
national Centre for Diﬀraction Data (ICDD) and they validates all datasets. An
ID is given to each powder diﬀraction ﬁle (PDF) for a straight forward comparison
between publications.
The grains and precipitates can be rotated relative to each other depending on
the texture of a material. Only orientated crystals with crystalline planes satisfying
Bragg’s law are measured by the detector. Multiple phases in a material can have
planes that fulﬁll Bragg’s law at the same ◦2θ angle and thereby a peaks intensity
can have multiple contributors which can make the phase analysis laborious.
Information of the crystallite size and micro strains in a phase can be obtained
by a line proﬁle analysis of its peaks in the XRD pattern.
3.5
Electron microscopy
Except otherwise mentioned the theory in this section is from [44]. The electron
microscopes that will examined is the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the
transmission microscope (TEM). Both microscopes use an emitted electron beam to
generate a signal, but the electron-specimen interaction and detection are diﬀerent.
A short description of the theory behind each microscope will be given in the fol-
lowing sections. It is not the scope of these sections to discuss the physics behind
the theories, but only to provide the reader the information necessary to understand
the experimental method used and how the results have been interpreted.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
The SEM is the most widely used electron microscope, due to its high resolution,
great depth of ﬁeld and it ease to use. It consist of an electron gun and a series of
electromagnetic lenses and aperture followed by a detector. The specimen is kept in
- 10 -
==PAGE:18==
3
THEORY
high vacuum to avoid the electrons to interact with the atoms in the air. An SEM
image is formed by a focused electron beam scanning across an area of a specimen.
The electrons interact with the specimen and are reﬂected backwards towards the
charged detector. The resolution of the SEM imaging is determined by the cross-
sectional diameter of the interaction volume. The size of the probe limits the size of
features on the specimen to be resolved. There are several factors that determines
the minimum probe diameter and two of these are the electron wavelength and
the brightness of electron illumination.
The probe diameter can be reduced by
using electron with short wavelength and by having a high brightness. The electron
wavelength is determined by the acceleration voltage, and a higher acceleration
voltage lowers the wavelength. The acceleration voltages is normally kept between
3-40 kV depending on the type of analysis. The brightness is proportional to the
acceleration voltage of the electron gun. A ﬁeld emission gun (FEG) is used in the
more advanced SEM systems, and can provide a 1000x brightness compared to a
tungsten thermionic gun.
The electron-specimen interaction can be described as either elastic or inelastic
scattering. The electrons are detected as back scattered electrons (BSE) when they
interact with the specimen by elastic scattering, which are incident electrons scat-
tered by atoms in the specimen. The BSE are typically deﬂected at large angles and
retain around 60-80 % of their incident energy. The secondary electrons (SE) are
produced by inelastic scattering which are electrons ejected from the atoms in the
specimen. The SE are deﬂected at small angles and with much less energy compared
to the incident electrons. The interaction zone of the electrons and specimen atoms
below the surface is very diﬀerent for BSE and SE as shown in Figure 12. Although
Figure 12: A illustration of the interaction zone of electrons and specimen atoms below a specimen surface. Figure
from [44]
the SE are produced in the whole interaction volume, they escape from the volume
near the surface with a depth of 5-50 nm. The higher energy BSE are able to escape
the specimen from deeper levels in the interaction zone with depth from 50-300 nm.
The BSE spatial resolution is lowered by the larger interaction zone, compared to
SE. An image formed by SE will have a improved spatial resolution compared to
- 11 -
==PAGE:19==
3
THEORY
BSE as seen in Figure 12. The beneﬁts of choosing a high acceleration voltage is
the electrons will have a short wavelength and an increased brightness. The higher
acceleration voltage will on the other hand increase in the interaction zone, which
results in a decrease in the lateral spatial resolution on the SEM micrographs. It is
necessary for the operator to balance acceleration voltage and probe current to ﬁnd
the optimal setting of the speciﬁc specimen and task.
Transmission Electron Microscopy
The TEM is a powerful tool to obtain information about the microstructure on an
atomic resolution. The TEM is also operated under high vacuum and consist of
an electron gun and a series of electromagnetic lenses and aperture followed by a
detector. It uses high speed electrons as source of illumination which is transmitted
through the specimen and detected by a charge coupled device (CCD) detector
below the specimen. The thickness of the sample has to be about 100 nm depending
on the material. The sample needs to be thinner for specimens with high atomic
weight. The acceleration voltage is normally greater than 100 kV to obtain a short
wavelength for the electrons for high resolution analysis.
The contrast on a bright-ﬁeld TEM image is generated when there is a diﬀerence
in the amount of electrons being scattered away from the transmitted beam on it
path though the specimen towards the CCD detector. There are two mechanisms
which inﬂuence the electron scattering. The ﬁrst is the mass-density contrast where
the interaction between the electron and the atomic nucleus results in a change of
path. The amount of electrons scattering at any speciﬁc point by mass-density scat-
tering depends on the speciﬁc atoms, the density and the thickness of the specimen
at that speciﬁc path. This type of image can be misleading because the image is seen
as two dimensional, but the features and contrast is generated by a three dimen-
sional specimen the electrons are transmitted though. The second type is diﬀraction
contrast where the electrons are scattered collaboratively by parallel crystal planes
similar to XRD. Bragg’s law of diﬀraction seen in Equation 3 also applies for elec-
tron diﬀraction. Constructive diﬀraction occurs when Bragg’s law is satisﬁed and a
strong electron deﬂection in the specimen results in the intensity of the transmitted
beam being reduced when the aperture ring block the diﬀracted beams.
A change of the optical settings on the microscope done by the operator is nec-
essary to get the diﬀraction pattern projected onto the detector. From the electron
diﬀraction pattern a phase analysis can be performed much in the same way as from
a XRD pattern. An illustration of the appearance of diﬀerent microstructure can
be seen in Figure 13.
Figure 13: Illustration of diﬀerent types of diﬀraction pattern which arise from diﬀerent specimen microstructure.
(a) A single crystal. (b) A small number of grains. (c) A large number of randomly oriented grains. Figure modiﬁed
from [18].
A dark-ﬁeld micrograph is acquired by adjusting the incident beam of electrons
- 12 -
==PAGE:20==
3
THEORY
so one selected diﬀraction beam will pass though the objective aperture. In the
dark-ﬁeld micrograph the illuminated area is the phase that fulﬁll Bragg’s law. Ori-
entations of the same phase can be distinguished by examining multiple diﬀraction
spots from the same phase.
Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) is possible for both SEM and TEM. It
takes advantages of the X-ray photons produced when a high energy electron knocks
an electron out of its original shell in an atom.
The ionized atom will quickly
return to its normal state by reﬁlling the inner electron vacancy by an outer shell
electron. The electron relaxation will generate an X-ray photon with the energy of
the diﬀerence between the inner and outer electron shell. The chemical elements
can be identiﬁed by the characteristic energy of the X-ray photon emitted by the
atoms. EDS can be used as a quantitative analysis of the concentration of chemical
elements in a specimen, by measuring the peak intensity in the measured spectrum.
The analysis is an automated process done by software where diﬀerent settings can
be applied as mapping of an area or a point analysis. As seen on Figure 12 for the
SEM electron interaction zone the X-ray photons is emitted from a volume below
the surface and has a signiﬁcant lateral size. The X-rays photons are generated
in the whole volume of the interaction zone. This is an advantage if the chemical
composition of a large area needs to be identiﬁed. The ratio between the interaction
volume and particle size needs to be taken into account when identifying particles.
The interaction zone for thin ﬁlm as used in TEM have a much higher resolution
compared to SEM. An illustration of the diﬀerence in the interaction zone for SEM
and TEM can be seen in Figure 14.
Figure 14: Illustration of interaction zone where x-ray photons is generated. (a) A solid specimen. (b) A thin ﬁlm.
Figure modiﬁed from [18].
The beam spread (B) for a speciﬁc material can be estimated as a function of
depth (t) using Equation 4 [18].
B = 0.198
Z
E
  ρ
A
1/2
t3/2
(4)
Where Z is the atomic number, A is the atomic weight, E is the electron energy
(keV) and ρ is the specimen density (g/cm3). The estimated beam spread is 6.45
nm for a 100 nm thin ﬁlm consisting of 100% iron using an acceleration voltage of
300 keV.
3.6
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
Except otherwise mentioned the theory in this section is from [44]. X-ray photoelec-
tron spectroscopy (XPS) is widely used for surface analysis [44]. The technique uses
- 13 -
==PAGE:21==
3
THEORY
photoelectrons emitted from the surface with a characteristic energy for elemental
analysis. The photoelectrons have relative low energies generally between 20-2000
eV and can only escape from depth down to around 10 nm. The photoelectrons
carry information about the chemical elements in the surface.
The XPS instrument contains a X-ray gun, ion gun and an electron energy
analyser. The specimen chamber requires an ultra high vacuum of pressures in the
range of 10−8 to 10−10 mbar.
The reason for the ultra high vacuum is twofold.
The low energy electrons are easily scattered by gas molecules which will reduced
intensity and increase background noise. The specimen surface also needs to be free
of contamination absorbed from its surroundings. XPS uses an Al kα and/or Mg
kα X-ray gun to ensure good energy resolution. The ion gun is used to clean the
surface and to remove atomic layers of the specimen for depth proﬁle analysis.
The X-ray photoelectrons are electrons ejected from an electron shell when an
atom absorbs an X-ray photon. Ernest Rutherfords equation can be used to calculate
the binding energy of the atoms photoelectron (EB) as shown Equation 5.
EB = EP −EK −Φ
(5)
Where EK is the kinetic energy required to eject an electron from its electronic shell
in an atom, EP is the energy of the X-ray photon and Φ is the work function which
is dependent on the spectrometer and the specimen. The binding energies of atomic
electrons have characteristic values used to identify the elements.
The chemical state of an atom can be determined by a chemical shift in the
elements distinctive peak. The chemical shift is caused by the atoms surroundings.
The binding energy of an electron in an atom can be written as
EBinding = E0
i + Ekqi + Σ( qi
rij
)
(6)
Where E0
i is the reference binding energy of an electron in an isolated atom. The
Ekqi is a weighed charge of an atom, which is related to the electro-negative inﬂuence
of the valence electrons. The Σ( qi
rij ) is the local potential at the atom caused by the
relaxation in the surrounding. A chart of the chemical shift of the carbon atom in
diﬀerent chemical states can be seen in Figure 15 [33]. The National Institute of
Figure 15: Binding energy for carbon C1s in diﬀerent compounds. Figure from [33].
- 14 -
==PAGE:22==
3
THEORY
Standards and Technology (NIST) collects binding energies for multiple materials
and stores them in an online database [35].
3.7
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
Except otherwise mentioned the theory in this section is from [32]. The technique
glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy (GDOES) is applied in order to obtain
information about the elemental composition of a specimen.
A sample is ﬁxed to the instrument using vacuum between the surface and a
small chamber on the instrument. Inside the chamber a copper tube placed in such
a way that it is not connected to the sample. A low argon pressure is generated in
the chamber and a bias between the tube (anode) and sample (cathode) is generated.
Electrons are accelerated from the sample towards the anode and on their path the
electrons collide with argon atoms. The collision causes the argon atoms to be pos-
itively ionised and thereby accelerated towards the negatively charged sample. The
ionised argon collide with the atoms at the sample and cause removal of these atoms
by sputtering. The removed atoms from the surface becomes excited by colliding
with high energy electrons and ionised argon in the chamber. The excited atoms
from the surface becomes de-excited after a short time and in this step a X-ray pho-
ton is emitted. The X-ray photons are detected and used for the elemental analysis.
This cycle is continues until the experiment is ended. The atomic elements can be
detected utilizing that diﬀerent elements emits X-ray photons with characteristic
wavelengths. The reactions occurring in the chamber can be seen in Figure 16.
Figure 16: Illustration of the reactions occurring in GDOES chamber. Figure modiﬁed from [5]
It is diﬃcult to convert sputtering time to a quantiﬁed depth, because of each
element speciﬁc sputtering factor needs to be taken into account. The depth proﬁle
is therefore shown as a function of sputtering time in this report.
- 15 -
==PAGE:23==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
4
Literature Review
The literature review is done in order to acknowledge what has been published on
the subject of electrodeposited steel coating and in order to have a comparative basis
for the experimental results obtained in this report. There are multiple electrolyte
compositions possible for the steel coating which are comparable to the electrolyte
composition examined in this report. The treatment parameters as electrolyte com-
position, temperature, pH-value and current density is provided for all published
results examined.
Most publications are based on the research between 1980-2000 done by Masanobu
Izaki, from the Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Osaka Municipal Technical Re-
search Institute, Japan. The literature review is divided into two sections. The
treatment process are examined in depth followed by a section where results about
material characteristics are examined.
4.1
Treatment parameters
Impact of the carbon source
The dependency of the carbon source on the coatings hardness, topography, mi-
crostructure and elemental composition were examined using 12 diﬀerent organic
acids [15]. Eight dicarboxylic acids with a linear alkyl chain of the molecule struc-
ture of COOH-(CH2)n-COOH with n = 0 to 7. Four monocarboxylic acids with a
linear alkyl chain of the form CH3 -(CH2)n−1-COOH with n = 1 to 4. The aim of the
publication was to ﬁnd the optimal carbon source to obtain the highest hardness.
The most important results are shown in Figure 17, 18 and 19.
Figure 17: The hardness vs carbon content.(•) Deposits from electrolyte of FeSO4 and with or without dicarboxylic
acids with a current density of 1 A/dm2, temperature of 50 ◦C and pH-value between 2.4 to 3.6. Carbon source:
oxa = oxalic acid; mal = malonic acid; suc = succinic acid, glu = glutaric acid; adi = adipic acid; pim = pimelic
acid; sub = suberic acid; aze = acelaic acid. (◦) Deposits from the bath with monocarboxylic acids obtained at 1
A/dm2. Carbon source: (1) acetic acid; (2) propanoic acid; (3) butanoic acid; (4) n-valeric acid. (△) Deposits from
a another electrolyte with citric acid and L-ascorbic as carbon sources with various current densities [27]. Error
bars represent the 95 % conﬁdence limit. Figure from [15].
The maximum hardness is obtained using succinic acid as shown in Figure 17.
- 16 -
==PAGE:24==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Figure 18: Scanning electron micrographs of the surface of the Fe-C deposits. Current density of 1 A/dm2, temper-
ature of 50 ◦C and pH-value between 2.4 to 3.6. Electrolyte with FeSO4 and (A) oxalic acid; (B) succinic acid; (C)
adipic acid; (D) suberic acid. Figures from [15]
Figure 19: Optical micrographs of cross section of Fe-C deposit and Fe deposit.
Current density of 1 A/dm2,
temperature of 50 ◦C and pH-value between 2.4 to 3.6. Electrolyte with FeSO4 and (A) oxalic acid; (B) succinic
acid; (C) adipic acid; (D) suberic acid; (E) Fe deposits from bath without organic acid. Figures modiﬁed from [15].
The topography and microstructure depends on the carbon source and is cate-
gorised into four categorises. The ﬁrst type has a carbon content of 0.13 wt%, the
topography was angular-grained and the microstructure was columnar as shown in
Figure 18 (A) and 19 (A) . The second type has a carbon content of 0.56 wt%, the
topography was smooth black mirror-bright and the microstructure was ﬁne-grained
as shown in Figure 18 (B) and 19 (B). The third type has a carbon content of 1.3
wt%, the topography was black and dull and the microstructure was large grains
with many defects as shown in Figure 18 (C) and 19 (C) . The fourth type has a
carbon content of 3.0 wt%, the topography was black bight and the microstructure
was columnar with defects as shown in Figure 18 (D) and 19 (D).
The optimal carbon source has a dicarboxylic acid with n = 2 and a carbon
content of 0.56 to below 1.3 wt%.
- 17 -
==PAGE:25==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Impact of the current density
The eﬀect of current density has been examined in multiple articles [27] [36] [20].
Representatives results are shown in Figure 20 and 21.
Figure 20: Carbon and oxygen content in a coating
vs current density. Electrolyte composition FeSO4,
citric acid and L-Ascorbic acid, temperature of 50
◦C and pH-value not provided. Figure from [27].
Figure 21: Current eﬃciency and hardness vs cur-
rent density. Electrolyte composition FeSO4 and ei-
ther succinic acid or asparaginic acid, temperature
55 ◦C and pH-value of 2.5-2.6. (a) current eﬃcient -
asparainic acid; (b) current eﬃcient - succinic acid;
(c) hardness - asparainic acid; (d) hardness - succinic
acid. Figure from [36].
The carbon content increase linear from 1 to 1.25 wt% when the current density
is increased from 1 to 7 A/dm2 as shown in Figure 20. There are little to none oxygen
occluded in the deposits applied with a current density below 3.0 A/dm2, followed
by an rapid increase to above 1.7 wt% oxygen at current density of 5 A/dm2. The
hardness measurements from these deposits are shown in Figure 17 represented by
△. The hardness decreases considerably when oxygen is occluded in the coating.
Either asparaginic acid or succinic acid are used as carbon source for the results
shown in Figure 21. The maximum current eﬃcient of around 92 % is achieved when
using asparaginic acid with a current density of 3.5 A/dm2, followed by a drop to
around 85 % at higher current densities. The hardness of the deposit reached the
maximum value of 650 HV at a current density of 3.5 A/dm2 and remains unchanged
when the current density is increased to 7 A/dm2 when using asparaginic acid. Using
succinic acid the current eﬃciency and hardness reached maximum value of 90 % and
620 HV respectively, at a current density of 3.5 A/dm2 and remains unchanged when
the current density is increased to 7 A/dm2. The hardness and current eﬃciency
obtained with current density below 3.5 A/dm2 are considerably lower.
The optimal current density is 3.0 to 3.5 A/dm2 dependent on the electrolyte.
Impact of the temperature
The eﬀect of temperature on the hardness of the coating has been examined and
the result is shown in Figure 22 [36]. It is stated that all the deposits exhibited a
smooth black and mirror-bright surface, expect for a temperature of 65 ◦C.
Either asparaginic acid or succinic acid are used as carbon source for the results
shown in Figure 22. The hardness decreases when the temperature is increased from
45 ◦C to 65 ◦C independent of the organic acid. The current eﬃciency is constant
around 95 % using temperatures of 45 to 55 ◦C, followed by a linear decrease as the
- 18 -
==PAGE:26==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Figure 22: Current eﬃciency and hardness vs temperature. Electrolyte composition of FeSO4 and either succinic
acid or asparaginic acid, current density of 3.5 A/dm2 and pH-value of 2.5-2.6. (a) current eﬃcient - asparainic
acid; (b) current eﬃcient - succinic acid; (c) hardness - asparainic acid; (d) hardness - succinic acid. Figure from
[36].
temperature is increased to 65 ◦C for asparaginic acid. The current eﬃciency has
its maximum around 90 % at bath temperatures of 55 ◦C and is linearly decreased
with temperatures below and above this value for succinic acid.
The eﬀect of temperature on current eﬃciency is depending on the electrolyte.
A maximum hardness is obtained around 45 ◦C independent of the electrolyte.
Impact of the pH-value
The eﬀect of bath pH-value on the hardness of the deposits has been examined and
the result is shown in Figure 23 and 24 [36] [15]. It is stated that all the deposits
exhibited a smooth black and mirror-bright surface, expect for a pH-value of 2 [36].
Figure 23: Current eﬃciency and hardness vs pH-
value.
The electrolyte composition of FeSO4 and
either succinic acid or asparaginic acid, current den-
sity of 3.5 A/dm2, temperature of 55 ◦C. (a) cur-
rent eﬃcient - asparainic acid; (b) current eﬃcient
- succinic acid; (c) hardness - asparainic acid; (d)
hardness - succinic acid. Figure from [36].
Figure 24: Carbon content, hardness and current ef-
ﬁciency vs pH-value.
The electrolyte composition
of FeSO4 and succinic acid, current density of 1
A/dm2, temperature of 50 ◦C. Figure from [15].
Either asparaginic acid or succinic acid are used as carbon source for the results
shown in Figure 23.
The hardness increases linear with an increasing pH-value
independent of the organic acid. The current eﬃciency increases by increasing the
pH-value and a maximum is not reached within the limits of the experimental setup
- 19 -
==PAGE:27==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
for asparaginic acid. The current eﬃciency peaks at a pH-value of 2.5 and decreases
above and below this value for succinic acid.
Succinic acid is used as carbon source for the results shown in Figure 24. The
hardness and current eﬃciency are relatively stable at pH-value from 2.5 to 3.5.
The hardness is comparable using a pH-value of 2.0 to that of higher pH-values.
The current eﬃciency is considerably lower at around 70 % using a pH-value of 2.0,
compared to above 90 % for higher pH-values. The carbon content decreases linearly
from 0.7 to 0.5 wt% as a function of the increased pH-value.
There are diﬀerence in the results regarding how the pH-value of the electrolyte
aﬀects the hardness. The maximum hardness for the coating from both groups were
reached using a pH-value of 3.0.
Impact of the bath mixing ratio
The appearance of the coating has been examined varying the ratio between FeSO4
and the organic acid and the result are shown in Figure 25 [14].
Figure 25: Schematic representations of the appearance of the deposits from Hull cell experiments. The pH-value
ranged from 1.7 to 2.2, temperature 50 ± 1 ◦C, total applied current 1.0 A. Electrolyte composition: (A) FeSO4
0.1M, citric acid 0.01M; (B) FeSO4 0.2M, citric acid 0.01M; (C) FeSO4 0.5M, citric acid 0.01M; (D) FeSO4 0.5M,
citric acid 0.025M; (E) FeSO4 0.5M, citric acid 0.1M; (F) FeSO4 0.5M, citric acid 0.01M, NaCl 1.5M. (HCD) high
current density end; (LCD) low current density end. Figure modiﬁed from [14].
The low Fe2+ concentration in the electrolyte with 0.2M FeSO4 or below resulted
in a voltage of 10 V, compared to 4 V in a electrolyte with 0.5M FeSO4.
The
bath voltage remained 4 V, when the FeSO4 was 0.5M by varying the citric acid
concentration.
The deposits appearance from the electrolyte with 0.1M FeSO4 and 0.01M citric
acid was brunt in the high current density (HCD) end and no deposition was seen
in the low current density (LCD) end. The coatings appearance from the electrolyte
with 0.5M FeSO4 and 0.01M citric acid was bight over the whole area of the cathode.
The deposits appearance from the electrolyte with 0.5M FeSO4 and 0.1M citric acid
was bight over the most of the cathode, but in the LCD end there was interference
colour followed by no deposition. The uniformity of the coating was improved and
the voltage was decreased to 2.0 V or below by adding NaCl to the electrolyte.
Replacing NaCl with Na2SO4 did not aﬀect the appearance of the deposit.
The optimal concentration of FeSO4 is 0.5M or above with 0.01M citric acid. The
addition of NaCl decreases the voltage and has a positive eﬀect on the appearance
of the deposits.
- 20 -
==PAGE:28==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Impact of the carbon content
The eﬀect of carbon content on the hardness has been examined and the result is
shown in Figure 26 [27]. The result is also presented in Figure 20 where the carbon
content as a function of current density was examined.
Figure 26: Hardness vs carbon content. Current densities from 0.2 to 7 A/dm2, electrolyte composition FeSO4,
citric acid and L-Ascorbic acid, temperature of 50 ◦C and pH-value is not provided. Figure from [27].
The maximum hardness of 800 HV was obtained with around 1.2 wt% carbon,
followed by a decrease when the carbon content is above this value as shown in
Figure 26. The drop in hardness is assigned to occluded oxygen in the deposits as
shown in Figure 20. The hardness is around 400 HV with no carbon content and
increase to around 750 HV for a coating with 0.4 wt% carbon.
The hardness of the deposit as a function of the carbon content is in good relation
with the change in microstructure shown in Figure 18 and 19.
The optimum carbon content is 1.2 wt%.
Impact of annealing
The hardness of the coating was measured after annealing for 1 hour at diﬀerent
temperatures ranging from 150 to 930 ◦C as shown in Figure 27 [24].
The hardness decreases from around 800 to 400 HV for a coating with a carbon
content of 0.43 wt% or below by annealing at temperatures around 150 ◦C.
The hardness of the deposits increase to around 1150 HV, when the annealing
temperature was around 350 ◦C for a coating with a carbon content of 1.03 and 1.18
wt%. The hardness decreases to around 1000 HV when the annealing temperature
was increased to around 450 ◦C. The hardness decreases below 400 HV when the
annealing temperature was further increased to 900◦C.
The increase in hardness of the deposits with above 1.04 wt% is assumed to be
the eﬀect of coherent precipitation of carbides.
Summery
A summery of the optimum treatment parameters based on the results published
and examined in this section is shown in Table 2.
- 21 -
==PAGE:29==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Figure 27: Eﬀect of annealing for 1 hour at the indicated temperatures on the hardness of coatings with carbon
content as indicated. Electrolyte of FeSO4, citric acid and L-ascorbic acid, temperature of 50 ◦C, pH-value of 2.75
and a current density of 0.02 to 3 A/dm2. Figure from [24].
Table 2: Table summarising of the optimum treatment parameters.
Electrolyte composition
FeSO4 and succinic acid
Ratio
0.5M FeSO4 and 0.01M citric acid
Temperature
45 ◦C
pH-value
3.0
Carbon content
1.2 wt%
Annealing
300 ◦C for 1 hour
Material characterisation
The literature review of the material characterisation is done for coating having
been deposited with a good result and with a treatment process comparable to A.
H. Nichro Haardchrom A/S setup.
4.2
Transmission electron microscopy
A cross section TEM micrograph for a coating is shown in Figure 28 [27].
Figure 28: Transmission electron micrograph of the cross section of a coating with 1.10 wt% carbon. Electrolyte
composition of FeSO4, citric acid and L-ascorbic acid, temperature of 50 ±2 ◦C, pH-value of 2.5, current density of
2.0 A/dm2. Figure modiﬁed from [27].
The grains are elongated with a width around 20 nm and a length around 70 nm.
- 22 -
==PAGE:30==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
In the lower right corner a diﬀraction pattern of the site is seen. The {200}α/{200}α′
and {211}α/{211}α′ peaks are suggested to arise from martensite. The intensity is
seen as a circle with even distributed intensity, which is a sign of the grains being
randomly orientated in the coating. It is stated that no change in contrast can be
found, which suggest that iron oxides and/or carbides are present in the deposit
[27].
X-ray diﬀraction
XRD patterns of coatings with diﬀerent carbon contents are shown in Figure 29 and
30 [24] [27].
Figure 29: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of coating with
the indicated carbon content. Electrolyte composi-
tion of FeSO4, citric acid and L-ascorbic acid, tem-
perature of 50 ◦C, pH-value of 2.75 and current den-
sity of 0.02 to 3 A/dm2. Figure from [24].
Figure 30: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of coatings with
the indicated carbon content. Electrolyte composi-
tion of FeSO4, citric acid and L-ascorbic acid, tem-
perature of 50 ◦C, pH-value not provided and a cur-
rent density of 0.2 to 7 A/dm2. Figure from [27].
The peak positions of ferrite {110}α, {200}α and {211}α are indicated in Fig-
ure 29. There are no indications of oxides, carbides or austenite in the diﬀraction
pattern. The breadth of the diﬀraction peaks are increased with increasing carbon
content in the deposit. The broadening of the {200}α and {211}α peak are sug-
gested to be an eﬀect of a elongation of the c-axis in ferrites bcc unit cell converting
it to a bct. This elongation of the c-axis is thought to point toward a martensite or
tempered martensite microstructure.
There are no indications of oxides, carbides or austenite in the diﬀraction pat-
tern shown in Figure 30. From the extended proﬁle it is stated that the {200}α
and {211}α peaks are asymmetric and the deconvolution results are shown. The
peaks are ﬁtted by a pseude-Voigt formula and a c/a ratio of 1.005 for the coating
containing 1.21 wt% carbon was calculated. The c/a ratio of 1.005 was suggested to
be due to usual anomaly in the interatomic bond strength of electrodeposited alloys
[27].
A XRD pattern for a coating annealed for 1 hour is shown in Figure 31.
There are no indication of oxides, carbides or austenite in the diﬀraction pattern
shown in Figure 31. A broad unidentiﬁed peak with low intensity is seen around 35
◦2θ after annealing at 200 ◦C for 1 hour. Multiple unidentiﬁed peaks are seen when
the annealing temperatures was raised to 350 - 480 ◦C. Peaks identiﬁed as cementite
are seen for the sample annealed at 900 ◦C.
- 23 -
==PAGE:31==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
Figure 31: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of coating with 1.18 wt% carbon before and after annealing at the indicated
temperatures for 1 hour. Electrolyte composition of FeSO4, citric acid and L-ascorbic acid, temperature of 50 ◦C,
pH-value of 2.75 and current density of 3 A/dm2. Figure from [24].
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
The XPS spectra of Fe2p3/2, O1s and C1s for a coating is shown in Figure 32. The
sputtering time indicates how long an argon ion beam had removed material from
the surface.
Figure 32: XPS spectrum of Fe2p3/2, O11s and C1s regions of a coating with 0.56 wt% carbon.
Electrolyte
composition of FeSO4 and succinic acid, current density of 1 A/dm2, pH-value of 2.4 to 3.6 and temperature of 50
◦C. Figure from [15].
The surface layer for the Fe2p3/2 consist mainly of FeO, Fe2O3 and FeOOH. FeO
and Fe2O3 are from oxidation with air and FeOOH is thought to be a degradation
product from succinic acid. The peak arising from metallic Fe is seen after sputtering
for 5 and 25 minutes. A shoulder to higher binding energies is assigned to FeO and
a low intensity is seen for FeOOH. This indicates surface contaminations have not
been fully removed after sputtering for 25 min.
There are peaks positioned at 530 and 532 eV in the O1s spectrum for the surface
layer. The peak at 532 eV is suggested to originate from carbonates or carboxyls and
- 24 -
==PAGE:32==
4
LITERATURE REVIEW
the peak at 530 eV is from Fe2O3 and FeO. The intensity of both peaks decreases
stepwise after sputtering for 5 and 25 min.
The C1s spectrum at the surface layer have two clearly separated peaks at 288
and 284.8 eV. The peak at 288 eV is attributed to carboxyl groups and the peak at
284.8 eV is assigned to hydrocarbons or graphite. The carboxyl groups have been
removed and the intensity of the peak at 284.8 eV has decreased after sputtering for
25 min. A peak is seen at 283 eV assigned to carbides. The disappearance of the
carboxyl group indicates that these are only located at the outermost surface layer
and only hydrocarbons, graphite and carbides are located in the microstructure.
- 25 -
==PAGE:33==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
5
Experimental setup
The setup and objectives for the experiments are provided in detail in this section.
The concepts and theory behind the instruments are written in section 3.
5.1
The plating process
All samples have been plated by Christian Probst at A. H. Nichro Haardchrom. A
standardized procedure before and after plating were used to ensure a consistency
for the coatings. Prior plating the substrates was subjected to anodic degreasing
for 1 min in EngTech El-aﬀedter KE 595 and rinsed in water. This is followed by
activation for 1 min in EngTech Tørsyre to remove alkaline residues on the surface
from and remove the thin oxide layer. The electrolyte consist of 0.263 M FeSO4 and
0.005 M citric acid. The electroplating setup was similar to the setup illustrated on
Figure 1, with Armco plates used as sacriﬁcial anode on both side of the workpiece.
A 5 x 5 cm St37 steel plate with a thickness around 1.25 mm was used as workpiece.
A plating time of 60 min with a current density of 3.5 A/dm2, a pH-value 2.5-2.75
and a temperature of 50 ◦C. No stirring was used. A current thief in the form of an
iron thread was placed around the workpiece edges with a distance of around 1 cm
to obtain an uniform deposition. The sample was rinsed in water and covered by
WD-40 oil to prevent oxidation with air after plating. An as deposited sample can
be seen in Figure 33.
Figure 33: An image of a coated plate.
The samples were anodic degreased for 2 min at 5 V and rinsed in water and
blow dried with compressed air to remove the oil and other contaminations before
an experiment. After degreasing the sample was kept in a desiccator to present
oxidation with air.
5.2
Heat treatments
The hardness of the coating can be modiﬁed by annealing as shown in Figure 27.
The change in hardness was dependent on the carbon content and the annealing
temperature [24].
Samples were annealed at temperatures ranging from 105 to 630 ◦C for 1 and
24 hours to examine the mechanism behind change in hardness. The coating would
ﬂake oﬀthe substrate when annealed in atmosphere containing a small amount of
- 26 -
==PAGE:34==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
air. It is possible to obtain an inert argon atmosphere in the furnace shown in Figure
34.
The furnace can be rolled onto the sample chamber when the heating is needed
and removed to increase the cooling rate. The temperature in the furnace is reg-
ulated by three RKC CB400. The design do not allow a sample to be placed in a
preheated sample chamber with an inert atmosphere. A coated workpiece was placed
in the sample chamber at room temperature, followed by a sealing of the chamber.
Four times were the sample chamber pumped to vacuum and pressurised with argon
to ensure no oxidation to take place at elevated temperature. An argon ﬂow of 0.2
L/min was used in the sample chamber for the duration of the annealing process.
The preheated furnace was rolled onto the sample chamber to start the heating of
the sample chamber afterwards. The time it before the sample camber had reached
the set temperature were between 20 and 40 min depending on the set temperature.
The duration of either 1 or 24 hours started when the sample camber had reached
the annealing temperature. The temperature in the sample chamber was measured
with a sensor placed below the sample connected to a RS 1313 thermometer. The
temperature proﬁle as a function of time is illustrated in Figure 35.
Figure 34: Image of the furnace used for the annealing
of the samples.
Figure 35: Illustration of the temperature as a function
of time in the annealing process.
The temperature in the sample chamber were between 5 to 30 ◦C higher com-
pared to the furnace set point. The sample chamber was cooled to below 100 ◦C
using fans after the duration of 1 or 24 hour, before the sample chamber was opened.
The samples was further cooled to room temperature in air and kept in a desiccator
until further examination.
The annealing time and temperature of the samples used in the experiments
can be seen in Table 3. It was decided to use the samples annealed at the slightly
higher temperature compared to the set temperature. The decision was based on
the planned in-situ X-ray diﬀraction and thermogravimetric analysis measurements
would provide information of the phase transformation temperatures. The sample
ID will be used when referring to a speciﬁc sample throughout the report.
5.3
Hardness measurement
The hardness of the deposit was measured with a Future-tech microhardness tester
FM-700. A force of 10 g was used and the geometry of the indent was measured at
- 27 -
==PAGE:35==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Table 3: Table of the annealing time and temperature for the samples used in experiments.
Sample ID
Annealing time in hour
Annealing temperature [◦C]
As deposited
%
%
105◦C-1h
1
105
205◦C-1h
1
205
315◦C-1h
1
315
420◦C-1h
1
420
525◦C-1h
1
525
630◦C-1h
1
630
105◦C-24h
24
105
315◦C-24h
24
315
420◦C-24h
24
420
630◦C-24h
24
630
100x magniﬁcation. All samples were measured at nine diﬀerent positions with a
distance between each indent of 1 cm as illustrated in Figure 36.
Figure 36: Illustration of the positions were the hardness was measured.
The average hardness (¯x) of the coating, along with the standard deviation (σ)
were calculated using Equation 7 and 8 respectively.
¯x = 1
n ·
n
X
i=1
(xi)
(7)
σ =
sPn
i=1(xi −¯x)2
n −1
(8)
5.4
Sample preparation
The thickness of the coating on the as deposited sample was mapped using cross
sections examined in SEM and the results are shown in Figure 37. An area was
selected that all experiments should be conducted within to ensure consistency in
the results as illustrated in Figure 38.
- 28 -
==PAGE:36==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
No preparation were used prior to the hardness, XRD and GDOES measurements
along with the topography measurements in SEM. The samples were cut to six pieces
of 10 x 10 mm prior to XPS, TEM, and the cross section examinations in light optical
microscope (LOM) and SEM as seen on Figure 38.
Figure 37: The thickness of the deposit at the in-
dicated values. The black line indicates where the
sample was cut.
Figure 38: Illustration of the cutting process.
The cutting was performed on a Struers Accutom-50 at low feed-rate and using a
cooling ﬂuid to prevent heating. The samples were afterwards cleaned in ethanol to
remove contaminations and cooling ﬂuid. No further preparation were necessary for
before the XPS analysis. One of the six samples was cold-mounted in epoxy for the
LOM and SEM cross section examination. The moulds were grinded and polished
by the procedure described in Appendix A.1.
Two diﬀerent etchants were used to reveal the microstructure and carbides in the
coating and substrate. The etchant Nital is a mixture of nitric acid and methanol.
A 3% Nital solution was applied to the mount for 3 seconds at room temperature,
followed by rinsing with water to stop the etching process. The etchant Murakami is
a mixture of 10 g NaOH, 10 g KaFe·cyanide and 100 g water and reveals carbides in
the deposit and substrate. The etching was done for 210 seconds at 55 ◦C, followed
by rinsing with water to stop the etching process.
A LOM micrograph were taken on an Olympus GX41 microscope before and
after the etching process. It needs to be stated that there are an unusually amount
of scratches in the cross section micrograph for the samples etched with Murakami.
The scratches are from the preparation and were etched away when using Nital.
The experiments were not redone when discovering the amount of scratches since
the results are not inﬂuenced. It is recommended to continue with 0.25 µm diamonds
in future preparations instead of stopping at 1 µm diamonds.
5.5
Light optical microscope
The LOM micrograph provide information of the covering properties of the coating.
It can also give indications of the grain size and precipitation depending on the
dimension of the features.
All LOM micrographs were taken on the Neophot 30 shown in Figure 39. A
bright-ﬁeld contrast mode was used for the cross section analysis.
- 29 -
==PAGE:37==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 39: Image of the light optical microscope used for cross section analysis.
5.6
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
The GDOES measurements are performed in order to understand the chemical com-
position and to identify the purity of the coating. The measurement indicates how
uniform the coating is by measuring the elemental distribution as a function of
depth. By measuring samples that have been annealed it is possible examine the
change in the chemical composition and distribution.
All measurements were performed on a Horiba GD proﬁler 2.
The software
connected to the instrument was Quantum XP2 version 2.07. A calibration was
performed of multiple iron-based standards with an maximum carbon content up
to 1.3 wt%. The calibration curve for carbon and iron can be seen in Appendix
section A.4 in Figure A22 and A23 respectively. A good linear ﬁt is seen for carbon
calibration curve. I was not possible to make a good ﬁt for iron since the calibrations
standard is widely spread. The method is not calibrated for hydrogen or oxygen.
The quantiﬁcations of the measurements are based on the calibration curves. The
method used along with the source parameters can be seen in Appendix section A.4
in Figure A24. The signal noise in the beginning of each measurement was removed
with the supervision of instrument responsible Rolf Jensen.
A smooth transition from the coating to the substrate was measured due to the
shape of the crater in the coating. The bottom of the crater is expected to have a
confocal shape. The confocal shape becomes more pronounced with the sputtering
time as the depth of the crater increases. The optimal conditions is for the bottom
of the crater to be completely ﬂat. A sharp interface between the interface would
be measured with a ﬂat bottom. The ﬂatness of the crater can be optimized by ﬁne
tuning the source parameter.
The GDOES instrument is used by multiple groups, measuring diﬀerent types of
materials, and this aﬀect the performance of the instrument. The important results
in this report are the carbon content and its distribution. A sharp interface can be
important for measuring multilayer structures.
5.7
X-ray diﬀraction
The XRD measurements are conducted on the coating for a phase analysis. The
development of carbides in the coating after annealing has been published and is
shown in Figure 31. The carbides is thought to increase the hardness of the coating
by age hardening. It is essential to understand the development and stability of the
- 30 -
==PAGE:38==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
carbides at elevated temperatures. It have only been possible to measure ex-situ
since to the in-situ equipment being unable sustain an inert atmosphere.
A Bruker D8 discover was used all XRD measurements.
The most common
anode material is copper given the short wavelength of Kα. A high background
noise called ﬂuorescence is created when using Cu radiation to examining steel [39].
The ﬂuorescence is created because the energy of the Cu Kα is high enough to eject
a K shell electron from iron. A Cr anode was chosen for all measurements to obtain
a good signal to noise ratio. Cr radiation has a Kα1 wavelength of 0.2291 nm and
an optimal operation voltage of 40 kV [44]. Cr radiation also produces Kα2 with
a wavelength of 0.2294 nm and Kβ with a wavelength of 0.2085 nm. These values
are important when identifying a peak because of Bragg’s law seen in Equation 3
is dependent on the wavelength. A crystalline plane will produce a peak at the ◦2θ
angle calculated by Bragg’s law for each wavelength.
The instrumental optical setup is important to increase the primary beam ﬂux of
Kα1, improve the angular resolution and to improve the peak-to-background ratio.
The optics also helps to reduce the ﬂux of Kα2 and Kβ radiation. An image of the
instrumental setup used for all XRD measurements is seen in Figure 40.
Figure 40: Image of the X-ray diﬀraction setup.
The X-ray tube was set to line focus to measure a greater area on the sample
compared to a point focus. The G¨oble mirror was used to ensure a parallel beam.
The silt and soller silts were used to reduce the divergence of the beam. The Eu-
lerian cradle was used to move the specimen into the correct position and for the
possibility of measuring multiple samples continuous by programming the position
of each specimen. The motorized silts was set to an opening of 9.5 mm to obtain
a high intensity.
The Lynxeye 1D detector consist of 192 channels that acts as
individual detectors. The position of each channel is calibrated so the instrument
can calculate the correct diﬀraction angle from the position of the Linxeye detector
and the individual channel. Using a Lynxeye 1D detector dramatically increases
measured intensities.
There are three important parameter that needs to be considered when designing
an XRD measurement. The 2θ range needs to included the enough peak positions
for a speciﬁc phase to be identiﬁed. The scanning of the 2θ range does not proceeds
continuous, but in progressive steps. Choosing the step size and step time can be
a trade-oﬀbetween accuracy in peak position and peak intensity. The duration
of a measurement is increased when increasing the 2θ range and step time or by
decreasing the step size. A preliminary measurement on the as deposited sample
with a range of 20-160 ◦2θ and a 0.4◦step size and 0.4 s step time was performed
in order to have an indication of the correct setting of the range. A range of 50
- 31 -
==PAGE:39==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
to 160 ◦2θ that contained all peaks for the as deposited sample was chosen for the
sample annealed for 1 hour up to 525 ◦C and the sample annealed at 105 ◦C for 24
hours. A range of 20 to 160 ◦2θ was used for the remaining samples. A step size of
0.2◦to ensure high accuracy of the peak position was used for all measurements. A
minimum step time of 4 second was chosen and depending of the amount of time
available before next scheduled experiment it would be increased. The intensity for
all measured samples are given in counts per second (Cps) which is independent of
the step time.
All peaks found in the XRD patterns are ﬁtted to a pseudo Voigt proﬁle using
Topas 4.2. The intensity and peak position are presented in tables in section 6.4.
AbsorbDX is software that approximates the maximum information depth in the
specimen. The depth is calculated based on the the density for the specimen, X-
ray wavelength and the incident angle.
The density of iron is 7.874 g/cm3, the
wavelength of Cr kα1 is 0.2291 nm. For a incident angle of 20 and 160 ◦2θ the depth
is estimated to 4.526 and 25.67 µm respectively. The depth is important to take
into account since the thickness of the coating is around 10 to 20 µm. The {211}α
ﬁts were unreliable and therefore not included in the analysis. This is believed to be
an eﬀect of a high background noise at high ◦2θ angles which could not be handled
by the software. The high background noise at high ◦2θ angles is thought to be
related to the maximum depth of the X-rays being similar or above the thickness of
the coating.
Line proﬁling
It is the scope of this section to provide the reader with relevant information to
follow how the calculations and results is treated. Information of the crystallite size
and micro strains in a phase can be obtained by a line proﬁle analysis of its peaks
in the XRD pattern.
The Kα1 and Kα2 peaks have been ﬁt with a pseudo Voigt function, but only
the integrated intensity of Kα1 is used for analysing.
The intensity of Kα2 are
approximated to be half the intensity of Kα1. The pseudo Voigt function is a super
position of a Lorentz and Gaussian function as seen in Equation 9
IpV = ηIL + (1 −η)IG
(9)
Where IpV is the intensity of the pseudo Voigt function, IL is the intensity of the
Lorentz function, IG is the intensity of the Gaussian function and η is the shape
factor. Conventionally is it assumed that the full width half maximum (FWHM) is
the same for all three functions as seen in Equation 10.
FWHMpV = FWHML = FWHMG
(10)
The shape factor is a value between 0 to 1 and represent the contribution from the
Lorentz or Gaussian function. A shape factor of 1 represent a fully Lorentz function
and 0 is a fully Gaussian function.
The pseudo Voigt integral breadth βpV is an essential value in the further analysis
of crystallite size and micro strain. It value can be calculated from Equation 11
βpV = ηπ
2 FWHML + (1 −η)1
2
r
π
ln(2)FWHMG
(11)
- 32 -
==PAGE:40==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
βpV = ηβL + (1 −η)βG
(12)
Where βL and βG is the integrated breadth of the Lorentz and Gaussian ﬁt respec-
tively. The measured breadth of a peak consist of both the a physical contribution
and an instrumental contribution. The instrumental contribution is found by mea-
suring a powder reference sample in the same setup as the experiment were con-
ducted. The instrumental broadening was measured using a standard LaB6 sample
(data not shown). By subtracting the instrumental proﬁle from the measured proﬁle
the physical breadth of a peak can be calculated as seen in Equation 13.
βphysical = βmeasured −βinstrumental
(13)
All ﬁts are done by Associate Professor Karen Pantleon from the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark (DTU). Karen Pantleon has written a Matlab script that takes the
type X-rays radiation into account. The script calculates the best possible value
of the shape factor shown in Equation 9 and βphysical shown in Equation 13 along
with other values. Only peaks which can be ﬁtted with a good result will analysed
further.
A method to analyse the line broadening has been proposed by Williamson and
Hall [42].
The integrated breadth (βpV ) of multiple peaks originating from the
same phase can be used to calculate the crystallite size and micro strain from a
Williamson-Hall plot. A Williamson-Hall plot consist of (2sin(θ))/λ plotted against
(βpV cos(θ))/λ and a linear extrapolation (f(x) = ax + b) of the data points. The
micro strain is from half the value of the linear extrapolated slope (ϵ = a/2) and
the crystallite size is the reciprocal value of the intercept (D = 1/b). Multiple peaks
from the same phase have to be taken into account for a trustworthy result. If it is
not possible to extrapolate a linear slope with a good result for all peaks from the
same phase due to orientation dependent size and strain.
The to gain information of a materials crystallite size and micro strain as de-
scribed by De Keijser [12]. A single peak is ﬁtted by a pseudo Voigt function opposed
to the Williamson Hall method where multiple peaks from the same phase are ap-
plied.
The crystallite size can be calculated from the integrated breadth of the
Lorentz functions contribution βL as seen in Equation 14.
D =
λ
βL cos(θ)
(14)
The micro strain is calculated from the integrated breadth of the Gaussian functions
contribution βG as seen in Equation 15.
ϵ =
βG
4 tan(θ)
(15)
5.8
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
The XPS measurements objectives are to gain information of the chemical state
of the carbon, iron and oxygen in the coating. Especially the carbon spectra will
provide information about if carbon exist as carbides, carbonates, hydro-carbon or
carboxylic in the coating. The samples examined are both as deposited and samples
annealed for 1 hour, in order to understand the development of new phases when the
- 33 -
==PAGE:41==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
coating has been annealed. A preliminary experiment showed no signal in sulphur
spectra and it was decided not to measure the spectra for samples (data not shown).
A XPS-Thermo Scientiﬁc using an Al X-ray gun with photon energy 1486.7
eV was used. The instrument is equipped with a monochromator to increase the
signal/noise ratio and improve the binding energy resolution. The X-ray spot size
was set to 400 µm to maximize the measured area. An argon ion gun was used for
depth proﬁling. All samples were mounted on a specimen holder and inserted into
the specimen chamber. The experiments were performed at a vacuum pressure of
6·10−8 mbar.
The experimental parameters for the measurement of the ﬁve spectra are shown
in Table 4 .
Table 4: Experimental parameters used for XPS measurements
Spectra
Scan
Step
Pass
Dwell
Number
range [eV]
size [eV]
energy [eV]
time [ms]
of scans
Survey
-10 to 1350
1.0
200
200
2
C1s
279 to 298
0.1
50
50
20
O1s
525 to 545
0.1
50
50
20
Fe2p
700 to 740
0.1
50
50
20
C KLL
1200 to 1250
0.1
50
50
20
An ion beam etch was done for 1800 second with an energy of 3000 eV and
the highest current setting after the measurements of the ﬁve spectra followed by
another measurements of the ﬁve spectra.
This cycle was repeated until the as
deposited sample, 105◦C-1h and 205◦C-1h were measured after a total etching time
of 7200 second. The total etching time for the remaining samples were lowered to
5400 second. The survey was measured to identify elements in the coating besides
of carbon, oxygen and iron. The C KLL spectrum was measured to distinguish
between the sp2 and sp3 state of carbon from the spacing between the minima and
maxima [2].
XPS data analysis
The analysis of the measurements was done with Thermo Avantage version 5.948.
The position of the peaks are aﬀected by the spectrometer condition and sample
surface. A calibration was done on all samples by measuring the shift necessary for
the the peak in C1s spectra before sputtering to be positioned at 285.0 eV. The
spectra for each sample was shifted the value found in the calibration which was
consistently around 0.5 eV. A manually ﬁtting procedure on the peaks in C1s, O1s
spectrum were done to identify the compounds in each spectra. The ﬁtting function
uses a convolution of a Lorentz and Gauss function with a ﬁxed shape factor of 0.3.
The shape factor of 0.3 is the standard value set by the software and is also suggested
to use by the personal at DTU DanChip. Often pure metallic components do not
have a simple Gaussian-Lorentzian peak shape [2]. An eﬀort to ﬁnd a ﬁt Fe2p3/2
which could be interpreted from a meaningful physical origin did not succeed and
the Fe2p3/2 spectra will therefore be presented without a ﬁt. The background of
each spectrum is removed using a smart background function which is based on
the Shirley background with the additional constraint that the background should
- 34 -
==PAGE:42==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
not be of a greater intensity than the actual data at any point in the region. The
ﬁtted peaks position are compared to data from NIST XPS database, the database
installed in Thermo Avantage and the values found in [33].
5.9
Scanning electron microscope
The SEM measurements are done in order to gain information of the location of pre-
cipitates. By examining the etched cross section the position, size and distribution
of the carbides can be found. The SEM measurements will also provide information
of the topography and morphology of the coating. If the particles is of a certain size
EDS measurement can provide information of their chemical composition.
The FEI Quanta 200 ESEM FEG electron microscope was used for all mea-
surement as shown in Figure 41. The best results for the topography analysis was
obtained using a acceleration voltage between 3-5 kV and detecting BSE. The de-
tection of SE with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV provided a higher resolution
necessary for the cross section analysis.
Figure 41: Image of the FEI Quanta 200 ESEM FEG microscope used to examine the specimens.
The samples were removed from the epoxy mould to avoid charging, followed
by a cleaning of the cross section with an objective lens cleaning tissue dipped in
ethanol. A specimen holder designed for cross section imaging, was used to ﬁx a
sample in the specimen chamber.
5.10
Transmission electron microscope
The TEM measurements are performed in order to gain information of the location
of precipitates. It is possible to identify phases from diﬀraction patterns, in the
same manner as the XRD measurements. Using the dark-ﬁeld technique it possible
to the pinpoint the location of the phases in the coating. The chemical composition
of nano meter sized areas can be quantiﬁed by using the EDS detector.
Due to the limited time in the microscope it were possible to measure two sam-
ples. The as deposited sample was chosen in order to conclude which precipitates are
presents in the coating and to gain information about the morphology. The second
sample was 315◦C-1h since both cohenite and magnetite are ﬁrst measured in this
sample. The nucleation point for these precipitates can provide useful information
about their coherency with the parent phase.
- 35 -
==PAGE:43==
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The sample preparation was done on a Helios NanoLab 600 equipped with a
focus ion beam (FIB). A detailed guide regarding procedure for TEM sample prepa-
ration is published [34]. The Laboratory Engineer Flemming Bjerg Grumsen have
performed the sample preparation and was operating the TEM microscope. The au-
thor was present when the TEM experiment was conducted, to oversee the procedure
and be of guidance of which experiments should be performed.
The TEM used was a Joel JEM-3000F position at DTU Risø and can be seen in
Figure 42.
Figure 42: Image of the Joel JEM-3000F TEM microscope used for transmission electron microscope measurements.
The TEM was operated at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV. The diﬀraction
pattern were taken with a camera length of 80 cm.
TEM data analysis
The software DigitalMicrograph version 3.01 was used for analysis of bright-ﬁeld
and dark-ﬁeld micrographs. A calibration of scale bar on the diﬀraction pattern was
necessary in order to gain trustworthy results regarding calculations of the d-spacing
from the diﬀraction spots. The calibration was done in the software JEMS using a
single crystal diﬀraction pattern of gold measured with the same camera length..
- 36 -
==PAGE:44==
6
RESULTS
6
Results
6.1
Light optical microscopy
Nital
Nital is a solution of alcohol and nitric acid commonly used for etching of steels.
A cross section micrograph of the as deposited sample before and after etching are
shown in Figure 43 and 44 respectively.
Figure 43: Optical micrograph of the cross section of the
as deposited sample after polishing.
Figure 44: Optical micrograph of the cross section of the
as deposited sample etched with nital.
The deposit and bulk after polishing for the as deposited sample are nearly free
of impurities as shown in Figure 43. All scratches from the grinding process have
not been fully removed by the polishing procedure. The nital etching have revealed
the grain boundaries in the bulk, along with a large number of small impurities
uniformly spread around the bulk as shown in Figure 44. The impurities are not an
eﬀect oﬀthe sample preparation, but a result of the etching revealing the impurities
in the bulk. A trench is seen in the interface between the coating and epoxy mould
and as a result interference colours are seen on the deposit. This needs to be taken
into consideration when analysing the outer layer of the deposit. It is seen that the
coating has good covering properties onto this substrate. There are not visible grain
boundaries seen in the deposit. The etchant reacts with the substrate and therefore
it is believed that the features in the deposit is beyond the resolution of the LOM.
The change in contrast for the grains in the bulk is thought to arises from variance
in orientation of the grains.
The etched cross sections of the samples annealed from 105 to 630 ◦C for 1 hour
are shown in Figure 45 to 50.
The samples annealed at 105 and 205 ◦C for 1 hour are shown in Figure 45 and
46 respectively. There are no visible changes in the deposit or the bulk, compared
to the as deposited sample shown in Figure 44. A noticeable change is seen in the
contrast of the deposit for 315◦C-1h as shown in Figure 47, compared to the samples
annealed at lower temperatures. It is not possible to identify grain boundaries, but
the darkening of the deposit is an indication of change in the morphology. The
darkening of the deposit has intensiﬁed considerable for 420◦C-1h and 525◦C-1h
shown in Figure 48 and 49 respectively. It is possible to identify separate grains in
the deposit for 525◦C-1h.
- 37 -
==PAGE:45==
6
RESULTS
Figure 45:
Optical micrograph of the cross section of
105◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 46:
Optical micrograph of the cross section of
205◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 47:
Optical micrograph of the cross section of
315◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 48:
Optical micrograph of the cross section of
420◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 49:
Optical micrograph of the cross section of
525◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 50:
Optical micrograph of the cross section of
630◦C-1h etched with nital.
Small particles is seen as bright spots uniformly spread in the deposit of 630◦C-
1h shown in Figure 50. It is not possible to extract information of the phase or size
of the grains with the LOM.
Murakami
Murakami is an etchant used to reveal carbides in iron and steels. A cross section
micrograph of the as deposited sample before and after etching are shown in Figure
- 38 -
==PAGE:46==
6
RESULTS
51 and 52 respectively.
Figure 51: Optical micrograph of the cross section of the
as deposited sample after polishing.
Figure 52: Optical micrograph of the cross section of the
as deposited sample etched with murakami.
Some impurities are seen in the deposit and in the bulk of deposited sample after
polishing shown in Figure 51.
The eﬀect of the murakami etch is clearly seen in the bulk of the as deposited
sample where multiple carbides are seen on Figure 52 . In the deposit there are some
impurities as seen in the un-etched sample shown in Figure 51. These impurities
are not considered to be carbides seen with the murakami etch.
The eﬀect of murakami etching on the annealed samples annealed from 105 to
630 ◦C are shown on Figure 53 to 58.
Figure 53: Optical micrographs of the cross section of
105◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 54: Optical micrographs of the cross section of
205◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
The samples annealed at 105 and 205 ◦C for 1 hour are shown in Figure 53 and
54 respectively. There are no visible changes in the deposit or substrate, compared
to the as deposited sample shown in Figure 52.
A noticeable change is seen in the appearance of the deposit of 315◦C-1h shown
in Figure 55, compared to the samples annealed at lower temperatures. It is not
possible to identify individual carbides in the deposit. The carbides is seen uniformly
spread in the deposit of 420◦C-1h and 525◦C-1h as shown in Figure 56 and 57
respectively. Three carbides are seen in the deposit of 630◦C-1h shown in Figure 58.
The increased size of the carbides are in good agreement with the theory of growth
of precipitates at elevated temperatures [7]. A higher resolution and magniﬁcation
are needed to gain information about the nucleation sites and size of the carbides.
- 39 -
==PAGE:47==
6
RESULTS
Figure 55: Optical micrographs of the cross section of
315◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 56: Optical micrographs of the cross section of
420◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 57: Optical micrographs of the cross section of
525◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 58: Optical micrographs of the cross section of
630◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
6.2
Scanning electron microscopy
Topography
The as deposited sample is not shown due to the similarities to 105◦C-1h.
A uniform characteristic surface with hills and valleys for 105◦C-1h is shown in
Figure 59. The characteristic surface is suspected to be a replication of the substrates
surface by a uniform growth rate of the deposit. A confocal microscopy roughness
proﬁle before and after the electroplating would conﬁrm this, but is beyond the
scope of the project. There are no cracks visible in the coating. There are few
impurities seen as dark areas for 205◦C-1h shown in Figure 60. A macro-crack is
seen in the middle of the micrograph and down the middle. The macro-crack has
emerged after the annealing process, which suggest a relief of compressive stresses
in the coating. No macro-cracks have been observed in samples annealed below 205
◦C. The observed number of macro-cracks have increased for 315◦C-1h as shown in
Figure 61. Two craters are seen at the junction of multiple macro-cracks. In most
cases the macro-cracks are seen to propagate perpendicular outwards from another
macro-crack.
The characteristic surface is still seen as the annealing temperature has been
increased. The width of the macro-cracks have increased for 420◦C-1h, compared to
the those seen at lower annealing temperatures. The increased temperature provides
the coating with more energy to relief the compressive stresses. No visible change is
- 40 -
==PAGE:48==
6
RESULTS
Figure 59: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 105◦C-1h.
Figure 60: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 205◦C-1h.
Figure 61: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 315◦C-1h.
Figure 62: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 420◦C-1h.
Figure 63: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 525◦C-1h.
Figure 64: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 630◦C-1h.
- 41 -
==PAGE:49==
6
RESULTS
seen for 525◦C-1h as shown in Figure 63, compared to 420◦C-1h. The appearance
of the surface is seen as rough for 630◦C-1h shown in Figure 64. There are craters
in the coating outside the frame of Figure 63 and 64.
Figure 65: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 205◦C-1h.
Figure 66: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 315◦C-1h.
A crater with a diameter around 30 µm in the surface of 205◦C-1h is shown in
Figure 65. The creation of the crater is suspected to be from a minor explosion
because of the shape. Furthermore the appearance of the sides seems to have been
melted. The crater in the surface of 315◦C-1h shown on Figure 66, has a diﬀerent
shape compared to Figure 65 and the two crater seen in Figure 61. The sides are
rounded and appears to have been above the melting temperature. There are cracks
propagating from the middle of the crater into the deposit.
Figure 67: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 420◦C-1h.
Figure 68: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 630◦C-1h.
With an increased magniﬁcation it is seen that the surface of 420◦C-1h is full
of micro-cracks as shown in Figure 67. The micro-cracks appear uniformly spread
around the whole surface with an average length of 1.3 µm and a width of 0.7
µm. The micro-cracks are thought to be an eﬀect of compressive stresses relieved
- 42 -
==PAGE:50==
6
RESULTS
in the deposit. The area closest to the macro-crack is free of micro-cracks as seen
for 630◦C-1h shown in Figure 68. It is also seen how the micro-cracks closest to
the macro-cracks are smaller compared to those further away from the macro-crack.
This points towards the compressive stresses being relieved by the macro-crack are
long ranged. No micro-cracks or craters were found in the coating of 315◦C-24h
(data not shown).
Figure 69: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 420◦C-24h.
Figure 70: Scanning electron micrograph of the surface
of 420◦C-24h.
Multiples macro and micro-cracks are seen in the coating of 420◦C-24h as shown
in Figure 69 and 70. There were no craters found in any of the samples annealed
for 24 hour (data not shown). The origin for the craters has not been found but
is thought to be related to the annealing time since they only appear for samples
annealed for 1 hour.
Cross section
Two diﬀerent etching chemicals were used to reveal the microstructure features of
the coating as described in section 5.4. Nital is used to reveal the microstructure
and Murakami is used to reveal carbides.
Nital
In this section the 105◦C-1h is not shown, due to the similarities with the as de-
posited sample and 205◦C-1h.
A column like structure with a direction orthogonal from the surface of the
substrate is observed for the as deposited sample shown in Figure 71. The coating
appears to have good covering properties. It is not possible to measure the width or
length of the column from this micrograph. The grown direction of the column like
structure appear homogeneous after approximately 1 µm. Multiple nano-meter sized
holes are seen spread around the coating. In the interface between the substrate and
coating the nucleations sites are seen. The shape of these will be described further
from Figure 77. There are lines seen in the deposit parallel to the substrate. The
lines are not from the sample preparation due to there lack of straightness.
A similar morphology is seen for 205◦C-1h shown in Figure 72, compared to
the as deposited sample. A macro-crack is seen at the top of the coating close to
- 43 -
==PAGE:51==
6
RESULTS
Figure 71: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of the as deposited sample etched with nital.
Figure 72: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 205◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 73: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 315◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 74: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 420◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 75: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 525◦C-1h etched with nital.
Figure 76: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 630◦C-1h etched with nital.
- 44 -
==PAGE:52==
6
RESULTS
the middle of the image, but this site was chosen to show how the macro-crack is
propagating trough the coating towards the substrate. The width of the macro-crack
is around 200 nm and has a depth around 3.8 µm at this position. The lines seen
parallel to the substrate seen on are not seen on this site. It is diﬃcult to state if
these lines have disappeared due the macro-crack or a change in the microstructure.
There are areas where the coating have no adhesion in the interface between the
substrate and coating. This is thought to be related to the stress relief the macro-
crack have inﬂicted onto this area, since all other micrograph with no macro-crack
near their site show good adhesion to the substrate.
A change in the morphology is observed for 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 73. The
column like structure have transformed to what appears to be nano sized grains,
along with a nucleation of nano-sized precipitates uniformly spread around the coat-
ing. The precipitates are seen as bright particles in the coating. The change in con-
trast for the particles indicates another phase, compared to the phase of columns
seen in Figure 71. The shape of the precipitates are both round and elongated.
The size and shape are described further from Figure 86. It is not possible to state
the nucleation sites or if the precipitates are carbides, oxides or both from this mi-
crograph. The interface between the substrate and coating shows good covering
properties compared to Figure 72.
The size and density of the precipitates have increased in the coating of 420◦C-
1h as shown in Figure 74.
The darkening of the coating observed in the LOM
micrographs is suspected to be the related to the proﬁle of the cross section, due to
light being scattered in all directions.
A further increase in size of the precipitates in the coating of 525◦C-1h is shown in
Figure 75. The adhesion of the coating towards the substrate appear unaﬀected by
the change in morphology. The thickness of the coating for 630◦C-1h has decreased
to around 6 µm as shown in Figure 76, compared to the other sample were the
thickness is between 10-15 µm. It is believed that the outer layer of the coating seen
with micro-cracks have been broken oﬀfrom the process of removing the sample
from the mould.
Figure 77: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of the as deposited sample etched with nital.
Figure 78: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 315◦C-1h etched with nital.
The interface between the coating and the substrate for the as deposited sample
- 45 -
==PAGE:53==
6
RESULTS
is shown at high magniﬁcation in Figure 77. The bright line seen at the interface is
an eﬀect of a diﬀerence in depth of ﬁeld, due to the substrate and coating are etched
at diﬀerent rates. Multiple nucleations sites are seen on the substrate with a growth
direction for the columns at an angle of around 45-90◦relative to the substrate. It
can be observed that the growth of a column is immobilize from further growth, when
it reaches an obstacle in the form of another column. Nucleations of columns are
seen on top of exiting columns with a direction closer to perpendicular compared
to the surface of the substrate. The growth direction of all column are close to
orthogonal at distance of around 0.5 to 1 µm from the substrate. This indicates
that growth direction of the columns becomes more inﬂuenced by the electrical ﬁeld
orientation between the cathode and anode. This can be stated due to the parallel
orientation between the cathode and anode in the electroplating process. The width
of the columns seems uniform with an average approximated to around 30 nm. The
thickness of the column can be found with much higher precision using the high
resolution TEM micrograph.
The features seen in the coating of 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 78, reveals that
shape of the precipitates are both round and elongated with a diameter around 170
nm. The column like structure as shown in Figure 77 have transformed to nano sized
grains. It is not possible to state the phase or nucleation sites of the precipitates
from this micrograph.
Figure 79: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross section of 420◦C-1h etched with nital.
The density and sizes of the precipitates are higher for 420◦C-1h shown in Figure
79, compared to Figure 78. The size of the precipitates ranging from 50 to 250 nm.
Murakami
The 105◦C-1h will not be discussed, due to the similarities with the as deposited
sample and 205◦C-1h.
The similar contrast and lack of grain boundaries makes the distinguish between
the coating and substrate diﬃcult for the as deposited sample and 205◦C-1h shown
in Figure 80 and 81 respectively. For the as deposited sample the interface around
2.5 µm from the bottom of the micrograph. The amount of scratches are higher
in the softer substrate compared to the harder coating.
The interface is at the
- 46 -
==PAGE:54==
6
RESULTS
Figure 80: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of the as deposited sample etched with Murakami.
Figure 81: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 205◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 82: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 315◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 83: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 420◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 84: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 525◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 85: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 630◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
- 47 -
==PAGE:55==
6
RESULTS
bottom of the macro-crack for the coating of 205◦C-1h. The width of the macro-
crack is smaller, compared to the macro-crack seen in Figure 72. It is believed to
be related to more aggressive nital etching removing material to increase the width.
The adhesion of the coating is not aﬀected by the crack. There are no carbides
visible on these samples.
Carbides are observed as nano-sized dark particles uniformly spread around the
coating for 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 82. The carbides seen in the coating makes it
easy to identify the interface between the coating and substrate. The shape of the
carbides are both elongated and round. It is not possible to state the nucleation site
for the carbides.
An increase in the density and size for the carbides are seen for 420◦C-1h shown
Figure 83, compared to 315◦C-1h.
The coating is damaged in the surface for 525◦C-1h and 630◦C-1h shown in
Figure 84 and 85. The coating has not been able to handle the forces when the
sample was removed from the mould.
Figure 86: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 315◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 87: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 420◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
The average size of the carbides are estimated to 110 nm for 315◦C-1h shown in
Figure 86. The average size of the carbides are estimated to 140 nm for 420◦C-1h
shown in Figure 87.
Two micrograph were taken on 420◦C-1h at the same site to state if the precip-
itates seen when etching with nital are carbides or oxides. A few scratches were
introduced to ensure the same sites were found. The ﬁrst micrograph was taken
when the sample had been etch with Murakami shown on Figure 88. The cross
section was then etched with nital and the second micrograph is shown in Figure
89.
The characteristic curved interface between the coating and the substrate reveals
that it is the same site. The scratches seen on Figure 88 have been etched away by
nital as seen in Figure 89. In the cross section etched with nital a higher density of
precipitates are visible. It is not possible to state if the particles seen in Figure 89
are carbides, oxides or both. Nital is a more aggressive acid that etch deeper into
the coating and this will reveal more particles. It was tried to identify the particles
- 48 -
==PAGE:56==
6
RESULTS
Figure 88: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 420◦C-1h etched with Murakami.
Figure 89: Scanning electron micrograph of the cross sec-
tion of 420◦C-1h etched with nital.
with EDS but the results were inconclusive (data not shown). It is believed that the
volume of the interaction zone, from where the characteristic X-rays are emitted, is
much larger compared to the size of the precipitates.
6.3
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
The elemental content for Fe, H, O and C are presented in the plots. The mea-
surements tested for multiple elements not shown in the plots, since their order of
magnitude are neglectable (data not shown). The values from hydrogen and oxygen
are not to be taken as qualitatively. The content of hydrogen and oxygen are de-
scribed as a procedure deﬁned unit (p.d.u.) and will be used as a relative comparison
between the samples examined.
The average content from 50 to 150 s of H, O, C and Fe are calculated for all
specimen measured as shown in Table 5.
Table 5: Table of the average content of the elements in the deposit, calculated from 50 to 150 s.
Sample
H [p.d.u.]
O [p.d.u.]
C [wt%]
Fe [wt%]
As deposited
2.08
0.84
0.84
65.87
105◦C-1h
1.51
0.71
0.73
67.53
205◦C-1h
1.40
0.75
0.80
70.77
315◦C-1h
0.98
0.72
0.84
71.06
420◦C-1h
0.76
0.71
0.87
75.04
525◦C-1h
0.80
0.71
0.90
69.10
630◦C-1h
0.74
0.66
0.57
71.93
105◦C-24h
1.19
0.58
0.74
59.22
315◦C-24h
0.23
0.43
0.78
87.62
420◦C-24h
0.24
0.46
0.69
84.49
630◦C-24h
0.23
0.37
0.05
89.15
The Fe content measured in the coating is surprisingly low, but is stable around
100 wt% in the St37 substrate for all samples. The source of error for the low Fe
- 49 -
==PAGE:57==
6
RESULTS
Figure 90: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content in the as deposited sample. The vertical
line at 200 s represent the interface between the substrate
and the coating.
Figure 91: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content in 105◦C-1h
content is presumed related to the calibration curve for iron seen in Figure A23. It
is believed that the relatively high amount of carbon aﬀect the measured Fe content
signiﬁcantly. The measured content of Fe is therefore used as a relative content
between the samples.
The average carbon content in the coating is 0.84 wt% and decrease to around
0 wt% in the substrate for the as deposited sample as shown in Figure 90. The
vertical line at 200 s represent the interface between the substrate and the coating.
There is an increased amount of carbon in the outermost surface. The stability of
the carbon content as a function of depth demonstrates a even distribution of carbon
in the coating. The oxygen content is around 1.34 p.d.u at the outermost surface,
followed by a constant decrease towards the interface and has a value of 0.2 p.d.u in
the substrate. The hydrogen content is around 3.05 p.d.u at the outermost surface,
followed by a constant decrease towards the interface and has a value of 0.5 p.d.u
in the substrate. The average oxygen and hydrogen content are 0.84 and 2.08 p.d.u
respectively.
The measurement of 105◦C-1h and 205◦C-1h are shown in Figure 91 and 92
respectively. Both have comparable carbon and iron contents compared to the as
deposited sample. The average oxygen and hydrogen content for 105◦C-1h have
decreased considerably to 0.71 and 1.51 p.d.u.
respectively, compared to the as
deposited sample.
The average hydrogen content has further decreased to 1.40
p.d.u. for 205◦C-1h. The decrease in hydrogen content is concluded to arise from
hydrogen being able to diﬀuse out of the coating. An identical method is used to
avoid hydrogen embrittlement in hardened steels [32].
A ﬂuctuation with a variation from maximum to minimum of 0.21 wt%, is seen
between 0 and 30 s for the carbon content in 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 93. The
average hydrogen content has decreased a signiﬁcant amount to 0.98 p.d.u. com-
pared to the reduction in content from 105◦C-1h to 205◦C-1h. The average content
of carbon and oxygen is similar to 205◦C-1h.
A similar ﬂuctuation in the carbon content with an increased variation of 0.35
wt% is observed in the outermost surface for 420◦C-1h shown in Figure 94. The iron
content has a peak positioned at similar time as the carbon content has its minimum.
It is believed that the measured iron content is connected to the measured carbon
content from these correlation. The average carbon and oxygen content are similar
- 50 -
==PAGE:58==
6
RESULTS
Figure 92: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content in 205◦C-1h
Figure 93: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content in 315◦C-1h
Figure 94: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content in 420◦C-1h
Figure 95: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content in 525◦C-1h.
to the samples annealed at lower temperatures. The average amount of hydrogen
has reduced further to 0.76 p.d.u.
The distribution of carbon is homogeneous in the coating for 105◦C-24h shown in
Figure 96. The average content of hydrogen is 1.19 p.d.u., which is higher compared
to 315◦C-1h. The average content of oxygen is 0.58 p.d.u., which is lower compared
to 630◦C-1h.
The ﬂuctuation in the outermost surface has a maximum of 0.81 wt% and a
variation of 0.41 wt% for 315◦C-24h shown in Figure 97. There is a depletion of
carbon closest to the surface, which is diﬀerently compared to the increased carbon
content in the same area seen for 315◦C-1h. The coating has an average carbon
content similar to the samples annealed for 1 hour at 420 ◦C and below.
The
average oxygen and hydrogen content have decreased compared to 315◦C-1h.
The average hydrogen and oxygen content for 420◦C-24h, seen in Figure 98, are
comparable to 315◦C-24h. The average carbon content is slightly lower compared to
315◦C-24h. A depletion of carbon is seen between 2 and 80 seconds with a carbon
content is as low as 0.09 wt%. The carbon has not diﬀused towards the interface,
since the average content is lower compared to samples annealed at temperatures of
525 ◦C and below.
The 525◦C-1h sample is shown in Figure 95. The GDOES instrument is cali-
brated for up to 1.3 wt% carbon as stated in Section 5.6. It is not possible to state
with a certainty the exact carbon content above this amount. There is an accumu-
- 51 -
==PAGE:59==
6
RESULTS
lation of carbon at the outermost surface followed by rapid decrease. The carbon
content is higher in the accumulation than the instruments calibration for carbon.
A minimum is in the carbon content is seen after 15 s, followed by a stabilisation
of the content at an average level of 0.90 wt% towards the interface. The average
hydrogen and oxygen content are similar to 420◦C-1h.
Figure 96: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content for 105◦C-24h.
Figure 97: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content for 315◦C-24h.
Figure 98: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content for 420◦C-24h.
There is a signiﬁcant increased accumulation of carbon at the outermost sur-
face for 630◦C-1h shown in Figure 99 compared to 525◦C-1h. The accumulation is
followed by an average carbon content of 0.57 wt%, which is a notably reduction
compared to samples annealed at 525 ◦C and below. The average hydrogen content
is similar to 420◦C-1h. The average oxygen content is slightly lower compared to
the samples annealed for 1 hour at 525 ◦C and below.
The average carbon content has deceases to 0.05 wt% for the coating annealed at
630◦C-24h shown in Figure 100. The carbon is seen accumulated at the outermost
surface for the coating, along with a carbon peak of around 0.5 wt% at 160 s. The
average hydrogen content is similar to 420◦C-24h, but the average oxygen content
is slightly lower.
- 52 -
==PAGE:60==
6
RESULTS
Figure 99: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C ele-
mental content for 630◦C-1h.
Figure 100: GDOES measurement of Fe, H, O and C
elemental content for 630◦C-24h.
6.4
X-ray diﬀraction
Phase analysis
The ﬁrst part of this section deals with the samples annealed for 1 hour to under-
stand how the temperature aﬀects the development of new phases. The second part
deals with the samples annealed for 24 hours, to examine the stability of the phases
at elevated temperature. The ferrite peaks will be discussed as {hkl}α with the
peaks individual hkl values.
Annealing 1 hour
The XRD pattern for the samples annealed at diﬀerent temperatures for 1 hour
are shown in Figure 101.
The plot is presented to show the full intensity proﬁle of each sample.
The intensity is ﬁxed to increase the level of detail for the minor peaks for the
measurements shown in Figure 102 to 107. The ﬁxed intensity result in the {211}α
peak being cut oﬀ. The position and integrated (Int.) intensity for the peaks ﬁt
in all samples can be seen in Table 6. The PDF from IDCC used to identify the
speciﬁc phases are shown in Appendix A.3 in Table A4.
The 105◦C-1h is not shown as a separate ﬁgure, due to it similarities with the
as deposited sample and 205◦C-1h.
Four peaks belonging to β-Fe2O3, {110}α,
{200}α and {211}α are identiﬁed for the as deposited sample and 205◦C-1h shown
in Figure 102 and 103 respectively. The use of a single peak for a phase analysis
is not accepted in practice. The single peak identiﬁed as the oxide β-Fe2O3 will be
justiﬁed in section 6.6 covering the TEM results, where multiple diﬀraction spots
are assigned to this phase. Two XRD measurements with a low gracing incident
angle of 0.5◦and 2◦, were performed on the as deposited sample to state if the
β-Fe2O3 phase is a result of oxidation with air. The peak assigned to β-Fe2O3 were
not observed in neither XRD patterns (data not shown). It was concluded that the
development of β-Fe2O3 was not from oxidation with air. The peak seen at 126.03
◦2θ arises from kβ radiation for {211}α. There is no shoulder observed at lower ◦2θ
angles for the ferrite peaks, which indicates that the iron consist solely of bcc ferrite.
Multiple new peaks are seen on the XRD pattern for 315◦C-1h shown in Fig-
ure 104. The peaks are identiﬁed as the oxide magnetite (Fe3O4) and the carbide
cohenite (Fe3C).
- 53 -
==PAGE:61==
6
RESULTS
Figure 101: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of the as deposited sample and the samples annealed for 1 hour at the
temperatures indicated.
Figure 102: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of the as deposited sample.
There are additional new peaks assigned to cohenite and magnetite for 420◦C-1h
and 525◦C-1h shown in Figure 105 and 106 respectively. The β-Fe2O3 is not present
in neither samples, which indicates a transformation into magnetite. The reduction
to magnetite at elevated temperatures, is believed to be from the limited amount of
oxygen and the presence of hydrogen in the coating [29].
The measurement range has been increased to 20 to 160 ◦2θ to be able to measure
graphites peak at 39.8 ◦2θ for 630◦C-1h shown in Figure 107. A good ﬁt for graphite
has not been possible, due to the background noise at low ◦2θ angles. Peaks identiﬁed
as w¨usite (FeO) are found in the coating. The Int. intensities for both cohenite
- 54 -
==PAGE:62==
6
RESULTS
Figure 103: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 205◦C-1h.
Figure 104: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 315◦C-1h.
Figure 105: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 420◦C-1h.
- 55 -
==PAGE:63==
6
RESULTS
Figure 106: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 525◦C-1h.
Figure 107: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 630◦C-1h.
and magnetite have decreased compared to 525◦C-1h. The decrease for magnetite
is believed to be a result of the transformation into w¨usite at 630 ◦C [29]. The
decrease for cohenite is believed to be a results of a transformation from cohenite
into graphite and ferrite [41].
The integrated intensities for ferrite shows a tendency to decrease from the as
deposited sample until 420◦C-1h followed by an increase. The similarities in the
Int. intensity for β-Fe2O3 in the as deposit sample and samples annealed at 105
to 315 ◦C reduces the possibility that the decrease in Int. intensity for ferrite is a
measurement error. At the moment there have not been found an explanation for
this tendency.
- 56 -
==PAGE:64==
6
RESULTS
Table 6: Table of the position and integrated intensity found by ﬁtting the XRD patterns of multiple samples
annealed for 1 hour at the indicated temperature. The phase of each peak is given along with its hkl plane and ◦2θ
position.
As
105◦C
205◦C
315◦C
420◦C
525◦C
630◦C
Phase
◦2θ
hkl
deposited
-1h
-1h
-1h
-1h
-1h
-1h
Fe3O4
53.69
311
◦2θ
53.69
53.65
53.63
53.68
Int. intensity
48.5
54.8
132.5
64.6
W¨usite
55
111
◦2θ
54.95
Int. intensity
3.2
Cohenite
57.29
121
◦2θ
57.22
57.20
57.17
Int. intensity
6.8
24.0
12.3
ß-Fe2O3
57.86
11¯5
◦2θ
57.75
57.83
57.75
57.75
Int. intensity
5.6
6.0
5.6
8.3
Cohenite
60.78
002
◦2θ
60.43
60.66
60.71
60.68
Int. intensity
76.8
74.8
178.8
32.6
Cohenite
62.13
201
◦2θ
62.05
62.10
Int. intensity
2.0
1.5
W¨usite
64.45
200
◦2θ
64.36
Int. intensity
2.8
Cohenite
65.81
211
◦2θ
65.79
65.78
65.76
65.73
Int. intensity
9.1
12.6
48.1
25.6
Ferrite
68.78
110
◦2θ
68.63
68.63
68.59
68.61
68.64
68.61
68.63
Int. intensity
126.4
35.4
38.5
33.0
31.7
61.6
88.2
Cohenite
70.77
112
◦2θ
70.61
70.64
Int. intensity
1.2
1.4
Cohenite
75.39
131
◦2θ
75.29
75.29
75.25
Int. intensity
2.2
3.4
4.0
Cohenite
76.3
221
◦2θ
76.28
76.18
Int. intensity
2.3
3.2
Fe3O4
83.68
422
◦2θ
83.63
83.65
83.65
83.73
Int. intensity
24.8
29.5
90.1
23.9
Cohenite
85.58
230
◦2θ
85.41
85.36
85.27
Int. intensity
3.9
11.7
7.0
Fe3O4
90.07
511
◦2θ
90.06
90.03
90.14
Int. intensity
3.4
9.3
3.6
Cohenite
92.19
301
◦2θ
92.06
92.14
Int. intensity
1.8
1.3
W¨usite
97.89
220
◦2θ
97.82
Int. intensity
9.3
Fe3O4
100.76
440
◦2θ
100.77
100.69
100.75
100.77
Int. intensity
2.7
7.9
20.1
2.4
Ferrite
106.03
200
◦2θ
105.88
105.84
105.86
105.79
105.80
105.81
105.79
Int. intensity
351.1
63.9
65.5
53.7
47.2
104.4
179.5
Fe3O4
118.90
620
◦2θ
118.83
118.82
Int. intensity
2.1
4.7
W¨usite
124.32
311
◦2θ
124.28
Int. intensity
47.4
Fe3O4
126.48
533
◦2θ
126.26
126.48
126.53
126.30
Int. intensity
13.1
29.1
78.3
48.8
Fe3O4
129.27
622
◦2θ
129.27
129.29
Int. intensity
6.2
14.9
Cohenite
138.24
401
◦2θ
138.62
138.46
138.19
Int. intensity
3.5
5.6
5.0
Cohenite
140.54
133
◦2θ
140.45
140.45
140.16
Int. intensity
2.4
10.1
3.2
- 57 -
==PAGE:65==
6
RESULTS
Annealing 24 hour
XRD measurements are performed on samples annealed at 105, 315, 420 and
630 ◦C for 24 hour. The ◦2θ range was increased 20 to 160 ◦2θ for the samples
annealed at 315, 420 and 630 to gain information of the background noise seen at
low ◦2θ angle. The complete XRD pattern for the samples are seen in Figure 108.
The Int. intensity and peak position ﬁtted of each peak can be seen in Table 7. The
XRD pattern is also seen in Figure 109 to 112 for the samples. In these ﬁgures the
maximum intensity has been set to a ﬁxed value to increase the level of detail for
the peaks with low intensity.
Figure 108: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of samples annealed for 24 hour at the temperatures indicated in the legend.
Figure 109: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 105◦C-24h.
- 58 -
==PAGE:66==
6
RESULTS
Figure 110: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 315◦C-24h.
Figure 111: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 420◦C-24h.
Figure 112: X-ray diﬀraction pattern of 630◦C-24h.
- 59 -
==PAGE:67==
6
RESULTS
Four peaks belonging to β-Fe2O3, {110}α, {200}α and {211}α are identiﬁed for
105◦C-24h shown in Figure 109. The peak seen at 126.11 ◦2θ arises from kβ radiation
for {211}α.
Peaks assigned to ferrite, cohenite and magnetite are measured for 315◦C-24h
are shown in Figure 110. The β-Fe2O3 phase is not observed in the measurement. It
is believed that at 315 ◦C the β-Fe2O3 transforms into magnetite. The background
noise is decreasing with a slight curve between 20 and 40 ◦2θ.
The same phases are presence for 420◦C-24h shown in Figure 111, compared
to 315◦C-1h. A signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the background noise at low ◦2θ angles is
seen compared to Figure 110. A plateau is seen from 20 to 28 ◦2θ followed by a
nearly linear decrease until 38 ◦2θ, where the background noise reaches a stable level.
Furthermore appears the peaks seen in the range from 50 to 64 ◦2θ to be positioned
in a area with higher background noise in the form of a broad hill. Such phenomena
are indications of a non-crystalline material in the coating as illustrated in Figure
10 [10].
The same indication of a non-crystalline phase is seen in the background noise
at low ◦2θ angles for 630◦C-24h shown in Figure 112. Peaks assigned to w¨usite are
found in the XRD pattern as measured in the sample annealed for 1 hour. A peak at
39.8 ◦2θ is identiﬁed as graphite. It is concluded that cohenite is fully transformed
into graphite and ferrite, since no cohenite peaks are found in the XRD pattern.
- 60 -
==PAGE:68==
6
RESULTS
Table 7: Table of the position and integrated intensity found by ﬁtting the XRD patterns of multiple samples
annealed for 24 hour at the indicated temperature. The phase of each peak is given along with its hkl plane and
the ◦2θ position.
Phase
◦2θ
hkl
Sample:
105◦-24h
315◦-24h
420◦C-24h
630◦C-24h
Carbon
39.8
002
◦2θ
39.80
Int. Intensity
9.2
Fe3O4
45.3
220
◦2θ
45.30
45.42
Int. intensity
2.9
1.3
Fe3O4
53.69
311
◦2θ
53.69
53.80
53.74
Int. intensity
98.2
57.7
11.9
W¨usite
55
111
◦2θ
55.10
Int. intensity
1.9
Cohenite
57.29
121
◦2θ
57.31
57.38
Int. intensity
15.2
6.7
ß-Fe2O3
57.86
11¯5
◦2θ
57.83
Int. intensity
9.6
Cohenite
60.78
002
◦2θ
60.62
60.84
Int. intensity
197.1
36.6
W¨usite
64.45
200
◦2θ
64.51
Int. intensity
1.1
Cohenite
65.81
211
◦2θ
65.89
65.92
Int. intensity
14.4
7.5
Ferrite
68.78
110
◦2θ
68.77
68.75
68.78
68.74
Int. intensity
38.0
30.8
13.5
22.7
Fe3O4
83.68
422
◦2θ
83.72
83.84
83.76
Int. intensity
63.1
37.5
6.5
Cohenite
85.58
230
◦2θ
85.47
85.55
Int. intensity
4.0
2.3
Cohenite
92.19
301
◦2θ
90.18
90.22
Int. intensity
2.9
2.7
W¨usite
97.89
220
◦2θ
97.95
Int. intensity
3.3
Fe3O4
100.76
440
◦2θ
100.80
100.89
Int. intensity
12.3
10.6
Ferrite
106.03
200
◦2θ
105.92
105.88
105.96
105.86
Int. intensity
45.1
60.5
38.3
63.6
Fe3O4
118.9
620
◦2θ
118.94
Int. intensity
2.8
W¨usite
124.32
311
◦2θ
124.51
Int. intensity
20.9
Fe3O4
126.48
533
◦2θ
126.57
126.72
126.19
Int. intensity
42.8
25.3
4.2
Fe3O4
129.2695
622
◦2θ
129.32
129.44
Int. intensity
6.4
5.6
Line proﬁle analysis
The theory and equations used for a line proﬁle analysis are described in Section 5.7.
It is not meaningful to calculate the crystallite size and strain from a Williamson-
Hall plot, due to the low number of measured ferrite peaks. More peaks will be
measurable at high ◦2θ using X-ray radiation with a shorter wavelength compared
to Cr kα.
A single line method described in Equation 14 and 15 were used to examine the
crystallite size and micro strain as described by De Keijser [12]. All ﬁts for the line
- 61 -
==PAGE:69==
6
RESULTS
proﬁle analysis can be found in Appendix section A.3.
Figure 113: Crystalline size and micro-strain from a single peak line proﬁle analysis for the samples annealed for 1
hour. The name in the label represent the hkl value of the ferrite peak. The dash line between the points is a guide
for the eye.
The results of the line proﬁle analysis can be seen in Figure 113. The micro-
strains are very low and therefore not thought to have an eﬀect on the hardness of
the coating. The as deposited sample have a smaller crystallite size for the (110)
peak compared to the (200) peak at 47.21 and 84.62 nm respectively. The crystallite
sizes decreases to 37.5 and 62.68 nm for the (110) and (200) peak respectively for
105◦C-1h. The crystallite sizes for the (110) peak increased to 44.76 nm, which is
similar to the as deposited sample, whereas the (200) peak has decreased further to
43.13 nm for 205◦C-1h. The crystallite size for (110) peak is similar as 205◦C-1h,
but the crystallite size has increased to 57.87 nm for the (200) peak for 315◦C-1h.
The crystallite sizes increases for both the (110) and (200) peaks when the annealing
temperature is increased to 420 ◦C compared to 315 ◦C. The crystallite size continue
to increase when the annealing temperature is increased further.
6.5
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
The XPS results are divided into sections concerning carbons, oxygens or irons spec-
tra for all measured samples. The survey spectra for each specimen were examined
to identify contaminations and impurities in the coating after a sputtering time of
5400 s. The survey spectra showed only intensities for argon, iron, carbon and oxy-
gen for all specimens (data not shown). A low amount of argon is introduced when
Ar+ is used for sputtering.
Fe2p3/2
As mentioned in Section 5.8 the Fe2p3/2 peaks have not been ﬁtted. An eﬀort to
ﬁnd good ﬁtting parameters for Fe did not succeed and therefore it was decided to
present the measurements after the background had been removed.
Five measurements of the as deposited sample are shown in Figure 114. The
measurements were done before and after the Ar+ beam had removed material. This
was done to determine the sputtering time needed to remove the oxide layer and
- 62 -
==PAGE:70==
6
RESULTS
other surface contaminations on the sample. It also determines if the measurements
made after diﬀerent sputtering times provide comparable results.
Figure 114: XPS Fe2p3/2 spectra of the as deposited sample after diﬀerent sputtering times indicated in the legend.
A range of where the peak position for compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen below the measured
intensity.
A range of where the peak position for compounds plausible to be found in the
spectra are shown below the measured intensities on each XPS plot. The range of a
chemical shift for a chemical state can span over 2 eV, as seen for the possible peak
position for metallic iron. Each range is set by values found in NIST database and
in the handbook of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy as seen on Figure 15.
The intensity before sputtering is diﬀerent, from the intensities after sputtering
had been performed. The peak seen before sputtering has its maximum that can
originate from both iron, hematite (Fe2O3) and magnetite (Fe3O4). A shoulder with
low intensity believed to arise from metallic Fe is seen at lower binding energy next
to the peak. The four measurements done after 1800, 3600, 5400 and 7200 s sputter-
ing are comparable in both peak position and intensity. The tail diﬀers in intensities
at higher binding energies, which is suspected to be related to the asymmetry of the
metallic iron peak or from the removal of the background from the spectra. It is
shown that after a sputtering time of 1800 s all surface contaminations and oxides
from oxidation with air has been removed. The XPS analysis was limited to the
measurements done after a sputtering time of 5400 s, based on these results.
The measurements of Fe2p3/2 spectra for all measured samples are shown in Fig-
ure 115. An asymmetric peak is seen with a maximum at 706.2 eV, believed to arise
from iron for all samples. Furthermore the peak has a tail to higher binding ener-
gies. There are no relation between the peaks maximum intensity and the annealing
temperature. This is seen by the samples with lowest maximum are annealed at 105,
315 and 630 ◦C for 1 hour, and the remaining samples have comparable maximums.
There is neither a relation between the annealing temperature and the tails inten-
sity. There are no indications of oxides or carbides peak in the Fe2p3/2 spectras. It
is believed that their intensity are concealed in the intensity of the Fe peak. It is
concluded that the result would have remained the same, if a good ﬁt was found.
This is due to fact that there is no relation between the annealing temperature and
the maxima or tail intensity and no peak shift related to oxides or carbides are seen.
- 63 -
==PAGE:71==
6
RESULTS
Figure 115: XPS Fe2p3/2 spectra of multiple samples after 5400 s sputtering. A range of where the peak position
for compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen below the measured intensity.
C1s
The measurements of the C1s spectra for each sample after sputtering of 5400 s are
shown in Figure 116 to 122. The values obtained by ﬁtting the measurements are
shown in Table 8 and 9.
Table 8: Table of the values obtained from ﬁtting peaks in the C1s spectra.
Sample
Fit#1
Fit#2
Position [eV]
Int. intensity
Position [eV]
Int. intensity
As deposited
282.59
2527
284.01
1111
105◦C-1h
282.51
2593
284.01
1235
205◦C-1h
282.44
1896
283.56
864
315◦C-1h
282.67
3006
284.22
1332
420◦C-1h
282.67
3313
284.15
1096
525◦C-1h
282.90
3915
284.17
1899
The C1s spectra for the as deposited sample is shown in Figure 116. Two peaks
were possible to ﬁt with good result. The Fit#1 is positioned at 282.59 eV and
Fit#2 at 284.01 eV. From their position it is possible to state that Fit#1 arises
from carbides and Fit#2 from carbon. It have not been possible to ﬁnd literature
on the binding energy of interstitial carbon in steel. XPS data of speciﬁc carbides are
limited in literature, and therefore is has not been possible at this time to state the
type of carbides is found in the C1s spectra. It would be possible if pure samples of
diﬀerent carbides were measured on the same XPS instrument as used in this report,
but this is beyond the scope of this report. The carbon is in the state of either sp2 or
sp3 or a mixture of both. All measurements of the C KLL spectra ranging from 1200
to 1250 eV, did not show any sign of peaks that would identify the chemical state
of carbon. Graphite consist purely of sp2 and carbon found in organic compounds
and diamond are sp3. The most simple organic compounds containing sp3 carbon
are methane (CH4) and ethane (C2H6). The green line labelled as ﬁtted proﬁle is a
combination of Fit#1 and Fit#2 and is used to see how comparable the combined
- 64 -
==PAGE:72==
6
RESULTS
ﬁts are with the measured intensity. The ﬁtted proﬁle is not following the measured
intensity at values above 284.8 eV. It was tried to ﬁt another peak into this area
without good results.
The shape, intensities and peak positions for 105◦C-1h shown in Figure 117 are
similar to the as deposited sample.
Figure 116: XPS C1s spectra of the as deposited coating
after 5400 s sputtering. A range of where the peak posi-
tion for compounds plausible to be found in the spectra
is seen below the measured intensity.
Figure 117:
XPS C1s spectra of 105◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Figure 118:
XPS C1s spectra of 205◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Figure 119: XPS C1s spectra of 315◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering. A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
The spectra for 205◦C-1h is shown in Figure 118. The Int. intensity is consid-
erably lower for both ﬁtted peaks as shown in Table 8. This is suspected to arises
from an area with a low content of carbon.
The ﬁtted peaks are shifted to a slightly higher binding energy for the samples
annealed at 315, 420 and 525 ◦C for 1 hour, compared to the as deposited sample.
It is believed that the shifts are related to the development of cohenite. The Int.
intensity for both peaks are increased considerable. The GDOES results in section
6.3, showed the carbon content ﬂuctuated at the outermost surface for these samples.
The increased Int. intensity is believed to be a result of measuring an area with
accumulated carbon.
The spectra of 630◦C-1h shown in Figure 122, supports the GDOES measure-
ments showing accumulated carbon in the outermost surface of the coating. Three
- 65 -
==PAGE:73==
6
RESULTS
Figure 120:
XPS C1s spectra of 420◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Figure 121:
XPS C1s spectra of 525◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Table 9: Table of the values obtained from ﬁtting the C1s spectrum.
Sample
Label
Position [eV]
Int. intensity
630◦C-1h
Fit#1
282.37
660
Fit#2
283.78
16808
Fit#3
285.21
3042
Figure 122: XPS C1s spectra of 630◦C-1h after 5400 s sputtering. A range of where the peak position for compounds
plausible to be found in the spectra is seen below the measured intensity.
ﬁts were possible with a good result and their position and Int. intensity are shown
in Table 9. Fit#1 is shifted to a lower binding energy at 282.37 eV compared to the
samples exposed to a lower annealing temperature. Fit#1 conﬁrms that carbides are
present in the specimen. The Int. intensity of Fit#1 is signiﬁcantly lower compared
to 525◦C-1h, which indicates that the carbides becomes unstable around 630◦C. The
Int. intensity have increase nearly 10 fold for Fit#2 positioned at 283.78 eV. The
Fit#3 peak positioned at 285.92 eV and arise from carbon.
O1s
The XPS spectra for O1s is diﬃcult to interpret because the peaks tend to be broad
and with many overlapping components. The reader should bear in mind that this
- 66 -
==PAGE:74==
6
RESULTS
makes it diﬃcult to accurately identify the chemical states. The O1s spectra for all
measured samples sputtered for 5400 s are shown in Figure 123 to 129. The Int.
intensity and peak position of the ﬁts are shown in Table 10.
Table 10: Table of the values obtained from ﬁtting the O1s spectrum.
Sample
Fit#1
Fit#2
Position [eV]
Int. intensity
Position [eV]
Int. intensity
As deposited
529.46
20944
530.91
7329
105◦C-1h
529.41
17820
530.57
6247
205◦C-1h
529.46
19592
530.84
5252
315◦C-1h
529.59
28199
530.89
7522
420◦C-1h
529.46
14359
530.67
4972
525◦C-1h
529.49
13150
530.64
3986
630◦C-1h
529.59
15486
530.59
4928
Figure 123:
XPS O1s spectra of 105◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Figure 124:
XPS O1s spectra of 205◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Figure 125:
XPS O1s spectra of 315◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Figure 126:
XPS O1s spectra of 420◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
- 67 -
==PAGE:75==
6
RESULTS
Figure 127:
XPS O1s spectra of 525◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
Figure 128:
XPS O1s spectra of 630◦C-1h after 5400
s sputtering.
A range of where the peak position for
compounds plausible to be found in the spectra is seen
below the measured intensity.
The O1s spectra for the as deposited sample is shown in Figure 123. Two peaks
are ﬁtted in the spectra with a position of 529.46 eV for Fit#1 and 530.91 eV for
Fit#2. The Fit#1 is identiﬁed as an oxide, but from the position it is not possible
to assign it to hematite (Fe2O3) or magnetite (Fe3O4). The Fit#2 is determined
as hematite. The ﬁtted proﬁle is not following the measured intensity at values
above 531.0 eV. It was tried to ﬁt a peak into this area without good results. The
possibility of a metal carbonate or an organic compound with a C-O group cannot be
excluded. The metal carbonate would be in the form of iron(II)carbonate (FeCO3).
The organic compound with a C-O group is more diﬃcult to give a qualiﬁed guess
above, due to the large variety of decomposition possibilities from citric acid. It
is believed the intensity outside the ﬁtted proﬁle is a result of the removal of the
background, since no peaks were identiﬁed as carbonates or C-O group in the C1s
spectra .
Figure 129: XPS O1s spectra of 630◦C-1h after 5400 s sputtering. A range of where the peak position for compounds
plausible to be found in the spectra is seen below the measured intensity.
The sample 315◦C-1h has a signiﬁcantly higher intensity for Fit#1 compared to
the other specimens as shown in Figure 126 and Table 10. It is believed that the
measurement are conducted in an area with a high content of oxygen.
The peak position of Fit#1 and Fit#2 are not shifted signiﬁcantly by the anneal-
ing process for all measured samples. Therefore the individual measurements will
- 68 -
==PAGE:76==
6
RESULTS
not be discussed separately. The Int. intensity for Fit#1 is about 5000 Cps higher
for the samples annealed at 205 ◦C and below, compared to the samples annealed
at 420 ◦C and above. The trend with a lower Int. intensity for samples annealed
at 420 ◦C and above is also seen for Fit#2. It is believed that the decreases can be
assigned to the transformation of β-Fe2O3 into Fe3O4.
6.6
Transmission electron microscopy
The reader should bear in mind that TEM images shows a very limited area of
a large sample.
The results cannot be generalised to the whole sample, before
multiple samples from a diﬀerent area of the samples are characterized with similar
results.
The result section for TEM is divided into three parts concerning the
microstructure, phase analysis and the dark-ﬁeld micrograph. This is done in order
present the results separately to make it straightforward to compare with previously
stated results.
Microstructure
An overview micrograph of the as deposited sample and 315◦C-1h are shown in
Figure 130 and 131 respectively. A column like morphology with a growth direction
perpendicular to the surface for the as deposited sample as shown in Figure 130.
There are no indications towards precipitates observed from this micrograph. This
is in good agreement with the cross section SEM results for the sample etch with
nital.
The column like structures have transformed into multiple grains for 315◦C-1h as
shown in Figure 131. The growth direction can still be observed in the morphology
after the annealing process. The carbides seen in the SEM result in Figure 82 etch
with Murakami, are not observed in this area. The carbides were homogeneously
spread in the deposit with an average diameter of 110 nm. It is not possible to state
if this area of the coating is simply free of the relatively large carbides or if they
have been removed in the polishing step by FIB milling.
Figure 130:
Transmission electron micrograph bright-
ﬁeld of the as deposited sample.
Figure 131:
Transmission electron micrograph bright-
ﬁeld of 315◦C-1h.
- 69 -
==PAGE:77==
6
RESULTS
A higher magniﬁcation is applied in Figure 132 and 133. The morphology consist
of a column like structure for the as deposited sample shown in Figure 132. The
thickness of the sample increases from the interface into the coating, as seen by the
brighter area close to the interface. This is the mass-density contrast where fewer
electrons are transmitted though the sample in the thicker areas. The diﬀerence in
thickness of the specimen is an eﬀect of the thinning of the sample by FIB milling.
Figure 132:
Transmission electron micrograph bright-
ﬁeld of the as deposited sample.
Figure 133:
Transmission electron micrograph bright-
ﬁeld of 315◦C-1h.
The morphology have transformed for 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 133. The initial
growth direction perpendicular to the surface is still apparent. Perpendicular to the
surface there are long elongated thin areas with a high brightness. There are dark
areas with shapes consisting of small round areas, large areas and thin elongated.
From these bright-ﬁeld micrograph it is not possible to identify a speciﬁc phase.
Areas with a high density will deﬂect more electrons resulting in a lower intensity
on the detector.
Thin elongated dark lines are seen parallel with the column like structure for the
as deposited sample shown in Figure 134. In the bottom of the micrograph dark
and bright small round and thin elongated areas are seen with a size of 5-15 nm.
Thin elongated bright line perpendicular to the surface for 315◦C-1h shown in
Figure 135. Dark round and elongated areas are seen with a size around 5-25 nm.
- 70 -
==PAGE:78==
6
RESULTS
Figure 134:
Transmission electron micrograph bright-
ﬁeld of the as deposited sample.
Figure 135:
Transmission electron micrograph bright-
ﬁeld of 315◦C-1h.
Phase analysis
The diﬀraction pattern, of the micrograph seen on Figure 132 for the as deposited
sample, are shown with and without tags in Figure 136 and 137 respectively. The
tags represent individual diﬀraction spots used in the phase analysis represented in
Table 11. The d-spacings of the phases were calculated from the distance R for the
diﬀraction spots. The calculated d-spacings were identiﬁed to a phase along with its
hkl value using the PDFs shown in Appendix A.3 in Table A4. The ◦2θ angle where
the diﬀraction spots would be positioned in a XRD pattern using Cr kα radiation
are also calculated and shown in Table 11, for a eﬀortless comparing between the
results.
Figure 136: Transmission electron microscope diﬀraction
pattern of the as deposited sample shown in Figure 132.
Figure 137: Transmission electron microscope diﬀraction
pattern with tags of the as deposited sample shown in
Figure 132.
The appearance of the diﬀraction spots arising from a speciﬁc phase indicates
- 71 -
==PAGE:79==
6
RESULTS
the both the microstructure and orientation as illustrated in Figure 13. The shape
of a nearly full circle indicates a phase with multiple grains randomly oriented in
the microstructure as tag 2 on Figure 137. The separate diﬀraction spots indicates a
small number of grains with a higher order of orientation as tag 3 on Figure 137. It
Table 11: Phase analysis based on diﬀraction pattern seen in Figure 136 from the transmission electrons micrograph
seen in Figure 132 for the as deposited sample. The tag represents the diﬀractions spots shown in Figure 137.
Measured values
Phase identiﬁcation
Tag
R [nm−1]
d [˚A]
◦2θ Cr kα
Phase
hkl
d [˚A]
◦2θ Cr kα
1
3.20
3.13
42.98
Unidentiﬁed
2
3.83
2.61
51.94
Unidentiﬁed
3
4.71
2.12
65.26
Ferrite
1 1 0
2.03
68.77
4
6.74
1.48
101.00
Ferrite
2 0 0
1.44
106.1
5
8.24
1.21
141.25
Unidentiﬁed
6
9.48
1.05
189.79
Ferrite
7
10.63
0.94
205.00
Unidentiﬁed
8
11.68
0.86
219.34
Unidentiﬁed
9
12.61
0.79
232.67
Unidentiﬁed
10
13.50
0.74
246.12
Unidentiﬁed
11
14.32
0.70
259.41
Unidentiﬁed
have not been possible to assign all diﬀraction spots to a speciﬁc phase as shown in
Table 11. Many spots are position with a large diﬀraction angle that cannot be found
in the PDFs. Tag 3 and 4 are identiﬁed as ferrite, but the calculated d-spacings
are higher compared to the values found in the database.
When measuring the
distance R the presumed center of the diﬀraction spot was used. The width of the
ferrite diﬀraction spots are believed to give rise to an uncertainty when measuring
the distance R. The accuracy of which several diﬀraction spots are identiﬁed for
β-Fe2O3, Fe3O4 and cohenite supports a correct calibration of the length scale.
The diﬀraction pattern, of the micrograph shown in Figure 149 for the as de-
posited sample, are shown with and without tags in Figure 138 and 139 respectively.
The phase analysis for the diﬀraction pattern can be seen in Table 12. The diﬀrac-
tion spots with tag 1, 4 and 6 are identiﬁed as β-Fe2O3. The diﬀraction spots with
tag 5 is identiﬁed as ferrite. The circular diﬀraction pattern of tag 3 have a higher
intensity compared to Figure 136.
- 72 -
==PAGE:80==
6
RESULTS
Figure 138: Transmission electron microscope diﬀraction
pattern of the as deposited sample shown in Figure 149.
Figure 139: Transmission electron microscope diﬀraction
pattern with tags of the as deposited sample shown in
Figure 149.
Table 12: Phase analysis based on diﬀraction pattern shown in Figure 138 for the as deposited sample from the
transmission electrons micrograph shown in Figure 149. The tags represents the diﬀraction spots seen in Figure
139.
Measured values
Phase identiﬁcation
Tag
R [nm−1]
d [˚A]
◦2θ Cr kα
Phase
hkl
d [˚A]
◦2θ Cr kα
1
2.47
4.05
32.85
β-Fe2O3
0 1 3
4.05
32.80
2
3.32
3.02
44.61
Unidentiﬁed
3
3.85
2.60
52.23
Unidentiﬁed
4
4.11
2.43
56.14
β-Fe2O3
0 1 8
2.49
56.15
5
4.87
2.06
67.69
Ferrite
1 1 0
2.03
68.77
6
6.06
1.65
87.86
β-Fe2O3
1 1 ¯11
1.65
87.88
7
6.57
1.52
97.46
Unidentiﬁed
8
7.56
1.32
119.88
Unidentiﬁed
9
8.33
1.20
144.76
Unidentiﬁed
10
9.68
1.03
192.42
Unidentiﬁed
11
10.69
0.94
205.80
Unidentiﬁed
12
11.80
0.85
221.09
Unidentiﬁed
13
12.75
0.78
234.66
Unidentiﬁed
14
14.51
0.69
262.69
Unidentiﬁed
The diﬀraction pattern, of the micrograph shown in Figure 133 for 315◦C-1h, are
shown with and without tags in Figure 140 and 141 respectively. The phase analysis
for the diﬀraction pattern can be seen in Table 13. Multiple new diﬀractions spots
are found for 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 140. Three diﬀraction spot with tag 1, 4
and 8 are identiﬁed as β-Fe2O3. The diﬀraction spot tagged with 5, 9, 12 and 14 are
assigned to cohenite. The diﬀraction spot tagged with 7 is identiﬁed as magnetite
and the spots tagged with 6, 11 and 15 are ascribed to ferrite. The circular diﬀraction
pattern of tag 3 is still present in the sample.
- 73 -
==PAGE:81==
6
RESULTS
Figure 140: Transmission electron microscope diﬀraction
pattern of 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 133.
Figure 141: Transmission electron microscope diﬀraction
pattern with tags of 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 133.
Table 13: Phase analysis based on diﬀraction pattern shown in Figure 138 for the as deposited sample from the
transmission electrons micrograph shown in Figure 133. The tags represents the diﬀraction spots shown in Figure
139.
Measured values
Phase identiﬁcation
Tag
R [nm−1]
d [˚A]
◦2θ Cr kα
Phase
hkl
d [˚A]
◦2θ Cr kα
1
2.73
3.67
36.36
β-Fe2O3
1 0 4
3.66
36.44
2
3.22
3.11
43.19
Unidentiﬁed
3
3.75
2.67
50.85
Unidentiﬁed
4
4.23
2.36
57.93
β-Fe2O3
1 1 ¯5
2.37
57.86
5
4.51
2.22
62.17
Cohenite
2 0 1
2.22
62.13
6
4.74
2.11
65.65
Ferrite
1 1 0
2.03
68.77
7
5.84
1.71
83.92
Fe3O4
4 2 2
1.71
83.83
8
6.10
1.64
88.59
β-Fe2O3
2 1 ¯6
1.64
88.68
9
6.26
1.60
91.47
Cohenite
3 0 1
1.59
92.19
10
6.46
1.55
95.39
Unidentiﬁed
11
6.70
1.49
100.08
Ferrite
2 0 0
1.44
106.10
12
7.63
1.31
121.61
Cohenite
1 2 3
1.33
118.91
13
8.19
1.22
139.13
Unidentiﬁed
14
8.45
1.18
150.66
Unidentiﬁed
15
9.47
1.06
189.59
Unidentiﬁed
16
10.61
0.94
204.73
Unidentiﬁed
17
11.56
0.87
217.67
Unidentiﬁed
18
12.53
0.80
231.43
Unidentiﬁed
- 74 -
==PAGE:82==
6
RESULTS
Figure 142: Transmission electron micrograph bright-ﬁeld of 315◦C-1h. The symbols on the micrograph represents
EDS measurements shown in Table 14.
The 315◦C-1h has been examined by EDS as shown in Figure 142. The chemical
composition of the individual measured sites can be seen in Table 14. The sites
measured in a bright areas have an increased oxygen content. The point indicated
with a • is measured in a bright area has a signiﬁcantly higher carbon content of
16.23 wt%, compared to all other measured sites. The four sites measured around
10-15 nm below the surface could have been aﬀected by surface contaminations or
oxidation by air. The measurement indicated with a + in a bright elongated area
has a oxygen content of 11.53 wt% and is believed to consist of an oxide.
Table 14: EDS results from transmission electron micrograph for 315◦C-1h shown in Figure 142.
Symbol
C [wt%]
O [wt%]
Fe [wt%]
■
3.20
8.46
88.34
•
16.23
19.81
63.97
▲
2.18
7.84
89.97
♦
3.56
13.77
82.67
+
2.63
11.53
85.84
- 75 -
==PAGE:83==
6
RESULTS
Dark-ﬁeld micrograph
The dark-ﬁeld micrographs are obtained by adjusting the incident beam of electrons
so one selected diﬀraction beam will pass though the objective aperture. The dark-
ﬁeld micrographs provides information of the locations of a phase in the coating.
It was necessary to adjust the exposure and brightness of the micrographs shown
in Figure 145 and 150, due to low contrast. Both micrograph can be seen without
adjustments in Appendix A.5 in Figure A25 and A26.
The diﬀraction pattern, of the micrograph shown in Figure 144 for the as de-
posited sample, is shown in Figure 143. The diﬀraction pattern have indications
of diﬀraction spots examined by dark-ﬁeld. The three dark-ﬁeld micrograph can
be seen in Figure 145, 146 and 147. The dark-ﬁeld micrograph seen in Figure 145
represent tag 2 seen in Table 11, which is unidentiﬁed. The unidentiﬁed phase is
uniformly present in this area. There are long elongated dark areas perpendicular
to the surface, where the phase is not present along with a few small areas where
the phase has accumulated. The accumulation seen in the center and in the left side
of Figure 145 are seen as dark areas in the bright-ﬁeld micrograph shown in Figure
131.
The dark-ﬁeld micrographs shown in Figure 146 and 147 are identiﬁed as ferrite.
The elongated column like grains are parallel to each other and perpendicular to
the surface. It is clearly seen that the ferrite columns is composed of multiple nano
sized grains. The average width of the columns are around 12.5 nm. The length of
the column varies with the longest measured begin around 300 nm.
The diﬀraction pattern, of the micrograph shown in Figure 149 for 315◦C-1h,
is shown 148. The indication on Figure 148 is of the diﬀraction spot examined by
dark-ﬁeld and shown in Figure 150. It consist the same unidentiﬁed phase as shown
in Figure 145. The phase consist of an elongated geometry with rounded edges and
has an average size around 2.5 nm. The area with the highest intensity is seen in the
lower left corner. This area is seen as the brightest when compared to the bright-
ﬁeld micrograph. The phase is located in what appear to be bands lying across the
micrograph with a width of around 22 nm. No intensity is measured between the
bands. It cannot be discarded that the phase is present in the dark areas, since the
contrast measured is from a certain orientation of the phase. This is encountered
for orientated ferrite grains shown in Figure 146 and 147.
- 76 -
==PAGE:84==
6
RESULTS
Figure 143:
Transmission electron micrograph
diﬀraction pattern with tags of diﬀraction spots
used for dark-ﬁeld of the as deposited sample
shown in Figure 144.
Figure 144:
Transmission electron micrograph
bright-ﬁeld of as deposited sample.
Figure 145:
Transmission electron micrograph
dark-ﬁeld of tag DF1 shown in Figure 143 for
the as deposited sample.
Figure 146:
Transmission electron micrograph
dark-ﬁeld of tag DF2 shown in Figure 143 for
the as deposited sample.
Figure 147:
Transmission electron micrograph
dark-ﬁeld of tag DF3 shown in Figure 143 for
the as deposited sample.
- 77 -
==PAGE:85==
6
RESULTS
Figure 148: Transmission electron micrograph diﬀraction
pattern with tag of diﬀraction spot used for dark-ﬁeld of
the as deposited sample shown in Figure 149.
Figure 149: Transmission electron micrograph diﬀraction
pattern of the as deposited sample.
Figure 150: Transmission electron micrograph dark-ﬁeld
of tag DF1 shown in Figure 148 for the as deposited sam-
ple.
6.7
Hardness measurement
In this section the results of the hardness measurement of the coating are presented.
The nine individual hardness measurements can be seen in Appendix section A.2 in
Table A3. A plot of the average hardness of the coating before and after annealing
is shown in Figure 151. The as deposited coating has an average hardness of 743 ±
104 HV. The standard deviation is above 100 HV which indicates the as deposited
coating is less uniform than expected. The measurements of the chemical compo-
sition and the morphology have not indicated large variation in the coating. The
average hardness of 105◦C-1h and 105◦C-24h have a similar average hardness 687
± 45 and 678 ± 31 HV respectively. The decrease in hardness is believed to be an
eﬀect of compressive stresses being relief.
The average hardness for 205◦C-1h increases to 742 ± 20 HV, compared to
- 78 -
==PAGE:86==
6
RESULTS
Figure 151: The average hardness, based on nine measurements, of the deposit before and after annealing at the
given temperatures for 1 and 24 hour.
105◦C-1h. The increase in average hardness is believed to be related to the decrease
crystalline size of ferrite, shown in the XRD line proﬁle analysis, along with an age
hardening process of the precipitates measured by XPS.
The highest average hardness is measured for 315◦C-1h at 771 ± 16 HV. The
increase in average hardness is suspected to be an eﬀect of the cohenite particles
developed in the microstructure as shown in the XRD pattern and SEM micrograph.
The average hardness is decreased to 681 ± 50 HV for 315◦C-24h. It is believed
to be related to compressive stresses being relief in the coating or a eﬀect of grain
growth at elevated temperature.
A further decrease in average hardness to 616 ± 26 and 578 ± 36 HV for the
coatings annealed at 420 and 525 ◦C for 1 hour respectively, are assigned to the
development of micro-cracks in the surface of the coatings. The size of the micro-
cracks increases as a function of the annealing time and temperature. The volume
deformed by the indent will have free space to occupy, which decreases the energy
needed to deform the volume.
The hardness is decreased further to an average hardness of 443 ± 45 HV for
630◦C-1h.
At this temperatures cohenite is transform into graphite and ferrite,
which is believed to advance the decrease in hardness. The samples annealed for
24 hours at 420 and 630 ◦C have a lower average hardness, compared to the sam-
ple annealed for 1 hour. The decrease is believed to be related to the mechanism
described for the individual samples being active for a longer period of time.
- 79 -
==PAGE:87==
7
DISCUSSION
7
Discussion
7.1
Discussion of results
As deposit
All measurements of the elemental content showed an impurity free coating. The
coating is found to consist of 0.85 wt% carbon, oxygen, 2.08 p.d.u. hydrogen and
iron. The iron is mainly in the state of ferrite, but is also found in the oxides β-
Fe2O3. The carbon is homogeneous distributed in the coating. It have not been
possible to identify speciﬁc phases for the carbon by the experimental methods
applied.
The state of carbon are in carbides along with sp2 or sp3 carbon or a
mixture of both. The intensity around 285 eV measured by XPS for the C1s could
not be ﬁtted with a good result, which could suggest an asymmetric peak. The
highly electron conductive graphite would give rise to an asymmetric peak which is
possible to measure up to 285.7 eV. It has not been possible to ﬁnd XPS literature
on the binding energy of interstitial carbon in ferrite. M¨ossbauer spectroscopy result
for a similar coating has been published, showing Fe having interstitial carbon atoms
as a second-nearest neighbour at about 0.32 nm [21].
The coating has good covering properties, as seen on the cross section LOM
and SEM micrograph. The characteristic topography of the coating is assumed to
be reproduction of the bulk. The morphology is columns, consisting of randomly
orientated ferrite grains, with an average width around 15-25 nm as seen in the
dark-ﬁeld TEM micrograph. The ferrite grains nucleating on the substrate have
an growth direction of 45-90◦relative to the substrate surface. This indicates a
basic orientation reproduction of the substrate crystalline orientation. The growth
direction is perpendicular to the substrates surface after a distance of 0.5 to 1 µm
from the interface, which is related to a ﬁeld oriented growth as shown in Figure
3 [43]. It was not possible to locate carbides or oxides in the microstructure by
SEM or TEM. EELS and FTEM measurements were performed on oxygen, carbon
and iron in the TEM on both samples. The measurements were inconclusive which
is believed to be related to the size of the grains for the diﬀerent phase (data not
shown).
The morphology of the coating published has smaller grains and no column
like structure [27] [15]. A randomly orientations of the ferrite grains are seen as
full circles with homogeneous intensity in the diﬀraction pattern in the published
TEM micrograph shown in Figure 28 [27]. This type of coating is described as an
unoriented dispersion type [43]. The substrate material were often stainless steel or
copper which are believed to inﬂuence the coating, since the growth of the coating is
dependent on the crystal structure and orientation of the substrate [24] [27] [19]. The
electrolyte are often found to contain FeSO4 and citric acid along with L-Ascorbic
acid [24] [27] [19]. The carbon content is higher for the coatings plated with an
electrolyte containing L-Ascorbic acid, compared to an electrolyte without [24] [27].
The results of the impact of the current density presented in Figure 20, concluded
that oxygen is occluded in the coating when the current density is 3.0 A/dm2 and
above [27].
The hardness decreased when coating contains oxygen as shown in
Figure 17 [15]. The optimum ratio and chemical composition of the electrolyte was
found by literature to be 0.5 M FeSO4 and 0.01 M citric acid [14]. The chemical
composition of the electrolyte used for deposition on the sample examined in this
thesis have the same ratio, but half the amount of each chemical. The increased
- 80 -
==PAGE:88==
7
DISCUSSION
concentration of metal ions would result in a basis reproduction if the inhibition
intensity is unaﬀected as shown in Figure 3. The unoriented dispersion type shown
in the published cross sections, indicates that the increase in concentration of metal
ions resolve in a increase in inhibition intensity. It is believed the hardness of the
coating can increase by increase the chemical concentration in the electrolyte and
thereby obtaining an unoriented dispersion type morphology. Further more it is
believed that the coating examined in this report can be improved by a lowering of
the current density to 3.0 A/dm2 or below which will reduced the occluded oxygen
in the coating.
The coatings average hardness of 742 ± 104 HV is ascribed to compressive
stresses along with the grain size of ferrite. The hardness is similar to the pub-
lished hardness measurements for a coating electrodeposited under similar condi-
tions [27] [15]. It is assumed that an amount of the carbon exist as interstitials and
contributes by a solid solution hardening. The oxides and carbides contribute by
dispersion hardening and precipitation hardening. The micro-strain calculated from
the XRD line proﬁle is neglectable.
The ferrite peaks in the XRD pattern did not have a shoulder to lower ◦2θ
angles. Diﬀraction spots measured by TEM were identiﬁed as β-Fe2O3 as shown in
Table 12 and 13. The peak measured by XRD around 57.75 ◦2θ was identiﬁed as
β-Fe2O3. This peak had previously been assigned to ϵ-carbide [27] [19]. The (011)
peak positioned at 57.85 ◦2θ for the ϵ-carbide has one of the lowest intensities found
in the PDF. As an example there was no intensity measured for the (111) peak
positioned at 65.56 ◦2θ, which is assigned to have a 100 times higher intensity. The
ϵ-carbide is a transition carbide found when tempering martensite. The publications
have argued that the coating exist in the 1st state of tempered martensite, based
on the presence of the ϵ-carbide [27] [19].
No results from this report have pointed towards the microstructure should con-
sist of martensite or tempered martensite.
105 ◦C
Annealing at 105 ◦C for 1 hour or 24 hours lowers the average hardness and
standard deviation to around 687 ± 45 HV. The decrease in average hardness is
believed to be a results of compressive stresses being relieved in the coating. The
average hydrogen content in the coating annealed for 1 and 24 hours have decreased
to 1.51 and 1.19 p.d.u. respectively. The XRD line proﬁling analysis showed the
crystallite size for the (200) peak had decreased. The crystallite sizes are consider-
ably larger compared to the width of the ferrite columns. This is either an eﬀect
of the measured direction or the calculation being a magnitude larger compared
to the width. In either way the trend is thought to relate to the changes seen in
the morphology by recovery and recrystallisation. The decrease in crystallite size
is believed to be an eﬀect of recovery of dislocations in the coating and formation
of new subgrain boundaries. Recovery is all annealing processes that occur without
long range migration of high angle boundaries [23].
205 ◦C
Macro-cracks and craters were seen in the surface of the coating. The macro-
cracks are thought to be a result of compressive stresses being relieved. The origin
for the craters has not been found but is thought to be related to the annealing time
- 81 -
==PAGE:89==
7
DISCUSSION
since they only appear for samples annealed for 1 hour. This means the craters must
have been initiated during cooling. The average hydrogen content was measured to
1.40 p.d.u. The morphology of the coating measured by SEM is similar to the as
deposited. The XRD line proﬁle analysis revealed the crystallite size to have further
decreased for the (200) peak. The increase in average hardness to 742 ± 20 HV for
the coating follows the same trend as age hardening shown in Figure 5. The increase
is believed to related to the decrease in crystallite size and growth of coherent or
semi-coherent oxides and carbides measured by XPS.
315 ◦C
The cohenite and magnetite phases are ﬁrst measured by XRD in the coating
annealed at 315 ◦C for 1 hour. The presence of cohenite instead of cementite was
unexpected since the Fe-C phase-diagram predicts steel with 0.8 wt% carbon to
have heterogeneous phase consisting of ferrite and cementite as shown in Figure 6
(b) [37]. Cohenite has been reported to be found in iron-meteoroids and in ferrite
bordered by charcoal fragments [38] [41]. Cohenite is described as a hard carbide
with low tendency for oxidation and will transform into ferrite and graphite at
elevated temperatures [41].
It is believed that the unidentiﬁed circular diﬀraction pattern measured by TEM
shown as tag 2 and 3 in Figure 141 is related to carbon. The present of β-Fe2O3
was measured by XRD in the coating annealed for 1 hour, but was not measured
in the sample annealed for 24 hour. It is believed that β-Fe2O3 is transformed to
magnetite at temperatures around 315 ◦C.
The macro-cracks shown in the coating annealed for 1 hour have increased in
width and numbers. The coating has its maximum average hardness of 771 ± 16
HV for the sample annealed for 1 hour. The increase in hardness is attributed to
the development of cohenite and magnetite uniformly spread in the coating. The
average hardness decreases to 681 ± 59 when the annealing time was extended to 24
hour. The decrease is believed to be attributed to cohenite and magnetite growing
and losing coherency with its parent phase.
The carbides with a size of 110 nm measured in the cross section by SEM,
are not observed in the TEM micrograph. An explanation has not been found for
the carbides not being observed by TEM. The morphology has altered form its
column like structure to a coating consist of round ferrite grains as shown in the
SEM and TEM micrograph. It is believed to be related to recrystallization which
is the formation of new grain structure by formation and migration of high angle
boundaries driven by stored energy of deformation [23].
The GDOES measurement for the sample annealed for 1 hour showed a ﬂuctu-
ating the outermost surface for carbon, followed by a uniformly distribution. The
carbon distribution for the coating annealed for 24 hour have a larger variation in
the ﬂuctuation, compared to the coating annealed for 1 hour. The ﬂuctuation of the
carbon content must be unrelated with the development of carbides, since it would
not be limited to the outermost surface. The average hydrogen content measured to
0.98 p.d.u. for the sample annealed for 1 hour. The average hydrogen content was
measured to a minimum at 0.23 p.d.u. for the sample annealed for 24 hour.
An increased intensity is measured by XPS for carbon in the state of sp2 or sp3,
compared to samples annealed at lower temperature. A transformation from ethan
into graphite will not result in a shift in the binding energy in the XPS spectra.
- 82 -
==PAGE:90==
7
DISCUSSION
The assumed transformation from ethan to graphite can explain the signiﬁcant de-
crease in the hydrogen and the ﬂuctuation of the carbon. Hydrogen is unable to
vacate the coating if it is bound to carbon in the chemical ethan. The mobility of
carbon is increased by decreasing its molecule size. With the column like structure
it is reasonable to assume that carbon and hydrogen can easily diﬀuse in the grain
boundary parallel to the columns. An explanation for the ﬂuctuations of the car-
bon content being limited to the outermost surface of the coating has not been found.
420 ◦C
The sample annealed for 1 hour has multiple micro-cracks in the surface as
measured by SEM. The micro-cracks are uniformly spread over the surface area,
but are not seen in the area closest to the macro-cracks. The average crystalline
size for ferrite to have increased as found the line proﬁle analysis. The increase in
crystallite size is believed to be related to grain coarsening. The β-Fe2O3 particles
are not measured and no new phase seen in the XRD pattern, compared to 315◦C-1h.
The average hardness for the sample annealed for 1 hour has decreased to 616 ±
26.0 HV. It is believed to be an eﬀect of the micro-cracks in the coating along with
the cohenite and magnetite growing in size and are suspected to become incoherent
with the parent phase. The volume between the micro-cracks is believed to lower
the resistance towards deformation when the indent is press into the coating. An
attempt to validate this theory was performed by measuring the cross section of an
indent using the Helios NanoLab 600 also used for TEM sample preparation. It did
not succeed to use the FIB to remove material and polishing of the cross section
(data not shown).
A ﬂuctuation in the carbon content at the outermost surface was seen for the
coating annealed at 1 hour. A depletion of carbon in the same area was measured
for the sample annealed for 24 hour. The depletion of carbon at the surface is in
contrast with the accumulation of carbon seen in the samples annealed at higher
temperatures. The sputtering time before the interface is similar to the other mea-
surements along with hydrogen content in the ﬁrst few seconds of the measurement.
This indicates that the noise in the beginning of the measurement has been removed
similar to the other measurements. The average carbon content was lower compared
to the samples annealed at lower temperatures and the maximum carbon content
measured was 0.8 wt% which eliminates the possibility of carbon diﬀusion into the
substrate. For carbon to be evaporated from the surface is unexpected, but there is
no indication of instrumental errors or increased content elsewhere.
The background noise in the XRD pattern for the sample annealed for 24 hours
indicates a non-crystalline phase present in the coating.
It is believed that the
micro-cracks, non-crystalline phase and the evaporation of carbon are related. The
average hardness of the sample annealed for 24 hours is decreased to 538 ± 36 HV,
which is presumed to be a result of both depletion of carbon and the increased size
of the micro-cracks.
525 ◦C
The GDOES measurement showed an accumulation of carbon in the outermost
surface, followed by a decrease and an even distribution in the remaining of the coat-
ing. The accumulation of carbon measured by GDOES is supported by the XPS
measurement with a signiﬁcantly increase in the intensity for both the carbide ﬁt
- 83 -
==PAGE:91==
7
DISCUSSION
and carbon ﬁt. The decrease in hardness for the coating continues with an average
hardness of 578 ± 35 HV. The line proﬁle analysis found that the average crystalline
size continues to increase for ferrite.
630 ◦C
The high temperature oxide w¨usite has developed in the coating and was mea-
sured in the XRD pattern for the sample annealed at 630 ◦C for 1 and 24 hour.
W¨usite is not stable at room temperature and from this it was concluded that the
cooling rate has been high enough to lock w¨usite in the coating [11] [29]. It is pre-
sumed that given enough time w¨usite will transform into an oxide stable at room
temperature, but this is dependent on the kinetics of the reaction. W¨usite is not
seen in the XPS measurement, which indicates that the oxide is not present in the
outer layer of the coating.
The XPS measurement of C1s spectra showed a pronounced increase for carbon
in the state either of sp2 and sp3. A diﬀusion of carbon towards the surface from the
whole coating is supported by the decrease in the average carbon content to 0.57
wt% measured by GDOES. The average carbon content had decreased further to
0.05 wt% when the annealing time was extended to 24 hour. The accumulation of
carbon was seen in the outermost surface for both coatings. The maximum carbon
contents were measured above the calibration of the GDOES instrument.
There was no indication of a non-crystalline phase in the XRD pattern for the
sample annealed for 1 hour. The background noise in the XRD pattern for the
sample annealed for 24 hour, indicates a non-crystalline phase present in the coating.
A peak identiﬁed as graphite was measured in XRD pattern for the coating annealed
for 24 hour, but cohenite phase was not measured. Cohenite is described by literature
as unstable at elevated temperatures and will transform into iron and graphite [41].
The thermodynamic stable phase diagram used for cast irons shown in Figure 6 (a)
predicts ferrite and graphite.
The hardness for the sample annealed for 1 and 24 hours are 442 ± 45 and 249
± 24.9 HV respectively. The decrease in hardness is assigned to the multiple micro-
cracks, the carbon accumulated in the outermost surface and the transformation of
carbides for the coating annealed at 24 hour.
7.2
Chemical reactions
A wholesome understanding the possible reactions in relation to citric acid in the
electrochemical deposition of the coating and in the annealing process is beyond
the scope of this report. With the equipment available it has not been possible to
identify speciﬁc organic compounds in the coating.
The usual instrumental techniques for determining the structures of organic com-
pounds are mass spectrometry (MS), infrared spectroscopy (IR) and nuclear mag-
netic resonance spectroscopy (NMR). A attempt with infrared spectroscopy, where
the coating was detached from the substrate in small ﬂakes, did not provide any
results. The metal reﬂected all incident light and no signal was measured (data not
shown). Raman spectroscopy is another technique using monochromatic light, usu-
ally from a laser in the visible, near infrared, or near ultraviolet range [44]. Raman
spectroscopy has not been attempted, since the light is believed to be reﬂected as
in infrared spectroscopy. An attempt to perform NMR spectroscopy was postponed
- 84 -
==PAGE:92==
7
DISCUSSION
after a meeting with Professor of chemistry Bo Wegge Laursen at The University of
Copenhagen. The amount of organic compound required for a measurement would
demand an extraction of all organic material of a very large coating area. The ex-
traction of the organic material would also require a solvent able to make the organic
material soluble without interfering with its molecular structure. An attempt with
mass spectroscopy has not been performed.
The chemical reactions that will be introduced in this section are based on the
results stated below.
• In the as deposited coating the chemical state of carbon are a carbide along with
either sp2 or sp3 carbon.
• Carbon is uniformly distributed in the coating.
• The average hydrogen content for 105◦C-24h is 1.19 p.d.u.
• The average hydrogen content for 315◦C-24h is 0.23 p.d.u.
• Carbon is in a non-crystalline state after annealing at 420 ◦C for 24 hour.
• Carbon is in a non-crystalline state and in the state of graphite after annealing at
630 ◦C for 24 hour.
The scope of this section is to investigate the chemistry of citric acid (C6H8O7)
and its relative reactivity. The function of citric acid is for carbon to be co-deposited
along with iron to obtain the steel coating. Citric acid have the chemical structure
as seen in Figure 152. There are four functional groups included in the molecular
Figure 152: The chemical structure of citric acid.
structure of citric acid. Three of which are carboxyl groups (COOH) and one alcohol
group (OH). In the electroplating process the environment in the double layer and
diﬀusion zone at the surface of the cathode can be considered harsh. In this zone a
high concentration of ions is transferred towards the charged cathode surface where
they are reduced to metal and with time building up the metal coating. It is assumed
that the citric acid can decompose into multiple fragments in this zone. The most
simple fragmentation would be one molecule of methanol (CH3OH), two molecules
of acetic acid (CH3COOH) and one formic acid (HCOOH). Other compounds as
methan (CH4), ethan (C2H6), ethanol (C2H5OH), formic acid (HCOOH) or glutaric
acid (HOOC(CH2)3COOH) could also be possible fragments of decomposed citric
acid.
A number of chemical reaction equations based on the assumptions mentioned
above is proposed.
The Gibbs free energy (∆G) for the reactions proposed are
calculated using HSC 5.11. The energy required for a reaction to proceed and how
the presence of a catalyst lowers the activation energy required are illustrated in
Figure 153 [6]. Iron is assumed to act as a catalyst in the coating. The calculations
of ∆G is very simpliﬁed. The pH-value and the electric ﬁeld lines surrounding the
- 85 -
==PAGE:93==
7
DISCUSSION
reactant in the electrolyte are ignored along with the charge of the cathode. The
calculation does not take into account that both cementite and cohenite have the
chemical formula of Fe3C. To include these eﬀects is beyond the scope of this report
and would require an chemist working for a longer period of time on this speciﬁc
topic.
Figure 153: Transformation from a initial to a ﬁnal state through an activated state of higher energy with and
without a catalyst present. Figure modiﬁed from [6]
With the knowledge that β-Fe2O3, carbides and carbon in the state of either sp2
or sp3 were found in the as deposited coating the reactions seen in Equation 16, 17
and 18 are proposed. They will provide an indication if citric acid or fragments with
either a carboxyl or alcohol group are stable in the coating.
3C6H8O7 + 50Fe ⇌13Fe3C + 7Fe2O3 + 6CH4
∆G0◦C = −137.5 kcal
(16)
13Fe + 6C2H6O ⇌2Fe2O3 + 3Fe3C + 9CH4
∆G0◦C = −96.9 kcal
(17)
13Fe + 3C2H4O2 ⇌2Fe2O3 + 3Fe3C + 3CH4
∆G0◦C = −47.9 kcal
(18)
All ∆G are negative at room temperature which gives a clear indication that it
would be unlikely to present in the coating without reacting with the iron.
The carbon seen in a non-crystalline state after annealing at 420 ◦C points toward
a transformation from either carbides, methan or ethan into carbon.
The three
reaction equations can be seen in Equation 19, 20 and 21. They will provide an
indication if Fe3C or fragments of methan or ethan are stable in the coating.
Fe3C ⇌3Fe + C
∆G0◦C = −4.9 kcal
(19)
CH4 ⇌C + 2H2
∆G600◦C = −1.3 kcal
(20)
C2H6 ⇌2C + 3H2
∆G300◦C = −4.7 kcal
(21)
The Fe3C are not stable at room temperature which is also seen in the thermo-
dynamic stable Fe-C phase diagram shown in Figure 6 (a). Ethan becomes unstable
around 300 ◦C and methan requires a higher temperature around 600 ◦C before
reacting with Fe.
- 86 -
==PAGE:94==
7
DISCUSSION
It is not expected that the carbon present in the coating will contain a functional
group based on the calculated ∆G for the reaction equations, which is supported by
the XPS results. The temperature ethan becomes unstable is consistence with the
temperature of which the average hydrogen content decreases to a minimum after
24 hours. With the equations it is not possible to explain the non-crystalline state
not begin present in 315◦C-24h, but is seen in 420◦C-24h.
7.3
Industrial applications
It is necessary to know the limitation of the coating before suggesting it for a speciﬁc
technical application. Experiments have shown that the coating ﬂakes of the sub-
strate if temperatures around 300 ◦C is reached in air. The hardness of the coating
decreases when the temperatures is at 315 ◦C for longer than 24 hour. This rules
out applications at elevated temperatures.
The micro-cracks was ﬁrst thought of as an unwanted by product of the annealing
process. The potential of having a coating with a hardness around 600 ± 25 HV full
of micro-cracks with an length around 1.3 µm and width of 0.7 µm was pointed out
in a discussion with professor Per Møller. They are thought to increase lubricants
adhesion by capillary forces and if an additional coating is necessary it can be
anchored in the uniformly spread micro-cracks.
Especially three results points towards the coating being suitable for bearings.
The average hardness around 750 HV for the as deposited coating will reduce abra-
sive wear. No impurities or ceramic particles above the size of a few nano-meters are
found in the as deposited coating, which will reduce the possibility of wear particles
introduced. It is believed that lubricant would gain a better adhesion towards the
coating as a result of the high carbon content. Most lubricants is based on oils com-
bined with diﬀerent additive selected for a speciﬁc application [28]. A preliminary
wear study of the coating showed an increased resistance towards abrasive wear,
compared to a hard chromium coating (data not shown).
It would be time consuming to deposit thick layers based on a coating rate
of approximately 20 µm per hour available at the moment. Repeated pressure or
load cycles on a thin hard coating on a soft bulk can cause a surface treatment to
fail by fatigue wear. Tribological measurements needs to be conducted in order to
concluded if the coating can endure the cyclic load subjected to a bearing. Adhesive
wear can be introduced if the rollers is produced in a material with a high aﬃnity
towards iron and not lubricated properly. From a corrosion point of view the high
standard electron potential of graphite can pose a thread for selective corrosion as
seen in graphization of grey cast iron [4]. No results have identiﬁed graphite in the
as deposited sample, but the XPS measurement of C1s suggest graphite could be
present in the coating.
It is imaginable that the coating would be possible to apply on a workpiece using
brush plating, based on the temperature, pH-value and the chemical composition
of the electrolyte. Using brush plating makes on-site repair of damaged workpieces
possible. The plating rate using brush plaiting is normally higher due to a reduction
of the diﬀusion zone [32].
- 87 -
==PAGE:95==
8
CONCLUSION
8
Conclusion
The coating is found to consist of a column like structure perpendicular to the
substrate consisting of nano sized ferrite grains. The coating is impurity free with
a chemical composition consisting of 0.85 wt% carbon and iron along with oxygen
and hydrogen. The phases present in the coating are ferrite, β-Fe2O3 and carbides
along with an unidentiﬁed phase accumulated in sizes around 2 nm. The ﬁnding of
β-Fe2O3 is important since it has preciously been misinterpreted as ϵ-carbide which
presence is attributed to the coating being in the state of tempered martensite. The
hardness of the coating is measured to around 750 ± 100 HV. The hardness can
be increased to 771 ± 16 HV by annealing at 315 ◦C for 1 hour. The coatings
hardness is believed to arise from a relation between the nano sized ferrite grains,
and coherent or semi-coherent nano sized carbides in the parent phase.
The morphology of the coating changes to a structure with nano sized grains along
with observable 110 nm sized cohenite precipitates when annealed at 315 ◦C for 1
hour. A depletion of carbon along with a non-crystalline phase are seen for the
coating annealed at 420 ◦C for 24 hour. The coating is being covered with micro-
cracks uniformly spread at this temperature, which is suspected to be related stress
relieves. The carbon diﬀuse towards the outermost surface and accumulates in the
form of graphite along with a transformation of cohenite to graphite and ferrite
when annealed at 630 ◦C for 24 hour. No results from this report have pointed
towards the microstructure should consist of martensite or tempered martensite.
The ﬁndings that have not been published previously are shown below.
• The presence of β-Fe2O3.
• The carbide cohenite.
• The non-crystalline phase.
• Micro-cracks in the coating.
• The presence of graphite.
• Accumulation of carbon/graphite in the outermost surface.
There are two ways to optimize the treatment process used for the steel coating.
The hardness of the coating can be increased by increase the chemical concentration
of the electrolyte and thereby obtaining an unoriented dispersion type morphology.
Furthermore the occluded oxygen can be reduce in the coating by lowering the cur-
rent density to around 3.0 A/dm2.
The technical areas where the coating can be applied are in bearings and repairing
of worn-out machinery. The uniformly spread micro-cracks in the coating annealed
at 420 ◦C could ensure a good adhesion for an additional coating in a multilayer
structure.
- 88 -
==PAGE:96==
9
FUTURE EXPERIMENTS
9
Future experiments
Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry and Thermogravimetric analysis
Diﬀerential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measures endothermic and exothermic
phase changes in a specimen by measuring the energy changes under a controlled
heating process. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measures the weight changes
of a specimen under a controlled heated process. These measurements could provide
information about phase transformations in the coating. A thin uniform substrate
with a well deﬁned thick uniform coating is needed to obtain good results in both
measurements.
A preliminary measurement with a sample cut to 2 x 2 cm was preformed with
a gas ﬂow of H2 in the sample chamber to avoid the coating from ﬂacking oﬀ. The
instrument used is able to perform TGA and DSC measurements simultaneously,
but the DSC detector was out of order when the preliminary test was performed.
The preliminary TGA test showed a weight loss around 260 ◦C on the ﬁrst heating
step and no weight loss in the second heating step. The raw data can be seen in
Appendix A.6 Figure A27. The appearance of the coating had changed after the
preliminary measurement to bright greyish appearance. It was decided to postpone
further experiments until samples with a optimum design are produced. The inﬂu-
ence of H2 on the coating needs also to be understood.
X-ray diﬀraction
In-situ measurements at a constant elevated temperature or an increasing tem-
perature can provide information of the type of transformations seen for the diﬀer-
ent phases being developed in the coating. The information can be compared with
DSC/TGA measurements for a greater interpretation of the data.
In-situ XRD measurements were performed in both vacuum and N2, but it were
not possible to avoid the coating from ﬂacking oﬀ.
Ex-situ measurements of the texture and stresses in the as deposited and an-
nealed coatings, would provide data of the impact of phase transitions and the
changes in the morphology. Cross sections measurements by SEM and TEM would
consolidate the XRD texture measurements.
Transmission electron microscope
The location and size of the β-Fe2O3, cohenite and magnetite particles can be
found using by dark-ﬁeld on identiﬁed diﬀraction spots.
Information of the chemical composition and location of the unidentiﬁed phase
seen in both sample examined, would be obtained by locating a grain boundary be-
tween ferrite columns and examine the diﬀraction pattern for the unidentiﬁed phase.
An area with a high concentration of the unidentiﬁed phase should be located, us-
ing dark-ﬁeld on its diﬀraction spot. Information of the chemical composition of
the unidentiﬁed phase can be found by EDS mapping an area with a high density
along with an area without intensity. It was concluded that the size of the uniden-
tiﬁed phase is around 2 nm in the as deposited sample. The resolution of the EDS
signal was calculated to around 6 nm for a 100 nm thick sample and therefore it is
important to have an area with high density of the phase.
Details about if the unidentiﬁed phase, found in the diﬀraction pattern, is ex-
isting in the grain boundaries can be found by preparing a sample so the electrons
- 89 -
==PAGE:97==
9
FUTURE EXPERIMENTS
would be transmitted parallel to the ferrite column.
The substrate
Information of the industrial application where the coating could be used would
be found by electroplating on multiple substrate. It would also provide information
about adhesion and how texture of the coating is impacted by the substrate.
The electrolyte
The ﬁrst publication of a coating electrodeposited with a similar electrolyte as
investigated in this thesis was in 1989 [25]. In the meantime multiple modiﬁcations
to the electrolyte has been published all of which improves the coatings properties.
A short list of interesting electrolytes and their improved properties can be seen in
Table 15.
Table 15: Table of electrolytes.
Elements
Improvements
Publication
Fe-C-B
Wear resistance
[26]
Fe-C-P
Wear resistance
[31]
Co-Ni-Fe-C
Durable cathode in hydrogen production
[45]
Hull cell test
Hull cell test would provide valuable information of how the current density,
substrate and the electrolyte aﬀects the coating. The quality of the coating can
be estimated using the appearance along hardness measurements and cross section
SEM micrograph.
- 90 -
==PAGE:98==
10
REFERENCES
10
References
[1] Association of World Steel: The white book of Steel. 2012.
[2] Thermo Avantage: XPS knowlegde view, 2015.
[3] Authors., V. ASM Metals Handbook Volume 3 - Alloy Phase Diagrams. 1992.
[4] Bardal, E. Corrosion and Protection. 2004.
[5] Bradshaw,
L.
http://depts.washington.edu/moleng/wordpress/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/gdoes anode scheme1.png.
[6] Bruice, P. Y. Essential Organic Chemistry. 2010.
[7] Callister, W. D. Material Science and Engineering: An Introduction. 2007.
[8] Chandler, H. Introduction to hardness testing. 1999.
[9] Cheng, L. I. U., Brakman, C. M., Korevaar, B. M., and Mitte-
meijer, E. J. The tempering of Iron-Carbon martensite; Dilatometric and
Calorimetric Analysis Cheng 1988.pdf.
[10] Cohen, M. X-Ray Diﬀraction.
[11] Cornell, R. M., and Schewertmann, U. The Iron Oxides: Structure,
Properties, Reactions, Occurences and Uses. 2004.
[12] de Keijser, T. H., Langford, J. I., Mittemeijer, E. J., and Vogels,
a. B. P. Use of the Voigt function in a single-line method for the analysis
of X-ray diﬀraction line broadening. Journal of Applied Crystallography 15,
Copyright 1982, IEE (1982), 308–314.
[13] Fujiwara, Y., Izaki, M., and Enomoto, H. Eﬀects of Hydroxycarboxylic
Acids on the Electrodeposition of Fe-C Alloys. Denki Kagaku (1993), 840–842.
[14] Fujiwara, Y., Izaki, M., and Enomoto, H. Optimization of bath com-
position for hard Fe-C alloy plating.
Journal of applied electrochemistry 28
(1998), 855–862.
[15] Fujiwara, Y., Nagayama, T., Nakae, A., Izaki, M., Enomoto, H.,
and Yamauchi, E. Electrodeposition of Fe-C Alloys from Baths Containing
Dicarboxylic Acids with a Linear Alkyl Chain.
J. Electrochem. Soc 143, 8
(1996), 2584–2590.
[16] Genderen, M. J., Isac, M., B¨ottger, a., and Mittemeijer, E. J. Ag-
ing and tempering behavior of iron-nickel-carbon and iron-carbon martensite.
Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 28, 3 (1997), 545–561.
[17] Georgia
State
University.
http://hyperphysics.phy-
astr.gsu.edu/hbase/quantum/bragg.html, 2014.
[18] Goodhew, P. J., Humphreys, J., and Beanland, R. Electron Microscopy
and Analysis, Third Edition. 2001.
- 91 -
==PAGE:99==
10
REFERENCES
[19] Haseeb, A. S. M. A., Hayashi, Y., Masuda, M., and Arita, M. On
the nature of the electrochemically synthesized hard Fe-0.96 mass pct C alloy
ﬁlm. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions B 33, 6 (2002), 921–927.
[20] Haseeb, A. S. M. A., and Huq, M. Z. Electrodeposition of martensitic
iron-carbon alloy coatings at room temperature. Metal Finishing 95, 3 (1997),
30–34.
[21] Haseeb, A. S. M. A., Nishida, T., Masuda, M., and Hayashi, Y.
M¨ossbauer investigation on electrodeposited Fe-C and Fe-Ni-C alloys. Scripta
materialia 44 (2001), 519–523.
[22] Hull, D., and Bacon, D. J. Introduction to Dislocations. 2011.
[23] Humphreys, F. J., and Hatherly, M. Recrystallization and related an-
nealing phenomena. 2004.
[24] Izaki, M., Enomoto, H., Nakae, A., Terada, S., Eiko, Y., and Omi,
T. Phase Transformations and Hardness Changes in Electrodeposited Alloy
Films Iron-carbon alloy ﬁlms. J. Surf- Fin. Soc. Jpn 45 (1994), 1303–09.
[25] Izaki, M., Enomoto, H., and Omi, T. Hardness and Carbon Content of
Fe Electroplate from Sulfate Bath Containing l-Ascorbic Acid and Citric Acid.
J. Surf. Fin. Soc. Jpn 40 (1989), 1304–05.
[26] Izaki, M., Miyamoto, N., Nakae, A., and Hasegawa, T. Martensitic
Iron-Carbon-Boron Alloy Electrodeposit with Improved Mechanical Properties.
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 149, 7 (2002), 370–374.
[27] Izaki, M., and Omi, T. Structural characterization of martensitic iron-carbon
alloy ﬁlms electrodeposited from an iron(ll) sulfate solution. Metallurgical and
Materials Transactions A 27, 2 (1996), 483–486.
[28] Mang, T. Lubricants and lubrication. 2006.
[29] Matthews, A. Magnetite forrnation by the reduction of hematite with iron
under hydrothermal conditions. American Mineralogist 6 (1976), 927–932.
[30] Mittemeijer, E. J., Cheng, L., Schaaf, P. J., Brakman, C. M., and
Korevaar, B. M. Analysis of nonisothermal transformation kinetics; temper-
ing of iron-carbon and iron-nitrogen martensites. Metallurgical Transactions A
19, 4 (1988), 925–932.
[31] Miyamoto, N., Yoshida, K., Matsuoka, M., and Tamaki, J. Eﬀect
of Phosphorus Content on Mechanical Properties of Electrodeposited Fe-C-P
Alloys. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 151, 10 (2004), C645.
[32] Møller, P., and Nielsen, L. P. Advanced Surface Technology. 2013.
[33] Moulder, J. F., Stickle, W. F., Sobol, P. E., and Bomben, K. D.
Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, 1995.
[34] Myers, B. TEM Sample Preparation with the FIB/SEM, 2009.
- 92 -
==PAGE:100==
10
REFERENCES
[35] Naumkin, A. V., Kraut-Vass, A., Gaarenstroom, S. W., and Pow-
ell, C. J. http://srdata.nist.gov/xps/Default.aspx, 2012.
[36] Panayotova, M. Deposition of Fe – C alloy on structural steel and cast iron
for repair of worn machine parts. Surface & Coating Technology 124 (2000),
266–271.
[37] Porter, D. A., Easterling, K. E., and Sherif, M. Y. Phase transfor-
mations in metals and alloys. 2009.
[38] Scott, E. R. D. New carbide, (Fe,Ni)23C6, found in iron meteorites. Nature
(Physical Science) 229, 2 (1971), 61 – 62.
[39] Suryanarayana, C., and Norton, M. G. X-Ray Diﬀraction: A Practical
Approach. 1998.
[40] Van Genderen, M. J., B¨ottger, a., Cernik, R. J., and Mittemei-
jer, E. J.
Early stages of decomposition in iron-carbon and iron-nitrogen
martensites: Diﬀraction analysis using synchrotron radiation.
Metallurgical
Transactions A 24, 9 (1993), 1965–1973.
[41] Waelkens, M., and Poblome, J. Sagalassos III. 1995.
[42] Williamson, G., and Hall, W. X-ray line broadening from ﬁled aluminium
and wolfram. Acta Metallurgica 1, 1 (1953), 22–31.
[43] Winand, R. Electrocrystallization - theory and applications. Hydrometallurgy
29, 1-3 (1992), 567–598.
[44] Yang, L. Materials Characterization. 2013.
[45] Zabinski, P. R., Meguro, S., Asami, K., and Hashimoto, K. Elec-
trodeposited Co-Ni-Fe-C Alloys for Hydrogen Evolution in a Hot 8 kmol/mˆ3
NaOH. Materials Transactions 47, 11 (2006), 2860–2866.
- 93 -
==PAGE:101==
A
APPENDIX
A
Appendix
A.1
Sample preparation
Table A1: Table of the steps in the Grinding process
Step
SiC - Grid
Rotation [RPM]
Force [N]
Time [min]
1
120
150
10
To work area
2
220
150
10
3
3
320
150
10
3
4
500
150
10
3
5
1000
150
10
1.5
6
4000
150
10
1
Table A2: Table of the steps in the polishing process
Step
Cloth
Diamond [µm]
Lubrication
Rotation [RPM]
Force [N]
Time [min]
1
Mol
3
Blue
150
10
3
2
Nap
1
Blue
150
10
3
A.2
Hardness measurement
Table A3: Table of measured hardness at 9 sites for all samples.
Measurement
Average
Standard
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
hardness
deviation
As deposited
599
638
796
798
608
826
742
796
890
743.7
104.4
105◦C-1h
705
608
755
693
670
742
698
649
670
687.8
45.3
205◦C-1h
717
768
768
742
729
755
717
755
729
742.2
20.2
315◦C-1h
782
782
768
768
796
755
768
782
742
771.4
16.2
420◦C-1h
608
670
618
599
648
590
608
599
608
616.4
26.0
525◦C-1h
590
628
608
590
581
538
515
555
599
578.2
35.8
630◦C-1h
436
425
348
493
487
442
414
473
467
442.8
44.9
105◦C-24h
729
659
638
670
648
705
705
693
659
678.4
30.8
315◦C-24h
638
670
659
768
728
628
768
638
628
680.7
58.5
420◦C-24h
515
523
546
523
546
563
581
581
467
538.3
36.2
630◦C-24h
238
293
236
248
253
266
245
203
266
249.7
24.9
- 94 -
==PAGE:102==
A
APPENDIX
A.3
X-ray diﬀraction
Figure A1: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
the as deposit sample 110 ferrite
peak.
The red line indicates the
measurement and the blue line the
ﬁt.
Figure A2: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
the as deposit sample 200 ferrite
peak.
The red line indicates the
measurement and the blue line the
ﬁt.
Figure A3: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
the as deposit sample 211 ferrite
peak.
The red line indicates the
measurement and the blue line the
ﬁt.
Figure A4: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
105◦C-1h 110 ferrite peak. The red
line indicates the measurement and
the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A5: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
105◦C-1h 200 ferrite peak. The red
line indicates the measurement and
the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A6: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
105◦C-1h 211 ferrite peak. The red
line indicates the measurement and
the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A7: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
205◦C-1h 110 ferrite peak. The red
line indicates the measurement and
the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A8: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
205◦C-1h 200 ferrite peak. The red
line indicates the measurement and
the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A9: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting of
205◦C-1h 211 ferrite peak. The red
line indicates the measurement and
the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A10: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 315◦C-1h 110 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A11: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 315◦C-1h 200 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A12: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 315◦C-1h 211 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
- 95 -
==PAGE:103==
A
APPENDIX
Figure A13: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 420◦C-1h 110 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A14: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 420◦C-1h 200 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A15: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 420◦C-1h 211 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A16: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 525◦C-1h 110 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A17: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 525◦C-1h 200 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A18: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 525◦C-1h 211 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A19: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 630◦C-1h 110 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A20: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 630◦C-1h 200 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Figure A21: Psudo-Voight ﬁtting
of 630◦C-1h 211 ferrite peak. The
red line indicates the measurement
and the blue line the ﬁt.
Table A4: Table of the XRD PDFs used for phase analysis.
Phase
PDF
β-Fe2O3
01-076-1821
Graphite
00-056-0159
Fe3O4
01-087-0244
Ferrite
06-0696
- 96 -
==PAGE:104==
A
APPENDIX
A.4
Glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy
Figure A22: GDOES calibration curve for carbon.
Figure A23: GDOES calibration curve for iron.
- 97 -
==PAGE:105==
A
APPENDIX
Figure A24: GDOES method settings.
- 98 -
==PAGE:106==
A
APPENDIX
A.5
Transmission electron microscope dark-ﬁeld micrograph
Figure A25: Transmission electron micrograph dark-ﬁeld of as deposit sample.
Diﬀraction spot measured is indicated as DF1 in Figure 143.
Figure A26: Transmission electron micrograph dark-ﬁeld of as deposit sample.
Diﬀraction spot measured is indicated as DF1 in Figure 148.
- 99 -
==PAGE:107==
A
APPENDIX
A.6
Thermogravimetric analysis
Figure A27: Raw data from a preliminary TGA measurement of a 2 x 2 cm plate with a thickness of 1.25 mm and
a coating plated on both sides with a thickness of 15-20 µm.
- 100 -
