==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
From Municipal Waste to Cooling through 
Gasifi cation, SOFC and Absorption Plant
Andreas W. L. Borgen 
March 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis
From Municipal Waste to Cooling
through Gasiﬁcation, SOFC and
Absorption Plant
Author:
Andreas W. L. Borgen
s083202
DTU Mech
Supervisors:
Masoud Rokni
Ulrik Birk Henriksen
March, 2016
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Project information
Title
From Municipal Waste to Cooling through
Gasiﬁcation, SOFC and Absorption Plant
Type
Master thesis
ECTS Point
35
Language
English
Student
Andreas W. L. Borgen
s083202
Study line
M.Sc. Sustainable Energy - Thermal Energy
Start date
August 2015
End date
March 2016
Supervisor
Masoud Rokni
Dr., Docent, Associate Professor
mr@mek.dtu.dk
Nils Koppels Allé, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Building 403, room 115
Ulrik Birk Henriksen
Senior Researcher
ubhe@kt.dtu.dk
Frederiksborgvej 399, 4000 Roskilde
Building 313
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis concludes the authors master program in Sustainable Energy at the
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Section of Thermal Energy at Techni-
cal University of Denmark, DTU. The thesis was performed under the super-
vision of main supervisor Associate Professor Masoud Rokni and co-supervisor
Senior Researcher Ulrik Birk Henriksen.
I would like to thank Masoud for his guidance, supervision and our almost
weekly meetings, Ulrik and Rasmus from DTU Risø for invaluable help regard-
ing the gasiﬁcation technology. I would like to thank Arne Jørgensen Egelund
from DTU for moral support, discussion and guidance.
- Andreas W. L. Borgen 2016
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Municipal solid waste can be considered a valuable resource to be used for
energy production. An decentralized small scale alternative to the conventional
energy recovery methods has been suggested. With a gasiﬁer, a heat treatment
of solid material, a combustible gas can be produced and fed to a solid oxide
fuel cell to produce power. The by-product heat from the processes can be
utilized to produce cooling through an absorption chiller plant.
The system has been designed and modelled with the in-house software DNA.
Simulations results in a thermal and exergetic eﬃciency of 35 and 32.8 %
respectively, a signiﬁcant increase in performance compared to the conventional
waste-to-energy methods. A parametric study has further improved the system
to 37.4 % thermal eﬃciency if better components is utilized. The absorption
plant can adequately utilize the by-product heat to provide chilled water for
district cooling with a 0.7 coeﬃcient of performance.
Diﬀerent municipal solid waste types has been analysed and evaluated based on
waste fractions, showing a signiﬁcant variance in properties depending on the
activity generating the waste. The diﬀerence in heating value between fuels
is over 30 % and the impact on the system performance shows that a good
estimate of waste composition is important for the design.
A thermoeconomic analysis shows that under given assumptions the system is
quite expensive, primarily due to the fuel cell and gasiﬁer component costs.
The resulting power production cost of 0.57 $/kWh is signiﬁcantly higher than
other power production methods, indicating that currently the fuel cell and
gasiﬁer technologies requires additional research and development to decrease
costs. The exergy analysis ﬁnds the high temperature diﬀerences and chemical
reactors in the system to be a major factor in energy ineﬃciencies.
v
==PAGE:10==
Contents
Project information
i
Preface
iii
Abstract
v
Contents
vi
Nomenclature
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background and Technologies
7
2.1
Future Danish energy system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
What is municipal solid waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Gasiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Fuel cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5
Absorption cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6
District heating and cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
MSW as a Fuel
29
3.1
Fuel composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Waste fractions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Moisture and ash content
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Heating value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
System Modelling
41
4.1
Simulation tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
System modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Gasiﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Solid oxide fuel cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Bottoming cycle production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Other components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.7
System performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.8
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
vi
==PAGE:11==
CONTENTS
vii
5
Design Results
59
5.1
Preliminary simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Improvement strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Anode conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.4
Product gas composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.5
Bottoming cycle conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.6
Fuel composition eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6
Parametric Study
73
6.1
SOFC stack and temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
SOFC utilization factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3
Gasiﬁcation temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.4
Carbon conversion factor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.5
Turbo machinery eﬃciencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.6
Ambient conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.7
Other considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.8
Absorption plant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.9
Optimized design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.10 Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7
Flue Gas Condensation
89
7.1
Condensing ﬂue gas and 4th generation DH . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.2
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
8
Exergy and Thermoeconomic Analysis
97
8.1
Thermoeconomic principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
8.2
Component costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
8.3
Cost of fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
8.4
Exergy and cost balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
8.5
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
8.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
9
Discussion
113
9.1
Design limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
9.2
MSW as a fuel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
9.3
System operation and performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
9.4
Economic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
9.5
Part load performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
9.6
Other considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
116
10 Conclusion
117
Bibliography
119
List of Figures
128
List of Tables
132
A Waste
135
==PAGE:12==
viii
CONTENTS
B Calculations
141
B.1
Speciﬁc heat estimate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
B.2
Performance parameters calculation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
C Modelling
145
D DNA script
151
E DNA output
163
F Exergetic eﬃciency Excel
169
G Thermoeconomic EES script
171
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
AB
Air blower
AH
Air heater
AP
Anode heating
APP
Absorption plant
BFB
Bubbling ﬂuidized bed
CB
Catalytic burner
CCF
Carbon conversion factor
CCHP
Combined cooling heat and power
CFB
Circulating ﬂuidized bed
CGE
Cold gas eﬃciency
CHP
Combined heat and power
COP
Coeﬃcient of Performance
CP
Cathode preheater
DC
District cooling
DE
District energy
DH
District heating
DiC
Direct Costs
DNA
Dynamic network analysis
DR
Dryer
DS
Desulphurizer
DTU
Technical University Denmark
EES
Engineering Equation Solver
FC
Fuel cell
GB
Gas blower
GHG
Green house gasses
GSF
Gasiﬁer
HEX
Heat exchanger
HHV
Higher heating value
HHW
Household waste
LHV
Lower heating value
LMTD
Logarithmic mean temperature diﬀerence
MSW
Municipal solid waste
PEC
Purchased equipment cost
PEM
Proton exchange membrane
PPM
Parts per million
R&D
Research and development
RDF
Refuse derived fuel
ix
==PAGE:14==
x
CONTENTS
RHW
Residual household waste
SB
Steam blower
SH
Steam heater
SOFC
Solid oxide fuel cell
TCI
Total capital investment
VCC
Vapour Compression Cycle
WtE
Waste-to-energy
Constants
F
Faraday’s constant
[96485.34 C/mol]
Greek symbols
∆
Diﬀerence
[ - ]
ϵ
Exergetic eﬃciency
[ - ]
η
Eﬃciency
[ - ]
ξ
Concentration
[ - ]
Latin symbols
˙C
Cost rate
[$/kWh]
˙E
Exergy
[kW]
˙m
Mass ﬂow
[kg/s]
˙Q
Heat ﬂow
[kJ/s]
˙Z
Yearly expense rate
[$/kWh]
A
Area
[m2]
C
Cost
[$]
c
Speciﬁc exergy cost
[$/kWh]
CT
Construction time
[years]
D
Diameter
[m]
E
Exergy
[kJ/s]
e
Speciﬁc exergy
[kJ/kg]
h or H
Enthalpy
[kJ/kg] or [kJ/kmol]
L
Length
[m]
L
number of electrons, number of years
[-]
Mf
Maintenance factor
[m]
Mf
Maintenance factor
[-]
P
Power
[kW]
p
Pressure
[bar]
Q
Heat
[kJ]
qi
Interest factor
[-]
T
Temperature
[◦C]
U
Heat transfer coeﬃcient
[W/(m2K)]
Uf
Utilization factor
[-]
V
Voltage
[volts]
W
Work
[kW]
w
Mass fraction
[-]
x
Vapour quality
[-]
Subscripts
==PAGE:15==
CONTENTS
xi
□0
Reference state, dead state
[-]
□c
Compressor
[-]
□D
Destroyed, Destruction
[-]
□el
Electrical
[-]
□e
Evaporator
[-]
□F
Fuel
[-]
□gc
Gas cooler
[-]
□g
Generator
[-]
□HEX
Heat exchanger
[-]
□h
Heat operated system
[-]
□k
k-th component
[-]
□L
Lost, Losses
[-]
□m
Mechanical
[-]
□P
Product
[-]
□R
Reaction
[-]
□sys
System
[-]
□th
Thermal
[-]
□tot
Total
[-]
Superscripts
□∗
dry basis, ash free
[-]
□CI
Capital investment
[-]
□OM
Operation and maintenance
[-]
□P H
Physical, Sensible
[-]
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Shift in the energy sector
Denmark has in the recent decades been investing in a green transition of the
energy sector. From early 1970 Denmark has moved from being completely
dependent on imported oil to a power sector utilizing primarily coal. With
the more recent focus on fossil fuel depletion and the environmental impact of
coal power production, another shift has been happening in the Danish energy
systems. The current ambitious energy and climate policy of the European
Union and the Danish government, requires a more sustainable energy system
without fossil fuels[1].
Wind power plays a signiﬁcant part in this transition, together with biomass
as a substitute for coal in large power plants. With the introduction of sus-
tainable energy, such as wind and solar, into the Danish energy system, the
old model of large combined heat and power plants is no longer feasible to
the same extent. Two overarching energy system scenarios for Denmark are
considered by the Danish Energy Agency, a wind or a biomass based system.
Each scenario includes some biomass and wind, but one of the two technologies
are the focus, such that the wind scenario relies on electrical vehicles in the
transportation sector, while the biomass utilizes liquid biomass derived fuels.
As a consequence the biomass scenario is heavily reliant on importing biomass
as fuel both in power plants and for conversion to liquid fuels. The wind sce-
nario on the other hand can have problems with security of supply due to the
availability of renewable energy sources, but relies only on biomass which can
be produced locally[2].
No matter the scenario, more eﬃcient and sustainable energy production meth-
ods and technologies are needed in the future, if Denmark is to reach the goal of
a fossil fuel free society by 2050. The available fuel in both scenarios, primarily
biomass, must be utilized to the fullest potential.
Polygeneration
Cogeneration means the production of heat and power simultaneously, widely
accepted for having a higher energy eﬃciency and reducing primary energy
1
==PAGE:18==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
consumption compared to producing the two products in separate processes.
The beneﬁt of the concept is illustrated on ﬁgure 1.1 for separate production
and ﬁgure 1.2 for cogeneration with estimated products based on common
eﬃciencies.
System A
Power 33 MW
Fuel 88 MW
System B
Heat 52 MW
Fuel 72 MW
Figure 1.1: Illustrative example of separate production of heat and power.
System C
Power 33 MW
Heat 52 MW
Fuel 100 MW
Figure 1.2: Illustrative example of cogeneration of heat and power.
Polygeneration, or trigeneration, is the production of three or more products
in the same plant, further adding to the advantages of cogeneration, being
even more eﬃcient and less polluting.
The system consist of at least one
power producing unit and one or more heat recovery systems, producing district
heating/cooling, process steam, liquid fuels and so forth. Utilizing the waste
heat from power production is a key factor in an energy eﬀective system, in
particular smaller systems closer to potential consumers[3].
Decentralization of small scale cogeneration plants is widespread in Denmark,
but does not extend to waste incineration, which is far more centralized[4][5].
Many power stations in Denmark has surplus heat available all year long and
utilizes it for district heating during the winter months, but during the summer
most of this available heat is dispersed in the atmosphere. This is especially the
case for waste incineration plants, which has to operate all year to dispose of
municipal waste. The temperature of district heating is however conveniently
adequate to utilize in absorption chiller plants, producing district cooling from
the available surplus heat[6].
Waste as a valuable resource
According to The World Bank’s report What a waste: a global review of solid
waste management from 2012, municipal solid waste (MSW) generation will
continue to increase in the coming decades. From an estimate of 1.3 billion
tonnes MSW in 2013 to 2.2 billion tonnes in 2025, primarily due to population
growth combined with urbanization. Furthermore the authors, Hoornweg et
al. predicts that MSW generation will not peak in the current century[7].
Solid waste generation varies signiﬁcantly depending on the region in the world,
income level, degree of urbanization and so forth. The income level in particular
==PAGE:19==
1.1. MOTIVATION
3
is important, as low income capita generate between 0.6 and 1.0 kg MSW per
day, while high income capita generate from 1.1 to 4.5 kg/day.
The waste
generated by the urban population in four income categories are shown in
ﬁgure 1.3. The ﬁgure displays how the growth in waste generation is expected
to increase more than twofold for the lower and middle lower income countries,
while the growth is more moderate in the higher income countries. The high
income countries (such as Denmark) are responsible for the largest generation
rate of MSW in 2010, but on the other hand have a far superior waste handling
system, compared to the developing world[8].
Low income
Lower middle income
Upper middle income
High income
75
369
243
602
213
956
360
686
Data 2010
Projected 2025
Figure 1.3: Waste generated in million tons/day in the urban population for
each income group[7].
In the future scenarios mentioned previously, MSW is considered a biomass
feedstock and valuable resource. In Denmark waste is sorted, so that only the
fraction which can not be reused or recycled is used as fuel in waste incineration
plants.
These plants however suﬀer from rather poor energy eﬃciency and
energy utilization[9].
Novel technologies
To more eﬃciently utilize the MSW as a fuel, new technologies must be consid-
ered to replace or support the current. The main problem with MSW as a fuel
is the heterogeneity. MSW is comprised of many diﬀerent diverse materials of
varying size and density with diﬀerent properties.
Gasiﬁcation is an alternative to the conventional waste incineration combustion
of solid waste, often utilized for more uniform biomass feedstock such as wheat
or wood pellets. Broadly speaking, gasiﬁcation is a high temperature thermal
conversion process of carbonaceous solid and liquid material into a combustible
gas. One advantage of gasiﬁcation compared to combustion is the relatively
clean gas, and the possibility of further removal of undesirable particles from
the gas before utilizing it in a power producing unit. Furthermore, a power
producing unit will not suﬀer the same technical limitations as a conventional
waste incineration plant in terms of corrosion issues when utilizing MSW gas
from gasiﬁcation[10].
The gas produced from the gasiﬁcation process can be used in conventional
==PAGE:20==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
power production units, such as a gas turbine or boiler in a steam cycle. A
fairly new concept is to integrate the gasiﬁcation process with a fuel cell. Fuel
cells are an interesting small scale technology, which converts hydrogen and
carbon rich fuels into electricity without the need for a burner or conversion
through mechanical work.
Several diﬀerent fuel cell designs in various stages of development are available
today. The solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) in particular are interesting from a
small scale system point of view. The SOFC has two major features making it
excellent for gas produced from MSW. A high operating temperature (700 to
1100 ◦C) allows the fuel cell to be insensitive towards the gas composition and
simpliﬁes the design. Furthermore, the high temperature waste heat produced
during the chemical conversion enables the SOFC to work as a co- or trigener-
ation system[11].
Gasification
SOFC
Input:
MSW
Air & steam
Output:
Gas
Ash
Input:
Gas
Air
Output:
Power
Surplus heat
Heat recovery
Input:
Surplus heat
Output:
Cooling
Heating
Figure 1.4:
Overview of main processes for waste to energy conversion
through gasiﬁcation and SOFC with bottoming cycle heat recovery.
Figure 1.4 shows the system concept diagram of a gasiﬁcation integrated SOFC
with heat recovery. Apart from MSW fuel, the system only utilizes air and
steam which is produced in the process, to produce electricity, heating and
cooling.
1.2
Objectives
The objective of this thesis is to investigate the viability of the system described
in ﬁgure 1.4, a small scale gasiﬁcation integrated SOFC system for trigeneration
of electricity, heating and cooling.
• How should a system combining a gasiﬁer, SOFC and absorption plant
be designed?
• What eﬀect does the MSW composition have on the operation of the in-
vestigated system?
• What is the cost of said system, is it viable today or in the future?
To examine these questions, a thermodynamic model and following simulations
will be carried out in the in-house DNA1 software at the Section of Thermal
1Further introduced in section 4.1.
==PAGE:21==
1.2. OBJECTIVES
5
Energy in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at DTU. The system will
be evaluated based on thermodynamic principles of energy and exergy analysis
as well as economic estimates and considerations.
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Background and Technologies
This chapter will lay the foundation for further analysis of the studied system
in the following chapters. The background for the project will be presented
along with the relevant technologies included in the system. The project relies
primarily on the Danish system and Danish data to the extend where it is
available and applicable.
2.1
Future Danish energy system
Before going into the details of technologies, methods and background informa-
tion for the project, a brief overview of the current and future Danish energy
system is in order. As mentioned in the introduction both Denmark and the
EU as a whole are in at the moment attempting to reduce emissions and thus
the impact of human activities on the climate.
For Denmark this results in a future energy system focused on renewable en-
ergy, primarily wind power and to some extend solar, with biomass conversion
as a sustainable substitute for liquid fuels. In the recent past, Denmark has
been almost entirely based on coal power for base load production with gas
turbines mostly used in peak consumption.
However, most of these power
plants should in the coming 35 years be taken out of commission and either
replaced with wind power or reconﬁgured to utilize biomass. This transition is
not without challenges, as a energy system based on renewable energy has to
be either vast in a geographical terms to cover weather variations or intercon-
nected with neighbouring regions with other types of renewable energy sources,
such as hydro power in the other Scandinavian countries or nuclear power in
Germany1. The current transmission lines will likely not suﬃce in a scenario
where most of Denmark’s power consumption are produced with wind energy
and the wind is not blowing for an extended time[12].
As of 2012 the power consumption in Denmark was covered by 52 % fossil
fuels, 33 % wind power and 15 % other sustainable energy sources. The past
consumption divided among wind power, other sustainable energy and fossil
fuels can be seen on ﬁgure 2.1 together with the consumption in 2012 and po-
litical goal for 2020. It is not clear in which category waste incineration are
1Whether nuclear power is renewable, sustainable or otherwise is possibly up for debate,
together with the fact that Germany might now be moving away from nuclear power.
7
==PAGE:24==
8
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
included[13]. The previous Danish government2 deﬁned energy policy mile-
stones for Denmark, aiming towards all heat and power production being cov-
ered by sustainable energy by 2035. By 2050 this should furthermore include
the transportation sector, a sector current based almost solely on liquid com-
bustible fuels today[14].
84
52
29
4
15
20
12
33
51
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Percentage of Danish power 
consumptiom 
2000                                2012                              2020   
Wind Power
Other Sustainable Energy
Fossil Fuels
Figure 2.1: The power consumption of Denmark in year 2000 and 2012 with
goals for 2020
Two issues with regard to introducing renewable energy in Denmark is ﬂexi-
bility and district heating. It is widely accepted that renewable energy sources
has problems with ﬂexibility and availability and requires large scale energy
storage options, which has yet to be solved. The other issue is that of district
heating production. Wind power has no surplus heat which can be used for
district heating production, as opposed to a CHP ﬁred with coal. Solar ther-
mal heating is said to be a potential large scale district heating production
candidate, but has several concerns regarding proﬁtability, corrosion etc.[15].
The current government (as of November 2015) recognizes the issue and are
considering electrically powered heat pumps a viable solution[13].
2.2
What is municipal solid waste
The deﬁnition of municipal solid waste diﬀers some depending on the source.
According to the world bank the OECD deﬁnes MSW as waste from house-
holds, commerce and trade, oﬃce buildings, institutions and small businesses.
Furthermore yard and garden waste is included in this deﬁnition, but sewage
waste, demolition and construction waste is not[8]. The OECD deﬁnition is
used throughout this project since sewage waste is not considered in any ex-
tend, due to the special treatment requirements, compared to MSW. Waste will
diﬀer substantially according to the producer. Household waste (HHW) will
have a diﬀerent composition from waste produced at a shopping center or hos-
pital. Sorting and recycling further impact the composition, both the degree
of recycling and if the sorting is conducted at the producer (in the household)
2As of writing this, it is unclear to what extend the current government will continue
towards the same goals.
==PAGE:25==
2.2. WHAT IS MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE
9
or at the waste handling site prior to incineration.
Table 2.1 shows an overview of MSW handling in selected European countries.
For some countries the data used by Eurostat dates back to 2007 and 2008,
meaning the situation has liked changed partially since then[16]. Even con-
sidering a certain amount of uncertainties in the data, many countries in the
EU has a large potential for utilizing MSW as a fuel in energy production pur-
poses. Both Greece, Poland and Spain landﬁll over 50 % of produced MSW,
while the Nordic countries landﬁll close to zero percent. For countries without
an extensive district heating grid, local small scale plants close to the waste
producers could prove a viable solution. A system supplying power, heating
and cooling without the large investment cost of setting up a district heating
network, while additionally reducing emissions/pollution and the land used for
landﬁlls, could provide signiﬁcant improvements.
Table 2.1:
MSW overview from selected EU membership countries 2012,
sorted by percentage of incinerated waste[16]. The full table can be seen in
appendix A, table A.1.
MSW
MSW treated
Recycled
Composted
Landﬁlled
Incinerated
kg
person
kg
person
%
%
%
%
Norway
477
467
26
14
2
57
Sweden
462
462
32
15
1
52
Denmark
668
668
32
13
3
52
Germany
611
610
47
18
0
35
Italy
529
523
24
14
41
20
UK
472
465
28
18
37
17
Ireland
570
570
37
8
39
16
Spain
464
464
17
10
63
10
Poland
314
249
13
12
75
1
Greece
503
493
16
2
82
0
Unless otherwise speciﬁed the terms MSW, waste and solid waste are used
interchangeably.
2.2.1
MSW in Denmark
For Denmark the MSW situation between 2011 and 2013 can be seen on ﬁgure
2.2. Primary waste being all received by the diﬀerent treatment stations, for
recycling this means all waste collected for recycling, of which some is transfer
to be incinerated or landﬁlled after sorting, normally classiﬁed as secondary
waste. As a consequence, both the share of incinerated and landﬁlled waste is
likely to be higher, correlating well with table 2.1 when also considering the
age diﬀerence in the data[17].
In previous years around 30 % of Danish MSW is incinerated with up to 70 % for
certain industries[17]. As of 2014 Denmark has 29 incineration plants located in
the vicinity of most major cities[5]. About two-thirds of the plants are combined
heat and power while the remaining is producing solely heat. The incineration
plants supply towards 20 % of Danish district heating consumption.
==PAGE:26==
10
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
2011
2012
2013
0
20
40
60
80
100
5 %
5 %
6 %
27 %
29 %
30 %
66 %
64 %
62 %
Percentage
Recycled
Incinerated
Landﬁlled
Other
Figure 2.2: Primary waste produced in Denmark divided by treatment[17].
The remaining two percent for each year is temporary landﬁlls and special
treatment, such as toxic waste etc.
MSW is normally sorted to some degree, depending on municipality, type of
housing and so forth. For household waste dry paper and board without food
scraps are collected separately together with glass, metal and electronic waste.
Furthermore, biodegradable waste is in rare cases separated from the remaining
household waste, which then consists of wet packaging, human hygiene waste
etc. Hard plastics are often in the form of bottles and are in Denmark in most
cases handed in via the bottle return scheme, meaning the plastics in MSW
are often thinner food packaging and plastic ﬁlm. A further sorting happens at
waste handling, either manual sorting on a conveyor belt or mechanic sorting.
2.2.2
Waste incineration
A waste incineration plant is designed only for the burning of MSW and will
normally not be utilized with other fuels since incinerating waste requires spe-
cial care. The main components are a reception area with feeding system, a
furnace, a boiler, a steam turbine cycle and a cleaning system. A sketch of the
system can be seen on ﬁgure 2.3. For all standard system conﬁgurations the
waste is fed to the furnace/incinerator where heat is released in a ﬂue gas and
utilized for the heating of water. In a CPH plant the water is superheated into
high pressure steam and utilized in a back-pressure steam turbine to produce
heat and power. Smaller waste incineration plants are in some cases designed
only to produce heat, foregoing the CHP plant entirely and heat exchanging
between the fuel gas and district heating system directly. After utilizing the
heat in the ﬂue gas an extensive cleaning system is required to remove dust,
heavy metals, acidic gasses and dioxins, resulting in both a price increase and
production of hazardous/toxic waste.
==PAGE:27==
2.2. WHAT IS MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE
11
Waste 
reception
Furnace
Boiler
Ash
Waste
Flue gas
Steam Cycle
Cold flue gas
Power
DH
Heat
Flue gas treatment
Water treatment
Contaminated water
Figure 2.3: Sketch of waste incineration process, based on[18].
According to the Rambøll report[19] from 2006, one ton of MSW can produce
around 0.67 MWh electricity and about 2 MWh heat. The average electrical
eﬃciency of the system is somewhere around 20 % and have a typical CO2
emission factor of about 37.0 kg/GJ.
Figure 2.4: WtE capacity in Denmark: The dark gray approximately hori-
zontal line is the expected amount of MSW to be incinerated, the light grey
and blue lines are the waste incineration capacity if each plant is operated for
25 and 20 years respectively before major renovation of the plants. Figure take
from [20].
In recent years the waste incineration plants (WtE3) in Denmark have had more
capacity available than the amount of waste generated, leading to a trend of
importing waste to incinerate. Even when considering transport of the waste,
this is a good practise seen both from an economic and environmental point of
view. Most of the waste is produced in the UK (and to some extent Ireland)
where they have severe issues with WtE capacity and thus end up with unde-
sirable landﬁlls if not for exporting. To a smaller degree waste is important
from Norway where utilizing the energy in combined heat and power plants
3Waste to Energy.
==PAGE:28==
12
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
are less common as the district heating network in Norway is supplying only
1-2 % of citizens. In 2013 Denmark imported 929.000 tons of waste (of which
around 158.000 tons is combustible, 4.6 % of total waste combusted in Den-
mark), compared to a total Danish waste production of over 11 million tons in
the same year[17]. Importing of waste is likely to cease within a decade or two,
as exporting countries both reduce combustible waste and catch up with WtE
capacity.
Figure 2.4 shows the expected amount of waste to be incinerated in the coming
decade together with the WtE capacity for two diﬀerent operation scenarios.
General the burner/boiler is the key component of the plant and the one sub-
jected to the highest temperatures and corrosive substances, resulting in the
lowest component lifetime. After 20 years an extensive maintenance is required
to keep the plant operating for another 5 years. The ﬁgure shows a steep de-
cline in capacity between 2010 and 2012 when several plants are reaching the
technical lifetime[20].
2.3
Gasiﬁcation
This section will brieﬂy describe the gasiﬁcation concept, more in detail the
working principle and reactions, present several types of gasiﬁcation reactors
and systems and investigate gasiﬁcation with regard to handling of waste.
The deﬁnition of gasiﬁcation is the thermal conversion of organic material to
combustible gas. The transformation is performed by heating the biomass with
the presence of a gasiﬁcation agent. By controlling the agent ﬂow rate in the
gasiﬁcation process it is possible to perform a incomplete combustion4 of the
feedstock and convert solid heterogeneous material to a gaseous fuel usable for
energy production through conventional conversion technologies, such as a gas
turbine, gas engine or a steam boiler[21]. Perhaps the best known early example
of gasiﬁcation is in London, where it saw large scale use in the production of
"city-gas" from coal, as means of simpler distribution compared to delivering
coal around the city.
Compared to direct combustion of MSW, gasiﬁcation oﬀers some interesting
advantages. Gasiﬁcation plants are possible in smaller scale while still achieving
high eﬃciencies, where as direct combustion plants are too expensive due to the
steam boiler5 and the produced gas are easier to handle and control compared
to solid fuel MSW. By being able to clean the gas before combustion, the
issue with corrosive HCl in the boiler is removed, which would allow for a
higher degree of superheat and up to 6 % points improvement in electrical
eﬃciency[10]. The technology is however not without issues, the produced gas
being both toxic and explosive and plants utilizing gasiﬁcation tend to be more
complex, both the design and during operation[22].
The distinction between products from gasiﬁcation is not clear. Producer gas
is the gas coming out of the gasiﬁcation reactor, comprised of hydrogen H2,
carbon monoxide CO, carbon dioxide CO2, various hydrocarbons for example
4Less than suﬃcient air to reach stoichiometric combustion.
5A small scale plant could incinerate waste and not utilize a steam cycle, but the eﬃciency
are less than desirable compared to the potential.
==PAGE:29==
2.3. GASIFICATION
13
CH4 and impurities, such as tars and sulphur. Synthetic gas on the other hand
is a processed gas, cleaned of impurities (tars) and CO2, comprised of H2 and
CO[21]. This project use the term producer gas or product gas for any gas
produced via gasiﬁcation, as the SOFC does not require clean synthetic gas6.
2.3.1
Working principle
Gasiﬁcation is in general a complex process with a number of physical and
chemical interactions happening at high temperatures in several stages. Drying
and preheating takes place at up to 150 ◦C, while pyrolysis occurs at up to
600 ◦C depending on feedstock and reactor type. The ﬁnal stage, gasiﬁcation
(partial oxidation), temperature is dependant on the gasiﬁcation agent available
in the reactor.
The ﬁrst step in the gasiﬁcation process is a pre-heating and drying of the
feedstock, removing moisture from the fuel before further heating. By drying
the feedstock before entering the reactor, the heating value of the produced
gas will be higher as no energy is needed to evaporate the moisture inside the
reactor.
Dry material
Heat
Pyrolysis
Devolatilization 
Permanent gasses
Tarry vapors
Char
Figure 2.5: Input and output of the pyrolysis process (devolatilization).
The initial reactions happen during the pyrolysis process, ﬁgure 2.5, a pre-stage
to the actual gasiﬁcation in an inert atmosphere. Here the feedstock is heated
to upwards of 600 or 700 ◦C and the volatile material will start to decompose
and release light gasses and tars while the remaining solid will form char. Light
permanent gasses are mostly CO, CO2, H2 and light hydrocarbons. Tars are
one of the most problematic aspect of gasiﬁcation. Maniatis et al. deﬁnes tars
as ’hydrocarbons with molecular weight higher than benzene’ following a series of
meetings by industry experts in 1998 and 99[23]. Tars also include polyaromatic
hydrocarbons7 and oxygen-containing hydrocarbons, many which will condense
into a thick liquid at low temperature and can contain a signiﬁcant portion of
the feedstock heating value. At temperatures above 400 ◦C tars can solidify
into char. Both in solid and liquid form the tars will clog equipment and can
deactivate catalysts and sorbents used downstream in the gas cleaning. The
composition and concentration of tar depends both on the temperature, the
pressure and the residence time inside the reactor[24]. Char is porous solid
remains of the feedstock comprised of carbon and inorganic material[21].
The gasiﬁcation stage8 (oxidation) depends on the reactor type. For downdraft
6This is one of the major advantages of the SOFC compared to conventional technologies.
7Rings of hydrocarbons.
8Sometimes referred to as the reduction zone.
==PAGE:30==
14
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
gasiﬁers the process is a partial combustion of the light gasses and tars in the
pyrolysis product to produce heat to drive the process, while the combustion
in ﬂuidised bed includes all the pyrolysis products. Due to the lack of oxygen,
a full combustion is not possible, nor desirable. The solid char and the light
gasses react with oxygen steam and CO2 in the gas-solid reactions(eq. (2.1)
- eq. (2.4)) and gas-phase reactions (eq. (2.5) - eq. (2.6)). The reactions
involving tars are somewhat more complicated due to the complex composition
of tars, but in general tars will decompose to smaller and smaller hydrocarbons
in endothermic reactions at high temperature[22], .
The reactions will reach an equilibrium with the amount of oxygen available,
such that no free oxygen is present at the gasiﬁer outlet. If standard air is used
as the oxidant in the reactions, a signiﬁcant amount of the nitrogen present in
the air will pass through the gasiﬁer without noteworthy reactions taking place,
resulting in a dilution of the produced gas[21]. Other reactions take place, but
these are the main reactions to determine the gas composition at the gasiﬁer
reactor outlet. For more details on reactions, see the MSW gasiﬁcation review
by Arena from 2012 in [22].
The exothermic9 carbon-oxygen reaction:
C + 1
2O2 ←→CO
∆HR = −110.5
MJ/kmol
(2.1)
Endothermic10 Boudouard reactions:
C + CO2 ←→2CO
∆HR = 172.4
MJ/kmol
(2.2)
Carbon-water reactions:
C + H2O ←→H2 + CO
∆HR = 131.3
MJ/kmol
(2.3)
Hydrogenation reactions:
C + 2H2 ←→CH4
∆HR = −74.8
MJ/kmol
(2.4)
Most of the char will react with the oxygen and steam, but a minor portion
will likely leave the reactor together with the ash, determined by the carbon
conversion factor. The presence of steam is important in the gasiﬁer, as this
will encourage the waster-gas shift on eq. (2.5), producing more hydrogen.
The water-gas shift reaction:
CO + H2O ←→H2 + CO2
∆HR = −41.1
MJ/kmol
(2.5)
And methanation reaction:
CO + 3H2 ←→CH4 + H2O
∆HR = −206.1
MJ/kmol
(2.6)
Figure 2.6 shows the input and products of the gasiﬁcation process. Some of
the available carbon from the char and light gasses will ignite, generating the
9Negative reaction enthalpy, generates heat.
10Positive reaction enthalpy, requires heat.
==PAGE:31==
2.3. GASIFICATION
15
Oxidant & steam
Gasification
Partial oxidation 
Permanent gasses
Tarry vapors
Char
Ash
Permanent gasses
Residual tars
Figure 2.6: Input and output of the gasiﬁcation process.
heat necessary to drive the processes. The tar will to some extend decompose
into smaller hydrocarbons, but the remaining tars can cause issues with the
equipment in form of clogging. Pyrolysis and gasiﬁcation can happen in the
same reaction or separately in a two-stage reactor. The two-stage reactor has
several advantages with regard to producer gas quality and tar content, but
adds more complexity to the system. In particular the possibility of separating
the pyrolysis gas and oxidizing it before the gasiﬁcation process greatly reduces
tar content[25]. One- or two-stage gasiﬁcation should be a cost balance between
the added performance of the plant and the added equipment/control required.
The density of waste fractions in MSW vary quite signiﬁcantly and it is likely
that some kind of shredder is necessary to achieve a more homogeneous mix[26].
This process and pre-treatment stage is not considered and it is assumed that
the waste is prepared for the gasiﬁcation in a reasonable manner.
2.3.2
Gasiﬁer types
Gasiﬁers are classiﬁed by their heating method, direct or indirect. The indi-
rect method requires an external heat source and can be considered as a high
temperature pyrolysis reactor. Since no air is used (only steam), the gas will
not be diluted by nitrogen and thus able to reach signiﬁcantly higher heating
values. The direct method requires air for partial combustion of the feedstock
to generate heat, but no external heating is needed after start up. The direct
method of gasiﬁcation is the one investigated via literature, while indirect gasi-
ﬁcation is not considered in this project11. Due to the added complexity and a
lack of external heat source, indirect gasiﬁers are deemed unsuitable for local
small scale MSW gasiﬁcation operation.
Several types of gasiﬁcation reactors are available today. The main diﬀerences
are in which manner heat is supplied, the operating pressure, temperature
ranges and in what way the feedstock is introduced. Some of the most com-
mon gasiﬁers are presented below, but for a more expansive list see [22].
In a ﬁxed bed gasiﬁcation reactor the feedstock (woodchips, waste, etc.) is fed
from the top of the gasiﬁer. Depending on conﬁguration the gas extraction
takes place either at the top or at the bottom. In both cases the feedstock
will fall from the top and pass through the least hot part of the reactor, in
11One way of utilizing the indirect could be solar power
==PAGE:32==
16
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
which drying takes place, followed by the pyrolysis. The char produced in the
pyrolysis will form a hot bed in lower part of the reactor, which will move up
or down depending on operation12. Depending on type, the air is introduced
at diﬀerent points, resulting in diﬀerent reduction zones, as seen on ﬁgure 2.7.
The updraft conﬁguration causes signiﬁcant tar concentration in the product
as the tar from the pyrolysis is carried upwards. The same is not the case in
the down draft, where the pyrolysis tar passes through the hottest part of the
reactor, resulting in superior thermal tar cracking[10][22].
Figure 2.7: Schematic working principle for the up- and downdraft gasiﬁers.
Taken from [10]. Reduction zone = gasiﬁcation zone, hearth zone = combustion
zone.
Fluidised bed gasiﬁers utilize an inert material such as sand to create a liquid-
like bed in the reactor via an up-ﬂowing gasiﬁcation agent. Depending on the
agent velocity two types of ﬂuidised bed conﬁgurations are possible, at low ve-
locities a bubbling bed13 while at high velocities the bed material circulates by
exiting the reactor with the gas at the top and are to be ﬁltered and returned
to the reactor, normally via a cyclone. The two conﬁgurations can be seen on
ﬁgure 2.8. There are no distinguishable reaction zones in ﬂuidised gasiﬁers and
all reactions takes place at a uniform temperature[10]. One of the advantages of
the ﬂuidised bed is the lower temperatures, reducing ash melting and sintering
while still having a reasonably high carbon conversion factor (close to 90 %,
compared to ﬁx bed which has 95 - 100%)[21]. For more details on gasiﬁcation
subtypes, please see literature [10, 21, 22].
12Often also called a moving bed gasiﬁer.
13Comparable to boiling liquid.
==PAGE:33==
2.3. GASIFICATION
17
Figure 2.8: Schematic working principle for the bubbling and circulating bed
gasiﬁers. Taken from [10].
2.3.3
Gas cleaning
Aravind et al. did an extensive review and analysis of high temperature gas
cleaning in conjunction with SOFC[24]. The syngas produced during gasiﬁ-
cation can contain multiple containments, such as tar, hydrogen sulﬁde H2S,
hydrogen chloride HCl and particulates.
The impact of tars on SOFC operation is not well documented, but could pos-
sibly lead to clogging and degradation of the fuel cell. A few ppms of tar should
however not have any eﬀect on the SOFC operation, but a fair amount of the
feedstock potential heating value can be embodied in the tar.
Two overall
options for tar-removal are non-catalytic and catalytic. By increasing the tem-
perature in the gasiﬁer it is possible to lower the concentration, but this will
also negatively impact the heating value of the gas. Another option is catalytic
removal, based on chemical reactions with the tars. This can either be done in
the gasiﬁcation reactor (with a catalytic bed material in BFB or CFB) or as
hot gas cleaning after the gas outlet.
Sulphur, both in form of H2S and COS, are in practise poison for the SOFC
and must be removed if not to cause irreversible damage. Even low ppm of
sulphur can decrease the performance of the fuel cell, by being absorbed in the
anode and consequently limiting fuel absorption. The investigation by Aravind
et al. concludes that down stream desulfurization is possible with zinc-based
materials, which can reduce the concentration to 1 ppm.
HCl is less troublesome than H2S, but can still cause issues with corrosion and
cause cell degradation. The preferred method of removal is like for sulphur a
down stream reactor with an absorbing material such as alkali or sodium, both
==PAGE:34==
18
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
able to reduce HCl concentration substantially[24].
2.3.4
MSW Gasiﬁcation
The gasiﬁcation process oﬀers signiﬁcant advances in energy recovery and emis-
sion reduction as a thermal treatment of waste. The most important factor re-
garding gasiﬁcation of MSW is choosing the correct reactor, depending on the
waste characteristics, which in itself presents an issue due to the heterogeneity
of MSW[10]. The lack of operational experience with commercially gasifying
waste is another challenge, which the technology has to overcome[22].
A small-scale experiment utilizing a bubbling ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁer to produce
syngas was conducted by Arena et al. in 2010[27]. The experiment investigated
diﬀerent waste-derived fuels with a capacity up to 100 kg/h. Utilizing various
bed materials in the gasiﬁer, the naturally-occurring mineral olivine14 was iden-
tiﬁed as a strong candidate for commercial gasiﬁcation due to the bed materials
ability to reduce tar content15 and increase of hydrogen and carbon monoxide
in the synthetic gas. This conclusion is in agreement with Aravind[24], which
also consider olivine viable as a bed material in BFB gasiﬁers with regard to
waste gasiﬁcation.
Directly comparing the cost of gasiﬁcation to conventional WtE technology (a
new and an old technology) is not possible, since R&D costs are included in
the new, but not the old[10].
2.4
Fuel cells
Fuel cells (FC) convert chemical energy from reactions into electricity without
the presence of combustion. The fuel cell consists of two electrodes, an anode
and a cathode, with an electrolyte layer/membrane in between. A fuel is fed
to the anode side and an oxidant or simply air is fed to the cathode side. The
electrolyte only allow positive ions to move through from anode to cathode (and
opposite for negative ions) and works as an insulator for electrons. The free
electrons must recombine on the other side of the electrolyte based on starting
point, thus moving through the circuit and creating an electric circuit[11].
Apart from electricity the fuel also generates by-products in the form of water
and heat via the exothermic chemical reactions. Using petroleum fuels, fuel
cells are able to reach high eﬃciencies (above 45 %) as stand-alone compared to
conventional combustion technologies. The applications of fuel cells are many,
anything from stationary power stations to person transportation are possible.
With regard to waste for example, the methane produced in untreated landﬁlls
are sometimes utilized in fuel cells.
2.4.1
Development
Some controversy remains about the invention of the fuel cell, but the basic
principle was investigated by both Christian F. Schönbein and William Grove
in late 1838. A rivalry between the two scientists went on for some time, but it
14A neo-silicate of Fe and Mg.
15According to the author, the tar content was below detectable values for some fuels.
==PAGE:35==
2.4. FUEL CELLS
19
is not clear who ﬁrst came up with the original idea. The ﬁrst device utilized
two platinum electrodes connected to sealed containers of oxygen and hydrogen
while submerged in sulphuric acid to create a stable ﬂowing current.
It was not until the middle to late part of the 20th century before fuel cells saw
ﬁrst commercial use, after Thomas F. Bacon presented a working 5 kW alkaline
fuel cell, which later lead to NASA utilizing them for power generation aboard
the space shuttle orbiters. Since then development has focused on reducing
installation costs, increasing performance and prolonging lifetime[11][28].
2.4.2
Classiﬁcation
Fuel cells are classiﬁed based on the electrolyte type and fuels and grouped in
to either low or high operating temperature (50 to 250 ◦C and 650 to 1000 ◦C
respectively). The low temperature fuel cell types are Proton exchange mem-
brane fuel cell (PEMFC), Alkaline fuel cell (AFC) and Phosphoric acid fuel cell
(PAFC). The high temperature FCs are Molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC),
Direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) and Solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC).
Anode
Cathode
Electrolyte
Fuel inlet H2
Surplus fuel H2
Load
O2
H2O + O2
H+
H+
e-
e-
Figure 2.9: Working principle of a PEM fuel cell operated with hydrogen as
fuel.
Each fuel cell has a number of characteristics, advantages and disadvantages
making them suitable or unsuitable for various applications. The low temper-
ature FC eﬃciencies varies between 40 and 60 %, have quick start up times,
but expensive due to platinum electrolytes and two of three types are very
sensitive towards impurities in the fuel. Due to the low temperatures these
cells are often considered suitable for transportation purposes and other forms
of portable power, as is evident by their utilization in space shuttles[11].
The high temperature FCs are characterised by eﬃciencies upwards of 60 %,
less sensitive to fuel compositions, but suﬀer from sulphur intolerance and have
longer start up times. The MCFC is considered for large scale transportation
such as naval vessels or trains, while SOFCs shows potential as co-generation
for power plants. For more information about fuel cell subtypes, please see the
review of the fuel cell technologies by Kirubakaran et al. from 2009[11] and
Wu et al. from 2006 on CCHP systems with fuel cells among other[29].
==PAGE:36==
20
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
2.4.3
General working principle
The working principle for the low temperature PEM fuel cell can be seen in ﬁg-
ure 2.9. Hydrogen enters the anode side and decompose into positive charged
hydrogen ions and electrons. The electrolyte membrane allows the hydrogen
ions to travel to the cathode where it reacts with oxygen in the air to create
water. The cathode reactions are exothermic and the dispersed energy leaves
the system as heat. The hydrogen (fuel) oxygen (oxidant) reactions are for-
mulated for the anode, cathode and combined in eq. (2.7), (2.8) and (2.9)
respectively[11].
H2 ⇒2H+ + 2e−
(2.7)
1
2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−⇒H2O
(2.8)
H2 + 1
2O2 ⇒H2O + ∆G
(2.9)
Where ∆G is the change in Gibbs free energy between products and reactants.
The maximum electrical work which can be produced by a fuel cell with no
losses and at constant temperature and pressure are deﬁned as:
Wel = ∆G = −nFE
(2.10)
Where n is number of electrons in the reactions, F is Faraday’s constant and
E16 is the ideal potential of the cell.
The real potential of a fuel cell is decreased by several irreversible losses, as
seen on ﬁgure 2.10.
Figure 2.10: Voltage-current diagram for a fuel cell with activation, ohmic
and concentration losses. Taken from [30].
The activation losses relates to the activation energy of the electrochemical
16Also called ’Electromotive force (EMF) or reversible open circuit voltage.
==PAGE:37==
2.4. FUEL CELLS
21
reactions. These are less prevalent in high temperature fuel cells, such as a
SOFC. The ohmic losses are ionic resistances in the electrolyte and electrodes
(anode and cathode) and are strongly related to the temperature, materials and
geometry of the fuel cell. Concentration losses are mass transport limitations
in the fuel cell and are connected to the utilization factor. The voltage rapidly
decline due to activation losses initially, followed by a more linear decline due
to the resistance losses, as the current is increased. The sharp decline at the
end reﬂects the lower concentration of oxidant and fuel while at high currents.
Combining all the irreversibilities, the operating voltage of the fuel cell is[31]
V = E −∆Vohm −∆Vact −∆Vcon
(2.11)
To avoid the sharp drop in voltage with increased currents, more fuel normally
pass through the fuel cell than can be chemically converted, leading to the fuel
utilization factor[32]:
Uf = Fuel mass reacting in FC
Fuel mass at inlet of FC
(2.12)
For small systems a high fuel utilization factor is normally preferable, as the
fuel cell is normally the only power producing unit in the system. For a larger
system, combined with a gas turbine for example the Uf would be lower to allow
the gas turbine burner temperature to reach an optimal level. Depending on
the fuel cell type and conﬁguration the utilization factor is normally between
0.5 and 0.95 for commercial fuel cells[30].
2.4.4
SOFC characteristics
The SOFC electrolyte is a solid ceramic material which allows oxygen ions to
pass through. Oxygen is reduced to negatively charged ions in the cathode
and pass through the electrolyte to oxidise the fuel in the anode. Figure 2.11
shows the working principle with oxygen ﬂowing through the cathode, oxygen
ions passing through the electrolyte and fuel oxidizing in the cathode[33]. The
surplus free electrons from the oxidation process pass through the load, to the
cathode where they further reduce oxygen to ions. This means that any gas
which can be reduced by oxygen could in theory be utilized as a fuel.
Equation (2.13) shows the reaction in the anode between hydrogen and oxygen
ions.
Eq.
(2.14) and (2.15) shows the reactions for carbon monoxide and
methane respectively. Since the SOFC utilizes a mix of fuels, the combined
reaction become non-trivial and interact, such that carbon monoxide generated
when methane is converted in equation (2.15) could further convert via equation
(2.14). The cathode oxygen reduction is shown in eq. (2.16).
Hydrogen as a fuel, anode reaction:
H2 →H2 + O2−→H2O + 2e−→H2O
(2.13)
Carbon monoxide as fuel, anode reaction:
CO →CO + O2−→CO2 + 2e−→CO2
(2.14)
Methane as fuel, anode reaction:
CH4 →CH4 + 2O2−→H2O + CO + 4e−→CO, H2O
(2.15)
==PAGE:38==
22
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
Fuel inlet
Surplus fuel & emissions
O2
Surplus O2
O2-
Electrolyte
O2-
O2-
O2-
Load
e-
e-
High temp. 
waste heat
Anode
Cathode
Figure 2.11: Working principle of a SOFC.
The oxidation reactions are exothermic in nature, producing a signiﬁcant amount
of energy as heat in the process. This both keeps the fuel cell at the correct
temperature, but also produces a signiﬁcant amount of waste heat leaving the
system with the used fuel (emissions) and the surplus air streams. The cathode
reaction is the same in all cases:
O2 + 4e−→2O2−→O2
(2.16)
The total reaction over the electrolyte only considering hydrogen and carbon
monoxide reactions:
H2 + CO + O2 −→H2O + CO2 + ∆G
(2.17)
2.4.5
Material requirements
The material requirements of the SOFC electrolyte are fairly speciﬁc. It must
be able to conduct oxygen ions while not conducting electrons. Electronic con-
duction in the material has a negative impact on the SOFC eﬃciency, since elec-
trons passing through the electrolyte takes no part in the electrical circuit[33].
Most electrolyte materials increase ion conductivity at increasing temperatures,
but at an even higher temperature become electronic conductive, the interval
determine the electrolyte operation temperature.
The most common mate-
rial YSZ, yttrium stabilized zirconia, conduct oxygen ions between 700 and
1100 ◦C, while becoming electronic conductive at 1500 ◦C [34]. Due to me-
chanical stress in components, it is desirable to operate the SOFC at as low a
temperature as possible.
The relatively high operating temperature of the SOFC is both an advantage
and disadvantage in numerous ways. The high temperature enables internal
reforming in the fuel cell, where CH4 reacts with water to produce carbon
monoxide and hydrogen which occurs simultaneously with eq. (2.15) at a ratio
depending on the temperature and pressure in the anode[35]. Furthermore the
by-product heat produced during reactions is well suited for co-generation with
a bottoming cycle, displaying both both high eﬃciencies and low ghg emissions.
==PAGE:39==
2.5. ABSORPTION COOLING
23
High temperature will on the other hand dictate strict requirements for mate-
rial properties in all components of the fuel cell[30].
Due to the high temperature in the SOFC, the air utilized in the cathode also
serves as a cooling medium to keep the fuel cell at the desired temperature.
The air must however be preheated to avoid large thermal stresses between
cathode, electrolyte and anode. Temperatures around 500 to 700 ◦C is com-
mon and the air is normally preheated via heat exchange with the hot used
oxidant leaving the fuel cell cathode.
2.4.6
Output, cells and stacks
The voltage produced by a single cell in any fuel cell is quite small (between
0.5 and 1.0 V), meaning many cells will have to be set in series, each increasing
the voltage level slightly, to reach a usable voltage level. This series of cells is
called a fuel cell stack. SOFCs are designed in several diﬀerent conﬁgurations,
overarching separated in planar and tubular.
The tubular design is a pipe
shaped cathode with an electrolyte layer and and anode on the outside. The
air/oxidant ﬂows in the pipe in contact with the cathode, while the fuel ﬂows on
the outside in contact with the anode. The design eliminates gas seals between
cells, thus simplifying the fuel cell. The planar are layers stacked on top of each
other with a rectangular shape. The planar design has smaller losses leading
to better performance, but issues with gas seal are signiﬁcant[33]. The planar
conﬁguration is used in this thesis, while tubular is not considered.
The SOFC follows the same theory as the general working principle, but due
to several gas species in the fuel the calculations become fairly complex. For
more information about SOFC reactions and eﬃciency, see Larmine et al.[34].
2.5
Absorption cooling
An absorption cycle utilizes a ’thermal compressor’ instead of mechanical power
to produce cooling or refrigeration, as opposed to a normal vapour compression
cycle which utilizes a mechanically driven compressor. The vapour compres-
sion cycle generally uses a single working media, a refrigerant such as R600a,
ammonia or CO2, while the absorption cycle requires a mixture of water and
a working medium[36]. Compared to the vapour compression cycle, the pump
in the absorption cycle requires signiﬁcantly less mechanical power, but addi-
tionally requires a heat input to drive the compressor.
The terminology often refer to the mixture of refrigerant and absorbent, in
pure, rich or poor, with the concentration ξ. Pure means only refrigerant, the
working medium. Rich solution means a mixture of refrigerant and absorbent
rich on refrigerant, ξr. The poor concentration ξp has a high concentration of
absorbent and low concentration of refrigerant[36].
An absorption cycle main components consists of an absorber, desorber (often
called generator), condenser, evaporator, a pump and two expansion devices.
The cycle can be seen on ﬁgure 2.12 showing how the system can be horizon-
tally divided in a high and low pressure part. The absorber is the low pressure
vessel in which the vapour refrigerant (working medium) and absorbent - com-
ing from the evaporator and desorber - are mixed into a liquid solution. The
==PAGE:40==
24
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
Cond
Desorb
Evap
Absorb
Heat rejection
Cooling output
Heat input
Heat rejection
Solution valve
Throttle valve
Solution 
pump
Thermal compressor
Figure 2.12: Working principle of an absorption cooling plant.
solution is pumped to the desorber, where the refrigerant is distilled17 by added
heat while the absorbent ﬂows back through an expansion device to the ab-
sorber. The refrigerant rejects heat in a condenser and is brought back to liquid
state. In the following expansion device, the pressure drops back down to the
low pressure level, causing the boiling point of the medium to drop. The low
pressure refrigerant absorbs heat in the evaporator, thus causing the cooling
eﬀect and bringing the refrigerant back to vapour state. From the evaporator
the working medium is dissolved in the absorber, where the process repeats[36].
In order to dissolve the refrigerant into the absorbent, heat must be removed
from the absorber, normally in the form of dry cooling, a cooling tower, sea-,
lake- or groundwater[6].
Two ﬂuid mixtures commonly used are a mixture of ammonia and water (NH3-
H2) or water and lithium bromide (H2O-LiBr), each with well deﬁned proper-
ties.
Ammonia-water is utilized for sub-zero cooling, with ammonia as the refrig-
erant and water as the absorbent. For this mixture a rectiﬁer is required to
remove possible water vapour from the ammonia leaving the desorber. Lithium
bromide-water is used for above-zero cooling and the refrigerant is water, while
the lithium bromide is the absorbent. The Lithium bromide-water is non toxic
as opposed to ammonia and water has a high heat of evaporation, making it
suitable as a refrigerant for the absorption cycle. The pressure in the system
must however be very low to have water boiling at the desired cooling tem-
perature and the lithium-bromide can have issues with crystallization at low
temperature[36]. For comfort cooling, as normally provided by district cooling,
Lithium Bromide is most often used due to the advantages stated above and
the fact that sub-zero cooling is not needed.
The coeﬃcient of performance of an absorption system can be calculated as
the heat removed in the evaporator over the heat supplied in the generator[37].
17By boiling the refrigerant out of the solution.
==PAGE:41==
2.6. DISTRICT HEATING AND COOLING
25
The work supplied by the pump is negligible and are most often not considered
in the COP calculation.
COPh =
˙Qe
˙Qg
(2.18)
A common COP value is between 0.6 and 0.7 for single stage systems[38].
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0
5
10
15
20
25
P  [bar]
T1  [C]
T1
T1
Figure 2.13: Water saturation temperature - pressure.
Figure 2.13 shows the saturation temperature of water as a function of pressure.
Depending on the desired cooling temperature, the pressure is adjusted. For a
cooling temperature of 4 or 6 ◦C, the pressure must be below 813.5 or 935.3
Pa respectively.
2.6
District heating and cooling
This project will not go into detail with how the district heating (DH) net-
work is designed and operated, but just in short go over the advantages of
distributing heating and cooling in this manner compared to for example elec-
trical heating. District heating and cooling are often collected under the term
district energy (DE). District energy can be deﬁned as production and distri-
bution of heating and cooling at central or decentralized plants. Today DE is
almost entirely used for comfort heating and cooling of building and hot water
production.
The district heating network is paramount for low energy heating of houses
and the system investigated in this thesis are dependant on the existence of a
local heating distribution network. The ﬂexibility in heat sources and lowering
the fuel consumption in CHP plants is possibly the best argument for utilizing
district heating (and cooling).
The ability to utilize waste heat from other
processes compared to using electricity directly is signiﬁcant in saving primary
fuels and reducing ghg emissions[39].
The current iteration of DH is normally referred to as 3rd generation, while
the upcoming low temperature DH is named 4th generation. 4th generation
==PAGE:42==
26
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND AND TECHNOLOGIES
DH is expected to play a pivotal role in the transition to 100 % sustainable
heating and cooling of buildings in the future, as part of a fully sustainable
energy system. The design process of 4th generation DE changes the focus
from what can be supplied by the producer and focuses instead on the demand
at the consumer. Table 2.2 shows the supply and return temperatures of the
current and future DH system with a ’transition period’ in between. The main
reason for keeping the DH at above 50 ◦C is to avoid legionella, a bacteria
which thrives in hot water at body temperature[40].
Table 2.2: Supply and return temperatures for 3rd and 4th generation, with
a transition temperature interval.
3rd generation
Transition
4th generation
Supply temp. [◦C]
85
70
55
Return temp. [◦C]
50
40
25
One of several further advantages of low temperature district heating (LTDH)
is the reduced heat loss during transmission, a reduction of 75 % compared to
3rd generation DH[41]. Additionally the lower return temperature increases
the eﬃciency of thermal plants and facilitates an even better utilization of low
temperature waste heat from industrial processes, geothermal and solar en-
ergy.
District cooling follows the same principle as district heating, but with one
important distinction - while DH is used for household heating, it is unlikely
that DC will do the same, at least in Scandinavia. Instead district cooling is
normally used by larger building complexes, such as hotels, shopping centres,
oﬃce buildings and other buildings where people, IT equipment or machinery
produces heat. For southern Europe the situation is likely diﬀerent, as these
regions have a signiﬁcant amount of warms days each year.
Instead of cooling water being produced by vapour compression cycles18 locally,
cooling water is delivered by external suppliers. Two temperature sets are often
mentioned, ﬁrst being 4 ◦C supply and 12 ◦C return, second is 6 and 16 ◦C
for supply and return respectively[42]. District cooling is often a combination
of several systems, for example dry cooling (heat exchanger with ambient air),
sea or lake cooling (heat exchanger with cold water available) and vapour com-
pression cycles. The system would utilize the cheapest available cooling when
possible, in most cases the dry cooling. An expedient solution is to produce DC
with surplus heat in an absorption plant, as high cooling demand corresponds
well to low heating demand[6].
The large up front investments of district energy is in general one of the major
issues[39].
18Possibly with the help of dry-cooling.
==PAGE:43==
2.7. SUMMARY
27
2.7
Summary
Interestingly, either of the two reports concerning the future of the Danish en-
ergy system mentions waste incineration in more than passing[14][13]. It would
seem the current waste incineration model is maintained and the focus is in-
stead on recycling and reducing waste. Both methods are decidedly preferable
to the thermal treatment of waste, but a signiﬁcant portion of MSW cannot
be recycled and must be either burned or landﬁlled regardless.
Based on the EU data presented, there is a great potential for waste utilized as
a fuel, particularly in southern and eastern Europe. Landﬁlls are in every way
at poor solution for waste management and uncontrolled landﬁlls contribute
signiﬁcantly to green house gas emissions. One of many obstacles is the lack of
a DH heating transmission grid or low heating demand in warmer climates. For
Denmark speciﬁcally, the current WtE capacity is ageing and leaves decision-
and policy makers in a unique situation when it comes the the future waste
handling system. Furthermore the waste incineration sector is relying on im-
ported waste, a trend which is unlikely to continue.
Gasiﬁcation of MSW is a viable treatment option with several diﬀerent reactor
designs, each with advantages and disadvantages. Some cleaning of the prod-
uct gas is necessary before it can be utilized in the SOFC, but all are possible
with current technology[24].
Solid oxide fuel cells oﬀer high electric eﬃciency and several unique properties
due to the high operating temperature. The ability to reform gas species in-
ternally can signiﬁcantly reduce the need for pre-processing of fuels and thus
simpliﬁes the design. Furthermore the operating temperature makes SOFCs an
excellent candidate for utilizing a bottoming cycle for better energy utilization.
One way to utilize the by-product waste heat of the SOFC is to produce cool-
ing. The cooling can be produced in an absorption cycle when demand for
heating is low, using a thermal compressor instead of mechanical, with the
beneﬁt of very low power consumption. The absorption cycle uses a mixture
of a refrigerant and an absorbent which is distilled in the desorber to produce
a refrigerant vapour.
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3
MSW as a Fuel
This chapter describes the process of determining physico-chemical composition
and properties of MSW, information needed when modelling MSW as a fuel.
3.1
Fuel composition
Municipal solid waste (MSW) can be seen as a renewable biomass feedstock
utilized for energy production. To determine the potential for use as fuel in
energy systems, the composition of the waste must be evaluated and the heating
value estimated.
Meraz et al. made several observations about MSW as a fuel in 2003[43]. MSW
can be considered as a combination of combustible and incombustible materials.
Food waste, paper, plastics and textiles are organic in nature are the primary
contributors to the combustion. Glass, metal and dirt are in general inorganic
and any combustible material comes from package labels, food scraps and so
forth. The heat released during combustion and moisture content varies greatly
between diﬀerent material fractions, making some materials more suitable for
combustion than others. During combustion most of the inorganic matter ends
up in the ash, resulting in an ash with high metal concentrations.
3.1.1
Methodology
When utilizing solid waste as a fuel in DNA simulations, a speciﬁc input format
is required. The elemental composition based on dry weight basis, moisture
content, speciﬁc heat capacity and heating value. The method for evaluating
the fuel properties is found utilizing the following steps:
• Determine waste fractions for waste type in question, for example house-
hold waste, hotel and restaurant business waste or other. Normally in
percentage or g/kg.
• For each waste fraction, it is necessary to evaluate the chemical element
composition, ash content and moisture content from tabular values.
• Accumulate elemental composition, calculate higher heating value (HHV)
based on correlations for elemental compositions of solid fuels and esti-
mate lower heating value (LHV).
29
==PAGE:46==
30
CHAPTER 3. MSW AS A FUEL
• Calculate speciﬁc heat cp.
• Format for DNA input.
Figure 3.1 visualises the process and interdependency for the various properties
and ﬁgure 3.2 shows the desired DNA format.
Waste fractions
Moisture Content
Elemental composition
Specific heat
HHV
LHV
Ash
DNA solid fuel input
Figure 3.1: Methodology for determining physico-chemical composition of
waste from fractions to DNA viable input.
LHV or HHV
Moisture
C
H
O
S
N
Ash
Cp
Dry weight
Wet weight
Thermodynamic
properties
Figure 3.2: Input for solid fuel in DNA.
In an upcoming article by Götze et al. data from almost a hundred published
articles, reports, books and theses are condensed into an overview of physico-
chemical1 waste characterisation[44]. Some of the major challenges regarding
waste properties are discussed. Much of the analysed literature does not have
waste characterization as the focus and has other research areas concerning
waste as the main topic. Furthermore, the published material often lacks im-
portant information such as whether the data within are on dry or wet basis
or the origin of the waste.
Due to the heterogeneous nature of MSW, the characteristics will vary depend-
ing on numerous factors, such as geographical region, income level, culture and
so forth. The previously mentioned report from the World Bank shows an sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence in waste fractions depending on income level, as can be seen
in table 3.1[8]. The other category includes rubber, textiles, etc. The major
1Physical and chemical properties including among others thermodynamic properties.
==PAGE:47==
3.2. WASTE FRACTIONS
31
diﬀerence is the amount of organic material and paper waste. For example,
the amount of pre-processed food is diﬀerence between the two income groups.
Whereas much food in the high income countries include packaging, this is to
the same extent not the case in the low income countries.
Table 3.1: Estimates of waste fractions for two income groups based of various
data between year 1990 and 2008, take from [8].
Income level
Organic
Paper
Plastics
Glass
Metal
Other
Low income
64 %
5 %
8 %
3 %
3 %
17 %
High income
28 %
31 %
11 %
7 %
6 %
17 %
The variation in fractions results in diﬀerent chemical compositions and ther-
modynamic properties.
Determining an average chemical composition and
heating value applicable for MSW worldwide is in essence impossible and the
following section focuses primarily on Denmark and Danish produced waste.
3.2
Waste fractions
Waste fractions2 or waste classiﬁcation is the practise of dividing the waste into
visibly discernible categories, such as paper, plastics, food waste etc. Table A.2
in appendix A shows various diﬀerent deﬁnitions of waste fractions. As noted
by Götze in [44], no international consensus for waste fractions exists, causing
issues when working with waste fractions from multiple sources. Since no stan-
dard for reporting waste fractions exists, fractions are most often based on the
context of the source material. Statistics Denmark3 has detailed fractions for
all waste produced in Denmark based on various activities, but are unsuitable
for determining elemental composition due to classiﬁcation types[45].
The material fractions used to determine chemical element compositions in
this project was presented in 2015 by Edjabou et al.[46]. The article presents
a detailed study of residual house waste (RHW), the fraction of waste left af-
ter producer sorting of MSW, which is well in line with the applications of
the investigated system. Based on the study a classiﬁcation of waste into 10
separate categories was suggested, each with three levels of detail. The RHW
are separated into food waste, gardening waste, paper, board, plastic, metal,
class, miscellaneous combustibles, inert and special waste.
For the purpose
of determining waste characteristics, paper and board has been merged into
a single category as the fraction is generally listed as such in open literature.
Miscellaneous combustibles include human hygiene waste, textiles, rubber etc.
Inert comprises ashes, gravel, sand and household construction waste. Special
waste is primarily batteries, electronic and electrical equipment and hazardous
waste. The original full table with deﬁnitions can be seen in appendix A table
A.3.
The chemical element composition for each waste fraction is derived from
2Waste fraction: Overall fractions such as food waste, paper and board, glass. Material
fraction: Detailed fractions, the components of each waste fraction.
For the food waste
fraction the material fractions are vegetable waste, food scraps. For paper the list of materials
are numerous, for example oﬃce paper, cardboard, kitchen tissues etc.
3The national statistics data bank in Denmark.
==PAGE:48==
32
CHAPTER 3. MSW AS A FUEL
Christensen[26], the most extensive inventory of common Danish household
waste available in literature4.
For various material fractions the table lists
both ash content, volatile solids and percentage of dry matter together with
a detailed list of chemical elements including multiple metals. Each material
waste fraction has been evaluated via eq. (3.1) on ﬁgure 3.4 to include only
the major elements: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, sulphur and nitrogen5.
wj,reduced = wj
wtot
· 100%
(3.1)
Where wj,reduced is the weight percentage of the reduced chemical element com-
position for each of the j elements, wtot is the sum of the reduced elements in
mg/kg and wj is the original weight of each element in mg/kg. The percentage
shows how well each (material fraction) is represented. The remaining solids in
each sample are assumed to be ash, which correlates well with the ash content
for each material fraction. Take for example vegetable food waste and vacuum
cleaner bags, having an ash content of 5.2 and 60.5 % of total solids respec-
tively, which is consistent with percentages from table 3.4 (95.84 and 39.64 %
respectively) approximately summarizing to 100 % each.
Several material fractions such as aluminium trays and foil include food scraps,
causing them to comprise partly of the major elements, even though the base
product does not normally contain those elements.
The material fractions seen on ﬁgure 3.4 is then averaged into each of the
Edjabou waste fractions, visualized for food waste and plastics on ﬁgure 3.3
yielding the average chemical element composition for each waste fraction. The
Material fractions
Waste fractions
Vegetable food
Animal food scraps
Food waste
Averaged
Soft plastics
Plastic bottles
Hard plastics
Non-recycable plastics
Plastics
Averaged
Figure 3.3: Visualization of transformation from material fractions shown on
ﬁgure to Edjabou waste fractions.
waste fractions combined with the averaged chemical element compositions can
be seen in table 3.2. As expected, plastics has a high carbon and hydrogen con-
tent, while both metals, glass and inerts are almost entirely consisting of ash.
4A new and improved version of the inventory is currently in progress from DTU En-
vironment as of writing this thesis[47].
The sorting and sampling method of the current
inventory is described in detail in [26] and cited literature within.
5Sometimes called the reduced chemical composition[43].
==PAGE:49==
3.2. WASTE FRACTIONS
33
0
20
40
60
80
100
Veg. food
Animal food
Newsprints
Magazines
Advertisements
Books and phonebooks
Oﬃce paper
Other clean paper
Paper and carton containers
Cardboard
Milk cartons and alike
Carton with alu-foil
Kitchen tissues
Dirty paper
Dirty cardboard
Soft plastics
Plastic bottles
Hard plastic
Non-recyclable plastic
Yard waste
Animals etc.
Diapers and tampons
Cottonsticks etc.
Other cotton etc.
Wood
Textiles
Shoes, leather
Rubber etc.
Oﬃce articles
Cigarette buts
Other combustibles
Vacuum cleaner bags
Clear glass
Green glass
Brown glass
Other glass
Al containers
Al trays/foils
Metal containers
Metal-like foil
Other of metal
Soil
Stones and gravel
Residual
Ceramics
Cat gravel
Batteries
Other
95.84
90
94.84
66.02
72.72
83.98
79.35
82.21
86.61
85.94
98.84
90.34
97.14
90.67
85.08
95.54
93.91
97.73
92.31
75.83
74.78
91.6
97.39
96.69
89.87
96.5
83.34
81.6
72.12
84.5
73.01
39.64
8.32 · 10−2
1.11 · 10−2
9.2 · 10−3
6.87 · 10−2
3 · 10−3
23.68
9.9 · 10−3
97.92
3.21 · 10−2
55.4
0.1
0
1.04 · 10−2
6.92
12.77
2.19
Percentage [%]
Figure 3.4: Percentage of material waste fractions composed of carbon (C),
hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), sulfur (S) and nitrogen (N), adapted from [26].
High percentages result in the waste material being well represented by the
ﬁve chemical elements.
==PAGE:50==
34
CHAPTER 3. MSW AS A FUEL
Table 3.2: Chemical elements of waste fractions as % of dry weight.
Ash
C
H
O
S
N
%
%
%
%
%
%
Food waste
6.95
52.25
7.27
28.76
0.28
4.49
Gardening waste
19.80
46.35
6.00
25.75
0.23
1.87
Paper and board
14.64
42.14
5.71
37.18
0.08
0.25
Plastics
4.55
77.97
11.24
4.59
0.07
1.58
Metal
95.22
3.07
0.55
1.08
0.01
0.08
Glass
100.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Other combustible
16.76
52.99
7.07
21.17
0.31
1.70
Inert
81.30
10.13
1.15
6.93
0.13
0.37
Special waste
92.20
4.54
0.68
2.27
0.14
0.17
3.3
Moisture and ash content
The moisture content, volatiles and ash of a solid waste fraction sample is
determined by a proximate analysis, in which the sample is ﬁrst heated to
above 105 ◦C, the weight diﬀerence before and after resulting in the moisture
content, see eq.
(3.2).
The remainder of the sample, the total solids (TS)
are then heated to 550 ◦C, where the volatile matter (VM) are combusted.
The remaining part of the sample is the ash. The chemical composition of
the volatiles can be determined using various methods, such as measuring the
amount of CO2 generated during combustion[26].
Mci = wwet −wdry
wwet
· 100%
(3.2)
Where the total moisture content in the waste is calculated as the weighted
average, eq. (3.3) with i being waste fractions.
Mctotal =
X
i
fi · Mci
(3.3)
The ash content and chemical element composition in the waste fuel are calcu-
lated using the same approach as the total moisture content.
Table 3.3 shows
the moisture content of ten waste fractions. The ﬁrst and second column is
adapted from typical moisture content and average of the various detailed ma-
terial waste fractions respectively[26]. The ﬁnal column is the based oﬀMeraz
et al. which has a similar study to Christensen, but no country of origin is
stated and the source material is not available for public access[43]. The dif-
ferences are signiﬁcant for some fractions, such as paper and board with vary
between 5.5 and 16.2 %. It would seem the simple averages of material waste
fractions overestimate moisture content compared to the typical values, likely
because not all materials are equally present in the waste. For evaluating mois-
ture content, the typical content percentages are used with the assumption that
special waste has zero moisture6.
6The waste fractions of special waste is below 1 % in most cases and the contribution to
the overall moisture content would be insigniﬁcant.
==PAGE:51==
3.3. MOISTURE AND ASH CONTENT
35
Table 3.3: Moisture concent of waste fractions based on [26][48] in percent
on wet basis.
Christensen, TH
Christensen, TH
Meraz et al.
Waste fraction
Typical content
Calc. Avg.
Calc. Avg
Food waste
70
67.5
54.5
Gardening waste
42.5
41.5
34.2
Paper and board
5.5
16.2
8.4
Glass
2
7.7
N/A
Metal
3
11.8
N/A
Plastics:
2
8.7
2.4
Other combustible waste
7.3
24.8
4.2
Inert
8
12.0
N/A
Special waste
N/A
20.5
N/A
Table 3.4 shows moisture content for RHW studied in 2015[46], from here called
DK-waste01. The table shows how the 42.2 % food waste fraction contribute
overwhelmingly to the overall moisture content of 33.8 %. The moisture con-
tent is a key factor concerning the viability of the waste as a fuel and varies
considerably both in literature and based on regions. In China the moisture
content can be as high as 85 % with an average over 50 %, severely reducing
the heating value[49]. Figure 3.5 and 3.6 shows the corresponding chemical
element composition with ash content on a wet and dry basis for DK-waste01.
The composition values can be seen on table 3.5.
Table 3.4: Household solid waste composition on dry basis from 2015[46] with
moisture content. The moisture content of the special waste is assumed to be
zero.
Percentage [%]
Waste fraction
Moisture content
Moisture
Food waste
42.2
70.0
29.5
Gardening waste
3.5
42.5
1.5
Paper and board
15.8
5.5
0.9
Plastic
12.6
2.0
0.3
Metal
2.3
3.0
0.1
Glass
2.0
2.0
0.0
Misc. Combustible
17.6
7.3
1.3
Inert
3.3
8.0
0.3
Special waste
0.7
0.0
0.0
Sum
100.0
-
33.8
Some glass and metal are usually still in the RHW even after sorting. Sorting
at the source (in households) are seldom perfect and smaller pieces of metal and
glass are often present, either because they are part of packaging or otherwise
combined with food scraps, such as foil used in cooking.
==PAGE:52==
36
CHAPTER 3. MSW AS A FUEL
Table 3.5: Chemical element composition on dry and wet basis (mass per-
centages) for waste-DK1.
Moisture
Ash %
C %
H %
O %
S %
N %
Dry weight
16.98
49.92
6.90
23.49
0.21
2.51
Wet weight
33.81
11.24
33.04
4.56
15.54
0.14
1.66
33.8 %
H2O
11.2 %
Ash
33.0 %
Carbon
4.6 %
Hydrogen
15.5 %
Oxygen
0.1 %
Sulphur
1.7 %
Nitrogen
Figure 3.5:
Waste fractions for DK-waste01 on wet weight basis, sulphur
being 0.1 % of the total.
17 %
Ash
49.9 %
Carbon
6.9 %
Hydrogen
23.5 %
Oxygen
0.2 %
Sulphur
2.5 %
Nitrogen
Figure 3.6:
Waste fractions for DK-waste01 on dry weight basis, sulphur
being 0.2 % of the total.
==PAGE:53==
3.4. HEATING VALUE
37
3.4
Heating value
When utilizing MSW as a fuel, the heating values or caloriﬁc values as it is
sometimes called, is a most important thermodynamic parameter. The lower
heating value (LHV) is deﬁned as the amount of heat released for a given
quantity during combustion, bringing the fuel from an initial temperature of
25 ◦C to combustion and the combustion products down to 150 ◦C. Since the
temperature is still above the boiling point of water at atmospheric pressure,
the latent heat of vaporization is not included in the LHV. For the higher
heating value (HHV) the combustion products are brought back to the initial
temperature, meaning the latent heat of vaporization is included. The LHV is
most commonly used when evaluating thermal systems in Europe, while other
countries/regions prefer the HHV.
Table 3.6 shows the LHV for common fuels, biomass materials and MSW. The
table is comprised of multiple diﬀerent sources and thus the deﬁnition of MSW
likely diﬀers, which partly explains the diﬀerences between the heating values.
The MSW samples from the UK is based on an experimental derived analysis
and is calculated from the chemical element composition of the waste, stating
the dry weight heating value[50]. The Danish samples on the other hand are
approximations based on the input and output of large scale Waste to Energy
(WtE) plants and are on a "as received" basis (takes into account moisture
content), resulting in a signiﬁcantly lower heating values compared to the UK
samples. Two types of common plastics are added to the table to illustrate
the LHV of hydrocarbons[51]. In some literature the HHV has a negative sign,
using the convention of work done by the system being negative.
Table 3.6: Lower heating value overview of common fuels and MSW based
on various references.
Fuel
LHV [MJ/kg]
Note
Ref.
Liquid Hydrogen
120.1
[52]
Liqueﬁed natural gas
46.6
[52]
Gasoline
43.5
[52]
polypropylene
43.4
[51]
Polyethylene
43.2
[51]
Crude Oil
42.7
[52]
MSW, UK
24.0
[50]
Coal
22.6
[52]
Methanol
20.1
[52]
MSW & industrial waste, UK
20.0
50/50 mix
[50]
News paper
19.6
[52]
Woody crops
17.9
Averaged
[52]
Wheat Straw
16.4
Averaged
[52]
MSW, US EU
15.3
Averaged
[52]
MSW, EU average
13.0
[53]
MSW, DK, 2025
12.0
Predicted
[9]
MSW, DK, 2008
10.5
[9]
MSW, DK, 2004
9.8
[9]
==PAGE:54==
38
CHAPTER 3. MSW AS A FUEL
Perhaps the most common correlation for estimating HHV is proposed by Du-
long’s in 1880, derived from coal. Since then a number of corrections to Du-
long’s correlation has been proposed, but the original correlation, see eq. (3.4),
is still utilized today. High oxygen content causes rather large errors in Du-
long’s correlation.
HHVDulong = 0.3383 · C∗+ 1.443 ·

H∗−O∗
8

+ 0.0942 · S∗
MJ/kg (3.4)
Where ∗denotes ash-free dry basis.
Channiwala et al. proposed a uniﬁed correlation for determining HHV of solid,
liquid and gaseous fuels on eq. (3.5). The correlation has an absolute error of
1.45 % within the given ranges of elements[54].
HHVChanniwala = 0.3491 · C + 1.1783 · H + 0.1005 · S−
0.1034 · O −0.0151 · N −0.0211 · A
[MJ/kg]
(3.5)
A correlation derived speciﬁcally for waste combustion is estimated by Meraz
et al. in 2003[43]. Based on a thermochemical concept the equation, eq. (3.6)
shows potential compared to experimental data.
HHVMeraz =
Moisture content
z
}|
{

1 −H2O
100

· (−0.3708 · C −1.124 · H + 0.1391 · O
−0.3178 · N −0.1391 · S)
[MJ/kg]
(3.6)
Meraz includes moisture content of the fuel in the correlation (wet basis) and
negative sign convention, while eq. (3.4) and (3.5) are on dry basis with pos-
itive sign convention. The moisture content term can simply be omitted for
easy comparison between correlations.
Using the chemical element composition from ﬁgure 3.5 the HHV has been cal-
culated for each correlation (with elements and ash in mass percentages). The
HHV on dry basis for Dulong (ash free), Channiwala and Meraz are 28.1, 22.75
and 23.75 MJ/kg respectively. The major diﬀerences in estimations are the
inclusion of ash content in the Channiwala correlation, but a negligible nitro-
gen coeﬃcient, while the coeﬃcient for oxygen, sulphur and particular nitrogen
are higher for Meraz. Dulong include neither ash nor nitrogen, both present
in signiﬁcant amounts in waste. Based on this, the Channiwala correlation is
utilized to estimate HHV for MSW in this thesis.
The LHV on dry basis can be estimated via eq. (3.7)[55].
LHVdry = HHVdry −(H · 2500) −(M · 2500)
(3.7)
The higher or lower heating value on wet basis can be evaluated as shown in
eq. (3.8) for the LHV:
LHVwet = LHVdry ·

1 −Mc
100

(3.8)
Where the moisture content (Mc) are in percent of total weight. The lower
heating value for the Channiwala correlation has been illustrated on ﬁgure 3.7.
==PAGE:55==
3.5. SUMMARY
39
The values agree well with the as-received Danish waste on table 3.6, where
moisture content is expected to be high.
0
10
20
30
40
50
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
20000
22000
24000
M  [%]
LHVchanniwala,  LHVchanniwala,wet [kJ/kg]
LHVchanniwala
LHVchanniwala
LHVchanniwala,wet
LHVchanniwala,wet
Figure 3.7: Dry and wet basis LHV as a function of moisture content for the
Channiwala correlation.
3.4.1
Speciﬁc heat capacity
The speciﬁc heat cp is not readily deﬁned for a mixture and is calculated as
a simple weighted average with the speciﬁc heat of each chemical element, eq.
(3.9), based on[55].
cp,tot =
P
i
fi · cp,i
P
1
fi
(3.9)
Where the speciﬁc heat for each element cp,i is evaluated in EES[56] and fi
is the mass fraction. For DK-waste01 the speciﬁc heat at 25 ◦C is 1.911
kJ
kgK .
More details can be found in appendix B, section B.1.
3.5
Summary
A method for determining physico-chemical properties of MSW based on waste
fractions has been developed. The method focuses on Danish data for waste
and material fractions, but should apply reasonably well for all countries similar
to Denmark to terms of geography and income level (Northern and Middle
Europe, US, UK etc.).
The method only takes sorting into account in the
waste fractions and only ’common’ waste is considered, such that fractions of
atypical waste from a speciﬁc industry is not supported without some editing.
==PAGE:56==
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
System Modelling
The following chapter introduces the modelling of the system. The simulation
tool DNA is brieﬂy described. The modelling of the system, divided in three
sections corresponding to the three main technologies gasiﬁcation, SOFC and
bottoming cycle with absorption plant is presented. The evaluation methods
of the tri-generation plant is discussed and the concept of exergy analysis is
presented.
4.1
Simulation tool
The main simulation program utilized in this thesis is Dynamic Network Anal-
ysis (DNA), a software developed at the Mechanical Department, Technical
University Denmark (DTU) since 1989. The program is written in FORTRAN
and uses an text-based EMACS editor for user input. Through a component
and ﬂuid property library, the user can connect various components to create a
thermodynamic system network. The network is analogue to that of an electri-
cal circuit, connecting components by nodes via branches in between, as seen
on ﬁgure 4.1. Each component is deﬁned via the library with a unique name
and input and output nodes and parameters, governed by a set of energy and
mass balance equations.
Component
1
2
Component
3
4
5
Node
Component
Branch
Figure 4.1: DNA network diagram with 5 nodes and two components. Each
node is deﬁned by a number and each component by a unique name. Here
the ﬁrst component could be a burner and the second a heat exchanger for
example.
41
==PAGE:58==
42
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
DNA solves steady state systems via an iterative process. Apart from physical
properties being deﬁned as desired (temperatures, pressures, etc.), a number
of reasonable start guesses might be needed for the solver to converge.
A simple heat exchanger has ﬁve nodes which must be connected to a cold
and hot in- and outlet together with a heat loss node which is not connected.
Furthermore two pressure loss parameters has to be deﬁned. For each node a
number of operating conditions must be set, such as pressure, temperature etc.
for DNA to be able to solve the system[57–59].
The thermodynamic system is constructed and simulated in DNA, which also
facilitates parametric variations of all deﬁned inputs and component param-
eters. The commercial software Engineering Equation Solver (EES) is used
as the general calculation program where DNA is not applicable. The pro-
gram is well suited for thermodynamic calculations with an extensive substance
database and iterative equation solver[56]. Microsoft Excel is utilized as stan-
dard data analyser and organizer to process the text-based DNA output ﬁles.
4.2
System modelling
The thermodynamic model for the initial base case plant design can be seen
in ﬁgure 4.2, with the three main sections top cycle gasiﬁcation and SOFC
and the bottoming cycle with absorption plant (APP) and district heating
connection. The absorption plant is here represented by a single block. The
bottoming cycle is a parallel connection between the APP and district heating
production in a simple heat exchanger. The conﬁguration, modelling, inputs
and assumptions of each main section is presented in sections 4.3 to 4.5.
A general assumption for the system is that the production of power, DE and
waste products (ash, sulphur) will be able to be utilized and consumed or re-
moved outside of the system boundary. Furthermore, the transmission and
conversion of power are beyond the system boundaries, likewise the transmis-
sion of DE is not considered. This assumption seems fair as the consumption
is supposed to occur near the system. Regulation and control of the system,
such as part load are not simulated or covered thermodynamically, but makes
for an excellent point of discussion in section 9.5. No components have deﬁned
heat losses, while all components but the absorption cycle has pressure losses.
The system design case is assumed to be operating during the summer, where
the need for district cooling is high and the outside temperature is too high
to adequately be utilized in dry coolers. The outside/ambient temperature is
set to 25 ◦C, a warm day in the Nordic climate. It is assumed that a small
portion of DH is always required to cover immediate hot water consumption
etc. Seasonal variation simulations are only conducted in a limited fashion in
chapter 6, as the bottoming cycle focus is on providing cooling primarily.
The system comprises many diﬀerent components, each with a varying number
of inputs. Advanced components such as the gasiﬁcation reactor and the SOFC
has a considerable amount of inputs, while other more specialized components,
for example the desulphurizer has none. This means that the control of some
components can be very detailed, while others oﬀer no control at all from a
modelling point of view.
==PAGE:59==
4.2. SYSTEM MODELLING
43
DH
Flue gas
Steam
Air
DR
GSF
AH
SH
DS
MSW
Gas
Ash
Sulphur
Air/steam 
Cathode
Anode
CB
CP
Air
AP
Absorption
plant
DC
Power
SB
GB
AB
Flue gas
DH
Drying, Gasification and Energy recovery
Gas cleaning
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
Cathode Preheat
Anode Preheat
Bottoming Cycle
Figure 4.2: Initial plant design with deﬁned sections of the plant. The thick
dashed lines denotes desirable outputs: power and DE. The ash, the cold ﬂue
gas and sulphur are considered waste products.
==PAGE:60==
44
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
4.2.1
Plant size
According to a report from IRENA1 from 2012, integrated biomass gasiﬁcation
- fuel cell plants are still only on the research stage and has several phases of
development remaining before becoming a mature/commercial technology[60].
As a result of this, very little operational experience with MSW gasiﬁcation
integrated with an SOFC is available and many parameters must be based on
assumptions or other theoretically studied systems.
The output of the system must be based on an average waste production at
a given location over a period of time, for example a year.
This can vary
greatly depending on the number of households connected to the system, the
size of the hospital or shopping center. From a thermodynamic point of view
the system has no size limit and could in theory be as large as desirable, but
from a practical engineering point of view both the gasiﬁcation and fuel cell
technology are not ready for large scale production in the immediate future.
Most often gasiﬁcation capacities are reported based on the full system output,
in electricity and district heating, rather than by the input of feedstock and
heating values.
For the small scale plants the gasiﬁcation process is often
combined with a gas engine and a heat recovery system to produce power and
heat and cannot directly be translated to the investigated system[25]. Fixed
bed gasiﬁers seem somewhat limited in scaling opportunities, in particular the
downdraft conﬁguration2. The reactor type can have trouble maintaining a
homogeneous bed for big reactors, further complicated by the heterogeneity of
MSW. The ﬂuidized beds reactors however has a good potential for up-scaling,
the circulating design being the best[10].
While large scale gasiﬁcation systems should be able to replace centralised
WtE plants in the future, the gasiﬁcation technology is still in infancy when it
comes to gasifying waste. Small scale systems seems to be a realistic goal in
the upcoming years, while large scale systems lack operational experience[22].
The system model is designed in such a way that only the MSW mass ﬂow to
the dryer has to be changed for varying the size/scale of the model, all other
mass ﬂows are calculated as necessary.
All components but the SOFC will
adjust as required. The SOFC on the other hand is governed by a number of
stacks and a number of fuel cells in each stack. Typically the number of cells
per stack is constant, but the number of stacks will have to be changed as the
design MSW mass ﬂow changes. For a mass ﬂow of 54 kg/h (0.015 kg/s) the
preliminary model used 150 stacks of 75 cells each. For a larger system, with a
MSW mass ﬂow of 144 kg/h (0.04 kg/s) the system has 350 stacks in the fuel
cell. This is an estimate and subject to further investigation in the chapter 6.
The current capacity possible for the fuel cell technology is around 2 MWel3,
with the SOFC being anywhere from a few kW up to the limit. This is likely
to change with further development of the SOFC in the future[11]. The base
case system is designed with 144 kg/h feed input, around 1100 tons per year
1The International Renewable Energy Agency.
2Some reports suggest 1 MWth input is the limit for a downdraft gasiﬁer. Assuming a
MSW of 10 MJ/kg, that results in a MSW mass ﬂow of 0.1 kg/s.
3The cite article is from 2009 and as such the limit for fuel cell capacity might already
be signiﬁcantly higher than reported here.
==PAGE:61==
4.3. GASIFIER
45
assuming 8000 operational hours/year.
4.3
Gasiﬁer
The gasiﬁcation plant comprises the drying, gasiﬁcation and post-treatment of
the producer gas, along with support utilities such as compressors and heat
exchangers.
Steam
Air
DR
GSF
AH
SH
DS
MSW
Gas
Ash
Sulphur
Air/steam 
SB
GB
To SOFC
Figure 4.3: Schematic diagram of the gasiﬁcation process. DR = Waste dryer,
GSF = Gasiﬁer, AH = Air heater, SB = Steam blower, SH = Steam heater,
DS = desulphurizer, GB = Gas blower.
The gasiﬁcation plant DNA model can be seen on ﬁgure 4.3. MSW is fed con-
tinuously to a dryer, in which most of the moisture is removed via steam. The
gasiﬁer is fed with the dry MSW and a mixture of hot air and steam, the out-
put is product gas and ashes. The sensible heat in the product gas is used ﬁrst
to preheat air followed by a steam generator, producing steam for the drying
and gasiﬁcation process. The gas is cleaned in a desulphurizer, where H2S is
removed catalytically. The gas-cleaning is not as simple in reality, as noted by
Rokni in [55], stating that the practical aspect of gas-cleaning is more compli-
cated than the thermodynamic representation. Aravind and de Jorg suggests
an extensive gas-cleaning system for biomass gasiﬁcation[24]. Dust ﬁlters are
likely necessary in all cases, but whether all steps of the proposed cleaning is
required for MSW gasiﬁcation must depend on the contaminants at the partic-
ular MSW producer. For purpose of the thermodynamic analysis the thermal
cracking of tars are assumed to happen inside the gasiﬁcation reactor.
The Gasifier component (GSF) is modelled as a simple Gibbs reactor in
DNA. The chemical equilibrium of a reaction is reached once the total free
Gibbs energy is at the minimal value. This principle can be used to evaluate
gas compositions at various pressures and temperatures without considering
chemical reactions. The gasiﬁer model does as such not represent a speciﬁc
reactor type, but rather the general working principle of the gasiﬁcation pro-
cess with partial-oxidation (i.e. not a indirectly heated gasiﬁer). For more
information on the modelling of the gasiﬁer, see [61].
==PAGE:62==
46
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
The Gasifier has a number of parameters and variables, apart from node con-
nections. The output product gas composition species are deﬁned via integers,
such that of 36 available gasses 8 are present in the producer gas; hydrogen,
nitrogen, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, water, hydrogen sulphide, methane
and argon. Furthermore, the pressure, temperature, pressure losses and carbon
conversion factor (see section 2.3) must be deﬁned. Due to an underestimate
of methane content in producer gas, the model is able to by-pass a fraction of
methane such that it does not react during the gasiﬁcation[61][25].
Table 4.1: Gasiﬁcation operation parameters and assumptions.
Parameter
Unit
Value
Fuel inlet temp.
◦C
25
Dry MSW temp.
◦C
150
Dry MSW moisture
%
0.5
Steam temp.
◦C
200
Gasiﬁer temp.
◦C
800
Gasiﬁer pressure
bar
1
Carbon conversion factor
-
1
None-eq. Methane
%
1
Producer gas outlet temp.
◦C
800
Air inlet temp.
◦C
25
Gas blower ηc
-
0.75
Gas blower ηm
-
0.98
Steam blower ηc
-
0.8
Steam blower ηm
-
0.98
The input parameters and assumptions can be seen in table 4.1. The gasiﬁ-
cation temperature is based on [62] for a ﬂuidized bed gasiﬁer utilizing refuse
derived fuels and [27], both using temperatures around 800 ◦C. The product
gas at the outlet of the gasiﬁer reactor is assumed to be the same temperature
as the gasiﬁcation process, although the model allows for the a separate outlet
temperature set point if a speciﬁc gasiﬁer was to be modelled. The carbon con-
version factor is based on [61], which uses the same DNA model of the gasiﬁer.
The desulphurizer is simply assumed to remove all sulphur.
The density of MSW can vary quite signiﬁcantly, thus it is likely that a shred-
der would be needed to process the waste into more manageable sizes before
the drying and gasiﬁcation (this process has no thermodynamic relevance and
is not included).
==PAGE:63==
4.4. SOLID OXIDE FUEL CELL
47
4.4
Solid oxide fuel cell
The SOFC DNA component model is based on planar fuel cells by Topsoe Fuel
Cells A/S and the former Risø National Laboratory and calibrated against ex-
perimental data with good results. From a model point of view, all CO and
CH4 are converted to H2 before the electrochemical reactions, such that only
hydrogen is converted in the anode. The amount of fuel (hydrogen, carbon
monoxide and methane) converted is based on the utilization factor[63].
One of the advantages of integrating the gasiﬁcation process with an SOFC is
the ability to utilize the hot product gas directly. Due to the high operation
temperature of the SOFC the fuel (and air) has to be preheated to avoid prob-
lematic stresses. Since the product gas is already at a fairly high temperature
when leaving the gas cleaning, the amount of preheat required is reduced sig-
niﬁcantly.
The SOFC requires both the inlet of air and fuel to be preheated to avoid
thermal stresses.
The power production of the SOFC is calculated as follows:
PSOF C =ηrevηvUf(LHVH2 ˙ηH2,in
+ LHVCO ˙ηCO,in + LHVCH4 ˙ηCH4,in)
(4.1)
Where Uf is the utilization factor, ηv is the voltage eﬃciency and ηrev is the
reversible eﬃciency deﬁned as change in Gibbs energy over the lower heating
value of the fuel.
ηrev = ∆Gfuel
LHVfuel
(4.2)
For more information about the equations behind the modelling of the SOFC
see [55] and [61]. The thermal eﬃciency can be calculated as the SOFC produc-
tion subtracted the auxiliary power consumption for pumps and compressors
divided by the LHV times the mass ﬂow of the MSW:
ηth = PSOF C −PAux
˙mMSW · LHV
(4.3)
The SOFC and auxiliary equipment setup can be seen in ﬁgure 4.4.
The
product gas coming from the gas cleaning is preheated to 650 ◦C before entering
the SOFC. Air is compressed in an air blower and preheated to 600 ◦C with the
oﬀ-air in the cathode preheater, both inlet temperatures common values when
modelling an SOFC[55][64]. The SOFC operates at slightly above atmospheric
pressure. The gas blower (from the gasiﬁcation section) and air blower have to
overcome component pressure losses in the overall system so that the ﬂue gas
out of the bottoming cycle components are at atmospheric pressure.
The oﬀ-fuel and oﬀ-air is burned in a catalytic burner.
A catalytic burner
oxidise the oﬀ-fuel catalytically in the presence of oxygen (from the oﬀ-air)
and produce heat without conventional combustion taking place. The process
produces a signiﬁcantly cleaner ﬂue gas with far lower content of NOx than
what is otherwise possible[65]. The pressure loss in the burner is assumed to
be zero. The ﬂue gas is utilized in the bottoming cycle to produce DE.
==PAGE:64==
48
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
From Gasification
Cathode
Anode
CB
CP
Air
AP
Power
AB
To bottoming cycle
Figure 4.4: Schematic diagram of the SOFC and auxiliary systems. AP =
Anode preheater, CP = Cathode preheater, AB = Air blower, CB = catalytic
burner.
Table 4.2: Input parameters and assumptions for the SOFC and utility equip-
ment.
Parameter
Unit
Value
Cells/Stack
-
75
Stack count
-
350
SOFC utilization factor
-
0.7
SOFC operating temp.
◦C
800
Anode pressure drop
bar
0.05
Cathode pressure drop
bar
0.05
SOFC fuel inlet temp.
◦C
650
SOFC air inlet temp.
◦C
600
Air temp.
◦C
25
Air blower ηc
-
0.7
Air blower ηm
-
0.98
AP pressure drop
bar
0.05
CP pressure drop
bar
0.05
==PAGE:65==
4.5. BOTTOMING CYCLE PRODUCTION
49
4.5
Bottoming cycle production
As noted above, the base design utilizes a parallel conﬁguration for the bot-
toming cycle, such that the ﬂue gas from the burner is split into two streams,
as can be seen on ﬁgure 4.5. The ratio between DH and DC can be calculated
as shown on eq. (4.4) using the mass ﬂows of ﬂue gas.
DEratio = ˙mfluegas −˙mfluegas,DH
˙mfluegas
(4.4)
The mass ﬂow of ﬂue gas passing through the desorber can be then found as:
˙mfluegas,DC = ˙mfluegas · DEratio
(4.5)
DH
Flue gas
CB
Absorption
plant
DC
Flue gas
DH
Figure 4.5: Parallel conﬁguration bottoming cycle. DH = District heating
heat exchanger.
The district heating in the base case is assumed to be current generation,
with a supply temperature of 90 ◦C and a return temperature of 45 ◦C. Only
the production of DE is considered, the distribution in the area/buildings are
outside the system boundaries. Unless otherwise mentioned, the plant produces
almost entirely cooling, with the DEratio being 0.98. The ﬂue gas pressure
drop in the heat exchanger is 0.05 bars and the ﬂue gas leaves the system at
atmospheric pressure.
4.5.1
Absorption plant modelling
The district energy is provided at 6 ◦C with a return temperature of 16 ◦C,
based on [6]. The distribution of the cold water is not considered.
The absorption plant are in several ways dependent on the manner in which
heat can be removed from the system. The condensing temperature limits the
high pressure level in the system, so that to ensure all the vapour refrigerant
can be condensed. By increasing the pressure in the condenser, heat will have
to be rejected at a lower temperature for the condensation to take place.
Furthermore, the available cooling in the absorber will set the limit for the
concentration of refrigerant (water) which can be absorbed by the absorbant
LiBr - the higher the refrigerant concentration the lower the temperature in the
absorber must be. The lower limit for of refrigerant is deﬁned by crystallization
risk in the high Li-Br concentration connection between desorber and absorber.
The desorber DNA component requires the concentration of Lithium bromide
==PAGE:66==
50
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
Cond
Desorb
Evap
Absorb
Heat rejection
Chilled Water
Flue gas
Heat rejection
Solution valve
Throttle valve
Solution 
pump
41
42
74
75
70
71
72
73
62
63
61
59
65
64
76
77
Water pump
60
Figure 4.6: Schematic diagram of the absorption plant. Desorb = Desor-
ber/generator, Cond = Condenser, Evap = Evaporator, Absorb = Absorber.
at the inlet (node 75) and the lithium bromide at the outlet (node 76). The
concentration of refrigerant in the rich and poor solution are:
ξr = 1 −ξLiBr,rich = 1 −0.55 = 0.45
(4.6)
ξp = 1 −ξLiBr,poor = 1 −0.7 = 0.30
(4.7)
Meaning that only 30 % of the poor solution is water, which is quite close to
the limit before crystallization of Li-Br becomes an issue[36].
Figure 4.6 shows the thermodynamic model of the single stage absorption plant
with lithium bromide water. The rich solution (high concentration of refriger-
ant) is pumped to the desorber (node 75) where water (refrigerant) is distilled
via boiling, while the remaining poor liquid solution ﬂows to the absorber (node
76). The vapour (node 70) rejects heat and condensates (node 71) before the
pressure is throttled (node 72). The refrigerant starts to evaporate again by
removing heat from the district cooling chilled water (node 72 and 73). The
vapour refrigerant is condensed and re-absorbed into the poor solution (node
73, 74 and 77).
The heat rejected in the condenser is assumed to be used partly for local hot
water production, but is not hot enough to be useful as 3rd. generation district
heating4. The remaining heat of the refrigerant not used for hot water is con-
densed in the ambient air, e.i. a dry cooler, consequently the heat is assumed
to be removed from the system, but does not represent a valuable output or
input. Either way, the heat rejection in the condenser is rarely considered ei-
ther an input or output when determining the performance of the absorption
4The limiting factor is the return temperature of 3rd. generation DH being too warm to
be used for condensing the refrigerant.
==PAGE:67==
4.5. BOTTOMING CYCLE PRODUCTION
51
cycle[66]. The condenser is modelled as a steam condenser, assuming the ﬂuid
entering on the hot side is saturated at the outlet, thus x = 0.
Table 4.3: Absorption plant input parameters and assumptions.
Parameter
unit
value
General
Component heat loss
kW
0
Solution pressure drop
bar
0
Desorber
ξLiBr,rich
%
55
ξLiBr,poor
%
70
Fluegas pressure drop
bar
0.05
Fluegas outlet temp.
◦C
100
Fluegas outlet pressure
bar
1.013
Condenser
Cooling water inlet temp.
◦C
30
Cooling water outlet temp.
◦C
60
Evaporator
DC Chilled water inlet
◦C
6
DC Chilled water outlet
◦C
16
Absorber
Cooling water inlet temp.
◦C
20
Cooling water outlet temp.
◦C
30
Cooling water pressure drop.
bar
2
Water pump isentropc eﬃciency
%
95
Solution pump
High pressure level
bar
0.05
Low pressure level
bar
0.009
Isentropic eﬃciency
%
90
The heat rejected in the absorber is quite important for the operation of the
plant. The cooling water is assumed to be pumped from an available and local
cold reservoir5, at 20 ◦C. The cooling water pump (WP) has to overcome a 2
bar pressure drop in the absorber on the cooling water side, representing a long
pipeline pressure drop. In DNA the evaporator is modelled as a simple heat
exchanger with the refrigerant water vapour entering the absorber as saturated
vapour, x = 1.
The expansion devices in the absorption plant operate adiabatically and pro-
vide only the pressure drop, the enthalpy remains the same on either side. No
components in the refrigerant or solution cycle include pressure drops. The
input parameters for the APP can be seen on table 4.3.
5Based on data from 2014 about a particular warm sea water temperature[67].
==PAGE:68==
52
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
4.6
Other components
4.6.1
Heat exchangers
Heat exchangers are modelled as counter ﬂow, either simply with a pressure
drop deﬁned for each side or with one additional parameter, a pinch tempera-
ture. The transferred heat is calculated for either side of the heat exchanger:
˙Q = ˙m1(h1 −h2)
(4.8)
The pinch temperature is found as the minimum of the hot or cold end tem-
perature diﬀerences or at phase change if one occurs. The steam generator in
the gasiﬁcation plant is modelled as a simple heat exchanger as well.
4.6.2
Pumps and compressors
All three fans are modelled as a compressor with a isentropic and mechanical
eﬃciency. The mechanical eﬃciency is 0.98 in all three cases. The isentropic
eﬃciency is calculated from the enthalpy change over the compressor[68]:
ηis = h2s −h1
h2 −h1
(4.9)
The isentropic eﬃciency of the individual compressors and pumps can be seen
in the tables for their respective section. See tables 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 for the the
gasiﬁcation, SOFC and APP sections.
4.6.3
Support components
Splitters and mixers are modelled as a mass balance over the component with
no pressure losses. For a mixer two inlets and one outlet:
˙m1 · h1 + ˙m2 · h2 = ˙m3 · h3
(4.10)
For the splitter the mass balance is reverse, with two outputs and a single
input. The pressure is the same in all nodes.
4.7
System performance
Each of the main sections have a well deﬁned performance parameter. For the
gasiﬁer, the cold or hot gas eﬃciency is common. For the SOFC the thermal
eﬃciency (also called electrical) is used, while the absorption plant is deﬁned
via a coeﬃcient of performance COP. The cold gas eﬃciency (CGE) is the
relationship between the fuel input and the product gas heating values[22].
CGE = Heating value of cooled product gas
Heating value of fuel
=
LHVgas · ˙mgas
LHVfeedstock · ˙mfeedstock
(4.11)
The performance of the SOFC is deﬁned as the thermal eﬃciency, the relation-
ship between power produced and the thermal input.
ηth = Pnet
˙Qth
=
Pnet
LHVfuel · ˙mfuel
(4.12)
==PAGE:69==
4.7. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
53
Where Pnet is the power delivered to the grid by the system when taking
auxiliary systems power consumption into account. The performance of the
absorption plant is presented in section 2.5 eq.
(2.18) as the coeﬃcient of
performance. The inclusion of the pump work in the absorption cycle has neg-
ligible eﬀect. The potential production of district heating is not readily deﬁned
by itself.
For the gasiﬁcation and SOFC integrated system, the combined thermal eﬃ-
ciency can be calculated the combination of eq. (4.11)) and (4.12):
ηth =
Pnet
LHVfeedstock · ˙mfeedstock
(4.13)
Where the feedstock in the investigated system is MSW.
When considering the performance of a CHP plant, normally three parameters
are presented. The thermal eﬃciency (same as eq. (4.12)), the overall plant
eﬃciency eq. (4.14) and the alpha value eq. (4.15).
ηCHP = Pnet + Qheating
Qth
(4.14)
α =
Pnet
˙Qheating
(4.15)
The alpha value expresses the ratio between heat and power produced. This is
possibly not viable for a CCHP plant, since heating and cooling (for example
DE) cannot be compared without two additional values (for example α and β),
one to relate power and DE and another to relate DC and DH.
ηCCHP = Pnet + ˙Qheating + ˙Qcooling
˙Qth
(4.16)
A CHP and CCHP eﬃciency is however a somewhat poor performance param-
eter in terms, of optimization, of how well the fuel is utilized. A small decrease
in power production can often increase the heat production greatly. Therefore
as a stand alone performance parameter the CPH eﬃciency would encourage
very high heat production and low power production, which is unlikely to be
a good use of the fuel or economically viable. In essence and from a practical
engineering stand point the best performance parameter would be one of mon-
etary value, considering what the products are worth in economic terms, not
thermodynamically. This is however not a straight forward calculation or well
deﬁned and prices on the power market ﬂuctuate extensively.
A potentially better alternative for optimization is exergy analysis and the
exergetic eﬃciency.
4.7.1
Exergy deﬁnition and analysis
From the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics it is well established that energy cannot
be destroyed or created.
From the second law of thermodynamics however
exergy can be destroyed. An exergy analysis uses the fact that while energy
cannot be destroyed, it can degrade in terms of quality towards the surrounding
==PAGE:70==
54
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
environment. While energy is a quantitative measure, exergy is a qualitative
measure. Exergy is often deﬁned as maximum possible amount of work which
can be done by a given amount of energy. Exergy, and not energy, is the better
measure for the quality of a certain amount of electricity (1 kJ) compared to
the same amount of heating (1 kJ) in energy terms. As Bejan et al. puts
it: ”Electricity clearly has the greater quality, and not incidentally, the greater
economic value.”[69]. The concept of exergy can be useful for determining losses
in a system and individual components and for evaluating the performance of
an integrated system with several outputs/products[69][70].
Exergy is calculated against a ’dead state’ or ’reference state’, where the system
is in equilibrium with the surrounding environment in terms of temperature T0,
pressure P0 and chemical composition µ0. The chemical composition is a set
of reference substances at a reference concentration. For gasses, the reference
substance is often air with a concentration of the common components found
in air. A system in total equilibrium with the surrounding environment has no
exergy, as no driving forces are present to drive processes[70].
The nomenclature for exergy and exergetic analysis is not standardized and can
be very diﬀerent depending on author. The nomenclature used in this thesis is
presented in [71]. Where exergy is denoted E in kJ/s, speciﬁc exergy denoted
e in kJ/kg and exergetic eﬃciency uses ϵ (Greek lower case Epsilon).
Exergy
Physical
Chemical
Potential
Kinetic
Reactions
Temperature
Mechanical
Mix and 
separation
Thermo-mechanical
Pressure
Figure 4.7: The exergy deﬁnition separated into major categories. Figure
inspired by [72].
Figure 4.7 visualizes the deﬁnition of exergy. On a general level exergy can be
split into a physical and chemical component.
E = EP H + ECH
(4.17)
The physical is subdivided into mechanical and thermo-mechanical, each repre-
senting diﬀerent aspects. For a system with no elevation and in rest compared
to the environment6, the kinetic and potential terms of the physical exergy can
be neglected.
EP H = ET M + 
:0
EP T I
+ 
:0
EKNI
(4.18)
The remaining physical exergy ’thermo-mechanical’ is deﬁned as the enthalpy
diﬀerence compared to the dead-state subtracted the dead-state temperature
6As is the case in this thesis.
==PAGE:71==
4.7. SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
55
times the entropy diﬀerence.
EP H = (H −H0) −T0(S −S0)
(4.19)
Entropy is an expression of ’disorder’ in a thermodynamic system and a mea-
sure of irreversibility occurring in real processes.
The entropy of a system
increases due to irreversible processes, such that at thermodynamic equilib-
rium the entropy of a system is maximized.
In some cases the physical exergy is estimated as the energetic content times
the Carnot factor. This value only takes the temperature term of the thermo-
mechanical exergy into account, thus if the pressure levels are not at the refer-
ence pressure P0 this estimate results in faulty values.
The chemical energy is deﬁned as reaction exergy and none-reaction exergy
(mixing and separation). The chemical exergy is the exergy a substance can
perform when not at the reference state.
ECH = ER + EN
(4.20)
Without diving too deep into chemistry, the chemical exergy is conveniently
equal to the higher heating value (as long as the pressure and temperature are
at the reference state)[69][70].
DNA is able to calculate the physical and chemical exergy and speciﬁc exergy
in and out of all components based on a deﬁnable reference state using eq.
(4.19) and (4.20).
4.7.2
Exergetic eﬃciency
The exergetic eﬃciency of a process is deﬁned via the exergy balance. The
exergy of the fuel EF used to generate a product EP is equal to the sum of the
product, the exergy destruction ED and the exergy lost EL.
EF = EP + ED + EL
(4.21)
Exergy losses are exergy lost with material streams leaving the system or leak-
ages of heat. The exergy destruction is related to the entropy generation:
ED = T0 · Sgen
(4.22)
1
2
3
Figure 4.8: Compressor or pump process with a pressure lift of a ﬂuid and a
work input.
For a component the exergetic eﬃciency can be deﬁned as the product EP over
the fuel input EF :
ϵ = EP
EF
(4.23)
==PAGE:72==
56
CHAPTER 4. SYSTEM MODELLING
For the compressor (or pump) on ﬁgure 4.8 the exergetic eﬃciency is:
ϵ = E2 −E1
E3
= m1(e2 −e1)
W
(4.24)
Here the work/electricity supplied to run the compressor is the fuel and the
exergy increase between before and after is the exergy product. The products
and fuels must be identiﬁed individually for all relevant component types in
the system. For a heat exchanger the product would be the exergy diﬀerence
on the cold side and the fuel would be the exergy diﬀerence on the hot side or
vice versa.
Two additional ratios concerning exergy can be very helpful when evaluating
a system. The exergy destruction ratios yD and y∗D:
YD =
ED
EF,tot
(4.25)
The exergy destruction ratio yD expresses how much of the exergy destruction
occurring in a given component compared to the total system fuel input. The
other ratio, y∗
D relates the exergy destroyed in a component to the total exergy
destroyed in the system[69].
Y ∗
D =
ED
ED,tot
(4.26)
4.7.3
Total exergy eﬃciency
The system exergy eﬃciency is very useful when determining the system per-
formance. Exergy is a homogeneous quantity, while energy is not, meaning
that the exergetic value of heating, cooling, power and so forth can freely be
added up and compared. The system exergetic eﬃciency is not always well
deﬁned and varies somewhat depending on literature. Thus when comparing
eﬃciencies, the reference point and the overall deﬁnition is of the utmost im-
portance.
Bejan et al. deﬁnes the exergetic eﬃciency of a system as the sum ’useful’
outputs or products over the sum of inputs.
ϵsys =
P Exergy of useful products
P Exergy of inputs
(4.27)
For a CHP consisting of a gas turbine and steam cycle producing power and
heat, the useful products would be the power outputs from the gas and steam
turbine and the exergetic increase of the heating medium. The input would
be the fuel and possibly the air, depending on the reference state and air inlet
temperature[69].
The values of heating and cooling can be quite low in terms of exergy. This is
due to the small temperature diﬀerence between the product and the reference
state.
==PAGE:73==
4.8. SUMMARY
57
4.7.4
Exergy eﬃciency calculator
A simple Excel spreadsheet was developed to quickly and with very few user
input evaluate the exegetic eﬃciency of a DNA simulated system. The spread-
sheet prompts the user for the DNA simulation output ﬁle (with extension .sta)
and the necessary information is extracted from the raw data automatically.
The user will only have to type in the DNA node numbers for in- and out-put
of the heating or cooling they wish to include in the system exegetic eﬃciency.
Several exergetic streams can be included, such that a system with both heat-
ing and cooling or multiple heating instances can be evaluated.
Excel was decided upon as it is the most widespread calculation tool and fairly
common for quick data analysis tasks. Matlab was another viable option, but
harder to access outside of academia and more complex, which makes expand-
ing the spreadsheet troublesome without extensive coding experience.
See the developed spreadsheet in appendix F, ﬁgure F.1.
4.8
Summary
The initial system design has been presented with the three main sections,
top cycle gasiﬁcation and SOFC with bottoming cycle absorption pant. The
simulation tools utilized in the thesis is brieﬂy introduced, with DNA being
the main simulation program in which the thermodynamic model is build. The
modelling of each section is described together with assumptions and input
parameters.
Methods for evaluating system performance has been shown and discussed.
The exergy eﬃciency could be a better candidate compared to combined cycle
eﬃciencies, with regards to energy optimization.
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 5
Design Results
This chapter presents the results of the initial design simulations, shows the im-
pact of design conﬁguration changes and the signiﬁcance of waste from various
sources and activities.
5.1
Preliminary simulation
The initial simulation uses the waste fuel DK-waste01. The impact of diﬀerent
waste sources are investigated in section 5.6. The base design is presented in
section 4.2. The input parameters for the base system can be seen on table 5.1
and the corresponding performance results on table 5.2.
Table 5.1: Major input parameters for the base system.
System information
Value
Unit
MSW mass ﬂow
0.04
kg/s
Gasiﬁcation temp.
800
◦C
SOFC temp.
800
◦C
Cell/stack
75
-
Stacks in SOFC
350
-
DE ratio
0.98
-
Fuel temp. SOFC inlet
650
◦C
More detailed input parameters are shown in section 4.2.
From table 5.2 it can be seen that the thermal eﬃciency is signiﬁcantly lower
than what is reported for SOFCs in general, but this is primarily due to the
poor heating value of the MSW and the fact that the system has some po-
tential for optimization. Compared to conventional WtE plants the system
produces signiﬁcantly more power and less DE. The thermal eﬃciency is 14
percent points higher than the common 20 % eﬃciency of WtE plants. Pro-
ducing energy from 1000 kg of MSW the system produces around 1.25 MWh
electricity and 1.5 MWh DE, compared to the production values mentioned in
section 2.2.2, the improvement is evident. The plant size diﬀerence obviously
matters here, as it would take the system just under 7 hours to process 1000
59
==PAGE:76==
60
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN RESULTS
Table 5.2: System performance for the base system.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Elec. Power Production
202.88
kW
Aux. Power Consumption
22.66
kW
Net Power Production
180.22
kW
DC production
212.1
kW
DH production
5.66
kW
FlueGas inlet temp.
470.73
◦C
FlueGas outlet temp.
100
◦C
Thermal Eﬃciency (LHV)
0.340
-
Exergetic Eﬃciency
0.317
-
COPAP P
0.71
-
kg of waste, while conventional large WtE plants can handle the same amount
in a fraction of that time.
The ﬂue gas temperature refers to the inlet of the desorber and DH heat ex-
changer, the outlet temperature refers to the allowable temperature of the ﬂue
gas coming into contact with the atmosphere. The temperature diﬀerence be-
tween inlet and outlet corresponds to the heat available for DE production.
The outlet temperature is set rather conservatively at 100 ◦C, a parameter
which justiﬁes some further analysis in the chapter 7. The DEratio is here set
to 0.98, assuming a small amount DH is always required for heating purpose,
while the main focus is on producing DC.
The CCHP eﬃciency can be calculated as shown in eq. (5.1), with power and
DE outputs added together as the products of the system.
ηCCHP = Pnet + QDC + QDH
LHVwet · ˙mMSW
(5.1)
For the base system this yields:
180.22kW + 212.1kW + 5.66kW
13240kJ/kg · 0.04kg/s
= 0.751
(5.2)
As mentioned in the secion 4.7 comparing power with heating and cooling are
by some considered a somewhat poor practise. While power is a homogeneous
product, heat and cooling is not. The temperature level at which the DE is
produced has a signiﬁcant impact on how well the available energy in the fuel
is utilized. The better way of combining various outputs is to utilize the exergy
values. The exergetic eﬃciency describes how much of the available energy in
the fuel is utilized in the system and takes temperatures of DE into account.
The exergy ﬂows are evaluated with a reference temperature and pressure of 25
◦C and 1.013 bar respectively. Grosso et al. did an analysis of energy recovery
from waste incineration in Europe in 2010, calculating exergetic eﬃciencies
for the various countries under assumptions of the temperature of the DH
produced. While the method is not exactly the same as the method in this
thesis, some comparisons can be made. The average exergy eﬃciency for a
==PAGE:77==
5.2. IMPROVEMENT STRATEGY
61
CHP waste incineration plant is 20.9 %, which is signiﬁcantly lower than the
31.7 % found for the investigated system[73].
For more details on calculations of the performance parameters, see appendix
B section B.2.
5.2
Improvement strategy
As the system is integrated, it is not possible to look at each section separately.
A change in the gasiﬁer will aﬀect the SOFC operation which could in turn
impact the APP cooling production. In light of this, a true optimization of
operational parameters is not possible. Instead parameters must be studied
separately and a combination of individually optimal parameters will form a
pseudo-optimal design. The study will be evaluated based on production of
power and DE, thermal and exergetic eﬃciencies. A parametric study of key
operational parameters and assumptions are conducted in chapter 6, with a
’optimized’ system as a result. Chapter 8 investigates the component exergy
eﬃciencies of the optimized system, in order to determine problematic compo-
nents and possibly inexpedient design choices.
Before considering individual parameters the overall system design should be
evaluated and if necessary redesigned. Two areas of interest in particular are
the anode preheating with or without methanation, and the bottoming cycle
conﬁguration.
5.3
Anode conﬁguration
A methanator is a ﬁxed or ﬂuidized bed reactor with a catalytic bed material,
which at high temperatures encourage the hydrogenation of carbon oxides to
methane in two reactions:
2H2 + 2CO →CH4 + CO2
∆HR = −247
kJ/kmol
(5.3)
4H2 + CO2 →CH4 + 2H2O
∆HR = −165
kJ/kmol
(5.4)
Both reaction (5.3) and (5.4) have negative reaction enthalpy, thus being
exothermic and will increase the temperature of the product gas. The amount
of methane produced and temperature increase depends on both temperature
and pressure in the reactor[74].
The higher amount of methane1 will increase the internal reforming in the fuel
cell, an endothermic reaction consuming heat, lowering the requirement for
cooling air in the SOFC and as an extension lowering the compressor work.
Due to the exothermic reactions in the methanator the preheating of the pro-
ducer gas before entering the SOFC anode might not be required before reach-
ing acceptable temperature levels. Figure 5.1 shows three possible anode pre-
heat conﬁgurations with oﬀ-fuel heat exchanger from the base system (a), oﬀ-
fuel heat exchanger and methanator (b) and methanator (c).
1From around 0.01 to 0.05 mole methane for DK-waste01, see ﬁgure 5.3.
==PAGE:78==
62
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN RESULTS
AP
2
1
3
4
(a) Oﬀ-fuel hex.
M
2
1
3
4
(b) Methanator
AP
M
2
1
3
4
(c) Oﬀ-fuel hex. and meth.
Figure 5.1: Anode preheat conﬁgurations. Stream 1 = From gas cleaning
or methanator, stream 2 = To SOFC anode, stream 3 = Oﬀ-fuel from SOFC,
stream 4 = To catalytic burner.
Table 5.3: Anode conﬁguration results.
All conﬁgurations maximizes DC
production, DE ratio = 0.98.
Parameter
Unit
Conﬁg. (a)
Conﬁg. (b)
Conﬁg. (c)
Elec. Power Production
kW
202.88
202.41
202.52
Aux. Power Consumption
kW
22.66
16.75
18.11
Net Power Production
kW
180.22
185.66
184.41
DC production
kW
212.10
213.58
218.82
DH production
kW
5.66
5.66
5.66
FlueGas inlet temp.
◦C
470.73
628.03
594.05
FlueGas outlet temp.
◦C
100.00
100.00
100.00
Thermal Eﬃciency (LHV)
-
0.340
0.351
0.348
Exergetic Eﬃciency
-
0.317
0.328
0.325
Fuel temp. SOFC inlet
◦C
650.00
586.54
650.00
The power production by the SOFC is not changed in any meaningful way
by integrating the methanator, but as expected the endothermic internal re-
forming reduces the auxiliary power consumption for the conﬁgurations with
a mathenator (conﬁg.
(b) and (c)).
The result is a net power production,
thermal and exergetic eﬃciency increase.
The auxiliary power consumption for the three conﬁgurations can be seen on
ﬁgure 5.2, showing the distribution of power consumption in the system. The
auxiliary power consumption of producer gas blower are lower in conﬁg. (b)
as no heat exchange with the oﬀ-fuel occurs (and thus no pressure loss in that
component). The cathode air blower is the prime power consumer for each
conﬁguration. The diﬀerence in conﬁg. (b) and (c) are due to the lower fuel
temperature at the anode inlet, which is aiding with the cooling of the SOFC,
lowering the need for cooling air. This could indicate that the SOFC is oper-
ating at a higher temperature than what is optimal with the current fuel and
should be investigated further in chapter 6.
As the burner outlet temperature increases, so will the potential in the bottom-
ing cycle, which can be seen by the higher DC production. Thermodynamically
the diﬀerence between conﬁguration (b) and (c) is minute, but conﬁg. (c) will
require another component in the heat exchanger, thus complicating the sys-
==PAGE:79==
5.4. PRODUCT GAS COMPOSITION
63
GB SB AB SP WP
0
5
10
15
20
3.39
1.02
16.81
0
1.44
Power consumption [kW]
(a) Conﬁg. (a)
GB SB AB SP WP
2.97
1.02
11.26
0
1.5
(b) Conﬁg. (b)
GB SB AB SP WP
3.29
1.02
12.2
0
1.49
(c) Conﬁg. (c)
Figure 5.2: Auxiliary power consumption for anode conﬁgurations. GB =
Gas blower, SB = Steam blower, AB = Air blower, SP = Solution pump, WP
= Water pump.
tem, adding pressure losses and increases the installation costs.
From the above analysis conﬁguration (b) would seem to be the most ther-
modynamically favourable, while (a) is the most simple and likely the least
expensive solution. Conﬁguration (b) with methanator is selected and imple-
mented in the following considerations. The low anode fuel inlet temperature
is a concern, as the temperature diﬀerence here is above 200 between inlet
and operation temperature, which could cause thermal stresses decreasing the
component lifetime2. This concern should however be at least partly mitigated
by the theory that the SOFC operating temperatures should be reduced in the
base case.
5.4
Product gas composition
The molar gas composition of DK-waste01 from the method section can be
seen in ﬁgure 5.3, visualizing the decrease in hydrogen and carbon monoxide
to produce methane in the methanator. Methane increases from around 0.01
molar fraction to 0.05. The ﬁgure additionally shows the extent of nitrogen
dilution of the product gas.
Figure 5.4 shows the corresponding change in heating values through the pro-
cess steps. The desulphurizer has no noticeable impact on the lower heating
value, but the methanator will trade oﬀheating value potential for a temper-
ature increase and methane production. The oﬀ-fuel potential can be seen,
which strongly depends on the fuel utilization factor, here at 70 %. The heat-
ing value of the ﬂue gas is zero after the catalytic burner.
The values for ﬁgure 5.3 and 5.4 can be seen in appendix C, table C.1.
2Speciﬁc numbers for acceptable temperature diﬀerence between fuel inlet and SOFC
operating temperature is not readily available, but rather the conclusion that higher tem-
perature diﬀerences reduce fuel cell life time[30].
==PAGE:80==
64
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN RESULTS
MSWgas
MSWgasclean
MSWgasmet
OﬀFuel
FlueGas
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mole fraction
Hydrogen
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Carbon monoxide
Carbon dioxide
Water (G.)
Hydrogen sulﬁde
Methane
Argon
Figure 5.3: Gas composition on molar basis for each process step. MSWgas =
producer gas after gasiﬁcation, MSWgasclean = after desulphurizer, MSWgas-
met = after methanation, OﬀFuel = after SOFC and FlueGas = after catalytic
burner.
MSWgas
MSWgasclean
MSWgasmet
OﬀFuel
FlueGas
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
LHVwet [kJ/kg]
Figure 5.4: Fuel LHV after each process step, see description on ﬁgure 5.3.
==PAGE:81==
5.5. BOTTOMING CYCLE CONFIGURATION
65
5.5
Bottoming cycle conﬁguration
Figure 5.5 shows the variation between producing DH or DC with the par-
allel conﬁguration. With increasing amounts of DH produced, the net power
production of the system will increase, as the pumps power consumption in
the absorption plant will decrease. At very low DEratio (approx. 0.05) the
absorption plant cannot operate and would have to be bypassed entirely, thus
only producing DH. When only producing DC or DH the production is 321.45
kW or 283.7 kW respectively. The correlation between the two can be found
by plotting DC as a function of DH and evaluating the trend line as:
QDC = −1.1331 · QDH + 321.45
[kW]
(5.5)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
100
200
300
400
DEratio
District Energy prodction [kW]
180
181
182
183
184
185
Net Power Production [kW]
QDC
QDH
Pnet
Figure 5.5: Power and DE production as a function of DEratio.
When producing 3rd generation DH, the conﬁguration is not of great impor-
tance, as the temperature interval for the desorber and the DH heat exchanger
are quite similar.
With the solution concentrations from table 4.3 and the
available heat in from the CB, the temperature in and out of the desorber are
35.2 and 99.4 ◦C respectively, while the DH is produced at 90 ◦C with a return
temperature of 45 ◦C. The base system utilizes a parallel connection with a
splitter to separate and control the amount of the ﬂue gas to each DE type and
as an extension the quantity produced.
In a series connection the temperature out of the ﬁrst DE type (either DH heat
exchanger or DC desorber) will control the amount produced of the other. The
series connection as seen in ﬁgure 5.6. The diﬀerence compared to the parallel
==PAGE:82==
66
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN RESULTS
DH
CB
Absorption
plant
DC
Flue gas
DH
Figure 5.6: Series conﬁguration bottoming cycle.
connection is negligible, less than 10 kW additional DC balanced against a
slightly higher auxiliary power consumption, resulting in a lower thermal and
exergetic eﬃciency. For the series connection ηth = 0.345 and ϵsys = 0.323,
compared to the ηth = 0.351 and ϵsys = 0.327 for the parallel. From an en-
gineering point of view the control of the parallel connection is likely more
straight forward and combined with the small performance advantage, makes
it the better solution.
5.5.1
Revised plant design with methanator
The plant design with methanator can be seen in ﬁgure 5.7 with corresponding
results in table 5.4. This setup is used for the study on diﬀerent waste fuels
in section 5.6 and for the parametric studies in chapter 6 and will simply be
referred to as ’base case’ system. The system with DNA node numbers can be
seen in appendix C ﬁgure C.1 with the DNA input ﬁle in appendix D and the
corresponding DNA output ﬁle in appendix E.
Table 5.4: Simulation results for the revised plant design.
Gasiﬁcation & SOFC
Elec. Power Production
202.4
kW
Power Consumption
16.7
kW
Net Power Production
185.7
kW
Thermal Eﬃciency (LHV)
0.351
-
Exergy Eﬃciency
0.328
-
CCHP eﬃciency
0.78
-
Bottoming cycle
DEratio
0.98
-
DC production QDC
220.1
kW
DH production QDH
5.7
kW
Flue gas temp. inlet
628.0
-
Flue gas temp. outlet
100
◦C
COP
0.71
-
QFlueGas
310.0
kW
Qrejected,cond
235.8
kW
Qrejected,abso
295.5
kW
==PAGE:83==
5.6. FUEL COMPOSITION EFFECT
67
5.6
Fuel composition eﬀect
Using the approach detailed in the methodology, section 3.1, a number of fuel
compositions has been evaluated in table 5.5, 5.6 and 5.7.
Each waste fuel
Table 5.5: Waste fractions of Danish households, health care services, hotels
and restaurants.
DK01
DK02
DK-Health
DK-HotelRes
DK-Stores
Organic/food waste
42.2
41.0
10.5
45.5
19.0
Gardening waste
3.5
4.1
0.5
1.0
1.0
Paper and board
15.8
23.2
55.5
26.0
44.5
Plastic
12.6
9.2
8.5
7.5
9.0
Metal
2.3
3.3
0.8
3.5
1.5
Glass
2.0
2.8
2.5
14.5
1.5
Misc. Combustible
17.6
12.2
21
2.0
16.0
Inert
3.3
3.5
0.0
0.0
6.5
Special waste
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.0
1.0
Sum
100
100
100
100
100
covers an activity in which the system is likely to be applicable.
The ﬁrst
is Danish household waste from 2015, used as example in the methodology,
DK-waste01. The second is Danish household data from 2009, DK-waste02.
The third fuel is waste from is health care services (Waste-DK-Health), such
as a hospital are based on waste fractions collected in [75] and adapted as
best possible to the waste fractions by Edjabou et al.[46]. The remaining two
are the hotel & restaurant industry (Waste-DK-HotelRes) and shopping/trade
(Waste-DK-Stores).
The waste fractions of the Danish waste types are seen in table 5.5 and the
moisture content, ash and chemical elements of the waste fuels can be seen on
table 5.6. As expected, the two household wastes are very similar in fractions
and element composition, despite the years between analysis. The health ser-
vices waste contains a huge amount of paper and board, lowering the moisture
signiﬁcant. This is most likely due to the massive amount of sterilized equip-
ment in packaging and other disposable material such as paper towels etc. The
’shopping’ waste follows a similar trend. As a consequence of high amounts of
paper and board and low food waste fraction, the moisture contents are almost
half compared to households. The hotel and restaurant waste are fairly similar
to the household waste, perhaps not unexpected considering both are living
accommodations in some form.
Included on table 5.6 are data from an extensive study on waste in China by
Zhuo et al.[49] and the RDF3 pellets utilized for simulations by Rokni in [55].
These illustrate the extremes of solid waste as a fuel with very high and low
moisture content.
Table 5.7 and ﬁgure 5.8 shows the calculated heating values and speciﬁc heat
capacity. Here the moisture and ash content inﬂuence are quite noticeable. The
3Refused derived fuel. Shredded and dehydrated solid waste, produced from MSW.
==PAGE:84==
68
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN RESULTS
Flue gas
Steam
Air
DR
GSF
AH
SH
DS
MSW
Gas
Ash
Sulphur
Air/steam 
Cathode
Anode
CB
CP
Air
M
Absorption
plant
DC
Power
SB
GB
AB
Flue gas
DH
DH
Figure 5.7: Revised base plant design.
==PAGE:85==
5.6. FUEL COMPOSITION EFFECT
69
Table 5.6: Moisture content, ash and chemical elements of waste fuels.
Mc
Ash
C
H
O
S
N
% wet
% dry
% dry
% dry
% dry
% dry
% dry
Waste-DK01
33.81
16.98
49.92
6.90
23.49
0.21
2.51
Waste-DK02
33.23
18.95
47.22
6.51
24.77
0.20
2.34
Waste-DK-Health
12.40
16.77
46.92
6.41
28.65
0.15
1.11
Waste-DK-HotelRes
34.40
25.68
42.21
5.86
23.82
0.16
2.28
Waste-DK-Stores
18.12
20.26
45.39
6.21
26.56
0.16
1.42
Waste-China [49]
48.12
43.57
32.16
4.42
18.65
0.21
0.87
RDF pellets [55]
4.00
17.00
40.00
6.90
35.4
0.001
0.006
Table 5.7: Waste fuels high and lower heating values and speciﬁc heat capac-
ity.
HHVdry
LHVdry
LHVwet
cp
[MJ/kg]
[MJ/kg]
[MJ/kg]
[kJ/kgK]
Waste-DK01
22.75
21.73
14.38
1.90
Waste-DK02
21.18
20.19
13.48
1.87
Waste-DK-Health
20.61
20.14
17.65
1.83
Waste-DK-HotelRes
18.61
17.61
11.55
1.85
Waste-DK-Stores
19.99
19.38
15.87
1.84
Waste-China[49]
13.60
12.29
6.37
1.85
RDF pellets[55]
18.20
17.93
17.20
1.94
Waste-DK01
Waste-DK02
Waste-DK-Health
Waste-DK-HotelRes
Waste-DK-Stores
Waste-China
RDF-pellets
0
10
20
21.73
20.19
20.14
17.61
19.38
12.29
17.93
14.38
13.48
17.65
11.55
15.87
6.37
17.2
Heating value [MJ/kg]
LHV (dry)
LHV (wet)
Figure 5.8: Visualization of lower heating values.
==PAGE:86==
70
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN RESULTS
resulting diﬀerence between fuel lower heating values is over 30 % excluding the
MSW from China. From eq. (3.5) in section 3.4 it is clear that hydrogen and
carbon contribute the most to the overall heating value. The combination of a
high carbon and hydrogen content together with low ash and moisture yields
the best heating values. The RDF pellets and the health care services both
have low moisture content making them signiﬁcantly better as fuels compared
to the household wastes and in particular the average waste from China. The
two largest contributors to Chinese waste are food residue and non-combustible
material, making the untreated waste poorly suitable as a fuel.
The method of calculating waste characteristics appear to be working as ex-
pected, such that MSW with a large fraction of plastics and paper and board
result in signiﬁcantly higher heating values. MSW with a large fraction of food
waste on the other hand prove to be less viable fuel, mostly related to the high
amount of moisture.
5.6.1
Simulation results
Each of the fuels have been fed to the revised base plant (ﬁgure 5.7) and the
results are shown in table 5.8. The ﬁrst thing to notice is the lack of a sim-
ulation for the Chinese MSW - the waste was simply too poor a fuel for the
model to converge4, both due to a massive amount of moisture and ash in the
fuel - only around 25 % of the wet weight is useful matter in terms of energy
production. Combined with a somewhat poor heating value, the consequence
is that a signiﬁcantly modiﬁed plant would be required to utilize MSW from
China. For China a plant for thermal treatment of MSW would likely be more
focused on disposal of MSW to reduce landﬁll issues (space used and environ-
mental) compared to energy recovery in other regions.
Each simulation is run for the same mass ﬂow of waste (0.04 kg/s), thus the
thermal input varies correspondingly. The diﬀerence in net power production
is signiﬁcant, the base case fuel DK-01 being somewhere in the middle, thus
a well representing fuel. Depending on the location and scale of the plant, it
is obviously possible that a combination of several sources might be producing
for the same plant, thus the fuel can easily be a mix of several or all of the
activities presented investigated in this thesis.
Table 5.8: Plant performance for various waste related fuels.
Unit
DK01
DK02
DK-health
DK-HotelRes
DK-Stores
RDF
PSOF C
kW
202.41
190.67
249.38
168.18
227.70
231.73
PAux
kW
16.75
15.71
23.53
13.42
20.64
22.70
PNet
kW
185.66
174.96
225.85
154.77
207.07
209.03
ηth
-
0.351
0.353
0.342
0.365
0.349
0.339
ϵsys
-
0.328
0.329
0.333
0.335
0.337
0.329
COP
-
0.710
0.703
0.703
0.706
0.712
0.709
QDE
kW
225.74
213.14
281.80
187.52
255.34
265.84
QDH
kW
5.66
5.66
7.54
5.66
7.54
7.54
QDC
kW
220.08
207.48
274.26
181.86
247.80
258.30
4The model was initially designed with Waste-DK01 as the base.
==PAGE:87==
5.7. SUMMARY
71
The thermal eﬃciency shows a surprising result. The eﬃciency is highest for
what was to be expected as the least suitable fuel - the waste from the hotel
and restaurant business. This fuel has the highest moisture content (apart from
the Chinese) and as a result the lowest lower heating values. This is another
indication that the fuel cell number of stacks is currently too low and that the
plant is unable to utilize the energy available in the fuel for the other cases
with higher LHV.
The DE produced5 is connected to the low thermal eﬃciency, such that the fuel
not adequately utilized in the SOFC will be converted to heat in the catalytic
burner. Therefore, the low thermal eﬃciency results in a temperature increase
in the burner, which in turn directly translates into a higher DE production.
This correlates well with the thermal eﬃciency for DK-HotelRes which pro-
duces the least DE by a fair margin. The COP of the absorption plant is very
similar in all cases, as the parameter is strongly related to the temperatures
which do not change signiﬁcantly when alternating between the waste fuels.
The exergetic eﬃciency does not yield any conclusive results. A high thermal
eﬃciency does not necessarily equal a high exergetic eﬃciency. The number of
parameters changed when varying fuels are fairly extensive, both the chemical
composition of the product gas, the heating values and the moisture and ash
content are diﬀerent and thus the eﬀect is not obvious.
Table 5.8 shows that waste from various activities has a profound eﬀect on the
system. This only reinforces the fact that a good estimate of the waste char-
acteristics are key in the design process of any system operating with any fuel
derived from MSW. This sensitivity towards waste properties and composition
could prove a potential problem for the system, as MSW are expected to vary
signiﬁcantly
5.7
Summary
The initial results for the system has been presented, showing a thermal eﬃ-
ciency of 34.0 %, a signiﬁcant improvement over the conventional WtE plants
operating in Denmark. The APP displays a COP of 0.71, correlating well with
the theory on single stage absorption plants. The exergetic eﬃciency is a big
improvement compared to the average in Europe for conventional WtE. Over-
all the system produces a fair margin more electricity than a WtE plant, but
less DE.
The anode preheating conﬁguration shows that the methanator can improve
the system by replacing the anode preheater heat exchanger entirely, though
without considering the economic aspects. The initial design was revised to
include the methanator.
Due to the temperature in the desorber and DH heat exchanger being very
similar, the bottoming cycle connection has a quite small impact on produc-
tion and eﬃciencies.
5The reason for the almost identical DH production is likely due to a rounding error for
the mass ﬂows. When the plant produces almost only DC the mass ﬂow of DH becomes very
small and thus the error is introduced.
==PAGE:88==
72
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN RESULTS
The conﬁguration changes conducted in this chapter will be revisited and ver-
iﬁed for the optimal system in the ﬁnal section of chapter 6.
The method for evaluating diﬀerent MSW types has been applied to ﬁve fuel
types, showing good correlations with expected behaviour. The fuel consid-
erations clearly shows that waste produced during various activities will have
a signiﬁcant impact on the system production and performance. In light of
this, a good estimate of waste fractions is paramount in the feasibility phase
of designing a plant utilizing waste as a fuel. The results further conﬁrm that
the system SOFC is too small to properly utilize the fuel potentials of the bet-
ter fuels for power production fully. The exergetic eﬃciency does not for the
diﬀerent fuels show any discernible trend.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 6
Parametric Study
Here follows the parametric study of operational parameters expected to be
important for the performance of the system. This is primarily assumed values
of temperatures, eﬃciencies and so forth.
Unless otherwise stated all simulation parameter studies uses the standard sys-
tem with methanator, Waste-DK01 and parallel bottoming cycle conﬁguration
with the DEratio being 0.98. This conﬁguration is simply called ’base case’ in
the remainder of this chapter.
The objective is to maximize the eﬃciency of the system, getting the most
performance out of the waste fuel.
Due to the deﬁnition of exergetic eﬃciency it will in most cases follow the ther-
mal eﬃciency quite closely, in such a way that an improvement to the SOFC
operation and production is also an improvement to the exergetic system eﬃ-
ciency. There are obviously exceptions to this reasoning, such as improvements
to the bottoming cycle, which will not impact the SOFC operation.
The performance parameters (ηth,ϵsys and COP) are all at design load under
steady state conditions.
6.1
SOFC stack and temperature
The base case stack number is 350 and the default SOFC operation temper-
ature is 800 ◦C. As considered in section 5.3 and 5.6 the temperature of the
SOFC is likely too high, while the stack number might be too low.
Varying the number of stacks in the SOFC (still 75 cells in each stack), the
thermal eﬃciency and exergetic eﬃciency can be seen on ﬁgure 6.1, while ﬁgure
6.2 shows the corresponding power and DE production. The thermal eﬃciency
increases more than the exergetic eﬃciency with an increase in stacks, this is
caused by electricity having a far higher exergetic value than district energy.
This agrees with the situation on ﬁgure 6.2, where the power and district en-
ergy gradients are quite similar.
As can be seen, the stack number alone does not yield any conclusive data
about an optimum, but rather the relationship between Power and DE pro-
duced. The number of stacks must be increased greatly before a substantial
73
==PAGE:90==
74
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
300
350
400
450
500
550
0.320
0.330
0.340
0.350
0.360
SOFC stacks [#]
Thermal eﬃciency ηth
ηth
ϵsys
Figure 6.1: Thermal eﬃciency as a function of SOFC stack count.
300
350
400
450
500
550
180
200
220
SOFC stacks [#]
Production kW
Pnet
˙QDE
Figure 6.2: Power and DE production as a function of SOFC stack count.
decline in thermal eﬃciency gradient can be observed, as shown in appendix C
ﬁgure C.2.
Figure 6.3 shows the thermal eﬃciency as a function of SOFC operating tem-
perature, using four diﬀerent stack counts. The ﬁgure shows a clear optimum
in the temperature range for each SOFC stack count. Furthermore, conﬁrming
that an operation temperature of 800 ◦C was indeed too high. By lowering
the temperature of the SOFC the demand for cooling also decreases, thus in-
creasing the net power production. The thermal eﬃciency will decline if the
temperature drops too low as the SOFC power production starts to decline,
while the air blower power consumption increases. This is likely due to the
endothermic internal reforming reactions in the SOFC starting to decline from
the lack of available heat. These reactions requires a high temperature to occur
and thus lowering the temperature will decrease the amount of reactions taking
place.
The results from ﬁgure 6.3 are combined on ﬁgure 6.4 to show the trend of
optimum for the four stack counts. The trend indicate that for a decreasing
stack count, the best SOFC operating temperature increases slightly. By in-
creasing the number of stacks, more carbon monoxide in the product gas will
be reformed internally, thus lowering the temperature by consuming heat and
==PAGE:91==
6.1. SOFC STACK AND TEMPERATURE
75
700
750
800
0.350 0.355 0.360 0.365
SOFC temp. [◦C]
Thermal eﬃciency [-]
700
750
800
0.350 0.355 0.360 0.365
SOFC temp. [◦C]
Thermal eﬃciency [-]
700
750
800
0.350 0.355 0.360 0.365
SOFC temp. [◦C]
Thermal eﬃciency [-]
700
750
800
0.350 0.355 0.360 0.365
SOFC temp. [◦C]
Thermal eﬃciency [-]
Figure 6.3:
SOFC operating temperature impact on thermal eﬃciency at
four diﬀerent numbers of SOFC stacks. Top left = 350 stacks, Top right = 400
stacks, Bottom left = 450 stacks, Bottom right = 500 stacks.
700
720
740
760
780
800
0.350
0.355
0.360
0.365
Trend
SOFC temp. [◦C]
Thermal eﬃciency [-]
350 stacks
400 stacks
450 stacks
500 stacks
Figure 6.4: Trend for SOFC temperature optimum at diﬀerent stack numbers.
==PAGE:92==
76
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
decreasing the requirement of air cooling and as an extension the air blower
compressor work. An added beneﬁt of the lowering the SOFC temperature is
to minimize the thermal stress in the fuel cell experiences due to the tempera-
ture diﬀerences between inlets and outlets.
The optimal SOFC operating temperature can improve the base case almost 1
percent point for the 350 stacks at ≈730 ◦C, and over 1.5 percent points if the
stacks is increased to 500 at ≈725 ◦C. Whether the increase can compensate
for the increased costs of the SOFC is unlikely, especially considering that the
lost work potential is partly recovered in the bottoming cycle. The lower op-
erating temperature of the SOFC should diminish the concern about thermal
stresses due to the temperature diﬀerence between anode fuel inlet and SOFC
temperature.
6.2
SOFC utilization factor
The utilization factor Uf was initially assumed be to 0.7. This parameter is
expected to have signiﬁcant impact on the power and DE production relation-
ships.
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.25
0.30
0.35
SOFC fuel utilization factor [-]
Eﬃciencies
ηth
ϵsys
Figure 6.5: Thermal and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of SOFC utilization
factor.
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
150
200
250
SOFC fuel utilization factor [-]
Production [kW]
Pnet
˙QDE
Figure 6.6: Thermal and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of SOFC utilization
factor.
==PAGE:93==
6.2. SOFC UTILIZATION FACTOR
77
Figure 6.5 shows the eﬃciencies as a function of the fuel utilization factor, with
ﬁgure 6.6 showing the corresponding energy production. The thermal and ex-
ergetic eﬃciency behave quite similarly and the optimal Uf is around 0.715. At
low utilization factors an increase has a positive eﬀect on the power production
and thus the opposite on the bottoming cycle. Further more, for low Uf fewer
reactions will take place in the SOFC, reducing the amount of produced heat
inside the fuel cell and the need for SOFC air cooling. As the utilization factor
increases more reactions take place and the SOFC will heat up further, requir-
ing more air ﬂow to cool it, but the net power production and eﬃciencies are
still increasing. At a certain point however the SOFC experience a sharp drop
in both eﬃciency and production. The cause of this sharp drop is visualized
on ﬁgure 6.7.
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
500
600
700
800
900
SOFC fuel utilization factor [-]
Current density [mA/cm2]
500
600
700
800
900
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Current density [mA/cm2]
Cell voltage [V ]
Figure 6.7: Left: Current density of the SOFC as a function of fuel utiliza-
tion factor. Right: Current density impact on cell voltage (voltage/current
characteristics).
The left part of ﬁgure 6.7 shows the current increase in the SOFC as the Uf
increases, while the right shows the voltage/current characteristics. As the Uf
increases, so does the current density of the SOFC, resulting in the voltage
experiencing a sharp drop due to primarily concentration losses and to some
extend ohmic losses. The concentration losses increases as the SOFC has lim-
ited mass transport capabilities. This behaviour agrees well with the theory
presented in 2.4 ﬁgure 2.10.
The fuel utilization factor is discussed by [30] in relation to fuel cell systems.
Depending on the focus of the plant, diﬀerent strategies can be applied. For a
fuel cell only producing power (normally very small scale), the optimal opera-
tion point would behave as presented on ﬁgure 6.5 - a balance between SOFC
production and cooling requirement - but if the plant uses a bottoming cycle it
might be more advantageous to operate at a lower fuel utilization factor, both
lowering the air cooling requirement of the SOFC and increasing the potential
of the bottoming cycle. For a plant with a fuel cell and a gas turbine bottoming
cycle it is likely that a much lower Uf would prove optimal.
==PAGE:94==
78
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
For the system investigated in the thesis, the focus is the highest energy (and
thus exergy) eﬃciency, in which case the utilization factor should be selected
in such a manner which most beneﬁt the electricity production.
6.3
Gasiﬁcation temperature
The temperature for gasiﬁcation (GSF) of MSW is normally between 800 and
900 [62], Arena et el. uses temperatures in the 800 to 900 range for their bed
material experiments as well[27]. In the base case the temperature is set to
800. Here follows investigations of the gasiﬁcation temperature impact on the
base case plant operation. The assumption about the product gas outlet tem-
perature being equal to the gasiﬁcation temperature is still valid.
800
820
840
860
880
900
920
0.32
0.33
0.34
0.35
Gasiﬁcation temperature [◦C]
Eﬃciencies [-]
ηth
ϵsys
Figure 6.8:
Thermal and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of gasiﬁcation
temperature.
Due to the assumptions concerning tars (fully converted thanks to the bed
material in the reactor) the gasiﬁcation model behaves in a quite simple and
linear manner. Had tars been a factor in the model, the increase in tempera-
ture would likely have caused a larger degree of tar cracking thus making more
of the feedstock available in the heating value. The increase in temperature
would however also have consumed more of the light gasses, thus a balance
between the two would have been expected.
800
820
840
860
880
900
920
180
190
200
210
220
230
Gasiﬁcation temperature [◦C]
Energy production [kW]
Pnet
˙QDE
Figure 6.9: Power and district energy production as a function of gasiﬁcation
temperature.
==PAGE:95==
6.3. GASIFICATION TEMPERATURE
79
The left side of 6.10 shows the molar composition of the product gas.
As
the temperature increases, the concentration of hydrogen decreases, while the
amount of carbon monoxide increases. The concentration changes are in gen-
eral quite small for the temperature interval. The right side shows the corre-
sponding lower heating value for the product gas. Increasing the gasiﬁcation
temperature will ’consume’ around 400 MJ/kg of the LHV, a decrease of 6.2
%. The tabular values for ﬁgure 6.10 can be seen in appendix C table C.2.
800 825 850 875 900 925
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Gasiﬁcation temperature [◦C]
Gas comp. [mole fraction]
H2
N2
CO
CO2
H2O
CH4
800 825 850 875 900 925
6000
6150
6300
6450
6600
Gasiﬁcation temperature [◦C]
LHVwet [kJ/kg]
Figure 6.10: Left: Molar product gas composition out of the gasiﬁer. The
change in Argon and Sulphide concentration is negligible, the molar fraction
being ≈3.5 · 10−3 and ≈4 · 10−4 respectively. Right: Lower heating value of
the product gas as a function of gasiﬁcation temperature.
At higher temperature the reactor requires more air, which causes a further
dilution of the product gas with nitrogen and argon. The higher mass ﬂow
of product gas will increase the need for SOFC cooling and as an extension
increase the compressor work of the air blower. At the same time, the district
energy production will increase slightly due to the higher mass ﬂow passing
through the SOFC and catalytic burner.
To summarize the increased gasiﬁcation temperature will result in a lower prod-
uct gas heating value. Together with the increased product gas temperature
and additional cooling demand, the eﬃciencies of the system will decline with
increasing GSF temperature. The trend for lowering gasiﬁcation temperature
is similar, with a decrease in GSF temperature the thermal eﬃciency will in-
crease, this is however beyond the gasiﬁcation temperature interval presented
and as such not a viable change.
==PAGE:96==
80
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
6.4
Carbon conversion factor
The carbon conversion factor (CCF) is in the base case set to 100 %.
In
reality the gasiﬁer is unlikely to reach perfect carbon conversion. For a partial-
oxidation reactor, the CCF can however reach very high values, between 95
and 99 %[21].
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1.00
0.32
0.33
0.34
0.35
Carbon conversion factor [-]
Eﬃciencies [-]
ηth
ϵsys
Figure 6.11: Impact of decreasing carbon conversion factor on thermal and
exergetic eﬃciencies.
The CCF expressed how much of the carbon in the feedstock material is con-
verted into gas products. The remaining carbon leaves the gasiﬁer with the
ash. The eﬀect on the thermal and exergetic eﬃciency is limited in the given
range of CCF, as can be seen on ﬁgure 6.11, both decreasing around 1 per-
cent point for a 5 % drop in CCF. The thermal and exergetic eﬃciency follows
the same declining gradient as both power and DE are equally aﬀected by the
change.
6.5
Turbo machinery eﬃciencies
The isentropic eﬃciencies of turbo machinery is assumed to values between
0.7 and 0.8 for compressors (the air blowers) and 0.9 and 0.95 for the pumps
respectively.
Figure 6.12 shows that the compressor eﬃciencies does not have a signiﬁcant
impact on the system performance. In particular the steam and gas blowers
variation of isentropic eﬃciency has very little eﬀect. Decreasing the isentropic
eﬃciency by 20 % will at the most decrease the thermal eﬃciency by 0.50 %
relatively to the base case (from 0.3506 to 0.3491). The air blower contribute
with the highest power consumption by a fair margin, so the eﬀect of changing
the isentropic eﬃciency is higher. For a 20 % increase in eﬃciency, the thermal
eﬃciency would increase 1 % relative to the base case (from 0.3506 to 0.3542).
The solution pump in the absorption plant has a very low power consumption
due to the very low pressures and therefore the change in isentropic eﬃciency
is negligible, as can be seen on ﬁgure 6.13. The pump supplying the absorber
with cooling water has some eﬀect on the thermal eﬃciency only if the pump
has a extremely poor isentropic eﬃciency.
==PAGE:97==
6.5. TURBO MACHINERY EFFICIENCIES
81
−20.00 −15.00 −10.00
−5.00
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
−1.50
−1.25
−1.00
−0.75
−0.50
−0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Parameter change [%]
Thermal eﬃciency ηth change [%]
Gas blower
Steam blower
Air blower
Figure 6.12: Relative change in system thermal eﬃciency as a function of
relative change in compressor isentropic eﬃciencies.
−60.00
−50.00
−40.00
−30.00
−20.00
−10.00
0.00
−1.00
−0.50
0.00
Parameter change [%]
ηth change [%]
Solution pump
Cooling water pump
Figure 6.13: Relative change in system thermal eﬃciency as a function of
relative change in pump isentropic eﬃciencies.
==PAGE:98==
82
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
The relative change in isentropic eﬃciency to absolute thermal eﬃciency can
be seen in C.3 and C.4 in appendix C. All in all the turbo-machinery isentropic
eﬃciencies have some impact on the system performance. The isentropic ef-
ﬁciencies are assumed to be operating in their optimal range and would be
expected to drop when operating in part load.
6.6
Ambient conditions
Considering only the air and MSW inlet temperatures, the system experiences
very little change to the thermal eﬃciency, as shown on ﬁgure 6.14. Both the
gasiﬁcation and SOFC operate at temperatures far above the ambient temper-
ature and as such, any realistic ambient temperature will have only minute
eﬀect on the thermal eﬃciency.
15
20
25
30
35
0.3517
0.3512
0.3506
0.3501
0.3495
Ambient temperature [◦C]
ηth [-]
Figure 6.14: Thermal eﬃciency as a function of ambient air temperature in
SOFC and gasiﬁer inlets.
With varying climate also comes a changed demand in district energy. While
the demand for cooling is not only aﬀected by the ambient air temperature,
it is strongly related and as the air temperature drops it is likely that other
forms of cooling becomes available, such as dry cooling. This investigation of
interconnected with the overall district energy system is however a diﬀerent
kind of analysis and beyond the scope of this thesis.
6.7
Other considerations
Here follows an investigation of component pressure drops, inlet temperatures
and waste properties and the eﬀect on the thermal eﬃciency.
Table 6.1 shows the impact on extreme pressure drops in components and vari-
ation of temperatures on the thermal eﬃciency. The cathode pressure drop in
the SOFC has a profound eﬀect on the performance, compared to the pres-
sure drop over the anode. This is due to the large diﬀerence in mass ﬂows on
the two sides of the SOFC. The cathode preheater (CP) pressure drops are
also connected to the relatively large mass ﬂow of air. The mass ﬂow diﬀer-
ence between cooling air entering and leaving the SOFC explains the diﬀerence
==PAGE:99==
6.7. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
83
Table 6.1: Parametric study of various pressure drops and temperatures re-
lated to SOFC power production.
A low and high value together with the
reference value with minimum and maximum resulting thermal eﬃciency. CP
= Cathode preheater.
Unit
Interval [low - ref. - high]
ηth
Anode ∆p
bar
[0.001 - 0.050 - 0.750]
[0.2736 - 0.3529]
Cathode ∆p
bar
[0.001 - 0.050 - 0.750]
[0.1658 - 0.3561]
CP ∆phot
bar
[0.001 - 0.050 - 0.750]
[0.3080 - 0.3544]
CP ∆pcold
bar
[0.001 - 0.050 - 0.750]
[0.2940 - 0.3553]
CB pressure ratio
-
[1 - 1 - 0.5]
[0.2414 - 0.3505]
Cathode inlet temp.
◦C
[450 - 600 - 750]
[0.2910 - 0.3569]
Dry MSW temp.
◦C
[125 - 150 - 165]
[0.3492 - 0.3508]
Steam Gen. temp.
◦C
[160 - 200 - 250]
[0.3420 - 0.3516]
Desulphurizer ∆p
bar
[0.0001 - 0.005 - 0.5]
[0.3135 - 0.3508]
in impact on ηth between hot and cold side pressure drop (oxygen ions pass
through the electrolyte to the anode side, see ﬁgure 2.11).
The catalytic burner pressure ratio between inlet and outlet increases the power
consumption of both the air blower and the gas blower. With declining pres-
sure ratio, more and more power has to be supplied to keep the ﬂue gas at
atmospheric pressure at the outlets in the bottoming cycle. The desulphurizer
pressure drop is not as detrimental as the cathode pressure drop, simply be-
cause the mass ﬂow of product gas from the gasiﬁcation plant is signiﬁcantly
lower than the mass ﬂow of air.
The drying temperature has no real impact in the interval. At higher temper-
atures, the feedstock could start pyrolysis which is not desirable. The steam
temperature for the drying and gasiﬁcation does not inﬂuence the SOFC opera-
tion to a large extend either. The cathode inlet temperature on the other hand
should not be increased too much, as this will increase the mass ﬂow greatly
to provide the same amount of cooling for the fuel cell. Thermodynamically
there is no issue with decreasing the air temperature, thus minimizing the air
ﬂow through the cathode and air blower power consumption, but the tempera-
ture diﬀerence between SOFC operation temperature and air inlet should not
exceed a reasonable level to avoid thermal stresses in the fuel cell.
Table 6.2: Variation of calculated waste properties and the impact on thermal
eﬃciency.
Parameter
Value
ηth
Unit
Lower
Ref.
Upper
Lower
Upper
Cp
kJ
kgK
1
1.911
3
0.3473
0.3544
Moisture
-
0.1
0.338
0.5
0.3411
0.3579
HHV
MJ/kg
15.1
22.75
23.2
0.2833
0.3526
Table 6.2 shows the calculated waste properties variation.
With increasing
moisture content the thermal eﬃciency increases due to the SOFC stack count,
==PAGE:100==
84
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
but the power production is signiﬁcantly lower than the base case. The speciﬁc
heat capacity has very little inﬂuence on the performance of the system. The
heating value has some impact on the system, so a correct estimate of this is
important for the design of the system.
6.8
Absorption plant
The absorption plant has several parameters which should be investigated. The
changes done to the APP parameters will in most cases not inﬂuence the SOFC
and gasiﬁer operation. An exception would be a change in pump eﬃciency or
component pressure drops on the ﬂue gas side. The pump eﬃciencies have
already been investigated in section 6.5.
If DC has to be provided at a lower temperature base case, the low pressure
level of the APP must be adjusted as per ﬁgure 2.13 in section 2.5. The supply
and return temperature of 6 and 16 ◦C is based on common values for comfort
cooling.
6.8.1
Condenser temperature
If the low temperature available heat in the APP condenser is cooled in the
ambient temperature and not used for hot water production, it can be a po-
tential improvement of the system. The means of which the heat is removed
is not implemented into the model however, but simply simulated by lowering
the temperature in the condenser. By having the ambient temperature avail-
able in the condenser, the condensation pressure can be decreased accordingly,
meaning more refrigerant can be able to be condensed.
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Condensing temperature [◦C]
Saturation pressure [kPa]
Figure 6.15: Water saturation temperature as a function of temperature.
Figure 6.15 shows the condensation pressure of water (the refrigerant) at de-
clining ambient temperature. The ambient temperature must be a few degrees
below the condensation temperature, a pinch temperature, otherwise the con-
denser would have to have a almost inﬁnitely large heat transfer area. In the
base case the temperature in the condenser was 30 ◦C, while the refrigerant
==PAGE:101==
6.8. ABSORPTION PLANT
85
condensates at 32.88 ◦C at 0.05 bar. Figure 6.16 shows the change in perfor-
mance parameters with decreasing ambient temperature.
20
22
24
26
28
30
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
Condensing temperature [◦C]
Performance parameters
ϵsys
COP
Figure 6.16: COP and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of ambient temper-
ature.
As previously mentioned the exergetic eﬃciency change with an increase in DC
production is very small. An increase in DC production of around 12.5 kW by
lowering the ambient temperature only increases the exergetic eﬃciency from
0.3281 to 0.3292. The COP better shows the eﬀect of lowering the ambient tem-
perature, increasing from about 0.71 to 0.75 when as the temperature drops.
The solution pump power consumption decreases as well, but the change is
insigniﬁcant.
6.8.2
Refrigerant concentration and absorber temperature
As mentioned earlier, the refrigerant concentration is related to the available
temperature in the absorber, which limits to what extend the lithium bromide
can absorb the water refrigerant. As the absorber temperature is lower, more
refrigerant can be absorbed which in turn will increase the DC production. In
the base case the cooling water inlet in the absorber is 20 ◦C sea or lake water
pumped to the system. With a 45 % concentration of refrigeration in the rich
solution (ξr = 0.45) in the base case, the temperature required to absorb the
refrigerant in the lithium bromide is about 35 ◦C. This is an inexpediently high
temperature diﬀerence (pinch), which could be improved somewhat to produce
more DC.
Figure 6.17 shows the improvements of the COP with increasing refrigerant
concentration. As ξr increases the absorber temperature drops to the point
where at ξr = 0.54 the temperature diﬀerence is less than 1 ◦C. The best suited
refrigerant concentration depends on the acceptable pinch temperature in terms
of economics. The lower the pinch, the larger the surface area is required in
the absorber to transfer the heat and the more expensive the component will
become.
==PAGE:102==
86
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
0.45
0.46
0.47
0.48
0.49
0.5
0.51
0.52
0.53
0.54
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76
Rich refrigerant concentraion in H2O-LiBr solution [-]
COP [-]
Figure 6.17: COP as a function of rich concentration refrigerant solution ξr.
6.9
Optimized design
The parametric study shows several possibilities for improving the system.
Both the SOFC temperature and utilization factor shows a clear local opti-
mum value in ﬁgure 6.3 and 6.5 respectively. Furthermore, improvements can
be done to the APP based on ﬁgure 6.17, indicating that the temperature
diﬀerence between absorbing temperature and cooling water being quite high.
Additionally, some factors display an approximately linear behaviour, such as
the SOFC stack number, turbo machinery eﬃciencies and pressure drops. Not
surprisingly, a higher isentropic eﬃciency will have a positive eﬀect on the sys-
tem performance, just as lower pressure losses will reduce pressure diﬀerences
in the system. These improvements are purely economical in nature, a higher
isentropic eﬃciency will in most cases result in a more expensive component.
To eﬃciently determine the best pumps and heat exchangers, the simulations
would have to include component prices and output values, something which
DNA does not support. Performing an economic based optimization of the
system is not within the scope of this thesis, as the entire system would have
to be re-designed in a less rigid simulation tool such as EES instead of DNA.
Two implementation scenarios has been conducted and compared to the base
case results. The ﬁrst (optimum1 case 1) includes only obvious improvements,
while optimum case 2 include more parameters.
Opt.
case 1 is the imple-
mentation a new SOFC operation temperature of 730 ◦C, a utilization factor
of 0.715 and a 5 ◦C temperature diﬀerence in the absorber by increasing the
refrigerant concentration to 50 %. Opt. case 2 uses Opt. case 1 improvements,
but additionally decreases prominent pressure losses and isentropic eﬃciencies
(for example by installed better quality equipment). The values can be seen in
appendix C table C.5.
Table 6.3 shows the results of Opt. case 1 and 2 simulations. Optimum case
1 shows a 1.17 percent point increase in thermal eﬃciency, while the exergetic
eﬃciency only increases with 0.85 percent point. This diﬀerence in eﬃciency
increases is due to the fact that when the top cycle performance is increased,
1It should be noted that this it not a true optimum, but rather a pseudo optimization,
as discussed in section 5.2.
==PAGE:103==
6.10. SUMMARY
87
Table 6.3: Comparison between base case, Opt. case 1 and Opt. case 2.
Gasiﬁcation & SOFC
Base case
Opt. Case 1
Opt. Case 2
Elec. Power Production
kW
202.406
215.1
214.9
Power Consumption
kW
16.747
23.8
16.9
Net Power Production
kW
185.659
191.2
197.9
Thermal Eﬃciency (LHV)
-
0.3506
0.3613
0.374
Exergetic eﬃciency
-
0.3280
0.3365
0.34702
CCHP eﬃciency
-
0.778
0.767
0.772
Bottoming cycle
DEratio
-
0.98
0.98
0.98
DC production
kW
220.08
209.16
204.96
DH production
kW
5.655
5.655
5.655
Flue gas temp. Inlet
◦C
628
426
421
Flue gas temp. Outlet
◦C
100
100
100
COP
-
0.71
0.73
0.74
Qfg
kW
310.0
286.
277.8
Qrejected,cond
kW
235.8
224.5
219.5
Qrejected,abso
kW
295.4
268.6
263.2
the bottoming cycle decreases, which is conﬁrmed by the power and DE pro-
duction. Optimum case 2 shows a further improvement of the system, mostly
due to the lower auxiliary power consumption. The lower compressor work by
the air blower results in a lower air temperature out of the cathode preheater,
thus aﬀecting the bottoming cycle production of DE. These results are well in
line SOFC CHP theory, stating that as the top cycle improves the bottoming
cycle production will reduce, though possibly not at the same rate.
6.10
Summary
The exergetic eﬃciency does overall not make for a particular good parameters
in terms of optimization. Where the power production is involved, the param-
eter follows the thermal eﬃciency closely. For changes in parameters without
an impact on power production, the increase or decrease in exergetic eﬃciency
is so small, that they are hard to visualize. Had the heating or cooling been at
a higher or lower temperature respectively, the exergetic eﬃciency would have
been better correlated with the parameter changes. The exergetic eﬃciency is
likely a better performance parameter when comparing conceptually diﬀerent
systems. In hindsight, perhaps a diﬀerent reference state than the standard
had been more suitable.
The parametric studies show that not all parameters has a local optimum
within a reasonable interval of change. Some parameters display a linear or
near-linear behaviour. Increasing numbers of SOFC stacks or isentropic eﬃ-
ciencies will obviously always have a positive eﬀect on the total system, either
as higher production or lower auxiliary consumption of power and is only lim-
ited by what is economically viable.
For the compressors and pumps, the air blower has the largest impact on the
==PAGE:104==
88
CHAPTER 6. PARAMETRIC STUDY
system by a fair margin and should be the focus of the turbo machinery compo-
nents. The solution pump in the APP only has to supply the pressure diﬀerence
between high and low pressure components. In reality some component pres-
sure losses should be considered when selecting the solution pump.
The study shows that the gasiﬁcation temperature should not be increased
needlessly unless necessary. While the increased temperature beneﬁts the bot-
toming cycle production, it has a signiﬁcant impact on SOFC operation and the
exergetic eﬃciency in this case quite clearly shows that the trade-oﬀbetween
the two not being worth it. The temperature is likely strongly dependant on
the feedstock MSW composition and requires more in depth study and a more
advanced modelling approach. The performance of the gasiﬁer could likely be
improved to better represent a real gasiﬁcation reactor. The assumption that
both all carbon is converted and that no tars leave the reactor with the product
gas is likely unrealistic.
The optimized results show that some improvement of the system is possible,
between 1.07 and 2.34 percent points for the thermal eﬃciency depending on
the degree of improvements.
The ﬁrst optimization case only improves the
operational parameters within stated assumptions, while the second case ad-
ditionally increases isentropic eﬃciencies and decreases pressure losses. The
parametric study showed that the rich refrigeration concentration in the APP
could be improved, resulting in a higher COP.
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 7
Flue Gas Condensation
This chapter will brieﬂy investigate the beneﬁts of lowering ﬂue gas outlet
temperature and ﬂue gas condensation with regard to the bottoming cycle
district energy production. The base case from ﬁgure 5.7 and table 5.4 are
used for simulations.
7.1
Condensing ﬂue gas and 4th generation DH
Figure 5.3 in section 5.4 indicate that some water vapour is present in the ﬂue
gas. This vapour and the remaining sensible heat of the ﬂue gas represent a DE
production potential. As MSW in general contain high amounts of moisture, it
could be worthwhile to investigate if ﬂue gas condensation could improve the
system. One of the advantages of the system is the relatively clean ﬂue gas.
Most impurities are assumed to be removed by the gas cleaning system before
the SOFC chemical conversion and combined with the clean catalytic burner,
the ﬂue gas should be fairly clean and could be condensed. By condensing the
water in the ﬂue gas, the water heat of evaporation can be exploited and the
DE production increased.
Hebenstreit et al. conducted a study of ﬂue gas condensation for heat recovery
of biomass boilers. An increase between 3 and 21 % in primary energy eﬃciency
was found depending on the ﬂue gas outlet temperature. Temperatures as low
as 10 ◦C was utilized in the analysis. Hebenstreit conclude that for large scale
systems ≥10 MW ﬂue gas condensation is very economically viable, but also for
much smaller systems, in particular if the added heating production can replace
electric heaters[76]. Blumberga et al. carried out a similar study in 2011, with
ﬂue gas condensation of wood chip-fuelled boilers. The heat recovered in the
gas condenser ˙Qgc was calculated as:
˙Qgc = ˙Qc + ˙Qph
(7.1)
Where ˙Qc is the heat recovered by condensation and ˙Qph is the physical/sensible
heat of the ﬂue gas. The results shows that for a speciﬁc setup it was possible
to recover 100-180 kWh/MWh[77].
The 4th generation district heating will enable the heat rejection from the ab-
sorption plant condenser to be utilized, thus greatly increasing the performance
and economy of the absorption plant[6]. For small localized plants, where the
89
==PAGE:106==
90
CHAPTER 7. FLUE GAS CONDENSATION
energy transmissions distances are very small or basically non-existent (for ex-
ample if the plant is located in the basement of a large hotel/hospital), it is very
reasonable to assume that low temperature district heating could be viable. By
combining ﬂue gas condensing with 4th generation DH, the bottoming cycle
DE production can be improved signiﬁcantly.
7.1.1
Modelling of ﬂue gas condensation
Due to limitations of the desorber and heat exchanger components in DNA it is
not possible to directly cool down the ﬂue gas and beneﬁt from both the sensible
heat and the condensation of water vapour. Instead both a thermodynamic
model and a simulation model must be developed. The thermodynamic model
is the principle of the ﬂue gas condensation in the bottoming cycle, while the
DNA model is the necessary conﬁguration to facilitate the simulations of ﬂue
gas condensation. Since the temperatures of the district heating is signiﬁcantly
lower, the bottoming cycle conﬁguration is here revisited.
CB
Desorber
DH
T40 = 625◦C
T41 = 60◦C
T42 = 30◦C
T81 = 55◦C
T80 = 25◦C
T75 = 35.3◦C
T70 = 99.4◦C
Figure 7.1: Temperatures in the ﬂue gas condensation with 4th generation
DH for series connection bottoming cycle.
Figure 7.1 shows the thermodynamic model of ﬂue gas condensation in the
series connection. The ﬂue gas temperature at the outlet of the desorber must
be higher than the supply temperature of the district heating plus a reasonable
pinch temperature (here 5 ◦C). The same is the case out of the district heating
heat exchanger, the ﬂue gas temperature at the outlet of the DH heat exchanger
must be higher than the DH water return temperature, here using the same
pinch.
The parallel connection model can be seen on ﬁgure 7.2. The same principle
applies for the series connection, but the temperatures are diﬀerent. Since the
ﬂue gas ﬂow is split, the temperature out of the desorber can be lower than the
series connection (the refrigerant temperatures on the desorber side remains as
shown in the series connection).
The saturation temperature of water vapour in a ﬂue gas mixture of gasses can
be calculated via the partial pressure[69]:
pwater = xwater · pfluegas
(7.2)
Where the saturation temperature is evaluated in EES at increasing water
==PAGE:107==
7.1. CONDENSING FLUE GAS AND 4TH GENERATION DH
91
CB
Desorber
DH
T46 = 625◦C
T41 = 625◦C
T42 = 40◦C
T47 = 30◦C
T81 = 55◦C
T80 = 25◦C
Figure 7.2: Temperatures in the ﬂue gas condensation with 4th generation
DH for parallel connection bottoming cycle.
molar fractions on ﬁgure 7.3. As water condensates, the partial pressure drops,
lowering the condensation temperature.
In the base case the mole fraction of water is ≈0.098, resulting in a saturation
temperature of 46.6 ◦C, as seen by point A on the ﬁgure 7.3.
This means
that for the series connection, no ﬂue gas condensation of water takes place in
the desorber only the DH, which can be seen on ﬁgure 7.1. Point B on ﬁgure
7.3 shows the water mole fraction corresponding the outlet of the desorber
(T41) in the series conﬁguration. For the parallel connection on ﬁgure 7.2 the
temperature at the outlet of both the desorber and DH are below the saturation
temperature, so condensation takes place in both components.
7.1.2
DNA ﬂue gas condensation
As mentioned, the regular DNA components has some limitations with regard
to condensing gasses, the underlying mass and energy balances does not support
phase changes. A specialized component must be used instead, a Gascooler,
which can handle the liquid condensate as an output as well as the remaining
gasses.
The series connection with DNA node numbers can be seen on ﬁgure 7.4. Since
no condensation takes place in the desorber (the desorber outlet is higher than
the saturation temperature), the ﬂue gas can heat exchange directly in the
desorber, as is the case in the normal series conﬁguration. A gas cooler is im-
plemented instead of the regular DH heat exchanger. The 4th generation DH
is heated through the gas cooler in node 80 and 81, in the process cooling the
ﬂue gas and releasing heat from the water vapour in the ﬂue gas. The water
condensate leaves the gas cooler in the bottom of the component. This small
stream of water is not considered further, but could possibly have uses in the
system, either as cooling of components or in the gasiﬁcation process.
The parallel conﬁguration follows the same principle as the series, but here two
gas coolers are required, since the outlet temperature of the desorber and DH
heat exchanger are diﬀerent, as can be seen on ﬁgure 7.2. The parallel ﬂue gas
condensation DNA model is displayed on ﬁgure 7.5. The ﬂue gas is condensed
in the gas cooler and the heat is transferred to air, which can then be used to
transfer the heat to the desorber and DH heat exchanger. Air is used as no
phase change occur in the relevant temperature interval. This only occurs from
==PAGE:108==
92
CHAPTER 7. FLUE GAS CONDENSATION
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
A
B
Water mole fraction in ﬂue gas [-]
Water saturation temp. [◦C]
Figure 7.3: Water saturation temperature as a function of molar fraction.
CB
Desorber
40
81
80
Condensate
(water)
42
CON
HEX
41
Cold flue gas
46
Off-air
Off-fuel
Figure 7.4: DNA modelling of series conﬁguration bottoming cycle with ﬂue
gas condensation.
==PAGE:109==
7.1. CONDENSING FLUE GAS AND 4TH GENERATION DH
93
a simulation point of view, in engineering sense the ﬂue gas condensation hap-
pens directly in the desorber and DH heat exchanger. The temperature out of
the gas cooler CON-HEX-1 in node 41 corresponds to node 44 and similar for
CON-HEX-2 in nodes 47 and 87. This ensures that the right amount of water
condensates and dissipates heat for the DC and DH production respectively.
CB
Desorber
CON
HEX
1
40
41
Air
42
43
44
Condensate
(water)
Cold flue gas
45
DH
Off-air
DH
HEX
46
47
39
CON
HEX
2
Condensate
(water)
48
Cold flue gas
Off-fuel
85
86
87
Figure 7.5: DNA modelling of parallel conﬁguration bottoming cycle with
ﬂue gas condensation.
The pressure drop in the gas cooler is equal to the pressure drop over the des-
orber and DH heat exchanger, such that the air and gas blower compressor
power consumption remains the same.
One must expect that the DH heat exchanger and desorber are more compli-
cated from an engineering point of view, when the water condensate has to be
removed from the components as well.
7.1.3
Veriﬁcation
To conﬁrm that the model is behaving as expected, the parallel ﬂue gas con-
densation model was compared to the base case parallel conﬁguration. Using
the ﬂue gas outlet temperature of 100 ◦C in both cases and matching the in-
let temperature of air and ﬂue gas, which is better seen in table 7.1, a direct
comparison can be made.
Recall that nodes 40 and 41 in the base case are the in- and outlet of ﬂue gas
in the desorber. In the new condensation model, nodes 40 and 41 are the in-
and outlet of the gas cooler, while 42 and 43 are the air inlet and out respec-
tively. The table clearly shows that for the same temperatures, the evaporator
production of DC is the same and the COP is maintained, showing that the
thermal input to the desorber is the same. From this it can be concluded that
at high temperatures, relative to condensation, the gas coolers behave as a
regular heat exchanger and that no discrepancies could be found and that the
==PAGE:110==
94
CHAPTER 7. FLUE GAS CONDENSATION
Table 7.1: Veriﬁcation of condensation model.
Medium
Symbol
Value
Unit
Base case parallel
Flue gas
T40
628
◦C
Flue gas
T41
100
◦C
˙Qevap
220
kW
COP
0.71
-
Condensation parallel
Flue gas
T40
628
◦C
Flue gas
T41
100
◦C
Air
T42
100
◦C
Air
T43
628
◦C
˙Qevap
220
kW
COP
0.71
-
heat exchange to air before DE components has no noticeable impact on the
system.
7.1.4
Simulation results
Based on the assumption that the ﬂue gas condensation implementation in
DNA is working as expected, simulations are performed for the parallel and
series connection to determine which conﬁguration performs the best in terms
of performance and energy utilization.
Table 7.2: Flue gas condensation results.
Series
Parallel
Qevap
242.8
258.7
kW
QDH
65.2
7.5
kW
Qcond
260.8
277.1
kW
QDE
568.8
543.4
kW
ϵsys
0.3554
0.3523
-
ηth
0.3443
0.3502
-
Table 7.2 shows the series connection having a slightly lower production of
district cooling, but a signiﬁcant increase in district energy overall. Both con-
ﬁgurations show an increase, 22 and 38 kW DC for the series and parallel
respectively. The district heating produced in the DH heat exchanger is sig-
niﬁcantly higher for the series connection, as the full ﬂue gas mass ﬂow passes
through and is utilized (the parallel conﬁguration uses the regular DEratio of
0.98).
The exergetic eﬃciency shows the same, being higher for the series connection
than the parallel, even though the pressure drop is higher in the series con-
nection which increases the power consumption. Both models have the same
impact on power production and thermal eﬃciency as in section 5.5 without
==PAGE:111==
7.2. SUMMARY
95
ﬂue gas condensation. The diﬀerences in performance are quite small in gen-
eral however and the conﬁgurations are inherently diﬀerent in terms of produc-
tion. The more determining factor is likely the demand proﬁle at the consumer
matching one or the other conﬁguration better. The overarching result here is
that with ﬂue gas condensation it is possible to better utilize the waste heat
from the SOFC, in particular when considering 4th generation DH as well,
enabling the heat rejected in the condenser to be utilized.
7.2
Summary
To summarize, the increase in district cooling production in the speciﬁc case
does not utilize the ﬂue gas condensation well.
From ﬁgure 7.3 it can be
seen that the amount of water in the ﬂue gas must be fairly high before the
temperature is high enough to utilize for the desorber in the absorption cycle.
The main beneﬁt from ﬂue gas condensation is only relevant if low temperature
4th generation district heating can be utilized in close proximity to the system.
In other systems with higher water content in the ﬂue gas the beneﬁt of ﬂue
gas condensation could be signiﬁcantly higher, in particular when connected to
low temperature processes such as the absorption plant.
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 8
Exergy and Thermoeconomic
Analysis
This chapter evaluates the system from an exergetic and thermoeconomic per-
spective. Thermoeconomics1 combine exergy and economic analysis to help
determine the production cost of products in a thermal energy system[78]. As
previously mentioned, electricity is a homogeneous product, while heating and
cooling is not, therefore this chapter focuses on the production of power by the
SOFC.
The exergy analysis method was introduced in chapter 4 section 4.7.2. The ex-
ergy analysis can help determine which processes and components in a system
contribute the most to energy ineﬃciencies and losses, information which an
energy analysis can not help determine.
The exergy analysis and thermoeconomic calculates uses the optimized system
Opt. case 1 from chapter 6, section 6.9.
8.1
Thermoeconomic principle
The cost balance of a system can on general form be formulated as:
˙CP,tot = ˙CF,tot + ˙ZCI
tot + ˙ZOM
tot
(8.1)
Where ˙CP,tot is the cost rate of the system products, ˙CF,tot is the cost rate
of fuel inputs,
˙ZCI
tot is the cost rate of capital investment (CI) and ˙ZOM
tot
is
the cost rate related to operation and maintenance (OM) of the system (not
including fuels). The CI and OM are ﬁxed and gathered under the single term
˙Z, covering the annual contribution to the CI and OM over the system lifetime.
The rate is deﬁned as price per number of hours or seconds per year the system
in question operates and has the unit [$/kWh]. The cost rates ˙C are related to
the exergy streams both of power, heat and material.
In the following sections 8.2 and 8.3 the ﬁxed cost rate ˙Z is evaluated for each
component based on cost correlations and estimates of total capital investment
(TCI). Section 8.4 introduces the thermoeconomic and exergy balances required
to calculate ˙C and exergetic eﬃciencies for each component individually.
1Often called ”Exergoeconomics” as well.
97
==PAGE:114==
98
CHAPTER 8. EXERGY AND THERMOECONOMIC ANALYSIS
8.2
Component costs
The purchased equipment cost (PEC) correlations are for the most part based
on one or more dominant variables, which describes the size of the component.
For heat exchangers this is the heat transfer area, for a pump or compressor
the power consumption and so forth.
If nothing else is stated, the PEC is
based on [79] and excel spreadsheets provided by the supervisor. Since the
cost correlations are complied of several sources, there is lack of consistency
in input units. Furthermore, the cost correlations which can be obtained from
other literature are often viable for a small range of input values (which is not
always deﬁned). In particular components related to the SOFC are often based
on very small systems, in the 1 to 5 kW power production range and does not
scale to the 200 to 200 kW range in a reasonable and logical manner. Cost
correlations for components are in general notoriously diﬃcult to ﬁnd and a
signiﬁcant margin of error must be attributed to these estimates.
All prices are in U.S. dollar unless otherwise stated.
8.2.1
Solid oxide fuel cell
The SOFC cost are based on geometric factors and the fuel cell operating
temperature.
CSOF C = CSOF C,stack + CSOF C,aux
(8.2)
Where the cost of the stack is calculated as:
CSOF C,stack = Ncell · Acell · (2.96 · Tcell −1907)
(8.3)
The SOFC correlation is originally for a tubular SOFC design, but are assumed
to be viable for a planar SOFC as well. Garche et. al states that as of 2015
SOFC prices are about $7000 to $8000 per kW electrical production[80]. Ledón
et al. performs a detailed analysis of an high eﬃciency ethanol-fueled SOFC
in [81], here the SOFC cost of $1500/kW installed capacity was used. In [82]
Meyer et al. calculated a cost rate ˙Z of 432.0 e/h for the exergoeconomic
analysis (for comparison, the ˙ZSOFC calculated in this thesis is around 77 $/h).
Santin et al. states that there is much uncertainty about commercial SOFC
costs with regard to a SOFC-GT hybrid system, mentioning numbers in the
$400 to $800/kW range[83].
In general the SOFC component cost varies to the extreme in literature de-
pending on fuel, plant size, installed capacity or production and so forth. Fur-
thermore, it is not always obvious if the SOFC costs stated is for the component
alone or with auxiliary support systems as well. No general trend became clear
while investigating the costs and the correlation in eq. (8.3) is assumed to be
adequate for estimating the SOFC PEC.
The auxiliary cost for the SOFC is assumed to be 10 % of the SOFC stack
cost.
CSOF C,aux = 0.1 · CSOF C,stack
(8.4)
==PAGE:115==
8.2. COMPONENT COSTS
99
8.2.2
Gasiﬁer
The gasiﬁer PEC is based only on the mass ﬂow of feedstock:
CGasifier = 2.9 · 106 · (3.6 · ˙mfeedstock)0.7
(8.5)
8.2.3
Dryer
The dryer PEC is based on biomass drying from [84] and relates to the amount
of water removed from the biomass per hour.
Cdryer = 26 · ˙mwater,removed
(8.6)
The evaporated water amount is found as the mass diﬀerence between MSW
inlet and outlet of the dryer component.
8.2.4
Turbo machinery
The PEC of pumps and compressors are based on the power consumption in
kW with the pump having an additional input based on the eﬃciency.
Ccompressor = 91562 ·
 ˙W
445
0.67
(8.7)
Cpump = 442 ·
  ˙W
0.71 · 1.44 ·

1 +
 1 −0.8
1 −ηpump

(8.8)
8.2.5
Heat exchangers
Heat exchangers PEC is evaluated from the heat transfer area.
Chex = 130 ·
 Ahex
0.093
0.78
(8.9)
Where the area can be calculated from the transferred heat, LMTD and a heat
transfer coeﬃcient.
Ahex =
˙Q
U · ∆TLMT D
(8.10)
The heat transfer coeﬃcient U is assumed to be 20 W/(m2K) for gas/gas heat
transfer and 30 W/(m2K) for gas/liquid.
8.2.6
Desulphurizer, Methenator, Catalytic burner
The desulphurizer, methanator and the catalytir burner are based on the PEC
of a gas catalytic reactor[85]. Based on the lowest component weight in the
range (400 kg) the price of the components cost is calculated from a reference
weight of 8 tons at a given price.
Cdesulph = $110000 ·
0.4
8
0.58
(8.11)
Cdesulph = CCB = Cmethanator
(8.12)
==PAGE:116==
100
CHAPTER 8. EXERGY AND THERMOECONOMIC ANALYSIS
8.2.7
Absorption plant
The absorption plant PEC is a total cost for a single stage system, based on
the chiller power and cost factor fAC depending on the heat source. In this
case the source heat is a ﬂue gas, resulting in a cost fAC of 1.14.
CAP P = fAC · 4 · 104 ·
 ˙Qevap
70
0.543
(8.13)
8.2.8
Additional costs
The expenses for a energy producing system is not only the equipment costs,
but also a large amount of installation costs, controls systems, civil engineering
and so forth. The total capital investment costs (TCI) are found based on the
PEC. The additional costs can be split into two, the direct costs related to
construction of the plant and indirect costs, related to the development and
funding.
Table 8.1: Plant costs: Direct costs (DiC) as a percentage of PEC. Indirect
costs as a percentage of DiC.
Direct costs (DiC)
% of PEC
Purchased equipment installation
35
Piping
35
Instrumentation and controls
12.5
Electrical equipment and materials
12.5
Civil, structural and architectural work
20
Service facilities
35
Indirect costs
% of DiC
Engineering and supervision
10
Construction costs
15
Contingency
15
Table 8.1 shows average values based on [69]. These expenses are both coun-
try and location speciﬁc and must be expected to vary greatly depending on
numerous factors.
Collecting the terms for direct, indirect and contingency, the following expres-
sion yields the TCI for component k.
TCIk = PECk ·

1 + 150
100

|
{z
}
Direct costs
·

1 +
 25
100

· 1.15

|
{z
}
Indirect costs
(8.14)
Simplifying:
TCIk = PECk · 2.5 · (1 + (0.25 · 1.15))
(8.15)
The result is that a plant component k is over three times more than just the
purchased equipment costs.
The component cost estimates can be seen in table 8.2. The price of mixers,
==PAGE:117==
8.2. COMPONENT COSTS
101
valves and splitters are assumed to be part of the ’piping’ entry on table 8.1.
The price of the SOFC and gasiﬁer are signiﬁcant compared to the remain-
ing components. The district heating heat exchanger and absorption plant is
dimensioned as if the full ﬂue gas mass ﬂow is utilized in each, based on the
assumption that at some point during the year only district cooling or heating
is required.
Table 8.2: PEC and TCI for each of the components in the system. Dollars
in thousands.
Component
PEC [$]
TCI [$]
Dryer
DR
6.4
26.8
Steam blower
SB
1.6
6.6
Gasiﬁer
GSF
746.9
3150.9
Air heater
AH
2.1
9
Steam heater
SH
6.5
27.4
Desulphurizer
DS
19.4
81.7
Gas blower
GB
3.2
13.5
Methanator
M
19.4
81.7
SOFC
SOFC
1387.1
5851.9
Cathode preheater
CP
14.5
61.3
Air blower
AB
10.8
45.8
Catalytic Burner
CB
19.4
81.7
District heating HEX
DH
22.3
93.9
Absorption plant
APP
82.6
348.6
Water pump
WP
3.9
16.4
SYSTEM
sys
2342.0
9880.5
8.2.9
Capital and O&M cost rates
From the total capital investment, the cost rates ˙ZCI and ˙ZOM can be formu-
lated. The capital investment cost rate ˙ZCI is deﬁned as the hourly cost of the
k-th component. The equations are based on [69] and [86].
˙ZCI
k
= f · TCIk
Teq
(8.16)
With f being the annuity factor based on the interest factor and construction
time (CT). The annuity factor splits the TCI into equal portions over the life
time of the system by taking inﬂation and interest into consideration.
f =

qn+CT
i
−1
(qi −1) · qn+CT
i
−
qCT
i
−1
(qi −1) · qCT
i
−1
(8.17)
Where qi is deﬁned as the interest factor or nominal escalation rate and ex-
presses the annual rate of change in costs including both inﬂation and interest
rate.
qi = [(1 + rr) (1 + ri)]
(8.18)
The operation and maintenance of the system components likely vary greatly.
For simplicity and because OM data rarely is available for generic components,
==PAGE:118==
102
CHAPTER 8. EXERGY AND THERMOECONOMIC ANALYSIS
a maintenance factor Mf is used for all components. The maintenance factor
is assumed to be 110 % for all components.
˙ZOM
k
= ˙ZCI
k
· Mf
(8.19)
Assumptions about operational hours per year (Teq) are based on [5], which
shows that new WtE plants have very high ’uptime’ both absolute and relative
to older plants. Considering the investigated system will be ’state of the art’ it
will likely operate a high number of hours yearly. Furthermore, MSW can only
be deposited a short time before starting to degrade, meaning the system should
be operating continuously as much as possible. The lifetime of the entire plant
is set to 20 years, although some components likely have a signiﬁcantly shorter
or longer technical lifetime. The construction time of the plant is assumed to
be one year.
Table 8.3: General economic input parameters for cost rates.
Paramter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Annual operating hours
Teq
8000
[hours/year]
Interest rate
rr
0.02
[-]
Inﬂation rate
ri
0.02
[-]
Equipment lifetime
n
20
[years]
Construction time
CT
1
[years]
Maintenance factor
Mf
1.1
[-]
The inﬂation rate in Denmark has been just shy of 2 % as an average over the
last 15 years, with a decreasing trend since 2013. The interest rate has a similar
trend of decreasing, although since 2009. The average interest rate over the
last two decades was around 2 %[87]. Table 8.3 shows the list of assumptions.
8.3
Cost of fuel
The cost of MSW as a fuel is not well deﬁned. Waste does not have a value per
the normal deﬁnition, but rather a cost of disposal. Instead the socio-economic
value of MSW as a fuel is used[88]. Based on a technical report by EA2 the
gain of importing waste is around 0.0144 $/kWh assuming a LHV of 13 MJ/kg.
8.4
Exergy and cost balance
General form of the thermoeconomic balance over component:
X ˙Cj,k,in + ˙Zk =
X ˙Cj,k,out
(8.20)
Where k is the k-th component in the system and j is the material or exergy
stream. The general form of the exergy balance is deﬁned in section 4.7.2.
By formulating a thermoeconomic balance for each component, a linear set of
2Energianalyse a/s.
==PAGE:119==
8.4. EXERGY AND COST BALANCE
103
equations for m exiting exergy streams can be solved iteratively in EES with
the help of m −1 auxiliary equations.
The auxiliary equations are supple-
ments to the thermoeconomic balances, related to the assumption of whether
an exiting exergy stream can be utilized further as fuel in another component
downstream[69].
The following sections shows the exergetic and thermoeconomic balances ex-
amples for diﬀerent component types.
8.4.1
MSW dryer
The dryer functions as a heat exchanger, with a cold and hot stream in- and
outlet. The dryer is special, as the waste fuel is introduced in this component.
MSW dryer
Steam inlet, 58
Steam outlet, 57
MSW outlet, 2
MSW inlet, 1
Figure 8.1: MSW steam dryer.
The exergy balance over the dryer:
˙E1 + ˙E58 = ˙E2 + ˙E57 + ˙ED + ˙EL
(8.21)
With the exergy losses being zero, as no streams or heat leaves the system, only
an exchange of exergy occurs. The corresponding thermoeconomic balance:
c1 ˙E1 + c58 ˙E58 + ˙ZDryer = c2 ˙E2 + c57 ˙E57
(8.22)
The cost of the MSW is c1 from section 8.3. The hot steam getting cooled has
the same value on both sides, as per the deﬁnition[69], meaning that c58 = c57.
8.4.2
Gasiﬁer
The gasiﬁer works as a reactor from an exergy and balance point of view. The
exergy balance over the gasiﬁer:
˙E2 + ˙E53 = ˙E3 + ˙E99 + ˙ED
(8.23)
With the ashes leaving the system:
˙E99 = ˙EL
(8.24)
==PAGE:120==
104
CHAPTER 8. EXERGY AND THERMOECONOMIC ANALYSIS
Gasiﬁer
Ash outlet, 99
Air and steam inlet, 53
MSWdry inlet, 2
Product gas outlet, 3
Figure 8.2: MSW gasiﬁcation reactor.
The thermoeconomic cost balance being:
c2 ˙E2 + c53 ˙E53 + ˙ZGasifier = c3 ˙E3 + c99 ˙E99
(8.25)
With the value of ashes assumed to be zero; c99 = 0. The ashes could depending
on purity possibly have a value as a material in other processes, but this is not
considered any further. The cost of c2 is found from the previous component,
the dryer.
8.4.3
Heat exchangers
Both the air heater, steam generator and cathode preheater are modelled as
a heat exchanger, following the same principle. Here the air heater (AH) is
shown as an example.
Air preheater
Product gas inlet, 3
Product gas outlet, 4
Air outlet, 52
Air inlet, 51
Figure 8.3: Gasiﬁcation air preheater.
The exergy and thermoeconomic balance is deﬁned normal:
˙E3 + ˙E51 = ˙E4 + ˙E52 + ˙ED + ˙EL
(8.26)
No exergy is lost in a heat exchanger with no heat losses, meaning that ˙EL =
0.
c3 ˙E3 + c51 ˙E51 ˙ZAH = c4 ˙E4 + c52 ˙E52
(8.27)
==PAGE:121==
8.4. EXERGY AND COST BALANCE
105
The auxiliary equation stating that the hot stream cost at in and outlet are
equal c51 = c52.
8.4.4
Compressors
For compressors and pumps an electrical input is included, which from the
theory is deﬁned as pure exergy. For the air blower the equations are shown
below.
Air blower
Air inlet, 25
Air outlet, 26
W
Figure 8.4: SOFC air blower.
The exergy balance:
˙E25 + ˙EW = ˙E26 + ˙ED + ˙EL
(8.28)
And the corresponding thermoeconomic balance:
c25 ˙E25 + cwEW + ˙ZAB = c26 ˙E26
(8.29)
Depending on the inlet an auxiliary equation might be required. If the inlet
stream is coming from another component, no other equation is required, but
if the inlet is air or water at ambient temperature, the cost is assumed to be
zero. For the air blower this is the case, as air is taken from the ambient, thus
c25 = 0. The cost of the work input cw is equal to the cost of power production
of the SOFC.
8.4.5
SOFC
The SOFC has two inputs and three outputs in the fuel and air together with
power production. The exergy balance over the SOFC:
˙E22 + ˙E27 = ˙E23 + ˙E28 + ˙EPSOFC + ˙ED + ˙EL
(8.30)
As there is no heat losses, the exergy losses are zero ˙EL = 0.
c22 ˙E22 + c27 ˙E27 + ˙ZSOF C = c23 ˙E23 + c28 ˙E28 + cw,SOFC ˙EPSOFC
(8.31)
The cost of the fuel (MSW gas) is calculated from the previous component, the
methanator. As the SOFC does not fully utilize the MSW product gas3, the
cost of the fuel at inlet and outlet is assumed to be the same, such that c22 =
3Which can be seen on ﬁgure 5.4.
==PAGE:122==
106
CHAPTER 8. EXERGY AND THERMOECONOMIC ANALYSIS
SOFC
Anode
Cathode
MSW gas, 22
Oﬀfuel, 23
Air, 27
Oﬀair, 28
PSOFC
Figure 8.5: Solid oxide fuel cell.
c23. Furthermore, the cost of the oﬀair is assumed to be zero, c28 = 0. As the
oﬀfuel and oﬀair is mixed in the catalytic burner, the bottoming cycle will
still have a cost of production.
Since the SOFC is the only component producing electricity, the production
cost can be found as the speciﬁc costs related to the power output cw,SOFC.
8.4.6
Other components
The thermoeconomic balance equations for the remaining components are not
listed.
The principle is very similar and the most interesting aspect is the
auxiliary equations. For the desulphurizer the sulphur is assumed to have no
cost for simplicity sake. In reality it is likely that this sulphur has some cost
associated with disposal, but could also be considered a valued product to
use in other processes. The methanator only has one input and output, so no
auxiliary equation is needed. The catalytic burner behaves as a regular burner,
which from the theory requires no additional equations[69]. The ﬂue gas and
steam splitters are considered part of the piping cost together with the steam
and air mixer, thus they have no separate cost rate ˙Z.
8.5
Evaluation
Based on the theory and cost calculations presented, the system performance is
evaluated to determine the cost of power production. Furthermore the exergetic
analysis results are presented and discussed.
8.5.1
Thermoeconomic results
With the cost rates ˙Z and cost balances evaluate, an EES script can be writ-
ten to calculate the cost of power production4. The thermoeconomic analysis
shows a SOFC power production cost of 0.5694 $/kWh (0.5 e/kWh or 3.8
DKK/kWh). Compared to other renewable or sustainable technologies, which
can be seen on ﬁgure 8.6, this is a quite high production price.
4See the full script in appendix G
==PAGE:123==
8.5. EVALUATION
107
Figure 8.6: Cost of electricity generation from renewable technologies in 2010
and 2014, taken from [89]. CSP = concentrating solar power.
Based on the high power production cost and due to the issues with PEC cor-
relations in general, some investigation of the most dominant components is
warranted to evaluate the impact of uncertainties.
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
· 10−2
0.55
0.56
0.57
0.58
Power production cost A
Fuel cost [$/kWh]
SOFC production cost [$/kWh]
Figure 8.7: Power production cost as a function of MSW fuel cost.
Figure 8.7 shows that the fuel cost does not have signiﬁcant impact on the
system power production price. Point A shows the MSW fuel cost from section
8.3 of 0.0144 $/kWh. As MSW is a material which must be disposed of in
some manner and the alternative to this system is the large WtE plants, some
societal beneﬁts should be included in the price as subsidies. As the system is
==PAGE:124==
108
CHAPTER 8. EXERGY AND THERMOECONOMIC ANALYSIS
placed close to producers of MSW and consumers of energy, the transport dis-
tances of the waste and transmission losses is signiﬁcantly lower, which result
in savings, both in a monetary and environmental sense.
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Power production cost A
$3000/kWinstalled
SOFC component cost ˙ZSOF C [$/h]
SOFC production cost [$/kWh]
Figure 8.8: The eﬀect on power production cost for SOFC component cost
in $/h. Point A = initial estimate.
As already discussed brieﬂy in section 8.2.1, the PEC of the SOFC component
is very uncertain. The correlation used is possibly not well representing the
current market. As can be seen from the cost rate ˙ZSOF C on ﬁgure 8.8, the
SOFC expenses have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the power production cost.
By
using a conservative price estimate of $3000 per kW installed capacity from
[11] (shown on the ﬁgure), the power production cost is decreased to just over
0.35 $/kWh, if the optimistic estimate of $1500/kW is used instead, the eﬀect
is even more pronounced. With continuing research and development of solid
oxide fuel cells the price should decrease even further, making the technology
able to better compete with more established power production methods.
The gasiﬁer is the other very expensive component with a large degree of un-
certainty. The PEC correlation is quite simple, only considering the mass ﬂow
of feedstock, but as presented earlier many diﬀerent gasiﬁcation reactors of
varying complexity is available. Figure 8.9 shows the power production cost of
the system if the gasiﬁer expenses are reduced.
To evaluate the eﬀect of lowering the cost rate ˙Zk for both gasiﬁer and SOFC
cost, a cost factor cf was introduced to the EES script.
˙ZSOF C,new = ˙ZSOF C · cf
(8.32)
˙ZGasifier,new = ˙ZGasifier · cf
(8.33)
The eﬀect of decreasing cost factor of both the gasiﬁer and SOFC can be seen
in ﬁgure 8.10.
By decreasing the cost of the SOFC and gasiﬁer to 50 % of the initial value,
the power production cost decreases to around 0.30 $/kWh. A 50 % decrease
==PAGE:125==
8.5. EVALUATION
109
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
45.0
50.0
55.0
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
Power production cost A
Gasiﬁer component cost [$/h]
Power production cost [$/kWh]
Figure 8.9: Gasiﬁer costs impact on power production price.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Power production cost A
50 % ˙ZSOF C,GSF
Price factor [-]
Power production cost [$/kWh]
Figure 8.10: Power production costs for decreasing SOFC and gasiﬁer ex-
penses.
in costs are quite signiﬁcant, but simply further emphasises the importance of
a good cost estimate when evaluating the viability of a system.
8.5.2
Exergy analysis results
The exergy analysis is conducted with the theory presented in section 4.7.2.
The exergy fuel, product, destruction and losses are shown in table 8.4.
The table shows that only a two components in the top cycle have exergy losses,
the gasiﬁer and the desulphurizer. This is due to the assumption about no heat
losses in the components. The ash from the gasiﬁer and the sulphur from the
desulphurizer are the only material streams leaving the system. The ﬂue gas
leaving the catalytic burner could be considered an exergy loss.
==PAGE:126==
110
CHAPTER 8. EXERGY AND THERMOECONOMIC ANALYSIS
Table 8.4: Exergy fuel, product, destruction and losses in the top cycle SOFC
gasiﬁcation system.
Component k
EP
EF
ED
EL
[kW]
[kW]
[kW]
[kW]
Dryer
1.52
7.27
5.75
0
Gasiﬁer
565.44
621.54
52.62
3.48
Air heater
18.7
25.07
6.37
0
Steam heater
12.62
20.72
8.1
0
Steam blower
0.86
1.02
0.16
0
Mixer
20.64
24.98
4.34
0
Desulphurizer
518.22
519.65
0.02
1.41
Gas blower
2.5
2.97
0.47
0
Methanator
515.89
520.72
4.83
0
SOFC
215.09
371.8
156.71
0
Air blower
12.59
18.43
5.84
0
Cathode preheater
198.59
249.91
51.32
0
Catalytic burner
149.27
232.36
83.09
0
Looking at the exergy eﬃciencies in table 8.5, it would at ﬁrst glance seem
like the dryer is the worst component in terms of exergy destruction. But the
exergy destruction to fuel exergy (YD) and component exergy destruction to
total exergy destruction (Y ∗
D) ratios for the dryer are very low, 0.95 and 1.51
% respectively. Meaning that while the dryer has a large degree of exergy de-
struction relative to the exergy product, both the fuel and product are quite
small in absolute values and relative to the system, the dryer ineﬃciencies are
insigniﬁcant.
Table 8.5: Component exergy eﬃciencies in the top cycle SOFC gasiﬁcation
system.
Component k
ϵk
YD
Y ∗
D
YL
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
Dryer
20.91
0.95
1.51
0
Gasiﬁer
90.97
8.73
13.86
0.58
Air heater
74.59
1.06
1.68
0
Steam heater
60.91
1.34
2.13
0
Steam blower
84.31
0.03
0.04
0
Mixer
82.63
0.72
1.14
0
Desulphurizer
99.72
0.00
0.01
0.22
Gas blower
84.18
0.08
0.12
0
Methanator
99.07
0.80
1.27
0
SOFC
57.85
26.01
41.28
0
Air blower
68.31
0.97
1.54
0
Cathode preheater
79.46
8.52
13.52
0
Catalytic burner
64.24
13.79
21.89
0
The components can be put in several overarching categories, chemical conver-
==PAGE:127==
8.6. SUMMARY
111
sion/reactions, mixing and heat transfer. Chemical reactions is a signiﬁcant
source of exergy destruction, due to the process irreversibility. The exergy de-
struction in a mixing process is related to the temperatures, such that mixing
two ﬂuids with a large temperature diﬀerence will yield a higher exergy destruc-
tion, compared to mixing at a small temperature diﬀerence. Several processes
can take place at the same time. Heat transfer follows the same principle as
mixing, the larger the temperature diﬀerences, the more exergy destruction
will occur.
Chemical conversion occurs in the gasiﬁer, SOFC and catalytic burner, inci-
dentally the three components with the highest YD. Of the three, the SOFC
accounts for over 41 % of the total exergy destruction. The chemical conver-
sions in the SOFC generates a large amount of heat which causes the exergy
destruction. For the gasiﬁer and catalytic burner, both mixing and chemical
conversion takes place resulting in a high exergy destruction.
The cathode preheater is another component with a high amount of exergy de-
struction. Here the temperature diﬀerence is over 750 ◦C between inlets of air
and oﬀ-air. The mass ﬂow in other heat exchangers is more moderate, making
them negligible compared to total the system destruction.
8.6
Summary
Based on available cost correlations, the SOFC and gasiﬁer PEC is very high
compared to the other equipment in the system. The age of some cost corre-
lations and lack of information causes signiﬁcant uncertainties regarding the
cost of the system in general.
The exergy analysis shows that the SOFC accounts for over 40 % of the ex-
ergy destruction in the system, due to the production of ”waste” heat. In the
catalytic burner and gasiﬁer both mixing and chemical reactions takes place,
making these components the other major exergy destruction contributors.
High temperature diﬀerences in heat exchangers should be avoided if possible,
as they cause a large amount of exergy destruction as well, in particular impor-
tant in the cathode preheater which has a high mass ﬂow. Due to assumptions
about heat losses, only a negligible amount of exergy is lost in form of ash and
sulphur leaving the system.
The cost of production for the optimized system is quite high compared to
other renewable/sustainable technologies. Whether the system should be able
to compete with other power producing systems is questionable due to the
added beneﬁt of MSW disposal and the reduction in both transport and trans-
mission losses.
The cost of power production is greatly dependent on the cost of the SOFC and
to some extent the gasiﬁer, while the fuel cost only has a small impact under
the given assumptions. Were the SOFC and gasiﬁer costs reduced, it is likely
that the impact of MSW fuel cost would increase correspondingly. The cost of
the gasiﬁer and SOFC is paramount for the economic viability of the system.
A study from 2013 on small scale biomass-gasiﬁer-SOFC systems reaches a
similar conclusion based on a thermoeconomic analysis[90].
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 9
Discussion
The results of simulations has already been assessed and commented on indi-
vidually in the relevant chapters. Here follows a more general discussion of the
obtained results and related subjects relevant to the investigated system.
9.1
Design limitations
The system is designed and modelled in DNA, using a number of operational
assumptions. The gasiﬁer DNA model is originally veriﬁed for a downdraft
wood chip gasiﬁer[61], but possibly a ﬁxed bed gasiﬁer is not the best suited
for MSW gasiﬁcation. A ﬂuidized bed reactor could prove a better choice, in
which case the behaviour and performance of the model should be quite diﬀer-
ent. Furthermore, the gasiﬁer does not take chemical reactions into account,
but instead uses minimization of gibbs energy. As stated previously, the gasiﬁer
model used in this thesis does not mirror a speciﬁc reactor type, but rather the
gasiﬁcation process on a more general level. The eﬀect of these simpliﬁcations
is not easy to determine and the impact on system performance would require
a more detailed modelling approach.
In several ways DNA is a strong tool for design and simulation of thermal sys-
tems, but has some limitations with regard to available components as well.
The limitations are also seen with regard to the ﬂue gas condensation where
some additional components were needed to model the ﬂue gas water vapour
condensation.
A number of assumptions was necessary to design and model the system in
DNA and the parameters expected to be most signiﬁcant were studied in chap-
ter 6. This parametric study showed that many assumed values had an impact
on the thermal eﬃciency ηth, though most were within a ± 2 percent points
for a reasonable interval.
9.2
MSW as a fuel
Only certain types of waste have been investigated and thus not MSW in the
broadest deﬁnition. Information about household-like waste, which is a signif-
icant portion of incinerated waste, is more readily available compared to other
types, thus the analysis focuses on the areas where data seems applicable. Con-
113
==PAGE:130==
114
CHAPTER 9. DISCUSSION
struction waste for example is not well represented in this work and should be
further investigated if the system is operating in a setting where construction
waste constitutes any signiﬁcant fraction in the utilized fuel.
Some uncertainties are related to the waste characteristic method developed.
The material fractions are quite certainly not represented in equal measure in
the waste fractions as is assumed, which could lead to some deviations com-
pared to the actual values.
The fuel analysis shows that diﬀerent waste types have signiﬁcant impact on
the overall properties and performance of the system. Organic waste in par-
ticular is a bad fuel due to the high moisture content. It is possible that this
particular fraction of waste would be better utilized in a diﬀerent manner, for
example in a biomass digester to produce liquid fuels and compost. This would
obviously require more complex waste sorting and would decrease the amount
of MSW available to use as fuel in WtE power production. None the less an
interesting subject to investigate further.
9.3
System operation and performance
The investigated system has been simulated, yielding a thermal eﬃciency of 36
to 37.5 % depending on the quality of components. One explanation for the
”poor” eﬃciency compared to more standard SOFC systems is the fuel. MSW
has to be processed in the gasiﬁer before it can be fed to the SOFC and this
conversion requires energy, which is consumed directly from the fuel.
The temperature of the ﬂue gas enabled the system to function as a CCHP
with a bottoming cycle absorption plant and district heating connection. The
possibility of producing both heating and cooling greatly increases the areas
of application of the system, but requires a means of which to distribute this
district energy. The temperature of the ﬂue gas is more than adequate to pro-
duce both DC and DH which requires temperatures of at least 100 ◦C. Both
dual and triple stage absorption plants could be viable for additional cooling
production[36]. Other options of bottoming cycles have been investigated in
the past, for example with a Stirling engine[55] or a Organic Rankine Cycle
[91], both yielding a high thermal eﬃciency compared to the investigated sys-
tem.
The absorption plant operation is simpliﬁed somewhat in terms of modelling.
The heat rejection from the condenser and absorber is not designed and sim-
ulated in detail. The cooling water used in the absorber is assumed to always
be available in needed quantities, while the condenser heat is supposed to be
removed partly by hot water production and the rest by free cooling. For lo-
cations without available cooling water, a free cooler or cooling tower would
have to be used instead, thus increasing the auxiliary power consumption of
the system. For modelling the system in a speciﬁc location, the assumptions
about water cooling and free cooling in the absorber and condenser should be
questioned and investigated further. A possibility for improving the absorption
plant could be to introduce an internal heat exchanger to recover heat between
the desorber and absorber.
The ﬂue gas condensation did not oﬀer much beneﬁt with regard to the dis-
==PAGE:131==
9.4. ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
115
trict cooling production, but was beneﬁcial for the district heating production
if 4th generation district heating was produced. It is not unlikely that by the
time the system will become more proﬁtable or sustainable from an economic
perspective, low temperature district heating could also be more widespread.
9.4
Economic analysis
The purchased equipment costs show that the SOFC and gasiﬁer components
are very expensive based on given assumptions and cost correlations. It is likely
that the utilized correlations are too out-dated. Furthermore the current time
value of the dollar has not been taken into account, which could have had an
impact on the expenses. For components still in development stage, such as
fuel cells and partly MSW gasiﬁers, component costs are not readily available
as is the case with more established technologies.
The thermoeconomic analysis found the power production cost to be fairly
high compared to other similar technologies. The analysis is based on numer-
ous assumptions about lifetime, yearly operation hours, maintenance factor,
inﬂation rate and so forth, all of which will have an impact. The PEC is ex-
pected to have the greatest eﬀect on the production price. Similar studies of
SOFC-gasiﬁcation integrated systems have found the same results. Moradin
et al. found the total investment cost of a wood-gasiﬁer-SOFC system to be
450’000 $ for a 60 kW rated power, somewhat comparable to the investigated
system considering the size diﬀerence[90].
9.5
Part load performance
The operation and control of the system in part load is not considered to any
extent in the thesis, but could potentially have a signiﬁcant impact on both
production and proﬁtability. The SOFC has some issues with load ﬂuctuations
and is best used for base load in an energy system[11].
This lines up well
with the fact that MSW has to be disposed of continuously, but does not
correspond well to regular consumer demand of power, heating and cooling. In
essence both part load operation and storage options should be considered as
well as simulation to evaluate performance in realistic situations. The storing
of heating and cooling in hot and cold water respectively is widely accepted,
while the storing of electricity has yet to be solved.
One interesting option is to operate the gasiﬁer continuously to produce gas
and store the gas for use when demand requires it. This could even be combined
with the reverse operation of the SOFC, using it as an electrolyte to produce
hydrogen from surplus renewable energy, with the added beneﬁt of keeping the
SOFC warm for easy switch to power production. There are both advantages
and disadvantages of storing the gasiﬁer product gas for later use. On one
hand adding a great deal of ﬂexibility to the system, but also to some degree
diminishing the beneﬁt of integration, as the sensible heat in the product gas
will likely be lost and additional preheating will be needed. This system is
presumably quite complex and must take demand proﬁles and waste generation
patterns into consideration on a detailed level to yield meaningful results.
==PAGE:132==
116
CHAPTER 9. DISCUSSION
9.6
Other considerations
The gasiﬁcation process allows MSW to be considered as a fuel for power
production with a SOFC. MSW is a ”free” fuel often either incinerated in
Scandinavia or simply landﬁlled in other parts of the world. In an energy eﬃ-
cient country like Denmark with a signiﬁcant amount of renewable energy, the
means of which to reduce emissions and pollution are limited. From a Dan-
ish and Scandinavian perspective the system is designed with energy recovery
from waste in mind, the primary function being to better utilize the waste as
a resource and improve the current waste handling scheme. For other parts
of the world the system could have a dual functionality, ﬁrst and foremost
the disposal of waste instead of landﬁlls and secondly as an energy recovery
process. Whether the system is viable compared to conventional WtE plants
in countries with more obvious ways of reducing emissions requires a diﬀerent
kind of analysis than conducted in this thesis.
In general the environmental impact is not considered at all in the thesis. This
could prove to be an interesting analysis, to compare emissions from conven-
tional WtE plants and from the investigated system. It is expected that the
SOFC and catalytic burner could greatly reduce the amount of CO2 emissions
per MWh produced compared to the technologies in use today.
==PAGE:133==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
A municipal waste gasiﬁer has been integrated with a solid oxide fuel cell and
an absorption plant to provide electricity, heat and cooling. Using the compo-
nent based simulation tool DNA, a thermodynamic model has been designed
and evaluated. The inclusion of a methanator has improved the design by low-
ering auxiliary power consumption and increasing bottoming cycle production
of district energy. The analysis shows that the thermal eﬃciency of the system
with methanator is 35.1 %, which could be enhanced to 36.1 % by modify-
ing assumed operational parameters and further to 37.4 % with higher quality
components. By improving the top cycle performance, the production of the
bottoming cycle is diminished, as less energy is available in the ﬂue gas. The
COP of the absorption plant is 0.7, a reasonably standard value according to
literature.
An exergetic eﬃciency of 32.8 % with methanator follows the thermal eﬃciency
closely, and does not bring much new information during the optimization pro-
cess. The exergy analysis however shows that most of the irreversible losses in
the system comes from the chemical conversions in key components and inex-
pedient temperature diﬀerences during heat exchange and mixing.
Using the developed method of determining MSW properties based on waste
fractions, several diﬀerent waste related fuels is investigated. The following
simulations shows that the MSW waste fractions and corresponding charac-
teristics have signiﬁcant impact on the system performance and should be a
key factor when determining the system viability at a speciﬁc location.
In
particular food scraps and vegetable waste proves to be a poor fuel due to the
embedded moisture.
During the thesis a small tool has been developed in Excel to easily calculate
the exergetic eﬃciency based on DNA output ﬁles. This tool could prove useful
for students to evaluate the performance of a thermodynamic system with few
user inputs.
From a thermodynamic point of view the investigated system results in a signif-
icant increase in performance compared to conventional waste-to-energy plants.
The thermoeconomic analysis shows that the cost of power production is ex-
ceedingly high compared to other sustainable technologies, primarily due to
the gasiﬁer and SOFC component costs. Analysis furthermore shows that if or
when the SOFC expenses decrease, the system can become viable and compete
with other technologies, despite the relatively poor fuel properties.
117
==PAGE:134==
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
[1]
Quartz + Co. Energiindustriens historiske omstilling og betydning for dan-
mark. Technical report, DI-Energi and Dansk Energi, 2015. URL http://
www.danskenergi.dk/Aktuelt/Arkiv/2015/Februar/15_02_24C.aspx.
[2]
Danish Energy Agency. Energiscenarier frem mod 2020, 2035 og 2050.
Technical report, Danish Energy Agency, 2014. URL http://www.ens.
dk/info/publikationer/energiscenarier-frem-2020-2035-2050.
ISBN: 978-87-93071-64-3.
[3]
S. Murugan and Bohumil Horák.
Tri and polygeneration systems - a
review.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 60:1032 – 1051,
2016.
ISSN 1364-0321.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.
01.127. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1364032116001829.
[4]
The Danish Energy Agency.
The danish energy agency’s interac-
tive maps, 2016.
URL http://www.ens.dk/en/info/facts-figures/
energy-info-maps/danish-energy-agencys-interactive-maps.
On-
line database, Latest accessed: 02-03-2016.
[5]
Dansk Aﬀaldsforening and DI and Dansk Energi. BEATE Benchmarking
af aﬀaldssektoren 2013 ( data fra 2012 ) - Forbrænding. Technical report,
Denmark, 2014.
[6]
H. Bach Christensen. Idas klimaplan 2050 - fagligt notat - fjernkøling.
Technical report, IDA, 2009.
URL https://ida.dk/sites/prod.ida.
dk/files/Fjernk%C3%B8ling_august.pdf.
[7]
Daniel Hoornweg, Perinaz Bhada-tata, and Chris Kennedy. Waste pro-
duction must peak this century. Nature, 502(7473):615–617, 2013. doi:
10.1038/502615a.
[8]
D. Hoornweg and P. Bhada-Tata.
What a waste:
a global re-
view of solid waste management.
Technical report,
World bank
-
Urban
Development
&
Local
Government
Unit,
2012.
URL
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/
Resources/336387-1334852610766/What_a_Waste2012_Final.pdf.
[9]
Energistyrelsen og Energinet.dk.
Technology Data for Energy Plants -
Generation of Electricity and District Heating, Energy Storage and Energy
Carrier Generation and Conversion. Technical report, 2012.
119
==PAGE:136==
120
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] V. Belgiorno, G. De Feo, C. Della Rocca, and R. M a Napoli. Energy from
gasiﬁcation of solid wastes. Waste Management, 23(1):1–15, 2003. ISSN
0956053X. doi: 10.1016/S0956-053X(02)00149-6.
[11] A. Kirubakaran, Shailendra Jain, and R.K. Nema. A review on fuel cell
technologies and power electronic interface. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 13(9):2430–2440, 2009. ISSN 13640321. doi: 10.1016/
j.rser.2009.04.004. URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S1364032109000872.
[12] The Danish Governement. Our future energy. Technical report, 2011. URL
http://www.ens.dk/en/policy/danish-climate-energy-policy.
[13] Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet. Energipolitisk redegørelse 2015.
Technical report, Klima-, Energi- og Bygningsministeriet, 2015.
URL
http://www.ens.dk/politik/dansk-klima-energipolitik.
[14] Regeringen.
Vores energi.
Technical report,
Klima-,
Energi- og
Bygningsministeriet,
2011.
URL
http://www.ens.dk/politik/
dansk-klima-energipolitik/regeringens-klima-energipolitik/
vores-energi.
[15] Energistyrelse & Energinet.dk. Solvarme - status og strategi - forskning,
udvikling og demonstration. Technical report, 2007. URL http://www.
ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/ny-teknologi/teknologi-strategier/
solenergi/Solvarme_status_og_strategi_2007_05_25.pdf.
[16] Eurostat.
Eurostat newssrelease 48/2014 - 25 march 2014.
Technical
report, European Commission, 2014.
[17] Rasmus Toft, Christian Fischer, Nanna Aa. Bøjesen, and Eik Kristensen.
Aﬀaldsstatistik 2013.
Technical report, Miljøstyrelsen, København K,
2013.
URL http://mst.dk/media/149735/affaldsstatistik-2013.
pdf.
[18] Rambøll.
Using
waste
as
a
resource.
Technical
report,
2012.
URL
http://www.ramboll.dk/ydelser-og-sektorer/energi/
affaldsforbraending.
[19] Rambøll & RenoSam. Waste-to-energy in Denmark - The most eﬃcient
waste management system in Europe. Technical report, 2006. URL https:
//stateofgreen.com/files/download/275.
[20] Miljøstyrelsen. Forbrænding af aﬀald - Afrapportering af den tværminis-
terielle arbejdsgruppe vedrørende organisering af aﬀaldsforbrændingsom-
rådet.
Technical report, Ministry of Environment and Food of Den-
mark, 2001.
URL http://www2.mst.dk/udgiv/publikationer/2010/
Affaldsforbr%C3%A6nding/978-87-7856-976-9.pdf.
[21] Richard L. Bain and Karl Broer. Gasiﬁcation, pages 47–77. John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd, 2011. ISBN 9781119990840. doi: 10.1002/9781119990840.ch3.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781119990840.ch3.
==PAGE:137==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
121
[22] Umberto Arena. Process and technological aspects of municipal solid waste
gasiﬁcation. A review. Waste Management, 32(4):625–639, 2012. ISSN
0956053X.
doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2011.09.025.
URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2011.09.025.
[23] K Maniatis and AACM Beenackers. Tar protocols. iea bioenergy gasi-
ﬁcation task. Biomass and Bioenergy, Biomass Bioenerg, Bio Bioener,
Biomass Bioenerg, Biomass and Bioenergy, 18(1):1–4, 2000.
ISSN
18732909, 09619534.
[24] P.V. Aravind and Wiebren de Jong.
Evaluation of high temperature
gas cleaning options for biomass gasiﬁcation product gas for solid ox-
ide fuel cells. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 38(6):737 –
764, 2012. ISSN 0360-1285. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2012.
03.006. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0360128512000214.
[25] Jesper
Ahrenfeldt,
Tobias
Thomsen,
Ulrik
Birk
Henriksen,
and
Lasse R/ongaard Clausen. Biomass gasiﬁcation cogeneration – a review
of state of the art technology and near future perspectives.
Applied
Thermal Engineering, Appl Therm Eng, Appl Th Eng, Applied Ther-
mal Engineering Design Processes Equipment Economics, Appl. Therm.
Eng, 50(2):1407–1417, 2013. ISSN 18735606, 13594311. doi: 10.1016/j.
applthermaleng.2011.12.040.
[26] Anders Lagerkvist, Holger Ecke, and Thomas H. Christensen. Waste Char-
acterization: Approaches and Methods, pages 61–84. John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd, 2010. ISBN 9780470666883. doi: 10.1002/9780470666883.ch5. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9780470666883.ch5.
[27] Umberto Arena, Lucio Zaccariello, and Maria Laura Mastellone.
Flu-
idized bed gasiﬁcation of waste-derived fuels.
Waste Management,
30(7):1212–1219,
2010.
ISSN 0956053X.
doi:
10.1016/j.wasman.
2010.01.038.
URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0956053X1000084X.
[28] J.M. Andújar and F. Segura.
Fuel cells:
History and updating.
A walk along two centuries.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views, 13(9):2309–2322, 2009.
ISSN 13640321.
doi:
10.1016/j.rser.
2009.03.015.
URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S1364032109001336.
[29] D. W. Wu and R. Z. Wang. Combined cooling, heating and power: A re-
view. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, Prog. Energy Combust.
Sci, Prog Energ, Prog Energ Combust, Prog Energ Combust Sci, Prog En-
ergy Combust Sci, Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 32(5-6):
459–495, 2006. ISSN 1873216x, 03601285. doi: 10.1016/j.pecs.2006.02.001.
[30] Inc. EG & G Technical Services. Fuel Cell Handbook. U.S. Department of
Energy - Oﬃce of Fossile Energy, seventh edition, 2004. ISBN 978-0-470-
84857-9.
==PAGE:138==
122
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[31] James Larminie and Andrew Dicks.
Operational Fuel Cell Voltages,
pages 45–66.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,., 2013.
ISBN 9781118878330.
doi:
10.1002/9781118878330.ch3.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
9781118878330.ch3.
[32] James Larminie and Andrew Dicks. Eﬃciency and Open Circuit Volt-
age, pages 25–43. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2013. ISBN 9781118878330.
doi:
10.1002/9781118878330.ch2.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
9781118878330.ch2.
[33] Jeﬀrey W. Fergus.
Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, pages 671–700.
Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2011.
ISBN 9783527639496.
doi: 10.1002/9783527639496.ch14. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
9783527639496.ch14.
[34] James Larminie and Andrew Dicks. Medium and High Temperature Fuel
Cells, pages 163–228. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2013. ISBN 9781118878330.
doi:
10.1002/9781118878330.ch7.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
9781118878330.ch7.
[35] V Vielstich, H.A. Gasteiger, A. Lamm, and H. Yokokawa, editors. Hand-
book of Fuel Cells - Fundamentals, Technology and Applications. John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2010. ISBN 978-0-470-97400-1.
[36] Granryd et. al. Refrigerating engineering part 1. Department of Energy
Technology, KTH, 2011. ISBN 978-91-7415-415-3.
[37] Z. Crepinsek, D. Goricanec, and J. Krope.
Comparison of the perfor-
mances of absorption refrigeration cycles. Wseas Transactions on Heat
and Mass Transfer, Wseas Trans. Heat Mass Transf, 4(3):65–76, 2009.
ISSN 22243461, 17905044.
[38] R. Palacios Bereche, R. Gonzales Palomino, and S. A. Nebra.
Ther-
moeconomic analysis of a single and double-eﬀect libr/h2o absorption
refrigeration system.
International Journal of Thermodynamics, Inter-
national Journal of Applied Thermodynamics, Int. J. Thermodyn, 12(2):
89–96, 2009. ISSN 21461511, 13019724.
[39] Behnaz Rezaie and Marc A. Rosen.
District heating and cooling: Re-
view of technology and potential enhancements. Applied Energy, 93:2–10,
2012. ISSN 03062619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.04.020. URL http:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S030626191100242X.
[40] Henrik Lund, Sven Werner, Robin Wiltshire, Svend Svendsen, Jan Eric
Thorsen, Frede Hvelplund, and Brian Vad Mathiesen.
4th generation
district heating (4gdh): Integrating smart thermal grids into future sus-
tainable energy systems.
Energy, 68:1 – 11, 2014.
ISSN 0360-5442.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2014.02.089. URL http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544214002369.
[41] TMM/FHA/PKO/PAKO. Etablering af lavtemperaturefjernvarme i ek-
sisterende fjernvarmeforsyning. Technical report, COWI, 2014. DOKU-
MENTNR: A001130-009-01.
==PAGE:139==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
123
[42] Wenjie Gang, Shengwei Wang, Fu Xiao, and Dian ce Gao. District cooling
systems: Technology integration, system optimization, challenges and op-
portunities for applications. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
53:253 – 264, 2016. ISSN 1364-0321. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.
2015.08.051. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1364032115009144.
[43] Laura Meraz, Armando Domıínguez, Isaac Kornhauser, and Fernando Ro-
jas. A thermochemical concept-based equation to estimate waste com-
bustion enthalpy from elemental composition. Fuel, 82(12):1499 – 1507,
2003.
ISSN 0016-2361.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361(03)
00075-9. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0016236103000759.
[44] Ramona Götze, A. Boldrin, C. Scheutz, and T. F. Astrup.
Physico-
chemical characterisation of material fractions in household waste:
Overview of data in literature. To be published in journal Waste man-
agement in 2016, 2016.
[45] Statistics Denmark. Statbank denmark, 2015-2016. URL http://www.
statistikbanken.dk/AFFALD01. Online database.
[46] Maklawe Essonanawe Edjabou, Morten Bang Jensen, Ramona Götze,
Kostyantyn
Pivnenko,
Claus
Petersen,
Charlotte
Scheutz,
and
Thomas Fruergaard Astrup.
Municipal solid waste composition: Sam-
pling methodology, statistical analyses, and case study evaluation. Waste
Management, 36:12 – 23, 2015. ISSN 0956-053X. doi: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.wasman.2014.11.009.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0956053X14005261.
[47] Ramona Götze.
Composition of waste materials and recyclables.
PhD
thesis, Technical University of Denmark, DTU Environment, 2016.
[48] L Meraz, A Dominguez, I Kornhauser, and F Rojas. A thermochemical
concept-based equation to estimate waste combustion enthalpy from ele-
mental composition. Fuel, Fuel, Fuel, Fuel Science and Technology of Fuel
and Energy, 82(12):1499–1507, 2003. ISSN 18737153, 00162361, 18792693,
00160032. doi: 10.1016/s0016-2361(03)00075-9.
[49] Hui Zhou, AiHong Meng, YanQiu Long, QingHai Li, and YanGuo Zhang.
An overview of characteristics of municipal solid waste fuel in china: Phys-
ical, chemical composition and heating value. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 36:107 – 122, 2014. ISSN 1364-0321. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.04.024. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1364032114002512.
[50] M.
Materazzi,
P.
Lettieri,
R.
Taylor,
and
C.
Chapman.
Per-
formance analysis of {RDF} gasiﬁcation in a two stage ﬂuidized
bed–plasma process.
Waste Management,
47,
Part B:256 – 266,
2016. ISSN 0956-053X. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2015.
06.016. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0956053X15004304. Refuse Derived Fuel/Solid Recovered Fuel.
==PAGE:140==
124
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[51] V. Wilk and H. Hofbauer. Conversion of mixed plastic wastes in a dual
ﬂuidized bed steam gasiﬁer.
Fuel, 107:787 – 799, 2013.
ISSN 0016-
2361.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2013.01.068.
URL http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S001623611300077X.
[52] B. Boundy, S. Diegel, L. Wright, and S. Davis. Biomass Energy Data
Book. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 4th edition, 2011.
[53] FhG-IBP. D 2.2 waste proﬁling. http://www.waste2go.eu/download/1/
D2.2_Waste%20profiling.pdf, 2014. Latest accessed: 03-02-2016.
[54] S.A. Channiwala and P.P. Parikh.
A uniﬁed correlation for estimat-
ing {HHV} of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. Fuel, 81(8):1051 – 1063,
2002.
ISSN 0016-2361.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0016-2361(01)
00131-4. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0016236101001314.
[55] Masoud Rokni. Thermodynamic analyses of municipal solid waste gasiﬁ-
cation plant integrated with solid oxide fuel cell and stirling hybrid system.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 40(24):7855–7869, 2015. ISSN
03603199, 18793487. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2014.11.046.
[56] S.A. Klein. Ees: Engineering equation solver. http://fchart.com/ees/,
2015.
[57] Brian Elmegaard.
SIMULATION OF BOILER DYNAMICS – De-
velopment, Evaluation and Application of a General Energy System
Simulation Tool.
PhD thesis, Technical University Denmark - DTU,
1999.
URL http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=
10.1.1.118.9595&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
[58] Brian Elmegaard and Niels Houbak. DNA – A General Energy System
Simulation Tool. 2013.
[59] Leonardo Pierobon, Jorrit Wronski, Brian Elmegaard, Fredrik Haglind,
and Ian H. Bell. DNA - An integrated open-source optimization platform
for thermo-ﬂuid systems. Linköping Electronic Conference Proceedings,
pages 197–210, 2014. ISSN 16503740, 16503686.
[60] IRENA - The International Renewable Energy Agency.
Biomass
for
power
generation.
Technical
report,
IRENA,
2012.
URL
https://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/RE_
Technologies_Cost_Analysis-BIOMASS.pdf.
[61] Masoud Rokni. Thermodynamic investigation of an integrated gasiﬁcation
plant with solid oxide fuel cell and steam cycles. Green, 2(2-3):71–86, 2012.
ISSN 18698778, 1869876x. doi: 10.1515/green-2011-0022.
[62] Alberto Gomez-Barea, Bo Leckner, Angel Villanueva Perales, Susanna
Nilsson, and Diego Fuentes Cano. Improving the performance of ﬂuidized
bed biomass/waste gasiﬁers for distributed electricity: A new three-stage
gasiﬁcation system. Applied Thermal Engineering, 50(2):1453–1462, 2013.
ISSN 18735606, 13594311. doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2011.12.025.
==PAGE:141==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
125
[63] Christian Bang-Møller and Masoud Rokni. Thermodynamic performance
study of biomass gasiﬁcation, solid oxide fuel cell and micro gas turbine
hybrid systems. Energy Conversion and Management, 51(11):2330–2339,
2010. ISSN 18792227, 01968904. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2010.04.006.
[64] Lieh-Kwang Chiang, Hui-Chung Liu, Yao-Hua Shiu, Chien-Hsiung Lee,
and Ryey-Yi Lee. Thermo-electrochemical and thermal stress analysis for
an anode-supported sofc cell. Renewable Energy, 33(12):2580–2588, 2008.
ISSN 18790682, 09601481. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2008.02.023.
[65] Yong Seog Seo, Sung Kyu Kang, Moon Hee Han, and Young Soon Baek.
Development of a catalytic burner with pd/nio catalysts. Catalysis To-
day, Catal Today, Catal. Today, 47(1-4):421–427, 1999. ISSN 18734308,
09205861. doi: 10.1016/s0920-5861(98)00325-3.
[66] Ibrahim Dincer and Marc A. Rosen.
Chapter 8 - exergy analysis of
absorption cooling systems.
In Ibrahim DincerMarc A. Rosen, editor,
Exergy, pages 115 – 131. Elsevier, second edition edition, 2013.
ISBN
978-0-08-097089-9.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-097089-9.
00008-5. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780080970899000085.
[67] The
Danish
Meteorological
Institute
(DMI).
Danmark
omgivet
af
varmt
hav
i
sommeren
2014,
2014.
URL
http://www.dmi.dk/nyheder/arkiv/nyheder-2014/09/
danmark-omgivet-af-varmt-hav-i-sommeren-2014/.
[68] A. B. Lauritsen, S. Gundtoft, and A. B. Eriksen. Termodynamik - teoretisk
grundlag, praktisk anvendelse. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2. edition, 2007.
[69] Adrian. Bejan, George. Tsatsaronis, and Michael. Moran. Thermal de-
sign and optimization.
Wiley-Interscience, 1996.
ISBN 0471584673,
9780471584674.
[70] Ibrahim Dincer and Marc A. Rosen. Exergy. Elsevier Ltd, second edition,
2013. ISBN 9780080970899.
[71] George Tsatsaronis.
Deﬁnitions and nomenclature in exergy analysis
and exergoeconomics.
Energy, Energy, Energy, Energy the Interna-
tional Journal, 32(4):249–253, 2007.
ISSN 18736785, 03605442.
doi:
10.1016/j.energy.2006.07.002.
[72] Truls Gundersen. An introduction the concept of exergy and energy qual-
ity. Technical report, Department of Energy and Process Engineering -
NTNU, March 2011.
[73] Mario Grosso, Astrid Motta, and Lucia Rigamonti.
Eﬃciency of
energy recovery from waste incineration,
in the light of the new
waste framework directive.
Waste Management, 30(7):1238 – 1243,
2010.
ISSN 0956-053X.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.
2010.02.036. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0956053X1000156X.
{IWWG} Task Group on “Thermal Treat-
ments”Special Thematic Issue “Thermal Treatment of Solid Waste”.
==PAGE:142==
126
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[74] Jan Kopyscinski, Tilman J. Schildhauer, and Serge M. A. Biollaz. Pro-
duction of synthetic natural gas (sng) from coal and dry biomass - a
technology review from 1950 to 2009. Fuel - Science and Technology of
Fuel and Energy, 89(8):1763–1783, 2010. ISSN 18737153, 00162361. doi:
10.1016/j.fuel.2010.01.027.
[75] Thomas H. Christensen and Thilde Fruergaard. Commercial and Insti-
tutional Waste, pages 97–99.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2010.
ISBN
9780470666883. doi: 10.1002/9780470666883.ch7. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/9780470666883.ch7.
[76] B. Hebenstreit, R. Schnetzinger, R. Ohnmacht, E. Hoeftberger, J. Lund-
gren, W. Haslinger, and A. Toﬀolo. Techno-economic study of a heat pump
enhanced ﬂue gas heat recovery for biomass boilers. Biomass and Bioen-
ergy, 71:12–22, 2014. ISSN 18732909, 09619534. doi: 10.1016/j.biombioe.
2014.01.048.
[77] D. Blumberga, E. Vigants, and I. Veidenbergs. Analysis of ﬂue gas con-
denser operation. Latvian Journal of Physics and Technical Sciences, 48
(4):17–24, 2011. ISSN 08688257.
[78] George Tsatsaronis. Thermoeconomic analysis and optimization of energy
systems. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 19(3):227–257, 1993.
ISSN 1873216x, 03601285. doi: 10.1016/0360-1285(93)90016-8.
[79] Masoud Rokni.
Cost calculations for diﬀerent components.
Technical
report, DTU, 2000.
[80] J. Garche and L. Jörissen. Applications of fuel cell technology: Status and
perspectives. Electrochemical Society Interface, 24(2):39–43, 2015. ISSN
19448783, 10648208. doi: 10.1149/2.F02152if.
[81] Yannay Casas Ledon, Luis E. Arteaga-Perez, Juan Toledo, and Jo Dewulf.
Exergoeconomic evaluation of an ethanol-fueled solid oxide fuel cell power
plant.
Energy the International Journal, 93:1287–1295, 2015.
ISSN
18736785, 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2015.10.036.
[82] Lutz Meyer, Renzo Castillo, Jens Buchgeister, and George Tsatsaronis.
Application of exergoeconomic and exergoenvironmental analysis to an
sofc system with an allothermal biomass gasiﬁer. International Journal of
Applied Thermodynamics, 12(4):177–186, 2009. ISSN 21461511, 13019724.
[83] Marco Santin, Alberto Traverso, Loredana Magistri, and Aristide Mas-
sardo. Thermoeconomic analysis of sofc-gt hybrid systems fed by liquid
fuels.
Energy the International Journal, 35(2):1077–1083, 2010.
ISSN
18736785, 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2009.06.012.
[84] Wade A. Amos. Report on biomass drying technology. Technical report,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory - U.S. Deparment of Energy, 1998.
[85] Donald R. Woods. Rules of thumb in engineering practice. Wiley-VCH,
2007. ISBN 352731220x, 9783527312207.
==PAGE:143==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
127
[86] Masoud Rokni. Thermodynamic and thermoeconomic analysis of a sys-
tem with biomass gasiﬁcation, solid oxide fuel cell (sofc) and stirling en-
gine. Energy the International Journal, 76:19–31, 2014. ISSN 03605442,
18736785. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2014.01.106.
[87] Trading Economics. Danmark - inﬂation-rate. Website, 2016. URL http:
//da.tradingeconomics.com/denmark/. Online, Last accessed: 01-03-
2016.
[88] Ea Energianalyse. Samfundsøkonomisk værdi af aﬀaldsimport. Technical
report, Dansk Aﬀaldsforening, 2014.
[89] M. Taylor, K. Daniel, A. Ilas, and E. So. Renewable power generation
cost in 2014. Technical report, IRENA, 2015.
[90] Matteo Morandin, François Maréchal, and Stefano Giacomini. Synthe-
sis and thermo-economic design optimization of wood-gasiﬁer-sofc sys-
tems for small scale applications. Biomass and Bioenergy, 49:299 – 314,
2013. ISSN 0961-9534. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2013.
01.003. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0961953413000093.
[91] Leonardo Pierobon, Masoud Rokni, Ulrik Larsen, and Fredrik Haglind.
Thermodynamic analysis of an integrated gasiﬁcation solid oxide fuel cell
plant combined with an organic rankine cycle. Renewable Energy, 60:226–
234, 2013. ISSN 18790682, 09601481. doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2013.05.021.
[92] Thomas H. Christensen, Thilde Fruergaard, and Yasushi Matsufuji. Res-
idential Waste, pages 85–96.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2010.
ISBN
9780470666883. doi: 10.1002/9780470666883.ch6. URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/9780470666883.ch6.
[93] F. P. Incropera, D. P. DeWitt, T. L. Bergman, and A. S. Lavine. Foun-
dations of heat transfer. John Wiley & Sons, 2013. ISBN 9780470646168.
==PAGE:144==
List of Figures
1.1
Illustrative example of separate production of heat and power.
. .
2
1.2
Illustrative example of cogeneration of heat and power.
. . . . . .
2
1.3
Waste generated in million tons/day in the urban population for
each income group[7].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Overview of main processes for waste to energy conversion through
gasiﬁcation and SOFC with bottoming cycle heat recovery.
. . . .
4
2.1
The power consumption of Denmark in year 2000 and 2012 with
goals for 2020 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Primary waste produced in Denmark divided by treatment[17]. The
remaining two percent for each year is temporary landﬁlls and spe-
cial treatment, such as toxic waste etc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Sketch of waste incineration process, based on[18].
. . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
WtE capacity in Denmark: The dark gray approximately horizontal
line is the expected amount of MSW to be incinerated, the light grey
and blue lines are the waste incineration capacity if each plant is
operated for 25 and 20 years respectively before major renovation
of the plants. Figure take from [20].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Input and output of the pyrolysis process (devolatilization). . . . .
13
2.6
Input and output of the gasiﬁcation process.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.7
Schematic working principle for the up- and downdraft gasiﬁers.
Taken from [10]. Reduction zone = gasiﬁcation zone, hearth zone
= combustion zone.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.8
Schematic working principle for the bubbling and circulating bed
gasiﬁers. Taken from [10]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Working principle of a PEM fuel cell operated with hydrogen as fuel. 19
2.10 Voltage-current diagram for a fuel cell with activation, ohmic and
concentration losses. Taken from [30].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.11 Working principle of a SOFC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.12 Working principle of an absorption cooling plant. . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.13 Water saturation temperature - pressure.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1
Methodology for determining physico-chemical composition of waste
from fractions to DNA viable input.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2
Input for solid fuel in DNA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Visualization of transformation from material fractions shown on
ﬁgure to Edjabou waste fractions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
128
==PAGE:145==
LIST OF FIGURES
129
3.4
Percentage of material waste fractions composed of carbon (C), hy-
drogen (H), oxygen (O), sulfur (S) and nitrogen (N), adapted from
[26]. High percentages result in the waste material being well rep-
resented by the ﬁve chemical elements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.5
Waste fractions for DK-waste01 on wet weight basis, sulphur being
0.1 % of the total.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.6
Waste fractions for DK-waste01 on dry weight basis, sulphur being
0.2 % of the total.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.7
Dry and wet basis LHV as a function of moisture content for the
Channiwala correlation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1
DNA network diagram with 5 nodes and two components. Each
node is deﬁned by a number and each component by a unique name.
Here the ﬁrst component could be a burner and the second a heat
exchanger for example. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Initial plant design with deﬁned sections of the plant. The thick
dashed lines denotes desirable outputs: power and DE. The ash,
the cold ﬂue gas and sulphur are considered waste products. . . . .
43
4.3
Schematic diagram of the gasiﬁcation process. DR = Waste dryer,
GSF = Gasiﬁer, AH = Air heater, SB = Steam blower, SH = Steam
heater, DS = desulphurizer, GB = Gas blower. . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Schematic diagram of the SOFC and auxiliary systems. AP = An-
ode preheater, CP = Cathode preheater, AB = Air blower, CB =
catalytic burner.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Parallel conﬁguration bottoming cycle. DH = District heating heat
exchanger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.6
Schematic diagram of the absorption plant. Desorb = Desorber/generator,
Cond = Condenser, Evap = Evaporator, Absorb = Absorber. . . .
50
4.7
The exergy deﬁnition separated into major categories. Figure in-
spired by [72]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.8
Compressor or pump process with a pressure lift of a ﬂuid and a
work input. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.1
Anode preheat conﬁgurations. Stream 1 = From gas cleaning or
methanator, stream 2 = To SOFC anode, stream 3 = Oﬀ-fuel from
SOFC, stream 4 = To catalytic burner.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.2
Auxiliary power consumption for anode conﬁgurations. GB = Gas
blower, SB = Steam blower, AB = Air blower, SP = Solution pump,
WP = Water pump. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Gas composition on molar basis for each process step.
MSWgas
= producer gas after gasiﬁcation, MSWgasclean = after desulphur-
izer, MSWgasmet = after methanation, OﬀFuel = after SOFC and
FlueGas = after catalytic burner. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Fuel LHV after each process step, see description on ﬁgure 5.3. . .
64
5.5
Power and DE production as a function of DEratio. . . . . . . . . .
65
5.6
Series conﬁguration bottoming cycle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.7
Revised base plant design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.8
Visualization of lower heating values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.1
Thermal eﬃciency as a function of SOFC stack count. . . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:146==
130
LIST OF FIGURES
6.2
Power and DE production as a function of SOFC stack count. . . .
74
6.3
SOFC operating temperature impact on thermal eﬃciency at four
diﬀerent numbers of SOFC stacks. Top left = 350 stacks, Top right
= 400 stacks, Bottom left = 450 stacks, Bottom right = 500 stacks.
75
6.4
Trend for SOFC temperature optimum at diﬀerent stack numbers.
75
6.5
Thermal and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of SOFC utilization
factor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.6
Thermal and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of SOFC utilization
factor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.7
Left: Current density of the SOFC as a function of fuel utiliza-
tion factor. Right: Current density impact on cell voltage (volt-
age/current characteristics). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.8
Thermal and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of gasiﬁcation tem-
perature.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.9
Power and district energy production as a function of gasiﬁcation
temperature.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.10 Left: Molar product gas composition out of the gasiﬁer. The change
in Argon and Sulphide concentration is negligible, the molar fraction
being ≈3.5 · 10−3 and ≈4 · 10−4 respectively. Right: Lower heating
value of the product gas as a function of gasiﬁcation temperature.
79
6.11 Impact of decreasing carbon conversion factor on thermal and ex-
ergetic eﬃciencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.12 Relative change in system thermal eﬃciency as a function of relative
change in compressor isentropic eﬃciencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.13 Relative change in system thermal eﬃciency as a function of relative
change in pump isentropic eﬃciencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.14 Thermal eﬃciency as a function of ambient air temperature in SOFC
and gasiﬁer inlets.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.15 Water saturation temperature as a function of temperature. . . . .
84
6.16 COP and exergetic eﬃciency as a function of ambient temperature.
85
6.17 COP as a function of rich concentration refrigerant solution ξr. . .
86
7.1
Temperatures in the ﬂue gas condensation with 4th generation DH
for series connection bottoming cycle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
7.2
Temperatures in the ﬂue gas condensation with 4th generation DH
for parallel connection bottoming cycle.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.3
Water saturation temperature as a function of molar fraction. . . .
92
7.4
DNA modelling of series conﬁguration bottoming cycle with ﬂue gas
condensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7.5
DNA modelling of parallel conﬁguration bottoming cycle with ﬂue
gas condensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
8.1
MSW steam dryer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
8.2
MSW gasiﬁcation reactor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
8.3
Gasiﬁcation air preheater. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
8.4
SOFC air blower. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
8.5
Solid oxide fuel cell.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
8.6
Cost of electricity generation from renewable technologies in 2010
and 2014, taken from [89]. CSP = concentrating solar power. . . .
107
8.7
Power production cost as a function of MSW fuel cost. . . . . . . .
107
==PAGE:147==
LIST OF FIGURES
131
8.8
The eﬀect on power production cost for SOFC component cost in
$/h. Point A = initial estimate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
8.9
Gasiﬁer costs impact on power production price.
. . . . . . . . . .
109
8.10 Power production costs for decreasing SOFC and gasiﬁer expenses.
109
B.1
Estimate of cp variation with temperature for DK-1 RHW compo-
sition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
C.1 Revised base plant design with DNA nodes and simpliﬁed APP
representation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
146
C.2 Thermal eﬃciency as a function of SOFC stacks. . . . . . . . . . .
149
F.1
Exergy eﬃciency excel calculator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
169
==PAGE:148==
List of Tables
2.1
MSW overview from selected EU membership countries 2012, sorted
by percentage of incinerated waste[16]. The full table can be seen
in appendix A, table A.1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Supply and return temperatures for 3rd and 4th generation, with a
transition temperature interval. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1
Estimates of waste fractions for two income groups based of various
data between year 1990 and 2008, take from [8].
. . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Chemical elements of waste fractions as % of dry weight. . . . . . .
34
3.3
Moisture concent of waste fractions based on [26][48] in percent on
wet basis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Household solid waste composition on dry basis from 2015[46] with
moisture content. The moisture content of the special waste is as-
sumed to be zero. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Chemical element composition on dry and wet basis (mass percent-
ages) for waste-DK1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.6
Lower heating value overview of common fuels and MSW based on
various references.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1
Gasiﬁcation operation parameters and assumptions.
. . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Input parameters and assumptions for the SOFC and utility equip-
ment.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Absorption plant input parameters and assumptions. . . . . . . . .
51
5.1
Major input parameters for the base system.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
System performance for the base system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Anode conﬁguration results. All conﬁgurations maximizes DC pro-
duction, DE ratio = 0.98. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.4
Simulation results for the revised plant design.
. . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.5
Waste fractions of Danish households, health care services, hotels
and restaurants.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.6
Moisture content, ash and chemical elements of waste fuels. . . . .
69
5.7
Waste fuels high and lower heating values and speciﬁc heat capacity. 69
5.8
Plant performance for various waste related fuels. . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.1
Parametric study of various pressure drops and temperatures re-
lated to SOFC power production. A low and high value together
with the reference value with minimum and maximum resulting
thermal eﬃciency. CP = Cathode preheater.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
83
132
==PAGE:149==
LIST OF TABLES
133
6.2
Variation of calculated waste properties and the impact on thermal
eﬃciency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.3
Comparison between base case, Opt. case 1 and Opt. case 2. . . .
87
7.1
Veriﬁcation of condensation model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
7.2
Flue gas condensation results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
8.1
Plant costs: Direct costs (DiC) as a percentage of PEC. Indirect
costs as a percentage of DiC.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
8.2
PEC and TCI for each of the components in the system. Dollars in
thousands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
8.3
General economic input parameters for cost rates.
. . . . . . . . .
102
8.4
Exergy fuel, product, destruction and losses in the top cycle SOFC
gasiﬁcation system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
8.5
Component exergy eﬃciencies in the top cycle SOFC gasiﬁcation
system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
A.1 Municipal waste, 2012 [16] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
136
A.2 Waste fractions from various literature and organizations. . . . . .
137
A.3 Table 2 from Edjabou et al. showing three diﬀerent levels of waste
fraction categorization[46]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138
A.4 Moisture content, ash and chemical element composition for waste-DK01
RHW sample calculated from waste fractions[46] . . . . . . . . . .
139
B.1
Speciﬁc heat of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur in
kJ/kg. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
C.1 Gas composition and LHVwet for DK-waste01 with methanation. .
147
C.2 Molar gas composition and LHV of product gas out of gasiﬁer as a
function of gasiﬁcation temperature. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
148
C.3 Tabular values for ﬁgure 6.12. Absolute values of thermal eﬃciency
for relative change in isentropic eﬃciencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
149
C.4 Tabular values for ﬁgure 6.13. Absolute values of thermal eﬃciency
for relative change in pump isentropic eﬃciencies. . . . . . . . . . .
149
C.5 Opt. case 2 additional input parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
==PAGE:150==
==PAGE:151==
Appendix A
Waste
135
==PAGE:152==
136
APPENDIX A. WASTE
Table A.1: Municipal waste, 2012 [16]
MSW
MSW treated
Recycled
Composted
Landﬁlled
Incinerated
kg
person
kg
person
%
%
%
%
Austria
552
528
28
34
3
35
Belgium
456
458
36
21
1
42
Bosnia and Herzegovina
346
284
-
-
100
-
Bulgaria
460
433
24
3
73
0
Croatia
391
381
14
2
85
0
Cyprus
663
663
12
9
79
0
Czech Republic
308
308
21
3
57
20
Denmark
668
668
32
13
3
52
Estonia
279
220
34
6
44
16
EU28 Average
492
480
27
15
34
24
Finland
506
506
22
12
33
34
Former Yug. Rep. Of Macedonia
381
381
-
-
100
-
France
534
534
23
16
28
33
Germany
611
610
47
18
0
35
Greece
503
493
16
2
82
0
Hungary
402
402
21
5
65
9
Iceland
338
338
36
6
50
7
Ireland
570
570
37
8
39
16
Italy
529
523
24
14
41
20
Latvia
301
301
14
2
84
0
Lithuania
469
458
19
2
79
1
Luxembourg
662
662
28
19
18
36
Malta
589
559
9
4
87
0
Netherlands
551
551
24
26
2
49
Norway
477
467
26
14
2
57
Poland
314
249
13
12
75
1
Portugal
453
453
12
15
54
20
Romania
389
313
1
0
99
0
Serbia
364
254
0
0
100
0
Slovakia
324
313
6
7
77
10
Slovenia
362
301
42
5
51
2
Spain
464
464
17
10
63
10
Sweden
462
462
32
15
1
52
Switzerland
694
694
35
15
0
50
Turkey
390
329
0
1
99
0
UK
472
465
28
18
37
17
==PAGE:153==
137
Table A.2: Waste fractions from various literature and organizations.
Götze, R. [44]
Eurostat
World bank [8]
Miljøministerieta
Christensen, T. H. [92]
Mixed organics
paper, paperboard
and paper products
Organic
Organic waste
Vegetable food waste
Food waste
Textiles
Paper
Cardboard
Animal food waste
Gardening waste
Plastics
Plastic
Glass
Newspapers and weekly papers
Paper and cardboard
Glass
Glass
Wood
Advertisings and printed matter
Composites
Metals
Metal
Plastics
Nappies, sanitary towels and cotton
Plastic
Organic material
Other
Paper and news paper
Other clean cardboard and paper
Combustibles
Bulky waste
Iron and metal
Cardboard and paper packaging
Metal
Other waste
Other unspeciﬁced
Other dirty cardboard and paper
Glass
Other
plastic packaging and containers
Inert
Other plastics
Mix
Flowers and yard waste
Other combustibles
Other glass
Iron and metal packaging
Other iron and metal
Other noncombustible
aMinistry of Environment and Food of Denmark
==PAGE:154==
138
APPENDIX A. WASTE
Table A.3: Table 2 from Edjabou et al. showing three diﬀerent levels of waste
fraction categorization[46].
Level I
Level II
Level III
1-Food waste
1.1 Vegetable food waste
1.i.1 Avoidable-processed food waste
1.2 Animal-derived food waste
1.i.2 Avoidable-unprocessed food waste
1.i.3 Unavoidable food waste
2-Gardening waste
2.1 Dead animal and animal excrements (excluding cat litter)
2.1.1 Dead animals
2.2 Garden waste
2.1.2 Animal excrement bags from animal excrement
2.2.1 Humid soil
2.2.2 Plant material
2.2.3 Woody plant material
2.2.4 Animal straw
3-Paper
3.1 Advertisements
3.7.1 Envelopes
3.2 Books & booklets
3.7.2 Kraft paper
3.3 Magazines & Journals
3.7.3 Other paper
3.4 Newspapers
3.7.4 Receipts
3.5 Ofﬁce paper
3.7.5 Self-adhesives
3.6 Phonebooks
3.7.6 Tissue paper
3.7 Miscellaneous paper
3.7.7 Wrapping paper
4-Board
4.1 Corrugated boxes
4.4.1 Beverage cartons
4.2 Folding boxes
4.4.2 Paper plates & cups
4.3 Cartons/plates/cups
4.4.3 Cards & labels
4.4 Miscellaneous board
4.4.4 Egg boxes & alike
4.4.5 Other board
4.4.6 Tubes
5-Plastic
5.1 Packaging plastic
5.i.1 PET/PETEa
5.2 Non-packaging plastic
5.i.2 HDPEb
5.3 Plastic ﬁlm
5.i.3 PVC/Vc
5.i.4 LDPE/LLDPEd
5.i.5 PPe
5.i.6 PSf
5.i.7 Other plastic resins labelled with[1–19] and ABSg
5.i.8 Unidentiﬁed plastic resin
5.3.1 Pure plastic ﬁlm
5.3.2 Composite plastic + metal coating
6-Metal
6.1 Metal packaging containers
6.i.1 Ferrous
6.2 Non-packaging metals
6.i.2 Non-ferrous
6.3 Aluminium wrapping foil
7-Glass
7.1 Packaging container glass
7.i.1 Clear
7.2 Table and kitchen ware glass
7.i.2 Brown
7.3 Other/special glass
7.i.3 Green
8-Miscellaneous
combustibles
8.1 Composites, human hygiene waste (diapers, tampons, condoms,
etc.)
8.1.1 Diapers
8.2 Textiles, leather and rubber
8.1.2 Tampons
8.3 Vacuum cleaner bags
8.1.1 Condoms
8.4 Untreated wood
8.2.1 Textiles
8.5 Other combustible waste
8.2.2 Leather
8.2.3 Rubber
9-Inert
9.1 Ashes from households
–
9.2 Cat litter
9.3 Ceramics, gravel
9.4 Stones and sand
9.5 Household constructions & demolition waste
10-Special waste
10.1 Single Batteries/non-device speciﬁc Batteries
10.2.1 Large household appliances
10.2 WEEE
10.2.2 Small household appliances
10.3 Other household hazardous waste
10.2.3 IT and telecommunication equipment
10.2.4 Consumer equipment and photovoltaic panels
10.2.5 Lighting equipment
10.2.6 Electrical and electronic tool (no large-scale stationary
tools)
10.2.7 Toys, leisure and sports equipment
10.2.8 Medical devices (except implanted and infected products)
10.2.9 Monitoring and control instruments
10.2.10 Automatic dispensers
Number system of waste fractions: a- fractions included at Level I; a.a: fractions included at Level II, a.a.a: fractions included at Level III; a.i.a: i refers to a fraction at Level II.
a Polyethylene terephthalate.
b Density polyethylene.
c Polyvinyl-chloride.
d Low density polyethylene.
e Polypropylene.
f Polystyrene.
g Acrylonitrile/butadiene/styrene.
==PAGE:155==
139
Table A.4: Moisture content, ash and chemical element composition for waste-DK01 RHW sample calculated from waste fractions[46]
Percentage [%]
Ash
C
H
O
S
N
Sum
Waste fraction
Moisture fraction
Moisture % wet
% dry
% dry
% dry
% dry
% dry
% dry
% dry
Organic/food waste
42.2
70.0
29.5
7.0
52.249
7.271
28.757
0.283
4.490
100.000
Gardening waste
3.5
42.5
1.5
19.8
46.354
6.002
25.750
0.228
1.865
100.000
Paper and board
15.8
5.5
0.9
14.6
42.137
5.709
37.184
0.084
0.247
100.000
Plastic
12.6
2.0
0.3
4.6
77.972
11.236
4.591
0.072
1.579
100.000
Metal
2.3
3.0
0.1
95.2
3.068
0.545
1.080
0.006
0.081
100.000
Glass
2.0
2.0
0.0
100.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
100.000
Misc. Combustible
17.6
7.3
1.3
16.8
52.990
7.066
21.174
0.315
1.696
100.000
Inert
3.3
8.0
0.3
81.3
10.126
1.148
6.929
0.126
0.371
100.000
Special waste
0.7
0.0
0.0
92.2
4.544
0.675
2.267
0.144
0.170
100.000
==PAGE:156==
==PAGE:157==
Appendix B
Calculations
141
==PAGE:158==
142
APPENDIX B. CALCULATIONS
B.1
Speciﬁc heat estimate
The speciﬁc heat (cp) of a solid can be estimated as:
cp,tot =
P
i
fi · cp,i
P
1
fi
(B.1)
Where fi is the fraction of each element and cp,i is the speciﬁc heat of each
element.
Hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur speciﬁc heats are evaluated from
EES[56], while the speciﬁc heat of carbon is based on graphite [93].
Table
B.1 shows the cp for each element at 300 K.
Table B.1: Speciﬁc heat of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur
in kJ/kg.
Element
cp [ kJ
kgK ]
C (graphite)
0.71
H2
14.35
O2
0.91
N2
1.04
S
0.74
Figure B.1 shows how cp varies with temperature (carbon cp is ﬁxed at 300 K,
since EES does not support this element well).
0
100
200
300
400
500
1.9
1.92
1.94
1.96
1.98
TC  [C]
Cptot  [kJ/kg-K]
Cptot
Cptot
Figure B.1: Estimate of cp variation with temperature for DK-1 RHW com-
position.
==PAGE:159==
B.2. PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS CALCULATION
143
B.2
Performance parameters calculation
Here follows the base case performance parameters presented in table 5.2 in
section 5.1.
The thermal eﬃciency is calculated as:
ηth =
Pnet
LHVwet · mMSW
(B.2)
With Pnet = 180.2247 kW, LHVwet · mMSW = 529.5169 kJ/s the thermal eﬃ-
ciency is:
ηth = 180.2247 kW
529.5169 kJ/s = 0.3404
(B.3)
For the simple exergetic eﬃciency:
ϵsys = Pnet + EDC + EDH
Efuel
(B.4)
Where EDC is calculated as the exergy increase in the DC chilled water:
EDC = E65 −E64 = 13.76 kJ/s −2.96 kJ/s = 10.8
kJ/s
(B.5)
And for the DH:
EDH = E81 −E80 = 2.47 kJ/s −1.71 kJ/s = 0.76
kJ/s
(B.6)
With the exergetic value of the fuel1 being 602.42 kJ/s the exergetic system
eﬃciency is:
ϵsys = 180.2247 kW + 10.8 kJ/s + 0.76 kJ/s
602.42 kJ/s
= 0.3184
(B.7)
The COP for the absorption plant as deﬁned in section 2.5 eq. (2.18).
COPh = Qe
Qg
= 212.1 kW
299.17 kW = 0.709
(B.8)
The pump power consumption is 1.175 · 10−3 kw or 1.175 W, having no impact
on the COP.
1In terms of value, but not conceptually being the same as the HHV times the fuel mass
ﬂow.
==PAGE:160==
==PAGE:161==
Appendix C
Modelling
145
==PAGE:162==
146
APPENDIX C. MODELLING
DR
GSF
AH
SH
DS
Cathode
Anode
CB
CP
M
APP
DC
SB
GB
AB
DH
DH
1
2
3
4
58
57
53
99
51
52
55
56
54
5
20
97
21
22
27
23
28
26
25
29
40
43
41
42
43
Power
Figure C.1: Revised base plant design with DNA nodes and simpliﬁed APP
representation.
==PAGE:163==
147
Table C.1: Gas composition and LHVwet for DK-waste01 with methanation.
Gas
MSWgas
MSWgasclean
MSWgasmet
OﬀFuel
FlueGas
HYDROGEN
29.24
29.26
24.17
9.00
0.00
OXYGEN
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
11.99
NITROGEN
31.33
31.34
34.10
30.82
71.52
CARBON MONOXIDE
19.07
19.08
10.80
5.57
0.00
CARBON DIOXIDE
7.83
7.83
14.08
21.90
5.92
WATER (I.G.)
11.09
11.10
10.93
32.70
9.79
HYDROGEN SULFIDE
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
METHANE
1.03
1.03
5.52
8.4E-05
0.00
ARGON
0.37
0.37
0.40
0.96
0.77
LHVwet
MSWgas
MSWgasclean
MSWgasmet
OﬀFuel
FlueGas
NET CALORI VALUE [MJ/kg]
6502
6496
5985
1449
0
==PAGE:164==
148
APPENDIX C. MODELLING
Table C.2: Molar gas composition and LHV of product gas out of gasiﬁer as a function of gasiﬁcation temperature.
GSF temp.
H2
N2
CO
CO2
H2O-G
H2S
CH4
AR
LHV
800.0
0.2924372
0.3132704
0.1907041
0.0783031
0.1109311
0.0004400
0.0102567
0.0036573
6502.0
825.0
0.2866812
0.3166015
0.1915424
0.0761280
0.1147802
0.0004377
0.0101317
0.0036973
6414.0
850.0
0.2810610
0.3198531
0.1922415
0.0741118
0.1184913
0.0004355
0.0100694
0.0037364
6333.0
875.0
0.2755932
0.3230453
0.1928188
0.0722356
0.1220614
0.0004334
0.0100375
0.0037747
6252.0
900.0
0.2702811
0.3261888
0.1932856
0.0704867
0.1254931
0.0004314
0.0100208
0.0038125
6173.0
925.0
0.2651216
0.3292893
0.1936508
0.0688555
0.1287918
0.0004294
0.0100118
0.0038497
6096.0
==PAGE:165==
149
200
500
800
1,100
1,400
1,700
2,000
2,300
2,600
0.350
0.360
0.370
0.380
SOFC stacks [#]
Thermal eﬃciency [ηth]
ηth
Figure C.2: Thermal eﬃciency as a function of SOFC stacks.
Table C.3: Tabular values for ﬁgure 6.12. Absolute values of thermal eﬃ-
ciency for relative change in isentropic eﬃciencies.
Relative change
GB
ηth
SB
ηth
AB
etath
-0.2
0.6
0.3491
0.640
0.3501
0.56
0.3453
-0.15
0.6375
0.3495
0.680
0.3502
0.595
0.3469
-0.1
0.675
0.3499
0.720
0.3504
0.63
0.3482
-0.05
0.7125
0.3503
0.760
0.3505
0.665
0.3495
0
0.75
0.3506
0.800
0.3506
0.7
0.3506
0.05
0.7875
0.3509
0.840
0.3507
0.735
0.3516
0.1
0.825
0.3512
0.880
0.3508
0.77
0.3526
0.15
0.8625
0.3514
0.920
0.3509
0.805
0.3534
0.2
0.9
0.3516
0.960
0.3510
0.84
0.3542
Table C.4: Tabular values for ﬁgure 6.13. Absolute values of thermal eﬃ-
ciency for relative change in pump isentropic eﬃciencies.
Relative change
SP
ηth
CP
ηth
-0.6
0.36
0.3506161
0.38
0.34632588
-0.5
0.45
0.3506173
0.475
0.34776441
-0.4
0.54
0.3506181
0.57
0.34871937
-0.3
0.63
0.3506186
0.665
0.34939950
-0.2
0.72
0.3506190
0.76
0.34990852
-0.1
0.81
0.3506193
0.855
0.35030379
0
0.9
0.3506196
0.95
0.35061960
==PAGE:166==
150
APPENDIX C. MODELLING
Table C.5: Opt. case 2 additional input parameters.
Opt. Case 2
Parameter
Ref
Change
Value
SOFC stack #
350
20%
420
Air blower ηis
0.7
20%
0.84
Steam blower ηis
0.75
10%
0.825
Gas blower ηis
0.8
10%
0.88
Anode ∆P
0.05
20%
0.04
Cathode ∆P
0.05
20%
0.04
CP hot & cold ∆P
0.05
20%
0.04
DH hex ∆Pfg
0.05
20%
0.04
Desorber ∆Pfg
0.05
20%
0.04
==PAGE:167==
Appendix D
DNA script
151
==PAGE:168==
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
C ~~ This is an auto-generated file containing a DNA model with updated initial guesses. 
C ~~ The file will be over-written by next DNA run.
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
title System_standard_methanator
C #####################################################
C    Gasification -> SOFC -> APP (-> DH)
C #####################################################
C *************************************************************
C -----------------     GASIFIER      --------------------
C *************************************************************
media 1 MSW
media 2 dry_MSW
media 51 STANDARD_AIR
media 3 MSWgas
media 99 Ash
C ----------- Fuel composition ---------------
C Waste-DK01 (Carbon adjusted to 0.4991)
SOLID MSW C 0.4991 H .0690 O .2349 S .0021 N 0.0251 ASH .1698
+ HHV 22750
+ CP 1.911
+ MOI .338
C ---------------------- DRYER ----------------------
STRUC MSWryer DRYER_03 1 58 2 57 300 0.05 0.005
ADDCO M MSWryer 1 0.040
ADDCO T MSWryer 1 25
ADDCO P 1 1.013
ADDCO P 2 1.008
ADDCO T MSWryer 2 150
ADDCO Q MSWryer 300 0
C -------------------- GASIFIER ---------------------
STRUC gasifier GASIFI_3 8 2 98 53 3 99 301  1 3 4 6 7 9 11 36 /
 0.998 800 0.005 0 1.0 0.01
ADDCO T gasifier 3 800
ADDCO T gasifier 98 150
ADDCO P 99 1.013
ADDCO Q gasifier 301 0
C ----------------- AIR PREHEATER -------------------
STRUC Gasification_Pre heatex_2 3 4 51 52 302 20 0.005 0.005
ADDCO Q Gasification_Pre 302 0
ADDCO T Gasification_Pre 51 25
C ----------------- STEAM HEATER --------------------
STRUC steamgen heatex_1 4 5 56 58 303 0.005 0.005
MEDIA 56 STEAM-HF
ADDCO T steamgen 58 200
ADDCO Q steamgen 303 0
C ----------------- STEAM BLOWER --------------------
STRUC steamblower COMPRE_1 57 55 304 104 0.8 0.98
C ------------------- SPLITTER ----------------------
152
APPENDIX D. DNA SCRIPT
==PAGE:169==
STRUC split SPLITTER 55 56 54
C --------------------- MIXER -----------------------
STRUC mixer MIXER_02 52 54 53
MEDIA 53 steam&air
C ------------------ GAS CLEANING -------------------
STRUC gascleaner GASCLE_1 5 20 97 311 0.005
MEDIA 20 MSWgas_clean
MEDIA 97 Hydrogen_Sulfide
ADDCO Q gascleaner 311 0
C -------------------- MSW GAS BLOWER ----------------
STRUC MSWgas_blower compre_1 20 21 305 205 .75 .98
C *************************************************************
C ----------------- Solid Oxide Fuel Cell --------------------
C *************************************************************
C -------------------- Methanator ---------------------
STRUC Met METHANATOR 21 22 380
addco Q Met 380 0
media 22 MSWgas_met
C ------------------ SOFC ----------------------
STRUC SOFC SOFCEQ_1DN2 22 27 23 28 207 307 .7 800 .05 .05 75 350
MEDIA 28 OffAir
MEDIA 23 OffFuel
MEDIA 27 STANDARD_AIR
ADDCO T SOFC 27 600
ADDCO Q SOFC 307 0
C ------------------ AIR BLOWER --------------
STRUC AB compre_1 25 26 309 209 .7 .95
MEDIA 25 STANDARD_AIR
ADDCO P 25 1.013
ADDCO T AB 25 25
C ------------------ CATHODE PREHEATER ----------------
STRUC CP heatex_1 28 29 26 27 308 .05 .05
MEDIA 26 STANDARD_AIR
ADDCO Q CP 308 0
C ---------------------- BURNER -----------------------
STRUC burner GASBUR_3 29 23 40 310 1
MEDIA 40 FlueGas
ADDCO Q burner 310 0
C ------------ FlueGas splitter -------
STRUC FGSPLIT FRCSPLIT 40 41 43 0.98
C ----------------------------------------------------
C ----------- DH pruduction --------------------------
C ----------------------------------------------------
STRUC DH_hex heatex_1 43 44 80 81 312 0.05 0.05
153
==PAGE:170==
addco T DH_hex 44 100
addco Q DH_hex 312 0
addco P 80 2
addco T DH_hex 80 45
addco T DH_hex 81 90
media 80 STEAM-HF
C **************************************************************
C -----------------------ABSORPTION PLANT----------------------
C **************************************************************
C _______________________________________DESORBER_______________
struc DESORBER desorb_1 75 70 76 41 42 330 0 0.05
addco p 42 1.01325
addco t DESORBER 42 100
addco y DESORBER 75 0.55
addco y DESORBER 76 0.70
addco q DESORBER 330 0
C _______________________________CONDENSER______________________
struc CONDENSER stecon_1 70 71 62 63 0 0
media 62 STEAM
addco t CONDENSER 62 30
addco t CONDENSER 63 60
addco p 62 2
C ___________________________EXPANSION DEVICE 1_________________
struc VALVE1 valve_01 71 72
addco p 72 0.009
C ______________________________EVAPORATOR_____________________
struc EVAPORATOR heatex_1 64 65 72 73 331 0 0
media 64 STEAM
addco p 64 2 
addco t EVAPORATOR 64 16
addco t EVAPORATOR 65 6
addco x EVAPORATOR 73 1
addco q EVAPORATOR 331 0
C __________________________EXPANSIONE DEVICE 2________________
struc VALVE2 solu_valcc 76 77
C ______________________________ABSORBER______________________
struc ABSORBER absorb_1 77 73 74 60 61 332 0 2
addco t ABSORBER 61 30
addco q ABSORBER 332 0
C ______________________________ water pump _________________
struc cond_pump LIQPUM_1 59 60 202 0.95
media 59 STEAM
addco P 59 1.013
addco p 61 1.013
addco T cond_pump 59 20
C ________________________________PUMP_______________________
struc PUMP solu_pump 74 75 400 0.9
addco p 75 0.05
154
APPENDIX D. DNA SCRIPT
==PAGE:171==
XERGY t 25 p 1.013
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
C ~~ Start of list of generated initial guesses.
C ~~ The values are the results of the latest simulation.
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
START M     MSWryer                     1  0.4000000000000001E-01 {~~}
START P                            1  0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     MSWryer                     1 -0.7616595719359551E+04 {~~}
START M     MSWryer                    58  0.3991567632518243E+00 {~~}
START P                           58  0.9980000000000002E+00 {~~}
START H     MSWryer                    58 -0.1309559474582558E+05 {~~}
START M     MSWryer                     2 -0.2787368421052632E-01 {~~}
START P                            2  0.1008000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     MSWryer                     2 -0.3774554633144369E+04 {~~}
START M     MSWryer                    57 -0.4112830790412979E+00 {~~}
START P                           57  0.9930000000000002E+00 {~~}
START H     MSWryer                    57 -0.1319443607829820E+05 {~~}
START Q     MSWryer                   300  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   H2          0.6555000000000003E-01 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   O2          0.2231550000000001E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   N2          0.2384500000000001E-01 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   CO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   NO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   CO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   H2O-L       0.5000000000000001E-01 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   NH3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   H2S         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   SO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   CH4         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C2H6        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C3H8        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C4H10-N     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C4H10-I     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C5H12       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C6H14       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C7H16       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C8H18       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C2H4        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C3H6        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C5H10       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C6H12-1     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C7H14       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C2H2        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C6H6        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C6H12-C     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   C           0.4741450000000002E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   S           0.1995000000000001E-02 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   NO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   HCN         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   COS         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   N2O         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   NO3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   SO3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   AR          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   ASH         0.1613100000000001E+00 {~~}
START X_J   dry_MSW                   TAR         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START M     gasifier                    2  0.2787368421052632E-01 {~~}
START H     gasifier                    2 -0.3774554633144369E+04 {~~}
155
==PAGE:172==
START M     gasifier                   98  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START P                           98  0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     gasifier                   98 -0.1319450918722706E+05 {~~}
START M     gasifier                   53  0.5733993742127672E-01 {~~}
START P                           53  0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     gasifier                   53 -0.2218541291202720E+04 {~~}
START M     gasifier                    3 -0.8071731763180304E-01 {~~}
START P                            3  0.9980000000000002E+00 {~~}
START H     gasifier                    3 -0.2639479250581342E+04 {~~}
START M     gasifier                   99 -0.4496304000000003E-02 {~~}
START P                           99  0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     gasifier                   99 -0.4308000000000000E+04 {~~}
START Q     gasifier                  301  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    gasifier                    1  0.8437750251140594E+05 {~~}
START ZA    gasifier                    2  0.3884066357865065E+05 {~~}
START ZA    gasifier                    3  0.1169268659486915E+06 {~~}
START ZA    gasifier                    4  0.3165825792517939E+06 {~~}
START ZA    gasifier                    5  0.1639117431428838E+06 {~~}
START ZA    gasifier                    6  0.2287124266408510E+06 {~~}
START ZA    gasifier                    7 -0.3009383873888932E+06 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    H2          0.2924372413733856E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    O2          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    N2          0.3132704471418813E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    CO          0.1907041267723893E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    NO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    CO2         0.7830308581196208E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    H2O-G       0.1109310765121879E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    NH3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    H2S         0.4400243554653266E-03 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    SO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    CH4         0.1025671772487572E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    NO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    HCN         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    COS         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas                    AR          0.3657280307852758E-02 {~~}
START X_J   Ash                       C           0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START X_J   Ash                       ASH         0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
START M     Gasification_Pre            3  0.8071731763180304E-01 {~~}
START H     Gasification_Pre            3 -0.2639479250581342E+04 {~~}
START M     Gasification_Pre            4 -0.8071731763180304E-01 {~~}
START P                            4  0.9930000000000002E+00 {~~}
START H     Gasification_Pre            4 -0.3095039548003869E+04 {~~}
START M     Gasification_Pre           51  0.4521362163180307E-01 {~~}
START P                           51  0.1008000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     Gasification_Pre           51 -0.8874069202168960E+02 {~~}
START M     Gasification_Pre           52 -0.4521362163180307E-01 {~~}
START P                           52  0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     Gasification_Pre           52  0.7245453023395268E+03 {~~}
START Q     Gasification_Pre          302  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    Gasification_Pre            1  0.3677160522749276E+02 {~~}
START M     steamgen                    4  0.8071731763180304E-01 {~~}
START H     steamgen                    4 -0.3095039548003869E+04 {~~}
START M     steamgen                    5 -0.8071731763180304E-01 {~~}
START P                            5  0.9880000000000002E+00 {~~}
START H     steamgen                    5 -0.3571766083297322E+04 {~~}
START M     steamgen                   56  0.3991567632518243E+00 {~~}
START P                           56  0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     steamgen                   56 -0.1319199819107677E+05 {~~}
START M     steamgen                   58 -0.3991567632518243E+00 {~~}
156
APPENDIX D. DNA SCRIPT
==PAGE:173==
START H     steamgen                   58 -0.1309559474582558E+05 {~~}
START Q     steamgen                  303  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    steamgen                    1  0.3848008717279063E+02 {~~}
START M     steamblower                57  0.4112830790412979E+00 {~~}
START H     steamblower                57 -0.1319443607829820E+05 {~~}
START M     steamblower                55 -0.4112830790412979E+00 {~~}
START P                           55  0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     steamblower                55 -0.1319199819107678E+05 {~~}
START Q     steamblower               304 -0.2046248495453736E-01 {~~}
START W     steamblower               104  0.1023124247739474E+01 {~~}
START M     split                      55  0.4112830790412979E+00 {~~}
START H     split                      55 -0.1319199819107677E+05 {~~}
START M     split                      56 -0.3991567632518243E+00 {~~}
START H     split                      56 -0.1319199819107677E+05 {~~}
START M     split                      54 -0.1212631578947365E-01 {~~}
START P                           54  0.1003000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     split                      54 -0.1319199819107677E+05 {~~}
START M     mixer                      52  0.4521362163180307E-01 {~~}
START H     mixer                      52  0.7245453023395266E+03 {~~}
START M     mixer                      54  0.1212631578947365E-01 {~~}
START H     mixer                      54 -0.1319199819107678E+05 {~~}
START M     mixer                      53 -0.5733993742127672E-01 {~~}
START H     mixer                      53 -0.2218541291202720E+04 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 H2          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 O2          0.1451504344563793E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 N2          0.5406591363437858E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 CO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 NO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 CO2         0.2098560498164520E-03 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 H2O-G       0.3075449876223140E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 NH3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 H2S         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 SO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 CH4         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C2H6        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C3H8        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C4H10-N     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C4H10-I     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C5H12       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C6H14       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C7H16       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C8H18       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C2H4        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C3H6        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C5H10       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C6H12-1     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C7H14       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C2H2        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C6H6        0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C6H12-C     0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 C           0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 S           0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 NO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 HCN         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 COS         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 N2O         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 NO3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 SO3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 AR          0.6435585527704527E-02 {~~}
157
==PAGE:174==
START Y_J   steam&air                 ASH         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 TAR         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   steam&air                 CH3OH       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START M     gascleaner                  5  0.8071731763180304E-01 {~~}
START H     gascleaner                  5 -0.3571766083297322E+04 {~~}
START M     gascleaner                 20 -0.8065821288420477E-01 {~~}
START P                           20  0.9830000000000002E+00 {~~}
START H     gascleaner                 20 -0.3574100459706519E+04 {~~}
START M     gascleaner                 97 -0.5910474759825331E-04 {~~}
START P                           97  0.9830000000000002E+00 {~~}
START H     gascleaner                 97 -0.3861230171132385E+03 {~~}
START Q     gascleaner                311  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              H2          0.2925659775290789E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              O2          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              N2          0.3134083544510460E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              CO          0.1907880781735181E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              NO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              CO2         0.7833755624465735E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              H2O-G       0.1109799103757205E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              CH4         0.1026123291727642E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              NO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_clean              AR          0.3658890308702563E-02 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          H2O-G       0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          NH3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          H2S         0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          SO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          HCN         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          COS         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          AR          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          ASH         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   Hydrogen_Sulfide          HCL         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START M     MSWgas_blower              20  0.8065821288420477E-01 {~~}
START H     MSWgas_blower              20 -0.3574100459706519E+04 {~~}
START M     MSWgas_blower              21 -0.8065821288420477E-01 {~~}
START P                           21  0.1119210526315789E+01 {~~}
START H     MSWgas_blower              21 -0.3538051626504391E+04 {~~}
START Q     MSWgas_blower             305 -0.5933947882946828E-01 {~~}
START W     MSWgas_blower             205  0.2966973941473963E+01 {~~}
START M     Met                        21  0.8065821288420477E-01 {~~}
START H     Met                        21 -0.3538051626504391E+04 {~~}
START M     Met                        22 -0.8065821288420477E-01 {~~}
START P                           22  0.1119210526315789E+01 {~~}
START H     Met                        22 -0.3538051626504391E+04 {~~}
START Q     Met                       380  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    Met                         1  0.6593170842627442E+05 {~~}
START ZA    Met                         2  0.6427667396361652E+04 {~~}
START ZA    Met                         3  0.2994843398926687E+06 {~~}
START ZA    Met                         4 -0.2749537766585029E+06 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                H2          0.2416596079767988E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                CO          0.1079905194683141E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                CO2         0.1407817755773392E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                H2O-G       0.1093042926076826E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                CH4         0.5524465936236678E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                N2          0.3410376955615260E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                NO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                H2S         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                SO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                NO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                HCN         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
158
APPENDIX D. DNA SCRIPT
==PAGE:175==
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                COS         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                N2O         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                NO3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                SO3         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   MSWgas_met                AR          0.3981449445972667E-02 {~~}
START M     SOFC                       22  0.8065821288420477E-01 {~~}
START H     SOFC                       22 -0.3538051626504391E+04 {~~}
START M     SOFC                       27  0.4526323567517241E+00 {~~}
START P                           27  0.1171842105263158E+01 {~~}
START H     SOFC                       27  0.5194064689472577E+03 {~~}
START M     SOFC                       23 -0.1037986839181324E+00 {~~}
START P                           23  0.1063250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     SOFC                       23 -0.5518987233252158E+04 {~~}
START M     SOFC                       28 -0.4294918857177964E+00 {~~}
START P                           28  0.1113250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     SOFC                       28  0.7454968252189118E+03 {~~}
START E     SOFC                      207 -0.2024060269784384E+03 {~~}
START Q     SOFC                      307  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        1  0.8935120884196558E+05 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        2  0.6941385414961982E+05 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        3  0.1167169677497759E+06 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        4  0.2964243284190684E+06 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        5 -0.2544965176112460E+07 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        6  0.6696123555637519E+00 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        7  0.7383655755323052E+03 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        8  0.8213067134181731E+00 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                        9  0.9610268606466006E-01 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                       10  0.7252040273535131E+00 {~~}
START ZA    SOFC                       11  0.5439030205151348E+02 {~~}
START Y_J   OffFuel                   H2          0.9001787597278173E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   OffFuel                   CO          0.5570560571316360E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   OffFuel                   CO2         0.2190475551745183E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   OffFuel                   H2O-G       0.3270167838699593E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   OffFuel                   CH4         0.8421234004601544E-06 {~~}
START Y_J   OffFuel                   N2          0.3082113371461766E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   OffAir                    O2          0.1692009486084054E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   OffAir                    N2          0.8102518445685342E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   OffAir                    CO2         0.3144980636182692E-03 {~~}
START Y_J   OffAir                    H2O-G       0.1058810147514840E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   OffAir                    AR          0.9644607284293691E-02 {~~}
START M     AB                         25  0.4526323567517241E+00 {~~}
START P                           25  0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     AB                         25 -0.8874069202168960E+02 {~~}
START M     AB                         26 -0.4526323567517241E+00 {~~}
START P                           26  0.1221842105263158E+01 {~~}
START H     AB                         26 -0.6510975511297454E+02 {~~}
START Q     AB                        309 -0.5629540350127869E+00 {~~}
START W     AB                        209  0.1125908070025578E+02 {~~}
START M     CP                         28  0.4294918857177964E+00 {~~}
START H     CP                         28  0.7454968252189118E+03 {~~}
START M     CP                         29 -0.4294918857177964E+00 {~~}
START P                           29  0.1063250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     CP                         29  0.1294876179347449E+03 {~~}
START M     CP                         26  0.4526323567517241E+00 {~~}
START H     CP                         26 -0.6510975511297455E+02 {~~}
START M     CP                         27 -0.4526323567517241E+00 {~~}
START H     CP                         27  0.5194064689472577E+03 {~~}
START Q     CP                        308  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    CP                          1  0.2645709560560018E+03 {~~}
159
==PAGE:176==
START M     burner                     29  0.4294918857177964E+00 {~~}
START H     burner                     29  0.1294876179347449E+03 {~~}
START M     burner                     23  0.1037986839181324E+00 {~~}
START H     burner                     23 -0.5518987233252158E+04 {~~}
START M     burner                     40 -0.5332905696359288E+00 {~~}
START P                           40  0.1063250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     burner                     40 -0.9699210142076394E+03 {~~}
START Q     burner                    310  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    burner                      1  0.8673060863169946E+01 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   O2          0.1199229292952588E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   N2          0.7152281755684629E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   NO          0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   CO2         0.5918624064466685E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   H2O-G       0.9793606686692759E-01 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   SO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   NO2         0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START Y_J   FlueGas                   AR          0.7726587624683853E-02 {~~}
START M     FGSPLIT                    40  0.5332905696359288E+00 {~~}
START H     FGSPLIT                    40 -0.9699210142076394E+03 {~~}
START M     FGSPLIT                    41 -0.5226247582432103E+00 {~~}
START P                           41  0.1063250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     FGSPLIT                    41 -0.9699210142076395E+03 {~~}
START M     FGSPLIT                    43 -0.1066581139271847E-01 {~~}
START P                           43  0.1063250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     FGSPLIT                    43 -0.9699210142076394E+03 {~~}
START M     DH_hex                     43  0.1066581139271847E-01 {~~}
START H     DH_hex                     43 -0.9699210142076395E+03 {~~}
START M     DH_hex                     44 -0.1066581139271847E-01 {~~}
START P                           44  0.1013250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     DH_hex                     44 -0.1566085657602277E+04 {~~}
START M     DH_hex                     80  0.3373942947547958E-01 {~~}
START P                           80  0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     DH_hex                     80 -0.1578247534527890E+05 {~~}
START M     DH_hex                     81 -0.3373942947547958E-01 {~~}
START P                           81  0.1950000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     DH_hex                     81 -0.1559401395917053E+05 {~~}
START Q     DH_hex                    312  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    DH_hex                      1  0.6358579645454467E+01 {~~}
START M     DESORBER                   75  0.4322318098405948E+00 {~~}
START P                           75  0.5000000000000001E-01 {~~}
START H     DESORBER                   75  0.8424424216014872E+02 {~~}
START Y     DESORBER                   75  0.5500000000000002E+00 {~~}
START M     DESORBER                   70 -0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
START P                           70  0.5000000000000001E-01 {~~}
START H     DESORBER                   70  0.2686886856023791E+04 {~~}
START M     DESORBER                   76 -0.3396107077318959E+00 {~~}
START P                           76  0.5000000000000001E-01 {~~}
START H     DESORBER                   76  0.2918665983781427E+03 {~~}
START Y     DESORBER                   76  0.7000000000000002E+00 {~~}
START M     DESORBER                   41  0.5226247582432103E+00 {~~}
START H     DESORBER                   41 -0.9699210142076395E+03 {~~}
START M     DESORBER                   42 -0.5226247582432103E+00 {~~}
START P                           42  0.1013250000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     DESORBER                   42 -0.1566085657602277E+04 {~~}
START Q     DESORBER                  330  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    DESORBER                    1  0.3115704026272722E+03 {~~}
START M     CONDENSER                  70  0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
START H     CONDENSER                  70  0.2686886856023791E+04 {~~}
START M     CONDENSER                  71 -0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
160
APPENDIX D. DNA SCRIPT
==PAGE:177==
START P                           71  0.5000000000000000E-01 {~~}
START H     CONDENSER                  71  0.1377651189884899E+03 {~~}
START M     CONDENSER                  62  0.1883066755770401E+01 {~~}
START P                           62  0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     CONDENSER                  62  0.1259237178100479E+03 {~~}
START M     CONDENSER                  63 -0.1883066755770401E+01 {~~}
START P                           63  0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     CONDENSER                  63  0.2513056056108636E+03 {~~}
START ZA    CONDENSER                   1  0.2361024646934506E+03 {~~}
START M     VALVE1                     71  0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
START H     VALVE1                     71  0.1377651189884899E+03 {~~}
START M     VALVE1                     72 -0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
START P                           72  0.9000000000000003E-02 {~~}
START H     VALVE1                     72  0.1377651189884899E+03 {~~}
START M     EVAPORATOR                 64  0.5240751366464941E+01 {~~}
START P                           64  0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     EVAPORATOR                 64  0.6736175272417702E+02 {~~}
START M     EVAPORATOR                 65 -0.5240751366464941E+01 {~~}
START P                           65  0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     EVAPORATOR                 65  0.2542098736028512E+02 {~~}
START M     EVAPORATOR                 72  0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
START H     EVAPORATOR                 72  0.1377651189884899E+03 {~~}
START M     EVAPORATOR                 73 -0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
START P                           73  0.9000000000000003E-02 {~~}
START H     EVAPORATOR                 73  0.2510886560940738E+04 {~~}
START Q     EVAPORATOR                331  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    EVAPORATOR                  1  0.2198011233914019E+03 {~~}
START M     VALVE2                     76  0.3396107077318959E+00 {~~}
START H     VALVE2                     76  0.2918665983781428E+03 {~~}
START M     VALVE2                     77 -0.3396107077318959E+00 {~~}
START P                           77  0.9000000000000003E-02 {~~}
START H     VALVE2                     77  0.2918665983781428E+03 {~~}
START Y     VALVE2                     77  0.7000000000000003E+00 {~~}
START M     ABSORBER                   77  0.3396107077318959E+00 {~~}
START H     ABSORBER                   77  0.2918665983781427E+03 {~~}
START M     ABSORBER                   73  0.9262110210869891E-01 {~~}
START H     ABSORBER                   73  0.2510886560940738E+04 {~~}
START M     ABSORBER                   74 -0.4322318098405948E+00 {~~}
START P                           74  0.9000000000000003E-02 {~~}
START H     ABSORBER                   74  0.8424141904468095E+02 {~~}
START Y     ABSORBER                   74  0.5500000000000002E+00 {~~}
START M     ABSORBER                   60  0.7096179843250950E+01 {~~}
START P                           60  0.3013000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     ABSORBER                   60  0.8422394029693821E+02 {~~}
START M     ABSORBER                   61 -0.7096179843250950E+01 {~~}
START P                           61  0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     ABSORBER                   61  0.1258336920348903E+03 {~~}
START Q     ABSORBER                  332  0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
START ZA    ABSORBER                    1  0.2952702815655316E+03 {~~}
START M     cond_pump                  59  0.7096179843250950E+01 {~~}
START P                           59  0.1013000000000000E+01 {~~}
START H     cond_pump                  59  0.8401303462458346E+02 {~~}
START M     cond_pump                  60 -0.7096179843250950E+01 {~~}
START H     cond_pump                  60  0.8422394029693821E+02 {~~}
START E     cond_pump                 202  0.1496624580991143E+01 {~~}
START M     PUMP                       74  0.4322318098405948E+00 {~~}
START H     PUMP                       74  0.8424141904468095E+02 {~~}
START M     PUMP                       75 -0.4322318098405948E+00 {~~}
START H     PUMP                       75  0.8424424216014870E+02 {~~}
161
==PAGE:178==
START E     PUMP                      400  0.1220240308018813E-02 {~~}
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
C ~~ End of generated initial guesses.
C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
162
APPENDIX D. DNA SCRIPT
==PAGE:179==
Appendix E
DNA output
163
==PAGE:180==
System_standard_methanator
RUNNUMBER1
ALGEBRAIC VARIABLES
NO
TO
MEDIA
M
T
P
H
ENERGY
X
S
V
U
DE
COMPONENT
[kg/s]
[C]
[bar]
[kJ/kg]
[kJ/s]
[kJ/kgK]
[m3/kg]
[kJ/kg]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 MSWryer
MSW
0.04
25 -
-7616.6
5.30E+02 -
0.4581 -
-7616.6
58 MSWryer
STEAM-HF
0.4
200
0.998
-13095.6
-
11.3524
2.1769
-13312.8
2 MSWryer
dry_MSW
-0.03
150 -
-3774.6
-
1.7376 -
-3774.6
57 MSWryer
STEAM-HF
-4.10E-01
150
0.993
-13194.4
-
11.1339
1.9505
-13388.1
300 MSWryer
HEAT
0.00E+00
2 gasifier
dry_MSW
0.03
150 -
-3774.6
-
1.7376 -
-3774.6
98 gasifier
STEAM-HF
0
150
1.003
-13194.5
-
11.1292
1.9309
-13388.2
53 gasifier
steam&air
0.06
574.52
1.003
-2218.5
-
9.1456
2.745
-2493.9
3 gasifier
MSWgas
-0.08
800
0.998
-2639.5
-
11.2539
4.3659
-3075.2
99 gasifier
Ash
0.00E+00
800 -
-4308
-
0 -
-4308
301 gasifier
HEAT
0.00E+00
3 Gasification_Pre
MSWgas
0.08
800
0.998
-2639.5
-
11.2539
4.3659
-3075.2
4 Gasification_Pre
MSWgas
-0.08
530.63
0.993
-3095
-
10.7678
3.2865
-3421.4
51 Gasification_Pre
STANDARD_AIR
0.05
25
1.008
-88.7
-
6.9012
0.8523
-174.7
52 Gasification_Pre
STANDARD_AIR
-5.00E-02
780
1.003
724.5
-
8.2417
3.0255
421.1
302 Gasification_Pre
HEAT
0.00E+00
4 steamgen
MSWgas
0.08
530.63
0.993
-3095
-
10.7678
3.2865
-3421.4
5 steamgen
MSWgas
-0.08
231.12
0.988
-3571.8
-
10.0297
2.0723
-3776.5
56 steamgen
STEAM-HF
0.4
151.27
1.003
-13192
-
11.1351
1.9369
-13386.3
58 steamgen
STEAM-HF
-4.00E-01
200
0.998
-13095.6
-
11.3524
2.1769
-13312.8
303 steamgen
HEAT
0.00E+00
57 steamblower
STEAM-HF
0.41
150
0.993
-13194.4
-
11.1339
1.9505
-13388.1
55 steamblower
STEAM-HF
-4.10E-01
151.27
1.003
-13192
-
11.1351
1.9369
-13386.3
304 steamblower
HEAT
-2.05E-02
104 steamblower
MECH_POWER
1.02E+00
55 split
STEAM-HF
0.41
151.27
1.003
-13192
-
11.1351
1.9369
-13386.3
56 split
STEAM-HF
-0.4
151.27
1.003
-13192
-
11.1351
1.9369
-13386.3
54 split
STEAM-HF
-0.01
151.27
1.003
-13192
-
11.1351
1.9369
-13386.3
52 mixer
STANDARD_AIR
0.05
780
1.003
724.5
-
8.2417
3.0255
421.1
54 mixer
STEAM-HF
0.01
151.27
1.003
-13192
-
11.1351
1.9369
-13386.3
53 mixer
steam&air
-0.06
574.52
1.003
-2218.5
-
9.1456
2.745
-2493.9
5 gascleaner
MSWgas
0.08
231.12
0.988
-3571.8
-
10.0297
2.0723
-3776.5
20 gascleaner
MSWgas_clean
-0.08
231.12
0.983
-3574.1
-
10.0327
2.0834
-3778.9
97 gascleaner
Hydrogen_Sulfide
0.00E+00
231.12
0.983
-386.1
-
6.5898
1.2516
-509.2
311 gascleaner
HEAT
0.00E+00
20 MSWgas_blower
MSWgas_clean
0.08
231.12
0.983
-3574.1
-
10.0327
2.0834
-3778.9
21 MSWgas_blower
MSWgas_clean
-8.00E-02
254.48
1.119
-3538.1
-
10.0499
1.9146
-3752.3
305 MSWgas_blower
HEAT
-5.93E-02
205 MSWgas_blower
MECH_POWER
2.97E+00
21 Met
MSWgas_clean
0.08
254.48
1.119
-3538.1
-
10.0499
1.9146
-3752.3
22 Met
MSWgas_met
-8.00E-02
586.54
1.119
-3538.1
-
10.2422
2.8668
-3858.9
380 Met
HEAT
0.00E+00
22 SOFC
MSWgas_met
0.08
586.54
1.119
-3538.1
-
10.2422
2.8668
-3858.9
27 SOFC
STANDARD_AIR
0.45
600
1.172
519.4
-
7.9834
2.147
267.8
23 SOFC
OffFuel
-0.1
800
1.063
-5519
-
9.5629
3.239
-5863.4
28 SOFC
OffAir
-4.30E-01
800
1.113
745.5
-
8.241
2.7923
434.6
207 SOFC
ELECT_POWER
-2.02E+02
307 SOFC
HEAT
0.00E+00
25 AB
STANDARD_AIR
0.45
25
1.013
-88.7
-
6.8998
0.8481
-174.7
26 AB
STANDARD_AIR
-4.50E-01
48.39
1.222
-65.1
-
6.9221
0.7583
-157.8
309 AB
HEAT
-5.63E-01
209 AB
MECH_POWER
1.13E+01
28 CP
OffAir
0.43
800
1.113
745.5
-
8.241
2.7923
434.6
29 CP
OffAir
-0.43
242.44
1.063
129.5
-
7.4499
1.4047
-19.9
26 CP
STANDARD_AIR
0.45
48.39
1.222
-65.1
-
6.9221
0.7583
-157.8
27 CP
STANDARD_AIR
-4.50E-01
600
1.172
519.4
-
7.9834
2.147
267.8
308 CP
HEAT
0.00E+00
29 burner
OffAir
0.43
242.44
1.063
129.5
-
7.4499
1.4047
-19.9
23 burner
OffFuel
0.1
800
1.063
-5519
-
9.5629
3.239
-5863.4
40 burner
FlueGas
-5.30E-01
628.03
1.063
-969.9
-
8.2699
2.4681
-1232.3
310 burner
HEAT
0.00E+00
40 FGSPLIT
FlueGas
0.53
628.03
1.063
-969.9
-
8.2699
2.4681
-1232.3
41 FGSPLIT
FlueGas
-0.52
628.03
1.063
-969.9
-
8.2699
2.4681
-1232.3
43 FGSPLIT
FlueGas
-0.01
628.03
1.063
-969.9
-
8.2699
2.4681
-1232.3
43 DH_hex
FlueGas
0.01
628.03
1.063
-969.9
-
8.2699
2.4681
-1232.3
44 DH_hex
FlueGas
-0.01
100
1.013
-1566.1
-
7.2974
1.0724
-1674.7
80 DH_hex
WATER
0.03
45
2
-15782
-
4.1544
0.001
-15782.2
81 DH_hex
WATER
-3.00E-02
90
1.95
-15593.5
-
4.7087
0.001
-15593.7
312 DH_hex
HEAT
0.00E+00
75 DESORBER
LiBrW
0.43
35.26
0.05
84.2
0.55
0.2223
0.0006
84.2
70 DESORBER
STEAM
-0.09
99.39
0.05
2686.9
-
8.7669
34.3623
2515.1
76 DESORBER
LiBrW
-0.34
99.39
0.05
291.9
0.7
0.4869
0.0005
291.9
41 DESORBER
FlueGas
0.52
628.03
1.063
-969.9
-
8.2699
2.4681
-1232.3
164
APPENDIX E. DNA OUTPUT
==PAGE:181==
42 DESORBER
FlueGas
-5.20E-01
100
1.013
-1566.1
-
7.2974
1.0724
-1674.7
330 DESORBER
HEAT
0.00E+00
70 CONDENSER
STEAM
0.09
99.39
0.05
2686.9
-
8.7669
34.3623
2515.1
71 CONDENSER
STEAM
-0.09
32.88
0.05
137.8
0
0.4763
0.001
137.8
62 CONDENSER
STEAM
1.88
30.02
2
125.9
-
0.437
0.001
125.8
63 CONDENSER
STEAM
-1.88
60
2
251.3
-
0.8312
0.001
251.1
71 VALVE1
STEAM
0.09
32.88
0.05
137.8
0
0.4763
0.001
137.8
72 VALVE1
STEAM
-0.09
5.44
0.009
137.8
0.046
0.4953
6.5927
131.8
64 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
5.24
16.02
2
67.4
-
0.2393
0.001
67.3
65 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
-5.24
6.01
2
25.4
-
0.0914
0.001
25.2
72 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
0.09
5.44
0.009
137.8
4.60E-02
0.4953
6.5927
131.8
73 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
-9.00E-02
5.44
0.009
2510.9
1
9.0135
142.7626
2382.4
331 EVAPORATOR
HEAT
0.00E+00
76 VALVE2
LiBrW
0.34
99.39
0.05
291.9
0.7
0.4869
0.0005
291.9
77 VALVE2
LiBrW
-0.34
99.9
0.009
291.9
0.7
0.4928
0.0005
291.9
77 ABSORBER
LiBrW
0.34
99.9
0.009
291.9
0.7
0.4928
0.0005
291.9
73 ABSORBER
STEAM
0.09
5.44
0.009
2510.9
1
9.0135
142.7626
2382.4
74 ABSORBER
LiBrW
-0.43
34.97
0.009
84.2
0.55
0.2128
0.0006
84.2
60 ABSORBER
STEAM
7.1
20.03
3.013
84.2
-
0.2968
0.001
84
61 ABSORBER
STEAM
-7.10E+00
30.02
1.013
125.8
-
0.4371
0.001
125.8
332 ABSORBER
HEAT
0.00E+00
59 cond_pump
STEAM
7.1
20.02
1.013
84
-
0.2968
0.001
84
60 cond_pump
STEAM
-7.10E+00
20.03
3.013
84.2
-
0.2968
0.001
84
202 cond_pump
ELECT_POWER
1.50E+00
74 PUMP
LiBrW
0.43
34.97
0.009
84.2
5.50E-01
0.2128
0.0006
84.2
75 PUMP
LiBrW
-4.30E-01
35.26
0.05
84.2
0.55
0.2223
0.0006
84.2
400 PUMP
ELECT_POWER
1.22E-03
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
EXERGY
NO
TO
MEDIA
E_PH
E_CH
E
EX_PH
EX_CH
EX
DE
COMPONENT
[kJ/kg]
[kJ/kg]
[kJ/kg]
[kJ/s]
[kJ/s]
[kJ/s]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 MSWryer
MSW
0
15060.5
15060.5
0
602.42
602.42
58 MSWryer
STEAM-HF
543.59 -
543.59
216.98 -
216.98
2 MSWryer
dry_MSW
-54.44
21612.5
21558.06
1.52
-602.42
-600.9
57 MSWryer
STEAM-HF
509.89 -
509.89
-209.71 -
-209.71
300 MSWryer
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
2 gasifier
dry_MSW
-54.44
21612.5
21558.06
-1.52
602.42
600.9
98 gasifier
STEAM-HF
511.24 -
511.24
0 -
0
53 gasifier
steam&air
302.02
57.98
360
17.32
3.32
20.64
3 gasifier
MSWgas
639.14
6366.11
7005.24
-51.59
-513.86
-565.44
99 gasifier
Ash
775 -
775
-3.48 -
-3.48
301 gasifier
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
3 Gasification_Pre
MSWgas
639.14
6366.11
7005.24
51.59
513.86
565.44
4 Gasification_Pre
MSWgas
328.52
6366.11
6694.63
-26.52
-513.86
-540.37
51 Gasification_Pre
STANDARD_AIR
-0.43
2.06
1.63
-0.02
0.09
0.07
52 Gasification_Pre
STANDARD_AIR
413.18
2.06
415.23
-18.68
-0.09
-18.77
302 Gasification_Pre
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
4 steamgen
MSWgas
328.52
6366.11
6694.63
26.52
513.86
540.37
5 steamgen
MSWgas
71.85
6366.11
6437.96
-5.8
-513.86
-519.65
56 steamgen
STEAM-HF
511.98 -
511.98
204.36 -
204.36
58 steamgen
STEAM-HF
543.59 -
543.59
-216.98 -
-216.98
303 steamgen
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
57 steamblower
STEAM-HF
509.89 -
509.89
209.71 -
209.71
55 steamblower
STEAM-HF
511.98 -
511.98
-210.57 -
-210.57
304 steamblower
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
104 steamblower
MECH_POWER
-
-
-
1.02
0
1.02
55 split
STEAM-HF
511.98 -
511.98
210.57 -
210.57
56 split
STEAM-HF
511.98 -
511.98
-204.36 -
-204.36
54 split
STEAM-HF
511.98 -
511.98
-6.21 -
-6.21
52 mixer
STANDARD_AIR
413.18
2.06
415.23
18.68
0.09
18.77
54 mixer
STEAM-HF
511.98 -
511.98
6.21 -
6.21
53 mixer
steam&air
302.02
57.98
360
-17.32
-3.32
-20.64
5 gascleaner
MSWgas
71.85
6366.11
6437.96
5.8
513.86
519.65
20 gascleaner
MSWgas_clean
71.25
6353.69
6424.94
-5.75
-512.48
-518.22
97 gascleaner
Hydrogen_Sulfide
50.12
23829.09
23879.21
0
-1.41
-1.41
311 gascleaner
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
20 MSWgas_blower
MSWgas_clean
71.25
6353.69
6424.94
5.75
512.48
518.22
21 MSWgas_blower
MSWgas_clean
102.18
6353.69
6455.87
-8.24
-512.48
-520.72
305 MSWgas_blower
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
205 MSWgas_blower
MECH_POWER
-
-
-
2.97
0
2.97
21 Met
MSWgas_clean
102.18
6353.69
6455.87
8.24
512.48
520.72
22 Met
MSWgas_met
393.67
6002.35
6396.01
-31.75
-484.14
-515.89
380 Met
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
22 SOFC
MSWgas_met
393.67
6002.35
6396.01
31.75
484.14
515.89
27 SOFC
STANDARD_AIR
285.06
2.06
287.12
129.03
0.93
129.96
23 SOFC
OffFuel
574.93
1570.73
2145.66
-59.68
-163.04
-222.72
28 SOFC
OffAir
440.08
2.42
442.5
-189.01
-1.04
-190.05
207 SOFC
ELECT_POWER
-
-
-
-202.41
0
-202.41
307 SOFC
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
25 AB
STANDARD_AIR
0
2.06
2.06
0
0.93
0.93
165
==PAGE:182==
26 AB
STANDARD_AIR
16.98
2.06
19.04
-7.69
-0.93
-8.62
309 AB
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
209 AB
MECH_POWER
-
-
-
11.26
0
11.26
28 CP
OffAir
440.08
2.42
442.5
189.01
1.04
190.05
29 CP
OffAir
59.92
2.42
62.33
-25.73
-1.04
-26.77
26 CP
STANDARD_AIR
16.98
2.06
19.04
7.69
0.93
8.62
27 CP
STANDARD_AIR
285.06
2.06
287.12
-129.03
-0.93
-129.96
308 CP
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
29 burner
OffAir
59.92
2.42
62.33
25.73
1.04
26.77
23 burner
OffFuel
574.93
1570.73
2145.66
59.68
163.04
222.72
40 burner
FlueGas
314.81
31.65
346.46
-167.89
-16.88
-184.77
310 burner
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
40 FGSPLIT
FlueGas
314.81
31.65
346.46
167.89
16.88
184.77
41 FGSPLIT
FlueGas
314.81
31.65
346.46
-164.53
-16.54
-181.07
43 FGSPLIT
FlueGas
314.81
31.65
346.46
-3.36
-0.34
-3.7
43 DH_hex
FlueGas
314.81
31.65
346.46
3.36
0.34
3.7
44 DH_hex
FlueGas
8.59
31.65
40.24
-0.09
-0.34
-0.43
80 DH_hex
WATER
2.79
49.96
52.74
0.09
1.68
1.78
81 DH_hex
WATER
26.08
49.96
76.03
-0.88
-1.68
-2.56
312 DH_hex
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
75 DESORBER
LiBrW
29.08 -
29.08
12.57 -
12.57
70 DESORBER
STEAM
77.6 -
77.6
-7.19 -
-7.19
76 DESORBER
LiBrW
56.4 -
56.4
-19.15 -
-19.15
41 DESORBER
FlueGas
314.81
31.65
346.46
164.53
16.54
181.07
42 DESORBER
FlueGas
8.59
31.65
40.24
-4.49
-16.54
-21.03
330 DESORBER
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
70 CONDENSER
STEAM
77.6 -
77.6
7.19 -
7.19
71 CONDENSER
STEAM
0.33 -
0.33
-0.03 -
-0.03
62 CONDENSER
STEAM
0.19 -
0.19
0.35 -
0.35
63 CONDENSER
STEAM
8.05 -
8.05
-15.16 -
-15.16
71 VALVE1
STEAM
0.33 -
0.33
0.03 -
0.03
72 VALVE1
STEAM
-5.35 -
-5.35
0.5 -
0.5
64 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
0.59 -
0.59
3.07 -
3.07
65 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
2.73 -
2.73
-14.29 -
-14.29
72 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
-5.35 -
-5.35
-0.5 -
-0.5
73 EVAPORATOR
STEAM
-171.93 -
-171.93
15.92 -
15.92
331 EVAPORATOR
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
76 VALVE2
LiBrW
56.4 -
56.4
19.15 -
19.15
77 VALVE2
LiBrW
54.64 -
54.64
-18.56 -
-18.56
77 ABSORBER
LiBrW
54.64 -
54.64
18.56 -
18.56
73 ABSORBER
STEAM
-171.93 -
-171.93
-15.92 -
-15.92
74 ABSORBER
LiBrW
31.91 -
31.91
-13.79 -
-13.79
60 ABSORBER
STEAM
0.28 -
0.28
1.99 -
1.99
61 ABSORBER
STEAM
0.09 -
0.09
-0.61 -
-0.61
332 ABSORBER
HEAT
-
-
-
0
0
0
59 cond_pump
STEAM
0.08 -
0.08
0.56 -
0.56
60 cond_pump
STEAM
0.28 -
0.28
-1.99 -
-1.99
202 cond_pump
ELECT_POWER
-
-
-
1.5
0
1.5
74 PUMP
LiBrW
31.91 -
31.91
13.79 -
13.79
75 PUMP
LiBrW
29.08 -
29.08
-12.57 -
-12.57
400 PUMP
ELECT_POWER
-
-
-
0
0
0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ELEC.POWERPRODUCTION=202.4060kW
TOTALPOWERCONSUMPTION=16.7470kW
NETPOWERPRODUCTION=185.6590kW
FUELCONSUMPTION(LHV)=529.5169kJ/s
FUELCONSUMPTION(HHV)=602.4200kJ/s
THERMALEFFICIENCY(LHV)=0.3506
THERMALEFFICIENCY(HHV)=0.3082
MAXIMUMRELATIVEERROR=4.8117E-12
COMPUTERACCURACY=2.2204E-16
IDEALGASCOMPOSITION(MOLARBASE):
steam&air
MSWgas
STANDARD_AI MSWgas_cleHydrogen_Sul
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HYDROG
0.00
0.29
0.00
0.29
0.00
OXYGEN
0.15
0.00
0.21
0.00
0.00
NITROGE
0.54
0.31
0.77
0.31
0.00
CARBON
0.00
0.19
0.00
0.19
0.00
CARBON
0.00
0.08
0.00
0.08
0.00
WATER(I
0.31
0.11
0.01
0.11
0.00
HYDROG
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
METHAN
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
ARGON
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEANM
25.60
20.48
28.85
20.47
34.08
NETCALO
0.00
6502.00
0.00
6496.00
15210.00
GRSCALO
0.00
13210.00
0.00
13210.00
16500.00
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
166
APPENDIX E. DNA OUTPUT
==PAGE:183==
IDEALGASCOMPOSITION(MOLARBASE):
MSWgas_met
OffFuel
OffAir
FlueGas
WATER
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HYDROG
2.42E-01
9.00E-02
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
OXYGEN
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.69E-01
1.20E-01
0.00E+00
NITROGE
3.41E-01
3.08E-01
8.10E-01
7.15E-01
0.00E+00
CARBON
1.08E-01
5.57E-02
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
CARBON
1.41E-01
2.19E-01
3.15E-04
5.92E-02
0.00E+00
WATER(I
1.09E-01
3.27E-01
1.06E-02
9.79E-02
0.00E+00
METHAN
5.52E-02
8.42E-07
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
ARGON
3.98E-03
0.00E+00
9.65E-03
7.73E-03
0.00E+00
WATER(L
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
1.00E+00
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEANM
2.23E+01
2.59E+01
2.87E+01
2.86E+01
1.80E+01
NETCALO
5.99E+03
1.45E+03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
-2.44E+03
GRSCALO
1.18E+04
4.21E+03
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
NON-IDEALFLUIDANDSOLIDCOMPOSITION(MASSBASE):
MSW
dry_MSW
Ash
--------------------------------------------------------
HYDROG
4.57E-02
6.56E-02
0.00E+00
OXYGEN
1.56E-01
2.23E-01
0.00E+00
NITROGE
1.66E-02
2.39E-02
0.00E+00
CARBON
3.30E-01
4.74E-01
0.00E+00
SULFUR(
1.39E-03
2.00E-03
0.00E+00
WATER(L
3.38E-01
5.00E-02
0.00E+00
ASHES
1.12E-01
1.61E-01
1.00E+00
--------------------------------------------------------
MEANM
1.32E+01
1.18E+01
7.60E+01
NETCALO
1.32E+04
2.01E+04
0.00E+00
GRSCALO
1.51E+04
2.16E+04
0.00E+00
--------------------------------------------------------
MEDIUM95:LIBR-WATER
MEDIUM200:ELECTRICALPOWER
NUMBEROFCLOSEDINTERNALLOOPSINTHESYSTEM:1
SOLUTIONFORTHEINDEPENDENTALGEBRAICVARIABLES:
VARIABL COMPONENT
NAME
VALUE
----------------------------------------------------------
1 gasifier
MULTIPLIERH
8.44E+04
2 gasifier
MULTIPLIERC
3.88E+04
3 gasifier
MULTIPLIERN
1.17E+05
4 gasifier
MULTIPLIERO
3.17E+05
5 gasifier
MULTIPLIERS
1.64E+05
6 gasifier
MULTIPLAr
2.29E+05
7 gasifier
GIBBSENERGY
-3.01E+05
1 Gasification_Pre
Transferred
3.68E+01
1 steamgen
Transferred
3.85E+01
1 Met
MULTIPLIERH
6.59E+04
2 Met
MULTIPLIERC
6.43E+03
3 Met
MULTIPLIERO
3.00E+05
4 Met
GIBBSENERGY
-2.75E+05
1 SOFC
MULTIPLIERH
8.94E+04
2 SOFC
MULTIPLIERC
6.94E+04
3 SOFC
MULTIPLIERN
1.17E+05
4 SOFC
MULTIPLIERO
2.96E+05
5 SOFC
GIBBSENERGY
-2.55E+06
6 SOFC
STCR
6.70E-01
7 SOFC
IDENSIY
7.38E+02
8 SOFC
ENERNST
8.21E-01
9 SOFC
DEPOL
9.61E-02
10 SOFC
ECELL
7.25E-01
11 SOFC
ESTACK
5.44E+01
1 CP
Transferred
2.65E+02
1 burner
Lambda
8.67E+00
1 DH_hex
Transferred
6.36E+00
1 DESORBER
Transferred
3.12E+02
1 CONDENSER
Transferred
2.36E+02
1 EVAPORATOR
Transferred
2.20E+02
1 ABSORBER
Transferred
2.95E+02
----------------------------------------------------------
167
==PAGE:184==
==PAGE:185==
Appendix F
Exergetic eﬃciency Excel
Figure F.1: Exergy eﬃciency excel calculator.
169
==PAGE:186==
==PAGE:187==
Appendix G
Thermoeconomic EES script
171
==PAGE:188==
File:opt_case_1_appendix.EES
25-03-2016 14:02:32  Page 1
EES Ver. 9.946: #0780: Department of Energy Engineering, Tech. Univ. of Denmark
   1:  "Thermoeconomic balance - Opt. case 1"
   2:  "Dryer"
   3:  E_1 = 602.42 [kW]
   4:  E_2 = 609.9 [kW]
   5:  E_58 = 216.98 [kW]
   6:  E_57 = 209.71 [kW]
   7:  Z_dryer = 0.353406 [$/h]
   8:  c_1 * E_1 + c_58 *E_58 + Z_dryer = c_2 * E_2 + c_57 * E_57
   9:  c_58 = c_57
  10:  c_1 = 0.0144 [$/kWh]
  11:  
  12:  "Gasifier"
  13:  E_3 = 565.44 [kW]
  14:  E_99 = 3.48 [kW]
  15:  E_53 = 20.64 [kW]
  16:  Z_gasifier = 41.547 [$/h]
  17:  c_2 * E_2 + c_53 * E_53 + Z_gasifier = c_3 * E_3 + c_99 * E_99
  18:  c_3 = c_4
  19:  c_99 = 0 [$/kWh]
  20:  
  21:  "Air heater AH"
  22:  E_4 = 540.37 [kW]
  23:  E_51 = 0.07 [kW]
  24:  E_52 = 18.77 [kW]
  25:  Z_AH = 0.1189 [$/h]
  26:  c_3 * E_3 + c_51 * E_51 + Z_AH = c_52 * E_52 + c_4 * E_4
  27:  c_51 = 0 [$/kWh]
  28:  
  29:  "Steam generator SG"
  30:  Z_SG = 0.3609 [$/h]
  31:  E_5 = 519.65 [kW]
  32:  E_56 = 204.36 [kW]
  33:  //c_56 = c_58
  34:  c_4 = c_5
  35:  c_4 * E_4 + c_56 * E_56 + Z_SG = c_5 * E_5 + c_58 * E_58
  36:  
  37:  "Steam blower SB"
  38:  Z_SB = 0.0867 [$/h]
  39:  E_55 = 210.57 [kW]
  40:  E_104 = 1.02 [kW]
  41:  c_57 * E_57 + E_104 * c_104 + Z_SB = c_55 * E_55
  42:  
  43:  "Steam splitter"
  44:  Z_SS = 0.0 [$/h]
  45:  E_54 = 6.21 [kW]
  46:  c_55 * E_55 + Z_SS = c_56 * E_56 + c_54 * E_54
  47:  c_56 = c_54
  48:  
  49:  "Steam Air mixer"
  50:  Z_mix = 0.0 [$/h]
  51:  c_52 * E_52 + c_54 * E_54 + Z_mix = c_53 * E_53
  52:  
  53:  "Gas cleaner DS"
  54:  Z_DS = 1.0766 [$/h]
  55:  E_20 = 518.22 [kW]
  56:  E_97 = 1.14 [kW]
  57:  c_5 * E_5 + Z_DS = c_20 * E_20 + c_97 * E_97
  58:  c_97 = 0 [$/kWh]
  59:  
  60:  "Gas blower GB"
172
APPENDIX G. THERMOECONOMIC EES SCRIPT
==PAGE:189==
File:opt_case_1_appendix.EES
25-03-2016 14:02:32  Page 2
EES Ver. 9.946: #0780: Department of Energy Engineering, Tech. Univ. of Denmark
  61:  Z_GB = 0.1775 [$/h]
  62:  E_21 = 518.52 [kW]
  63:  E_205 = 2.97 [kW]
  64:  c_20 * E_20 + E_205 * c_205 + Z_GB = c_21 * E_20
  65:  
  66:  "Methanator M"
  67:  Z_M = 1.0766 [$/h]
  68:  E_22 = 515.89 [kW]
  69:  c_21 * E_21 + Z_M = c_22 * E_22
  70:  
  71:  "Air blower AB"
  72:  Z_AB = 0.6032 [$/h]
  73:  E_25 = 1.52 [kW]
  74:  E_26 = 14.11 [kW]
  75:  E_209 = 18.43 [kW]
  76:  c_25 = 0 [$/kWh]
  77:  c_25 * E_25 + c_209 * E_209 + Z_AB = c_26 * E_26
  78:  
  79:  "Cathode preheater CP"
  80:  Z_CP = 0.8077 [$/h]
  81:  E_27 = 212.7 [kW]
  82:  E_28  =  275.44 [kW]
  83:  E_29  = 25.53 [kW]
  84:  c_26 * E_26 + c_28 * E_28 + Z_CP = c_27 * E_27 + c_29 * E_29
  85:  c_29 = c_28
  86:  
  87:  "SOFC"
  88:  Z_SOFC = 77.1626 [$/h]
  89:  E_23 = 206.83 [kW]
  90:  E_207 = 215.09 [kW]
  91:  c_28 = 0
  92:  c_22 = c_23
  93:  c_22 * E_22 + c_27 * E_27 + Z_SOFC = c_23 * E_23 + c_28 * E_28 + c_207 *E_207
  94:  
  95:  "Catalytic burner"
  96:  Z_CB = 1.0766 [$/h]
  97:  E_40 = 149.27 [kW]
  98:  c_29 * E_29 + c_23 * E_23 + Z_CB = c_40 * E_40
  99:  
 100:  "Power production and consumption"
 101:  c_104 = (c_207 * E_207)/E_207
 102:  c_104 = c_205 
 103:  c_104 = c_209
 104:  
173
==PAGE:190==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 4131
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
