==PAGE:1==
 
Spectral mapping of wildlife in southern Africa 
Spektral kortlægning af vildt i det sydlige Afrika 
 
 
M.Sc. Thesis in Earth and Space Physics and Engineering 
 
 
by:  Eric Jürgen Haase 
Supervisor:  Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen 
 
 
DTU-Compute and DTU-Space Program 
Institut for Matematik og Computer Science 
og Institut for Rumforskning og -teknologi 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 2016 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Summary: 
 
This project undertakes to discover if it is feasible to detect animals within color or multispectral 
aerial imagery using spectral techniques.  Civilian drones and light aircraft are producing imagery in 
multiple spectral bands with hyperspatial resolution and the location and identification of animals is 
now possible.  Manual evaluation of volumes of imagery is inaccurate and too time consuming to be 
an effective anti-poaching device.  To assist the aerial animal census surveys for national parks and 
game farms remote sensing techniques are employed to rapidly search the imagery for animals based 
on the principle that materials possess unique spectral reflectance signatures that may identify them.  
The discovery of an animal spectra betrays their presence in an image even if the animal is partly 
obscured by vegetation which would confound geometric identification strategies. 
 
A spectral library was produced of many Namibian big game and smaller animals to study their 
reflectance signatures in the near ultraviolet, visible, near infrared and shortwave infrared spectra.  
To accomplish this a portable spectrophotometer was taken to a taxidermy workshop that has ex vivo 
hides and pelt specimens of most Namibian game animals.  Ex vivo spectra proved to be subdued in 
reflectance, especially in the infrared, but are valuable to get an idea of an animals spectral features.  
And ex vivo specimens allow one to study elusive or dangerous wild animals. Some in vivo animal 
spectra were made at Naan Ku Se Wildlife Sanctuary and proved highly effective in this study.   
 
Civilian drones carry small cameras with CCD or CMOS sensors which detect light in the visible to 
very near infrared.  This project used drone imagery collected over a game farm in Namibia with a 
3-channel RGB and a 4-channel multispectral camera to test if spectral remote sensing techniques 
could discriminate animals from their habitat.  Results were moderate for the methods tested as the 
bands of the RGB camera correlate strongly and the Multispectral Camera channels optimized for 
vegetation did not perform well on animals under the conditions tested. 
 
To identify what spectral channels are desirable for a camera with interest in animal detection, the 
hyperspectral library containing both animal and habitat signatures was examined to determine where 
diagnostic spectral features of animals were located and which bands could improve discrimination 
for a multispectral survey.  It was found that the Blue channel was valuable as well as a few channels 
in the near and shortwave infrared, improving separation of animals from habitat by over 30%. 
1
==PAGE:3==
I. 
Introduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
II. 
Spectrophotometry principles 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
III. 
Flora Spectra  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
IV. 
Fauna Spectra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
V. 
Spectrophotometer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
VI. 
Filtering Spectra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
VII. 
Derivative Spectra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
VIII. 
Principle Component Analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
IX. 
Image Processing: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
 
i. 
Image Registration 
 
 
 
 
34 
 
 
ii. 
Thresholding  
 
 
 
 
38 
 
 
iii. 
Band Ratios 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
X. 
Supervised Classification: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
i. RGB camera  
 
 
 
 
 
45 
ii. NIR camera  
 
 
 
 
 
48 
iii. Multispectral camera 
 
 
 
 
52 
iv. Minimum Noise Fraction 
 
 
 
 
59 
XI. 
Unsupervised Classification  
 
 
 
 
 
63 
XII. 
Similarity Measures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
XIII. 
Camera Emulation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
XIV. Conclusions  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
XV. 
Bibliography  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83 
XVI. Acknowledgements  
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
XVII. Appendices: 
i.    Spectral Library 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
ii.   Matlab Codes 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
==PAGE:4==
I.     Introduction 
 
Many animals look similar to their environment 
and distinguishing them in aerial imagery is 
challenging.  See Figure 1.  So it is helpful to 
examine wavelengths outside the visible spectrum 
where there may be higher contrast between the 
animal and its habitat, facilitating detection. 
 
Inspiration for this project was work pioneered by 
Lavigne and Øritsland (1974) for counting seals in 
the arctic.  In visible light baby seals are pure white 
and indistinguishable from snow and ice in aerial 
photography.  But in ultraviolet (UV) baby seals 
appear black while the background remains white 
providing high contrast and an easy way to count 
baby seals.  See figure 2 below. 
 
 
Figure 2.  In visible light (left) dark spots are adult seals. UV photo (middle) the added dark spots are 
baby seals.  Seal skin sled in Visible vs. UV (right).  Image:  Lavigne and Øritsland, 1974 
 
Drone technology in the early 21st century introduced relatively inexpensive and rapid hyperspatial 
imaging capability to the civilian aerial surveying market.  This allows one to consider tracking 
animals from the air by mapping very frequently.  During a typical aerial survey thousands of 
imagery are collected with large overlaps intended for generation of orthophotography.  A standard 
setting is 60% forward lap and 40% side lap per survey line.  Due to the low cost of drone flight 
time plus high data capacity and speed of modern digital cameras as much as 80% forward lap is 
Figure 1. Oryx look similar to dry grass.  
3
==PAGE:5==
often used. While excellent to have the redundant spatial coverage, manually searching for animals 
in these huge volumes of resulting imagery is lengthy, laborious and inaccurate work.  What is 
needed are digital classification schemes to search automatically and flag only those imagery 
containing possible animal targets for closer visual inspection. Three fundamental approaches 
might be employed, they are:  geometric, change detection and spectral schemes. 
 
Figure 3.  Animals shelter from the Sun under vegetation much of the day, obscuring their presence. 
 
Geometric schemes may be easily fooled as animals often shelter among dense vegetation 
concealing their true form. See figure 3 above and notice the oryx under the tree. In southern 
Africa the Sun is intense and typically by 10:00 all the animals are sheltering in the shade and 
won’t come out in the open again until circa 16:00 (Blixen-Finecke, 1986) unless there is substantial 
cloud cover.  But clouds are exceptionally rare for at least 6 months of the year during the dry season 
in the Kalahari and other deserts of southern Africa.  At low and tropical latitudes where daylight 
varies little from 12 hours this leaves two very short time windows per day for finding animals in 
the open, early morning or late afternoon. But then Sun angles are low and cast long shadows which 
complicates classification too, as discussed later. In addition one foresees false positives generated 
by ground litter such as logs, bushes, rocks, etc. having similar sizes and profiles to animals.  In all 
a geometric identification scheme is not the most dependable for the southern African context. 
 
Change detection schemes may detect animals if there exists a previous photo set or photos are being 
made in rapid succession while the animals are moving. Some animals run when a low-flying drone 
approaches.  In fact some run away so fast the cameras may not catch them in their field of view.  
Other animals do not run.  Rhinos in particular seem unphased by drones and have not moved even 
if the buzzing drone circles 10 meters above their heads.  Change detection schemes also give 
absolutely no indication as to what has changed.  But may be a useful tool for RGB camera surveys. 
4
==PAGE:6==
 
Figure 4.  Two Black Rhinos unconcerned by the drone imaging them from 10m above. 
 
Dead animals may not be noticed by a change detection scheme and a poached rhino or elephant 
carcass could be overlooked as it does not move. Detecting poaching and knowing the location 
of rhino and elephant, live or dead, is a highly desired application of this project.  Therefore 
change detection may not be the best for game management in the context of southern Africa. 
 
Spectra may be the optimal way to locate and possibly identify animals too.  A spectral 
identification scheme has the advantage that in theory only a single pixel of an animal needs to be 
viewed through vegetative cover to betray the presence of an animal. And with the multispectral 
and hyperspatial resolution of aircraft imagery able to deliver a few centimeters resolution per 
pixel the likelihood of animal-filled pixels being seen through vegetative cover is quite improved. 
 
With spectral methods there is no dependency upon motion so an animal may be live or dead, or at 
least recently dead and still be detected as an animal present in the scene.  Carcass decomposition 
spectra have not been studied.   
5
==PAGE:7==
 
Spectral techniques work on the principle that materials of differing chemical composition may look 
the same in certain wavelengths but very differently in other wavelengths. So first one needs to 
identify the wavelengths of high contrast in materials which discriminate them easily. 
 
To identify the presence of an animal by its spectral signature requires one to know what the 
spectral signature is. To this end a library of animal reflectance spectra has been started for this 
project by collecting hyperspectral reflectance signatures of large game animals in Namibia using a 
portable field spectrophotometer.  This device scans from 350 to 2500nm.  Animals scanned were 
alive (in vivo), recently dead or taxidermy specimens (ex vivo). 
 
Spectral classification technique have been well established in geologic exploration for decades and 
now new multispectral cameras on low-flying drones provide very high spatial resolution and fair 
spectral resolution as well.  The time has arrived to study animals spectrally as they are no longer 
sub-pixel constituents but now multiple pixel objects within hyperspatial imagery. 
 
Contemporary game counting by large commercial farms and wildlife parks commonly use 
aircraft.  The animals panic and run like hell from the aircraft which flushes them out of the bushes 
to be counted by observers onboard who can only see at the periphery of the aircraft but not 
directly beneath it.  Performing an animal census this way is not highly accurate and counting about 
70% of the true population is considered successful (M. Hauptfleisch, personal communication). 
 
Chasing animals with aircraft stresses them and they may injure themselves or calves may become 
separated from mothers.  For endangered species like black rhinos this old fashioned style of game 
counting may do more harm than good.  This project seeks a lower-impact method of animal counting 
and hopes the much quieter drones or aircraft flying from higher altitude with multispectral cameras 
can be the solution that benefits both wildlife and humans alike. 
Figure 5.  Many animals shelter in the shade of the trees, labelled 1, 2, 3, 4.  (Photo: Drone Adventures) 
6
==PAGE:8==
II. 
Spectrophotometry principles 
 
Spectrophotometry is the measurement of light reflected by a material at different wavelengths.  It 
functions on the principle that photons of increasing wavelength have decreasing energy and different 
materials will selectively interact with specific energy levels.  If photon energy equals the energy of an 
atomic or molecular orbital transition or bond in a material there can be interaction. This gives 
information about the chemical properties and materials can be uniquely identified by which photons of 
the spectrum they will or will not interact with, called their ‘spectral signature’. 
 
Three properties of photons are mathematically proportional; wavelength in meters, frequency in Hertz 
and energy in electron Volts.  Each are in common use in some field of science.  This report uses 
wavelengths in nanometers (nm) as a surrogate for photon energy.  While wave number which is wave 
cycles per cm is also a commonly used unit in spectrophotometry, particularly in middle infrared, all 
values in this report are stated in their equivalent wavelengths in nm. 
 
Spectral imaging analyzes the color bands comprising each pixel by digital number (DN) which 
represents the reflectance integrated over the channel’s band width (Zhao, 2008), modulated by the 
quantum efficiency of the photon collecting device such as chemical films, CCD, CMOS, diode, etc.  The 
spectrum received at the camera depends upon the spectral reflectance signature of materials within the 
pixel, the physical shape of the objects, radiative transfer phase angle and the solar illumination qualities 
(after Robles and Kelley, 2013). 
 
Williams and Williams suggest that the percentage of IR increases with lower solar angles relative to the 
other wavelengths due to atmospheric filtering of blue and preferential transmission of red and longer 
wavelengths through thicker atmospheric cross sections.  Though they offered no direct evidence the idea 
seems to have merit based upon the authors experience with Mars rover data whose atmosphere has iron 
oxide aerosols that scatter red and transmit blue sunsets.  Hence ephemeral atmospheric properties can 
play a role especially in Africa where the continent-wide fire season and dust from the deserts produce 
huge amounts of aerosols which effect atmospheric optical depth considerably and will modulate light 
incident to a scene. 
 
The Spectrum 
 
There exist at least two major conventions that attempt to standardize wavelength ranges and their names.  
These are the International Commission on Illumination (CIE) and the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) (Robles-Kelly, 2010).  Each defines the spectral regions in differently and assigns 
them slightly different names.  However these two conventions are disobeyed almost ubiquitously in 
earth science literature and many authors, even in many textbooks, simply follow their own conventions 
or field-specific needs (after Clark, 1999).  Hence literature in astronomy or electrical engineering my 
define their spectral regions very differently from the earth science literature. 
 
In reality boundaries between spectral regions are transitional and not absolute.  One must be flexible 
when reading literature to understand what wavelengths are included in the bands by that author’s 
definition.  For example, it is common in some fields to have the NIR/SWIR boundary at 1000 nm (1 
micron) as this is the upper limit of silicon CCD sensors.  Likewise sometimes the SWIR ends at 1700 
nm as that is the upper limit of InGaAs diodes.  The risk in using sensor-based definitions of spectral 
regions is that technology is ephemeral (after Clark, 1999).  In 2016 CCDs are already being replaced by 
CMOS sensors whose sensitivity ends at 850nm.  Thereby the CCD sensor-based spectral band definition 
is already antiquated and one century from now neither CCD nor CMOS sensors are likely to exist.  
7
==PAGE:9==
However plants and water are stable through time and defining spectral bands based upon their physics 
and chemistry will remain consistent.  Next will be defined this project’s convention on spectral regions 
which roughly follows the CIE wavelength groupings but with names commonly used in remote sensing 
literature for the earth sciences. 
 
Ultraviolet (UV) 
 
The ultraviolet can be divided into three regions called UV-A, UV-B and UV-C.  These are highly 
energetic wavelengths shorter than 380nm but often rounded off in the literature to waves shorter than 
400nm.  Only the UV-A region plays any role in this study as the spectrophotometer used for field data 
begins scans UV from 350 to 400nm.  What is interesting about the UV however is that many studies of 
organic chemistry are performed in the UV due to several organic compounds having diagnostic features 
in UV-A and UV-B, such as the amino acid tyrosine in pigments and the substance keratin found in animal 
hair which is highly absorptive in the UV, as are any proteinaceous particles regardless of shape and 
roughness (Bohren and Sardie, 1981).  The UV is also the spectral region where Lavigne and Øritsland 
did their pioneering work counting seals on arctic ice.  UV seems important for biological photometry. 
 
Visible light 
 
According to Lewis and Rippon (2013) the cone cells in the retina of the human eye responsible for color 
vision at high ambient light levels such as daylight gives what is known as photopic vision.  This vision 
begins about 380nm at the UV-A / Violet boundary and progresses through the color spectrum of the 
rainbow to end by 750nm. This upper boundary defines the end of visible Red and start of Near Infrared 
but again the boundary is transitional and usually 700nm is taken as the conservative choice for the 
official Red / NIR boundary.  In low light levels the human eye uses rod cells called scotopic vision and 
spectral sensitivity changes.  But this project is concerned only with color in broad daylight or photopic 
vision which is that simulated by modern photography. 
 
The visible spectrum is often simplified to just the three additive primary colors of Blue, Green and Red.  
But in some cases the three subtractive colors of Cyan, Magenta and Yellow are used instead.  White 
light contains equal amounts of all colors at the saturation point of the human vision and black is equally 
low levels of all colors at or below the threshold of human visual perception.  Shades of gray are equal 
amounts of all colors too, within the range of the upper and lower human perception. 
 
Though the visible range actually starts about 380nm some humans with their crystalline lens of the eye 
removed can perceive color as bluish light down to 360nm (Fox and Vevers, 1960), as can new babies 
whose eye lenses have yet to crystallize.  Many individuals may not begin to perceive Visible violet light 
until near 400nm and though human vision may extend up to 750nm (Fox and Vevers, 1960) or even 
760nm in some cases, most humans lose light perception anywhere after 700nm.  Thereby we define 
visible spectrum as 400 to 700nm with the caveat that many humans actually perceive light both above 
and below those values and this is not considered extraordinary. 
 
To measure an individual's own light perception range, view the full spectrum of white light with a device 
called a spectroscope where a prism projects the colors of the rainbow upon a gauge with graduations in 
wavelength.  In this way one may measure one's own color perception range.   
 
 
 
 
8
==PAGE:10==
Infrared 
 
The infrared region deals with vibrations of either molecular or atomic lattice which cause absorption 
bands.  The infrared is subdivided into regions called Near Infrared (NIR), Shortwave Infrared (SWIR) 
and Middle Infrared, the latter also called Thermal Infrared (TIR) as is this band falls in the range of 
Earths circa 300K thermal Planck emissions.  Longer wavelengths than infrared are considered 
microwave spectrum and shorter wavelengths enters the human visible red. 
 
Near Infrared 
 
The NIR region starts sometimes formally begins at 700nm even though the Visible sometimes may not 
end until the mid-700s.  NIR also ends transitionally between 1300 to 1400nm.  NIR region was defined 
by wavelengths where plants are highly reflective including the chlorophyll fluorescence band.  The NIR 
contains two bands of special interest to vegetation characterization, the aforementioned fluorescence 
band and another called ‘Red Edge’, both to be discussed in more detail in the Plant Color section. 
 
Sometimes the NIR is subdivided again into the Very Near Infrared (VNIR) which are the IR wavelengths 
detectable by CCD, i.e. less than 1000nm.  Most importantly VNIR also encompass the chlorophyll 
fluorescence maximum region of the NIR.  A caveat is offered that in some literature the VNIR has been 
used to mean Visible and NIR together (Clark, 1999).  But here VNIR is the Very Near Infrared of 700 
to 1000nm 
 
Shortwave Infrared 
 
The SWIR is defined by water.  It starts with the onset of the large water absorption overtone band at 
circa 1400nm and ends at the beginning of the major water absorption feature at 2500nm.  The latter 
feature is so large and absorptive that by the time one exits this water absorption feature at roughly 
3000nm the thermal infrared has begun.  SWIR is considered to range from circa 1400 up to 2500nm. 
 
Within the SWIR there are some important features, silica has remarkable absorption features and there 
is another large water overtones at circa 1900nm.  In addition plants cellular water is the dominant 
absorbing mechanism with SWIR (UNH.edu). 
 
9
==PAGE:11==
III.  Flora Spectra 
Plants form an important part of this study as they are the most abundant biologic material in the 
aerial imagery.  Though not the emphasis of the project, one needs to understand a little bit about 
vegetation spectra in order to differentiate animals whose organic spectra look very similar to plants.  
Also the aerial camera employed was designed with the intention of mapping vegetation so uses 
spectral bands placed in regions that vegetation has diagnostic features. 
The color of plants is characterized in the Visible and VNIR spectra by the pigment chlorophyll.  In 
this document chlorophyll refers collectively to both chlorophyll-α and chlorophyll-β.  Chlorophyll 
absorbs strongly in the Visible, reflecting a bit more of green (Thulin, 2008).  This is why healthy 
vegetation usually appears green.  When plants die or become dormant their chlorophyll ceases to 
photochemically absorb the red and some of the blue light.  The addition of red color to the reflected 
green light produces brown which is a color people can affiliate with an unhealthy or dead plant.  
Often as a leaf becomes senescent the chlorophyll concentrations decrease allowing the accessory 
pigments such as carotenes (not to be confused with keratin) and xanthophylls to be expressed (Pinter 
et al, 2003) causing the familiar increased yellow and orange coloration in the Visible during autumn.   
The Red Edge is a narrow region between the Visible Red at 680nm and the Near Infrared reflectance 
plateau at 780nm and longer wavelengths.  Red Edge is characterized by a steep slope from the Red 
absorption minimum up to the NIR fluorescence peak.  Subtle changes in the slope of the Red Edge 
can indicate vegetation health.  Therefore very narrow spectral bands characterize leaf reflectance 
better than the multispectrally averaged ones (Shafri et al, 2012).  In the Multispectral Camera 4C 
offered by SenseFly © which was used on this project, the Red Edge channel has its axis at 735nm 
and appears to be about 20nm wide from their published spectral channel graph (SenseFly.com). 
Shifts in the Red Edge toward shorter wavelengths indicate less chlorophyll and shifts toward longer 
wavelengths indicate increased chlorophyll.   
The high reflectance in the NIR beyond is due to internal leaf scattering (Horlor et al, 1983) and the 
contribution of chlorophyll fluorescence emissions (Pedros et al, 2008) if the vegetation is healthy, 
reaching a maximum by 900nm.  The vegetation spectrum then begins a gradual decline of reflectance 
into and through the SWIR, but remaining more reflective than in the Visible.  See figure below. 
In the NIR region Pinter et al (2003) state there is considerable scattering from the mesophyll cell 
wall which contributes to the high reflectance by vegetation in the NIR and SWIR.  There is a minor 
absorption feature near 1200nm from the 3rd water vibrational overtone and the 4th near 900nm, 
which is hard to detect. Hydrogen bonding with carbon, nitrogen or oxygen causes stretching, bending 
or deformation vibrations responsible for absorption bands in the infrared (Sapienza et al, 2008). 
  
The SWIR region beyond circa 1300nm is characterized by water in the plant cells.  There are two 
strong water absorption features here.  The first is about 1450nm and the next near 1900nm, 
representing the 2nd and 1st water vibrational overtones, respectively.  Near 1400nm there is an 
absorption feature due to lignin (UNH.edu) which is incorporated into the larger water feature nearby.  
Also near 2200nm there is a broad reflectance peak from cellulose (UNH.edu). 
In summary, plants under stress have a decreased reflectance in the NIR an increased reflectance in 
the Red and the Red Edge position shifts to the shorter wavelengths (Horlor et al, 1983).  
10
==PAGE:12==
 
Figure 6.  Two grass samples from Namibia in dry season showing vegetation spectral features. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Reflectance of vegetation in Green, Red, Red Edge and NIR bands made by the Multispectral 
Camera 4C by SenseFly©.  Note: frame radiances are not balanced.   
(Imagery:  Drone Adventures) 
 
 
In the top figure Dry Grass Spectra three absorption features diagnostic of dry vegetation in SWIR 
are illustrated, caused by protein and fibers from nitrogen, lignin and cellulose after Thulin (2008) 
who further points out the band between 1650 to 1770nm is affiliated with the first overtones of CH 
bonds for nitrogen, protein, lignin and cellulose.  Between 2000 to 2200nm with axis at 2100 nm are 
protein, cellulose and lignin chemical overtones and around 2300nm is a feature from nitrogen, 
protein, lignin and cellulose.  Vegetation has water features at 970, 1200, 1450 and 1940nm.  However 
the 970nm feature must be used with caution due to photometer instrument noise at circa 990nm 
where it changes from CCD to diode and there is often a discontinuity in the spectrum. 
 
Green 
Red 
Red Edge 
NIR 
Cellulose 
Water 
Water 
Lignin 
Chlorophyll 
(scenescent) 
Water 
Lignin 
Cellulose 
Protein 
Lignin 
Cellulose 
Dry 
Dry 
Hydrated 
11
==PAGE:13==
IV.    Fauna Spectra 
The emphasis of this project is on animal spectra.  Knowing what causes, alters or influences animal 
reflectance is key to spectrally discriminating and mapping the occurrence of animals in the field. 
A literature review revealed very little work done on animal photometry in the infrared regions.  Much 
work was done during the 19th and early to middle 20th centuries on understanding animal colors in 
visible light.  For information the reader is referred to Fox and Vevers (1960) and Fox (1936) and 
their lists of references.  Photometry work on organic compounds in general is often done throughout 
the UV as well as the UV photography employed by authors like Lavigne, Øritsland and Reynolds in 
the 1970s for animal surveys in the arctic.  But this project ignores the UV almost entirely due to 
substantial spectrophotometer noise in the spectra from 350 to 400nm making the data untrustworthy. 
The author discovered the textiles industry uses photometry on wool in the UV to Visible ranges. 
Their purpose is making woolen products and for aesthetics and nothing to do with remote sensing. 
But they seem to have spared no expense in their comprehensive research on the properties of wool, 
effects of chemical treatments and the physics of light for color perception of the wool.  If one 
presumes wool may be similar to other animal fur then some fundamentals of animal hair structure, 
chemistry and physics can be learned from the textiles field.  See Lewis and Rippon (2013). 
 
Colors 
Animal colors are divided into two fundamental categories:  Pigmentary Colors and Structural Colors 
(Ball, 2012; Fox and Vevers, 1960; Fox, 1936).  This translates to color caused by chemical 
mechanisms and colors by physical mechanisms.  The colors of animals in the near UV, Visible and 
Infrared spectrums are caused by either or both pigments and structural colors.   
 
Most large fur-covered mammals are dominantly colored by pigments.  But structural colors still play 
an important role as they can influence the colors perceived by observers at different locations. 
 
1. Pigmentary Colors 
Most animals in this project are covered by optically thick layers of fur with only a few examples of 
pachyderm, reptile and human being the exceptions.  Hair in all mammals is comprised largely of 
keratin (Lewis and Rippon, 2013) not to be confused with carotene.  Colors are produced by cells in 
the epidermis called melanocytes which create pigments called melanin that give color to the keratin.  
These pigments derive from an amino acid called tyrosine and like many organic compounds have 
key spectral absorption features in the UV regions (Marshall, 1978).  
The figure at right shows some of the important amino acids involved 
with proteins and therefore must be involved somehow in most of the 
organic molecular spectra in this study.   
Do take note in the figure that the Y-axis is in extinction and indicates 
a transmission photometer was used.  Extinction is the inverse of 
reflectance which is how the spectra are presented in this work.  The 
UV-B region shown is beyond the range of the spectrophotometer, but 
indicates an interesting spectrum to study further to locate animals. 
Figure 8. Amino acids in UV 
(Image: Marshall, 1978) 
12
==PAGE:14==
Mammals have two types of melanin and a third pigment (Murray, 1988; Fox and Vevers, 1960): 
A.)  Eumelanin; from Greek words ‘eu’ (good) and ‘melas’ (black) makes black or brown. 
Example:  black zebra stripes 
 
B.) Pheomelanin; from phaeos (dusty) which makes yellows or reddish orange. 
Example:  human ‘redheads’ 
C.) Carotenoids; Red, orange and yellows occur in fungi to the highest mammals (Ball, 2012). 
Example:  pink flamingos 
 
According to Fox and Vevers (1960) and Fox (1936) there are two sources of pigments; either 
endogenous or exogenous.  Endogenous means the animals produce the pigments themselves and 
mammals do produce melanin.  When mammals do not produce melanin they are amelanistic or 
‘albino’.  Though the albino term must be applied cautiously as some animals are intentionally devoid 
of, or low in, melanin such as polar bears (Reynolds and Lavigne, 1981) or the white stripes of a zebra 
(Bard, 1981) and even white lions are not albinism. 
The exogenous or externally sourced pigments are derived from plant food, directly or indirectly.  For 
example, flamingos bright pink feather color is extracted from their food of brine shrimps which 
themselves get it from algae.  In times of less shrimp, flamingos are less pink.  What an animal eats 
can affect its pigment coloration and that variable also can depend upon seasonal food abundance. 
In the arctic some animals change coloration between the summer and winter, such as the arctic fox 
and hare.  In the winter they are both pure white which is the absence of melanin.  The summer 
triggers the production of melanin again and fur becomes colored (Øritsland and Ronald, 1978).  
Hence the season of year can effect an animal’s coloration based upon environmental factors such as 
light or temperature.  It was not found in the literature if southern African mammals change color by 
the season of year, however humans produce more melanin with increased sunlight exposure so it is 
possible that other animals may also alter their colors too. 
Phenology can alter the fur color as well.  As an animal develops from youth to adult they may change 
pigmentation of their coats.  For example, the southern African genet (type of cat) has dark eumelanin 
stripes as a juvenile and then change to redder pheomelanin stripes as adults (Fox and Vevers, 1960). 
 
Gender color variations were not studied but was not noticed to play any role amongst the animals 
measured for this project.  The available animal population sample was very limited and no 
comparisons were intentionally made of a male or female of any species.  The only in vivo options 
for gender comparisons would have been some semi-tame baboons or three cheetah cubs at Na’an 
Ku Se farm.  Or ex vivo with taxidermy specimens but those colors are modified, as discussed later. 
 
Variation amongst individuals could play a role too.  There are many unknowns and much left to be 
studied.  This project makes the assumption that animals do not very much within a species or by 
season of year with the caveat that later studies could find this assumption in error.  As Reynolds and 
Lavigne (1981) remarked in their studies of UV spectra that animals do vary by sex and species.  In 
summary, the pigment color of an animal may be a temporal variable (Curtis, 2011).  Individuals, age, 
gender, seasonal diet, sunlight and perhaps other factors not considered may affect the pigment 
coloration of an animal, possibly outside the Visible spectrum where it is not so easily noticed. 
13
==PAGE:15==
2. Structural Colors 
Structural colors are important to many animals but the effect on mammals is more subtle.  The largest 
factors of concern to fur and hide-covered animal are Bidirectional Reflectance Function (BDRF), 
diffuse or specular reflectance, scattering and indices of refraction. 
The most vivid structural colors are known in insects and birds such as highly iridescent, metallic 
colors like greens and purples in peacock feathers, beetle carapaces or butterflies (Ball, 2012; Fox 
and Vevers, 1960), but these effects do not largely impact the animals of study here. 
Some colors are produced by structures on the order of size of a wavelength of light and interact, 
reflecting a prism of colors depending highly upon the angle from which the animal is observed.  This 
follows Bragg’s law which is a key principle to X-ray diffraction, however is also valid to other 
wavelengths as well.  Incidence and exit angles of light into a surface are critical and the resulting 
constructive and destructive interference can intensify some colors and cancel others.  Pigments 
absorb some wavelengths of incident light and reflect the remainder, but structural colors can have 
much higher intensity if the critical conditions are met (Ball, 2012). 
 
Structural colors are in two groups, those independent of, and those dependent upon the presence of 
a pigment. The first group may be caused by total reflection, surface striations (natural gratings) or 
thin plates or laminae such as natural films   (Fox, 1936) 
 
The structural effects dependent upon the presence of pigments may include the optical depth and 
single scattering albedo of a surface, such as the animal hairs or skin and this leads to the largest topic 
effecting structural colors in animals, and that is BDRF. 
BDRF plays a critical role in the reflectance radiance of fur covered animals due to their co-aligned 
hairs of backward-oriented fur.  Meaning the front of the animal has fur aligned towards the rump.   
This aligned fur effects shadow hiding and reflectance attributes of an animal, especially the exit 
radiance.  If the light is incident from the back it could follow the hair shaft toward the skin, whereas 
from the front it is more likely to follow the hair shaft away from the animal.  BDRF is also a function 
of wavelength and will change properties possibly effecting light in spectra outside the Visible. 
According to Bohren and Sardie (1981), “A pelt is a multi-scattering particulate medium the 
individual particles of which are hairs. ...if they are optically thick and the particles weakly 
absorbing... These media have properties in aggregate that are not possessed by the individual 
particles or grains.”  This is very important information for BDRF modeling which is a large field 
in computer vision now and has applications to animal mapping if this becomes more sophisticated. 
 
Bare animal skins with a matte surface such as that of elephants, rhinos, hippos, crocodiles, will 
follow a Lambertian diffuse reflectance model, whereas fur animals have a more complex BDRF 
function with optical depth, single scattering albedo and opposition surge common to particulate 
materials. 
This is the domain of radiative transfer equations which is a field of its own.  The intention is simply 
to state the author is very aware this component exists and further research needs to be done on 
understanding the BDRF effects of animal color reflectance. 
14
==PAGE:16==
The Brewster Angle or critical reflectance of an animal is important to remote sensing as it brightens 
the animal considerably compared to the background.  A rounded body in the sun will likely make 
some critical angle at some place on the body over a large range of phase angles, but not all.  This 
critical reflectance was used to map animals with reasonable success for animals standing in direct 
sunlight at the appropriate phase angle, via simple thresholding operations, discussed later. 
Physical effects caused geometrically by nano-structures involve well studied scattering mechanisms 
like Tyndall, Mie and Rayleigh scattering. White can also be caused by scattering by air bubbles or 
colloids causing almost total scattering of visible light by structural elements (Fox and Vevers, 1960). 
 
The index of refraction is important to animal colors too and best demonstrated if the animal is wet.  
Colors change if the animal is wet because the diffraction is changed (Ball, 2012).  Water changes the 
color by filling in the air pockets of the fur, and this changes the index of refraction between the air 
and hair by adding a mediating layer of water in between them.  Instead of light traveling from air 
into hair with a high index of refraction, light first enters the air/water boundary which is a lower 
index and then transfers to the water/hair boundary which is also a lower index than air/hair.  If the 
photon escapes the internal reflectance it must exit via a similar path.  This is why wet animals look 
different, usually darker than a dry animal.  Oils on the hairs and skin known as sebum have a similar 
effect but a different index of refraction than water. 
 
Øritsland and Ronald (1978) concluded that "fluffing" of fur results in lower reflectance values for a 
given wavelength, and that transmission of incident visible radiation in mammals will be affected by 
the morphology of the hair cover, specifically hair pigmentation and the proportion of air vacuoles in 
the cortex and medulla (Reynolds and Lavigne, 1981).  The author adds that fluffed fur increases the 
shadowing and is now a well-known radiative transfer effect of particulate media, see Hapke (1984). 
 
 
Figure 9.  Flamingos have pink to red carotenoids in their feathers they accumulate from brine shrimp. 
 
Due to lack of appropriate specimens no studies of carotenoids were made in this study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
==PAGE:17==
Animal Spectrophotometry 
 
If one considers the spectra of an animal it is often not just the animal hair which is imaged.  Animals 
live amongst vegetation which gets caught in their fur and they often like to roll in the sand or take 
dust or mud baths.  This adds foreign material to their spectra both organic and inorganic.  No studies 
were undertaken here to determine precisely how much foreign matter is incorporated into animal 
pelts and hides, so one turns to industry for related information. 
 
Lewis and Rippon (2013) report from the textiles industry that wool can contain 25-75% by mass of 
impurities consisting of wool grease, suint, dirt and vegetable matter such as burrs and seeds.  They 
further define some subject specific terms as wool grease being a complex mixture of fatty esters and 
acids.  Suint comes from perspiration and contains potassium salts, short-chain acids, sulphate, 
phosphate and nitrogenous material.  In brief, animals are not ‘clean’ and if one presumes that most 
all animals of the gregarious herbivora variety have things in common, then one should expect that 
live animals in the field in southern African may have similar matter in their pelts to add a bit of 
complexity.  In fact, one researcher from the 1830s whose reference has been lost, commented that 
studying the rhino’s true color was difficult because they were always covered with mud. 
 
Most species of animal spectra were made at Tau Taxidermy shop in Windhoek, Namibia.  These 
spectra have the advantage that the dead animals are very safe and patient while one scans their hides.  
Dangerous animals like crocodile, water buffalo, lions, leopards, rhino, elephant and hippo can all be 
easily scanned in minutes.  Fast animals like the entire range of gazelles and antelopes which cheetahs 
have difficulty to catch, just sit and wait.  And they are all in the same room together.  Science had 
never been so easy.  Regrettably it was discovered there are differences in the reflectance spectra of 
live (in vivo), dead and taxidermy (ex vivo) animals so that using ex vivo specimens was interesting 
to get a general idea of what that animal spectra looks like but it isn’t equivalent to the live spectrum. 
 
When supervised classification is done with the ex vivo animal spectra the results are much poorer 
than with in vivo spectra.  One needs live animals that allow themselves to be scanned.  Easier to say 
than do.  Plus the constraint was the portable photometer could only be borrowed for a few hours so 
one could not go very far with it.  So either the fur samples had to go to the laboratory, or one needed 
to find tame animals close to town. 
 
The problem with taxidermy specimens is the preservation treatments.  These are proprietary but the 
author was given a brief overview of the process.  The animals are shot and skinned in the field and 
the hides are completely covered in rock salt, like what is used in Denmark for ice on the streets.  This 
is to prevent decay and dehydrates the hides.  The hides are delivered to the shop were they are very 
stiff and commence a 3-day long system of chemical baths in vats of preservative solutions.  These 
chemicals desiccate and dissolve the natural oils like sebum which may be similar to the ‘suint’ in 
wool mentioned by Lewis and Rippon (2013).  What comes out after these treatments is a faded 
version of what went in.  Occasionally the hides are even painted to restore some color.  And as was 
subsequently discovered the fading is much more pronounced in Infrared than the Visible spectrum. 
 
However the taxidermy spectra are valuable, as mentioned they give a general idea of what the spectra 
look like and offers animals which will take a long time to get actual in vivo spectra to replace the ex 
vivo in the animal spectral library.  The author was invited by Park Rangers in Etosha Park to come 
scan live animals they sedate for tagging or DNA sampling or to game farms with tame animals, but 
the spectrophotometer was borrowed and not allowed to go on such long trips, very regrettably. 
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 10.  Tau Taxidermy in Windhoek has most every game species of Namibia represented. 
 
Figure 11.  Notice all fur animals (blue lines) have identical patterns after circa 1400 to 2500nm. 
 
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 12.  In vivo (top) versus ex vivo (lower) oryx spectra demonstrating the subdued IR reflectance. 
 
 
Take note of the fur spectra of leopard, lion and oryx.  From the beginning of the graph at 350nm up 
to circa 1350 or 1400nm the spectra are somewhat different.  1350 to 1400nm is coincidentally the 
NIR/SWIR boundary too.  Beyond circa 1400nm the spectra are nearly identical until 2500nm.  This 
curiosity of all fur having identical spectra in the SWIR will be discussed in detail later. 
 
Note the elephant spectrum is similar but not precisely the same pattern in the SWIR.  One might 
expect a pachyderm to be different from fur pelage.  However this elephant spectra is viewed with 
caution as one cannot be sure what the chemicals and drying treatments did to the skin cell structures. 
 
In the figure above the spectra of a live oryx is compared to the spectra of a taxidermy oryx specimen.  
The in vivo spectra are the six higher reflectivity lines and the ex vivo spectra are the four lower lines.  
Notice that all of the absorption feature and peak axes remain in the correct wavelength but the ex 
vivo spectral features are simply subdued, at times greatly.  Most common change is the depth of the 
water absorption bands at circa 1450 and 1925nm.  This is logical given the dehydration of the 
taxidermy pelts.  However most all features suffer a loss in reflectance for the taxidermy specimen.  
Hence the taxidermy specimens are usable for study, but for spectral classification the loss of 
reflectance reduces their performance in matching in classification schemes, detailed in later sections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
==PAGE:20==
 
Figure 13.  Horns and hide made of hard and soft keratin, respectively. 
 
 
Keratin 
 
Hair is made mostly of a protein called keratin which is the Greek word for ‘horn’ and is in fact what 
horn is made of as well as hoofs, claws, feathers and beaks.  But there is also keratin in skin.  The 
former group belong to ‘hard’ keratins and the skin contains ‘soft’ keratins.  The difference is the 
Sulphur content which makes it harder (Lewis and Rippon, 2013).  Do not confuse keratin the protein 
with carotene the pigment.  They are not the same though they can be in the same places. 
 
The spectrum of pure keratin is presumed for this project to be that of rhino horn.  This ‘keratin’ 
spectra looks like a much less reflective version of the fur spectra in SWIR though the horn has not 
been treated by chemicals. 
Figure 14.  Spectra of the front and rear rhino horns, used as a spectrum of pure keratin. 
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 15.  Ivory vs. rhino horn comparison showing identical features in the SWIR. 
 
 
Keratin – Ivory conundrum 
 
This project postulated that since hair is made of keratin and rhino horn is made of keratin and they 
have identical spectra in the SWIR that this is the spectrum of keratin.  However there is a 
complication to that postulate.  When rhino horn spectra are plotted with elephant ivory it is noted 
that they too have identical spectra in the SWIR.  Elephant ivory is to be made of dentin which is a 
form of hydrated calcium phosphate and carbonate.  This is not the same composition as keratin.  
Though the ivory spectrum shows no similarities to calcite (CaCO3) in the SWIR at all, so perhaps 
there exists some chemical similarity between keratin and ivory, or the postulate was incorrect 
entirely and there is something else taking place in the SWIR the author is unaware of. 
 
A possible reconciliation; according to Derrik et al (1999) leather, hair and ivory are categorized as 
proteinaceous animal tissues which are readily identifiable in the IR.  The IR has a huge range and 
most work on organics is conducted in the middle IR, as was featured in their book, or in the UV 
skipping the NIR and SWIR entirely.  They further state ‘all organic species absorb in the NIR (and 
SWIR) and produce many overlapping bands...spectroscopy is nearly impossible’.  So maybe that is 
the reason so little information about animal spectra in the NIR and SWIR exists in the literature. 
 
Perhaps what ivory, fur and horn have in common spectrally is related to protein spectra and not 
keratin specifically?  More research is needed on this topic to identify why nearly all animal materials 
look the same in the SWIR. 
 
The key point is most all animal spectra do look identical in the SWIR and this signature is different 
than vegetation, soil or geologic materials.  Hence if one is searching for animals the SWIR is the 
region to differentiate them from their habitat.  Future cameras should look to the SWIR to spectrally 
map the occurrence of animals in an image.  It is not possible to differentiate the species of animals 
in SWIR, but that could be possible in the Visible and NIR where pigments are strongly expressed. 
20
==PAGE:22==
 
Figure 16.  Giraffe fur spectra plotted versus sand and grass and ‘keratin’ spectra. 
 
In the figure above giraffe fur is the green, blue and red lines representing light, mixed and dark fur 
respectively.  The purple line is the rhino horn ‘keratin’ spectrum for comparison.  The tan line is the 
dry grass spectrum and the orange line is the red Kalahari sand.  Note that the sand spectrum in the 
latter half of the SWIR is much brighter than the fur or vegetation. 
 
The fur and vegetation have similar reflectance in the SWIR though individual peaks and absorptions 
vary on small scales a broad band spectral channel collecting the weak photons of SWIR may not 
resolve.  In the SWIR the plant spectra discussed in Section III expresses cellular water, cellulose and 
proteins (Thulin, 2008).  The proteins in vegetation could be the reason their SWIR spectrum is so 
similar in reflectance to animal fur.  Though the peak and absorption feature axes of vegetation either 
dry or hydrated do not match those of animal fur. 
 
A larger spectral feature which may be used to discriminate an animal from vegetation or geologic 
material is located at approximately 1650 to 1750nm.  Clark (1999) explains this feature at 1700nm 
is due to a C-H stretching overtone in organic compounds.  The precise wavelengths of the 1700nm 
absorption feature can shift if C-H is involved with hydrogen bonds.  The compound causing this 
feature in animals was further explored in the Derivative Spectra section VII. 
 
Thulin (2008) reports that dry plants also have a major feature between 1650 to 1770nm due to 
nitrogen, protein, lignin and cellulose.  However this feature is expressed in dry grass spectra as more 
of a plateau, at least in grass specimens scanned for this project.  When the grass is hydrated it turns 
into a peak.  However for animals the feature is a distinctly deep bimodal absorption at 1730nm and 
neither a plateau nor peak.  Therefore should be usable to differentiate animals from dry vegetation 
in SWIR. 
 
Note that if vegetation cells are hydrated and one presumes chlorophyll is also active, it would be a 
simple matter to distinguish active chlorophyll and hence most vegetation from other materials.  
However grass in this survey area was semi-green indicating chlorophyll was still absorbing Red and 
Blue but the grass failed to be indicated in the NDVI imagery. 
21
==PAGE:23==
Another absorption feature in animal spectra has an axes at 1500nm, however its proximity to the 
large water absorption feature at circa 1450nm would make it difficult to detect without accurate 
hyperspectral measurements.  Anything containing water or hydroxyl will have a strong absorption 
close to 1400nm due to O-H stretching overtones (Clark, 1999).  Usually the feature is observed 
closer to 1450nm in this project spectra. 
 
Pigment spectra 
 
The spectra of melanin pigments seems to be dominant in the Visible and NIR ending by the boundary 
with SWIR at circa 1350-1400nm.  This conclusion was arrived at empirically by studying the spectra 
of multicolored animals.  It was noted that the spectra of two or more colors on an individual animal 
are different in the Visible through NIR and then converge at the SWIR boundary, as discussed in the 
previous section.  Hence a cheetah or leopard with a yellow body and dark spots has two unique 
spectra in the Visible to NIR, as do the black and white stripes of zebra.  The conclusion is that this 
must be due to pigments as in the Visible one can verify that the animals look quite different and this 
is echoed by their spectra.  But the trend of pigment differences does not terminate at the Visible 
boundary with the NIR but continues through the NIR to finally merge at the SWIR. 
 
On the other end of the spectrum it seems that most pigments converge again by the near UV.  
However the spectrophotometer used gives suspicious readings in the near UV and no further 
attempts of interpretation will be made for UV spectra. 
 
Figure 17.  Dichromic:  zebra has eumelanin and no melanin.  Cheetah is eumelanin and pheomelanin. 
 
In the figure below of zebra stripes which according to Bard (1981) are due to eumelanin in the black 
stripes and the absence of melanin in the white stripes.  This demonstrates that when animal spectra 
converge to the same trend by roughly 1350 to 1400nm that the influence of melanin no longer 
dominates the spectra and the reflectance is dominated by another, as yet unconfirmed compound.  
There are offsets in the reflectance but this is minor and possibly due to instrument parameters. 
 
22
==PAGE:24==
Other dichromic animals tested such as cheetah, leopards, giraffe, etc display identical trends though 
their colors are from two different types of melanin and not the lack of it, as in zebra stripes.   
Figure 18.  Difference between black (eumelanin) and white (no melanin) zebra stripes.  Ex vivo spectra. 
 
 
The study of spectral reflectance signatures of animal fur from several different species demonstrates 
that the reflectance curves all merge together near 1400nm and continue together up to the boundary 
limit of the spectrophotometer at 2500nm.  Even the spectra of black and white stripes of an individual 
zebra or the yellow body and dark spots of Namibian leopards or cheetahs demonstrate this pattern.  
This suggests that whatever mechanisms are responsible for reflectance in the visible and NIR are no 
longer the dominant process of reflectance in the Short Wave Infrared (SWIR). 
 
 
Hidden pelt patterns 
 
Even apparently monochromic (unicolored) animals could be polychromic (multicolored) outside the 
visible range and it would go undetected.  So there is a possibility of error to measure the spectral 
reflectance of pelts with point measurements by the spectrophotometer, as done by this project.  This 
risk is due to the possibility of landing upon an unusual fur coloration feature not expressed in the 
visible range which does not represent the general spectral reflectance signature of the animal.  A 
study by Hedges et al (2015) of melanistic black leopards in Malaysia using very near infrared 
(VNIR) imagery revealed the cats also possess distinctive spots on their fur similar to the patterns of 
yellow and black leopards in southern Africa, but the spots become noticeable only in NIR. 
 
To test the possibility of hidden patterns in the IR several pelts of Namibian wildlife were imaged 
with an eBee Multispec 4C© camera in Green, Red and then two VNIR channels; Red Edge at circa 
730 nm and the NIR at circa 790nm. In these multispectral imagery of gnu, springbok and oryx pelts 
plus an elephant hide sample there were no patterns to be found which are not obvious in visible light.  
These multispectral imagery are found in the Spectral Library with their respective animal. 
23
==PAGE:25==
V. 
Spectral Evolution PSM 3500 spectrophotometer 
 
Data Collection 
 
After 
locating 
perhaps 
the 
only 
field 
spectrophotometer in Namibia and arranging to 
borrow it, the author collaborated with local 
biologists Dr. 
Morgan 
Hauptfleisch of 
the 
Polytechnic of Namibia, Stuart Munro of Na'an Ku 
Se Farm and Dr. Friedrich Reinhardt of Kuzikus 
Farm collecting spectral ‘laboratory’ data of local 
animals.  These spectra comprised mostly of large 
game but some smaller animals as well. They 
provided access to the specimens to be scanned, 
both live and in some cases dead, and handled the 
live animals while the author attempted to scan 
them.  It turns out that 10 seconds for a scan is a 
very long time for a nervous animal to be held still and many rebukes were suffered by all, 
including by the 40,000 USD spectrophotometer.  It is essential to work as a team with expert 
animal handlers as these animals are not pets so one person has to feed or otherwise distract the 
business-end of the animal and the second person has to scan the animal in a calm state for 10 
seconds. The success rate was about 50%. 
 
The lamp in the photometer produces warmth enough so the animals can often feel it through 
their fur and when they notice the instrument you have secretly placed upon them while they 
were eating they often move away abruptly before the 10 second scan is completed. Young 
animals are easiest, older animals are nearly impossible. Hence dealing with dead animals is 
often the best alternative. But as will be discussed later this is not exactly the same reflectance 
signature as the live animal.  Live animal or in vivo spectra is the most desirable. 
 
The field spectrophotometer used for the measurements made both indoors at Tau Taxidermy and 
outdoors at the Na'an Ku Se farm was the brand name Spectral Evolution model PSM-3500. This 
device has the specifications listed below copied directly from the Instrument Users Manual. 
 
The instrument was calibrated before measurements began and then again before every new 
sample or after a few samples if they were quick. Ambient air temperatures were between 15 C 
and 30 C. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19A.  Pistol grip with light source and fiber optic data feed (right). 
24
==PAGE:26==
 
Figure 19B. Table above taken directly from the PSM photometry manual. 
 
The spectrophotometer has a pistol grip that contains the light source which comes from a 
Halogen bulb, 4.25 V at 1.06 A with color temperature of 3000 K (Spectral evolution manual, 
2012). The pistol grip connects to the spectrophotometer by a fiber optic and power cable. 
 
 
Figure 20.  Proper scanning technique:  preoccupy the business end of the critter and apply photometer. 
25
==PAGE:27==
VI. 
Filtering 
 
Low pass filtering is used to smooth noisy data that slowly varies in time and has high frequency random 
noise effecting it.  In spectra this noise can arise from refractive index variation or scattering in the sample 
and instrumental white noise (Zimmermann and Kohler, 2013).  Here, low pass filtering is assumed to 
be applied to data points in a series that are all equally spaced, such as reflectance values per nanometer. 
 
Moving Window Averaging Filter 
 
The simplest form of low-pass filter is the Moving Window Averaging Filter.  This technique takes a 
central data point on a line together with neighboring data points to the left and right of it, usually 
symmetrically, sums the data values inside this 'window' and divides the result by the total number of 
points used  ( #Left + 1 in center +  #Right ).  It replaces the center data point value with the new value.  
To continue, the entire Moving Window shifts over one position and repeats the operation.   
 
The advantage of this operation is the simplicity.  Just replacing the center data point with the mean value 
and the data is not weighted based upon its distance from the center point.  Instead it is presumed that 
noise more or less cancels itself out within the window.  This operation preserves the total area under the 
curve and the position on the axis (Numeric Recipes, 1992; Schafer, 2011). 
 
The disadvantages are that all maxima and minima will be reduced in amplitude and slopes will be 
suppressed, smoothing the feature by reducing height and increasing width.  Rather undesirable in 
studying photometry peaks.  Further, the more narrow the peaks the more their total height will be 
reduced after the window averaging.  So two peaks initially of equal height the narrower one will be the 
lower in height after the averaging window has passed.  Peaks with most peakedness (Numerical Recipes 
Ch 14.8, 1992) also called positive or leptokurtic kurtosis of the 4th moment (Numeric Recipes Ch 14.1, 
1992) will suffer the most height suppression, while broader features suffer proportionally less. 
 
The moving average window filter was implemented in MATLAB with this sample code trying first no 
weights on all points in the window and then trying a double weight upon just the center point: 
 
 
 
 
 
for k = 1:500       % k is # of smoothing iterations 
         
    for i = 3:2149; % must indent starting/ending pixels based upon window width 
 
           dr(i,:) = ( r(i-2) + r(i-1) + (r(i)) + r(i+1) + r(i+2) )/5; 
        %  dr(i,:) = ( r(i-1) + 2(r(i)) + r(i+1) )/4;  % after (Milton et al, 1991) 
    end    
end 
 
 
26
==PAGE:28==
Savitzky-Golay Filters 
 
An improved low pass filter was developed by Savitzky and Golay (S-G) in 1964 (Schafer, 2011) and is 
the most widely used smoothing algorithm in spectroscopy (Zimmermann and Kohler, 2013) as it reduces 
high frequency noise and preserve details such as the local maxima, minima, height and width of peaks 
(Num. Recipes, 1992; Schafer 2011), if not perfectly then very well. 
 
In contrast to the Moving Window Average Filter the S-G is a weighted filter using least squares to 
calculate coefficients for the central point in the window and the M points to each side of it.  Zimmerman 
and Kohler (2013) demonstrated the importance of optimizing S-G parameters, specifically the window 
size to fit spectral features as well as the polynomial order which are typically 2nd or 4th, but should have 
an even order number (Schafer, 2011). 
 
S-G filter finds coefficients (cn) that preserve the higher moments such as variance, skewness and 
kurtosis (Num. Recipes Ch 14.1, 1992). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
𝑔𝑔𝑖𝑖= ෍ 
𝑛𝑛𝑅𝑅
𝑛𝑛=−𝑛𝑛𝐿𝐿
𝑐𝑐𝑛𝑛𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑖+𝑛𝑛 
 
 
Picking the correct window width 2M+1 is a challenge but the Numerical recipes book recommends that 
as a rule of thumb, to choose that the full window size of the 4th order S-G filter is between 1 and 2 times 
the full width half maximum (FWHM) of desired features in the spectra.  The broader features which the 
moving S-G window cannot fully encompass will be smoothed more poorly. 
 
However, signal bandshapes can differ markedly in different spectral regions; hence, it should be taken 
into consideration that an optimal SG window size is often limited to an exact spectral region 
(Zimmermann and Kohler, 2013). 
 
 
MATLAB implementation of S-G 
 
Matlab has a command to implement the S-G filter with several options possible.  Here is the one 
requiring minimum information: 
 
sgolayfilt(file, order, size);    
%  file is the name of regularly spaced reflectance data 
 
 
 
 
 
%  order should be even, commonly 2nd or 4th  (Schafer, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
%  size is the moving window's full width (2M+1) 
 
The author chooses 4th order, selects a width according to the rule-of-thumb being 1 or 2 times longer 
than the widest features of interest in the spectra.  In this case the width should be equivalent to nm of 
the spectral features.   
27
==PAGE:29==
 
 
Figure 21.  A sample of common spectra showing the widths of the features common in this data. 
 
In the figure above one notices the majority of major spectral features are broad, especially in the infrared 
which is vibrational processes such as the water bands.  But some minor yet important absorption such 
as animals at 1500nm and silicates at 2200 nm should be preserved.  Therefore choosing 100nm wide 
window seems appropriate to try. 
 
 
The Matlab code for the filtering routines including the S-G filter is found in Appendix 2 Matlab codes. 
28
==PAGE:30==
XII. 
Spectral derivatives 
 
 
Calculating derivatives of spectra emphasize absorption feature’s axes positions, maxima, minima and 
inflection points while reducing or eliminating vertical baseline offsets.  Another advantage of using 
derivative spectra is that it is less sensitive to variations in illumination caused by solar incidence angle, 
clouds, topography, vegetation and other attenuation (after Zimmermann and Kohler, 2013). 
 
The first derivative removes baseline vertical shift that occur when the light source between the 
background and the sample spectrum varies.  The second derivative removes the slope from spectra 
caused by excessive Mie scattering which slope is inversely proportional to wavelength (after 
Zimmermann and Kohler, 2013). 
 
 
Case Study 
 
In section IV. Fauna Spectra it was mentioned that at 1730nm animals have a distinct bimodal absorption 
feature.  The test below demonstrates the utility of using derivative spectra and how they were often 
employed as a tool to evaluate spectral features more precisely. 
 
 
Figure 22.  Animal spectra have unique absorption features near 1730nm. In vivo hartebeest in red, kudu in green. 
 
This project investigates spectral features and tries to understand their mechanisms.  That animals show 
a unique spectral feature is key to discriminating and mapping them in the field.  A substance called 
sebum, a type of oil on mammal skin and hair, might be present especially in live animal spectra.  Shifts 
in absorption axes are common due to impurities so derivatives help one understand the spectra better. 
29
==PAGE:31==
1730nm absorption feature:  Test for Sebum 
 
Sebum is a natural oil excreted by animals 
which covers their skin and hairs and is a pos-
sible candidate to cause the double absorption 
feature noted in animal spectra near 1702 and 
1736nm. 
 
Sebum spectra show minima at 1210nm and 
doublettes at 1736 and 1760, 2306 and 2346nm. 
 
Looking at the spectra of in vivo hartebeest and 
kudu using 0 t h and 1 s t derivatives shows little 
agreement with published sebum spectral data. 
There is indication of a slight feature near 
1210nm, however this is also the range of a 
common water overtone. Most persuasively in 
favor of sebum is the major diagnostic absorp-
tion feature at precise1y 1736nm.  But this is a 
twinned feature in sebum with another minima 
expected at 1760nm. This 1760nm feature is 
missing entirely in both the 0 t h and 1 s t order 
derivative data.  See figures. 
 
In animal spectra the minima of sebum at 2306 
and 2346nm are also completely absent. The 
conclusion is sebum is not detected here and is 
not the cause of the absorption feature. 
 
The figure top left displays the zeroth order spectrum, i.e. the normal reflectance spectrum.  The minima 
near 1730nm is very interesting and sebum seems a reasonable candidate as the cause.  When the spectra 
of both the kudu and hartebeest are filtered using 2nd and 4th order S-G filters and then plotted as first 
derivatives on the graph far right, the 0-crossing of the Y-axis is at precisely 1736nm and indicates the 
trough axis of the zeroth order spectrum.  This makes a very good case for sebum whose major absorption 
feature is at 1736nm. 
 
Yet the adjacent minima for sebum are missing entirely and the derivatives would show the inflections 
hidden in zeroth order spectra due to overlapping absorptions by other materials.  This is the best asset 
of utilizing the derivatives; to extract overlapping features from within the spectra.  Yet after evaluating 
the derivative data one can say with some confidence that the other features for sebum are missing and 
the 1736nm minima was a coincidence.  The search for the responsible absorbing material must continue. 
Figure 23. 
 
Top, 0th order spectra of 
feature of interest. 
 
Right, 1st order 
derivative spectra using 
2nd & 4th order Savitzky-
Golay filters for in vivo 
kudu and hartebeest. 
30
==PAGE:32==
VIII.    Principle Component Analysis 
 
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) is a very common procedure used to reduce the dimensionality of 
data. PCA tries to find the direction in the spread of data points that has the largest variance, and then the 
second largest variance, etc.  In this way one can select the PCs which emphasize the greatest variation.  
However, note that the largest variance of the data, PC1, does not necessarily locate the most 
discriminating axes for what one wishes to find.  Sometimes PC2 enhances the features one seeks better, 
or not at all. 
 
Figure 24.  RGB image of the Kalahari with animals.   (Photo:  Drone Adventures) 
 
It is desired to emphasize the information contained in this 3 band RGB image.  So PCA was performed 
and the three resulting PCs were analyzed.  It was found that the first PC had the most information and 
this was color scaled, the result is the animal are the brightest objects in the scene if in direct sunlight.  
Sometimes these simple tricks work as desired.  But even when not, PCA is often an initial step for 
numerous data analysis strategies so it never hurts to have a look at the PCs. 
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 25.  First PC and then a color scale.  Larger animals in sun are emphasized due to critical angle 
reflections.  Animals in shade not emphasized.  Example, in bush shadow at (2600, 1200) 
Figure 26.  An enlargement of the animals in the scene.  Note the animal in the shade top center. 
32
==PAGE:34==
Figures 27 and 28.  Rhino with RGB image highlighted by PC1 and color scale added.  Original image below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Image:  Drone Adventures) 
33
==PAGE:35==
XII. 
Image Processing 
 
Image Registration: 
 
Data from the Multispec 4C © camera is collected in paged Tiff files, 1 page for each of four channels.  
They suffer co-alignment problems such that each lens does not have the same principle point.  These 
offsets must be correctly adjusted so each pixel overlaps with itself in neighboring bands to give an 
accurate spectra and not a spectra that contains the neighboring pixel spectrum values for one or more 
of the other bands from other pixels. 
 
First the imagery were aligned by selecting ground control points (GCPs) for each of the three bands 
against an arbitrary band used as the master image.  GCPs were evenly distributed over the image. 
 
Figure 29.  Images left and right sides are being co-registered by GCP rectification. Top windows are zooms 
of rectangles in lower windows.  
And these results are achieved: 
34
==PAGE:36==
Before: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 30.  Image MSP_00089_00025 before co-alignment of the bands, showing severe offsets. 
 
Figure 31.  Image MSP_00089_00025 after co-alignment of bands to a master image, band 1. 
35
==PAGE:37==
Co-registration using intensity: 
An enhancement to using GCPs to co-register adjacent bands of the Multispec 4C was found by the 
author late in the project so was not implemented in time to re-process all the data.  However there is 
a function in Matlab that uses intensity mapping to co-register the bands.  This technique worked well 
on the 4 bands of the Multispec 4C camera.  As this camera has four independent lenses and four 
independent CCDs it is essentially four separate cameras, but each is controlled by the same processor 
to fire all four shutters near-simultaneously and then all four data layers are saved to the same file.  
The intensity mapping method worked well to align the four bands taken at the same time and 
position.  But as discussed below, it failed to co-register imagery by a second drone. 
 
Figure 32.  Color composite showing the improved co-alignment of spectral bands by intensity mapping. 
 
A composite registration of the Multispec 4C camera by intensity showing superior co-registration of 
the bands than by using GCPs, evident by the enhanced detail.  The abundant trails and aardvark 
holes, sandy patches and bushes certainly provide good intensity features distributed around the 
image to match equivalent features in the adjacent bands.  This is a false-color composite. 
Compare this image to the one above registered by GCPs.  And this intensity mapping method takes 
only minutes while the GCP method can take ½ hour to do well. 
36
==PAGE:38==
 
Figure 33.  Blue channel from RGB camera, left.  Green from Multispec 4C © camera, right.  Co-registration 
failed as animals have moved. 
An attempt was made to co-register the Blue channel from the RGB camera on drone#2 with the 
Multispec 4C camera on drone#1.  But the algorithm failed to find a match likely due to the running 
animals in the scene that had moved about 1 meter.  The Blue channel subset above-left has high 
native resolution and shows the animals running.  The Green channel above-right taken by the 
Multispec 4C shows the animals about 1 meter ahead.  A small change but enough to cause a problem.  
The two cameras were not coordinated to shoot at the same times only at the same positions on the 
flight plan.  So if drone#2 is 10 meters ahead then there will be a short delay until drone#1 arrives at 
the same shot point.  Due to different camera parameters such as focal length and F-stop the RGB 
camera drone#2 flew higher and a little bit ahead of the Multispec 4C camera drone#1 in order not to 
catch it in the imagery.  On rare occasions possibly due to roll pitch and yaw of drone#2, the drone#1 
was imaged inside the frame by the RGB camera.  Shown below. 
However it is possible the moving animals were not the problem.  Due to the far more dominant fixed 
features like trees, trails and holes a match could have been possible.  The two cameras have very 
different image scale and distortion by the 
Multispec 4C lenses is quite strong.  Both 
‘similarity’ and ‘affine’ transformations 
were attempted to align the imagery and 
allowed translation, rotation, scaling and in 
the case of affine, also shear.  But only 
bizarre and unusable alignment results were 
achieved. 
Figure 34.  Drone #1 carrying Multispec 4C 
camera imaged from above by Drone #2 with 
RGB camera.  The blue bar is the bottom of 
the image frame so drone#1 is < 1m inside. 
37
==PAGE:39==
IX.     ii.  Thresholding 
Thresholding is a simple technique that involves setting a level in which all values higher are made 
white, and all values lower are made black.  Trying to isolate animals this way brought better results 
than expected.  About ¾ of the animals in sunlight are detected.  Only few false positives. 
Figure 35.  Green channel, left set to threshold = 0.540 of single data.  Right and zoomed below are picks. 
Oryx and zebra standing perpendicular to the solar incidence direction pick up well though not 100% 
However, the hartebeest also standing perpendicular do not register at all.  They are darker in albedo 
and not detected.  Anomalous bright spots are sometimes identifiable as rocks or logs. 
38
==PAGE:40==
IX.    iii.   Band Ratios 
Band ratio’ing is a data transformation method to reduce the effects of environmental conditions that 
come from topographic slope and aspect, shadow and changing of illumination angle and intensity.  
Next pages will demonstrate some image ratio’ing to attempt certain feature enhancement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 36.  Original RGB camera image with strong shadowing.  Note animal in shade (red circle). 
Figure 37.  Band ratio = Red / Blue.  Notice animal in the shade (top center) well equalized.  Note, black 
borders and sand ripples suspected to be edge enhancement artifact of the camera software. 
39
==PAGE:41==
Figure 38.  Ratio = Green / Red Edge.  Decent shadow suppression but ‘striping’ introduced. 
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 39.  Red Edge / Red  
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 40.   Red / Red Edge 
This combination worked very well in smoothing features, regrettably the animals are gone too. 
42
==PAGE:44==
 
Figure 41.  NDVI shows healthy vegetation very well.  Only trees, no grass is indicated. 
 
The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) differences the NIR band which is the 
reflectance maximum of vigorous vegetation with the Red band which is the reflectance minimum.  
Often over a factor of 10 in reflectance strength, i.e. 60% vs. 5% for NIR vs. Red, respectively.  The 
difference is then normalized between 0 to 1 or 0 to -1 by dividing the difference by the sum of the 
two bands.  The result is that vigorous vegetation with active chlorophyll is emphasized strongly 
while senescent vegetation like the dry grass is not seen at all, nor are the animals and Kalahari sand. 
This NDVI image could be used to negate vigorous vegetation pixels from other image schemes 
where animals co-classify with vegetation. 
 
 
 
 
 
43
==PAGE:45==
Figure 42.  An ‘iron oxide’ normalized index 
The iron oxide image above simulates the usual iron ratio which would be Red / Blue, however as 
Blue is not collected the Green channel was used with reasonable results, as would be guessed.  The 
principle works upon the fact that ferrous iron has a large absorption band centered in the UV.  As a 
result iron has a monotonic increasing slope from the UV toward a maximum in the NIR.  The result 
of dividing high values in Red by lower values in Green or Blue results in iron emphasized.  While 
vegetation which is low in Red and high in Green gets suppressed by dividing low values by higher 
values. 
Making a normalized index simply normalizes values like the NDVI does.  As one experiment was 
using both this ‘iron index’ image with the NDVI image together.  But not improved classification 
resulted for the animals.  However if one can subtract the vegetation and subtract iron oxide, all one 
should have remaining are the animals.  Except it is dry season and dry grass is not classified at all 
by the NDVI.  If it were wet season and all vegetation was vigorous, maybe this trick would work. 
The results are that iron oxide covered Kalahari sand which underlies the region is well emphasized 
where it is exposed on the surface.  Though the trails are visible they are not as emphasized as 
expected, leading one to suspect that perhaps the co-registration of the image layers is imprecise.  
This issue was addressed in the Intensity Mapping co-registration. 
44
==PAGE:46==
X.    Supervised Classification 
 
The drone named eBee © marketed by Sensefly was used for this project for aerial surveys and carried 
three different types of cameras which were tested for performance in spectral classification.  The 
first two cameras are Canon S110 compact cameras that have been slightly modified to be carried on 
the drones.  The modifications include wires from the camera circuitry to the drone circuitry in order 
to share a common power supply and to fire the camera shutter when the drone arrives at photograph 
shot-points.  Also the spectral filters were modified on the NIR model of the Canon S110 camera. 
 
i.    RGB camera: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 43.  Drone-modified Canon S110 camera and its spectral band sensitivities. (Images: Sensefly.com) 
Figure 44.  Original RGB image to be classified for discrimination of animals.  (Photo: Drone Adventures) 
45
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 45.  3-member classified image using K-means.  Sand = purple, bushes = blue, grass = gold. 
Figure 46.  6-member supervised classification.  Animals in sun classify with dense grass = orange.  
46
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 47.  Oryx look like dry grass.  Spectra of oryx above compared with dry grass below (Graph: USGS). 
The RGB camera was not able to uniquely discriminate the animals in the image which are mostly 
oryx and a few springbok.  The classification was tried repeatedly but never able to achieve a unique 
classification of the oryx even when training samples were made of the pixels on their backs.  This 
may be due to the RGB camera’s wide and overlapping bands as shown in the spectral band figure at 
the beginning of this section.  These non-discrete bands obviously co-correlate greatly and make a 
very nice photograph but are not able to be effectively used to spectrally discriminate animals.  Here 
the scene is very simple:  bushes, grass, red sand, shadows and some animals in the sun and shade.  
The 3-member classification was able to provide the basic three members of red sand, grass and 
bushes however the animals and the shadows also classified as bushes too. 
The 6-member supervised classification was attempted and the results were better but still the animals 
did not classify uniquely.  This time the animals classified with dense grass represented as orange on 
the map, which is different than the mixed pixels of sparse grass and red sand which represented as 
red on the map.  Noting the photograph figure above, oryx do look like dry grass.  But the proof is in 
the hyperspectra.  In the figure above at the top right is a laboratory spectrum of an oryx pelt and 
below it is a spectrum of dry golden grass from the U.S. Geological Survey Spectral Library (USGS).  
The green windows demarcate the Visible spectrum.  Note that the reflectance and curves look very 
similar.  Hence even with spectral methods in the Visible range it is difficult or impossible to 
discriminate oryx from the grass which is their favorite habitat.  Please note that the spike about 
400nm in the lab spectrum of the oryx is just instrument noise.  A 40,000 USD spectrophotometer 
plus several of the best mathematical classification algorithms prove; oryx do look like dry grass. 
47
==PAGE:49==
ii.    NIR camera: 
 
The next classification was made using imagery from the NIR camera by Sensefly.  This is also a 
drone-modified Canon S110 which the stock RGB Bayer filter has also been modified and the Blue 
channel exchange for a NIR channel, so the three channels are now Green, Red and NIR. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 48.  Drone-modified Canon S110 NIR camera and spectral band sensitivities. (Images: Sensefly.com) 
 
One notices from the figure above that the bands for the NIR camera still overlap however the NIR 
channel is a bit more separated, however has a long tail of sensitivity for the width of the NIR, it 
should be good to pick up the vegetation reflectance plateau beyond circa 750nm to the end of the 
detector sensitivity range. 
These camera of the Canon S110 line initially had 10 Megapixels and later 14 Megapixels so offered 
very good ground resolution.  Though their spectral bands are not discrete they offer reasonable 
spectral feature discrimination in addition to spatial separability.  In the false color image mosaic 
below the NIR channel is red, the Red channel is green and Green channel is blue.  The composite 
produces vigorous vegetation with active chlorophyll as orange-red, senescent vegetation as green 
and the red Kalahari sand is purplish. 
In the mosaic of NIR images made during a drone survey of a game farm in the Kalahari no animals 
were located so spectral capabilities could not be tested. 
In the 5-member classification the bushes and their shadows do not separate well, but mix dark blue 
and light blue.  The cause of this is not understood.  Dense dry grasses are pale green, sparse grass 
and sand mixed pixel areas are orange and bare sand is mapped as dark red, such as in the car tracks.  
Ironically, what appears to be an aardvark burrow at the far right lower part of the image, does not 
show up particularly well as bare sand, though one expects the aardvark to excavate abundant pile of 
san and the entrance to the hole. 
This camera was designed to monitor vegetation and its abilities to discover animals was 
unfortunately not able to be tested, as the animals were not found in the scene.  However, low 
expectations are held as demonstrated in the oryx spectra figure above, that most animals appear 
similar to dry grasses into the close NIR range where this NIR camera offers sensitivity.  However 
the good spatial resolution is a favorable asset. 
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 49.  Processed mosaic of Green, Red and NIR imagery.  No animals were found in any NIR scenes. 
Figure 50.  5-class NIR image mosaic.  A few misclassifications possibly due to angle and the optics. 
49
==PAGE:51==
As no impressive results were found for spectrally mapping animals with the RGB or NIR cameras, 
next will be tested if the 4 discrete channel multispectral camera for eBee© drone is of utility for 
animal discrimination. 
 
iii.    Multispec 4C © camera 
Figure 51.  The Multispec 4C camera and the published spectral channel sensitivity.  (Images: SenseFly) 
 
The Multispec 4C© camera marketed by Sensefly used with their eBee drone is a four independent 
channel camera with an extra irradiance channel to calibrate the radiance.  This irradiance channel 
may be seen as the white button on the top of the camera in the figure above.  The bottom of the 
camera has four independent lenses each with an independent CCD chip of 1.2 Megapixels.  Spatial 
resolution is much less than the previously tested cameras, however the advantage of the Multispec 
4C camera is the four discrete, i.e. non-overlapping channels.  For spectral processing these should 
provide great advantages.  The camera is designed similar to the Multispectral Scanner flown on the 
Landsat satellites of the 1970s in that it has no blue channel but uses Green, Red, Red Edge and NIR 
bands primarily intended for vegetation purposes (USGS). 
The arrangement of the 4 lenses for each channel on the bottom of the camera is in a square patter 
with a lens at each corner of the square.  This produces four independent images which are slightly 
offset spatially from one another.  Also, each CCD will have its own noise and thermal characteristics 
which may not be shared with other colors like in the Bayer filter arrangement used for the single 
CCD of other cameras.  There are however alignment and vignetting effects which must be dealt with 
in the data post-processing. 
The spectral graph in the figure above was retrieved from the SenseFly© website.  It is not known 
how accurately these bands are portrayed in the figure.  One has to presume they are accurate.  The 
camera flown for the aerial surveys used in this project was actually the prototype Multispec 4C © 
camera made before it went into production.  There were a few issues with it in the field. 
This camera comes with a calibration card to characterize the CCD responses.  Before each flight the 
card was placed on the ground in ambient sunlight and imaged by the camera.  The classification of 
this camera’s imagery is the focus of this project and little to no more attention will be paid to the 
RGB or NIR cameras.  All of the following work is based upon classifying multispectral imagery. 
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 52.  Four independent channels collected by the Multispec 4C© camera.  (Imagery: Drone Adventures) 
51
==PAGE:53==
X.  Supervised Classification  -  iii. Multispec 4C © camera 
 
Supervised classification is a technique to produce thematic maps by partitioning the image into 
classes.  To supervise the classification the user draws polygons over physical features using pixels 
as pure as possible of an unique object.  The polygons use those sets of inclusive pixels for statistical 
analysis to characterize the feature.  Then a mask for filtering data is made to classify all remaining 
pixels into as many classes as the user has defined. 
 
Classification and Confusion Matrix 
 
For each observation we calculate the likelihood that it belongs to each class, based on the 
Mahalanobis distance. The result is then used to determine the class with maximum likelihood. 
Subsequently, the confusion matrix is constructed in order to measure the quality of the classification 
which can be done both graphically and numerically. 
 
Each class is assumed to have equal probability of being chosen; some terms in the original expression 
for likelihood have been dropped; constant 1/2 has been dropped and a minus sign has been changed, 
so that rather than maximizing, we minimize. 
 
In principle, the classification is to be made over the original data matrix.  For hyperspectral data this 
may be computationally prohibitive but for multispectral data it is not an issue. Thus, one can apply 
orthogonal transformations upon the data matrix that are intended to decrease the number of variables. 
Below, is given the option to perform classification using the original data matrix or using 
transformed data after PC or MNF. In the latter case, it is requested that Euclidean distance be 
preserved. 
 
Quality of the Classification 
 
The confusion or error matrix is a measure of the quality of the classification and this quality can in 
turn be judged qualitatively by determining whether the matrix is diagonally dominant by row or 
column.  The matrix is diagonally dominant by row if the absolute value of each diagonal element is 
greater than or equal to the sum of the absolute values of the off-diagonal elements of its row. 
 
Quantitatively, the quality of the confusion matrix can be judged by the ratio of the sum of its diagonal 
to the total sum of its elements; the closer this ratio is to one the higher is the quality of the 
classification. Notice that this ratio could also be performed upon each row or column of the matrix, 
yielding measures of quality for individual supervision data classes (rows) or individual predicted 
classes (columns). 
 
The figure below shows the original 4-band image after co-registration of bands 2, 3, 4 to band 1.  
Note in none of these imagery is there any georectification, the only concern is accurate co-
registration so the pixel spectra are not mismatched with the neighboring pixels. 
 
 
52
==PAGE:54==
Figure 53.  Image to be classified for animals is this 4-band image; Green, Red, Red Edge, NIR. 
 Note the abundance of animals in the scene. 
53
==PAGE:55==
 
Figures 54 and 55.  The Green channel top, Red channel below 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54
==PAGE:56==
 
Figures 56 and 57.  The Red Edge channel top, NIR below. 
55
==PAGE:57==
 
 
Figure 58.  Image for selecting sample regions (left), area masks of the 4 classes created in white (right). 
 
Figure  59.  Bands 3 2 1, Red Edge, Red, Green with a 4-member class scheme. 
Notice in this classification that the grass tones are shaded red, then blue, then green from the 
illumination effects and optical vignetting.  The latter is the same classification as the vigorous trees 
which have deep root systems, however the grass is dry brown and their chlorophyll is dormant.  The 
classification highlights the shadows of animals well, but does not classify the actual animal bodies. 
56
==PAGE:58==
 
Figure 60.  Close-up of a oryx herd. 
 
 
 
 
57
==PAGE:59==
 
Figure 61.  Close-up view of large animals in NIR channel, likely a herd of oryx. 
 
Viewed from a distance the mind reconstructs the animal shapes by noting illumination and shadows, 
but up close one realizes what the computer algorithm sees:  just a few bright pixels, many likely 
mixed spectra with the background and in this case just 4-bands to resolve the classes.  It may not be 
so surprising that the results were not as hoped.  The animals refuse to classify independently and 
often are grouped with vegetation. 
58
==PAGE:60==
X.    iv.   Minimum Noise Fraction 
 
 
The supervised classification was attempted using the Minimum Noise Fraction (MNF) technique. 
The eigenvalues are used to find the image components which maximize variance and hence 
signal to noise ratio (SNR) which are displayed as images ranked from highest to lowest SNR.  
Because the transform is a ratio, it is also scale invariant (UTexas.edu).  
 
In this 4-channel image shown below the first component had SNR = 930, the second SNR = 230 
and already the 3rd = 30 and 4th = 9, so low as to be dominantly noise.  The first two components 
contain about 97% of the SNR in the image and this combination was used for further analysis as 
these two images look the least noisy and have most signal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 62.  Top left SNR = 930;  top right SNR = 230;  lower left SNR = 30;  lower right SNR = 9 
 
 
In the classification routine if all noise fractions were computed then it would be the same result 
as if one had not computed MNF at all.  Instead by removing the noisiest components from 
the classification step one hopes to improve the classification results.  Next we shall see: 
59
==PAGE:61==
The confusion matrix displays on the Y-axis the amount of 
sample pixels in each training class initially given and the 
X-axis show many samples were eventually assigned to 
each category by the classifier method. The 1st bin is 
sand, 2nd is grass, 3rd is animal, 4th shadow and 5th is bush.  
One sees in the box (row 2, column 3) that animals are 
being largel y co-assigned with grass and vice versa.  
One reason may be that when selecting the sample pixels 
of the animals just a few pixels large that grass is 
inadvertently included into the hand-drawn sampling cell 
too. Or perhaps mixed pixels are included which do not 
have pure spectra of the desired target, allowing the cross 
classification problem. 
 
The confusion matrix at right is for the first two highest 
SNR components.  The numeric confusion matrix box 
shows population numbers of the colored graphic above. 
Figure 63.  #1 sand, #2 grass, #3 animal, 
  
#4 shadow and #5 is bush. 
 
Figure 64.  The original image classified using all components has the most grass classified correctly. 
60
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 65.  Classification using components 1, 2 and 4.  Grass classified as grass (green) or animal (red). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 66.  Using components 1 and 2: grass now classifies as three objects: grass, animal and sand. 
 
61
==PAGE:63==
Results of using MNF were not as hoped; the more noise components removed the less accurate the 
classifications were.  Looking at the imagery gives one an idea via the grass which does not classify 
only as green, instead it classifies also in large regions as animal and also as sand when using only 
two SNR image components.  Further, this mis-classification of the grassy regions seems to 
correspond with illumination changes across the imagery. 
 
Looking at the confusion matrices of all SNR bands [1, 2, 3, 4], the highest two SNR components [1, 
2] as well as the three components [1, 2, 4] confirms that the classifications error more with the fewer 
components that are used.  The most accurate classification occurs using all 4 SNR bands, i.e. the 
original image, the next best was with three SNR components [1, 2, 4] and the least accurate was the 
best SNR components [1, 2].  This is certainly not what was hoped or expected but is clear that this 
method, though visually pleasing without the noise, does not aid classification in this instance. 
 
Above all, the main purpose of this exercise is to discriminate animals and this was not successful at 
all.  If the animal pixels were successful then they are mixed in with misclassified pixels so well as 
to not stand out from the background adequately. 
 
 
 
Figure 67.  The original multiband false color image used in the MNF for comparison of details with the MNF 
supervised-classification results, above.  Note the abundant animals and their locations. 
62
==PAGE:64==
XI.    Unsupervised Classification with K-means 
K-means divides the data into K# of clusters defined by the user, with or without a rejection class, 
and will attempt the classification multiple times to see if the resulting centroids are consistent. 
Initial attempts to classify animals as a unique class with all 4 channels proved ineffective.  Recalling 
tests discussed in Chapter XIV, the Red Edge channel actually diminished classification results 
sometimes.  So a few rounds of K-means were attempted using only the bands NIR, Red and Green. 
Using too few K-means classes categorizes the animals with the trees.  Using too many classes still 
categorizes the animals with trees but additionally introduces classifications to the vignetting, or 
illumination conditions artifacts caused by the optical image distortions.  See the many figures below. 
In the 15 member image the animals are still not classified, instead the vegetation is just being 
classified in ever more illumination detail.  This may be due to there being insufficient animal pixels 
present in this image to ever make a unique statistical class, despite the numerous oryx herd present. 
Low solar angle and vertical imaging angle make the condition that the front of the trees are in direct 
sun yet the camera sees the shaded back sides too.  This may be an issue with the NIR channel as it 
is senstive to chlorophyll fluoresence.  The leafs in the direct sunlight might be producing more NIR 
signal than the leafs on the back side of the trees, possibly explaining the ‘halo’ often around plants. 
That the bare sand classified with the trees must be a result of their being a missing Blue band where 
iron oxide absorbs strongly.  But the healthy vegetation should absorb Red very well whereas the iron 
oxide coated sands reflects Red very brightly.  So is a mystery how they classify together sometimes. 
K-means results were disappointing.  This image could not be simpler: red sand, green plants, white 
oryx and dark shadows.  All attempts to classify animals failed.  I would like to make a thematic map 
which shows just these 4 feature using the K-Means method but even using 7, 8, 10 and up to 15 K-
classes while adjusting iterations and rejection class settings consistently gave unreliable results. 
 
The biggest problem is there is too much information in the image.  So one classifies the waves and 
shadows in the sand ripples, individual leafs on trees want to classify differently with their own 
shadows really confusing the image.  Humans want less information, usually.  So one might attempt 
to use a strong boxcar filter or other low pass smoothing to blend the shadows and leafs together so 
that one just gets the classification of a bush over the entire area of the bush and not 5 different 
illumination zones inside the area of one bush.  Or that all the sand ripples classify as being just sand.  
However low pass filters obliterate the 1 to 3 bright pixels typical of animals. 
 
The only semi-successful attempt to classify the image and discriminate the animals was actually 
achieved using a 4-class K-means classification plus a rejection class.  Using this rejection class 
caused the sunny side of the animals and even the animals lying in the shade of a bush to be classified 
as rejected.  At least they classified as something.  The catch is the animals aren’t the only things in 
the rejected class, else this would be fine way to find animals in the scenes. 
 
Hyperspatial data from drones makes imagery with more information than one needs and this must 
be reduced to give general spatial categories instead of separating too many details within an object 
that a human would usually just like to classify as a singular object; like a bush, sand, animal, etc.  
63
==PAGE:65==
Figure 68.  The non-classified test image showing details of bands: NIR, , Red and Green. 
Most successful classification was a 5 member + rejection class.  Animal shadows classify brown as 
Class 6, the rejection class, along with some sand patches and bushes ‘halos’.   
Figure 69.  The 5-Class + 6th Rejection Class image at least delineates many animal locations. 
64
==PAGE:66==
Figure 70.  K-means 15 member classification to prove that animals will never show up as their own class. 
Figure 71.  10 member K-means classification with a rejection class, below. 
65
==PAGE:67==
Figures 72 and 73. Above, RGB bands 4, 2, 1 image without Red Edge and below, the classification results. 
Note that classifiers often just classifying the shadows of the animals and not the animal bodies.  This 
is not a reliable result.  The conclusion is K-Means is not appropriate here to discriminate animals. 
66
==PAGE:68==
XII:    Similarity Measures 
 
Spectral Angle Mapper (SAM) and Spectral Information Divergence (SID) are methods of measuring 
similarity between a reference spectrum and a target spectrum.  Both methods were employed in this 
project to characterize the imagery as well as with the synthetic band evaluations with this projects own 
hyperspectral library data in order to validate the potential contributions newly designed camera channels 
might bring. 
 
SAM similarity value ranges from 0 (identical) up to 1 (very dis-similar).  This value between 0 to 1 is 
an angle in radians between two vectors.  One vector pointing from the origin to a reference point in 
multispectral channel feature space.  The point coordinates being the normalized spectral reflectivity 
values in each band.  And the second vector being that of the tested pixel coordinate in the multispectral 
feature space.  The angle between these two vectors determines how similar they are. 
 
The similarity test value is often the default value of 0.1 and is recommended to be less than 0.3 or to 
reject the spectrum.  However adjusting static thresholds requires expert knowledge (Galal et al, 2012).  
It is important to realize that the angles are in radians in order to visualize in 2D  how much departure 
angle is being allowed in degrees.  The smaller the angle between the test and sample vectors the better 
the SAM fit and the lower the values will be mapped out onto an image of pixels being evaluated, hence 
darker is better.  But this can be inverted to make bright values the better fits but just using:  cos(α) 
instead of (1/acos)  where α is the angle of departure between the vectors. 
 
The primary advantage of SAM is that it is resistant to changes in illumination (Nielsen, 2001).  
Regardless of lighting or topographic slope the proportion of light in the different spectral channels 
should be the same.  So no matter where a point plots along a vector, it still belongs to that class.  The 
way it may achieve this is by being a ratio mechanism.  SAM compares slopes of 2 lines and measures 
the angle between them.  Slopes are themselves ratios and ratio’ing has been demonstrated to eliminate 
illumination aspects from a scene. 
 
In theory proportionality of light should be constant for an animal in the Sun or shade, as the reflectance 
ratios of 2 bands will stay the same.  If in the sun band X is 100 and band Y is 50, then in the shade band 
X might be 60 and therefore band Y should be 30, preserving the proportionality factor of 2 in the slope 
X/Y. 
 
In reality, proportionality may not be perfect as gases and aerosols in the air may scatter certain 
wavelengths preferentially producing a slight addition or subtraction of band strength.  For example, the 
sky on Earth is blue because water vapor scatters blue wavelengths preferentially.  Therefore sunsets on 
Earth are red as blue is filtered out.  On Mars the sky is red from scattering by aerosols and sunsets are 
blue.  Therefore shadowed regions on the ground often have a bit more blue light scattered into them 
from neighboring pixels.  The Kalahari is usually very dry and watervapor near ground level not often a 
factor however the dust aerosols are a factor and due to scattering may interfere with radiative transfer, 
producing bias in some colors.  It is not believed that SAM algorithm has an ability to detect or correct 
for these biases, but the author suspects that if the number of bands is high, that the overall influence of 
one or two slightly altered bands would have minimal impact. 
 
According to the ENVI software tutorial a big limitation of SAM is the impossibility of distinguishing 
between negative and positive correlations because only the absolute value is considered.  However only 
Matlab was used and the values are set in the codes shown in the Appendix 2. Matlab Code. 
 
67
==PAGE:69==
Spectral information divergence (SID) 
 
According to the ENVI tutorial (2014) SID is a probabilistic method that allows for variations in pixel 
measurements, where probability is measured from zero to a user-defined threshold.  SID as a 
classification method uses divergence measures to match pixels to reference spectra and the small we the 
divergence the more likely the pixels are similar.  Maximum divergence angle 0.05 to 0.08 rad. 
 (ENVI Tutorial) 
 
Ít was found by the author that SID was much more sensitive to small changes and did not have as much 
success as the SAM method.  SID was attempted alongside with every SAM of an image but did not 
seem to perform as well so was not included in the results of this thesis.  More experience needs to be 
gained first.  However perhaps it was the SAM that was in error and not the SID when it indicated that 
reference and test spectra were nearly always barely separable.  The code for the SID is included in the 
Matlab Code Appendix 2 and the values used for the parameters may be viewed there. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 74.  And example of SAM..The black star is a test point and the white star is a reference spectrum 
in a comparison space of two spectral bands being the X and Y axes.  The angle α between them 
determines their similarity, not the length of the vectors which represent illumination.    
α 
68
==PAGE:70==
XIII.    Camera Emulations: 
The theoretical capabilities of the Multispectral Camera marketed by SenseFly © of Switzerland are 
modeled using data from their eponymous website which gives the spectral response curves of their 
'Multispec 4C camera'.  The data was current as of January 2016.  The tests were conducted using the 
two hyperspectral data sets; the 230 member total set of in vivo and ex vivo spectra as well as the 90 
member subset of the in vivo spectra only, also known as the 'NKS' data.  
  
 
Figure 75.  Multispectral camera channel response curves.  It is presumed Y-axis is Reflectance (%) and the 
X-axis is nanometers (nm) of wavelength.  (Image: Sensefly.com) 
The author would like to comment that the curves in the figure above look idealistic.  It is not in his 
experience that band pass filters can be so clean and vertical without blending into neighboring 
wavelengths.  However as DTU is not known to the author to posses this multispectral camera, it was 
not able to be tested to verify its spectral capabilities directly.  Therefore the following tests were 
conducted with the above information given in the figure, with the caveat that it may not be entirely 
accurate.  Quantum efficiencies were not attempted in the test data. 
The Tests: 
The multispectral camera has four color channels; Green, Red, Red Edge and NIR.  So first it was 
tested how well animal spectra could be discriminated from their Kalahari habitat using these four 
bands and SAM/SID algorithms.  Since the actual camera was not at hand, it's abilities were crudely 
replicated using band ranges estimated from the figure above, symmetric about what is presumed to 
be the band axes listed on the right side of the table.  Communication with a Sensefly vender in South 
Africa did not bring to light any clarification on the data. 
%  multispectral camera channel emulation (specs on www.Sensefly.com) 
%       Green    = 525 to 575 (nm)      Axis = 550 (nm) +/- 25 (nm)   
%       Red      = 640 to 680           Axis = 660      +/- 20 
%       Red Edge = 725 to 745           Axis = 735      +/- 10    
%       Near IR  = 760 to 820           Axis = 790      +/- 30 
69
==PAGE:71==
Both animal spectral databases also contain the spectra of red sand, loam soil and two different species 
of dry grass for comparison. The Kalahari desert consists of a firmament of red sand and/or arid soils 
such as loam (M. Hauptfleisch, personal communication) and this base is covered in most places by 
grasses, bushes and sparse trees.  As it is desired to discriminate the animals from this habitat these 
materials were used as Reference Spectra in the SAM/SID scripts provided by Allan Aasbjerg 
Nielsen. 
Mini-hyperspectra: 
This easy simulation was to extract the bandwidths from the hyperspectral data sets equivalent to the 
multispectral camera's 4 channel widths.  The hyperspectra have one data point at each nanometer, 
hence the band's width in nm contains an equal number of datapoints.  For example the Green channel 
extends from 525 to 575 nm so accordingly consists of 51 datapoints which retain all of the original 
spectral curve's fine structure between the high and low cutoff boundaries.  These subsets will be 
called mini-hyperspectra.  Each of the color channels of mini-hyperspectra will subsequently be 
compared to the corresponding mini-hyperspectra of all materials in the spectral library during the 
SAM/SIM tests.  The four mini-hyperspectra channels comprise Green 51 nm wide, Red 41nm, Red 
Edge 21nm and NIR 61nm wide totaling 174 out of the 2151 total samples contained in each 
hyperspectrum from 350 to 2500nm. 
Extracting the mini-hyperspectra channels from the 230 member in vivo and ex vivo spectral library, 
plus the multispectral camera simulation, is as follows in Matlab: 
SID,SIDx,SIDy,negSID,SIDSAMs,SIDSAMt,SAM,ref] = ... 
     
specInfoDivRef(spectra(:,:,[525:575, 640:680, 725:745, 
760:820]), ...      
spectra(2,9,[525:575, 640:680, 725:745, 
760:820]));   
The results: 
 
Figure 76.  Applying the SAM analysis versus the Sand reference using 4 simulated mini-hyperspectral bands.  
Dark blue pixels are most similar to the sand spectrum and red is least similar. 
70
==PAGE:72==
The 230 member spectral library is dominantly animals beginning with Aardvarks at (1,1) proceeding 
alphabetically column-wise to end with Zebras at (23, 10).  The reference spectra pixel was sand at 
(20, 10) and being identical to itself, is the darkest blue.  Very similar are the 4 other adjacent sand 
pixels as well as a loam pixel, which is also high in silicates.  The remaining dark pixels are animals 
which could not be separated well by SAM and this camera simulation.  Some animals are 
discriminated well, for example the crocodile is the lone red-brown pixel in the middle. But separating 
a crocodile from Kalahari red sand should be easy.  Somewhat surprisingly the cheetahs are yellow 
and orange which is very good separation.  It will be demonstrated later that excluding certain 
wavelengths may improve the mathematical separability of some spectra. 
Essentially this exercise is purely academic as there may not exist real mini-hyperspectra cameras. 
But this simulation is likely the best correlation measurements possible from a 4-channel scheme 
because the fine details of the mini-hyperspectra within the bands ought to provide some extra 
information not available in broad, averaged single-value bands, which is the next exercise.   
If a camera has very accurate calibration there is the possibility some fine structure within the broad 
averaged channels could be reconstructed to a limited extent and possibly more closely approach this 
level of theoretical maximum accuracy achieved using mini-hyperspectra.  But the reconstruction of 
fine structure is metameric and the author points the reader with interest in 'spectral recovery' 
strategies to texts on colorimetry such as Westland and Ripamonti (2004). 
Synthetic Broad Spectral Channels: 
The next test is to more accurately simulate the Multispectral Camera than in the previous exercise. 
As the Multispectral Camera has 4 relatively broad color bands which return just one spectral 
reflectance value per band, in this exercise the mini-hyperspectra from the previous exercise will be 
averaged to yield a single value per band and these will be used for both the Reference Spectra and 
the spectral library to test the camera-simulation with SAM. 
The Matlab code employed was supplied by Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen: 
Aux1 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,525:575),3);   % Green 
Aux2 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,640:680),3);   % Red 
Aux3 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,725:745),3);   % Red Edge 
Aux4 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,760:820),3);   % NIR 
Aux5 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,400:460),3);   % Blue 
Aux = cat(3,Aux1,Aux2,Aux3,Aux4,Aux5); 
[SID,SIDx,SIDy,negSID,SIDSAMs,SIDSAMt,SAM,ref] = specInfoDivRef(Aux,Aux(2,9,:)); 
The library of in vivo animal spectra is called NKSpectra.  Though it also contains sand, loam, grass 
and two ex vivo spectra of a hyrax and a jackal pelt.  The latter used primarily to maintain the even 
geometry of the pseudoimage.  Notice that a Blue channel has been added to test the efficacy of 
possibly have such a channel, though it is not supplied with the SenseFly Multispec 4C © camera.  
The filters to create Blue may possibly be exchanged with a less effective channel such as the Red 
Edge.  Also, in NIR and SWIR can be tested in this way to determine which channels might be 
worthwhile for this project to consider having in the future. 
 
71
==PAGE:73==
 
Figure 77.  Left is the mini-hyperspectra image previously tested.  Right is the same data average into a single 
value for each broad color band.  A jackal spectrum is tested in each image.  Note the index. 
The value of the identical pixel is tested for each figure above, in this case a jackal, which shows the 
reduction in the SAM index for the averaged channels presumably due to the lack of fine structure 
information contained in the mini-hyperspectra.  Most pixels compared had about 10 to 15% less 
separability with the 4 averaged channels compared to the 4 mini-hyperspectral channels. 
 
Figure 78.  Left, is a RGBI 4 channel image.  Right, is a 5 channel RGBI + Red Edge image. 
SAM for In Vivo Spectra vs Sand 
4 averaged-channel camera emulation 
Green = 550, Red  = 660, NIR= 790 
Blue 400 to 460 = 430  
2 
4 
6 
8 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
0 
0.05 
0.1 
0.15 
0.2 
0.25 
0.3 
0.35 
72
==PAGE:74==
Synthetic channels 
The next experiment tests more simulated channels to find what bands might perform well for the 
purpose of detecting animals using a camera of one's own design.  There is a camera on the market 
called Tetracam© which has six independent CCDs and allows one to customize the bandpass filters 
for each channel.  Perhaps it is also possible to customize the channels for the Multispectral Camera 
sold by Sensefly.  This particular camera and it's eBee © drone platform are of interest because they 
were employed for two aerial surveys of a game farm in the Kalahari the author was involved with.  
The eBee drone is vended locally in Denmark by COWI and was also used by them on a project 
contracted out by DTU-Space (R. Forsberg, personal communication, 2015).   
A few conditions will be adhered to in this experiment to create camera bands which are realistic. The 
first tests will choose bandwidths within the ranges of CCD or CMOS detectors.  The CCD is sensitive 
from about 300nm up to 1000nm maximum and the CMOS up to 850 or 900nm.  Also the band widths 
must be reasonably wide for good signal to noise (S/N) ratio.  The test channel values will be averaged 
over their bandwidth like real cameras. The near ultraviolet-A range between 350 to 400nm will not 
be included as these spectra in the database are noisy and suspicious looking.  Further, ultraviolet 
photography requires specialized optics because regular glass is absorptive of UV.   
Future expansion of this project may explore the applications of mapping southern African animals 
in the UV spectral range, emulating work done in the arctic by Lavigne and Øritsland (1974) whose 
seminal papers inspired this entire project. 
A Blue band was created and added to the original Multispectral camera configuration of Green, Red, 
Red Edge and NIR.  The Blue band is from 400 to 460nm and averaged to have a value at the band 
center of 430nm.  This 5 channel configuration was used with the SAM script and results displayed 
in the figure above. 
Next the Red Edge channel was removed, keeping the Blue channel, to create a 4 channel RGBI 
image which is the common configuration employed in modern professional aerial surveying using 
full-size digital cameras.  The results are displayed above in the figure.   
Comparing the RGBI+Red Edge data to the RGBI data brings a surprising result.  The SAM 
separability actually improved 10 to 15% for most pixels with the RGBI data.  This means that the 
Red Edge channel is actually not helping the classification and in fact diminishes it.  The author 
concedes the Red Edge channel is employed for vegetation health monitoring (Horler et al, 1983) and 
not intended for plant nor animal discrimination. 
This is good news for using the 4 channel Multispectral Camera with the eBee drone as it might be 
easily requested to replace the channel optics dedicated to Red Edge with very standard Blue filters.  
What actual wavelengths of Blue pass filters are possible in cameras was not researched, but Blue has 
very energetic photons and the band could likely be more narrow than Green so a 60nm band width 
for Blue employed for this test was a very conservative width. 
NIR and SWIR Channels 
The experiment continues to examine channels for separability of animals against the Kalahari 
background of Sand and Grass.  Now bands in the NIR and SWIR from 1000 to 2500nm will be 
created and tested.  Though these wavelengths are not achievable by CCD or CMOS chips, diodes 
are able to detect these ranges in more sophisticated imaging systems. 
73
==PAGE:75==
The great advantage enjoyed by aerial surveying and particularly low altitude drones is that 
atmospheric absorption effects are essentially halved as compared to satellites and other high level 
remote sensing platforms.  The light makes a one way trip though the atmosphere, strikes the ground, 
reflects and travels <50 meters back to the drone or <2000 meters to an aircraft.  This allows the 
positioning of spectral bands in wavelengths that satellites orbiting at 700km cannot receive.  
 
Figure 79. Spectra from a few common animals with fur, Kalahari red sand, loam and two dry grasses. 
From the figure above one can qualitatively guess where the greatest advantage to place new bands 
would be.  Common to most all materials are the water absorption bands with overtones at circa 1925, 
1450 and 1200nm.  Plants and animals have water in their cell structure. The sand may have some 
moisture between the grains from rains though this is restricted to certain times of year and should 
not be counted upon, and loam soil contains clays which have water locked into their matrices. 
The materials containing phyllosilicates have absorption hydroxyl features with axes 
at 1400 and 2200nm (Clark, 1999).  Plants have a small cellulose maximum axes at 
2200nm too (UNH.edu). Animals have multiple small absorption features >2000nm.  
However in this region one must exercise caution as the features are subtle, narrow 
and the photons are weak even for a low flying drone, so it may not be practical to 
make a camera with bands narrow enough to be effective in this upper wavelength 
range of the SWIR.  For comparison the Landsat imagers have a band centered about 
2200nm which is 200nm wide with a 30m2 footprint to collect enough energy 
(landsat.usgs.gov). 
 
Animals have what is suspected to be a possible keratin-related absorption feature 
with axis at 1500nm.  This absorption feature is broad, often exhibiting a 'shoulder' 
due to the neighboring water overtone at 1450nm.  But this 1500nm feature seems to 
be unique to animals and should be exploited for discrimination.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 80. Right, the spectral feature. 
74
==PAGE:76==
NIR Edge Band 1250 to 1350nm 
The onset of the proposed combined keratin-water (K-W) absorption feature is at about 1350nm 
which is also near the end of the NIR and start of the SWIR so this band will be called NIR Edge. To 
measure the plateau height of many of the animal spectra here prior to the K-W absorption feature 
and to gain enough band width to make a measurement, the NIR Edge band is proposed to encompass 
1250 to 1350nm.  Hopefully 100nm width is enough in this range for aerial cameras to get a good 
(S/N).  Landsat has a 200nm wide channel nearby at 1550nm but that channel cannot sit upon the 
water band itself else it will never make it through the atmosphere. 
Keratin-Water Band (K-W) 1450 to 1550nm 
Now the depth of the K-W band should be measured.  With this information one can then compare 
the values of the NIR Edge and K-W bands for a good differential ratio as it appears that organics, 
both plant and animal, have decreasing slope here and inorganics like the sand and loam have an 
increasing slope. 
It is suggested to center the band on the Keratin* absorption axis at 1500nm and to ensure enough 
bandwidth, to extend from 1450 to 1550nm. 
* Keratin is very hypothetical and it may be any cell or crystalline structure causing the feature. 
These two new bands, NIR Edge and K-W, are implemented in MATLAB for SAM analysis. 
%%  Channel Simulation 
  
Aux1 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,525:575),3);   % Green 
Aux2 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,640:680),3);   % Red 
Aux3 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,725:745),3);   % Red Edge 
Aux4 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,760:820),3);   % NIR 
Aux5 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,400:450),3);   % Blue 
Aux6 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,1250:1350),3); % NIR Edge  
Aux7 = mean(NKSpectra(:,:,1450:1550),3); % K-W 
Aux = cat(3,Aux1,Aux2,Aux3,Aux4,Aux5,Aux6,Aux7); 
  
[SID,SIDx,SIDy,negSID,SIDSAMs,SIDSAMt,SAM,ref] = specInfoDivRef(Aux,Aux(2,9,:));   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75
==PAGE:77==
Results: 
 
Figure 81.  Comparison of SAM results for RGBI + K-W band (left) and RGBI + NIR Edge (right). 
 
Figure 82.  SAM result for 6 channel combination of RGBI with NIR Edge and K-W bands. 
The addition of a 5th channel in the NIR/SWIR range to the basic RGBI proved quit helpful, boosting 
SAM separability index of the cheetah test pixel from 0.36 for just RGBI up to about 0.49, an 
improvement of 35%.  The K-W band appears slightly stronger than the NIR Edge band for the cheetah 
pixel tested in the figures above, but results vary a little upon which pixels are tested.  Unexpected 
was that adding both NIR Edge and K-W bands to the RGBI for a 6 channel composite actually 
reduced separability compared to the 5 channels, achieving only 0.45 for the cheetah pixel. 
76
==PAGE:78==
 
A proposed C-S band and neighboring band might assist 
discrimination between animal and plant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Figure 83.  Top, spectral channels- 
 
 
 
 
 
      Below, relative responses. 
 
SWIR 2 
C-S band  
Silica 
High 
Low 
Cellulose 
Low 
High 
Animal 
High 
Medium 
C-S
SWIR
77
==PAGE:79==
XIV.  Conclusions 
Reflection mechanisms 
This project believes it has identified the dominant expression of melanin pigments on the reflectance 
spectra of animals in the Visible to NIR becomes subordinate in the SWIR, possibly to keratin 
proteins. 
 
Two main conclusions are drawn from the laboratory hyperspectra: 
 
1.)  To generally detect the presence of animals in an image with spectral imagery one could 
utilize the SWIR between circa 1400 to 2500nm.  Nearly all animals tested look identical in 
this region regardless of mammal fur, pachyderm or reptile scale. 
 
These animal spectra in SWIR might be due to the substance identified as hard keratin by 
Lewis and Rippon (2013) referred to by Montagna and Ellis (1958) as equivalent to eukeratin 
by Block and Bolling (1938). 
 
*Though humans had unique spectra in the NIR or SWIR this could have been due to 
spectrophotometer diode detector failures.  Or possibly due to the so-called soft keratin (Lewis 
and Rippon, 2013) and its possible equivalent pseudokeratin by Block and Bolling (1938) 
implied as equivalent by Montagna and Ellis (1958). 
 
Two keratin types hard and soft in hair and skin, respectively have differing composition and 
may explain the partial difference in taxidermy elephant skin spectra (pachyderm) and the 
very different human skin spectra; if external processes did not induce errors. 
 
Note:  the idea that keratin is the mechanism in the spectra or other proteins is a hypothesis. 
 
2.)  To spectrally differentiate animal species utilize the Visible and NIR between 400 to 1350nm.  
The data suggests this spectral range has the largest variance in reflectance due to melanin 
concentrations. 
Note:  Note that carotene pigment spectra are not known to have been tested.  Also the UV 
was not studied and could be a valuable region for identification of animals in southern Africa, 
as demonstrated by Lavigne and Øritsland (1974) in the arctic. 
 
Classification 
The cameras utilized in this project were constrained to the Visible and very near Infrared, i.e. 
between 500 to 900nm.  In this limited spectral region it was difficult to differentiate animals reliably 
from their habitat.  A great problem was illumination and shadowing effects.  Though illumination 
independent tactics were employed in the form of Spectral Angle Mapping (SAM) and band ratios to 
neutralize the lighting effects, only moderate success was achieved. 
Often animals in direct sunlight with critical angle reflectance observable to the camera was 
successful to identify an animal with the Multispec 4C© camera imagery.  However many animals 
were missed, especially in the shade and false positives were acquired as well. 
78
==PAGE:80==
SID methods were simultaneously attempted but had much lower success so were not pursued by this 
project.  Supervised classification failed to produce good results. 
There are too few animals present in the scenes to be of influence upon the statistics.  Even if an entire 
herd of 20 animals was present.  Using statistical methods, the best results to identify animals in an 
image were achieved if or when the animals landed into a rejection class.  However the animals were 
not always alone in this rejection class and very often they co-classified with another class, like 
vegetation. 
The other difficulty with statistical methods was that we would like to know if even just one animal 
is present, or not, in an image.  And this animal will have no statistical impact.  Given the similarity 
of oryx and kudu spectra to that of dry grass in the CCD or CMOS detector range of Visible to VNIR, 
there is unfavorable chance these animals will reliably classify as rejection and not as vegetation 
themselves. 
Using K-Means for unsupervised classification 
 
Hyperspectral Library 
A spectral library of southern African animals was created for use in this project.  Pelts and hides 
both live, dead and taxidermy were scanned by a portable spectrophotometer between 350 to 2500nm. 
The animal hyperspectra are not ideal laboratory data.  The portable spectrophotometer instrument 
used outside in up to 33C weather while being moved around is likely not as accurate as a stationary 
laboratory spectrophotometer in a controlled environment.  Also the animal samples themselves were 
a large variable.  The taxidermy specimens were easy to work with in a semi-controlled environment.  
Comparisons to in vivo animal species spectra proved the ex vivo spectra were quite similar but more 
subdued in reflectance.  But no in vivo samples were acquired of pachyderms which is a key group 
of interest to nature conservation.   
The author urges caution when using the taxidermy spectra due to the unknown chemical and physical 
alterations they have undergone, such as soaking in chemical baths, salt, de-oiling, dehydration, 
mechanical deformation possibly damaging cell structure, painting in some cases especially 
pachyderms, and more.  The ex vivo spectra also classified more poorly in practice than in vivo 
spectra using the SAM, SID and supervised classification.  But taxidermy spectra are better than no 
spectra and they did seem to preserve the axes of reflection maxima and minima. 
The in vivo spectra also are not as good as they might be.  All live animals tested were fully awake 
and moving.  Ten seconds required to make a scan with the photometer is a long time for a nervous 
or animal to be completely still.  Surprisingly some good spectra were acquired despite the odds.   
Modelling of channels 
The hyperspectral library was used to create and test hypothetical channels for their performance in 
discriminating animals from their Kalahari habitat.  Future cameras might consider employing these 
channels in their design if tasked to monitor animals in the field. 
79
==PAGE:81==
It was not always the case that the more channels the better the result.  Some channels tested reduced 
success.  One example is the Red Edge channel.  As it has 91% correlation to the NIR, including the 
Red Edge simply doubles the weighting influence of spectral similarity of the NIR between 730 to 
790nm on the outcome.  Omitting Red Edge and replacing it with another channel #4 often improved 
results over including Red Edge and adding a 5th channel.  There were other channels that did not 
model as bringing much benefit and these were not included in the report.  Only modelled channels 
with helpful results were discussed. 
Several channels were identified near major absorption features in the IR as well as the visible Blue.  
Usually one should ideally have channels in pairs to measure the height of the ‘wings’ before/after a 
diagnostic absorption feature as well as channel to measure the minima of the feature in order to 
calculate a net difference in reflectance.  In this way ratio’ing is important to neutralize variance in 
reflectance curves with modest differences to other spectra. 
When some of the recommended hypothetical channels were included with the Multispec 4C© 
camera bands they provided over 30% improvement in success using SAM methods to discriminate 
animals from the habitat spectra of dry grass, loam and sand. 
One of the recommended modelled channels which already exists in drone cameras is Blue. 
Blue Channel 
Figure 84. Drones in tandem flight; Multispec 4C camera, left.  High resolution RGB camera, right. 
A 17.5 Mpixel RGB camera was flown in a second drone with the Multispectral camera that collected 
Green, Red, Red Edge, and NIR.  It was attempted unsuccessfully to co-register and append the Blue 
channel of the RGB camera onto the multispectral imagery to have Blue, Green, Red, Red Edge, NIR. 
The Blue channel would be an advantage to have included with the other spectral channels.  The 
addition of an extra channel and especially one that is closer to the reflectance minima (absorption 
maxima) of iron and melanin in the UV.  Chlorophyll Alpha and Beta strongly absorb the Blue.  Blue 
is sensitive to moisture and is used in some soil indices.  A 5th channel would add an extra principle 
component and likely have lower correlation to the other bands than the Red Edge channel which has 
91% correlation to the NIR channel, so is barely a 4th band. 
80
==PAGE:82==
In addition, the 17,5 Mpixel Blue band can be used to improve the apparent resolution of the other 
1.2 Mpixel channels.  This would function as ‘pan-sharpening’ is done for the Landsat imagery where 
the high resolution panchromatic band is used to improve the apparent spatial resolution of the 
spectral channels.  However the possibility of adding the Blue channel appeared very late in the game 
and when issues were encountered to co-register it to the other channels, the idea was put aside in 
favor of completing the Thesis on time. 
Future work 
Future work should investigate if the UV spectrum is valuable for identifying animals.  Success with 
UV for animal remote sensing was demonstrated in the arctic by Lavigne and Øritsland (1974).  The 
UV is a realistic low(er) cost area to consider as CCD and CMOS detectors are sensitive to the UV 
and some minor modifications to standard cameras allows them to image in the UV.  One limitation 
is that regular glass optics absorb UV strongly below 350nm so lenses need to be exchanged with UV 
transmissive material lenses.  Many brands are available, Nikon for example.  In the literature much 
diagnostic laboratory work with organics is done in the UV or Middle Infrared.  So the UV seems 
like a good, inexpensive region to explore the possibility of mapping animals in southern Africa or 
other environments of the world.  Perhaps mapping Danish cattle for SKAT is of interest. 
A good portable spectrophotometer should be acquired that is allowed to go on trips.  Perhaps one 
that is sensitive to the UV as well.  In this manner one could travel to animals in game parks, zoos or 
veterinary clinics, etc when the animal is sedated in order to get the best in vivo spectra.  The author 
and biologist colleagues while acquiring data have been rebuked by some of the annoyed creatures.  
When dealing with larger more dangerous animals it would be beneficial if the animal were sedate. 
This project had the good fortune to have 2 drones with 2 different cameras available.  The first was 
a multispectral camera with good spectral resolution and low spatial resolution, the second drone 
camera was a conventional RGB with low spectral resolution and high spatial resolution.  The two 
data sets complimented each other well to have the best of both worlds.  Combining the data so far 
has been more complicated than hoped so was not pursued seriously in the interest of time.  But the 
company Sensefly, perhaps as a direct results of this dual-drone experiment, just announced they will 
release in March 2016 a compound camera system incorporating the 4 channel Multispec 4C© with 
1.2 Mpixel resolution plus an added 16 Mpixel RGB camera built into the same box.  This should 
resolve a few challenges the author faced by having the two cameras not fire at precisely the same 
time, because in the interim some of the animals had moved confounding correlation attempts 
between the imagery sets. 
With conventional GCPs one could force the two imagery to overlap to add the Blue channel to the 
Green, Red, Red Edge and NIR for a 5 channel composite data set.  The Blue channel is used for 
example in some soil indices as it is sensitive to moisture.  However this project is interested in having 
more channels to discriminate animals.  Combined with the possibility of up-sampling the low spatial 
resolution channels to fit the high spatial resolution Blue channel in a method similar to ‘pan-
sharpening’ of Landsat data.  The latter has been done but the running animals did not co-align in the 
asynchronous image sets which defeats the purpose of this multispectral project.  Time was not at 
hand to search for possible image pairs where the animals may not have moved as this might allow 
validation of adding the broad Blue channel from the RGB camera onto the Multispectral bands for 
a 5-band spatially sharpened image. 
81
==PAGE:83==
Samples with the 3rd pigment, carotenoids, should be studied to test if they too stop being expressed 
in the spectra at 1400nm when the hypothetical keratin protein mechanism becomes dominant. 
Sincerely, 
Eric Juergen Haase,  s112115,  
Denmarks Technical University 
29. February 2016 
82
==PAGE:84==
XV.    Bibliography 
 
Angelopoulou, E., The Reflectance Spectrum of Human Skin, 1999, Technical Reports (CIS). Paper 
584.   http://repository.upenn.edu/cis_reports/584 
 
 
Ball, P., 2012, Natures color tricks, Scientific American, May 2012, pp.74 - 79 
 
 
Bard, J. B. L., 1981, A model for generating aspects of zebra and other mammalian coat patterns, 
Journal of Theoretical Biology, Vol. 93, No. 2., pp. 363-385, doi:10.1016/0022-5193(81)90109-0 
 
 
Bereiter-Hahn, J. and A.G. Matoltsy, K.S., 2010, Biology of the Integument, 2: Vertebrates;   p.281 
 
 
Blixen-Finecke, Bror, Baron von, 1986, African Hunter, translated from the Swedish by F.H. Lyon, 
St. Martins Press, New York, ISBN:  031200959-3 
 
 
Block, R. J and D. Bolling, 1939, The amino acid composition of keratins the composition of gorgonin, 
sponging, turtle scutes and other keratins, Journal of Biological Chemistry, Vol. 127, Issue 3  
 
Bohren, C.F. and J.M. Sardie, 1981, Utilization of solar radiation by polar animals: an optical model 
for pelts; an alternative explanation, Applied Optics, Vol. 20, Issue 11, pp. 1894_1-1896, doi: 
10.1364/AO.20.1894_1 
 
 
Chávez, A., F. Bozinovic, L. Peichl and A.G. Palacios, 2003, Retinal spectral sensitivity, fur 
coloration, and urine reflectance in the genus Octodon (Rodentia): implications for visual ecology.  
Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science 44: 2290-2296. 
http://www.mpg.de/481902/pressRelease20030610 
 
 
Clark, R. N., 1999, Chapter 1; Spectroscopy of rocks and minerals, and principles of spectroscopy, 
in, Remote sensing for the Earth sciences:  Manual of remote sensing, 3 rd., Vol. 3, edited by A. N. 
Rencz, ISBN: 0471-29405-5, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
 
 
Clevers, J. and L. Kooistra, 2003, Assessment of heavy metal contamination in river floodplains by 
using the red-edge index, 3rd EARSeL Workshop on Imaging Spectroscopy, Herrsching, 13-16 May 
2003 
 
 
Curtis, A., K. Calabro, J. R. Galarneau, I. J. Bigio and T. Krucker, 2011, Temporal Variations of Skin 
Pigmentation in C57Bl/6 Mice Affect Optical Bioluminescence Quantitation, Molecular Imaging and 
Biology, 13:1114 – 1123, DOI .1007/s11307-010-0440-8 
83
==PAGE:85==
Derrick, M. R., J. M. L. Stulik and D. Stulik, 1999, Infrared spectroscopy in conservation science; 
Scientific tools for conservation, The Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles 
 
 
Farmer, V.C. and F. Palmieri, 1975, The characterization of soil minerals by infrared spectroscopy, in 
Soil Components, J.E. Geiseking (ed.), Springer Verlag, New York 
 
 
Fox, D.L., 1936, Structural and chemical aspects of animal coloration, American Naturalist, Vol. 70, 
No. 730 (Sep. - Oct., 1936), pp. 477-493 
 
 
Fox, H. M. and G. Vevers, 1960, The nature of animal colours, Sidgewick and Jackson Ltd, London 
 
 
Galal, A., H. Hasan and I.F. Imam, 2012, Learnable hyperspectral measures.  Egyptian Informatics 
Journal, 13, pp.85-94 
 
 
Hapke, B., 1984, Bidirectional reflectance spectroscopy.  3. Correction for macroscopic roughness, 
Icarus, 59, pp.41-59 
 
 
Harvey T.A., K.S. Bostwick, and S. Marschner, 2013, Directional reflectance and milli-scale feather 
morphology of the African Emerald Cuckoo, Chrysococcyx cupreus. J R Soc Interface 10: 20130391.   
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.039 
http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/royinterface/10/86/20130391.full.pdf 
 
 
Hedges, L., Lam, W. Y., Campos-Arceiz, A., Rayan, D. M., Laurance, W. F., Latham, C. J., Saaban, 
S. and Clements, G. R., 2015, Melanistic leopards reveal their spots: Infrared camera traps provide a 
population density estimate of leopards in Malaysia. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 79: 846–
853. doi: 10.1002/jwmg.901 
 
 
Herweg, J., J. Kerekes and M. Eismann, 2013, Separability between pedestrians in hyperspectral 
imagery, Appl. Opt. 52, 1330-1338 
 
 
Horler, D. N. H.; M. Dockray and J. Barber, 1983, The red edge of plant leaf reflectance, International 
Journal of Remote Sensing, Vol. 4, Issue 2, pp. 273-288, ISSN: 13665901, 01431161 
 
 
Lavigne, D. M. and N. A. Øritsland, 1974: Ultraviolet photography: a new application for remote 
sensing of mammals. Canad. J. Zool., 52: 939-941 
 
 
 
84
==PAGE:86==
Lewis, D. M. and J. A. Rippon, Editors, 2013:  The structure of wool, in; The coloration of wool and 
other keratin fibres, John Wiley & Sons Inc., ISBN: 1119962609, 9781119962601 
 
 
Lukyanov, K. A., A. F. Fradkov, N. G. Gurskaya, 2000,  Natural animal coloration can be determined 
by a nonfluorescent green fluorescent protein homolog, Journal of Biological Chemistry, Vol. 275, 
Issue 34, pp. 25879-25882  ISSN:  1083351x, 00219258   DOI: 10.1074/jbc.c00033820 
 
 
Maan, M. E. and M. E. Cummings, 2008, Female preferences for aposematic signal components in a 
polymorphic poison frog, Evolution, 62-9, p. 2334–2345, doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2008.00454.x 
 
 
Marshall, A. G., 1978, Biophysical chemistry: Techniques & applications, John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, p. 399 
 
 
Montagna, W. and R. A. Ellis, editors, 1958, The biology of hair growth, Academic Press, Inc., 58-
12793 
 
 
Murray, J. D., 1988, How the leopard gets its spots, Scientific American, pp.80-87 
 
 
Nielsen, A. A., 2001, Spectral mixture analysis: Linear and semi-parametric full and iterated partial 
unmixing in multi- and hyperspectral data, Int. Journal of Computer Vision, 42(1/2), 17-37, Kluwer 
 
 
Pedros, R., I. Moya, Y. Goulas and S. Jacquemoud, 2008, Chlorophyll fluorescence emission 
spectrum inside a leaf, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 7, 498–502, DOI: 10.1039/b719506k 
 
 
Pinter, P. J., Jr., J. L. Hatfield, J. S. Schepers, E. M. Barnes, M. S. Moran, C.S.T. Daughtry and D. 
R. Upchurch, 2003, Remote Sensing for Crop Management, Photogrammetric Engineering & Re-
mote Sensing, Vol. 69, No. 6, pp. 647–664, 0099-1112/03/6906–647 
 
 
PSM Series Spectrometer Manual, Revision: 1.04, 4/4/2012, Spectral Evolution, Inc.  90 Sutton St. 
Unit 4, North Andover, Massachusetts, 01845, USA 
 
 
Reynolds, P. S. and D. M. Lavigne, 1981, Visible and ultraviolet reflectance characteristics of arctic 
homeotherms, Int. J. Biometeor. 1981, vol. 25, number 4, pp. 299-308 
 
 
Robles-Kelly, A., C. P. Huynh, 2013, Imaging spectroscopy for scene analysis, Advances in Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4471-4652-0_1, Springer-Verlag London 
 
85
==PAGE:87==
Sapienza, D., P. Berzaghi, N. Martin, D. Taysom, F. Owens, 2008, NIRS White Paper, Near Infrared  
spectroscopy for forage and feed testing, NIRS Forage and Feed Testing Consortium 
http://www.foragelab.com/Media/nirs_white_paper.pdf 
 
Shafri, H. Z. M., N. Hamdan and M. I. Anuar, 2012, Detection of stressed oil palms from an airborne 
sensor using optimized spectral indices, International Journal of Remote Sensing, Vol. 33, Issue 14, 
pp. 4293-4311 DOI:  10.1080/01431161.2011.619208 
 
Stevens, M., C. Alejandro Párraga, I. C. Cuthill, J. C. Partridge and T. S. Troscianko, 2007, Using 
cameras to study animal coloration, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 90, 211–237 
 
 
Thulin, S. M., 2008, Hyperspectral remote sensing of temperate pasture quality, PhD Thesis, RMIT 
University, Melbourne, Australia   https://researchbank.rmit.edu.au/eserv/rmit:7867/Thulin.pdf 
 
 
Westland, S. and C. Ripamonti, 2004, Computational colour science using Matlab, John Wiley & 
Sons, Ltd: ISBN 0 470 84562 7 
 
 
Zhao, Y., 2008, Image Segmentation and Pigment Mapping of Cultural Heritage Based on Spectral 
Imaging, PhD Dissertation, Rochester Institute of Technology. 
 
 
Zimmermann, B. and A. Kohler, 2013, Optimizing Savitzky-Golay parameters for improving spectral 
resolution and quantification in infrared spectroscopy, Applied Spectroscopy, Vol. 67, Issue 8 
 
 
Øritsland, N. A., and K. Ronald. 1978. Solar heating of mammals: Observations of hair transmittance. 
Journal of Biometeorology 22:197–201 
 
****************************************************************** 
 
USGS.gov:   http://landsat.usgs.gov/best_spectral_bands_to_use.php   – position of Landsat bands 
 
 
UNH.edu: http://www.forestwatch.sr.unh.edu/imagery/aboutimagery.shtml 
 
UTexas.edu:  http://www.csr.utexas.edu/projects/rs/hrs/feature.html 
 
 
Williams and Williams, http://medicalphotography.com.au 
 
 
http://www.visiondummy.com/2014/04/geometric-interpretation-covariance-matrix 
86
==PAGE:88==
XVI.    Acknowledgements: 
Thank you to: 
Dr. Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen, for all the excellent instruction, patience and good humor over the years.  
Much appreciated. 
Dr. Morgan Hauptfleisch, Ecologist at the Polytechnic of Namibia now the Namibia University of 
Science and Technology, for the expert handling of the animals, samples, contacts, etc.  Also co-PI 
on the drone project.  Watch out for the red hartebeest, she is out for revenge. 
Dr. Friedrich Reinhardt, Biologist at Kuzikus Wildlife Sanctuary and co-PI of the drone project. 
Stuart Munro, Biologist at Na’an Ku Se Wildlife Sanctuary, for expert handling of the animals. 
Kombada Mhopjeni, Chief Geologist, Ministry of Mines and Energy, for the spectrophotometer. 
Van Rooyen Strydom proprietor of Tau Taxidermy in Windhoek, Namibia for access to specimens. 
Pierre Du Preez, Chief Conservation Scientist, Namibia Ministry of Environment and Tourism, for 
the crocodile sample and images of the Kavango. 
Drones Adventures of Switzerland, for drones and cameras. Thanks for flying two simultaneously. 
The author thanks everyone for their cooperation and hopes this work aids the cause against rhino poaching. 
Figure 128.  Black Rhino.  Imagery in this Thesis is original work by the author, unless otherwise credited. 
87
==PAGE:89==
Appendix 1.    Spectral Library 
 
Animal Colors 
Baboon 
 
 
 
 
 
89 
Cheetah 
 
 
 
 
 
90 
Crocodile 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
Elephant 
 
 
 
 
 
93 
Giraffe 
 
 
 
 
 
95 
Gnu, Blue (Wildebeest) 
 
 
 
 
97 
Hartebeest 
 
 
 
 
 
100 
Impala 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
Kudu 
 
 
 
 
 
103 
Leopard 
 
 
 
 
 
105 
Lion 
 
 
 
 
 
106 
Oryx (Gemsbok) 
 
 
 
 
107 
Rhino, Black  
 
 
 
 
109 
Springbok 
 
 
 
 
 
110 
Warthog 
 
 
 
 
 
113 
Zebra 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
 
 
Habitat Colors 
Grass, Dry  (C. ciliaris) 
 
 
 
 
115 
Sand, Kalahari, red (hematitic) 
 
 
 
116 
88
==PAGE:90==
Animal Colors 
 
 
Baboon 
 
 
Figure 86.  In vivo baboon spectra with red Kalahari sand as reference. 
89
==PAGE:91==
Animal Colors 
 
 
Cheetah 
 
Figure 87.  Cheetahs are widespread in southern Africa and very well camouflaged in their habitat of grassy 
planes.  The world's fastest land animal is difficult to catch with a spectrophotometer.   
 
Figure 88.  Adult cheetah hyperspectra of yellow fur, dark spot and a mixed sample. 
 
The three cheetah spectra in the figure above are all from the same cheetah shown in the first figure.  
The red line is the spectrum of the yellowish fur, the blue line is a dark spot and the green line is a 
sample of mixed dark and yellow fur, as it is suspected that an averaged spectrum made from a 
distance, such as by aircraft, would detect such a mixed color signal. 
 
90
==PAGE:92==
 Figure 89.  Fur sample of a taxidermy cheetah pelt showing color structures of hairs. 
 
 
The fur of the cheetah is primarily yellowish from pheomelanin with dark spots of eumelanin.  The 
sample in the figure above is from a taxidermy specimen and shows the spot structures close up.  The 
colors in these photographs are not calibrated and relies upon auto-white-balance of the camera in 
artificial lighting. 
 
 
 
Figure 90.  The spectra show in the visible spectrum the cheetah's light colored, yellowish fur is very similar 
to dry grass and this may be seen in the cheetah photo in the top figure. 
 
91
==PAGE:93==
Animal Colors 
 
 
Crocodile 
Figure 91.  Drone image of 3-meter crocodiles in Kavango.  (Photo: Ministry of Environment and Tourism) 
 
Figure 92.  Spectrum of untreated crocodile scale.  Note reflectance scale is very low. 
 
92
==PAGE:94==
Animal Color 
Elephant 
Figure 93. Elephants are pachyderms and have few hairs on their integument. 
 
Figure 94.  Ex vivo (taxidermy) hide of an elephant. May be highly altered from in vivo. 
 
93
==PAGE:95==
Figure 95.  Raw elephant hide.  Note: this hide was not scanned by the spectrophotometer. 
 
Figure 96.  Multispec 4C © camera image of elephant hide from left: Green, Red, Red Edge and NIR 
In figure 96 above there are no patterns in the hide in the Red Edge or NIR channels that are not also 
in the Green and Red.  This was done to check if these animals exhibited similar patterns in the NIR 
as discovered by Hedges et al (2015) for black leopards which have spots visible in IR camera. 
 
94
==PAGE:96==
Animal Color 
 
Giraffe  
  
 
The giraffe is the largest member of the gazelle family and spectra were only acquired ex vivo. 
Samples of giraffe hide were obtained in unspecified stages of the tanning processes from Tau 
Taxidermy in Windhoek, Namibia. Certainly all the hide samples were covered in rock salt in 
the field prior to delivery to the taxidermy shop. What other chemical treatments may have been 
applied to the hide samples are unknown. The hide samples were scanned by the Spectral 
Evolution PSM-3500 field spectrophotometer after calibration with a Spectralon albedo standard. 
 
 
Figure 97. Note the color patterns on the southern African giraffe. It has large polyhedron of brown 
separated by white amelanistic (no melanin) stripes. 
 
 
In the giraffe spectra figure below three sets of measurements were made on the ex vivo hide samples. They 
were on dark fur, white stripe fur and mixed fur where the photometer port set on approximately 50/50 of 
dark and white fur together. Note that the dark fur itself varies in tone. This is due not so much to the dark 
hairs being lighter color, but to more white hairs being mixed in. The top of the giraffe appears darker brown 
because the ratio of dark to white hair is higher than on the sides of the animal where it appears lighter brown 
due to a higher mixing ratio with white hair. This becomes a challenge to determine a 'typical' giraffe 
spectra. The hide sample received from Tau Taxidermy for scanning was a scrap and its original position on 
the giraffe body is unknown. But given the small size of the brown polyhedra it may have been from a leg. 
95
==PAGE:97==
In the figure of the giraffe ex vivo spectra dark, light and mixed fur are compared. The highest reflecting 
khaki line is the white fur. This is the fur with the least or no melanin. From the visible light range up 
through the NIR til the SWIR at circa 1400nm it has a convex upward curvature while the other two spectra 
the dark fur and the mixed dark-white fur are concave. After circa 1400nm the three spectra seem identical 
in pattern, barring an offset in reflectance which might be due to sampling inconsistencies. 
Figure 98. Comparison spectra of giraffe fur colors 
 
Peculiar is that the white fur spectrum is not a flat line of equal reflectance in all colors in the visible but a 
strongly sloped line which is high in red at 650-700nm but low in blue. This would logically make the 
color red or brown. While the dark fur spectra, orange line, is nearly flat in the visible range which 
should make the fur look black. Which it does not. It must be kept in mind that though the spectrum are 
re-calibrated to a Spectralon white standard roughly every 10 scans, it is a field spectrophotometer subject 
to wide temperature changes and movement. The spectra are not as accurate as stationary laboratory 
instruments in a controlled environment. 
 
Figure 99. Comparison of giraffe fur colors to other materials. 
 
96
==PAGE:98==
Animal Colors 
 
Gnu, Blue  (Wildebeest) 
 
Figure 100.  Blue gnu also known as wildebeest.  Blue Gnu have black tails, Black Gnu have white tails. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 101.  Blue Gnu spectra with red Kalahari sand for reference. 
97
==PAGE:99==
Figure 102.  Blue Gnu pelt. 
98
==PAGE:100==
 
 
Figure 103.  Blue Gnu spectra with Multispec 4C © camera.  Top-left, Green;  Top-right, Red, Bottom-left, 
Red Edge; Bottom-right, NIR. 
In the figure 103 above that there are no patterns in the fur in Red Edge or NIR channels that are not 
also in the Green and Red.  This was done to check if these animals exhibited similar patterns in the 
NIR as discovered by Hedges et al (2015) for black leopards which have spots visible in IR cameras. 
 
99
==PAGE:101==
Animal Color 
 
 
Hartebeest 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photo:  Wikipedia.org 
Figure 104.  In vivo hartebeest blue and red (upper) and ex vivo tan (lower).  Sand (green line) for reference. 
Hartebeest are very reddish looking in the Red between 600 to 700nm the pelt matches the red 
Kalahari sand reflectance.  Also note the characteristic subdued reflectance of ex vivo spectra. 
 
100
==PAGE:102==
 
Figure 105.  Hartebeest pelt, note the pelt has been taxidermy processed. 
101
==PAGE:103==
Animal Color 
 
 
Impala 
 
 
 
 
Figure 106.  Ex vivo spectra of impala. 
102
==PAGE:104==
Animal Colors 
 
Kudu  
 
 
Figure 107A.  Juvenile kudus were scanned in vivo and an adult kudu ex vivo. 
Figure 107B.  Kudu scans from several places on their fur.  Compare to grass, sand and ‘keratin’ spectra. 
 
103
==PAGE:105==
Figure 107 above shows good agreement between scans of brown fur and a slightly lower reflectance, 
yet tightly grouped, mixed fur color spectra. With key difference as expected in the proposed melanin-
dominant range of the spectrum between 400nm and circa 1300nm. In the proposed keratin-dominant 
region of the spectrum from circa 1300nm to 2500nm agreement is much closer. 
 
The light blue keratin spectrum matches closely to the absorption features of kudu fur longer than circa 
1300nm. Interesting are the features with axes at 1500nm which is a combined absorption feature with water 
at 1450nm and the doublet feature ± 25 to 50nm on either side of 1700nm. The grass (green) has the water 
absorption only at 1450nm only, suggesting the minima features at 1500nm and 1700nm are unique to 
keratin as it is neither expressed in the grass nor sand spectra. 
 
All spectra except the sand show an axes near 1200nm which may be the 3rd water overtone, as easily seen in 
these spectra are also the 1450nm of the 2nd  water overtone and the first water overtone at 1925nm. 
 
Note that the feature commonly seen at about 990nm is a noise artifact of the spectrophotometer from the 
change of the detector from CCD to diode. As well as a less pronounced change at 1990nm from diode #1 to 
diode #2. 
 
If the spectra radiance are accurate then the kudu is much more reflective than its habitat materials of sand 
and grass from 1000 to 2000nm.  This should be held with caution but may prove a useful range to exploit. 
 
 
Figure 108.  Adult Kudu ex vivo spectrum for comparison to the juvenile in vivo spectra: 
104
==PAGE:106==
Animal Color 
 
Leopard 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 109.  Ex vivo leopard fur spectrum 
 
105
==PAGE:107==
Animal Color 
 
Lion 
 
Figure 110.  Lions are well camouflaged in dry grass. 
 
Figure 111.  Ex vivo male lion fur spectra. 
 
 
106
==PAGE:108==
Animal Color 
 
 
Oryx 
 
Figure 112.  Oryx are one of the most common game animals in southern Africa. 
Figure 113.  In vivo spectrum of a juvenile oryx. 
107
==PAGE:109==
 
Figure 114.  Oryx spectra with Multispec 4C © camera.  Top-left, Green; Top-right, Red, Bottom-left, Red 
Edge; Bottom-right, NIR. 
In the figure 114 above there are no patterns in the fur in Red Edge or NIR channels that are not also 
in the Green and Red.  This was done partly to check if these animals exhibited similar patterns in the 
NIR as discovered by Hedges et al (2015) for black leopards which have spots visible only in IR 
cameras. 
108
==PAGE:110==
Animal Color 
 
 
Rhino, Black 
 
Figure 115.  Black rhino are not black and distinguished from white rhino by the mouth shape, not color. 
 
 
 
Figure 116.  Ex vivo taxidermy spectra of rhino hide from the leg and rhino horns both front and rear. 
109
==PAGE:111==
Animal Color 
 
 
Springbok 
 
Figure 117. Springbok ex vivo, left.  In vivo, right.  Their springing jump to evade predators lends the name. 
Springbok are another of the most numerous game animals in southern Africa and common in the 
aerial imagery of the Kalahari. 
Figure 118.  Springbok ex vivo spectra compared to red Kalahari sand for reference. 
 
110
==PAGE:112==
Figure 119.  Springbok pelt covered with salt before taxidermy process. 
 
The springbok pelt in the figure above was not the pelt used for the ex vivo spectra shown above.  The 
multispectral images shown below were taken with the Multispec 4C camera ©.  The large shadow 
over the pelts in the drone body with camera inside, without the wings attached. 
Note that in the multispectral imagery some intensity changes in the color patterns are evident, 
however there are no patterns in the fur in Red Edge or NIR channels that are not also in the Green 
and Red.  This was done to check if these animals exhibited similar patterns in the NIR as discovered 
by Hedges et al (2015) for black leopards which have spots visible in IR camera. 
111
==PAGE:113==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 120. Multispec 4C image: Top-left, Green; Top-right, Red; Bottom-left, Red Edge; Bottom-right, 
NIR. 
112
==PAGE:114==
Animal Colors 
 
 
Warthog (wild pig) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 121.  Warthog (wild pig) ex vivo spectrum with Kalahari red sand for reference. 
113
==PAGE:115==
Animal Color 
 
Zebras;   Plains and Mountain (Hartmann’s) 
In southern Africa zebras are two common zebra types.  The Plains Zebra as their name indicates live 
on the savannahs and may congregate in herds of hundreds.  They are identified by the alternating tan 
or platinum thin stripes which alternate with the black stripes.  This trait is unique to their species. 
A less common zebra is the elusive Mountain Zebra also called Hartmann’s Zebra.  They have only 
black and white stripes and live in small herds in hilly to mountainous regions. 
Figure 122.  Left, note the alternating tan stripes indicative of Plains Zebra.  Right, a Hartmann’s Zebra. 
The colored stripes contain eumelanin and the white stripes contain no melanin which is the result of 
chemical inhibitors which spread preventing melanin formation (Bard, 1981).  So actually zebras are 
black with white stripes, not vice versa. 
Figure 123.  Ex vivo spectra of white (no melanin) and black (eumelanin) stripes for comparison. 
114
==PAGE:116==
Habitat Color 
 
 
Grass, Dry  (C. ciliaris) 
115
==PAGE:117==
Habitat Color 
 
 
Sand, red, Kalahari 
Figure 125 .  Kalahari red sand and the two eBee © drones that performed the aerial survey. 
Kalahari red sand is siliceous with iron oxide (hematitic) coating.  The sand is from stabilized 
longitudinal dunes which may be seen clearly from altitude in the western Kalahar.  Sparse trees and 
grass copses (shown in the figure) immobilize the sands with their roots and by baffling the winds.  
Though the grass is greenish in the photo indicatin chlorophyll is actively absorbing Red and Blue, it 
did not show up in the NDVI imagery produced. 
Figure 126.  Kalahari siliceous (SiO2) sand with hematitic coating (Fe2O3) imparting red color. 
In the graph above the ‘shoulder’ feature at 600nm and again at 900nm are indicative of Fe+3 in iron 
oxides such as hematite.  The small absorptions at 1400, 1900 ad 2200 indicate hydroxyl and/or water 
overtones common in clays.  
116
==PAGE:118==
The decline of the iron oxide spectrum from should be monotonic decreasing into the UV where iron 
has an absorption band center (Clark, 1999 and J. Crowley, personal communication).  That the 
reflectance increases between 400nm to 350nm makes the author mistrust all data produced by this 
spectrophotometer in the near UV.  There are other reasons too leading to this conclusion but this 
data of ferrous iron spectrum confirms there is a good reason to mistrust the calibration is off or the 
instrument does not perform well in the near UV. 
 
Figure 127.  Notice the coarse sand displays BDRF effects. 
117
==PAGE:119==
Appendix 2.    Matlab Codes 
 
Note:  List given in order of processing progression or grouped with topic-affiliated functions. 
 
Script 
 
Function 
 
 
 
 
 
Readspectra.m 
Reads raw spectrophotometer *.sed  files . 
 
119 
SGfilter.m 
 
Savitzky-Golay and other filtering methods 
 
124 
Deriv.m 
 
Takes derivatives of hyperspectra 
 
 
129 
GCPcoReg.m 
Co-registers imagery using ground control points 
 
134 
AutoCoReg.m 
Co-registers imagery using intensity mapping 
 
136 
imshowrgb2.m 
Modified version of imshowrgb.m for Multispec 4C© imagery 
140 
PCA2.m 
 
Principle Component Analysis; modified PCA.m 
 
142 
MNF.m 
 
Minimum Noise Fraction  
 
 
144 
Supervised.m 
Supervised classification of imagery 
 
 
147 
Kmeans.m 
 
Unsupervised classification of imagery using K-Means 
150 
Specang.m  
Called during SAM/SID similarity methods 
 
153 
SpecInfoDivRef.m 
SAM / SID similarity methods 
 
 
154 
MakeBild.m  
Creates pseudo-imagery for SAM/SID testing 
 
157 
Ratio.m 
 
Makes band ratios and multispectral indices 
 
158 
Threshold.m  
Assigns pixels to a binary image  
 
 
161 
 
118
==PAGE:120==
Matlab code  -  Readspectra.m 
%%  Read-in library of  spectra to a list 
  
%  1.)  Aardvark 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Aardvark_NKS1_330.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Ar = M(:,2);     %  get all Aardvark reflectance(Ar) in column 2 from M 
  
%% %% 
  
%  2.) Baboon 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Baboon_NKS1_350.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Br = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(Br %) in column 2 from M 
  
%% %%     WARNING:  big file => set reflectance column to M(:,6) 
%  3.) Cheetah - adult 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Cheetah_adult_mixed_NKS2_488.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into 
matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Cr = M(:,6);     %  get all Cheetah reflectance(Cr %) in column 6 from M 
  
%% %% 
  
%  4.)  Crocodile 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Crocodile_MMS1_003.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
CCr = M(:,2);     %  get all CroCodile reflectance(CCr %) in column 2 from M 
  
  
%% %% 
119
==PAGE:121==
  
%  5.)  Giraffe -  
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Giraffe_mixed_MMS2_046.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into 
matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Gr = M(:,2);     %  get all Giraffe reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
  
%% %% 
  
%  6.)  Gnu - dead 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Gnu_Tau2_234.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
GNr = M(:,2);     %  get all Gnu reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
  
  
%% %% 
%  Hartebeast - live 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Hartebeast_NKS1_291.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Hr = M(:,2);     %  get all Hartebeest reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
  
%% %% 
%  hyrax 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Hyrax_MMS2_335.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
HYr = M(:,2);     %  get all HYrax reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
  
  
%% %% 
%  Impala 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Impala_Tau2_M228.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
120
==PAGE:122==
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Ir = M(:,2);     %  get all Imapal reflectance(Ir %) in column 2 from M 
  
%% %% 
%  Jackal 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Jackal_saddle_MMS2_051.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into 
matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Jr = M(:,2);     %  get all Jackal reflectance(Jr %) in column 2 from M 
  
  
%% %% 
%  Kudu     
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer  Big file**   reflectance is 
%  in M(:,6) 
  
M = dlmread('Kudu_mix_NKS2_443.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Kr = M(:,6);     %  get all Kudu reflectance(%) in column 6 from M 
  
  
%% %% 
%  Lechwe 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Lechwe_Tau2_263.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
LWr = M(:,2);     %  get all Lechwe reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
  
  
%% %% 
%  Leopard   WARNING:  big file => set M(:,6) 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Leopard_dense_spot_Tau3_425.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into 
matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
121
==PAGE:123==
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Lr = M(:,6);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 6 from M 
  
  
%%%% 
%   
% %  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
% M = dlmread('','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
%                                             % '' autodetect delimiter type 
%                                             % cut off top 24 rows of header 
%                                             % 0 means start with column 1 
%  
% nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
%  
% r = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
%  
% %%%% 
% %   
% %  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
% M = dlmread('','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
%                                             % '' autodetect delimiter type 
%                                             % cut off top 24 rows of header 
%                                             % 0 means start with column 1 
%  
% nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
%  
% r = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
%  
% %%%% 
% %   
% %  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
% M = dlmread('','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
%                                             % '' autodetect delimiter type 
%                                             % cut off top 24 rows of header 
%                                             % 0 means start with column 1 
%  
% nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
%  
% r = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
%  
% %%%% 
% %   
% %  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
% M = dlmread('','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
%                                             % '' autodetect delimiter type 
%                                             % cut off top 24 rows of header 
%                                             % 0 means start with column 1 
%  
% nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
%  
% r = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
%  
% %%%% 
% %   
122
==PAGE:124==
% %  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
% M = dlmread('','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
%                                             % '' autodetect delimiter type 
%                                             % cut off top 24 rows of header 
%                                             % 0 means start with column 1 
%  
% nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
%  
% r = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
%  
  
%% %% 
%  Oryx 
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Oryx_NKS_M348.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into matrix M 
                                            % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
Or = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
  
  
  
%%  TEST 
clc 
figure(1) 
dif= Hr - Kr 
max(max(dif))  
min(min(dif)) 
T=repmat(dif,1,50);  %  make the line 50 lines wide so one can see it. 
g=uint8(T); 
imshow(g,[]) 
  
 
 
123
==PAGE:125==
Matlab code  -  SGfilter.m 
 
-  Sovitzky – Golay and other filtering methods. 
 
%% ************************************************** 
% Script for making plots from Spectral Evolution PSM-3500 photometer 
% taking the derivatives of those plot and smoothing the data with 
% an algorithm from Milton, Eiswerth et al 1991, cubic spline and Savitzky-
Golay filters 
%  
% *************************************************** 
% Read in the raw spectra *.sed text files which are space/tab delimited 
% and have a 24 line header that needs removed. 
% This leaves 2151 samples (= 2500nm-350nm) at every nanometer (nm). 
% There are only 2 columns in the data:  wavelength(nm) and reflectance(%) 
% 
%To specify row and column offsets without specifying a delimiter, use an 
%empty string '' as a placeholder, for example, M = dlmread(filename,'',2,1). 
% 
%  = dlmread ('datafile.txt','',[#rows of header to cut],[column#]) 
% 
% ,'',  means to autodetect delimiter type (space, tab, comma, etc) 
% 
% note:  row1 is row1; but column 0 is column#1, 1 is column#2, etc. 
 
%% 
 
% Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Sand_Kalahari_MMS2_005.sed','', 24,0); % read text file into matrix M 
%M = dlmread('Loam_Oshikoto_012.sed','', 24,0); 
%M = dlmread('Grass_MMS2_015.sed','', 24,0); 
%M = dlmread('Rhino_horn_front_Tau2_274.sed','', 24,0); 
%M = dlmread('Oryx_NKS_M348.sed','', 24,0); 
% '' autodetect delimiter type 
% cut off top 24 rows of header 
% 0 means start with column 1 
 
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
 
r = M(:,2);    %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
 
 
 
%%   ***********  Curve smoothing  ************ 
 
 
124
==PAGE:126==
 
% spectra data from the PSM-3500 needs smoothing. The CCD is very noisy. 
% 
% Milton, Eiswerth et al (1991) ran their data through 10 iterations. 
 
%i=351:2499   % drop endpoints of 350-2500 for differencing so it doesnt look 
% for values 349 and 2501 that do not exist: i-1, i+1, etc. 
 
% This next loop smooths the original data in vector r and outputs vector dr 
% of the smoothed data. 
% 100 iterations does very little to smooth the curve. Try k = 500 to 1000 
 
 
 
%% *********** Smooth original data ************* 
 
 
 
% set k to be the number of smoothing iterations desired. 
% i is the number of samples in the vector of reflectance data r. It changes. 
% So if the original nm range was 350-2500 = 2151 samples. 
% Offsets in i are required so when the equation looks for i-1, i-2 or 
% i+1, i+2 that it finds values within the exsiting range 1 to 2151. 
% hence the 3 to 2149 samples. As # of r changes, this must be kept track of. 
 
c=0; 
% sets loop counter (c) to zero 
 
for k = 1:500 
% k is # of smoothing iterations 
 
for i = 3:2149; 
dr(i,:) = ( r(i-2) + r(i-1) + (r(i)) + r(i+1) + r(i+2) )/5; 
% dr(i,:) = ( r(i-1) + 2(r(i)) + r(i+1) )/4; % Barbaras eqn. 1991 
 
end 
 
c=c+1;  % count test for correct k iterations (loops) 
end 
 
c 
% Display results of number of iterations completed 
 
% Plot results of window filter 
figure(1); plot(nm, r) 
axis([360 2500 0 80])  % start at 360nm to cut off noisy data at 350nm 
title('original data blue, smoothed data red') 
ylabel('Reflectance %') 
 
125
==PAGE:127==
 
xlabel('Wavelength 
(nm)') hold on 
nmdr = (2501-(length(dr)):2500); % nmdr = nanometers to match # of dr points 
plot(nmdr,dr,'r') 
% plot in 'r'ed.  nmdr fits dims of dr 
axis([360 2500 0 80]) 
 
 
 
 
%% *******  Take derivatives of the smoothed reflectance spectra ******** 
 
r1 = diff(dr); 
% takes first difference of the vector r, vector now 2150 samples. 
 
 
 
% r2 = diff(r1) % takes second difference of the vector r1, vector now 2149 samples. 
 
%% 
*******  Smooth the derivative data ********* 
% 
********************************************* 
cc=0; 
% set loop counter cc to zero 
 
%  this loop takes the 1st derivative curve data contained in vector r1 and 
%  outputs smoothed data as vector dr1. 
 
for k= 1:1000 
% iterate through this whole loop k times 
 
for i = 3:2145 
%  process each (i) value between 2 to 2149 
 
dr1(i,:) = ( r1(i-2) + r1(i-1) + (r1(i)) + r1(i+1) + r1(i+2) )/5 ; % Barbaras eqn.1991 
 
end 
 
cc= cc+1; 
end 
 
cc 
% verify that actual iterations match k requested iterations 
 
 
 
figure(2)  % plot the derivative data 
 
nm1 = ((2501-(length(r1))):2500); 
126
==PAGE:128==
plot(nm1,r1,'b') 
axis([360 2500 -1 
0.5]) 
title({'unsmoothed derivative data blue', 'smoothed data cyan, spline green', '3rd SG red, 4th SG 
pur- ple'}) 
 
 
ylabel('delta r / delta nm') 
xlabel('Wavelength (nm)') 
 
hold on 
 
nmdr1 = ((2501-(length(dr1))):2500); 
plot(nmdr1,dr1,'c') 
axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]) 
 
 
 
%% *********** cubic spline *********** 
 
%nm1=350:2446   % size of the array after differencing, to match r1 
%nm2=350:2498   % size of the array after differencing again, etc, to match r# 
 
% pp = csaps(nm1,r1) % equation pp 
 
%figure(3) 
% fnplt(pp,'g') 
% plot the pp equation 
% axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]) 
%title('spline fit of first deriv curve') 
%ylabel('delta r /  delta nm') 
%xlabel('Wavelength (nm)') 
 
% to make this spline 'stronger' - see 'help csaps' 
 
%% ***************************************************** 
% ************ Savitzky Golay Filter ******************* 
 
% Apply S-G 3rd-order filter 
 
SG3c=0   % set iteration counter to 0 
 
 
 
for k =1:20 
SG3r1 = sgolayfilt(r1,3,61); % S-G filter; input; 3rd order ; window size 
SG3c = SG3c+1; 
end 
127
==PAGE:129==
 
SG3c 
% echo to screen how many iterations were completed 
 
%subplot(2,1,1) 
% 
plot([1:2148],SG3r1(1:2148),'b'); 
plot([(2501-length(SG3r1)):2500],SG3r1,'r'); 
%plot([351:2498],SG3r1,'r');  % range 351 to 2148 is just a guess to match SGr1 
 
 
axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]); 
% title('Savitzky Golay Filter of r1 data; 3rd order blue , 4th order red'); grid; 
 
 
 
hold on 
 
 
 
% Apply S-G 4th-order filter 
 
SG4c = 0 % set iteration counter to zero 
 
for k = 1:20 
SG4r1 = sgolayfilt(r1,4,61); 
SG4c = SG4c + 1; 
end 
 
SG4c 
% echo to screen how many iterations were completed 
 
%subplot(2,1,2) 
% 
plot([351:2498],SGr1(1:2148),'r'); 
plot([(2501-length(SG4r1)):2500],SG4r1,'m'); 
%plot([351:2498],SG4r1,'m'); 
axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]); 
 
128
==PAGE:130==
Matlab code  -  Deriv.m 
 
%%  Deriv.m 
  
%% ********************************************************* 
% Script for making plots from Spectral Evolution PSM-3500 photometer 
% taking the derivatives of those plot and smoothing the data with  
% an algorithm from Milton, Eiswerth et al 1991, cubic spline and Savitzky- 
% Golay filter 
% *********************************************************** 
% Read in the raw spectra *.sed text files which are space/tab delimited  
% and have a 24 line header that needs removed.  
% This leaves 2151 samples (= 2500nm-350nm) at every nanometer (nm). 
% There are only 2 columns in the data:  wavelength(nm) and reflectance(%) 
% 
%To specify row and column offsets without specifying a delimiter, use an 
%empty string '' as a placeholder, for example, M = dlmread(filename,'',2,1). 
% 
%   = dlmread ('datafile.txt','',[#rows of header to cut],[column#]) 
% 
%  ,'',  means to autodetect delimiter type (space, tab, comma, etc)       
% 
%  note:  row1 is row1; but column 0 is column#1, 1 is column#2, etc. 
  
clear all 
close all 
clf 
%%    
  
%  Read-in raw data file from the photometer 
M = dlmread('Sand_Kalahari_MMS2_005.sed','', 24,0);  % read text file into 
matrix M 
%M = dlmread('Loam_Oshikoto_012.sed','', 24,0);                     
%M = dlmread('Grass_MMS2_015.sed','', 24,0); 
%M = dlmread('Rhino_horn_front_Tau2_274.sed','', 24,0); 
%M = dlmread('Oryx_NKS_M348.sed','', 24,0); 
                                           % '' autodetect delimiter type 
                                            % cut off top 24 rows of header 
                                            % 0 means start with column 1 
  
nm = M(:,1);    %  get all nanometers(nm)in column 1 from M 
  
r = M(:,2);     %  get all reflectance(%) in column 2 from M 
  
  
%%    ***********   Curve smoothing   ************ 
  
%  spectra data from the PSM-3500 needs smoothing.  The CCD is very noisy. 
% 
%  Milton, Eiswerth et al (1991) ran their data through 10 iterations. 
  
%i=351:2499   %  drop endpoints of 350-2500 for differencing so it doesnt look 
              %  for values 349 and 2501 that do not exist: i-1, i+1, etc. 
  
% This next loop smooths the original data in vector r and outputs vector dr 
129
==PAGE:131==
% of the smoothed data. 
% 100 iterations does very little to smooth the curve.  Try k = 500 to 1000 
  
  
%%  ***********  Smooth original data ************* 
  
c=0;            % sets loop counter (c) to zero 
  
% set k to be the number of smoothing iterations desired. 
% i is the number of samples in the vector of reflectance data r. It changes. 
% So if the original nm range was 350-2500 = 2151 samples.  
% Offsets in i are required so when the equation looks for i-1, i-2 or  
% i+1, i+2 that it finds values within the exsiting range 1 to 2151. 
% hence the 3 to 2149 samples. As # of r changes, this must be kept track of. 
  
  
for k = 1:500       % k is # of smoothing iterations 
         
    for i = 3:2149; 
           dr(i,:) = ( r(i-2) + r(i-1) + (r(i)) + r(i+1) + r(i+2) )/5; 
        %  dr(i,:) = ( r(i-1) + 2(r(i)) + r(i+1) )/4;  % Barbaras eqn. 1991 
             
    end 
     
    c=c+1;  % count test for correct k iterations (loops) 
end 
  
c       % Display results of number of iterations completed 
  
%  Plot results of box filter 
  
figure(1) 
plot(nm,r) 
axis([360 2500 0 80])   % start at 360nm to cut off noisy data at 350nm 
title('original data blue, smoothed data red') 
ylabel('Reflectance %') 
xlabel('Wavelength (nm)') 
  
hold on 
  
nmdr = (2501-(length(dr)):2500); % nmdr = nanometers to match # of dr points 
plot(nmdr,dr,'r')       % plot in 'r'ed.  nmdr fits dims of dr 
axis([360 2500 0 80]) 
  
  
  
%% *******  Take derivatives of the smoothed reflectance spectra  ******** 
  
r1 = diff(dr);      % takes first difference of the vector r, vector now 2150 
samples. 
  
  
%  r2 = diff(r1)    % takes second difference of the vector r1, vector now 2149 
samples. 
  
130
==PAGE:132==
%%      *******  Smooth the derivative data ********* 
%       ********************************************* 
cc=0;               % set loop counter cc to zero 
  
%   this loop takes the 1st derivative curve data contained in vector r1 and  
%   outputs smoothed data as vector dr1. 
  
for k= 1:1000      %  iterate through this whole loop k times 
     
    for i = 3:2145          %  process each (i) value between 2 to 2149 
     
        dr1(i,:) = ( r1(i-2) + r1(i-1) + (r1(i)) + r1(i+1) + r1(i+2) )/5 ; % 
Barbaras eqn.1991 
         
    end 
     
    cc= cc+1; 
end 
  
cc      %  verify that actual iterations match k requested iterations 
  
  
figure(2)  %  plot the derivative data 
  
nm1 = ((2501-(length(r1))):2500); 
plot(nm1,r1,'b') 
axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]) 
title({'unsmoothed derivative data blue', 'smoothed data cyan, spline green', 
'3rd SG red, 4th SG purple'}) 
ylabel('delta r / delta nm') 
xlabel('Wavelength (nm)') 
  
hold on 
  
nmdr1 = ((2501-(length(dr1))):2500); 
plot(nmdr1,dr1,'c') 
axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]) 
  
  
%%  *********** cubic spline *********** 
  
%nm1=350:2446   % size of the array after differencing, to match r1 
%nm2=350:2498   % size of the array after differencing again, etc, to match r# 
  
%    pp = csaps(nm1,r1) % equation pp 
  
%figure(3) 
%    fnplt(pp,'g')       % plot the pp equation 
%    axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]) 
%title('spline fit of first deriv curve') 
%ylabel('delta r  /  delta nm') 
%xlabel('Wavelength (nm)') 
  
%  to make this spline 'stronger' - see 'help csaps' 
  
131
==PAGE:133==
%% ***************************************************** 
% ************ Savitzky Golay Filter ******************* 
  
% Apply S-G 3rd-order filter 
  
SG3c=0   % set iteration counter to 0 
  
  
for k =1:20 
    SG3r1 = sgolayfilt(r1,3,61);  % S-G filter; input; 3rd order ; window size  
    SG3c = SG3c+1; 
end 
  
SG3c          % echo to screen how many iterations were completed 
  
%subplot(2,1,1) 
%                    plot([1:2148],SG3r1(1:2148),'b'); 
plot([(2501-length(SG3r1)):2500],SG3r1,'r'); 
%plot([351:2498],SG3r1,'r');  %  range 351 to 2148 is just a guess to match SGr1 
axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]); 
% title('Savitzky Golay Filter of r1 data; 3rd order blue , 4th order red'); 
grid; 
  
  
hold on 
  
  
% Apply S-G 4th-order filter 
  
SG4c = 0    % set iteration counter to zero 
  
for k = 1:20 
    SG4r1 = sgolayfilt(r1,4,61);    
    SG4c = SG4c + 1; 
end 
  
SG4c        % echo to screen how many iterations were completed 
  
%subplot(2,1,2) 
%           plot([351:2498],SGr1(1:2148),'r'); 
plot([(2501-length(SG4r1)):2500],SG4r1,'m'); 
%plot([351:2498],SG4r1,'m'); 
axis([360 2500 -1 0.5]); 
  
  
  
%%  programming scraps 
  
%subplot(2,1,2) 
%plot([1:2000],smtlb(1:2000)); axis([0 2000 -4 4]); 
%title('smtlb'); grid; 
  
%figure; 
%clf; 
%subplot(2,1,1), imshowrgb(data,[3 2 1]), title('Data'); 
132
==PAGE:134==
%subplot(2,1,2), imshow(Xmask), title('Mask'); 
%ylabel('Pressure (mb)') 
%xlabel('Latitude (degrees)') 
%title('Zonanl Mean Temperature (K) ') 
 
133
==PAGE:135==
Matlab code  - GCPcoReg.m 
% Coregister imagery using ground control points (GCP) 
%% Image Alignment 
% Geometric alignment of tiff images using built-in MATLAB functions. 
  
% clear, close all; clc; 
  
%Assign data matrix by extracting images from a tiff stack 
%X = xtiff('MSP_00089_00025.tif'); 
%X = xtiff('5band.tif');   
  
B=imread('blueband.tif'); 
  
L = imresize(B,[960 1280],'bicubic'); % I= blueband.tif resized to fit  
                                % the other bands which are all 960x1280 
  
P=imread('4bands.tif'); 
  
X = cat(3,P,L); 
  
%% 
  
[~,~,nb] = size(X); 
  
iptsetpref('ImshowAxesVisible','on'); 
  
I = X(:,:,1); %fixed image 
Xwarp = nan(size(X)); 
Xwarp(:,:,1) = X(:,:,1); 
  
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
numofcontrolpoints = 4; 
movingPoints = zeros(numofcontrolpoints,2,nb-1); 
fixedPoints = zeros(numofcontrolpoints,2,nb-1); 
if exist('GCP_workspace.mat','file') == 2 
    ws = load('GCP_workspace.mat','movingPoints','fixedPoints'); 
    movingPoints = ws.movingPoints; 
    fixedPoints = ws.fixedPoints; 
    for i = 2:nb 
        tform = fitgeotrans(movingPoints(:,:,i-1),fixedPoints(:,:,i-
1),'NonreflectiveSimilarity'); 
        Xwarp(:,:,i) = imwarp(J,tform,'FillValues', 
255,'OutputView',imref2d(size(I))); 
    end 
else 
    for i = 2:nb 
        J = X(:,:,i); %next moving image 
        [movingPoints(:,:,i-1),fixedPoints(:,:,i-1)] = cpselect(scale2rng(J,[0 
1]),scale2rng(I,[0 1]),'Wait',true); 
        tform = fitgeotrans(movingPoints(:,:,i-1),fixedPoints(:,:,i-
1),'NonreflectiveSimilarity'); 
        Xwarp(:,:,i) = imwarp(J,tform,'FillValues', 
255,'OutputView',imref2d(size(I))); 
134
==PAGE:136==
    end 
    save('GCP_workspace.mat','movingPoints','fixedPoints'); 
end 
  
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
% 
for i = 2:nb 
    J = X(:,:,i); %next moving image 
  
    %define control points and calulate the transformation 
    [movingPoints,fixedPoints] = cpselect(scale2rng(J,[0 1]),scale2rng(I,[0 
1]),'Wait',true); 
    tform = fitgeotrans(movingPoints,fixedPoints,'NonreflectiveSimilarity'); 
    %tform = fitgeotrans(movingPoints,fixedPoints,'Similarity'); 
    %tform = fitgeotrans(movingPoints,fixedPoints,'Affine'); 
    %tform = fitgeotrans(movingPoints,fixedPoints,'Projective'); 
     
    %apply the transformation 
    Xwarp(:,:,i) = imwarp(J,tform,'FillValues', 
255,'OutputView',imref2d(size(I))); 
    %visualize blending of the transformed imaged onto the fixed image 
    %figure, imshowpair(I,Xwarp(:,:,i),'blend'); 
end 
  
save('GCP_workspace.mat','movingPoints','fixedPoints'); 
% 
  
  
  
%visualize both original data transformed data 
figure, imshowrgb(X,[5,4,1]);  % blue, NIR, Green 
figure, imshowrgb(Xwarp,[5 4 1]); 
save('transformedimg.mat','Xwarp'); 
 
 
135
==PAGE:137==
Matlab code  -  AutoCoReg.m 
%  Coregister image bands using intensity mapping 
%% Automated co-registration algorithm for multiband imagery 
% read in the imagery 
clear all, close all, clc 
  
  
F=imread('4bands.tif'); 
  
%imshow(F(10:950,10:1250,1); 
  
NIR=F(:,:,4); 
NIR = imresize(NIR,[3672 4896],'bicubic'); 
  
RE=F(:,:,3); 
RE = imresize(RE,[3672 4896],'bicubic'); 
  
Red=F(:,:,2); 
Red = imresize(Red,[3672 4896],'bicubic'); 
  
Green=F(:,:,1); 
Green = imresize(Green,[3672 4896],'bicubic'); 
  
Blue=imread('blueband.tif'); 
  
  
%% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
%       Register the RE to the NIR image 
% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
Fixed = Green;  % remains the same for all band operations 
  
Moving = RE; 
  
%%  View the two images 
%imshow(Moving); 
%imtool(Fixed); 
  
%% View the images side by side in a montage 
imshowpair(Fixed, Moving, 'montage'); 
title('NIR base map with Red Edge') 
%%  Configure Parameters in imregconfig 
[optimizer, metric] = imregconfig('Multimodal'); %multimodal means images come 
from different cameras 
  
%%  Default registration 
registered43 = imregister(Moving, Fixed,'similarity',optimizer,metric); 
% choose:   similarity, translation, affine,rigid 
figure(); 
imshowpair(registered43,Fixed); 
title('Similarity Registration of NIR (L) and Red Edge (R)'); 
  
%%  Modifications to optimizer/metric and transform type <-- copied from video 
% optimizer.GrowthFactor = 1.16974; 
136
==PAGE:138==
% optimizer.Epsilon = 0.75401; 
% metric.NumberOfSpatialSamples = 500 
% metric.NumberOfHistogramBins = 90; 
% optimizer.InitialRadius = 0.00675; 
% optimizer.MaximumIterations = 100; 
  
  
%% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
%   NEXT IMAGE:  register Red to the composite of NIR_RE 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
%Fixed = registered43; 
  
Moving = Red; 
  
%%  View the two images 
%imshow(Moving); 
%imtool(Fixed); 
  
%% View the images side by side in a montage 
figure() 
imshowpair(Fixed, Moving, 'montage'); 
title('NIR-Red Edge base map (L) with Red (R)') 
  
%%  Configure Parameters in imregconfig 
[optimizer, metric] = imregconfig('Multimodal'); %multimodal means images come 
from different cameras 
  
%%  Default registration 
registered432 = imregister(Moving, Fixed,'similarity',optimizer,metric); 
% choose:   similarity, translation, affine,rigid 
  
figure(); 
imshowpair(registered432,Fixed); 
title('Similarity Registration of Bands 4,3,2'); 
  
%%  Modifications to optimizer/metric and transform type 
% optimizer.GrowthFactor = 1.16974; 
% optimizer.Epsilon = 0.75401; 
% metric.NumberOfSpatialSamples = 500 
% metric.NumberOfHistogramBins = 90; 
% optimizer.InitialRadius = 0.00675; 
% optimizer.MaximumIterations = 100; 
%  
  
%% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
%  NEXT IMAGE:  NIR to composite of NIR_RE_Red 
% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
%Fixed = registered432; 
  
Moving = NIR; 
  
%%  View the two images 
%imshow(Moving); 
%imtool(Fixed); 
137
==PAGE:139==
  
%% View the images side by side in a montage 
figure() 
imshowpair(Fixed, Moving, 'montage'); 
title('NIR-Red Edge-Red base map (L) with Green (R)') 
%%  Configure Parameters in imregconfig 
[optimizer, metric] = imregconfig('Multimodal'); %multimodal means images come 
from different cameras 
  
%%  Default registration 
registered4321 = imregister(Moving, Fixed,'similarity',optimizer,metric); 
% choose:   similarity, translation, affine,rigid 
figure(); 
imshowpair(registered4321,Fixed); 
title('Similarity Registration of Bands 4,3,2,1 composited') 
%%  Modifications to optimizer/metric and transform type 
% optimizer.GrowthFactor = 1.16974; 
% optimizer.Epsilon = 0.75401; 
% metric.NumberOfSpatialSamples = 500 
% metric.NumberOfHistogramBins = 90; 
% optimizer.InitialRadius = 0.00675; 
% optimizer.MaximumIterations = 100; 
  
  
%% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
%   Add the Blue channel from the RGB camera 
% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
%  Can RESIZE the Blue channel by de-sampling to match dims of other bands 
%  but if using a 'scale' transform like Affine or Similarity, not required 
  
%  Resize from 17Mpixel down to 1.2 Mpixels: 
% Blue = imresize(Blue,[960 1280],'bicubic');  % bicubic or bilinear re-sample  
                                 
  
Moving = Green(1221:2230,3060:4150,1); 
Fixed = Blue(1318:2126,3508:4605,1); 
  
%Fixed=Blue; 
%Moving=registered4321; 
  
%%  View the two images 
%imshow(Moving); 
%title('Blue Band') 
%imtool(Fixed); 
  
%% View the images side by side in a montage 
figure() 
imshowpair(Fixed, Moving, 'montage'); 
title('4-Band composite (L) with Blue (R)') 
%%  Configure Parameters in imregconfig 
[optimizer, metric] = imregconfig('Multimodal'); %Multimodal- images come from 
different cameras 
                                                 %Monomodal - all images from 
                                                 %same camera. 
                                                  
138
==PAGE:140==
% Multiuspec 4C camera has 4 independent lenses and CCDs, hence multimodal.               
%%  Default registration 
registered54321 = imregister(Moving, Fixed,'similarity',optimizer,metric); 
  
% choose a transformation method, enter in 'purple' of command line above: 
%           Translation = X, Y  shifts 
%           Rigid       = translate + rotate 
%          *Similarity  = translate + rotate + scale 
%           Affine      = translate + rotate + scale + shear 
  
%          * works the best 
figure(); 
imshowpair(registered54321,Fixed); 
title('Similarity Registration for 5 bands'); 
  
%%  Modifications to optimizer/metric and transform type 
% optimizer.GrowthFactor = 1.16974; 
% optimizer.Epsilon = 0.75401; 
% metric.NumberOfSpatialSamples = 500 
% metric.NumberOfHistogramBins = 90; 
% optimizer.InitialRadius = 0.00675; 
% optimizer.MaximumIterations = 100; 
  
  
%% %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
%  Source of this code from the help video at Mathworks: 
%  " IMAGE PROCESSING MADE EASY "  by Andy The' of Mathworks  
  
%  http://se.mathworks.com/videos/image-processing-made-easy-
81718.html?form_seq=conf1050&elqsid=1456247718398&potential_use=Education&countr
y_code=DK 
  
  
  
  
  
  
%%  Concatenate the registered bands into 1 file 
  
bands2 =cat(3,registered4321,registered432,registered43,NIR); 
  
imwrite(bands2,'Reg4Bands2.tif');  %missing band '5' = blue 
  
 
139
==PAGE:141==
Matlab code  -  imshowrgb2.m  
% -  modified ’imshowrgb.m for the Multispec 4C camera imagery 
%%  Original code by Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen 
%  Modified by Eric Haase for the Multispectal camera 
%  Mods begin line 61: elseif sizergb == 4 % 4-band image 
  
  
function imshowrgb(img, rgb, varargin) 
  
% 
% imshowrgb(img, rgb, nstd, magn) 
% 
% img   - 3-D (or 2-D) matrix 
% rgb   - order of bands shown as R, G and B, e.g. [4 -2 1] (or one band); 
%         optional, defaults to [1 2 3] 
%         if <0: negate band 
% nstd  - strech between mean -/+ nstd stddevs of image bands; 
%         optional, defaults to 2 
% magn  - magnification in % 
  
% rgbi - 4 band image - Eric added on line 57 to 69 
  
% (c) Copyright 2008-2013 
% Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen 
% aa@space.dtu.dk, www.imm.dtu.dk/~aa 
% 11 Mar 2011 
  
if nargin < 1, error('imshowrgb: wrong input specification'), end 
% if ndims(img)~=3, error('imshowrgb: input image must be 3-D'); end 
  
nstd = 2; 
magn = 100; 
if nargin == 1, rgb = [1 2 3]; end 
if nargin > 2, nstd = varargin{1}; end 
if nargin > 3, magn = varargin{2}; end 
[nr nc nf] = size(img); 
sizergb = size(rgb,2); 
if nf == 1 
    sizergb = 1; 
end 
if sizergb == 1 % only one band specified 
    sgn = sign(rgb); 
    img = img(:, :, abs(rgb)); 
    img = cast(reshape(img, nc*nr, 1), 'single'); 
    img = img-repmat(mean(img), nr*nc, 1); 
    stdvar = std(img); 
    img = reshape(img, nr, nc); 
    %stds = sqrt(1/2997); stdvar = [stds stds stds]; 
    r = sgn(1)*img/(2*nstd*stdvar)+0.5; r(r<0)=0; r(r>1)=1; 
    imshow(r, 'InitialMagnification', magn) 
elseif sizergb == 3 % 3-band image 
    sgn = sign(rgb); 
    img = img(:, :, abs(rgb)); 
    nf = 3; 
    img = cast(reshape(img, nc*nr, nf), 'single'); 
140
==PAGE:142==
    img = img-repmat(mean(img), nr*nc, 1); 
    stdvar = std(img); 
    img = reshape(img, nr, nc, nf); 
    % stds = sqrt(1/2997); stdvar = [stds stds stds]; 
    r = sgn(1)*img(:,:,1)/(2*nstd*stdvar(1))+0.5; r(r<0)=0; r(r>1)=1; 
    g = sgn(2)*img(:,:,2)/(2*nstd*stdvar(2))+0.5; g(g<0)=0; g(g>1)=1; 
    b = sgn(3)*img(:,:,3)/(2*nstd*stdvar(3))+0.5; b(b<0)=0; b(b>1)=1; 
    imshow(cat(3,r,g,b), 'InitialMagnification', magn) 
elseif sizergb == 4 % 4-band image 
    sgn = sign(rgbi); 
    img = img(:, :, abs(rgbi)); 
    nf = 4; 
    img = cast(reshape(img, nc*nr, nf), 'single'); 
    img = img-repmat(mean(img), nr*nc, 1); 
    stdvar = std(img); 
    img = reshape(img, nr, nc, nf); 
    % stds = sqrt(1/2997); stdvar = [stds stds stds]; 
    r = sgn(1)*img(:,:,1)/(2*nstd*stdvar(1))+0.5; r(r<0)=0; r(r>1)=1; 
    g = sgn(2)*img(:,:,2)/(2*nstd*stdvar(2))+0.5; g(g<0)=0; g(g>1)=1; 
    b = sgn(3)*img(:,:,3)/(2*nstd*stdvar(3))+0.5; b(b<0)=0; b(b>1)=1; 
    i = sgn(3)*img(:,:,4)/(2*nstd*stdvar(3))+0.5; i(i<0)=0; i(i>1)=1; 
    imshow(cat(3,r,g,i), 'InitialMagnification', magn) % use 'i' not 'b' 
else 
    error('wrong specification of rgb'); 
end 
 
 
141
==PAGE:143==
Matlab code  -  PCA2.m  
% modified PCA code for Multispec 4C camera imagery. 
%%  Code from Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen 
% modified by Eric Haase for the Multispec 4C camera imagery 
%  mods begin line 48 to end. 
  
  
function PC = pca(datamatrix) 
% 
X = datamatrix; 
[nobservs, nvars] = size(X); 
S = cov(X); 
[A, L] = eig(S); 
A = fliplr(A); 
L = rot90(L,2); 
X0 = X - repmat(mean(X),nobservs,1); 
PC = X0*A; 
  
  
  
  
% Eigenvalues 
figure; 
for i = 1:nvars 
%bar(L,10,'b'); 
    plot(diag(L),'--x',... 
        'MarkerSize',8,'MarkerEdgeColor','b',... 
        'LineWidth',2,'Color',[0,.7,0.7]); 
end 
xlabel('Number'); 
ylabel('Value'); 
title('Eigenvalues'); 
  
  
% Cumulative sum of eigenvalues 
figure; 
eigvalpc = diag(L) / sum(diag(L)) * 100; 
eigvalcumsum = cumsum(eigvalpc); 
%bar( eigvalcumsum ); 
plot(1:size(eigvalcumsum,1),eigvalcumsum,... 
    'MarkerSize',8,'MarkerEdgeColor','b',... 
    'LineWidth',2,'Color',[0,.7,0.7]); 
xlabel('Eigenvalue nr.'); 
ylabel('Data Percentage'); 
title('Cumulative Sum'); 
  
  
% Plots of the components 
figure; 
nrows = 940;                 %  rows of the Multispec 4C image 
ncols = 1250;                %  cols of the Multispec 4C image 
nbands = 4;                  %  bands of the Multispec 4C image 
reshapedPC = reshape(PC,nrows,ncols,nbands); 
%subplot(2,2,1); 
%imshowrgb(reshapedPC, 1); 
142
==PAGE:144==
figure() 
title('Four Principle Components'); 
for i = 1:4 
    subplot(2,2,i); 
    imshowrgb(reshapedPC, i); 
end 
       
  
  
%computation of retained PC's 
retained = 2; 
PC = PC(:,[1 2]);  %  use PCs [1 4] 
%PC = PC(:,1:retained);  % uses first up to 'retained' PCs in order. 
 
 
143
==PAGE:145==
Matlab code  -  MNF.m 
%   Minimum Noise Fraction (MNF) 
function PF = mnf(datamatrix, varargin) 
% 
normalization = 0; 
if nargin > 1, normalization = varargin{1}; end 
  
X = datamatrix; 
[nobservs, nvars] = size(X); 
  
%2DO!!!! The noise model should be defined as a function by itself. 
s = [ 1 -2  1; 
     -2  4 -2; 
      1 -2  1]/9;   
%{ 
Noise = nan(nobservs,nvars); 
for i = 1:nvars 
    Noise(:,i) = conv2(X(:,i),s,'same'); 
end 
SN = cov(Noise); 
%} 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
nrows = 512; 
ncols = 512; 
nbands = 4; 
data = reshape(X,nrows,ncols,nbands); 
Noise = nan(size(data)); 
for i = 1:nbands 
    Noise(:,:,i) = conv2(data(:,:,i),s,'same'); 
end 
[nrowsN, ncolsN, nbandsN] = size(Noise); 
XNoise = reshape(Noise,nrowsN*ncolsN,nbandsN); 
SN = cov(XNoise); 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
S = cov(X); 
  
[A, L] = eig(S,SN); 
A = fliplr(A); 
L = rot90(L,2); 
  
% Normalization converts eigenvectors into unit vectors. This is done with the 
% purpose of preserving Euclidean distances. 
if normalization 
    A = A * 1./repmat( sqrt(sum(A.^2,1)),size(A,1),1); 
end 
X0 = X - repmat(mean(X),nobservs,1); 
PF = X0*A; 
  
  
  
  
% Eigenvalues 
figure; 
for i = 1:nvars 
144
==PAGE:146==
%bar(L,10,'b'); 
    plot(diag(L),'--x',... 
        'MarkerSize',8,'MarkerEdgeColor','b',... 
        'LineWidth',2,'Color',[0,.7,0.7]); 
end 
xlabel('Number'); 
ylabel('Value'); 
title('Eigenvalues'); 
  
  
% Cumulative sum of eigenvalues 
figure; 
eigvalpc = diag(L) / sum(diag(L)) * 100; 
eigvalcumsum = cumsum(eigvalpc); 
%bar( eigvalcumsum ); 
plot(1:size(eigvalcumsum,1),eigvalcumsum,... 
    'MarkerSize',8,'MarkerEdgeColor','b',... 
    'LineWidth',2,'Color',[0,.7,0.7]); 
xlabel('Eigenvector nr.'); 
ylabel('Data Percentage'); 
title('Cumulative Sum'); 
  
  
% Plot of signal-to-noise ratio. 
figure; 
plot(diag(L)-1,'-r','LineWidth',2); 
xlabel('Eigenvector nr.'); 
ylabel('Ratio'); 
title('Signal-to-Noise Ratio'); 
  
% Plot of cumulative signal-to-noise ratio 
figure; 
eigvalpc = (diag(L)-1) / sum(diag(L)-1) * 100; 
eigvalcumsum = cumsum(eigvalpc); 
plot(1:size(eigvalcumsum,1),eigvalcumsum,... 
    'MarkerSize',8,'MarkerEdgeColor','r',... 
    'LineWidth',2,'Color',[0.7,.7,0]); 
xlabel('Eigenvector nr.'); 
ylabel('Noise Percentage'); 
title('Cumulative Signal-to-Noise Ratio'); 
  
  
  
% Plots of first three factors 
figure; 
nrows = 512; 
ncols = 512; 
nbands = 4; 
reshapedPF = reshape(PF,nrows,ncols,nbands); 
subplot(3,1,1); 
imshowrgb(reshapedPF, 1); 
title('First Three Factors'); 
for i = 2:3 
    subplot(3,1,i); 
    imshowrgb(reshapedPF, i); 
end 
  
145
==PAGE:147==
  
  
  
%2DO!!!!: computation of retained PC's 
retained = 2; 
PF = PF(:,1:retained); 
 
146
==PAGE:148==
Matlab code  -  Supervised.m 
%%  Code written in Image Processing class of Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen at DTU 
%  with help of Jesus Alamansa 
%% Supervised Classification 
%  
close all; 
clear all; 
clc 
  
data = imread('Gnu.tif','tiff'); 
  
data = im2single(data(11:950,1:1250, [4 3 2 1])) ; 
              % trim off the bad edges off the co-registered channels 
                                        % select bands to use = 
                                        % only works with 3 bands 
  
%data = imread('Oryx.JPG','jpg'); 
%data = uint8( permute(data,[2 1 3]) ); 
[nrows,ncols,nbands] = size(data); 
  
figure(1); 
  
imshowrgb2(data, [4 2 3]);   % trees green 
% imshow(data, [3 2 1])    % grass green 
  
%% Example Classes 
% the code fragment below implements a procedure to yield a mask for 
% filtering data and obtain example classes that will be used to categorize all 
data. 
  
% Note: Function bands2rgb(.) is a code fragment of imshowrgb. A more robust 
% alternative is to use imshowrgb(.) itself and modify it to have it output 
% data and accept an extra argument to switch displaying on/off.  
  
nclasses = 5;   % *** Select number of samples *** 
        %  pick: sand, grass, animal, shadow, bush  
        %  Left click to add box node.  Right click to finish 'Create Mask' 
         
         
         
Xmask = zeros(nrows,ncols); 
if exist('workspace.mat','file') == 2 
    ws = load('workspace.mat','Xmask'); 
    Xmask = ws.Xmask; 
else 
    for i = 1:nclasses 
        t = i*roipoly(bands2rgb(data,[3 2 1])); 
        Xmask = Xmask + t; 
    end 
    imshow(Xmask); 
    %print -dtiff mask.tiff; 
    save('workspace.mat','Xmask'); 
end 
147
==PAGE:149==
  
figure(2); 
%clf; 
subplot(1,2,1), imshowrgb2(data,[3 2 1]), title('Data'); 
% subplot(1,2,1), imshowrgb(data,[4 2 3]), title('Data'); 
subplot(1,2,2), imshow(Xmask), title('Mask'); 
  
  
%% Classification and Confusion Matrix 
% 
% Below, we give the option to perform classification using the original 
% data matrix, or using transformed data after PCA, or MNF. In the latter 
% case, it is requested that Euclidean distance be preserved (second 
% argument equal to one; cf. mnf.m). 
  
X = double( reshape(data,nrows*ncols,nbands) ); 
  
type = 'mnf'; 
switch type 
    case 'pca' 
        titlestr = 'Classification of PCA(X)'; 
        X = pca2(X);  % pca2.m is Eric-modified version of pca.m 
    case 'mnf' 
        titlestr = 'Classification of MNF(X)'; 
        X = mnf(X,1); 
    case 'original' 
        titlestr = 'Classification of X'; 
end 
  
%%% 
% Function mahal2(.) is a modification of MATLAB built-in function mahal(.) 
% that outputs in addition to the mahalanobis distances the covariance 
% matrix of the sample data (example class). 
  
likelihood = nan(nrows*ncols,nclasses); 
for i = 1:nclasses 
    [d,covC] = mahal2(X, X(Xmask == i,:)); 
    likelihood(:,i) = log(det(covC)) + d; 
end 
[mins, ind] = min(likelihood,[],2); 
  
Xmask(Xmask == 0) = NaN; 
C = confusionmat(reshape(Xmask,nrows*ncols,1), ind); 
%C = confusionmat(reshape(Xmask,nrows*ncols,1), ind); 
  
  
figure(); 
imagesc(C); 
title('Confusion Matrix'); 
  
   
%% Quality of the Classification 
% The confusion (or error) matrix is a measure of the quality of the 
% classification, and this quality can in turn be judgedqualitatively % by 
determining whether the matrix is diagonally dominant by row (or % column)-- a 
matrix is diagonally dominant by row if the absolute % 
148
==PAGE:150==
% value of each diagonal element is greater than or equal to the sum of the 
absolute values of the off-diagonal elements of its row. 
% fprintf('Confusion Matrix\n'); 
% fprintf('   Diagonally dominant by row? %d (1/0 - Yes/No)\n',... 
 %        all((2*abs(diag(C))) >= sum(abs(C),2)) ); 
% fprintf('   Diagonally dominant by column? %d (1/0 - Yes/No)\n',... 
  %       all((2*abs(diag(C))) >= sum(abs(C),1)') ); 
  
%%% 
% Quantitatively, the quality of the confusion matrix can be judged by the 
% ratio of the sum of its diagonal to the total sum of its elements; the 
% closer this ratio is to one the higher is the quality of the 
% classification. Notice that this ratio could also be performed upon each 
% row or column of the matrix, yielding measures of quality for individual 
% supervision data classes (rows) or individual predicted classes 
% (columns). 
%fprintf( '   Overall Quality: %g\n', trace(C) / sum(sum(C,1)) ); 
%fprintf( '   Quality by Columns: %g\n', diag(C) ./ sum(C,1)' ); 
%fprintf( '   Quality by Rows: %g\n', diag(C) ./ sum(C,2) ); 
  
%% Result 
% The final result of classification is shown below where the original 
% data can be contrasted with the classified data. 
ind = reshape(ind,nrows,ncols); 
  
figure(); 
imshowrgb2(data,[4 2 1]), title('Data'); 
  
figure(); 
imagesc(ind), title(titlestr); 
axis equal; 
set(gca, 'DataAspectRatio', [1 1 1],... 
    'XLim', [0, 1073], 'YLim',[0, 742]); 
colormap(lines(nclasses)); 
hcb = colorbar('XTick',1:nclasses,'Location','SouthOutside',... 
               'XTickLabel',{' ','sand','grass',' ','animal','shadow',' 
','bush',' '}); 
set(hcb,'XTickMode','manual'); 
  
 
149
==PAGE:151==
Matlab code  -  Kmeans.m 
% K-Means 
% 
%   KMEANS K-means clustering. 
%   IDX = KMEANS(X, K) partitions the points in the N-by-P data matrix 
%   X into K clusters.  This partition minimizes the sum, over all 
%   clusters of the within-cluster sums of point-to-cluster-centroid 
%   distances.  Rows of X correspond to points, columns correspond to 
%   variables. 
% 
  
clear all 
close all 
clc 
  
% get the image 
X0=uint8(imread('MSP089_025_rec.tif')); 
  
X0=X0(150:860,100:1170,[4 3 2 1]);  % trim bad edges of co-registered channels 
                                    % select which bands to use 
[nrows ncols nbands] = size(X0); 
  
%X=reshape(X0,nrows,ncols,nbands); 
  
figure 
%imshowrgb(X0(20:940,20:1260,:),[4 2 1]); 
%imshowrgb(X0,[4 2 1]); 
imshowrgb(X0); 
% reshape 
  
% [IDX] = kmeans(X, 5) 
% [IDX, C, SUMD, D] = kmeans(X,4) 
  
  
%% Open and read data from file 
%fid = fopen... 
%    ('C:\Users\eric\Desktop\Allans classes\day3\Oryx.jpg','r'); 
%X0 = fread(fid,'uint8'); 
%fclose(fid); 
%nrows = Number of columns (for the reshape of the matrix) 
%ncols = Number of rows 
%nvars = Number of bands 
%[nrows ncols nbands] = size(X0); 
  
%reshape X0 to the size nrows, ncols, nbands 
Xr = reshape(X0, nrows, ncols, nbands); 
  
for ii=1:nbands %transpose the matrix (To read column-wise) 
150
==PAGE:152==
    X(:, :, ii) = Xr(:, :, ii)'; 
end 
clear Xr 
  
%% Change variables here: 
% Define method, choose 1 for either k or fuzzy, not both: 
k=1; % k-means clustering 
fuzzy_c=0; % fuzzy c-means clustering 
  
% Define number of classes to start with 
  
C = input('Enter number of classes (recommend 5 or 6): ') 
% C=5;   % need to set C in order publish the report, else activate interactive line above 
  
%% Choose class center randomly for C classes 
X=double(reshape(X,nrows*ncols,nbands));  %  nbands=4?   I added the double 
  
%X=reshape(X,nrows*ncols,nbands);  %  nbands=4?   without the double 
  
xr=ceil(rand(C,1)*nrows*ncols); %A random index to classcenters 
xc=X(xr,:);% Value of the class center, each row is a center 
%xc =[13 7 4 1;40 47 47 25;20 23 25 10; 17 20 23 11; ... 
%    16 9 6 0; 15 6 6 0]; 
%% 
tic; 
lim=1; 
it=0; 
%% k-means: 
if k==1 
    while lim> 10^(-6) 
        it=it+1; 
        if it>200   % recommend 100 
            break 
        end 
        for i=1:C %Calculate distance to class centers 
            D(i,:)=sum((X-repmat(xc(i,:),length(X),1))'.*... 
                (X-repmat(xc(i,:),length(X),1))'); 
        end 
        [D,Idx]=min(D); %Find the minimum distance 
        for i=1:C 
            class_i=X(Idx==i,:); % Assign observation to class 
            xc_new(i,:)=mean(class_i); % Compute new classcenters 
          
        end 
         
        diff=abs(xc-xc_new); 
        lim=max(diff(:)); 
        xc=xc_new; 
151
==PAGE:153==
    end 
    it 
    toc 
    figure 
    hist(D,100); 
    title(['Minimum Distance, ',num2str(C),' classes.']) 
end 
  
  
%% Add colormap and plot the results 
if k==1 
    kc=['k']; 
else 
    kc=['c']; 
end 
  
Idx = reshape(Idx, ncols, nrows, 1); 
figure,imshow(Idx',[1 (C+1)])            %transpose Idx to un-invert image 
title([num2str(kc),'-means, ',num2str(C),' classes.']) 
colormap(jet) 
colorbar 
%% Rejection class 
if k==1 
    a=1000;   % recommend 200 
    reject=find(D>a); %reject if distance > a 
end 
if fuzzy_c==1 
    a=0.25; 
    reject=find(M<a); %reject if less than "a" degree of membership 
end 
Irej = reshape(Idx, ncols*nrows, 1); 
Irej(reject)=C+1; %Assign a new class to rejected pixels 
%% plot with rejected class 
Irej = reshape(Irej, ncols,nrows, 1); 
figure,imshow(Irej',[])  %  transpose Irej to un-invert image 
title([num2str(kc),'-means, ',num2str(C),' classes and rejection class.']) 
colormap(jet) 
colorbar % The rejected pixels will appear as dark-red 
%% Some statistics 
for j=1:C 
   p(j)=length(find(Idx==j));  
end 
p=p/sum(p) 
for j=1:(C+1) 
    prej(j)=length(find(Irej==j));  
end 
prej=prej/sum(prej) 
  
152
==PAGE:154==
Matlab code  -  Specang.m 
 
function [cosangle dist2] = specang(x,y) 
  
% [cosangle dist2] = specang(x,y) 
% 
% specang - spectral angle change detection 
% 
% outputs cosine of spectral angle 
%   and optionally Euclidean distance squared 
%   for each pixel in two image cubes 
% 
% x - input image 1 
% y - input image 2 
% 
  
% (c) Copyright 2009-2012 
% Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen, Ph.D., M.Sc. 
% aa@space.dtu.dk, www.imm.dtu.dk/~aa 
% 28 Mar 2009 - 2 Aug 2012 
  
sx = size(x); 
sy = size(y); 
if sx ~= sy 
    error('images must have same size') 
end 
  
p = 1; 
if length(sx)==3 
    p = sx(3); 
end 
if p==1 
    error('images must be multispectral') 
end 
  
sxy = sum(x.*y,3); 
sxx = sqrt(sum(x.*x,3)); 
syy = sqrt(sum(y.*y,3)); 
cosangle = sxy./sxx./syy; 
  
if nargout > 1 
    dist2 = sum((y-x).^2,3); 
end 
 
153
==PAGE:155==
Matlab code  -  SpecInfoDivRef.m 
 
function [SID,SIDx,SIDy,negSID,SIDSAMs,SIDSAMt,SAM,ref] = specInfoDivRef(X,ref) 
  
% Spectral Information Divergence (SID) between a hyperspectral image cube 
%   and a reference spectrum    Code by Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen 
% 
% [SID,SIDx,SIDy,negSID,SIDSAMs,SIDSAMt,SAM,ref] = specInfoDivRef(X,ref); 
% 
% Call example: sid = specInfoDivRef(cube, []); 
% 
% Input 
% X      - 3-D image cube 
% ref    - reference spectrum (as a ***row*** vector); 
%          if ref is empty (i.e., "[]"), a window opens and the user selects 
%          a pixel containing the reference spectrum (under the crosshairs) 
% 
% Output 
% SID    - spectral information divergence (i.e., the symmetrized 
%          Kullback-Leibler divergence/relative entropy of properly normed 
%          spectra) for all pixels vs a reference spectrum 
% SIDx 
% SIDy 
% negSID - the KL-divergence obeys the so-called Gibbs' inequality: it must 
%          be nonnegative; this variable flags pixels where this is 
%          violated; if less than four output variables are specified, this 
%          check is skipped 
% SIDSAMs - SID*sin(SAM) 
% SIDSAMt - SID*tan(SAM) 
% SAM     - spectral angle 
% ref     - reference spectrum 
% 
% References 
% 
% Chang, Chein-I. (2000). 
% An information-theoretic approach to spectral variability, similarity, 
%   and discrimination for hyperspectral image analysis. 
% IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 46(5), pp. 1927-1932. 
% 
% Yingzi Du, Chein-I Chang, Hsuan Ren, Chein-Chi Chang, James O. Jensen 
%   and Francis M. D’Amico (2004). 
% New hyperspectral discrimination measure for spectral characterization. 
% Opt. Eng. 43(8). pp. 1777–1786. 
  
% (c) Copyright 2012 
% Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen 
% aa@space.dtu.dk, www.imm.dtu.dk/~aa 
% 20 Apr 2012 - 24 Aug 2012 
  
  
if ndims(X) ~= 3    % number of dimensions of image file 
    error('image must be 3-dim') 
end 
[nrows,ncols,nvars] = size(X); 
  
if (nargin < 2) || isempty(ref) 
154
==PAGE:156==
%     figure, imshowrgb(X, [3 2 1]) 
    figure, imshowrgb(X, [3 2 1], 2, 1000) % for spectra 
    [x,y] = ginput(1); 
    X = reshape(X, nrows, ncols, nvars); 
    ref = squeeze(X(round(y), round(x), :))'; 
end 
  
if nvars ~= length(ref) 
    error('image must have same spectral dimension as reference') 
end 
% figure, histogram(ref), drawnow 
Y = reshape(repmat(ref, nrows*ncols, 1), nrows, ncols, nvars); 
  
% norm spectra for each pixel to unit integral (i.e., make pdf-look-alike) 
aux = sum(X, 3); 
X = X./repmat(aux, [1 1 nvars]); 
aux = sum(Y, 3); 
Y = Y./repmat(aux, [1 1 nvars]); 
clear aux 
% % check 
% sum(squeeze(X(160,201,:))) % or any other coordinate 
% sum(squeeze(Y(2,8,:))) % or any other coordinate 
  
% calculate KL-divergence/relative entropy for all normed spectra 
SIDx = X.*log(X./Y); 
SIDy = Y.*log(Y./X); 
if nargout < 4 
    clear X Y 
end 
SIDx(SIDx==Inf) = NaN; 
SIDy(SIDy==Inf) = NaN; 
SIDx = nansum(SIDx, 3); 
SIDy = nansum(SIDy, 3); 
  
if nargout > 3 
    % Check for violation of the Gibbs inequality 
    negSID.rowx = []; 
    negSID.colx = []; 
    if min(SIDx(:))<0 
        warning('*** SIDx < 0, bad ***') 
        minSIDx = min(SIDx(:)) 
        imtool(SIDx<0) 
        [negSID.rowx,negSID.colx] = find(SIDx<0); 
        SIDx(SIDx<0) = 0; 
    end 
    negSID.rowy = []; 
    negSID.coly = []; 
    if min(SIDy(:))<0 
        warning('*** SIDy < 0, bad ***') 
        minSIDy = min(SIDy(:)) 
        imtool(SIDy<0) 
        [negSID.rowy,negSID.coly] = find(SIDy<0); 
        SIDy(SIDy<0) = 0; 
    end 
end 
  
% symmetrized version 
SID  = SIDx + SIDy; 
155
==PAGE:157==
  
% SID-SAM sin or tan 
if nargout > 4 
    SAM = acos(specang(X, Y)); 
    clear X Y 
    SIDSAMs = SID.*sin(SAM); 
end 
if nargout > 5 
    SIDSAMt = SID.*tan(SAM); 
end 
 
 
156
==PAGE:158==
Matlab code  -  MakeBild.m 
%%  MakeBild.m   make an image file from the animal hyperspectral scans 
%  This script uses the results of Readspec.m which read in the photometer text files and assigned 
%  the spectrum a letter code in matlab, representing the animal 'Or' is Oryx Reference, 'Kr' 
%  Kudu reference, 'Cr' cheetah reference spectra. 
  
%  The idea is to compile those animal spectra into a 'pseudo-image file'  
%  called 'Bild' for subsequent analysis by SAM and SID. 
  
%%   Create the Bild of multiple animal spectra 
  
% Bild will be an image 1 row and 15 columns where each column is 1 hyperspectra for each 
%animal per pixel.     Ex.  15 animals = 15 pixels 
  
% We want to make an image that is:  1 row x 15 columns x 2151 bands 
  
%  Note:  2500nm - 350nm = 2151 x 1 nm bands  
  
 % Using a subset of 15 Animal Spectra created in Readspec.m 
  
%  Test =[Ar';Br';Cr';CCr';Cr';GNr';Gr';HYr';Hr';Ir';Jr';Kr';LWr';Lr';Or']; 
  
Bild = [Ar; Br; Cr; CCr; Cr; GNr; Gr; HYr; Hr; Ir; Jr; Kr; LWr; Lr; Or] 
  
%%  Create an image of a Reference Spectra to matching Bild's dimensions. 
%   
%  Each 'pixel' spectra in Ref_animal is the same animal.  Create a Ref Image  
%  one for every animal whose presence in a scene is to be tested. 
%  Just replace the oryx ref spectra (Or) with another created by READSPEC.m  
%  and substitute it into the repmat command below:  such as Kudu (Kr) 
  
%  in this case the master image called 'Bild'  has 15 different 'pixels' 
%  of spectra.  Each spectra needs to match the hyperspectra 2151 samples, 
%  ordered into rows, like bands.  Each pixel (15 here) is a new sample. 
  
Ref_oryx = repmat(Or, 1,15); 
  
size(Ref_oryx) 
  
%% Prepare variables for feeding into SpecAng.m 
%  Now these two files:  Bild and Ref_oryx can be compared for similarity by SAM or SID. 
  
x=Bild 
y=Ref_oryx 
  
% clean up all the junk files to save memory. 
% All that is needed to continue are 'x' and 'y' 
 clear *r ; clear M  ; clear Bild  ; clear Ref_oryx 
157
==PAGE:159==
Malab codes  -  Ratio.m 
 
%%  Image processing 
  
%template for ratio'ing bands and making indices from multispectral bands. 
  
close all 
clear all 
clc 
% get the image 
  
X0=im2single(imread('M:\Eric Data\superv_Gnu\Gnu2.tif')); 
% X0=uint8(imread('C:\Users\eric\Documents\MATLAB\kiacho.jpg')); 
% X0=uint8(imread('C:\Users\eric\Desktop\Drone\Kalahari2014\Oryx3.jpg')); 
% X=single(imread('C:\Users\eric\Desktop\Drone\Kalahari2014\Oryx3.jpg')); 
  
X0 = X0(15:950,1:1250,:);  % trim off the bad edges of the co-registered 
channels 
  
[nrows ncols nbands] = size(X0); 
  
X=reshape(X0,nrows,ncols,nbands); 
  
%figure() 
%imshow(X)  %  0 to 1 with imshow 
%title('Original Image') 
  
NDVI = (X(:,:,4) - X(:,:,2))./ (X(:,:,4) + X(:,:,2))*100; 
figure() 
imshow(NDVI,[]) 
title('NDVI = (NIR - Red) / (NIR + Red)') 
  
%  seems like band 3 might be blue and band 1 red !? 
  
% figure() 
% imshow(X(:,:,4)); 
% title('band4 NIR') 
%  
% figure() 
% imshow(X(:,:,3)); 
% title('band 3 Red Edge') 
%  
% figure() 
% imshow(X(:,:,2)); 
% title('band 2 Red') 
%  
% figure() 
% imshow(X(:,:,1)); 
% title('band 1 Green') 
  
%  Xs=single(X);    % change number format for math operations 
  
ratio2d4 = (X(:,:,2))./ (X(:,:,4)); 
figure() 
158
==PAGE:160==
imshow(ratio2d4,[]) 
  
%ratio3d1 = (Xs(:,:,3))./ (Xs(:,:,1).*(1.3));   % scaled to balance. 
  
% Ratio by the Red Edge Band 
  
ratio4d3 = (X(:,:,4))./ (X(:,:,3)); 
ratio2d3 = (X(:,:,2))./ (X(:,:,3)); 
ratio1d3 = (X(:,:,1))./ (X(:,:,3)); 
  
%  display the ratios 
  
ratio4d3 = (X(:,:,4))./ (X(:,:,3)); 
figure() 
imshow(ratio4d3, []); 
title('ratio bands 4/3  NIR/RE') 
  
ratio2d3 = (X(:,:,2))./ (X(:,:,3)); 
figure() 
imshow(ratio2d3,[]); 
title('ratio bands 2/3  Red/RE') 
  
ratio1d3 = (X(:,:,1))./ (X(:,:,3)); 
figure() 
imshow(ratio1d3,[]); 
title('ratio bands 1/3  Green/RE') 
  
  
GnuRatios = cat(3,ratio4d3, ratio2d3,ratio1d3); 
  
figure() 
A=log(GnuRatios); 
B=imshow(A,[]) 
  
  
%SID,SIDx,SIDy,negSID,SIDSAMs,SIDSAMt,SAM,ref] = specInfoDivRef(Aux, 
Aux(2,9,:)); 
  
  
  
% figure() 
% imshow(ratio3d1); 
% title('ratio bands 3/1.3') 
%  
% ratio1d3 = (Xs(:,:,1))./ (Xs(:,:,3)); 
% figure() 
% imshow(ratio1d3./3); 
% title('ratio bands 1r/3b') 
%  
% ratio3d2 = (Xs(:,:,3))./ (Xs(:,:,2)); 
% figure() 
% imshow(ratio3d2); 
% title('Ratio bands 3 / 2') 
%  
% % ratio2d1 = (Xs(:,:,2))./ (Xs(:,:,1)); 
% %  
159
==PAGE:161==
% % figure() 
% % imshow(ratio2d1); 
% % title('Ratio bands 2 / 1') 
% %  
% %  
% % ratio1d2 = (Xs(:,:,1))./ (Xs(:,:,2))/10; 
% %  
% % figure() 
% % imshow((ratio1d2)*2); 
% % title('Ratio bands 1 / 2') 
% %  
% %  
% % %%  Add new bands to image file (X) 
% %  
% % % change number format back to uint8 for display purposes 
% %  
% %  
% % Xnew = cat(3, Xs, ratio3d1);   % 3 specifies a column, 2 row, add band ratio 
3/1 image 
% %  
% % [nrows ncols nbands] = size(Xnew); 
% %  
% % Xnew = reshape(Xnew,nrows,ncols,nbands); 
% %  
% % Xnewu8 = uint8(Xnew); 
% %  
% %  
% % figure() 
% % %imshow(Xnewu8,[4 2 1]); 
% %  
% test3=cat(3,X,ratio1d3); 
  
 
 
160
==PAGE:162==
Matlab code  -  Threshold.m 
 
%  Threshold.m 
%% Read in image 
clc; clear; close all 
  
I = imread('blueband.tif'); 
%J = imread('redband.tif'); 
  
  
%R = J./I*50; 
  
imshow(I); 
  
%%  Convert to grayscale 
%Igray = rgb2gray(I); 
%imshow(Igray); 
%%  Illumination 
level= 0.59;%Right click next to value#,Tool;'Increment value Run Section' 
% depends upon data type single, double, uint8, etc 
Ithresh = im2bw(I, level); 
figure() 
imshow(Ithresh); 
colormap(hot); 
% imshowpair(I, Ithresh, 'montage'); 
title('Threshold of the Blue channel of RGB camera') 
 
 
161
