==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis - Kandidatspeciale
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Migration af platin på oxidoverader
Author:
Emil Agostini (s082718)
Supervisors:
Peter Christian Kjærgaard Vesborg
Thomas Pedersen
Master Thesis
March 16, 2016
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis covers the study of the platinum migration phenomenon on SiO2 amongst other
oxide substrates. The thesis has been completed at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), in
collaboration with the Department of Physics, the Center for Individual Nanoparticles Functionality
(CINF), DTU Nanotech and DTU Danchip. My supervisors were Peter Christian Kjærgaard Vesborg
and Thomas Pedersen, which I would like to thank for their help and guidance, throughout the
project. I would also like to thank Ole Hansen and Ib Chorkendor for their advice regarding the
project during meetings. Lastly I would like to thank the Danchip sta and especially Conny Hjort
and Thomas Pedersen for the trainings on the equipment inside the cleanroom during the project.
==PAGE:3==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Resumé
I løbet af dette kandidatprojekt er fænomenet migration og dispersion af platin på SiO2 (Silicium
oxid) og andre substrater blevet undersøgt. En eksperimentel procedure er blevet planlagt og frem-
stillet, med henblik på at observere, karakterisere og forhåbentligt kvanticere fænomenet. Hoved-
karakteriseringsmetoderne har været SEM (Scanning electron microscopy) og AFM (Atomic force
microscopy). På baggrund af dette, er en alternativ analysemetode for disse mikrografer blevet udar-
bejdet. Metoden er en koncentrisk midlet radial prolering (CARP). Platin migrationen er blevet
observeret og rapporteret af ere karakteriseringsmetoder på SiO2 ved varmebehandlingsbetingelser
givet ved 400◦C i 30 min, ved atmosfærisk tryk og med strømning af 5 SLM (Standard liter per
minute) N2 (Nitrogen) og 1 SLM O2 (Oxygen) og ligeledes kun med strømning af 5 SLM N2. In-
gen migration blev rapporteret ved varmebehandling af platin på SiO2 ved et tryk på 3.5 mbar
med gasstrømninger af 1 SLM N2 og 0.2 SLM O2. Andre substrater som TiO2 (Titanium oxid),
Al2O3 (Aluminium oxid), Si3N4 (Silicium nitrid) og SiC (Silicium carbid) er blevet undersøgt, men
resultaterne for migrationen var ikke endegyldige.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Abstract
During this master thesis, the phenomenon of migration and dispersion of platinum on
SiO2 and
other substrates has been studied. An experimental process has been designed and fabricated in order
to observe, characterize and possibly quantify the phenomenon. The main characterization methods
has been SEM (Scanning electron microscope) and AFM (Atomic force microscope) microscopy.
That is why, an alternative analysing method for the micrographs has been developed, namely the
method of concentric averaged radial proling (CARP). The platinum migration has been observed
and reported by several characterizing methods on
SiO2 at annealing conditions of 400◦C for 30
min, at atmospheric pressure with ows of 5 SLM of N2 and 1 SLM O2 and also only with 5 SLM
N2. No migration was reported when annealing the platinum on
SiO2 at a pressure of 3.5 mbar
with gas ows of 1 SLM of N2 and 0.2 SLM O2. Other substrates like TiO2, Al2O3, Si3N4 and
SiC were investigated, but the results for the migration were not conclusive.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Contents
Preface
i
Resumé
ii
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Motivation and state of the art
3
2.1
The microreactor project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The background of the platinum migration phenomenon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Theoretical Background
6
3.1
Heterogeneous Catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Models for platinum migration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Mask Design
8
4.1
The shadow mask design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.2
The device wafer mask design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Alignment marks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Fabrication
17
5.1
Shadow Mask fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.1
Nitride Deposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.2
Photolithography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.1.3
Reactive ion etching (RIE)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.1.4
KOH etch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Device wafer fabrication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.1
Silicon etch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2.2
Silicon Oxide growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2.3
Alignment of shadow mask and device wafer and platinum deposition
. . . .
23
5.2.4
Other substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Results
25
6.1
Development of method to analyse and quantify the characterization results . . . . .
25
6.2
Annealing furnace and conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3
Annealing of platinum spots on SiO2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3.1
Experiment 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.3.2
Experiment 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3.3
Experiment 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3.4
Experiment 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Annealing of platinum spots on TiO2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.5
Annealing of platinum spots on Al2O3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
iv
==PAGE:6==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
6.6
Results on other substrates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.7
Results summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Outlook and future work
66
7.1
Fabrication improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.2
Further studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.3
Analysis improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8
Conclusion
69
9
Appendix
72
9.1
Other supports SEM pictures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
9.2
SEM CARP code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
9.3
AFM CARP code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
v
==PAGE:7==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
1
Introduction
The world's energy consumption has been increasing ever since the industrial revolution until it
reached in 2012 a recorded value of 104 × 103 TWh (ref [1]), whereas the natural resources left
needed to produce energy are decreasing. 87 % of the actual energy production is generated by the
mean of burning fossil fuels. (2012 number ref [1]). Continuing at the same rate, the prediction for
the lasting of the actual discovered resources of oil is 50 years, 60 years for gas and 90 years for coal
(ref [2]). The world is facing an energy crisis more and more for every year, and cannot continue to
be as dependent on fossil fuel energy resources.
On top of the risk of an energy crisis, there is also a substantial risk of an environmental crisis
due to the pollution, which is linked to the production and consumption of energy. In fact, the
increasing concentration of Greenhouse Gases in the atmosphere (GHGs), can have irreversible eco-
logical consequences for the planet: acid rain, ocean level increases and climate changes. According
to the statistic the CO2 concentration has reached a level of 404 ppm (parts per milion) in February
2016. An increase of the atmospheric CO2 concentration to 600 ppm would result in an increase of
the sea level of up to 1 m (ref [3]). That is without mentioning other GHGs like methane which is
the second largest anthropogenic GHG and has a much stronger contribution to radiative forcing, in
equal amounts.
To avoid a world energy crisis and an ecological catastrophe, we need to start producing energy
from renewable sources and in a sustainable manner.
There are several sources of renewable energy available: for example wind energy, solar energy or
wave energy just to cite a few. The problem with all these energy sources is that the energy obtained
from it is in the form of electricity, which cannot be stored directly, as opposed to oil or natural gas.
Although those renewable sources of energy are promising, they show some drawbacks. Indeed, due
to their close link to weather changes, they cannot supply energy when the energy input such as sun
or wind is not present to begin with. Therefore, it is not taken for granted that the energy demand
and production peaks are coordinated. The massive amount of space and special conditions needed
for renewable energy supplies also present a challenge, because it makes them cumbersome to have
close to areas where the energy has to be supplied. To solve these issues, the energy or surplus of
energy, needs to be stored and used when the demand is higher than the production. A way to do
this is by using an energy carrier, a so-called renewable fuel. Such a fuel could be H2 (hydrogen),
hydrocarbons or alcohols, as a replacement for the gasoline we have nowadays.
In order to convert the produced or harvested electricity into a fuel, a catalyst is required. To get
hydrogen for example, the electricity produced with a renewable energy source can be used to drive a
water splitting reaction, where water is split into hydrogen and oxygen. However, in order to induce
that reaction, a catalyst is needed. Unfortunately, the best catalysts needed to make renewable fuels
are very rare and expensive. One of the most widely used catalysts is platinum and it's derivatives.
Platinum for example used in the automotive industry for catalytic converters, to transform carbon
monoxide (CO) to carbon dioxide (CO2). It is therefore crucial to gure out how to optimize and
use as little as possible of the catalyst. The catalysts have to be tested with very high precision to
characterize and optimize them in the best possible way. The goal is to get the highest conversion
1
==PAGE:8==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
rates with as little catalyst as possible.
DTU Cinf (Center for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality) has developed for this purpose devices
called microreactors (ref [4]), designed to test very small amounts, structures and mixes of catalysts,
by getting a prompt and accurate response due to the small volumes of gas that are dealt with.
To know the precision of the microreactor, some tests were conducted to test the smallest amount
of catalyst that could be detected. CO oxidation was used as a test reaction. Some platinum spots
where deposited in dierent sizes (down to 1,5 µm of diameter) in the microreactor. The smallest
spots gave much higher response of catalytic activity. The samples were therefore examined in a SEM
(Scanning electron microscope) before and after annealing treatments corresponding to the reaction
conditions, to look at the platinum lms and see if any changes could be observed. An unexpected
phenomenon was then observed on the SEM: platinum particles seemed to have migrated away from
the platinum spots' centers and dispersed around the spots. That could be an explanation for the
obviously higher surface area resulting in the high activities.
Particle dispersion and migration phenomenons of platinum on oxide surfaces have been observed
before to a certain extent (ref [5], [6], [7]), but their characterizations and explanations are not in
agreement across the papers. The investigated conditions and parameters and their ranges, were not
exactly tting the issues encountered in the microreactor project. On top of that, the phenomenon
has never been looked at as a problem and no solutions to avoid it is to be found in the literature.
The goal of this project is to design an experiment for the investigation and characterization of
the platinum migration and dispersion phenomenon. It includes the design and fabrication of devices
suited for characterization by SEM and AFM. A range of relevant parameters and substrates will be
characterized and compared along the study. A method suited to analyse and quantify the achieved
characterization results of the phenomenon, will also be developed.
2
==PAGE:9==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
2
Motivation and state of the art
2.1
The microreactor project
With the huge importance of heterogeneous catalysis and the need for developing new catalysts, a
way to easily test and characterize these new catalysts in dierent reactions, is needed. That's why
a microreactor was designed at DTU CINF (ref [4]).
The microreactor developed by DTU Cinf proposes many advantages compared to conventional
large-scale reactors. The most obvious is the amounts of catalysts and reactants that are needed.
On top of that, all the parameters like temperature, ow rate, pressure and residence time can be
controlled much easier and faster thanks to the small volumes and dimensions. The goal is to achieve
very high sensitivity of detection and to measure the activity of a catalyst in the most precise way.
To test the sensitivity of the microreactor, some platinum thin lm spots of specic sizes, thereby
knowing their active surface area, were put into the microreactor. Then the CO oxidation reaction
was tested because as a standard reaction, its kinetics are well known and it has been studied a lot (ref
[4]). Moreover, it's a very common reaction happening in all cars' exhaust systems with a catalytic
converter, which, considering the amount of cars worldwide, it has a non-negligible importance.
Surprisingly, the measured activities for even the smallest spots (ref) were way above the expected
values. Even with the smallest diameters of platinum thin lm spots, there was full conversion of
the inserted CO, meaning that there was much more activity than expected for a platinum thin lm
spot of that size.
2.2
The background of the platinum migration phenomenon
This section will introduce the background for the study and give an insight in the past literature
that have treated similar cases. The literature will be compared to see if there are similar observa-
tions across the studies that can be used in this project.
The tests conducted on the platinum spots on silicon oxide thin lm substrates in the microreactor,
resulted in activities that were far above the expected values. Very small surface areas of the plat-
inum thin lm catalyst were still showing very high activity and full conversion of the inserted CO
to CO2. In fact, the dierence in catalytic activity was much more striking for the smaller platinum
spots, indicating that the eect would be more noticeable on smaller spots.
However, a lot of measurements had been conducted before the problem was detected in the CINF
group, making them useless, because the actual surface area of the spots is not known. Because it is
very important to know the precision of the microreactor's detection and because a lot of conducted
experiments' validity depend on it, a more thorough study and characterization of the platinum
spots had to be done.
Before I started on this project, the samples had been examined in a SEM, after these surprising
measurements, to try and gure out an explanation for them. On these SEM images (insert them if
we can nd them) a phenomenon of migration or dispersion away from the platinum spots and out
on the substrate seemed to be observed when comparing samples before and after they had been
exposed to temperatures around 400 ◦C at atmospheric pressure with a ow of 1 SLM O2 and 5
SLM N2.
Particles that weren't there before the annealing seemed to be present at the edge of the spots. This
could be the explanation for the higher catalytic activity measured: if the surface area of the plat-
3
==PAGE:10==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
inum spots, actually was much more than believed in the rst place. The migration phenomenon was
observed for platinum spots on silicon oxide substrates, because it was the support for the platinum
in the microreactor.
In this project, the goal is to reproduce this phenomenon and to understand under which conditions
it is happening. Then a characterization of the spots and the migration phenomenon with various
methods such as SEM, EDX and AFM will be done. On top of that solutions to avoid the migration
will also be considered, by testing dierent substrates and annealing conditions.
In order to get an idea of the past studies in the eld of the platinum dispersion/migration phe-
nomenon, a literature study has been done to try and extract useful information before starting
making the study.
Looking into past literature, not many articles, especially not recently, have looked into this phe-
nomenon, that isn't well known and seems to have been forgotten since the 1980's. This lack of
knowledge and study about this phenomenon was also one of the reasons for the study. Never-
theless, some research groups have observed and studied the phenomenon to some extent before
in dierent ways, with dierent substrates and annealing conditions. In ref [6] (Zhang et al.) the
dispersion of platinum on
SiO2 and
Al2O3 substrates was studied. The authors quantied the
migration with a variable called "percentage exposed".
This variable gives an idea about the surface area in terms of the size of the particles. They estimated
the "percentage exposed" by chemical extraction and TEM. They annealed the samples in an oxygen
environment in temperatures going from 20 to 600◦C at atmospheric pressure. The parameters used
in this study are comparable with the ones relevant for this project. However, the big dierence
between their study and this one, is that the platinum is deposited from an aqueous solution in their
case, whereas here I'm looking into platinum thin lm spots of a determined size and surface area.
Their result showed that the "percentage exposed" was constant up to 500◦C for platinum on dier-
ent Al2O3 substrates and then above that temperature the particles sintered and the "percentage
exposed" dropped. For platinum on SiO2 on the other hand the "percentage exposed" increased up
to 300◦C and was then constant to 500◦C and dropped above 500◦C. A dispersion of the platinum
particles was therefore observed on SiO2 up to 500◦C, with the increasing percentage exposed mean-
ing smaller particles. As a model for the dispersion, they believed that it was due to the amount of
interaction between the formed PtOx and the supports.
Another article, ref [5] (W.Romanowski et al.) has also observed dispersion of platinum on SiO2.
They deposited the platinum by evaporation, obtaining a thin lm, like it is intended to do it in
this project, making it easier to compare to. In their study, they had 4 dierent annealing recipes
(programs. In the rst one, they rst annealed in vacuum for 10h at 550◦C at a pressure of 1·10−5Pa,
then in H2 for 10h at 500◦C, then in H2 for 10h at 550◦C, then in O2 for 10h at 500◦C and to nish
with in O2 for 10h at 550◦C. The hydrogen and oxygen annealings were performed at pressures from
1 · 10−3Pa to 1 · 10−1Pa.
In between each step they measured the size of the particles by manual visual counting on EM (elec-
tron microscope) pictures. They observed that the annealing in vacuum and hydrogen increased the
mean particle size, resulting in sintering, whereas the following O2 annealings reduced the particle
size again and showed a dispersion of the particles.
In the second annealing program they reproduced the rst one, but split the last step in two, with
one sample annealed 2h and another one annealed 2h + 8h. They wanted to test the inuence of the
4
==PAGE:11==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
annealing time in oxygen on the particle size distribution, and it resulted that the sample annealed
for 10h had a smaller mean particle size than the one annealed for 2h, and therefore also a bigger
surface area.
In the third annealing experiment they had a thinner platinum lm of 1,5 nm instead of the earlier
3 nm. They rst annealed in H2 for 10h at 550◦C at a pressure of 3 · 10−2Pa, then in O2 for rst
10h at 500◦C and then 10h again at 550◦C at a pressure of 7 · 10−3Pa, then in H2 again for 10h
at 550◦C at a pressure of 3 · 10−2Pa and to nish with back again in
O2 for 10h at 550◦C at a
pressure of 3 · 10−2Pa. The annealings in O2 were with a ow of 1500 l/h. By annealing back and
forth in O2 and H2, they observed that the platinum particles were sintering in H2 environment
and redispersing in O2 environment. Furthermore, a longer and hotter annealing in O2 resulted in
further redispersion of the platinum particles, reducing the mean particle size.
In their last experiment, they reproduced the third experiment, but increased the ow of O2 to 2000
l/h in the last annealing step. This yielded in a strong redispersion.
From this study (ref [5] (W.Romanowski et al.)) it can be concluded that annealing of platinum
particles in an oxygen environment at temperatures between 500-550◦C, is resulting in dispersion of
the particles. On the other hand, annealing in a reducing atmosphere with hydrogen at equivalent
temperatures, gives the opposite eect, namely sintering. They also show the possibility to sinter
and redisperse the platinum particles by annealing back and forth in an oxidising and reducing at-
mosphere.
Another group that has studied the dispersion of platinum phenomenon is S.E.Wanke's group. They
published several papers in relation to this study. One of them is "Sintering and redispersion of
conventional supported metal catalysts in hydrogen and oxygen atmospheres" [7], where sintering
and redispersion of platinum on Al2O3 and SiO2 has been studied.
The dispersion was dened by the ratio of surface to total metal atoms. The values for the dis-
persion before and after annealing were obtained by (hydrogen or CO) adsorption measurements.
The platinum was deposited from an aqueous solution, so a dierent method than in this study.
However, it can be interesting to compare the results either way. The annealing temperatures they
used were from 300 to 800◦C and they annealed in O2 and H2 at atmospheric pressure. The rst
experiment was an oxygen annealing for 16 h at temperatures from 300 to 600◦C for the
SiO2
support and 300 to 800◦C for the Al2O3 support. For the SiO2 support, the normalized dispersion
was constant between 300 and 400◦C and was decreasing between 400 and 600◦C. This was showing
that the platinum particles became less dispersed above 400◦C, which is a sign of sintering. This is
in contradiction with the results from the previous mentioned paper ref [5], where the dispersion of
platinum particles on SiO2 was strong, for annealings in oxygen at 500-550◦C. On the other hand,
the annealing on
Al2O3 showed an increasing normalized dispersion from 300 to 550◦C, followed
by a drop in dispersion above 550 and up to 800◦C. The platinum particles supported on
Al2O3
started by dispersing up to 550◦C and then showed a strong sintering above 550◦C.
In another experiment they made, they studied the eect of a 1h hydrogen annealing on Pt on Al2O3
and SiO2 from 500 to 800◦C. The result is a drop in the normalized dispersion for both substrates,
with a 50 % bigger drop though for the SiO2 compared to the Al2O3. This is in agreement with
the previous paper ref [5], where annealing in a hydrogen environment was also showing sintering of
the platinum particles on SiO2. In the other papers from S.E.Wanke et al., references [8], [9], [10]
and [11], the results were in agreement across the papers: the annealing of platinum on an Al2O3
5
==PAGE:12==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
support in an oxygen environment, yielded in dispersion up to 600◦C, and above the particles were
sintering.
Group
Zhang et al.
Romanowski et al.
Wanke
Wanke and Flynn
Temperature (◦C)
20-600
500 and 550
300-600
300-700
Annealing environment
O2
vaccum H2, O2
O2 and H2
O2
Support
SiO2 and Al2O3
SiO2
SiO2 and Al2O3
Al2O3
Annealing time (h)
1
10 at each T/environment
16 O2, 1 O2, 1 H2
1-128
Pressure (Pa)
atm. pressure
10−5, 10−1-10−3
atm pressure
atm pressure
Flow (L/min)
15 · 10−3
17 L/min H2,17 and 25 L/min O2
Table 2.1: Comparison of the literature experiments parameters.
3
Theoretical Background
This section will introduce the main principles that will be dealt with in the study.
3.1
Heterogeneous Catalysis
A catalyst is a substance that lowers the activation energy needed for a reaction to happen and
thereby increase the rate of a chemical reaction but without being consumed in the process. Catalysis
is the process of increasing the rate of a chemical reaction to get the most out of a desired product
as possible. In heterogeneous catalysis, the catalyst is a solid substance and the reactants are in a
dierent phase, either gas or liquid. The reactants then adsorb onto the catalyst surface and react
forming chemical bonds. The formed products then desorb from the surface. Almost all chemicals
that are produced nowadays have catalytic processes involved (ref [12]). This includes for example
ammonia synthesis, which is the most common fertiliser (ref [13]). Furthermore, another example
could be the processing of crude oil for gasoline production or in a more sustainable perspective,
hydrogen production and generally sustainable fuels (ref [14]).
The biggest energy challenge for the next century will be to nd replacements for the contem-
porary energy resources, which are mainly fossil fuels. There are many ways to harvest energy in a
sustainable way, especially with solar energy by using for example electrolysis, photochemistry and
photovoltaics. However, the main issue is to store the harvested energy in order to be able to use it
like we use gasoline, in a transportable and versatile way.
The energy harvested needs to be converted to a chemical fuel, and to do that, a catalyst will always
be needed in the process. In the run against fossil fuels, renewable fuels have to be more and more
ecient in order to be considered as replacements at all. That is why new catalysts have to be
developed. They have to be more ecient and use less material for the same output, because the
best catalyst materials are often very expensive. To optimize the catalytic activity, nanoparticles
are oftenly used because they have a very high surface area. They can be varied to specic sizes
and are tested to improve their performances. Even the smallest details are important when talking
about massive production. Therefore, the testing and characterization of catalysts is of dramatic
importance. In that scope, the microreactor developed at DTU CINF is perfectly suited to test
catalysts precisely, fast and at a scale that is very easy to handle.
3.2
Models for platinum migration
In all the studied papers, the dierent research groups tried to come up with models describing the
platinum particle dispersion and migration. There is a common agreement in those papers on the fact
6
==PAGE:13==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
that when annealing in an oxygen environment, oxygen is adsorbed on the Pt surface and oxidises
the Pt to form PtO2. The PtO2 is then believed to detach and spread onto the support. Then,
the explanations for the dispersion and migration mechanisms are varying a bit. S.E.Wanke et al.
stated in their dierent papers ([7], [8], [9], [10] and [11]) that the PtO2 particles after detaching are
spreading onto the support and diusing until encountering and colliding with another particle. The
diusion can either be of individual atoms or of crystallites particles. The mobility of the diusing
elements depends on the collision and merging rates.
W.Romanowski et al. in ref [5], agrees on the fact that the PtO2 particles are spreading onto the
support. However, they also state another possible mechanism, which is the splitting of the platinum
crystallites due to strains generated in particles during their oxidation. Their explanation for the
sintering after annealing in H2, is that the PtO2 is reduced to metallic Pt which does not wet the
substrate. The interaction between the substrate and the particles is weaker and the particles are
more likely to move around.
The past literature study in the eld of platinum migration and dispersion gave an idea of the
state of the art characterization, theories and models of the phenomenon. There is no doubt that a
platinum dispersion and migration phenomenon is happening under specic conditions, according to
the results of the papers. Nevertheless, the papers and research groups do not seem to agree com-
pletely on all the parameters that cause dispersion and migration. On top of that dierent models
and explanations are used to describe the phenomenon. The dispersion of platinum does not seem
to have been a problem in the past, because usually it is the opposite phenomenon, sintering that
is the big issue, because it is diminishing the activity of the catalyst. Dispersion was more studied
as a way to counter sintering than as a problem. It is also a common process to disperse platinum
nanoparticles on a support to get the most surface area as possible.
The environment and conditions of the platinum thin lms in the CINF microreactor project,
are quite dierent than the ones stated in the past papers. A characterization for the specic case
of the microreactor is needed.
The dispersion of platinum has been considered as a solution to
avoid sintering, than an issue for precision measurements. With the more evolved fabrication and
characterization instruments available nowadays, a dierent study of the migration and dispersion
phenomenon is possible.
The next two sections will describe the design and fabrication process's needed, to: 1) be able to
reproduce in the best possible way, the actual conditions where the platinum thin lms are meant
to be used and 2) to have the best designs for the characterization of the phenomenon.
7
==PAGE:14==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
4
Mask Design
In this section, the design ideas and thoughts to make the fabrication and characterization the most
reproducible, intuitive and practical as possible, will be shown. A bad mask design could jeopardize
the whole fabrication process, and wasting precious time in the project, if new masks have to be
ordered and the fabrication has to be done from scratch.
In order to deposit the platinum spots in a way which limits particles and is clean and reproducible,
I decided to use a shadow mask.
A shadow mask is a silicon wafer with structural holes going
all the way through it, which then works as a stencil for metal deposition on another wafer. This
allows for accurate metal deposition on the device wafers. In comparison to a lift o process using
photoresist for example, a shadow mask avoids the presence of wet chemicals and also residues from
the photoresist. The precision of a lift o process is maybe superior to the one using a shadow mask,
but for this purpose, the precision achieved with a shadow mask is adequate, as the spots have a large
window to be deposited within. Furthermore, the cross contamination is more crucial here than the
precision, as we want the samples to be as clean as possible. Having the shadow mask fabricated, it
also reduces the number of steps for the metal depositions. Three dierent masks where involved in
the creation of the device wafers, which are the wafers with the chips and platinum spots on. Two
masks to make the shadow mask and one mask to make labels, indications and alignment marks on
the device wafer. The shadow mask and device wafer are then aligned and held together before the
deposition. All the masks were designed with the L-Edit software, which works with a layer system,
and each layer then represents a mask. The light green layer is the backside mask for the shadow
mask, the light brown color is the frontside mask for the shadow mask and the deep blue color is the
device wafer mask (gure 4.3).
4.1
The shadow mask design
The two masks for the shadow mask fabrication, were used to make the front- and back-side openings
in the Silicon Nitride layers. The silicon in between the silicon nitride layers, was then etched through
with a KOH etch, to make a hole through the shadow mask, only leaving the silicon nitride membrane
with the desired pattern inside to dene the structures. To make the KOH etch through the whole
wafer, the backside opening had to be big enough, to open the desired window on the other side of
the wafer, because of the anisotropic etch along the <111> silicon plane. A silicon nitride membrane
would then be suspended on the front side of the shadow mask, with the etched holes in it, later
used to deposit the platinum through.
The suited opening of the backside silicon nitride, was calculated using the etching relations
between KOH and <111> silicon. The equation for the etching is given by: Wback = Wfront+
√
2·YSi.
So for a given opening that we want on the front side Wfront we need to make an opening Wback on
the back side in the silicon nitride, where YSi is the thickness of the silicon wafer. So for example,
if we want the front side opening to be 65 × 65 µm with a 350 µm thick silicon wafer, the backside
opening should be: Wback = 65 +
√
2 · 350 = 560 µm, as it can be seen on gure 4.1. The bigger
the structures in the silicon nitride membrane, the bigger window is needed. The opening on the
backside needs to be proportional to the structure on the other side, as it can be seen on gure 4.2.
In gure 4.2 on can see the green area corresponding to the back side opening. Similarly, the black
line shows the opening on the front side of the wafer.
8
==PAGE:15==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 4.1: Picture from the mask design software, L-Edit, where we can see the backside opening
(in green) which is 560 µm and the corresponding front side opening of 65 µm (in the black outline)
Figure 4.2: Picture from the mask design software, L-Edit, where we can see the cell design from
above. The backside openings (in green) and the front side windows (black outline) that are varying
depending on the size of the structures on the front side of the shadow mask.
9
==PAGE:16==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 4.3: Overview of the wafer, divided into quarters and into chips of 5 × 5 mm.
A sketch of the KOH etching can be seen on gure 4.4. It shows the cross section of the shadow
mask and illustrates how the KOH etch in silicon takes place. The KOH etch stops at the silicon
<111> plane.
To investigate the platinum migration, dierent design parameters have been considered for the
platinum spots: the size of the spots, the spacing between them and the eect neighboring spots
may have on each other. On top of that, I wanted the possibility to isolate and cut out some chips
with specic spots on and separate the wafer in quarters to test them individually with dierent
parameters.
I divided the wafer into similar chips of 5 × 5 mm which can be seen on gure 4.2, all across the
wafer, as it can be seen on gure 4.3. Inside the chip there is then 5 rows with cells of 600 × 600 µm.
The rst row of the chip consists of the individual spots with these diameters, from left to right:
1, 5 µm, 4 µm, 6 µm, 10 µm and 20 µm in each their cell. On gure 4.5 single spots of 4 µm and
20 µm can be seen.
The second row consists of 3 × 3 arrays of spots of 1, 5 µm , 2 µm, 3 µm, 5 µm and 10 µm with a
spacing between the spots of the diameter of one spot. So a spacing of 1, 5 µm between the 1, 5 µm
spots, a spacing of 2 µm between the 2 µm spots etc. The third row have the same spot sizes as the
second row, but with arrays of 9 × 9 and still a spacing of one spot size diameter. The fourth row is
the same as the third one, but with double spacing, so two spot diameters between the spots. The
last row consists of two cells with the biggest spots of 100 µm. In one of the cells there is only one
10
==PAGE:17==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 4.4: Sketch of the cross section of the anisotropic KOH etch in silicon, for the shadow mask
fabrication. The etching is stopping at the (111) plane, and the opening in the silicon nitride on the
backside needs to be of a certain size, for the etching to get through the wafer.
(a) Schematic of a 4 µm diameter spot.
(b) Schematic of a 20 µm diameter spot.
Figure 4.5: Screenshots of the mask design software, of a 4 µm hole and a 20 µm hole in the
shadowmask.
11
==PAGE:18==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a) Picture of a 3 × 3 array of 2 µm diameter
spots, with spacing of two spot size.
(b) Picture of a 9 × 9 array of 2 µm diameter
spots, with spacing of two spot sizes
(c) Picture of a 9 × 9 array of 2 µm diameter
spots, with spacing of one spot size
Figure 4.6: Screenshots from L-Edit, of the dierent array designs for 2 µm size spots.
spot and in the other one, there is a 2 × 2 array of the 100 µm spot.
These spot sizes are comparable with the ones where the platinum migration phenomenon was
observed earlier at CINF ref [4]. From the past results in the group it is believed that the migration
is not proportional to the size of the spot, because the change in activity is dramatically more
noticeable for smaller spots. However, for the sake of comparison it could still be interesting to see
the migration phenomenon on bigger spots.
Moreover, it can be interesting to see how the dierent spot sizes behave, and ensure to have some
spots deposited if the deposition of the small spots fails because of fabrication issues. Due to the
long delivery time of the mask, the order of other mask will not be possible within the time allocated
for the project. Due to this constraint, it is necessary to diversify the structure on the mask in order
to make sure some structures can provide a measurable platinum spot.
12
==PAGE:19==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 4.7: The labels LU (left up), LD (left down), RU (right up) and RD (right down) beside the
red arrow help recognising which wafer quarter is looked at in the characterization methods.
4.2
The device wafer mask design
One of the biggest challenges for the device wafer, was to make sure that the cells and chips could be
dierentiated even when being exactly the same all over the wafer. The samples had to be investi-
gated with a variety of characterization methods, before and after dierent annealing treatments. It
was for that reason crucial to consistently examine the same platinum spot, pre- and post-annealing.
For that purpose I have designed a labelling system for the chips, which is repeated for each quarter
wafer. So all 4 quarters have the same chip labels, but the quarters can be dierentiated thanks to
the wafer at and some additional marks that were added in the central part of the wafer, as it can
be seen on gure 4.7. The quarters have the labels LU (left up), LD (left down), RU (right up) and
RD (right down), referring to the wafer at being the bottom of the wafer.
All the cells in one quarter of a wafer have an individual label. On gure 4.8 a cell with the
labelling system is shown. The code in the upper left corner is specic for each cell. Here it is M7.
The letters from L to R, here M, indicates which row it is, and the number next to it, here 7, gives
the column. The columns goes from 1 to 7. The code in the lower left corner is specic for each
chip inside a cell. Here it is D1. The letters from A to E indicates the column inside the cell and
the number, here 1, indicates the row. There are 5 rows, from 1 to 5. That kind of labelling system
makes it very easy to nd a specic chip or cell when making characterization with for example SEM
or AFM (Atomic force microscope).
4.3
Alignment marks
A crucial aspect of the mask design, is the alignment marks. They are used to align the masks to the
wafers between the photolithography steps and also to align the shadow mask to the device wafer
before the platinum deposition. Alignment marks ensure high-precision of the structures. There
are two crucial alignments in the process: the alignment of the front- and back-side when doing the
photolithographies of the shadow mask and the alignment of the shadow mask with the device wafer
13
==PAGE:20==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 4.8: Example of a chip with the labelling system.
Table 4.1: Table showing the naming convention for the device groups on the top right wafer quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
L
L1
M
M1
M2
M3
M4
N
N1
N2
N3
N4
N5
O
O1
O2
O3
O4
O5
O6
P
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
Q
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
R
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
R7
Table 4.2: Table showing the naming convention for the platinum spots in each chip
A
B
C
D
E
1
A1
B1
C1
D1
E1
2
A2
B2
C2
D2
E2
3
A3
B3
C3
D3
E3
4
A4
B4
C4
D4
E4
5
A5
B5
C5
D5
E5
14
==PAGE:21==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 4.9: Picture from L-Edit of the backside alignment marks. There are two 30x30 µm squares
on each mask in diagonal, which are then brought as close as possible to align the samples. Arrows
helps nding the alignment marks, when having a small eld of view with the alignment equipment.
Units in µm
before depositing platinum.
When fabricating the shadow mask there are photolithography processes on both sides. The front
side mask is rst aligned to the at of the wafer and the alignment marks are dened along with
the structures. The backside alignment is performed, to align the backside mask with the dened
alignment marks on the frontside. This is done with the alignment instrument by taking a picture
of the alignment marks on the front side and xing the wafer in that position. Then, the backside
mask is moved so the alignment marks t to the picture. The alignment marks for the backside
alignment can be seen on gure 4.9. They are standard square alignment marks of 30 µm used at
Danchip. Some arrows around the alignment marks have been added as a feature, to help nding
them when using the alignment equipment.
The same alignment marks were also etched down in the device wafer to align them with the
backside alignment marks of the shadow mask. In case the alignment equipment to align the shadow
mask and the device wafer did not work properly or broke down, some big matching alignment
marks that were visible to the naked eye, were made on the backside of the shadow mask and on
the device wafer. These alignment marks would make it possible to manually align the shadow mask
with the device wafer under an optical microscope and made it possible to align within few hundreds
micrometers.
They also helped to position the shadow mask and device wafer before aligning them with the
alignment equipment. The big alignment marks can be seen on gure 4.10. The backside opening
on the shadow mask was 5 mm on the backside, and 4, 5 mm on the frontside, due to the KOH
15
==PAGE:22==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 4.10: Picture from L-Edit of the big "naked eye" alignment marks used to pre-align the
shadow mask and device wafer. A large opening was made on the backside of the shadow mask (in
green) so it could be possible to look through and see the four squares etched in the device wafer (in
blue). Units in µm
etch. The squares etched in the device wafer were 2, 5 mm and could be seen through the shadow
mask and its thin silicon nitride membrane (150 nm). Another feature that was added to make the
rotational alignment easier, was a 40 µm wide horizontal line etched down in the silicon through the
middle of the device wafer. It can be seen on gure 4.10 in the middle of the big alignment marks.
16
==PAGE:23==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
5
Fabrication
In the previous section the design and pre-fabrication considerations were presented. This section
will describe the fabrication process steps in details, in order to be able to reproduce them later on.
The whole fabrication process has been performed in the cleanroom facility at DTU Danchip. The
reason for that was to keep the samples clean and particle free through the fabrication steps, and
because all the needed machines and equipment were available inside. Both the fabrication and the
characterization part could be done in the cleanroom.
The fabrication process was divided into two sections: the shadow mask fabrication and the device
wafers fabrication.
5.1
Shadow Mask fabrication
The shadow masks were made from 350 µm thick boron doped p-type double sided polished wafers.
To fabricate it, two masks were required as described in section 4. Sketches of the fabrication process
ow can be seen on gure 5.1 and 5.2.
5.1.1
Nitride Deposition
A protective layer of Silicon nitride of around 150 nm thick, was then deposited on both sides. The
Silicon nitride was deposited with an LPCVD furnace (Low Pressure Chemical Vapour). The layer
was used as a protective layer for the silicon when etching through the wafer with KOH (potassium
hydroxide) later on. The silicon nitride membrane is working as the masking membrane to deposit
the platinum through. The etch rate selectivity between silicon and silicon nitride is around 1000
for the KOH etch, which is why silicon nitride was used as a protective layer. The silicon will be
etched much faster than the silicon nitride.
The LPCVD furnace deposits stoichiometric silicon nitride, which means it has high tensile stress.
The expected thickness of the nitride was 150 nm with a deposition rate of 2, 5
nm
min and a deposition
time of 60 minutes. The actual thickness was measured to 160 nm after a 60 minutes deposition.
The lm thickness measurement was done with the Filmtek 4000 instrument, which uses ber-optic
spectrophotometry together with a modelling software to estimate the thickness. The uncertainty
of the measurement was ± 10 nm.
5.1.2
Photolithography
Two positive photolithography processes were then done to make openings on both sides in the Silicon
nitride, in order to let the KOH etch through the Silicon from the backside and have a membrane
with holes in it on the frontside to deposit through. Here two masks were needed for the front and
the back opening, details of the masks can be found in section 4. Firstly, the wafers were coated
with a HMDS coating (Hexamethyldisilazane), in order to promote the adhesion of the photoresist.
A Star2000 model from IMTEC oven was used to deposit the HMDS. The process takes 30 min.
The photoresist was then spun on the wafers' frontside. The photoresist was a 1, 5 µm thick AZ5214e
Novolac resist. It is a positive resist, which means that the exposed resist becomes soluble in the
photoresist developer after exposure to UV light. The remaining resist protects the silicon nitride
from being etched where it should not be in the next step. The machine used for the spinning was
the Maximus SSE Spinner. The photoresist was spun on with the recipe DCH-100mm-AZ5214E
1, 5 µm, which spins for 10 s at 2300 rpm with closed lid, followed by 10 s at 3500 rpm with open
17
==PAGE:24==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 5.1: Sketches of the important steps in the fabrication process ow.
18
==PAGE:25==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 5.2: Sketches of the important steps in the fabrication process ow.
lid. The resist was then baked at 90 ◦C for 90 s.
The resist spinning procedure was repeated for the backside of the shadowmask wafers. The wafers
and the frontside mask were then aligned and exposed with a Süss MicroTek Mask Aligner MA6.
Using that aligner which has a Hg-Xe lamp of 500 W and set to 13
mW
cm2 at 365 nm, the dose needed
for the AZ 5214E resist of 1, 5 µm was 72
mJ
cm2 . Given the relationship: t =
D[
J
m2 ]
I[
W
m2 ] , the exposure
time was rounded up to 6 s, to be sure to expose it enough.
The shadowmask wafers were then developed with the Developer TMAH UV-Lithography machine.
It uses the developer called AZ 726 MIF. The used recipe was called DCH-100mm-SP-60s. 100 mm
is the size of the wafers (4"), SP stands for single puddle and 60 s is the developing time. Before
developing, the Developer pre-wets the wafers for 2 s at 1200 rpm using developer. The puddle
of developer is then dispensed for 3 s at 30 rpm, with a total volume of 11 ml. The developer is
dispensed on the center of the wafer, forming a puddle of developer across the wafer. The developer
stays for 2s at a rotation of 30 rpm and is then spun-o for 3s at 4000 rpm. The wafer is then rinsed
with DI (Deionized) water for 30 s at 4000 rpm, followed by a 10 s dry with nitrogen at 3000 rpm.
The wafers were then ready to be etched in the RIE (reactive ion etch). The photolithography step
was repeated after the frontside RIE etch, for the backside lithography and then put back in the
RIE for the backside opening.
5.1.3
Reactive ion etching (RIE)
Now that the photolithography was completed the silicon nitride had to be etched away in the desired
places. Reactive Ion Etching (RIE) is a type of dry etching that uses a chemically reactive plasma
to remove material. The created plasma ionizes the reactive gases that are inserted in the chamber
(SF6 or CHF3 with N2 or O2), the ions are then accelerated towards the sample and can either react
at the surface, or sputter away some material.
A dry etching was chosen because of its anisotropic properties, resulting in straight walls when
etching. The used recipe for the silicon nitride etch was BGE-NITR, which uses a ow of 8 sccm
CHF3 and 43 sccm of
N2, together with a pressure of 38 mTorr and a power of 50 W. The etch
rate of the recipe in silicon nitride was tested to be 40
nm
min by the Danchip sta. As the measured
thickness was 160 nm (± 10 nm), I decided to etch it for 3 min 45 s which should be around 150
nm, to not over etch it. The selectivity between the resist and the silicon nitride was known to be
about 1:1, so I was sure that the resist would protect the silicon nitride underneath.
19
==PAGE:26==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Sketches of the shadowmask after the front- and back-side RIE etch.
Figure 5.4: Sketch of the shadowmask after the KOH etch.
After the front side etch, a photolithography step was performed on the backside and the RIE etch
was repeated for the backside. The remaining resist was then stripped away with the Plasma asher
1 with the following parameters: 400 sccm O2, 70 sccm N2 at 1000 W for 30 min. A sketch of the
shadow mask after the RIE steps, can be seen on gure 5.3.
5.1.4
KOH etch
The last step in the shadowmask fabrication was the KOH etching trough the backside of wafer,
in order to let the silicon nitride membrane free, and be able to deposit Platinum through the
shadowmask. I used a KOH wet etch because it had a faster etch rate than a dry etch (1, 3 µm
min at
80◦C and a 28 wt% KOH), because the selectivity between Silicon and Silicon nitride is very high
(1:65000).
It is also a batch process so one can process many wafers at a time, and furthermore I'm using the
fact that the etching stops at the Silicon (111) plane because it is almost inert in KOH as illustrated
on gure 5.4. It is common to take the wafers out of the KOH during the etching process, in order
to check the etching rate. The wafers were taken out after 1 hour to check the etching rate with a
prolometer. The Dektak 8 stylus proler was used for that purpose. It can scan down to 50 Å in
the z direction.
Unfortunately, the silicon etching was not started. There was a remaining layer of silicon nitride
that was not etched entirely through. Only around 100 nm of the 160 nm of silicon nitride were
etched with RIE process. There were now two options: either make a new photolithography and try
to RIE etch again, but risking getting misalignment with the previous photolithography, or make
a RIE etch on the wafers without having resist to protect the rest of the silicon nitride membrane,
meaning that the whole membrane would be etched down and be thinner everywhere. I decided to
make a RIE etch without making a new photolithography with a couple of wafers. There was about
20
==PAGE:27==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
60 nm left of silicon nitride where the original RIE etch was executed, but the rest of the membrane
was still around 160 nm and would still be 100 nm after etching the remaining silicon nitride in the
openings. The wafers were RIE etched again for 2 min and 10s, calculated from the etching rate of
the previous etch : 100 nm in 3 min 45 s which is around 27
nm
min. This was performed for both sides
of the wafers.
The wafers were put back in the KOH and the same procedure was repeated, then were taken out
after an hour to check the etch rate. The KOH etching rate was really low, meaning there was still
a thin membrane of silicon nitride left. It had only etched 30 µm in the silicon, whereas it should
have etched around 80 µm. The wafers where etched for another hour in the KOH to get a more
realistic etch rate. The etching in the silicon was now of 110 µm, so the last hour had the expected
etch rate of 1, 3 µm
min. The remaining 240 µm of silicon should then take 3 hours and 5 min to etch.
When they were taken out, it could be seen that the silicon was etched through the wafer, so the
etch was successful.
A helpful feature to know the progression of the dry etching, would have been to have an end point
detection system in the dry etch step. The troubles with the remaining silicon nitride layer remaining
would then have been avoided. Unfortunately the used RIE equipment did not have the end point
detection feature.
After a KOH etch, the wafers had to be cleaned in a Piranha or 7-up solution (Sulfuric acid 98% and
Ammonium persulfate, the names for it varies) in order to remove heavy organics and alkali ions.
The shadowmasks were then inspected with an optical microscope, to ensure that the structures
were successful. Looking at gure 5.5 a), it can be seen that not all the structures are intact, in
some of the chips, the silicon nitride membrane collapsed. Nevertheless, many chips are intact and
the spot holes in the silicon nitride seems perfectly dened, as showns in gure 5.5 a). Considering
the amount of chips on a whole wafer, they did not all need to be successful on every cell.
5.2
Device wafer fabrication
With the shadowmasks ready, the next step was then to fabricate the device wafers, before depositing
platinum on them. Alignment marks to align the device wafers to the shadow masks and all the chip
and cell labels, had to be etched down in the device wafers, before depositing the platinum spots.
For the device wafers, 525 µm thick phosphorous n-doped single side polished wafers were used.
5.2.1
Silicon etch
First a photolithography step was carried out with the same recipe and parameters as in the shad-
owmask fabrication section 5.1.2. The labels and alignment marks were etched down 1 µm in the
silicon wafer, in order to be able to see them clearly and not having to etch in the silicon oxide,
which comes on top afterwards.
This part of the fabrication involved the last of the three device wafer masks, and was simply aligned
to the at, because no prior structures were present on the wafer. The etching in the silicon was
performed with a RIE etch like in the shadowmask fabrication. A RIE etch was chosen because of
its anisotropic etching properties.
Another recipe was used to etch in the silicon, namely the recipe called OH-POLYA on the machine.
The parameters for the etching were here: 32 sscm of SF6, 8 sscm of O2 at a pressure of 80 mTorr
and a power of 30 W. The etch rate in silicon should be around 454, 6
nm
min. Therefore, the etching
21
==PAGE:28==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Optical microscope pictures of the nished shadowmask. Picture a) shows a 20 µm spot
hole and picture b) shows an overview of a chip.
22
==PAGE:29==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
time to etch 1 µm was calculated to be 2 min and 12 sec. After inspection with the Dektak pro-
lometer, the etched step was measured to 999 nm, which was almost exactly the expected 1000 nm.
The depth of the etching had to be deep enough to still see it, after a 50 nm silicon oxide layer was
deposited on top. It should be the case with an etching of 1 µm.
5.2.2
Silicon Oxide growth
The reference support for the platinum migration study was silicon oxide, because it was the one used
in the previous microreactor experiments. To reproduce the exact same situation, a silicon oxide
layer was grown on the silicon wafers. The growth was done using a dry thermal oxidation process.
However, before putting it in the furnace, an RCA cleaning was needed. The RCA clean consists of
three solutions: RCA1 solution which contains deionized water, ammonium hydroxide and hydrogen
peroxide, in the proportions (5:1:1), RCA2 solution which contains deionized water, hydrochloric acid
and hydrogen peroxide, in the proportions (5:1:1) and lastly BHF solution (Buered hydrouoric
acid). The RCA1 solution removes light organics, particles and metals, the RCA2 removes alkalis,
metal hydroxides and residual metals and the BHF removes the native silicon oxide layer. This was
a mandatory step before putting the wafers in that type of furnaces.
The furnace used was the Phosphorous drive in A3 furnace. The recipe was the Dry1050 oxidation
process, running at 1050 ◦C with 5 slm of O2. The oxide growth is predicted with the Deal-Grove
model and the statistics from Danchip. As I wanted around 50 nm, the oxidation time had to be
approx 50 min. The thickness of the silicon oxide was checked using the Filmtek 4000. It measured
the oxide layer to be 70 nm. The uncertainty of the measurement was ± 10 nm. So it was a bit
more than expected, but in order to be consistent between the dierent samples, the same oxidation
time was kept all along the project.
5.2.3
Alignment of shadow mask and device wafer and platinum deposition
Now that the shadow masks and device wafers were ready, the platinum spots could be deposited. In
order to deposit the spots in the designed cells and chips, the shadow masks and device wafers had
to be aligned and clamped together. The alignment procedure is manual and therefore challenging.
It requires skill and training to be performed well.
The equipment used for the alignment is part of a bonding tool, the EVG NIL bonder.
This
equipment is primarily used to align two wafers that would be bonded together.
However, the
alignment part of the tool could be used to perform the adjustment between the shadow mask wafer
and the device wafer. The device wafer and shadow mask were aligned with the dedicated alignment
marks (see section 4) and clamped together on the equipment.
Once aligned, a small pressure
was applied on the wafers with three ngers and the clamps could be removed safely, without the
two wafers sliding apart from each other. A pincette was used to hold the two wafers together.
Only when the pincette was holding both wafers together, the pressure applied with the ngers
was released. Then, while holding the pincette strongly clamped with one hand, three beforehand
prepared aluminium tape pieces were put around both wafers, with the other hand, to ensure they
stay stuck together.
The platinum spots were now ready to be deposited through the shadow masks on the device wafers.
The Wordentec machine was used to deposit the platinum, with an E-Beam vapor deposition process.
The clamped wafers were put in the Wordentec chamber, which is then pumped down to at least
4, 0 · 10−6 mbar before the deposition can take place. An E-Beam is then focused on the platinum,
23
==PAGE:30==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
and heats it up. When the platinum has the right temperature, the shutter between the platinum
target and wafers is removed, and the platinum is evaporated onto the wafers. With a deposition rate
of 10
◦A
s , 5 s were necessary to deposit the desired 5 nm of platinum. The whole process is automatic,
and the deposition rate and nal deposition is controlled by a QCM (quartz crystal microbalance).
So the deposition stopped by itself when the desired thickness was achieved on the QCM.
5.2.4
Other substrates
During the project, other substrates than silicon oxide have been tried to deposit platinum on. The
silicon oxide was always kept underneath as the rst layer on top of the silicon, but I wanted to
investigate the behaviour of the platinum spots on other substrates. This was especially to nd a
way to avoid the suspected migration of platinum that was happening, when deposited on silicon
oxide.
It was important to try and nd a substrate that did not interact with the platinum in the tested
parameter range and thereby be used for catalyst testing in later studies. The other materials used
as substrates were:
TiO2 (titanium dioxide),
Al2O3 (aluminium oxide),
Si3N4 (Silicon Nitride)
and SiC (silicon carbide).
TiO2, Al2O3 and Si3N4 are commonly used as catalyst supports (ref
[15] and [16]) where SiC is a relatively new catalyst support, but has interesting physical properties,
such as chemical inertness and high thermal conductivity (ref [17]).
Al2O3 was also widely used as
substrate for the platinum in the past dispersion studies, as was seen in section 2.
TiO2 and Al2O3 substrates
The
TiO2 and
Al2O3 substrates, were deposited by ALD (atomic layer deposition) and with a
thickness of about 10 nm. It was important that the layers were as thin and uniform as possible,
to deposit the platinum spots on the most plane substrates possible. Even if the main factor of
surface uniformity must be the silicon oxide underneath because it's much thicker, the roughness
can accumulate by having several dierent substrates, resulting in surfaces that are rough.
ALD is a type of chemical vapour deposition, but with only one chemical at the time. For the
deposition of TiO2 and Al2O3, two precursors for each material deposition are used. One precursor
is inserted at the time in so called cycles, and reacts with the surface of the sample, depositing slowly,
atomic layer by atomic layer. The reactions are self-limiting, which mean that they terminate once
all the reactive sites on the surface are consumed.
From the usage log of the machine and the experience of the Danchip sta, the statistics on deposition
rates were used to calculate the deposition parameters for 10 nm TiO2 and Al2O3 on two separate
device wafers. For the Al2O3 deposition 40 cycles were needed at 200 ◦C to get the 10 nm, whereas
the TiO2 deposition needed 80 cycles at 150 ◦C to get a thickness of 10 nm. At 150 ◦C, the TiO2
deposition, would create amorphous TiO2 (ref [18]), which was decided to be deposited because I
believed that it would be more uniform than the crystaline one. Intuitively a crystaline surface is
believed to be more rough. Nevertheless, the TiO2 could eventually become crystalline again after
the annealing treatments (above 250 ◦C the TiO2 can become crystalline ref [18]) that would be
done afterwards, so the choice was not obvious to make.
Si3N4 substrate
The Si3N4 layer was deposited the same way that for the shadow mask, with LPCVD. Again the
layer had to be thin to keep a uniform surface and also to avoid charging eects from both the silicon
oxide and silicon nitride, when looking at the samples with the SEM. I decided to deposit 10 nm,
24
==PAGE:31==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
and with the deposition rate of 2, 5
nm
min, the deposition time was of 4 min.
SiC substrate
I also decided to investigate SiC as a support for the platinum spots. It is a promising support
for catalysts (ref [17]) and the fact that it is inert and has a high thermal conductivity, could give
interesting results for the migration problem I was dealing with. The target was 99.5 % pure SiC
indium bonded.
To deposit the SiC, a RF (radio frequency)-magnetron sputtering technique was used. The Lesker
sputter chamber was used for that purpose. As the material had never been used in the cleanroom
before, the parameters for the deposition were taken from the manufacturers' website. The layer of
SiC should like the other substrates also be around 10 nm. To get that thickness a deposition time
of 1200 s, a power of 157 W and a voltage of 630 V were used.
6
Results
In this section, the results of the platinum migration study will be shown and analysed. The charac-
terization results for the dierent parameters and substrates that were investigated will be presented
and compared before and after being annealed. I strived during the experiments to compare exactly
the same platinum spots before and after the annealing treatments for the sake of consistency.
I chose to focus my observations and analysis on the smallest spots available, the B1 and C1 spots,
as the A1 spots were not successfully evaporated on the substrate. The reason why I disregard the
larger spots mentioned in the mask design section, is because any migration would be much less
visible when viewing the entire spot. Likewise, the arrays of spots were not examined as I decided to
go deeper in my examination of the small spots using AFM. An alternative technique of analysing
and quantifying the platinum migration phenomenon that was developed during the project will also
be shown and explained.
6.1
Development of method to analyse and quantify the characterization
results
The results that are achieved from the characterization by SEM and AFM give a qualitative image
of the phenomenon that is happening. The SEM and AFM images can reveal if particles of platinum
have migrated from the spot out on the substrate. However, the challenge with the analysis and
comparison of the dierent samples' pictures, is to be able to compare them quantitatively.
There is the possibility of making a linescan over the platinum spot in both SEM images and AFM
images. In SEM images, a linescan would give pixel intensity as a function of distance and for AFM,
height as a function of distance. However, the downside of such a linescan is that it is only taking
one value per distance along that line. This may not be representative of what is happening on the
rest of the image. Additionally, it does not give a statistical result across the image. Some data may
also be lost for the comparison of dierent samples.
This is why I decided to make a Matlab program that would give a concentric averaged radial prole,
which will be referred to as CARP in the rest of the report. In other words, a radial prole for the
platinum spots, where the average of all the values of the pixel intensity on the image is taken at
every concentric circles (to the center of the spot) and plotted in terms of the distance from the
center of the platinum spot. The technique is illustrated on gure 6.1. The denition of the center
of the spot for zoomed-in pictures is not straightforward. The center of the spot is estimated by
25
==PAGE:32==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.1: Illustration of the working principle in the CARP program.
extrapolating the zoomed-in picture's position compared to the original overview picture.
By doing that, a much more statistical plot can be done of the platinum spot prole and gives me
the possibility to quantify the width of the migration in a more representative manner. By using the
CARP tool for every image I am also able to exhibit more consistent results, as opposed to drawing
arbitrary line scans
From the past literature that have dealt with migration, dispersion and sintering of platinum,
the classical way to quantify such phenomena is to make a particle count/size analysis. However,
in this study we're starting out with an evaporated lm of platinum, which is dierent from having
platinum particles dispersed by an aqueous solution on a substrate. Usually, when particle analysis
is made, individual particles are compared before and after an annealing process. Particles would be
found in a specic area and captured in a picture, and then the same area would be captured again
after annealing. Then, a comparison would be made of the two pictures.
In this study, the platinum particles that migrate and disperse are coming from a compact lm.
On top of that, when I started to analyse the SEM and AFM pictures, the phenomenon could be
observed, but it seemed dicult to identify individual particles. It appeared as though a thin lm of
platinum atoms was formed in addition to particles. Making a particle analysis for this case would
have been very approximate and subjective. The advantage of particle counting is of course the
possibility to lter artefacts out of the pictures. The size of the particle, and the counting can easily
become subjective.
An advantage of the CARP program is that it can be tuned to analyse both SEM and AFM pictures,
26
==PAGE:33==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
getting either a pixel intensity depending on the material looked at for the SEM, or a height for the
AFM as a function of distance.
6.2
Annealing furnace and conditions
All the annealing treatments made on the samples were made in the ATV Multipurpose annealing
tube furnace in the Danchip cleanroom of DTU. All the samples were inserted in the furnace at room
temperature. The samples were placed in the middle of the loading boat with 3 dummy wafers on
each side of it, in order to avoid heat dissipation and to ensure that the temperature was constant
on the sample. All the samples during the experiments were annealed for 30 min at 400◦C. The
furnace was heated up at a rate of 30◦C /min, so the heating took around 12 min. The furnace had
the possibility to anneal in both oxygen and nitrogen at pressures down to 0.1 mbar depending on
the gas ow. When the annealing was done, the samples could be removed from the furnace, as soon
as the temperature in the furnace was below 300◦C. This would mean waiting around 10 min for the
furnace to cool down.
6.3
Annealing of platinum spots on SiO2
In order to reproduce and characterize the suspected platinum migration phenomenon on
SiO2,
dierent annealing experiments were conducted for platinum spots on that substrate.
Four dierent experiments were made:
 Experiment 1: Annealing at atmospheric pressure with ows of 1 slm of O2 and 5 slm of N2.
Cooled down from 400◦C to 200◦C in the furnace, with a cooling rate of 10◦C/min.
 Experiment 2: Annealing at atmospheric pressure with a ow of 5 slm of
N2 only. Same
cooling as experiment 1.
 Experiment 3: Annealing at a pressure of 3, 5 mbar with ows of 0,2 slm of O2 and 1 slm of
N2. Same cooling as experiment 1.
 Experiment 4: Same as experiment 1, but with a shorter cooling time by taking the sample
out directly at 300◦C when the furnace could be opened.
The samples used for experiment 1-3 came from the same wafer, whereas the sample used for
Experiment 4 came from another wafer batch.
6.3.1
Experiment 1
For this experiment SEM pictures of the same platinum spots M5B1 and M5C1 were taken before
and after annealing, AFM pictures of spot M5B1 were taken after annealing and EDX line scans of
spot M5C1 were taken before and after annealing. Furthermore, the SEM and AFM pictures were
analysed with the CARP program. The annotations on the SEM pictures can be disregarded as they
do not oer any useful insights, but unfortunately burnt into the pictures.
Figure 6.2 shows the platinum spot M5C1 before annealing and gure 6.3 shows the same platinum
spot after annealing of experiment 1. It is clear to see on the overview picture the brighter ring
appearing around the spot after it got annealed.
zooming in on the edge of the platinum spot
we can notice a brighter lm has appeared when comparing the before and after anneal pictures.
Additionally, some bigger brighter points can be seen on that brighter lm, spread from the edge
27
==PAGE:34==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
and out on the substrate. It seems that there are three zones of migration: rst closest to the edge, a
high concentration of small individual particles, then a bright homogeneous lm which is dotted with
additional particles and going further out, the lm is becoming sporadic with the dark background
from the substrate appearing.
Figure 6.4 shows the plots of the CARP for gure 6.2 and 6.3. On gure 6.4 a), we can see
that the intensity is constant for both spots, from the center and out to the edge, which indicates
a homogeneous platinum signal. Then both curves have a dramatical fall in intensity. For the red
curve it is due to the dark border of the spot, which makes the intensity drop to 0. The blue curve
is not dropping completely down to 0 and then rises again, forming a small bump. By recalling the
previously mentioned zones of migration, it is in agreement with the intensity that is slightly lower
for the rst zone than for the second zone with the bright lm. After the bump, the intensity is
dropping gradually down, which also concurs with the previous visual interpretation of the images.
The red curve on the other hand is rising signicantly again after the drop. Unfortunately, like it
can be observed on the SEM picture 6.2, there is a huge change of contrast between the dark edge
around the spot and the surrounding substrate. This means the substrate far from the spot has
almost the same intensity as the spot itself. This is believed to be the substrate showing charging
eects which induce contrast changes. Nevertheless, it is considered to be an artefact from the SEM
and it is assumed that the substrate far from the platinum spot is only SiO2 and should therefore
be darker than the platinum spot.
This is also conrmed when looking at the graph gure 6.4 b), where the prole was taken for the
zoomed in pictures. By having the zoomed pictures, the noise from the outer picture is removed and
only the change in contrast coming from the migrated platinum is observed. The blue curve is now
dropping to a plateau level where it is constant and then decreasing gradually down. The bump that
was observed on graph 6.4 a) is now more like a smooth step transition. That would mean that the
migration of particles happens gradually from the edge and out on the substrate.
On gure 6.5 the platinum spot M5B1 is shown, before and after annealing, which is the neigh-
bouring spot of M5C1. Both the studied M5B1 and M5C1 spots showed clear signs of migration.
However, the M5B1 SEM picture featured many artefacts, which would create noise in the CARP
analysis. As such, I decided to conduct the CARP analysis on the M5C1 spot's SEM pictures and
on the M5B1 spot's AFM pictures.
Figure 6.6 shows the AFM picture of exactly the same spot from the same sample, M5B1. It is
challenging to see any signs of migration by looking at the overview AFM picture. Nevertheless,
looking at the adhesion force gure 6.7 some dark grains can be seen around the spot. A dark spot
on the adhesion force image of the AFM means a negative adhesion force, hence a repulsing force.
This indicates an edge or a sudden height dierence.
Looking closer at the adhesion force on gure 6.9 the edge of the spot is steep and is therefore
appearing dark on the adhesion micrograph. When looking further away from the edge of the spot,
dark dots can be seen which indicate the presence of particles. This seems to be conrmed in gure
6.8, which shows the height prole around the spot's edge, as some lighter dots are barely visible
away from the edge.
Now looking at close-up AFM pictures of the particles on gure 6.10 and 6.11, individual particles
can be identied on both the height image and the adhesion force image. The particles appear bright
on the height prole and dark on the adhesion force prole.
28
==PAGE:35==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.2: SEM images of platinum spot M5C1 of 6 µm of diameter before annealing. Picture a)
shows an overview of the spot and gure b) shows the area of the square at a higher magnication.
29
==PAGE:36==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.3: SEM images of platinum spot M5C1 after annealing of experiment 1.
30
==PAGE:37==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.4: Plots of CARP of SEM pictures before and after annealing of experiment 1. Figure
a) shows the proles for the overview SEM pictures of gures 6.3 and 6.2 and gure b) shows the
proles for the zoomed in SEM pictures of gure 6.3 and 6.2.
31
==PAGE:38==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.5: SEM images of platinum spot M5B1 before a) and after b) annealing of experiment 1.
32
==PAGE:39==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.6: AFM height prole of platinum spot M5B1 after annealing of experiment 1.
(a)
Figure 6.7: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot M5B1 after annealing of experiment 1.
33
==PAGE:40==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.8: zoomin of AFM height prole of platinum spot M5B1 after annealing of experiment 1.
(a)
Figure 6.9: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot M5B1 after annealing of exper-
iment 1.
34
==PAGE:41==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.10: Further zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot M5B1 after annealing of
experiment 1. Some identied platinum particles are circled in red.
(a)
Figure 6.11: Further zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot M5B1 after annealing
of experiment 1. The identical particles as in the height prole picture above are identied with red
circles.
35
==PAGE:42==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.12: Plots of CARP of AFM pictures after annealing of experiment 1. Figure a) shows the
proles for the overview AFM pictures of gure 6.6 and gure b) shows the proles for the zoomed
in AFM picture of gure 6.8. The height relative to the substrate is plotted as a function of the
distance from the center of the spot.
The CARP program was adapted to analyse AFM height prole pictures. On gure 6.12, the
plots for gures 6.8 and 6.6 are shown. We can observe that the height is increasing when going out
to the edge of the spot, which is supposably an eect from the AFM when scanning back and forth,
darker scanning lines appears, which are getting less remarkable close to the edge.
On gure 6.12 a) the curve is completely at after the fall from the edge of the spot. No migration
can be seen from that prole. On the other hand, gure 6.12 b) displays a small bump after the fall
that could come from the migrated platinum. The zoom-in picture reveals a better contrast of the
migrated particles.
I also chose to investigate the sample using EDX, in order to get information about the material
composition of the sample. Figure 6.13 shows the EDX platinum signal linescans of the platinum spot
M5B1. It can be seen that the linescan after the annealing is slightly wider than before annealing.
The dierence in FWHM (full width half maximum)is of 225 nm.
36
==PAGE:43==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.13: EDX linescans before and after annealing of spot M5B1
6.3.2
Experiment 2
In experiment 2, the eect of the oxygen in the annealing process was investigated by only annealing
the sample in N2. Past studies had shown, that oxygen had a crucial eect on the platinum migration
on SiO2 as was discussed in the "models for platinum migration" section. By comparing experiment
1 and 2 the eect of oxygen ow under annealing is investigated.
By only annealing in nitrogen, we would have expected that the platinum migration would not have
happened or in a milder way as mentioned in the "models for platinum migration" section. However,
by comparing the SEM picture before and after annealing gure 6.14 and 6.15, it is clear to see
the presence of migrated particles post annealing. The dierence with the migration observed in
experiment 1 though, is that it only seems to be individual particles that have migrated now. The
additional lm with the brighter ring was not observed this time.
Like it was the case for experiment 1, the CARP for the zoomed in pictures (gure 6.16 b)) have
less noise from the charging eects. The curve after annealing (blue), drops to 0 after the fall, but
the intensity increases again after reaching 0 in a gradual manner and remains constant afterwards.
Hence, according to the plot, the concentration of migrated particles is constant for about 600 nm.
Unfortunately the plot for the overview pictures (6.16 b)) is again too noisy after the drop.
Combining the information of the AFM height pictures gure 6.17 and 6.19 and adhesion force
pictures gure 6.18 and 6.20, the migrated particles can clearly be identied, and are circled in red.
The CARP plot of the overview AFM picture on gure 6.21 is not showing any signs of migration,
as was the case for the previous AFM overview picture 6.21 a). For experiment 1 the plot for the
zoomed in picture was more informative, but unfortunately the plot for the zoomed in AFM picture
was not possible for this experiment because of the many contrast artefacts.
From the past literature study that was discussed in "the background of the platinum migration
37
==PAGE:44==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.14: SEM images of platinum spot P3C1 of 6 µm of diameter before annealing. Picture a)
shows an overview of the spot and gure b) shows the area of the square at a higher magnication.
38
==PAGE:45==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.15: SEM images of platinum spot P3C1 after annealing of experiment 2.
39
==PAGE:46==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.16: Plots of CARP of SEM pictures before and after annealing of experiment 2. Figure a)
shows the proles for the overview SEM pictures of gures 6.14 a) and 6.15 a) and gure b) shows
the proles for the zoomed in SEM pictures of gures 6.14 b) and 6.15 b).
40
==PAGE:47==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.17: AFM height prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of experiment 2.
(a)
Figure 6.18: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of experiment 2.
41
==PAGE:48==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.19: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of experiment 2.
(a)
Figure 6.20: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of
experiment 2.
42
==PAGE:49==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.21: Plots of CARP of the AFM overview picture after annealing 6.17 of experiment 2.
phenomenon" section and "models for platinum migration" section, there was common agreement on
the fact that annealing in oxygen environment was the reason for platinum migration. The presence
of migration in this experiment, where the sample was annealed only in nitrogen, is therefore in
contradiction with prior ndings. Nevertheless, the study in ref[5], showed migration of platinum on
SiO2 down to 10−5mbar in oxygen environment. Hence, in experiment 2 the oxygen impurities in
the nitrogen ow and in the chamber could potentially contribute to the platinum migration. This
would explain the observed migration in this experiment.
6.3.3
Experiment 3
The purpose of experiment 3 was to investigate the inuence of pressure inside the annealing furnace,
while still owing oxygen and nitrogen in the same proportions as in experiment 1. The pressure in
the furnace was 3, 5 mbar and the gas ows of 0,2 slm of O2 and 1 slm of N2.
For this experiment no migration was observed at all. The SEM pictures before and after an-
nealing ( gure 6.22 and 6.23) did not show any signs of migrated particles. A CARP analysis was
performed to conrm the absence of particles on the substrate (gure 6.24). These plots seem to
contradict the visual interpretation by showing rising slope after the edge of the spot. Clearly this
is not the case, but the CARP analyses the pixel intensity of the spot and substrate on the overall
picture. To the naked eye it is clear that there is contrast between the spot and the substrate, but
the CARP program "sees" similar intensities on the spot area and away from the spot's edge, which
explains why the curves rise again despite the absence of migration.
This is further shown using AFM picture after annealing (gures 6.25, 6.26, 6.27 and 6.28).
Comparing gures 6.27 and 6.28 with gures 6.19 and 6.20, it is clear that this experiment did not
result in any migration whatsoever.
43
==PAGE:50==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.22: SEM images of platinum spot P3C1 of 6 µm of diameter before annealing. Picture a)
shows an overview of the spot and gure b) shows the area of the square at a higher magnication.
44
==PAGE:51==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.23: SEM images of platinum spot P3C1 after annealing of experiment 3.
45
==PAGE:52==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.24: Plots of CARP of SEM pictures before and after annealing of experiment 3. Figure a)
shows the proles for the overview SEM pictures of gures 6.22 and 6.23 and gure b) shows the
proles for the zoomed in SEM pictures of gures 6.22 and 6.23.
46
==PAGE:53==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.25: AFM height prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of experiment 3.
(a)
Figure 6.26: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of experiment 3.
47
==PAGE:54==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.27: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of experiment 3.
(a)
Figure 6.28: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P3B1 after annealing of
experiment 3.
48
==PAGE:55==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.29: Plots of CARP of the AFM overview picture after annealing 6.25 of experiment 3.
6.3.4
Experiment 4
The sample used for experiment 4 was taken from a later batch than the previous experiments.
This allowed me to take AFM pictures before and after annealing of the sample, as the AFM
equipment was available at that point of the project to perform characterization both before and
after. Experiment 4 was made to reproduce experiment 1, but changing the cooling down conditions.
Instead of letting the furnace cool down to 200◦C before taking the sample out, the furnace was
opened immediately when reaching the allowed 300◦C.
For this experiment I was not able to get satisfying SEM pictures of the spots. The substrate was
exhibiting so much charging that it was impossible to visualise high resolution pictures, which are
necessary for the visual interpretation and the CARP analysis.
However, AFM pictures have been taken. They are also very noisy compared to the previous samples
and come out with less clear information than for the previous experiments. Nevertheless, from what
can be seen, it doesn't seem that any migration is happening. The adhesion pictures are not showing
any dark dots on the substrate and no bright dots can neither be seen on the height pictures.
Since the cooling down process was the only varied parameter for this sample, it could be a sign
that the fast cooling from 300◦C, by taking the sample out to room temperature, could cause the
absence of migration. Extrapolating from this, we could eventually think that the migration could
happen while the sample is exposed to temperatures between 300 and 400◦C.
However, to conrm this theory, further experiments would have to be conducted at that temperature
range, since the poor quality of the AFM pictures made it dicult to conclude if whether or not
migration happened in experiment 4.
The CARP plots on gure 6.38 have almost the same trends a part from the slope for the blue
curve which less steep. But again, by judging of the resolution of the edges on gure 6.31 and 6.35
it is challenging to draw direct conclusions from this.
49
==PAGE:56==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.30: AFM height prole of platinum spot O7B1 before annealing of experiment 4.
(a)
Figure 6.31: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot O7B1 before annealing of experiment 4.
50
==PAGE:57==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.32: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot O7B1 before annealing of experiment
4.
(a)
Figure 6.33: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot O7B1 before annealing of
experiment 4.
51
==PAGE:58==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.34: AFM height prole of platinum spot O7B1 after annealing of experiment 4.
(a)
Figure 6.35: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot O7B1 after annealing of experiment 4.
52
==PAGE:59==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.36: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot O7B1 after annealing of experiment 4.
(a)
Figure 6.37: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot O7B1 after annealing of
experiment 4.
53
==PAGE:60==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.38: Plots of CARP of the AFM overview pictures, before and after annealing 6.31 of
experiment 4.
6.4
Annealing of platinum spots on TiO2
For the TiO2 substrate the same annealing conditions as in experiment 1 were repeated. As it can
be seen on gure 6.39, the platinum deposited on
TiO2 did not have shapes resembling the ones
of of SiO2. All the AFM images are also very noisy. This is certainly due to the TiO2 substrate,
exhibiting more surface roughness than the SiO2 substrate. The TiO2 was deposited as amorphous
(see fabrication section), as it was believed that the roughness of the surface would be less important
than for crystallite TiO2 (ref [18]).
Nevertheless as it was mentioned in the fabrication section, the annealing process at 400◦C, could
transform the structure of the surface from amorphous TiO2 into crystalline. However, by looking at
the AFM pictures for both the height and the adhesion (gures 6.40, 6.41 6.42, 6.43 6.44, 6.45, 6.46
and 6.47) it seems that there is crystallites both inside and outside the platinum spot. This is the
case on both before and after annealing pictures. Nonetheless, when comparing gures 6.42 and 6.43
and 6.46 and 6.47), the crystals are bigger on the pictures after annealing. This is in agreement with
the fact that the TiO2 should become crystalline after the annealing process. What was unexpected
was that the crystals would be there already before annealing.
By comparing gure 6.43 and 6.47, one can notice that the edge of the spot is almost not visible
before annealing and gets then well dened after annealing. This is an indication that the structure
of the surface have changed. Additionally, a darker ring appeared around the platinum spot after
the annealing, and could be similar to the migration phenomenon observed on SiO2 experiment 1.
However, it is complicated to conclude that migration happened because of the amount of noise on
the pictures and the afore mentioned roughness issues.
54
==PAGE:61==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.39: SEM images of platinum spot P5B1 of 4 µm of diameter before and after annealing.
Picture a) shows an overview of the spot before annealing and picture b) shows an overview of the
spot after annealing.
55
==PAGE:62==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.40: AFM height prole of platinum spot P5B1 before annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.41: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5B1 before annealing.
56
==PAGE:63==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.42: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot P5B1 before annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.43: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5B1.
57
==PAGE:64==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.44: AFM height prole of platinum spot P5B1 after annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.45: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5B1 after annealing.
58
==PAGE:65==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.46: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot P5B1 after annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.47: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5B1.
59
==PAGE:66==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
6.5
Annealing of platinum spots on Al2O3
For the
Al2O3 substrate the same annealing conditions as in experiment 1 were repeated. The
platinum deposition resulted in comparable spots than for the samples on SiO2, as opposed to the
spots on the TiO2 substrate. A common feature for the Al2O3 and TiO2 substrates is that have
very rough surfaces. The edge of the spot is not quite visible before annealing (gure 6.51 and
6.52), whereas after annealing (gure 6.55 and 6.56), the edge of the spot appears much clearer.
Comparing gure 6.49 with gure 6.53, some bright dots have appeared on the platinum spot itself.
A similar eect than for the TiO2 is observed with the appearance of crystals. However, as opposed
to the sample with TiO2 substrate, the crystals are rst appearing after annealing and only on the
platinum spots area. An explanation for this could be that the crystals underneath the spot, are
lifting the platinum up and become then the highest points on the AFM picture.
6.6
Results on other substrates
The two other substrates that were investigated,
SiC and
Si3N4 did not give conclusive results.
The roughness of the surfaces and charging eects made it impossible to obtain useful SEM or AFM
pictures. With a thin layer of 5 nm of platinum, very slight changes in the substrate surface structure
can lead to the impossibility of analysing the spots with AFM or SEM. The surface roughness might
also have resulted in a smeared out deposition of the platinum lm. Alternatively, it could be the
metal deposition that was unsuccessful. However, the same parameters and deposition method was
used for every deposition, so it seems less likely. On the other hand, to be certain that it was not
the metal deposition that went wrong, some quality control tests could be done in a future study.
6.7
Results summary
The goal of the study was to observe and characterize the platinum migration phenomenon on SiO2 in
dierent environments. In order to quantify the migration, dierent analysis methods of the results
from the characterizations were used.
The CARP program was developed to get an alternative
quantication method to the common ones like manual particle counting. The measurable result
that is obtained by the CARP method is a migration distance from the edge of the platinum spots
and out on the substrate. I have shown that the program seemed to "see" the migration more on SEM
pictures than on AFM pictures. The migration distance estimated with the program can then be
compared both to a distance measurement on the AFM pictures where a line is drawn perpendicularly
from the edge to the last observable particles, and to an EDX linescan width dierence taken at the
FWHM before and after annealing.
This comparison can be seen in table 6.1. The distances estimated with the CARP program on the
SEM pictures for experiment 1 and 2 are comparable around 800 nm, even if the CARP value for the
overview picture of experiment 1 is underestimating the migration (200 nm less), which is certainly
due to the lower resolution of the image. Comparing the measured values for the AFM on the other
hand, the width for experiment 2 is twice as much as for experiment 1, 1100 nm against 550 nm.
This indicates that particles migrated much further in experiment 2 than in experiment 1, because
the distance is measured up to the particles furthest away.
The CARP migration distance was measured for the same AFM picture and is giving a smaller
width of 340 nm. Visually the particles were easier to see on the AFM adhesion pictures than on
the height pictures. However, the program was not adapted to analyze adhesion pictures. The EDX
60
==PAGE:67==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 6.48: SEM images of platinum spot P5C1 of 6 µm of diameter before and after annealing.
Picture a) shows an overview of the spot before annealing and picture b) shows an overview of the
spot after annealing.
61
==PAGE:68==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.49: AFM height prole of platinum spot P5C1 before annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.50: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5C1 before annealing.
62
==PAGE:69==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.51: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot P5B1 before annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.52: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5B1.
63
==PAGE:70==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.53: AFM height prole of platinum spot P5B1 after annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.54: AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5B1 after annealing.
64
==PAGE:71==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
Figure 6.55: Zoom-in of AFM height prole of platinum spot P5B1 after annealing.
(a)
Figure 6.56: Zoom-in of AFM adhesion force prole of platinum spot P5B1.
65
==PAGE:72==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Table 6.1: Comparison of quantitative measurements of the width of the migration from the edge of
the platinum spots and out on the substrate.
Experiment
SEM CARP Overview and Zoom-in
AFM Width
AFM CARP
EDX di FWHM
Exp 1
830 nm and 650 nm
550 nm
340 nm
112.5 nm
Exp 2
810 nm
1100 nm
Na
Na
Exp 3
0 nm
0 nm
0 nm
Na
width dierence between the line scans before and after annealing gives a substantially smaller value
than the other characterizing methods. The reason for that could be that the EDX is measuring
only if there is platinum material on that exact line scan. A measurement lasting longer or over a
larger area would give a better statistical result. As mentioned before Experiment 3 did not show
any migration.
The fact that the migration was observed on experiment 1 and 2 and not on experiment 3 is a strong
piece of evidence that the migration happened because the samples come from the same wafer
and were processed exactly in the same way. Furthermore the characterization methods provide
information about the nature of the migration and gives an order of magnitude for it.
The other substrates that were investigated did not give conclusive results concerning the migration
phenomenon. Studies to improve the fabrications of these would be needed.
7
Outlook and future work
In this section the overall output of this study and the future use and benets of it will be discussed.
Additionally, some improvements for the dierent steps in the project will be presented.
7.1
Fabrication improvements
If the fabrication was to be reproduced, it would be useful to use another equipment than the RIE2
dry etching for the shadow mask fabrication. The end point detection feature, which is a detector
in the dry etching equipment that measures when the etching is through the desired layer, would
be a great improvement for the fabrication. It would allow to know when the Si3N4 layer is etched
through, and avoid the troubles with the KOH etch afterwards. The ICP metal etch equipment has
the end point detection feature and could be a good replacement for the RIE2, as it also does etches
Si3N4.
Another point that could be improved is the depositions of the alternative substrates to SiO2, namely
TiO2, Al2O3, Si3N4 and SiC. It was observed that the samples with these materials as substrates for
the platinum spots, resulted in very rough surfaces, making it dicult to have appropriate resolution
for the thin lms of 5 nm of platinum. A reduction of roughness investigation would be benecial
for the platinum migration study on these supports (ref [19] and [18]).
7.2
Further studies
In order to strengthen, characterize and quantify even further the results of this studies, some addi-
tional investigations seems like the natural next steps. For example an in-situ or identical location
transmission electron study (TEM) of the platinum migration, would be a valuable contribution to
the already observed results. The study could make it possible to observe the migration "in-situ"
and also to get information about the exact nature and size of the migrated particles.
66
==PAGE:73==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.1: Images of the TEM grid holder for metal deposition, fabricated by PhD student Matteo
Todeschini. a) The holder mounted in the metal evaporation carousel. b) Close up of the actual
holder.
During the project some thoughts were already given for a study like this one. The already made
chips from the shadow masks could be cut out and used to mask some commercially bought SiO2
TEM grids under the metal deposition. A special holder for the TEM grids have already been made
for this purpose by PhD student Matteo Todeschini, who was contacted. The holders can be seen
in gure 7.1. The procedure for the deposition would be to position the TEM grids in the prepared
holes and then position the shadowmask chip on top. They would then be held in place with the
available clamps.
Experiment 4 in this study showed that possibly no migration was happening when having a
faster cool-down time. As a future study it would be interesting to investigate additional ranges of
temperatures and cool-down times when annealing the samples.
Another logical next step would be to test the fabricated samples in the actual microreactor. By
doing that the quantications of the migration and estimations of the surface area of the specic
spots, could be compared to the actual catalytic activity of the spots.
As a last proposition for a future study, an EDX mapping of the platinum spots could be made. It
67
==PAGE:74==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 7.2: Picture of an EDX mapping of platinum on a 4 µm wide platinum spot on SiO2.
was already tried to some extent, but due to time constraints I was not able to investigate it further.
An EDX mapping of 1 min can be seen on gure 7.2. The purple dots on the picture indicate the
measured presence of platinum in that area. The EDX detector measures the energy of the outcoming
x-rays excited with the electron gun from the SEM. Then, all materials have characteristic x-ray
energy signatures, and thereby the platinum characteristic peak can be identied.
It could be interesting to make a similar mapping of the platinum spots and measure for a longer
time on the same area. This would give a higher count and therefore a better statistical result of
the mapping. The developed radial proling program could potentially also be used to analyse the
images of the mapping.
7.3
Analysis improvements
In order to make a particle analysis of the obtained AFM pictures, the program developed during
the project could be improved in order to make a more automated and consistent particle count.
Instead of averaging the pixel intensities along a concentric circle, the idea would be to make the
program count a particle every time a pixel in a specic range of intensity has more than a certain
number of neighbours within the same range of intensity. Another way to do it, where the concentric
circle approach is kept, would be to count the number of pixels within a certain threshold and divide
it by the total number of pixels. This would give the ratio of a certain pixel intensity threshold,
which could then lead to a physical parameter and potentially give an alternative particle count.
68
==PAGE:75==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
8
Conclusion
In this thesis, an experimental setup was designed to investigate the migration of platinum particles
on SiO2. The phenomenon was successfully observed, characterized and analysed. By combining
dierent characterization methods the migration was conrmed experimentally for annealings at
400◦C at atmospheric pressure for 30 min in an oxygen and nitrogen atmosphere. On top of that it
has also been shown that the migration was not happening at a pressure of 3,5 mbar in an oxygen
and nitrogen atmosphere. I also tried to investigate the platinum migration on substrates of TiO2,
Al2O3, Si3N4 and SiC. However, the results were not conclusive enough to conrm or to deny the
presence of migration on these supports.
A computational analysis method of concentric averaged radial proling (CARP) has been developed
to analyse the SEM and AFM results. The method was developed as a supplementary method to
the classical analysis methods using microscope pictures. Convincing results were obtained from the
program also in comparison with dierent measuring methods, showing that the CARP would be a
useful tool for similar studies in the future.
The results and observations made in this study will hopefully bring the microreactor group a step
closer to the understanding of this phenomenon. The combination of the result of this study and
further analysis by TEM and activity measurements could give a more exact quantication of the
migration. Thereby, an estimation of the actual surface areas of the samples that will be tested in
the microreactor could be obtained.
69
==PAGE:76==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
References
[1] EIA. Report from the energy information agency.
[2] BP. Bp statistical review of world energy. June 2015.
[3] Susan Solomon, Gian-Kasper Plattner, Reto Knutti, and Pierre Friedlingstein.
Irreversible
climate change due to carbon dioxide emissions. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
pages pnas0812721106, 2009.
[4] Toke R Henriksen, Jakob L Olsen, Peter Vesborg, Ib Chorkendor, and Ole Hansen. Highly sen-
sitive silicon microreactor for catalyst testing. Review of Scientic Instruments, 80(12):124101,
2009.
[5] R Lamber and W Romanowski. Dispersion changes of platinum supported on silica glass during
thermal treatment in oxygen and hydrogen atmospheres. Journal of Catalysis, 105(1):213226,
1987.
[6] Yongnian Yang, Jincheng Pan, Ning Zheng, Xingquan Liu, and Jiayu Zhang. Dispersion of
platinum on silica and alumina by chemical extraction. Applied Catalysis, 61(1):7587, 1990.
[7] Sieghard E Wanke. Sintering and redispersion of conventional supported metal catalysts in
hydrogen and oxygen atmospheres. In Materials Science Research, pages 223242. Springer,
1984.
[8] Peter C Flynn and Sieghard E Wanke.
A model of supported metal catalyst sintering: I.
development of model. Journal of Catalysis, 34(3):390399, 1974.
[9] Peter C Flynn and Sieghard E Wanke.
A model of supported metal catalyst sintering: Ii.
application of model. Journal of catalysis, 34(3):400410, 1974.
[10] Sieghard E Wanke and Peter C Flynn. The sintering of supported metal catalysts. Catalysis
Reviews, 12(1):93135, 1975.
[11] Peter C Flynn and Sieghard E Wanke. Experimental studies of sintering of supported platinum
catalysts. Journal of catalysis, 37(3):432448, 1975.
[12] Agus Haryanto, Sandun Fernando, Naveen Murali, and Sushil Adhikari.
Current status of
hydrogen production techniques by steam reforming of ethanol: a review.
Energy & Fuels,
19(5):20982106, 2005.
[13] Zhao Xiang. Forecast the demand for ammonia manufacturing catalysts in early 21st century
[j]. GONGYE CUIHUA (INDUSTRIAL CATALYSIS), 4:000, 1998.
[14] Ibrahim Dincer. Renewable energy and sustainable development: a crucial review. Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 4(2):157175, 2000.
[15] F Monnet, Y Schuurman, F Cadete Santos Aires, JC Bertolini, and C Mirodatos.
Silicon
nitride supported platinum catalysts for the partial oxidation of methane at high temperatures.
Catalysis today, 64(1):5158, 2001.
70
==PAGE:77==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
[16] Oleg S Alexeev, Soo Yin Chin, Mark H Engelhard, Lorna Ortiz-Soto, and Michael D Amiridis.
Eects of reduction temperature and metal-support interactions on the catalytic activity of
pt/γ-al2o3 and pt/tio2 for the oxidation of co in the presence and absence of h2. The Journal
of Physical Chemistry B, 109(49):2343023443, 2005.
[17] Marc J Ledoux and Cuong Pham-Huu. Silicon carbide: a novel catalyst support for heteroge-
neous catalysis. Cattech, 5(4):226246, 2001.
[18] D Saha, RS Ajimsha, K Rajiv, C Mukherjee, M Gupta, P Misra, and LM Kukreja. Spectroscopic
ellipsometry characterization of amorphous and crystalline tio 2 thin lms grown by atomic layer
deposition at dierent temperatures. Applied Surface Science, 315:116123, 2014.
[19] MD Groner, FH Fabreguette, JW Elam, and SM George. Low-temperature al2o3 atomic layer
deposition. Chemistry of Materials, 16(4):639645, 2004.
71
==PAGE:78==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
9
Appendix
9.1
Other supports SEM pictures
9.2
SEM CARP code
72
==PAGE:79==
==PAGE:80==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
Figure 9.1: SEM image of platinum spot N3B1 of 4
µm in diameter on SiC substrate before
annealing.
Figure 9.2: SEM image of platinum spot Q4D1 of 8
µm in diameter on Si3N4 substrate before
annealing.
74
==PAGE:81==
==PAGE:82==
Platinum migration on oxide surfaces
9.3
AFM CARP code
76
==PAGE:83==
==PAGE:84==
