==PAGE:1==
1
The design of a product concept to motivate, 
trigger and facilitate mindfulness meditation.
Technical university of Denmark
Master’s thesis by
Anne Marie-Louise Svensson Rasmussen
Submission date
25th of June 2016
12
min 
Reducing stress 
through behavioural design
Supervisor
Philip Cash, associate professor, 
DTU management engineering
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
3
Preface

Danish title 
Reduktion af stress gennem adfærdsdesign.
English title
Reducing stress through behavioural design.
Project Description:
Stress is an issue in many office environments and though a wide range of products and services are on the 
market with the aim of targeting this, stress is still a part of the everyday life for many Danes and a growing 
issue. The main focus in this thesis is to develop a product that can help to reduce stress in office environ­
ments. The design process will be based on the basic theories behind behavioural design. The understanding 
of stress and what can influence stress will be gained through a study of existing literature. 

Project: 	
	
	
	
	
Master Thesis in M.Sc. Design and Innovation
Author: 	
	
	
	
	
Anne Marie-Louise Svensson Rasmussen
Supervisor: 	
	
	
	
Philip Cash
Submission date: 	
	
	
25/06/2016
Department: 	
	
	
	
Management Engineering
University: 		
	
	
	
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
 
Anne Marie-Louise Svensson Rasmussen 
s102990
==PAGE:4==
4
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis was to develop a product 
concept that can help reduce stress in an office envi­
ronment by using the behavioural design mindset.
An investigation of what stress is, the effects of 
stress, what increases and what can reduce the 
stress level was carried out to understand the basics 
of stress. The conclusion of this investigation was 
that by implementing mindfulness meditation in 
an everyday life of an employee working at an office 
environment, would decrease stress level and wor­
rying and improve stress management abilities.  
In order to develop a product concept fit for the 
context of an office environment, observations and 
interviews were carried out in two office environ­
ments to give an overview of behaviours in offices. 
Based on the findings it was determined that mind­
fulness meditation should be implemented in the 
routine of going from the toilet back to the desk. 
This decision was based on the observation that the 
employees at least once a day went to the toilet and 
that this break was done individually so that taking 
a mindfulness meditation break could be carried 
out in privacy. 
For the design of the product concept different 
design methods were used to generate ideas, form 
concepts and evaluate them. The result was one 
product concept of a meditation booth with guided 
meditation as well as associated parts such as an 
motivational information poster and speakers with 
birds singing. The concept contained a motivating, 
a triggering and a facilitating element. 
A low-fidelity prototype of this product concept 
was made and tested. The feedback was used as 
input to refine the concept. The end product of the 
thesis was a final product concept named ReMind, 
motivating, triggering and facilitating 12 minutes of 
mindfulness meditation in an office environment.
As the prototype was an early stage low-fidelity 
prototype, further refinement should be done by 
doing more iterations of prototyping and designing. 
Additionally, further research should be performed 
to determine the long-term effects of implementing 
a meditation booth to office environments.
==PAGE:5==
5
Reading guide
The thesis is composed of seven chapters and relat­
ed sections. 
Chapters and sections will throughout the thesis 
be referred to as chapter x and section x. However 
some sub sections are not numbered and will be 
referred to by the number of the section it belongs 
to and its name (section x - name).
Figures, pictures and tables will be referred to as 
figure, picture or table x.
All figures are made by the author.
Appendices will be referred to as (Appendix x). 
References will be presented in brackets (Last name, 
release year). 
Web references will be referred to by name of au­
thor or name of homepage (Web: name of author/
homepage, year).
==PAGE:6==
6
Learning objectives
The learning objectives for the master’s thesis will be presented here. 
When the student has completed the thesis, she:
1.	
Shall attain a good understanding of - and be able to reflect on - relevant scientific and engineering 	
	
knowledge within the subject area of the project based on research literature.
2.	
Shall be able to identify relevant scientific problems within the subject area and be able to formulate 	
	
clear and relevant research questions/design problems.
3.	
Shall be able to identify and review the relevant scientific literature and based on a literature review be 	
	
able to develop a conceptual framework guiding the empirical work.
4.	
Shall be able to assess, select and apply appropriate scientific methods, tools and competencies within 	
	
the subject area of the project.
5.	
Shall be able to assess, select and apply appropriate design methods, tools and competencies to the 	
	
project problem.
6.	
Shall be able to analyse explain and discuss relevant professional and scientific problems.
7.	
Shall be able to manage work and development situations that are complex and unforeseen and re-	
	
quire new solution models.
8.	
Shall be able to independently initiate and carry out discipline-specific and cross-disciplinary cooper-	
	
ation and to assume professional responsibility.
9.	
Shall be able to disseminate research-based knowledge as well as the final design approach and out-	
	
come.
10.	
Shall be able to set up a clear framework for the thesis and communicate the work clearly and in an 	
	
understandable manner.
11.	
Shall be able to provide proper documentation, including proper referencing throughout the project 	
	
and provide a complete reference list.
12.	
Shall adjust the staging of the project based on an assessment of the magnitude of the task, complexity 	
	
and desired result.
==PAGE:7==
7
Appreciations
In this section the author would like to express grat­
itude to all the people who have been there to su­
pervise, put time aside to answer questions, to share 
insights or participating in the test of the prototype 
during the master’s thesis project. 
First and foremost to Philip Cash, from DTU 
Management Engineering, who with weekly guid­
ance and supervision has been a great support and 
supervisor throughout the master’s thesis project.
To Mikkel Leth Olsen who have been main contact 
person from IdemoLab, DELTA, and has been a 
part of the three milestone meetings and helped 
with useful insights and guidance on amongst other 
things; prototyping and testing.
To David Coleman student intern at IdemoLab, 
DELTA, who has been a great help during the 
development of the prototype, with coding and 
making the electronics part of the prototype setup.
To the rest of the employees at Idemolab, DELTA 
for contacts, participation in a brainstorming ses­
sion and advise. 
To the employees at DELTA, who tried the proto­
type, left useful feedback, participated in interviews 
and user testing.
To Lonnie Lütken at TRYG and Charlotte Kærgaard 
at IF and the employees at the departments who 
put time a side to participate in observations and 
interviews.
To Susan Rasmussen for taking part in brainstorm­
ing on ideas for the product concept. As well as 
looking through graphs and illustration layout to 
ensure comprehensibility.
Finally thanks to Sven Eric Svensson for proof read­
ing the report. 
==PAGE:8==
8
Table of Contents
Chapter 1
11
Introduction
	
1.1 Why stress is an important issue to address 
12
	
1.2 Why behavioural design is an especially appropriate method when addressing stressed people 12
	
1.3 The aim of the thesis
13
	
1.4 The structure of the report
13
Chapter 2
15
Theory and existing products
	
2.1 Stress
16
	
2.2 How to increase or decrease the stress level
20
	
	
2.2.1 Literature on stressors and stress relievers
20
	
	
2.2.2 Products on the market
29
	
	
2.2.3 Summing up
36
	
2.3 Sub conclusion
37
Chapter 3
41
Behavioural design process
	
3.1 Behavioural design
42
	
	
Definitions
43
	
3.2 The design process
44
	
3.3 Sub conclusion
46
Chapter 4
47
Product concept development
	
4.1 The discover stage
48
	
	
4.1.1 Product vision
48
	
	
4.1.2 Target outcome
48
	
	
4.1.3 Target actor
48
	
	
4.1.4 Additional constraints
48
	
	
4.1.5 Target action
48
	
	
4.1.6 When to implement mindfulness
49
	
	
4.1.7 Summing up 
51
	
4.2 Design stage
51
	
	
4.2.1 Complex high tech 
54
	
	
4.2.2 Low Tech
56
	
	
4.2.3 Simple high tech
58
	
	
4.2.4 Mindful Trigger
60
	
	
4.2.5 Summing up
63
	
4.3 The refine stage 
63
	
	
4.3.1 Prototyping 
63
	
	
4.3.2 Collection of feedback
65
	
	
4.3.3 Main findings
66
	
	
4.3.4 Summing up
69
	
4.4 Sub conclusion
69
==PAGE:9==
9
Chapter 5
71
Final product concept
	
5.1 Motivating the actor
72
	
5.2 Triggering the actor
74
	
5.3 Facilitating the action
74
	
5.4 Summing up
78
Chapter 6
79
Discussion
	
6.1 Implications
80
	
6.2 Limitations
80
	
6.3 Sub conclusion
81
Chapter 7
83
Conclusion
	
7.1 Further work
85
	
7.2 Final words
86
References
87
Web references
92
Figure list
94
Picture list
95
Table list
95
Graph list
95
==PAGE:10==
10
==PAGE:11==
11
Introduction
Chapter 1
1.
==PAGE:12==
12
1.1 Why stress is an impor­
tant issue to address 
According to Stress Foreningen, 1400 Danes die due 
to stress every year. In 2007 an average of 35.000 
Danes were on sick leave on a daily basis due to 
stress and it is estimated that 430.000 Danes every 
day have symptoms of stress (Web: Si-folkesund­
hed.dk, 2016a). 
A study conducted by the Danish National Institute 
of Health shows that from 2005 to 2010 there has 
been an increase in the number of people feeling 
stressed often or very often (Web: Si-folkesundhed.
dk, 2016b). 
Feeling stressed in a short period of time is normal 
and is not in itself a big issue. However, stress over 
a longer period of time is often linked to depres­
sion and other diseases (Andersen, 2009). Chronic 
stress can lead to bad life quality for the individual 
by affecting the entire day, week, year or lifetime 
(Andersen, 2009). 
In relation to stress in everyday life, many un­
healthy habits are often associated with coping 
techniques for reducing the stress level (“Stress, 
relaxation & pleasure: A survey among office 
workers.,” 1995). Some habits can be mentioned; 
smoking, high intake of coffee, drinking alcohol 
and eating fast food or candy (“Stress, relaxation & 
pleasure: A survey among office workers.,” 1995). In 
addition to bad life quality and unhealthy habits, it 
costs companies and the health care system billions 
of Danish kroner every year (Web: Si-folkesundhed.
dk, 2016a). Stress Foreningen states that stress costs 
Denmark around 14 billion Danish kroner a year 
(Web: Si-folkesundhed.dk, 2016a).
As can be seen reducing stress will be beneficial for 
companies to ensure increased productivity. Fur­
thermore, the focus on employees’ job satisfaction 
and health is becoming a more and more important 
subject for leading companies such as Google (Web: 
Crowley, 2013). A way to target stress in work 
environments is by product design, which will be 
discussed in the following sections.
1.2 Why behavioural design 
is an especially appropriate 
method when addressing 
stressed people
Behavioural design is a design mindset that aims 
to nudge the behaviour of the individual interact­
ing with the product or service designed (Wendel, 
2013). Behavioural design or designing for behav­
ioural change is a design mindset built on physi­
ology and behavioural economics and is similar to 
persuasive technology and nudging. 
People with stress are affected by stress in differ­
ent ways and can be more or less sensitive to their 
surroundings (section 2.1) (Andersen, 2009). 
Behavioural designing aims to motivate, trigger 
and facilitate a specific behaviour (Wendel, 2013), 
therefore it is an ideal method to use when target­
ing stressed people, since there are some specific 
behaviour traits associated with being stressed. E.g. 
research show that stressed people are very likely 
to do what they usually do, they get easier annoyed 
or they feel fatigue (Neal, Wood, & Drolet, 2015) 
(Andersen, 2009). 
Everywhere in our surroundings, there are designs 
trying to make us behave in a specific way. Behav­
ioural design aims to change or influence behaviour 
to make the user behave in a healthier, more sus­
tainable or favourable way (Wendel, 2013). Some 
examples of real life behavioural designs are; green 
footsteps towards a trash bin, nudging people to go 
to the bin to throw away their trash. Another ex­
ample of a design solution is; placing a small sticker 
illustrating a fly in the bottom of the men’s room’s 
urinals to make it an aiming point when urinating. 
These designs trigger a favourable behaviour us­
ing different techniques. More about the theories 
behind behavioural design can be found in section 
3.1. 
This chapter will introduce the topic and the aim of 
the master’s thesis as well as present the structure of 
the report. 
==PAGE:13==
13
1.3 The aim of the thesis
1.4 The structure of the 
report
This thesis targets the problem of stress in office en­
vironments. The aim is to develop a product concept 
that can help to reduce stress in an office environ­
ment by using the behavioural design mindset. The 
behavioural design mindset is used to help under­
stand general office behaviour and target the final 
product concept to fit into the environment in order 
to motivate, trigger and facilitate a stress reducing 
behaviour. 
The thesis will examine what stress is, how it af­
fects human beings long-term and short-term and 
how it can be reduced. In order to understand the 
existing market of products aiming to reduce stress, 
the existing products will be mapped out to get an 
overview of fields that are covered and where there 
is inconsistency in the theory of stress relievers and 
existing products and services. 
When these areas have been covered one or more 
stress relievers will be used as a foundation for the 
development of a product concept to reduce stress 
in an office environment. To test the concept, a 
prototype will be made and tested in an office en­
vironment. The test feedback will be used to refine 
the concept and evaluate what further work has to 
be done. 
This thesis report includes seven chapters. This 
section will give a short description of each of the 
chapters.
Chapter 1 
Introduction
The first chapter gives an introduction to the im­
portance of targeting the issue of stress in the office 
environment. A short introduction to behavioural 
design and the thesis in general.
Chapter 2 
Theory and existing products
This chapter gives a description of what stress is, 
how it affects people in an office environment and 
how it can be reduced.
A map-out of the existing products and services on 
the market which aim to reduce stress.
Chapter 3 
Design process and behavioural method
This chapter walks through the design process of 
the product concept and the different stages includ­
ing the methods used in each step.
Chapter 4 
Concept development
This chapter is divided into three different sections 
following the stages within the design process; 
discover, design and refine. For each stage there is a 
description of the outcomes of using the methods 
described in chapter 3. 
Chapter 5 
Final product concept
The fifth chapter presents the final product concept.
Chapter 6 
Discussion
This chapter discuss the limitations and implica­
tions of the thesis.
Chapter 7 
Conclusion
The last chapter concludes on the thesis as well as 
suggests what further work has to be done.
==PAGE:14==
14
==PAGE:15==
15
Theory and existing products
Chapter 2
==PAGE:16==
16
As many other of the body’s mechanisms and 
responses, stress is developed through evolution 
and is a response that exists to protect the individ­
ual by reacting on the dangers or threats, stressors, 
in our surroundings (Nesse, Bhatnagar, & Young, 
2010). Centre for Studies on Human Stress defines a 
stressor as “..anything that causes the release of stress 
hormones” (Web: Humanstress.ca, 2016). 
Patton (2016d) describes the acute stress response 
as a response triggered by a stressor, which makes 
the body ready to “fight or flight” meaning re­
moving the stressor or removing oneself from the 
stressor. The sympathetic nervous system reacts by 
increasing the heart rate (HR) and respiratory rate 
in order to take in more oxygen and get rid of more 
carbon dioxide (Web: Patton, 2016c). Also, there is 
a decrease in the blood flow to the legs and arms, 
in order to increase the blood flow to the core and 
head (where the most important organs are located; 
heart, lungs and brain, the organs that keep the rest 
of the body alive) (Web: Patton, 2016c). This is done 
by vascular contraction in the arms and legs, mean­
ing the blood vessels are tightened, thus affecting 
the nutrition and oxygen distribution in the body 
(Web: Patton, 2016c). 
Patton (2016c) describes the body’s response to 
stress in the following way. The endocrine system, 
which is the hormone supplier, also responds to 
the stressor and supports the sympathetic nervous 
system by producing hormones, which are chemical 
signals, telling the body how to react. 
In the medulla, which is in the inside of the adrenal 
glands, the catecholamine hormones; epinephrine 
and norepinephrine also known as adrenaline and 
noradrenaline, are produced. These are the hor­
mones supporting the sympathetic nervous system 
response by increasing heart and respiratory rate. 
On the outside of the adrenal glands, the cortex, 
cortisol, which is in the glucocorticoid class of hor­
mones, is produced. This steroid hormone’s purpose 
is to redistribute energy, by releasing the stored
2.1 Stress
Exhaustion phase
(Chronic stress)
3.
Alarm phase
Resistance phase
Recovery
1.
2.
Figure 2.1, illustrates the phases short- and long-term 
linked to stress
The damages caused by chronic stress will be de­
scribed in this section. There are multiple ways of 
how the body can be affected if there is no recovery 
phase after the acute stress response. This is illus­
trated as physical symptoms and affects in
glucose into the blood. 
Furthermore, the body reacts by suppressing the 
immune system, digestion and reproduction func­
tions, since these functions are not as important in 
a stressful situation (Web: Patton, 2016c). 
Another response to a stressor is called “tend and 
befriend” (Web: Patton, 2016c). In this response the 
hormone oxytocin is released. Oxytocin is associ­
ated with social bonding and sexual reproduction. 
This hormone elevates feelings of attachment, trust 
and connection to others. Hereby the response 
makes individuals stand together in order to cope 
with the stressful situation. 
Selye (1951) explains how the stress response can be 
divided into three phases as illustrated in figure 2.1. 
The term general adaptation syndrome describes the 
body’s short- and long-term reaction to stress.
The first phase is called the alarm phase. Here the 
body starts mobilising resources, the HR rises, 
making the body ready to run or fight. 
The second phase, called the resistance phase, is 
where the individual responds. There is an increase 
in temperature, the stress hormones are activated 
and in this phase the body’s resources are utilised. 
The third phase, the exhaustion phase, is the phase 
that follows if the body after the resistant phase 
does not have time to relax and recover. If the re­
sistance phase is not followed by a recovery phase, 
it can have damaging effects on the body, as the 
body’s reserves are depleted. 
This chapter will look into what stress is, how it 
affects the body and how stress can be reduced. Fur­
thermore, it is investigated which products are on 
the market aiming to be stress reducing. Finally, it 
will be determined how the product concept should 
target stress by using one or more stress relievers. 
The effects of chronic stress
==PAGE:17==
17
Headache
Increased sensitivity 
to sound and light
Muscular tension
Constipation
Sexual dysfunction
Increase in blood pressure
Hunger or lack of 
appetite
Cardiovascular disease
Increase heart rate (HR)
Increase respiratory rate
Vascular contraction
Sympathetic 
nervous system
Endocrine system
Glucocorticoid hormones;
cortisol
Catecholamine 
hormones; epinephrine 
and norepinephrine
Oxytocin
Suppressed 
functions
Reproduction
Immune system
Digestion
Physical symptoms
Hypertension
Vascular disease
Coronary artery 
disease/heart attract
Diseases
Figure 2.2, Illustration of how the human body responds 
to stress; the reactions, the symptoms of chronic stress and 
the diseases chronic stress can cause. 
More susceptible to 
diseases
Diabetes 
figure 2.2. As described, the HR increases when re­
sponding to stress, leading to increased blood pres­
sure (Web: Patton, 2015b). Patton (2016b) describes 
how this, over time, will make the blood vessels 
expand. To counteract this effect the blood vessels 
build up more muscle tissue around the vessels. 
This causes them to become rigid, which means that 
it requires more force for the heart to pump blood 
around the body. This is a vicious circle, which can 
lead to the disease called hypertension, where the 
blood pressure keeps increasing. As a consequence 
of this, it can lead to vascular disease, due to epi­
sodes of damage to the blood vessels, as illustrated 
in figure 2.3 (Web: Patton, 2015b). In the points 
damaged plaque and inflammation build up. Plaque 
and inflammation attract fat and cholesterol, which 
accumulates causing the blood vessels to become 
smaller. The effects of these blood vessels becoming 
smaller are worst in the coronary arteries. These 
are the blood vessels, which feed the heart tissue. 
If coronary arteries are blocked or narrowed it can 
result in death of heart tissue. This disease is called 
coronary artery disease or heart attack (Web: Pat­
ton, 2015b).
Another damaging effect of chronic stress is on the 
metabolism (Web: Patton, 2016b). When stressed, 
there is an increase in the energy distributed to the 
body as described earlier. If this extra energy, which 
under the stress response is lead to the blood, is not 
used for running from or fighting the stressor, it 
stays in the blood. The extra nutrition and glucose 
being distributed to the body lead to an increase in 
blood sugar, which is floating around in blood ves­
sels, aggravate diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. 
When being stressed the reproduction function
==PAGE:18==
18
the emotional and behavioural responses. There 
are four main emotional and behavioural responses 
identified to chronic stress; depression, anger, anxi­
ety and addiction (figure 2.4). Depression is caused 
due to damage on the frontal cortex (Web: Patton, 
2015a). The part that makes the individual feel hap­
py is located here, leading to anhedonia, which is 
inability to feel pleasure. When the individual does 
not feel pleasure it leads to feeling demotivated and 
unhappy. Anger is linked to the fight response and 
anxiety is linked to the flight response and since 
these responses are activated under stress these 
emotions become stronger at chronic stress. Finally, 
addiction is linked to bad coping techniques such 
as drinking, taking drugs or similar (Web: Patton, 
2016a). 
Figure 2.3, Illustration of how stress damage point in the 
blood vessels, leading to inflammation and atherosclerotic 
plaques formation, resulting in smaller vessels and risk of 
blood clots (SanoFarm, 2013).
shuts down, meaning that under chronic stress the 
reproductive ability can be reduced and lead to im­
potency in men (Web: Patton, 2015b). The immune 
function is also affected by stress. The immune 
function has two systems; the innate system and the 
adaptive system (Web: Patton, 2015b). The adaptive 
system controls the production of white blood cells 
and the innate system adjusts the inflammation. 
Acute stress can lead to extreme inflammation and 
hereby also attacking the body. This is for exam­
ple seen in arthritis. When the body is exposed to 
chronic stress, meaning the immune system being 
activated too often causing too much inflammation 
it self-regulates the immune system by not acti­
vating it or by suppressing it. This makes the body 
more susceptible to diseases and studies have shown 
that in periods of chronic stress there is a decrease 
in wound healing (Web: Patton, 2015b). 
It is commonly known that stress is linked to 
depression, lack of motivation and sadness. In this 
section it will be described how the behavioural and 
emotional response to stress is linked to the body’s 
reaction (Web: Patton, 2016a).
As described in the previous, glucocorticoid hor­
mones such as cortisol is produced under the stress 
response. Patton (2016a) explaines that the parts 
of the brain that have the most glucocorticoid 
receptors are the hippocampus and the frontal 
cortex. The memory and learning are linked to the 
hippocampus. Reasoning, judgement and impulse 
control are linked to the frontal cortex. These parts 
of the brain are being light up in times of stress due 
to the impact from glucocorticoid. Under chronic 
stress neurons in these parts of the brain can die. 
If these parts of the brains are damaged, the skills 
linked to them are also affected, which can affect 
Difficulties concentrating 
and remembering
Insomnia
Depression
Anger
Anxiety
Addiction
Amygdala
Hippocampus
Frontal cortex
Figure 2.4, Illustration the main parts of the human brain 
what are affected by chronic stress and the emotions and 
behaviours it causes.
- activation
- damage
- damage
Other symptoms of stress are lack of appetite, 
increased sensitivity to light and sound as well as 
muscular tension which can lead to headache or 
migraine (Andersen, 2009). 
In five studies conducted by Neal, Wood, & Drolet 
(2015) it was found that when people are stressed 
they have lower self-control and willpower and 
therefore tend to follow old habits. This mechanism 
helps people reach their goals which are usually 
supported by their habits (Neal, Wood, & Drolet, 
2015).
The effects of acute stress
Acute stress has been linked to higher motivation 
and improved immune system (Andersen, 2009). 
Furthermore, Kirby et al. (2013), found in a study 
with adult rats that when the rats were exposed to a 
moderate time of acute stress, brain cells in the 
==PAGE:19==
19
hippocampus were generated. Two weeks after the 
generation the brain cells functioned and the study 
showed that the rats had improved memory and 
better performance.
Mindset about stress
The way the individual cope with and think of 
stress affects the body’s reaction (Maddi, 2013). 
Maddi (2013) describes in the article Hardiness as 
the Existential Courage to Grow Through Searching 
for Meaning how people can learn something he 
calls hardiness. Hardiness is a combination of three 
attitudes; commitment, control, and challenge (the 
3Cs). When in a stressful situation staying commit­
ted, engaged and seeing the stressful situations as 
a challenge that one can learn from, has proven to 
have beneficial effects on physical as well as mental 
health (Maddi, 2013). He writes: “Specifically, strong 
levels of the 3Cs should lead to low levels of painful 
emotions (e.g., anxiety, anger, fear, depression), even 
though you are addressing, rather than avoiding, the 
stressful circumstances” (Maddi, 2013). This suggests 
that ones mindset about stress is an important issue. 
Measuring stress
The stress level has in studies been measured by 
different means. To measure the stress level a wide 
span of methods can be used. Heart rate (HR) and 
heart rate variance (HRV) can be measured through 
pulse or more exact through an electrocardiogram 
(ECG), which is used for measuring heart activity 
(Sharpley & Gordon, 1999). The cortisol level can 
be measured in the saliva, urine or in a blood sam­
ple (Turpeinen & Hämäläinen, 2013). Furthermore, 
an electroencephalography (EEG), which is a tool to 
measure electrical activity of the brain, can be used 
for observing changes in mood (Liu et al., 2013).
Another way is to use computer programs recog­
nising stress either through an image of the face or 
a record of the voice (Metaxas, Venkataraman, & 
Vogler, 2004). Finally, the perceived stress level can 
be measured using different types of questionnaires 
and can be a cheap way of measuring stress (Sood, 
Priyadarshini, & Aich, 2013). Sood, Priyadarshini, 
& Aich (2013) studied how these different ways of 
measuring stress correlates and found that the re­
sults from questionnaires are very much in accord­
ance with results from analysing the stress-related 
biomarkers such as cortisol level. 
Summing up
As described stress can affect mood, lead to depres­
sion, anxiety, anger, loss of memory and concentra­
tion, muscular tension, irritability, insomnia, sensi­
tivity towards light and sound etc. These symptoms 
of stress can make the individual more sensitive 
to things or events that normally would be a trifle 
(Andersen, 2009). This can be seen as a vicious cir­
cle of stress as illustrated in figure 2.5, where stress 
can built up and can have fatal consequences, e.g. 
heart attack. 
The next section will look into what affects the 
stress level in an everyday life of an employee work­
ing in an office environment.
Context
Behaviour
Body response
Cognitive
respose
Situation, environment 
or other factors influencing 
the individual
Fight, flight, cope 
or not cope
Figure 2.5, Illustration of the stress response including 
cognitive and body response seen in a specific context.
==PAGE:20==
20
2.2 How to increase or de­
crease the stress level
Different factors have been linked to work-relat­
ed stress (Andersen, 2009). The factors, which 
increase the stress level are referred to as stress­
ors (Fortes-Ferreira, Peiro, González-Morales, & 
Martín, 2006). These factors can both be physically 
and psychologically influencing the individual (An­
dersen, 2009). However there are also some factors 
that can reduce the stress level. The factors having 
a positive effect on the stress level are referred to as 
stress relievers. 
This section will give an overview of the different 
factors to provide knowledge and insight, which 
will be used to choose what factors to target when 
designing a device to reduce stress in a work envi­
ronment (chapter 4). This section will also include 
an overview and description of products that are 
currently on the market, sold for their stress reduc­
ing properties (section 2.2.2). Finally the different 
aspects will be hold together to define the further 
focus (section 2.2.3). 
2.2.1 Literature on stressors and 
stress relievers
A lot of research has been carried out with the in­
tention to map out which factors make people more 
stressed and which can help reduce stress (Chiesa 
& Serretti, 2010), (Elliot & Maier, 2014), (Sctzer, 
2009). However, the reason why the different tech­
niques work is often hard to define (Mcsweeney, 
Rainham, Johnson, Sherry, & Singleton, 2015). 
Therefore there are many theories, speculations and 
assumptions trying to explain the psychological or 
biological reasons why the stress level is affected 
(Mcsweeney et al., 2015). This section will look into 
documented effects with only limited exploration of 
the underlying explanation for these. As described 
in section 2.1, the stress level can be measured in 
many different ways. E.g. through biomarkers in 
blood samples, HR, HRV etc. Due to these differ­
ences in measurements and incomplete research 
it is hard to evaluate, which stressors and reliev­
ers have the biggest effects on the stress level and 
whether the relievers have short and/or long-term 
positive effect. This section will look into different 
stressors related to an office environment and stress 
relievers which have been identified by reviewing a 
wide range of different studies.
Stressors 
This section will give an overview of different stress­
ors in an office context and others that are influenc­
ing the workday. Some of the factors can be directly 
linked to stress others are normally associated with 
lack of concentration, lack of comfort etc. However, 
since these factors can affect the stress level, these 
are also included in this section. It is important to 
keep in mind that when a person is stressed even 
small things can affect the individual and it can be 
hard to say exactly what was the main cause to the 
stress (Andersen, 2009). The stressors identified 
in an office environment have been divided into 
four categories, describing how they influence the 
individual. The categories are; stressors related to 
physical workspace, stressors related to social work 
environment, task related stressors and personal 
related stressors.
Stressors related to the physical workspace
Office noise
Around 2008 open office plans were a big trend 
introduced to many big offices (Brennan, Chugh, & 
Kline, 2002) (figure 2.6). Today research shows that 
the open office layout does not only have advantag­
es and that some of the argued advantages might 
not even be true (Brennan et al., 2002). One of the 
most common disadvantages is the noise associated 
(Brennan et al., 2002). Noise can come from peo­
ple talking to others or themselves, but noise can 
also come from ventilation, building constructions 
etc. Noises do not have to be loud to be interrupt­
ing or frustrating. However research suggests that 
especially noise from talking can interfere with the 
individual’s ability to concentrate and communicate 
(Web: Lund, 2015). As described in section 2.2.1 
small stressors can trigger stress (Andersen, 2009). 
Noise is one of these small stressors that can in 
combination with other stressful factors lead to or 
increase the stress level (Andersen, 2009).
Distractions and interruptions 
When introducing the open plan offices it was 
argued that they would increase interaction and 
socialization between the employees (Brennan et 
al., 2002). Research suggest that the noise and other 
distractions associated with the open layout actually 
make people feel more stressed and the relationship 
with colleagues deteriorate when changing from 
traditional office layout to open (Brennan et al., 
2002).
Distractions can be closely related to the noise in 
the office. However noise is not the only distraction.
==PAGE:21==
21
Some others are ringing phones, emails, colleagues 
asking for help, meetings, social media such as 
Facebook, etc. These distractions can take up much 
of an individual’s day and when the individual 
has to get back to the task interrupted, this can be 
difficult (Nelson, 2011). Nelson describes how it can 
take up to 25 minutes to get back in focus after an 
interruption. However the individual might simply 
have lost track of the task and this might lead to 
tasks being forgotten (Nelson, 2011).
Besides leading to an inefficient workday, distrac­
tions or interruptions can be confusing and increase 
the sense of work overload and hereby increase 
stress level (Nelson, 2011).
Lack of privacy
Another disadvantage of the open plan offices is the 
lack of privacy. Privacy can be seen as two things; 
visual and acoustical privacy (Gupte, 2014). Most 
tasks performed at the office the individual does not 
do in collaboration with others (Grossman, 2002). 
This suggests that most tasks do not invite for inter­
action with colleagues (Grossman, 2002). In order 
to build close relations between colleagues, privacy 
is an important factor as it can affect the commu­
nication (Grossman, 2002). This is closely related 
to the fact that a good work culture and emotional 
work environment is important (section 2.2.1 - 
Stressors). Lack of privacy can lead to many distrac­
tions and frustration and hereby lead to increased 
stress level.
Bad furniture
The furniture available at the office is an important 
part of the physical work environment (Klitzman 
& Stellman, 1989). Working Environment Infor­
mation Centre recommends that the office layout 
and choice of furniture enable employees to adjust 
furniture and change working position during the 
workday (Web: Arbejdsmiljoviden.dk, 2011). Some 
examples of what bad furniture can lead to is; repet­
itive strain injury and back pain (Helliwell & Taylor, 
2007). These are some of the consequences of not 
ergonomic furniture. Pain can have an influence 
on concentration and comfort, which can affect the 
stress level (Panerai, 2012).
Clutter and little workspace
The workspace assigned to each employee and the 
amount of clutter in the office can affect the visual 
distractions (Vischer, 2007). Too little space or too 
much clutter can give less overview and hereby be a 
trigger for stress. Especially already stressed people 
can be very sensitive to clutter (Caruso, 2013).
Bad indoor climate
A bad indoor climate with bad or little lighting, air 
quality and too high or too low temperature can 
affect the employee’s well being and his or her abil­
ity to concentrate and hereby be a trigger for stress 
(Gutnick, 2007).
Stressors related to the social work 
environment 
Organizational culture
A competitive work environment can help motivate 
people but too much competition can put a lot of 
pressure on the individual (Teasdale, 2006). Expec­
tations for oneself, from colleagues or managers 
can lead to a too high work pressure, anxiety and 
an increase in stress level (Teasdale, 2006). Lack 
of control, influence and missing appreciation can 
lead to feelings of not being important, missing job 
satisfaction and can affect the feeling of job security, 
which can have a negative impact on the stress level 
(Teasdale, 2006).
Relations to colleagues or managers
The social environment or the human aspects of 
working at an office can affect the employee’s mood 
(Barsade, Sigal; O’Neill, 2016). The article Manage 
your Emotional Culture (Barsade, Sigal; O’Neill, 
2016) describes the importance of an emotional 
culture, where not only the cognitive values are 
streamlined but also the emotional values, which 
are often non-verbal cues such as facial expressions 
and behaviour. It has also been seen that the way 
people act towards each other affect the individual’s 
job satisfaction and the overall performance at the 
company (Barsade, Sigal; O’Neill, 2016). Bullying 
is not only something that is seen at the schoolyard 
but does also exist at work environments and can 
have great influence on how well the individual 
thrives at the workplace and affect the stress level 
(Blaug, 2007). In a study from Norway it was found 
that bullying could increase the stress level but 
also that stress in a workplace could foster bullying 
(Hauge, Skogstad, & Einarsen, 2010).
Task related stressors
Too difficult or too easy tasks 
The feeling of being unqualified, not educated for 
the job or not being able to get help with a demand­
ing or unmanageable task can be frustrating and 
lack of resources or capabilities can increase the 
stress level (“Stress – hvad kan der gøres?,” 2007). 
On the other hand having a too easy job can also be 
a stressor. Not being challenged can make the per-
==PAGE:22==
22
son feel less worthy and make the individual bored 
or insecure (Teasdale, 2006).
Task overload and deadlines
Task overload is one of the factors which is often 
referred to by people feeling stressed (Andersen, 
2009). Too many tasks can lead to long workdays or 
time pressure. An overwhelming amount of tasks 
that has to be done in a too short time span can lead 
to lack of overview, which can lead to confusion, 
frustration and hereby increase the stress level (An­
dersen, 2009). 
Personal related stressors 
Thoughts or worrying
When having issues in the spare time many people 
cannot let go of these experiences or worries when 
at work (Barringer & Orbuch, 2013). When think­
ing about future or past it is hard to concentrate on 
the present tasks that has to be done (Kabat-Zinn, 
2014). How much people worry is closely related to 
their personality and different people have different 
levels of tolerance towards stressors (Bibbey, Car­
roll, Roseboom, Phillips, & de Rooij, 2013). Worries 
can increase the feeling of being stressed (Bibbey 
et al., 2013) and affect the body’s response to stress 
(Maddi, 2013).
Lack of sleep
Sleep habits can have an influence on exhaustion, 
concentration and mood, which all naturally will 
affect the day at the office (Åkerstedt, 2006). Com­
bined with some of the other stressors it can be a 
trigger to stress. Stress can also lead to bad sleep, 
which means that it can be a vicious circle, with less 
sleep and more stress and exhaustion (Åkerstedt, 
2006).
Life changing events outside work
Death, divorce or similar can be big life changing 
events, which can have a big influence on a person’s 
life (Andersen, 2009). Even though these events are 
not connected to the person’s job or work environ­
ment, these events can influence the person’s entire 
life as well as his of her well-being and stress level 
(Blaug, 2007). 
Summing up 
As seen some of the stressors that influence a 
workday is not directly linked to what is happening 
at the office or in the actual work environment, but 
can be linked to the rest of the employee’s day (An­
dersen, 2009). Here worrying, life changing events 
and lack of sleep can be mentioned. Also what 
happens at the office is often influencing the rest of 
the employee’s day if this individual is not able to let 
go of the foregoing experiences and worries (Gun­
narsson, 2001). This can be seen as a vicious circle, 
where being stressed is something that keeps build­
ing up (Gunnarsson, 2001). Stress can influence the 
individual’s skills and physical conditions (section 
2.1). E.g. an event triggers thinking and worrying, 
which triggers bad mood, stress and maybe the dis­
ability to sleep, leading to lack of sleep. All of which 
influence skills and ability, which have an impact 
on the actions or reactions hence leading to more 
worrying and increased stress level. Overthinking 
or worrying are often the stressors that cause the 
vicious circle to start or to continue (Andersen, 
2009). Therefore worrying and overthinking are 
important factors to reduce in order to prevent or 
stop a vicious circle. Different approaches on how to 
reduce stress will be explored in the next section.
Figure 2.6, Illustration of a 
physical layout of an open 
office environment. 
==PAGE:23==
23
Stress relievers can either come from the environ­
ment, the context or the thought process of the 
individual person. This section will shortly describe 
different types of stress relievers, both external and 
internal relievers. The relievers are divided into 
different main topics: Senses, includes touch, heat, 
sight, hearing and essential oils. Activities, includes 
exercise, hobbies, healthy diet, distractions and bad 
habits. Socialization, includes talking to
Stress relievers
others, smiling or laughing and being with pets. 
Thought process, includes mindfulness meditation, 
therapy and hypnosis.
Table 2.1 gives an overview of the different relievers. 
Some relievers have long- and some only short-
term positive effects on the stress level. As seen in 
the table some relievers have other positive effects 
and some have negative side effects or some minus­
es. In the following sections each reliever will be 
described.
Table 2.1, overview of effects of stress relievers.
*Short-term positive effects when exposed or right after exposure. 
** Long-term positive effects, either when exposed once or multiple times.
*** No research was found concerning long-term positive effects on the stress level
==PAGE:24==
24
Senses
Touch
There are many different types of massage some 
with pressure, some focusing on specific areas of 
the body and some just stimulating the skin. Touch 
or massage has shown to both be comforting but 
also reducing muscular tension, which is often 
related to stress (Lindgren, 2012). Touch is related 
to human interaction, comforting and nurturing 
(Web: Chillot, 2013). On a daily basis we not only 
touch others but we also touch ourselves, which is 
shown to decrease stress level measured by HR and 
level of cortisol (Web: Chillot, 2013). Besides being 
touched, touching others also reduces stress (Lind­
gren, 2012). It can be assumed that as being touched 
is linked to being nursed, touching is related to 
nursing. In Emotional and physiological responses to 
touch massage different measurements were used to 
measure the effects. E.g. there was found a decrease 
in HR, increase in HRV and decrease in cortisol 
level in saliva (Lindgren, 2012).
Thermotherapy 
As described in section 2.1 tense muscles in the 
neck area, can be related to stress and can lead to 
headache or migraine. By applying heat as thermo­
therapy the tension e.g. from stress can be reduced 
(Jeong et al., 2008). Jeong et al. (2008) found pos­
itive effects of thermotherapy on HR, and HRV. 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stressors, pain can 
be frustrating and therefore be a trigger for stress 
meaning reducing tension can help the individual
relax and hereby decrease the stress level.
Sight
Visuals of nature have shown to be associated with 
a natural environment and seem relaxing on peo­
ple (Dijkstra, Pieterse, & Pruyn, 2008). The reason 
for this is not clear but Dijkstra, Pieterse, & Pruyn, 
write: “The preferences for natural settings are as­
sumed to have an evolutionary base; people are to 
some extent biologically adapted to natural as op­
posed to built environments.”
Colours used in paintings are often signs or sym­
bols of feelings or similar. When adding colour to 
a wall in a room the perception of the colour can 
be different. However, some colours are linked to 
having specific effects on people. Elliot and Maier 
conclude; “… color is about more than aesthetics—it 
can carry important information and can have an 
important influence on people’s affect, cognition, 
and behaviour”. E.g. blue is linked to relaxation 
and green linked have beneficial effects on creative 
performance (Elliot & Maier, 2014), (“Cure stress at 
work with a touch of colour,” 2005). This indicates 
that using visuals of nature or specific colours in an 
office environment can have a positive effect on the 
stress level, concentration and creativity.
Hearing
Sounds of nature such as rippling water, ocean, 
birds singing etc. have shown, as with visuals of na­
ture, to make people associate with nature and relax 
==PAGE:25==
25
(Thoma et al., 2013). Thoma et al., use a number of 
different indicators to measure the effects. E.g. HR, 
respiratory sinus arrhythmia and subjective stress 
perception (Thoma et al., 2013). Music are also 
linked to concentration, distraction and/or relaxa­
tion (Thoma et al., 2013). Meaning that what people 
listen to can influence their mood, concentration 
and energy level and hereby affect the stress level 
(Thoma et al., 2013). 
Essential oils
Essential oils are natural plant extracts (Sctzer, 
2009). There exist many different essential oils, 
which is used for their different properties (Sctzer, 
2009). E.g. in the article Electroencephalographic 
Study of Essential Oils for Stress Relief it was con­
cluded that rose and sandalwood essential oils 
have stress relieving effects measured by observing 
electroencephalography (EEG) changes (Liu et al., 
2013). Essential oils can be absorbed through skin 
or inhalation (Lim, 1997). Essential oils can direct­
ly affect the concentration, relaxation and reduce 
stress (Sctzer, 2009).
Activities
Exercise
Exercising affects the body in different ways. When 
we exercise the breathing deepens, the produc­
tion of endorphins activates and muscular tension 
reduces (Plante, Coscarelli, & Ford, 2001). All of 
these factors help in changing mood and reducing 
stress level. In the study conducted by Plante et al., 
it was concluded that whether you exercise alone or 
with someone can influence both your perception 
of your stress level and physical respond, which was 
measured using an Activation-Deactivation Adjec­
tive Check List (AD-ACL is a self-report checklist 
used to measure temporary mood states). In the 
article Does Exercising with Another Enhance the 
Stress-Reducing Benefits of Exercise?, it was found 
that exercising with someone whether talking or 
not, will make you more tired but also calmer than 
if exercising alone (Plante et al., 2001). The reason 
for this is not clear but it is suggested that exercising 
with someone might be supporting but might also 
increase the intensity due to a competitive element 
(Plante et al., 2001). 
Exercise is also a beneficial way of deal with stress, 
since the stress response increases blood sugar to 
prepare the body to fight or “fly”. As described in 
section 2.1 the increased amount of blood sugar is 
not utilized in many stressful situations at an office 
e.g. when the stress is caused by worrying (Nesse, 
Bhatnagar, & Young, 2010). Therefor exercising
besides reducing stress also have a positive effect of 
reducing the level of sugar in the blood and hereby 
decrease the risks of diseases linked to high blood 
sugar (Web: Khan Academy, 2016). 
Sexual activity
Sexual activity has been identified to reduce stress 
and prevent a number of deceases which can be 
linked to stress (Ein-Dor & Hirschberger, 2012) 
(Brecher, 1977). However this stress reliever ac­
knowledge but will only be mentioned shortly as it 
is perceived by the author as not feasible to imple­
ment it in an office environment. 
Hobbies
Hobbies can be a wide range of different things, 
however, the main characteristic is that it is an 
activity carried out for pleasure or relaxation when 
not working (Web: Dictionary.cambridge.org, 
2016). Being totally engaged in an activity, not wor­
rying about past and future, forgetting time is some 
of the qualities of engaging in a hobby. Putting time 
aside to doing something of interest are related to 
taking care of oneself and investing time in oneself 
(Andersen, 2009). Drawing, painting or sculptur­
ing has a demand for total concentration and this 
“flow” research shows to be close to meditative and 
be beneficial for the mind (Andersen, 2009) (Bell & 
Robbins, 2007). A lot of other activities have similar 
stress reducing benefits (Caltabiano, 1994).
Healthy diet
A balanced diet is generally known to be strongly 
linked to health and well-being. Eating vegetables, 
less red meat and less intake of refined sugar, alco­
hol and processed food are standard recommenda­
tions from The Danish Health Authority (Web: The 
Danish Health Authority, 2016). Eating breakfast 
has been linked to increased concentration ability 
(Barringer & Orbuch, 2013). Some foods and herbs 
are directly linked to increased energy, reduce anx­
iety and stress etc. E.g. chamomile tea is generally 
recommended for relaxing whereas coffee or black 
tea contain caffeine and can help increase energy 
level but can have the side effect of increasing anx­
iety (Hughes, 1996). Lack of vitamins can lead to 
fatigue and diseases (Kiecolt-Glaser, 2011). 
Furthermore, it is important to remember how 
stress influences the body (section 2.1). Since a 
combination of an unhealthy diet and chronic stress 
can be linked to increased risk of e.g. diabetes and 
heart diseases (Wellen & Hotamisligil, 2005). 
==PAGE:26==
26
Bad habits
Bad habits as a stress reliever will only be men­
tioned shortly since this may be a way of reducing 
stress, that in the short-term might have a huge 
effect on the stress level, but in the long-term can 
contribute to the vicious circle of stress (section 
2.1) and have bad side effects. Research shows that 
drinking alcohol, overeating, taking drugs and 
smoking are some of the methods people use when 
trying to cope with stress, depression or anxiety 
(Sinha, 2001). Though most of these methods are 
not life threatening when used once many can lead 
to abuse and hereby long-term negative effects 
(Sinha, 2001).
Distractions
As distractions can have a bad influence on the 
stress level, some distractions can help change focus 
and mood. This means that distractions which 
intent to change focus from the stressful situation to 
a positive aspect can help reduce the stress level at 
least in the moment of distraction. Positive distrac­
tions could be a lot of different things that make 
the individual forget the stressful situation for a 
moment, e.g. different types of entertainment such 
as television watching (Anderson, Collins, Schmit, 
& Jacobvitz, 1996), (Depp, Schkade, Thompson, & 
Jeste, 2010). Positive distractions such as paintings, 
photographs, posters and TV have shown to have 
positive effects on stress level in a hospital setting 
measured by perceived stress (Andrade & Devlin, 
2015). However since distractions are also placed 
in the category of stressors, positive distractions 
might become stressors if the individual is exposed 
unwillingly to too many distractions or too often 
(section 2.2.1 - Stressors). It is hard to say which 
distractions will be successful in reducing stress in 
different individuals in an office environment. 
Socializing
Talking and being with others
In general it can in all situations of life be beneficial 
to talk to others, share experiences and see thing 
from another point of view. House, 1981 defines 
social support as “an interpersonal transaction 
involving one or more of the following: (1) emotion­
al concern (liking, love, empathy), (2) instrumental 
aid (goods or services), (3) information (about the 
environment), or (4) appraisal (information relevant 
to self-evaluation)”. Social support makes people feel 
understood, cared for, which can help in the process 
of coping with stress (Dunkel-Schetter, Folkman, & 
Lazarus, 1987). Blagoev describes how socializing 
activities within a company can positively affect 
perceived stress and hereby increase the company 
productivity (Blagoev, 2013).
Smiling and laughing
In a study conducted by Kraft & Pressman (2012) 
where the participants had to smile in stressful 
situation it was concluded “… there are both physi­
ological and psychological benefits from maintaining 
positive facial expressions during stress”. In the study 
chopsticks where placed in different ways in the 
participants’ mouth to simulate different types of 
smile. Ekman & Davidson (1993) found that when 
the facial muscles related to smiling are activated 
the left part of the frontal region was active more 
than the right. The left part of the brain is related 
to experiencing positive emotions (Web: Walsh, 
2016). This was both valid when the individual 
was aware and unaware of own facial expression 
(Ekman & Davidson, 1993). It has been tested how 
people perceive facial expressions and how smiling 
at someone can positively affect you and the other 
individual (Wood, Rychlowska, Korb, & Niedenthal, 
2016). A saying, which also builds on the theory 
of the contagious effect of smiling is “smile to the 
world and the world smiles back at you” (unknown). 
In a study of how laughter affects the stress level, it 
was found that the production of hormones linked 
to stress were significantly decreased, when the par­
ticipants were watching a “humor video tape on life 
size screen” (Berk et al., 1989). All of these studies 
imply that smiling have positive effects on the stress 
level and can possibly decrease some of the negative 
effects that stress has on the brain (section 2.1). 
Being with pets
Different studies have tested the effects of being 
around and petting pets (Young, 2012) (Siegel, 
1993). Pet therapy has been used both on students 
before and after exams, on prisoners and on hos­
pital patients (Young, 2012). It is found that pets 
have beneficial effects on the individual interacting 
with them, by positively affecting the stress level e.g. 
measured by HR and perceived stress (Siegel, 1993) 
(Browder, 2009). 
Thought process
Mindfulness and meditation
Mindfulness means being present here and now 
and is e.g. practiced in different types of meditation 
(Davanger, Eifring, & Hersoug, 2008). Mindfulness 
has proven to have beneficial effects on the stress 
==PAGE:27==
27
level, both on perceived stress, on measurable stress 
hormones in the blood and HR (Davanger et al., 
2008). Mindfulness meditation has both short and 
long-term effects and can influence perception of 
stress and the way of coping with a stressful situa­
tion (Davanger et al., 2008). More on mindfulness 
can be seen in section 2.3.1.
Hypnosis
Hypnosis can be conducted by a hypnotist, as well 
as by the individual self by using affirmations, 
which is the repetition of words or meanings that 
an individual can use for self-hypnosis (Web: May­
oclinic.org, 2015). Hypnosis has many of the same 
qualities as meditation, however the two have some 
significant differences (Halsband, Mueller, Hin­
terberger, & Strickner, 2009). Hypnosis often has a 
specific purpose or intention e.g. changing percep­
tion, suppressing memory or altering awareness on 
specific aspects of e.g. past experiences (Halsband 
et al., 2009). Meditation focus on the now and here 
and has no specific purpose (Kabat-Zinn, 2002). 
Studies show that the brain activity during hypno­
sis is different from the activity during meditation 
(Halsband et al., 2009). However, both have bene­
ficial effects for coping with stress (Halsband et al., 
2009). Halsband et al. write that; “Using meditation 
and hypnosis people have a powerful tool to calm 
down and to disentangle themselves from their stress­
ful environment.”
Psychological therapy
Psychological therapy is a term used for a wide 
range of different types of therapies involving 
talking to a therapist including: “1) cognitive and 
behavioural therapies; 2) interpersonal and psy­
chodynamic therapies; 3) person-centred therapies” 
(Maguire, 2012). These different types will here just 
be referred to as therapy. As with mindfulness and 
hypnosis, therapy can help an individual becoming 
aware of an issues and help change a view, percep­
tion or attitude towards different things (Maguire, 
2012). Therapy is widely used to help people get 
through and over a stressful period or event in life 
(Maguire, 2012). Therapy in general focuses mostly 
on long-term stress reduction and on giving tools 
to target negative not constructive thought patterns 
(Gardner, Rose, Mason, Tyler, & Cushway, 2005).
Summing up
As described there are many ways to relieve stress, 
some target the actual stressor and others give relief 
through direct or indirect interaction with the 
individual. It is hard to say which stress relievers are 
most efficient and effective. This is both due to the 
way that the different relievers have been measured 
and to the way the studies have been conducted. 
However the ones that seem to have more long-
term positive effects focus on affecting the thought 
process and the way of coping with the stress, e.g. 
therapy, meditation and hypnosis (See overview in 
table 2.1). 
The next section will look into the different prod­
ucts on the market to see how these theories on 
stress relievers have been incorporated in existing 
products. 
==PAGE:28==
28
==PAGE:29==
29
Figure 2.7, Illustration of the human 
stress respond in a specific context, 
affected by a stressor. It is shown how 
the different product categories target 
the stress respond. 
2.2.2 Products on the market
chairs, that have many similarities. An ergonom­
ic office chair with properties similar to the other 
chairs in the group, was chosen. This was done in 
order not to make an overcomplicated map consist­
ing of hundreds of ergonomic office chairs and to 
give an easy overview of the different product types. 
On page 32 to 36 is a description of each category 
and the corresponding product groups. The de­
scription contains the characteristics of the group 
and how the products within each group affect the 
employees if implemented in an office environment. 
To support the descriptions, each section is accom­
panied with pictures of some of the products in the 
group. The rest of the pictures of the products can 
be found along with references for each product in 
appendix 1.
This section describes existing products on the mar­
ket that either target basic stressors (section 2.2.1 
- Stressors) or positively affect the human stress 
response and hereby relief or reduce stress (section 
2.2.1 - Stress relievers). The products are grouped 
into different categories based on how they aim 
to affect the individual; through context, through 
cognitive response, through direct behaviour or in­
teraction and finally by eliminating actual external 
stressors.
In figure 2.7 it is seen how the different types of 
products affect the individual. 
employees associate with nature, which has been 
linked to being stress relieving (section 2.2.1 - Stress 
relievers). Finally some products aim to change 
behaviour or demand interaction in order to work. 
E.g. table football demands direct interaction and 
can increase socialization with colleagues and here­
by improve social bonds and feeling of appreciation 
and fellowship. 
Figure 2.8 gives an overview of the types of prod­
ucts that are on the market. The products are 
categorized to give an overview of the way they aim 
to affect the individual. It should be noted that the 
products mapped are only an excerpt from what is 
available on the market. The products are represent­
atives of similar products on the market. E.g. there 
exists a wide range of ergonomic, comfortable office
As seen in figure 2.7 the existing products target 
the stress in different ways. Some try to limit or 
remove the stressor itself, e.g. by providing privacy 
to reduce interruptions (section 2.2.1 - Stressors). 
Others change the context in order to change the 
body and cognitive response, e.g. through visuals of 
nature in an office environment make the
Stressor
External
Context
Behaviour
Body response
Cognitive
response
Situation, environment 
or other factors influencing 
the individual.
Fight, flight, cope 
or not cope
Focus on changing the environment:
- Sounds; nature or music
- Visuals, nature
- Aromatherapy
- Nutrition and herbs
Focus interaction:
- Pets
- Visuals; hypnosis
- Socialization
- Distractions
- Massage and touch
- Task structure 
   and overview
- Relaxation
- Activities; hobbies 
   and sports
Targeting the way of thinking:
- Meditation and mindfulness
- Awareness, stress detection
Targeting the actual stressors by 
changing physical environment:
- Ergonomics or movement
- Privacy
- Indoor climate
==PAGE:30==
30
Products 
and services
Mindfulness and meditation
Figure 2.8, Overview of 
products on the market 
which are targeting stress.
Privacy
Awareness through stress detectors
Massage and touch
Activities
Task structure and overview
Ergonomics and movement
==PAGE:31==
31
Socialization
Nutrition and herbs
       Relaxing sounds
Indoor climate
Aromatherapy
Visuals
Pets
Relaxation
Distractions
==PAGE:32==
32
Reducing external stressor
The products in this category reduce or remove 
external stressors. The way these products have 
an impact on the stress level is by improving the 
physical work environment, and hereby decreasing 
or eliminating external stressors in the office envi­
ronment.
Ergonomics and movement 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stressors, bad furni­
ture can be a trigger for stress, therefore ergonom­
ic furniture are crucial. These products focus on 
ergonomics (Eco Green Ergo Chair) and movement 
when working, to ensure a healthy working posi­
tion to reduce physical pain, frustrations and stress. 
The different products focus on different aspects of 
ergonomics and movement. Some are designed to 
give the best comfort for the individual (The Evol­
uent Vertical Mouse 4), others to enable exercising 
while working (Treadmill Desk) and finally some 
for changing positions during a workday (Conset 
501-7). The products only target one individual at a 
time and e.g. one mouse and one chair is needed for 
each employee. 
Indoor climate 
The effects of bad indoor climate were described in 
section 2.2.1 - Stressors. Bad indoor climate such as 
too little light, too little oxygen or wrong temper­
ature setting can decrease ability to concentrate, 
affect mood and health and hereby be a trigger for 
stress. These products focus on improving the in­
door climate, by improving air quality (Air condi­
tioner), letting in natural light (Modular Skylight) 
or providing a good light setting (CoeLux, light 
panel). The products are not targeting one person, 
but all the individuals in the room.
Privacy 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stressors, lack of 
privacy can lead to many interruptions from col­
leagues socializing or making noise. Interruptions 
can lead to distraction, confusion and stress. 
Privacy can be obtained in different ways. The 
products identified in this group give the employees 
privacy or a quiet place to perform specific work 
tasks. More than this it is also about making rooms 
or settings dedicated for specific tasks (Quiet Zone) 
or relaxation (Quiet Retreat). The products only af­
fect the employees who are engaging with them in a 
specific moment. However most of the products e.g. 
Creative Wedge which is a flexible furniture should 
only be used for specific tasks such as relaxation. 
Though The Emperor 1510 which is a workstation 
would probably be used by the same employee dur­
ing an entire day. 
Creative Wedge
The Emperor 
1510
Quiet Retreat
Quiet Zone
The Evoluent Vertical 
Mouse 4
Treadmill Desk
Conset 501-7
Eco Green Ergo Chair
Air conditioner
Modular Skylight
CoeLux
==PAGE:33==
33
Changing context
The products in this category change the situation 
or environment. These products are not removing 
an identified stressor but changing the context in 
which the stressor is experienced. 
Relaxing sounds 
Sounds of nature or composed relaxation music can 
as described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, have 
stress reducing effects. These products focus on 
relaxing sounds, either composed music or sounds 
from nature, such as waves and birds singing. As 
seen in the pictures the products in this group are 
mostly speakers and applications (App) for smart­
phones or smart devices. A speaker playing will 
affect everybody in the room. The App requires a 
smartphone and will probably be combined with 
regular speakers or headphones only targeting one 
individual. 
Nature visuals 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, 
visuals of nature have a positive effect on the stress 
level. The products in this group focus on bringing 
nature into the room by visualising nature. This is 
done by projecting pictures of water on to the ceil­
ing (Umine Nature), decorating the room with real 
or artificial plants or grass (Living), covering a wall 
with wallpaper or stickers with pictures of forest 
or similar (Wallpaper). These products will affect 
everybody in the room.
Nutrition and herbs 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, the 
intake of nutrition and herbs can affect the stress 
level. The products in this group focus on the effects 
of nutrition and herbs. Getting the right nutritions 
can affect the individual’s health, mood and ability 
to concentrate. It is up to the individual to eat or 
drink the right amount and type of nutritions, but 
in an office environment the canteen can influence 
what the individual eats by presenting specific types 
of food, in a specific order and hereby influencing 
the individuals choice of food. Products put in this 
group are different types of diet plans, vitamins, tea 
and herbs.
Aromatherapy 
Aromatherapy is as described in section 2.2.1 - 
Stress relievers, inhalation of essential oil and can 
affect the stress level. The products in this group 
focus on the effects of aromatherapy. The effects are 
specific for the different types of essential oil. This 
should be taken into account when applying aroma­
therapy. Stress relief might also mean relaxing and 
lead to feeling sleepy, which might not be beneficial 
in a work environment where productivity should 
be high. The aromas are hard to direct and will 
therefore influence everybody in the room (Incense 
Sticks, Aromatherapy candle, USB Aroma diffuser). 
Wallpaper
Umine Nature
Living walls
Magic window
Sound+Sleep system by ASTI
Incense Sticks
Aromatherapy 
Candle
USB Aroma 
Diffuser
==PAGE:34==
34
Behaviour
Products in this category demand direct interac­
tion. These products help the individual change 
focus from something stressful and is hereby a 
positive distraction. However they can also become 
another negative distraction and hereby make the 
individual more stressed.
Pets 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, in­
teracting with pets can have a positive effect on the 
stress level. These products focus on the effects of 
petting or playing with pets. Some of the products 
in this group are interactive and respond to the 
human reaction (Dream Dog DX), others just give 
the sense of a real pet by including the furry feeling, 
temperature and sound (Nyantomo kitten). These 
products demand interaction and only affect the 
individual interacting with them. 
Hypnosis visuals 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, hyp­
nosis often has a specific purpose and is either done 
by self-hypnosis or by a hypnotist. In this group 
of products are Apps for smart devices, which 
combine a guiding voice with visuals (Hypnotizer 
Free). However most of the products in this group 
only focus on hypnosis based on visual distraction 
(Zen Dolphin) or repeating movements (Aduki Ni 
Light). The products do not require interaction they 
only require focus and observation (Zen Dolphin). 
Distractions 
These products focus on distracting the mind, mak­
ing the individual think about other things than the 
stressful situation. Some focus on play (Original 
Buckyballs Magnets Supraballs), some on getting 
out aggression (Stress Buster) or tension (Edama­
me Keychain). These products only focus on one 
individual and demand specific behaviour in order 
to work.
Socialization 
Socializing is important for all human beings and 
feeling cared for or feeling part of something can 
influence mood and stress level (section 2.2.1 - 
Stress relievers). These products focus on using the 
work breaks to get people to interact with each 
other while being either relaxed or active. This is 
either done by creating a room layout with furniture 
to support interaction (Florence Knoll Sofa) or by 
providing games where the individuals have to play 
with one another or against each other (Gemini 
Table Football). These products require engagement 
from more than one person. All products demand a 
dedicated space and if placed in the wrong setting it 
can lead to more stress or noise. 
Dream Dog DX
Nyantomo kitten
Gemini Table Football
Florence Knoll Sofa
Zen Dolphin
Aduki Ni Light
Hypnotizer 
Free
Stress Buster
Original Buckyballs 
Magnets Supraballs
Edamame 
Keychain
==PAGE:35==
35
Massage and touch 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, mas­
sage and touch, being touched or touching has been 
linked to reducing tension and stress. These prod­
ucts focus on touch or massage to make the indi­
vidual calm down and reduce stress. The products 
in this group are products that the individual has 
to actively approach and put time aside to use and 
only affects the individual using the product. 
Task structure and overview 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stressors, stress 
can be increased when the employee feels under 
pressure e.g. due to too many tasks or deadlines. 
These products help the user to keep track of tasks 
and give an overview of what is missing and what 
needs to been done (iCalender). The products help 
the individual keep focus on one task at a time by 
allowing the individual to stop memorizing com­
ing task (Sticky notes). The products require con­
stant update to give the optimal outcome. The task 
tracking products (iCalender) can be shared among 
employees to give an overview of upcoming and 
past tasks.
Relaxation 
As described in section 2.1 stress can lead to prob­
lems sleeping and fatigue. These products focus on 
facilitating relaxation, either setting the stage for 
a relaxing working position, break or sleep. These 
products only target one individual, and requires a 
relaxed and open-minded organizational culture, 
meaning that the manager and colleagues should 
accept relaxation during working hours. 
Activities 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, 
hobbies have effects similar to mindfulness and 
concentrating on doing something joyful can be 
very calming and meditative. In this group many 
different activities can be mentioned. Sports such 
as swimming can help the individual use some 
of the extra sugar that is released when stressed. 
Creative hobbies, such as watercolour painting or 
photographing can take the individuals mind off 
the stress experienced or worrying. The products 
and services in this group are very different, but all 
focus on the individual, and demand dedication 
interaction and time. 
Head Kenzan
TechTouch Massage Chair
Muscle Mouse
Sticky notes
iCalender
FUUT
OSTRICHPILLOW
Watercolours 
Starter Bundle
Canon EOS 7D
Swimming 
classes
==PAGE:36==
36
Cognitive response
The products in this category aim to make the indi­
vidual aware and mindful, meaning reducing wor­
ries, enhance the ability to concentrate and decrease 
the stress level.
Mindfulness and meditation 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, 
mindfulness is about being present in the present 
moment, not worrying and not judging events 
or thoughts. The products in this group focus on 
increasing mindfulness in everyday activities by 
focusing on breathing and getting in touch with the 
body. This is done through colouring (The Mind­
fulness Colouring Book), yoga, breathing exercises 
(Breathing Zone) and similar. Also a big trend is 
mindfulness courses taught as 8-weeks courses. All 
the products and services in this group demand 
great focus and engagement. They primarily focus 
on one individual but e.g. yoga can be done in a 
group with an instructor.
The Mindfulness 
Colouring Book
Yoga classes
Breathing Zone
Awareness through stress detectors 
As with mindfulness (section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers) 
the products in this group focus on making the user 
aware of his/her stress and the stressors affecting 
the stress level. The products are combined with a 
service providing techniques and guidance on how 
to reduce the stress level e.g. through breathing 
exercises (emWave2).
The products track the stress level in different ways 
by HR (Darma Stress), HRV, pulse (The Wellbe) or 
cortisol level in spit or sweat. All of these products 
focus on one individual and demand engagement 
and interaction in order to work. 
The WellBe
emWave2
2.2.3 Summing up
As described there are many different approaches 
on how to reduce stress in the everyday life but how 
come that people are still stressed, when there are 
so many products on the market and why are these 
not used in all office environments? 
When looking at the stressors related to the physical 
workspace it is seen that office noise, lack of priva­
cy, not ergonomic furniture, bad indoor climate as 
well as distractions and interruptions are all covered 
in some way or the other. E.g. lack of privacy and 
noise are solved by making booths for doing specif­
ic tasks (section 2.2.2 - Privacy), bad indoor climate 
is targeted in multiple ways; air conditioning for 
regulating temperature, light panels for simulating 
real day light (section 2.2.2 - Indoor climate) etc. 
However the products that target noise, distractions 
and lack of privacy demand space, which is not 
always available. Furthermore, entire office make­
overs can be costly. Bad furniture can be replaced 
with ergonomic chairs and tables but these products 
only target one individual and can be expensive. 
This means that even though the products are on 
the market they might not be an option for some 
companies.
When looking at personal related stressors, one of 
the options is mindfulness through yoga, colouring 
books or Apps with guided meditation. However 
mindfulness demands time and motivation and 
to be an effective tool against stress, it should be a 
part of the everyday habits. As described in section 
2.1 stress can make the individual demotivated and 
depressed and hereby making it hard for the indi­
vidual to implement new habits.
As for the stressors related to the social work envi­
ronment these are targeted by facilitating sociali­
zation but in order for these products to function 
more than one employee need to be engaged and 
time needs to be set aside.
Finally looking at the task related stressors, it is 
seen that these are targeted by a couple of computer 
programs and Apps giving an overview of the tasks 
coming and the ones done. However these initia­
tives needs constant update and will not eliminate 
deadlines and time pressure, which might be the 
actual stressor. 
As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, there 
is a wide span of theories and studies documenting
Darma Stress, cushion
==PAGE:37==
37
As seen there are many different factors that affect 
the individual’s stress level, both positively and 
negatively. A stressor triggers the cognitive process 
starting the immune system, increasing the heat 
rate, production of cortisol, insulin and blood sugar, 
impacting the emotions and behaviour (Web: Pat­
ton, 2016a). The decision or reaction will then again 
affect the thoughts, feelings, body response and the 
following behaviour. This circle of events can if not 
interrupted by some kind of internal or external 
stress reliever end up being a vicious circle. 
As described Neal, Wood, & Drolet (2015) found 
that people when they are stressed tend to do what 
they normally do, following old habits (section 2.1). 
The lack of self-control means that the motivational 
energy for creating new habits is low. Therefore it 
can be hard to get people to use specific products or 
approaches when they are stressed, if it is not some­
thing they usually do. 
Some of the products described change the work 
environment, which means that here is no need for 
behaviour change or any direct interaction. How­
ever the most common stressors are not caused by 
the physical work environment, but by the person’s 
own expectations or by the social interactions and 
organizational culture (Andersen, 2009). Percep­
tions and expectations are through stress relievers 
targeted when focusing on the individual’s though 
process, e.g. by using mindfulness meditation, hyp­
nosis or therapy (section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers). 
2.3 Sub conclusion
the effects of different stress relievers. 
More than removing the stressors there are also 
products that reduce stress by affecting the physi­
cal or psychological response. E.g. by changing the 
context in which the stressful situation occurs it is 
possible to reduce the stress level. This can be done 
by using sounds, visuals, aromatherapy or ensuring 
the right nutritions. In these groups many products 
exist which target the individuals in the room with­
out removing the actual stressors.
When looking at the products that demand a cer­
tain behaviour or interaction most of the products 
mainly work as distractions and are only treating 
the symptoms of stress in the moment of interac­
tion. This means that as soon as the individual goes 
back to the desk to work he or she might also go 
back experiencing the same stressful situation. 
As seen in table 2.1 mindfulness meditation and 
hypnosis both have direct short-term relaxing 
effects as well as long-term effects on the stress 
management ability. The difference between the two 
is the purpose: Mindfulness meditation does not 
have a specific intention, whereas hypnosis often 
has a specific purpose e.g. to change perception, 
mood or similar. Mindfulness meditation focuses 
on the now and here and does not try to change an­
ything, simply expanding one’s awareness. It is hard 
to say which of the two methods are more effective 
in reducing stress short- and long-term and which 
is better at making an individual become aware of 
a stressor or targeting over-thinking, worrying or 
other negative thoughts contributing to a vicious 
circle of stress. However, since mindfulness medita­
tion does not have a specific focus it can be imple­
mented in the everyday even before the employee is 
stressed and might hereby be able to prevent nega­
tive thought processes and increase awareness. 
From this research of stress, theories on stressors 
and stress relievers and existing products it was 
found that to target over-thinking, too high expec­
tations and similar, mindfulness meditation is an 
effective reliever and has both short and long-term 
positive effects. In section 2.3.1 a more in-depth de­
scription of mindfulness meditation can be found.
==PAGE:38==
38
2.3.1 Mindfulness meditation in-
depth
Mindfulness and meditation have become trends 
in Denmark and are used in office environments. 
Mindfulness and meditation originate from Hin­
duism and Buddhism (Davanger et al., 2008). 
However the modern techniques and meditation 
forms are separated from the religious and cultural 
aspects of the original meditation and mindfulness 
(Davanger et al., 2008). Jon Kabat-Zinn a known 
researcher and mindfulness teacher defines mind­
fulness: “… mindfulness is the awareness that arises 
from paying attention on purpose, in the present 
moment, non-judgemental” (Paulson, Davidson, Jha, 
& Kabat-Zinn, 2013). 
Within mindfulness and meditation there are two 
distinctive ways of practising (Davanger et al., 
2008). Often when people think about meditation 
they associate it with clearing ones mind and not 
thinking of anything. This is one form of medita­
tion, another is being open, letting spontaneous 
thoughts pass, accepting them, not judging them, 
not holding on to them but just acknowledging 
them and letting them pass on (Davanger et al., 
2008). 
In Denmark mindfulness is often taught in 8-weeks 
courses where the focus is on topics such as; the 
basics behind mindfulness, being present, being 
aware of the thoughts and behaviour, relations 
between thoughts, emotions and actions, self care, 
what gives you energy and what drains your energy 
(Web: Rønnebro, 2016). These mindfulness courses 
are based on Jon Kabat-Zinn’s model (Kabat-Zinn, 
2001). In these courses different types of medita­
tion are introduced; mindful breathing, body scan, 
sitting meditation, yoga or mindful movement and 
being aware and mindful in everyday activities such 
as eating (Kabat-zinn, 2001).
Critics discuss whether this way of handling stress 
is good or is just a way of treating the symptoms 
(Søgaard, 2014). Einar Baldursson, researcher in 
stress, argues that mindfulness removes the feelings 
of stress but does not target the actual stressors 
(Søgaard, 2014). He says that the companies instead 
should use the resources on improving the work en­
vironment (Søgaard, 2014). However studies show 
that mindfulness meditation helps the individual 
reduce stress, by reducing production of stress hor­
mones and decrease HR, help the individual 
become aware of stressors as well as increase abil­
ity to manage stressful situations (Davanger et al., 
2008). All of these studies indicate that mindfulness 
meditation has some good effects on the individual.
Many studies have been conducted to map out how 
mindfulness meditation affects the individual’s 
brain activity, brain structure, stress biomarkers and 
perceived stress (Davanger et al., 2008). These stud­
ies indicate that there is a change in brain structure, 
over a period of time with meditation practice. Also 
it is seen that the non-directive approach with free 
mental attitude has the largest physiological and 
psychological effects (Davanger et al., 2008). It has 
been identified that the cortical was thicker in indi­
viduals practicing meditation compared to individ­
uals in the same age group not meditating. When 
aging there is a naturally decrease in cortical thick­
ness. Lazar et al., 2005 write: “Interestingly, despite 
the effects of aging on the prefrontal cortex, in one 
focal region of BA 9/10 the average cortical thickness 
of the 40–50-year-old meditation participants was 
similar to the average thickness of the 20–30-year-old 
meditators and controls, suggesting that regular prac­
tice of meditation may slow the rate of neural degen­
eration at this specific locus.” The results suggest that 
meditation affects the cortical plasticity (Halsband 
et al., 2009) and the brain is kept younger (Lazar et 
al., 2005). 
Studies show that under meditation multiple parts 
of the brain are activated and this activation of the 
network has been linked to anxiety relief and mood 
improvements (Zeidan, Martucci, Kraft, McHaffie, 
& Coghill, 2013). Furthermore, under meditation 
there is an increase in the alpha-activity in the 
brain, which is linked to relaxation and resting 
activity (Davanger et al., 2008). Under some types 
of meditation there is an increase in theta-activity, 
which is seen as evidence of anxiety reduction and 
activation of aspects that can change personality 
(Davanger et al., 2008). 
Besides these effects on the brain the heart is also 
affected with a decrease in HR and an increase in 
HRV (Davanger et al., 2008) (Nesvold et al., 2012). 
In Thayer, Yamamoto, & Brosschot’s article from 
2010, high HRV is linked to faster and more exact 
reaction and decision making in cognitive tasks. 
Furthermore, high HRV is linked to lower pro­
duction of the stress hormone cortisol in stressful 
situations (Thayer, Hansen, Saus-Rose, & Johnsen, 
2009). 
==PAGE:39==
39
Figure 2.9, Illustration of effects 
of doing mindfulness meditation. 
As described in section 2.1, hypertension can be 
a negative effect of chronic stress. Schneider et 
al. 2005 investigated how long-term practice of 
transcendental meditation (a type of mindfulness 
meditation) lower hypertension. It was found that 
“Compared with combined controls, the TM group 
showed a 23% decrease in the primary outcome of 
all-cause mortality after maximum follow-up (rela­
tive risk 0.77, p=0.039). Secondary analyses showed a 
30% decrease in the rate of cardiovascular mortality 
(relative risk 0.70, p=0.045) and a 49% decrease in 
the rate of mortality due to cancer (relative risk 0.49, 
p=0.16) in the TMgroup compared with combined 
controls” (Schneider et al., 2005). This indicates that 
mindfulness meditation might help decrease the 
risk of some of the fatal consequences of chronic 
stress (section 2.1).
As described in section 2.1 the immune system is 
affected by the stress response and chronic stress 
can have negative effects on the immune system. 
Studies indicate that meditation might have a pos­
itive effect on the immune system (Davidson et al., 
2003) (Solberg, Halvorsen & Holen, 2000) (Solberg, 
Halvorsen, SundgotBorgen, Ingjer, & Holen, 1995).
As described in section 2.1 difficulties to sleep can 
be an effect of stress and be a contributor to the 
vicious circle of stress. In a study conducted by Hei­
denreich et al. (2006) it was found that by introduc­
ing meditation to individuals suffering from insom­
nia their mean total sleep time was increased from 
5,5 to 6,5 hours a night. Furthermore, there was a
decrease in the number of participants taking medi­
cine for their sleeping problems.
As described and illustrated in figure 2.9 mindful­
ness meditation affects the individually positively in 
different ways. It can both be beneficial for stressed 
people by reducing stress and increasing stress 
management abilities but can also be beneficial to 
prevent stress, stress related deceases and brain ag­
ing. A more in-depth review on meditation can be 
found in the book Fighting stress - Review of media­
tion research (Davanger et al., 2008).
How much time should be used on meditation is a 
subject that is being discussed. Within Acem med­
itation (an mindfulness meditation technique) it is 
recommended to do one meditation session on 45 
minutes or two on 30 minutes each a day (Davanger 
et al., 2008). However research suggests that a sig­
nificant effect on the stress level can be seen after 12 
minutes of meditation (Moss et al., 2012). Daverne 
writes in his book 12 minutes to success 2011 that: 
“12 minutes is enough” and argues that 12 minutes 
is feasible and that 12 minutes is time that can easily 
be set aside in a busy everyday life.
Though it is acknowledged that there might be 
some trade-offs between time spent on meditation 
and the benefits, it is determined that to implement 
12 minutes of meditation a day is feasible in an 
office environment and a good way to introduce 
meditation to the companies and employees work­
ing there.
Decreased risk of e.g. 
cardiovascular deceases
Reduced stress level
Improved stress management skills
Improved cognitive skills
Faster and more exact reaction and 
decision making
Reduced anxiety
Improved mood
Increased feeling of relaxation
Improved sleep
Improved immune system 
==PAGE:40==
40
R
str
relie
produ
a
==PAGE:41==
41
Research on 
tress, stress 
ievers and 
ducts
Research target 
behaviour
Ideation
Observations 
and interviews
Brainstorming
Morphology 
chart
Conceptualization
Behaviour 
plans
Behavioural 
personas
Prototyping
Final product 
concept
Testing
Insights
Target 
identified
3 concepts
1 concept
Weighted ma-
trix
User testing
Further work
Story 
boards
Behavioural
mapping
Experience 
flow
Observations 
and interviews
Behavioural design process
Chapter 3
==PAGE:42==
42
The purpose of this thesis is not to make a literature 
review of behavioural design, since this has been 
done before (e.g. Behavioural design: The develop­
ment of a new design method by Hartlev and Durazo 
(2015) . In this chapter the design process including 
methods (section 3.2) as well as the basic theory 
(section 3.1) that was used for the development of 
the product concept is described.
3.1 Behavioural design
This section will explain the overall basics of behav­
ioural design, which have been used in the develop­
ment of the product concept. 
When designing for user interaction, usability has 
for a long time been the main concern. Usability 
is about making the product easy to use (Bevan, 
2006). In contrast to usability, behavioural design 
is not only about making it possible for the user to 
do things it is also about motivating and trigger­
ing the user to do it (Wendel, 2013). It will always 
be hard to predict exactly how the individual will 
act or react. However behavioural design has been 
developed trough studies of behavioural econom­
ics and psychology. The strategies are based on the 
knowledge of how people are triggered to behave 
and what they experience afterwards (Wendel, 
2013). This sequence is described in the ABC model 
(Antecedent-behaviour-consequence) (See figure 
3.1) (Miltenberger, 2008). 
Antecedent
Behaviour
Consequence
Anything that 
happens just 
prior to the 
behaviour 
and triggers it
The way the 
actor re­
sponse, acts 
or reacts by 
saying or 
doing
The thing that 
happens just 
after the be­
haviour as 
feedback, a 
reward or a 
punishment
Figure 3.1, ABC-model (Miltenberger, 2008)
The antecedent is what triggers the user or actor 
to behave in a certain way. It can be a cue, a situa­
tion, an emotion etc. After the behaviour the ac­
tor experiences some kind of feedback, reward or 
punishment. This consequence can affect the actor’s 
reflections and hereby the future behaviour. This 
sequence is important to consider when designing 
for behaviour change.
Fogg’s behaviour model is shown in figure 3.2. The 
model illustrates a curve called the action line. If 
Ability
Motivation
Hard to do
Easy to do
High
Low
Triggers 
failing
Action line
Triggers 
suceeding
Figure 3.2, Fogg’s behaviour model, B=mat (Fogg, 2009)
Fogg talks about three main motivators; pain/pleas­
ure, fear/ hope, social rejection/acceptance (Fogg, 
2009). When designing for behaviour change it is 
important to have these in mind and understand 
the users in the specific context in order to choose 
the right motivator or understand which motivators 
or de-motivators already exist.
In order to make the user start the action a trigger 
is needed. Fogg talks about three main categories of 
triggers; facilitator, spark and signal (Fogg, 2009). 
The trigger should be seen in relation to the Fogg’s 
behaviour model. In order to choose the right 
trigger it is crucial to understand the user’s situation 
and the specific context; the motivation and ability. 
A facilitator should be used if the user’s motivation 
is high, the spark should be used if the motivation 
is low and the ability high and finally if both mo­
tivation and ability is high it is only a signal that is 
needed to trigger the behaviour. Timing is crucial 
when introducing a trigger. “Whatever the form, 
successful triggers have three characteristics: First, 
we notice the trigger. Second, we associate the trigger 
with a target behavior. Third, the trigger happens 
when we are both motivated and able to perform the 
behavior” (Fogg, 2009). As illustrated in figure 3.2; 
if the trigger is right and timed well as the ability 
and the motivation is balanced the user will per-
the motivation (y-axis) is very high but the ability 
(x-axis) is very low (not easy to do the activity) 
it might simply be impossible for the user to act 
(Fogg, 2009). In the same way it might be very easy 
to do the activity (high ability) but if there is simply 
no motivation for doing it the user will never act 
on the trigger (Fogg, 2009). This model shows the 
importance of finding the balance between motiva­
tion, ability and triggering. 
==PAGE:43==
43
form the activity. Fogg describes how triggers can 
be misused, and instead of making the user do the 
wanted behaviour the user gets annoyed or frustrat­
ed due to lack of motivation or ability. 
Fogg argues that by triggering one behaviour other 
behaviours might be triggered too. So that a “small” 
behaviour might lead the user to do another “big­
ger” behaviour due to the previous. This can be 
used if the wanted behaviour is difficult to execute 
and hard to motivate or trigger. 
Fogg argues that timing is crucial when triggering a 
user to behave in a certain way (Fogg, 2009). Wen­
del argues that what he calls the Action Funnel con­
sists of five stages that an action has to pass before it 
can be executed. First the target actor is triggered by 
a cue or similar, this feeds a reaction, which leads 
to an evaluation of the perceived consequences of 
acting. Then that actor considers the ability to do 
the action and finally considers whether it is the 
right timing or if there are other things that are 
more important at that moment (Wendel, 2013). 
Wendel argues that the actor at any point during 
this sequence can be distracted and then the action 
will not be carried out (Wendel, 2013). 
The reaction on the trigger is dependent on the 
thinking which Kahneman divides into system 1 
and system 2 thinking (Kahneman, 2005). These 
two systems describe the way of thinking. System 1 
thinking leads to an immediate instinctive reaction. 
System 2 thinking leads to a slower reaction based 
on logical reasoning. 
Fogg describes how habits can be created and why 
creating habits are crucial. When doing system 1 
thinking the actor does not have to reason simply 
actor. Meaning when a habit has been created it is 
system 1 that is in used. To create a habit the trigger 
has to be linked to a reward (a satisfying conse­
quence of doing the behaviour) and this link drives 
the action. In order to create a habit the link needs 
to be made and here a rewarding feedback system 
or pleasant consequence is crucial to incorporate in 
the product or service design.
The theories point out the importance of the bal­
ance between an appropriate motivator to make the 
actor driven to do the action first time, a well-timed 
trigger, the ability to do the action and a reward or 
satisfying consequence that will be linked to the 
behaviour and be a motivator for future actions. 
Cue
Reaction
Evaluation
Ability
Timing
Does not 
notice
Negative 
reactions
Cost > 
benefit
Cannot 
act now
No urgency
Distraction
Distraction
Distraction
Distraction
Distraction
Target actor
Execute action
Figure 3.3, The Action Funnel (Wendel 2013)
Definitions
In the theory different words are used, some which 
explain the same things. 
Actor (target actor) or user
“the person who takes action because of the product. 
When the actor takes the action, it causes the prod­
uct’s outcome” (Wendel, 2013).
Action (target action) or behaviour
The action that the design aims to trigger.
Motivator
The level of motivation is how willing the actor is 
to do the action. It is a result of the expectancy of a 
consequence, which Fogg (2009) divides into three: 
pain/pleasure, fear/ hope and social rejection/ac­
ceptance.
A trigger, cue or antecedent
Wendel (2013) defines cue as: “The cue is something 
that tells us to act now”.
Ability
Having the knowledge on how to perform the ac­
tion, the resources and the skills to act and belief in 
success (Wendel, 2013).
==PAGE:44==
44
3.2 The design process
As described in report Part A (Appendix 2) the de­
sign process of the product concept is divided into 
four stages each with different goals and outcomes 
(Wendel, 2016). These were reached by using differ­
ent methods in each stage. This section will describe 
the chronological order of the use of the methods, 
with the reasoning behind the use and the sequence 
of use. Figure 3.4 shows the chronological order of 
the design process and the methods used.
The main reference for the design process was the 
stages and methods described by Wendel, 2013 in 
the book Designing for Behaviour Change. Howev­
er it was found necessary to support the methods 
described in this book with other methods such 
as brainstorming, morphology chart and weight­
ed matrix. The sequence in which the different 
methods have been used will be explained and the 
outcome will be described in chapter 4. 
In the first stage, understand, the goal was to get an 
understanding of stress, the effects of stress on the 
human body and how to influence the stress level 
(Appendix 3). This was done by making a literature 
review (Martin & Bruce, 2012) to get an overview 
of the different stressors and stress relievers that can 
influence an employee (section 2.2.1). Furthermore, 
the purpose was to get an overview of existing 
products on the market aiming to reduce stress. 
Here the data collection was done by searching the 
internet, hereafter making a map over the different 
categories and product groups (section 2.2.2). 
These insights gained from the literature review 
were used to determine the main stress reliever to 
use in the product concept (section 2.3). 
The second stage, discover, included defining the 
problem, the intended outcome, the actors and the 
action (Wendel, 2013). This was done by making fly 
on-the-wall-observations (Martin & Bruce, 2012) 
of users of two open plan office environments. In 
one of the offices the employees were familiar with 
mindfulness meditation. In the other office most 
were more sceptical towards the effects of medita­
tion. These observations were supported by phone 
interviews with mindfulness meditation coaches 
(Appendix 4). This was done in order to determine 
which mindfulness activity to implement and in 
which daily routine to implement it.
To code the observations the AEIOU framework 
(Activities, Environment, Interactions, Objects and 
Users) was used (Martin & Bruce, 2012). Further­
more, the observations were used to make a behav­
ioural mapping to gain insights and map out the 
different activities and routines in an office environ­
ment (Martin & Bruce, 2012). 
The behavioural map was primarily based on obser­
vations made at the office where most of the em­
ployees were familiar with mindfulness, and most 
had had an 8-weeks course in mindfulness but none 
of the employees used the mindfulness facilities in 
the building (Appendix 5). To support these obser­
vations, observations were made in the office where 
very few had knowledge about mindfulness and 
most did not believe in the effects of mindfulness 
(Appendix 6). 
Research on 
stress, stress 
relievers and 
products
Research target 
behaviour
Ideation
Literature 
review
Observations 
and interviews
Brainstorming
Morphology 
chart
Conceptualization
Behaviour 
plans
Understand
Discover
Design
Refine
Behavioural 
personas
Prototyping
Final product 
concept
Testing
Insights
Target 
identified
3 concepts
1 concept
Weighted 
matrix
Methods:
Stages:
Outcome:
Description:
User testing
Further work
Story 
boards
Behavioural
mapping
Experience 
flow
Observations 
and interviews
Figure 3.4, Design process divided into four stages; under­
stand, discover, design and refine.
==PAGE:45==
45
To support the observations semi structured inter­
views (Martin & Bruce, 2012) were conducted with 
the employees in the offices in order to gain more 
in-depth knowledge about their day at the office, 
the use of facilities and work culture. Most of the 
interviews were made at the office where mindful­
ness was mostly unknown, since it was evaluated to 
be the more general picture of how office environ­
ments in Denmark are at this moment. Based on 
the insights behavioural personas (Wendel, 2013) 
were formed with the purpose of understanding the 
end-users. Likewise experience flows of two main 
routines at the office environment were developed. 
The experience flow describe each step of the rou­
tines including the user’s thoughts, feelings, touch 
points etc. (Wendel, 2013). 
	
In the design stage the understanding and the 
insights from the two previous stages were used as 
basic knowledge to start the ideation. Based on the 
experience flows made in the discover stage it was 
identified where in the daily routine interventions 
could be done. This was used as a foundation for 
the brainstorming of ideas (Martin & Bruce, 2012). 
In order to generate a large number of ideas an early 
version of The Intervention Design Wheel was used 
as inspiration during the brainstorming (Aakerlund 
& Nielsen 2016) (Appendix 7). The generated ideas 
were broken down into part solutions and were 
divided into different functions based on the theory 
of behavioural design (section 3.1)(Appendix 8). By 
using a morphology chart the solutions were com­
bined into 3 concepts (Boeijen, Daalhuizen, Zijlstra, 
& Schoor, 2010). The morphology chart was used 
to ensure that all concepts would have at least one 
motivator, trigger and facilitating function.
The second step of the design stage was to go from 
the three concepts to one. In order to choose which 
concept(s) to improve or combine a weighted ma­
trix was used to discuss and determine the most im­
portant qualities or properties as well as identifying 
which concept(s) was the stronger (Martin & Bruce, 
2012). Based on the weighted matrix one concept 
was developed by taking parts from all three con­
cepts and combining them into one concept (sec­
tion 4.2.4).
In the refine stage the concept was tested. To test 
the concept a low-fidelity prototype of a part of the 
concept was made (Martin & Bruce, 2012). The part 
of the concept that was tested
consisted of a motivator, a trigger and a part of the 
facilitator. The prototype was tested in an office 
environment with potential end-users to determine 
which aspects of the concept could be improved 
and how. Feedback from the test participants was 
gained through a five-levelled emotion rating scale 
(Coelho & Esteves, 2007), written feedback right af­
ter the test, observation of the prototype in use and 
semi structured interviews after the testing period. 
The five-levelled emotion rating scale was made 
to collect data on perceived relaxation (Appendix 
9). The test participants had to push one of the five 
coloured buttons; dark green, light green, yellow, 
orange and red. The colours were accompanied by 
emoticons (smiley/icon expressing an emotion) 
going from very satisfied to very unsatisfied as well 
as a small text below the buttons furthest to the left 
saying “much more” and to the furthest to the right 
saying “much less”. This was done to make it easy 
for the test participant to give immediate feedback 
and understand the meaning of the response op­
tions. 
To collect some detailed feedback right after the 
testing a feedback page containing three main top­
ics were placed next to the prototype along with a 
post box for the answers. The questions were: what 
was good, what was not so good and suggestions 
for improvements. These topics were chosen to hear 
the test participants’ opinions about the prototype 
and their suggestions to how it could be improved. 
In the bottom of the feedback page contact infor­
mation could be added if the test participant was 
willing to participate in a follow-up interview. 
These interviews were semi structured and the main 
purpose was to examine the effects of the different 
parts of the prototype. Furthermore, the focus was 
on doing user testing of an additional part.
The feedback helped to confirm some of the as­
sumptions made in the design stage. Furthermore, 
it was used to identify the crucial aspects of the 
concept as well as point out the parts that could be 
improved.
As a start on the second iteration of the design pro­
cess a final product concept was formed (chapter 5). 
In section 7.1 further work is discussed.
==PAGE:46==
46
As described the design process was formed based 
on the theories behind behavioural design, empha­
sising the importance of considering the target ac­
tor’s context including motivation and ability to do 
the target action, when developing a product. When 
balancing the motivation and ability a well-timed 
and appropriate trigger is needed to start the action.
The methods from the book Designing for Behav­
iour Chang by Wendel (2013) was combined with 
methods used in other design practices such as 
experience design. 
The design process should be seen as an iterative 
process and though the methods have been pre­
sented in chronological order the stages should be 
thought of as done in iterations. 
The design process findings and results will be 
described in chapter 4 from the define to the refine 
stage. The outcome of the understand stage is what 
has been presented in chapter 2.
Further the final product concept, as a result of the 
design process, will be presented and explained in 
chapter 5. 
3.3 Sub conclusion
==PAGE:47==
47
Product concept development
Chapter 4
==PAGE:48==
48
In this chapter the results and conclusions accumu­
lated during the design process of the product con­
cept will be presented. The chapter will be divided 
into the three stages: the discover, the design and the 
refine stage. 
4.1 The discover stage
In this section the findings and the conclusions, 
which were made in the discover stage will be ex­
plained. As described in section 3.2 the purpose of 
this stage was to determine product vision, target 
outcome, actor and action. 
4.1.1 Product vision
The product vision is to increase people’s quality 
of life, both the people directly interacting with 
the product but also the ones in contact with these 
people. 
4.1.2 Target outcome
The target outcome is to reduce stress level in an 
everyday office environment.
4.1.3 Target actor
The description of the user or the target actor is 
based on the interviews made at the two office envi­
ronments. The product should be used by employ­
ees working in an office. To narrow this description, 
the findings from the observations and interviews 
were used to create three behavioural personas as 
seen in figure 4.1 (see full description in appendix 
10).
The personas described have very different person­
alities and degrees to which they are open to chang­
es and open to trying new things. Bent is more 
sceptical towards doing meditation, whereas Mette 
practises meditation every day and prefers doing it 
Mette
Karin
Bent
Figure 4.1, Pictures of the three behavioural personas.
 her way. Karin is more open to trying new things 
and mostly needs the facilities and a small nudge 
to do meditation. However they have all to some 
degree experienced stress in their everyday lives 
and would like tools to manage stressful situations 
or feelings of being stressed. The two personas, 
which would most likely use facilitated meditation 
would be Karin and if pushed a little possibly also 
Bent. Since Mette already practises meditation and 
finds that sufficient, she will not be within the main 
group of target actors.
Description of individuals within the 
group of target actors
Age: 18-69 years (69 is the pension age in Denmark 
(Web: Pensionsalder.info, 2016)).
Gender: both men and women.
Personalities: both open-minded as well as more 
sceptical people (meaning sceptical towards mind­
fulness).
Location: an office environment in Denmark.
Technology knowledge: it can be assumed that all 
people in the target group have some kind of inter­
action with computers and smartphones on a daily 
basis.
As seen this group of actors is within a very wide 
age frame. It is obvious that the people in this span 
are different, have different family compositions, 
opinions, believes and hobbies. These factors have 
to be kept in mind when designing the product. 
4.1.4 Additional constraints
In addition some general constrains were set: The 
product should be easy to implement in an office 
setting. Some type of partial prototype of the prod­
uct concept should be developed within five weeks 
(time put aside for the prototyping). 
4.1.5 Target action
In this section the target action is determined. As 
described in section 2.1, stressed people have diffi­
culties building new habits. Therefore the product 
should be built into an everyday activity and should 
remind or help the individual to take the specific 
action. Further it is important to keep in mind that 
the most common stressors affecting the stress level 
in an office environment are not physical stressors 
such as noise or non-ergonomic furniture but are 
psychological stressors, which can come from the 
person’s way of thinking, acting, the social envi­
ronment, the people the person is surrounded by, 
through expectations or work culture (section 
==PAGE:49==
49
2.2.1). These stressors are targeted by changing a 
mindset or focus. Changing a mindset or focus can 
be done by making the people reflect, see things in 
a different perspective and be mindful about the 
present. Thus as shown in figure 4.2, the action aims 
to bring mindfulness into the everyday of the office 
workers.
How to implement mindfulness
Mindfulness can be introduced to the everyday 
through different actions. In order to try to list all 
possible actions a brainstorming session was con­
ducted (Appendix 11). 
Below are two lists of possible mindfulness activi­
ties. 
The actions in the first list should all be seen 
as a part of taking a break. 
Do:
- mindful breathing
- mindful observation
- mindful appreciation
- mindful listening
- mindful colouring
- yoga
- or meditation, body scan, guided meditation etc.
a couple of times a day
Here is a list of some actions that could be 
incorporated in the working time. 
Practice:
- being mindful then doing tasks and keeping focus 
on one task at a time
- mindful awareness
- mindful conversation
at least once a day.
Since studies show that there are positive effects 
when doing 12 minutes mindfulness meditation a 
day (section 2.3.1), the aim is to make the employ­
ees do 12 minutes meditation at least once a day. To 
ensure high ability to do the mindfulness activity, 
the activity will be a guided meditation
4.1.6 When to implement mindfulness
As described in section 2.3.1 mindfulness medita­
tion has already been introduced through 8-weeks 
courses in a range of big companies in Denmark 
(Nordea, TRYG, IF insurance and more). However 
it was found through the two interviews in the of­
fice, where the employees had been taught medita­
tion, that none of the employees in the correspond­
ing departments used the facilities available in the 
office building (Appendix 12). The two interviewed 
had different opinions about meditation. One said 
that it did not work for him (breathing while count­
ing to 10, not guided meditation) but that with 
another type of meditation he would be willing to 
try again. The other said that he actually did not 
know why he was not using the meditation facilities 
anymore. He had used it in a period of time right 
after the end of the course but had forgotten to use 
it since (Appendix 12). This indicates that even 
though that there are facilities for doing meditation, 
the placement is crucial in order to increase ability 
and trigger the employee in the everyday life in the 
office. Furthermore, being able to personalize the 
meditation and choose different types of meditation 
is important to target different users. This was taken 
into considerations through observing the daily 
routines in the office.
Most days in the office are composed in the same 
way; built up around tasks and routines. The way 
the individual sits, the things he or she is in con­
tact with, the time for eating, when to go for coffee 
and visit the toilet is more or less the same every 
day. This means that the everyday consists of many 
habits. Figure 4.3, which is made based on the be­
havioural map (Appendix 13) and the observations 
coded into the AEOUI framework (Appendix 14), 
points out the identified common actions the indi­
vidual takes throughout a regular day at the office 
and the interaction points associated with these 
actions.
Under the interviews it was examined how the 
employees would feel about doing meditation as a 
break sitting at their desks (Appendix 15).
Decrease 
stress level
Product
Mindfulness
Office 
environment
Context
Action target
Outcome
Actor
Office 
worker
Action ?
Figure 4.2, Illustration of the defined target, action, 
actor and outcome.
==PAGE:50==
50
To the question “Would you feel comfortable sitting 
at your desk with your eyes closed for 10 minutes?” 
many of the employees answered that they would, 
but would be too curious about what was going on 
around them to be able to concentrate and focus on 
doing mindfulness meditation. Some said that they 
would not feel comfortable in a room with people 
they did not know. Some thought that their col­
leagues would see it as weird. 
Furthermore, it was concluded that it was very 
much up to the individual employee what he or she 
did in the breaks and how long they were. These 
results show that for the employees to do the mind­
fulness meditation; privacy and comfort are some 
important aspects, to minimize distractions.
As seen in figure 4.3 the employees do various 
different activities throughout the day. The break 
activities that are identified to be the most common
Work at the station
- computer
- mouse
- keyboard
- smartphone
- internet
- chair
- table
Walking/transporting
- walls
- floor
- stairs
- visuals
Attending meetings
- furniture
- colleagues
- screen 
- whiteboard
Going to the toilet
- toilet
- sink
- paper towels
- mirror
Printing
- printer
Having something to 
drink (from kitchen)
- sink
- cabinet doors
- cups
- box of tea bags
- water boiler
- coffee machine
Figure 4.3, Illustration of an office plan with point 
outs of actions and associated interaction points.
between all employees are going to the kitchen 
and going to the toilet. From the observations at 
both offices it was concluded that in general all 
employees go to the toilet and the kitchen at least 
once a day. To gain more insight and determine in 
which of these two activities it would be suitable to 
implement a mindfulness meditation, experience 
flows were conducted for both going to the kitchen 
and going to the toilet (Appendix 16 and appendix 
17). As seen going to the kitchen from time to time 
is done with others or with the intend to pick up 
something (coffee, tea etc.). This suggests that the 
toilet or the path from the toilet would be locations 
fit to start the new behaviour of doing the mindful­
ness meditation. 
Going for lunch 
break
- furniture
- colleagues
- canteen 
- floor 
- stairs
- walls
==PAGE:51==
51
4.2 Design stage
This section will explain the findings and the con­
clusions, which were made in the design stage. As 
described in section 3.2 the purpose of this stage 
was to design the product around the determined 
target behaviour. 
The first step in the design stage was to use the 
experience flow, which was made in the discover 
stage to point out where the new behaviour should 
be implemented (Appendix 17). In the experience 
flow, in the row called Opportunities, the possi­
ble places to implement a mindfulness meditation 
within the “going to the toilet” routine is pointed 
out. It was concluded that when going towards the 
toilet the actor is busy and here the motivation for 
doing mindfulness meditation is very low. When at 
the toilet the actor will in most cases stay less than 
12 minutes, meaning that the actor will not stay for 
an entire meditation session but could possibly be 
convinced to stay. When leaving the toilet the actor 
is still in a break away from the tasks and could very 
likely be triggered to do meditation if the ability and 
motivation were high. 
These observations were crucial for the brain­
storming session when generating ideas for how 
to motivate, trigger and facilitate the mindfulness 
meditation break (The morphology chart seen in 
figure 4.4 shows all the solutions developed through 
the brainstorming session).
The three concepts were developed using the mor­
phology chart as a template (see figure 4.4). The 
columns in the morphology chart are the following 
functions: to trigger, to motivate, to facilitate, to 
create privacy, to register, to personalise and to en­
sure comfort. Each row contains different solutions 
on how to provide the specific function.
To make three distinct concepts with different prop­
erties, the concepts were named according to their 
level of technology and complexity. Subsequently 
they were formed based on their names: Low Tech, 
High Tech Simple and High Tech Complex. 
Each concept aimed to motivate, trigger and facil­
itate a guided meditation session in an office en­
vironment, which were accomplished in different 
ways. To illustrate and explain the concepts user 
stories were made as story boards (section 4.2.1 to 
4.2.3). 
4.1.7 Summing up 
It was found that to reach the outcome: To reduce 
the stress level in an everyday office environment, 
the target action should be to make the employ­
ees meditate for 12 minutes at least once a day, by 
implementing guided meditation in the routine of 
going to the toilet.
==PAGE:52==
52
Personalise
Figure 4.4, the morphology chart used to develop the three 
concepts. 
Complex - 
high tech
Simple -
high tech
“Low tech”
The concepts are illustrated by:
==PAGE:53==
53
Comfort
Comfort
==PAGE:54==
54
Mette just 
finished her 
“mindful 
break”
Would you like to 
recommend the 
mindful break to a 
colleague?
YES
Choose colleague:
Suggestions:
- Carsten
- Karla
- Mikkel
- ...
Write a text
Suggestion:
Hi Carsten.
I had a wonderful mindful 
break. You should ...
Send
Carsten receives 
the text from Mette
Motion sensors 
activate projection 
on the wall. The 
video starts and the 
animals move in 
the same pace as 
Carsten towards the 
meditation booth.
Some hours 
later Carsten 
leaves the
toilet
Door opens
automatically to an 
empty booth.
4.2.1 Complex 
high tech 
Maybe I should try it, 
just to see how it is. It is 
only 12 minutes and it 
should be very relaxing...
==PAGE:55==
55
Hold your finger 
on the button 
Please wait
This week meditation
2
1
Times a day
Days
Great job! 
Your heart rate went 
down from 
77,5 to 68 beats per 
minute, indicating great 
relaxation
During the 12 minutes of 
guided meditation aro­
mas are released and the 
goggles show visuals of 
selected type of nature. 
The headphones play 
music, sounds of the 
nature, while the speaker 
guides Carsten through 
the meditation.
Login
Swipe your 
ID Card and 
enter your 
code:
1   2   3
4   5   6
7   8   9
     0 OK
Hold your finger 
on the button 
Please wait
Select:
Speaker     Nature      Aroma
START
The booth contains an ad­
justable chair with massage, 
fluffy flooring, head phones, 
goggles, a fan, aromathera­
py and a touch screen
After a week Carsten 
checks the App
2
1
Times a day
Day
Your score this 
week:     7
You are 2. best.
Keep going!
Button with 
pulse sensor
Button with 
pulse sensor
Next
M  Tu  W  Th  F  Sa  Su
After the 
meditation
The App shows the individual’s 
ranking and score but does not 
show who of his colleagues are 
meditating or how much. The 
score is calculated so 1 time a 
day gives 1 point 2 times = 2 
points, but 3 times only give 2 
points in order not to make the 
employees use too much time 
on meditating during the work 
day. 
==PAGE:56==
56
It sounds interesting I 
will try it at some point.
Carsten is 
about to un­
lock the toilet 
door and leave
Choose speaker
Check in. 
- Mette
- Henrik
- Carsten
- Karla
- ...
Make yourself 
comfortable and put 
on the headphones.
Enjoy your break!
START
Try our new 
mindful break 
booths!
It only takes 12 
minutes, increases 
concentration, pro­
ductivity and reduces 
stress.
A poster on the toilet door 
describes what the mindfulness 
break is and some facts about 
how it works. The picture is the 
same as the one on the wall on 
the mindfulness booths.
4.2.2 Low Tech
==PAGE:57==
57
Carsten gets back to 
his desk and receives 
a text message
During the 12 minutes 
of guided meditation 
the headphones play 
music combined with 
sounds of the nature, 
while the speaker 
guides Carsten through 
the meditation.
Mindful 
break over
After the 
meditation
Great 
job! you did 
your first 
mindfulness 
break. It is 
recommended 
taking a break 
1-2 times a 
day.
==PAGE:58==
58
7.30 
Carsten just
arrived at work
It sounds like something 
I should try... maybe 
later.
NEWS
Video:
Stress, productivity 
and mindfulness
Motion sensors 
activate projection 
on the floor. The 
footsteps is project­
ed in front of Carsten 
leading towards the 
room
Some hours 
later Carsten 
leaves the
toilet
Welcome to the 
mindful break. 
Register by placing 
finger on reader and  
wait
Finger print 
reader
Choose speaker
Make yourself 
comfortable and put 
on the headphones.
Enjoy your break!
START
4 chairs in 
this room.
Please check if 
one is available 
before entering 
the room. 
In the room there 
is place for four 
people. Each have 
a touch screen a 
blanket and head­
phones.
4.2.3 Simple 
high tech
==PAGE:59==
59
Thank you!
This break will help you be 
more focused and produc­
tive and less stressed. It is 
recommended doing 1-2 
breaks a day.
After the 
meditation
During the 12 minutes 
of guided meditation 
the headphones play 
music combined with 
sounds of the nature, 
while the speaker 
guides Carsten through 
the meditation.
To come from three concepts to one, the concepts 
were compared and evaluated using a weighted 
matrix based on some criteria (see table 4.1). The 
criteria were divided into main topics: motivation, 
trigger, ability and general. 
It was found that the concepts rated very similar 
and all of the concepts had some good parts and 
some parts that could be improved or changed. 
Therefore it was decided to take the best parts from 
each concept and combine them into one concept. 
The one concept named Mindful Trigger is de­
scribed and illustrated in a storyboard in section 
4.2.4. Furthermore an experience flow describing 
the sequence of  touch points, actions and reactions 
can be found in appendix 18.
Table 4.1, weighted matrix evaluating and comparing the 
three concepts
==PAGE:60==
60
Carsten enters the toilet and 
locks the door. A motion sensor 
activates a speaker. Classical 
music combined with sounds 
of nature starts playing, after 2 
seconds a person starts talking. 
The person explains how mind­
fulness meditation can increase 
ability to concentrate and pro­
ductivity and decrease stress. 
The person tells about the new 
mindfulness break booths and 
recommends taking a break 1-2 
a day.
Carsten leaves the toilet.
The booths are decorated 
with wallpaper illustrating na­
ture. One of the three booths 
is not occupied and the door 
automatically opens when 
Carsten is walking towards it.
Carsten walks towards 
his desk. 
Motion sensors sense 
that Carsten is moving 
in the direction of the 
mindfulness booths and 
a speaker starts playing 
relaxing classical music 
and sounds of nature.
This information is to motivate Carsten 
by informing him about the new facilities, 
what mindfulness is and make him asso­
ciate mindfulness with proven effects and 
not a waste of time.
The wallpaper and 
the music is to make 
Carsten associate with 
the relaxing sensation 
of nature and remind 
him of the information 
he listened to in the toi­
let. The door opens and 
the light in the booth 
turns on to increase 
curiosity.
4.2.4 Mindful Trigger
==PAGE:61==
61
Welcome to the 
meditation booth
Make yourself comfortable, 
put on the headphones 
and go next page.
next
Who would you like 
as your guide:
Jette
Danish
Kate
English
Kim
Danish
START
Register here:
 
næste
næste
next
      Find yourself
  - Kristian
 - Mette
 - Carsten
 - Hans
 - Christina
Thank you for taking a 
meditation break
Go to next step to see your 
results.
næste
næste
next
Inside the booth there is a comfortable chair, 
a blanket, a touch screen and headphones. 
On the screen it says welcome. Carsten has 
to register and then choose a speaker. When 
the meditation starts the light is turned down.
During the meditation a 
speaker guides Carsten 
through the meditation. 
A heart rate monitor is 
placed on the chair to 
measure Carsten’s HR 
during the meditation.
After the meditation the light is 
gradually increased and the touch 
screen shows a text thanking 
Carsten and telling him that he can 
see his results on the following 
page.
The booth is furnished and 
illuminated to associate 
with comfort and relaxation.
The interface guides 
Carsten through the steps 
to make it easier and hereby 
increase ability to do the 
meditation. It is possible to 
personalise the meditation 
session to make it more fun 
for more experienced users. 
read more
==PAGE:62==
62
We recommend 1-2 
breaks a day with 
mindfulness medita­
tion. 
Have a nice day!
Previous
Here you can see the 
change in heart rate during 
the meditation:
It indicates relaxation
next
Previous
Overview of times 
meditated the past month:
Times/
day
Days
next
Previous
1
2
3
Write text here:  
 Suggestion:
 Hi Mette,
 Today I had an fantastic 
meditation break I think... 
Best, 
Carsten
SEND
Previous
Do you wish to recom­
mend the meditation to a 
colleague?
      
Find colleague:
  Suggestions:
 - Kristian
 - Mette
next
Previous
On next page a graph shows the HR during the meditation 
and the HRV. To supplement the graph a small text sums 
up: “your heart rate was during the meditation reduced from 
X to Y and your heart rate variation was increased to Z”. A 
button saying “read more” leads to a side telling about HR 
and HRV and implications. 
Finally Carsten can choose to recommend the mindfulness 
break to a colleague. Colleagues are suggested and the text to 
write to them are also suggested but can easily be changed. 
On the next page a graph shows the times 
meditated the past month. 
Carsten can skip 
all the final steps 
just by pushing 
the small red but­
ton in the upper 
right corner. 
In an App, Carsten can down­
load to his phone, he can see 
the record of his scores and 
see how many times he has 
meditated during the past 
month. Furthermore, he can 
read about the mindful break 
and change settings so that 
he can be reminded each day 
to go and do the meditation.
read more
The feedback with results from the meditation session is to 
motivate Carsten to do meditation in the future.
The recommendation system is to help motivate other em­
ployees and to increase Carsten’s feeling of ownership.
Mindful pause
About the 
meditation
Heart rate 
results
History
Times
/day
Days
1
2
3
Settings
The App makes it possible 
for Casten to access infor­
mation and records even 
when at his desk or when 
not at work. 
==PAGE:63==
63
4.2.5 Summing up
As described in section 4.2.4 the result of the design 
stage was the concept Mindful Trigger, which con­
sists of a couple of different parts; speakers play­
ing birds singing combined with an motivational 
information poster placed in the toilet, a medita­
tion booth with guided meditation decorated with 
wallpaper illustrating forest combined with birds 
singing, a touch screen and an App as well as the 
possibility to recommend the mindfulness medita­
tion to a colleague. The different parts are combined 
to ensure high motivation, a well-timed and appro­
priate trigger combined with high ability ensured by 
a booth with guided meditation. The booth is locat­
ed in the path from the toilet back to the employ­
ee’s desk. To ensure high motivation for using the 
meditation booth in the future, the Mindful Trigger 
includes a feedback system entailing information on 
the HR reduction during the meditation as well as 
overview of times meditated. 
To see if the Mindful Trigger successfully achieved 
to motivate, trigger and facilitate the meditation 
prototyping and testing was done. The results will 
be presented in the next section. 
4.3 The refine stage 
This section will describe findings and realizations 
done during the prototyping and testing of the con­
cept Mindful Trigger. 
To test how well the concept motivated, triggered 
and facilitated the 12 minutes meditation a proto­
type was made. The prototype was developed in col­
laboration with the department IdemoLab at DEL­
TA in Hørsholm. IdemoLab is specialised in doing 
iterative prototyping with the expertise as well as 
components available for creating a prototype for 
the meditation booth (Web: IdemoLab, 2016). The 
prototype developed was a a low-fidelity prototype 
made with available components making it a sim­
plified prototype of the ideal concept. The prototype 
was placed at the office building of DELTA, to make 
it easy to keep an eye of the prototype and to make 
changes during the testing period. 
The prototype consisted of an motivational infor­
mation poster placed in the toilet, the booth deco­
rated with forest posters and the facilitation of the 
meditation using headphones and an office chair. 
4.3.1 Prototyping 
The booth was placed to target the employees work­
ing in the departments surrounding it in DELTA. 
However it was placed close to the canteen hereby 
targeting a larger number of employees. In picture 
4.1 and 4.2 the outside of the booth which was 
placed in the hallway at DELTA can be seen (Ap­
pendix 19). 
Picture 4.1, booth as seen when walking from offices.	
Picture 4.2, booth as seen when walking from toilets.
==PAGE:64==
64
As seen the booth was made out of blue movable 
walls and decorated with printed posters illustrating 
a forest (Appendix 20). Furthermore, some plants 
were placed next to the booth. This was partially 
done to hide the speaker playing a file with birds 
singing, to decorate the booth and finally to keep 
one of the walls from falling. This setup was made 
to trigger the employees and to associate with na­
ture and relaxation. 
As the motivational part of the prototype, a poster 
was developed in Danish informing the employees 
about short and long-term positive effects of doing 
meditation as well as describing how to do it (see 
figure 4.5 and full version appendix 21). To illus­
trate the textual content of the poster some icons 
were designed. This was done to make it easier to 
read and to give an overview of the content. 
Furthermore, a logo was placed in the top part of 
the poster designed to illustrate the 12 minutes of 
meditation as a relaxing pleasant break. This logo 
along with the illustration of leaves was used on all 
the elements of the prototype to make the employ­
ees connect to the information gained through the 
poster with the additional parts of the prototype. 
Guidet meditation
- en god pause på dagen!
Effekter her og nu
Undersøgelser har vist, at meditation er effektiv til at
afspænde og afstresse. Dette skyldes bl.a. at produk­
tionen af stress hormoner samt hjerterytmen sænkes 
under meditation. 
På længere sigt
Ud over disse øjeblikligt mærkbare positive effekter, er 
hjerneaktiviteten øget under meditation og regelmæs­
sig meditation kan føre til forbedret hukommelse, øget 
koncentrationsevne og produktivitet. Undersøgelser 
har vist at meditation kan sænke blodtryk og hermed 
være med til at sænke risikoen for livsstilssygdomme 
såsom hjertekarsygdomme. 
Fokus under meditation
Meditationen har fokus på åbenhed, tilstedeværelse, 
opmærksomhed og accept af det der er her og nu. 
Selvom meditation og mindfulness har oprindelse i 
hinduisme og buddhisme, er der intet religiøse aspekt i 
den guidede meditation.
Sådan gør du
Der er udenfor toiletterne er opsat et lille rum med en 
stol og et par høretelefoner. Sæt dig godt til rette, tag 
høretelefonerne på og tryk på start knappen og lad 
dig blive guidet af stemmen igennem 12 minutters 
afslappende meditation.
God fornøjelse!
Her
og nu
Længere
sigt
START
12
min 
12
min 
Figure 4.5, information poster in Danish.
The facilitation of the guided meditation was done 
by providing privacy by placing movable walls 
around an office chair and a set of headphones, 
which were connected to a small box with a start 
button (see picture 4.3). When pressing the start 
button a file playing a 12 minutes guided medi­
tation was started. If pressed again before the file 
ended it would stop playing and would be reset to 
be ready for the next test participant.
The booth had no door but a sign saying occupied 
was made in the first iteration of the testing to en­
sure privacy when in use. 
The file used to guide was with Danish speech 
downloaded on: http://www.tove-kofoed.dk. Tove 
Kofoed the woman guiding the meditation has 
taught meditation and recorded personal medi­
tations since 1991 (Web: Kofoed, 2016). The file 
was chosen due to the right length (12 minutes), 
a pleasant flow and relaxing music playing in the 
background.
Picture 4.3, start button on the box containing a file with 
guided meditation. 
An interactive PowerPoint slide show was made in 
Danish as a separate prototype (see figure 4.6 and 
full version in appendix 22). This was designed 
to illustrate the user interface of the touch screen 
placed in the meditation booth. It was formed 
including the elements described in section 4.2.4, 
Mindful Trigger: Registration, selection of guide, 
overview of HR results, history of meditations done 
over the past month, possibility to recommend the 
break to a colleague and finally two buttons were 
implemented saying “read more”, with information 
about the meditation and the HR changes measured 
during the meditation. 
==PAGE:65==
65
4.3.2 Collection of feedback
As described in section 3.2 the feedback was col­
lected through different means.
The first data collected was on how many who had 
tried the 12 minutes guided meditation. It was 
found that during the three weeks testing period 
the meditation booth was tried 31 times (measured 
by times pressed start without being stopped). The 
overview of the days the meditation booth was 
used, can be seen in graph 4.1. 
Graph 4.2 shows the started and completed medita­
tions distribute over a week. It is seen that the booth 
was mostly used on Fridays and Mondays. This 
might indicate that the employees feel like they have 
more time or more need for doing meditation on 
these two days.
Furthermore, a graph was formed to show the use 
over a period of a day. As seen in graph 4.3 the 
booth was mostly use in the hours from 11.00-12.00 
and from 13-14 (lunch at DELTA starts at 11.30). 
This suggests that around lunch time people were 
more likely to put time aside to try the booth. 
Velkommen 
Sæt dig godt til rette,  
tag høretelefonerne på  
og tryk på næste	  
Næste	  
Læs	  mere	  
12
min 
Næste	  
Figure 4.6, front page of touch screen interface prototype 
in Danish.
Graph 4.1, use during the 3 weeks testing period.
Number
Day
Graph 4.2, use distributed over a week.
Number
Day
==PAGE:66==
66
said that they thought that they were not allowed 
to try it more times or that it would ruin the data 
collection. These employees were the once from the 
surrounding departments who all in advance had 
had some knowledge about the project. However 
one of the employees said that she had afterwards 
downloaded an App with guided meditation so that 
she could listen to it in between tasks to clear her 
mind. 
Two of the interviewed who were from other de­
partments had tried it more times (one unsure but 
3-4 times, the other 2 times). This indicates that it 
was clear to the participant that it was a prototype 
but that the rules for testing it was unclear. This 
data will be discussed further in section 7.1 on 
further work. 
4.3.3 Main findings
This section will explain the main findings from the 
feedback page and the follow-up interviews (Ap­
pendix 26)
14 of the 15 test participants who filled in the feed­
back page gave positive feedback on the setup and 
one the idea behind the meditation booth and the 
relaxing break. E.g. one wrote: “Nice initiative! I am 
a fan!” and another wrote “A nice break. A fantastic 
Hvad var godt? 
Hvad var ikke så godt? 
Forslag til forbedringer
Hvad synes du?
Hvis jeg må kontakte dig senere med et kort interview, 
skriv venligst dit navn og kontakt oplysninger
Navn
Telefonnr el. email
Tak for din hjælp! 
M.v.h Marie-Louise (IdemoLab)	
Kontakt: AMLSR90@gmail.com
Prototypen er sat op i forbindelse med mit kandidat speciale. Jeg håber, 
at du vil være med til at teste den og komme med forslag til forbedring. 
12
 
min 
Figure 4.7, the Danish feedback page template for the 
employees to fill in feedback. 
Picture 4.4, feedback buttons placed next to the feedback 
page template .
Graph 4.3, use distributed over a day.
Number
Hour
Besides this data, feedback was collected through a 
feedback question (Do you feel more relaxed than 
before doing the meditation?) answered by pushing 
a button (see picture 4.4). 16 of the test participants 
voted (=52% of all tests). 100% of the participants 
who voted felt more relaxed than before the med­
itation (7 voted more and 9 voted much more 
relaxed). 
This feedback was supported by a feedback page 
(see figure 4.7 and appendix 23 for full version), 
which the test participants could choose to answer 
or not (see answers in appendix 24). The feedback 
page contained three questions to be answered: 
What was good? What was not so good? Sugges­
tions for improvements. 
15 filled in the feedback page and 14 left contact 
information for follow-up interviews It was found 
that most of the employees who had tried it and 
given feedback on the feedback page were from the 
surrounding departments, which had been the ini­
tial target actors. However it was established based 
on the contact information that at least three of the 
test participants were from other departments. Fur­
ther it was found, during the interviews, that most 
had only tried it once (Appendix 25). Some
==PAGE:67==
67
idea – some take a break to go and smoke – others 
can take a meditation break.” However there were 
also some critique and suggestions for improve­
ments. 
The setup
All interviewed liked the decoration of the booth 
with the forest posters and the birds singing. One 
said “Lovely. It supports the idea of going into an­
other world. A forest environment.” Another wrote 
in the feedback page “Complete setup :D Simple. 
Easy to understand.” Five of the test participants 
commented on the chair. Two suggested a bed or 
mattress on the floor. One had practised meditation 
before and would like to sit on a cushion on the 
floor. Two suggested an arm chair or a lounge chair. 
This indicates that this is a matter of taste, but that 
an office chair is not suited for doing meditation.
The time frame
Some discussed whether 12 minutes were enough, 
too much or a sufficient time frame, both in regards 
to what was acceptable, having in mind that it was 
done within work hours but also if there was need 
for more time for relaxation. This indicates that the 
time span of the meditation session could possibly 
be one of the options that the employee should be 
able to determine e.g. 12 minutes, 20 minutes and 
30 minutes of guided meditation. 
The file with guided meditation
One wrote that he did not find the text guiding 
him very relaxing and would prefer another type 
of guided meditation such as body scan or mindful 
breathing. Others would like to be able to adjust 
the volume or the setting e.g. sounds of ocean, rain 
etc. This supports the initial idea of having different 
voices guiding the meditation, but also points to 
having more options such as types of meditation, 
length and different sound settings. Finally, one 
suggested using binaural technique to give a 3-D 
sound effect (Binaural technique uses two micro­
phones during the recording to give a 3-D stereo 
sound (Møller & Sørensen, 1996)). 
Noise and privacy
The biggest point of critique was the noise from the 
individuals walking by the booth (mentioned by 
6 of the 15 participants who filled in the feedback 
page). Further the booth not being enclosed, mean­
ing that other employees were, if eager to, able to 
observe the test participant during the meditation, 
did worry some of the test participants. One wrote: 
“The placement of the booth is not good – I feel on 
display and the noises in the background are disturb­
ing.” This critique points out the importance of ei­
ther having sound cancelling headphones or sound 
insulated walls in an enclosed booth. 
The placement of the booth
In the feedback page some mentioned the place­
ment as a negative thing. During the follow-up in­
terviews this matter was investigated further. Most 
said it was due to the noise and feeling of being on 
display in an open booth, meaning it was about the 
privacy and the noise from the surroundings. Dur­
ing the interview one said “I think it is good that it is 
placed where people walk by, see it and remember it.” 
However one said that she would not feel comfort­
able that people could see her going into the booth 
even if it was enclosed. Yet it should be noticed that 
she had tried the booth twice. Another said that he 
would not care if someone saw him in the booth 
but that others would probably feel differently about 
it. These findings pinpoint that though there is an 
open-minded work culture some personal barriers 
can come in the way of using the meditation booth. 
It is seen that it might be hard to satisfy all but that 
privacy is something that should be considered.  
The information poster
During the interviews it was found that most of the 
test participants had not seen the poster or had first 
seen it after trying the meditation booth. None of 
the interviewed remembered what it said and most 
had skimmed it or only looked at the headings. One 
said “I spotted it and recognized that it was an adver­
tisement for the meditation booth. But I did not really 
read it.” This suggests that the booth in it self was 
what motivated the individuals to test it and that 
the poster was not what was the motivational factor. 
However it also suggests that the link between the 
poster and the booth was clear. 
During the interviews one expressed that he would 
like some facts about the effects of doing medi­
tation. If he had read the poster he would proba­
bly had had these needs covered. It is hard to say 
whether it was the placement, the form of commu­
nication, the layout of the poster or a combination 
that is the reason for this feedback. Two suggested 
using DELTA’s intranet (DELTA’s internal data net­
work) as a platform for advertising. It is clear that 
the communication form is something that should 
be further developed.
==PAGE:68==
68
Layout
The first test showed that the buttons placement and 
wording was easy to follow, since all test partici­
pants pushed the right buttons within an acceptable 
time frame. However one of the test participants, a 
graphic designer, said that it should be considered 
which of the elements could be deleted, to make it 
more simple and make it look more professional. 
Furthermore, there were some comments on the 
guide options. One said that for him it did not make 
sense to choose who to listen to from three differ­
ent pictures of people that he did not know. This 
suggests that choosing a voice/guide from three 
pictures might be confusing and the names might 
seem irrelevant to participants with no prior knowl­
edge about meditation.
The graphs
There were some mixed feedback on the graph 
showing the HR changes during the meditation. 
One said ”I think it is nice that I can see the effects. 
We love to measure; BMI, kilometres, steps, fat per­
centage etc.” Another said that he could maybe learn 
from it if he could see that around 6 minutes he was 
unfocused, then he could maybe do it better next 
time. He suggested using some pattern recognition 
which could then explain the results and changes. A 
third said that he did not like it to become a compe­
tition since “that is not what meditation is about.” 
Others said that it was hard to interpret the graph 
and with some more explanation of the results it 
would be easier to understand. 
This suggests that the graph as a part of the feed­
back would motivate some but others might not like 
it. The same applied to the graph on history of times 
meditated, where most understood the initial idea 
but would like some supporting text.
Recommending it to colleagues
The part about recommending the meditation to 
colleagues (figure 4.10) got different reactions. Con­
cerning the layout some thought that they would 
send a default message just by pushing next, and 
therefore would not use it because a default message 
would just be like sending an annoying spam mail 
to a colleague. Some said it could be used as a joke 
to send a message to a stressed out colleague who 
“needed” the break. Others said that they would 
rather tell it to a colleague in person. 
Most of the test participant saw differently on the 
part about recommending it to a colleague, after 
reading the suggested text and became more open 
to the idea. Finally one said that she would use it 
Vælg hvem du ønsker at 
blive guidet af: 
Jon Kabat-Zinn 
English 
	  
Tove Kofoed 
Dansk 
	  
Kim Bergensol 
Dansk 
	  
Forrige	  
Figure 4.8, touch screen interface prototype in Danish, 
page with overview of optional guides.
Næste	  
Her kan du se udviklingen 
af din hjerterytme under 
meditationen 
60
100
90
80
70
50
Minutter
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Hjerterytme
(bpm) 
Forrige	  
Læs	  mere	  
Figure 4.9, touch screen interface prototype in Danish, 
graph over HR changes during the meditation.
Næste	  
Anbefal til en kollega: 
Forrige	  
Anne	  Kris/ansen	  
Be2na	  Clausen	  
Chris/an	  Jensen	  
Karl	  Svenssen	  
Frederikke	  Nielsen	  
Mar/n	  Rasmussen	  
Me?e	  Hansen	  
O?o	  Nielsen	  
	  
Navn	  
Spring	  over	  
Figure 4.10, touch screen interface prototype in Danish, 
first page of recommend to colleagues.
The touch screen interface
As a part of the follow-up interviews the touch 
screen interface was tested (Appendix 27). Here the 
main findings are discussed. 
==PAGE:69==
69
As described in section 3.3 the result of the design 
stage was the concept Mindful Trigger, which con­
sists of a couple of different parts; speaker play­
ing birds singing combined with an motivational 
information poster placed in the toilet, a meditation 
booth with guided meditation decorated with wall­
paper illustrating forest combined with birds sing­
ing, a touch screen and an App as well as the pos­
sibility to recommend the mindfulness meditation 
to a colleague. The different parts were combined 
to ensure motivation, a well-timed and appropri­
ate trigger combined with high ability ensured by 
a booth facilitating guided meditation. The booth 
should be located in the path from the toilet back to 
the employee’s desk. To ensure high motivation for 
using the meditation booth in future, the Mindful 
Trigger included a feedback system entailing infor­
mation on HR reduction during the meditation as 
well as an overview of times meditated. 
To see if the Mindful Trigger successfully achieved 
to motivate, trigger and facilitate the meditation 
prototyping and testing was done. 
The feedback pointed out the places where the 
Mindful Trigger could be improved and some sug­
gestions were given on how.
The final product concept, which was developed 
based on the feedback will be presented in chap­
ter 5 along with explanations on the decisions and 
thoughts behind the improvements. 
4.4 Sub conclusion
but would personalize the text and write it to tell 
about her personal experience. This indicates that 
the recommendation should probably not be divid­
ed into two pages and that a suggested text could be 
used as inspiration to set the tone but would proba­
bly be edited and personalized. 
4.3.4 Summing up
As described, feedback was collected based on the 
prototype testing. This feedback is crucial for the 
further development starting on a second iteration 
of the design - refine stages. 
However, during the interviews it was found that 
some of the employees had never seen the poster 
because they did not use the toilets where they were 
placed. Others had not understood the purpose 
of setup until they had seen others using it. As 
described in the section on data collection some 
commented during the follow-up interviews that 
they did not know that they were allowed to vote 
again after second time use and some did not know 
that they were allowed to test the booth more than 
once. This will be discussed in limitations (section 
6.2) and further work (section 7.1). 
==PAGE:70==
70
==PAGE:71==
71
Final product concept
Chapter 5
==PAGE:72==
72
In this section the final product concept will be pre­
sented. The final product concept is a further devel­
opment of the Mindful Trigger described in section 
4.2.4 based on the findings in the refine stage which 
is described in section 4.3.3. The different parts will 
be described, illustrated and explained in the office 
environment context. In addition there will be a 
section on thoughts on when and how to imple­
ment the product concept in an office environment. 
The final product concept has been named ReMind 
a combination of the two words; relaxation and 
mindfulness. 
All the parts have been developed and will be pre­
sented in English but if implemented in a Danish 
company with Danish speaking employees it should 
be translated into Danish. 
5.1 Motivating the actor
The motivation of the actors is done through the 
information poster, the recommendations from col­
leagues and additionally through the intranet (the 
company’s internal online network). 
The intranet was something that was mentioned 
by a couple of the interviewed and is a place where 
company news and information is posted. By using 
this media as a way to get the employees’ attention 
the value of using the meditation booth is empha­
sized. Also it shows that it is a company decision to 
implement the booth and prioritise mindfulness
12
min 
12 minuters guidet meditation
meditation and hereby give attention to employees’ 
well-being. Figure 5.1 is a screen shot of DELTA’s 
intranet front page with a suggestion to how the 
advertisement for ReMind could be done. Infor­
mation about the reasons for implementing the 
booth in the company as well as the effects and the 
instructions on how to use it should be found when 
following the link on the front page.
As described in section 4.3.3, the interviewed test 
participants had not read the poster hanging on 
the bathroom, they had noticed it and some had 
skimmed it or read the headings. To make it easi­
er to get an overview of the effects of mindfulness 
meditation the poster text has been converted into 
bullet points as shown in figure 5.2. This should 
ensure that though the individuals might only skim 
through the first couple of points they would get 
an idea of the positive effects of mindfulness and it 
should catch their interest to know more and read 
on.
Furthermore, the design was changed to make it 
look more simple and professional and to commu­
nicate that ReMind is about bringing relaxation into 
a busy everyday life at the office.
Figure 5.1, screen shot of DELTA’s Danish intranet front page 
with advertisement on the 12 minutes guided meditation.  
==PAGE:73==
73
12
min 
Guided meditation
- a powerful break!
Immediate Effects
•   Decreased heart rate
•   Decreased production of stress hormones
•   Relaxation, reduced tension and cleared mind
Long term benefits
When doing meditation on a regular basis:
•   Improved memory
•   Improved stress management skills
•   Increased productivity and ability to concentrate
•   Decreased risk of cardiovascular diseases
 
Focus during the meditation
•   Being present here and now 
•   Awareness and kindness towards yourself
•   No religious aspect
How you do it
Go to the meditaiton booth and
Enjoy!
12
min 
Here & 
now
Long
term
Figure 5.2, the motivational information poster
ReMind
==PAGE:74==
74
Figure 5.4, Illustration of two booths. One is available and 
the other is occupied. The dashed line indicates the area 
with birds singing
The booths are decorated with wallpaper illustrating 
forest. As described in section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, 
visuals of nature have shown to reduce stress and 
this already sets the ambience and underline the 
idea behind the booth. 
In the area around the booths speakers are placed 
to focus the sound to this specific area (figure 5.4). 
These are playing birds singing to support the forest 
theme. The speakers are only playing when one or 
more booths are available. This will ensure that the 
birds singing it is not something that the employees 
get too familiar with and therefore do not notice but 
should come as a pleasant surprise when walking 
towards the booths when at least one is available.
Making the door to the booth stand open 25 centi­
metres just enough for people to look inside it will 
trigger curiosity and make the employees wanting 
to inspect the room.
Furthermore, to ensure that the employees are not 
afraid of interrupting others doing meditation, a 
lamp above the door indicates whether the booth 
is available or not (indicated by green signifying 
available and red occupied).
5.3 Facilitating the action
To make a comfortably sized room taking into 
account that it should be able to fit into different 
office environments different enclosed rooms such 
as toilets, phone booths etc. was studied (Appendix 
28). It was concluded that around 100*135 centime­
tres are a feasible size.
Figure 5.5 illustrates a man looking into the booth 
just about to enter. When looking into the booth he 
can see a green room with the rear wall with wall­
paper illustrating a forest (figure 5.6). To make the 
room not seem claustrophobically small the walls 
are light green with an even lighter green ceiling 
that furthermore is lit up by lamps. 
As described in section 4.3.3 some employees re­
quested more privacy and would like to be able to 
lock the door. To ensure privacy the booth can be 
mechanically locked from the inside. This is a famil­
iar action as it is done in toilets and will help calm 
the employees when doing the meditation.
In the room there is a chair with built in heart rate 
sensors similar to the once used in Darma
Stress cushions (section 2.2.2 - Awareness through 
stress detectors) (Web: Darma.co, 2016). The chair is 
a chair which supports the lower part of the back to 
Offices
WC
WC
Booth
Booth
Figure 5.3, Illustration of two booths placed in the path 
from toilet to desk. The dashed line illustrated the area 
with birds singing.
5.2 Triggering the actor
As described in section 3.1 a well-timed trigger is 
crucial to start the behaviour. 
The booth is placed, as described in section 4.2.2 in 
the path from the toilet to the office to ensure high 
ability (figure 5.3). Since the employees passing by 
the booth are already off their desks, having a break 
and just been to the toilet the ability to perform the 
behaviour of doing 12 minutes guided meditation is 
high.
==PAGE:75==
75
ensure a straight back during the meditation. 
Next to the chair is a touch screen, a pair of noise 
cancelling headphones hanging just underneath 
and a blanket on the floor. 
The noise cancelling headphones ensure that noise 
from people walking by will not distract the medi­
tator and makes it possible to manufacture the walls 
of the booth relatively thin. Further the guided 
meditation should be designed to give the best 
possible sound and an effect of moving around the 
room. This can be done by using binaural tech­
nique. This technique was suggested in the feedback 
page by one of the test participants (section 4.3.3).
During the meditation the light is dimmed to 
ensure that it does not irritate the eyes. When the 
meditation is over the light gradually turns back on 
to accustom the eyes to the light.
This simple setup supports the purpose of the ses­
sion; relaxation and being mindful.
Figure 5.5, Illustration of an employ­
ee entering the available booth
Figure 5.6, Illustration of the inside of the booth.
==PAGE:76==
76
To ensure high ability the touch screen interface 
guides the actor (Appendix 29). As illustrated in 
figure 5.7 the front page includes three symbols 
explaining the sequence of actions that the actor has 
to go through to start the meditation. In the bottom 
of the page are two buttons, one leading to more in­
formation about meditation and the other to infor­
mation about meditation posture. This information 
is something that the actor will possibly read at first 
time usage to understand the purpose and how to 
perform the meditation. However it is not crucial to 
read in order to perform the meditation.  
The second page, illustrated in figure 5.8, is a page 
for registration. Here the employee can write initials 
or name to log in. The registration is needed to 
track the meditation history, which is presented as a 
part of the feedback. 
The next step is to choose how to be guided through 
the meditation (figure 5.9). Here one of the options 
is to have the same settings as last session, this is 
also dependant on the registration. To have other 
options the actor has to push “other options” and is 
then presented for Danish or English followed by 
different voices and finally different sound settings. 
About 
meditation 
12
min 
Further 
instructions 
About meditation 
Immediate	  eﬀects	  
It	  has	  through	  research	  been	  found	  that	  medita3on	  is	  eﬀec3ve	  for	  relaxa3on	  and	  
reducing	  stress	  level.	  Due	  to	  a	  decrease	  in	  the	  produc3on	  of	  stress	  hormones,	  increase	  
ac3vity	  in	  the	  parts	  of	  the	  brain	  linked	  to	  relaxa3on	  etc.	  	  
	  
Long-­‐term	  eﬀects	  
Besides	  these	  immediate	  beneﬁts,	  prac3cing	  medita3on	  on	  a	  regular	  basis	  can	  improve	  
memory,	  produc3vity	  and	  ability	  to	  concentrate.	  Research	  has	  shown	  that	  medita3on	  
can	  decrease	  high	  blood	  pressure	  and	  decrease	  the	  risk	  of	  lifestyle	  diseases	  such	  as	  
cardiovascular	  diseases	  	  
	  
The	  focus	  	  
The	  guided	  medita3on	  focuses	  on	  awareness,	  apprecia3on	  and	  acceptance.	  	  
Though	  medita3on	  is	  originally	  from	  Hinduism	  and	  Buddhism,	  the	  guided	  medita3on	  
has	  no	  religious	  aspect.	  	  	  
	  
Make	  yourself	  comfortable	  put	  on	  the	  headphones	  and	  choose	  how	  you	  would	  like	  to	  
be	  guided	  through	  a	  session	  with	  12	  minutes	  relaxing	  medita3on.	  	  
	  
Enjoy!	  
Previous 
Previous 
Further instructions 
Sit	  straight	  upright	  and	  place	  your	  hands	  in	  your	  lap.	  	  
This	  posture	  will	  make	  you	  stay	  alert	  but	  relaxed	  and	  help	  
you	  to	  not	  fall	  a	  sleep	  during	  the	  medita;on.	  
	  
You	  can	  put	  on	  the	  blanket	  or	  take	  of	  your	  shoes	  if	  you	  like	  
to.	  Try	  to	  make	  yourself	  as	  comfortable	  as	  possible.	  	  
	  
Close	  your	  eyes	  and	  follow	  the	  voice	  guiding	  you.	  The	  
guided	  medita;on	  focuses	  on	  awareness,	  apprecia;on	  
and	  acceptance.	  Do	  not	  judge	  your	  thoughts.	  Let	  them	  
come	  and	  go.	  Do	  not	  hold	  on	  to	  them	  but	  try	  to	  focus	  on	  
the	  guiding	  voice	  and	  the	  sounds	  you	  hear	  during	  the	  
medita;on.	  	  
	  
Figure 5.7, Front page, leading to more information on 
meditation and on how to do meditation.
Figure 5.8, Registration page.
Next 
Enter your name or initials 
Previous 
Previous 
Same as  
last session  
Different 
options 
Danish	  
English	  
Female 
(Tove Kofoed) 
  
Male  
(Kim Bergensol)  
No voice 
 (just music) 
12
min 
Figure 5.9, options flow, leading to 12 minutes of guided 
meditation.
==PAGE:77==
77
The heart rate changes 
during the meditation 
60
100
90
80
70
50
Minutter
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Hjerterytme
(bpm) 
Read more 
Next 
Previous 
The graph indicates that: 
you started out with some frustration, but after around one 
minute you became more relaxed and the stability and heart rate 
variability indicates you came in an appreciative state.	  
Thank yourself! 
Go to next to see your results.	  
Next 
Your meditation history  
3
2
1
Dage
M Ti O To F
L
S
M Ti O
Antal 
meditationer 
To F
L
S
M Ti O To F
L
S
M Ti O To F
L
S
M Ti
4
Next 
Previous 
It is recommended to do 1-2 meditation sessions a day.  
Keep up the good habit!	  
When these options have been chosen the actor is 
as described, guided through 12 minutes of mind­
fulness meditation. During this the light on the 
screen is decreased as with the light in the room. 
After the meditation the purpose is to give the 
actor some useful feedback that can help to further 
increase the motivation for future use. A message 
tells the actor to thank him/herself, as a way to em­
phasize the focus of the mindfulness meditation on 
being mindful, non-judgemental and kind towards 
oneself (figure 5.10). 
When continuing to the next page the actor can see 
a graph over the HR changes during the medita­
tion session. To support this graph a program with 
pattern recognition should help explain the results. 
An example of how this explanation could be pre­
sented can be seen in figure 5.11. Furthermore, it is 
possible for the actor to read more about HR (figure 
5.12). 
As a further feedback the actor can see the times 
meditated over the past month (figure 5.13). This is 
supported with a small text telling about the recom­
mendations and giving an encouraging message.
Figure 5.14 shows the final step where the actor can 
choose to recommend the meditation session to a 
colleague. This page have been changed after the 
testing of the prototype to indicate more clearly that 
the text can be personalised and be sent either by 
email or as a text message.
The last page is a page saying thank you to the 
employee and recommending the employee to do 
mindfulness meditation one to two times a day 
(figure 5.15).
Figure 5.10, First screen after the meditation session is 
over.
Figure 5.11, Overview of HR results during the meditation 
session.
Figure 5.12, Information about HR and what it says about 
health, as well as instructions on how to read the graph.
Figure 5.13, Overview of times meditated during the past 
month.
Previous 
About heart rate 
Your	  heart	  rate	  says	  something	  about	  your	  ac2vity	  level,	  stress	  level	  and	  overall	  
health.	  Research	  shows	  that	  your	  heart	  rate	  decreases	  during	  medita2on	  and	  your	  
heart	  rate	  variability	  increases	  and	  becomes	  more	  frequent.	  	  
	  
Experiencing	  posi2ve	  emo2ons	  such	  as	  apprecia2on,	  results	  in	  a	  more	  harmonious	  
heart	  rate,	  whereas	  nega2ve	  feelings	  such	  as	  anger	  results	  in	  a	  chao2c	  inconsistent	  
heart	  rate,	  which	  is	  illustrated	  in	  the	  graph.	  
	  
High	  heart	  rate	  variability	  is	  a	  sign	  of	  general	  health	  and	  decreases	  the	  risk	  of	  
diseases	  such	  as	  cardiovascular	  diseases,	  anxiety,	  chronic	  stress	  asthma	  and	  more.	  
	  
The	  graph	  shows	  a	  change	  in	  heart	  rate.	  	  
The	  person	  is	  frustrated	  and	  changes	  to	  	  
relaxed	  and	  apprecia2ve.	  	  
==PAGE:78==
78
Send a personal recommendation to a colleague  
Enter name or initials 
Skip 
SMS  
Previous 
Suggestion: 
Hi Betina, 
Today I had a fantastic experience with the 
12 minutes guided meditation. I really 
recommend you to try J 
Best,  
Niels 
Email 
Figure 5.14, Possibility to recommend the mindfulness 
meditation to a colleague through a personal text.
Thank you! We recommend 
1-2 sessions a day. 
Have a nice day.	  
Figure 5.15, Last page encouraging the actor to come back 
for more meditation.
Furthermore, as described in section 4.2.4 the 
Mindful Trigger also included an App to access 
results and the option to give a notification to re­
mind about doing mindfulness meditation once a 
day. This App was not tested during the refine stage. 
However during the interviews it was found that 
one had after using the booth downloaded an App 
with mindfulness meditation and others said that 
they would maybe like to meditate at home. This in­
dicates that the App could contain some audio files 
with guided meditation to make it possible for the 
employees to do meditation even when not at work 
in order to keep a good habit of doing meditation 
every day. 
Implementing ReMind
As described in section 2.3.1 there are many bene­
fits associated with doing mindfulness meditation, 
e.g. decreased stress level, improved stress man­
agement skills, improved ability to concentrate and 
lower risk of various diseases such as cardiovascular
diseases. This means that it is beneficial for all 
employees. It is not necessary for the company to 
identify stress in the company before investing in 
ReMind since meditation can also help prevent 
stress, increase productivity and employee job satis­
faction.
The booth in itself can be placed or implemented in 
different ways. E.g. it can easily be implemented in 
existing office buildings by placing a booth or when 
building new buildings or changing office layouts 
the booth could be implemented as a room with the 
right placement in the path from the toilet to the 
offices as shown in figure 5.1. 
The number of booths needed per company is hard 
to say but if the booths were sold as modulus it 
would be possible to add and extra booths if it was 
found necessary after an implementation period.
This means that the booth can be incorporated in 
different ways into the office layout, as long as the 
original thoughts behind motivating, triggering 
and facilitating the meditation are remembered and 
taken into account.
5.4 Summing up
As described the findings in the refine stage section 
4.2.3 have been implemented in the final concept, 
ReMind. ReMind ensures a balance between the 
motivation, the trigger and the ability to do mind­
fulness meditation. The motivation is created or 
increased through a motivational information 
poster with bullet points giving an overview of 
the positive effects of doing meditation combined 
with advertisement for the booth on the company’s 
intranet and finally it is supported by recommen­
dations from colleagues. The triggering is done by 
placing the booth in the path from the toilet to the 
office and making it visible with visuals of nature 
underlined with speaker playing birds singing. To 
trigger curiosity the door is open when the booth 
is available and a lamp over the door shows that 
it is okay to enter the booth. Facilitation further 
increases the ability to do the 12 minutes of mind­
fulness meditation by having a simple touch screen 
interface and a guide guiding the employee through 
the meditation. The feedback system including 
results, encouraging messages, which along with 
the rewarding feeling of relaxation contributes to an 
increased motivation for next time use. 
Finally the App helps employees do mindfulness 
meditation and keep the good habit by facilitating 
meditation when not at the office.
==PAGE:79==
79
Discussion
Chapter 6
!?
==PAGE:80==
80
concepts and compose a process that supports the 
purpose of behavioral designs. How the design pro­
cess has been composed in this thesis project can be 
used as inspiration for designers designing similar 
products.
Implications for companies
As described in section 2.3.1, 8-weeks mindfulness 
courses have been taught in various companies in 
Denmark (TRYG, IF insurance, Nordea etc.). Re­
Mind can be seen as an alternative to these cours­
es. As described in section 4.1.6 observations and 
interviews conducted at TRYG showed that none 
of the employees, from the two departments, who 
had participated in the 8-weeks course, used the 
facilities in the office building or did meditation. 
As described in section 2.1 stressed individuals 
have difficulties implementing new habits, there­
fore the ReMind is a good solution for motivating, 
triggering and facilitating mindfulness meditation 
in an everyday life at the office. Further, it can 
advantageously be used by both the stressed and 
not stressed employees. Implementing mindfulness 
meditation in office environments can increase 
productivity and employees’ job satisfaction and 
decrease stress level and improve stress manage­
ment skills (Davanger et al., 2008). However, as 
with many other things, practice is essential, which 
is also what the companies investing in these types 
of courses should be aware of and take into account.
6.2 Limitations
This section will discuss three main topics of limi­
tations. The discussion should be seen as giving rise 
to further work, which will be discussed in section 
7.1.
Research on meditation
As the aim was to develop a product to reduce 
stress in an office environment, the first step was to 
determine what affects the stress level. What in­
creases and what decreases the stress level (section 
2.2). It was found that, since chronic stress often is a 
matter of how one interprets the stressor and worry 
about the future and the past, 12 minutes of mind­
fulness meditation a day could be a way to target 
the vicious circle of stress (section 2.1). Though this 
decision to use mindfulness meditation as the main 
stress reliever and incorporate it into the employees’ 
everyday life, was based on a number of different
In this section the focus will be on discussing the 
implications and limitations of the master’s thesis. 
With regards to the implication the section will 
describe how the product concept and the findings 
during the design process should be considered by 
others. Looking at limitations the main focuses will 
be on the prototyping and the testing of the product 
concept as well as further research on trade-offs 
between time used and effects of doing meditation. 
6.1 Implications
Implications for stress reliever research
In section 2.2.1 - Stress relievers, an extensive review 
of different stress relievers was done. This compar­
ison of various ways to reduce the stress level gives 
an overview of a large number of stress relievers. 
Although reviews of different stress relievers have 
been done before, no such comparison have to the 
author’s knowledge been presented before. It was 
acknowledged that there is missing data and that 
different measurements have been used to deter­
mine the short and long-term effects of the different 
stress relievers. This should be taken into account 
when further comparing the relievers. The overview 
can be used to do further more in-depth research 
on the different relievers comparing their short and 
long-term effects on stress and stress management.
Implications for designers
As described in section 3.2 the design process was 
formed and executed partially based on the pro­
cess described in the book Designing for behavior 
Change by Wendel and on the author’s prior expe­
rience with design methods such as brainstorming, 
morphology chart and weighted matrix. Wendel 
(2013) describes a design process and gives sugges­
tions for methods to use during this process. E.g. 
when forming a behavioural plan he suggests that 
this plan can be expressed with different tools such 
as customer experience maps (Wendel, 2013). In 
the process of developing ReMind an experience 
flow tool was used (section 4.1.6). This tool is used 
by Philips in the process of developing experience 
design products (Swaminathan, 2014). 
Behavioural design is a relatively new concept with 
a limited number of design tools with the specific 
purpose to support the design of a product that 
aims to implement, change or influence a behav­
iour. Therefore designers have to draw on know-
ledge from previous experience with other design
==PAGE:81==
81
studies showing that mindfulness meditation has 
positive effects on both stress management as well 
as mental and physical health, some research is still 
missing. Comparing different types of meditation, 
and further determining the trade-offs between us­
ing 12 minutes on meditating compared to e.g. 20, 
30 or 50 minutes of mediation should be done. This 
means that, even though Daverne in his book 12 
minutes to success (Daverne and Kjær, 2011) argues 
that 12 minutes of mindfulness every day is enough 
in order to make one less stressed, more happy and 
smarter, 20 minutes of meditation might give more 
than double the effect and might be worth spending 
the 8 minutes extra time. This matter is something 
that should be investigated further (section 7.1).
Prototype testing
During the design process the aim was to develop 
a product concept, which could make people do 
12 minutes of meditation at least once a day. The 
behaviours of the employees in two office envi­
ronments were studied and these two companies 
could serve as representatives for other open office 
environments. However the prototype was tested in 
another office environment where most of the em­
ployees were aware of the meaning behind the setup 
(being a prototype for a thesis project). This can be 
seen as a bias, which might have affected the testing. 
E.g. the employees might have been more positive 
towards the booth and have had more positive com­
ments about the setup and the idea behind. 
Since there were also some negative points of 
critique it can be assumed that the employees were 
trying to truly express their opinions (both positive 
and negative). However doing more testing in other 
companies would possibly give other insights. 
During the disassembly of the booth one employee 
walking by said “No why are you taking it down? 
People are just starting to get used to it. I have seen 
people coming in and out of it.” This indicating that 
a longer testing period possibly would have made 
more employees tried it, also the more cautious 
ones.
Prototype level of refinement
The level to which the prototype was made and 
tested have given some limitations on research of 
effects of implementing the booth in an office en­
vironment as well as the data collection on what to 
improve. 
Two test participants expressed during the fol­
low-up prototype interviews that they had only
tried the booth once because they though that they 
were not allowed to try it more times. This indicates 
that the low-fidelity prototype might have scared 
potential users away or made the purpose and the 
“rules” of the meditation booth unclear. 
Making a low-fidelity prototype is an early stage 
prototype and it is clear that such a prototype, in 
refinement, is fare from the end product to market. 
However the prototype represented the Mindful 
Trigger concept with a motivator, a trigger and 
a part of the facilitator. It can be assumed that a 
high-fidelity prototype would have prevented some 
of the negative feedback, e.g. missing privacy and 
the request for moving the booth somewhere with 
less noise. However making a low-fidelity proto­
type was necessary to get some initial feedback for 
improvements of a first iteration product concept 
and worked as a satisfactory starting point for doing 
a second iteration of prototyping and testing, which 
will be discussed in section 7.1. 
6.3 Sub conclusion
This chapter has outlined some implications for 
future research and for designers about how to start 
a behavioural product design process. Further the 
limitations of the master’s thesis have been dis­
cussed. 
Chapter 7 will conclude on the thesis as well as dis­
cuss further work.
==PAGE:82==
82
==PAGE:83==
83
Conclusion
Chapter 7
==PAGE:84==
84
This section will conclude on the work done 
throughout the master’s thesis and look into what 
could be done as further work.
The aim of the thesis was to develop a product con­
cept that can help reduce stress in an office environ­
ment by using the behavioural design mindset. 
The report has described the four different stages of 
this development from the understand stage to the 
refine stage. 
The focus in the understand stage was to investigate 
stress (section 2.1), the effects of stress and the fac­
tors that can increase and decrease the stress level 
(section 2.2) as well as the basic theories behind 
behavioural design (section 3.1) which was used in 
the design process (section 3.2). Here it was found 
that worrying is a crucial contributor to the vicious 
circle of stress (section 2.1) and it was determined 
that to reduce the stress level, worrying should be 
targeted by introducing mindfulness meditation in 
the office environment to help the employees be­
come more present in the moment and reduce their 
stress level here and now and improve their stress 
management skills. 
In the discover stage the aim was to define the 
product vision, target outcome, actor and action. 
This was done by investigating the routines of the 
employees at two offices and asking supporting 
questions through interviews. It was found that in 
general all employees visit the toilet at least once a 
day and that it should be in this routine that a 12 
minutes session of guided meditation should be 
incorporated. 
The next step was to design the product concept. 
This was done by using an experience flow to 
determine where in the going to the toilet rou­
tine the guided meditation could be incorporated. 
Subsequently brainstorming was done to expand 
the solution space. The ideas were organized in a 
morphology chart, which was then used to form 
three concepts. These concepts were rated using a 
weighted matrix and it was found that all three had 
some good parts and some that could be improved. 
Based on these findings one concept was formed, 
the Mindful Trigger.
In the refine stage the aim was to make a prototype 
that would represent the Mindful Trigger concept. 
This was done using available components testing 
the prototype in an office environment where it was
easy to make adjustments and collect feedback 
through a feedback page and follow-up interviews. 
It was found that some adjustments could be made 
and that some of the parts that had been excluded 
in the prototype were crucial for the function of 
the concept. E.g. it was found that having the booth 
enclosed and sound insulated was important for the 
relaxation in the booth. 
Based on the findings a final product concept was 
formed (chapter 5). The concept ReMind consisting 
of different parts enabled the actor to do mindful­
ness meditation in the office environment as well 
as keeping the good habit when not at the office. 
ReMind includes motivating the actor by inform­
ing about benefits through a motivational poster, 
advertisement on the intranet as well as recommen­
dations send as emails or texts from colleagues. The 
triggering is done by placing the booth in the path 
from the toilet to the office desk as well as making it 
visible accomplished by forest wallpaper supported 
by a stimulation of the ears done by speakers play­
ing birds singing when the booth is available. To 
trigger curiosity the doors to the booths available 
are open. 
The facilitation is done through a comfortable light 
green room, a touch screen informing and guiding 
the actor and finally sound cancelling headphones 
playing the audio file with guided mindfulness 
meditation. 
To increase motivation for future meditation the 
touch screen interface includes results showing HR 
changes and history of times meditated. 
Finally in order to support the employees in prac­
ticing meditation when not at work an App can be 
downloaded to phone or tablet containing audio 
files as well as the results and information on mind­
fulness meditation.
The implication of the thesis was discussed in 
section 6.1. The topics discussed were implications 
for future study of stress relievers for designers and 
finally for companies. 
In regards to the research on stress relievers, data is 
missing in order to give an exact comparison, which 
should be taken into account for further research. 
Behavioural design is not yet a fully developed 
mindset. This means that designers have to use 
methods from other design mindsets such as ex­
perience design in order to compose a meaningful 
design process. 
Companies should take into account that an em­
ployee work day at the office is busy and it is
==PAGE:85==
85
7.1 Further work
This section will look into what further work should 
be done in order to reach a more finalized product. 
The topics for further work are based on the limita­
tions discussed in section 6.2. 
Prototype level of refinement and testing
As described in section 4.3 the prototype developed 
was only a low-fidelity prototype. As this level of re­
finement is an early stage prototype more iterations 
of testing and refining the product concept would 
be needed for finalizing the meditation booth and 
the accompanying elements of the concept. It would 
be necessary to make a more detailed high-fidelity 
prototype to gain more insight on the behaviours 
around and in the booth. This could possibly be 
supported with more observations of the usage. 
Likewise more user testing would be needed to es­
tablish an ideal number of options for personalizing 
the meditation session. E.g. number of voices, num­
ber of time frames, types of meditation etc. Fur­
thermore, doing more tests on the placement of the 
information poster would determine where most 
people would see it and where it would have the 
best motivational effect. It could also be considered 
doing different motivational posters with sentences 
describing the effects of meditation, placed around 
the office to remind the employees about the bene­
fits of doing the meditation on a daily basis. 
Research on meditation
As described in section 6.2 some research were 
missing on the optimal length and type of medi­
tation when investigating meditation in an every­
day office environment. Meaning that it should be 
considered that the meditation will be done within 
work hours but that the length could be seen as 
a trade-off between time “wasted” on meditating 
versus time “gained” during meditation due to 
increased productivity and decreased stress level. 
This could be an interesting topic to look further 
into. As described in section 2.2.1 there are different 
ways of measuring stress and this should of cause 
be taken into account when testing the booth. It 
might be beneficial to use more measurements such 
as perceived stress, biomarkers, HR and HRV. The 
two last mentioned are already measured as part of 
the meditation booth feedback system for further 
motivation of the employees to do more meditation. 
important to ensure high ability, motivation and a 
well-timed trigger in order to make the employees 
practise mindfulness meditation once a day.
As a product concept has been developed through 
the described stages it is fair to say that the aim to 
develop a product concept that can help reduce stress 
in an office environment through behavioural de­
sign has to some degree been reached. However as 
described in the discussion (section 6.2) there have 
been some limitations; the prototype level
of refinement and testing, location of prototype 
testing and missing research on meditation types 
and length. Therefore it is hard to say how well or 
how much the product does accomplish the aim of 
reducing stress in an office environment. Howev­
er this issue is addressed in section 7.1 on further 
work.
==PAGE:86==
86
This data could be used to get an overview of over- 
all effects of implementing the meditation booth in 
different office environments.
However other interesting variables to look into 
are the increase in productivity and employees’ job 
satisfaction as well as the decrease in sick leave.
Prototype testing location
As the low-fidelity prototype was tested in an office 
environment where the employees were aware of 
the significance of the prototype (being a master’s 
thesis project), it would possibly be valuable to test 
the next iteration prototype in a different office en­
vironment to lower the degree of bias. Furthermore, 
doing more user testing in a number of different 
offices might give some useful insight, since the 
work culture might be very different in the different 
offices, which possibly has significant influence on 
the use of the booth. This would give more in-depth 
knowledge about how to incorporate the booth in 
the daily routines.
7.2 Final words
This thesis has described the development of the 
product concept ReMind to motivate, trigger and 
facilitate mindfulness meditation. From the under- 
stand stage where the purpose was to understand 
stress, the effects and what can relieve or increase 
stress level. To the define stage were the aim was
to determine how to target the problem and how
to implement mindfulness meditation in an office 
environment. To the design stage where the design 
of the product concept was done by using different 
methods and ended up with a concept ready to test 
through a low-fidelity prototype in the refine stage. 
This process ended with in a final product concept, 
ReMind, which is designed to fit into an office 
environment to decrease the stress level through the 
facilitation of mindfulness meditation.
==PAGE:87==
87
References
Aakerlund, J., & Nielsen, C. B. (2016). The Intervention Design Tool - developing a design tool for early stage 
development in Behavioural Design projects 
Andersen, Marianne Boje. (2009) Stresshåndtering På Arbejdspladsen: En Håndbog Om Ledelse, Trivsel Og 
Psykisk Arbejdsmiljø. 1st ed. Vol. 1. Kbh.: Frydenlund. Print.
Anderson, D. R., Collins, P. A., Schmit, K. L., & Jacobvitz, R. S. (1996). Stressful life events and television 
viewing. Communication Research, 23(3), 243–260.
Andrade, C. C., & Devlin, A. S. (2015). Stress reduction in the hospital room: Applying Ulrich’s theory of 
supportive design. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 41, 125–134. doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2014.12.001
Barringer, P., & Orbuch, D. (2013). Stress, wellness and compliance: Practical strategies for reducing stress, 
improving personal health, and engaging your employees. Journal of Health Care Compliance, Jan-Feb(Febru­
ary), 23–28, 52.
Barsade, Sigal; O’Neill, O. A. (2016). Manage your Emotional Culture. Harvard Business Review, (Janu­
ary-February), 58–66.
Bell, C. E., & Robbins, S. J. (2007). Effect of Art Production on Negative Mood: A Randomized, Controlled 
Trial. Art Therapy, 24(2), 71–75. doi:10.1080/07421656.2007.10129589
Berk, L. S., Tan, S. A., Fry, W. F., Napier, B. J., Lee, J. W., Hubbard, R. W., … Eby, W. C. (1989). Neuroendo­
crine and stress hormone changes during mirthful laughter. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences, 
298(6), 390–396.
Bevan, N. (2006). International Standards for HCI. Encyclopedia of Human Computer Interaction, 55(May), 
1–15. doi:10.1006/ijhc.2001.0483
Bibbey, A., Carroll, D., Roseboom, T. J., Phillips, A. C., & de Rooij, S. R. (2013). Personality and physiological 
reactions to acute psychological stress. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 90(1), 28–36. doi:10.1016/j.
ijpsycho.2012.10.018
Blagoev, A. (2013). The effects of socializing activities on stress and loneliness, as well as on business climate 
and company productivity. IUC Management Review, (1), 1–14.
Blaug, R. (2007). Stress at Work A report prepared for The Work Foundation’s Principal Partners. Stress at 
Work, 1–10.
Boeijen, A. Van, Daalhuizen, J., Zijlstra, J., & Schoor, R. Van Der. (2010). Delft Design Guide: Design Methods. 
Delft: BIS Publishers.
Brecher, J. (1977). SEX STRESS AND HEALTH. International Journal of Health Services, 7(1), 89–101. 
Brennan, A., Chugh, J. S., & Kline, T. (2002). Traditional versus Open Office Design: A Longitudinal Field 
Study. Environment and Behavior, 34(3), 279–299. doi:10.1177/0013916502034003001
Browder, L. M. (2009). Paws and Relax. One Hospice’s Pet Therapy Journey. Home Healthcare Nurse, 27(7), 
443–448. doi:10.1097/01.NHH.0000358280.84670.68
==PAGE:88==
88
Caltabiano, M. L. (1994). Measuring the similarity among leisure activities based on a perceived stress-reduc­
tion benefit. Leisure Studies, 13(1), 17–31. doi:10.1080/02614369400390021 
Caruso, I. B. (2013). End clutter now. Igarss 2014, (1), 45–47. doi:10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2
Chiesa,  a, & Serretti,  a. (2010). A systematic review of neurobiological and clinical features of mindfulness 
meditations. Psychological Medicine, 40, 1239–1252. doi:10.1017/S0033291709991747
Coelho, P. S., & Esteves, S. P. (2007). The choice between a five-point and a ten-point scale in the framework 
of customer satisfaction measurement. International Journal of Market Research the Journal of the Market 
Research So, 49(3), 313–339.
Cure stress at work with a touch of colour. (2005). Cabinet Maker, (5422), 115. 
Davanger, S., Eifring, H., & Hersoug, A. G. (2008). Fighting Stress: Reviews of Meditation Research. Oslo: 
Acem.
Daverne, H. & Kjær, T. (2011). 12 minutter til succes. Kbh.: Politiken.
Davidson, R. J., Kabat-Zinn, J., Schumacher, J., Rosenkranz, M., Muller, D., Santorelli, S. F., … Sheridan, J. F. 
(2003). Alterations in brain and immune function produced by mindfulness meditation. Psychosomatic Medi­
cine, 65(4), 564–570. doi:10.1097/01.psy.0000077505.67574.e3
Depp, C. A., Schkade, D. A., Thompson, W. K., & Jeste, D. V. (2010). Age, affective experience, and television 
use. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 39(2), 173–178. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2010.03.020
Dijkstra, K., Pieterse, M. E., & Pruyn, A. (2008). Stress-reducing effects of indoor plants in the built health­
care environment: The mediating role of perceived attractiveness. Preventive Medicine, 47(3), 279–283. 
doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2008.01.013
Dunkel-Schetter, C., Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1987). Correlates of social support receipt. Journal of Per­
sonality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 71–80. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.53.1.71
Ekman, P., & Davidson, R. J. (1993). Voluntary smiling changes regional brain activity. Psychological Sci-
ence, 4, 342–345.
Elliot, A. J., & Maier, M. a. (2014). Color psychology: effects of perceiving color on psychological functioning 
in humans. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 95–120. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115035
Fogg, B. (2009). A behavior model for persuasive design. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on 
Persuasive Technology - Persuasive ’09, 1. doi:10.1145/1541948.1541999
Fortes-Ferreira, L., Peiro, J. M., González-Morales, G., & Martín, I. (2006). Work-related stress and well-be­
ing: The roles of direct action coping and palliative coping. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 47(4), 293–
302. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9450.2006.00519.x
Gardner, B., Rose, J., Mason, O., Tyler, P., & Cushway, D. (2005). Cognitive therapy and behavioural cop­
ing in the management of work-related stress: An intervention study. Work and Stress, 19(2), 137–152. 
doi:10.1080/02678370500157346
Grossman, R. J. (2002). Office open, 36–40.
==PAGE:89==
89
Gunnarsson, L.-G. (2001). Bodily symptoms as expressions of vicious circles of stress and anxiety. Läkartid­
ningen, 98(51-52), 5856–5857. 
Gupte, J. (2014). Privacy matters. Australian Journal of Pharmacy, 95(1128), 16–18. 
doi:10.1145/1378727.1378734
Gutnick, L. (2007). A workplace design that reduces employee stress and increases employee productivity 
using environmentally responsible materials. Masters Theses and Doctoral Dissertations, 1(1), 109. Retrieved 
from http://commons.emich.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1150&context=theses
Halsband, U., Mueller, S., Hinterberger, T., & Strickner, S. (2009). PLASTICITY CHANGES IN THE BRAIN 
IN HYPNOSIS AND MEDITATION. Contemporary Hypnosis, 26(1), 48–59. doi:10.1002/ch
Hartlev, C. G., & Durazo, C. (2015). Behavioural design: The development of a new design method.
Hauge, L. J., Skogstad, A., & Einarsen, S. (2010). The relative impact of workplace bullying as a social stressor 
at work. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 51(5), 426–433. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9450.2010.00813.x
Heidenreich, T., Tuin, I., Pflug, B., Michal, M., & Michalak, J. (2006). Mindfulness-based cognitive 
therapy for persistent insomnia: A pilot study [2]. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 75(3), 188–189. 
doi:10.1159/000091778
Helliwell, P. S., & Taylor, W. J. (2007). Repetitive strain injury. Lancet, 369(9575), 1815–1822. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)60820-4
House, J. W. (1981). Work stress and social support. Reading, MA: Ad- dison-Wesley
Hughes, R. N. (1996). Drugs which induce anxiety: Caffeine. New Zealand Journal of Psychology.
Jeong, I., Jun, S., Park, S., Jung, S., Shin, T., & Yoon, H. (2008). A Research for evaluation on stress change via 
thermotherapy and massage. Conf.Proc.IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, 2008(1557-170X (Print)), 4820–4823.
Kabat-zinn, J. (2001). Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR): Standards of Practice, (February), 
161–169.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2002). Meditation Is about Paying Attention. Reflections, 3(3), 68–71. 
doi:10.1162/152417302317363949
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2014). Nowscape. Mindfulness, 5(2), 215–216. doi:10.1007/s12671-014-0291-5
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (2011). Stress, Food, and Inflammation: Psychoneuroimmunology and Nutrition at the 
Cutting Edge. Behavioral Medicine, 72(4), 365–369. doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181dbf489.Stress
Kirby, E. D., Muroy, S. E., Sun, W. G., Covarrubias, D., Leong, M. J., Barchas, L. A., & Kaufer, D. (2013). Acute 
stress enhances adult rat hippocampal neurogenesis and activation of newborn neurons via secreted astrocyt­
ic FGF2. eLife, 2013(2), 1–23. doi:10.7554/eLife.00362
Klitzman, S., & Stellman, J. M. (1989). THE IMPACT OF THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT ON WELL-BE­
ING OF OFFICE WORKERS. Soc. Sci. Med., 29(6), 733–742.
Kraft, T. L., & Pressman, S. D. (2012). Grin and Bear It: The Influence of Manipulated Facial Expression on 
the Stress Response. Psychological Science, 23(September), 1372–8. doi:10.1177/0956797612445312
==PAGE:90==
90
Lazar, S. W., Kerr, C. E., Wasserman, R. H., Gray, J. R., Greve, D. N., Treadway, M. T., … Fischl, B. (2005). 
Meditation experience is associated with increased cortical thickness. Neuroreport, 16(17), 1893–7. 
doi:10.1097/01.wnr.0000186598.66243.19
Lim, B. P. (1997). Essential stress relief : the use of oils to treat tension, (6), 336–338. 
Lindgren, L. (2012). Emotional and physiological responses to touch massage (Vol. 3). Retrieved from http://
umu.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2:568111
Liu, C., Wang, C., Chuang, K., Lo, C. and Chen, C. (2013). Electroencephalographic Study of Essential Oils 
for Stress Relief. AMM, 437, pp.1085-1088.
Maddi, S. R. (2013). Hardiness as the existential courage to grow through searching for meaning. Experience 
of Meaning in Life: Classical Perspectives, Emerging Themes, and Controversies, Experience of Mean. in Life: 
Class. Perspectives, Emerg. Themes, and Controversies, 227–239. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6527-6_18
Maguire, N. (2012). Psychological therapies. Medicine, 40(12), 668–671. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
mpmed.2012.09.003
Martin, B., & Bruce, M. H. (2012). Universal Methods of Design: 100 Ways to Research Complex Problems, 
Develop Innovative Ideas, and Design Effective Solutions. Beverly: Rockport Publishers.
Mcsweeney, J., Rainham, D., Johnson, S. A., Sherry, S. B., & Singleton, J. (2015). Indoor nature exposure 
(INE): A health-promotion framework. Health Promotion International, 30(1), 126–139. doi:10.1093/heapro/
dau081
Metaxas, D., Venkataraman, S., & Vogler, C. (2004). Image-based stress recognition using a model-based 
dynamic face tracking system. Computational Science-ICCS …, 813–821. Retrieved from http://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-24688-6_105
Moss, A. S., Wintering, N., Roggenkamp, H., Khalsa, D. S., Waldman, M. R., Monti, D., & Newberg, A. B. 
(2012). Effects of an 8-Week Meditation Program on Mood and Anxiety in Patients with Memory Loss. The 
Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 18(1), 48–53. doi:10.1089/acm.2011.0051
Møller, H., & Sørensen, M. F. (1996). Binaural technique: Do we need individual recordings? Journal of the 
Audio …, 44(6), 451–469. Retrieved from http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=7897
Neal, D. T., Wood, W., & Drolet, A. (2015). How Do People Adhere to Goals when Willpower is Low? The 
Profits (and Pitfalls) of Strong Habits. Statewide Agricultural Land Use Baseline 2015, 1, 1–65. doi:10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.004
Nelson, J. (2011). Distracted. Canadian Business, 84(14), 28–30.
Nesse, R. M., Bhatnagar, S., & Young, E. A. (2010). Evolutionary Origins and Functions of the Stress Re­
sponse. Encyclopedia of Stress, 2, 965–970. doi:10.1016/B978-012373947-6.00150-1
Nesvold, A., Fagerland, M. W., Davanger, S., Ellingsen, O., Solberg, E. E., Holen, A., … Atar, D. (2012). 
Increased heart rate variability during nondirective meditation. European Journal of Preventive Cardiology, 
19(4), 773–780. doi:10.1177/1741826711414625
Panerai, A. E. (2012). Pain stress and headache. Neurological Sciences, 33(SUPPL. 1), 1–3. doi:10.1007/
s10072-012-1032-y
==PAGE:91==
91
Paulson, S., Davidson, R., Jha, A., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2013). Becoming conscious: The science of mindfulness. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1303(1), 87–104. doi:10.1111/nyas.12203
Plante, T. G., Coscarelli, L., & Ford, M. (2001). Does Exercising with Another Enhance the 
Stress-Reducing Benefits of Exercise? International Journal of Stress Management, 8(3), 201–213. 
doi:10.1023/A:1011339025532 
Schneider, R. H., Alexander, C. N., Staggers, F., Rainforth, M., Salerno, J. W., Hartz, A., … Nidich, S. I. (2005). 
Long-term effects of stress reduction on mortality in persons > or = 55 years of age with systemic hyperten­
sion. Am J Cardiol, 95(0002-9149 (Print)), 1060–1064. doi:S0002-9149(05)00183-9 [pii]\r10.1016/j.amj­
card.2004.12.058
Sctzer, W. N. (2009). Essential Oils and Anxiolytic Aromatherapy. Natural Product Communications, 4(9), 
1305–1316.
Selye, H. (1951). The General-Adaptation-Syndrome. Annual Review of Medicine, 2(1), 327–342. doi:10.1146/
annurev.me.02.020151.001551
Sharpley, C. F., & Gordon, J. E. (1999). Differences between ECG and pulse when measuring heart rate and 
reactivity under two physical and two psychological stressors. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 22(3), 285–301. 
doi:10.1023/A:1018724608328
Siegel, J. M. (1993). Companion Animals: In Sickness and in Health. Journal of Social Issues., 49(1), 157–167. 
doi:10.1007/s13398-014-0173-7.2
Sinha, R. (2001). How does stress increase risk of drug abuse and relapse? Psychopharmacology, 158(4), 
343–359. doi:10.1007/s002130100917
Solberg, E., Halvorsen, R. and Holen, A. (2000). Effect of meditation on immune cells. Stress Medicine, 16(3), 
pp.185-190.
Solberg, E., Halvorsen, R., SundgotBorgen, J., Ingjer, F., & Holen, A. (1995). Meditation: A modulator of the 
immune response to physical stress? A brief report. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 29(4), 255–257.
Sood, P., Priyadarshini, S., & Aich, P. (2013). Estimation of Psychological Stress in Humans: A Combination 
of Theory and Practice. PLoS ONE, 8(5). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0063044
Stress – hvad kan der gøres? (2007). Danske Forsikringsfuntionærers Landsforening (DFL), Finansforbundet 
og Finanssektorens Arbejdsgiverforening (FA). Datagraf.
Stress, relaxation & pleasure: A survey among office workers. (1995). Supervision, 56(6), 1–8.
Swaminathan, M. (2014). Experience Flows. Retrieved from http://www.newscenter.philips.com/main/de­
sign/resources/pdf/Inside-Innovation-Backgrounder-Experience-Flows.pdf
Søgaard, J. I. (2014). Stressforsker advarer mod mind- fulness på arbejdspladsen. Kristeligt Dagblad.
Teasdale, E. L. (2006). Workplace stress. Psychiatry, 5(7), 251–254. doi:10.1053/j.mppsy.2006.04.006
Thayer, J. F., Hansen, A. L., Saus-Rose, E., & Johnsen, B. H. (2009). Heart rate variability, prefrontal neural 
function, and cognitive performance: The neurovisceral integration perspective on self-regulation, adapta­
tion, and health. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 37(2), 141–153. doi:10.1007/s12160-009-9101-z
==PAGE:92==
92
Thayer, J. F., Yamamoto, S. S., & Brosschot, J. F. (2010). The relationship of autonomic imbalance, heart rate 
variability and cardiovascular disease risk factors. International Journal of Cardiology, 141(2), 122–131. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.09.543
Thoma, M. V., La Marca, R., Brönnimann, R., Finkel, L., Ehlert, U., & Nater, U. M. (2013). The Effect of Music 
on the Human Stress Response. PLoS ONE, 8(8), 1–12. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0070156
Turpeinen, U., & Hämäläinen, E. (2013). Determination of cortisol in serum, saliva and urine. Best Practice 
and Research: Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 27(6), 795–801. doi:10.1016/j.beem.2013.10.008
Vischer, J. C. (2007). The effects of the physical environment on job performance: Towards a theoretical mod­
el of workspace stress. Stress and Health, 23(3), 175–184. doi:10.1002/smi.1134
Wellen, K. E., & Hotamisligil, G. S. (2005). Inflammation, stress, and diabetes, 115(5), 1111–1119. doi:10.1172/
JCI200525102.The
Wendel, S. (2013). Designing for Behavior Change - Applying psychology and behavioral economics. Gra­
venstein: O’Reilly Media.
Wood, A., Rychlowska, M., Korb, S., & Niedenthal, P. (2016). Fashioning the Face : Sensorimotor Simula­
tion Contributes to Facial Expression Recognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, xx(3), 1–14. doi:10.1016/j.
tics.2015.12.010
Young, J. S. (2012). Pet Therapy: Dogs de-stress students. Journal of Christian Nursing, 29(4), 217–221. 
doi:10.1097/CNJ.0b013e31826701a7
Zeidan, F., Martucci, K. T., Kraft, R. A., McHaffie, J. G., & Coghill, R. C. (2013). Neural correlates of mindful­
ness meditation-related anxiety relief. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 9(6), 751–759. doi:10.1093/
scan/nst041
Åkerstedt, T. (2006). Psychosocial stress and impaired sleep. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment and 
Health, 32(6), 493–501. doi:10.5271/sjweh.1054
Web references
Arbejdsmiljoviden.dk,. (2016). Indretning af kontor: Vigtig med gode variationsmuligheder. Arbejdsmiljov­
iden.dk. Retrieved 9 February 2016, from http://www.arbejdsmiljoviden.dk/Emner/Fysisk-arbejdsmiljoe/
Indretning-af-kontor/Generelle-krav-til-arbejdsrum
Chillot, R. (2013). The Power of Touch. Psychology Today. Retrieved 10 February 2016, from https://www.
psychologytoday.com/articles/201302/the-power-touch
Crowley, M. (2013). Not A Happy Accident: How Google Deliberately Designs Workplace Satisfaction. 
[online] Fast Company. Retrieved 12 Mar. 2016, from http://www.fastcompany.com/3007268/where-are-they-
now/not-happy-accident-how-google-deliberately-designs-workplace-satisfaction
Darma.co,. (2016). Darma Inc. - Team. Darma.co. Retrieved 17 March 2016, from http://darma.co/Pages/
Darma%20Inc.%20-%20Technology.html
Dictionary.cambridge.org,. (2016). hobby Meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary. Dictionary.cambridge.
org. Retrieved 24 May 2016, from http://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/hobby
==PAGE:93==
93
Humanstress.ca. (2016). Stressors | Centre for Studies on Human Stress (CSHS). [online] Retrieved 9 Mar. 
2016, from http://www.humanstress.ca/stress/what-is-stress/stressors.html
IdemoLab. (2016). About us - IdemoLab. [online] Retrieved 13 Feb. 2016, from http://idemolab.madebydelta.
com/about/ 
Khan Academy,. (2016). Khan Academy. Khan Academy. Retrieved 24 April 2016, from https://www.khanac­
ademy.org/science/health-and-medicine/endocrine-system-diseases/diabetes/a/what-is-diabetes-mellitus
Kofoed, T. (2016). Om tove. [online] Tove-Kofoed. Retrieved 12 May 2016, from http://www.tove-kofoed.dk/
om-tove.html
Lund, S. (2015). NFA: Arbejdsmiljø i Danmark: Arbejdsmiljø og Helbred i Danmark 2012-20: Arbejdsmiljøet i 
ord: Faktaark om resultaterne fra 2014: Støj: Forstyrrende støj. Arbejdsmiljoforskning.dk. Retrieved 4 February 
2016, from http://www.arbejdsmiljoforskning.dk/da/arbejdsmiljoedata/arbejdsmiljoe-og-helbred-20/arbejd­
smiljoeet-i-ord/2014/stoej/forstyrrende-stoej
Mayoclinic.org. (2015). Hypnosis - Mayo Clinic. [online] Retrieved 30 May 2016, from: http://www.mayoclin­
ic.org/tests-procedures/hypnosis/basics/definition/prc-20019177
Pensionsalder.info. (2016). Pensionsalder. [online] Retrieved 12 Apr. 2016, from http://pensionsalder.info/
pensionsalder.html 
Patton, R. (2016a). Behavioral effects of stress. [online] Khan Academy. Retrieved 9 Apr. 2016, from https://
www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/mcat/processing-the-environment/stress/v/behavioral-effects-of-stress
Patton, R. (2016b). Physical effects of stress. [online] Khan Academy. Retrieved 9 Apr. 2016, from https://
www.khanacademy.org/test-prep/mcat/processing-the-environment/stress/v/physical-effects-of-stress
Patton, R. (2016c). Responding to stress. [online] Khan Academy. Retrieved 9 Apr. 2016, from https://www.
khanacademy.org/test-prep/mcat/processing-the-environment/stress/v/responding-to-stress
Patton, R. (2016d). What is stress?. [online] Khan Academy. Retrieved 9 Apr. 2016, from https://www.khanac­
ademy.org/test-prep/mcat/processing-the-environment/stress/v/what-is-stress
Rønnebro, S. (2016). Mindfulness privat. Signeronnebro.dk. Retrieved 3 May 2016, from http://signeronnebro.
dk/mindfulness
Si-folkesundhed.dk. (2016a). 2.2 Stress. [online] Retrieved 7 Feb. 2016, from http://www.si-folkesundhed.dk/
upload/susy_2010_2_2_stress.pdf
Si-folkesundhed.dk. (2016b). Statens Institut for Folkesundhed, SDU. [online] Retrieved  7 Feb. 2016, from 
http://si-folkesundhed.dk
The Danish Health Authority,. (2008). Publications about nutrition. Sundhedsstyrelsen.dk. Retrieved 16 April 
2016, from https://sundhedsstyrelsen.dk/en/health-and-lifestyle/nutrition/publications
Walsh, J. (2016). Emotions: cerebral hemispheres and prefrontal cortex. [online] Khan Academy. Retrieved 10 
Apr. 2016, fromhttps://www.khanacademy.org/science/health-and-medicine/executive-systems-of-the-brain/
emotion-2014-03-27T18:40:38.294Z/v/emotions-cerebral-hemispheres-and-prefrontal-cortex
==PAGE:94==
94
Figure list
Figure 2.1, Illustrates the phases short- and long-term linked to stress.
16
Figure 2.2, Illustration of how the human body responds to stress; the reactions, the symptoms of 
chronic stress and the diseases chronic stress can cause. 
17
Figure 2.3, Illustration of how stress damage point in the blood vessels, leading to inflammation and 
atherosclerotic plaques formation, resulting in smaller vessels and risk of blood clots (SanoFarm, 
2013).
18
Figure 2.4, Illustration the main parts of the human brain what are affected by chronic stress and the 
emotions and behaviours it causes.
18
Figure 2.5, Illustration of the stress response including cognitive and body response seen in a specific 
context.
19
Figure 2.6, Illustration of a physical layout of an open office environment. 
22
Figure 2.7, Illustration of the human stress respond in a specific context, affected by a stressor. It is 
shown how the different product categories target the stress respond. 		
	
	
	
  29
Figure 2.8, Overview of products on the market which are targeting stress.
30
Figure 2.9, Illustration of effects of doing mindfulness meditation. 
39
Figure 3.1, ABC-model (Miltenberger, 2008).
42
Figure 3.2, Fogg’s behaviour model, B=mat (Fogg, 2009).
42
Figure 3.3, The Action Funnel (Wendel 2013).
43
Figure 3.4, Design process divided into four stages; understand, discover, design and refine.
44
Figure 4.1, Pictures of the three behavioural personas.
48
Figure 4.2, Illustration of the defined target, action, actor and outcome.
49
Figure 4.3, Illustration of an office plan with point outs of actions and associated interaction points. 50
Figure 4.4, The morphology chart used to develop the three concepts. 
52
Figure 4.5, Information poster in Danish.
64
Figure 4.6, Front page of touch screen interface prototype in Danish.
65
Figure 4.7, The Danish feedback page template for the employees to fill in feedback. 
66
Figure 4.8, Touch screen interface prototype in Danish, page with overview of optional guides.
68
Figure 4.9, Touch screen interface prototype in Danish, graph over HR changes during the meditation.

68
Figure 4.10, Touch screen interface prototype in Danish, first page of recommend to colleagues.
68
Figure 5.1, Screen shot of DELTA’s Danish intranet front page with advertisement on the 12 minutes 
guided meditation.  
72
Figure 5.2, The motivational information poster.
73
Figure 5.3, Illustration of two booths placed in the path from toilet to desk. The dashed line illustrated 
the area with birds singing.
74
==PAGE:95==
95
Figure 5.4, Illustration of two booths. One is available and the other is occupied. The dashed line indi­
cates the area with birds singing.
74
Figure 5.6, Illustration of the inside of the booth.
75
Figure 5.5, Illustration of an employee entering the available booth.
75
Figure 5.7, Front page, leading to more information on meditation and on how to do meditation.
76
Figure 5.8, Registration page.
76
Figure 5.9, Options flow, leading to 12 minutes of guided meditation.
76
Figure 5.10, First screen after the meditation session is over.
77
Figure 5.11, Overview of HR results during the meditation session.
77
Figure 5.12, Information about HR and what it says about health, as well as instructions on how to 
read the graph.
77
Figure 5.13, Overview of times meditated during the past month.
77
Figure 5.14, Possibility to recommend the mindfulness meditation to a colleague through a personal 
text.
78
Figure 5.15, Last page encouraging the actor to come back for more meditation.
78
Picture list
Picture 4.1, Booth as seen when walking from offices.	

63
Picture 4.2, Booth as seen when walking from toilets.
63
Picture 4.3, Start button on the box containing a file with guided meditation. 
64
Picture 4.4, Feedback buttons placed next to the feedback page template .
66
Table list
Table 2.1, Overview of effects of stress relievers.
23
Table 4.1, Weighted matrix evaluating and comparing the three concepts.
59
Graph list
Graph 4.1, Use during the 3 weeks testing period.
65
Graph 4.2, Use distributed over a week.
65
Graph 4.3, Use distributed over a day.
66
==PAGE:96==
96
