==PAGE:1==
Predicting Academic Performance
from Social Networks
Valentin Kassarnig
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
There is a strong interest in idetifying factors that determine students’ grades. Signif-
icant literature focusing on understanding which factors inﬂuence students’ academic
performance dates back to the 1960s and since then countless studies have tried to an-
swer the question. However, they all lack of deeper insights into the students’ lives and
hence, they all just scratch on the surface. This thesis takes the question to a new level
by utilizing the SensibleDTU dataset which was assembled by tracking smartphones
from nearly 1000 students. Among other data types it contains data on face-to-face
interactions, telecommunication, social networks, and locations. By investigating that
data we show that several factors can be found that affect students’ academic achieve-
ments. We also show that social interactions and networks are at least as important as
individual aspects. In particular, we found that the academic performance of friends is
among the strongest predictors followed by class attendance, and centrality in the social
network. Other positively correlated factors were the personality traits Conscientious-
ness and Self Esteem. Different approaches of utilizing the ﬁndings to predict students’
academic performance were investigated and a detailed discussion of the ﬁndings was
conducted.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquir-
ing an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis investigates different aspects of students’ lives in order to ﬁnd out what
inﬂuences their academic performance. It analyses their individual behaviours and
personalities as well as their social interactions and networks. The analyses are based
on the data of the SensibleDTU dataset which contains the collected data from 1000
smartphones handed out to students. The dataset is unprecedented in its kind, size and
resolution and thus, it provides a far deeper insight into human behavior and social
interactions.
Lyngby, 25-June-2016
Valentin Kassarnig
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Related work
3
3
Data set
7
3.1
Data types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Data access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Academic Performance
11
5
Individual effects
15
5.1
Class attendance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Facebook activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Personality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Network effects
29
6.1
Channels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Network Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3.1
Network centrality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3.2
Group homophily . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
7
Performance Prediction
37
7.1
Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7.2
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3.1
Regression task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.3.2
Classiﬁcation task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8
Discussion
45
9
Conclusion
49
A Additional material
51
B
Source code
53
C Additional results
55
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
There is a strong interest in identifying factors that determine students’ grades. Signif-
icant literature focusing on understanding which factors inﬂuence students’ academic
performance dates back to the 1960s [1]. It is well known that many factors regarding
performance are related to behavioral patterns [2], such as time allocation, social ties,
sleep, participation in sport activity, etc. Most of the existing literature is unable to
quantitatively address the effects of such behavioral aspects simply due to lack of de-
tailed behavioral data. Previous research is mostly based on data obtained from surveys
and self-reports. This captures only quantitative aspects (e.g. hours per day spent on
online social networks) but give no qualitative insights (e.g. what speciﬁc activities are
performed). Moreover, investigations have shown that there is a signiﬁcant discrepancy
between self-reported information and actual truth [3, 4].
For that reason, we utilize the SensibleDTU dataset to tackle the problem at a whole
new level. The dataset emerged from the Copenhagen Network Study [5] where data
was collected from smartphones handed out to approximately 1000 students. Over a
period of more than two years data on face-to-face interactions, telecommunication,
social networks, and locations was collected. The dataset is unprecedented in its kind,
size and resolution and thus, it provides a far deeper insight into human behavior and
social interactions. It enables an in-depth analysis which helps us to get a better under-
standing of what actually affects the academic achievement of students.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
This report is structured as follows: Chapter 2 considers related research and discusses
their methods and results. In Chapter 3 we describe the dataset we used and how
we accessed it. Chapter 4 explores our measures of academic performance. Then
we investigate various individual effects in Chapter 5 followed by network effects in
Chapter 6. Chapter 7 looks at different approaches to predict academic performance
before Chapter 8 discusses the results and sets them into context of previous research.
Finally, Chapter 9 concludes with a summary and a future outlook.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Related work
This section discusses related literature which investigates the relation of various as-
pects of students’ lives and their academic performance.
Social media
Numerous studies investigated academic implications of social media
usage. Table 2.1 gives an overview of studies which have investigated the effect of
social media usage on academic performance based on self-reports and surveys. The
majority of them found a negative correlation between the time spent on social media
and academic performance [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] while others did not ﬁnd any
correlation [14, 15] and some found even a positive correlation [15, 16]. Tayseer et
al. [16] reason the positive relation by arguing that social sites act as stress relievers
which break the routine after spending some time studying.
Kolek and Saunders [17] used a different approach and analyzed Facebook proﬁles
manually. They investigated 339 proﬁles with respect to about 50 characteristics like
number of photographs, number of Facebook friends, and whether the proﬁle picture
showed the person drinking beer or not. This investigation did not reveal a relation
between proﬁle characteristics and academic performance.
Class attendance
Several studies have investigated the role of class attendance [19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26] and all of them have found that class attendance has a positive
and signiﬁcant impact on students’ course grades. Moreover, Crede et al. [22] claim
==PAGE:12==
4
Related work
Study
Sample size
Finding
Maqableh, Rajab, et al. (2015) [6]
N = 366
Negative correlation
between Facebook/social
media usage and academic
performance
Al-Menayes and Jamal (2015) [7]
N = 1327
Al-Menayes (2014) [8]
N = 308
Karpinski, Kirschne, et al (2013) [9]
N = 875
Paul, Baker, et al. (2012) [10]
N = 340
Junco (2012) [11]
N = 1839
Jacobsen and Forste (2011) [12]
N = 1026
Kirschner and Karpinski (2010) [13]
N = 219
Pasek, More, et al. (2009) [14]
N = 1060
No correlation between
Facebook usage and
academic performance
Hargittai and Hsieh (2010) [18]
N = 1060
Ainin, Naqshbandi, et al. (2015) [15]
N = 1165
Positive correlation
between Facebook usage
and academic performance
Tayseer, Zoghieb, et al. (2014) [16]
N = 30
Table 2.1: Overview of studies which investigated the relation between Facebook/so-
cial media usage and academic performance.
that class attendance is the best known predictor of academic performance. Further
investigated related factors such as seating position were unrelated to performance [20].
Personality
In the current literature the Big Five personality traits, also known as the
Five-Factor Model (FFM), represent the most commonly accepted framework to cap-
ture personality [27, 28, 29]. The model consists of the ﬁve dimensions Neuroticism,
Extraversion, Openness to Experience, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness. The re-
lationship between each of those ﬁve personality traits and academic performance is
heavily studied [30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58]. The majority of these studies have found that
Conscientiousness has a moderate to strong positive correlation with academic achieve-
ment while Neuroticism has a weak to moderate negative correlation. The other three
personality traits show only weak to no correlations. However, Extraversion is rather
positively and Openness rather negatively correlated. Agreeableness has not shown to
be signiﬁcantly correlated.
Other personality characteristics that were linked to academic performance are Self Es-
teem [59] and Satisfaction with Life [60, 61] which showed both a positive correlation.
Furthermore, low scores on the Locus of Control scale, which corresponds to more in-
ternal beliefs, were also correlated to higher academic achievements [62, 63, 64, 65].
On the other side, the characteristics Depression [66, 67, 68] and Stress [69, 70] were
negatively related to academic performance. Furthermore, positive affect (PANAS pos-
==PAGE:13==
5
itive) was found to be associated with higher marks while for negative affect (PANAS
negative) no signiﬁcant relation was found [71]. Investigations of the characteristics
Loneliness [72, 73] and Narcissism [74, 75] did not reveal a signiﬁcant relation to aca-
demic performance.
Real-world Social Networks
In recent literature the relation between students’ so-
cial interactions and academic performance has gained growing importance [76, 77,
78, 79, 80, 81, 82]. In particular, many of them emphasize the positive inﬂuence of
the centrality in academic networks [83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88]. Furthermore, Poldin et
al. found signiﬁcant peer effects in the network of study partners [89]. Their results
indicate a signiﬁcant, positive correlation between the GPAs of students and the GPAs
of their study partners.
Predicting academic performance
The StudentLife study [90] and its follow-up ex-
periment, the SmartGPA study [91], collected data from smartphones in order to model
the relationship between the students’ activities and their average GPA. Over a period
of 10 weeks, data from the phones’ accelerometer, microphone, light sensor, GPS/Blue-
tooth was collected. From that data, they inferred information on the students’ daily
routines and activities like bed time, wake up time, sleep duration, conversation fre-
quency, physical activity, indoor/outdoor mobility, etc. Wang et al. investigated the
connection between GPA and more than 200 different features and found several cor-
relations. They also used these features to train a linear regression model with lasso
regularization that predicts GPAs with a very high precision (MAE = 0.197). How-
ever, due to the small sample size (N = 48) it has proven difﬁcult to generalize these
ﬁndings to make meaningful conclusions.
Vandamme et al. [92] aimed to predict as early in the academic year as possible whether
students have a low, medium, or high risk of failing or dropping out. They followed
Parmentier’s [93] approach and investigated three sets of factors: Personal History of
the Student, Student Behaviour, and Students’ Perceptions. Each of the 533 students
was represented by 375 variables of which about 20% showed signiﬁcant correlations
with academic success. The highest correlations concerned class attendance, estimated
chance of success, previous academic experience (particularly in mathematics), and
study skills. Different statistical models were tested to predict the risk-level of stu-
dents. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) achieved the best results with 57.35% accu-
racy which is still not particularly good.
Nghe et al. [94] predicted the academic performance of undergraduate and postgradu-
ate students at two different institutions using data from 20.492 and 936 students. They
used Decision Trees and Bayesian Networks as models and got pretty decent results:
73/71% accuracy for 4-class predictions (fail, fair, good, very good) and 94/93% for a
fail/pass prediction. However, they are predicting the GPAs after the completed third
==PAGE:14==
6
Related work
study year while using the students’ cumulative GPA after the completed second study
year in their feature set. This feature alone explains already more than 44% of the
data’s variance. It can be assumed that the GPAs from year two to year three change
only marginally which explains the outstanding predictions.
Summary
We have presented here different attempts from current literature to iden-
tify factors that determine students’ academic achievements. Investigated areas include
social media usage, class attendance, personality, and real-world social networks. Dif-
ferent studies have found that social media usage is linked to academic performance but
the results are inconsistent. However, the majority found a negative impact of social
media usage on academic performance. Class attendance is another heavily studied
factor and here the results are more clear; it was unanimously found to be positively re-
lated to high grades. Among the investigated personality traits, Conscientiousness, Self
Esteem, and Satisfaction with Life were found to be positively related to good grades,
while Locus of Control, Neuroticism, Stress, and Depression were negatively related.
The analysis of real-world social networks is quite a new ﬁeld. Recent literature has
pointed out the importance of peer effects as well as the strategic position in the net-
work. Performance predictions have been proven to be very intricate; results vary a lot
between the different approaches but each of them has its limitations.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Data set
The main data source for this project is the SensibleDTU dataset [5]. The dataset
emerged from the Copenhagen Network Study where data was collected from smart-
phones handed out to nearly 1000 undergraduate students from the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU). Over a period of more than 2 years data on face-to-face interac-
tions, telecommunication, social networks, and locations was collected. The study
covered the academic years 2013/14 and 2014/15. About 77% of the study participants
were male and 23% female. Participants had the opportunity to drop out at any given
point and thus, the number of participants varied over the course of the study. In the
following sections we describe the parts of the dataset that were used in this project
and how we accessed them.
3.1
Data types
Facebook data
The dataset contains dumps of the users’ facebook proﬁles. Among
others, the dumps contain friendships, feeds, and statuses. Messages between users
were not retrieved. Dumps were pulled in 24 hour intervals from the Facebook Graph
API1. However, the access tokens expired after 90 days and not all users renewed them.
That caused a strong decrease in data over time. In the last week of 2013 552 students
1https://developers.facebook.com/docs/graph-api/reference
==PAGE:16==
8
Data set
had a valid token in contrast to 108 valid tokens at the end of 2014. A Facebook dump
is basically a snapshot of the current state of a user’s proﬁle. That is, many elements
(posts, pictures, etc.) appear in multiple dumps which leads to duplicates. We have
used the creation timestamp as unique identiﬁer to ﬁlter out duplicates. That is, when
we ﬁnd another data element which was created at exactly the same time we reject it.
Location data
Location data was periodically obtained from the location sensors of
the phones. We used a condensed version of the location data with a 15-minute time
resolution which still provided sufﬁcient precision for our purposes. For the academic
years 2013/14 and 2014/15 (summer holidays excluded) we have at total more than 21
million data points.
Bluetooth data
The dataset contains detected devices from bluetooth scans. That is,
it shows other bluetooth devices which were within a range of 5-10 meters. From that
data face-to-face interactions can be inferred [95].
Calls & Texts
For each call the dataset contains information about the duration, the
number of the caller / called person and whether it was an incoming, outgoing, or
missed call. Similarly, for each text message there is information about the the number
of the sender / recipient and whether it was an incoming or outgoing message. All
numbers were anonymized but they can be linked to the study participants.
Questionnaires
Study participants ﬁlled in entrance questionnaires including a num-
ber of different personality tests. The dataset contains all questions and given answers
as well as information whether a student has submitted the questionnaire or not.
Course grades
The dataset contains the grades of all taken courses during the time of
the study. Additional course information like class time and credits were dynamically
obtained from the course page archive2 through web scraping. The URL of the desired
course pages were assembled by the course number plus the term and was then used to
download the course page. The information on the retrieved page were structured in an
HTML table which allows to extract it through simple text-parsing.
2http://www.dtu.dk/Uddannelse/kursusbasen/Andre_udgaver
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Data access
9
3.2
Data access
The data was accessed through a provided REST API. By making GET requests data
is pulled from the web endpoints. Query parameters such as user-ids or start- and end-
date allow to ﬁlter out not desired data elements. For every request an API token is
required which is valid for six hours. A parameter limit allows to specify how many
data elements should be returned. The preferred response format is JSON which can be
easily processed. When pulling a big amount of data it is useful to send several requests
and request each time only data from a small number of users. Otherwise the server
may need too long to compute the response which causes a timeout. However, making
too many small requests may lead to a lot of overhead and unnecessary trafﬁc. Thus,
ﬁnding the right balance of requested users and response size helps to avoid timeouts
and reduces the overall processing time. It would be very naive to just assume that the
data can be pulled from the server without any timeouts. Thus, it is essential to take
possible timeouts into account and implement a strategy to handle them. Listing B.1
in the appendix shows an example Python code for requesting data through the API. In
this example we request data for 10 users at a time and limit the the number of results
to 100 per response. After every timeout the timeout-time is increased by a second and
the request is sent again. After six unsuccessful requests in a row the procedure stops.
The retrieved data is periodically saved to a ﬁle which enables us to stop the script
and start it again without losing any data. This method has been successfully used to
retrieve big amounts of data in a very efﬁcient way.
3.3
Summary
In this chapter we have given an overview of our dataset and discussed the different
data types. Furthermore, we have described how we access the data, what issues there
are, and how to handle them. An example source code is attached in the appendix of
this report.
==PAGE:18==
10
Data set
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 4
Academic Performance
In this project we use three different measures of academic performance: Course
grades, Term GPAs, and Overall GPAs. Course grades are present in the dataset and
are given in the Danish 7-point grading scale1 which ranges from -3 to 12 where -3 and
00 are failing grades and 02, 4, 7, 10, and 12 are passing grades in ascending order.
Courses using a different grading scale were ignored.
For analyses which exceed the scope of individual courses we use the GPA as perfor-
mance measure. The GPA is a primarily in the United States used but widely accepted
performance measure of students. Using this scale allows us to compare our results
to related literature. From the given course grades the weighted term and overall GPA
of each student was calculated as shown in Equation 4.1. First the weighted mean
grade gW is calculated where each course grade was weighted by the amount of course
credits. Second, the mean grade was then converted from the Danish Grading Scale
(-3 - 12) to the GPA Scale (0 - 4). Negative grades were directly converted to 0 and
positive grades where linearly scaled to the range from 0 to 4. Term and cumulative
GPAs where calculated in the same way but considered grades from different periods.
Furthermore, cumulative GPAs were only considered when at least three courses were
1http://eng.uvm.dk/Education/General/7-point-grading-scale
==PAGE:20==
12
Academic Performance
taken.
gW =
#courses
P
i=0
gradei · crediti
#courses
P
i=0
crediti
(4.1a)
GPA =
(
0,
if gW ≤0
4·gW
12 ,
otherwise
(4.1b)
Table 4.1 gives a quantitative overview of the available grades data. It can be seen that
for the academic years 2013/14 and 2014/15 there were a total of 18142 course grades
available. From that 3494 term GPAs and 957 cumulative GPAs were computed. Fig-
ure 4.1 shows the distribution of cumulative GPAs with a mean of 2.38 and a standard
deviation of .81. It can be seen that there are only very few extreme values and the
majority is centered around the mean with a negative skew.
E2013
F2014
E2014
F2015
Total
Course grades
4033
5960
3991
4158
18142
Term GPAs
943
903
820
828
3494
Mean term GPA
2.27
2.39
2.38
2.51
2.38
SD of Term GPAs
1.01
.94
.95
.92
.96
Table 4.1: Overview of grades in the fall (E) and spring (F) terms of the academic
years 2013/14 and 2014/15.
In order to determine the impact of a particular factor on the academic performance we
use Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient [96] which is denoted as rS through out
this report. The advantage of this measure is that it is nonparametric and, in contrast
to the widely used Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefﬁcient [97], it does not
assume a linear relation.
==PAGE:21==
13
Figure 4.1: Distribution of 957 cumulative GPAs. The negatively skewed distribution
has a mean of 2.38 and a standard deviation of .81.
==PAGE:22==
14
Academic Performance
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 5
Individual effects
This section discusses different inﬂuence factors on the level of individual students that
affect their academic achievements. That includes behavioural aspects as well as their
personalities.
5.1
Class attendance
This section investigates how import class attendance is for achieving high grades. It
describes the methods to determine class locations and class attendance, and discusses
the results.
Method
The SensibleDTU dataset contains the course grades of students as well as their loca-
tions. However, it contains no information about class schedules or class locations. For
that reason we have to estimate the class locations. We propose here a method that al-
lows us to estimate a class location from the given data. The following listing describes
the single steps of the method.
==PAGE:24==
16
Individual effects
1. Determine courses and course participants
All students with course grades in the dataset are considered as course partic-
ipants. From the course grades we derive the courses and the number of par-
ticipants. We reject all courses with less than eight participants to ensure that
sufﬁcient data for each course is available.
2. Determine class time
For each course we try to determine the class time. For the 13-week lecture
period DTU uses a ﬁxed module timetable where each class occupies a four hour
time slot, either from 8am to 12pm or from 1pm to 5pm (see Table A.1). The
class time for a particular course is extracted from course page in the course page
archive (see Chapter 3 for more details). Courses with a missing course page or
with an anomalous class schedule were rejected.
3. Class time binning
We divide the four hour class time into 16 15-minute time bins to estimate for
each a class location. The reason for calculating multiple locations for a single
class lies in the fact that there are classes which change room, for example when
a class consists of a lecture and a lab part and they are held in different rooms.
Furthermore, it is less prone to failure when there are some wrong or missing
data points for some of the time bins.
4. Create bluetooth network and ﬁnd cluster
For each time bin of a class we determine the network of face-to-face interactions
of course participants obtained from the bluetooth data. We assume the cluster
consisting of the highest-degree node and its neighbors represents a group of
class attendees. If this cluster has less than four nodes we reject it.
5. Estimate class location
We then determine the locations of the members of this cluster. The median
of these locations represents the cluster center. When this cluster center is on
campus we consider it as estimated class location for a particular time bin.
Class attendance of a particular student is determined by calculating his/her distance
to the estimated class location. Students who were part of the bluetooth cluster from
which the class location was estimated have automatically a distance of 0. For all
others the distance to the estimated class location was calculated by using the Haversine
formula [98]. Equation 5.1 derives the distance between two points whose respective
coordinates Lon1, Lat1 and Lon2, Lat2 are given in radians. Equation 5.1c calculates
a, the square of half the chord length between the points, and Equation 5.1d calculates
c, the angular distance in radians. In Equation 5.1e c is multiplied by the median earth
==PAGE:25==
5.1 Class attendance
17
radius r = 6367km which gives the ﬁnal distance ∆km in km.
∆Lon = Lon2 −Lon1
(5.1a)
∆Lat = Lat2 −Lat1
(5.1b)
a = sin(∆Lat
2
)2 + cos(Lat1) · cos(Lat2) · sin(∆Lon
2
)2
(5.1c)
c = 2 · asin(√a)
(5.1d)
∆km = r · c
(5.1e)
If the distance to the estimated class location is less than a certain threshold for at least
three time bins of the class time we assume that the student is at class, otherwise not.
Results were robust against variation of the threshold. That is, the same trends were
observed with all tested thresholds (5m - 500m). Based on an empirical evaluation a
threshold of 200 meters has proven to capture best the imprecision of the location data
caused by the GPS sensor [99] and other providers, and was therefore used for further
analyses.
An interactive visualization tool based on JavaScript and D3 was created in order to
evaluate the quality of the calculated class locations. This tool can show the estimated
class locations as well as the locations of the students. Figure 5.1 shows screenshots of
this visualization tool. Figure 5.1a on the left side shows all estimated class locations
for a selected course in the fall term of 2013. Some of them originate from the same day
but from different time bins. It can be seen that all locations of the classes vary by only
a few meters. Figure 5.1b on the right side shows the class and student locations for
a particular day. Each of the small colored dots represents a student at a certain time.
Dots with the same color represent the same student but different time bins on the same
day. This ﬁgure also marks the surrounding 200 meter radius of each estimated class
location which is considered as the at-class-range. That is, students who are within this
radius are considered to be at class. The tool and its source code is online available on
GitHub1. Note, that the original data from the dataset is not available.
For every course participant we determined how many classes he/she attended during
the semester and how many not. Based on that we obtained the ratio of attended classes.
We ignored students with not sufﬁcient data points who would add too much impreci-
sion to the data. For example, a student with only one data point would give a class
attendance ratio of either 0% or 100%. Concluding such a class attendance based on a
single observation would not be qualiﬁed. Thus, we rejected all class participants who
had less than nine data points per semester which gives a reasonable trade-off between
data precision and the amount of data. That gave us data for 2944 course participants
from 202 courses.
1https://valentin012.github.io/class-loc-d3/
==PAGE:26==
18
Individual effects
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Screenshots from the visualization tool focusing the area of DTU campus.
The left image (a) shows all estimated class locations of course 26000
(General Chemistry) in the fall term of 2013. The right image (b) shows
the estimated class locations of the same course on a particular day. Fur-
thermore, it shows the locations of the students and the at-class-ranges
surrounding the class locations. Students within that 200 meter radius are
considered to be at class.
Results
Grouping students according to their ﬁnal course grades and looking at the distribu-
tions of class attendance ratios of each of those groups indicates a clear trend. Results
show that higher class attendance is positively correlated to higher grades. Figure 5.2
illustrates this trend using a box plot. Each box in the plot marks the lower and upper
quartile as well as the median (solid horizontal line) and the mean (square) values. A
correlation coefﬁcient of rS = .255 (p < .001) conﬁrms the positive relation. More-
over, similarly strong correlations were achieved for other measures of academic per-
formance. The term GPA and the cumulative GPA showed correlations of rS = .255
and rS = .274 (both p < .001), respectively. Figure C.1a and Figure C.1b in the
appendix illustrate those correlations using a density scatter plot.
In Figure 5.3 students are divided into ﬁve groups of equal size according to their class
attendance. Each bar in Figure 5.3a represents one group and the bar height indicates
the mean course grade of students within the group. Figure 5.3b shows the grade dis-
tribution of each group. These plots reveal not only that low attenders have on average
lower grades but also how the grades are distributed. The grade distribution of the ﬁrst
two and the last two groups look very similar. However, comparing the ﬁrst (lowest
attendance) and the last group (highest attendance) shows a signiﬁcant difference in
the grade distribution. In particular, while students in the ﬁrst group received a mean
grade of 5, the students in the last group received nearly an 8. Furthermore, 23% of the
students in the ﬁrst group failed the course while less than 4% of the last group failed.
==PAGE:27==
5.1 Class attendance
19
Figure 5.2: Class attendance grouped by grade in the class. Box plot shows median
values (solid horizontal line), mean values (square), lower and upper quar-
tile (box outline), lower and upper extremes (whisker), and outliers (cross).
Apart from the visual observation we want to quantify whether the observed grades
from the different groups are statistically different. Therefore, a two-sided Mann-
Whitney U-test [100] to compare the observed course grades from each pair of groups
was performed. The Mann-Whitney U-test is a nonparametric statistical test which
tests whether two samples are signiﬁcantly different from each other. In contrast to
the very common Student’s t-test [101], the Mann-Whitney U-test does not assume a
normal distribution. Since the class attendance observations are not necessarily normal
distributed a nonparametric test is here preferred.
Table 5.1 contains the resulting p-values which represent the probabilities that the two
samples originate from the same population. The results show that the grade distribu-
tions of each group are signiﬁcantly different from each other. That is, the observation
that students with higher attendance get higher grades is signiﬁcant. Only the tests be-
tween group 3 and 4, and group 4 and 5 have resulted in a lower signiﬁcance level. That
is, the difference between those groups is not signiﬁcant. These results are consistent
with the visual observations made from Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.4 illustrates how class attendance changes over the course of the semester.
Course participants were grouped into three groups according to their obtained course
grades. It can be observed that the class attendance of all three groups peaks in the
ﬁrst semester week and experiences then a progressive decline. At each point during
the semester the overall attendance level of the high performers (10, 12) is higher than
the one of moderate performers (4, 7) and theirs is again higher than the one of low
performers (-3, 00, 02). Furthermore, low performers experience a massive attendance
drop after the ﬁrst week. In the beginning of the semester, around 83% of the high
==PAGE:28==
20
Individual effects
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: The plot at the top (a) shows the division of students into ﬁve groups
of equal size according to their class attendance.
Each bar represents
one group and the bar-height indicates the mean course grade of students
within the group. Since there are more high attenders than low attenders
the bars on the right side are wider than on the left side to make sure that
each group contains the same number of students. The plot at the bottom
(b) shows the grade distribution of each group. These plots reveal not only
that low attenders have on average lower grades but also how the grades are
distributed. The grade distribution of the ﬁrst two and the last two groups
look very similar. However, comparing the ﬁrst (lowest attendance) and
the last group (highest attendance) shows a signiﬁcant difference in the
grade distribution.
==PAGE:29==
5.2 Facebook activity
21
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 5
Group 1
-
Group 2
.011
-
Group 3
<.001
<.001
-
Group 4
<.001
<.001
.064
-
Group 5
<.001
<.001
<.001
.090
-
Table 5.1: p-values of two-sided Mann-Whitney U-test of observed course grades from
each pair of groups.
graders, 79% of moderate graders, and 71% of low graders attend classes, while at the
end of the semester only 74%, 68%, and 50%, respectively, show up for class. The
decrease is for all three groups very linear while the one of low graders has a steeper
slope.
Figure 5.4: Change of class attendance over the 13-week semester. Students were
grouped into high graders (12, 10; blue line), moderate graders (7, 4; green
line), and low graders (02, 00, -3; red line). There is a signiﬁcant decrease
of class attenders for all three groups. At each point during the semester the
ratio of class attenders of good graders is higher than that of low graders.
5.2
Facebook activity
The SensibleDTU dataset contains dumps of users’ Facebook proﬁles which were ob-
tained from the Facebook Graph API. Among others, the dumps contain the users’
==PAGE:30==
22
Individual effects
feeds. The feed of a person contains either posts published by this person or posts
which were published by others on the person’s proﬁle. Those posts include status up-
dates, photos, links, shared stories, etc. Each feed-object contains a from-ﬁeld which
identiﬁes the publisher of the post. That allows us to infer the weekly publishing ac-
tivity of this user. Facebook activity was only analysed for the terms Fall 2013 and
Spring 2014 since only for those two terms sufﬁcient data was available. Furthermore,
weeks without any posts were tested against expired tokens. That is, those weeks are
only considered when a valid token was available and a Facebook dump could have
been pulled in that week. We also ignored posts with an empty status-type or of type
approved_friendship since they do not reﬂect a publishing action.
In order to make sure that the results are not driven by outliers we used Bootstrap-
ping [102] for this analysis. That is, we performed 100 test runs with a bootstrap
sample instead of the original one. The bootstrap sample is taken from the original
one using sampling with replacement and has the same size as the it. Figure 5.5 shows
the results of analysing the relationship between Facebook activity and term GPAs.
Students were divided into ﬁve groups of approximately same size according to their
weekly Facebook activity. Figure 5.5a on the top shows the activity levels of each
group as well as the mean term GPA, and Figure 5.5b on the bottom shows the detailed
GPA distribution of each group. In both plots the bar heights indicate the mean values
from 100 test runs and the error bars show the standard error of the mean (SEM). The
SEMs are very low which indicates that the sample estimates the population very pre-
cisely. Figure 5.5a reveals that people with less activity have on average higher GPAs.
Furthermore, it can be seen that the majority of the people post less than four posts per
week. There are only very few people with four or more posts per week and thus, the
most right bar is far wider than the others but contains the same number of students.
Looking at Figure 5.5b and comparing the two groups of highest and lowest activity
shows clearly a different pattern which emphasizes the negative effect of Facebook
activity on academic performance.
Next, we investigated how the activity patterns change over the course of the semester.
For that reason we looked at the weekly Facebook activity of students. The students are
here divided into four groups according to their term GPA. We consider here the 13-
week lecture period plus the following two-week examination period. Figure 5.6 shows
how active the students of the different groups were in each week of the semester. The
bar heights indicate the number of published posts in a particular week and the error
bars show the standard error of the mean after 100 test runs. The results reveal that the
activity levels of each group are surprisingly robust over the semester. It can also be
seen that high performers are on average less active on Facebook which is consistent
with the results shown in Figure 5.5.
Here we want to ﬁnd out whether the Facebook activity of the different groups is sig-
niﬁcantly different. A statistical test should reveal whether the observations originate
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Facebook activity
23
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: The top plot (a) shows the division of students into ﬁve groups of equal
size according to their Facebook activity. The bar heights indicate the
mean term GPAs of each group. The bottom plot (b) shows the detailed
distribution of term GPAs for each group. Error bars indicate the standard
error of the mean after 100 test runs.
from the same population or not. As before, we use here the two-sided Mann-Whitney
U-test and compare the average number of published posts per week of the students
from each of the four performance groups. Table 5.2 shows the resulting p-values from
a pair-wise comparison. The two groups with lowest GPAs have a probability of 90%
to originate from the same population. That is, there is no statistical evidence that the
==PAGE:32==
24
Individual effects
Figure 5.6: Weekly Facebook activity of students divided into four groups according
to their term GPA. Bar heights indicate the number of published posts in a
particular week and the error bars show the standard error of the mean.
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 1
-
Group 2
.902
-
Group 3
<.001
<.001
-
Group 4
<.001
<.001
<.001
-
Table 5.2: p-values of two-sided Mann-Whitney U-test of weekly Facebook activity
from each pair of groups.
observed values do not belong to the the same group. It also means that the observation
that group 2 has higher grades than group 1 is not signiﬁcant. All other test yielded a
very low p-value (p < .001) which indicates a signiﬁcant difference.
5.3
Personality
The SensibleDTU dataset contains questionnaires which were ﬁlled out by the study
participants in the beginning of the experiment. The questionnaire contains a num-
ber of personality tests. The following paragraphs describe the tests that were further
investigated.
Big Five Inventory (BFI) [103]
44-item questionnaire which assesses ﬁve personal-
ity dimensions: Openness to experience, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeable-
==PAGE:33==
5.3 Personality
25
ness, and Neuroticism. It is considered to be the most commonly accepted framework
to capture personality [27, 28, 29]. All 44 items are answered using a 5-point Likert
scale which measures to what extend the test taker agrees with given character descrip-
tions.
Rosenberg Self Esteem Scale [104]
10-item questionnaire that measures global self-
worth on a one-dimensional scale. The items are answered using a 4-point Likert scale
ranging from "strongly agree" to "strongly disagree".
Narcissism NAR-Q [105]
18-item questionnaire which assesses two dimensions of
narcissism: admiration and rivalry. The items are answered using a 6-point Likert scale
ranging from "not agree at all" to "agree completely".
Satisfaction With Life Scale [106]
A short 5-item questionnaire that measures on
a one-dimensional scale how satisﬁed a person is with his/her life. The items are an-
swered using a 7-point Likert scale ranging from "strongly agree" to "strongly dis-
agree".
Rotters Locus of Control Scale [107]
13-item questionnaire which measures the
extent to which people think they have control over events affecting them. Each item
consists of two statements and test takers have to indicate which describes better how
they feel.
UCLA Loneliness scale [108]
20-item questionnaire which measure one’s subjective
feelings of loneliness. The items are answered using a 4-point Likert scale ranging from
"I often feel this way" to "I never feel this way".
Cohen’s perceived stress scale [109]
10-item questionnaire which measures "the
degree to which individuals appraise situations in their lives as stressful" [109]. The
questions ask about feelings and thoughts during the last month, and are answered
using a 4-point Likert scale ranging from "never" to "very often".
Major Depression Inventory [110]
12-item questionnaire which measures depres-
sion of individuals. The questions ask how one has been feeling over the last two
weeks, and are answered using a 6-point Likert scale ranging from "All the time" to
"At no time".
==PAGE:34==
26
Individual effects
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) [111]
10-item questionnaire which
assesses one’s positive and negative affect. Test takers indicate to what extend they ex-
perience a given emotion using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from "Not at all" to
"Completely".
839 students submitted ﬁlled-out questionnaires which were evaluated and used to an-
alyze the inﬂuence of personality on academic performance. This was done by calcu-
lating for each personality feature Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcients [96]. Since
the personality test was taken only once at the beginning of the study and captures the
overall personality we focused only on the impact on the cumulative GPAs.
Results
Table 5.3 shows the correlations between all investigated personality factors and cumu-
lative GPAs calculated from 813 students. Self Esteem and Conscientiousness show a
signiﬁcant positive correlation with cumulative GPAs. Furthermore, Satisfaction with
Life and PANAS positive show a moderate positive correlation while Depression, Stress,
and Locus of Control show a moderate negative correlation. All other personality fea-
tures failed to reach statistical signiﬁcance or show no perceivable correlation. Mis-
chel [112] coined the term personality coefﬁcient which he deﬁned as a correlation
coefﬁcient between .20 and .30. He argues that this represents the upper limit of a cor-
relation between a personality dimension inferred from a questionnaire and any kind
of conceivable external effect. Accordingly, the personality traits Self esteem and Con-
scientiousness are such personality coefﬁcients for predicting academic performance.
The correlation of those two traits with the cumulative GPA is shown in the plots in
Figure 5.7. Figure 5.7a shows the correlation of Self Esteem and Figure 5.7b shows
Conscientiousness. Every point in the scatter plots represents one student and the col-
ors indicate the density of points; dark-red corresponds to a very high density and blue
to a low one. In both plots a positive, almost linear correlation can be observed.
By investigating the correlations of the personality traits we have tested 16 hypotheses
with the same sample. Seven of those were conﬁrmed with a signiﬁcance of p < .001.
However, when testing multiple hypotheses with the same sample there is always the
risk of getting a signiﬁcant result by chance. Equation 5.2 derives the probability of
getting a signiﬁcant result by chance where ˆp is our desired signiﬁcance level of .001.
According to the result, there is a chance of 1.6% of getting an irregular signiﬁcant
result. This is higher than our desired signiﬁcance level but still quite small. However,
==PAGE:35==
5.4 Summary
27
Personality feature
rS
p-value
Self esteem
.253
<.001
Big Five: Conscientiousness
.215
<.001
Satisfaction with Life
.188
<.001
Depression
-.162
<.001
Stress
-.162
<.001
PANAS positive
.144
<.001
Locus of Control
-.131
<.001
PANAS negative
-.076
.031
Loneliness
-.071
.044
Big Five: Openness
.066
.059
Narcissism: Rivalry
-.037
.298
Narcissism: Admiration
.025
.472
Big Five: Neuroticism
-.023
.505
Narcissism: Overall
-.007
.849
Big Five: Extraversion
.003
.926
Big Five: Agreeableness
.003
.922
Table 5.3: Correlations of personality traits and cumulative GPA.
when testing more hypotheses this is something that should be taken into account.
P(at least one signiﬁcant result in m tests) = 1 −P(no signiﬁcant result in m tests)
= 1 −(1 −ˆp)m
= 1 −(1 −0.001)16
≈.016
(5.2)
5.4
Summary
We analysed here different behavioural factors as well as the personalities of students.
Furthermore, we have presented a new method to derive class locations from blue-
tooth and location date which allowed us to analyse the students’ class attendance. We
found that class attendance is an essential predictor for academic performance. This
is in line with the ﬁndings in signiﬁcant literature [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26].
Furthermore, the publishing activity on Facebook was shown to be negative corre-
lated. Other works have pointed out already the negative impact of social media us-
age [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] but they mostly focused on the spent time. In the last
==PAGE:36==
28
Individual effects
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: Scatter plots showing the correlations between the two top personality fea-
tures and the cumulative GPA. The left plot (a) shows Self Esteem and the
right plot (b) shows Conscientiousness. The colors indicate the density of
the points; dark-red shows a high density and blows shows a low density.
part of this section we have investigated different personality traits. Out of 16 person-
ality traits Self Esteem and Conscientiousness were found to be the strongest predictors
for academic performance. Satisfaction with Life and Positive Affect (both positive) as
well as Stress, Depression, and Locus of Control (all negative) showed also a signiﬁ-
cant impact on academic achievements. All these results are consistent with the current
literature and conﬁrm that the data is representative.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6
Network effects
Traditional research is mostly focused on individual students. We go beyond this point
to investigate how students are affected by their social networks. In this section we
describe the methods and discuss the results.
6.1
Channels
We model the students’ social networks based on their social interactions. For each
type of interaction we create a separate network. The following paragraphs describe
the ﬁve different channels of social interactions from which we modeled the students’
social networks.
Face-to-face interactions
Face-to-face interactions were inferred from the bluetooth
data. Bluetooth scans show other devices in a close distance (5-10 m) and were binned
into 5 minute time bins. Interactions between two people were only considered when
the connection appeared in at least two subsequent time bins. If between two inter-
actions of the same two people is a gap of only ﬁve minutes (=one time bin) the two
interactions were merged to one. It is possible that two people are within a 10 me-
ter radius without an actual social interaction and it is also possible to interact over a
==PAGE:38==
30
Network effects
distance greater than 10 meters [5]. So, even tough bluetooth scans do not perfectly
capture face-to-face interactions they have been successfully used for sensing social
networks [113].
Facebook friendships
Facebook friendships were retrieved from the Facebook dumps
in the dataset. We considered the friendship network as static. That is, we did not inves-
tigate changes in friendships. For per-term investigations two people were considered
as friends when their friendship was present in at least one dump which was pulled
during the semester. That is, even when they became friends late in the semester they
were considered as friends during the entire semester.
Facebook interactions
Facebook interactions between people were inferred from
Facebook feeds of type status and photo. Every feed is associated with a number
of Facebook proﬁles. First of all, there is the creator of the feed (from) followed by a
number of tagged proﬁles. There are different types of tags: to, with_tags, story_tags,
message_tags. We have treated all associated proﬁles equally regardless of the type
of association. An interaction was considered between each pair of those proﬁles.
Facebook messages are not considered here since they are not present in the dataset.
Calls
For each call the dataset contains information about the duration, the number
of the caller / called person and whether it was an incoming, outgoing, or missed call.
Text messages
For each text message the dataset contains information about the the
number of the sender / recipient and whether it was an incoming or outgoing message.
6.2
Network Analysis
Modelling friendship networks from the different channels brings up some issues re-
lated to the nature of the channel types. Facebook friendships are very straight-forward
because for every pair of students either there is a link in the network or there is no
link. That is, all relations are the same. For all other channels it is not that simple
because relationships are derived from interactions between students. The number and
properties of interactions leads to very different relationships. We consider the number
of interactions as the most important property and thus, we consider them as the edge
weights when modelling friendship networks. When analyzing the network there are
three ways to consider edge weights:
==PAGE:39==
6.3 Results
31
(a) Binary edges: All relationships are treated the same. The number of interactions
or other properties have no effect.
(b) Thresholding: Considering only edges with weights above the threshold but
treating them all the same. That is, we only consider a relationship between two
students when they had at least a certain amount of interactions in a particular
period.
(c) Weighting: The higher the edge weight the stronger the relation. Effects from
friends with more interactions have greater impact.
In an empirical evaluation we analysed the characteristics of every interaction chan-
nel. That is, we investigated how the interaction patterns of average students look like
in terms of number of interactions, number of interaction partners, etc. Based on the
results of this investigation we have decided to model call and text networks with bi-
nary edges and the networks for Facebook and Face-to-face interactions with weighted
edges. The reason for modelling the call and text message network with binary edges is
because the number of incoming and outgoing edges per node is quite small and there
is also only very little variation in the number of interactions. Thus, putting some extra
weight on some edges does not make sense. However in the Facebook and Face-to-face
network there are way more edges per node and the number of interactions varies a lot.
Weighting the edges helps to put more focus on the relevant interactions. However,
a linear weighting has shown to be too sensitive. For example, when there are 10 in-
teractions with person A and 20 interactions with person B a linear weighting would
consider person B as twice as important. For that reason, we have chosen to weight the
edges by the ﬂoor of the square root of number of interactions. This would give person
A weight 3 and person B weight 4 in the previous example. This is more robust against
the high variation of interaction numbers.
Friendship networks via calls and texts have an additional speciality: They can be
considered as directed or undirected graph. That is, we can take into account whether
a call or text was incoming or outgoing, or treat them all as the same. In the undirected
network for calls are also missed calls considered. For most of the analyses we have
investigated both versions but the results showed only marginal differences.
6.3
Results
6.3.1
Network centrality
We want to investigate what inﬂuence the position in a social network has on academic
performance. For each channel we build a network of social interactions where each
==PAGE:40==
32
Network effects
Channel
degree-centrality
eigenvector-centrality
Face-to-face interactions
.213
.266
Calls (incoming)
.183
.136
Calls (undirected)
.176
.130
Calls (outgoing)
.174
.126
Facebook friendships
.152
.140
Texts (incoming)
.142
.097a
Facebook interactions
.138
.097a
Texts (undirected)
.132
.096a
Texts (outgoing)
.132
.094a
a: p < .01; others: p < .001
Table 6.1: Correlations between cumulative GPAs and two different centrality mea-
sures in social networks. Centrality in the face-to-face network shows the
strongest correlation. Results from both centrality measures are very con-
sistent.
node represents an individual student. For each node we compute the centrality and
determine then their correlation to the cumulative GPA. As measure for centrality we
use the degree and the eigenvector centrality. The degree centrality for a node is the
fraction of nodes it is connected to. That also means that the edge weights are ig-
nored and only the number of incoming and outgoing edges are considered. Whereas
in the eigenvector centrality a node is important if it is linked to by other important
nodes. That means is also takes the edge weights into account. For calls and texts we
consider both the undirected and the directed network. Table 6.1 shows the resulting
correlations . For all channels a weak to moderate positive correlation was found. Cen-
trality in the face-to-face network showed the strongest inﬂuence. There is almost no
difference between the directed and undirected networks of texts and calls. However,
the incoming edges shows for both texts and calls a marginal higher correlation. The
results are robust against the measure of centrality and consistent with the current liter-
ature [83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88]. However, only the centrality in the face-to-face network
showed a similarly strong correlation.
6.3.2
Group homophily
We have found that a high level of homophily with respect to academic performance is
present in the social networks. That is, students tend to prefer social contacts to others
with similar GPAs. This result is robust with respect to the channel of interaction; we
ﬁnd the same trend for Facebook friendships, Facebook interactions, Face-to-face in-
teractions, calls, and texts. This observation is illustrated in Figure 6.1 where students
are divided into ﬁve groups of equal size according to their GPAs. Each line represents
==PAGE:41==
6.3 Results
33
a certain channel and all of them show an increasing trend. Remarkable is, that inter-
actions via calls and texts show a stronger level of homophily compared to the other
channels. Table 6.2 shows the correlations between the cumulative GPA and mean GPA
of friends for all channels. All channels show very strong correlations led by texts and
calls. Furthermore, Figure 6.2 illustrates the correlation for text messages using a den-
sity scatter plot. The density of points is shown by different colors; dark-red indicates
a high density and blue means a low density. A clear positive and linear correlation can
be observed.
Figure 6.1: Group homophily with respect to academic performance across channels.
In order to ﬁnd out how strong this group homophily is we analyze the social interac-
tions of each student. For that reason we divide the students into four groups of equal
size according to their cumulative GPAs. For each student we determine the distribu-
tion of his/her interactions. That is, we calculate the fraction of interactions between
the student and members of each of the GPA groups. Figure 6.3 illustrates the aver-
aged distribution for each group of students for interactions via texts. The bar heights
indicate the mean ratios of every group. In each group the bar of the same group peaks.
That is, students preferably communicate with students within the same group. Similar
trends were also observed for the other channels.
In order to show that the observed communication patterns between the groups are dif-
ferent we perform as before a pair-wise comparison using a two-sided Mann-Whitney
U-test. For each student the mean group number G of their interactions was calcu-
lated as shown in Equation 6.1 where pi denotes the ratio of interactions with students
in group i. Table 6.3 shows the resulting p-values. Almost all pairs achieve a high
signiﬁcance level which means there is a signiﬁcant difference in with whom people
interact. Only group 3 and 4 have a probability of about 15% to originate from the
==PAGE:42==
34
Network effects
Channel
rS
Texts
.432
Calls
.415
Facebook interactions
.323
Facebook friendships
.300
Face-to-face interactions
.284
Table 6.2: Correlations between cu-
mulative GPA and mean
GPA of friends from differ-
ent channels.
All correla-
tions with p < .001.
Figure 6.2: Correlation between students’
cumulative
GPAs
and
the
GPAs of their friends obtained
from text messages.
Colors
indicate the density of points;
dark-red shows a high density
and blue a low density.
same distribution which indicates an insigniﬁcant difference. This is consistent with
the observations made in Figure 6.3.
G =
4
X
i=1
i · pi
(6.1)
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Group 1
-
Group 2
<.001
-
Group 3
<.001
.006
-
Group 4
<.001
<.001
.145
-
Table 6.3: p-values from two-sided Mann-Whitney U-test comparing the mean group
number of text messages. Results prove that each group has a signiﬁcantly
different selection of interaction partners. Only the comparison between
group 3 and group 4 has not reached sufﬁcient signiﬁcance.
==PAGE:43==
6.4 Summary
35
Figure 6.3: Group homophily with respect to academic performance observed in the
text message network. Bar heights indicate the ratio of interactions made
within a group. In each group the bar of the own group peaks. That is,
most of the interactions occur between people with a similar GPA.
6.4
Summary
In this section we have presented our approaches of analysing network effects on aca-
demic performance. For modeling the students’ social networks we have considered
social interactions from ﬁve different channels. The strategic position in the social net-
work has been shown to have signiﬁcant impact on academic achievements. This effect
has the highest degree of severity in the face-to-face network but was also observed in
the other networks. Moreover, results are robust against the type of centrality measure
and are in line with the current literature [83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88]. Further analyses of the
social networks have revealed a strong degree of group homophily. That is, most so-
cial interactions occur between people with similar academic achievements. Thus, the
friends’ GPAs are excellent predictors for the own GPA. Particularly, in the networks of
texts and calls we have found a very strong correlation and statistical tests have proven
the signiﬁcance. This is consistent with the work of Poldin et al. who found a positive
relation between the GPAs of students and the GPAs of their study partners which they
described as peer effects [89].
==PAGE:44==
36
Network effects
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 7
Performance Prediction
The goal of this section is to use the ﬁndings from the previous chapters to predict
students’ academic performance. In particular, we try to solve here a supervised ma-
chine learning problem: Each student is represented by a number of features and has a
label according to his/her academic performance. Statistical models are created based
on these feature-label pairs to predict the label of a new, unseen feature-vector. We
investigate here two different approaches of labelling the students:
(a) Regression: Each student is labelled with his/her cumulative GPA of a student.
(b) Classiﬁcation: According to their overall GPA students are divided into three
classes: low-, moderate-, and high-performers. As group limits we use the 33.33
and 66.67 percentiles of the GPAs to make sure that the group sizes are balanced.
For both approaches a number of different models are tested and evaluated. The follow-
ing sections describe the features and models followed by an evaluation of the results.
==PAGE:46==
38
Performance Prediction
Feature set
Features
personality-only
Big Five: Neuroticism, Big Five: Openness, Big Five: Con-
scientiousness, Big Five: Extraversion, Big Five: Agreeable-
ness, Satisfaction with Life, Locus of Control, PANAS pos,
PANAS neg, Self Esteem, Loneliness, Stress, Depression,
Narcissism: Rivalry, Narcissism: Admiration, Narcissism:
Overall
individual-only
Facebook activity, Class attendance, all personality features
network-only
Mean GPA of friends from {Calls, Texts, Face-to-face, Face-
book interactions, Facebook friends}, Degree centrality in
Social Network from {Calls, Texts, Face-to-face, Facebook
interactions, Facebook friends}
individual-
network-combined
all individual features + all network features
Table 7.1: Feature sets for performance predictions.
7.1
Features
We only used the features extracted from the previous analyses in order to determine
how much predictive potential they have. We assigned each of them to one or more sets
of features: personality-only, individual-only, network-only, and individual-network-
combined. The personality-only feature set contains all features extracted from the
personality tests discussed in Section 5.3. Individual-only contains the personality fea-
tures plus Facebook activity and class attendance. Network-only contains all features
extracted from the network analyses in Chapter 6 such as network centrality, and mean
GPA of friends from different channels. The Individual-network-combined feature set
contains all the features from the Individual-only and network-only features. Table 7.1
lists all feature sets with their contained features. Based on the analyses in the previous
sections we extracted a total of 28 features. Out of initial 957 students with a cumula-
tive GPA, 541 students have complete feature vectors. Figure 7.1 shows the correlation
of each feature with the cumulative GPA. Blue bars indicate a positive correlation while
red bars show a negative correlation.
The correlations are already a good indicator about how important different features
are. However, we want to further explore on that and apply some feature importance
analyses. For the classiﬁcation task we apply the Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) F-
test and for the regression task we use a univariate linear regression tests. Table 7.2
shows the ten most import features for the regression task and Table 7.3 shows the
feature ranking for the classiﬁcation task. It can be seen that both tables contain the
same ten features with only minor differences in the ranking. The results show also
that the friends’ GPAs from different channels represents the best predictor followed
==PAGE:47==
7.1 Features
39
Figure 7.1: Correlations between feaures and cumulative GPAs. Blue bars indicate
positive correlations and red bars negative correlations.
1p<.001, 2p<.01
by the class attendance. The complete ranking of all features including the computed
values can be found in Table C.1 and Table C.2 in the appendix.
The Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a commonly used method for data reduc-
tion and simpliﬁcation [114]. It uses singular value decomposition of the data to project
it to a lower dimensional space. Figure 7.2 contains two plots showing the results of
the PCA of the combined feature set. Figure 7.2a shows the cumulative sum of each
component’s explained variance. Figure 7.2b shows a projection of the ﬁrst two com-
ponents where each class is represented by a different color. The data is very noisy and
a class separation cannot be observed here. According to these results a dimensionality
reduction of this data is not suggested and thus, we use the unaltered data for further
investigations.
==PAGE:48==
40
Performance Prediction
Rank
Feature
1
Mean GPA - Texts
2
Mean GPA - Calls
3
Mean GPA - FB Interactions
4
Class attendance
5
Mean GPA - FB friends
6
Mean GPA - Face-to-face
7
Centrality - Face-to-face
8
Big Five: Conscientiousness
9
Self esteem
10
Centrality - Calls
Table 7.2: Top ten features for regression
task determined by a univari-
ate linear regression test.
Rank
Feature
1
Mean GPA - Texts
2
Mean GPA - Calls
3
Mean GPA - FB Interactions
4
Mean GPA - Face-to-face
5
Class attendance
6
Mean GPA - FB friends
7
Big Five: Conscientiousness
8
Centrality - Face-to-face
9
Self esteem
10
Centrality - Calls
Table 7.3: Top ten features for classiﬁ-
cation task determined by an
ANOVA F-test.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.2: Results from Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of the combined fea-
ture set. The left plot (a) illustrates how much variance is explained by
how many principal components. The right plot (b) projects the ﬁrst two
principal components where each class is represented by a different color.
As seen in (a) those two components explain only 36.4% of the features’
variance. A class separation cannot be observed here.
7.2
Models
For both prediction tasks a number of different models were tested. For predicting the
GPAs we tested Linear Regression, Elastic Net, Support Vector Regressor (SVR), and
Random Forrest Regressor. For the 3-class prediction we tested Logistic Regression,
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), Support Vector Classiﬁer (SVC), and Random
==PAGE:49==
7.3 Results
41
Forest Classiﬁer. For each model different parameter-conﬁgurations were tested. We
only discuss the best found conﬁguration of each model. For the experimental evalua-
tion we used the model implementations of the Scikit-Learn Package for Python [115].
To measure the predictive performance of the models we use a 10 fold cross-validation.
Experiments have shown that results vary signiﬁcantly. Thus, we average the result
over 30 test runs. As performance criterion for classiﬁcation models we use accuracy.
For regression models we consider the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) as performance
measure.
7.3
Results
7.3.1
Regression task
Table 7.4 shows the results for the GPA prediction of different models. Comparing the
results for the different feature sets shows that predictions only based on personality
features perform poorly. Adding behavioral features of individuals gives already a sig-
niﬁcant improvement. Furthermore, all models give better results for network features
than for individual features. However, the best results arise from combining individual
and network features.
An Elastic Net is a linear regression with combined L1 and L2 priors as regularizer.
That is, it comprises the Lasso penalty (L1) and the Ridge penalty (L2) [116]. The best
result was achieved by such an Elastic Net model with a penalty factor α = 0.001 and
a balanced L1-L2 ratio (.5) using the combined feature set. The model explains 31% of
the variance and yields a MAE of .49. However, this result is only slightly better than
the one from Linear Regression and moreover, it is not particularly good on a GPA scale
from 0 to 4. Figure 7.3 shows a density scatter plot of predicted versus actual GPAs
from a 10-fold cross-validation with an Elastic Net model. The red diagonal indicates
perfect predictions. The color of the dots indicates the density; dark-red represents
high density and blue means a low density. It can be seen that the predictions are very
conservative. That is, most predictions are in the range from 2.0 to 3.0. Most of the
very low GPAs are predicted too high and the very high GPAs are predicted too low.
These predictions reﬂect the original distribution of GPAs (see Figure 4.1).
==PAGE:50==
42
Performance Prediction
Model
i
ii
iii
iv
Linear Regression
.610
.570
.538
.493
Elastic Net
.608
.568
.538
.490
SVR
.613
.576
.538
.510
Random Forrest Regressor
.625
.584
.547
.516
i) personality-only, ii) individual-only, iii) network-only, iv) individual-network-combined
Table 7.4: Mean Absolute Errors (MAE) from GPA predictions after 30 10-fold cross-
validations. The best result is achieved by the Elastic Net model with the
combined feature set.
Figure 7.3: Predicted versus actual GPAs from a 10-fold cross-validation with an Elas-
tic Net model. The red diagonal line indicates perfect predictions. The
colors of the dots indicate the density of predictions; dark-red represents
the highest density and blue shows the lowest density.
7.3.2
Classiﬁcation task
Table 7.4 shows the results for the classiﬁcation task of different models. LDA achieved
with the combined feature set an accuracy of 53.6% which is signiﬁcantly better than
the baseline (33.33%). Table 7.6 shows more details of the prediction. It can be seen
that the model struggles with predicting moderate performers. Only 35.1% of moderate
==PAGE:51==
7.4 Summary
43
Model
i
ii
iii
iv
Logistic Regression
41.7%
46.9%
47.0%
51.2%
LDA
42.2%
47.2%
46.1%
53.6%
SVC
41.2%
41.4%
43.6%
41.3%
Random Forrest Classiﬁer
43.2%
43.2%
45.3%
47.5%
i) personality-only, ii) individual-only, iii) network-only, iv) individual-network-combined
Table 7.5: Classiﬁcation accuracies from 3-class predictions after 30 10-fold cross-
validations. The best result achieves the Linear Discriminant Analysis with
the combined feature set.
Low GPA
Moderate GPA
High GPA
Per-class Precision
60.1%
40.6%
57.8%
Per-class Recall
59.8%
35.1%
65.9%
Table 7.6: Per-class precision and recall for 3-class prediction made by an LDA model
with 53.6% accuracy.
performers are predicted as such.
7.4
Summary
In this chapter we have taken an attempt to create statistical models which can predict
students’ academic performance. Students were represented by a number of features
which were extracted from the previous analyses. In order to get a better understanding
of the data we performed a number of different analyses including feature importances
and dimensionality reduction. By testing different feature sets we were able to show
that network features are at least as important as individual features and the best results
were achieved by combining them. The friends’ GPAs from different channels and the
class attendance have been shown to be the most important predictors. The regression
models were homogeneously unable to achieve meaningful predictions. None of them
could explain more than 32% of the data’s variance. However, we got some decent
results for the classiﬁcation task. LDA has achieved a classiﬁcation accuracy of around
20 percentage points above the baseline. This is approximately the same as Vandamme
et al. achieved in their attempt [92]. However, predicting academic performance has
been proven to be not a trivial task.
==PAGE:52==
44
Performance Prediction
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
Individual Effects
Among the individual effects class attendance has shown the strongest correlation with
academic performance. The observed positive effect of class attendance is consistent
with the ﬁndings in existing literature [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. This also proves
the effectiveness of the proposed method of deriving the class locations and class atten-
dances from location and bluetooth data. However, since the actual class locations are
unknown the only evaluation of the method was through a sanity check by using the
visualization tool. Furthermore, there are known issues with courses with anomalous
class schedules, courses with only very few participants, and courses with an uncon-
ventional class format (e.g. independent group works).
Facebook activity was found to have a negative relation to academic performance. This
agrees with the majority of the studies that investigated Facebook and social media
usage [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. However, our Facebook activity refers only to the
publishing activities of users such as posting a status update or uploading a picture.
We have no information about how much time a user spends on Facebook just strolling
through the news feed and others’ proﬁles.
The analysis of the different personality traits revealed two personality coefﬁcients
namely Conscientiousness and Self Esteem. That is, those two reached a correlation
==PAGE:54==
46
Discussion
coefﬁcient between .20 and .30 which represents according to Mischel [112] the upper
limit for any correlation with a personality trait. The positive relation of Conscientious-
ness and Self Esteem with academic performance corresponds with the results of many
existing works [30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59]. Also the results for all the other personality
traits agree with the current literature. That indicates that the sample is representative .
Network Effects
Network centrality was found to be positive correlated with academic performance
which is in line with the current literature [83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88]. However, only the
centrality in the face-to-face network achieved a similarly strong effect.
The academic performance of friends has proven to be the best predictor of the own
academic achievements. The term friends refers here to people we interact with. This
correlation was found across different channels of social interactions. Calls and text
messages were the channels who showed the strongest correlations. We assume that
this is due to the fact that those interactions capture stronger relationships. That is,
calling a person requires more effort and time commitment as compared to initiating
or accepting a friend request on Facebook. For all the investigated interactions we
only considered interactions between two study participants. Consequently, a lot of
interactions were left out.
For both the individual effects and the network effects we have found a number of
different correlated factors. However, it should be noted that the correlations found do
not necessarily imply causation. That is, we can not conclude whether class attendance
has really a positive effect on ﬁnal grades or whether good students simply show up
more often for class. The same holds for the group homophily where we do not know
whether friends really inﬂuence the grades or whether they just pick friends with similar
grades. We assume that the truth is a combination of both and future work is needed to
establish causal relationships.
Performance Prediction
Although we were able to extract a lot of correlated features predicting academic per-
formance is not a trivial task. Our analyses gave us some new insights into the im-
portance of individual and network effects but there are also other aspects and circum-
stances that contribute to study success. Both types of predictions, the regression and
==PAGE:55==
47
the classiﬁcation approach, had their issues. None of the regression models could ex-
plain more than 32% of the data’s variance. At the classiﬁcation task we achieved a
classiﬁcation accuracy of about 20 percentage points above the baseline which is still
quite low. However, the result as well as the method itself is very similar to the ap-
proach of Vandamme et al. [92]. The best results there were also achieved with LDA
and even some of their features were identical (e.g. class attendance). The accuracy
of 57% they obtained is also similar to our results. Achieving a similar result with a
similar method supports the hypothesis that making performance predictions based on
the used data is only to some extent possible. However, we achieved a similar result
with only a fraction of the features. While Vandamme et al. used 375 features we
used only 28 which suggests the previous hypothesis that the dependence of academic
performance on personality and social environment is limited and it is a more complex
phenomenon.
For both the classiﬁcation and the regression task the best results were achieved with
quite simple, linear models such as LDA and Elastic Net. This can be reasoned by
the fact that most of the features have a pretty linear correlation with academic perfor-
mance. Consequently more sophisticated models do not give any improvement.
By testing different feature sets we were able to show that adding network-related fea-
tures gives an performance improvement. That is, analyses which are only looking at
the individual students are missing out important information. For future research we
recommend to explore the role of social interactions and social networks even further.
==PAGE:56==
48
Discussion
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
With this project we have taken an approach to investigate individual and network
factors that inﬂuence students’ academic performance. We utilized the SensibleDTU
dataset that contains the collected data from 1000 smartphones handed out students.
It contains data on face-to-face interactions, telecommunication, social networks, and
locations which was collected over more than two years. By analyzing this data we
have found a umber of factors that were correlated with academic performance. Net-
work effects, in particular the academic performance of friends showed a very high
correlation. This was observed across different channels of interactions. Furthermore,
behavioral predictors like class attendance and Facebook activity were also shown to
be correlated. From the investigated personality traits showed Conscientiousness and
Self esteem the highest correlation. As part of the analyses we have proposed a novel
approach of estimating class locations and deriving information about class attendance
from bluetooth and location data. This method has been proven to work very accurately.
Based on these analyses we extracted 28 features which were used to create statistical
models to predict the academic performance of students.With a classiﬁcation approach
we have achieved an accuracy which is about 20 percentage points above the baseline.
This is still quite low but corresponds to results in current literature. This shows that
making predictions is not a trivial task and that there are also other aspects and circum-
stances that contribute to study success. Possible steps to improve the results as well as
directions for future research were discussed.
==PAGE:58==
50
Conclusion
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX A
Additional material
Module timetable
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
8am - 12pm
1A
3A
5A
2B
4B
12pm - 1pm
- b r e a k -
1pm - 5pm
2A
4A
5B
1B
3B
Table A.1: Module timetable for 13-week lecture period at DTU
Source:
http://www.dtu.dk/english/Education/International-Student-Guide/Studying-at-
DTU/Academic-calendar
==PAGE:60==
52
Additional material
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX B
Source code
Date retrieval via API
Listing B.1: Source code to access data through REST API.
from
__future__
import
d i v i s i o n
import
u r l l i b 2 ,
json ,
pickle ,
datetime ,
time ,
os . path
import numpy as np
#
i n i t
data
s t a r t _ d a t e
= 1377986400 # 01.09.2013
end_date
= 1433023200 # 31.05.2015
i
= 0
i n i t _ t i m e o u t
= 6
timeout
= i n i t _ t i m e o u t
f a t a l _ e r r o r
= False
d a t a _ d i c t
= d i c t ( )
l i m i t _ r e s p o n s e
= 100
l i m i t _ u s e r s
= 10
b e a r e r _ t o k e n
= ’ ’ # API token
u s e r _ l i s t
= [ ]
#
L i s t
of
user
i d s
# check
whether we t h e r e
e x i s t s
a l r e a d y
a
data
f i l e
i f
os . path . i s f i l e ( " d a t a _ f i l e . p" ) :
d a t a _ d i c t = p i c k l e . load ( open (
" d a t a _ f i l e . p" ,
" rb "
)
)
p r i n t
s t r ( len ( d a t a _ d i c t ) ) + ’
u s e r s
loaded ! ’
while
i < len ( u s e r _ l i s t ) :
==PAGE:62==
54
Source code
u s e r _ i d s = [ ]
while
( len ( u s e r _ i d s ) < l i m i t _ u s e r s )
and
( i < len ( u s e r _ l i s t ) ) :
i f
not
u s e r _ l i s t [ i ]
in
d a t a _ d i c t :
u s e r _ i d s . append ( u s e r _ l i s t [ i ] )
d a t a _ d i c t [ u s e r _ l i s t [ i ] ] = −1
i += 1
u s e r _ s t r = ’ , ’ . j o i n ( u s e r _ i d s )
u r l = ’ h t t p s : / /www. s e n s i b l e . dtu . dk / s e n s i b l e −dtu / c o n n e c t o r s /
connector_answer / v1 / < endpoint >/? ’
+\
’ b e a r e r _ t o k e n = ’ + b e a r e r _ t o k e n
+\
’&format = json&decrypted = f a l s e ’
+\
’&s t a r t _ d a t e = ’ +
s t r ( s t a r t _ d a t e ) + \
’&end_date= ’ +
s t r ( end_date ) + \
’&u s e r s = ’ +
u s e r _ s t r + \
’&l i m i t = ’ +
s t r ( l i m i t _ r e s p o n s e )
timeout = i n i t _ t i m e o u t + ( timeout−i n i t _ t i m e o u t ) /2
while
( u r l
!=
’ ’ ) :
p r i n t
’ . ’ ,
sys . s t d o u t . f l u s h ( )
a t t e m p t s = 6
r e s p o n s e _ d a t a = d i c t ( )
while
a t t e m p t s > 0:
t r y :
response =
u r l l i b 2 . urlopen ( url , timeout = timeout )
r e s p o n s e _ d a t a = json . loads ( response . read ( ) )
break
except
Exception , e :
p r i n t
’ Try
again . . . ’ , attempts , e
sys . s t d o u t . f l u s h ( )
a t t e m p t s −= 1
timeout += 1
e l s e :
p r i n t
’ Out of
a t t e m p t s : ’ , i
f a t a l _ e r r o r
= True
break
f o r
r e s u l t
in
r e s p o n s e _ d a t a [ ’ r e s u l t s ’ ] :
uid =
r e s u l t [ ’ user ’ ]
#TODO:
Process
data
d a t a _ d i c t [ uid ] = data
u r l = ’ ’
i f
’ paging ’
in
r e s p _ d a t a [ ’ meta ’ ] :
i f
’ l i n k s ’
in
r e s p _ d a t a [ ’ meta ’ ] [ ’ paging ’ ] :
i f
’ next ’
in
r e s p _ d a t a [ ’ meta ’ ] [ ’ paging ’ ] [ ’ l i n k s ’ ] :
u r l = r e s p _ d a t a [ ’ meta ’ ] [ ’ paging ’ ] [ ’ l i n k s ’ ] [ ’ next ’ ]
i f
f a t a l _ e r r o r :
break
e l s e :
p i c k l e . dump ( d a t a _ d i c t ,
open (
" d a t a _ f i l e . p" ,
"wb"
)
)
p r i n t
" Completed ! "
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX C
Additional results
Correlation of class attendance
(a)
(b)
Figure C.1: Scatter plots showing the correlations between class attendance and term
and cumulative GPA. The left plot (a) shows the correlation for the term
GPA and the right plot (b) shows it for the cumulative GPA. The colors
indicate the density of the points; dark-red shows a high density and blows
shows a low density.
==PAGE:64==
56
Additional results
Feature importance
Rank
Feature
F-value
p-value
1
mean gpa texts
136.915
< .001
2
mean gpa calls
126.703
< .001
3
mean gpa fb interact
76.787
< .001
4
class attendance
63.222
< .001
5
mean gpa fb friends
54.823
< .001
6
mean gpa f2f
54.245
< .001
7
centrality f2f
30.705
< .001
8
big ﬁve conscientiousness
19.480
< .001
9
self esteem
15.869
< .001
10
centrality calls
13.875
< .001
11
centrality texts
11.953
0.001
12
fb activity
11.267
0.001
13
depression
7.836
0.005
14
centrality fb inter
7.776
0.005
15
centrality fb friends
6.438
0.011
16
satisfaction
5.458
0.020
17
panas pos
4.756
0.030
18
locus of control
4.119
0.043
19
big ﬁve agreeableness
2.793
0.095
20
stress
2.776
0.096
21
big ﬁve openness
2.250
0.134
22
big ﬁve extraversion
0.984
0.322
23
big ﬁve neuroticism
0.505
0.478
24
narcissism overall
0.202
0.654
25
narcissism admiration
0.173
0.677
26
narcissism rivalry
0.088
0.767
27
panas neg
0.050
0.823
28
loneliness
0.013
0.909
Table C.1: Complete feature importance ranking from univariate linear regression test
for regression task.
==PAGE:65==
57
Rank
Feature
F-value
p-value
1
mean gpa texts
51.728
< .001
2
mean gpa calls
45.744
< .001
3
mean gpa fb interact
27.546
< .001
4
mean gpa f2f
26.435
< .001
5
class attendance
24.046
< .001
6
mean gpa fb friends
18.605
< .001
7
big ﬁve conscientiousness
12.624
< .001
8
centrality f2f
11.757
< .001
9
self esteem
9.501
< .001
10
centrality calls
7.222
0.001
11
centrality texts
5.180
0.006
12
centrality fb inter
5.020
0.007
13
fb activity
4.816
0.008
14
centrality fb friends
4.128
0.017
15
satisfaction
4.063
0.018
16
depression
3.822
0.022
17
panas pos
3.483
0.031
18
stress
1.770
0.171
19
big ﬁve agreeableness
1.536
0.216
20
locus of control
1.239
0.291
21
big ﬁve openness
0.834
0.435
22
big ﬁve extraversion
0.694
0.500
23
narcissism rivalry
0.402
0.669
24
loneliness
0.189
0.828
25
big ﬁve neuroticism
0.177
0.838
26
panas neg
0.147
0.863
27
narcissism admiration
0.075
0.927
28
narcissism overall
0.066
0.936
Table C.2: Complete feature importance ranking from ANOVA F-test for classiﬁcation
task.
==PAGE:66==
58
Additional results
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] D. E. Lavin, The prediction of academic performance. Russell Sage Foundation,
1965.
[2] K. McKenzie and R. Schweitzer, “Who succeeds at university? factors predict-
ing academic performance in ﬁrst year australian university students,” Higher
education research and development, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 21–33, 2001.
[3] R. Junco, “Comparing actual and self-reported measures of facebook use,” Com-
puters in Human Behavior, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 626–631, 2013.
[4] T. F. Van de Mortel et al., “Faking it: social desirability response bias in self-
report research,” Australian Journal of Advanced Nursing, The, vol. 25, no. 4,
p. 40, 2008.
[5] A. Stopczynski, V. Sekara, P. Sapiezynski, A. Cuttone, M. M. Madsen, J. E.
Larsen, and S. Lehmann, “Measuring large-scale social networks with high res-
olution,” PloS one, vol. 9, no. 4, p. e95978, 2014.
[6] M. M. Maqableh, L. Rajab, W. Quteshat, R. Moh’d Taisir Masa, T. Khatib,
H. Karajeh, et al., “The impact of social media networks websites usage on
students’ academic performance,” Communications and Network, vol. 7, no. 04,
p. 159, 2015.
[7] J. J. Al-Menayes, “Social media use, engagement and addiction as predictors of
academic performance,” International Journal of Psychological Studies, vol. 7,
no. 4, p. 86, 2015.
[8] J. J. Al-Menayes, “The relationship between mobile social media use and aca-
demic performance in university students,” New Media and Mass Communica-
tion, vol. 25, pp. 23–29, 2014.
==PAGE:68==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] A. C. Karpinski, P. A. Kirschner, I. Ozer, J. A. Mellott, and P. Ochwo, “An ex-
ploration of social networking site use, multitasking, and academic performance
among united states and european university students,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1182–1192, 2013.
[10] J. A. Paul, H. M. Baker, and J. D. Cochran, “Effect of online social network-
ing on student academic performance,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 28,
no. 6, pp. 2117–2127, 2012.
[11] R. Junco, “The relationship between frequency of facebook use, participation in
facebook activities, and student engagement,” Computers & Education, vol. 58,
no. 1, pp. 162–171, 2012.
[12] W. C. Jacobsen and R. Forste, “The wired generation: Academic and social
outcomes of electronic media use among university students,” Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 275–280, 2011.
[13] P. A. Kirschner and A. C. Karpinski, “Facebook R⃝and academic performance,”
Computers in human behavior, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 1237–1245, 2010.
[14] J. Pasek, E. Hargittai, et al., “Facebook and academic performance: Reconciling
a media sensation with data,” First Monday, vol. 14, no. 5, 2009.
[15] S. Ainin, M. M. Naqshbandi, S. Moghavvemi, and N. I. Jaafar, “Facebook us-
age, socialization and academic performance,” Computers & Education, vol. 83,
pp. 64–73, 2015.
[16] M. Tayseer, F. Zoghieb, I. Alcheikh, and M. N. Awadallah, “Social network:
Academic & social impact on college students,” 2014.
[17] E. A. Kolek and D. Saunders, “Online disclosure: An empirical examination of
undergraduate facebook proﬁles,” NASPA journal, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 1–25, 2008.
[18] E. Hargittai and Y.-l. P. Hsieh, “Predictors and consequences of differenti-
ated practices on social network sites,” Information, Communication & Society,
vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 515–536, 2010.
[19] L. Stanca, “The effects of attendance on academic performance: Panel data ev-
idence for introductory microeconomics,” The Journal of Economic Education,
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 251–266, 2006.
[20] L. Buckalew, J. D. Daly, and K. Cofﬁeld, “Relationship of initial class atten-
dance and seating location to academic performance in psychology classes,”
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 63–64, 1986.
[21] J. Chen and T.-F. Lin, “Class attendance and exam performance: A randomized
experiment,” The Journal of Economic Education, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 213–227,
2008.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[22] M. Credé, S. G. Roch, and U. M. Kieszczynka, “Class attendance in college
a meta-analytic review of the relationship of class attendance with grades and
student characteristics,” Review of Educational Research, vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 272–
295, 2010.
[23] M. L. Van Blerkom, “Class attendance in undergraduate courses,” The Journal
of psychology, vol. 126, no. 5, pp. 487–494, 1992.
[24] J. Brocato, “How much does coming to class matter? some evidence of class
attendance and grade performance.,” Educational Research Quarterly, 1989.
[25] S. E. Gump, “The cost of cutting class: Attendance as a predictor of success,”
College Teaching, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 21–26, 2005.
[26] T.-F. Lin and J. Chen, “Cumulative class attendance and exam performance,”
Applied Economics Letters, vol. 13, no. 14, pp. 937–942, 2006.
[27] L. R. Goldberg, “The structure of phenotypic personality traits.,” American psy-
chologist, vol. 48, no. 1, p. 26, 1993.
[28] R. R. McCrae and P. T. Costa Jr, “A ﬁve-factor theory of personality,” Handbook
of personality: Theory and research, vol. 2, pp. 139–153, 1999.
[29] J. S. Wiggins and P. D. Trapnell, “Personality structure: The return of the big
ﬁve.,” 1997.
[30] S. J. Dollinger and L. A. Orf, “Personality and performance in “personality”:
Conscientiousness and openness,” Journal of Research in Personality, vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 276–284, 1991.
[31] M. Goff and P. L. Ackerman, “Personality-intelligence relations: Assessment of
typical intellectual engagement.,” Journal of Educational Psychology, vol. 84,
no. 4, p. 537, 1992.
[32] M. G. Rothstein, S. V. Paunonen, J. C. Rush, and G. A. King, “Personality and
cognitive ability predictors of performance in graduate business school.,” Jour-
nal of educational psychology, vol. 86, no. 4, p. 516, 1994.
[33] R. N. Wolfe and S. D. Johnson, “Personality as a predictor of college perfor-
mance,” Educational and psychological measurement, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 177–
185, 1995.
[34] F. De Fruyt and I. Mervielde, “Personality and interests as predictors of edu-
cational streaming and achievement,” European journal of personality, vol. 10,
no. 5, pp. 405–425, 1996.
[35] S. V. Paunonen, “Hierarchical organization of personality and prediction of be-
havior.,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 74, no. 2, p. 538,
1998.
==PAGE:70==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] V. V. Busato, F. J. Prins, J. J. Elshout, and C. Hamaker, “Intellectual ability,
learning style, personality, achievement motivation and academic success of psy-
chology students in higher education,” Personality and Individual differences,
vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1057–1068, 2000.
[37] S. V. Paunonen and M. C. Ashton, “Big ﬁve predictors of academic achieve-
ment,” Journal of Research in Personality, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 78–90, 2001.
[38] E. K. Gray and D. Watson, “General and speciﬁc traits of personality and their
relation to sleep and academic performance,” Journal of personality, vol. 70,
no. 2, pp. 177–206, 2002.
[39] F. Lievens, P. Coetsier, F. De Fruyt, and J. De Maeseneer, “Medical students’
personality characteristics and academic performance: A ﬁve-factor model per-
spective,” Medical education, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 1050–1056, 2002.
[40] K. W. Bauer and Q. Liang, “The effect of personality and precollege charac-
teristics on ﬁrst-year activities and academic performance.,” Journal of College
Student Development, 2003.
[41] T. Chamorro-Premuzic and A. Furnham, “Personality traits and academic exam-
ination performance,” European Journal of Personality, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 237–
250, 2003.
[42] T. Chamorro-Premuzic and A. Furnham, “Personality predicts academic per-
formance: Evidence from two longitudinal university samples,” Journal of Re-
search in Personality, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 319–338, 2003.
[43] Å. Diseth, “Personality and approaches to learning as predictors of academic
achievement,” European Journal of personality, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 143–155,
2003.
[44] T. Farsides and R. Woodﬁeld, “Individual differences and undergraduate aca-
demic success: The roles of personality, intelligence, and application,” Person-
ality and Individual differences, vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 1225–1243, 2003.
[45] A. Furnham, T. Chamorro-Premuzic, and F. McDougall, “Personality, cognitive
ability, and beliefs about intelligence as predictors of academic performance,”
Learning and Individual Differences, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 47–64, 2002.
[46] J. W. Lounsbury, E. Sundstrom, J. M. Loveland, and L. W. Gibson, “Intelli-
gence,“big ﬁve” personality traits, and work drive as predictors of course grade,”
Personality and Individual Differences, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1231–1239, 2003.
[47] P. Phillips, C. Abraham, and R. Bond, “Personality, cognition, and university
students’ examination performance,” European Journal of Personality, vol. 17,
no. 6, pp. 435–448, 2003.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[48] A. Duff, E. Boyle, K. Dunleavy, and J. Ferguson, “The relationship between
personality, approach to learning and academic performance,” Personality and
individual differences, vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 1907–1920, 2004.
[49] A. Furnham and T. Chamorro-Premuzic, “Personality and intelligence as pre-
dictors of statistics examination grades,” Personality and Individual Differences,
vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 943–955, 2004.
[50] P. Hair and S. E. Hampson, “The role of impulsivity in predicting maladap-
tive behaviour among female students,” Personality and Individual Differences,
vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 943–952, 2006.
[51] M. A. Conard, “Aptitude is not enough: How personality and behavior pre-
dict academic performance,” Journal of Research in Personality, vol. 40, no. 3,
pp. 339–346, 2006.
[52] K. A. Barchard, “Does emotional intelligence assist in the prediction of aca-
demic success?,” Educational and psychological measurement, vol. 63, no. 5,
pp. 840–858, 2003.
[53] P. H. Langford, “A one-minute measure of the big ﬁve? evaluating and abridg-
ing shafer’s (1999a) big ﬁve markers,” Personality and Individual Differences,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1127–1140, 2003.
[54] F. L. Oswald, N. Schmitt, B. H. Kim, L. J. Ramsay, and M. A. Gillespie, “De-
veloping a biodata measure and situational judgment inventory as predictors of
college student performance.,” Journal of applied psychology, vol. 89, no. 2,
p. 187, 2004.
[55] F. T. Leong, L. W. Gibson, J. W. Lounsbury, and B. C. Huffstetler, “Sense of
identity and collegiate academic achievement,” Journal of College Student De-
velopment, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 501–514, 2005.
[56] S. D. Ridgell and J. W. Lounsbury, “Predicting academic success: General intel-
ligence," big ﬁve" personality traits, and work drive,” College Student Journal,
vol. 38, no. 4, p. 607, 2004.
[57] M. Komarraju, S. J. Karau, and R. R. Schmeck, “Role of the big ﬁve personal-
ity traits in predicting college students’ academic motivation and achievement,”
Learning and individual differences, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 47–52, 2009.
[58] E. E. Noftle and R. W. Robins, “Personality predictors of academic outcomes:
big ﬁve correlates of gpa and sat scores.,” Journal of personality and social
psychology, vol. 93, no. 1, p. 116, 2007.
[59] J. Lane, A. M. Lane, and A. Kyprianou, “Self-efﬁcacy, self-esteem and their
impact on academic performance,” Social Behavior and Personality: an inter-
national journal, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 247–256, 2004.
==PAGE:72==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[60] A. Lepp, J. E. Barkley, and A. C. Karpinski, “The relationship between cell
phone use, academic performance, anxiety, and satisfaction with life in college
students,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 31, pp. 343–350, 2014.
[61] H. P. Chow, “Life satisfaction among university students in a canadian prairie
city:
A multivariate analysis,” Social Indicators Research, vol. 70, no. 2,
pp. 139–150, 2005.
[62] D. D. Gifford, J. Briceno-Perriott, and F. Mianzo, “Locus of control: Academic
achievement and retention in a sample of university ﬁrst-year students.,” Journal
of College Admission, vol. 191, pp. 18–25, 2006.
[63] M. J. Findley and H. M. Cooper, “Locus of control and academic achievement:
a literature review.,” Journal of personality and social psychology, vol. 44, no. 2,
p. 419, 1983.
[64] T. J. Prociuk and L. J. Breen, “Locus of control, study habits and attitudes,
and college academic performance,” The Journal of Psychology, vol. 88, no. 1,
pp. 91–95, 1974.
[65] D. Bar-Tal and Y. Bar-Zohar, “The relationship between perception of locus of
control and academic achievement: Review and some educational implications,”
Contemporary Educational Psychology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 181–199, 1977.
[66] M. E. Haines, M. P. Norris, and D. A. Kashy, “The effects of depressed mood
on academic performance in college students.,” Journal of College Student De-
velopment, 1996.
[67] J. Leach, “The relationship between depression and college academic perfor-
mance,” College Student Journal, vol. 43, no. 2, p. 325, 2009.
[68] M. Owens, J. Stevenson, J. A. Hadwin, and R. Norgate, “Anxiety and depression
in academic performance: An exploration of the mediating factors of worry and
working memory,” School Psychology International, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 433–449,
2012.
[69] S. M. Stewart, T. Lam, C. Betson, C. Wong, and A. Wong, “A prospective analy-
sis of stress and academic performance in the ﬁrst two years of medical school,”
Medical Education-Oxford, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 243–250, 1999.
[70] S. Akgun and J. Ciarrochi, “Learned resourcefulness moderates the relationship
between academic stress and academic performance,” Educational Psychology,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 287–294, 2003.
[71] D. H. Saklofske, E. J. Austin, S. M. Mastoras, L. Beaton, and S. E. Osborne,
“Relationships of personality, affect, emotional intelligence and coping with stu-
dent stress and academic success: Different patterns of association for stress and
success,” Learning and Individual Differences, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 251–257, 2012.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[72] M. F. Nicpon, L. Huser, E. H. Blanks, S. Sollenberger, C. Befort, and S. E. R.
Kurpius, “The relationship of loneliness and social support with college fresh-
men’s academic performance and persistence,” Journal of College Student Re-
tention: Research, Theory & Practice, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 345–358, 2006.
[73] J. J. PONZETTI JR, “Sex differences in the relationship between loneliness and
academic performance,” Psychological Reports, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 758–758,
1981.
[74] L. Farwell and R. Wohlwend-Lloyd, “Narcissistic processes: Optimistic expec-
tations, favorable self-evaluations, and self-enhancing attributions,” Journal of
personality, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 65–83, 1998.
[75] A. R. King, “Relations between mcmi-ii personality variables and measures
of academic performance,” Journal of Personality Assessment, vol. 71, no. 2,
pp. 253–268, 1998.
[76] D. W. Johnson and R. T. Johnson, “Structuring groups for cooperative learning,”
Journal of Management Education, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 8–17, 1984.
[77] S. L. Thomas, “Ties that bind: A social network approach to understanding
student integration and persistence,” Journal of Higher Education, pp. 591–615,
2000.
[78] Y. C. Yuan, G. Gay, and H. Hembrooke, “Focused activities and the develop-
ment of social capital in a distributed learning “community”,” The Information
Society, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 25–39, 2006.
[79] T. E. Rizzuto, J. LeDoux, and J. P. Hatala, “It’s not just what you know, it’s
who you know: Testing a model of the relative importance of social networks to
academic performance,” Social Psychology of Education, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 175–
189, 2009.
[80] D. Gaševi´c, A. Zouaq, and R. Janzen, ““choose your classmates, your gpa is at
stake!”: The association of cross-class social ties and academic performance,”
American Behavioral Scientist, p. 0002764213479362, 2013.
[81] M. P. Vitale, G. C. Porzio, and P. Doreian, “Examining the effect of social inﬂu-
ence on student performance through network autocorrelation models,” Journal
of Applied Statistics, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 115–127, 2016.
[82] J.-V. Tomás-Miquel, M. Expósito-Langa, and D. Nicolau-Juliá, “The inﬂuence
of relationship networks on academic performance in higher education: a com-
parative study between students of a creative and a non-creative discipline,”
Higher Education, pp. 1–16, 2015.
[83] T. T. Baldwin, M. D. Bedell, and J. L. Johnson, “The social fabric of a team-
based mba program: Network effects on student satisfaction and performance,”
Academy of management journal, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1369–1397, 1997.
==PAGE:74==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[84] H. Yang and J. Tang, “Effects of social network on students, performance: A
web-based forum study in taiwan. jaln, 7 (3), 93. retrieved 11 26, 2011,” 2003.
[85] H. Cho, G. Gay, B. Davidson, and A. Ingraffea, “Social networks, communi-
cation styles, and learning performance in a cscl community,” Computers &
Education, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 309–329, 2007.
[86] R. A. Smith and B. L. Peterson, ““psst... what do you think?” the relationship
between advice prestige, type of advice, and academic performance,” Commu-
nication Education, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 278–291, 2007.
[87] J. Hommes, B. Rienties, W. De Grave, G. Bos, L. Schuwirth, and A. Scherpbier,
“Visualising the invisible: a network approach to reveal the informal social side
of student learning,” Advances in Health Sciences Education, vol. 17, no. 5,
pp. 743–757, 2012.
[88] R. T. Sparrowe, R. C. Liden, S. J. Wayne, and M. L. Kraimer, “Social networks
and the performance of individuals and groups,” Academy of management jour-
nal, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 316–325, 2001.
[89] O. Poldin, D. Valeeva, and M. Yudkevich, “How social ties affect peer group ef-
fects: Case of university students,” Higher School of Economics Research Paper
No. WP BPR, vol. 15, 2013.
[90] R. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Chen, T. Li, G. Harari, S. Tignor, X. Zhou, D. Ben-Zeev,
and A. T. Campbell, “Studentlife: assessing mental health, academic perfor-
mance and behavioral trends of college students using smartphones,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 3–14, ACM, 2014.
[91] R. Wang, G. Harari, P. Hao, X. Zhou, and A. T. Campbell, “Smartgpa: how
smartphones can assess and predict academic performance of college students,”
in Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 295–306, ACM, 2015.
[92] J.-P. Vandamme, N. Meskens, and J.-F. Superby, “Predicting academic perfor-
mance by data mining methods,” Education Economics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 405–
419, 2007.
[93] P. Parmentier, “La réussite des études universitaires. facteurs structurels et
processuels de la performance académique en première année en médecine,”
Louvain: Faculté de Psychologie et des Sciences de l’Éducation, Université
Catholique de Louvain, 1994.
[94] N. T. Nghe, P. Janecek, and P. Haddawy, “A comparative analysis of techniques
for predicting academic performance,” in Frontiers In Education Conference-
Global Engineering: Knowledge Without Borders, Opportunities Without Pass-
ports, 2007. FIE’07. 37th Annual, pp. T2G–7, IEEE, 2007.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[95] N. Eagle and A. Pentland, “Reality mining: sensing complex social systems,”
Personal and ubiquitous computing, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 255–268, 2006.
[96] M. Hollander, D. A. Wolfe, and E. Chicken, Nonparametric statistical methods.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[97] K. Pearson, “Notes on the history of correlation,” Biometrika, vol. 13, no. 1,
pp. 25–45, 1920.
[98] C. Veness, “Calculate distance and bearing between two latitude/longitude
points using haversine formula in javascript,” Movable Type Scripts, 2011.
[99] R. Moen, J. Pastor, and Y. Cohen, “Accuracy of gps telemetry collar locations
with differential correction,” The Journal of Wildlife Management, pp. 530–539,
1997.
[100] H. B. Mann and D. R. Whitney, “On a test of whether one of two random vari-
ables is stochastically larger than the other,” The annals of mathematical statis-
tics, pp. 50–60, 1947.
[101] Student, “The probable error of a mean,” Biometrika, pp. 1–25, 1908.
[102] B. Efron, “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife,” The Annals of
Statistics, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 1979.
[103] O. P. John and S. Srivastava, “The big ﬁve trait taxonomy: History, measure-
ment, and theoretical perspectives,” Handbook of personality: Theory and re-
search, vol. 2, no. 1999, pp. 102–138, 1999.
[104] M. Rosenberg, “Society and the adolescent self-image,” 1965.
[105] M. D. Back, A. C. Küfner, M. Dufner, T. M. Gerlach, J. F. Rauthmann, and
J. J. Denissen, “Narcissistic admiration and rivalry: Disentangling the bright
and dark sides of narcissism.,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
vol. 105, no. 6, p. 1013, 2013.
[106] E. Diener, R. A. Emmons, R. J. Larsen, and S. Grifﬁn, “The satisfaction with
life scale,” Journal of personality assessment, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 71–75, 1985.
[107] J. B. Rotter, “Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of re-
inforcement.,” Psychological monographs: General and applied, vol. 80, no. 1,
p. 1, 1966.
[108] D. W. Russell, “Ucla loneliness scale (version 3): Reliability, validity, and factor
structure,” Journal of personality assessment, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 20–40, 1996.
[109] S. Cohen, T. Kamarck, and R. Mermelstein, “A global measure of perceived
stress,” Journal of health and social behavior, pp. 385–396, 1983.
==PAGE:76==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[110] P. Bech, N.-A. Rasmussen, L. R. Olsen, V. Noerholm, and W. Abildgaard, “The
sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the major depression inventory, using the present
state examination as the index of diagnostic validity,” Journal of affective disor-
ders, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 159–164, 2001.
[111] D. Watson, L. A. Clark, and A. Tellegen, “Development and validation of brief
measures of positive and negative affect: the panas scales.,” Journal of person-
ality and social psychology, vol. 54, no. 6, p. 1063, 1988.
[112] W. Mischel, Personality and assessment. Psychology Press, 2013.
[113] N. Aharony, W. Pan, C. Ip, I. Khayal, and A. Pentland, “Social fmri: Investi-
gating and shaping social mechanisms in the real world,” Pervasive and Mobile
Computing, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 643–659, 2011.
[114] S. Wold, K. Esbensen, and P. Geladi, “Principal component analysis,” Chemo-
metrics and intelligent laboratory systems, vol. 2, no. 1-3, pp. 37–52, 1987.
[115] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel,
M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Ma-
chine learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12,
pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[116] J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, The elements of statistical learning,
vol. 1. Springer series in statistics Springer, Berlin, 2001.
