==PAGE:1==
Experimental Determination of The Static and 
Dynamic Stiffness of Steel Depending on The 
Strain Rates and Load Levels 
Anders Lehmann Gramfeldt Ebbesen  
 
Nikolaj Harrison Rask 
 
 
 
MSc Thesis 
  
Department of Civil Engineering 
2016 
 
DTU Civil Engineering  
June 2016 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Experimental determination of the static and dynamic stiﬀness of steel depending
on the strain rates and load levels
This thesis was prepared by:
Anders Lehmann Gramfeldt Ebbesen - S103557
Nikolaj Harrison Rask - S103566
Supervisor:
Jeppe J¨onsson, Professor at the Civil Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
Project period:
January 2016 - June 2016
ECTS:
30
Education:
Master of Science in Engineering - MSc
Field:
Steel Constructions - Civil Engineering
Remarks:
This thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University of
Denmark.
Copyrights:
©DTU Civil Engineering, Anders L.G. Ebbesen & Nikolaj H. Rask,
2016
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
Symbols
iii
Abstract
v
Preface
vii
1
General Introduction
1
1.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Experimental Expectations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Structure of The Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Application of The Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature and Background Theory
5
2.1
Literature Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Background Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Modulus of Elasticity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2
Cyclic Phenomenons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
Machine Stiﬀness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.4
Statistical Hypothesis Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.5
Matlab Scripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Experimental Program
25
3.1
Early Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.1
Experimental Test Ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.2
Experimental Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Test Set-ups and Procedures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Uniaxial Tensile Test - Dog Bones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.2
Bending Test - IPE proﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Experimental Results
33
4.1
Dog Bone Experiments - Uniaxial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Dog Bone Experiments - Cyclic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
i
==PAGE:6==
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4.2.1
Dog Bone 32 (S355 - Perpendicular) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Comparison of Cyclic Dog Bone Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.1
Comparison of Rolling Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.2
Comparison of Cyclic Strain Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.3
Comparison of The Inﬂuence of Cyclic Numbers
. . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.4
Statistical Investigation of Cyclic Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Bending Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4.1
1 Hz Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4.2
5 Hz Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4.3
9 Hz Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5
Comparison of Cyclic Bending Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.1
Statistical Investigation of Cyclic Bending Experiments
. . . . . . . .
53
5
Discussion
55
5.1
Comparison of Previous Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion
59
Bibliography
61
Appendices
65
A Folder structure
67
B Cyclic Tensile Test Results
69
==PAGE:7==
Symbols
Latin Letters
Symbol
Unit
Description
F
N or kN
Force
A
m2
Area
l
m
Length of the test subject
E
MPa
Young’s modulus
K
kN/mm
Stiﬀness
fy
MPa
Yield strength
fu
MPa
Ultimate strength
w
mm
The thickness of the gauges length for the dog bone subject
L0
mm
The gauge length
LC
mm
The parallel length
LR
mm
The radius length
Lg
mm
The grip length
Lt
mm
The total length
W
mm
The thickness of width grip
R
mm
Radius for the dog bone rounding
vc
mm/s
Speed
eLc
s
Strain rate
X
-
Sample one
Y
-
Sample two
S
-
Standard deviation
n1
-
Sample size one
n2
-
Sample size two
H0
-
Null hypothesis
iii
==PAGE:8==
iv
SYMBOLS
Greek Letters
Symbol
Unit
Description
σ
MPa
Stress
ϵ
-
Strain
µ
-
Mean value
∆
-
Specify the diﬀerence is something
Indexes
Symbol
Description
PC
Piston correction
EXT
Extensometer
1
Linear elastic area in compression
2
Linear elastic area in Tension
SG
Strain Gauges
Sec
Secant modulus
Tan
Tangent modulus
1/4
First quarter of the elastic curve
y
Yielding
u
Ultimate
Min
Minimum
Max
Maximum
m
Machine
s
Steel
Corr
corrected
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Earlier research has shown that it is diﬃcult to determine Young’s modulus of metallic
materials through uniaxial tensile experiments. Some test standards describes methods of
determination the Young’s modulus in a very self-determined way, in which this thesis gives
an educated estimate on how Young’s modulus can be determined for both static and dynamic
experiments.
In the present work, a literature study of the topic is conducted in order to gain an overview
of earlier experiments and the theories elaborated within this particular topic. The literature
study covers; diﬀerent calculation methodologies for Young’s modulus, beam stiﬀness, ma-
chine stiﬀness, measuring equipment and diﬀerent cutting methods. It also provides several
suggestions of experiments which will be investigated in this thesis.
The experimental program contain three diﬀerent experiments.
The ﬁrst one is tensile
tests which account for material properties. The second, experimental program is cyclic experi-
ments which primarily examines the Young’s modulus by Hooke’s law. The third, experimental
program is cyclic four point bending experiments, where Young’s modulus is determined by
deﬂections and strains from the test specimens. Before the experiments were performed it
was necessary to determine the impact of several parameters during the experiments and
afterwards lock a few of them. The steel strengths of the specimens for tensile and cyclic tests
are S235 and S355, and S275 for the bending test. The cyclic experiments investigate Young’s
modulus with respect to strain rates on 1 Hz, 5 Hz and 9 Hz. In total 48 specimens (cut as
dog bones) are tested and analysed, beside this 9 four point bending experiments are performed.
A statistical analyses has been made due to the large amount of test samples. A paired t-tests
are made in order to determine whether there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the obtained
results. On that basis it can be concluded; that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the Young’s
modulus relative to the strain rate on 1 Hz, 5 Hz and 9 Hz for steel S235 and S355. However,
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in Young’s modulus with respect to the steel quality S235 and S255, is
observed. The rolling direction shows also signiﬁcant diﬀerence in Young’s modulus for both
steel types S235 and S355. This indicates that the steel material is slightly inhomogeneous.
However, the results seem to be quite scattered for both directions and no clear conclusion
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
ABSTRACT
can be made. There is no signiﬁcant change of the Young’s modulus doing cycle number 1 to
cycle number 2000.
The results regrading bending experiments also indicate no signiﬁcant diﬀerence of Young’s
modulus relative to the strain rates. Despite the diﬃcult experimental set-up, the estimation
of Young’s modulus is greater than the theoretical value and in relation of. Corresponding to
this is the cyclic tensile tests estimating lower values.
==PAGE:11==
Preface
This thesis is written as a part of the Master of Science education in civil engineering at
The Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The work has been conducted jointly between
Anders Lehmann Gramfeldt Ebbesen and Nikolaj Harrison Rask in the period from January
25th to June 17th and has a volume of 30 ETCS points.
The thesis is a pilot project in which Young’s modulus is examined through various ex-
periments. Parallel to this thesis another investigation is describing: Uniaxial load testing of
steel - Inﬂuence of the strain rate and possible creep by Adrian Moen Hjartnes and Maria
Helene Aaberg.
Several hours has been used on pretesting due to the inﬂuence of many parameters such as; steel
type, rolling direction, strain rate, amplitude, number of cycles and testing in both compression
and tensile conditions. Knowledge obtained from the pretesting resulted in ﬁxing some of the
variable in order to restrict variables in the actual tests. It has also been necessary to specify
the experimental set-up and thereby the project description in order to follow the purpose
which is; study the steel material parameters behaviour on the strain rates and load levels
during experiments. A literature study was made and mainly obtained from DTU’s library
facilities, in terms of papers and standards (DS/EN). In the wake of this study a reformed and
more speciﬁc test description has been developed: Test specimens will be exposed to diﬀerent
strain rates during cyclic tests: 1 Hz, 5 Hz and 9 Hz and still exposed to the same load condi-
tions. Both cyclic tensile test and cyclic bending experiments will be conducted and various
methods are used for determining the Young’s modulus. The experiments ended up studying
possible inﬂuence of rolling direction, steel strength, strain rate, load level and number of cycle.
A USB key is following the main thesis with additional materials such as papers, calculations
scripts from Matlab, drawings, etc. A content description of the USB key is shown in Appendix
A.In order to get the ﬁles please talk with Professor Jeppe J¨onsson or the authors of this thesis.
Associated to the main thesis an experimental test report [1] is made in order to reduce results
in the main thesis and in order for future test studying only by using the test report. The
test report contains a theory section, detail descriptions of test set-ups and procedures and all
test results of the uniaxial tensile tests, cyclic tensile tests and bending tests.
vii
==PAGE:12==
viii
PREFACE
Acknowledgement
All experiments are performed on a uniaxial tensile test machine at DTU’s civil engineering
department. In that context, we would like to thank the technical employees in the laboratory
who have helped during the experimental period. Especially with measuring equipments, intro-
duction to test machines and inputs/ideas for experiments. A special thank to Andrei Costache
from DTU Mechanics: Department of Solid Mechanics for his help with Spider8 logging system.
Weekly project meetings has been arranged with our Supervisor and Professor Jeppe J¨onsson.
We want to express our deepest thanks, for all inputs and comments during the project period.
No tests without test specimens, in that context we would like to say thank to the Danish
company: KT steel Industry A/S for arranging a visit in their factory during the cutting of
the test specimens.
Lyngby, June 17, 2016
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
General Introduction
In many cases, structures and structural elements must be designed to withstand cyclic
loads which can lead to the plastic deformations in the structure. Examples of structures
exposed to loads in that regime are; oﬀshore structures, components in changing temperatures,
structures in earthquake areas and speciﬁc vessels.
It is important in structural engineering to have materials with properties that allows
deformation when a load is applied in order to avoid failure without warning. Frequently,
lots of building structures are designed to be some kind of elastic. A distinction between
linear and non-linear elasticity and the linear elastic deformation is characterised with: The
deformation is proportional to the load and non-linear is the opposite. Elastic materials may
be isotropic or anisotropic in which the isotropic elasticity is characterised by having the
same elastic properties in all directions of the material. This is why steel and other metals
usually is considered isotropic. As a contrast is timber an anisotropic material, i.e. the elastic
properties vary in all directions. The elasticity is described by ratio of stresses and strains
and will be investigated though this thesis. This is done by uniaxial tensile tests, cyclic tensile
tests and cyclic bending tests. Previous investigations have shown complications associated
with the determination of Young’s modulus, regarding diﬀerent strain rates and load levels
which will be explored in this thesis.
1.1
Purpose
The purpose is to study the static and dynamic stiﬀness of steel depending on strain rates
and load levels. The studying is done by experimental tests of diﬀerent steel specimens which
is subjected to uniaxial tensile, cyclic tensile and cyclic bending tests. By these methods the
best possible way of determining Young’s modulus is also investigated.
1.2
Experimental Expectations
Before the experiments were conducted in the laboratory several questions were developed
regrading the uniaxial tensile experiments and bending experiments. The questions are given
below.
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Tensile Experiments
• Does the rolling direction make signiﬁcant change on the Young’s modulus?
• Does diﬀerent steel strengths have an signiﬁcant impact on the Young’s modulus?
• Does the frequencies (strain rates) of the cyclic tests make an inﬂuence on the Young’s
modulus?
• Does the cyclic loads in the plastic regime have any eﬀect on the Young’s modulus?
• Does the number of cycles have an inﬂuence on the Young’s modulus?
• Is it possible to take the machine stiﬀness into account, as well as other factors in the
machine such as slippage in the jaws?
• Is it possible to establish a general method to determine the Young’s modulus, which
could be included in test standards?
Bending Experiments
• Is it possible to develop an experimental set-up which determines Young’s modulus more
accurate than tensile experiments?
1.3
Structure of The Thesis
The main thesis contains a literature study together with background theory, main results,
discussion and suggestions for further research and ﬁnally an overall conclusion. Both the Main
Thesis and the Test Report contains various appendices, which supplements the explanations
and experiments.
The thesis consists of three main ﬁelds described below.
The study of the literature provides an overview of previous research of the topic. This studying
involves 23 diﬀerent papers, which spreads over 5 topics: diﬀerent calculation methodologies
for Young’s modulus, beam stiﬀness, machine stiﬀness, measuring equipment and diﬀerent
cutting methods. This is followed by the theory used for experiments, calculations and
explanations. Afterwards the experimental part follows and include three mechanical tests:
uniaxial tensile tests, cyclic tensile tests and cyclic bending tests. The post-processing of the
experimental data are shown and explained in the next part.
This is followed by a comprehensive review of the results and discussion including hypothesis
tests, together with a comparison regarding previous studies. Future research related to the
same topic is described.
==PAGE:15==
1.3. STRUCTURE OF THE THESIS
3
Scope of Work
The literature overview of the topic gives an understanding of the topic and what is
clariﬁed and which methods that are used to clarify the topic. A brainstorm was conducted
in order to make a clear overview of the topic which led to a chronological accumulation of
the literature as illustrated on Figure 1.1. The study follows a chronological accumulation
and throws some of the irrelevant bullet points away.
 
 
Static and 
Dynamic 
Stiffness of 
Steel 
Cutting 
Methods (CO2 
laser, Waterjet, 
Fiber laser) 
Beam Stiffness 
Different 
Calculation 
Methodologies 
Machine 
Stiffness 
Different 
Strain Rates 
and Load 
Levels 
Temperature - 
Test Specimen 
and Room 
Harding / 
Softning of the 
Material  
Material 
Structure - 
(Chemical) 
Measuring 
Equipment - 
(DIC, 
Ultrasound, 
Strain Gauges, 
Extensometer) 
Static and Dynamic 
Stiffness of Steel 
Different Calculation Methodologies and 
Different Strain Rates and Load Levels 
Beam Stiffness 
Machine Stiffness 
Measuring Equipment - (DIC, Ultrasound, 
Strain Gauges, Extensometer) 
Cutting Methods (CO2 laser, Waterjet, Fiber 
laser) 
Figure 1.1: Illustration of all the issues potentially aﬀecting the determination of the static and
dynamic Young’s modulus. Left) is an outline of the brainstorm. Right) is a chronological accumulation
of the literature review.
The thesis continues with further theoretical investigations and explanations of the topic.
According to the purpose it is decided to make experimental tests. The experimental tests
is done by steel specimens cut in a shape like a dog bone. The steel quality is taken into
consideration and two diﬀerent steel qualities will be investigated. The Young’s modulus will
be calculated by diﬀerent methods (tangent, secant and linear). Furthermore, bending tests
of IPE-proﬁles will be explored in order to compare results with the cyclic tensile test. The
IPE-proﬁles consist of a third steel quality.
All experiments takes place in the test laboratory at The Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU). The experiments are made on an test Instron 8502 250kN and Instron 8502
100kN machines. These machines provide the framework for all the experiments. The 48 dog
bone test specimens has been cut by an ﬁber laser machine. Dog bones has also been cut
of the IPE-proﬁle in order to get material properties. This has been done with a Computer
Numerical Controlled (CNC) machine at DTU.
==PAGE:16==
4
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION
1.4
Application of The Literature
The experimental investigations are made on basis from the literature study. This is done
in order to make experimental tests which sustain the observations in the literature review.
Also in order to investigate new methods and inﬂuence of determining the Young’s modulus.
The application of the methods in the papers are described in the following part of this section.
The results of the experimental investigations are discussed and compared with the knowledge
from the papers section 5: Discussion.
Calculation Methodologies
The secant modulus (Esec) will be calculated in order to determine the Young’s modulus of
the uniaxial tensile tests. The determinations of the Young’s modulus during a cyclic test will
be done according to quarter part of each cycles (E1 & E2). The tangent modulus (Etan) will
also be used in order to compare results of E1/4.
Young’s Modulus of Beams
A four point bending experiment will be made in order to get constant moment in the middle
of the test specimen. The measurements of the beam will be done by extensometers and
strain gauges. The Young’s modulus will be calculated by Hooke’s law and the general beam
theory for deﬂection.
Machine Stiﬀness
The machine stiﬀness is taken into account by a method determined by the authors of this
thesis, where the extensometer measurements will be used for the correction of the piston
measurement. This is a simpliﬁed method which do not take the strain rate into considerations.
Measuring Equipment
Extensometers, strain gauges and piston data were chosen as the measuring equipment. This
is used due to the fact that it is the most common measuring equipment at DTU laboratory.
Also one of the papers found no diﬀerence in the results obtained from an extensometer and a
strain gauge. Then it should be comparable.
Cutting Method
The ﬁber laser is chosen for the cutting method of the dog bones. This is mainly due to
the fact that 80 % of the energy transfers to the shavings and the specimens are therefore
not infected by heat. It is also possible to touch a specimen just after it has been cut which
supports the contention.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Literature and Background Theory
2.1
Literature Investigation
A literature study of the topic is made in this chapter in order to clarify earlier investigations
and methods. Subsequently the basic theory and other theoretical knowledge and calculations
is described and used later in the thesis. For instance, the statistical theory of hypothesis
testing (paired t-test), cyclic hardening/softening and machine stiﬀness.
Diﬀerent Calculation Methodologies
Figure 2.1: Illustration of using the tan-
gent and secant method from the paper [2].
Usually an uniaxial tensile test is performed
for determining the Young’s modulus but is often
not accurate. The issue with test of metal is de-
scribed in the paper: Data acquisition and analysis
of tensile properties for metal matrix composites [2].
The paper says that the issue is largely because
the elastic limit in the steel material is low due to
the residual stresses present in the material. The
proportional limit of the Young’s modulus is dif-
ﬁcult to determine unless validated methods are
used. The new procedure described in the paper
[2] enables accurate values of Young’s modulus and
proportional limit to be obtained and the procedure
has been veriﬁed by extensive laboratory testing.
Figure 2.1 shows the analysis method where the
idea is to move the origin in order only to consider
the linear region (P-Q) of the curve. This type of
calculation depends on how accurate the selection
of the two points are. The procedure also enables
tangent and secant modulus plots to be produced
over a range of stress or strain. The tangent modulus is the slope of a tangent curve of
a certain point. The secant modulus is the slope of a line starting from origin to a certain point.
5
==PAGE:18==
6
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
Cyclic Stresses
The Young’s modulus can be determined by diﬀerent methods eg. for modelling cyclic stress-
strain curves and for analysis of local stresses and strains which is done in the paper:Potential
ambiguity in the determination of the plastic strain range component in LCF testing [3].
During a cyclic period a hysteresis loop will be obtained. The paper determines values of
Young’s modulus E1 (Tension) and E2 (compression) from the hysteresis loops obtained
during a Low Cycle Fatigue (LCF) test. The paper describes the diﬃculty of determining the
Young’s modulus of hysteresis loops compared to the initial modulus of a stress-strain curve.
Figure 2.2 illustrates a hysteresis loop with indication of the E1 and E2 on the loop taken
from [3]. The Young’s modulus E1/4 is explained in the paper which is being determined as
the ﬁrst quarter part of the loading and unloading curve in cyclic loops. Following has to be
satisﬁed: E1 = E2 = E1/4 together with linear loading and unloading parts.
Figure 2.2: General deﬁnitions used in LCF testing where ∆ϵp is in accordance with ISO from [3].
The paper used four diﬀerent standards (BS 7270:1990, ASTM E606-92, ISO/DIS 12106
and AECMA prEN 3988) for determining Young’s modulus. The specimens were in total
strain-controlled LCF tests. The paper also describes how the tangent modulus decreases as
the strain increases. This indicates that the value of the tangent modulus is dependent on the
strain values according to the paper. After a lot of experiments the paper concludes: E1 is
always less than E2 and E2 > E. This is mainly due to the change in the specimens geometry
and to a less extension, opening and closure of the fatigue micro-cracks.
The studies of dynamic Young’s modulus continued throughout the 00’s, where the paper:
The eﬀect of the method of determination of young’s modulus on the estimation of fatigue
life of structural elements [4] was published. A speciﬁc issue presented in the paper are
inﬂuenced from calculations when determination the Young’s modulus of the fatigue life for
structural elements. The paper also made an observation of the structural stiﬀness behaviour
as increasing the number of hysteresis cycles as shown on Figure 2.3 and this hereby causes a
change in the Young’s modulus.
==PAGE:19==
2.1. LITERATURE INVESTIGATION
7
Figure 2.3: Hysteresis loops for 45 steel from [4].
The paper concluded that there exist at least two Young’s modulus, one for uniaxial
tensile tests and one for dynamic tests. The paper also used the four diﬀerent methods of
determination the Young’s modulus as described in [3]. On the basis of the conducted tests
and calculations, the paper has several conclusions concerning the sensitivity of Young’s
modulus, too small number of the realised loading levels does not allow one to determine
the inﬂuence of the loading amplitude on Young’s modulus. The tangent modulus, indicates
increasingly weaker linearity of the elastic part as the hysteresis loop number increases which is
also supported by the explanation in [3]. The linearity of the tangent modulus investigated in
the paper is shown in Figure 2.4. The same has been obtained in the paper: A code of practice
for the determination of cyclic stress-strain data [5], which has further good arguments for
determination of Young’s modulus and the paper also give comments on the diﬀerence between
E1 and E2. It is described in the paper that the diﬀerence between E2 compared to E1 on
more than 10 % possible indicates cracking in the test specimen and thereby making the
cyclic loops invalid for the determination of Cyclic Stress Strain (CSS) data and on that basis
the paper proposes two calculation methods for the estimation of Young’s modulus.
Figure 2.4: Variation of Young’s modulus as function of the number of cyclic loops from [4]. The
tests have been performed on three diﬀerent materials and exposed to diﬀerent strain values.
==PAGE:20==
8
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
Each one has its own advantages depending on the shape and quality of the hysteresis loop.
The ﬁrst method is as previously mentioned in papers, by using the ﬁrst 1/4 of the elastic zone
for determining the Young’s modulus. The large focus on calculating Young’s modulus has
led to several researches which indicates that the tensile experiments give misleading results
due to the test machine own ”spring” stiﬀness, as the section ”Machine Stiﬀness” is focusing on.
Young’s modulus of Beams
Some research of static and dynamic Young’s modulus has been described on concrete
beams in the paper: Static and dynamic stiﬀness of reinforced concrete beams [6]. The paper
studies static stiﬀness on the basis of deﬂections, dynamic stiﬀness and on the eigenfrequencies
(ultra-sound). A comparison shows signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the static and dynamic
characteristics of structures. A positive perspective by the eigenfrequencies method is that
it is a non-destructive procedure. Another paper: material parameters identiﬁcation using
experimental continuous spherical indentation for cyclic hardening [7], describes the ultra-
sound method. The paper concludes after concerning the Young’s modulus that they ﬁnd
values of ultra-sound method close to E = 170 GPa (steel) that is a gap close to 20%. This is
the same gap as for the tensile tests.
As previous mentioned the usual method for determining the Young’s modulus are by axial
tensile tests, but the paper: Extremely low cycle fatigue tests on structural carbon steel and
stainless steel [8], were also performing bending conﬁgurations. The paper expresses the
advantage of bending conﬁgurations by avoiding of buckling. The tests in the paper were all
done with dog bone specimens as well as in the bending tests. The paper is using a four point
bending conﬁguration. The advantages of a four point bending test is that you will get a
constant moment between the loads on the specimen and hereby constant strain. The paper
also mentioned the problem of ﬂuctuations/noises in test result from a cyclic test. Results
shows less ﬂuctuations/noises for the bending test than the uniaxial test. The tests in the
paper [8] is done in the plastic part of the material which results in hardening of the material
as described and taken into account. The paper concludes that the bending test were done
without concerning of slippage and buckling of the bending tests but the ﬂuctuations were
still lower. Another paper: Dynamic vs static young moduli - a case study [9], describes
the connection between uniaxial tensile test and dynamic tensile test on austenitic steel and
concludes that there is no huge diﬀerence between the two tests.
Machine Stiﬀness
The machine stiﬀness (Km) are often not considered which is one of the reasons for huge
diﬀerences in the Young’s modulus obtained from test machines. One of the ﬁrst papers
which comment on this issue was the paper: Mechanical testing machine stiﬀness [10]. They
mentioned; that machine stiﬀness change not only from test to test, but also from start to
end in a single test. The eﬀective testing machine stiﬀness is actually a composite stiﬀness
which includes machine, grips or platens, load cell, insulation and lubricant. After several
experiments the paper concluded; the elastic interaction between testing machine and specimen
==PAGE:21==
2.1. LITERATURE INVESTIGATION
9
Figure 2.5:
Typical load-time trace recorded during mechanical property test.
e.g.
tension or
compression, from [10].
may be taken into account by calculating the machine stiﬀness. The paper made a formula
of the machine stiﬀness as a linear spring with a specimen being pulled by constant speed.
The paper concluded that the measured machine stiﬀness value is signiﬁcant lower than the
theoretical value of the machine. Figure 2.5 shows a typical load-time plot [10] where it is
seen that the machine is assumed only to have elastic deformations which is shown as the
dashed line. In wake of this article, a paper about the machine stiﬀness was published: A
New Method for Determination of Proportional Limit and Machine Stiﬀness by [11]. The
method presented some concerns; simultaneous measurement of stress rate and strain rate
and also permits a new means of measuring machine stiﬀness by the ”load-time slope method”.
The tests in the paper were done with medium carbon steel. The paper does also mention a
calculation method of the stiﬀness beyond elastic region. However, the paper was not the
only one experimenting the machine stiﬀness back in the 1970’s. Another paper: ”Constancy
of the Tensile Test Machine Stiﬀness” [12] did also consider the machine stiﬀness. The main
focus in this paper is a method for determining the current value of the stiﬀness of a tensile
machine during uni-axial loading tests. The method is based on stress relaxation tests and on
the determination of the slopes of the load-time curve at the moment when the crosshead
speed is changed from zero to a somewhat ﬁnite value. The conclusion of this method shows
that the machine stiﬀness can be assumed as a constant value and independent of the applied
load, crosshead speed, and specimen dimensions within fairly wide ranges of these variable.
Measuring Equipment
During determination of Young’s modulus of tensile test it is necessary to measure the
stress-strain curve as accurate as possible. Now a days there is a wide variety of techniques
existing for measuring strain in the tensile test eg. strain gauge, extensometer, stress and
strain determined by machine piston motion. The measuring equipments are considered in
the paper: Assessment of strain measurement techniques to characterise mechanical properties
of structural steel [13]. This paper compares three diﬀerent strain measurement techniques as
mentioned before and shown on Figure 2.6. All data values were analysed statistically and
the paper found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the equipment. Strain measurement in the elastic
region by strain gauge technique gave reliable output but in the plastic region there is no
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
more bonding to the specimen and unfortunately could not provide the reliable strain in that
regime. The motion of the machine piston showed high variability in the strain measurement
which also can be seen on Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: A systematic diagram of the stress strain curve, showing the expected Young’s modulus
value and values calculated and recorded from the tensile tests conducted from [13].
Another measuring method which can provide a more correct understanding and visuali-
sation of stresses way through a specimen is called Digital Image Correlation (DIC). This
measuring method is often used in laboratory testing. It works by using camera technology
and a software system which can compare diﬀerent pictures and see possible changes among
the pictures. This method makes it possible to measure a material without touching it and
the error sources will hereby be reduced. Strains, stresses and deformations are possible to
measure in a high accuracy which depends on the resolution of the camera(s). DIC has also
been used successfully in full-scale tests of fatigue in cable-stayed bridges which is described
in the paper: Digital image correlation, dic - til strukturel tilstandsfastsættelse af broer [14].
Further investigations has been carried out in the paper: Measurement of local deformations in
steel monostrands using digital image correlation [15] and stated: DIC represents a technique
used for accurate measurements of surface deformation (see Figure 2.7).
Figure 2.7: (a) Location of measurement; (b) Correlation between strains measured using DIC and
strain gauges ([15]).
The paper also validate the DIC system, by comparing with other measurements like eg.
strain gauge. This provided conﬁdence in the presented outcome of the optical measurement.
==PAGE:23==
2.1. LITERATURE INVESTIGATION
11
This way of measuring deformation and strains can also be applied to smaller laboratory
experiments and hereby help to obtain better results. Another advantage of the DIC system
is the independence on the test specimens. It can be compared with strain gauges and
extensometers which have risk of slippage on the element and this is not possible for the DIC
method.
Cutting Methods
In the case of steel processing there are various cutting methods eg. CO2 laser, ﬁber
laser, Waterjet and plasma cutting. The best cutting method of a given situation depends on
the thickness and design of the steel which has to be cut. Each of the mentioned methods
above are eﬀective for cutting mild steel up to 2.60 cm. All cutting methods are possible by
Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine technology.
The CO2 laser cutting process is highly accurate and obtains excellent cutting qualities
with a very small kerf width and small heat aﬀect zone. The laser beam has very high light
intensity with a single wavelength which is in the infra-red spectrum. The force of the CO2
laser beam is made by focusing the laser beam by mirrors or special lenses. Focusing all
the energy into a single spot makes the tiny spot extremely hot. This high power density
results in a rapid melting of the material. The ﬁber laser works by forcing a high power laser
beam into an accidental material. The ﬁber laser generates the beam inside a ﬁber cable
then the delivery of the laser beam is very stable and easy to use. There are several reasons
that ﬁber laser is a more attractive than the CO2 laser. The ﬁrst one is that the beam is
generated and conﬁned inside the small core. This means that the beam is very straight
due to lower wavelength described in the paper: Fiber lasers change the cutting market [16]
and thereby can be focusing on much smaller points. The ﬁber laser is hereby more eﬀective
than the CO2 laser. The second reason is that ﬁber laser is very eﬃcient and do not make
high heat in the material. 80 percent of the power is transfered directly into the shavings
and it is therefore possible to touch the specimens just after cutting. A directly comparison
of ﬁber laser and CO2 laser cutting machines has been done in the paper: A technical and
commercial comparison of ﬁber laser and CO2 laser cutting [17]. Both types of machines have
their advantages and disadvantages. The overall conclusion in the paper from a company
perspective is that the CO2 laser is more versatile tool - but a ﬁber laser would be a useful
addition to an existing team of 3 or 4 CO2 machines. Another cutting method is the water jet
cutting which is an industrial tool capable of cutting various of diﬀerent materials by using
high water pressure and this is described in the paper: Waterjet cutting builds a business [18].
The water pressure is around 3900-4000 bar and it is therefore possible to cut in soft materials.
If the water is mixed with an abrasive substance (eg. sand) it is capable of cutting in harder
materials such as steel, concrete, stone etc. The method is often preferred when a material
is sensitive to high temperatures because the water jet leaves the metals without harming
or changing intrinsic properties. During mixing process the abrasive particles are gradually
accelerated due to transfer of momentum from the water. Causing water and abrasive particles
to leave the tube at same velocity described in the paper: Lesson 37-water jet and abrasive
water jet machining [19].
==PAGE:24==
12
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
2.2
Background Theory
2.2.1
Modulus of Elasticity
Modulus of elasticity also known as the elastic modulus or Young’s modulus describes the
linearity between the stress and strain of a material in the linear elastic area. At daily basis
it is called the stiﬀness of the material, which eﬀect the structure with larger deformations
when the stiﬀness is decreased. This elastic relation of materials was ﬁrst time described in
1675 by Robert Hooke, and known as Hooke’s Law [20]. The linearity is given in Eq. 2.1.
E = σ
ϵ
(2.1)
This proportionality between stress (σ) and strain (ϵ) is only acting in the elastic part of the
material. The stress is deﬁned by an acting normal force on the element cross section area,
shown in Eq. 2.2.
σ = P
A
(2.2)
Where P is the acting force on the element and A is the area that is eﬀected by the force. An
example of a stress-strain curve (relation) of a steel material is illustrated on Figure 2.8. The
linear elastic part of the curve is indicated with the bracket on the ﬁgure. According to the
DS/EN ISO 6892-1 standard [21] the Young’s modulus is determined on the elastic part of
the stress-strain curve. fy is the yielding stress and fu is the ultimate strength of the steel.
The yielding point of steel is typically at a strain value of 0.2% and the ultimate strength is
around 2.0% strain [22].
Figure 2.8: Illustration of stress-strain curve with indication of yield- and ultimate strength and
Young’s modulus.
The element will get a deformation due to the acting normal force and this is deﬁned by
the non-dimensional strain (ϵ) which is deﬁned by the ratio between the delta extension and
the original length of the element. Figure 2.3 illustrates an element loaded with a force P and
gets an extension in the length.
ϵ = ∆l
l
(2.3)
==PAGE:25==
2.2. BACKGROUND THEORY
13
Figure 2.9: Illustrations: Left) Initial beam. Right) Beam with indication of the acting load and
extension.
During elongation of the element (∆l), the cross sectional will get smaller. Within the
elastic part of a material, the reduction in the cross section is suﬃciently small and assumed
to be constant in that area. This assumption is called ”The Engineering Stresses or Nominal
Stresses” [22], because it consider the cross section as constant. The element will get a speciﬁc
smaller cross sectional after the yielding stage (fy) and after the maximum strength (fu) has
happened. This narrowing in the cross section is called ”Necking”. In that range the cross
sectional is taken into account which is called ”True” stresses.
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
2.2.2
Cyclic Phenomenons
A good understanding of metallic material eﬀect and behavior, can only be obtained by
physical test investigations. Hence, the stress-strain behavior under a cyclic loading is very
miscellaneous and needs an individual approach for diﬀerent metallic materials [23]. The most
relevant phenomenons are cyclic hardening/softening, cyclic creep (also known as ratcheting).
Determination of Young’s modulus
The determination of Young’s modulus in a hysteresis loop is done by considering the
linear part of the loops in the compression and tension regime. Figure 2.10 illustrates a
hysteresis loop with indication of useful factors for the analysing part. Explanation of factors
in the Figure: σmax is the maximum stress of the hysteresis loop and σmin is the minimum
stress of the hysteresis loop. EC is the Young’s modulus of the compression part and ET is
the Young’s modulus of the tension part of the hysteresis loop. EC and ET are determined by
the ﬁrst 1/4 part of the loops and EC and ET is described as E1 and E2, respectively, during
the thesis even though the investigated papers uses an other nomenclature of E1 and E2.
Figure 2.10: Illustration of one hysteresis loop with indications of belonging factors.
==PAGE:27==
2.2. BACKGROUND THEORY
15
Cyclic Hardening and Softening
The micro-structure in steel often changes in the beginning of cyclic loadings. This results
in changes of physical properties and stress response in the material [23]. This phenomenon is
called cyclic softening/hardening. The eﬀect of softening/hardening of a material response
or decreasing/increasing load or strain, is heavily dependent on the number of cycles until
equilibrium is reached. A cyclic test is characterised by closed hysteresis loops. The hysteresis
loops may have diﬀerent conﬁgurations depending on the type of tests. The element can be
subjected to strain control or stress control test which can be seen in Figure 2.11. The ﬁgure
includes diﬀerent hysteresis loops depending on hardening/softening conditions of the material.
The main diﬀerence of hardening/softening of a strain controlled and stress controlled test is:
strain controlled (constant); the stress decreases during the hysteresis loops which is called
Softening and stress controlled (constant); the stain decreases during the hysteresis loops
which is called Hardening.
Figure 2.11: Figure a) and b) are both strain controlled test, which is characterised by constant
strain, and the stress is changeably. Conversely, for c) and d) which both are constant in stress is
changeably in strain. a) is also Cyclic softening and cyclic hardening b). c) cyclic hardening and cyclic
softening d), From [23].
Isotropic, Kinematic and mixed Hardening
Some materials such as stainless steel or cooper often shows very strong cyclic soften-
ing/hardening in which the structural steel is less clear. Cyclic properties are not only
depending on hardening/softening of the material, but also on the loading amplitude and
more generally on strain history. Hardening processes can be described as three hardening
rules: isotropic hardening, kinematic hardening and mixed hardening, as illustrated on Figure
2.12. The three hardening rules are being described below in Figure 2.12.
==PAGE:28==
16
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
Figure 2.12: (a) Isotropic hardening model showing the expansion of the yield surface with plastic
strain; (b) kinematic hardening model showing the translation of the yield surface with plastic strain;
(c) mixed isotropic–kinematic hardening model showing the expansion and translation of the yield
surface with plastic strain; and (d) resulting stress–strain curves showing diﬀerent yield stresses in the
compression as predicted by diﬀerent plasticity models: C – kinematic hardening, D – mixed hardening,
and E – isotropic hardening. [24].
• Isotropic Hardening - This hardening process is at the point where the yield surface
remains the same shape but can expand or contract uniformly about the centre of
the loops as shown in Figure 2.12 a). It is clear that isotropic hardening neglects the
behaviour of Bauschinger’s Eﬀect, since the isotropic hardening raises the yield point
in both tension and compression. Hence, the isotropic hardening has a tendency to
over-predict the size of the elastic region on reversed loading in the plastic modelling
[24].
• Kinematic Hardening - Isotropic hardening is normally not useful in situations where
components are subjected to cyclic loadings due to the behaviour of Bauschinger’s Eﬀect.
Therefore, the kinematic hardening is introduced. This phenomenon does not change
the shape of the yield surface or orientation, but rather move the whole yielding surface
in the stress plan, illustrated on Figure 2.12 b) [24]. This theory often corresponds to
material response which takes place for cyclic loadings with low amplitude.
• Mixed Hardening - The mixed isotropic–kinematic hardening model, combines
isotropic and kinematic components. The model allows simultaneous translation and
expansion/contraction of the yield surface as shown on Figure 2.12 c) [24].
Ratcheting (Cycle Creep)
In uni-axial tests with load control conditions and a non zero mean stress (Indicates that
there is more of the cycle in the tension than in the compression zone). The accumulation of
axial plastic strain is possible to occur cycle by cycle [23]. This phenomenon is usually called
ratcheting or cyclic creep. Ratcheting is characterised by an open hysteresis loop which results
in a non-linear behaviour of the material in both tension and compression. The accumulation
of plastic strain in any cycles depends on the cyclic softening/hardening behaviour of the
material (Hardening; The plastic strains get smaller, Softening; The plastic strains get larger).
==PAGE:29==
2.2. BACKGROUND THEORY
17
Figure 2.13 illustrates an uni-axial ratcheting test with inﬂuence of softening/hardening during
the cycles [25].
Figure 2.13: Uniaxial ratcheting and inﬂuence of hardening/softening behaviour[23]. Where σa is
the amplitude and σm is the mean stress.
Experimental investigations of ratcheting has been performed on steel 1070 and Figure
2.14 shows the inﬂuence of hardening and softening of a steel material.
Figure 2.14: Experimental cyclic ratcheting for a two-step uniaxial loading. Note the ratcheting rate
decay in step 1 and the inconsistency of ratchetting direction with mean stress in step 2, from [26]
2.2.3
Machine Stiﬀness
The stiﬀness of test machines has been studied and highlighted in Chapter 2. It was
investigated that even with identical specimens the test machine stiﬀness showed diﬀerent
values of each tests. Calculation of the machine stiﬀness has therefore been simpliﬁed in this
thesis. It is assumed that the test machine only acts in the elastic area (deformations). In
order to simplify the calculation of machine stiﬀness it is necessary to have a second part
measuring equipment in the test set-up, e.g. extensometer, ARAMIS etc. which is able
to measure strains in the test specimen without inﬂuence of the test machine. The test
investigation in this thesis has been corrected with the simpliﬁed formula for determination of
the machine stiﬀness which is given below in the next part.
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
The correction of the Young’s modulus of the test machine (including: jaws, piston, frames
etc.) by comparing with extensomter, is given by
Em,corr =




1
σµ
ϵµ,m
−
1
σµ
ϵµ,Ext




−1
(2.4)
Where σµ is the mean stress values and ϵm,µ is the mean strain values measured by the test
machine. ϵExt,µ is the mean strain values measured by the extensomter. All the mean values
in this thesis are calculated of the ﬁrst 1/3 part of the elastic regime in the stress-strain curve.
Calculation of the mean stress and strains for the machine correction of Young’s modulus, as
follows:
σµ = F
A0
(2.5)
where F is the force measured by the test machine and A0 is the initial cross section area of
the test specimen.
ϵµ,m = ∆Lm
Lc
(2.6)
Where ∆Lm is the displacement of the test machine and Lc is the parallel length of the test
specimen.
ϵµ,Ext = ∆LExt
LExt
(2.7)
Where ∆LExt is the displacement of the extensometer and LExt is the initial measuring length
of the extensometer. An illustration of the correction method is shown on Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: Illustration of the correction method of the machine stiﬀness, in which 1/3 indicates
the length of the linear part which is considered.
The corrected machine of Young’s modulus is now used to calculate the corrected machine
strains and subtracting it from the original machine strains.
ϵm,corr = ϵm −
σ
Em,corr
(2.8)
Where ϵm is the original machine strains and σ is the stress to a given strain/time.
The Young’s modulus of the machine is now determined by regression of the new stress-strain
==PAGE:31==
2.2. BACKGROUND THEORY
19
curve of the machine. The regression is also made of the ﬁrst 1/3 part of the linear elastic
area.
Em,Ext =
σ(1/3) −σ(0)
ϵm,corr(1/3) −ϵm,corr(0) =
σ(1/3)
ϵm,corr(1/3)
(2.9)
The stiﬀness of the machine is hereby determined by
Km = Em · A0
L0
(2.10)
2.2.4
Statistical Hypothesis Testing
When investigating many tests it is necessary to perform some statistical calculations of
the data. The statistic theory in this section is based on the book; Probability and Statistic for
Engineers [27]. Statisticians methods can be used to describe populations or data sets and also
be used to make decisions for instants via hypothesis test. When using hypothesis test, it is
essential to ask the question: ”does the measurements have signiﬁcantly diﬀerences”. The word
”signiﬁcant” refers in this context to whether the observation have diﬀerences that are greater
than the random variation that always occurs in experiments. In this case, several hypotheses
is examined by comparing two independent small samples. When test sample 1 (n1) and test
sample 2 (n2) are both small and the mean population and variances is known a T-test can be
used for compare the mean values. The only requirement is that both populations are normal
distributed. Check for normal distribution can be done by develop a QQ plot, or just assume
that the sample size is normal distributed, due to a very small population. Furthermore, it
is necessary that the two populations can be assumed to have identical standard deviations
(so-called variance homogeneity). This can be investigated by using a F-test, but the test is
often not that important, and the requirement is often abandoned and the standard deviations
is assumed to be identical. So overall the T-test is check of the hypotheses are: H0 : µ1 = µ2
or if H0 is rejected H1 : µ1 ̸= µ2. Now the test statistic is expressed by:
t =
(X −Y )
Sp
q
1
n1 + 1
n2
(2.11)
If the t-value from Eq. 2.11 is large it seems that the investigated diﬀerence is signiﬁcant.
Whereas, a small value indicates variations in the populations. This means that a large
t-value will result in the rejection of the null hypothesis (H0), whereas a small t-value will
lead to accepting the null hypothesis. Exactly how big the t-value must be before one rejects
the null hypothesis, is determined by calculating the p-value. If the p-value is less than a
predetermined level of signiﬁcance (in this case 0.05), one reject the null hypothesis. In the
context of rejecting the null hypothesis, it is possible to make two types of errors: type 1 and
type 2. Type 1 error: is to reject the null hypothesis, in cases where no diﬀerence between
the populations exist. To avoid this error, simply put the signiﬁcant level as small as possible,
which leads to type 2 error. Type 2 error: means accepting the null hypothesis even if this is
wrong. The above mentioned p-value is determined by:
p = 2 · P(T ≥| t |) = 2 · (1–Φ(T ≤| t |))
(2.12)
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
Where Φ is determined by the tests degrees of freedom (DOF = n1 +n2 −2) and which is used
for reading a probability value in a statistical table. If p ≤α/2, H0 is rejected. Note that the
p-value does not say anything about the probability that the null hypothesis is right or wrong.
If the null hypothesis is true, then it is unlikely to get the observed sample. This is used as
an indication to analyse the dataset. The samples are in no way statistical representative,
and are only used to provide a better overview of the results.
==PAGE:33==
2.2. BACKGROUND THEORY
21
2.2.5
Matlab Scripts
Matlab scripts are developed to transform the raw data to useful plots and results.
Therefore, it was decided to create a script which could be used for the data processing.
Several scripts were developed in order to simplify the process. The scripts are as follows:
• Main script, uniaxial tensile experiment: treat all the raw data form the tensile experi-
ments.
• Main script, cyclic tensile experiment: treat all the raw data form the cyclic experiments.
• Sub script: collects all the means and standard deviations for the cyclic Young’s Modules
in bar plots as: Young’s modulus vs. dog bone number, Young’s modulus vs. strain rate,
machine stiﬀness vs. dog bone number and last Young’s modulus vs. number of cycles.
• Main script, cyclic bending experiment: treat all the raw data form the bending
experiments.
• Sub script: collects the results from each bending experiment and gather them in a bar
plot for Young’s modulus vs. strain rate.
The main script for cyclic experiments is brieﬂy described as a ﬂow chart presented in Figure
2.16. The ﬂow chart is describing the processing from raw data to end of documented results
and is made in order to give an idea of how the structure of the script is.
 
Input Parameter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programming in MatLab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output Parameter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Calculation 
of the 
machine 
stiffness 
ENGINEERING 
Stress-Strain 
curve 
Stress-Time curve 
And Strain-Time curve 
Area for each 
hysteresis  
Secant- and 
Tangent modulus 
Separate each 
cycle and 
determines the E1 
and E2 from the 
first 1/4 of the 
elastic region 
 Determine 
the area in 
each cycles 
Store data 
values in .Txt 
and Plots in 
.Pdf 
Piston 
movement 
in [mm] 
Force/load 
in [kN] 
Extensometer 
1 in [mm] 
Extensometer 
2 in [mm] 
Time in 
[sec] 
Cyclic 
Counter in 
[no.] 
Input data 
is zeroed 
Mean and standard deviation 
for Secant Modulus regarding 
each cycle 
Secant Modulus vs 
cycle number.  
Mean and standard deviation 
for Secant modules both for 
E1, E2 and corrected piston 
End of 
MatLab 
script 
Figure 2.16: The ﬂow chart illustrates how the script works, form raw data to the results. It is
divided into 3 areas: Input parameter, Matlab programming and Output parameter, in order to indicate
what is going on and where.
==PAGE:34==
22
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE AND BACKGROUND THEORY
Input Parameters
Raw data form Instron machine and Spider8 system given as .xlsx ﬁles.
• Force/load [kN]
– It is almost impossible to reset the force of the machine before the test has been
made. It should hereby be zeroed afterwards by correction for the initial piston
force. This is done by subtracting the ﬁrst value of the force from each of the
following values: ∆Force = [Force(2,3,4,...,j) −Force(1)], where j is the maximum
measured value.
• Piston displacement [mm]
– The same applies for the piston displacement, because it works as a relative value
and should therefore also be reset by correction for the initial piston position. This
is done by subtracting the ﬁrst value of the piston movement from each of the
following values: ∆Piston = [Piston(2,3,4,...,j) −Piston(1)], where j is the maximum
measured value.
• Extensometer (EXT) 1 and 2 [mm]
– The extensometers do also have to be reset which is done in the same way as for the
Force and the displacement. Reset by: ∆Ext = [EXT(2,3,4,...,j) −EXT(1)], where j
is the maximum measured values. The mean extensometers is now used by using
the average values from EXT 1 and EXT 2.
• Time [Sec]
– The time is just indicating the time (length) that the experiments takes from start
to end.
• Cyclic Count [-]
– Indicates the number of cycles.
Output Parameters
The output from the scripts are in the form of plots and values subsequently used for
comparison between test specimens in the sub scripts. Figure 2.17 illustrates the determination
method of the diﬀerent Young’s moduli.
• The slope of the piston movement is always less steep than the extensometer, the slope
for piston movement can be corrected as shown in section 2.2.3.
• Esec and Etan modulus in [MPa]. This is used for both the elastic part before the cycles
and the during the cycle loops.
• Area for each hysteresis loops is determined using a trapezoidal function in Matlab.
==PAGE:35==
2.2. BACKGROUND THEORY
23
• Esec is determined form the ﬁrst 1/4 in the elastic zone for both compression (E1) and
tension (E2) and for the ﬁrst 1/3 part of the elastic zone in the uniaxial tensile tests
(Esec,1/3).
Figure 2.17: Illustration of the determination methods of Young’s modulus at diﬀerent stages in the
test result. The dashed box shows a zoomed part of the illustration with includes three cycles.
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Experimental Program
The beginning of this chapter describes early assumptions of experimental test ideas, which
has been made in order to investigate the way of determining Young’s modulus. This section
is mainly made because it is a pilot project and therefore diﬀerent ways for determining
Young’s modulus were studied.
Three test procedures and test set-ups consisting of uniaxial tensile and cyclic tests of
the dog bones (special geometry of test specimens) and cyclic four point bending test of
IPE-proﬁles. The Young’s modulus of the dog bones will be measured by extensometers and
piston movement form the machine itself. This is both used in the uniaxial tensile and cyclic
experiments of the dog bones. The deﬂections of the four point bending test of the IPE-proﬁle
are also used for determining Young’s. The deﬂection will also be measured by extensometers,
and these deﬂections will be compared with an attached strain gauge.
In general, only a brief presentation of the test set-ups are mentioned.
A complete de-
scription of the experimental program is performed in the Test Report [1].
3.1
Early Assumptions
Early assumptions has to be investigated based on knowledge obtained from the literature.
The idea was to determine what and how it was possible to make experimental investigations
of the Young’s modulus in steel. The following subsections discloses various experimental
ideas of how the Young’s modulus can be determined. The ideas have been discussed during
the early stage of the thesis and some of them have been rejected or optimised during the
experimental investigation.
3.1.1
Experimental Test Ideas
• The ﬁrst idea was to make the tests with dog bone specimens as it is in this way other
experimental investigations of steel material properties have been made. The idea is to
design the dog bone according to the standard of tensile test: ISO-6892 (2013) [21] &
cyclic tensile/compression test: ISO-12106 (2003) [28]. This test will make it possible
to notice if a cyclic test is having any inﬂuence on the Young’s modulus or/and if it
25
==PAGE:38==
26
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROGRAM
actually is possible to determine the Young’s modulus with this method. Figure 3.1
illustrates a dog bone specimen subjected to uniaxial tensile.
Figure 3.1: Early stage of cyclic tensile/compression test of dog bones.
• The second idea was to make a bending test in order to determine the Young’s modulus
during cyclic deformations by the bending deﬂection of a beam instead of the dog bone
with tension and compression. The bending test was determined to be a four point
bending test in order to obtain an area between the loads with constant moment and
strain. At the ﬁrst stage the beam was considered as a dog bone laying down. This
idea was rejected after some concerning of the cross sectional which would aﬀect the
deﬂection. The bending test idea with a dog bone is illustrated on Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Early stage of bending test with dog bone.
• Another idea of making the bending test was to have a plate of steel with a thickness of
6 mm
 same thickness as the considered dog bones
. This was a possible solution for
a four point bending test. The problem was the failure of lateral buckling due to no
stiﬀeners in the element. This could be solved by ﬁxing the plate with some home made
solutions for protecting against lateral buckling. The bending test idea with a ﬂat steel
is illustrated on Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Early stage of bending test with ﬂat steel.
• A third and diﬀerent solution for the bending test was using IPE-proﬁles which is an
often used proﬁle in the construction industry. The advantage with that proﬁle was the
resistance against lateral buckling due to the top and bottom ﬂange in the proﬁle. The
bending test idea with an IPE-proﬁle is illustrated on Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:39==
3.1. EARLY ASSUMPTIONS
27
Figure 3.4: Early stage of bending test with IPE-proﬁle.
3.1.2
Experimental Parameters
The conﬁguration of the experiments is hereby established, but there should be a knowledge
and understanding of the parameters that eﬀect the determination of Young’s modulus. The
parameters are: steel type, rolling direction, frequency (strain rate), amplitude, number of
cycles and testing in both tension and compression conditions. The diﬀerent parameters are
described below.
• Steel type (strength) has nothing to do with the test conﬁguration, but steel type is
nonetheless interesting. Due to the fact that Young’s modulus should be the same of all
types of construction steel (210 GPa), but is this really the truth?
• Rolling direction has also nothing to do with the test conﬁguration, but there has
been theories about stronger and stiﬀer steel in one rolling direction than the other
direction. In that context specimens of parallel and perpendicular rolling directions has
been ordered.
• Frequency (strain rate) is the fundamental reasons for this experiment.
What
happens to the Young’s modulus when the strain rate is changed doing a test? Does it
have a signiﬁcant impact on the determination of Young’s modulus?
• Amplitude during a test is also an important parameter to investigate. The uniaxial
test machine can simulate various types of ”waves”: triangular cycles, square cycles and
sine cycles. The sine wave cycle is applied for the experiments, because structures often
are exposed to sinusoidal waveforms like, water, wind and earthquake.
• Number of cycles is important if a structure has to be designed for fatigue life. In
relation to this it could be interesting to see if Young’s Modules change in relation to
the number of cycles.
• Testing in both tension and compression conditions is the usual way of making
cyclic tests.
The test specimen just has to satisfy that it is possible to test it in
compression without buckling.
When an experiment has so many diﬀerent parameters to modify, it is necessary to lock
some oﬀthem to a speciﬁc value. In current case the following selections has been made:
There will only be preformed experiments on steel material with strength S235 and S355.
Both steel types will be investigated in the perpendicular- and parallel rolling direction, with
three diﬀerent strain rates: 1 Hz, 5 Hz and 9 Hz. The reason why these three frequencies
==PAGE:40==
28
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROGRAM
are selected are that, it could be interesting to see if Young’s modulus change during high
frequencies.
It is important to have the same intervals between the strain rates in order to compare
the results. The amplitude is one of the parameters that easily can be changed. Several
pre-experiments pointed in the direction that it could be interesting to investigate Young’s
modules by a sinus curve around the yielding area. Small amplitudes during cyclic tests have
less inﬂuence on the plastic deformations of the specimen.
The number of cycles was locked to 2500 as it was decided to investigate loss of stiﬀness and
not fatigue life. The geometry of the dog bone made it impossible to investigate the sample
under compression, due to the fact that it will buckle.
==PAGE:41==
3.2. TEST SET-UPS AND PROCEDURES
29
3.2
Test Set-ups and Procedures
This section describes the test set-ups and procedures, starting with the axial test of the
dog bones following with the bending test of the IPE-proﬁles.
The preparation in relation of geometry of the dog bone specimens are made according
to the DS/EN Standard: Metallic materials - Tensile testing - Part 1: Method of test at
room temperature [21] together with the International standard: Metallic materials - Fatigue
testing - Axial-strain-controlled method [28].
The theory for designing the test specimens (cyclic tensile and bending) are described in the:
Test Report - Section ”4.1.2 Global Stability” and Section ”4.2 Design of Bending Test”.
3.2.1
Uniaxial Tensile Test - Dog Bones
The following section describes the design, execution and test set-up of the uniaxial tensile
tests and the cyclic tests. The uniaxial tensile tests were made in order to determine the
material parameters of the steel used in the cyclic test eg. the yielding stress and ultimate
stress together with the corresponding strain values. The design of the dog bones is shown on
Figure 3.5 and the corresponding dimensions are given in Table 3.1.
Figure 3.5: Design of the dog bones.
Table 3.1: Design dimension of the dog bone specimens.
Thickness
Width
Radius
Width Grip
Gauge Length
Parallel Length
Radius Length
Grip Length
Total Length
t [mm]
w [mm]
R [mm]
Wg [mm]
L0 [mm]
Lc [mm]
LR [mm]
Lg [mm]
Lt [mm]
6
15
30
39
54
73
24
65
251
Uniaxial Tensile Experiments Procedure
Four dog bones are chosen to be tensile tested, two of S235 steel and two of S355 steel.
Cyclic Tensile Experiments Procedure
36 out of the 48 dog bones are chosen to be cyclic tested and the rest of them were used
for early test investigations and tensile experiments. The test schedule is shown in Table 3.2.
The test set-up for the cyclic experiments is similar to uniaxial tensile experiment.
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL PROGRAM
Table 3.2: Experimental test schedule of the cyclic tests.
Steel Type
Rolling Direction
Test Type
1 Hz
5 Hz
9 Hz
S235
Perpendicular
Cycle around tension at yielding
3 pcs
3 pcs
3 pcs
Parallel
3 pcs
3 pcs
3 pcs
S355
Perpendicular
3 pcs
3 pcs
3 pcs
Parallel
3 pcs
3 pcs
3 pcs
Rate and Data Sampling of Cyclic Tests
The strain rate of the cyclic tensile tests are not determined according to any standards.
Cyclic test standards is only made for LCF. Table 3.3 shows the loading rates and the strain
rates. The loading rates are based on yielding stresses determined in the uniaxial tensile tests.
The loading to yielding point is determined to be 87.5 % of the yielding stress, and the ratio
of the cyclic amplitudes and the loadings to yield points are equals for both steel types.
Table 3.3: Load levels and strain rates used for the cyclic experiments.
Steel Type
Loading to Yield Point
Cyclic Amplitude
Strain Rates (Cyclic)
[-]
[kN]
[kN]
[1/s]
S235
23.0
6.1
1
5
9
S355
30.0
8.0
1
5
9
3.2.2
Bending Test - IPE proﬁle
The bending tests are made in order to determine the Young’s modulus from deﬂection
and strain in the beam and hereby compare it with the Young’s modulus determined for the
dog bones described in section 3.2.1. Furthermore similar dog bones will be cut out of the
IPE-proﬁle for material properties. The design of the dog bones is shown on Figure 3.6 and
the corresponding dimensions are given in Table 3.4.
Figure 3.6: Illustration of the cross sectional of the IPE proﬁle with indication of dimensions.
==PAGE:43==
3.2. TEST SET-UPS AND PROCEDURES
31
Table 3.4: Data speciﬁcation of IPE beam used for bending tests.
Type
Strength [MPa]
h [mm]
b [mm]
d [mm]
t [mm]
r [mm]
A [mm2 ]
Iy [mm4]
ρ
 kg
m3

g
kg
m

IPE 80
S275
80.7
47.02
4.15
5.1
5
793.6
8.191*10ˆ5
7850
6.23
The IPE beam is cut in specimen of 600 mm in order to have 500 mm in free span and 50
mm outside each supports. Due to risk of an uncontrolled failure it is chosen not to test the
beams in the yielding range. The yielding and ultimate strength of the steel is determined
from uniaxial tests made on dog bones cut out form the beam. All the experiments are
deformation controlled and the maximum applied force on the beams was 23 kN in each loads.
Table 3.5 shows the test schedule for the bending tests.
Table 3.5: Experimental test schedule of the cyclic bending experiments.
Proﬁle
Span Length
Cyclic Tests
-
[mm]
1 Hz
5 Hz
9 Hz
IPE80
500
3 pcs
3 pcs
3pcs
Rate and Data Sampling of Bending Tests
The bending experiments are displacement controlled due to risk of failure with load
control system. The strain rates and load levels for the cyclic tests are shown in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Strain rates used for the bending experiment.
Steel Type
Loading at Yield point
Rate to Yield Point
Cyclic Amplitude
Strain rate
[-]
[kN]
[mm/s]
[kN]
[1/s]
IPE80
36.9
0.004
10.5
1
5
9
==PAGE:44==
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Experimental Results
This chapter is divided into ﬁve sections in order to present the experimental results. The
ﬁrst section describes the uniaxial tests which are done for four random chosen dog bones.
Two of steel S235 (dog bone no. 02 and 04) and two of steel S355 (dog bone no. 25 and 31).
In the second section only results from dog bone no. 36 are presented regarding the cyclic
tensile experiments. The third section is a comparison of all 36 cyclic tensile results. The
fourth section describes the bending results for three diﬀerent experiments, one of each strain
rate. Last, is a comparison of the nine bending experiments.
4.1
Dog Bone Experiments - Uniaxial
Four random chosen dog bones (no. 02, 04, 25 and 31) have been uniaxial tensile tested
according to the test program. The results of dog bone 02 are shown and described in the
following section in which only main results of dog bone no. 04, 25 and 31 are given. Detailed
descriptions have to be found in the Test Report. The tests are performed in compliance
with DS-EN ISO. Usually one has to perform several tests to have representative results,
however this is not necessary in this situation because only an estimate of the steel material
parameters is required for later use in the cyclic tests. Specially the yielding stress, yielding
strain, ultimate stress and ultimate strain has to be determined. The piston strain is also
being investigated and corrected according to the description in section 2.2.3.
Dog bone 02 (S235 - Perpendicular)
The test result of the yield and ultimate stress together with strains are shown described
in subsection 4.1. Figure 4.1 shows the raw data of the dog bone plotted as stress vs. time.
By observing the ﬁgure it is clear that the stress-time curve is similar compared to a normal
curve of steel material1. The yielding is obtained after approx. 400 s. Afterwards the steel is
hardening and thereby become stronger as illustrated on Figure 4.2. A ”jump” in the piston
curve (blue one) appears at a strain value of 0.22 which is due to a change in the strain rate
(From block 2 to block 3). It is also noticed that the extensometer and piston movement
1One of the graphs o the ﬁgure is done by using Matlab smooth function. This feature means the raw data
for unwanted small ﬂuctuations
33
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
follows the same path, as expected. After yielding phase the extensometers are removed and
it is therefore only possible to see the strain from the piston at the last part of the test.
Figure 4.1: The plot illustrates stress vs. time
where the pink line is the raw data from Matlab
and the blue line is smooth by a function in Mat-
lab. It is diﬃcult to see the pink line because the
blue curve contains many data points.
Figure 4.2: The curves show stress vs. strain
for piston, extensometer 1 and extensometer 2.
After yielding part the two extensometers are
removed, which makes curves drops to zero of
the extensometers.
The piston measurements
continues.
Figure 4.3 shows the elastic part with measurements from both extensometers with
corresponding linear trendlines. Figure 4.4 shows the same elastic part with an average value
for the two extensometers (mean extensometer) with corresponding linear trendline. The
trendlines (y1, y2 and y3) are the Young’s modulus of the curves and the values are shown in
Table 4.1. The calculated values of the Young’s modulus have around 30 GPa deviation from
the theoretical on 210 GPa.
Figure 4.3: Stress vs.
Strain curve only in
the elastic region of extensometer 1 and 2 corre-
sponding trendlines.
Figure 4.4: Stress vs. Strain curve only in the
elastic region for the mean extensometer and the
corresponding trendlines ﬁtting the curve.
==PAGE:47==
4.1. DOG BONE EXPERIMENTS - UNIAXIAL
35
Table 4.1: Values of the secant modulus of the extensometers shown in Figure 4.3 and 4.4. The
correlation coeﬃcient of the trendlines are also given.
Secant modulus (Esec) [MPa]
Correlation Coeﬃcient (R2) [-]
Extensometer 1 (y1)
184070
0.9937
Extensometer 2 (y2)
180520
0.9933
Mean Extensometer (y3)
182280
0.9935
The same method as for the extensometer values has been used for the piston data which
are shown on Figure 4.5 and 4.6. Figure 4.5 is the raw piston data in which Figure 4.6 is
the corrected piston data according to the machine stiﬀness. The trendlines (y1 and y2) are
the Young’s modulus of the curves and the values are shown in Table 4.2 with corresponding
correlation factors. The corrected piston shows a deviation only 3.18 GPa from the theoretical
value of Young’s modulus.
Figure 4.5: Stress vs. strain curve in the elastic
region for piston (blue), with the corresponding
trendline (red).
Figure 4.6: Stress vs. strain curve in the elastic
region for the corrected piston movement (blue)
and the corresponding trendline (red).
Table 4.2: Values of the Secant modulus of the piston shown in Figure 4.5 and 4.6. The correlation
coeﬃcient of the trendlines are also given.
Secant modulus (Esec) [MPa]
Correlation Coeﬃcient (R2) [-]
Piston (y1)
78804
0.9966
Piston Corrected (y2)
206820
0.9759
Figure 4.7 illustrates the stress-strain curves of the elastic part of piston, piston corrected
and the two extensometers. Indicating that the corrected piston and two extensometers have
nearly the same slopes. The yielding stress is determined of the 0.2 % strain which is shown
as the black dashed lines. Figure 4.8 shows the variation of the tangent modulus Etan in the
elastic area as function of strain.
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Figure 4.7: Stress vs. strain of all measuring
equipment: Piston, corrected piston ,extensome-
ter 1 and 2.
Figure 4.8: The plot shows the variation of tan-
gent modulus (Etan) vs. strain, of the corrected
piston and mean extensometer.
It is seen on Figure 4.8 that mean extensometer and corrected piston diﬀers a lot. The
mean extensometer shows values close to 210 GPa at the ﬁrst 1/3 part of the elastic curve,
while the corrected piston diﬀers much more in the beginning but it is seen that it goes
towards a value close to 210 GPa. At a strain value of approx. 0.6E-3 the tangent modulus
makes signiﬁcant changes and decreases. This observation can also be seen on Figure 4.7
where the curves changes in the inclination at 140 MPa. This could be a result of possible
slippages in the machine jaws.
Summary of dog bone no. 02, 04, 25 and 31
The uniaxial tensile tests of dog bone 02, 04, 25 and 31 has been done in order to get material
properties of the steel and use it in further investigation of the cyclic tests. All four tests
showed large deviations of the secant modulus measured by the extensometers compared to
the theoretically value of Young’s modulus. The deviation of the four tests were around 30-40
GPa compared to the theory (210 GPa). The secant modulus of the corrected piston were
around 207 GPa which is around 1.5 % diﬀerence from the theory. The corrected piston secant
moduli has large diﬀerence in the beginning of the test seen on the ﬁgures, but ends up close
to the theoretically value of Young’s modulus. The secant modulus of the mean extensometer
on Figure 4.7 is close to 210 GPa at the beginning of the elastic part of the curve but starts
decreasing at a strain value on approximately 0.6. The material properties of the four dog
bones with the two diﬀerent steel strengths are shown in Table 4.3 together with dog bone no.
04 (S235) and 31 (S355).
Table 4.3: Main results of the uniaxial tensile tests of dog bone 02, 04, 25 and 31.
Steel Type
No.
Yield Stress [MPa]
Yield Strain [-]
Ultimate Stress [MPa]
Ultimate Strain [-]
S235
02
297
0.002
427
0.220
04
308
0.002
429
0.175
S355
25
386
0.002
479
0.168
31
397
0.002
489
0.175
==PAGE:49==
4.2. DOG BONE EXPERIMENTS - CYCLIC
37
4.2
Dog Bone Experiments - Cyclic
The pretesting were performed and resulted in ﬁrmly lock of certain values. The amplitude
of the sine waves during the experiments has shown to be a diﬃcult parameter to control.
The ﬁrst tests were tried in diﬀerent kind of tension and compression and with diﬀerent load
levels of the amplitudes. These tests showed buckling in the compression zone and the idea of
the experiments were afterwards to make tests only in the tension zone due to risk of buckling
in the compression. The amplitude was tried to be controlled by force and deformation. It
was diﬃcult to control the test only to be in the tension zone when the deformation controlled
was used. The force controlled method was chosen for the rest of the test specimens and
thus it is easier to control the cycles around the yielding of the specimens, where the Young’s
modulus is interesting to be determined. All the tests of dog bones are shown in chronological
order in the Test Report and only one detailed description is made of dog bone no. 32 in the
main Thesis.
4.2.1
Dog Bone 32 (S355 - Perpendicular)
Speciﬁcations of the experimental test of dog bone no. 32 is shown in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Speciﬁcation of dog bone no. 32 inclusive tested frequency.
Specimen no.
Steel strength
Rolling direction
Tested frequency
Tensile Force
Amplitude Force
[-]
[MPa]
[-]
[Hz]
[kN]
[kN]
32
355
Perpendicular
9.0
30
8
The dog bone is pulled to almost the yield point (87.5 % of yielding) doing a semi quick
load as demonstrated on the top plot from time 0 to 60 s in Figure 4.9. The cycles are hereby
acting around the yielding stage of the steel. The cyclic loading is continuing the rest of the
test. The lower plot to the left on Figure 4.9 shows the ﬁrst cycles form 60 s to 65s. It has to
be noticed that the stress gets bigger at the ﬁrst cycles in the time between 60 s and around
60.5 s. Afterwards the stress decreases and the stress is normalised at approximately 65 s.
The machine is load controlled and should therefore not have any ﬂuctuations in the stress
values. It is therefore assumed that the machine uses the ﬁrst cycles to identify the stiﬀness
of the steel and then afterwards it can provide the right force output.
==PAGE:50==
38
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Figure 4.9: The three graphs illustrating the stress vs. time of 9 Hz experiment. The upper plot
shows the stress throughout the whole experiment, while the other 2 lower plots are fragments of the
upper plot.
The stress and strain curves shown on Figure 4.10 and 4.11, are developed in order to
determine the Young’s modulus. The corrected piston movement is determined by the method
presented in Section 2.2.3. The ﬁgures shows that the piston corrected is almost equal to
the measured extensometer values, although the blue curve is slightly oﬀset. However, the
important is that the slope is the same of the corrected piston and mean extensometer, which
Figure 4.11 illustrates. It is seen on the ﬁgures that the cyclic procedure is starting at around
340 MPa and continues with 2500 cycles an then the test stops. It do not look like normal
cycles due to the large plastic deformations in the steel at these stress values (Yielding stage).
Figure 4.10: Stress-strain plot of extensometer
1 and 2 and the corrected piston.
Figure 4.11: Stress-strain plot of the corrected
piston and mean extensometer (average of exten-
someter 1 and 2 from Figure 4.10).
It is seen on Figure 4.10 and 4.11 that the dog bone has large plastic deformations during
the ﬁrst 50 cycles and stops at a strain value of around 0.02 witch is about the yielding
stage. The hardening process begins after around cycle no. 50 and continues throughout the
==PAGE:51==
4.2. DOG BONE EXPERIMENTS - CYCLIC
39
test. This is due to the applied force in the cycles which goes to equilibrium with the tensile
strength of the dog bone.
The left plot on Figure 4.12 shows how the measurements develops plastic strains along the
stress-strain path. This is because the cycles are located in the plastic zone (yielding stage).
The right plot in Figure 4.12 shows 11 diﬀerent selected cycles in order to investigate possible
changes in the cyclic deformations. At the plot to the right it is easy to see the hardening
process starts around cycle no. 50 to cycle no. 2000 because the cycles are much closer located
in strain values.
Figure 4.12: Stress-strain plot with 11 cyclic loops highlighted. It is seen that the test is hardening
after 0.023 strain which is illustrated by the area getting smaller in the hysteresis along the strain axis.
The hardening process is better illustrated on a strain-time curve which is made in Figure
4.13 where the top plot shows the entire test. After 60 s the cyclic test is started. Down to the
left on the ﬁgure, the ﬁrst cycles from 60 s to 65 s is shown. The stain values are signiﬁcant
increase after 65 s and at around 100 s the strain values are almost in equilibrium in the
during the cyclic loops.
Figure 4.13: The three plots illustrates the strain vs. time for 9 Hz. The top plot shows the strain
throughout the whole experiment, while the fragment to the left illustrate strain when the cyclic load
starts and the plot to the right is the cycles at the end of the test.
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The plastic strains are not relevant when determining the Young’s modulus, and according
to the Theory Section 2.1 the Young’s modulus is being determined from the ﬁrst 1/4 part of
all the cycles. Figure 4.14 shows triangles (E1) which indicates the elastic area for compression
and circles (E2) which indicates the elastic area for tension. Although the specimen is in
the tension regime all the time. The black lines which runs between these points are the
corresponding trendlines. Figure 4.15 shows the tangent moduli corresponding to the points
in Figure 4.14. The secant moduli (E1 and E2) of the mean extensometers and areas of each
cycles are shown in Table 4.5.
Figure 4.14:
Illustration of cycle no.
1000
where the ﬁrst 1/4 of the elastic area are marked
with points along with the trendlines. This is
tension (E2) and compression (E1).
Figure 4.15: The scatter points is the tangent
modulus vs.
strain of the triangle and circle
points on Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.16 is developed in order to investigate wherever the Young’s modulus (secant
modulus) is changing during a cyclic test. All the values of compression (E1) and tension
(E2) are average for all cycles shown as the horizontal lines. Both the secant modulus of the
corrected piston values together with the mean extensometer values. It is hereby possible to
determine whether the plastic deformation has an eﬀect on the secant modulus, when the
cyclic load amplitude has center point at the yielding stage. The ﬁgure indicates that the
secant modulus is constant along the number of cycles. The piston is the opposite and are very
scattered for all of the measured values. This may be due to the machine has a ﬂuctuation in
the power supply and hereby the data points. The power ﬂuctuation has been examined by a
FFT plot, and there was no high frequencies for disturbing the measurements. Hereby the
ﬂuctuation just have a greater role when analysing for small values, in this situation strains.
==PAGE:53==
4.2. DOG BONE EXPERIMENTS - CYCLIC
41
Figure 4.16: Average secant module respect to the cycle number of the extensometer and the piston
correction, for E1 and E2 in the hysteresis loops.
Table 4.5: Results overview from dog bone 32.
Cycle Number
E1EXT
E2EXT
Area
[Mpa]
[Mpa]
[J]
Cycle no. 2
213071
352214
0.08082
Cycle no. 10
209860
NaN
0.08357
Cycle no. 20
200660
NaN
0.09329
Cycle no. 50
198319
123886
0.22243
Cycle no. 100
196147
204961
0.00083
Cycle no. 250
194110
196506
0.00062
Cycle no. 500
195138
195677
0.00262
Cycle no. 750
199089
200009
0.00206
Cycle no. 1000
199817
197301
0.00167
Cycle no. 1500
195782
196888
0.00123
Cycle no. 2000
200094
197515
0.00138
Having a closer look at Table 4.5 it is seen that the area in the hysteresis is decreasing a lot
after cycle no. 50. This is because the hardening process to the acting force start at around
this cycle number. After cycle no. 500 the steel hardening continues along the stress-strain
curve and the area is getting larger again. This indicates that the hardening process is of
no signiﬁcance for Young’s modulus, although the test specimen has been exposed to large
plastic deformations in a period of 2500 cycles. The ﬁrst values of E2 in the table shows NaN
(Not a Number) values. This is due to the large plastic deformation of the ﬁrst 50 cycles
in the test and the quarter parts of the cycles are therefore located another places on the
hysteresis loops and results in large and also negative values which are removed.
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
4.3
Comparison of Cyclic Dog Bone Experiments
Results of steel type S235 and S355 have been gathered and will be analysed doing this
section. The result values corresponding to the plot in this section is list in Appendix B.
This Appendix is made as a A3 format(fold out) in order for the reader to have both result
values and plots at the same time. Inﬂuence of the strain rates and the rolling directions
will be investigated in order to see possible signiﬁcant impact on the Young’s modulus. The
mean values of the two extensometers are used during the comparison, but if slippage/oﬀset
happens of one extensometer, then it is only the other extensometer which is used.
At ﬁrst, the elastic load stage from start to 87.5 % of yield stress is analysed in Figure 4.17.
This secant modulus vs. dog bone no. in the ﬁgure are shown for all dog bones which have
been cyclic tested. Figure 4.18 shows the machine stiﬀness with indication of mean value
and standard deviation. The stiﬀness shown in the ﬁgure is only calculated from the cyclic
experiments.
Figure 4.17: The secant modulus of the ﬁrst
1/3 part of the elastic stage. The average values
are indicated as dashed lines and the values are
given on the ﬁgure.
Figure 4.18: The machine stiﬀness (Km) de-
termined by the theory described in Section 2.1.
In Figure 4.17 the mean values of all the secant moduli is 197174 MPa of the corrected
piston. The mean value of all secant moduli for the mean extensometer is about 204469
MPa, which indicates that the ﬁrst 1/3 of the elastic part is good for determination of
the secant modulus (Young’s modulus). It is obvious on Figure 4.18 that the stiﬀness dif-
fers from test to test, as one of the papers [10] also describes. The mean value is 160.1
kN/mm is also signiﬁcant lower than the one given in the Instron datasheet [29] on 585
kN/m, which also is described in the paper. It was not possible to ﬁnd datasheet of Instron
8502 and a similar Instron 8802 datasheet was hereby used instead. Machine stiﬀness ob-
tained from dog bone no. 6 and 40 are not shown due to mistake in measurement sampling
of dog bone no. 6 and dog bone no. 40 was tested on another test machine Instron 8502 100kN.
==PAGE:55==
4.3. COMPARISON OF CYCLIC DOG BONE EXPERIMENTS
43
4.3.1
Comparison of Rolling Directions
Secant moduli (Compression E1 and Tension E2) of both the mean extensometer and
corrected piston have been determined of each 2500 cycles. The amplitude (in percent) is
the same for all the tests. The mean values of the secant moduli of all the cycles in each
experiment have been calculated as shown on Figure 4.16 as the horizontal lines.
Steel S235
A summary of all the mean values of the secant moduli is stated in Figure 4.19 and Figure
4.20.
Figure 4.19: Bar plot of dog bones 3-12 (S235 -
Rolling direction: Perpendicular). Each dog bone
has four mean bars (E1 and E2 of the extensome-
ter and the corrected piston) with corresponding
standard deviations which is shown as the verti-
cal black lines.
Figure 4.20: Bar plot of dog bones 13-21 (S235
- Rolling direction: Parallel). Each dog bone has
four mean bars (E1 and E2 of the extensometer
and the corrected piston) with corresponding stan-
dard deviations which is shown as the vertical
black lines.
Dog bone no. 4 is used for determination of steel properties for steel S235 and therefore
not shown in Figure 4.19. The sampling rate was wrong of dog bone no. 6, which resulted in
too few measurements of each cycle and the dog bone has hereby been discarded. The results
from Figure 4.19 and Figure 4.20 clearly illustrates that the mean value of secant modulus for
extensometer is a bit less than 200000 MPa. The corrected piston mean value is above 200000
MPa, but with very large standard deviation. The large standard deviations are connected
with the scattered measurements obtained from the corrected piston as eg. can be seen on
Figure 4.16.
Steel S355
The results of steel strength S355 are prepared in the same way as steel S235 and shown in
Figure 4.21 and Figure 4.22. The results from dog bone no. 31 is not included because it
is used for comparison between the extensometer and a strain gauge. The results of steel
S355 appear not that unique compared to the S235 and they are much more ﬂuctuated, as
demonstrated by the standard deviations of the corrected piston. By taken a closer look at
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
the ﬁgures it appears that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the secant moduli relative
to the rolling directions. The mean secant modulus of the perpendicular direction is about
195.000 MPa and mean of the parallel direction is about 185000 MPa. A diﬀerence of the
rolling directions of around 10 MPa is determined.
Figure 4.21: Bar plot of dog bones 27-36 (S355
- Rolling direction: Perpendicular). Each dog
bone has four mean bars (E1 and E2 of the ex-
tensometer and the corrected piston) with corre-
sponding standard deviations which is shown as
the vertical black lines.
Figure 4.22: Bar plot of dog bone 37-48 (S355
- Rolling direction: Parallel). Each dog bone
has four mean bars with (E1 and E2 of the ex-
tensometer and the corrected piston) with corre-
sponding standard deviations which is shown as
the vertical black lines.
By comparing the four Figures 4.19, 4.20, 4.21 and 4.22 there seems to be a connection
between the rolling directions and the secant modulus (Young’s modulus) because both steel
strengths shows lower Young’s modulus of the parallel rolling direction. It could also look like
there is a connection between the steel strength and Young’s modulus because the steel S235
shows a bit higher values than the S355 steel. These hypotheses are investigated later in this
section by making a statistical hypothesis testing.
4.3.2
Comparison of Cyclic Strain Rates
The experiments are now sorted in strain rate of 1 Hz, 5 Hz and 9 Hz. The steel strength
and rolling direction is still ﬁrmly locked. Figure 4.23 and 4.24 are achieved by sorting the
experiments into cyclic strain rates and rolling directions. The ﬁgures make it much easier to
get an overview of the secant modulus compared with strain rates and rolling directions. It is
immediately apparent that no signiﬁcant diﬀerences exist between the three strain rates. This
statement will be examined in greater detail later in this section. Experiments of steel S355
are also divided into the three cyclic strain rates and the rolling directions. Figure 4.25 and
4.26 shows the comparison of steel S355 with strain rates and rolling directions.
==PAGE:57==
4.3. COMPARISON OF CYCLIC DOG BONE EXPERIMENTS
45
Figure 4.23: The bar plot shows the three dif-
ferent strain rates for the perpendicular direction:
1 Hz, 5 Hz and 9 Hz relative to the secant modu-
lus. All dog bones are of steel S235 and plotted
for both the piston corrected and mean eksten-
someter. The missing test-result for 1 Hz is due
to mistake in the sampling rate of dog bone no.
6.
Figure 4.24: The bar plot shows the three dif-
ferent strain rates for the parallel direction: 1 Hz,
5 Hz and 9 Hz relative to the secant modulus. All
dog bones are of steel S235 and plotted for both
the piston corrected and mean ekstensometer.
Figure 4.25: The bar plot shows the three dif-
ferent strain rates for the perpendicular: 1 Hz, 5
Hz and 9 Hz relative to the secant modulus. All
dog bones are of steel S355 and plotted for both
the piston corrected and mean ekstensometer.
Figure 4.26: The bar plot shows the three dif-
ferent strain rates for the parallel direction: 1
Hz, 5 Hz and 9 Hz relative to the secant modulus.
All dog bones are of steel S355 and plotted for
both the piston corrected and mean ekstensome-
ter. The ﬁrst one of the 5 Hz bars is dog bone
no. 40 which has been tested on the other Instron
8502 100kN machine.
Figure 4.23 and 4.24 do not show any signiﬁcant changes in the Young’s modulus compared
with the stain rates. It is still possible to see the diﬀerence in the Young’s modulus vs. rolling
directions. Figure 4.25 and 4.26 do also not show any signiﬁcant changes in the Young’s
modulus compared with the strain rates.
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
4.3.3
Comparison of The Inﬂuence of Cyclic Numbers
It is also interesting to investigate if Young’s modules change during the number of cycles
and at the same time investigate the diﬀerences between Young’s modulus in compression (E1)
and tension (E2). This comparison has only been done with the mean extensometer values.
The results of these investigations are shown in Figure 4.27. The mean values of E1 and E2 of
all the experiments are plotted relative to a speciﬁc number of cycle. Cycle 2, 10 and 20 have
very high standard deviations for µE2,EXt, this is due to large plastic deformation at the top
of hysteresis loops. The determination of E1 and E2 values are still determined at the same
spot of the hysteresis loops and then with large plastic deformations the Young’s modulus will
get less accurate. Disregarding these measurements (cycle 2, 10, 20 and up to 49) the number
of cycles does not seems to have any eﬀect on Young’s modulus beyond normal experimental
deviations. This indicates that Young’s modulus can be determined with a good achievement,
whether it is E1 or E2, it just has to be noticed that the values still deviate a bit from the
theoretical.
Figure 4.27: A bar collection of all E1 (µE1,EXT ) and E2 (µE2,EXT ) mean values of each cyclic
experiment with associated standard deviations.
==PAGE:59==
4.3. COMPARISON OF CYCLIC DOG BONE EXPERIMENTS
47
4.3.4
Statistical Investigation of Cyclic Experiments
Data from extensometer 1 and 2 will in the following section be analysed using statistical
hypothesis test, called a paired t-test. The null hypothesis (H0) are established by a comparison
of diﬀerent considerations and results of the H0 will be rejected if the p-value is under 0.05
and H1 will come into eﬀect. If p-value is larger than 0.05 H0 is conﬁrmed. The diﬀerent
hypothesis are listed below
• No. 1: H0 hypothesis: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between Young’s modulus of
steel S235 relative to the Young’s modulus of steel S355 (H0 : µE,s235 = µE,s355).
• No. 2: H0 hypothesis: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between all the Young’s Moduli
(No. 1 to 48) relative to the expected Young’s modulus on 210 MPa (H0 : µE =
µE,210MPa).
• No. 3: H0 hypothesis: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between Young’s Modules of E1
and E2 (H0 : E1 = E2).
• No. 4: H0 hypothesis: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the Young’s Modules
of cycle no. 1 to no. 2000 (H0 : ENo.1 = ENo.2000).
• H0 hypothesis: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the Young’s Modules of
diﬀerent strain rates (1 Hz to 5 Hz and 1 Hz to 9 Hz) (H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,5hz) and
(H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,9hz).
• H0 Hypothesis: There is signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the Young’s Modules of diﬀerent
rolling directions (parallel and perpendicular) (H0 : µE,Parallel = µE,Perpendicular).
The hypothesis are investigated and answered further down, but at ﬁrst it is necessary to
investigate the distribution of the data sample. All though this data sample is small, a QQ
plot shown in Figure 4.28 is developed to investigate if the data is normal distributed. QQ is
an expression for quantile-quantile and is a plot where one quartile depicts to one another
quartile. The values of Young’s modulus used in the plot are measured by the extensometers.
Figure 4.28: QQ plot comparing randomly generated and independent data on the vertical axis (S235)
to a randomly generated and independent data on the horizontal axis (S355). The linearity (red line)
of the scattered points suggests that the data are normally distributed.
==PAGE:60==
48
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
By observing Figure 4.28 it appears that the trendline (red line) is close to linear, despite
some single points fall slightly of the trend. Hereby, it is claimed that the sample is normal
distributed and the data can be analysed by using a paired t-test to investigate whether the
null hypothesis is true.
The results of no. 1 to no. 4 of the null hypothesis t-tests are shown in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Results for paired t-tests between: S235 Strength and S355 Strength (H0 : µE,s235 = µE,s355
or H1 : µE,s235 ̸= µE,s355) and all tests and 210000 MPa (H0 : µE = µE,210MP a or H1 : µE ̸=
µE,210MP a). Signiﬁcance level at 0.05 (5% quantile).
Paired t-test
p-value
Hypothesis
Signiﬁcant diﬀerence
No. 1: S235 Strength & S355 Strength
0.023
1
Yes! reject the null hypothesis
No. 2: All tests & 210000 MPa
0.001
1
Yes! reject the null hypothesis
No. 3: E1 and E2
0.624
0
No
No. 4: ENo.1 and ENo.2000
0.640
0
No
Table 4.6 shows that there exist a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between Young’s modulus and
the steel strengths, which hereby rejects the null hypothesis. The same is investigated for
the Young’s modulus of mean values and the theoretical Young’s modulus, which hereby also
rejects the null hypothesis. Thus, one hypothesis H1 is true for hypothesis test no. 1 and
no. 2. This corresponds to the main issue in this thesis of determining the value of Young’s
modulus. In summation; the two steel types, E1 and E2, and the number of cycles shows no
signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
The hypothesis test of the strain rates inﬂuence is shown in Table 4.7 for steel strength
S235 and in Table 4.8 for steel strength S355.
Table 4.7: Results of paired t-tests for: 1 Hz to 5 Hz (H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,5Hz or H1 : µE,1Hz ̸= µE,5Hz),
1 Hz to 9 Hz (H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,9Hz or H1 : µE,1Hz ̸= µE,9Hz) and rolling direction (H0 : µE,P arallel =
µE,P erpendicular or H1 : µE,P arallel ̸= µE,P erpendicular) for steel S235. Signiﬁcance level at 0.05 (5%
quantile).
Paired t-test
p-value
Hypothesis
Signiﬁcant diﬀerence
1 Hz & 5 Hz
0.921
0
No
1 Hz & 9 Hz
0.773
0
No
Parallel & Perpendicular
0.000
1
Yes! reject the null hypothesis
In Table 4.7 it appears for 1 Hz to 5 Hz and 1 Hz to 9 Hz, that there is no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence of Young’s modulus and hereby H0 is true. The p-values of both t-tests are very
high, which means that conﬁrmation of H0 is very good. As a contrast, the p-values for
parallel and perpendicular is zero, which is below the signiﬁcant level, thus the H0 hypothesis
is rejected. Hereby, the H1 is accepted which causes diﬀerences in Young’s Modules in relation
to the rolling direction of steel type S235. The same hypothesis investigations has been
conducted regrading steel type S355, the results are stated in Table 4.8.
==PAGE:61==
4.4. BENDING EXPERIMENTS
49
Table 4.8: Results of paired t-tests for: 1 Hz to 5 Hz (H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,5Hz or H1 : µE,1Hz ̸= µE,5Hz),
1 Hz to 9 Hz (H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,9Hz or H1 : µE,1Hz ̸= µE,9Hz) and rolling direction (H0 : µE,P arallel =
µE,P erpendicular or H1 : µE,P arallel ̸= µE,P erpendicular) for steel S355. Signiﬁcance level at 0.05 (5%
quantile).
Paired t-test
p-value
Hypothesis
Signiﬁcant diﬀerence
1 Hz & 5 Hz
0.507
0
No
1 Hz & 9 Hz
0.800
0
No
Parallel & Perpendicular
0.001
1
Yes! reject the null hypothesis
The results of S355 is very similar to S235. It is clear, that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the strain rates for 1 Hz to 5 Hz, and for 1 Hz to 9 Hz. Thus the H0 hypothesis
is true. Regrading the parallel and perpendicular rolling direction the p-value is below 0.05
which means that the H0 hypothesis should be rejected and H1 is true. Hereby no relationship
exist between the Young’s modulus for the 2 rolling directions.
4.4
Bending Experiments
After a several experiments with wrong test set-up it became possible to modify the
test set-up and get a successful set-up. Three successful tests has been completed, thus
three test per strain rate has been conducted. The measurement of the deﬂection of the
beam is done with two extensometers which are located under the beam in the quarter
points. The strain gauges are placed on the bottom side of the beam, in the center of the
beam. The strain gauge output is pure strain so the calculation of the secant modulus is
done by Naviers formula and Hooke’s formula. For the two extensometers, the calculations
are diﬀerent because the output is a displacement and the unit is in millimetres. Here, is
the static deﬂection formula for a four-point beam used which is obtained from the beam theory.
It is not possible to collect data from the strain gauge via Instron machine and there-
fore the Spider8 is used. The next sections includes only one random experiment from each
strain rate. The remaining experiment results can be found in the Test Report.
The experimental test has been conducted using deformation control of the Instron machine.
The amplitude is easier to control with this conﬁguration. Force controlled is also desirable
during this experiment, but unfortunately it has not been possible, because the IPE-proﬁle
has some imperfections and these imperfections makes load signal blurred and the machine
can not handle this.
4.4.1
1 Hz Experiment
Since the set-up has to collect data by two diﬀerent systems a comparisons by the two
signals has to be made. Figure 4.29 shows the comparison wherein the force is plotted with
respect to the deformation. Both signals follow each other nicely, thus it is determined that
the results from strain gauges can be compared with extensometes (Instron machine) as
illustrated on Figure 4.30.
==PAGE:62==
50
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Figure 4.29: Comparison of the signals between
Instron Machine and Spider8. The red circle
indicate full contact with the beam element and
the load cell.
Figure 4.30: Young’s modulus of the beam rel-
ative to the force. Both for stain gauge and Ex-
tensometer 1 and 2. The mean values of Young’s
modulus of the cycles are set by the three diﬀerent
dashed lines.
The red circle in Figure 4.29 indicate when there is full contact between the load cell
and the beam. Afterwards the force and the displacement has a linear relationship. Figure
4.30 illustrates that the Young’s modulus is heading against a asymptote, as the force output
becomes higher. The three dashed lines indicates the mean value of Young’s modulus for the
cycled regime. It is seen that the values are higher than the theoretical on 210.000 MPa.
4.4.2
5 Hz Experiment
The same experiments were conducted with a strain rate of 5 Hz. The results are illustrated
on Figure 4.31 and 4.32 in the same way as for 1 Hz.
Figure 4.31: Comparison of the signals between
Instron Machine and Spider8. The red circle
indicate full contact with the beam element and
the load cell.
Figure 4.32: Young’s modulus of the beam rel-
ative to the force. Both for stain gauge and Ex-
tensometer 1 and 2. The mean values of Young’s
modulus of the cycles are set by the three diﬀerent
dashed lines.
==PAGE:63==
4.5. COMPARISON OF CYCLIC BENDING EXPERIMENTS
51
The red circle on the left chart indicates when there is full contact between the load cells
and the beam, thus the ratio between force and deformation is linear. The three dashed lines
indicates the mean value of Young’s modulus for the cycled regime. It is seen that the values
are than the theoretical on 210.000 MPa, but extensometer 2 is very close to the theoretical
value.
4.4.3
9 Hz Experiment
The same experiments were conducted with a strain rate of 9 Hz. The results are illustrated
on Figure 4.33 and Figure 4.34 in the same way as for 1 Hz and 5 Hz.
Figure 4.33: Comparison of the signals between
Instron Machine and Spider8. The red circle
indicate full contact with the beam element and
the load cell.
Figure 4.34: Young’s modulus of the beam rel-
ative to the force. Both for stain gauge and Ex-
tensometer 1 and 2. The mean values of Young’s
modulus of the cycles are set by the three diﬀerent
dashed lines.
The results of this experiment shows values of Young’s modulus closer to the theory. The
measurements of extensometer 1 on Figure 4.34 begins with high values and get smaller
where the opposite happens for extensomter 2. This has to due with the output from the
test machine. The strain gauge and Ext 1 shows the constant shape, which is true according
to the theory about deﬂection, stress and Young’s modulus of beams. However, the mean
value of the strain gauge is too high, compared to the two extensometers. This has possible
something to due with error from the output signals in the Instron to the Spider8, maybe the
strain rate is two fast and still gets reliable results in the Spider8.
4.5
Comparison of Cyclic Bending Experiments
The results of bending tests are shown in Figure 4.35, where each bar column value is
a mean value for cyclic deﬂection, which is illustrated on Figure 4.30, 4.32 and 4.34 by the
dashed lines. It is clear that Young’s modulus is substantially higher than 210.000 MPa for all
nine experimental bending tests. This indicates that the bending method is overestimating
the Young’s modulus compared to the cyclic tensile experiments, in which Young’s modulus
==PAGE:64==
52
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
was underestimated. The overestimation in the bending experiments is probably due to some
diﬀerent factors, eg. may lay in the diﬃculty of placing the beams in the exactly same spot.
It can also be caused by a shear eﬀect. A completely third impact could be when the beam
curvature changes due to the acting loads and get exposed to a larger support area.
Figure 4.35: Strain rate vs. Secant modulus for 1 Hz, 5 hz and 9 Hz. Each test contains average
values for Extensometer 1 and 2 and the strain gauge.
The mean values from Figure 4.35 appears in Table 4.9. There is added an extra value in
the form of a mean value of extensometer 1 and 2.
Table 4.9:
Summarized results of the bending experiments.
Note that µE,EXT 1, µE,EXT 2,
µEXT 1+EXT 2 and µE,SG are average values calculated in the cyclic regime.
Test Specimen
Steel Type
Strain Rate
µE,EXT1
µE,EXT2
µEXT1+EXT2
µE,SG
[MPa]
[Hz]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
Beam - T2
S275
1
234831
217012
225921
223746
Beam - T3
S275
1
230557
213499
222028
207809
Beam - T4
S275
1
209187
214126
211657
223107
Beam - T2
S275
5
228061
211176
219619
222372
Beam - T3
S275
5
213816
195693
204754
214167
Beam - T4
S275
5
217059
217004
217032
223614
Beam - T2
S275
9
203617
191427
197522
235603
Beam - T3
S275
9
234561
203204
218882
220290
Beam - T4
S275
9
212056
210707
211381
223023
Average
220416
208205
214311
221526
Standard Deviation
11738
9329
8942
7556
DV. from 210 GPa [%]
4.96
0.85
2.05
5.49
As it can be seen in Table 4.9, there appears no large ﬂuctuation of the Young’s modulus,
indicating that there is no sign that the Young’s modulus is inﬂuenced by the strain rate.
==PAGE:65==
4.5. COMPARISON OF CYCLIC BENDING EXPERIMENTS
53
4.5.1
Statistical Investigation of Cyclic Bending Experiments
In order to conﬁrm whether there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the diﬀerent strain
rates, a hypothesis testing is performed using a paired t-test as made for the cyclic dog bone
tests. The diﬀerent hypothesis are listed below
• No. 1: H0 hypothesis : There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence of the Young’s modulus
between the bending strain rate on 1 Hz relative to the bending strain rate on 5 Hz
(H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,5Hz).
• No.
2: H0 hypothesis: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence of the Young’s modulus
between the bending strain rate on 1 Hz relative to the bending strain rate on 9 Hz
(H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,9Hz).
• No.
3: H0 hypothesis: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence of the Young’s modulus
between the diﬀerent measuring equipments, in this case Strain gauge and extensometer
(H0 : µE,EXT = µE,SG).
All though this data sample also is small, a QQ plot shown in Figure 4.36 is developed to
investigates if the data is normal distributed. Only one steel type is investigated and the
QQ plot is therefore made with this steel type. QQ plot showing the EBeam vs. Standard
Normal Quantiles. The values of Young’s modulus used in the plot are measured by the
extensometers.
Figure 4.36: QQ plot comparing randomly generated Young’s modulus to a Standard Normal Quantiles.
The linearity (red line) of the scattered points suggests that the data are normally distributed.
By observing Figure 4.36 it appears that the trendline (red line) is close to linear, despite
some single points fall slightly of the trend. Hereby, it is claimed that the sample is normal
distributed and the data can be analysed by using a paired t-test to investigate whether the
null hypothesis is true.
==PAGE:66==
54
CHAPTER 4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Table 4.10: Results of paired t-test for: 1 Hz to 5 Hz (H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,5Hz or H1 : µE,1Hz ̸=
µE,5Hz), 1 Hz to 9 Hz (H0 : µE,1Hz = µE,9Hz or H1 : µE,1Hz ̸= µE,9Hz) and measuring equipments
(H0 : µE,EXT = µE,SG or H0 : µE,EXT ̸= µE,SG) for bending experiment with steel strength S275.
Signiﬁcance level at 0.05 (5% quantile).
Paired t-test
p-value
Hypothesis
Signiﬁcant diﬀerence
Bending: 1 Hz & 5 Hz
0.387
0
No
Bending: 1 Hz & 9 Hz
0.234
0
No
Mean Ext & Strain gauges
0.234
0
No
As the Table 4.10 indicates, there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between bending: 1 Hz and 5
Hz, bending: 1 Hz and 9 Hz and mean Ext and strain gauges.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The experimental outcome during the process has led to reﬂections of the conducted
procedures and realisation of better methods to perform. This chapter discuss the obtained
results of all experiments and compares the results with earlier methods.
Uniaxial Test Results
The measured fy and fu are higher than the categorisation, as illustrated in Table 4.3.
This is due to the manufacture must secure the fy is minimum the categorised value. Secant
modulus measured by the two extensometers showed deviations of around 15 % from the
theoretical value. The secant modulus measured by the corrected piston showed a deviation
of around 1.5 % from the theoretical value. This is due to the correction which is based on
the ﬁrst 1/3 part of the elastic part measured by the extensometers.
The Young’s modulus is determined on the relatively linear part of the elastic curve from zero
to the yielding stage. This is probably wrong according to Figure 4.8 where it is observed
that Young’s modulus will be more accurate if just 1/3 of the elastic part is considered when
determining Young’s modulus.
Cyclic Dog Bone Test Results
The diﬀerence in the rolling direction during the experiments showed diﬀerent behaviour
for the hardening process.
The perpendicular specimens showed variations in the cyclic stresses at the ﬁrst approximately
20 cycles, as the standard deviation illustrates in Figure 4.27. At these cycles the increasing
is considered to be a part where the machine struggles in given the right force, due to the
plastic elongations in the material. After the ﬁrst 20 cycles they become more stable due to
the hardening phenomenon of the material.
The parallel specimens are a bit diﬀerent. The tests do not show any increasing or decreasing
in the stress during the ﬁrst several cycles. The stress is constant during the cycles but start
increasing when the hardening process begins. The observations of the diﬀerence behaviour of
the steel depending on the rolling direction might indicate that the construction steel is not
totally isotropic material. This is also indicated by the larger strains of the parallel than the
perpendicular specimens.
55
==PAGE:68==
56
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
The statical hypotheses in the present thesis, are based on small sample size. Deﬁnitive
conclusions cannot be made, due to the small sample size, but this analysing tool is useful for
discussing all the measurements.
The hypothesis revealed several interesting points. From Table 4.6 the No. 1 hypothe-
sis concerns the diﬀerence for Young’s modulus of the two steel types. Here the statistical
calculation indicated that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between them. This came a bit as
a surprise due to the fact that construction steel normally is assume to be 210 GPa. This
is probably due to diﬀerence in the chemical composition of the two steel types. The No. 2
hypothesis in Table 4.6 concerns probably diﬀerence of the theoretical Young’s modulus. The
investigation was signiﬁcant which was expected due to uncertainty of measurement. No. 3
hypothesis showed that Young’s modulus not was signiﬁcant of E1 and E2. This was expected
because of equally elastic parts in a majority of the cycles. No. 4 hypothesis showed that
Young’s modulus not was signiﬁcant of numbers of cycles even though the ﬁrst cycles have
large deviations.
The statistical calculation regarding the diﬀerent strain rates in Table 4.7 and 4.8, showed
distinct no signiﬁcant diﬀerence for either 1 Hz to 5 Hz and 1 Hz to 9 Hz. Then it is assumed
that there also is no diﬀerence in 5 Hz to 9 Hz. Hence, no diﬀerences in Young’s modulus
compared to the diﬀerent strain rates. This apply to both steel types. The tests of rolling
direction showed an signiﬁcant diﬀerence which is astonishing due to the fact that steel is
isotropic material and therefore should not be diﬀerent no matter rolling direction. This
could be an issue in constructions, if constructions are designed for the same stiﬀness in all
directions.
Cyclic Bending Test Results
The bending experiments leads to the following statements: the Young’s modulus is over
estimated when it is determined through the beam theory. The general beam theory does
not take any imperfections into account. This has turned out to be a challenge due to the
beam crumbs around the supports, and hereby has a wider area at the two supports. The
same appeared for the load cells connection with the beam. With mathematical calculation it
is possible to neglect impact of the crumbs, shown in the paper: On the diﬀerence between
ﬂexural moduli obtained by three-point and four-point bending tests [30]. The inﬂuence of
shear eﬀect is not expected to have a impact in this experiment, because the span two depth
ratio is greater than 40 as described in paper [30]. From Table 4.10 it appears that there is no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between 1 Hz and 5 Hz, 1 Hz and 9 Hz. This was also expected to be the
same outcome as the cyclic tensile tests. Hereby, it was not necessary to make a comparison
of 5 Hz to 9 Hz. Comparison of extensometer and strain gauge do not show any signiﬁcation
on the Young’s modulus. From Table 4.9 it appears that the extensometers overestimates the
Young’s modulus. The reason of this is due to the crumbs around the supports and load cells.
Another reason is that it is diﬃcult to place the extensometers at the exact same position
each time.
==PAGE:69==
5.1. COMPARISON OF PREVIOUS STUDIES
57
5.1
Comparison of Previous Studies
In the following the experimental results are compared with observations from the literature.
Table 5.1: Comparison of literature observations with investigations in this thesis.
Paper
Paper Observations
Thesis Observations
Data
Acquisition
and
Analysis of Tensile Prop-
erties for Metal Matrix
Composites [2].
New method of using secant
and tangent for calculation of
Youngs modulus
Etan is used for the linear elas-
tic part and Esec is used for
the E1/4 in order to calculate
Young’s modulus.
Potential ambiguity in the
determination of the plas-
tic range component in
LCF testing [3]
Stated: E1 = E2 = E1/4. Re-
sults obtained: E1 < E2 and
E2 > E. The Etan decreases
as the strain get larger.
There is no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ence in E1 and E2 and the tan-
gent modulus drops when the
strain increases.
The eﬀect of the method
of
determination
of
Young’s modulus on the
estimation of fatigue life
of structural elements [4].
The paper concluded that the
Young’s modulus changes as
the number of cycle increases.
No signiﬁcant changes in the
Young’s modulus as increasing
of the number of cycles.
A code of practice for the
determination
of
cyclic
stress-strain data [5].
Using the E1/4 method and
concludes that the test ma-
chine own stiﬀness gives mis-
leading results.
The experimental results of
the piston displacement has
also been impacted by the stiﬀ-
ness of the test machine.
Dynamic vs static young
moduli - a case study [9].
Examines diﬀerence between
uniaxial tensile tests and bend-
ing tests.
Both uniaxial tensile tests and
bending tests were investi-
gated and showed signiﬁcant
higher values of Young’s mod-
ulus in the bending tests.
Mechanical
testing
ma-
chine stiﬀness [10].
Machine stiﬀness changes of
each experimental tests. The
paper made a formula of deter-
mination of the machine stiﬀ-
ness.
This thesis concluded that the
machine stiﬀness changes from
test to test.
A simpliﬁed
method for calculation of the
machine stiﬀness was devel-
oped.
Assessment of strain mea-
surement techniques to
characterise
mechanical
properties of structural
steel [13].
Consider
three
diﬀerent
measurement
equipments
(strain gauge, extensometer
and crosshead)
This thesis uses all three mea-
surement equipments as de-
scribed in the paper.
Other
measurement method could eg.
DIC.
Most of the papers investigate LCF in which is not the case of these experiments. Table
5.1 is also not completely valid because the experimental investigations have not been done
with the same conditions, but it still been interesting to see diﬀerences.
==PAGE:70==
58
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.2
Further Research
Since this is a pilot project a lot of ideas for further research were discovered during the
experimental work and analysing process. The ideas are listed below
A investigation of possible inﬂuence of Young’s modulus by using diﬀerent fastening methods
of the test specimen. This thesis used jaws, but the design codes [21] suggests diﬀerent
gripping mechanisms such as wedges. Another method is to have a pin through the grip part
of the specimen which hereby should avoid sliding.
The results indicate that there is signiﬁcant diﬀerence of Young’s modulus for the steel
type S235 to S355. It could be interesting to conduct experiments with high strength steel,
such as S650 in order to investigate if Young’s modulus really are eﬀected by the steel strength.
The area inside each hysteresis loops has been determined in all the experiments. It has not
been possible to develop a method, which gives an relation between Young’s modulus and
the area. Perhaps it is not possible to use it for anything beside a view of how much energy
the system is losing during each cycle, but it could be interesting to examine. It also has
to be considered that due to the huge ﬂuctuation by using extensometer, a strain gauge is
recommended for determination of energy loss.
Unfortunately it was not possible to investigate Young’s modulus according to other cutting
methods such as. milling and water jet cutting. Therefore it is proposed that the additional
steel plates (stored in the lab at DTU) are cut with other equipments and investigated by the
same methods as in this thesis.
It is earlier mentioned in the literature that a diﬀerent way to determined Young’s modulus
can be done by the eigenfrequencies method. The diﬀerent mode shapes of an element is
estimated and afterwards sound waves with known frequency is sent through the element.
Sound measurement is placed on speciﬁc locations on the element. The stiﬀness of a element
is calculated based on the time it takes the wave to travel from the start to the sensor. This
has been done on concrete beams which is described in paper: Static and dynamic stiﬀness of
reinforced concrete beams [6].
The bending tests was investigated on IPE construction proﬁles which had a lot of im-
perfections. The tests could instead be made on rectangular proﬁles which are ensured for
lateral torsional buckling. Steel used for this experiment could probably be the stored steel
plates as mentioned before.
Other measurement equipments such as DIC could be used and hereby investigated whenever
it results in more accurate determination of Young’s modulus. DIC could also be interesting
for indication of possible eﬀects on the steel specimens from the cutting methods.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The uniaxial tensile tests showed variations in the measurements of the secant modulus
of both the extensometers and the corrected piston measurements. By analysing the linear
elastic part of all the experiments from uniaxial and cyclic tests, it is concluded that the
determination of the Young’s modulus should instead be calculated based on the ﬁrst 1/3
part of the linear elastic curve.
During the cyclic experiments it is obtained that the rolling direction of the specimens has
impact on the total strain. It was also obtained that the rolling direction has impact on the
stress behaviour during the beginning of the cyclic periods.
It can be stated from the statical hypothesis that: There is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence be-
tween the various strain rates, neither for steel S235 and S355.
There is no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the Young’s modulus relative to wherever it is determined in the compression
of tension zone (E1 and E2). There is also no signiﬁcant change of the Young’s modulus for
cycle number 1 to cycle number 2000. Nor does the plastic deformations during the cycles
any eﬀect on the Young’s modulus. Instead shows the rolling direction signiﬁcant diﬀerence
in Young’s modulus for both steel types S235 and S355. This indicates that the steel material
is slightly inhomogeneous. However, the results seem to be quite scattered for both directions
and no clear conclusion can be made.
In the bending experiment it appeared that there also is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between 1
Hz and 5 Hz, 1 Hz and 9 Hz or between extensometer and strain gauges measurements. It
has to be noticed that the cyclic tensile test tends to estimate a lower Young’s modulus than
the theoretical. Whereas the bending test tends to estimate a higher Young’s modulus than
the theoretical.
59
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
A. Ebbesen and N. Rask, Test Report - Experimental determination of the static and
dynamic stiﬀness of steel depending on the strain rates and load levels. 2016.
[2]
D. Petersen, B. Roebuck, J. Lord, P. Cooper, and L. McCartney, “Data acquisition
and analysis of tensile properties for metal matrix composites,” Journal of Testing and
Evaluation, J. Test. Eval, J Test Eval, Astm J Test Eval, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 63, 1994.
[3]
F. Kandil, “Potential ambiguity in the determination of the plastic strain range component
in lcf testing,” International Journal of Fatigue, Int. J. Fatigue, Int J Fatig, Int J Fatigue,
vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 1013–1018, 1999.
[4]
P. Dariusz Boronski, “The eﬀect of the method of determination of young’s modulus on
the estimation of fatigue life of structural elements,” JOURNAL OF THEORETICAL
AND APPLIED MECHANICS, vol. 2, no. 15, pp. 269–283, 2004.
[5]
R. Hales, S. R. Holdsworth, M. P. Donnell, I. J. Perrin, and R. P. Skelton, “A code of
practice for the determination of cyclic stress-strain data,” Materials at High Temperatures,
Mater High Temp, Mater High, Materials at High Temperatures Materials Generation
Applications, Mater. High Temp, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 165–185, 2002.
[6]
M. Musia l, “Static and dynamic stiﬀness of reinforced concrete beams,” Archives of Civil
and Mechanical Engineering, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 186 – 191, 2012.
[7]
J.-M. Collin, T. Parenteau, G. Mauvoisin, and P. Pilvin, “Material parameters iden-
tiﬁcation using experimental continuous spherical indentation for cyclic hardening,”
Computational Materials Science, Comput. Mater. Sci, Comp Mat Sc, Comp Mater Sci,
Comput Mater Sci, Computational Mechanics Advances, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 333–338, 2009.
[8]
K. H. Nip, L. Gardner, C. M. Davies, and A. Y. Elghazouli, “Extremely low cycle
fatigue tests on structural carbon steel and stainless steel,” Journal of Constructional
Steel Research, J. Constr. Steel. Res, J Constr St, J Constr Steel Res, Journal of
Constructional Steel Research Jcsr, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 96–110, 2010.
[9]
H. Ledbetter, “Dynamic vs static young moduli - a case-study,” vol. 165, no. 1, pp. L9–L10,
1993.
61
==PAGE:74==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] J. E. Hockett and P. P. Gillis, “Mechanical testing machine stiﬀness,” International
Journal of Mechanical Sciences, Int J Mech, Int J Mech Sci, Int. J. Mech. Sci, vol. 13,
no. 13, pp. 251–264, 1970.
[11] R. B. Clough, “New method for determination of proportional limit and machine stiﬀness.,”
J Test Eval, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 143–146, 1975.
[12] M. Fortes and J. Proenca, “Constancy of tensile test machine stiﬀness,” Journal of Testing
and Evaluation, J. Test. Eval, J Test Eval, Astm J Test Eval, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 248–250,
1976.
[13] H. Motra, J. Hildebrand, and A. Dimmig-Osburg, “Assessment of strain measurement
techniques to characterise mechanical properties of structural steel,” Engineering Science
and Technology, an International Journal, Engineering Science and Technology, an
International Journal, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 260–269, 2014.
[14] J. Winkler and C. v. Scholten, “Digital image correlation, dic - til strukturel tilstands-
fastsættelse af broer,” Traﬁk and Veje, 2015.
[15] J. Winkler, G. Fischer, and C. T. Georgakis, “Measurement of local deformations in steel
monostrands using digital image correlation,” Journal of Bridge Engineering, J Bridge
Eng, J. Bridge Eng, vol. 19, no. 10, p. 04014042, 2014.
[16] M. Grupp, “Fiber lasers change the cutting market,” Laser Technik Journal, Laser-
technik-journal, Ltj, Laser Tech. J, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 36–39, 2011.
[17] J. Powell and A. F. H. Kaplan, “A technical and commercial comparison of ﬁber laser and
co2 laser cutting,” Icaleo 2012 - 31st International Congress on Applications of Lasers
and Electro-optics, Icaleo - Int. Congr. Appl. Lasers Electro-opt, pp. 277–281, 2012.
[18] M. Marotti and P. Hill, “Waterjet cutting builds a business,” Welding Design and
Fabrication, vol. 77, no. 9, 2004.
[19] NPREL, “Lesson 37-water jet and abrasive water jet machining,” no. 24, pp. L9–L10,
2009.
[20] S. Krenk, Mechanics and analysis of beams, columns and cables. Polyteknisk Press, 2000.
[21] ISO-6892, “Metallic materials - tensile testing - part 1: Method of test at room tempera-
ture,” Test method for steel, vol. 152, 2013.
[22] D. Roylance, “Stress-strain curves,” 2012.
[23] S. J. H. R. and S. M., “Phenomenological modelling of cyclic plasticity,” Computer
and Information Science ≫Numerical Analysis and Scientiﬁc Computing ≫”Numerical
Modellin”, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 329–354, 2012.
[24] O. Muransky, C. J. Hamelin, M. C. Smith, P. J. Bendeich, and L. Edwards, “The
eﬀect of plasticity theory on predicted residual stress ﬁelds in numerical weld analyses,”
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
Computational Materials Science, Comput. Mater. Sci, Comp Mat Sc, Comp Mater Sci,
Comput Mater Sci, Computational Mechanics Advances, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 125–134, 2012.
[25] T. HASSAN and S. KYRIAKIDES, “Ratchetting in cyclic plasticity .1. uniaxial behavior,”
International Journal of Plasticity, Int. J. Plast, Int J Plast, Int J Plasticity, vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 91–116, 1992.
[26] Y. JIANG and H. SEHITOGLU, “Cyclic ratchetting of 1070 steel under multiaxial stress
states,” International Journal of Plasticity, Int. J. Plast, Int J Plast, Int J Plasticity,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 579–608, 1994.
[27] I. Miller and J. Freund, Probability and statistics for engineers. Prentice-Hall, 1965.
[28] ISO-12106, “Metallic materials - fatigue testing - axial-strain-controlled method,” IN-
TERNATIONAL STANDARD, vol. 40, 2003.
[29] Instron Model 8802, 8803, 8804, 8805 and 8806 - Load Frames. Instron Corporation,
2001.
[30] F. Mujika, “On the diﬀerence between ﬂexural moduli obtained by three-point and
four-point bending tests,” Polymer Testing, Polym. Test, Polym Test, vol. 25, no. 2,
pp. 214–220, 2006.
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
Appendices
65
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
Appendix A
Folder structure
67
==PAGE:80==
Nummerering 
Folder 
Description
1
Project Statement
Contains certification of all steel material used in the 
experiments, as well and Thesis statement.
2
Meetings
containing the agenda and issues for all continuous 
meetings with supervisor.
3
References
Contains the following subfolders: 
03_01_Bending_experiments         
03_02_Cutting_Methods                              
03_03_Standards_DS-EN 
03_04_Isotropic_and_kinematic_hardening 
03_05_Measuring_Equipment                              
03_05_Spider 8_software_Guide 
03_07_Former_Student_Projects 
03_08_Literature_Used_In_The_Report
4
Rapport
 LaTeX document with related pictures and graphs.
5
Drawings
Contains the following subfolders: 
05_01_DogBone_Drawings                         
05_02_Process_Map                               
05_03_Wood_blockspacer                                   
05_04_IPE_Beam
6
Experiment
Contains the following subfolders:                         
06_01_Test specimens                                                       
06_02_Dog bone                                              
06_03_Bendingtest                                           
06_04_Calibration                                                                        
Also includes an overview of: Experiment Schedule, 
experimental plan and Paired t-test summary
7
Examples
Contains documents and spreadsheets with calculations 
from previous tensile experiments
8
Inspiration
Inspiration from previous assignments
9
Pictures
Contains the following subfolders:                         
09_01_Visit_by_KTstål_d_07_03_16                                        
09_02_Dog-bone_pictures_d.14_03_16                                  
09_03_Experimental_set_up                     
09_04_Strain_gauge                                              
09_05_Calibration of Extensomter                
09_06_Bending_Experiment                     
09_07_IPE_Dogbone
10
Test report
 LaTeX document with related pictures and graphs.
Folder structure
68
APPENDIX A. FOLDER STRUCTURE
==PAGE:81==
Appendix B
Cyclic Tensile Test Results
The following Appendix include all mean values and corresponding standard deviations
obtained from the cyclic tensile tests of the dog bones.
Following results of mean values of Young’s modulus are shown in the table:
• µEXT,sec: Start elastic part of the mean extensometer.
• µPC,sec: Start elastic part of the piston corrected.
• µE1,EXT : Cyclic mean E1 of all cycles of the mean extensometer (compression part).
• µE2,EXT : Cyclic mean E2 of all cycles of the mean extensometer (tension part).
• µE1,PC: Cyclic mean E1 of all cycles of the piston corrected (compression part).
• µE2,PC: Cyclic mean E2 of all cycles of the piston corrected (tension part).
Following results of standard deviation values of Young’s modulus are shown in the table:
• SEXT,sec: Start elastic part of the mean extensometer.
• SPC,sec: Start elastic part of the piston corrected.
• SE1,EXT : Cyclic mean E1 of all cycles of the mean extensometer (compression part).
• SE2,EXT : Cyclic mean E2 of all cycles of the mean extensometer (tension part).
• SE1,PC: Cyclic mean E1 of all cycles of the piston corrected (compression part).
• SE2,PC: Cyclic mean E2 of all cycles of the piston corrected (tension part).
69
==PAGE:82==
70
APPENDIX B. CYCLIC TENSILE TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:83==
71
Test
Steel
Rolling
Strain
µEXT,sec
µPC,sec
µE1,EXT
µE2,EXT
µE1,PC
µE2,PC
Specimen
Type
Direction
Rate
[MPa]
[-]
[Hz]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
Dog Bone 03
S235
Perpendicular
1
209075
202971
195045
193533
196987
192666
Dog Bone 05
S235
Perpendicular
1
201032
196843
196722
194952
216976
212774
Dog Bone 06
S235
Perpendicular
1
205756
195869
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
Dog Bone 07
S235
Perpendicular
5
205047
199246
193336
192955
209542
205201
Dog Bone 08
S235
Perpendicular
5
200570
189724
195371
194934
203886
203868
Dog Bone 09
S235
Perpendicular
5
213142
200004
196631
195486
209254
205401
Dog Bone 10
S235
Perpendicular
9
208185
196176
194864
193004
207794
200193
Dog Bone 11
S235
Perpendicular
9
198094
185730
197233
197801
205299
202189
Dog Bone 12
S235
Perpendicular
9
204866
187879
196985
195098
206082
197939
Dog Bone 13
S235
Parallel
1
199027
194289
192275
191780
204765
202475
Dog Bone 14
S235
Parallel
1
199039
203157
189125
187761
202296
198715
Dog Bone 15
S235
Parallel
1
206128
205147
190753
188719
209936
205880
Dog Bone 16
S235
Parallel
5
197391
193704
188369
187468
204230
199239
Dog Bone 17
S235
Parallel
5
197958
194903
189795
190335
205787
206058
Dog Bone 18
S235
Parallel
5
205977
209512
192148
193065
195434
198150
Dog Bone 19
S235
Parallel
9
203520
189121
189538
188316
197584
191377
Dog Bone 20
S235
Parallel
9
192509
174403
190325
188991
185748
183074
Dog Bone 21
S235
Parallel
9
198317
197948
192881
190874
216346
209351
Dog Bone 27
S355
Perpendicular
9
205589
199140
194138
191827
216046
208994
Dog Bone 28
S355
Perpendicular
9
215155
199358
197502
194671
211610
200021
Dog Bone 29
S355
Perpendicular
5
208398
199374
187721
186765
214448
209429
Dog Bone 30
S355
Perpendicular
5
209010
199008
194354
192772
203808
199887
Dog Bone 32
S355
Perpendicular
9
213961
207341
195380
192834
218454
210472
Dog Bone 33
S355
Perpendicular
1
211313
206355
191505
192010
213174
213207
Dog Bone 34
S355
Perpendicular
1
215330
207933
195176
194384
208595
207124
Dog Bone 35
S355
Perpendicular
5
215408
202146
193838
193786
199756
197473
Dog Bone 36
S355
Perpendicular
1
208280
194396
192412
193178
207414
213921
Dog Bone 39
S355
Parallel
1
204306
190280
184890
184658
192122
190562
Dog Bone 40
S355
Parallel
5
192576
202890
173052
172435
202939
189661
Dog Bone 41
S355
Parallel
1
204116
206836
182126
182799
181569
191365
Dog Bone 42
S355
Parallel
1
211046
201186
190531
191701
220271
220360
Dog Bone 43
S355
Parallel
9
204656
204747
182176
183720
211535
210537
Dog Bone 44
S355
Parallel
9
199274
191043
187126
188086
203500
204295
Dog Bone 45
S355
Parallel
9
197490
188300
182308
181187
194285
193170
Dog Bone 46
S355
Parallel
5
200331
191486
186340
187274
197893
198372
Dog Bone 47
S355
Parallel
5
198317
191294
191571
191158
207350
206305
Dog Bone 48
S355
Parallel
5
198317
194400
186545
188411
211699
211280
==PAGE:84==
72
APPENDIX B. CYCLIC TENSILE TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:85==
73
==PAGE:86==
74
APPENDIX B. CYCLIC TENSILE TEST RESULTS
Test
Steel
Rolling
Strain
SE1,EXT
SE2,EXT
SE1,PC
SE2,PC
Specimen
Type
Direction
Rate
[MPa]
[-]
[Hz]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
[MPa]
Dog Bone 03
S235
Perpendicular
1
4119
10561
11185
14981
Dog Bone 05
S235
Perpendicular
1
4207
12026
13206
19456
Dog Bone 06
S235
Perpendicular
1
NaN
NaN
NaN
NaN
Dog Bone 07
S235
Perpendicular
5
4116
14454
10528
19549
Dog Bone 08
S235
Perpendicular
5
4189
16203
11234
21581
Dog Bone 09
S235
Perpendicular
5
4129
14548
10179
18331
Dog Bone 10
S235
Perpendicular
9
4330
19683
14061
25474
Dog Bone 11
S235
Perpendicular
9
4590
8172
13810
16194
Dog Bone 12
S235
Perpendicular
9
4371
18026
13596
23316
Dog Bone 13
S235
Parallel
1
4087
9887
11520
17593
Dog Bone 14
S235
Parallel
1
4025
9762
11497
15868
Dog Bone 15
S235
Parallel
1
4031
9773
12405
16208
Dog Bone 16
S235
Parallel
5
3941
12347
9976
17119
Dog Bone 17
S235
Parallel
5
4018
13098
10807
18596
Dog Bone 18
S235
Parallel
5
4003
13821
10846
19382
Dog Bone 19
S235
Parallel
9
4139
16137
12691
20755
Dog Bone 20
S235
Parallel
9
4177
15822
11645
19230
Dog Bone 21
S235
Parallel
9
4230
17218
14831
24677
Dog Bone 27
S355
Perpendicular
9
4695
25811
18951
37089
Dog Bone 28
S355
Perpendicular
9
4855
24228
22185
34067
Dog Bone 29
S355
Perpendicular
5
4254
18730
16754
25623
Dog Bone 30
S355
Perpendicular
5
4305
18399
13348
23570
Dog Bone 32
S355
Perpendicular
9
4780
24227
23383
34630
Dog Bone 33
S355
Perpendicular
1
4084
16935
13438
27966
Dog Bone 34
S355
Perpendicular
1
4256
17129
13054
25737
Dog Bone 35
S355
Perpendicular
1
1637
4518
9593
10826
Dog Bone 36
S355
Perpendicular
1
11681
13272
25055
27251
Dog Bone 39
S355
Parallel
1
3946
16112
11397
22883
Dog Bone 40
S355
Parallel
5
2345
6001
39764
34629
Dog Bone 41
S355
Parallel
1
5210
16052
79461
85320
Dog Bone 42
S355
Parallel
1
3388
7063
29683
28912
Dog Bone 43
S355
Parallel
9
2366
8125
15715
18179
Dog Bone 44
S355
Parallel
9
2346
8049
14220
15510
Dog Bone 45
S355
Parallel
9
4346
24641
15506
32402
Dog Bone 46
S355
Parallel
5
1613
6297
12242
13357
Dog Bone 47
S355
Parallel
5
1635
4313
13840
13984
Dog Bone 48
S355
Parallel
5
1793
5227
16264
13250
==PAGE:87==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Telephone  45 25 17 00 
www.byg.dtu.dk
