==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
The association between Group A Rotavirus and the occurrence of 
diarrhea in stool samples from Danish weaners 0-3 weeks post-
weaning 
Master’s thesis 
30 ECTS points  
B.Sc. med. Vet. Louise Ellegaard Pedersen, wdp474 / s160526  
Main Supervisor   
Professor Lars Erik Larsen, National Veterinary Institute, DTU  
Senior adviser Charlotte Kristiane Hjulsager, National Veterinary Institute, DTU, Research assistant and pHd 
Hanne Kongsted, Aarhus University, Chef scientist Claus Hansen and senior veterinarian Svend Haugegaard, 
SEGES.  
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Preface 
This Master’s thesis project marks the completion of the Veterinary Master’s degree by Louise Elle-
gaard Pedersen. The project was conducted in close cooperation with the National Veterinary Institute 
(NVI) and the Pig Research Centre, SEGES. 
 
In this project, I have studied the association between rotavirus and the occurrence of diarrhea and its 
impact on Danish weaners. Furthermore. I have studied if rotavirus potentiates Escherichia coli (E.coli) 
infection in weaners with diarrhea, along with different methods to detect rotavirus. This study is dedi-
cated to everyone with an interest in post weaning diarrhea and with an interest in improving the 
health of nursery pigs. 
 
I would like to personally thank my main supervisor Professor Lars Erik Larsen (NVI), and Co-
supervisors Senior advisor Charlotte Kristiane Hjulsager (NVI), research assistant and PhD Hanne 
Kongsted (AU, former SEGES), Chief scientist Claus Hansen (SEGES) and Senior veterinarian Svend 
Haugegaard (SEGES) for the indescribable support and expert guidance. 
 
I would also like to thank Hue Thi Thanh Tran for patience and essential help in the laboratory, along 
with everyone at the Section for Virology, the section for PCR diagnostics and Nils Toft.  
 
Furthermore, huge thanks are given to the following veterinary practices: Hyovet, Danvet, Ø-vet, Por-
cus, Svinevet, LVK and Sydvet. The project would not have been possible without their help in identi-
fying potential herd candidates. Finally, a big thank to the many farmers for their tremendous hospitali-
ty and collaboration. 
 
Lastly I am grateful for the help I received from MSc. Juri Gall, PhD scholar and DVM Hannah Zakari-
assen and DVM Bonnie Hoelstad for entertainment, proofreading and fantastic support. 
 
 
 
 
Louise Ellegaard Pedersen 
 
Copenhagen 24th of June 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
Summary 
Diarrhea in piglets the first weeks after weaning is an important health problem in the pig production 
industry and results in increased mortality, reduced growth and increased consumption of antibiotics. 
Viruses, particularly rotaviruses, are known to increase the prevalence’s of diarrhea in weaners and 
are thus expected to be an important risk factor for diarrhea, either independent or in combination with 
other common pathogens as Escherichia coli.  The aim of this study was to investigate rotavirus group 
A and its association to diarrhea in Danish weaners 0-3 weeks post weaning, along with co-infection 
with enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. A second study was performed to validate the performance of 
two of the diagnostics methods, ELISA and real time RT-PCR, respectively, used to detect rotavirus. 
A total of 1,000 stool samples were collected throughout Denmark after thorough selection of case 
and control farms. These samples were further pooled into 200 samples. The stool samples were 
scored as diarrheic or non-diarrheic and hereafter grouped into three age groups: week 1 (1-7 days af-
ter weaning), week 2 (8-14 days after weaning) and week 3 (15-21 days after weaning). Rotavirus de-
tection was investigated by real time RT-PCR using primers designed to detect rotavirus group A, 
while the further investigation for Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (F4 and/or F18) was done by real 
time PCR.  The investigation of Escherichia coli also included 17 sock samples.  
Rotavirus group A was detected in 68% of the case pools and 58% of the control pools, with an odds 
ratio of 1.5. The amount of rotavirus positive pigs was associated with the age of the pigs, being more 
positive in piglets one week post weaning than pigs 2-3 weeks post weaning (p=0.0001), When inves-
tigating some of the collected samples for enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (F4/F18) higher amounts of 
Escherichia coli F4 was found in pigs with diarrhea (53%) and statistical evidence could be found 
(p=0.001) when compared to the control group (13%). However, rotavirus did not potentiate the effect 
of Escherichia coli on diarrhea. Finally, real time RT-PCR was found to have a higher sensitivity to de-
tect rotavirus (93%) compared to ELISA (80%).  
The collected data indicates that porcine rotavirus group A is likely to be detected in weaners at most 
pig herds in Denmark, and that infection with rotavirus is often asymptomatic and decreases with age. 
The data further indicates that rotavirus does not potentiate the effect of Escherichia coli on diarrhea. 
Finally, it can be assumed that real time RT-PCR is a more reliable and sensitive method to detect ro-
tavirus, than the widely used ELISA method. 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Rotavirus, RV, rotavirus group A, RVA, diarrhea, Danish weaners, nursery pigs, post-weaning, post-
weaning diarrhea, real time RT-PCR, RT-qPCR, ELISA, co-infections, Escherichia coli, E.coli.  
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Resumé 
Diarre hos smågrise efter fravænning er et af de største sundhedsmæssige problemer i svineprodukti-
onen, og resulterer i øget dødelighed, nedsat tilvækst og et øget forbrug af antibiotika.  Særligt virus, 
heriblandt rotavirus, er kendt for øge forekomsten af diarre, og anses som en vigtig risiko faktor udvik-
lingen af fravænningsdiarre enten alene eller i kombination med andre almindeligt forekommende pa-
togener (f.eks. Eschericia coli).  
Formålet med dette studie er at undersøge sammenhængen mellem rotavirus gruppe A og diarre hos 
fravænningsgrise 0-3 uger efter fravænning, med samtidig fokus på enterotoksigene Escherichia coli, 
der er kendt for at inficere grise samtidig med rotavirus. Der vil også indgå et studie i opgaven, der 
forsøger at belyse validiteten af 2 diagnostiske test, henholdsvis ELISA og RT-qPCR, der kan benyt-
tes til at diagnosticere rotavirus gruppe A.  
I alt blev 1000 fæces prøver indsamlet over hele landet efter en meget nøje udvælgelse af case og 
kontrol besætninger. Prøverne blev poolet til et samlet antal af 200 prøver, svarende til det antal stier 
prøverne blev udtaget fra. Prøverne blev klinisk vurderet som værende normale eller unormale i for-
hold til en gødningsscore.  Fravænningsgrisene, som prøverne er udtaget fra, blev inddelt i 3 alders-
grupper: uge 1 (1-7 dage efter fravænning), uge 2 (8-14 dage efter fravænning) og uge 3 (15-21 dage 
efter fravænning.) Rotavirus gruppe A blev påvist ved RT-qPCT. 
Rotavirus gruppe A blev fundet i 68 procent af case stierne og 58 procent af kontrol stierne med en 
odds ratio på 1,5. Mængden af rotavirus var associeret med alderen på grisene, eftersom grise lige ef-
ter fravænning havde et højere antal positive grise end 2-3 uger efter fravænning (p=0,0001). Ved vi-
dere undersøgelse af prøverne for Escherichia coli (F4 og/eller F18) med real time PCR (qPCR) blev 
der påvist statistisk signifikans, da højere niveauer af Eschericia coli F4 blev påvist i case-gruppen 
sammenlignet med kontrolgruppen (p=0,001). Det kunne ikke påvises at rotavirus potenserer effekten 
af E.coli. Afslutningsvis, blev det vist at RT-qPCR har en højere sensitivitet (93%) sammenlignet med 
ELISA (80%) til at detektere rotavirus.  
Det kan konkluderes, at rotavirus A er meget hyppigt forekommende blandt fravænningsgrise i danske 
svinebesætninger, og at mange af fravænningsgrisene er subklinisk inficeret. Ligeledes reduceres an-
tallet af rotavirus positive med alderen. Vores data indikerer at rotavirus ikke potenserer effekten af 
Escherichia coli. Afslutningsvis kan det konkluderes at RT-qPCR er en mere pålidelig og sensitiv me-
tode til at påvise rotavirus gruppe A, end den rutinemæssigt anvendte ELISA metode. 
 
 
 
 
 
Nøgleord: Rotavirus, RV, rotavirus gruppe A, RVA, diarre, danske fravænningsgrise, fravænning, fravænningsdi-
arre, PWD, real time RT-PCR, RT-qPCR, ELISA,  co-infektioner, escherichia coli, E.coli. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
Abbreviations 
ADD  
Average Daily Dose 
AGP 
Antimicrobial growth promotor  
BCS 
Body condition score 
DLP 
Dobble layered protein 
DNA 
Deoxyribonucleic acid 
dsDNA 
Double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid 
dsRNA 
Double stranded RiboNucleic Acid 
E.coli 
Escherichia coli 
ELISA 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
EM 
Electron microscopy 
ER  
Endoplasmic reticulum 
ETEC  
Enterotoxigenic Escheria coli  
GI 
Gastrointestinal 
GI-tract  
Gastro intestinal tract 
IEM  
Immune electron microscopy 
IF 
Immunoflourescens 
Ig 
Immunoglobulins 
IGF-1   
Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 
NNPDS 
New neonatal porcine diarrhea syndrome 
NSP 
Non-structural protein 
dNTP 
Nucleoside triphosphates containing deoxyribose 
 
NVI 
National veterinary institute 
PBS  
Phosphate-buffered saline 
PCR 
Polymerase chain reaction 
PWD  
Post weaning diarrhea  
qPCR 
Real time polymerase chain reaction 
RNA 
RiboNucleic Acid 
RT-PCR 
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  
RT-qPCR 
Real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
RV  
Rotavirus 
RVA  
Rotavirus serogroup A 
SD 
Standard deviation 
SDS-PAGE 
Sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
SEM 
Standard error of the mean 
TGE  
Transmissible gastroenteritis 
TPL 
Triple layered 
VP 
Viral protein 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
Contents  
1. 
Introduction 
9 
2. 
Literature review 
10 
2.1 
Definition of diarrhea 
10 
2.1.1 
Clinical evaluation of diarrhea 
10 
2.1.2 
Causes of infectious diarrhea in piglets and nursery pigs 
10 
2.1.3 
Non-infectious causes of diarrhea 
11 
2.1.4 
Feeding pattern and choice of diet associated to diarrhea 
11 
2.1.5 
Zinc oxide supplementation 
12 
2.1.6 
Management and hygiene associated to diarrhea 
12 
2.2 
Enteric disease caused by rotavirus 
12 
2.2.1 
Taxonomy 
13 
2.2.2 
Characteristic of the rotavirus 
13 
2.3 
Epidemiology 
16 
2.3.1 
Stability of the virus 
16 
2.4 
Pathogenesis 
16 
2.4.1 
Rotavirus and Co-infections with other pathogens 
18 
2.4.2 
Immune response of young piglets 
18 
2.4.3 
Small intestine structure at weaning 
19 
2.5 
Clinical signs 
19 
2.5.1 
Lesions 
19 
2.6 
Diagnostics 
20 
2.6.1 
The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
21 
2.6.2 
Diagnostic Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) 
21 
2.6.3 
Real time PCR (qPCR) 
22 
2.6.4 
PCR methods to detect RVA and common pathogens 
24 
2.7 
Treatment, control and prevention 
25 
2.7.1 
Vaccine strategies 
25 
2.8 
Economic impact 
26 
3. 
Research study: Rotavirus as risk factor for diarrhea 
27 
3.1 
Background 
27 
3.2 
Objectives 
27 
3.3 
Hypotheses 
27 
4. 
Materials and methods 
28 
4.1 
Study design 
28 
4.1.1 
Sample size 
28 
4.1.2 
Selection of herds 
29 
4.1.3 
Sampling strategy and randomization 
30 
4.1.4 
Collection of samples 
31 
4.2 
Laboratory analysis 
31 
4.2.1 
Processing of stool samples 
31 
4.2.2 
Processing of sock samples 
32 
4.2.3 
Extraction of RNA from fecal samples and sock samples 
32 
4.2.4 
Rotavirus group A RT-qPCR, primer and probe design 
32 
4.3 
Questionnaire 
33 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
7 
==PAGE:8==
 
4.4 
Statistical analysis 
33 
5. 
Results 
34 
5.1 
Data from the questionnaires 
34 
5.1.1 
Overview of the farms 
34 
5.1.2 
Management and stable conditions 
36 
5.1.3 
Feeding and the use of antibiotic and zinc 
36 
5.2 
Observations during sampling 
37 
5.3 
Results on rotavirus detection by RT-qPCR 
38 
5.4 
Analyses of hypotheses (pen-level) 
39 
5.4.1 
Relation between rotavirus detection and the occurrence of diarrhea (1a) 
39 
5.4.2 
Quantitative amount of rotavirus and the occurrence of diarrhea (1b) 
40 
5.4.3 
Rotavirus detection and the age of the pig after weaning (1c) 
41 
5.4.4 
Co-infections with E. coli (1d) 
43 
6. 
Discussion 
45 
6.1 
Discussion on results 
45 
6.1.1 
The occurrence of rotavirus post weaning 
45 
6.1.2 
Importance of the age after weaning 
47 
6.1.3 
Co-infection with E. coli 
47 
6.2 
Discussion of the methods and study design 
48 
6.2.1 
Assessment of diarrhea 
48 
6.2.2 
Diagnostic method 
48 
6.2.3 
Study design 
49 
6.2.4 
Sample size 
49 
6.2.5 
Validity of results 
49 
7. 
Conclusion 
49 
8. 
Perspectivation 
50 
9. 
Research study: ELISA and RT-qPCR 
51 
9.1 
Background 
51 
9.2 
Objectives/aims 
51 
9.3 
Hypotheses 
51 
10. 
Materials and methods 
51 
10.1 
Study design 
51 
10.2 
Laboratory analysis 
52 
10.2.1 
Processing of samples and extraction of RNA 
52 
10.2.2 
Rotavirus A ELISA and RT-qPCR 
52 
10.3 
Statistical analysis 
52 
11. 
Results 
52 
11.1 
Results from ELISA and RT-qPCR methods 
52 
11.2 
Results of bead beating samples 
53 
11.3 
Analyses of hypotheses 
53 
11.3.1 
The difference in sensitivity and specificity of the two tests (2a) 
53 
11.3.2 
The difference of bead beaten samples and regular samples (2b) 
54 
12. 
Discussion 
54 
12.1 
Discussion on results 
54 
12.2 
Discussion on methods 
55 
13. 
Conclusion 
55 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
8 
==PAGE:9==
 
1. Introduction 
Acute diarrhea is a complex problem in infants and young animals worldwide, and can be due to sev-
eral causes. Enteric viruses is believed to be one of the major causes, and occur in around half of the 
diarrhea outbreaks of humans, where rotaviruses (RV) have been found to be a major etiology of gas-
troenteritis (Giaquinto et al. 2008). Several studies, have reported that RVs are an increasing gastroin-
testinal (GI) problem in pigs, where high prevalence’s of the pathogen have been found in both young 
piglets and weaners (Halaihel et al. 2010; Katsuda et al. 2006). In routine samples submitted to the 
Pig Research Centre in Kjellerup the prevalences of RV positive Danish piglets less than five days old 
were found to be around 30 percent (Personal communication Hanne Kongsted). Studies conducted in 
Denmark investigating the prevalence of RV in weaners less than 10 days after weaning, have not 
been performed since the 80’s, and are unlikely to reflect the current epidemiological situation 
(Svensmark 1983; Pedersen et al. 2010). To the authors’ best knowledge, there are no updated re-
ports concerning the occurrence of RV in Danish weaners.  
The aim of the following study is to determine the occurrence of rotavirus serotype A (RVA) in Danish 
weaners by real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) to assess if the 
pathogen is an important risk factor for diarrhea. However, many studies have only focused on either 
diarrheic pigs (Wieler et al. 2008; Barreiros et al. 2003) or on diarrheic pigs  and non-diarrheic pigs 
from the same farm (Linares et al. 2009; B Svensmark et al. 1989), not taking into account the risk of 
subclinical cases. For this reasons, will RVA in this study be investigated with cases and controls on 
farm level. As RVA rarely occurs alone, but co-infections between RVA and enteric pathogens have 
regularly been described (Wieler et al. 2008; Theuns et al. 2014), the aim of this study was also to in-
vestigate if co-infections of RVA and Escherichia coli (E. coli) occurs after weaning, and if this has a 
consequence for the occurrence of diarrhea. Further, several studies have described a decreasing 
tendency of RV positive diagnosis compared to an increasing age of the pigs (Gelberg 1992; Halaihel 
et al. 2010). As the pathogen can rarely be found in pigs older than 8 weeks (Wilhelm et al. 2016), an-
other aim was to see if the same pattern with decreasing amount of RV positive pigs would be found in 
Danish weaners. As different diagnostic methods have been shown to have different sensitivities to 
detect RVA (Pang et al. 2004), a further aim of this study was to validate the two common used meth-
ods, Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and real time RT-PCR, in order to optimize the di-
agnostics to detect RVA.  
 
This thesis contains a study review of diarrhea in piglets and weaners, as well as a general explana-
tion of RV disease, followed by a research study about the occurrence of RVA and co-infections in di-
arrheic weaners. Another research study investigating the validity of the diagnostic tests to detect RVA 
will also be included. Finally, all the results from the studies will be analyzed and discussed. To sup-
port the mentioned statements primary literature has been used as well as relevant textbooks and 
webpages. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:10==
 
2. Literature review 
2.1 Definition of diarrhea  
Diarrhea is routinely described as an altered bowel defecation pattern with loose fecal material and an 
increased frequency of defecation (Brown et al. 2007). Diarrhea is a not a diagnosis, but a clinical 
symptom that can occur either primary or secondary to disease. Diarrhea in piglets is a serious and 
potentially life-threatening condition, as it can lead to electrolyte disturbances and severe loss of fluids 
(Brown et al. 2007). The etiology for diarrhea can be multifactorial and divided into infectious or non-
infectious causes. Usually, it is an interplay of etiologies that leads to outbreaks of diarrhea on farm 
level (Ruiz et al. 2016). The four main pathophysiological mechanisms leading to diarrhea include 1) 
hypersecretion (efflux of fluids), 2) exudation (increased permeability), 3) hypermobility (increased per-
istalsis) or 4) malabsorption (osmotic diarrhea) (Brown et al. 2007).  
2.1.1 Clinical evaluation of diarrhea 
There are several methods that can be utilized to clinically evaluate diarrhea. The most widely used 
method to clinically assess the occurrence of diarrhea in a pig herd, is to perform a subjective as-
sessment of the amount of diarrhea droppings on the pen floor (Pedersen et al. 2011a). Other meth-
ods include examinations of all pigs for clinical signs and/or the assessment of the fecal consistency 
from a representative sample (Pedersen & Toft 2011), but these methods are less used due to practi-
cal reasons. The fecal consistency score describes the consistency of the feces with scores from 1-4. 
A consistency score of 1 is identical to a normal, firm and shaped stool, whereas a score 4 is indicat-
ing that the pig has watery diarrhea (see appendix A). Score 2 and 3 are intermediary scores indicat-
ing loose stools and soft and shaped stools respectively (Pedersen & Toft 2011). Another accepted 
method, which is thought to determine the dry matter in the feces (Pedersen et al. 2011b), is highly re-
liable as it gives a quantitative measurement of the diarrhea status. Although different methods exist to 
clinically evaluate diarrhea, a pig does not necessarily need to have signs of diarrhea while it its in-
fected with pathogens (Weber et al. 2015).  
2.1.2 Causes of infectious diarrhea in piglets and nursery pigs 
Several pathogens have been identified as causes to diarrhea, either independent or as co-infections. 
The occurrence of diarrhea has been described by Madec (1998) to be particularly high within the first 
3 weeks after weaning and culminates around day 7-9 post weaning. A correct diagnosis and treat-
ment requires the veterinarian to pay attention on a frequent examination, especially because many of 
the common pathogens involved in diarrhea changes over time (Pedersen et al. 2015). Clostridium 
perfringens/difficile, enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), enterococcus, rotaviruses as well as 
parasites are among the most important pathogens associated with diarrhea-related diseases in pig-
lets before weaning (Ruiz et al. 2016; Jonach et al. 2014). A high amount of these pathogens can also 
be found in non-diarrheic piglets, whereas protozoan parasites (Cryptospora suis and Eimeria) occur 
significantly more in piglets with diarrhea (Ruiz et al. 2016). E.coli, Brachyspira pilosicoli and 
Lawosonia are among the most common pathogens detected in the nursery room (Pedersen et al. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
10 
==PAGE:11==
 
2010), but rotavirus, clostridium perfringens and isospora suis may also be prominent (Driesen et al. 
2008). Finally, Lawsonia intracellularis is the most dominating pathogen in the finishing barn (Stege et 
al. 2000). 
 
E.coli is the one of the main causes for post weaning diarrhea (PWD) and is one of the most problem-
causing pathogens in Danish herds just after weaning (Johansen & Maribo 2013). E.coli is a gram-
negative bacterium and a part of the normal intestinal flora in limited numbers. Huge amounts of path-
ogenic strains of E.coli on the other hand, will give rise to both intestinal and extra-intestinal problems 
(e.g. edema disease). The enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) induces diarrhea in pigs by producing ter-
molabile (LT) or termostable (STa and STb) enterotoxins (Straw et al. 2006; Frydendahl 2002). The 
diarrhea causing strains usually have virulence factors F4 (K88) or F18 fimbria which help the bacteria 
adhere to the wall of the small intestines (Fairbrother et al. 2005). The most prevalent serogroups in 
Denmark are O149 followed by O139, O141 and O8 (Frydendahl 2002).  
 
2.1.3 Non-infectious causes of diarrhea  
Non-infectious causes of diarrhea are described by a phenomenon named non-specific colitis, where 
no pathogens can be detected, but pathological lesions can be found (Chase-Topping et al. 2007). 
However, such a lesion does not necessarily rule out an infection, and there is a chance that the mor-
phological changes result from the feed composition (Pedersen et al. 2012). A new neonatal porcine 
diarrhea syndrome (NNPDS) may play a crucial role in neonatal piglets, if no pathogens can be de-
tected and if the pigs does not respond to antibiotics (Kongsted et al. 2014).  
 
2.1.4 Feeding pattern and choice of diet associated to diarrhea  
Especially feeding pattern and choice of diet shortly after weaning is thought to play a main role in the 
development of diarrhea in piglets. It is known that most pigs develop diarrhea after changing the diet 
from milk of the mother sow to grains. However, signs of diarrhea in relation to changes in diets, have 
been shown to be reduced after a few days on dry food (Tzipori et al. 1980). Further is a restrictive 
feeding pattern with lower nutrient content thought to reduce the occurrence of diarrhea (Lecce et al. 
1983).  
The existence of crude protein in diets is believed to be an important cause for diarrhea. Dietary regi-
mens with high solids and high proteins are further creating a prolonged diarrhea outbreak. In addition, 
diets containing a high level of proteins affect the occurrence of diarrhea since they can affect the mi-
crobiota by raising the gastric pH and thereby reduce the pepsin activity and protein digestibility (Heo 
et al. 2008). A Low protein diet may be preferred 7-10 days post weaning, if the diet is supplemented 
with essential amino acids, as it has been shown to decrease PWD without changing the growth per-
formance (Heo et al. 2008). A low protein diet is also favorable as lower protein levels reduce toxic 
substances from the large intestines such as ammonia, amines, indoles, phenols, and branched-chain 
fatty acids (BCFA) (Nyachoti et al. 2006; Heo et al. 2009). It is believed that high amounts of dietary 
carbohydrates and non-starch polysaccharides can give an osmotic overload in the colon of newly 
weaned piglets and result in diarrhea due to the fermentation or production of fatty acids (Straw et al. 
2006). This can either be due to an excessive carbohydrate intake or mal-absorption from the small in-
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
11 
==PAGE:12==
 
testines. Also toxins from diets and vitamin E defiency have been described to cause diarrhea in 
nursery pigs (Straw et al. 2006). 
 
The nutritional status of the pig is thought to be essential for optimal and quick recovery from rotaviral 
disease and other pathogens. Zjilstra (1997) has shown that that full-fed pigs recover better from rota-
viral infection than infected malnourished pigs, where diarrhea and the growth reduction will usually 
persist, because plasma Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 IGF-I, villus height and alkaline phosphatase re-
main reduced in malnourished pigs (Zijlstra et al. 1997). Since the discontinuation of the use of antimi-
crobial growth promotor (AGP) in Denmark, there has been a need to develop high-quality diets to 
avoid PWD and chronic infections (Kjeldsen & Callesen 2006; Kil & Stein 2010). This constitutes an 
economic burden for the farmer, as the diets are getting more expensive and the use of therapeutic 
antibiotics is increased. This can be seen especially in weaners, where the highest amount of antibiot-
ics is consumed and represents up to 70 Average Daily Dose (ADD) (DANMAP 2010). ADD is a 
standard measure for consumption of antibiotics in cattle and pig farms. Overall, it can be concluded 
that the understanding of feed-related colitis and methods to prevent diarrhea is of critical importance 
to improve pig health and production (Thomson 2009). 
 
2.1.5 Zinc oxide supplementation 
Supplementations of Zink oxide (ZnO) in the diets around weaning, have shown to maintain stability of 
the intestinal microflora and reduce the occurrence of diarrhea (Katouli et al. 1999; Poulsen 1989). 
The Danish Food Administration has allowed the use of 2,500 ppm ZnO in the diets for 14 days post 
weaning (Fødevarestyrelsen 2012). Also, the addition of organic acids into the diets has been shown 
to have a good effect on diarrhea due to the killing of infectious E. coli pathogens (Maribo et al. 2000; 
Knarreborg et al. 2002). 
 
2.1.6 Management and hygiene associated to diarrhea  
Different factors of hygiene and management play a crucial role in regards to diarrhea in weaners. In 
the nursery room just after weaning the pigs have a lack of protective antibodies and are exposed to 
stress factors that can cause immunosuppression and thereby influence the occurrence of diarrhea. 
Some of the most important stress factors include high stocking, switch, moving and mingling with un-
familiar pigs, contaminated air, low biosecurity, ambient temperature or high infection pressure by im-
proper cleaning/disinfection that causes widespread contamination with different pathogens (Hessing 
& Tielen 1994; Kil & Stein 2010; Madec et al. 1998). 
 
2.2 Enteric disease caused by rotavirus 
RVs were first discovered in 1973 in calves and has since been one of the most severe and important 
causes of diarrhea in infants and young animals worldwide (Bishop et al. 1973). Later on, the virus 
was also detected in humans, pigs and other species (Woode et al. 1976). RVs can be detected in 
both diarrheic and non-diarrheic pigs, but are most common in pigs with diarrhea (Halaihel et al. 
2010). As mentioned, RVs are important pathogens contributing to diarrhea in young pigs, which is 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
12 
==PAGE:13==
 
supported by several other studies (see table 1). The detection of the disease may be influenced by 
the sampling time of the infected piglets, as the highest viral load occur during the acute stage of dis-
ease (Chan et al. 2013). It has further been shown that RV is more likely to be detected in loose stools 
rather than watery and normal stools (B. Svensmark et al. 1989).  
The importance of RV infections in pigs might be underestimated, as it can be difficult to recognize the 
subclinical infections. Further, most laboratories focus solely only on the diagnosis of the most com-
mon occurring RV serogroup A (RVA), instead of focusing on other important epidemiologically 
serogroups (Marthaler et al. 2014). This is likely to have a significant impact, as RV serogroup B and C 
have been found to be quite common in Belgium and the US (Marthaler et al. 2014; Theuns et al. 
2016).  
 
2.2.1 Taxonomy  
RVs belong to the genus Rotavirus and is a member of the family called Reoviridae. Furthermore, two 
subfamilies, spinareovirinae and sedorevirinae are expected to be created from RV (Quinn et al. 
2011). RVs got their name due to their morphology of particles that resembles a wheel with short pro-
jections and a spherical outer rim (Straw et al. 2006). 
 
 
Figure 1: The figure shows a RV particle and the six viral protein layers. The figure is adapted from: (Usonis et al. 2012) 
 
 
2.2.2 Characteristic of the rotavirus  
RVs are complex non-enveloped, icosahedral particles around 60-80 nm in diameter and are com-
posed out of multiple viral protein (VP) layers, including the outer layer (VP7 and VP4), the inner layer 
(VP6), and the core layer (VP2, VP1 and VP3) (Estes et al. 2001; Estes & Cohen 1989). All three lay-
ers need to be intact for the virus to be infective, but the outer layer is the most virulent. The proteolyt-
ic cleavage of the non-glycosylated VP4 to VP5 and VP8 is especially important for the infectivity of 
the virus (Arias et al. 1996). The glycosylated VP7is the main serogroup-specific antigen, making it the 
target for protective antibodies (Quinn et al. 2011). VP6 confers group specific antigenicity, and is im-
portant in the detection of RV. Additionally, there are six non-structural proteins (NSP) named NSP 1 
to 6 (Quinn et al. 2011). The viral genome is composed of 11 segments of double-stranded RiboNu-
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
13 
==PAGE:14==
 
cleic Acid (dsRNA) enclosed in the core, and encodes for the 12 proteins listed above (Estes et al. 
2001). The size of the segments ranges from 0,6 to 3,3 kb. Based on the antigenic properties and the 
sequence diversity of the virus, RV has been divided into several antigenically distinct serogroups 
from A to H. Porcine RVs consist of five serogroups: A, B, C, E and H (Marthaler et al. 2014). 
Serogroup A is the most common one (Martella et al. 2007). It compromises of at least 10 G geno-
types (G1-6, 8-10 and 11) and 7 P genotypes (P5-8, 13, 19 and 21) in pigs due to the VP7 and VP4 
glycoproteins (Martella et al. 2001; Barreiros et al. 2003). More than 27 G and 35 P genotype have 
been identified in other species (Matthijnssens et al. 2011). If a strain shares more than 89% amino 
acid sequence identities it is considered to belong to the same genotype (Matthijnssens et al. 2011). A 
European study found that serogroup C seems to play a more pronounced role in pigs than expected 
(Marthaler et al. 2014; Martella et al. 2007). So far, serogroup E is detected solely in pigs (Chasey et 
al. 1986), while serogroup A-C are also detected in humans (Saif & Jiang 1994). Some of the geno-
types are highly virulent.  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree on coding sequences of the RVA VP4 gene. Danish strains are marked with a 
 closely related human strains are written in italic (Midgley et al. 2012).  
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
14 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
Figure 3: Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree on coding sequences of the RVA VP7 gene. Danish strains are marked with a 
 closely related human strains are written in italic (Midgley et al. 2012). 
 
The predominant genotypes in pigs are G4 (Gottfried-like) and G5 (OSU-like), but also G3 (CRW –
like) and G11 (YM-like) are quite common genotypes in the pig (Barreiros et al. 2003; Martel-Paradis 
et al. 2013; Martella et al. 2001; Zeller et al. 2012). According to a Belgian study, the combination 
G5P[7] is the most common strain in pigs (Theuns et al. 2014), however, this is not the case in Den-
mark, where G4P[6] has been shown to be detected more often (Midgley et al. 2012). RVs are con-
sidered to be species specific, but as transmission of virus isolates between species can occur occa-
sionally, some genotypes might have zoonotic potential, or contribute to the emergence of new geno-
types in heterogeneous hosts (Midgley et al. 2012). Along with cattle, pigs are considered as signifi-
cant reservoirs for the diversification of human RV (Martella et al. 2010). A full phylogenetic tree of all 
the genotypes based on partial sequences of VP4 and VP7 from a European study can be found in 
figure 2 and 3 respectivly (Midgley et al. 2012).  
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
15 
==PAGE:16==
 
2.3 Epidemiology 
Transmission of RV typically occurs via the oral-fecal route (horizontal transmission). Transmission by 
the nasal route has also been described in experimentally studies, but whether transmission by the 
respiratory tract occurs needs to be further investigated (Azevedo et al. 2005). The virus is extremely 
stable in the environment and it may be challenging to raise pigs free of porcine RV, especially in 
heavily contaminated intensively-reared animals (Straw et al. 2006). RVA has the highest prevalence 
in pigs at 3-5 weeks age due to a decline in maternal immunity (Bohl 1979; Hampson & Fu 1987). The 
prevalence’s of RVA in different age groups and countries are summarized in the table 1: 
 
Table 1: The prevalence of RV in different countries and groups of pigs from 1983-2013 
Country (year), author 
N  
Diarrhea 
 RV + 
Non-diarrhea 
RV +  
Piglets  
Weaners 
Finisher 
Test 
Germany (2001), Wieler 
149 
4% 
NA 
2% 
4% 
0% 
EM 
Brazil (2003), Barrieros 
99 
55% 
NA 
56% 
52%  
NA 
PAGE 
Japan (2006), Katsuda  
269 
N/A 
NA 
67,3% 
65,5% 
NA 
RT-PCR 
Spain (2010), Halaihel 
221 
26,5% 
6,5% 
26,7% 
47% 
10,2% 
RT-PCR 
Japan (2013), Miyazaki 
145 
NA 
NA 
43% 
67 % 
7% 
RT-PCR 
Denmark (1983), Svenmark 
1090 
34,6 
28,2 
26,3 
37,4 
NA 
ELISA 
NA: not available. Data in the table are collected from the following articles: (Wieler et al. 2008; Barreiros et al. 2003; Katsuda et 
al. 2006; Halaihel et al. 2010; Svensmark 1983; Miyazaki et al. 2013). The mentioned methods required to detect RV will be fur-
ther explained in section 2.6.   
 
It can be seen from table 1 that RVs have a high prevalence in pigs both before and after weaning, but 
after the age of 8 weeks the prevalence’s of RV are very low (Halaihel et al. 2010; Wilhelm et al. 
2016). When RVA clinically affects an animal it excretes high amounts of virus. Pigs usually shed virus 
from 1-14 days in the feces depending on the genotype, and the average shedding is 7.4 days, even 
though some pigs continue shedding the virus for up to two months(Hampson & Fu 1987), and the 
main part of the pigs that are infected develop diarrhea shortly after they get infected with the virus. In-
fections with RV typically give a high morbidity, but are not associated with mortality unless the pigs 
get severely dehydrated or co-infected with other pathogens (Kim et al. 1999). 
 
2.3.1 Stability of the virus  
RVs are highly stable viruses that survive for a long term period in the environment. Studies have 
shown that the viruses remain infective in feces for 32 months when stool samples are stored at low 
temperatures of 10 degrees, and for 7-9 months when stored at around 18-20 degrees (Ramos et al. 
2000; Straw et al. 2006). The viruses are further resistant to several antiseptics and disinfectants, 
making it difficult to combat herd infections (Abad et al. 2006). The virus is stable at pH-ranges from 3-
9, but will lose its infectivity and hemagglutination with continuous freezing and thawing (Straw et al. 
2006). 
 
2.4 Pathogenesis 
The pathogenesis of RV and the accompanied development of diarrhea is complex and disease se-
verity depends on several factors like virulence of the strain, the level of immunity and the amount of 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
16 
==PAGE:17==
 
ingested virus (Estes et al. 2001). When an animal ingests the virus, the virus survives the passage 
through the gastric acid, and enters the small intestine, where it infects the enterocytes at the apex of 
the villi. Different strains of RV have different requirements to infect the epithelial cells and the degree 
of villous atrophy further depends on the strain, the genotype and the age of the pig (Collins et al. 
1989; Shaw et al. 1989). 
 
Virus and epithelial cell receptor interactions mediate the first steps of the life cycle of the virus. It has 
been described that these interactions are mediated by the viral VP4 that is attached to the cell, and 
interaction with AlphaVBeta3 (integrin) and the 70-kD Heat-Shock protein (Guerrero et al. 2002). Fur-
ther, an endocytopatic pathway, direct penetration (Arias et al. 2001) and sialic acid receptor entry al-
so has been described (Jolly et al. 2000). When the virus enters the cell, the triple layered (TPL) ma-
ture virions, loose their outer layer and exposes the intermediate VP6 layer that becomes transcrip-
tionally active as double-layered virions (DLPs). Inside the DLPs 11dsRNA segments and the mRNA 
molecules can be released. The exact mechanism behind transcription remains unknown and needs 
to be further investigated (Estes et al. 2001). After transcription, the newly formed DLPs pass the en-
doplasmatic reticulum (ER) membrane with help from the NSP4s that are located in the ER mem-
brane. NSP4 has shown to be an enterotoxin itself and can induce diarrhea (Estes et al. 2001). The 
synthesis of RV proteins activates several mechanisms. First, it increases plasma-membrane permea-
bility to calcium and secondly it activates regulatory mechanisms finally increasing the concentration of 
calcium in the ER. The increased calcium in the infected endothelium cells causes an activation of 
calcium dependant enzymes. These enzymes play a major role in inducing cell lysis and release of the 
viral progeny and proteins after the viral replication (Ruiz et al. 2000). 
 
After replication, the viral progeny leaves the epithelial cells by transcytosis. Released virus infects 
other absorptive cells leading to massive atrophy of the epithelial cells, and thereby a marked reduc-
tion in the absorptive capacity of intestinal epithelium. The enterocyte replacement is known to be slow 
in young animals, and the immature cells that replace the old ones usually result in a decline of disac-
charides and glucose-coupled sodium transport. This gives optimal circumstances for bacteria to pro-
liferate due to undigested lactose (Rhoads et al. 1991; Straw et al. 2006). The enterocyte replacement 
further leads to an osmotic effect and retention of fluid in the lumen (Quinn et al. 2011). 
 
The association with RV and diarrhea may be caused by several mechanisms as described above, 
and has both mal-absorptive and secretory components. The main cause of the development of diar-
rhea might be reduced absorption as a complication to the destruction of enterocytes, leading to villus 
ischemia and intestinal secretion due to the intra- and extracellular action of NSP4 (Estes et al. 2001; 
Dong et al. 1997). Also, the enteric nervous system is a key element in the development of diarrhea, 
as it regulates fluid secretion and is activated by amines/peptides from the NSP4 (Lundgren & 
Svensson 2001). This might explain how diarrhea can occur without any histological visible lesions on 
the tissue (Lorrot & Vasseur 2007). 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
17 
==PAGE:18==
 
2.4.1 Rotavirus and Co-infections with other pathogens  
Co-infections between enteric pathogens and viruses have regularly been described in young piglets 
and is known to be a major problem (Wieler et al. 2008; Theuns et al. 2014; Katsuda et al. 2006; 
Tzipori et al. 1980). It is believed that an infection with RV destroys the epithelium of the small intes-
tines, making it more advantageous for hemolytic E.coli to adhere, accompanied with more severe hy-
per secretory diarrhea, and a higher risk of mortality than pigs infected with only one agent (Lecce et 
al. 1982; Benfield et al. 1988). It has also been proven that villous atrophy in general is similar regard-
less if the pigs are affected with one agent or more, leading to the belief that co-pathogen infections 
have an additive effect rather than a synergistic effect. According to Benfield (1988), a pig does not 
get RV due to an E.coli infection or vice versa, but rather due to a high pressure of the two pathogens 
in the environment (Benfield et al. 1988). A study from the 90's showed that RV followed by E. coli are 
the most often isolated pathogens, either individually or in combination in neonatal piglets, while multi-
ple pathogens were more often found in nursery pigs (Johnson et al. 1992). This was confirmed by a 
Japanese study, where piglets were more prone to infection with a single etiologic agent (60%), while 
weaners had a higher rate of diarrhea cases with a combination of etiologic agents (47%) (Katsuda et 
al. 2006). 
 
2.4.2 Immune response of young piglets  
While RV infections are usually endemic in most farms, the main portion of sows will have immunity to 
RV (Kim et al. 1999). This is an advantage for the piglets the first days of life, where they receive co-
lostrum from the sows/gilts. The presence of immunoglobulin’s (Ig) are very important for passive im-
munity, even though the levels of antibodies in the milk will rapidly decline during the first days of lac-
tation (Wagstrom et al. 2000). IgG is the most dominant immunoglobulin in colostrum within the first 24 
hours of life, where the neonatal piglets have the highest absorption. Other immunoglobulin’s like IgM 
and IgA are also substantial. In particular, IgA which mediates gut protection, and can be found in the 
intestines and serum. IgA becomes the dominant protective immunoglobulin after 2-4 days, where the 
levels of IgM and IgG usually decline up to two- to three-fold in the colostrum (Porter et al. 1970). Al-
ready 24-36 hours after birth the gut will close and the piglet can no longer absorb antibodies. This 
leads to that the piglets have fewer outbreaks of diarrhea when they are younger than 2 weeks of age, 
but the infective level of RV may eventually exceed the passive immunity when it declines to unpro-
tected levels (Straw et al. 2006).  The decline in passive antibodies make the pigs more prone to infec-
tions until the pigs develop an appropriate level of active immunity at around 5-8 weeks of age (Tzipori 
et al. 1980). 
As described above, the maternal antibodies are believed to protect the piglets, but it has been shown 
that infection and disease can be developed in piglets even though they had serum-neutralizing anti-
bodies obtained from the nursing sero-positive sows (Shaw et al. 1989). It has further been shown that 
weaning at an early age decreases immunity, which can make the piglets more susceptible to diseas-
es (Blecha et al. 1983). Nagesha et al. (1992) suggested that there is a continuous release of virus in 
intensive production systems, which gives a constant cycle of RV infections. This constant release to-
gether with the development of active immunity, gives the virus the opportunity to mutate and evolve 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:19==
 
into several varieties of viruses over a period of time (Nagesha et al. 1992). Pigs that recover from a 
RV infection are usually fully protected against reinfection with the same P and G serotypes, but not 
from other serotypes it has not previously encountered (Saif et al. 1997; Hoshino et al. 1988). Based 
on the evidence described above, it can be theorized that it might be beneficial for a pig to become 
subclinical infected at the age when it still harbours passive immunity from the sow. This might prevent 
disease, while still allowing for development of active immunity which could protect from clinical dis-
ease later in life. 
 
2.4.3 Small intestine structure at weaning 
It has been shown that the crypt depth in the intestines increases gradually with the age of the pig, 
while the villus height changes more slowly. If the pigs are weaned between 21-32 days and are pre-
sented with grains there will be a high increase in the crypt depth and a reduction in the villus height 
(up to half the size of their initial height) that leaves less absorptive cells (Hampson 1986). The chang-
es of the villous have been shown to be most dramatic proximally in the small intestine, while the 
changes of the crypt depth are more dramatic distally (Hampson 1986). These changes may overall 
be expected to increase the susceptibility to pathogens if the pigs are weaned too early, or presented 
to grains at a young age, due to the reduction in ability of the villous to absorb and digest nutrients 
(Hampson 1986). It is expected that the pigs decreases food intake the first two days after weaning, 
and will not reach the same caloric intake before 2 weeks after weaning (Zijlstra et al. 1997). The ca-
loric deficit along with the more fragile intestinal epithelium makes the post weaning period one of the 
most critical in the piglet’s life, with a high risk of development of diarrhea. Since the intestinal epitheli-
um is more mature in pigs weaned at an older age, pigs with a high weaning age have fewer gastroin-
testinal problems with diarrhea in the nursery room (Weber & Eskildsen 2014). 
 
2.5 Clinical signs 
The typical clinical sign associated with RV infection is gastroenteritis. The incubation time from infec-
tion to development of clinical signs is usually short, as first signs of disease appear within 16-36 
hours after viral exposure (Bohl 1979). Diarrhea, poor appetite and weight loss are the clinical signs 
most often described (Tzipori et al. 1980). Diarrhea is usually described as loose/profuse, watery and 
light brown feces or as mixture of yellowish materiel. Death and dehydration also occurs, but is only 
common in very young pigs less than one week old (Bohl 1979). The pigs typically have diarrhea for 3-
14 days before clinical signs disappear (Straw et al. 2006), while milder cases usually recover without 
treatment within 1-3 days (Bohl 1979). The degree of clinical signs may vary depending on the infect-
ing strain of RV (Collins et al. 1989).  
 
2.5.1 Lesions  
It can be a big challenge to diagnose RV from clinical signs, as the signs are nonspecific applicable to 
many different GI-diagnoses. However, the virus is known for its ability to give villous atrophy in the 
enterocytes of the small intestine, and thereby loss of absorptive cells on the upper two-thirds of the 
villi (Lundgren & Svensson 2001), leading to damages of the epithelium and onset of diarrhea.  The 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
19 
==PAGE:20==
 
destruction of villi is typically most distinct 1-3 day post inoculation, but will usually regenerate after 
short time (Stevenson 1990). The time acquired to adapt and regenerate to normal villi depends on 
the age of the pigs (Collins et al. 1989; Stevenson 1990), as is typically is less severe in older pigs. 
When necropsy is performed, the first part of the GI-tract usually looks normal and ventricles contain 
food. The small intestines will appear thin walled, flaccid and with watery, yellow/greyish fluid. The 
caecum and colon will usually have a similar content and be dilated. The infection of the intestinal epi-
thelial cells is usually self-limiting, making RV disease differ from many other viruses and pathogens 
(Bohl 1979). 
 
2.6 Diagnostics  
As described in chapter 2.5 the clinical signs for RV infection are often identical to those seen in other 
GI-tract diseases, making the diagnosis more complicated. Several techniques exist to detect RV, in-
cluding:  
 
1) Detection of the viral particle: cell culture/virus isolation, electron microscopy (EM), immune electron 
microscopy (IEM), negative-contrast electron microscopy and dot blot hybridization.  
2) Detection of antigens: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), latex agglutination or direct 
immunofluorescence (IF).  
3) Detection of the viral genome: RNA electropherotyping, sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
(Straw et al. 2006).  
 
For all methods, it is important that the samples (e.g. fecal samples or intestinal contents) are collect-
ed in the acute phase of disease to increase the chances to detect RV (Straw et al. 2006).  
The methods that detect the viral particle are usually quick, but require certain amounts of virus to be 
to confirm the diagnosis (Quinn et al. 2011). EM has traditionally been used and has a high specificity 
The technique is usually chosen, for a limited amount of samples as it is rapid (Brandt et al. 1981). EM 
is a microscope that utilizes a beam of electrons as a source to create an image of the specimens. It 
has a higher resolution than a light microscope and can visualize structures of smaller objects. Since 
the method can only investigate the ultrastructure of the virus it is necessary to use IEM to differentiate 
RV into serogroups (Saif and Jiang 1994), why the method is many cases are replaced with newer 
and more sensitive techniques like RT-qPCR.  
Antibodies for the detection of antigens are commercially available, but are often specific for RVA. 
Blood samples are usually of little diagnostic value, because most swineherds are sero-positive for an-
tibodies, but high titres of antibodies can indicate an active or recent infection (Straw et al. 2006). The 
ELISA method will be further described in the following section 2.6.1.  
For detection of the viral genome electrotyping of viral RNA is an old well-known method used to 
demonstrate the different RV groups, as RVs of different serogroups have a distinct electropherotype. 
The method utilizes polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and silver staining to visualize the 
RNA bands, while RNA segments cluster into four regions (Herring et al. 1982). For the common 
serogroups that occur in pigs, the regions include 4:2:3:2 (group A), 4:2:2:3 (group B and E) and 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
20 
==PAGE:21==
 
4:3:2:2 (group C). However, also this methods is often replaced with RT-PCR procedures, as further 
diagnostics are necessary to detect the different serotypes (Straw et al. 2006; Holmes 1996). RT-
qPCR is now one of the most used methods, and will be further elaborated in the chapter 2.6.3 and 
4.2.4 
 
2.6.1 The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
ELISA is a common used method for detecting RV antigens from feces (Straw et al. 2006). The ELISA 
technique is designed for detecting and quantifying the concentration of certain proteins (antigens or 
antibodies) by exploiting special antibody’s ability to bind on proteins. The method can be either direct, 
indirect or a capture assay (´sandwich´). The capture assay method exploits 2 steps in a plate-based 
assay, where the antigen must be immobilized to a solid surface. An ELISA micro well is used for test-
ing. Antibodies that are specific for the protein we trying to detect are attached to the bottom of the 
well. In the first step, the protein-solution is added, so it can bind to the antibodies in the well. It is af-
terwards necessary to flush the well, to make sure that unbound proteins are flushed away. In the 
second step, another antibody which is linked to an enzyme with the ability to bind to the protein being 
detected is added, and the well needs to be flushed again. Detection is accomplished by adding a 
substance that changes colour upon contact with the enzyme (ThermoFisher 2016). 
 
 
Figure 4: The figure shows 3 different ELISA methods.  The capture assay “Sandwich” is the one described in this section 
(ThermoFisher 2016). 
 
Based on the colour switchover it can be seen, whether the protein is present in the sample or not. 
The colour switchover can further be a measure for the concentration of the protein, as the colour is 
more intense if many proteins are bound (ThermoFisher 2016). 
 
2.6.2 Diagnostic Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) 
PCR is a method for amplification of genetic material and is one of the most utilized techniques in mo-
lecular biology. It is a highly advantageous and sensitive method, which rapidly detects small amounts 
of infectious agents. The PCR method amplifies specific genetic targets to a detectable level by the 
use of agarose gel electrophoresis. Essential elements in the process include DNA polymerase, an 
enzyme that catalyzes the process, and variable primers, which are necessary for amplification of 
specific DNA target from a single stranded template sequence. A forward and backward primer is nec-
essary to synthetize both strands in the DNA double helix (Arnheim & Erlich 1992; Kubista et al. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
21 
==PAGE:22==
 
2006). PCR is performed by repeating a sequence of different time and temperature cycling. The cy-
cles can be divided into the following three steps: 
 Denaturation: the double stranded DNA (dsDNA) is separated at high temperatures (95 de-
grees) to render the target nucleic acid single strands. The newly formed single strands act as 
a template. 
 Annealing: the temperature is lowered to 60 degrees, so the sequence-specific primers an-
neal to their complementary sequences. The optimal temperature depends on the nucleotide 
sequence of the primers. 
 Elongation: each primer is extended through the target region by the action of DNA polymer-
ase that incorporates deoxynukleotides (dNTPs) at higher temperatures (usually around 72 
degrees). After this step a new dsDNA is created (Kubista et al. 2006; Valasek 2005). 
 
The polymerase chain reaction continues as long as it is kept at the same temperature and the tem-
plate DNA is available. After many cycles the reactants become exhausted and the DNA product level 
reaches a plateau, decreasing efficiency of the reaction (Valasek 2005). If the result shows copies of 
DNA of the expected length, it indicates that the suspected pathogen was present. Results from PCR 
are provided qualitatively as being either positive or negative for the pathogen investigated (Arnheim & 
Erlich 1992; Kubista et al. 2006). 
 
There is a great diversity among PCR techniques depending on what kind of agent needs to be de-
tected. A PCR technique that differs from the original one includes reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-
PCR), and is a technique which is utilized when the genetic material being amplified is RNA. This 
method uses the enzyme reverse transcriptase converting RNA to the complementary DNA (cDNA) 
before the amplification step (Valasek 2005). This process is further displayed in figure 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.6.3 Real time PCR (qPCR) 
A new variant of PCR is qPCR. qPCR can be used to quantitatively measure the amplification of spe-
cific DNA targets via fluorescence, and follow the result while processing. The real time technique uti-
lizes fluorescent probes or dyes (e.g. Primer Probe Energy Transfer, SYBR or dual labelled probes) to 
visualize the amplification of the genetic target. Each of the different chemistries differ in characteris-
tics, but all have the same strategy and link the continuing measurement of a fluorescence signal that 
reflects the amplification of DNA. The amount of fluorescent signal is correlated to the amount of spe-
cific DNA target sequence in the sample. At the end of each cycle, fluorescence is measured and 
thereby enables quantification of the target DNA. High fluorescence is indicative of a high amount of 
Figure 5: The conversion of RNA to DNA can be achieved by us-
ing the enzyme reverse transcriptase (Valasek 2005).   
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
22 
==PAGE:23==
 
PCR products (Kubista et al. 2006). For dye and PriProET chemistries, the dissociative curve of ampli-
fied products can be analyzed to determine the melting point. This process helps to ensure the speci-
ficity of the test (Valasek 2005). 
Dual labelled probes (also known as TaqMan probes) are the most commonly used probes. The dual 
labelled probe is a synthetic DNA with a flourophor reporter attached to the 5´-end and a quencher at-
tached to the 3´-end. The reporter (e.g. FAM, Cy5, ATTO633) is a molecule that emits fluorescence 
with a specific wavelength when excitated, whereas the quencher (e.g. BHQ, TAMRA) absorbs the 
signal from the reporter when they are in close proximity (as they are when bound to the same short 
oligonucleotide). During PCR at the elongation step, the reporter and quencher molecules are sepa-
rated by DNA polymerase during PCR amplification, and the reporters fluorescence’s signal is liberat-
ed (Valasek 2005). Excitation and emission depends on the choice of flourophor. The described pro-
cess is illustrated in figure 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results from qPCR are illustrated graphically by computer software, where positive samples will usual-
ly form a sigmoidal curve (see figure 7). Initially, the fluorescent signal is weak and difficult to distin-
guish from the background. As the amount of products accumulates the signal develops and increases 
exponentially. In qPCR the curves saturates at the same level, when the reactants reach a plateau 
(Kubista et al. 2006). 
A certain amount of cycles are required to reach a fluorescence threshold. This threshold is defined as 
a Ct (cycle threshold) value. Since changing reaction conditions influences fluorescence, the Ct-value 
verified for a particular sample may be variable in different assays. A positive Ct-value is defined as a 
fluorescent interpretation less than the final cycle number (Bustin & Nolan 2004). A low Ct-value is 
equal to more viral copies in the starting sample and a higher fluorescent signal. If the Ct-value is zero 
or does not reach the threshold, the sample is considered negative. High Ct-values can occur falsely 
and give a nonspecific result. 
 
Figure 6: The figure shows the concept of dual labelled probe consisting of a reporter flourophor and a quencher. 
The DNA polymerase cleaves the probe during the amplification, allowing measurement of the fluorescence (Valasek 
2005). 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
23 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is important to note that there may be false-positive test results, if the samples have been contami-
nated during the pre-assay stage or if cross-reactivity occurs with other DNAs (Johnson et al. 2013). 
Further, there is a risk of a lower sensitivity and false-negatives if PCR inhibition occurs. An example 
of inhibitors found in body fluids includes urea and haemoglobin (Wilson 1997). The purification of 
RNA and choice of reverse transcriptase are critical steps to prevent PCR inhibitory effects (Schrader 
et al. 2012). The false differences in mRNA that can occur if inhibitors are present in the different tem-
plates, can be avoided by testing each RNA preparation for inhibitors by amplifying an amplicons set 
that differs in sequence identity from the target RNA (Bustin & Nolan 2004). A quantitative result of the 
amplification process can be provided by comparison of a sample Ct-value to a standard curve. The 
standard curve is constructed from a ten-fold dilution series of virus with a known concentration. The 
Ct-values of the individual dilutions are plotted against the concentrations (Pestana et al. 2010). 
 
2.6.4 PCR methods to detect RVA and common pathogens 
The most utilized method to detect RVA is RT-qPCR. This method has been shown to have a higher 
sensitivity than ELISA (Rout & Saikumar 2014) and EM that have traditionally been used in the detec-
tion of RVA (Pang et al. 2004). Many different assays for RV detection have been published with 
different primers, duration and temperature during the PCR cycle (Song et al. 2006; Marthaler et al. 
2014; Pang et al. 2004). An exact description of the method used for detection of porcine RVA at 
National Veterinay Institute (NVI) will be described in details in chapter 4.2. Due to gastrointestinal 
disorders qPCR is most commonly used to test for different pathogens in sock samples (described in 
chapter 4.1.4.). In fact, this method has shown to have a higher sensitivity than traditional cultivation of 
frequently occurring pathogens like E.coli and B. pilosicoli (Ståhl et al. 2011). 
 
Figure 7: The figure shows graphical data from the Rotor-Gene Series Software (QIAGEN). The curves represent real
time PCR curves. It can be seen that the positive samples have a smooth sigmoidal curve. The figure is provided by
senior advisor Charlotte Kristiane Hjulsager (NVI). 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
24 
==PAGE:25==
 
2.7 Treatment, control and prevention 
Diarrhea due to gastrointestinal disorders is usually treated with antibiotics (DANMAP 2010). In the 
case of a virus, treatment with antibiotics may be questionable, unless secondary bacterial infections 
occur. There is no specific treatment for RV available, but it can be expected that fluid therapy with 
electrolyte solutions containing glucose-glycine, L-glutamine or feeding with transforming growth factor 
alpha by oral route might be beneficial, and the treatment of choice, to keep the animals sufficiently 
hydrated secondary to diarrhea (Bywater 1983; Rhoads et al. 1995; Rhoads et al. 1991). The virus in-
fections cannot be treated medically, meaning there are greater demands for good management and 
sanitation to reduce the agent in the environment. Steinmetz et al. (2008) assumed that a thorough 
cleaning, disinfection and drying of sections whenever new pigs are inserted, and a construction 
where minimal feces build-up on the floor area, can reduce the amount of virus in the environment 
(Steinmetz et al. 2008). However, in contrast to this, Dewey (2003) showed that a herd using a contin-
uous flow rather than the all in/all out procedures had lower levels of RV concluding that pigs which 
are exposed to the virus in the environment may be more able to develop active immunity (Dewey et 
al. 2003). Due to this, it is important to pay a lot of attention to the sows in regards to feed intake and 
comfort, as the colostrum is the most important factor for passive immunity in the piglets during the 
first weeks of life (Bohl 1979). The temperature in the nursery room is also important, as low tempera-
ture and/or fluctuations in temperature was shown to increase mortality (Straw et al. 2006). The litera-
ture indicates that management and weaning strategy play a crucial role to control and prevent RV in-
fections. 
 
2.7.1 Vaccine strategies  
Since RVs are a significant cause of enteric infections, especially in piglets, and have often more im-
portance than other viral and bacterial causes, the development of a vaccine has been considered to 
be necessary. The vaccine protects the piglets against developing severe diarrhea the first days of life, 
where a high risk of RV infection exists as a consequence of poor immunity. So far, Rokovac Neo from 
Salfarm is the only available vaccine on the Danish market (since autumn 2015). However, the indi-
vidual farm is required to detect RV before it is licensed to use the vaccine (Medicintildyr 2016). Roko-
vac Neo is an intramuscular vaccine that is injected to the gilts twice with an interval of 2 to 4 weeks. 
The last injection should be given within 2 weeks before farrowing, to ensure proper protection of the 
neonatal piglets by antibodies in the colostrum. The vaccine does not have any known effect on 
weaners. Rokovac Neo consists of inactivated antigens of RV and E. coli (Medicintildyr 2016). 
 
The most important focus in the production of a vaccine is to mimic a natural infection by a given sero-
type specific immunity and thereby create local intestinal immunity against RV (Hoshino & Kapikian 
2000). This has been done by including RV suis OSU 6 in the vaccine and several E.coli strains. 
However, suis OSU6, is not the most common occurring strain in Denmark according to Midgley 
(2012). The efficiency of the vaccine cannot be estimated with certainty due to the many different 
geno- and serotypes that exist, and due to genetic heterogeneity that gives rise to diarrhea outbreaks 
even though the sows are vaccinated (Saif & Fernandez 1996). It has been shown that cross-
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
25 
==PAGE:26==
 
protection among the different genotypes and serotypes almost doesn’t exist, but the more the individ-
ual pig gets infected and repeatedly vaccinated, the better is the protection against the heterotypic RV 
(Chiba et al. 1993). However, there are also articles that question the use of vaccination, as the 
amount of antibodies the neonatal piglets obtain from the swine milk are so small, that it might be un-
likely to induce active rotaviral gut immunity (Hoblet et al. 1986). This is supported by Yuan et al., who 
showed that maternal antibodies can interfere with the development of active immunity, highlighting 
the need for more improved vaccine approaches (Yuan et al. 1998). Overall it can be concluded, that 
obtaining a better insight into diversity of RV strains and genotypes will be crucial in the future devel-
opment of rotaviral vaccines. 
 
2.8 Economic impact  
The occurrence of RV gives both direct and indirect economic losses. The occurrence of RV and diar-
rhea in piglet post weaning can be significant, not only due to the high morbidity, but also due to the 
high expenses associated with the recurring treatment of sick piglets with antibiotics. The extensive 
use of antibacterial agents seems to become increasingly inefficient on many farms and also giving 
cause for concern in regards to public health. An alternative to antibiotics is therefore the use of vac-
cines as described above. RV is mainly regarded as a problem in weaners because it reduces weight 
gain efficiency (Johnson et al. 1992).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
26 
==PAGE:27==
 
3. Research study: Rotavirus as risk factor for diarrhea   
3.1 Background 
Diarrhea in pigs after first weeks after weaning is a main health problem in the pig production industry, 
resulting in a high consumption of antibiotics. Virus, especially RV, is known to be a common cause of 
gastrointestinal problems in neonatal piglets the farrowing barn, and results in increased mortality and 
reduced growth. So far, RV is only being routinely tested in piglets in association with diarrhea. 
Through the past few years the virus has been shown to have high prevalence’s in weaners. Several 
countries have reported a significant correlation between the incidence of RV and diarrhea in piglets 
as well as weaners. While no literature has recently confirmed the occurrence of RV in Danish wean-
ers, there is an increasing need to examine the occurrence of RV-associated diarrhea in Danish pig-
lets 0-3 weeks after weaning. A better understanding of the role of RVA in association with diarrhea 
and the co-infections with other pathogens (E.coli) will facilitate effective prophylactic measures 
against RV and give an understanding of how farmers, veterinarians and scientists should handle RV. 
 
3.2 Objectives 
The primary objective of this project was to investigate RVA and its association to diarrhea in Danish 
pigs 0-3 weeks post weaning. A second objective of this thesis was to assess if a difference occurs 
between age group. A final objective was to assess whether RVA potentiates the effect of E.coli on di-
arrhea post-weaning. Due to financial restrictions the latter will only be carried out on a certain amount 
of the samples collected on the individual farms combined with sock samples collected at the case 
farms. 
 
3.3 Hypotheses 
The main hypothesis was – at pen level – RVA is not a risk factor for diarrhea 0-3 weeks post-
weaning. RVA was defined by RT-qPCR. To investigate this hypothesis, the following sub-hypotheses 
were stated:  
 
1a. H0: There is no association between the detection of RVA and the occurrence of diarrhea. 
1b. H0: There is no significant relation between the quantitative amount of RVA and diarrhea. 
1c. H0: There is no association between the detection of RVA and the occurrence of diarrhea within 
specific age groups. 
1d. H0: RVA does not potentiate the effect of E.coli on diarrhea post-weaning. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
27 
==PAGE:28==
 
4. Materials and methods  
4.1 Study design  
The study was performed as a case control study with RVA as the proposed risk factor (exposure) pri-
or to diarrhea (outcome). Weaners with diarrhea were defined as cases, while non-diarrheic clinically 
healthy weaners were defined as controls. A total of 1,000 samples were collected from 40 different 
herds in Denmark from pigs after weaning. A total of 500 samples were collected from herds with 
problems regarding diarrhea in weaners and additional 500 samples were collected from herds with 
non-diarrheic weaners. This leads to 20 case and 20 control herds. From each herd, a total of 25 
samples were collected from 5 pigs in 5 different pens. The five samples collected from five different 
pigs, were pooled before the analysis (1 pool equal to 1 pen). Furthermore, sock-samples were col-
lected from 17 out of the 20 case farms. It was assumed that, based on this study, the association be-
tween RVA and diarrhea could be evaluated.  
 
Figure 8: The figure gives an overview of how the samples were collected on each farm. The figure was made by the research-
er of this study. 
 
4.1.1 Sample size  
It was assumed from studies conducted in other countries that the prevalence of RV positive weaners 
was between 4-67% as mentioned in table 1. An average of these percentages would lead to an esti-
mated exposure to RV of 43% in the case group, which was close to the prevalence of 37,4% that has 
been found in Danish weaners 30 years ago (B. Svensmark et al. 1989). Furthermore, a Spanish 
study has discovered that the risk of inducing diarrhea were 4 times higher if the weaners were infect-
ed with RV (Halaihel et al. 2010). With a power of 0,8 and an alpha value of 0,05 a rounded sample 
size of 36 samples was estimated for each test group at pen level. For those reasons, it was conclud-
ed that a sample size of 100 pens for each test group after pooling was sufficient. The use of simula-
tions, which take into account the herd factor, could lead to a more precise sample size. This process 
has been rejected due to the limited time frame of the current study.  
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
28 
==PAGE:29==
 
4.1.2 Selection of herds  
A total of 40 herds throughout Denmark have been selected in close cooperation with the connected 
practitioner. The majority of samples were collected in Jutland. The distribution of the samples accord-
ing to their origin is presented in table 2.   
 
Table 2: Origin of fecal samples from cases and controls used for porcine RVA detection in Danish pig herds. 
  
        Fecal samples  
County 
  
Herds 
Cases 
Controls 
Total 
Region Zealand 
6 
75 
75 
150 
 Region of Southern Denmark  
  13 
  175 
  150 
   325 
Central Denmark region 
14 
175 
225 
400 
North Denmark region 
7 
75 
50 
125 
 Total 
40 
500 
500 
1000 
Inspiration from: (Linares et al. 2009) 
 
Farms had to fulfill several criteria to be a part of the study population. The case farms had to have a 
high number of outbreaks of diarrhea in weaners. Furthermore, the case farm must have had prob-
lems with diarrhea in 25% of the batches for at least 2-3 months to ensure problems with diarrhea in 
the farm at the time of collection. None of the case farms were allowed to be included in the study if it 
was known that the cause of diarrhea was due to newly nutritional changes. 
To be defined, as a control herd the farm must not have had any problems with diarrhea in weaners 
within the last 2-3 months, and the herd must have had clinical healthy pigs in general (see table 3). 
 
 Table 3: The table shows the selection criteria’s on farm level 
Case (farm-level) 
Control (farm-level) 
• 
Diarrhea must have occurred for a mini-
mum of 25% of the batches within the last 
2-3 months or longer 
 
• 
The herd must have clinical healthy pigs 
without problems with diarrhea within the 
last 2-3 months 
 
 
To reduce bias, similar types of herds were sampled. Organic farms were excluded from the study due 
to the differences in weaning age. The herds were further not allowed to vaccinate the sows as it could 
give false-negative results. It was decided that the use of zinc in the feed or treatment with antibiotics 
in the individual herd was accepted in the current study design, as both antibiotics and zinc are used 
in the majority of the Danish herds, making it difficult to find the right amount of herds to be included in 
the study, if such an exclusion criteria had been applied.  
 
Since some farms at the time of sampling differed from the veterinarians assessment (long-term as-
sessment), whether the farm had diarrhea or not, and it in some cases was not clearly stated from the 
veterinarians, if the farm was a problem herd, it was decided to evaluate whether a farm was a case or 
a control at time of sampling (snapshot), even though there was a risk that this assessment would de-
viate from the farm inclusion criteria. 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
29 
==PAGE:30==
 
4.1.3 Sampling strategy and randomization 
The samples were collected between end of February until beginning of April 2016 by one researcher. 
Samples were only collected from pigs grouped into three age groups after weaning: week 1 (1-7 days 
post weaning), week 2 (8-14 days post weaning) and week 3 (15-21 days post weaning).  
The collection of case samples was purposive based on pens with the highest occurrence of diarrhea 
after all sections had been quickly inspected. For the controls, only one stool dropping on the pen-floor 
was allowed to be diarrheic, while cases should have at least 4-5 diarrheic stools droppings on the 
pen-floor to increase the chances for the pen to be a true case. 
 
Table 4: The table shows the inclusion criteria on pen level 
 
 
Cases (pen-level) 
Controls (pen-level) 
• 
Some of the pigs in the pen must have 
clinical visible diarrhea 
 
• 
Pens with the highest occurrence of diar-
rhea are prioritized 
 
• 
3-5 diarrhea stools on the pen floor are 
required  
• 
The pigs in the pen must look clinically 
healthy without being contaminated at the 
rear 
 
• 
One diarrhea stool on the pen floor pen is 
allowed 
 
 
After the five pens had been identified, another inclusion criterion had to be followed for the individual 
pigs. Whether the pig had diarrhea or not was clinically assessed by using a classification scale with 4 
categories of feces consistency (Pedersen & Toft 2011). For cases, the inclusion criteria’s were visible 
clinical diarrhea (a diarrheic line between the thighs and/or red/soiled around the anus) or a feces 
consistency score of 3 or 4. On contrary, controls had to be clinically healthy without any visible indica-
tion of diarrhea (no contamination with feces). Pigs in the control group were expected to have a score 
of either 1 or 2. 
Table 5: The table shows the inclusion criteria on pig level 
Cases (pig-level) 
Controls (pig-level) 
• 
Visible clinical diarrhea  
 
• 
Fecal score of 3 or 4 
 
• 
Age: 0-3 weeks post weaning 
• 
Clinically healthy without visible signs of 
diarrhea 
 
• 
Fecal score of 1 or 2 
 
• 
Age: 0-3 weeks post weaning  
 
 
Pigs that fulfilled the clinical criteria in each of the selected pens were chosen randomly for sampling. 
However, if two out of five of the random collected samples in a pen varied from feces consistency 
score criteria a new sample was taken from a pig that matched the inclusion criteria better. However, 
this was only done in around 15% of the farms, and the main part of these farms was excluded from 
the study. Additionally, since a pig could have diarrhea even though it looked clean and healthy from 
the outside and vice versa, and because the samples were pooled before laboratory analysis, it was 
accepted that one out of 5 pigs deviated from feces score criterion. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
30 
==PAGE:31==
 
4.1.4 Collection of samples 
The selection of sections to do the sampling was initiated in cooperation with the farmer. The farmer 
pointed out the sections with newly weaned pigs, and when possible a weaning date was noted.  
The fecal samples were collected from the rectum of each pig by digital manipulation. After collection 
of the samples the pigs were marked to avoid sampling the same pig twice. Gloves were changed in 
between collection of samples in different pens to avoid contamination of the next samples. Additional-
ly, gloves were also changed between pigs in the same pen, but only if they were contaminated during 
the sampling. For each pig, observations like body condition score (BCS) (below average, normal, 
above average), fecal consistency score (1 to 4), weeks since weaning (1, 2 or 3 weeks) and overall 
general condition were observed by the researcher. The arrangement of sections and stockings were 
also registered.  
The fecal samples were collected in plastic containers with a lid. Each sample was marked with the 
farm test number (from 3046 to 3085) and identification number of the pen (No: 1 to 5). The samples 
were further allocated with an identification number of the single pig (No: 1 to 25).  
The sock samples were collected by placing a disposable plastic sock on the boot (to prevent contam-
ination from the boot), followed by a clean standard sock and walk inside all pens of a section with the 
highest occurrence of diarrhea. The sock samples were collected by normal walking in the sections 
without jumping from stool to stool.  
The fecal samples were refrigerated at 4 degrees and kept on ice during transportation by car to the 
NVI. The majority of the samples were processed in the laboratory within 24 hours after collection and 
latest after 48 hours. The sock samples were put in clean plastic bags and kept frozen at –20°C de-
grees until transportation and analysis at the NVI.  
 
4.2 Laboratory analysis 
The fecal samples were kept in cold storage at refrigerator temperature until processing of the sam-
ples, however, the sock samples differed from this, as they were kept in the freezer. All samples were 
processed and analyzed at the NVI. Sock samples were tested for bacterial pathogens (Lawsonia in-
tracellularis, Brachyspira pilosicoli and Escherichia coli F4 and F18) by quantitative qPCR and all the 
fecal samples were tested for RV by RT-qPCR.  However, 78 of the fecal samples were also tested for 
Escherichia coli F4 and F18 by qPCR.  
 
4.2.1 Processing of stool samples 
Prior to the RNA extraction each stool sample was diluted to a 10% fecal solution with Phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS). This was done by adding 0.1-0.15 g feces carefully to a 2 ml eppendorf tube 
and subsequently adding sterile PBS thus creating a 10% fecal solution by weighing the tube when 
adding the buffer. The 10% fecal suspensions were pre-treated by bead beating in Tissuelyser II (QI-
AGEN) for 30 sec and 15 Hz with 5 mm stainless steel beads (5 mm, QIAGEN). The suspensions 
were centrifuged for 120 s at 10.000 x g (Thermo Scintific, Ekspresso Personal Centrifuge). 200 µL 
supernatant was collected from each of the five samples from the same pen and was made into a 
1000 µL pooled sample in a new 2 ml eppendorf tube. From the pooled sample 400 µL supernatant 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
31 
==PAGE:32==
 
was transferred into a 2 ml screw cap sarstedt tube, and was subsequently kept frozen at –80 °C until 
the RNA extraction. During the processing, the total of 1,000 individual samples was reduced to 200 
pools. 
 
4.2.2 Processing of sock samples  
The collected sock samples from the case farms were also prepared into a 10% fecal solution in PBS 
prior to the DNA extraction by weighing the socks. The feces-containing sock samples were placed in-
to a clean plastic bag with PBS buffer to obtain a concentration of 10% feces by mixing with a stom-
acher (Stomacher 400 Circulator, Seward). Approximately 1 ml feces suspension was collected into a 
2 mL eppendorf tube. Immediately prior to RNA extraction, the 10% fecal suspensions were pre-
treated by bead beating in Tissuelyser II (QIAGEN) for 30 sec and 15 Hz with stainless steel beads (5 
mm, QIAGEN). The suspensions were centrifuged in 90 s at 10.000 x g (Thermo Scientific, Ekspresso 
Personal Centrifuge). Finally, 350 μL supernatant were collected and pipetted into a screw cap sar-
stedt tube. 
 
4.2.3 Extraction of RNA from fecal samples and sock samples  
For both sock samples and fecal samples RNA/DNA was extracted from 10% fecal suspensions by 
using QIAsymphony extraction robot and QIAsymphony DSP virus/pathogen mini kit (QIAGEN). The 
protocol used was Pathogen complex 200. Elution was done in 110 μL and the processed sample vol-
ume was 200 μL. In each RNA/DNA extraction an equivalent volume of PBS (negative control) and 
known positive samples for RVA, E.coli F4/F18, B.pilosicoli, L.intracellularis (positive control) were in-
cluded. The RNA/DNA extract was kept at -80 °C until analysis.  
 
4.2.4 Rotavirus group A RT-qPCR, primer and probe design  
Samples were tested for RVA by the RT-qPCR assay previously described (Pang et al. 2004) with a 
few modifications. The Ag-Path-ID One-Step mastermix kit (AM1005, Thermofischer Scientific), was 
used and each reaction tube contained: 4,624 µL gibco water, 7,5 µL 2 x RT-PCR buffer, 0,12 µL Rota 
forward primer (50µM), 0,12 µL Rota reverse primer (50µM), 0,036 µL Rota probe (50µM), 0,6 µL RT-
PCR enzyme mix (Ag-Path kit) and 2 µL of the purified RNA. A final amount of 15 µL mixture was 
added to a 200 µL thin-walled PCR tube. Primer and probe sequences are given in table 6. 
The porcine RVA RT-qPCR assay were analyzed by the following thermal cycling conditions on Rotor-
Gene Q PCR System (QIAGEN): 1) Reverse transcription, 10 min at 45°C, 2) Taq activation/RT inac-
tivation, 10 min at 95°C; followed by 3) 48 cycles of 15 seconds at 95°C, and 45 seconds at 60°C. 
Fluorescent signal was acquired at 60°C.  
Samples with Ct-values less than 33 were considered as being positive for RVA. Samples with a Ct 
equal to zero were considered negative, whereas samples above 33 were considered suspect posi-
tive. The threshold was determined by experience from earlier testing (personal communication Char-
lotte Kristiane Hjulsager).  
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
32 
==PAGE:33==
 
Primers for the real time RT-qPCR were selected from the group A NSP3 sequence. The length of the 
amplicon was 87 bp. The probe was flourogenic and labeled on the 5´end with the fluorescent mole-
cule FAM reporter and the TAMRA molecule at the 3’ end (Pang et al. 2004). The following gene se-
quences were used to generate sequence alignments: 
Tabel 6: List of RVA primers and probes used for amplification and detection of RV NSP3 (Pang et al. 2004) 
Forward primer 
(Rota NVP3-F) 
 
Reverse primer 
(Rota NVP3-R) 
 
Probe 
(TaqMan probe) 
 
ACCATCTACACATGACCCTC 
 
Location: 963-982 
 
GGTCACATAACGCCCC 
 
Location: 1,034-1,049 
 
ATGAGCACAATAGTTA-
AAAGCTAACACTGTCAA 
 
Location: 984-1,016 
 
Sock samples and 78 of the fecal samples were tested for E.coli F4 and F8 with qPCR utilizing the as-
say described by Ståhl (Ståhl et al. 2011).   
 
4.3 Questionnaire 
On each farm a questionnaire regarding feeding, medication, hygiene- and weaning strategy was filled 
out with help from the farmer (see Appendix D). The questionnaire was initially filled out by hand, and 
later typed into a computer. The veterinarians were also sent an electronic questionnaire focusing on 
herd’s diagnosis and the use of medication (see Appendix E). From the questionnaire it was analyzed 
whether the feeding, hygiene and/or weaning strategy could affect the outcome of diarrhea. Answers 
from the farmers reflect the farmer’s own perception. Further, the answers are defined as qualitative 
variables that can’t be measured; therefore the values may not give an objective measurement of the 
state of the herd. 
 
4.4 Statistical analysis  
The collected data was analyzed with Microsoft Excel and by Prism 7 software for Mac (GraphPath, 
Software). Data was evaluated for a guassian distribution, and normally distributed data was reported 
with mean (including a 95% confidence interval), the standard deviation (Sd) and standard error of the 
mean (SEM). Non-normally distributed data was reported with median, minimum/maximum and the 
quartiles. To evaluate potential associations between two variables, Fisher’s exact test was utilized, 
with significance levels of 5%. To adjust for confounding Mantel Haenszels test was used. To evaluate 
difference in the quantitative amounts of RVs Shapiro-wilk normality test and t-test (Mann-whitney test) 
was utilized. Analyses were solely made on pools and not on individual pig samples.  
The observational study at collection of samples included one continuous variable and four categorical 
variables. The questionnaire for the farmer included mainly continuous and categorical variables (see 
Appendix D), however many of these variables were afterwards changed to dichotomous variables. 
These included the average facility drying period (‘<5’ or ‘>5’), zinc ordination (‘<14’ or ‘>14’) and 
treatment with antibiotics (‘<50 %’ or ‘>50 %’). The dichotomous variables were used for preliminary 
screening (Fisher’s exact test) to analyze if significance occurred.  
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
33 
==PAGE:34==
 
5. Results  
5.1 Data from the questionnaires  
An overview and analysis of data from the farmer questionnaire is given in the following. Also data 
from the internet-based questionnaire send to veterinarians is included. The response rate of the 
questionnaires was 100% for both veterinarians and farmers, but a few questions weren’t answered 
completely. The questions were either closed or semi-opened. Most of the questions had polytomous 
answers, but were re-categorized into dichotomous answers afterwards to investigate if any of the 
questioned factors were associated with herd diarrheic status (See Appendix D). 
 
5.1.1 Overview of the farms  
A total of 40 farms were selected for the study (as described in detail in section 4.1). Among the 40 
farms, 38 of the farms produced their own piglets, whereas two farms purchased pigs at 7 kg. The av-
erage number [180; 3500] of sows per year in the study farms was 1,009 sows. 
 
A total of 6 farms were excluded from the study. Three cases and one control farm were excluded, be-
cause it subsequently emerged that they injected the gilts and/or the sows with Rokovac (vaccine) be-
fore farrowing. Another case was excluded, because the farmer by mistake had changed the feed 
formula, so the pigs around two weeks of age after weaning got more than 10 times higher amount of 
protein in the feed than intended. Finally, one case was excluded because it didn’t fulfill the inclusion 
criteria described in section 4.1.3 table 5. This gave a total of 15 cases and 19 control herds that were 
included in the analyses (n=34), and overall a total of 75-case pools and 95-control pools (n=170).  
 
 
Figure 9: the figure shows the number of farms and pools included in the study after the exclusion of farms that didn’t fulfil the 
inclusion criteria’s.  
 
An overview of age (after weaning) distribution from the collected pooled samples can be found in ta-
ble 7. The main part of the cases was collected one week after weaning, whereas the main part of 
controls was collected 2 and 3 week after weaning.  
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
34 
==PAGE:35==
 
Table 7: The table shows the amount of pigs in each age group on pen-level post-weaning (n=170) 
 
1st week  
(0-7 days) 
2nd week  
(8-14 days) 
3rd week 
(15-21 days) 
 
Total 
Case 
33 (44%) 
21 (28%) 
21 (28%) 
75 (100%) 
Control 
26 (27%) 
35 (37%) 
34 (36%) 
95 (100%) 
Total 
59 
56 
55 
170 
 
The most common herd diagnoses, applied with code 56 (nursery pigs) in Vetstat, included gastroin-
testinal disease (GI-disease), mainly E.coli, and encephalitis (streptococcus suis) (see table 8). GI-
diseases were most common in case pigs, while encephalitis only occurred as a herd diagnosis in the 
control group. Tetracycline (Doxycycline) was the most consumed antibiotic to treat gastrointestinal 
diseases (56% of the cases) compared to the use of other antibiotics, based on prescription from the 
herd veterinarian.  
Table 8: Herd diagnoses of the included farms (n=34). Some farms have more than one diagnosis. 
Farm diagnoses  
Gastroenteritis 
Encephalitis 
Others 
Unspecified 
Cases (15)   
9 (60%) 
0 (0%) 
1 (7%) 
6 (40%) 
Controls (19) 
6 (32%) 
4 (21%) 
0 (0%) 
11 (58%) 
 
 
From the questionnaire given to the herd veterinarian, the veterinarian was asked, whether he catego-
rized the farm as a case or a control based on the inclusion criteria mentioned in table 3. In 65% 
(22/34) of the farms, the researcher and the farm veterinarian agreed on the assessment (table 9), 
even though it was a long-term assessment compared to a snapshot from the time of sampling of the 
diarrhea status at the farm.  
 
Table 9: The agreement between farm veterinarians and researcher on farm-level 
Percentages of  
Total 
Case  
(Researcher) 
Control  
(Researcher) 
 
Total 
Case (Vet) 
7 (21%) 
4 (12%) 
 
11 
Control (Vet) 
8 (23%) 
15 (44%) 
 
23 
Total 
15  
19  
 
34 
 
 
If the data was analyzed based on the veterinarian’s long-term categorization of the farms as a case 
or control, it could be comprehended that an equal number of case and control pools (62% and 63% 
respectively) were positive for RV (see table 10).  
 
Table 10: Porcine group RVA detected by RT-qPCR from pools categorized as cases or controls on farm level (long-term) 
n = 170 pens  
         Stool samples 
RT-qPCR 
Cases 
Controls 
Total 
Positive 
37 (63%) 
69 (62%) 
106 
Negative  
22 (37%) 
42 (38%) 
64 
Total 
59 
111 
170 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
35 
==PAGE:36==
 
The subsequent results will be presented with the researchers’ evaluation on cases and controls, as it 
was chosen to investigate cases that actually had an on-going diarrhea problem, to assess the asso-
ciation between RV and occurrence of diarrhea.  
 
5.1.2 Management and stable conditions 
The farmers were asked several questions regarding their management and weaning procedures (see 
appendix D. An overview of the management strategy, after continuous variables were changed to di-
chotomous variables can be seen in figure 10. 
 
 
Figure 10: The figure shows the percentages of farms and each of the management procedure utilized at case and control 
farms.  
 
It can be seen from figure 10 that case and control farms were similar in most of the parameters. The 
most distinct differences were found with regards to hygiene, as days of facility drying and use of dis-
infectants varied by approximately 20-30 percent between the two groups. Cases often had a longer 
drying period, whereas the controls applied more disinfectants than the case group. When comparing 
the management strategies with fishers exact test no statistically significant association could be found 
between the two groups and use of disinfection or facility drying (p=0.2960 or p= 0.1458).  
 
 
5.1.3 Feeding and the use of antibiotic and zinc 
Of the 34 farms 28 (82%) used dry food in the first three weeks after weaning. Six control farms also 
offered their pig’s wet food. Only two of the farms included in the study did not use zinc in the diets. 
Most farms offered zinc to the pigs for two weeks, and in 82% of the farms the use of zinc didn’t ex-
ceed the maximum of allowed 14 days (Fødevarestyrelsen 2012). There was no statistically significant 
association between the two groups and whether they used zinc in less than the recommendable peri-
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:37==
 
od (p=0,82). The average days [10; 21] of usage of zinc in the case farms were 14 days, which were 
similar to the average days [8; 28] of zinc in the control farms. 
 
At the time of sampling 85% of the farms medicated more than 50% of the pigs in the sections includ-
ed in the study. Only three farms did not use antibiotics at all in the weaners. Unfortunately, it was not 
known whether the tested pigs were treated with antibiotics. An overview of utilized antibiotics by the 
farmer (prescribed for herd diagnoses in the age group) can be seen in figure 11.   
 
 
Figure 11: The pie chart shows the type of antibiotics utilized in the included farms (n=34) 
 
A combination of zinc and antibiotics was used in 85% of the farms, while 80% of the farms used 
batch medication when they initiated antibiotic treatment. The preferred approach of the farms for ap-
plying antibiotics was when the pigs were moved to the nursery room and/or after discontinuation of 
zinc in the diet. Unfortunately, the exact number of farms that used this approach was not registered. 
 
5.2 Observations during sampling 
At each farm several observations were made (see Appendix A). The results from the observations on 
pen-level can be seen from table 11. Pigs that had a lowered BCS and were unthrifty were more often 
observed in the case group compared to the control group.  
 
Table 11; Overview of observations made in each pen (n=170).  
Macrolides + 
Tetracyklins 
6% 
Tetracylins 
47% 
SULFA/TMP 
6% 
Polymyxins 
8% 
Pleuromutilins 
3% 
Macrolides 
3% 
Macrolides + 
Penicillins 
6% 
Lincosamids 
9% 
Aminoglycosid
es 
3% 
None 
9% 
Use of antibiotics (farmers) 
Observation (pen-level) 
Cases  (n=75) 
Controls (n=95) 
Feces consistency score: 
Score 1:  
Score 2: 
Score 3: 
Score 4:  
 
0 (0%) 
3 (4%) 
44 (59%) 
28 (37%) 
 
74 /78%) 
21 (22%) 
0 (0%) 
0 (%) 
 
Clinically visible diarrhea: 
Yes: 
No: 
 
68 (91%) 
7 (9%) 
 
0 (0%) 
95 (100%) 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
37 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
Table 12 presents the RT-qPCR results divided into the different average feces scores for the pooled 
samples. The table shows that RVA was detected within all scores, while score 4 had the relatively 
highest amount of positive pools per score (82%).  
Table 12: RT-qPCR results divided into the different feces scores  (n=170) 
Feces consistency score 
 
 
 Rotavirus group A  
Feces score 
Amount 
Positive 
Negative 
 
4 (3,6-4) 
28 
23 (82%) 
5 (18%) 
 
3 (2,6-3,5) 
44 
27 (61%) 
17 (39%) 
 
2 (1,6-2,5) 
24 
10 (42%) 
14 (58%) 
 
1 (1-1,5) 
74 
46 (62%) 
28 (38%) 
 
Total 
170 
106 (62%) 
64 (38%)                      
 
 
5.3 Results on rotavirus detection by RT-qPCR 
Results on pen level (n= 170 pools) 
The results of the distribution of RT-qPCR for all the included samples can be seen in table 13 and in 
figure 12. All Ct-values occurred within both groups; but the control group had a higher amount of sus-
pect positive Ct-values than the case group. The suspect positive samples were included as negatives 
in the following analyses.  
 
Table 13: Porcine group RVA detected by RT-qPCR in stool samples from case and control pigs (n=170). 
n = 170 pens  
         Stool samples 
RT-qPCR 
Cases 
Controls 
Total 
Positive 
51 (68%) 
55 (58%) 
106 
Suspect Positive  
9 (12%) 
24 (25%) 
33 
Negative 
15 (20%) 
16 (17%) 
31 
Total 
75 
95 
170 
 
 
BCS: 
Below average: 
Average:  
Above average:  
 
16 (21%) 
59 (79%) 
0 (0%) 
 
8 (8%) 
87 (92%) 
0 (0%) 
 
General status:  
Poor:  
Good:   
 
 
4 (4%) 
71 (96%) 
 
0 (0%) 
100 (100%) 
Stocking density: 
< 0.20 m2/pig 
> 0.20 m2/pig 
 
10 (13%) 
65 (87%) 
 
10 (11%) 
85 (89%) 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
38 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
Figure 12: Porcine group RVA detected by RT-qPCR in stool samples from case and control pigs (n=170).  
 
Results on farm level (n=34) 
On farm level, all of the 34 herds except one were found to be RVA positive (97%) in minimum one 
pooled sample. Based on this no further analysis was made from the results of the questionnaires in 
regards to the RVA status at each farm. 79% of the case farms had minimum 3 positive pools com-
pared to 58% for the control farms (see table 14).  
 
Table 14: Number of positive pens in case and control farms (n=34).  
Number of positive pools 
Cases (n=15) 
Controls (n=19) 
All pools negative 
1 (6.7%) 
0 (0%) 
1 positive pen 
1 (6.7%) 
2 (10%) 
2 positive pens 
1 (6.7%) 
6 (32%) 
3 positive pens 
3 (20%) 
4 (21%) 
4 positive pens 
6 (39%) 
6 (32%) 
5 positive pens  
3 (20%) 
1 (5%) 
Total 
15 (100%) 
19 (100%) 
 
 
 
 
5.4 Analyses of hypotheses (pen-level) 
 
5.4.1 Relation between rotavirus detection and the occurrence of diarrhea (1a) 
1a. H0: There is no association between the detection of RVA and the occurrence of diarrhea  
As RV is seen as a risk factor for diarrhea, the data from table 13 was analyzed with Fisher’s exact 
test, to evaluate if RVA occurs to a higher degree among pigs 0-3 weeks post weaning with diarrhea 
compared to non-diarrheic pigs.   
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
39 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
Figure 13: Frequencies of RVA positive and negative samples in each group (n=170)  
 
Out of the analyzed 170 samples, 106 samples (62%) were tested positive for RVA (see table 13). 
The frequency of RVA positive diagnosed cases (68%) compared to the frequency of RVA positives in 
the control group (58%), with an odds ratio of 1.5, was not found to be statistically associated 
(p=0.20).  
 
5.4.2 Quantitative amount of rotavirus and the occurrence of diarrhea (1b) 
1b. H0: There is no significant relation between the quantitative amount of RVA and diarrhea. 
If evaluating RV detection by the quantitative Ct-values, a median of 26.4 [20.96; 35,8] was found for 
the case group, compared to 28.2 [19.31; 37.18] in the control group. Minimum, 25% quartile, median, 
75% quartile and maximum can be seen from the boxplot in figure 14.  
 
Figure 14: Boxplot of positive and suspect positive Ct-values for cases and controls (n=139) 
 
  32% 
42%
  68% 
  58% 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
40 
==PAGE:41==
 
The boxplot shows that 75% of the pools were below the cut-off value for the case group, whereas the 
control group had a higher amount of suspect positives. The values for the controls had a wider range 
compared to the case group. The lowest Ct values were found in the control group, but overall the 
case group had a lower median and first quartile, indicating a higher amount of samples with low Ct-
values. 
 
A comparison of Ct-values divided into intervals for the two groups can be seen in Table 16. Negative 
values are included in the [≥ 43 < 48] interval.  
Table 15: Amount of RVA positive pigs within each interval of Ct-values (n=170) 
Ct-
interval 
> 18 < 23 
≥ 23 < 28 
≥ 28 < 33 
≥ 33 < 38 
≥ 38 < 43 
≥ 43 < 48 
Total 
Cases 
7 (9%) 
20 (27%) 
24 (32%) 
9 (12%) 
0 (0%) 
15 (20%) 
75 (100%) 
Controls 
14 (15%) 
21 (22%) 
20 (21%) 
24 (25%) 
0 (0%) 
16 (17%) 
95 (100%) 
 
The hypothesis was rejected. No statistical difference was found between the two groups and RVA de-
tection by RT-qPCR in regards to the Ct-value (p=0.2435). 
 
5.4.3 Rotavirus detection and the age of the pig after weaning (1c) 
1c. H0: There is no association between the detection of RVA and the occurrence of diarrhea 
within specific age groups  
As age is known as a possible factor to affect the occurrence of rotaviral infection, the OR analyzed in 
hypothesis 1a, was further analyzed with Mantel Haenszels test, calculating the adjusted odds ratio, 
where the relation between RVA infection and diarrhea were adjusted for age as a confounder.  
 
Table 16: The crude 2x2 table for RVA and diarrhea (n=170) 
n = 170 pens  
         Stool samples 
RT-qPCR 
Cases 
Controls 
Total 
Positive 
51  
55  
106 
Negative  
22  
40  
64 
Total 
75 
95 
170 
p = 0,20, ORCRUDE = 1.5 
 
Table 17: The resulting 2by2 tables when stratifying according to age as a confounder 
1 week (1-7 days) 
2 weeks (8-14 days) 
3 weeks (15-21 days) 
Diarrhea 
Diarrhea 
Diarrhea 
RT-qPCR 
Yes 
No 
RT-qPCR 
Yes No 
RT-qPCR 
Yes 
No 
RVA + 
29 
23 52 
RVA + 
14 
18 
32 
RVA + 
8 
14 
22 
RVA - 
4 
3 
7 
RVA - 
7 
17   24 
RVA - 
13 
20   33 
Total 
33 
26 59 
Total 
21 
35 
56 
Total 
21 
34 
55 
p = 0.99          
OR1=0.9 
[0.2; 3.8] 
 
 
 
 
p = 0.40         
OR2=1.9  
[0.6; 5.5]  
 
 
 
 
p = 0.99        
OR3=0.9 
[0.3; 2.8] 
 
 
 
 
ORADJ = 1.2 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:42==
 
As only a difference of 20 percentages could be found between ORCRUDE (1.5) and ORADJUSTED (1.2), 
and all of the 95% confidence intervals for odds ratios included 1 for the individual age groups, it could 
not be shown that the proportion of pigs being infected with RVA was not the different from the case 
and control groups after controlling for age after weaning.  
As RVA is known to decrease with age, multiple 2by2 tables (see appendix) were compared to see, if 
a difference between the age groups and RVA infection could be found independent of diarrhea sta-
tus. A statistically significant association could be found, between RV infection and the different age 
groups post weaning, for pigs 1 week after weaning compared to 2 weeks (p=0.0003) and 3 weeks 
(0.0001) after weaning. 
 
Table 18: Number of RVA positive and negative samples in weeks after weaning (n=170)  
  
         Rotavirus 
  
  
Age groups 
Positive 
Negative 
p-value  
1 week 
52 
7 
0.0003 
 
2 weeks  
32 
24 
 
3 weeks 
22 
33 
Total 
106 
64 
170 
 
 
The difference is graphically illustrated in the boxplot in figure 15. It can be concluded, that RVA de-
crease with age, but no association can be found between rotavirus and the two groups depended on 
age. 
 
 
Figure15: The figure shows the difference in the minimum, 25% quartile, median, 75% quartile and maximum for the Ct-value 
for the different age groups (n=170).  
 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
42 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
5.4.4 Co-infections with E. coli (1d) 
1d. H0: RVA does not potentiate the effect of E.coli on diarrhea post-weaning 
To analyze this hypothesis data from the sock samples on farm level were included. In a total of 17 
sock samples, 12 sock samples from case herds were analyzed. E.coli (either F4/F18 or/and a combi-
nation) were found in all farms were a sock sample was collected. 83% of the farms were infected with 
RVA and minimum of one of the E.coli types, which gives a strong indication that RVs and E. coli oc-
cur as co-infections in many herds. The distribution and frequency of pathogens in the case farms can 
be seen in figure 16. Brachyspira pilosicoli and Lawsonia intracellularis is excluded, as they only were 
found in few farms in combination with either RVA or E.coli.  
 
 
Figure 16: Pathogens found in sock samples taken from case farms in the study (n=14). The findings also include if the farm 
was tested RVA positive in minimum one of the pooled facel samples. 
 
By combining the result from each pathogen in the re-tested fecal pools in 2by2 contingency tables 
with cases and controls (see Appendix), we achieved the following results:  
 
Table 19: P-values, ORCRUDE and the 95% Cl, when comparing RVA, E.coli F4, E.coli F18 and E.coli F4/F18 combinations as 
risk factor for diarrhea between case and control groups. 
Risk Factor 
P-Value 
ORCRUDE 
95% CI OR 
Rotavirus A 
0.102 
2.61 
0.95 – 7.17 
E.Coli F4 
0.001 
7.29 
2.36 – 22.51 
E.Coli F18 
0.518 
0.67 
0.27 – 1.66 
E.Coli F4/F18 
0.680 
1.35 
0.54 – 3.37 
 
Out of the analyzed 78 fecal samples, 26 samples (33%) were tested positive for E.coli F4 (see table 
21). The frequency of E.coli F4 positive diagnosed cases (53%) compared to the frequency of E.coli 
F4 positives in the control group (13%), with an odds ratio of 7.3 was found to be statistically associat-
ed (p=0.0003). Mantel Haenszels test was made to see if RVA potentiates the effect of E.coli F4 diar-
rhea post-weaning (see table 22). 
Table 20: The crude 2x2 table for E.coli F4 and diarrhea (n=78) 
 
 
 
 
E. coli F14 + 
F18 + rotavirus  
58% 
E. coli F4 +  
rotavirus 
8% 
E.coli F18 + 
rotavirus  
17% 
E. coli F4 + F18 
17% 
n = 78 pens  
         Stool samples 
qPCR 
Cases 
Controls 
Total 
E.coli F4 Positive 
21 (53%) 
5 (13%) 
26  
E.coli F4 Negative 
19 (47%) 
33 (87%) 
52 
Total 
40  
38 
78 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
43 
==PAGE:44==
 
Table 21: The resulting 2by2 tables when stratifying according to RVA as a co-variable (n=78) 
 
                       RVA positive 
RVA Negative 
Diarrhea 
Diarrhea 
qPCR 
Yes 
No 
qPCR 
Yes 
No 
E.coli F4 + 
18 
4 
22 
E.coli F4 + 
3 
1 
4 
E.coli F4 - 
14 
19 
33 
E.coli F4 - 
5 
14 
   19 
Total 
 
p= 0.0052 
OR= 6.1 
[1.7-18.9] 
32 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
 
Total 
 
p= 0.1028 
OR= 8.4 
[0.9; 115] 
8 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
 
ORADJ= 6.3   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORADJ was found to be 6.3 . When comparing ORCR (7.3) and ORADJ (6.3) a difference of only 14% could 
be found, indicating that the two pathogens co-exists, and RV does not potentiate the effect of E.coli 
on diarrhea post-weaning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
44 
==PAGE:45==
 
6. Discussion 
6.1 Discussion on results  
 
6.1.1 The occurrence of rotavirus post weaning 
The main objective of the study was to investigate whether RV was associated with diarrhea in pigs 0-
3 weeks post-weaning.  When stating this hypothesis, it was expected that there would be an associa-
tion, and that the highest occurrence of RV would be found in the case group. This was stated, since 
an association has been found in weaners in several other studies, as prior mentioned. Halaihel et. al 
(2010) showed, that the chances of having diarrhea was four times higher when pigs were infected 
with RV (Halaihel et al. 2010). It can be discussed why this finding could not be demonstrated in the 
present study. One explanation might be that Halaihel et al. (2010) included pigs from several age 
groups and even included samples collected from pigs at a slaughterhouse. As RV has been shown to 
have low prevalences in finishers (Wilhelm et al. 2016), there is a chance that the detected association 
in Halaihei, was falsely increased due to the inclusions of this group of pigs. Also Linares (2009) has 
shown an association between RV and diarrhea in weaners (Linares et al. 2009), but it is worth to no-
tice that the weaners investigated in Linares et al. study were only 3 weeks of age at weaning, indicat-
ing that problems with RV associated diarrhea might have been expected to worse, due to a less ma-
tured immune system (Dewey et al. 2003) in this age group, compared to the weaners in the current 
study, that were usually older than four weeks of age. Further might pigs after weaning being expected 
to have a higher degree of age-related immunity. Also Svensmark (1989) found a small difference in 
the occurrence of RV in pigs with and without diarrhea. However, when interpreting this result it is im-
portant to be critical, as the samples in Svensmarks study were collected from the pen floor and could 
have been contaminated from the environment, from prior pigs than those being examined in the 
study, as RV is highly stable and resistant to many disinfectant (Abad et al. 2006). From these find-
ings, it can be suggested that the findings in the current study are reliable, even though it varies from 
the prior studies.    
A remarkable finding from the current study is that RVA has been found in high frequencies in both 
groups, and was identified at all study farms except one. Several studies have investigated the preva-
lence of RVA in pigs (see table 1). These studies cannot be directly compared with the current, but 
they can shed light on other perspectives of the results in this study. The majority of the earlier studies 
found a prevalence of RV higher than 50% in newly weaned piglets (Katsuda et al. 2006, Barrios, 
Miyazaki), which is similar to the findings in this study, when evaluating the frequency of RV in either 
the case or control group. The main part of studies conducted in other countries has only investigated 
RV in pigs with diarrhea, giving inadequate information about if RV actually is causing diarrhea. Most 
of the mentioned studies were conducted outside Europe, where rearing of pigs and weaning strategy 
may differ considerably from the strategies in Denmark. Two earlier studies conducted in European 
countries found prevalence’s of 4% and 47% respectively (Wieler et al. 2008; Halaihel et al. 2010). 
This significant difference might be explained by, that Wieler (2008) only investigated samples from 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
45 
==PAGE:46==
 
pigs with watery and bloody diarrhea, where other pathogens might have been expected to be the 
cause for diarrhea, whereas Halaihel (2010) included pigs from both production farms and a slaugh-
terhouse. The demonstration of somewhat higher occurrence of RV in the present study (68%) can 
most likely be explained by the more sensitive RT-qPCR method that was utilized to detect RVA com-
pared to EM and RT-PCR in the two European studies (Pang et al. 2004). This leads the discussion in 
the direction of the chosen cut-off value to detect RVA by RT-qPCR, as it might have influenced the 
number of positive samples. However, since RV was almost equally distributed in the Ct-range be-
tween the two groups, it is not expected that an association could have been found by changing the 
cut-off value.   
During sampling at the farms it was discovered, by conversations with the farmers, that a general ten-
dency towards frequent changes in the occurrence of diarrhea exists, even though the farm was fol-
lowing the same feeding routines. For the same reasons it showed up that the inclusion criteria (`Diar-
rhea must have occurred for a minimum of 25% of the batches within the last 2-3 months or longer`) at 
farm level, were not always met. Instead, the farms were evaluated for diarrhea occurrence at the time 
of sampling, to get a reliable assessment of diarrhea status. Thus, whether the farm on a long-term 
basis was having problems on diarrhea was not taken into account. When comparing the overall 
agreement between the current study and the herd veterinarian, the current study found a higher 
number of positive case farms, whereas the veterinarians (who based their opinion on long-term as-
sessments) defined more farms as controls. Conversely, the difference in positives was only 5% be-
tween researcher and veterinarian, which underlines that RV in weaners, can be found in equal 
amounts in diarrheic and non-diarrheic pigs.  
According to the current study, RVA could be detected with a high frequency in pigs within all feces 
consistency scores, but watery feces had the highest amount of positive results. The assessment of 
the feces score was made for each individual pig, while the analysis of RV status was done on pooled 
samples. This creates a potential bias since averages of the feces consistency scores were utilized, 
which are not as statistically reliable. Conversely, RVA has been detected exclusively in solid feces in 
previous studies with frequent occurrence in RV asymptomatic pigs (Collins et al. 2010; Miyazaki et al. 
2013), suggesting that RVA in non-diarrheic pigs is a common finding among weaners (contra side the 
findings in suckling piglets) why virulence of RVA in weaners may be questionable.   
It can be discussed why control pigs in the current study excretes high amounts of RV, without getting 
clinical visible disease from it. A simple explanation could be that rotavirus doesn’t cause diarrhea in 
weaners at all and is a part of the intestinal flora. Another explanation could be that the pigs are highly 
infected in the farrowing barn (Johnson et al. 1992; Katsuda et al. 2006) and can transmit the virus in-
to the nursery room at weaning, hence giving an continuous release of virus, that gives a constant cy-
cle and exposure to rotaviral infection. That the pigs do not get clinical illness, might be explained by 
an age-related immunity or that the pigs had an prior infection giving protection against reinfection with 
the same P and G genotypes (Saif et al. 1997; Hoshino et al. 1988). However, this cannot be stated, 
as long as the genotypes of the RV strains in this study remain unknown, as an option is that more 
pathogenic strains occur in the case group.  
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
46 
==PAGE:47==
 
6.1.2 Importance of the age after weaning  
The study has shown that the excretion of RVA is associated with the age of the pig. RVA has previ-
ously been shown to have the highest prevalence when the piglets are around 3 to 5 weeks old (Bohl 
1979; Fu and Hampson 1987). This is supported by the findings in the present study, as the highest 
amount of RV was found in pigs 1 week post weaning (whereby the pigs are expected to be around 4-
5 weeks of age). A study from Spain further identified the highest prevalence of RVA in nursery pigs at 
4-8 weeks of age (Halaihel et al. 2010), which covers the same age-group investigated in the current 
study, and can explain the high prevalence of virus found in each group. A main difference from the 
current study is that a shorter period of time was investigated and it not was directly corresponding 
with the age of the pig, but rather the time after weaning, which is important when comparing the find-
ings with other studies. However, a decrease of RV could still be found, supporting the findings from 
other studies. The data used to analyze the difference in occurrence of RV after weaning, was collect-
ed from different farms, where the use of zinc and antibiotics was not taken into account in the study 
design, which might have been a potential bias when evaluating the results. The decreasing amount of 
RVA positive pigs in both groups a couple of weeks after weaning, indicates that RV occurrence might 
be transient, despite that RV infection does not seem to give problems with diarrhea in weaners.  
 
6.1.3 Co-infection with E. coli 
The sock samples collected for this study indicated that E.coli F18 would be the dominating pathogen 
in the pooled fecal samples from case farms. However, the re-tested pooled fecal samples from single 
animals showed that E.coli F4 was the most frequently detected pathogen. These findings can be ex-
plained by the fact that the sock samples are a mix of feces from a large amount of random pigs, 
whereas the pools were collected from the pigs with clinical diarrhea. Hence, the samples collected 
from the single pigs displaying diarrhea might be expected to be pathogenic and could somehow differ 
from the general occurrence of pathogens in the main part of pigs on the farm. However, when acquir-
ing an indication of what pathogens are present at a farm at the time of sampling, the sock sampling 
method has been shown to be reliable, even though the pathogens involved in diarrhea changes over 
time (Pedersen et al. 2015).  
A careful approach is important when comparing the diagnosis of RV and E.coli, as most of the sec-
tions in this study were treated with antibiotics to avoid E.coli diarrhea. An optimal comparison would 
be, to have knowledge of the precise time of outbreaks of diarrhea and initiation of antibiotic treatment, 
allowing for further elaboration of the results. According to Benfield (1988) will simultaneous occur-
rence of RV and ETEC lead to more severe diarrhea than infection with only one of the pathogens 
(Benfield et al. 1988). This finding could not be demonstrated in the current study, where the E.coli F4 
and RVA co-existed, without potentiating the effect of each other. Unfortunately was the degree of di-
arrhea not evaluated in the present study, but as Benfield’s study was an experimental setup, might 
gnotobiotic pigs who never have been into contact with the pathogens be expected to get a more pro-
nounced response, than pigs being constantly exposed to the pathogens in the environment. Simulta-
neous infections with E.coli and RV have also been shown by Theuns (2014), and have shown to be 
more frequently encountered than other pathogens, however, Theuns study was performed on sam-
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
47 
==PAGE:48==
 
ples routinely submitted to a laboratory, why pathogens might be expected to be high in these sam-
ples, as the submitted samples might be expected to have occurred from pigs with GI-problem pigs 
(Theuns et al. 2014). 
 
 
6.2 Discussion of the methods and study design 
6.2.1 Assessment of diarrhea 
Each farm was identified as a case or control farm by the study researcher by evaluating the amount 
of diarrhea droppings on the pen floor. It can be discussed, whether the pigs had diarrhea or not, as 
Pedersen et al. (2015) and Weber (2015) have shown that a subjective assessment of diarrhea drop-
pings can be a poor indicator of diarrhea, as problems with diarrhea infections are variable. However, 
in the current study, most of the case pigs were found to have diarrhea even though this subjective 
evaluation was used to define a farm as a case on pen-level. Combined with the feces consistency 
score evaluation, the reliability of the assessment might have increased. Feces consistency score has 
further been shown to have a high intra observer agreement (Pedersen and Toft 2011), and has been 
shown to be almost as reliable as the quantitative determination of dry matter content in the feces 
(Pedersen et al. 2011b), as diagnostic sensitivity has been shown to be 83% when clinically evaluating 
the feces consistency score compared to content of dry matter (Pedersen et al. 2013). According to 
these studies, it can be concluded that the fecal consistency score has been a reliable method to 
evaluate if the farms were a case or control.  
 
 
6.2.2 Diagnostic method 
The RT-qPCR method reliability to detect RV has been confirmed in other studies (Halaihel et al. 
2010; Logan et al. 2006; Marthaler et al. 2014). It has also been shown that RT-qPCR has a higher 
sensitivity than the ELISA method (Rout and Saikumar 2014), which further can be supported by the 
second research study ‘ELISA and RT-qPCR’ in this thesis.  
Based on these findings it is assumed that the RT-qPCR results are highly reliable. RT-qPCR is highly 
sensitive, but the reliability of the method can be discussed when performed on pooled samples. The 
advantage of pooling samples is that a large number of samples can be tested, while keeping the cost 
low. However, pooling of samples may decrease sensitivity due to dilution. The effect on the sensitivity 
depends on the number of pooled samples, and the quantitative load of the pathogen (Muniesa et al. 
2014). Based on this study, it can be concluded that a risk of false negative results exists when pool-
ing samples before RT-qPCR testing, and that analysis of non-pooled samples might increase reliabil-
ity of the results. It is recommended that the use of pooled samples for the RT-qPCR assay for RVA is 
validated at the NVI. As the used RT-qPCR method was only testing for RVA, it could further be rec-
ommended to change the assay, so multiple genotypes can be detected, since RVC has been shown 
to be increasing in occurrence in other countries (Theuns et al. 2016). 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
48 
==PAGE:49==
 
6.2.3 Study design 
In the study design a number of available nursery pigs with diarrhea (cases) and a number of pigs 
without diarrhea (controls) from other farms were included. A typical approach is to select the cases 
and controls from the same farm, so that the controls reflect the same general properties as the cases. 
However, since it was expected that nursery pigs in case farms had an increased exposure to RV with 
increased chances of pigs being sub clinically infected or in the late stage of disease compared to the 
general pig population, the selection of control pigs was performed on farms without known problems 
with diarrhea.  
 
6.2.4 Sample size 
It can be discussed if the sample size was big enough, as it was estimated from an average of the 
prevalence of RV found in pigs in foreign countries. Further, the known earlier investigated prevalence 
of RV in the utilized age groups of Danish pigs was out-dated, making it an unreliable estimation of the 
prevalence found today. After the exclusion of several farms the final sample number ended up being 
75 pools from case farms and 95 from control farms, which must be regarded as sufficient from the 
calculated 46 samples, and the actual prevalences found in each group that was higher than those 
shown in other studies. However, if the prevalence of 37,5% found in Danish weaners in the 1980’s 
and the RR of 0,765 was utilized it would be necessary to include 1,300 animals for each group (B. 
Svensmark et al. 1989), putting into question if the sample size utilized was adequate from a statistical 
point of view (Houe et al. 2004).  
 
6.2.5 Validity of results 
Contamination could have occured during the laboratory procedure, if the hygiene measures were not 
followed. It has been shown that RV is sensitive and will loose its infectivity and hemagglutination if it 
is continuously being frozen and thawed (Straw et al. 2006). However, the timeframe where the sam-
ples were not in the freezer was short, so it is expected to only have a minimal effect on the samples.  
 
 
7. Conclusion 
According to this study RVA is not associated with diarrhea during the first 3 weeks after weaning. The 
collected data indicated that RVA is widespread in the nursery room of Danish pig herds, as the virus 
has been detected in 97 percent of the herds and in 62 percent of the pens included in the study. The 
study also showed that the prevalence of RVA decreases with time after weaning as a higher amount 
of RVA positive pigs were found one week after weaning compared to two and three weeks after 
weaning. Also, the study concludes RVA does not potentiate the effect of E.coli. 
 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
49 
==PAGE:50==
 
8. Perspectivation 
As RVA has been found to be quite common in Danish weaners, regardless if the pigs were diarrheic 
or non-diarrheic, it is assumed to be unnecessary to do further investigations of pathogen. However, 
since it is not known, whether the different genotypes differ in pathogenicity, a genetic characterization 
of the VP7 and VP4 genes of the RV strains could be of interest to detect the genotypes, and depend-
ing on the findings doing an experimental case-control study by exposing the case group with possible 
pathogenic strains. Additionally, could a cohort study be made by following the same pigs in the far-
rowing barn and the nursery room, to investigate the progress of RV and assess whether the pigs are 
transmitted with RV in the farrowing barn and in case, if the RV follows the pigs into the nursery room.  
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
50 
==PAGE:51==
 
9. Research study: ELISA and RT-qPCR  
9.1 Background 
When a disease status is determined, it is important to know how well a diagnostic test performs by 
assessing the validity of a test and further what interferences can be drawn from the results. The most 
common method of validation is to evaluate the used test against a golden standard to compare the 
sensitivity, specificity and predictive values of the test. A golden standard does not always exists, mak-
ing an approach that focuses on cross-classification of the test result and disease necessary to evalu-
ate the test (Houe et al. 2004). ELISA has for a long period been the preferred method to detect RV in-
fections in pigs, however, a new and more rapid RT-qPCR technique exists. While no literature has so 
far studied how the two tests perform compared to each other, this research study will try to give an 
estimate of the specificity and sensitivity of ELISA and RT-qPCR to detect RVA.  
 
9.2 Objectives/aims 
The objective of this project was to compare the sensitivity and specificity of the two common diagnos-
tic methods, ELISA and RT-qPCR, for the detection of porcine RVA from fecal samples.  A second ob-
jective was to assess if bead beating during the processing of samples, before the RT-qPCR analysis 
increases the extraction of RNA.   
 
9.3 Hypotheses 
H0:  There is no difference between the use of ELISA and RT-qPCR to detect RV 
2a. H0: There is no difference in sensitivity and specificity of the two tests. 
2b. H0: There is no difference in Ct-values of bead beaten samples and regular samples.  
 
 
 
10. Materials and methods  
10.1 Study design 
The samples included in this project were taken from pigs routinely sent from farmers to the Pig Re-
search Centre in Kjellerup. The pigs included in the study were around 1-week-old and had prior prob-
lems with diarrhea. The samples were received in the period from November 2013 until September 
2014. Intestinal contents were collected either from individual pigs or in a pool (from 2 to 3 piglets). A 
total of 127 samples were included in the study. Three of the samples were excluded due to missing 
PCR results.  
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
51 
==PAGE:52==
 
10.2 Laboratory analysis 
ELISA testing was carried out at the Pig Research Center and the RT-qPCR was subsequently tested 
with RT-qPCR at the NVI. A minimum of 1 g of intestinal content was left after the ELISA procedure, 
and was kept at -80 degrees, until it was transported on dry ice to the NVI for the final analysis.  
 
10.2.1 Processing of samples and extraction of RNA 
All samples were processed into a 10% fecal solution (as described earlier). The detailed processing 
at the Pig Research Center is unfortunately not known at this time, but the procedures at NVI are iden-
tical to those already described for the case-control study in chapter 4.2. 10 out of the 124 samples 
were tested by RT-qPCR, both with and without being bead beaten in Tissuelyser II (QIAGEN). 
 
10.2.2 Rotavirus A ELISA and RT-qPCR 
The assay used for ELISA is a qualitative enzyme immunoassay method called ProSpecT Rotavirus 
Test (Code: R240396, TermoFischer). ProSpecT utilizes a polyclonal antibody in a solid-phase sand-
wich ELISA to detect specific antigens (including VP6) for RVA. The test was originally developed to 
detect RV in humans, and has been a standard test for analyzing RV since the 1980’s (Gautam et al. 
2013). The general principles for the ELISA procedure can be found in chapter 2.6.1. Further descrip-
tion of the exact reactants utilized has been described elsewhere (Oxoid, Ltd., Basingstoke, Hamp-
shire, UK). The ELISA test considered a sample as positive for values that were above an individually 
calculated cut-off value. The description of the assay used for RT-qPCR can be found in chapter 4.2.4. 
 
10.3 Statistical analysis  
The results were analyzed by a Bayesian model described by Branscum (Branscum et al. 2005). The 
model used a conditional independence two tests 2, 2 populations model. The statistical computer 
software openBUGS using Markov Chain Monto Carlo (MCMC) methods was utilized to calculate sta-
tistical differences (Toft et al. 2007). The two populations referred to were created by dividing the 
submitted samples into two seasons, winter (November 2013 to March 2014) and summer (April 2014 
to September 2014) respectively. 
 
 
11. Results  
11.1  Results from ELISA and RT-qPCR methods  
When comparing the data the results from the two tests were 30 out of 124 samples tested positive for 
RV in both tests, 76 samples tested negative in both tests, and finally 14 samples tested negative with 
ELISA and positive with RT-qPCR, while 4 samples tested positive with ELISA and negative with RT-
qPCR. The resulting data was cross- classified in two 2x2 tables as presented in table 21, for n1 = 43 
piglets sampled in the winter period [1] and n2 = 81 piglets sampled in the summer [2]. 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
52 
==PAGE:53==
 
Table 21. Cross-classified test results for RV in neonatal piglets based on RT-qPCR and ELISA in summer and 
winter prevalence populations  
 
RT-qPCR  
Prevalence 
Winter [1] 
  
RT-qPCR  
Prevalence 
Summer [2] 
  
T-a 
T+a 
T-a 
T+a 
T - 
49 
1 
T - 
27 
3 
T + 
9 
22 
T + 
5 
8 
a for ELISA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The estimates found for sensitivity, specificity and prevalence with 95% Cl probability interval were:  
 
SeELISA = 0.798 (0.586, 0.987)  
SeRT-PCR = 0.926 (0.763, 0.996) 
 
SpELISA = 0.963 (0.894, 0.998)  
SpRT-PCR = 0.908 (0.761, 0.995) 
        p1 = 0.279 (0.127, 0.463)  
          p2 = 0.341 (0.220, 0.478)  
 
 
11.2 Results of bead beating samples  
Out of a total of 10 samples that were bead beaten before the RT-qPCR two samples were negative 
(CT=0).  
 
Table 22. Ct-values from bead beated and regular samples before RT-qPCR. 
Test # 
Beaten 
sample 
Regular 
sample 
 Range 
6A 
24.58 
26.19 
  1.61 
7A 
30.95 
30.09 
- 0.86 
11A 
23.59 
26.13 
  2.54 
12A 
28.02 
28.48 
  0.46 
19A 
22.71 
24.67 
  1.96 
27A 
25.36 
26.5 
  1.14 
32A 
23.15 
24.79 
  1.07 
39A 
24.87 
25.15 
  0.28 
 
 
From the positive Ct-values (Ct>0<33) it was shown that 88% (7/8) samples had a lower Ct-value 
when bead beaten compared to a regular sample, showing that more RNA was present in the sample. 
The difference in Ct-values can be seen in table 22. 
 
11.3 Analyses of hypotheses  
11.3.1 The difference in sensitivity and specificity of the two tests (2a) 
2a. H0: There is no difference in sensitivity and specificity of the two tests. 
The results showed that the sensitivity of RT-qPCR was higher (93%), compared to the sensitivity of 
ELISA (80%), whereas the specificity for RT-qPCR was lower (91%) compared to the ELISA (96%). 
The results indicate that RT-qPCR is a good method for detecting all possible RVA positive pigs, even 
though false positive may also occur. It was also shown from the analysis that the prevalence of RV 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:54==
 
was marginally lower (28%) in the winter period, compared to the prevalence found in the summer pe-
riod (34%). 
 
11.3.2 The difference of bead beaten samples and regular samples (2b) 
2b. H0: There is no difference in Ct-values of bead beaten samples and regular samples.  
The results showed that a lower Ct-value was found in 88% of the beaten samples; hence more RNA 
can actually be extracted if a sample is beaten during the processing of the samples. In 71% of the 
samples the Ct-value varied with more than one Ct-value. However, one sample got a higher Ct-value 
after being bead beaten. The latter results were used to reject the hypothesis. 
 
 
12. Discussion  
12.1 Discussion on results  
The first hypothesis focused on sensitivity and specificity, was stated to address if a difference be-
tween the two test methods ELISA and RT-qPCR exists. When stating this hypothesis, it was ex-
pected that RT-qPCR would be a more sensitive and reliable method than the widely used ELISA 
method. It was shown that RT-qPCR assay represents a powerful diagnostic tool for detection of RV in 
feces samples, as it enabled the finding of RV in samples were ELISA failed to detect the virus. RT-
qPCR was found to have a higher sensitivity compared to ELISA, showing that the RT-qPCR method 
is better in detecting truly diseased animals as positive. Whether a high sensitivity or specificity is pre-
ferred depends on the aim of detection, often dependent on the characteristics of the disease being 
tested. In case of RV a high sensitivity would be preferred, as it is intended to detect as many of the 
animals with an infection as possible, and because it doesn’t have any serious consequences if an an-
imal falsely is assessed as being positive (Houe et al. 2004). 
 
The findings in the current study is supported by several studies made in swine (Rout & Saikumar 
2014; Theuns et al. 2016), but also humans studies have using differing methods have shown that RT-
qPCR has a higher sensitivity than ELISA (Gutierrez-Aguirre et al. 2008), EM and conventional PCR 
assays (Pang et al. 2004). It is important to note that the sensitivity of a diagnostic test will vary ac-
cording to clinical status of the animals being tested (Branscum et al. 2005). In this study it was not 
known if the animals were in the sub-, acute or late stage of disease, therefore it is likely that the sen-
sitivity found in this study can vary, if the test would be repeated and the disease stage of the pigs was 
taken into account. The prevalence of RV was found to be highest in the summer period, which is op-
posite to the expectation, as viruses usually peak during winter and spring (Martella et al. 2010). From 
the calculated prevalence’s, 34% and 28% respectively, it can be observed that the difference in the 
prevalence is less than 10%. This finding can affect the precision of the sensitivity and adds to the var-
iation as described by Toft (Toft et al. 2005), which indicates that two populations that had a higher dif-
ference in the prevalence of disease would have been preferable. When the estimation of the data be-
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
54 
==PAGE:55==
 
comes so poor, it can also be found that the 95% Cl intervals varies markedly (up to 40% for ELISA), 
which makes the calculated sensitivity questionable. Extrapolation from these results should therefore 
be done with caution (Toft et al. 2005). To provide a good diagnostic result it can be concluded that it 
is necessary to bead beat the samples before RT-PCR, as there is an increased probability of extrac-
tion of higher amounts of RNA and hence getting a positive result.  
 
12.2 Discussion on methods  
Since the biological bases for the two test were different, ELISA utilizes antibody detection whereas 
RT-qPCR detects RNA, a conditional independent method is assessed to be acceptable to calculate 
the data set (Branscum et al. 2005). The two sub-populations reflected the same age group of pigs, 
hence it can be discussed whether the used methods were appropriate. To get a more precise sensi-
tivity it is recommendable to compare the two tests based on two populations that differ more than 
those included in this study. It is further important to bear in mind that the samples compared in the 
two studies consisted both of pooled and single fecal samples. This can be problematic, as pooled 
samples have been shown to have a lower sensitivity depending on the prevalence of the disease and 
the number of samples included in the pool (Muniesa et al. 2014). It is further important to point out 
that the samples in the two populations were not collected randomly, but rather calculated from sam-
ples submitted routinely for the Pig Research Centre, questioning if the results reflect the true preva-
lence in the general population of 1-week old pigs.  
 
 
13. Conclusion  
As a summary of the above findings, it can be concluded that RT-qPCR is better in detecting positive 
cases of RV compared to ELISA, but that the precision of the calculated sensitivities should be evalu-
ated with caution. It can further be concluded that bead beating is recommendable, when samples are 
processed for the real time RT-qPCR procedure. 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
55 
==PAGE:56==
 
References 
 
Abad, F.X., Pintó, R.M. & Bosch, A., 2006. Disinfection of human enteric viruses on fomites. FEMS 
Microbiology Letters, 156(1), pp.107–111. 
Arias, C. et al., 1996. Trypsin activation pathway of rotavirus infectivity. J. Virol., 70(9), pp.5832–5839. 
Arias, C.F. et al., 2001. Early events of rotavirus infection: the search for the receptor(s). Novartis 
Foundation symposium, 238, pp.47–60; 
Arnheim, N. & Erlich, H., 1992. Polymerase chain reaction strategy. Annual review of biochemistry, 61, 
pp.131–56. 
Azevedo, M.S. et al., 2005. Viremia and nasal and rectal shedding of rotavirus in gnotobiotic pigs 
inoculated with Wa human rotavirus. Journal of virology, 79(9), pp.5428–36. 
Barreiros, M.A.B. et al., 2003. An Outbreak of Diarrhoea in One-week-old Piglets Caused by Group A 
Rotavirus Genotypes P[7],G3 and P[7],G5. Veterinary Research Communications, 27(6), 
pp.505–512. 
Benfield, D.A. et al., 1988. Combined rotavirus and K99 Escherichia coli infection in gnotobiotic pigs. 
American journal of veterinary research, 49(3), pp.330–7. 
Bishop, R. et al., 1973. Virus particles in epithelial cells of duodenal mucosa from children with acute 
non-bacterial gastroenteritis. The Lancet, 302(7841), pp.1281–1283. 
Blecha, F., Pollman, D.S. & Nichols, D.A., 1983. Weaning Pigs at an Early Age Decreases Cellular 
Immunity. Journal of Animal Science, 56(2), pp.396–400. 
Bohl, E.H., 1979. Rotaviral diarrhea in pigs: brief review. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 174(6), pp.613–615. 
Brandt, C.D. et al., 1981. Comparison of direct electron microscopy, immune electron microscopy, and 
rotavirus enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for detection of gastroenteritis viruses in children. 
Journal of clinical microbiology, 13(5), pp.976–81. 
Branscum, A.J., Gardner, I.A. & Johnson, W.O., 2005. Estimation of diagnostic-test sensitivity and 
specificity through Bayesian modeling. Preventive veterinary medicine, 68(2-4), pp.145–63. 
Brown, C.C., Baker, D.C. & Baker, I.K., 2007. Alimentary System. ln: Grant Maxie, M (Ed), Pathology 
of Domestic Animals 2nd ed., Philidelphia: Elsevier Saunders. 
Bustin, S.A. & Nolan, T., 2004. Pitfalls of quantitative real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain 
reaction. Journal of biomolecular techniques : JBT, 15(3), pp.155–66. 
Bywater, R.J., 1983. Diarrhoea treatments--fluid replacement and alternatives. Annales de recherches 
vétérinaires. Annals of veterinary research, 14(4), pp.556–60. 
Chan, G. et al., 2013. A retrospective study on the etiological diagnoses of diarrhea in neonatal piglets 
in Ontario, Canada, between 2001 and 2010. Canadian journal of veterinary research, 77(4), 
pp.254–60. 
Chase-Topping, M.E. et al., 2007. Epidemiology of porcine non-specific colitis on Scottish farms. 
Veterinary journal, 173(2), pp.353–60. 
Chasey, D., Bridger, J.C. & McCrae, M.A., 1986. A new type of atypical rotavirus in pigs. Archives of 
virology, 89(1-4), pp.235–43. 
Chiba, S. et al., 1993. Virological and serological aspects of immune resistance to rotavirus 
gastroenteritis. Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America, 16 Suppl 2, pp.S117–21. 
Collins, J.E., Benfield, D.A. & Duimstra, J.R., 1989. Comparative virulence of two porcine group-A 
rotavirus isolates in gnotobiotic pigs. American journal of veterinary research, 50(6), pp.827–35. 
Collins, P.J. et al., 2010. Detection and characterisation of group A rotavirus in asymptomatic piglets in 
southern Ireland. Archives of virology, 155(8), pp.1247–59. 
DANMAP, 2010. DANMAP 2010. Available at: http://www.danmap.org/~/media/Projekt 
sites/Danmap/DANMAP reports/Danmap_2010.ashx [Accessed April 8, 2016]. 
Dewey, C. et al., 2003. Relationship between group A porcine rotavirus and management practices in 
swine herds in Ontario. The Canadian veterinary journal., 44(8), pp.649–53. 
Dong, Y. et al., 1997. The rotavirus enterotoxin NSP4 mobilizes intracellular calcium in human 
intestinal cells by stimulating phospholipase C-mediated inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate production. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 94(8), 
pp.3960–5. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
56 
==PAGE:57==
 
Driesen, S., Carland, P. & Fahy, V., 2008. Studies on preweaning piglet diarrhoea. Australian 
Veterinary Journal, 70(7), pp.259–263. 
Estes, M.K. et al., 2001. Pathogenesis of rotavirus gastroenteritis. Novartis Foundation symposium, 
238, pp.82–96. 
Estes, M.K. & Cohen, J., 1989. Rotavirus gene structure and function. Microbiological reviews, 53(4), 
pp.410–49. 
Fairbrother, Nadeau, J.M. & E. Gyles, C.L., 2005. Escherichia coli in postweaning diarrhea in pigs: an 
update on bacterial types, pathogenesis, and prevention strategies. Animal Health Research 
Reviews; 2005, 6(1), pp.17–39. 
Fødevarestyrelsen, 2012. Ministeriet for Fødevarer, Landbrug og Fiskeri. Vejledning om foder og 
fodervirksomheder. 2012105. Available at: https://www.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/Sider/forside.aspx 
[Accessed May 18, 2016]. 
Freeman, M.M. et al., 2008. Enhancement of detection and quantification of rotavirus in stool using a 
modified real-time RT-PCR assay. Journal of medical virology, 80(8), pp.1489–96. 
Frydendahl, K., 2002. Prevalence of serogroups and virulence genes in Escherichia coli associated 
with postweaning diarrhoea and edema disease in pigs and a comparison of diagnostic 
approaches. Veterinary Microbiology, 85(2), pp.169–182. 
Gautam, R. et al., 2013. Comparison of PremierTM Rotaclone®, ProSpecTTM, and RIDASCREEN® 
rotavirus enzyme immunoassay kits for detection of rotavirus antigen in stool specimens. Journal 
of clinical virology : the official publication of the Pan American Society for Clinical Virology, 
58(1), pp.292–4. 
Gelberg, H.B., 1992. Studies on the Age Resistance of Swine to Group A Rotavirus Infection. 
Veterinary Pathology, 29(2), pp.161–168. 
Giaquinto, C. et al., 2008. Prospective study of the burden of acute gastroenteritis and rotavirus 
gastroenteritis in children less than 5 years of age, in Padova, Italy. Infection, 36(4), pp.351–7. 
Guerrero, C.A. et al., 2002. Heat shock cognate protein 70 is involved in rotavirus cell entry. Journal of 
virology, 76(8), pp.4096–102. 
Gutierrez-Aguirre, I. et al., 2008. Sensitive Detection of Multiple Rotavirus Genotypes with a Single 
Reverse Transcription-Real-Time Quantitative PCR Assay. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 
46(8), pp.2547–2554. Available at: http://jcm.asm.org/cgi/doi/10.1128/JCM.02428-07 [Accessed 
June 7, 2016]. 
Halaihel, N. et al., 2010. Enteric calicivirus and rotavirus infections in domestic pigs. Epidemiology and 
infection, 138(4), pp.542–8. 
Hampson, D.J., 1986. Alterations in piglet small intestinal structure at weaning. Research in veterinary 
science, 40(1), pp.32–40. 
Hampson, D.J. & Fu, Z.F., 1987. Group A rotavirus excretion patterns in naturally infected pigs. 
Research in veterinary science, 43(3), pp.297–300. 
Heo, J.-M. et al., 2008. Effects of feeding low protein diets to piglets on plasma urea nitrogen, faecal 
ammonia nitrogen, the incidence of diarrhoea and performance after weaning. Archives of animal 
nutrition, 62(5), pp.343–58. 
Heo, J.M. et al., 2009. Feeding a diet with decreased protein content reduces indices of protein 
fermentation and the incidence of postweaning diarrhea in weaned pigs challenged with an 
enterotoxigenic strain of Escherichia coli. Journal of animal science, 87(9), pp.2833–43. 
Herring, A.J. et al., 1982. Rapid diagnosis of rotavirus infection by direct detection of viral nucleic acid 
in silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Journal of clinical microbiology, 16(3), pp.473–7. 
Hessing, M.J.C. & Tielen, M.J.M., 1994. The effect of climatic environment and relocating and mixing 
on health status and productivity of pigs. Animal production, 59(1), pp.131 – 139. 
Hoblet, K.H. et al., 1986. Efficacy of an orally administered modified-live porcine-origin rotavirus 
vaccine against postweaning diarrhea in pigs. American journal of veterinary research, 47(8), 
pp.1697–1703. 
Holmes, I.H., 1996. Development of rotavirus molecular epidemiology: electropherotyping. Archives of 
virology. Supplementum, 12, pp.87–91. 
Hoshino, Y. et al., 1988. Infection immunity of piglets to either VP3 or VP7 outer capsid protein confers 
resistance to challenge with a virulent rotavirus bearing the corresponding antigen. Journal of 
virology, 62(3), pp.744–8. 
Hoshino, Y. & Kapikian, A., 2000. Rotavirus serotypes: Classification and importance in epidemiology, 
immunity, and vaccine development. Journal of Health, Population and Nutrition, 18(1), pp.5–14. 
Houe, H., Ersbøll, A.K. & Toft, N., 2004. Introduction to veterinary epidemiology. 1. edition. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
57 
==PAGE:58==
 
Johansen, M. & Maribo, H., 2013. Fravænningsdiarré. Videncenter for svineproduktion, pp.1–5. 
Johnson, G., Nolan, T. & Bustin, S.A., 2013. Real-time quantitative PCR, pathogen detection and 
MIQE. Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.), 943, pp.1–16. 
Johnson, M.W. et al., 1992. The six most common pathogens responsible for diarrhea in newborn 
pigs. Veterinary Medicine; 1992, 87(4), pp.382–386. 
Jolly, C.L., Beisner, B.M. & Holmes, I.H., 2000. Rotavirus Infection of MA104 Cells Is Inhibited by 
Ricinus Lectin and Separately Expressed Single Binding Domains. Virology, 275(1), pp.89–97. 
Jonach, B. et al., 2014. Fluorescence in situ hybridization investigation of potentially pathogenic 
bacteria involved in neonatal porcine diarrhea. BMC veterinary research, 10, p.68. 
Katouli, M. et al., 1999. The effect of zinc oxide supplementation on the stability of the intestinal flora 
with special reference to composition of coliforms in weaned pigs. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 87(4), pp.564–573. 
Katsuda, K. et al., 2006. Frequency of Enteropathogen Detection in Suckling and Weaned Pigs with 
Diarrhea in Japan. Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation, 18(4), pp.350–354. 
Kil, D.Y. & Stein, H.H., 2010. Board Invited Review: Management and feeding strategies to ameliorate 
the impact of removing antibiotic growth promoters from diets fed to weanling pigs. Canadian 
Journal of Animal Science, 90(4), pp.447–460. 
Kim, Y. et al., 1999. Characterization of group C rotaviruses associated with diarrhea outbreaks in 
feeder pigs. Journal of clinical microbiology, 37(5), pp.1484–8. 
Kjeldsen, N. & Callesen, J., 2006. Terminated use of antimicrobial growth promoters in pig production 
in Denmark: Effects on pig welfare and productivity D. Barug et al., eds., The Netherlands: 
Wageningen Academic Publishers. 
Knarreborg, A. et al., 2002. Establishment and application of an in vitro methodology to study the 
effects of organic acids on coliform and lactic acid bacteria in the proximal part of the 
gastrointestinal tract of piglets. Animal Feed Science and Technology, 99(1-4), pp.131–140. 
Kongsted, H., Toft, N. & Nielsen, J.P., 2014. Risk factors and epidemiological characteristics of new 
neonatal porcine diarrhoea syndrome in four Danish herds. BMC veterinary research, 10, p.151. 
Kubista, M. et al., 2006. The real-time polymerase chain reaction. Molecular aspects of medicine, 
27(2-3), pp.95–125. 
Lecce, J.G. et al., 1983. Effect of dietary regimen on rotavirus-Escherichia coli weanling diarrhea of 
piglets. Journal of clinical microbiology, 17(4), pp.689–95. 
Lecce, J.G. et al., 1982. Rotavirus and hemolytic enteropathogenic Escherichia coli in weanling 
diarrhea of pigs. Journal of clinical microbiology, 16(4), pp.715–23. 
Linares, R. de C. et al., 2009. Frequency of group a rotavirus in piglet stool samples from non-
vaccinated Brazilian pig herds. Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, 52(spe), pp.63–68. 
Logan, C., O’Leary, J.J. & O’Sullivan, N., 2006. Real-time reverse transcription-PCR for detection of 
rotavirus and adenovirus as causative agents of acute viral gastroenteritis in children. Journal of 
clinical microbiology, 44(9), pp.3189–95. 
Lorrot, M. & Vasseur, M., 2007. How do the rotavirus NSP4 and bacterial enterotoxins lead differently 
to diarrhea? Virology journal, 4, p.31. Available at: 
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1839081&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype
=abstract [Accessed May 3, 2016]. 
Lundgren, O. & Svensson, L., 2001. Pathogenesis of Rotavirus diarrhea. Microbes and Infection, 
3(13), pp.1145–1156. 
Madec, F. et al., 1998. Measurement of digestive disorders in the piglet at weaning and related risk 
factors. Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 35(1), pp.53–72. 
Maribo, H. et al., 2000. Produkter til smågrise: Kombinationen af mælkesyre og myresyre og 
benzoesyre. Meddelelse 490. Landsudvalget for Svin, pp.1–13. 
Martel-Paradis, O. et al., 2013. Full-length genome analysis of G2, G9 and G11 porcine group A 
rotaviruses. Veterinary Microbiology, 162, pp.94–102. 
Martella, V. et al., 2001. Genomic Characterization of Porcine Rotaviruses in Italy. Clinical and 
Vaccine Immunology, 8(1), pp.129–132. 
Martella, V. et al., 2007. Prevalence of group C rotaviruses in weaning and post-weaning pigs with 
enteritis. Veterinary Microbiology, 123(1-3), pp.26–33. 
Martella, V. et al., 2010. Zoonotic aspects of rotaviruses. Veterinary microbiology, 140(3-4), pp.246–
55. 
Marthaler, D. et al., 2014. Rapid detection and high occurrence of porcine rotavirus A, B, and C by RT-
qPCR in diagnostic samples. Journal of virological methods, 209, pp.30–4. 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
58 
==PAGE:59==
 
Matthijnssens, J. et al., 2011. Uniformity of rotavirus strain nomenclature proposed by the Rotavirus 
Classification Working Group (RCWG). Archives of virology, 156(8), pp.1397–413. 
Medicintildyr, 2016. Rokovac Neo. Available at: 
http://medicintildyr.dk/produkt.aspx?soeg=ord&word=ROKOVAC+NEO. 
Midgley, S.E. et al., 2012. Diversity and zoonotic potential of rotaviruses in swine and cattle across 
Europe. Veterinary microbiology, 156(3-4), pp.238–45. 
Miyazaki, A. et al., 2013. Annual changes in predominant genotypes of rotavirus A detected in the 
feces of pigs in various developmental stages raised on a conventional farm. Veterinary 
microbiology, 163(1-2), pp.162–6. 
Muniesa, A. et al., 2014. Estimation of the relative sensitivity of qPCR analysis using pooled samples. 
PloS one, 9(4), p.e93491. 
Nagesha, H.S., Huang, J. & Holmes, I.H., 1992. A variant serotype G3 rotavirus isolated from an 
unusually severe outbreak of diarrhoea in piglets. Journal of medical virology, 38(2), pp.79–85. 
Nyachoti, C. M. Omogbenigun, F. O. Rademacher, M. Blank, G., 2006. Performance responses and 
indicators of gastrointestinal health in early-weaned pigs fed low-protein amino acid-
supplemented diets. Journal of Animal Science; 2006, 84(1), pp.125–134. 
Pang, X.L. et al., 2004. Increased detection of rotavirus using a real time reverse transcription-
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay in stool specimens from children with diarrhea. 
Journal of medical virology, 72(3), pp.496–501. 
Pedersen, K.S. et al., 2015. Clinical utility and performance of sock sampling in weaner pig diarrhoea. 
Preventive veterinary medicine, 120(3-4), pp.313–320. 
Pedersen, K.S. et al., 2013. Evaluation of farmers’ diagnostic performance for detection of diarrhoea in 
nursery pigs using digital pictures of faecal pools. Acta Veterinaria Scandinavica, 55(1), p.72. 
Pedersen, K.S. et al., 2010. Intestinal pathogens in acute diarrhea in weaners: A case control study in 
20 Danish herds. In proceedings ved 21st IPVS Congress, Vancouver, Canasa. p. 756. 
Pedersen, K.S., Kristensen, C.S. & Nielsen, J.P., 2012. Demonstration of non-specific colitis and 
increased crypt depth in colon of weaned pigs with diarrhea. Veterinary Quarterly. 
Pedersen, K.S., Stege, H. & Nielsen, J.P., 2011a. Estimation of diarrhoea prevalence using diarrhoeic 
faecal pools on the pen floor. 
Pedersen, K.S., Stege, H. & Nielsen, J.P., 2011b. Evaluation of a microwave method for dry matter 
determination in faecal samples from weaned pigs with or without clinical diarrhoea. Preventive 
veterinary medicine, 100(3-4), pp.163–70. 
Pedersen, K.S. & Toft, N., 2011. Intra- and inter-observer agreement when using a descriptive 
classification scale for clinical assessment of faecal consistency in growing pigs. , 98, pp.288–
291. 
Pestana, E. et al., 2010. Early, rapid and sensitive veterinary molecular diagnostics - real time PCR 
applications 1st ed., Springer. 
Porter, P., Noakes, D.E. & Allen, W.D., 1970. Secretory IgA and antibodies to Escherichia coli in 
porcine colostrum and milk and their significance in the alimentary tract of the young pig. 
Immunology, 18(2), pp.245–57. 
Poulsen, H.D., 1989. Zinkoxid til grise i fravænningsperioden. Meddelse nr. 746. Statens 
husdyrbrugsforsøg. 
Quinn, P.J.B.K., Markey, F.C. & Leonard,  et al, 2011. Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease, 
2nd Edition. Wiley, pp.635–639. 
Ramos, A.P. et al., 2000. The stability of porcine rotavirus in feces. Veterinary microbiology, 71(1-2), 
pp.1–8. 
Rhoads, J.M. et al., 1991. L-glutamine stimulates jejunal sodium and chloride absorption in pig 
rotavirus enteritis. Gastroenterology, 100(3), pp.683–91. 
Rhoads, J.M. et al., 1995. Oral transforming growth factor-alpha enhances jejunal mucosal recovery 
and electrical resistance in piglet rotavirus enteritis. Pediatric research, 38(2), pp.173–81. 
Rout, M. & Saikumar, G., 2014. Use of various methods for detection of sero-group A rotavirus in 
porcine intestinal and fecal specimens. Indian J. Anim. Res, 48(2), pp.198–200. 
Ruiz, M.C., Cohen, J. & Michelangeli, F., 2000. Role of Ca2+in the replication and pathogenesis of 
rotavirus and other viral infections. Cell calcium, 28(3), pp.137–49. 
Ruiz, V. et al., 2016. Case-control study of pathogens involved in piglet diarrhea. BMC research notes, 
9(1), p.22. 
Saif, L. et al., 1997. Comparative studies of the pathogenesis, antibody immune responses, and 
homologous protection to porcine and human rotaviruses in gnotobiotic piglets. Advances in 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
59 
==PAGE:60==
 
experimental medicine and biology, 412, pp.397–403. 
Saif, L.J. & Fernandez, F.M., 1996. Group A rotavirus veterinary vaccines. The Journal of infectious 
diseases, 174 Suppl , pp.S98–106. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8752298 
[Accessed May 10, 2016]. 
Saif, L.J. & Jiang, B., 1994. Nongroup A rotaviruses of humans and animals. Current topics in 
microbiology and immunology, 185, pp.339–71. 
Schrader, C. et al., 2012. PCR inhibitors - occurrence, properties and removal. Journal of applied 
microbiology, 113(5), pp.1014–26. 
Shaw, D.P., Morehouse, L.G. & Solorzano, R.F., 1989. Experimental rotavirus infection in three-week-
old pigs. American journal of veterinary research, 50(11), pp.1961–5. 
Song, D.S. et al., 2006. Multiplex reverse transcription-PCR for rapid differential detection of porcine 
epidemic diarrhea virus, transmissible gastroenteritis virus, and porcine group A rotavirus. J Vet 
Diagn Invest, 18(3), pp.278–281. 
Ståhl, M. et al., 2011. The use of quantitative PCR for identification and quantification of Brachyspira 
pilosicoli, Lawsonia intracellularis and Escherichia coli fimbrial types F4 and F18 in pig feces. 
Veterinary microbiology, 151(3-4), pp.307–14. 
Stege, H. et al., 2000. Prevalence of intestinal pathogens in Danish finishing pig herds. Preventive 
Veterinary Medicine, 46(4), pp.279–292. 
Steinmetz, H.V., Callesen, J. & Johansen, M., 2008. Produktionssikker fravænning. Available at: 
http://vsp.lf.dk/Publikationer/Manualer/Produktionssikker fravaenning.aspx?full=1 [Accessed May 
10, 2016]. 
Stevenson, G., 1990. Pathogenesis of a new porcine serotype of group A rotavirus in neonatal 
gnotobiotic and weaned conventional pigs. Retrospective Theses and Dissertations. Available at: 
http://lib.dr.iastate.edu/rtd/9468 [Accessed May 3, 2016]. 
Straw, B.E. et al., 2006. Diseases of Swine 9th ed. B. E. Straw et al., eds., West Sussex, UK: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
Svensmark, B. et al., 1989. Epidemiological studies of piglet diarrhoea in intensively managed Danish 
sow herds. II. Post-weaning diarrhoea. Acta veterinaria Scandinavica, 30(1), pp.55–62. 
Svensmark, B. et al., 1989. Epidemiological studies of piglet diarrhoea in intensively managed Danish 
sow herds. III. Rotavirus infection. Acta veterinaria Scandinavica, 30(1), pp.63–70. 
Svensmark, B., 1983. Prevalence rate of porcine rotavirus in Danish swine herds. Annales de 
recherches vétérinaires. Annals of veterinary research, 14(4), pp.433–6. 
ThermoFisher, 2016. Overview of ELISA. Available at: https://www.thermofisher.com/dk/en/home.html 
[Accessed June 18, 2016]. 
Theuns, S. et al., 2014. Porcine group a rotaviruses with heterogeneous VP7 and VP4 genotype 
combinations can be found together with enteric bacteria on Belgian swine farms. Veterinary 
Microbiology, 172(1-2), pp.23–34. 
Theuns, S. et al., 2016. Presence and characterization of pig group A and C rotaviruses in feces of 
Belgian diarrheic suckling piglets. Virus research, 213, pp.172–83. 
Thomson, J., 2009. Feed-associated colitis of growing pigs and its interaction with enteric infections 
Colite nutricional em suínos de crescimento e sua interação com infecções entéricas. , 37(Supl 
1), pp.1–10. 
Toft, N. et al., 2007. Assessing the convergence of Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods: an example 
from evaluation of diagnostic tests in absence of a gold standard. Preventive veterinary 
medicine, 79(2-4), pp.244–56. 
Toft, N., Jørgensen, E. & Højsgaard, S., 2005. Diagnosing diagnostic tests: evaluating the 
assumptions underlying the estimation of sensitivity and specificity in the absence of a gold 
standard. Preventive veterinary medicine, 68(1), pp.19–33. 
Tzipori, S., Chandler, D., Makin, T., et al., 1980. Escherichia coli and rotavirus infections in four-week-
old gnotobiotic piglets fed milk or dry food. Australian veterinary journal, 56(6), pp.279–284. 
Tzipori, S., Chandler, D., Smith, M., et al., 1980. Factors contributing to post weaning diarrhoea in a 
large intensive piggery. Australian Veterinary Journal, 56(6), pp.274–278. 
Usonis, V. et al., 2012. The unpredictable diversity of co-circulating rotavirus types in Europe and the 
possible impact of universal mass vaccination programmes on rotavirus genotype incidence. 
Vaccine, 30(31), pp.4596–605. 
Valasek, M.A., 2005. The power of real-time PCR. AJP: Advances in Physiology Education, 29(3), 
pp.151–159. 
Wagstrom, E.A., Yoon, K.J. & Zimmerman, J.J., 2000. Immune components in porcine mammary 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
60 
==PAGE:61==
 
secretions. Viral immunology, 13(3), pp.383–97. Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11016601 [Accessed May 3, 2016]. 
Weber, A.V. & Eskildsen, M., 2014. Svineproduktion 1st ed., Landbrugsforlaget. 
Weber, N. et al., 2015. Occurrence of diarrhoea and intestinal pathogens in non-medicated nursery 
pigs. Acta veterinaria Scandinavica, 57, p.64. 
Wieler, L.H. et al., 2008. Prevalence of Enteropathogens in Suckling and Weaned Piglets with 
Diarrhoea in Southern Germany. Journal of Veterinary Medicine, Series B, 48(2), pp.151–159. 
Wilhelm, B. et al., 2016. Farm-level prevalence and risk factors for detection of hepatitis E virus, 
porcine enteric calicivirus, and rotavirus in Canadian finisher pigs. Canadian journal of veterinary 
research = Revue canadienne de recherche vétérinaire, 80(2), pp.95–105. 
Wilson, I.G., 1997. Inhibition and facilitation of nucleic acid amplification. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 63(10), pp.3741–3751. 
Woode, G.N. et al., 1976. Morphological and antigenic relationships between viruses (rotaviruses) 
from acute gastroenteritis of children, calves, piglets, mice, and foals. Infect. Immun., 14(3), 
pp.804–810. 
Yuan, L. et al., 1998. Antibody-secreting cell responses and protective immunity assessed in 
gnotobiotic pigs inoculated orally or intramuscularly with inactivated human rotavirus. Journal of 
virology, 72(1), pp.330–8. 
Zeller, M. et al., 2012. Full genome characterization of a porcine-like human G9P[6] rotavirus strain 
isolated from an infant in Belgium. Infection, genetics and evolution : journal of molecular 
epidemiology and evolutionary genetics in infectious diseases, 12(7), pp.1492–500. 
Zijlstra, R.T. et al., 1997. Protein-energy malnutrition delays small-intestinal recovery in neonatal pigs 
infected with rotavirus. The Journal of nutrition, 127(6), pp.1118–27. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
61 
==PAGE:62==
 
Appendix A Observationional scheme  
CHR number:______________________    
Case-herd ☐   Control-herd ☐  
 
  
Pig num-
ber  
Age (1-3 
weeks) 
Feces score (1-
4) 
Clinically visible di-
arrhea (0-1) 
BSC 
(-1, 0, 1) 
General status  
(0-1) 
Comments  
Pen 1 
1   
  
  
  
  
  
  
2   
  
  
  
  
  
  
3   
  
  
  
  
  
  
4   
  
  
  
  
  
  
5   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Pig num-
ber  
Age (1-3 
weeks) 
Feces score (1-
4) 
Clinically visible di-
arrhea (0-1) 
BSC 
(-1, 0, 1) 
General status  
(0-1) 
Comments  
Pen: 2 
6   
  
  
  
  
  
  
7   
  
  
  
  
  
  
8   
  
  
  
  
  
  
9   
  
  
  
  
  
  
10   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Pig num-
ber  
Age (1-3 
weeks) 
Feces score (1-
4) 
Clinically visible di-
arrhea (0-1) 
BSC 
(-1, 0, 1) 
General status  
(0-1) 
Comments  
Pen: 3 
11   
  
  
  
  
  
  
12   
  
  
  
  
  
  
13   
  
  
  
  
  
  
14   
  
  
  
  
  
  
15   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Pig num-
ber  
Age (1-3 
weeks) 
Feces score (1-
4) 
Clinically visible di-
arrhea (0-1) 
BSC 
(-1, 0, 1) 
General status  
(0-1) 
Comments  
Pen: 4 
16   
  
  
  
  
  
  
17   
  
  
  
  
  
  
18   
  
  
  
  
  
  
19   
  
  
  
  
  
  
20   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
Pig num-
ber  
Age (1-3 
weeks) 
Feces score (1-
4) 
Clinically visible di-
arrhea (0-1) 
BSC 
(-1, 0, 1) 
General status  
(0-1) 
Comments  
Pen: 5 
21   
  
  
  
  
  
  
22   
  
  
  
  
  
  
23   
  
  
  
  
  
  
24   
  
  
  
  
  
  
25   
  
  
  
  
  
                 Pig per pen:________  Pen length:__________   Pen width:___________   Stocking:____________ 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
62 
==PAGE:63==
 
Appendix B Explanation observations  
 
 
 
 
Explanation Observations: 
 
Age: 
1 = 1 week (1-7 days after weaning) 
2 = 2 weeks (8-14 days after weaning) 
3 = 3 weeks (15-21 days after weaning). 
 
Feces Score: 
1 = firm and shaped 
2 = soft and shaped 
3 = loose 
4 = watery 
 
General status: 
0 = the pig doesn’t seems to thrive 
1 = the pig seems to thrive 
Clinically visible diarrhea: 
0 = the pig is by observation clinically well 
and has no signs of diarrhea  
1 = the pig has clinically apparent diarrhea 
(soiling, diarrhea stroke or red anus). 
 
Body condition score (BCS) 
-1 = the pig is below average  
0 = the pig has normal BCS 
1 = the pig is above average 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
63 
==PAGE:64==
 
Appendix C Fecel consistency score  
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
64 
==PAGE:65==
 
Appendix D Questionnaire farmers (in Danish) 
 
SPØRGESKEMA TIL BESÆTNINGEN:  
 
 
CHR-nr / test.nr :_____________________________________ 
 
 
 
Generelt: 
Besætningens størrelse (antal årssøer inkl. gylte):   _____________________ 
SPF-status:_____________________________ 
Fravænnede grise/årsso:__________________________ 
 
 
 
1. Diarre-problem: 
Har besætningen har problemer med diarre hos fravænningsgrisene 0-3 uger efter fravænning. 
  
 
 
 
Ja ☐ 
  
 
 
 
Nej  ☐ 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Fravænningsstrategi/smittespredning: 
Hvordan er fravænningsstrategien overordnet (sæt kryds) 
  
Grisene fravænnes efter alt-ind-alt-ud princippet ☐ 
  
Grisene fravænnes kontinuerligt ☐ 
 
Hvor stor en andel af grisene fravænnes inden de er 4 uger gamle 
  
 
 
under 25% ☐ 
  
 
 
mellem 25-50% ☐ 
  
 
 
mellem 50-75 % ☐ 
  
 
 
Over 75% ☐ 
 
Gennemsnitlige fravænningsvægt:____________ 
Gennemsnitlige fravænningsalder:____________ 
 
3. Hygiejne: 
Hvordan rengøres klimastaldene mellem hvert fravænningshold? (sæt kryds) 
  
  
  
Der foretages ingen vask eller desinficering ☐ 
  
 
  
Staldene vaskes uden sæbe og desinficeres ikke ☐ 
  
 
 
Staldene vaskes uden sæbe og desinficeres ☐ 
  
  
 
Der gøres både brug af vask med sæbe og desinfektion☐ 
  
 
 
Andet (beskriv):___________________________ 
 
 
 
Hvor lang er tomperioden af sektionen (udtørring), før der indsættes et nyt hold fravænningsgrise. 
 
 
 
 
under 5 dage ☐ 
  
 
 
 
over 5 dage ☐ 
 
 
4. Sortering 
Hvordan fordeles grisene ved indsættelse i klimastalden  
  
 
Kuldvis ☐ 
  
 
De mindste 15-20% af grisene samles ☐ 
  
 
Størrelsessorteres, for at få mere ens grise i stierne ☐ 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
65 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
5. Fodring af fravænningsgrise 
Hvad fodres grisene med lige efter fravænning (sæt kryds) 
  
 
Tør foder ☐ 
  
 
opblødt foder ☐ 
  
 
Begge dele ☐  
 
 
 
Foretages der rutinemæssigt behandling med Zink mod fravænningsdiarre? 
  
 
ja ☐  Hvor længe?__________________________________      Nej ☐ 
 
Gør i noget bevidst i forbindelse med fodringsskiftet mellem de første 2 blandinger, for at undgå 
diarre (evt. gjort sig overvejelser, eller forsøgt noget uden effekt): 
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
 
 
 
 
6. Behandlinger af fravænningsgrise 
Foretages der i øjeblikket antibiotikabehandling af fravænnings grisene 0-3 uger efter fravæn-
ning? 
  
 
Ja, på enkeltdyrs niveau ☐  
  
 
Ja, på flok/sti-niveau ☐  
  
 
Nej ☐ 
 
Hvis ja, hvor mange af holdene flokbehandles inden for de første 3 uger? 
 
 
< 33%               ☐ 
  
 
33-66%             ☐  
  
 
> 66%    
  ☐ 
 
 
Hvilket præparat anvendes og hvad er effekten: 
  
 
Ringe                       ☐ 
  
 
Nogenlunde             ☐  
  
 
God     
         ☐ 
  
 
Præparat:_______________________________ 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
66 
==PAGE:67==
 
Appendix E Questionnaire veterinarians (in Danish) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
67 
==PAGE:68==
 
Appendix F Multiple 2by2 tables (age groups) 
  
         Rotavirus 
  
  
Age groups 
Positive 
Negative 
p-value  
1 week 
52 
7 
0.0003 
 
2 weeks  
32 
24 
 
Total 
84 
31 
115 
  
  
  
  
1 week  
52 
7 
0.0001 
3 weeks  
22 
33 
Total 
74 
40 
114 
  
  
  
  
2 weeks  
32 
24 
0.0883 
3 weeks  
22 
33 
Total 
54 
57 
111 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
68 
==PAGE:69==
 
APPENDIX G  Mantel Haenzsels test (E.coli, rotavirus, 
diarrhea) 
E.coli 
           Diarrhea 
F4 
Case 
Control 
Grand Total 
Positive 
21 
5 
26 
Negative 
19 
33 
52 
Grand Total 
40 
38 
78 
 
E.coli 
Diarrhea 
F18 
Case 
Control 
Grand Total 
Positive 
14 
17 
31 
Negative 
26 
21 
47 
Grand Total 
40 
38 
78 
 
 
Diarrhea 
Rotavirus 
Case 
Control 
Grand Total 
Positive 
32 
23 
55 
Negative 
8 
15 
23 
Grand Total 
40 
38 
78 
 
 
Diarrhea 
E.coli 
Case 
Control 
Grand Total 
Positive 
26 
22 
48 
Negative 
14 
16 
30 
Grand Total 
40 
38 
78 
 
 
 
Rotavirus as a risk factor for diarrhea 
 
 
69 
