==PAGE:1==
1
International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy,
Department of Civil Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark
In collaboration with EKJ
ENERGY CONSUMPTION 
IN UNDERGROUND MUSEUMS
Mads Panﬁ l Jeppesen
Supervisor Rune Korsholm Andersen
Co-supervisor Carsten Rode
June 2016
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
I
Titlesheet
Title: 
Energy Consumption in Underground Museums
Danish Title:
Energiforbrug i underjordiske museer
Project type:
Master Thesis
University: 
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
International Centre of Indoor Environment and Energy
Credits:
30 ECTS
Language:
English
Project period:
January to June 2016
Author:
Mads Panﬁ l Jeppesen
Student number:
s120602
Field of Study:
Architectural Engineering - Energy Design
Supervisor: 
Senior Researcher Rune Korsholm Andersen
Department of Civil Engineering
International Centre of Indoor Environment and Energy
Co-supervisor:
Professor Carsten Rode
Department of Civil Engineering
International Centre of Indoor Environment and Energy
In collaboration with:
EKJ
==PAGE:4==
II
Preface
This master thesis of 30 ETCS points was written at the International 
Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy (ICEE) at the Department of 
Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in collaboration 
with EKJ. EKJ is currently involved in the design of the Natural History 
Museum to be built underneath the Botanical Gardens of Copenhagen. 
The thesis will not simulate the new museum but is a general research of 
the building typology. However, the simpliﬁ ed walls and ﬂ oors used for 
simulations were based on early sketches by EKJ
This research involved several diff erent studies including indoor climate 
in museums, user behaviour, energy simulation and soil temperatures. 
These studies were used for the ﬁ nal simulations but can be studied 
individually. Even though this project was written as an engineering 
thesis about underground museums, certain aspects should thus be 
of relevance for those involved with museums in general, underground 
buildings or energy simulation.
A large number of museums provided data on visitor presence. 
Furthermore, user behaviour was investigated at M/S Maritime Museum 
of Denmark based on surveillance tapes.
The thesis was supervised by Senior Researcher Rune Korsholm Andersen
and Professor Carsten Rode.
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors Rune Korsholm Andersen 
and Carsten Rode for great commitment to the project, valuable inputs 
and sharing their knowledge on various subjects. Both have been very 
supportive and have always had time for help and discussions. I would 
also like to thank the rest of ICEE and fellow thesis students for providing 
a good study environment.
The project was done in collaboration with EKJ. It has been very rewarding 
to get an insight on how an underground building is being designed. 
Thanks to all of the staff  I encountered during my thesis, especially 
project leader Susanne Skjellerup Thomsen and my main contact at EKJ, 
Johannes Utoft Christensen.
I'm very grateful for the amount of trust that was put into me by the M/S 
Maritime Museum of Denmark. CEO Ulla Tofte has been very welcoming 
and allowed for a very rewarding study using the surveillance system of 
the museum as well as the museum accounts. In a ﬁ eld where risk of 
theft is always an issue, such allowance is very unusual. Special thanks 
are due to the facility manager, Michael Krabbe Kiær, who was very 
helpful throughout the whole project and provided valuable knowledge 
on the running of an underground museum. Thanks to Heidi Petersen 
from bookkeeping for providing data from the museum accounts. In 
general I would like to thank all of the museum staff  for making me feel 
welcome and for interesting discussions during lunch breaks.
Much thanks to Morten Ryhl-Svendsen, Associate professor at the 
School of Conservation - KADK Copenhagen, for providing me with many 
of his articles and for taking the time to have an initial discussion on the 
interesting world of preventive conservation. Additionally, the Librarians 
at KVIC were very good at providing me the basic literature needed in 
order to understand the basics of preservation as well as giving me 
access to their beautiful library.
==PAGE:5==
III
Thanks to Jørgen Larsen Financial Controller and Poul Hasbeck the Director 
of Facilities & Security at Louisiana for visitor data and information about 
the indoor climate at the museum.
I would like to thank Tim Padﬁ eld for an interesting talk about museum 
energy, indoor climate and many other interesting subjects related to 
museums. Padﬁ eld did also provide valuable advice on the development 
of the thesis.
Lastly, I would like to thank my girlfriend and son for their help and 
support and for visiting museums with me on weekends.
I would also like to thank Patrik Skogqvist and Mika Vuolle from EQUA. 
Not only have they given me access to the HMwall component, but they 
have also been extremely helpful whenever I encountered problems.
Thanks to Susanne Armand from the National History Museum of 
Denmark for providing very detailed visitor data of both the Zoological 
Museum and Geological Museum. 
Much thanks to Sille Brethvad from Cisternerne for not only providing 
visitor data but also the energy bill of the museum. 
I truly appreciate the visitor data on a large number of museums provided 
by Frank Birkebæk from Roskilde Museum. 
Thanks are due to Curator Morten Ravn as well as Claus Christiansen 
Head of Finance, Administration and Facilities at the Viking Ship Museum 
for giving me access to their visitor data and information about the 
indoor climate. 
I thank Karin Andreasen Head of Visitor Operations at the National 
Museum of Denmark for providing me with large amounts of data of the 
many museums being part of the National Museum.
Bettina Weiland and Lene Rolfsen is to be thanked for the visitor data on 
Thorvaldsens Museum and information about the set points for indoor 
climate.
I thank Uff e Gorm Jensen from Rambøll for letting me get access to 
documents from the design process of M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark. 
It provided a great understanding on the development and discussions 
about indoor climate set points in museums.
I would like to thank Norconsult for information on the ventilation and 
indoor climate at the new museum in Roskilde, Ragnarock.
==PAGE:6==
IV
Abstract English
Several underground museums have recently been built in Denmark 
and currently four new underground museums are being designed. It 
is therefore relevant to study whether underground museum has the 
potential to lower the often very high energy consumption of museums. 
The standard methods for simulating underground buildings in the 
building performance simulation programme IDA ICE is too simpliﬁ ed to 
use as a basis for detailed energy simulations. Furthermore, users will 
have a large inﬂ uence on the energy consumptions in museums as they 
aff ect both the heating-, cooling and ventilation systems. Unfortunate-
ly, user patterns and the number of visitors have previously not been 
thoroughly studied.
A method combining results from 2D heat transfers simulations with 
a building performance programme was made in order to make more 
precise simulations of underground buildings. Entrance data from 23 
Danish museums was used in order to study visitor patterns. This data 
was also used to study the correlation between summer weather and 
number of visitors in 7 museums in order to determine if visitor presence 
can be predicted. No museums could provide data on the user pattern 
on an hourly basis or had data on the occupancy densities (pers/m2). A 
study on the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark was, therefore, made 
in order to study these parameters based on one month of surveillance 
tapes. The user patterns from these studies were implemented into the 
building performance simulations. A study was made on the requirements 
for the indoor climate in museums in order to have realistic settings for 
the simulations. Additionally, the requirements from 9 Danish museums 
was used in order to study how the indoor climate set points was deﬁ ned 
in practice.  
In all cases, the simulated underground museum used less energy than 
a similar museum above ground. The inﬂ uence of the stable tempera-
tures underground was largest if very little insulation was used. Even 
if an above ground museum had walls with large thermal capacity and 
300 mm of insulation an underground museum would use 2-3 kWh/m2 
less per year. By using 500 mm of insulation the diff erence between 
the energy use of an above- and below ground museum was very small. 
The occupancy densities and the settings for the control systems had 
an often larger inﬂ uence on the total energy consumption than if the 
museum was placed above or below ground.
It can be concluded that the energy use of an underground museum will 
be lower than for the above ground museum. How large the diff erence 
between above- and below ground will be, vary greatly depending on the 
construction, the user pattern and the control systems. Placing museums 
underground, thus, has some potential beneﬁ ts in regards to energy use, 
but it is not the short cut for making museums energy effi  cient.
==PAGE:7==
V
Abstract Danish 
Indenfor de sidste par år er ﬂ ere underjordiske museer blevet bygget i Danmark 
og ﬁ re nye er på nuværende tidspunkt på tegnebrættet. Siden nogle museer 
har meget højt energiforbrug er det relevant at undersøge om det at placere 
et museum under jorden kan være med til at mindske dette forbrug.
Programmet IDA ICE kan bruges til at beregne energiforbruget i bygninger, 
men metoderne til at simulere underjordiske bygninger er for simpliﬁ cerede 
til at kunne bruges til en detaljeret analyse. Derudover vil brugere have en 
stor indﬂ ydelse på energiforbruget i museer da de påvirker både varme-, køle- 
og ventilationssystemerne. Desværre er der ikke tidligere lavet grundige un-
dersøgelser af antallet af besøgende og brugeradfærd i museer.
En metode der kombinerede resultaterne fra simuleringer af 2D varmetrans-
port med simuleringer i et bygningsenergiprogram blev lavet for at kunne 
udføre mere præcise simuleringer af underjordiske bygninger. På baggrund af 
data om antallet af besøgende blev besøgsmønstre undersøgt i 23 danske 
museer. Dette data blev også brugt til at analysere sammenhængen mellem 
vejret om sommeren og antallet af besøgende i 7 museer for at undersøge 
hvorvidt besøgstallet kan forudsiges. Ingen museer kunne udlevere data om 
besøgstal på timebasis eller havde data omkring tætheden af personer (pers/
m2). Derfor blev disse parametre undersøgt vha. en måneds overvågningsvideo 
fra M/S Museet for Søfart. Besøgsmønstre fra disse undersøgelser blev brugt 
til simuleringer af bygningers energiforbrug. Derudover blev indeklimakravene 
i museer undersøgt for at have realistiske værdier til simuleringerne. De relle 
indstillingsværdier fra 9 danske museer blev brugt til at studere hvordan 
kravene blev deﬁ neret i praksis.
I alle tilfælde brugte det simulerede underjordiske museum mindre energi 
end et museum over jorden. De stabile jordtemperaturer havde dog større 
indﬂ ydelse hvis der blev brugt mindre isolering. Selv hvis et overjordisk 
museum havde vægge med stor termisk kapacitet og 300 mm isolering 
ville et underjordisk museum bruge 2-3 kWh/m2 mindre om året. Ved at 
bruge 500 mm isolering, blev forskellen på energiforbrug af museum 
over- og under jorden meget lille. Tætheden af personer og indstillingerne 
for kontrolsystemet havde ofte en større indﬂ ydelse på det totale ener-
giforbrug end om museet lå over eller under jorden.
Det kan konkluderes at energiforbruget for et underjordisk museum vil 
være mindre end for et museum over jorden. Men hvor stor forskellen 
i energiforbrug på at placere et museum over og under jorden vil være 
afh ænger af konstruktionen, brugeradfærd og kontrolsystemet. At 
placere et museum har derfor nogen potentielle fordele mht. energifor-
brug, men det er ikke en genvej til at gøre et museum energieff ektivt.
==PAGE:8==
VI
Table of contents
01 Introduction 
1
02 Objectives 
2
Research question: 
2
03 Cases 
4
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark 
4
Natural History Museum of Denmark 
5
Blåvand Bunker museum 
5
Ordrupgaard extension 
6
Moesgaard Museum 
6
The Museum of Danish Resistance 
7
Architects: Lundgaard & Tranberg 
Arkitekter 
7
Cisternerne 
7
Other underground museums in Denmark 
8
Underground museums worldwide 
9
Discussion and Conclusion 
9
04 Indoor Climate for preservation 
10
Humidity 
10
Temperature 
11
Light 
11
Pollutants 
12
Guidelines 
13
Conclusion 
14
05 Set points in practice 
15
Discussion 
17
Conclusion 
17
06 Relative humidity 
18
Humidity control  
20
Moisture buff ering 
21
IDA ICE humidity 
24
Discussion and Conclusion 
25
07 Visitors 
26
Method 
28
Results 
30
Discussion 
42
Conclusion 
44
08 Visitor presence  
45
At M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark 
45
Method 
45
Results 
47
Discussion 
55
Conclusion 
58
09 Lighting loads 
59
10 Ground temperatures 
62
Ground temperatures in COMSOL 
65
Comparison of hand calculations 
and COMSOL output 
68
Combination of soil types 
69
Heat from buildings to the ground 
70
The eff ect of the surroundings 
71
11 Combine COMSOL and  IDA ICE 
74
Method  
75
Results 
77
Discussion 
78
Conclusion 
80
12 Simulations 
81
Method 
81
Results 
87
Discussion 
90
13 Discussion 
91
14 Conclusion 
94
15 References 
95
Appendix 
 
 
 
     103
==PAGE:9==
VII
Nomenclature
Symbol  
Description  
 
 
 
Unit
ACH  
 
Air Changes per Hour   
 
h-1
ACD 
 
Air Changes per day 
 
 
d-1
T 
 
Temperature 
 
 
 
K
θ 
 
Temperature 
 
 
 
ºC
q  
 
Airﬂ ow   
 
 
 
l/s
ρ 
 
Density  
 
 
 
kg/m3
c 
 
Heat capacity  
 
 
J/(kgK)
λ 
 
Thermal conductivity 
 
 
W/(mK)
α 
 
Thermal diff usivity 
 
 
m2/s
RH 
 
Relative humidity  
 
 
% or -
V 
 
Volume  
 
 
 
m3
A 
 
Area 
 
 
 
 
m2
m 
 
Length  
 
 
 
m
δ 
 
Vapour permeability 
 
 
kg⁄(msPa)
Gvp 
 
Vapour production 
 
 
kg/s or g/h
Gvol 
 
Vol. ﬂ ow 
 
 
 
m3/s 
β 
 
Surface coefficient water vapour 
kg⁄(m2sPa)
p 
 
Pressure 
 
 
 
Pa
MBV 
 
Moisture Buffer Value  
 
kg/(m2 %RH)
R 
 
Gas constant 
 
 
 
J/(kgK)
lx 
 
Lux 
 
 
 
 
(cd·sr)⁄m2
lxh 
 
Lux Hours 
 
 
 
lxh
UVmax   
Maximum allowed UV light 
 
μW/lm
D0 
 
Occupant density 
 
 
pers⁄m2
Vr 
 
Visitor ratio 
 
 
 
-
clo 
 
Clothing insulation 
 
 
W/(m2K)
r 
 
Linear correlation coeffi  cient 
 
-
R2 
 
R squared 
 
 
 
-
Abbreviations
AHU  
 
 
Air Handling Unit
EMPD  
 
Eff ective Moisture Penetration Depth
LCA 
 
 
Life Cycle Assessment
==PAGE:10==
VIII
==PAGE:11==
1
01 Introduction
In Denmark 30-40% of the energy is used on heating, ventilation and 
lighting of buildings (Danish Energy Agency, 2016). Regulations on 
the energy use of buildings are, thus, an eff ective way of lowering the 
overall energy consumption. It is expected that the Danish energy frame 
for new buildings is set to 20-25 kWh/m2 per year from 2020 (Building 
regulations a, 2016). Meanwhile, an energy consumption of 400-500 
kWh/m2 per year is not uncommon in many museums (Larsen & Padﬁ eld, 
2011). If museums are to meet the requirements research is needed for 
ﬁ nding ways to lower the need for energy. 
The current trend in museum building, especially in Denmark, is to place 
the museum underground. Currently four new underground museum 
buildings are being designed (National History museum of Denmark, The 
Museum of Danish Resistance, Blåvand Bunker museum and Himmelhaven 
at Ordgrupgaard). As a researcher, engineer, curator, architect, planner or 
any other profession involved in these projects, it is highly relevant to 
ask the question whether or not this current trend has the possibility 
to make museums more sustainable? Could the stable ground temper-
atures and thermal mass of the ground be used for lowering the large 
energy needs? As the current methods for simulating the underground 
conditions in tools such as IDA ICE are very simpliﬁ ed, a more precise 
method is needed for answering those questions. By incorporating two 
dimensional heat ﬂ ows from COMSOL into a simulation work ﬂ ow with 
IDA ICE, better calculations can be made. 
By making energy simulations of museums with a constant amount of 
users, the need for energy can appear much lower than it actually will be. 
The reason is that by using average values the extreme cases are cut off  
even though these are the most energy consuming. Users of museums 
are typically employees and visitors. Employees can be assumed to be 
present during work hours at certain parts of the museum. However, the 
presence of visitors is diffi  cult to predict since it in most cases is based 
on the will of each individual, rather than a need to visit museums. No 
standardized user schedules are developed and thus research are needed 
on how to make realistic assumptions. Based on data from several Danish 
museums as well at data obtained through surveillance tapes at the M/S 
Maritime Museum of Denmark, a method for making a dynamic yearly 
schedule is developed for in order to make simulations closer to realistic 
conditions.
The HVAC engineer often works with a set of conﬂ icting goals of 
achieving good indoor climate for users with a minimized energy use. 
The optimal solution will therefore need to be a compromise between 
the goals. However, working on indoor climate for museums is adding 
to the complexity. Often the indoor climate suitable for preservation is 
not comfortable for the users. Furthermore, the preservation of certain 
objects can result in a need for extremely stable climate conditions 
causing a very large energy demand and large running costs. The term 
museum is also used for range of widely diff erent buildings with very 
diff erent functions. The result is that, even though guidelines exists, the 
indoor climate at museums diff ers greatly. As to be seen in this thesis 
using diff erent requirement for the indoor climate can result in very 
diff erent energy consumptions.
This thesis will add to the knowledge of user behaviour in museums, 
the impact of indoor climate requirements on the energy consumption 
and the potential beneﬁ ts in regards to energy use of placing museums 
underground. Hopefully, this work can help the developers of the new 
museums to make well-founded decisions as well as inspire others to 
continue the research in museum energy, underground buildings and user 
behaviour.
==PAGE:12==
2
02 Objectives
RESEARCH QUESTION:
The subject of this thesis is energy consumption in underground 
museums. In Denmark, many underground museums have been built 
in the last couple of years and currently four new Danish underground 
museum buildings are be designed. There are several reasons why 
museums are currently being placed underground, but so far sustainabil-
ity has not been a deciding factor. Museums can have very large energy 
consumptions and it is therefore relevant to ask: 
Is it beneﬁ cial to place museums underground in regards to 
energy use?
To carry out this calculation, a set of parameters have to be accurately 
studied in order to get realistic results. 
Underground temperatures
Underground museums will thermally perform diff erently than on ground 
museums. The soil has more stable temperatures than the ambient air 
and when taking the thermal mass of the soil into consideration the 
need for heating and cooling could be minimized. Investigations are to be 
made on how the temperatures and thermal mass inﬂ uence the energy 
consumption. Underground buildings can potentially utilize a greater 
thermal mass by using the soil to store excess heat. 
 
User behaviour
Each user has little inﬂ uence on the indoor climate of a museum, since 
one is usually not allowed to open a window or change the settings of 
thermostats. But since the number of users in museums varies greatly 
throughout the day, week and year users have a big impact on the ability 
of the active systems to maintain the desired indoor climate. Studies 
will determine user patterns as well as estimations on realistic loads 
that will be used for simulating the energy use of museums. Admission 
statistics from a number of Danish museums as well as an analysis at the 
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark in Elsinore will form the basis for this 
research. 
Set points
All energy calculations are done based on a certain set of values for a 
range of indoor climate parameters. However, the set points for the indoor 
climate in museums diff er from one museum to another due to the type 
of building and collection. The basis for calculating the performance of 
the museums are thus diff erent. The aim of this thesis is not to evaluate 
if these set points are set correctly, but rather to investigate the impact 
on the energy use.
Figure 1. Important factors in calculation of energy use of underground 
museums
Museum parameters
Underground 
building parameter
Energy use
Underground 
temperatures
User behavior
Set points
+/-
+/-
==PAGE:13==
3
Many more interesting and relevant studies could be made in this ﬁ eld. 
There has been made several interesting studies on museum storages 
(for instance Padﬁ eld et al., 2006, Ryhl-Svendsen et al., 2011).  There-
fore, this thesis will focus on the exhibition area instead. This area of 
museum is of great importance as it often accounts for a large part of 
the energy use. 
This thesis will study the running energy use and will not deal with the 
embedded energy of building underground, life cycle assessments or 
any structural or economic considerations. The inﬂ uence of ground wa-
ter ﬂ ows will also not be addressed. The use of renewables to counter 
the often large energy use is an interesting but comprehensive, subject 
also not included in this work. Moreover, the focus is set on underground 
museums in Denmark as much diff erent results could be obtained in 
other climates. 
Method
The diff erent parts of the thesis are presented in the roadmap (Figure 
2). After a short description of cases a series of studies are done on the 
indoor climate at museums and the visitor presence. As the standard 
method for calculation an underground building in IDA ICE are to simpli-
ﬁ ed an alternative method is developed. 
In the end these studies will be used for simulations of the energy use 
of simpliﬁ ed museums buildings with wall, ﬂ oor and ceiling construc-
tions having resemblance to early sketches of the new National History 
Museum of Denmark. All simulations in this thesis are done using COM-
SOL for heat transfer simulations and IDA ICE for energy simulations 
(introductions to the programs are found in appendix 01).
Cases
Why and how are museum placed underground?
Indoor climate for preservation
What is indoor climate for preservation and what are the 
guidelines for set points?
Set points in practice
What are the set points in museums?
Relative humidity
How is the vapour balance in museums 
and how to control it?
Visitors
Can admittance data from museums be used
to estimate when people go to museums?
Visitor presence - At M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
Where and when are people present in a museum?
Lighting loads
What are realistic lighting loads for a new museum?
Ground temperatures
How to calculte the temperatures of the soil?
Combine COMSOL and IDA ICE
How to combine simulations of these programs?
Simulations
Is it possible to save energy by placing museums underground? 
Figure 2.  Roadmap of the thesis
==PAGE:14==
4
03 Cases
The following section will brieﬂ y describe some of the underground 
museums built in Denmark as well as some of the underground museums 
to be built in the near future. The diff erent cases will show the variety 
within this building typology and provide a basic knowledge of the 
museums that will be referred to in the thesis.
As seen on the following pages, four underground museums in Denmark 
are in the process of being designed. This thesis was done in collabora-
tion with EKJ, currently being involved in the development of the Natural 
History Museum of Denmark.
Additionally, the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark collaborated in order 
to gain knowledge from a built case. The museum was used for measure-
ments of user behaviour as well as providing valuable experience on how 
to run a new underground museum in Denmark (appendix 04).
The high number of underground projects recently build and under 
development shows that the research done in this thesis is highly 
relevant. To get a perspective on the calculations and simulations that 
is presented in this thesis, it is useful to understand how and why the 
underground museum is being built. 
M/S MARITIME MUSEUM OF DENMARK
Architects: BIG
Engineers: Rambøll
Size: 17,500 m2 (Politiken, 2014)
Opened: 2013
The Maritime Museum of Elsinore was situated at Kronborg Castle for 
98 years, but due to donations from 11 diff erent funds it was possible 
to build a separate museum. It was designed by BIG and opened up in 
October 2013 (Andersen, 2013). The new building has caused the 
museum to make a transition from a traditional and little known museum 
(Andersen, 2013) to put Elsingor on the New York times list for places to 
visit in 2014 (The New York Times, 2014), being one of ﬁ ve ﬁ nalists for 
the 2015 Mies van der Rohe award (Archdaily,  2015) and winning the 
Archdaily award for best culture building (Politiken, 2014).
The museum is placed in the walls of a former dry dock and no part of the 
building is placed above ground. In the middle of the museum are windows 
surrounding the old dry dock providing daylight to the underground 
museum.
Figure 3.  M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark (BIG a, 2016)
==PAGE:15==
5
NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM OF DENMARK
Architects: 
Lundgaard & Tranberg Arkitekter, Claus Pryds, Steen Høyer
Engineers: EKJ
Size: 20.900 m2 where 8.300 m2 are existing buildings to be incorpo-
rated (SNM competition brief, 2011)
To open: 2020
The new Natural History Museum is planned to be placed underneath 
the botanical gardens of Copenhagen and is set to open in 2020. 
The funding comes from four private funds, the Danish state and the 
University of Copenhagen and is estimated to cost 950 million Dkk. 
The Natural History Museum of Denmark will combine the Botanical 
Museum, the Geological Museum and the Zoological Museum all owned 
by the University of Copenhagen as well as four research institutes. It 
is excepted that the number of visitors will increase from 150,000 to 
400,000 a year. Furthermore, it is expected that the percentage of 
tourists will increase from only 2% at the moment to 33% (New Natural 
History Museum, 2016).
Figure 4. Section of the new Natural History Museum of Denmark (Lund-
gaard & Tranberg Arkitekter, 2016)
BLÅVAND BUNKER MUSEUM
Architects: BIG
Engineers: Rådgivende ingeniører Johansson & Kalstrup P/S
Size: 2400 m2 (Varde Museum b, 2016)
To open: 2017
The municipality of Varde wanted to build a museum hidden underneath 
the sand dunes, combining a bunker museum, an amber museum, a 
special exhibition gallery and a “histolarium” being an interactive gallery 
about the history of Blåvand (Byggecentrum, 2014). Due to the special 
site chosen, it has been important to make a building that is both “breath-
taking and invisible”. The existing bunker on site is to be ﬁ tted with a 
transparent canon replica, functioning as a skylight as well as showing 
where a canon was originally placed. (Varde Museum, 2012). It is currently 
being designed by BIG in collaboration with the local engineering 
ﬁ rm Johansson & Kalstrup (Varde Museum, 2016). The access to the 
underground museum buildings is provided by four cuts into the dunes. 
These cuts will function as inner walls in between the four museums 
parts and will be ﬁ tted with windows to provide daylight. One of these 
cuts is shown in Figure 3 (BIG b, 2016).
Figure 5. Blåvand bunker museum (BIG b, 2016)
==PAGE:16==
6
ORDRUPGAARD EXTENSION
Architects: Snøhetta 
Engineers: Dansk Energi Management & Esbensen and EKJ 
Size: 1.600 m2
To open: unknown 
The art museum Ordrupgaard is situated in an upper class family home 
from 1917 (VisitCopenhagen, a 2016). Ordrupgaard was in 2005 
extended with a 1,150 m2 building done by Zaha Hadid (Ordupgaard a, 
2016), but now the museum plans to enlarge the area even further by 
having an underground building done by Snøhetta called “Himmelhaven”. 
This will, eventually, be the ﬁ rst building done in Denmark by the interna-
tionally known Norwegian architectural ﬁ rm (Ordrupgaard b, 2016). 
Figure 6.  Himmelhaven by Snøhetta (Ordrupgaard 2016)
MOESGAARD MUSEUM
Architects: Henning Larsen Architects and landscape architects Kris-
tine Jensens Tegnestue
Engineers: COWI
Size: 15,500 m2
Opened: 2014
Moesgaard Museum is an archaeological and ethnographical museum 
from 1970 and is known for the mummy Grauballemanden. The museum 
was originally placed in an old manor, now situated next to the new 
museum. The old manor is now used for teaching by the University of 
Aarhus. On October 2014, the offi  cial opening of the new 15,500 m2 
and 393 million Dkk museum took place (Rottensten, 2015). Due to 
Moesgaard being an archaeological, museum the museum is being placed 
under ground. It also ensured not to destroy the beautiful landscape in 
which the manor is built. The roof is earth covered and follows the natural 
sloping of the site, making the large building volume become part of the 
landscape (Bundegaard, 2014).  
Figure 7. The new Moesgaard museum (Henning Larsen Architects, 2016)
==PAGE:17==
7
THE MUSEUM OF DANISH RESISTANCE
Architects: Lundgaard & Tranberg Arkitekter
Engineers: EKJ, Dansk Energi Management & Esbensen and ÅF Light-
ing – Hansen og Henneberg
Size: 1600 m2 
Opening: end of 2018
The old Museum of Danish Resistance caught ﬁ re 28 April of 2013. 
It was too damaged to be rebuild, but all of the exhibition was saved 
(National Museum of Denmark, 2016). A competition for building a new 
Museum of Danish Resistance at the same site was therefore made in 
2014 (National Museum of Denmark, 2014). The museum is planned 
to be 1600 m2, where 1300 m2 is planned to be placed underground. 
The only spaces placed above the ground is an ellipse shaped entrance 
building and the waste storage (Indreby Lokaludvalg, 2016). The entrance 
building in 2 stories will contain shop, info desk, cafeteria and auditorium, 
and the rest of the building site is to be a lowered gravel garden. Below 
ground the museum is planned to be a big rectangular exhibition space 
with the ellipse shape in the middle containing stairs, elevators, a smaller 
exhibition space and small niches (National Museum of Denmark, 2015).
Figure 8. The gravel garden and the entrance building visualized by Lun-
dgaard & Tranberg Arkitekter (National Museum of Denmark 2016)
CISTERNERNE
Architects: Københavns Vandforsyning
Engineers: Københavns Vandforsyning
Size: 4320 m2
Opening: 1856
Cisternerne is an old water reservoir from 1856. The placement in a hill, 
made it possible to provide pressure to the water to reach the top of 
the newly build tall town-houses in Copenhagen. The water was pumped 
from nearby lakes into the reservoir. The Cholera epidemic in 1853 caused 
4.300 deaths in Copenhagen and clean water supplied by reservoir was 
one of the means to avoid similar epidemics. The reservoir was open 
towards the ambient as a pond in front of the nearby castle until 1891, 
where a grass covered concrete roof was constructed to avoid contami-
nation. In 1933, the reservoir was no longer used, but it was not emptied 
from water until 1981. As a part of Copenhagen being the culture city 
of 1996, the reservoir was turned into an exhibition space. Cisternerne 
consist of 3 big 4.3 m high rooms with pillars and a RH constantly close 
to 100%. Stalactites are naturally present at Cisternerne adding to the 
cave-like atmosphere. The walls are made of granite and ﬂ oor of concrete 
and neither is insulated. There is no heating system and is, thus, closed 
from December to February (Cisternerne a, 2016).
Figure 9. Interior view of Cisternerne (Cisternerne b, 2016).
==PAGE:18==
8
OTHER UNDERGROUND MUSEUMS IN DENMARK
Many underground or partly underground museums exist in Denmark. 
The following is a description of some of the some of them but and not 
all of the Danish underground museum spaces will be mentioned.
A great number of other Danish museum buildings have extended their 
building volumes with underground extensions. In 2014, the listed 
museum building, Den Frie, had 1000 m2 ﬂ oor area added underground 
by Bente Lange Arkitekter. This space is used for a bookstore, storage 
and additional exhibition space (A.P Møller Fonden a, 2014). In the 
dense center of Copenhagen, Lundgaard & Tranberg Architects designed 
additional exhibition space below ground for The Worker's Museum in 
2005 (Lundgaard & Tranberg Architects b, 2016). The Danish Castles 
Centre had a new exhibition building designed by Lundgaard and 
Tranberg Architects in 2013 (A.P Møller Fonden b, 2014). Most of the 
Figure 10. The unbuilt underground Jorn museum by Utzon (Silkeborgarkiv, 
2016)
1200 m2 building is placed underground. The use of corten steel for the 
visible part of the building and the placement below ground level gives 
the volume more of a ruin- than building appearance that ﬁ ts with the 
area (The Danish Castle Centre, 2016).
During the renovation of Glyptoteket, the museum was also added 
underground exhibition space (Bygtek, 2006) and The Black Diamond 
by schmidt hammer lassen architects built in 1999 (DAC, 2016) has the 
National Museum of Photography placed in the basement (VisitCopenha-
gen b, 2016). One unbuilt, but well known reference is the underground 
Asger Jorn museum by Utzon, proposed in 1964. It was meant to be built 
in Silkeborg, but was never constructed due to technical diffi  culties and 
in 1982 an entirely diff erent museum was constructed (Museum Jorn, 
2016).
Another type of underground museums are the ones exhibiting 
underground attractions such as excavated ruins. Examples of these 
are The "Gråbrødrekloster Museet" being placed 3 m below a pedestrian 
street in Aalborg (The Historical Museum of Northern Jutland, 2016) 
and Sankt Laurentius Museum placed 2 m below the ground in Roskilde 
(Sankt Laurentius, 2016). For these exhibitions an above ground museum 
is obviously not an option.
Figure 11. Undergrond gallery at The Danish Castles Center (Lundgaard & 
Tranberg Architects c, 2016)
==PAGE:19==
9
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Based on the presented cases it can be seen that underground museums 
are a highly relevant subject. The reasons for building museums 
underground are numerous and will diff er from case to case. Being placed 
in a beautiful landscape, at a historical site or dense urban areas can 
cause at least parts of the museums to be placed underground. It is not 
the potential for a lower energy use which have made designers build 
underground but rather architectural visions or limitations of the sites. 
The two Danish architecture ﬁ rms, BIG and Lundgaard & Tranberg 
Architects, can be seen to have had a great impact on the use of this 
typology, as both architectural companies have designed underground 
museums as well as being in the process of designing two new 
underground museums each. The typology is popular among the next 
generation of architects as the underground museum is a popular 
topic among many master thesis projects at the architecture school of 
Copenhagen (according to Ryhl-Svendsen appendix 02).
In the past, ideas like the Jorn museum did not turn into built projects 
due to technical diffi  culties. But now, a large amount of underground 
museums is being build. This thesis will investigate this building typology 
from an energy perspective. Due to the large amount of projects recently 
being build, it would be useful if these projects were monitored and 
researched thoroughly in order to identify initial as well as long term 
challenges and beneﬁ ts in regards to both structure, maintenance and 
building energy.
UNDERGROUND MUSEUMS WORLDWIDE
The underground museum is not a Danish typology, as many fully or partly 
underground museums are built or are planned to be build world-wide. 
One of the most famous is the underground extension of Louvre done 
by M Pei in 1989 (Goldberger, 1989) and another well-known example is 
the underground passageways underneath The Jewish Museum of Berlin 
done by Daniel Liebeskind (berlin.de 2016). 
The underground museum is, in the near future, going to be relevant 
to discuss internationally. A master-plan done by BIG architects for the 
Smithsonian will connect the existing museum buildings by underground 
connections, galleries, a store and an auditorium. The big project is 
expected to costs 2 billion US$ and the construction is to start in 5-7 
years and take up to 20 years to complete (The Washington Post, 2014). 
An 80 million GBP underground museum is planned in Dorset, England 
(BBC, 2015) and in 2017 an entirely underground museum in New Delhi 
is to exhibit art, culture and architectural history (Verma, 2015).
Figure 12. The glass pyramids of Louvre serving as skylights for the under-
ground parts of the museum (PlanetWare, 2016)
==PAGE:20==
10
04  Indoor Climate for   
preservation
In order to estimate set point values for an indoor climate at a museum a 
short review of the environmental factors was made. It was not possible 
to ﬁ nd set point values that can be used for all museum collections, but 
guideline values of 40-60% RH, no more than 25 ºC and limited daylight 
are suitable for many museums.
When designing museum buildings, it is important to remember that the 
indoor climate demands are not solely based on user comfort, but also on 
preventive conservation of museum artefacts. Preservation is a separate 
ﬁ eld of study mainly practised by conservation specialists. However, as 
an engineer a basic knowledge of the subject is needed in order to work 
with energy use of museums. The aim of the preservation is to limit the 
need for conservation work on the objects as the treatment will change 
the artefacts and reduce the authenticity (Ryhl-Svendsen and Padﬁ eld, 
2003).
Diff erent materials have diff erent requirements and taking this into 
account can maximize the lifespan of the museum collection (Erhardt, 
Tumosa and Mecklenburg, 2007). At the same time, there is a lack of 
scientiﬁ c evidence for strict environmental standards for preservation 
(Padﬁ eld, 2007). Recommendations has been based mainly on building 
regulations, limitations of the HVAC systems and costs of implementation 
and maintenance and only recent research has provided a scientiﬁ c basis 
for the recommended values (Erhardt et al., 2007). Recent suggested 
values for ﬂ uctuations allow for much larger deviations in temperature 
and RH than traditionally used in many museums (Atkinson, 2014)
HUMIDITY
The relative humidity (RH) is a very important factor in preservation. 
When designing a indoor climate for museums three factors are to be 
determined in regards to the RH. The ﬁ rst is the set point value, the 
second is the allowable ﬂ uctuation and the ﬁ nal parameter to specify is 
the seasonal drift (Erhardt et al, 1995).
Earlier on, recommendations were based on a RH of 55%, but this was 
mainly based on the value being the midpoint value between the higher 
limit for avoiding mould at 70% and the lower limit for avoiding embrittle-
ment at 40%. There is no evidence that 55% is the optimal RH for many 
types of materials and, furthermore, strict limits on the ﬂ uctuations of 
+/- 4-5% has been based on limitations of the ventilation systems rather 
than knowledge of preservation (Erhardt, Tumosa and Mecklenburg, 
2007). Studies have shown that much larger deviations such as 35-60% 
RH could be used in many museums having 40% RH +/-5% in winter and 
55% RH +/-5% in the summer (Mecklenburg and Tomusa, 1999). 
The shrinking and swelling of wood will be aff ected by both temperatures 
and RH but according to The Smithsonian Center for Materials Research 
and Education (SCMRE) the latter is considered the most important. This 
is due to temperatures having a more even eff ect on the wood all the 
way though the material whereas the RH will aff ect the outer layer of 
wood ﬁ rst. The stress created in the wood due to the uneven humidity 
levels can then cause cracking. Painting or other surface treatments to 
the wood will then be damaged as well (Olstad and Haugen, 2007).
Care is also to be taken with micro climates near the artefacts. Behind 
e.g. paintings small air gaps can be found in which the micro climate diff er 
from the rest of the room. Due to the condensation on exterior walls 
the RH can thus reach 100% behind the painting. It is possible to have 
ﬂ uctuations from 30 to 100% in these air gaps while having the interior 
of a room at a constant 50% RH. Consequently, the stretcher expansion 
can cause cracking of the painting. At 80% RH and above, the paint is of 
risk of delamination of from the canvas due to the glue not working as a 
bond, the paint ﬁ lm becoming very ﬂ exible but weak and if being loose 
the canvas would be exposed to shrinking (Mecklenburg, 2007). 
==PAGE:21==
11
Furthermore, most insects rely on high relative humidity and high moisture 
contents in the materials to survive. Finally, eggs and young larvae of 
furniture beetles do not survive at RH below 65% (Child, 2007). However, 
some objects might have been exposed to a high RH for centuries and 
will be damaged by lowering the RH to the traditional guideline values 
(Padﬁ eld, 2013)
The governing body of culture in Denmark prescribes that the RH must 
be in the range of 40% to 60% but recommends a 45% to 55% range if 
possible. (Agency for Culture and Palaces a, 2016). The RH may never 
exceed 70% but certain metals, photographic materials etc. will need a 
lower RH, having recommended ranges as low as 15-30% (Agency for 
Culture and Palaces b, 2016). Fluctuations in RH is considered more 
harmful than temperature ﬂ uctuations. Therefore, the temperatures can 
be used as a mean for controlling the RH (Agency for Culture and Palaces 
a 2016). 
TEMPERATURE
Increasing the temperature will decrease the RH. Using heating systems 
in previously unheated buildings can, thus, cause damage to e.g. wooden 
artefacts if the lowering of RH is not taken into account (Olstad and 
Haugen, 2007). However, even when the inﬂ uence of temperatures on 
the RH is not regarded, the temperature is an important factor. Higher 
temperatures can accelerate chemical reactions leading to faster deteri-
oration (Hornbeck, 2009). 
The temperature also plays a large role in the control of insects. These 
will primarily live in the micro climates behind pictures, embedded in 
materials etc. Insects are cold blooded and are therefore often depend on 
external heat sources. Small insects have a large surface to body volume 
ratio and will have an increased dependency on the climate conditions. 
Most insects have optimal living conditions between 20 and 35 ºC with 
higher activity levels and reproduction levels with higher temperatures. 
However, at temperatures above 35 degrees for longer periods of time 
insects will often dry out. Temperatures below 15 ºC tend to limit ﬂ ying, 
mating and egg laying (Child, 2007). Below 10 ºC insect movements stop 
and they start to hibernate. Insects at all stages will die at temperatures 
below -10 ºC and this principal is therefore used for pest control. Other 
treatments such as insecticides are not eff ective below 20 ºC due to the 
lowering of activity and are therefore less likely to get in contact with 
the poison.
For many centuries paper has been the predominant media for storing 
knowledge, and several of medieval artefacts are proof of the durability 
of the media. However, during the 19th century there was an increased 
demand for paper and high quality materials were replaced by inferior 
(Balažic et al., 2007). The use of acid in paper for bleaching causes 
paper to degenerate rapidly. However, a decrease of temperature of 5 ºC 
increases the longevity of paper by a factor 2 (Balažic et al., 2007). As 
a result, temperatures are recommended to be in the range of 2-18 ºC 
(Agency for Culture and Palaces b, 2016 and ISO 11799, 2015).
Due to the comfort of the users the temperature levels are kept at the 
comfort range in the exhibitions at the expense of long term preserva-
tion (Mecklenburg & Tumosa, 1999). However, the prioritizing between 
comfort and preservation will diff er from museum to museum (Ry-
hl-Svendsen, appendix 02)
LIGHT
Since light on museum subjects are needed for the visitors to see the 
exhibition, light damage cannot be avoided. Daylight is the natural 
available light source and is emitted at a wide range of diff erent wave 
lengths. However, only radiation in the range between 380 to 780 nm 
can be seen and is, therefore, what is regarded as light. Below 380 nm 
it is considered UV and above 780 nm it is considered infrared light (IR) 
(Jacobs, 2004). Some harmful chemical reactions are in need of light 
and especially UV-light (Grzywacz, 2006). UV light cause fading and 
degradation of organic material but can be almost fully ﬁ ltered by glass 
panes. The long wave IR light cause heating which can result in damages 
by shrinking due to dehydration. With the use of coated glass, most of the 
==PAGE:22==
12
IR spectrum can be ﬁ ltered as well (Huber, 2007). The governing body of 
culture in Denmark has made speciﬁ c demands for maximal light (lux) and 
UVmax (μW/lm) in regards to diff erent exhibited materials (Agency for 
Culture and Palaces b 2016). It is however recommended that no UV light 
is present in exhibition areas and UVmax is therefore only to be used in 
cases where UV light can not be avoided.
The Canadian Conservation Institute has implemented some dynamic 
lighting guidelines in which it is allowed to have higher light levels for 
some time if the overall light exposure is compensated with time with 
lower light levels (Druzik and Eshøj, 2007) thereby it is e.g. allowed to 
increase light levels from 50 lux to 150 lux for an hour if the light is 
turned off  for the next 2 hours since the sum in both cases are 150 lxh. 
The Danish regulations can allow a similar approach since it is stated that 
“light dosage” can be used as an alternative method (Agency for Culture 
and Palaces a, 2016).
Whether to choose sunlight or electrical lights for museums depend 
on many aspects and preferences that aff ect both conservation of the 
exhibition as well as the energy consumption. The exhibition should be lit 
in order to be viewed by the public and daylight can be used by museums 
in order to lower their energy consumption (Schollmeyer, 2007). However, 
all light and especially daylight is harmful to most types of collections. 
Therefore, the solar gain must be controlled if natural light is used and 
the quality of light in the exhibit area is to be regarded (Bazianac and 
Winkelmann, 1989) 
POLLUTANTS
The pollutants can be in both solid, liquid and gaseous forms. It must 
be noted that pollutants that are harmful to people are not necessarily 
harmful to exhibited materials and vice versa. Many types of pollutants in 
the indoor air can cause harm to the exhibited objects. Some gases tend 
to form acid through chemical reactions and others, like ozone, causes 
oxidation. All of these chemical reactions happens faster when the 
temperature is higher. Some reactions like hydrolysis requires humidity, 
but all decay is a function of the quantity of pollutants in contact with 
the material (Ryhl-Svendsen, 2005). 
Particles are suspended in the air, but depending on the size they will 
deposit at diff erent times. Large particles will fall down much faster than 
small particles due to gravity (Ryhl-Svendsen, 2005). Larger particles 
(dust) can be visible when depositing on surfaces and cleaning can be 
time consuming as well as potentially dangerous for fragile artefacts 
(Lloyd et al., 2009).
Pollutants can come from the exterior air, like SO2 or from the interior 
like the compounds released by building materials, furnitures etc. 
These compounds can be divided into primary emission, i.e. drying of 
paint, and secondary emissions, i.e. material decomposition. Primary 
emissions will decrease relatively fast. Whereas secondary emissions 
will continue through the lifetime of the product. Carboxolitic acids are 
the main group of compounds causing deterioration and are released 
from paint glue etc. It can cause corrosion in metals like copper as well 
as in lead glass. Calcareous materials like shells and pottery can as well 
be corroded by carboxyl (Gryzwacz, 2006). 
There is a relation between the concentration of pollutants and the air 
exchange rate. Large spaces will have higher air exchange than micro 
environments and there is, therefore, higher concentration in display 
cases and storage cabinets than in the general storage area. The gallery 
spaces have the highest air exchange and, thus, the lowest concen-
tration of pollutants (Grzywacz, 2006). The governing body of culture 
in Denmark does not have limits for the amount of pollutants allowed 
in museums. However, as a museum space should be able to achieve 
category II indoor climate of max 500 ppm CO2 above outdoors (DS/EN 
15251, 2007), ventilation will be used for removing some pollutants. 
==PAGE:23==
13
GUIDELINES
Indoor climates for museums are not based on regulations but on 
guidelines, as the requirements will diff er based on the museum 
collection. The museum has the largest knowledge of the collection and 
have to pay for the instalment and running of the systems The require-
ments will therefore be set by the museum. (Ryhl-Svendsen, appendix 
02). The chosen set points values are a compromise of preservation and 
human comfort. The recommended climate for conservation of certain 
materials and the recommended climate for comfort have only very few 
overlaps as seen in Table 1 and Table 2. Some materials like fur require 
very strict indoor climate conditions whereas materials like stone has 
very low demands in all categories. Generally, the temperature range for 
conservation are below the temperature range for occupants. The Addi-
tionally, much higher light levels are recommended for occupants than 
for the museum collection. Working areas are required to have at least 
a 2% daylight factor, but this rule can be dispensed if compliance would 
be detrimental to the operation of the activity (Building Regulations 
b, 2016). However, for conservation of all materials low daylight is 
recommended. The daylight requirements for comfort and preservation 
are thus completely opposite. The RH set points for preventive conser-
vation is in this sense unproblematic, since most materials require RH 
ranges that comply with comfort needs.
Due to the lack of matching temperature and lighting ranges for comfort 
and conservation, the values will be a compromise. Certain museums will 
favour the requirements of the occupants, whereas other museums will 
Table 2.  Indoor climate standards for occupants (DS/EN 15251, 2007 and 
DS /EN 12464, 2011)
Table 3.  International Environmental guidelines for museums (International 
Council of Museums, 2016)
Table 1.  Recommended climate based on materials (Agency for Culture and 
Palaces, 2016)
light min
UV max
temp
RH
(lux)
(μW/lm)
(⁰C)
(%)
DS/EN 15251, Conference room 
20-26
25-60
DS/EN15251, Auditorium 
20-26
25-60
DS/EN15251, Department store 
16-25
25-60
DS/EN 12464, Auditorium
500
DS/EN 12464, Reading areas
500
DS/EN 12464, Circulation areas
100
DS/EN 12464, Bookshelves
200
temp
RH
Ramping
(⁰C)
(%)
Bizot
16-25
40-60 
Temp: 10% +/- in 24 h
AICCM
15-25
45-55 
+/- 4% Temp and +/- 5% RH per 24 h 
AICCM (with drift)
15-26
40-60 
RH: +/- 5% per 24 hr
AIC
15-25
45-55 
+/- 4% Temp and +/- 5% RH per 24 h
light max
UV max
temp
RH
(lux)
(μW/lm)
(⁰C)
(%)
Botanic material
50
70
15-20
40-60
Bones
200
10
15-20
45-60
Ceramics
500
75
15-20
40-60
Fur
50
75
18
50-55
Fossils
500
75
15-20
30-60
Gypsum
500
75
15-20
40-60
Metals
500
75
15-20
40- 61
Paintings, thick colourlayer
200
75
15-20
40-62
Paintings, thin colourlayer
50
75
15-20
40-63
Paper
50
75
2-18
30-45
Photographic positives
50
75
(-3)-18
30-50
Photographic negatives
50
75 (-10)-21
20-50
Stone
500
75
15-20
30-60
Wood, untreated
200
75
15-21
45-60
Wood
200
75
15-22
30-45
==PAGE:24==
14
favour the conservation of the exhibition (Ryhl-Svendsen, appendix 02). 
No single international guideline has been elevated to a status of being 
the offi  cial standard and thus many diff erent can be used (ICC, 2014) 
although many of the guidelines propose similar indoor climates (Table 3). 
If the guideline values should be set in accordance to the local climate in 
order to lower energy use is in an ongoing discussion in the conservation 
community (Atkinson, 2014).
CONCLUSION
The maximum allowed temperature of 25 ºC and a RH ranging from 
40-60% or 45-55% from the Agency for culture and Palaces complies 
with international guidelines (Table 3). 
Since many artefacts consist of many types of materials and that ma-
terials respond diff erently to RH, temperatures, light and pollutants the 
speciﬁ cation of appropriate levels of these factors are very complex. No 
indoor climate set points can be used for all museums and all collections. 
The values will thus have to be estimated in each case by the conserva-
tors but standard values should be usable in most cases. 
In the continued work of this thesis 40-60% RH and 20-25 ºC will be 
used as set points. It must, however, be noted that certain zones could 
be in need of either smaller bandwidths depending on the exhibition. If 
possible larger bandwiths could be used for at least part of the exhibition 
areas where no sensitive objects are placed in order to lower the energy 
use.
==PAGE:25==
15
05  Set points in practice
Based on information from museum personnel, engineers as well as 
articles a study on the actually used set points in museums was made. 
As to be seen the values diff er greatly due to the diff erent types of 
collections and diff erent types of museums. Some museums allow only 
for very small deviations in temperature and RH whereas other museums 
have no limits for indoor climate parameters. 
The energy consumption of a building is to a certain extend a result of 
the passive systems (insulation, windows, wall thickness etc.) and the 
active systems (ventilation, heating etc.). However, determining the set 
points for the indoor climate, and thereby the performance goals of the 
building, has a big inﬂ uence on the energy use. If no requirements for the 
indoor climate are set, then there is no need for any energy use of the 
systems. Furthermore, two identical museums with the same systems 
may have very diff erent energy consumptions if the requirements for the 
indoor climate a set diff erently. 
The 2015 building regulations requires an energy use of new buildings to 
be below 41,0 kWh/m2 per year not including electricity for appliances. By 
2018, this requirement is expected to be lowered to 25 kWh/m2 (Building 
Regulations, 2016). However, an annual energy use of 400-500 kWh/
m2 is common for museums even in moderate climates. Such a large 
energy use is naturally a large part of the museum budget, minimizing 
funds for other museum activities (Larsen & Padﬁ eld, 2011). Allowing for 
larger ﬂ uctuations in the indoor climate, great energy as well as ﬁ nancial 
savings could be made.
An example of this is Cisternene which has no insulation, temperature 
control, lighting or ventilation. No set points are set as the indoor climate 
is not actively controlled. Only a small local heater is sometimes placed 
next to the ticket sale stand in the small entrance building on the ground. 
The temperatures are passively controlled by the thermal mass of the 
concrete walls, ﬂ oors, ceiling and the adjacent layers of soil. The RH is 
constantly close to 100% and the humidity results in a deformation of 
the concrete and causes stalactites to be formed. There are no skylights 
and electrical lighting is usually only sparsely used in the installations. 
The low light levels, temperatures and high RH is therefore a deliberate 
part of the museum experience. The indoor climate limits the possible 
types of exhibitions but is also a part of what makes Cisternerne a unique 
museum. The museum is often used for special art installations in which 
artiﬁ cial lighting such as candles or lamps are an integrated part of the 
exhibition. 
The exhibitions will sometimes need some electricity but in general 
the energy use is extremely low. Based on the energy bills provided by 
Cisternerne for this thesis, it can be seen that the annual energy use 
was in the range of 2.4-2.9 kWh/m2 from 2012-2015. Thus, It is possible 
to achieve an energy use close to zero without using insulation or 
renewables. The goal is achieved by simply not having indoor climate 
requirements. However, this method does have some quite signiﬁ cant 
limitations. The museum has to be closed in the winter and the indoor 
climate would not be acceptable if visitors were to stay there for longer 
periods of time. But since there is typically only one large installation, 
visitors are not meant to be in Cisternerne for longer periods of time and 
the indoor climate conditions, like the lack of lighting, is often an essential 
part of the art work.
A similar approach has been used for Rudolf Tegner's Museum as it has 
no external energy supply. Thick concrete walls with no insulation keeps 
temperatures stable and suffi  cient lighting is provided only by a glass 
roof. A large ceiling height and natural ventilation is the only measures 
used to ensure suffi  cient air quality. The RH is high most of the year, but 
due to the robustness of the exhibition this not an issue. Like Cisternerne, 
the lack of systems limits the season as Rudolf Tegners Museum is only 
open in the summer (Larsen and Padﬁ eld, 2011).
If the requirements for the indoor climate can be relaxed in certain areas 
==PAGE:26==
16
of a museum building large energy savings could be made and it would 
lower the initial costs of system components due to downsizing. With 
the use of recent and more ﬂ exible guidelines, the cost of the construc-
tion of the Udvar-Hazy Center annex to the National Air and Space 
Museum of the Smithsonian Institution was reduced by approximately 
$10 million (10%). Furthermore, implementation of the new guidelines 
in the Smithsonian museums resulted in $2.7 million $ of energy savings 
for the second half of 2006 out of 32 million $ of energy costs for the 
whole of 2006 (Erhardt et al., 1999). It has been stated that: “Up to 50 
percent of construction costs for new museums and archival storage 
facilities may go toward highly overbuilt heating and cooling systems. 
Most museums can adequately protect their collections with commer-
cially available technology, such as the heating and cooling systems used 
in grocery or retail stores.” (Schultz, 1994). Similar tendecies could be 
Through design notes recieved by Rambøll it can be seen that the 
competition brief for the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark contained 
strict requirements for the indoor climate. The requirements were, 
however, not set according to the the needs of the collection. As a result, 
the set points for indoor climate was adjusted several times during the 
design. In the competition brief, the requirements were set to be 20 
ºC+/- 1 and 50 %RH +/- 3. However, later in the design it was determined 
that the indoor climate should only be set according to the comfort of 
visitors and the employees. Since the conservation of the exhibit should 
not be taken into account it was possible aim for 20 ºC–26 ºC and a RH of 
30%-70%. Today, there is no control of the RH in the museum and tem-
peratures are within the range of 20-24 ºC. The initial requirements were 
therefore signiﬁ cantly diff erent than what is used in the end. 
An example of having deliberately relaxed indoor climate requirements 
from the early stages of design in order to lower the energy use is the 
new Museum of Danish Resistance. In the competition brief (The National 
Museum of Denmark, 2014) the requirements for the indoor climate are 
set and the building is to live up to the requirements of energy class 
2020. The building is divided into two zones. Zone 1 being the service 
area is to live up to the standards of the building regulation concerning 
the employees. Zone 2 is the exhibition area and in this area large ﬂ uc-
tuations are allowed. The RH is allowed to be in the range of 30-70%. 
The temperature settings are relying on the ambient temperatures and 
are set to be min. 15 ºC in the winter and max. 25 ºC in the summer. The 
competition brief speciﬁ es that no mechanical cooling is to be used to 
keep the 25 ºC threshold. The broad range of temperatures and RH is, 
thus, used to get a low energy consumption. However, daylighting in 
Zone 2 was not preferable and in the assessment panel report the four 
teams not winning the competition received criticism for having allowed 
daylight to enter into the exhibition area. The argument for this critic 
was that the staging of a ﬂ exible exhibition room should be done by 
the exhibited artefacts and not by room itself (The National Museum of 
Denmark, 2015). By not using daylight, the total energy consumption 
could be higher, although it will lower the cooling demand. By specifying 
realistic values for the set points in the competition brief, the architects 
and engineers get a possibility of designing active and passive systems 
for the museum which match these requirements.
There is a great diff erence in the allowed temperature and RH ranges in 
Danish museums in practice, which are both much above and below the 
guidelines (Table 4). There is a tendency for art museums to have more 
strict requirements for the indoor climate than cultural- or natural history 
museums even though the exhibition might consist of the same type 
of materials. This could be due to art museums tending to exhibit more 
expensive artefacts than other museums (Ryhl-Svendsen, appendix 02). 
The art museum Louisiana has the set points closer than required in 
relation to the guideline values in order to make sure to stay within 
the limits. In order to ensure that the RH is always within 45-55% 
RH, the system is set to keep the RH between 47-53%. Likewise, the 
temperature is set with a very narrow dead band of 20-24 ºC with no 
seasonal ramping. If the system for some reason is not able to cope with 
very high loads, then the temperatures are allowed to be increased half a 
degree in order to keep the RH within the limits.
==PAGE:27==
17
Table 4.  Set points for indoor requirements in Danish museums buildings. 
Data from Liselund is based on Larsen and Padﬁ eld (2011) and data of the 
Museum of Danish Resistance is based on the competition brief. All other 
data is provided by the staff  of the museums or engineering companies. 
Museums not only contain historic artefacts but can be historic objects 
themselves. In old museum buildings such as Thorvaldsens Museum or 
the country house in Liselund, it is not possible to maintain a very stable 
indoor climate. Thorvaldsens museum cannot achieve yearly stable tem-
peratures but keep the RH very stable. The country house in Liselund has 
no heating but a dehumidiﬁ cation system is used to keep the RH at 60%. 
This rather limited modiﬁ cation of the indoor climate results in an energy 
use of 20 kWh/m3 per year (Larsen and Padﬁ eld, 2011).
One thing is to specify what to aim for, another is how to measure it. 
RH can be diffi  cult to measure precisely (Padﬁ eld, 2013). Even the best 
sensors might have a calibration error of around +/-1 % but are prone 
to much larger deviations if not calibrated properly (Schellenberg, 2013). 
In between these calibrations the accuracy will drift. Understanding the 
amount of drift is more important for making measurements than the 
initial precision (Appel, 2010). The measurements are also prone to errors 
caused by condensation in the instrument or contamination of chemicals, 
cleaners sponges etc. Finally, the measurement of RH, temperature 
etc. are aff ected by the position of the sensors in the room. By moving 
sensors in a room very, diff erent results can be obtained and deﬁ ne if 
the indoor climate values seem to be within the prescribed range (Kiær, 
appendix 04).
DISCUSSION
The general requirements for a museum are loosely deﬁ ned in the 
guidelines and will in practice diff er greatly depending on the type of 
collection, the type of building and the museum´s approach to indoor 
climate.
In theory, all buildings could have a very low energy use if all systems were 
turned off . But it would result in very poor indoor climates and is, thus, 
not advisable. It is, however, advisable to specify the set points based on 
a thorough analysis of the use of the building. If e.g. users are allowed to 
wear coats in the exhibition and/or if user are expected to have a higher 
than normal activity level the temperatures could be lowered. 
An integrated design approach including all actors is needed in order to 
establish the overall goals of design. This is needed in order to achieve 
the smallest energy use while still providing a suffi  cient indoor climate 
for both users and preservation. Knowing the goals early in the design 
process can result in much lower energy consumptions and costs as early 
optimization initiatives has much more impact than initiatives done near 
the end (Löhnert, Dalkowski and Sutter, 2003).
CONCLUSION
It is clear that the actual indoor climate at museums diff er from the 
guidelines due to the museums being very diff erent types of buildings 
with diff erent exhibitions. Therefore, some museums have very large 
energy consumption whereas others use very little energy. In the design 
of a new museum, care should be taken to determine the required indoor 
climate for the exhibition at an early stage in order to design the ideal 
active and passive systems. 
Museum
Temperatures
RH
Cisternene
No requirements No requirements
The Museum of Danish Resistance
15-25 ⁰C
30-70%
Liselund
0-20 ⁰C
approx 60%
Louisiana
20-24 ⁰C
47-53%
Thorvaldsens Museum (Area 1)
18-24
50-60 %
Thorvaldsens Museum (Area 2)
18-24
30-43 % 
Ragnarock
20-26
50-60%
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark (phase I) 19-21 ⁰C
47-53%
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark (phase II) 20-26 ⁰C
30-70%
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark (in use)
20-24 ⁰C
No requirements
The National Museum (standard)
max 25 ⁰C*
40-60%
The Viking Ship Museum
18-25
40-60%
*The lower limit is not known
==PAGE:28==
18
vapour as described in the following formula:
(3) 
where :
The vapour pressure will consequently increase if the mass of vapour 
increases. 
The ventilation system is a mean of controlling the RH in the air. By 
supplying dry air to a humid room, the RH will decrease due to the mixing 
of the air. If humidity loads, such as humans, are present in a room, a RH 
of the supply air being lower than the RH of the room can be used to 
equalize the vapour production of the occupants. Such calculations can 
be made using the following formula:
(4) 
where:
06  Relative humidity
As people are a source of both vapour and heat, the number of visitors 
have a large inﬂ uence on the RH and total energy use of a museum. 
Studies on moisture accumulation indicated that cellular concrete could 
be used to lower the need for humidity control as long as the air change 
rate is low. The humidity calculations in IDA ICE was analysed and a wall 
component capable of moisture transport was implemented.
Controlling RH can be very energy consuming. Knowledge on the factors 
inﬂ uencing RH is, therefore, important as the control in reality can be 
very complex. The relative humidity is a term describing the ratio of the 
vapour pressure in relation to the saturated vapour pressure at a given 
temperature (Rode, 2016):
(1) 
where: 
The saturated vapour pressure indicates the maximum amount of vapour 
that can be stored in the air. If more vapour is present, it will condensate. 
The RH can consequently never be larger than 1. The saturated vapour 
pressure at any temperature can be found as:
(2)
where:
The RH will therefore decrease if the temperature is increased. The 
vapour pressure is related to the temperature and the mass of water 
==PAGE:29==
19
The humidity supplied or extracted by the ventilation system can, based 
on Eq. (4), be used to keep a stable RH. But many factors have an inﬂ uence 
on the RH of a museum space (Figure 13). Users will aff ect both the heat 
balance and the vapour balance. Evaporation and respiration will cause 
water vapour and the metabolic rate causes heat. Moisture buff ering 
in materials can stabilize the RH by adding or removing moisture from 
the room similar to thermal mass keeping temperatures stable. The 
temperature of the room is inﬂ uenced by many factors. The heat ﬂ ux to 
and from the building parts, the heating- and ventilation system and heat 
loads such as humans.
If the RH is outside the limits of the set points values, the ventilation 
system can be used to add or remove moisture. Ventilation can be both 
natural, mechanical or a combination. The type of system used will 
naturally have a large inﬂ uence on the energy use. Based on measure-
ments of the temperatures and the RH, the set points of the control 
system will adjust the ventilation and heating systems. 
The simpliﬁ ed balance (Figure 13) has two active systems (heating and 
ventilation) and three uncontrollable sources (heat transfer, moisture 
buff er and user behaviour). The heat transfer is depending on the passive 
systems as well as the internal and external climate conditions. 
Energy is only used by the active systems. In order to obtain a low energy 
use, the need for these systems will have to be as low as possible. By 
relaxing the set points, the systems will need to be activated less and 
the energy use will be lowered. This can off  course only be done if a more 
unstable indoor climate is not causing damage to the museum collection 
or discomfort for the occupants. The passive systems should be designed 
in such a way that the need for active systems is limited. A stable heat 
transfer will result in more stable temperatures and, in the end, a more 
stable RH. Similarly, a good moisture buff ering capability can minimize the 
need for ventilation to control the amount of vapour. As user behaviour is 
a large source of both heat and vapour, it will have a large eff ect on the 
total energy use. This factor is, however, the hardest one to control as 
Zone
 temperature
Heating
Ventilation
Vapour
Moisture
Buffering
Relative 
humidity
User behavior
Heat transfer
+/-
C
o
C
o
Set points
Figure 13.  The inﬂ uence of users and active systems on the RH
people enter museums when they want to and not necessarily when it 
would be suitable for the total energy use. Studies of visitor patterns in 
museums are therefore done (Section 08 and 07) in order to make more 
realistic simulations.
==PAGE:30==
20
Many museums do not allow visitors to bring jackets, trolleys, bags and 
similar objects into the exhibition areas partly due to theft. However, by 
prohibiting these potentially wet objects from the exhibition area, the 
humidity load can be decreased. To what extend wet clothes has an eff ect 
on the humidity loads has not been found in any studies. 
Standard values of evaporation by people are known for certain activities 
(Table 5). It can be seen that the loads diff er considerably depending on 
the type of activity done by the user. Of course these are only to be used 
to give an estimate as the actual amount of heat emitted is also depending 
on draught, temperatures, clo values etc.
HUMIDITY CONTROL 
The RH will usually be controlled by RH sensors placed either in the room 
or in the return air duct. Several methods can be used for humidifying and 
dehumidifying. There are three major types of dehumidiﬁ ers: desiccant 
dehumidiﬁ ers, spray dehumidiﬁ ers and refrigeration dehumidiﬁ ers.
The refrigeration dehumidiﬁ ers will dehumidify by cooling the air. The 
dehumidiﬁ cation is done by lowering the temperature of the air using 
a cooling coil until enough moisture is removed and then the air can 
be reheated using a reheating coil to avoid to low supply air. If used in 
combination with humidiﬁ cation, this system is called "constant-tempera-
ture, constant-humidity cycle" (ASHRAE, 2003).
Desiccant dehumidiﬁ ers use absorbing materials like silica gel to remove 
humidity from the air. Heat are then added in order to regenerate the 
absorption material (ASHRAE, 2003).
Spray coiled humidiﬁ ers works by ventilation air being passed through a 
chamber with water being sprayed. Dehumidiﬁ cation will occur when the 
temperature of the water is lower than the dew point of the air, whereas 
humidiﬁ cation will occur if the temperature is higher (Machinery Equipment 
Online, 2016). However, maintenance costs will usually make this system 
less desirable than the two previous mentioned systems (ASHRAE, 2003).
Several technologies can be used for adding humidity to the air including 
"evaporative" where dry air passes over a wet surface and make water 
evaporate (systemair, 2016). Steam humidiﬁ ers heat up water in order 
to produce steam and rotary humidiﬁ ers is based on a pad rotated from 
water to the inﬂ ow air in order to humidify (Brumbaugh, 2004). Ultrasonic 
humidiﬁ ers use a metal diaphragm vibrating at a high frequency and thus 
propelling moisture into the air (DAN FUGT, 2016). 
In addition to the internal humidity loads, there is also external loads to 
consider in order to supply air within the required boundaries. A visual tool 
for expressing the relation between RH, temperature and the speciﬁ c 
humidity is the Mollier diagram. This was used to study changes of the 
air through an Air Handling Unit (AHU) using the "constant-temperature, 
constant-humidity cycle". As an example of the diff erences in conditions, 
a summer and a winter case was made (Figure 15):
In the winter case (blue), the ambient air was -10 ºC and the RH was 
100% (1). When this air was heated up in the AHU, the temperature 
increased to 20 ºC and was blown into the exhibition space. If no humid-
iﬁ cation was made, the speciﬁ c humidity would remain the same but the 
RH would decrease to 11% (2). If the museum required at least 45% RH 
then humidiﬁ cation was needed. By applying 4.93 g/kg of vapour to the 
air, the RH was increased to 45% (3).
Table 5.  Humidity loads from activities. Drying clothes are based on a 24 
hour load.
Activity
g/h
Source
Sleeping
10-21
Oliver (1988)
Normal activity level
31-62
Oliver (1988)
Sitting
45
SBI 139 (1984)
Office work
60
SBI 139 (1984)
Shopping
90
SBI 139 (1984)
Cashier/kitchen work
120
SBI 139 (1984)
Drying clothes
125-313
Oliver (1988)
==PAGE:31==
21
-20
-15
-10
 -5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
41
45
50
0.005
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
RH
0.000
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
Temperature ºC
Specific humidity (kg/kg)
Enthalpy (kJ/kg)
0
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
0.030
0.035
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
Figure 15.  Changes of temperature, Speciﬁ c humidity and RH of ambient 
air through the AHU if 20 ºC air and RH of 45-55% is needed. The red dots 
indicate a summer scenario and blue a winter scenario.
In the summer case (red) where the ambient temperature was 28 ºC 
and the RH was 85%, then the speciﬁ c humidity was 0.020 kg/kg (1). 
When this air was cooled to 20 ºC then the RH was changed to 100% 
(2). However, since no more than 0.015 kg/kg of vapour can be stored 
at 20 ºC then 0.005kg/kg water would condensate. To get to a limit of 
55% RH at 20 ºC the air needed to be cooled even further to get more 
water to condensate and then be reheated to 20 ºC. Therefore, the air 
was cooled to 11 ºC to get the speciﬁ c humidity to be 0.008 kg/kg (3). 
This resulted in a RH of 55% when reheated to 20 ºC (4). To dry out the 
air is thus a very energy consuming process, since the air will be cooled 
down 17 ºC and then reheated 9 ºC, rather than just cooling down 7 ºC if 
the RH had been appropriate. Such a system will be more effi  cient if the 
reheating of air can partly be done by excess heat from the cooling coil, 
heat exchangers or similar methods for utilizing "free" heating.
MOISTURE BUFFERING
The sources of vapour in a museum space are typically the users and the 
supply air. The vapour is to be removed by the exhaust air, as no moisture 
sinks are typically present at museums (Padﬁ eld, appendix 03). However, 
some vapour might be absorbed or desorbed by the room or furniture 
surfaces. The amount of moisture in a room at any given point in time is 
a result of the balancing of the mentioned factors (Figure 14).
Typically, only the vapour production and ventilation is used in the calcu-
lations for indoor climate. But moisture buff ering could be used to lower 
the need for humidity control by removing the large peaks in vapour 
loads from the exhibition area. This principle is already used in storage 
facilities where e.g. large book collections will provide a large vapour 
buff er capability (Padﬁ eld and Larsen, 2004). Furthermore, studies have 
been done in which moisture accumulation in museum storages were 
used to keep the RH more stable (Padﬁ eld and Jensen, 2011). Moisture 
buff ering is also widely used in the exhibition areas, but in a smaller scale, 
as many displays contain a certain amount of silica gel in order to stabilize 
the RH. Display cases are very airtight with an Air Changes per day (ACD) 
typically in the range of 0.5 to 20 ACD (Keepsafe, 2016). Therefore, the 
peaks in humidity in the room will not cause large humidity ﬂ uctuations 
in the display cases. Furthermore, rather large amounts of silica gel is 
used as 20 kg/m3 is advised for display cases with an ACD below 1 (Yu, 
Klein and Reindl, 2001).
Supply
Absorbtion
Exhaust
Desorbtion
Production
Figure 14.  The vapour ﬂ ow in the exhibition space.
==PAGE:32==
22
However, at room scale not enough studies are made on this subject in 
order for companies to actively use moisture buff ering in the design of 
buildings. No commercial and certiﬁ ed products are available, as is needed 
in order be used in the industry (Ryhl-Svendsen, appendix 02).
As the ability of a material to absorb and desorb moisture is based on 
both the vapour permeability, density of material and the sorption curve, 
it can be diffi  cult to estimate a good buff er material. For this purpose, 
the Moisture Buff er Value MBV (kg/m2 %RH) was developed (Rode et al., 
2005). Several types of wood and concrete as well as gypsum and brick 
was tested. Besides spruce boards, cellular concrete provided the best 
buff ering material whereas regular concrete had the worst properties for 
moisture buff ering. Brick was also not very useful possibly due to the low 
moisture sorption (Masea, 2016).
A calculation based on the Eff ective Moisture Penetration Depth (EMPD) 
method was done in order to estimate the eff ect of three types of 
materials using Eq. (4) in combination with a moisture accumulation term 
(Rode, 2016):
(5) 
where:
The calculations were done based on a 1000 m2 room with 6 meter 
ceiling height with a varied number of occupants, diff erent Air Changes 
per Hour (ACH) and three diff erent materials (Figure 16). The initial RH 
of the room was 45% and the inﬂ ow air was 40%. Occupants were 
present for 8 hours and the museum was left empty for 6 hours with the 
ventilation running. The equivalent indoor climate category in regards 
to DS/EN 15251 (2007) was noted in order to estimate the ventilation 
needs based on CO2 concentration at steady state. 
High density concrete and oak had a very similar performance in all 
cases. Untreated wood is usually not used in museums due to unwanted 
de-gasiﬁ cation of compounds and will therefore need some type of 
surface treatment. This would lower the permeability and make the 
diff erence between wood and high density concrete even smaller. Cellular 
concrete did provide a smaller increase of RH especially at low ventilation 
rates. These diff erences were more distinct with larger humidity loads. 
However, by increasing the ACH, the inﬂ uence of humidity buff ering 
decreases. At an ACH of 1.2, there was very little diff erence in RH no 
matter the type of wall surfaces used. As a number of museums tend 
to have air change rates as high as 6-8 ACH (Valentín, 2007) moisture 
buff ering will have an little eff ect. But in situations where low ventilation 
rates can be used, then the surface materials could be of use in regards 
to moisture. However, it was evident that the storage areas of the 
museums are much better suited for beneﬁ ting of the buff ering capa-
bilities as the ACH are as low as 0.04 h-1 (Padﬁ eld et al., 2013). Since no 
humidity loads from visitors are present in storages, moisture buff ering 
will be more signiﬁ cant.
In museums, it is important to remove as much dust as possible to avoid 
particles to be settled on the collections. High quality ﬁ lters should 
therefore be used for the ventilation system, but thorough cleaning of the 
exhibition area is also crucial (Lord, Lord and Martin, 2012). The challenge 
when using cellular concrete or many other permeable materials is the 
accumulation of dust. If the surface is coated in order to be easily cleaned 
it could signiﬁ cantly decrease the moisture buff er capabilities. 
Therefore, due to the need for smooth and easily cleaned surfaces and 
large ACH, moisture buff ering does not have the same potential in the 
exhibition as in storage spaces. Below ground buildings will typically 
==PAGE:33==
23
have much less permeable outer walls resulting in the external vapour 
pressure not inﬂ uencing the internal vapour ﬂ ow. 
Low density cellular concrete did have the largest eff ect on the RH (Figure 
16). In the case with the worst indoor climate, buff ering had the largest 
eff ect. Higher ventilation rates compared to the internal loads resulted in 
the moisture buff ering having less of an impact. With a category II indoor 
climate, as could be used in most museums the, diff erence between using 
the best and the worst moisture buff er material was around 2%. At Cat 
I the diff erence between the materials was very small as the ventilation 
controlled the moisture content with a large ACH. In the total energy 
simulations in the end of this thesis, high density concrete was used as 
the default interior surface material but an energy simulation using low 
density concrete was also carried out in order study the potential for 
lowering the total energy use. 
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
20 pers 0.15 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
20 pers 0.3 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
20 pers 0.6 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
20 pers 1.2 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
40 pers 0.15 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
40 pers 0.3 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
40 pers 0.6 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
40 pers 1.2 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
80 pers 0.15 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
80 pers 0.3 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
80 pers 0.6 ACH
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RH (-)
Time (h)
80 pers 1.2 ACH
High density concrete
Low density concrete
Aok Wood
Cat III
Cat I
Cat I
Cat I
Cat II
Cat I
Cat III
Cat II
Cat I
Cat IV
Cat IV
Cat I
Figure 16.  Moisture buff ering of high density concrete, low density concrete and oak at diff erent ventilation rates and number of people. The category of the 
inddoor climate (I-IV) are done in accordance to DS/EN 15251 
==PAGE:34==
24
IDA ICE HUMIDITY
Since IDA ICE was used as the simulation tool for the energy use in this 
thesis, it is important to determine how the program calculates humidity. 
These types of calculations are done within the zone part of the math-
ematical model in which the code can be studied. Important parts of this 
code is discussed in this section but a more detailed description can be 
found in appendix 06.
In IDA ICE, the humidity load from users are calculated based on the 
activity level and the number of users present. The amount of occupants 
can vary over time based on a schedule. If the mathematical model is not 
changed, then the metabolic rate is set as one value for all users at all 
times. In a museum, the activity level is more or less the same at all times 
and an average value can be used. Depending on the type of museum, 
the expected metabolic rate of the users could diff er, but a value of 1, 
equivalent to walking 2.5 km/h, could be used in most exhibitions (ISO 
8996, 2004). The total heat load from an occupant is calculated as:
 
QOccMet[i] := nOccAct[i] * 1.8 * M[i] * 58  
Where nOccAct[i] is the number occupants present at a given time and
1.8 is the body area (m2). M[i] is the metabolic rate and 58 is value for 
converting 1 met to W/m2 (ISO 7330, 2006).
Since the body area is written in the IDA ICE code as a constant and not 
a changeable parameter, it not possible to change this value. According 
to ISO 8996 (2004), 1.8 m2 surface area corresponds to that of a 175 cm 
tall and 75 kg man. A 60 kg and 170 cm tall woman has and body area 
of 1.6 m2. According to the National Institute of Public Health (2007), an 
average Danish male is 83 kg and 177 cm and an average Danish woman 
is 68 kg and 167 cm. Thus,1.8 m2 is a fairly good estimate of the average 
area of an adult, if an evenly distributed amount of men and women are 
present. However, it is not an even distribution of men and women that 
visits museums and the value of 1.8 m2 does not take into account the 
large number of children being present at museums or the many museums 
in which mainly women tend to visit such as museums of art and cultural 
history (Jensen and Lundgaard, 2015). Danish museums have detailed 
information on the gender and age of the visitors due to the large yearly 
national user survey done by Gallup and a very large number of Danish 
museums (Jensen and Lundgaard, 2015). This data could be used in order 
to make estimations of the internal loads. As the body area is ﬁ xed in the 
code, the heat load could be adjusted by altering the metabolic rate.
Sweat is calculated as being the diff erence between the total heat load 
and the parts used for convective- radiant- and vapour loads. The vapour 
ﬂ ow from occupants is then calculated as:
 
 
VapFOcc2Zone := SUM i=1, nOp                       
QOccVap[i] + QSweat[i]                     
END_SUM / 2430000
The vapour ﬂ ow from occupants (kg/s) is calculated as the sum of the 
vapour load from occupants (W) and the sweat from occupants (W) 
divided by 2430000 (J/kg) being the latent heat evaporation of air (Genç 
and Porter, 2003). The vapour load is calculated based on the metabolic 
rate and vapour pressure.
HumFact * MassAir * XHumLoc’ = VapFOcc2Zone 
                       - SUM i=1, nLocUnit Wf[i] END_SUM 
                       + SUM i = 1, nUnit   
                       schedEquip[i] * (VapFSrcEquip[i] + EvapVapFSrcEquip[i])
                           END_SUM
                         + VapF_0 + SUM i=1, nTerminal VapF[i] END_SUM; 
The mass of the air (kg) times a factor that increases the humidity storage 
capacity of air (-) times the humidity in the zone (kg/kg) is equal to:
The vapour ﬂ ow from occupants (kg/s) and the sum of condensation from 
the AHU (kg/s) as well as the humidity load and evaporative humidity 
load from equipment times the equipment schedule (kg/s) +/- the vapour 
ﬂ ow from the terminals (kg/s).
(6) 
(8) 
(7) 
==PAGE:35==
25
The humidity can therefore either be provided by the AHU, the occupants 
or the equipment and is to be removed by the AHU. Moisture accumula-
tion in building materials or in the inventory is not included in IDA ICE. 
The running values of VapFocc2Zone is not possible to be exported from 
IDA ICE. However, if the humidity load is needed QOCVAP and Qsweat 
can be used in combination with equation (7). By using this method on 
the standard building in IDA ICE consisting of one person of one met 
in a room, the humidity load over a year will be in the range of 47-80 
g/h. These corresponds well to the estimates from Table 5. If moisture 
from the clothes of users was to be included in the simulations, then the 
equipment schedule could be used for adding additional moisture loads.
However, this method would not be very suitable for moisture accumu-
lation in the surfaces as the moisture ﬂ ow in and out of the wall is not 
a parameter possible to predeﬁ ne before the simulation. It is a result of 
pressure diff erences and will thus change depending on the results of 
the previous steps in a simulation. However, a wall model to include in the 
mathematical part of the IDA ICE was developed by Kurnitski and Vuolle 
(2000). This model has been further been developed by Patrik Skogqvist 
based on work by Kûnzel (1995). This work resulted in the HMwall in 2013. 
This wall component is not a part of the IDA ICE but has been provided 
by Voulle and Skogqvist to be used for this project. In this thesis, the wall 
has been tested and a guide for using it can be found in Appendix 14. 
The HMwall deﬁ nes the sorption curve based on the water content in the 
material at 80 and 100% RH and the diff usion resistances are calculated 
based on the dry- and wet cup vapour diff usion resistances.
As the wall can only be used in the advanced level of IDA ICE and is 
to be connected to a large number of parameters, it is currently quite 
time consuming to use. Furthermore, all variables have to be speciﬁ ed 
as single- or vector values for each parameter and each element. It is 
therefore not possible to just choose a material and then have the 
program automatically derive the values based on that choice as walls 
in the standard level of IDA ICE. The very large amounts of manual work 
related to the use of the HMwall did cause a potential risk of human error 
resulting in false simulation results or numerical errors.
To use the HMwall in the current version, where it can only be used 
in the advanced mode, is limiting the use as even very simple models 
are rarely made correct in the ﬁ rst try. To do very complex geometries 
would therefore be very challenging. However, as it should be possible to 
integrate it in the standard mode of IDA ICE in the future, the HMwall has 
a large potential. By accounting for moisture accumulation in walls, IDA 
ICE can be used for better simulations of e.g. museum galleries, storages, 
laboratories, hospitals or other building types where the RH is of great 
importance.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Even though the concept of RH is relatively simple, calculating and 
controlling the RH can be complex due to both vapour and heat balances 
having an inﬂ uence. The steady temperatures of underground buildings 
can be utilized to keep a more steady temperature in the room and 
thereby steadier control the RH.
Moisture buff ering only had a limited eff ect on the RH in the calculation 
as the ventilation removed much vapour. The results of such calculations 
would of course diff er based on how dry the inﬂ ow air was, the room 
volume etc. But there is a potential for humidity buff ering lowering peak 
vapour loads in museums. For a moisture buff er cleaning and certiﬁ cation 
is needed in order to be used in practice. However, small scale humidity 
buff ering in display cases is a moisture buff ering technique which can 
potentially reduce the need for RH control of the AHU. It is easy to use 
in an exhibition and can be removed or altered easily. It is thereby a much 
more ﬂ exible moisture buff er than having the moisture buff er materials 
on the wall surfaces.
The use of the HMwall adds the possibility to make more detailed 
simulations and was therefore used for all IDA ICE simulations in this 
thesis.
==PAGE:36==
26
07  Visitors
The number of visitors at any given time in a museum will have a large 
inﬂ uence on the internal loads of a museum. Entrance data from 23 
museums wss used to study the user presence. Based on a series of 
studies was can be concluded that the number of visitors were aff ected 
by many factors such as day of week, weather, size of the museum etc.  
Humans are a signiﬁ cant source of heat and humidity in buildings. 
Furthermore, most climate systems are designed in order to ensure the 
comfort of the occupants. Thus, many systems can be turned off  or set 
to minimum capacity when no people are present and many visitors 
will result in a larger load on the systems. The usage pattern of the 
visitors is therefore of great importance for estimating the energy use 
of museums.
It is much more complex to determine how many and when visitors are 
present in a museum than estimating how and when people are present in 
dwellings or offi  ces. In offi  ces an average workday can be estimated and 
it can be safe to assume that the amount of people in the building rarely 
surpasses the number of employees. Dwellings are also designed for a 
certain number of people and will only surpass that at social gatherings 
such as birthdays. 
Museums however, are not designed for a speciﬁ c number of people. 
Unlike offi  ces where most are paid to show up and dwellings where most 
people will return every night, people will visit the museums when they 
want to within the opening hours. The diff erence between wanting to 
be in a building and needing to be in a building makes the user presence 
much more diffi  cult to predict. 
In offi  ces most employees will be at their desk or in meeting rooms during 
all working hours except at lunchtime. Whereas visitors at a museum can 
make very short or long visit or everything in between. Furthermore, it 
can be diffi  cult to predict where the users are situated during a visit. 
Diff erent users might prefer to spend more time in certain parts of the 
museum. At large museums it is not possible to see all of the exhibition in 
a single day and which forces the visitors to choose to only visit certain 
parts of the exhibition.
Standard schedules for user presence in many building types are 
developed for ASHRAE (Building Energy Codes Program, 2016) but event 
spaces such as museums with a more dynamic presence are notably not 
included.
Many factors can inﬂ uence the number of visitors including exhibition 
type, location of museum, holidays, weekday, commercials, weather etc. 
A research of the user patterns in a selection of Danish museums will 
form a basis for evaluating the nature of visitor presence in museums 
well knowing that this study will not give deﬁ nitive answers.
23 Danish museums provided visitor data at four diff erent levels of 
reﬁ nement. Daily, weekly, monthly or yearly. Unfortunately, no museums 
were able to document the entrance times of visitors at smaller time 
intervals, meaning that the daily entrance patterns cannot be determined 
based on available data.  The National Museum of Denmark is currently 
installing a system for more detailed logging of visitors, but unfortunate-
ly the system was not ready in time for this thesis.
When a public building is googled then a presence graph shows up next to 
the search results to make it possible to avoid the crowded times (Figure 
17). However, this feature is based on when people have “chosen to 
store their location information on Google servers” (Google, 2016). Only 
a certain segment of the visitors will leave an online trace of their visits 
and it is uncertain exactly how these data were derived. Furthermore, 
it is not possible to extract the data behind the graphs numerically and 
must, therefore, be estimated based on the graph. Additionally, it is not 
possible to detect the duration of the user's visit at the museum with 
this method. Therefore, the data is not regarded good enough to be the 
==PAGE:37==
27
 100,000
 200,000
 300,000
 400,000
 500,000
 600,000
 700,000
0
100
200
300
400
Visitors per year
Museums
Accumulated amount of visitors, 2014
base of further calculations without the collaboration of google. It is 
however, clear that a collaboration with big data companies like Google 
would provide a good insight on occupancy in museums as well as other 
building types. However, without the help of such a company, it is hard to 
ﬁ gure out how this data was collected and how it should be interpreted. 
As a consequence, another method for the actual presence of users of 
museums per day was made (section 08).
Many museums provided data about their yearly number of visitors to 
Statistics Denmark. In 2014, being the latest statement available at the 
time of this thesis, 410 museums provided data (Statistics Denmark, 
2016). By making an accumulated graph of this data it can be seen that 
the accumulation is an exponential function (Figure 18). The top two 
museums both had around 600,000 visitors, 92% off  all the museums 
had below 100,000 yearly visitors. The data is based on individual 
museums and will thus not sum up data from museums under the same 
organization. The National Museum is for instance in charge of a total 
of 13 Danish museums providing data. All together these museums had 
1,153,302 visits, whereas the National Museum accounted for 591,384 
of the visits. This makes The National Museum the second most visited 
museum in Denmark in 2014, only surpassed by the 647,857 visits to 
the art museum Louisiana.
In order to make a more detailed analysis of visitor behaviour, data from 
23 museums was analysed. Two diff erent analysis was carried out. One 
set was done on visitor data measured on a daily basis and a second 
analysis was done on data where the user presence was logged at a 
monthly basis.
Figure 17.  Example of  a search for the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark 
at Google
Figure 18.  415 museums are  sorted based on the number of visits in 
2014. The accumulation of this data is approximately exponential
==PAGE:38==
28
The analysis using daily measurements was done based data from 
Cisternerne, Louisiana, M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark, Zoological 
Museum, Geological Museum and the Viking Ship Museum. Then the 
analysis on monthly and yearly behaviour patterns was done based on 
data from Thorvaldsen's Museum, The Natural History Museum of Aarhus,
 Little Mill, The Museum of Danish Resistance, The Royal Danish Naval 
Museum, The Open Air Museum, Brede Works, The Danish Music Museum, 
Trelleborg, The Royal Danish Arsenal Museum, The Victorian Home, 
Lützhøfts Old Grocer’ Shop, Museum of Tools, Lejre Museum and Roskilde 
Museum.
METHOD
As no speciﬁ c data about user presence in museums were available, the 
analysis were based on data from the number of entrances at museums. 
Since museums vary much in number of visitors it can be diffi  cult to 
detect any tendencies if the amount of visitors during a year is compared 
between diff erent museums. Furthermore, the number of visitors can 
diff er much from year to year at certain museums as to be seen in the 
following data. Thus, a method had to be developed in order to compare 
tendencies between museums and to be able to investigate the impact 
of certain days or months while ﬁ ltering out the inﬂ uence of the year 
and the size of the museum. To make this analysis, the visitor ratio was 
developed to be able to make a investigation of either daily, monthly or 
yearly visitor patterns. 
The daily visitor ratio is deﬁ ned as:
(9) 
where
The average Vr,day for a given year will, thus, always be 1. Values above 1 
is due to a larger amount of visitors the given day than the average daily 
amount of visitors the given year.
The Vr,month is similar to the daily Vr,day but is based on monthly registra-
tions of visitors rather than daily. The monthly visitor ratio is deﬁ ned as:
(10) 
where
In order to compare the yearly number of visitors between diff erent 
museums and between years the Vr,year was calculated using the total 
numbers of visits in 2014 as the index:
(11) 
Since the museums have diff erent number of yearly visits the Vr,year can 
be used to evaluate a growing and a decreasing tendency of visitors .
Seven museums provided data regarding number of visitors on a daily 
level. This data was used for a number of studies:
1) Vr,day was plotted for all the years to investigate the yearly pattern. 
Furthermore, large spikes in the plot were investigated to ﬁ nd out if any 
special occasions caused the large deviation from normal.
2) The Vr,day was summed up for each day of the week for each year. This 
was done in order to determine if any weekly visitor presence pattern is 
showing when a large number of days are investigated and to test if this 
pattern is similar for the diff erent years.
==PAGE:39==
29
3) Correlations between Vr,day and daily weather data of rain, temperature 
and sun hours were made during the three summer months. Thereby, it 
could be determined if bad weather in the summer will cause a tendency 
for more visitors to museums. Then, the correlation was found between 
the amount of visitors and all three types of weather data as well as the 
seven days of the week. Thereby, it was possible to estimate how much 
these parameters have an inﬂ uence of the running of a museum.
A linear correlation between the daily number of visitors and weather 
data was found to be ﬁ tted with the following formula:
(12)
 where:
This was found for rain (mm), temperatures (ºC) and sun hours (h). As data 
with daily measurements was received by 7 museums and a total of 14 
years, 42 simple correlation models was made.
Then a model was made for the correlation between the number of 
visitors and rain, temperatures, sun hours and days of the week (mon-sun). 
The data was ﬁ tted to the following model:
(13)
where:
This resulted in 14 models depending on 10 parameters each.
4) Vr,month was used to study monthly patterns at to study the development 
over a longer period of time
For all museums the Vr,year was calculated. This was used to determine if 
the total number of visitors were increasing or decreasing. The museums 
providing monthly data did typically provide data for more years than 
the museums providing daily data. The monthly data did therefore give 
a information of long term tendencies of up to 15 years whereas the 
maximum years with daily measurements was 3. As only one museum 
provided data with weekly measurements, this data was summed up and 
plotted as monthly data in order to compare with other museums.
It must be noted that the visitors numbers at the M/S Maritime Museum 
of Denmark was based on the ticket sales and not actual measures of 
visitors (as to be described in section 08) and is therefore less precise 
than the other datasets. 
==PAGE:40==
30
RESULTS
1) Visitor presence on a daily basis
As the 7 museums with daily measurements had only 1-3 years of data 
available, it is not possible to determine if the number of visitors are 
growing or decreasing in the long run. But, it can be concluded that the 
total amount of visitors per year in these 2-3 years is not stable (Figure 
19). From 2013 to 2014 the National Museum of Denmark went from 
1.22 to 1 and the Zoological museum went from 0.77 to 1. It was, thus, 
important to ﬁ lter out these yearly variations in the sum of visitors in 
order to be able to detect the visitor patterns on a monthly and a daily 
basis. As only one year of data was available for Cisternere no yearly 
change could be calculated and it was, thus, not included in the ﬁ gure.
Closing days are included in the graphs as values of zero (Figure 20- 
Figure 26). It can be seen that in general the visitor presence is a highly 
ﬂ uctuating factor with occasional very large peaks. Only 2-3 years of 
data was available, but in this short time period  peaks do not seem to 
occur at the same date every year. 
By researching the dates with very large peaks of it could be determined 
that these extreme cases were caused primarily by certain events at 
the museums. The Viking Ship Museum the 8th of August had a visitor 
ratio of 10.1 (Figure 23). On that day the museum was the start and 
stop of a professional bike race as well as for a ﬁ tness run for amateurs 
(Johannesen, 2014).
The National Museum of Denmark had a Vr,day of 6.4 for two days in a row 
during 17th-18th August 2013 (Figure 21). This happened during a two 
day viking market at the museum (The National Museum of Denmark, 
2013). 
The Geological Museum had a visitor ratio of 40.0 the 10th of October 
2013 during the Copenhagen Culture Night (Figure 26). The company 
10TONS exhibited life-like giant prehistoric reptiles. (Parkmuseerne, 
2014) Moreover, rather large visitor ratios of 8,8 and 6.5 occurred the 27th 
and 10th of March 2014. It has not been possible to ﬁ nd any particular 
events occurring on these dates. However, since the Geological Museum 
has provided quite detailed data, it can be seen that during these two 
speciﬁ c dates 97% of the visitors were primary and secondary school 
students. It is reasonable to assume that speciﬁ c events for students 
were happening these two dates.
The plot of Cisternerne has two noticeable outliers (Figure 25). The ﬁ rst 
is a Vr of 14.1 as a result of the Copenhagen Culture night. The second 
outlier was based caused by a large number of students or pensioners. It 
is known that this price group caused the peak based on knowledge from 
the ticket sales. However, no records could be found of any happening 
on this date but it must be assumed that an event of some kind occurred 
since the large increase of visitors was due to only one visitor category 
while the remaining categories were similar to most other days. 
Figure 19.  Change in number of yearly visitors based 2014 numbers as 
index 
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
2013
2014
2015
Yearly visitor rato based on 2014
Time (year)
Visitor ratio per year based on 2014 for museums with 
daily measurements 
Louisiana 2014-2015
The National Museum of
Denmark 2013-2014
The Viking Museum 2014-
2015
M/S Maritime Museum of
Denmark 2014-2015
Zoological Museum 2013-
2015
Geological Museum 2014-
2015
==PAGE:41==
31
Figure 22.  Visitor ratio for the M/S Maritime Museum of Den-
mark for the years 2015 and 2015
Figure 20.  Visitor ratio for Louisiana for the years 2014 and 
2015
The Zoological Museum can be seen to have an increased number of 
visitors during the autumn holidays in week 41 and 42. Week 42 in 204 
was especially well visited as no day had a Vr,day lower than 4.0 (Figure 24)
In general larger museums tend to have smaller deviations in Vr,day than 
smaller museums. The yearly pattern seems to diff er much for diff erent 
museums. However, all museums seems to have had an increased amount 
of visitors during the autumn holidays in week 42. This resulted in higher 
Vr,day values from day 286-292 in 2014 and day 285-291 in 2015 and 
2013. The pattern from year to year is for most museums similar for the 
diff erent years. Especially the pattern of the Viking Ship Museum is similar 
for both years. The Vr increases steadily until around day 200 to 250 and 
decreases until the end of the year with some small exceptions. Since 
only one year of data was available from Cisternerne it is not possible to 
compare between years.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Visitor ratio (-)
Time (day)
Louisiana, visitor ratio
2015
2014
 Visitors 2014:  647,857 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Visitor ratio (-)
Time (day)
The National Museum of Denmark, visitor ratio
2014
2013
 Visitors 2014:  589,835 
Figure 21.  Visitor ratio for the National Museum of Denmark 
for the years 2014 and 2013
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Visitor ratio
Time (day)
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark, visitor ratio
2015
2014
 Visitors 2014:  154,790
==PAGE:42==
32
Figure 23.  Visitor ratio for The Viking Ship Museum for the 
years 2014 and 2015
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Visitor ratio (-)
Time (day)
Cisternerne, visitor ratio
2015
14.1
Visitors 2014:  31,051 
Figure 24.  Visitor ratio for the Zoological Museum for the 
years 2013- 2015
Figure 25.  Visitor ratio from Cisternerne for 2014
Figure 26.  Visitor ratio for the Geological Museum for the 
years 2014 and 2015
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Visitor ratio (-)
Time (day)
The Viking Ship Museum, visitor ratio
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  134,159 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Visitor ratio (-)
Time (day)
Zoological museum, visitor ratio
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  125,411
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Visitor ratio (-)
Time (day)
Geological Museum, visitor ratio
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  17,413
40.5
==PAGE:43==
33
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Sum of daily visitor ratio
Weekday
Visitor ratio per day of week
for Louisiana, 2014-2015
2014
2015
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Sum of daily visitor ratio
Weekday
Visitor ratio per day of week for the 
National Museum of Denmark, 2013-2014
2013
2014
2 Weekly visitor patterns
When the Vr,day is summed up for each weekday during a year, very distinct 
patterns emerge. For all the museums except the Geological Museum, 
the curves of the 2-3 years look very similar. It must however be noted 
that the Geological Museum had noticeably less visitors than the other 
5 museums. Most museums tend to have closed on Mondays. However, 
none of the museums in this research had zero visitors during all Mondays 
in a year. This was due to either having the museum opened on Mondays 
in holidays, the summer or during special events.
The two large museums, Louisiana and the National Museum of Denmark, 
had similar patterns with a Vr,day of around 1 from Tuesday to Thursday 
and then increasing number of visitors until it tops at around 1.4 on 
Sundays. The plots of the Zoological Museum and the M/S Maritime 
Museum of Denmark did also look very similar. From Tuesday to Friday 
the number of visitors decreased slightly and peaked during the weekend 
with Saturdays being signiﬁ cantly busier than Sundays.
Figure 27. Weekly visitor pattern for Louisiana
Figure 28. Weekly visitor pattern for the National museum of Denmark
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Sum of daily visitor ratio
Weekday
Visitor ratio per day of the week for the 
Viking Ship Museum, 2014-2015
2014
2015
Figure 29. Weekly visitor pattern for the Viking Ship Museum
==PAGE:44==
34
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Sum of daily visitor ratio
Weekday
Visitor ratio per day of week for the 
Cisternerne, 2015
2015
Figure 33. Weekly visitor pattern for the Geological Museum
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Sum of daily visitor ratio
Weekday
Sum of visitor ratio per day of the week for 
the Zoological Museum, 2013-2015
2013
2014
2015
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Sum of daily visitor ratio
Weekday
Visitor ratio per day of the week for the M/S 
Maritime Museum of Denmark, 2014-2015
2014
2015
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Sum of daily visitor ratio
Weekday
Visitor ratio per day of the week for the 
Geological Museum, 2014-2015
2014
2015
Figure 31. Weekly visitor pattern for the Zoological Museum
Figure 30. Weekly visitor pattern for the M/S Maritime Museum of 
Denmark
Figure 32. Weekly visitor patter for Cisternerne
==PAGE:45==
35
3 Correlation between visitors and weather
Many factors can inﬂ uence whether or not people choose to go to 
museums. Bad weather in the summer are by many believed to result in 
more visitors at museums (Hjortdal and Nepper-Rasmussen, 2015 and 
Hansen, 2015). To test whether this assumption holds, the correlation 
between weather data and the amount of visitors during the summer 
months of June, July and August were calculated.
The test was done based on three types of weather data: amount of 
rain, temperature and sun hours. If bad weather will cause less visitors, 
Table 6.  Correlation bewteen daily amount of visitors and daily weather data for rain, temperatures and sun hours. Signiﬁ cant values are marked with white
The Viking Ship Museum is the only one of the museums regularly opened 
on Mondays and the only one with a very ﬂ at visitor pattern. 
Besides having very few visitors during Mondays due to often being 
closed, very little tendencies can be spotted during the two years of 
data from the Geological Museum. 2015 looks more like the curves of 
the other museums, whereas 2014 is very much unique especially since 
the largest number was present on Fridays. This was partly caused by 
the large spike caused by the Culture Night Friday the 10th of October 
(Figure 26).
2013
2014
2015
Rain
Temp
Sun
Rain
Temp
Sun
Rain
Temp
Sun
mm
(°C)
(h)
mm
(°C)
(h)
mm
(°C)
(h)
The National Museum of Denmark
0.062 -0.016 -0.176
0.086 -0.160 -0.144
Louisiana
-0.039
0.066 -0.220
0.006
0.144
0.054
Zoological Museum
0.319 -0.230 -0.319
0.140 -0.017 -0.352
0.230 -0.096 -0.321
Geological Museum
0.134 -0.160 -0.053
0.046
0.007 -0.116
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
0.186 -0.081 -0.183
0.120
0.012 -0.284
The Viking Ship Museum
0.165
0.202
0.026
0.032
0.295
-0.02
Cisternerne
-0.12
0.141
-0.01
then the amount of visitors at the museums should increase with lower 
temperatures, more rain and/or fewer sun hours. Thus the correlation 
between visitors and temperature was expected to be negative, between 
visitors and rain to be positive and between visitors and sun hours to be 
negative.
The weather data for temperatures and rain was derived from the weather 
station at Kastrup Airport and Rosklide Airport (Weather Underground 
a and b, 2016) and sun hours was derived from Danish Meteorological 
Institute (2016). The formula for the models is:
The correlations are generally small (Table 8). The largest numerical value 
of 0.352 was found when comparing amount of visitors at the Zoological 
Museum with the amount of sun hours for 2014.
According to Evans (1996) a correlation of .00-.19 is “very weak”, 0.20-.39 
“weak” 0.40-.59 “moderate”, 0.60-.79 “strong” and 0.80-1.0 “very 
strong”. According to this scale none of the calculated correlations can 
be categorized as more than "weak". However, data was also tested with 
a two sided Student's t-test to evaluate if the correlations were statis-
tically signiﬁ cant. Only 9 out the 42 correlation proved to be signiﬁ cant. 
For the Zoological Museum 6 of the correlations was signiﬁ cant and was, 
==PAGE:46==
36
thus, the museum with the strongest relation between weather and 
number of visitors.
The Viking Ship Museum had a signiﬁ cant correlation between visitors 
and temperature for both years. The correlation was, however, positive, 
meaning more people tend to visit the museum during warm weather 
than cold. It must be noted that the museum is placed in the Roskilde 
marina and displays a range of outdoor activities during the summer 
months such as ship building and a blacksmith (The Viking Ship Museum, 
2016). Some museum like the Geological Museum had very low correlation 
values and all were positive even though the correlation between visitors 
and temperature and sun was expected to be negative. 
The Viking Ship Museum is the only one of the museums correlated to 
weather data from Roskilde Airport. The correlation was strongest using 
temperature data. for 2015. The correlation between number of visitors 
and temperatures was a bit too weak to be signiﬁ cant according to the 
students t-test. It is noteworthy, that the correlation was positive for 
temperatures for both years.
.
4 Correlation with several factors
The ﬁ rst correlation study was based on only one weather factor at the 
time. This was evolved by calculating the combined correlation of several 
factors. Using the same data, a study was made on the correlation 
between visitors and temperatures, rain, sun hours and the seven 
weekdays for each year. This resulted in 14 correlations as seen in Table 
7.
Louisiana is the museum with the user presence best described by these 
parameters as the adjusted R2 is 0.627 and 0.584. The National Museum 
of Denmark and Cisternerne also had values around 0.5 depending on the 
year. The lowest value of 0.063 were found for the Geological museum 
of 2014. However, the following year the value of 2015 was 0.24 being 
much larger.
Table 7.  The adjusted R2 of models based on rain, temperatures, sun hours 
and weekday for 7 diff erent museums
The Viking Ship Museum did generally not have a very good ﬁ t since the 
values for both years were low. The M/S Maritime Museum did also have 
relatively small values for both years.
It is thus clear that the user behaviour at certain museums had a much 
stronger correlation with these 10 parameters than other museums. 
Further values from the study such as estimate coeffi  cients, p-values are 
found in appendix 07.
Visitor presence on a monthly basis
A much larger number of museums were able to provide data with 
ﬁ gures regarding monthly number of visitors. Unlike the study based on 
daily measurements, the data stretches several. 2014 was used as the 
reference year in order to calculate Vr,year. Smaller museums tend to have 
larger yearly diff erences and more outliers. (Figure 34-Figure 36). By 
looking at the larger museums (Figure 34) it can be seen that there has 
been an increase in the number of visitors in comparison to 2001. Three 
museums provided data from 2002 and the Vr,yearly for the museums 
in 2002 was around 0.5 for the three museums. The total amount of 
visitors did thus double from 2002 to 2014. 
In museums with 5,000-50,000 yearly visitors only 5-6 years of data 
was available. In this period, no tendency was found as several values 
both above and below 1 is to be seen on both sides of the reference 
2013
2014
2015
The National Museum of Denmark
0.422
0.566
Louisiana
0.627
0.584
Zoological Museum
0.386
0.392
0.219
Geological Museum
0.063
0.240
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
0.137
0.183
The Viking Ship Museum
0.101
0.065
Cisternerne
0.524
==PAGE:47==
37
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Visitor ratio month (-)
Month
Yearly visitor ratio for museums
with more than 50,000 yearly visitors
The National Museum of
Denmark
The Open Air Museum
The Museum of Danish
Resistance
The Royal Danish Arsenal
Museum
Thorvaldsens Museum
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Visitor ratio month (-)
Month
Yearly visitor ratio for museums 
with 5,000-50,000 yearly visitors
The Royal Danish Naval
Museum
Rosklide Museum
Lützhøfts Old Grocers'
Shop
The Museum of Tools
The Victorian Home
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Visitor ratio month (-)
Month
Yearly visitor ratio for museums
with less than 5,000 yearly visitors
Lejre Museum
The Danish Music
Museum
Trelleborg
Brede Works
Little Mill
Figure 34.  Visitor ratio for museums with more than 50,000 yearly visitors
Figure 35. Visitor ratio for museums with 5,000 - 50,000 yearly visitors
Figure 36.  Visitor ratio for museums with less than 5,000 yearly visitors
year. For the museums below 5,000 yearly visitors 2014 was a resulted 
in both high and low number of visitors compared to the other years as 
many values above 1 is found on both sides of the reference year (Figure 
36). The largest value of Vr,year was 3.0 at the Danish Music Museum in 
2015. It must be noted, that the museum moved into a new building in 
the late 2014 (Habermann, 2014) which probably had an inﬂ uence. 
As it was only possible to acquire one year of data from the Natural 
History Museum of Aarhus it was not plotted in this set of ﬁ gures, but 
the monthly pattern is displayed (Figure 42).
On the following pages the monthly visitor ratio can be seen for 16 
museums. For the museums not providing data for the whole of 2015 
the Vr,month was calculated based on the assumption that the last months 
would have values similar to 2014.
==PAGE:48==
38
 -
 1.0
 2.0
 3.0
 4.0
 5.0
 6.0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The National Museum of Denmark
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Visitors 2014:  589,835
 -
 1.0
 2.0
 3.0
 4.0
 5.0
 6.0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The Open Air Museum
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  239,709 
 -
 1.0
 2.0
 3.0
 4.0
 5.0
 6.0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The Museum of Danish Resistance
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
 Visitors 2014:  74,865 
 -
 1.0
 2.0
 3.0
 4.0
 5.0
 6.0
Jan
Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The Royal Danish Arsenal Museum
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  73,927 
Figure 37.  Monthly visitor ratio for the National Museum of Denmark. No data 
was available for November and December 2015
Figure 38.  Monthly visitor ratio for the Open Air Museum. It is usually closed 
Janurary, Februrary, March and November
Figure 39.  Monthly visitor ratio for the Museum of Danish Resistance. The 
museum burned down in the beginning of 2013
Figure 40.  Monthly visitor ratio for the Royal Danish Arsenal Museum. No data 
was available for November and December 2015
==PAGE:49==
39
 -
 1.00
 2.00
 3.00
 4.00
 5.00
 6.00
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The Royal Danish Naval Museum
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  36,571
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan
Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
Thorvaldsens Museum
2013
2014
2015
Visitors 2014:  55,988 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan
Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The National History Museum of Aarhus
2014
Visitors 2014:  47,389
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan Feb Mar Apr
Maj
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Okt Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
Roskilde Museum
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  29,978 
Figure 41.  Monthly visitor ratio for Thorvaldsens Museum
Figure 43.  Monthly visitor ratio for the Royal Danish Naval Museum. No 
data was available for November and December 2015
Figure 44.  Monthly visitor ratio for Roskilde Museum. No data was availa-
ble for November and December 2015
Figure 42.  Monthly visitor ratio for the National History Museum of Aarhus
==PAGE:50==
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The Victorian Home
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Visitors 2014:  5,817
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan Feb Mar Apr
Maj
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Okt Nov Dec
Monthly visitorratio (-)
Month
Lützhøfts Old Grocers' Shop
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  16,773 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan Feb Mar Apr
Maj
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Okt Nov Dec
Monthly visitora ratio (-)
Month
The  Museum of Tools
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  9,829 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan Feb Mar Apr
Maj
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Okt Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
Lejre Museum
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  4,725 
Figure 45.  Monthly visitor ratio for Lützhøfts Old Grocers' Shop. No data was 
available for November and December 2015
Figure 46.  Monthly visitor ratio for the Museum og Tools. No data was availa-
ble for December 2015 and Novemeber and December 2011
Figure 47.  Monthly visitor ratio for the Victorian Home. The museum was closed 
December 2013, November - December 2014 and September-December 2015
Figure 48.  Monthly visitor ratio for Lejre Museum. No data was available for 
December 2015
==PAGE:51==
41
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun
 Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
Brede Works
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  1,365 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun
 Jul  Aug  Sep  Oct  Nov  Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
Trelleborg
2013
2014
2015
Visitors 2014:  3,523 
 -
 1.00
 2.00
 3.00
 4.00
 5.00
 6.00
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitor ratio (-)
Month
The Danish Music Museum
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2015
Visitors 2014:  3,933 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Monthly visitorratio (-)
Month
Little Mill
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
 Visitors 2014:  911
Figure 49.  Monthly visitor ratio for the Danish Music Museum . No data was 
available for November and December 2015
Figure 50.  Monthly visitor ratio for Trelleborg
Figure 51.  Monthly visitor ratio for Brede Works. The museum is usually 
closed from Janurary to July
Figure 52.  Monthly visitor ratio for Little Mill. The museum was only open 
in the summer until 2011. No data was available from Nov-Dec 2015
==PAGE:52==
42
It is evident that the diff erent museums had very diff erent visitor 
patterns. However, many museums had similar patterns when comparing 
the diff erent years for the same museums. This tendency was, however, 
less showing for the small museums. The two smallest museums, Brede 
Works and Little Mill, had highly ﬂ uctuating patterns. Neither of the 
museums have totally random patterns as peaks at around August was 
showing for both museums. But the patterns change much from year to 
year.
In general, small museums had larger deviations of the Vr values than 
larger museums. The largest value of 6.5 was found at Trelleborg being 
the third smallest museum in the study.
Many museums had peaks at the summer holiday in July and the Autumn 
holiday in October. At the Royal Danish Arsenal Museum values of above 
3 is seen for all three years of data. It must be noted that the Royal 
Danish Arsenal Museum has a tradition of hosting a large medieval knight 
tournament during the Autumn holiday (Thorsen, 2008).
 
DISCUSSION
Patterns
Even though some students might be forced to go to museums, a 
majority of the museum visitors are present because they want to be 
there. The presence is therefore often based on the visitor's wish to be 
at a certain place rather than the need to be there. This makes the user 
pattern much more ﬂ uctuating and more diffi  cult to predict. The plots of 
daily measurement of visitors were highly ﬂ uctuating and seemed to lack 
a pattern. However, based on this study, it is evident that even though 
the behaviour seen in a short timespan seems random it is often caused 
by certain factors if a large amount visits are analysed. Events proved to 
be the cause of large number of visitors at certain dates. Especially for 
many larger museums, a seasonal pattern was showing when studying 
the monthly summations. 
As seen in the graphs, Vr ,day tend to be of larger values than Vr,month. This 
was caused by averages of certain time steps removing peaks in data. If 
data at an hourly basis was available, then even larger peaks would be 
expected.
Even when the large events were not ﬁ ltered out and the monthly 
patterns were not taken into consideration, a model based on weather 
data and weekdays had a correlation with the visitor number in many of 
the museums investigated. For further research a model taken events 
into account as well as the monthly variations could be developed. 
Furthermore, user groups such as students are not inﬂ uenced by the 
same parameters since they often have scheduled visits. Data on these 
user types are stored by some of the museums included in this study. 
Accounting for user groups with diff erent behaviour could as well be in-
corporated in the model. 
The Geological Museum did not ﬁ t very well into a predictable pattern. 
The very large peak of 40.5 Vr did have an impact. However, based on data 
from Statistics Denmark,36% of the visitors at the Geological Museum 
were students whereas Louisiana only had 10% students. As student 
presence are based on school hours rather than the student's preference, 
this will cause some error in the prediction modelling. However, the 
Zoological Museum had 40% students and had a much more predictable 
pattern. The number of students was, thus, not enough to explain the 
presence pattern. What can have a signiﬁ cant inﬂ uence is the fact that 
the Zoological Museum had 5 times as many visitors during a year than 
the Geological Museum. But it is not possible to determine just one or 
two factors that can explain the behaviour at certain museums as it is a 
complex matter.
Data from larger museums often displayed a stable pattern when looking 
at data for the whole year. This did not happen to the same extend when 
looking at data from smaller museums. A reason for this is the law of large 
numbers. Having fewer visitors will cause less chance of the expected 
average to occur. Data from smaller museums did ﬂ uctuate much more 
==PAGE:53==
43
than the larger museums. This was caused by a group of people having 
a bigger impact on the total amount of people in a small museum than a 
big museum. Since the group sizes to a certain extend is not related to 
the size of the museum, large ﬂ uctuations will occur. For instance, a class 
of students will be of the same size no matter the type of museum. When 
dimensioning climate systems for smaller museums, it is, thus, important 
to take into account the fact that the actual number of visitors will often 
be much higher or lower than the average number of visitors.
Data
Unfortunately, it was not possible to get data from museums where 
smaller time intervals than days were registered. The National Museum of 
Denmark is currently installing a new system for counting visitors. When 
it is running, this data could be used for further research in this ﬁ eld. 
Beyond the National Museum of Denmark, at least one Danish museum 
has such a system installed at present but were unable to provide data 
for this study. Fortunately, the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark allowed 
for a study of the users as to be seen in the following section.
In general, acquiring data from the museums has been a challenge. The 
reasons for this are many but sometimes the museum had a policy that 
they couldn't provide data to external sources. Often data was received 
only after a very long correspondence. Several museums were not sure 
about which employee had access to such information and several 
employees had to be contacted. Certain employees responded that they 
were not allowed to use extra time on such tasks. It must be noted that 
many museums are under a large pressure due to the large ﬁ nancial 
cuts enacted by the government on museums and theatres (Højsgaard, 
2016). Fear of theft, terrorism and similar threats could also be a reasons 
for museums not being able to participate. 
A large number of museums delivered data for this study. However, the 
data was often in diff erent formats. Therefore, eff ective data handling 
has been a challenge during this study and will be a continued challenge 
if further searching this ﬁ eld is to be done. Since this data is measured by 
the museums, the sources of error are unknown and might diff er for the 
diff erent museums. However, since the number of visitors are important 
to all museums, it must be excepted that the values are very close to the 
actual number.
It must be noted that this type of entrance data does not specify how 
many people are present at a museum at a given time. It is only possible 
to determine when people enter the museum but not how long they tend 
to stay there. This is of course important since one visitor at a museum 
for 6 hours will cause the same total heat load as 12 visitors visiting for 
half an hour. Furthermore, this study does not provide data on where the 
visitors are situated. Visitors will rarely be evenly distributed throughout 
the museum and, thus, certain areas will be more crowded than others. 
Impact of visitors on the active systems
Research on user patterns can be used for dimensioning new systems 
for either an existing or new museum. When designing system for an 
existing museum or an extension to an existing museum, visitor data 
should be studied. Since the pattern, especially for larger museums, tend 
to be stable it should be taken into account. If strong weekly patterns are 
showing, as was the case in all but one museum in this study, weekends 
should be used for dimensioning the ventilation, cooling and dehumidiﬁ -
cation systems as the Vr,day were typically 1.4-1.6 in the weekend. 
Monthly patterns should as well be taken into account. Few visitors 
during winter months will result in smaller internal heat loads and more 
heating will be needed. Furthermore, many visitors during the summer 
will result in a larger need for cooling, ventilation and dehumidiﬁ cation. 
Additionally, when the visitor number correlates with weather conditions 
this will have an impact on the energy use. For some museums it could be 
seen that more people choose to visit museums during a rainy summer 
day. This results in a larger need for dehumidiﬁ cation. Even though many 
museums require that bags, coats and trolleys are left in the wardrobe, 
rain is still kept in pants, hair, hats etc. of the visitors. Thus, rainy days will 
==PAGE:54==
44
cause more people to visit and make them evaporate more water vapour. 
The dehumidiﬁ cation system should be able to cope with these regular 
spikes in humidity loads and would have to have a larger capacity. No 
research was found on the exact amount of humidity evaporating from 
wet pants, shoes and similar clothing and could be   the focus of further 
research.
Some museums had more visitors during sunny and warm days, others 
had less and for some the weather did not have a large impact. When 
designing systems for a museum it should be noted how visitors respond 
to sunny weather. As in the case of the Viking Ship Museum the internal 
heat and humidity loads are the largest at the same time as the external 
loads being large. This will of course put extra stress on the system's 
ability to contain the humidity and temperature levels. 
Due to the highly ﬂ uctuating pattern of visitors on a daily basis it will 
not be possible to design systems always keeping the humidity and 
temperatures in between tight thresholds. Doing so would cause over 
dimensioned systems most of the year, being both very expensive and 
space consuming. But as the very large peaks in Vr,day are caused by 
scheduled events by the museum, it is possible to take precautions. 
Additional dehumidiﬁ cation devices, increased air change with the use of 
natural ventilation, pre-cooled rooms etc. are some of the methods that 
could be used in order to account for the larger amount of humidity and 
heat introduced by many visitors. Some of these scheduled events, like 
the knight tournament at the Royal Danish Arsenal Museum, are partly 
taking place outdoors which decreases the loads. 
Future pattern of the National History Museum
As the new National History Museum of Denmark is expected to have 
around 400,000 yearly visitors the visitor pattern should be much 
diff erent and with smaller ﬂ uctuations than the patterns of the smaller 
Zoological museum and Geological museum. It would be reasonable to 
assume that the daily pattern will be more similar to the pattern of the 
National Museum of Denmark 
CONCLUSION
No matter the precautions, it will not always be possible to keep the 
indoor climate in museums within the set points for the active systems. 
Especially at smaller museums the people load is highly ﬂ uctuating and 
will at times be larger than what can be coped with by the systems. But 
by knowing and understanding the principles of the visitor patterns and 
the preservative challenges of the museum collection, better systems 
can be designed. As seen in the above cases visitor patterns are not 
completely unpredictable and entrances are one of the ways to study 
these patterns.
Vr,day values will result in larger values and more ﬂ uctuations than Vr,month. 
Vr,day is therefore preferable in order to make energy simulations. For the 
simulations in this thesis the Vrday patterns will be used for making more 
realistic simulations than having a steady visitor presence from opening 
to closing time. The pattern from the National Museum of Denmark will 
be used as the default pattern, but other types will be used in order to 
evaluate the inﬂ uence on the overall energy use.
Generally, few museums had very detailed measurements of visitors. It 
was not possible to study the daily patterns due to a lack of good data. 
In order to gain further knowledge of this subject a study was done at 
the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark as seen in the following section.
==PAGE:55==
45
08  Visitor presence 
AT M/S MARITIME MUSEUM OF DENMARK
No data provided by museums were logged at smaller time intervals than 
single days. Thus, in order to estimate the user patterns at museums 
during a day a study was done at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark. 
The research was based on one month's surveillance videos at 5 diff erent 
places in the museum as well as the sales ﬁ gures from ticket sales. Based 
on this data it was possible to detect the variety in people densities and 
user patterns in diff erent types of areas. The cafe and entrance area had 
much higher people densities than the exhibition. However, for all areas 
weekends were the busiest times.
No museums were able to provide data describing the daily distribution of 
visitors in a museum. In order to make realistic user pattern schedules for 
energy simulation such data is needed. Furthermore, the actual amount 
of visitors at a museum at any time step is only to a certain extend related 
to the entrance numbers analysed in section 08. Fewer visitors staying 
in museum for long time may result in similar heat and humidity loads as 
many daily visitors only staying for a short period of time. A study on the 
occupant density can be used to quantify this behaviour.
Knowledge of the behaviour of the users and on what happens outside 
of the opening hours of a museum is needed in order to make realistic 
energy simulations. A collaboration with M/S Maritime Museum of 
Denmark was done in order to study these usage patterns.
METHOD
Surveillance tapes from 10 Jan. to 9 Feb. 2016 was used to investigate 
the presence of visitors and employees. Five diff erent areas in the 
museum were selected. The areas were the Entrance/Shop, Auditorium, 
Café and two larger gallery areas. One camera in each area was used to 
determine a presence pattern. Many more cameras are available at the 
museum as well as in these rooms. It was considered suffi  cient with data 
from one camera per room when taking the time consumption for going 
through the material into consideration.
Figure 53. The auditorium, cafe and one of the galleries at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark (BIG a, 2016)
==PAGE:56==
46
The total sales of the year in relation to price groups were as well made 
to make an estimation of the user types.
In order to compare the number of people entering the museum based on 
sales and the amount of detections from the surveillance cameras a ratio 
between these two measurements was calculated as:
(16) 
Thus a high presence ratio indicates that a visitor is more likely to 
be detected by a camera in the given time interval than if the visitor 
presence ratio was low. A high presence ratio will also indicate that any 
visitor stays longer in that part of the museum. A value of one will mean 
that there is a visitor will be detected once in the investigated area for a 
given time period.
However, since the staff  at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark does 
not wear uniforms it was not possible to determine if the people detected 
was visitors or staff . Therefore, all people detected was registered.
Occupant density is a term used in ﬁ re engineering for calculating escape 
times (Spearpoint, 2008). But this term can as well be used in energy 
simulations as the heat and humidity loads of people are distributed over 
an area. The density was calculated per day as:
(17)
where:
During the recorded period the museum was open from Tuesday to 
Sunday from 11-17, but due to employees using the building outside of 
the opening hours the footage from 8.00-18.30 from Monday to Sunday 
was used. Based on an initial screening of the footage, this time range 
was evaluated to be able to capture most activity inside the museum. For 
every 15 minutes the number of people visible on every one of the ﬁ ve 
cameras was noted. Based on this, a large amount of data was generated. 
This data was analysed graphs comparing diff erent days, diff erent areas 
and diff erent times of the day. 
In the museum there were two types of users; visitors and employees. 
The number of employees at work was not noted, but it was typically 
2-3. Unfourunately, the museum did not have access to the daily number 
of visitors But as data of the amount of visitors per day was not available, 
data from the ticket sales was used. Three types of data were provided 
by the accounting. A total count of visitors for diff erent price categories 
for 2015 as well as a total income for each of the diff erent categories 
in 2015 was used to estimate an average price per visitor. Based on 
the daily ticket sales from the cash registers during the study and the 
account data from 2015, it was possible to make an estimation of the 
daily amount of visitors.
The museum had 22 diff erent price categories based on age, discount 
cards, group sales, campaigns etc. These ﬁ gures were used to calculate 
the average ticket fare per user:
(14)
The ticket sales from each of the cash registers could then be summed 
up to give an estimation of visitors per day:
(15) 
where:
==PAGE:57==
47
Figure 55.  Estimated users per day based on the daily ticket sales in the 
measuring period
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
10/1
15/1
20/1
25/1
Weekend
30/1
4/2
9/2
Visitors
Days
Estimated visitors per day based on ticket sales
Zone
Area (m2) Position in museum
Entrance/Shop
200 The ﬁrst room to be entered at the museum
Auditorium
300 Centrally in the building
Cafe
230 Halfway through the exhibition
Gallery 1
290 Halfway through the exhibition
Gallery 2
475 The end of the exhibition
Table 8.  The position and area of the studied zones
Figure 54.  The ﬁ ve user types in 2015
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
Adult
Seniors
Free
Children
Campaigns
Visitors per year
User types
User types as The Danish Martime Museum 2015
RESULTS
The 22 price groups were divided into ﬁ ve major user types present at 
the museum during 2015 (Figure 54). The groups “Free” and "Campaigns" 
were used when no age were deﬁ ned in the speciﬁ c user group but 
only the sale price. Both the categories "Free" and "Children" would not 
have to pay for entrance and thus not inﬂ uence the sale numbers from 
registers. "Seniors" and "Campaigns" were allowed to pay discount prices. 
The average income per user was thus lower than the standard entrance 
fee. 
The estimated visitors per day based was plotted for the whole time 
period (Figure 55). The visitors were distributed in a repeating pattern 
over the month. After the closed Monday quite a lot visits were made on 
Tuesdays compared to the rest of the workdays. After a small decrease 
on Wednesdays the amount ramped up until Saturday after which a small 
decline on Sunday was showing.
The amount of square meters visible from the diff erent cameras were 
calculated based on CAD measurements and an evaluation of what could 
be seen on the chosen cameras (Table 8). 
==PAGE:58==
48
The occupancy densities were found for each day at each zone from 
10.30 - 17.30. Average, maximum and minimum values were plotted 
separately (Figure 56).  Very low occupancy densities were found in the 
galleries compared to the Cafe and Entrance/Shop area. A single day of 
high usage caused a large peak during Wednesdays for the Auditorium.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Occupant density (n/m2)
Days
Entrance/shop 
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
0.21
0.22
0.23
0.24
0.25
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Occupant density (n/m2
Days
Auditorium
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Occupant density (n/m2)
Days
Cafe
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Occupant density (n/m2)
Days
Gallery 1
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Occupant density (n/m2)
Days
Gallery 2
Occupant density per day at the ﬁve areas of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
Maximum occupant density for a given weekday
Average occupant density for a given weekday
Minimum occupant density for a given weekday
Figure 56.  Max. Min and average occupancy density for the ﬁ ve areas investigated during the 30 days of measuring.
==PAGE:59==
49
Scatter plots of all the detections during each week day was made in 
combination with a line showing the average value at each time step for 
the particular day of the week. Below are the plots for the Entrance and 
shop area.
Even though the museum was closed on Mondays a small number of 
people was present during the day. This was caused by a steady ﬂ ow 
of employees working in the shop area as well as the constant ﬂ ow of 
craftsmen and museum employees entering and exiting. However, no 
more than 5 people were present at the same time on Mondays. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Mondays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Tuesdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Saturdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Sundays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Wednesdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Thursdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Fridays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Mondays
Entrance and shop area
of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
Average amount of 
people counted 
Visible area: 200 m2
Amount of people at 
one timestep
Figure 57. Results of the counting of visitors in the combined entrance and shop area
Signiﬁ cant spikes are seen around the opening of the museum at 11.00 
and around on 12.30 on Tuesdays where larger groups of visitors were 
gathered in the entrance area. A steady ﬂ ow of people with some small 
ﬂ uctuations was seen throughout the day from Wednesdays to Fridays.
During the weekend more people were present and the average curve 
became more rounded with a midpoint around 14.00. For all days, activity 
was detected outside of the opening hours. The amount of people 
ramped up from 10.30 to 11.00 and ramped down from 17.00 to 18.00 
==PAGE:60==
50
The ﬁ rst of the two galleries areas is shown below. Mondays resulted in 
almost no activity, whereas the weekends again were the busiest. For 
all days the activity levels were evenly spread out through the days. Oc-
casionally larger groups of visitors resulted in peaks. Unlike the former 
two areas investigated almost no activity was detected outside of the 
opening hours. Only cleaning personnel were regularly detected outside 
11.00-17.00. 
During the weekends, the average amount of people was close 5 from 
around 12.00 to 17.00. This timespan was from one hour after opening 
time and until closing time. It must be noted that the gallery area 1 is 
Café area
of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
Average amount of 
people counted 
Visible area: 230 m2
Amount of people at 
one timestep
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Mondays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Tuesdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Wednesdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Thursdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Fridays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Saturdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Sundays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Figure 58. Results of the counting of visitors in the café area
placed after two exhibitions. It will, therefore, take some time for the 
visitors that enter the museum at 11.00 to reach this area.
==PAGE:61==
51
Galley area 1
of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
Average amount of 
people counted 
Visible area: 290 m2
Amount of people at 
one timestep
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Mondays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
5
10
15
20
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Tuesdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Wednesdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Thursdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Fridays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Saturdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Sundays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Tuesdays 
Figure 59. Results of the counting of visitors in the ﬁ rst of two gallery areas
The ﬁ rst of the two galleries areas is shown below. Mondays resulted in 
almost no activity, whereas the weekends again were the busiest. For 
all days the activity levels were evenly spread out through the days. Oc-
casionally, larger groups of visitors resulted in peaks. Unlike the former 
two areas investigated almost no activity was detected outside of the 
opening hours. Only cleaning personnel were regularly detected outside 
11-17.00. 
During the weekends, the average amount of people was close 5 from 
around 12 to 17 p.m. This timespan was from one hour after opening 
time and until closing time. It must be noted that the gallery area 1 is 
placed  after two exhibitions. It will, therefore, take some time for the 
visitors that enter the museum at 1100 to reach this area. 
==PAGE:62==
52
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Mondays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Tuesdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Wednesdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Thursdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Fridays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Saturdays
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Sundays
Galley area 2
of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
Average amount of 
people counted 
Visible area: 475 m2
Amount of people at 
one timestep 
Figure 60. Results of the counting of visitors in the second of two gallery areas
In the second gallery area very little activity was detected during 
Mondays as was the case with the first gallery. But samples a high as 
4 people was detected. This occasional activity was caused by workers 
preparing a new display in the only day off week without visitors.
From Tuesdays to Fridays no large peaks were visible in the second 
gallery. Small peaks in the average people detected were showing but 
the peaks did not fall in a repeated pattern. 
The average curve during the weekend is more rounded with a midpoint 
at around 14.00. Similar to the first gallery very little activity is seen 
before 11.30 and almost not activity was detected outside of the 
opening hours.
==PAGE:63==
53
Auditorium
of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark
Average amount of 
people counted 
Visible area: 300 m2
Amount of people at 
one timestep
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Mondays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Tuesdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Wednesdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Thursdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Fridays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Saturdays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Sundays 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
8
10
12
14
16
18
People detected (n)
Time (h)
Wednesdays
The auditorium was used very little except for one Wednesday in which 
the usage was very high. On this speciﬁ c day 5 counting’s had higher 
results than 220 people and are thus not visible in the below ﬁ gure. This 
one day increased the average for Wednesdays signiﬁ cantly.
Only a few other organized presentations in the auditorium was visible 
during the 1 month of video provided, and none of these where able to 
ﬁ ll the auditorium. However, since the auditorium is open to the rest of 
the exhibition area a small amount of visitors often was present. The 
area was used by visitors to take a break for eating, talking or simply 
resting. Especially elderly people were often seen taking a short stop and 
sit in the seat of the auditorium. It must be noted that the auditorium is 
constructed as a bridge connecting the two sides of the museum and 
has large glass façades on each side. The view of the dock area from 
the auditorium is thus very good and the overall feel of the auditorium 
is open and ﬁ lled with daylight. Therefore, many entered to enjoy the 
view. Several children also used the room for playing. These unstructured 
activities resulted in most of the activity besides the one large presenta-
tion.
Figure 61. Results of the counting of visitors in the auditorium
==PAGE:64==
54
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Ratio detections/entrances  per day
Day of week
Entrance/shop presence ratio - adjusted
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Ratio detections/entrances  per day
Weekday
Entrance/shop presence ratio - adjusted
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Ratio detections/entrances  per day
Day of week
Entrance/shop presence ratio
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Ratio detections/entrances  per day
Weekday
Entrance/shop presence ratio
Figure 62.  Presence ratio for the combined entrance and shop area
Figure 63.  Adjusted presence ratio for the combined entrance and shop area
The presence ratio for the shop/entrance for the diff erent days of the 
week are plotted Figure 62. During workdays, there are clearly larger 
values for the presence ratio as well as larger deviations than for the 
weekend. The boxes, indicating the 0.25 to 0.75 quartile, are also 
remarkably smaller in the weekend. Since measurements were done for 
one month, four days of data were available for each weekday, except for 
Mondays and Tuesdays where 5 days of data were available.
Since the presence ratio is aff ected by the employees working in the shop 
and ticket sales, an adjustment was made using an assumed number 
of employee detections. 64 counting’s per day was subtracted during 
weekdays and 94 counting’s per day was subtracted in the weekends 
(Figure 63). This is equal to 2 employees standing in a room from 11-17 
in workdays and 3 employees standing in the room in the weekend. This 
adjusted plot is seen in Figure 63. This adjustment lowers the maximum 
presence ratio from being 2.9 to 1.9 and lowers the maximum average 
presence ratio from 2 to 1.2. As no visitors are present on Mondays it is 
not included in these ﬁ gures.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Detections per day
Days of week
Adjustement for employee presence
Avr. detections of users
Expected detections of employees
Figure 64. Subtraction of estimated employee presence
==PAGE:65==
55
This adjustment lowers the presence ratio, especially for the weekdays. 
The average values of the workdays are moved closer to the weekend, 
even though the workdays are subtracted by a lower number (64) than 
the weekend (94). Even with this adjustment there is a tendency for 
each user to stay in the shop for longer during weekdays than weekends. 
In the galleries there were a higher presence ratios during weekdays than 
the weekend (Figure 65 and Figure 66). Friday had lower presence ratio 
than Tuesday to Thursday and especially in gallery 1 Friday had values 
similar to the values of the weekend. As very little staff  was expected 
to be deteted in the galleries no adjustment of the gallery graphs was 
made. In general presence ratios for the galleries was smaller than the 
presence ratio for the shop/entrance.
DISCUSSION
Occupant densities
It is evident that the diff erent museum areas did not have similar 
occupant densities. The Entrance/shop area as well as the café had much 
higher values than the exhibition areas. The low occupancy density was 
partly due to the large area. This would, in many museums, be beneﬁ cial 
for the energy use as the galleries are the only areas where museum 
artefacts are traditionally exhibited and the indoor climate set points 
are set accordingly. A high people density will cause large loads to be 
minimized by the active and passive systems of the building. This will 
result in a larger energy use. Thus low people density in the exhibition 
areas will require less work by the systems in order to keep stable RH 
and temperatures and thereby less use of energy. As the M/S Maritime 
Museum does not have stricter requirements for the exhibition areas 
than for the rest of the museum this notion will not have an eff ect on 
this speciﬁ c museum.
User pattern
A similar usage pattern was visible in all room types except the 
auditorium. A similar usage pattern was visible in all room types except 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Ratio detections/entrances  per day
Weekday
Gallery 2 presence ratio 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Ratio detections/entrances  per day
Weekday
Gallery 1 presence ratio
Figure 65.  Presence ratio for gallery 1
Figure 66.  Presence ratio for gallery 2
==PAGE:66==
56
the auditorium.  Most visitors were present in the weekends, especially 
on Saturdays. Furthermore, Tuesdays did have more visitors than the 
following two days. The Auditorium however had constantly few users 
except for one day in which a very large number of users were present. 
The large amount of users in the auditorium did however not increase the 
amount of museum visitors on that particular day. If these patterns are 
repeated for the rest of the year they could be used for dimensioning the 
climate systems. In such a case, it would be reasonable to use Saturdays 
for determining heat and moisture loads. In case of the auditorium, very 
large climate systems would be needed, if the maximum loads were used 
for dimensioning the systems. But as a ﬁ lled auditorium is planned usually 
several days in advance, it should be possible to use measures that could 
provide additional cooling and ventilation at very speciﬁ c times. Increased 
use of natural ventilation or pre-cooled surfaces could be some of the 
possible means to cope with high loads. The one Wednesday in which 
the auditorium encountered a very high people density was caused by 
a yearly event for a school of marine and technical engineering. Thus all 
seats in the auditorium were used and some had to people were stand 
next to the seated area. In addition to being all full, the room was ﬁ lled 
with mostly male adults resulting in very large thermal and humidity 
loads. This event caused high values on Wednesdays on average, but 
it cannot be concluded that many people are likely to be present at 
the auditorium on Wednesdays. It can, however, be concluded that the 
auditorium was seldom used by many people, and when it was, very large 
loads occurred. It is important to note, that outside of the offi  cial use of 
the auditorium a small amount of people was often present. The reason 
for them being present could be curiosity, relaxing, eating lunch or the 
like. Similar behaviour could be expected in other museum auditoriums if 
they are not locked up or are located very isolated.
Although Mondays during this period was closed, there was still activity 
going on in all rooms, but much less than the rest of the week. When 
simulating museums Mondays should therefore be included with a low 
amount of users as maintenance and other types of work happens during 
this day. 
After a rather high amount of visitors Tuesday, the total activity per day 
was increasing during the week and peaked at Saturday after which a 
small decline occurred Sunday. This pattern of a many users during 
Tuesdays deviates from the study of user presence in other museums 
in this thesis. However, the reason for this pattern could be caused by 
the fact that the museum made a campaign for discounts for seniors 
on Tuesdays in which a free tour was included in the price as well as 
coff ee and cake from the café (M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark, 2016). 
This also explains the large number of people in the entrance area during 
Tuesdays. The tours were meeting up at this spot and thus created large 
people densities for small time periods. This also resulted in larger activity 
in the additional rooms of the museum.
The café area was used heavily throughout the whole day and not just 
during the traditional lunch times of 12.00-14.00. Especially during the 
weekend, a signiﬁ cant peak occurred from 13.00-14.00. Due to the 
relatively small area of the café in comparison to the other room types 
the average density was the highest among all room types investigated. 
The entrance and shop area had a high number of people detected. Since 
the area was relatively small, the people density was often very high. 
Since it was the ﬁ rst and last room the visitors would be in, the use was 
spread out over the entire opening period and at times late visitors or 
staff  could be detected at 18.15.
Based on the data it was not possible to make statistics that could 
determine how the user behaviour will be in other museums and at other 
times of the year. The data only describes the user behaviour at the 
museum in January. There might be diff erences in summer and winter 
behaviour and the type and placement of the museum might as well have 
had an impact on the ﬂ ow of visitors. The 15 min time step between 
measurements could cause large groups of people to be undetected 
since it is possible that a large group is present in a room for 14 minutes 
and still not being detected if the measurement pattern and the user 
behaviour pattern was out of sync. 
==PAGE:67==
57
Presence ratio
The average presence ratio at the entrance from Tuesday to Thursday 
was 1.9. It then dropped to 1.2 during Fridays and was down to 0.6 during 
the weekend. One reason for this could be that some of the visitors did 
spend more time in the shop in the weekdays than in the more crowded 
weekends. Another reason for this was that the amount of employees 
being present was only to a small degree related to the amount of visitors 
and that the employees were not accounted for in the visitor entrance 
numbers. But an employee in the shop would be present in that room 
most of the day, whereas most visitors would be constantly moving from 
room to room and may not even be counted once due to the timespan 
between counting’s. An employee in the ticket sales would cause a high 
presence ratio since he/she would be counted several times during a day. 
That would result in a high number in the numerator while not being 
included in the visitor entrances, leaving the denominator unchanged (in 
Eq. (16)). Therefore, days with few visitors, but with a similar amount of 
staff  resulted in a high presence ratio. 
For the galleries the presence ratio was smaller than in the entrance/
shop. That indicates that people did spend more time in the shop/
entrance than in either of the galleries. It is, however, important to note 
that many more galleries exist at the museum and therefore it cannot 
be concluded that people in spend more time in the shop than in the 
exhibition. The larger presence ratio in the weekdays indicates that even 
though less people visits the exhibition in the weekdays they tend to 
stay for a longer period of time.
The large deviations during the workdays could be caused by the lower 
amount of visitors. Therefore, a similar sized group would cause larger 
deviations in the workdays than in the weekend. It is important to note 
that the actual number of visitors was not known but only an estimation 
based on the income from ticket sales. If people on average got in at 
a lower price during workdays than in the weekend the presence ratio 
would as well be increased. Since the data on the amount of visitors 
per day is not of high quality then it is not possible to make any well 
based conclusions. However, if people in general spend more time in the 
museum in the weekdays than in the weekend it will be beneﬁ cial for the 
running of the climate systems since the total number of visitors is larger 
in the weekends. Thereby, the occupancy density will be decreased in the 
weekends and increased in the week days compared to an assumption of 
a ﬁ xed amount of time per visitor.
Data acquisition
This method required the footage to be viewed and registered manually 
at a 15 min time step which required a large amount of work. Since the 
museum made the surveillance gear available for one week, a smaller 
time step would result in either a smaller time period than a month or 
less cameras to be registered. But a smaller time period would give very 
little basis to evaluate which measurement was out of the ordinary if e.g. 
two Sundays had very diff erent patterns. Having fever room types would 
not be beneﬁ cial since the ﬁ ve areas chosen represents four of the major 
room types present in most museums. Furthermore, having double meas-
urements of the galleries areas made it possible to determine if similar 
patterns occurred. A motion detection function within the surveillance 
program was used to avoid watching large amount of footage in which 
no people was present. However, this function was not suitable for 
the exhibition area due to the large amount of video projections in the 
exhibition. Each visible area of the ﬁ ve cameras was measured using CAD 
drawings in order to be able to determine the density of people, when 
having the counted the amount of people present.
Not being able to determine the number of visitors per day precisely but 
only estimating it based on income is a large source of uncertainty. Ad-
ditionally, the actual counting’s was based on a large amount of manual 
work in which the risk of human error was greater than if an automatic 
system was used. Such a system could be based on registering the number 
of times a laser beam was crossed, or particle recognition software could 
be connected to the surveillance tapes.
==PAGE:68==
58
CONCLUSION
The day of the week had an inﬂ uence on the number of visitors. It was 
also evident that diff erent user patterns were connected to diff erent 
room types. If a user behaviour was to be simulated it would thus be 
reasonable to make diff erent user schedules for auditoriums, entrance/
shop areas, cafés and galleries as well as making diff erent schedules for 
each day.
The link between visitors per day and the amount of people present in 
each room was calculated using the presence ratio. Since employees and 
visitors were measured separately it did have an impact on the results 
from the entrance/shop area. But based on the visitor ratio from both 
the entrance/shop area and the galleries, it can be concluded that even 
though more people visited the museum in the weekend and that visitors 
did spend longer time in those areas in the weekdays than the weekend. 
However, since the number of visitors are larger in the weekend the 
occupany density were still higher in the weekend.
The ﬁ eld of user behaviours for energy simulation is a ﬁ eld in development 
and especially data about user behaviour in special buildings such as 
museums is almost non-existent. The data from this study only describes 
one museum for a short period of time. However, as very little data like 
this are avaible it can be used in future research as well as be the best 
basis for user schedules until further research is done within this ﬁ eld.
Due to this method being very time consuming it would be beneﬁ cial to 
develop an automated measuring method. This could either be done by 
sensors installed in the museums or by image detection systems working 
in combination with the recorded footage.
==PAGE:69==
59
09 Lighting loads
In order to determine realistic lighting loads for a new museum building, 
exhibition spaces from 6 museums were estimated. The study included 
spaces both above and below ground and showed that 10-15 W/m2 is a 
reasonable setting for the lighting loads.
Even though light is harmful for most collections it is needed in order for 
the visitors to experience the displays. Since daylight is often not desired 
due to preservation, electrical lighting is needed. The luminaries will 
aff ect the overall energy use of the museum due to the large electricity 
demand, but will also cause a signiﬁ cant heat load. Thereby, it will result 
in a smaller demand for heating, but can cause a larger cooling load. 
A small study was made on the amount of wattage that could theoret-
ically be used for diff erent exhibition spaces at the National Museum of 
Denmark, Thorvaldsens Museum, Glyptoteket, The Worker's Museum and 
the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark. In total, 53 exhibition spaces in 6 
museums below and above ground were researched.
Method
The six museums was visited an a number of of exhibition spaces in the 
diff erent parts of the museums was selected. For each room the width 
and length was either paced out or measured on plan drawings. Then 
the number of lighting ﬁ xtures was counted and divided into 9 diff erent 
categories. The wattage needed for similar new appliances were found 
and multiplied with the number of lamps. This resulted in an estimated 
wattage per area ratio in order to determine realistic values for museum 
lighting. Both rooms with and without daylight and rooms below and 
above ground were included. In Figure 67, a 10 of the spaces studied are 
shown. 
The lighting ﬁ xtures were divided into: small, medium and large spots, 
projectors, small pendant, large ﬂ oodlight, small and large ﬂ uorescent 
lamps and monitor screens. Additional emergency lighting and turned off  
lamps were not included. For each room it was noted whether the room 
was above or below ground and if the room had direct daylight, dimmed 
daylight or no daylight at all. Data on the assumed lighting ﬁ xtures as 
well as the calculations and images of all rooms in this study is placed in 
appendix 11
Figure 67.  10 of the 53 rooms investigated. The top ﬁ ve images are examples of exhibition spaces above ground and the bottom ﬁ ve are examples of spac-
es below ground. All images and references to museums can be found in appendix 11
==PAGE:70==
60
Results
The potential energy use diff ered greatly for the diff erent museums 
(Figure 68). The M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark had the largest 
average energy use of 15.9 W/m2 and Glyptoteket had the lowest of 5.4 
W/m2. There was a large variation between rooms in most museums and 
the National Museum of Denmark had spaces with a theoretical energy 
demand of 3.3 W/m2 and 43.2 W/m2. 
A large number of spaces both below and above ground used daylight 
but most tended to use either curtains, frosted glass or the alike to dim 
the light. A few spaces were only depended on daylight and used no 
electrical lighting at all. 
Discussion
It must be emphasised that these estimations are assumptions based 
on new energy effi  cient appliances. The actual use of the ﬁ xtures was 
not known but were sorted into a few standard categories. Data sheets 
from new products was used and resulted in a much lower energy use 
than older appliances. Incandescent lamps can have an effi  cacy of 9 lm/W 
whereas new light sources can have effi  cacies above 100 lm/W (Pohl & 
Zimmermann, 2003). The actual energy use of these museums could 
thus be signiﬁ cantly higher. 
The type of lighting chosen is, however, not just a question of using the 
newest and most effi  cient systems. Diff erent lighting sources will have 
diff erent colour rendering as well as diff erent Correlated Colour Tempera-
tures (CCT) (Jacobs, 2004). The lighting atmosphere will have a big impact 
on the light sources used in museums, as it has a great impact on the 
quality of the exhibition. Furthermore, it can be seen that museums have 
very diff erent types of collections, diff erent buildings and diff erent ways 
of using lighting to communicate with the visitors. These factors result in 
very diff erent lighting designs and thus diff erent lighting loads.
In some of the rooms, lighting was activated by sensors. This control 
feature can signiﬁ cantly decrease the energy consumption especially in 
less populated museums or in remote areas of larger museums.
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Energy use (W/m2)
Space number (-)
Estimated W/m2 for exhibition spaces from different museums
Above ground
Daylight
Dimmed daylight 
No daylight
Underground
Daylight
Dimmed daylight 
No daylight
The National Museum 
of Denmark
Thorvaldsens
Museum
Den Frie
Glyptoteket
The Workers’ Museum
M/S Maritime Museum of 
Denmark
Avr. per museum
Figure 68.  Estimated W/m2 for 53 diff erent exhibition spaces at 6 diff erent Danish museums including spaces both above and below ground.
==PAGE:71==
61
For some of the museums, the area was measured on plans. However, 
most rooms were paced out in order to estimate the dimensions which 
potentially caused some measurement uncertainty. A wide range of 
lighting sources were found during the investigation and having to put 
these into a few overall categories can cause some error.
From notes received from Rambøll, it can be seen that 20 W/m2 was used 
as heat load from light during the design phase as a basis for all areas 
at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark. Since these documents were 
made in 2009, where appliances were less effi  cient, it seems realistic that 
much lower values could be used in new museums. Based on conversa-
tions with EKJ staff , an assumed 10-15 W/m2 is to be used in the design 
of the National History Museum. Based on this small study, these values 
are realistic loads for many types of museums. However, since certain 
exhibitions like the ones at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark uses 
electrical lighting and projectors as an integrated part of the exhibition, 
much larger loads can be expected at some museums. According to 
Norconsult 45 W/m2 was used as heat load from lighting and equipment 
for indoor climate simulations of the new Ragnarock Museum in Roskilde.
The evolution in LED technology has had a signiﬁ cant inﬂ uence on the 
overall energy use in museums. Traditionally cooling in museums have 
been necessary mainly to cope with the heat from lamps. By switching 
to LED, the need for ventilation will be greatly reduced. However, for 
some existing museums, the costs of changing the lighting equipment 
to newer and more effi  cient appliances is considered too expensive even 
though the running costs will be signiﬁ cantly lowered (Padﬁ eld, appendix 
03)
Conclusion
Despite rather large sources of uncertainties in the measuring and 
diff erent aims for the diff erent exhibitions it can be concluded that 10-15 
w/m2 can be a quite realistic setting for simulation of the exhibition area 
of a new museum building. The value could be much higher or lower 
depending on the collection and the type of museum. If daylight is used. 
It can potentially be set to zero.  
Further research
It would be very interesting if an in depth analysis of the actual lighting 
and heat loads of museums was conducted. Such a study would have to 
be done in collaboration with a large number of museums in which the 
actual data sheet of each luminaire was used as well as more precise 
dimensions of rooms. Measurements of lux, lumen outputs as well as cat-
egorization of the diff erent museums and collection types would provide 
a knowledge of a ﬁ eld in which very little knowledge could be found.
Lighting in IDA ICE.
In IDA ICE, the use of electrical lighting will be added as a lighting 
load in zone. The energy consumption from this is measured with a 
separate meter called “lighting”. Additionally, the luminous effi  cacy and 
the convective fraction must be speciﬁ ed. The luminous effi  cacy is not 
relevant for the calculations of this thesis, since the amount of light 
emitted does not inﬂ uence the total energy consumption. The convective 
fraction, however, will determine if the wattage is applied as convection 
or radiation. This ratio will diff er depending on the type of luminaire to be 
modelled as well as the position in regards to air streams. The convective 
part will be added as heat to the room immediately whereas the radiative 
part is ﬁ rst absorbed by the surfaces and then later released to the room 
(Wijeysundera, 2016). The standard value for the convective fraction 
of 0.3 in IDA ICE is kept for this study being equivalent of recessed 
ﬂ uorescent light (Kreider, 2000).
==PAGE:72==
62
10 Ground temperatures
The following section will provide knowledge on how ground tempera-
tures are deﬁ ned in IDA ICE, how they can be calculated by hand and how 
to simulate ground temperatures using COMSOL. The type of soil as well 
as the surroundings will have an impact on the results.
To begin the study on how to calculate ground temperatures the standard 
methods in IDA ICE and hand calculations in DS 418 is studied.
When making calculations of the design transmission losses through 
the exterior surfaces based on DS418, the ﬁ rst 0-2 m of soil are to be 
calculated as -12 ºC (DS 418). Below this, all temperatures are to be set 
to 10 ºC. The transmission losses are therefore lowered signiﬁ cantly 
when the building is placed deeper in the ground than 2 meters. 
Ambient air temperatures can in IDA ICE be simulated with either 
synthetic weather data, or weather ﬁ les such as the Test Reference Year 
(TRY). When simulating ground temperatures, IDA ICE has the possibility 
to use either the ISO 13370 or theICE3 option. ISO 13370 is based on 
the average annual temperature and an amplitude in combination with 
a calculated time lag. The ISO 13370 is a reference to the Danish and 
European standard for “Thermal performance of buildings – Heat transfer 
via the ground – Calculation methods". To determine exactly how IDA ICE 
utilizes the standard cannot be done by viewing code in the advanced 
mode as key parameters are calculated in some underlying code of IDA 
ICE. However, in ISO 13370, calculations on the ground heat ﬂ ow rate 
can be done in a monthly basis. When doing so the ground temperatures 
are calculated as:
(18) 
where:
τ is set to 1 which is good approximation on the northern hemisphere (ISO 
13370, 2008). The standard provides a list of mean monthly external 
temperatures. Based on this list the amplitude of variations as well as 
the annual average temperatures can be calculated. When using the 
ISO13370 option in IDA ICE it can be seen that the same temperatures 
are used for underground walls and ﬂ oor.
ICE3 sets diff erent temperatures for the walls and ﬂ oors. Underneath 
the ﬂ oor, ICE3 will use the average temperature of the weather ﬁ le and 
the underground walls are connected to a crawlspace kept at ground 
temperature (IDA ICE, 2016).
No 2D or 3D heat ﬂ ows are supported in either of the methods. Addi-
tionally, the temperatures of the DS418, ICE3 and the ISO 13370 are 
not depending on depth. IDA ICE will calculate building parts just below 
ground with completely diff erent temperatures than just above ground. 
The temperatures will also not diff er with further distance into the 
ground as would be expected. 
The ambient temperatures in IDA ICE (TRY) have a high ﬂ uctuation pattern 
with large temperature deviations (Figure 69). The ICE3 walls follow the 
TRY pattern but with less variation whereas the temperature for the 
ﬂ oor is stable at 8 ºC. The ISO 13370 method results in a small wave 
curve with an average of 8 ºC. The ground temperatures from DS418 
are slightly higher than the ground temperatures from IDA ICE methods 
although the ambient temperatures from DS418 are very diff erent from 
the TRY. As DS418 is used for dimensioning the worst case scenario an 
external temperature of -12 ºC seems to be in accordance with the TRY. 
However, the soil temperatures are, compared to the IDA ICE method, too 
==PAGE:73==
63
The following formula was used by DMI in order to calculate soil tempera-
tures for the TRY (DMI, 2013). It is based on calculating the ground tem-
peratures as a function of depth and time of year (Kvisgaard and Hadvig, 
1980):
(19) 
where:
Values of α=8∙10-7 m2/s, θ0m=9⁰C and θ0=3.15∙107 can were then used 
by Kvisggard and Hadvig to simply the formula (as shown in appendix 08):
:
(20) 
where:
It can be seen that further into the ground, the temperatures are aff ected 
by surface temperatures from earlier on in the year. Thus, the soil at 
1 m depth is calculated based on temperatures from the same month 
whereas the temperatures at 8 m is aff ected by the surface tempera-
tures 5 months earlier. 
Figure 69.  Comparison of ambient and ground temperatures in IDA ICE and 
the temperatures used in DS 418 for the design reference losses.
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Jan
Mar
Apr
Jun
Aug
Sep
Nov
Dec
Temperature (C⁰)
Time (Month)
Ambient and soil temperatures. 
DS 418 compared to IDA ICE  
TRY amb. air
ISO 13370 ground
DS 418 ground (below 2 m)
DS 418 amb. air
ICE3 walls
ICE3 ﬂoor
high for heating calculations.
Neither the IDA ICE methods or DS418 are precise enough to use for the 
studies carried out in this thesis. To make a proper investigation of the 
thermal conditions of underground buildings, there is a need for a method 
taking into account the depth of the soil layer in the estimation of the 
ground temperatures as well as diff erent types of soil. COMSOL will, thus, 
be needed to make heat transfer simulations in order to estimate the soil 
temperatures. A formula is then needed in order to validate the method 
of using COMSOL for simulating the soil temperatures.
==PAGE:74==
64
Based on equation (20) the temperatures at diff erent depths for a year 
based on the average monthly temperatures of the ground surfaces 
was plotted (Figure 71). These temperatures correspond very well to the 
underground temperatures listed by SBI (SBI 139, 1984) (Figure 70). SBI 
does not provide the formula for calculating the plotted curves, but it can 
be used to compare with Figure 71 as part of a validation of Eq. (20). 
In both ﬁ gures, further depth results in the amplitude of temperatures 
being lowered and the peak of the curve being moved further into the 
year. At m depth this results in the temperatures of the ground will be 
warmer in the winter than in the summer. These tendencies correspond 
with measurements of temperatures done in the Copenhagen area at 
diff erent depths (Kristensen 1959). 
Whether the surface is covered by either soil or grass it will have an 
inﬂ uence on the ground temperatures. But these diff erences will be 
decreased signiﬁ cantly with further depth and is gone at 50-70 cm 
depth (Kristensen, 1959). The surface covering of the ground will not 
be studied further in this thesis, but it is important to remember that the 
upper layers of soil in a real case will be less precisely simulated if the 
heat transfer of the surface is not taken into account.
At 8 m, the amplitude is decreased signiﬁ cantly and an almost constant 
temperature can be seen in both ﬁ gures. It is thus relevant at which 
depth the walls of a building is placed. Close to the surface. The heating 
demand will be larger during the winter as the temperature variation of 
the soil is very close to the ambient temperatures. At greater depths, 
higher temperatures in winter could thus be utilized to lower the need 
for heating. The reverse situation is showing in the summer where more 
heating are needed 8 m below ground than above ground. 
Then a simulation model was set up in COMSOL in order to do heat 
transfer simulations. Eq. (19) was compared with results from COMSOL in 
order to validate the method. 
Figure 70.  Temperature of the soil as a function of the time of year for 
diff erent soil depths (SBI 139, 1984)
Figure 71.  Temperature of the soil as a function of the time of year for 
diff erent soil depths based on equation (20)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
Temp C
Month
Temperature of ground at different depths
0.6 m
1.25m
2.5 m
5 m
8 m
==PAGE:75==
65
GROUND TEMPERATURES IN COMSOL
Ground temperatures can be simulated in time using 2D models in 
COMSOL. In COMSOL, a heat balance during the year was set up and 
temperatures at the diff erent layers were measured. The inputs needed 
besides the geometry were the thermal conductivity, the density and 
the heat capacity of the soil and the temperature of the air. 
In COMSOL, the air temperature can be speciﬁ ed as a function of time 
but not as a matrix like the TRY. A way of specifying the air temperatures 
would be to use Eq. (18) with the average temperatures and amplitude 
given by the ISO 13370. But DS418 use a similar equation with diff erent 
constants. In order to determine which standard had the best match with 
TRY, a plot was made (Figure 72). DS418 speciﬁ ed a constant temperature 
Jun
Aug
Oct
Mar
May
Jan
Dec
TRY
ISO 13370
DS 418
Figure 72.  TRY temperatures for ambient air compared with ground temper-
atures with constants from ISO13770 and DS418
of 8 ºC and an amplitude of 8.5 ºC, whereas using the ISO13770 resulted 
in a constant temperature of 7.795 ºC and an amplitude of 7.05 ºC. In the 
ISO 13370 the constants are calculated based on a list of weather data 
(appendix 09). The two temperature functions were very similar, but the 
DS418 constants gave a better approximation to the TRY temperatures. 
The DS418 was, thus, used as boundary condition for the temperatures. 
Diff erent types of soil will have diff erent thermal properties but the 
moisture content also has a large inﬂ uence on the thermal properties of 
soil (Farouki, 1981). Since the properties of the soil can vary, diff erent 
types of soil is created in order to study the inﬂ uence of the soil type on 
the simulation results. 
The soil in DS418 is set to have a thermal conductivity of 2 W/(mK) and
ρ · c=2∙106 J/(m3K). The density and heat capacity is thus assumed to be 
1500 kg/m3 and 1333 J/(kgK). The soil used in Kvisggard and Hadivig (1980) 
is set to have a thermal conductivity of 2 W/(mK) and a thermal diff usivity 
of 8 · 10-7 m2/s. The density and Heat conductivity was assumed based 
on the equation for thermal diff usivity (Lienhard and Lienhard, 2008):
(21)
These were compared to other types of soil (Table 9) with diff erent 
properties from Hamdhan and Clarke (2010). The inﬂ uence of the soils 
on the ground temperatures was then tested in COMSOL.
The COMSOL model was made as layers of soil placed upon each other 
and the DS418 temperature variation were used as a boundary condition 
for the external temperatures. A description of the mesh and solver 
settings of the COMSOL model can be found in appendix 10. 
==PAGE:76==
66
Thermal 
Density
Heat 
Thermal 
Type
Type of soil
conductivity
capacity
diffusivity
(water content%)
W/(mK)
kg/mᶟ
J/(kgK)
(m²/s)
A
Fine sand (0%)
0.15
1600
800
1.17E-07
B
Fine sand (24.6%)
2.75
2010
1632
8.38E-07
C
Course sand (0%)
0.25
1800
800
1.74E-07
D
Course sand (20.2%)
3.72
2080
1483
1.21E-06
E
Sandy clay (19.5%)
2.45
2100
1459
8.00E-07
F
Sandy clay (26.5%)
1.61
1890
1996
4.27E-07
G
Soft grey ﬁne sandy clay (54.6%)
4.20
1067
2646
1.49E-06
H
DS418
2.00
1500
1333
1.00E-06
I
Kvisgaard & Hadvig
2.00
1500
1667
8.00E-07
As seen from this example of diff erent soil types, the thermal properties 
vary greatly depending on the soil type and water content. The soil types 
were investigated in COMSOL in order to ﬁ nd the impact it has on the 
ground temperatures at diff erent depths.
It is important to know the water content as the heat capacity of soil is 
mainly related to the porosity and water content (Kristensen, 1959). For 
these simulations, the water content will not change, but in reality the 
water content will change over time. A series of simulations were made 
using only one soil type for all layers. The nine types of soil from Table 9 
were then used for nine diff erent simulations. The average temperatures 
at diff erent depth was plotted as a function of time (Figure 73 - Figure 
76). The plots were made based on values after 4 years in order to get 
stable temperatures.
Table 9.  Thermal properties for diff erent types of soil from Hamdhan and Clarke (2010), DS418 (2011) and Kvisgaard & Hadvig 
(1980). Assumed values based on the thermal diff usivity and thermal conductivity are colored grey.
Results
At 0.6 m below the ground surface, the yearly amplitude was high and 
the soil type had some inﬂ uence as the results deviated slightly for the 
diff erent types (Figure 73). However, at 2.5 m the diff erence between 
the diff erent soil types were more clearly showing (Figure 74). Soils 
with low thermal conductivity like A, C, and F had very little amplitude 
whereas soils with higher thermal diff usivity like D, G and H had the 
largest amplitude. 
At 8 meter depth, the diff erence between the diff erent soil types is not 
very large (Figure 75). Soils with a large thermal conductivity had almost 
no amplitude whereas large thermal diff usivity will cause some amplitude.
It took some time for the yearly ﬂ uctuations to stabilize, especially at 
larger depths. The temperatures increased slightly for the ﬁ rst four years, 
after which a similar pattern is visible for the remaining 6 years (Figure 
76).
==PAGE:77==
67
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperatures  (ºC)
Time (month)
Ground temperatures at 0.6 m with different soil types at year 5
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperatures  (ºC)
Time (month)
Ground temperatures at 2.5 m with different soils at year 4
H
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
I
Figure 73.  Ground temperatures at 0.6 m for a year for nine diff erent soil 
types at year 4
Figure 76.  Ground temperatures at 8 m for a 10 year period
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperatures  ( ºC)
Time (month)
Ground temperatures at 8 m  with different soils at year 4
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.6
7.8
8.0
8.2
8.4
8.6
8.8
9.0
0
720
1,440
2,160
2,880
3,600
Temperatures  (ºC)
Time (days)
Ground temperatures at 8 m  with different soils for 10 years
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Figure 74.  Ground temperatures at 2.5 m for a year for nine diff erent soil 
types at year 4
Figure 75.  Changes in ground temperatures at 8 m for nine diff erent soil 
types at year 4
==PAGE:78==
68
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperature (ºC)
Time (month)
Comparison of ground temperatures at 0.6 m depth from COMSOL 
with hand calculations
Hand calc I
H
Hand calc H
I
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperature (ºC)
Time (month)
Comparison of ground temperatures at 8 m depth from COMSOL 
with hand calculations
I
H
Hand calc I
Hand calc H
Figure 77.  Comparision of ground temperatures from COMSOL and  hand- 
calulations at 0.6 m depth
Figure 78.  Comparision of ground temperatures from COMSOL and hand- 
calulations at 8 m depth
COMPARISON OF HAND CALCULATIONS AND 
COMSOL OUTPUT
Hand calculations based on Eq. (19) were compared to the COMSOL 
calculations with the soil types based on properties from Kvisgaard & 
Hadvig and DS418.
The hand calculations of soil type I used the thermal properties as well 
as the ambient temperature list provided by Kvisgaard & Hadvig. This 
resulted in Eq. (20) based on weather data with average temperature 
of 8.73 ºC and an amplitude of 10.5 ºC (weather data input are seen in 
appendix 09). By making a hand-calculation of H using the DS418 soil 
properties and Eq. (19) the following equation was derived (appendix 08):
(22) 
where:
The equation was used with the weather data from DS418 also used 
for the COMSOL simulations. This weather proﬁ le had a lower average 
temperature of 8 ºC and lower amplitude of 8.5 ºC than used for the hand 
calculations of soil I.
This resulted in the hand calculations of soil I having a slightly larger 
deviation and larger average temperatures as seen in Figure 77. The 
hand calculations of H and the COMSOL simulations of the same soil 
corresponds very well, being almost identical at both 0.6m and 8 m depth.
Both the hand calculations based on Eq. (19) and the COMSOL simulations 
can therefore be used in order to estimate ground temperatures. But Eq. 
(19) is only valid if the same type of soil is used throughout the whole 
depth. Additionally, using COMSOL added the possibility of including 
other energy sources than the ambient air and was thus the method to 
be used in the continued work of this thesis. 
==PAGE:79==
69
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperature (ºC)
Time (month)
Temperatures at 0.6 m depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperature (ºC)
Time (month)
Temperatures at 2.5 m depth
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperature (ºC)
Time (month)
Temperatures at 8 m depth
s1
s2
s3
s4
5s
s6
COMBINATION OF SOIL TYPES
A small study in COMSOL was done to determine the eff ect of combining 
soil types. Six diff erent soil proﬁ les were created (Figure 79 and Table 
10) based on the soil types deﬁ ned in Table 9. Soil A had the lowest 
thermal conductivity and was thus used as insulation whereas soil type 
G was used as a heat store. Soil type H had properties in between these 
extremes. s1, s2, s3 consisted of just one type of soil whereas s4, s5 and 
s6 consisted of a combination of soil types with soil A as an insulation 
layer on top.
s2 and s3 followed a similar pattern having the highest amplitude of all 
soils at all depths (Figure 80). This was also expected since these proﬁ les 
did not have insulation of soil A in the top layers and thus would be able 
to gain more heat in the summer but would as well loose much in the 
winter. 
s1 solely consisted of soil A and s6 had a 2.5 meter thick layer of soil A on 
top. Both had large amplitudes in the upper layer. But at 2.5m depth this 
amplitude was very small and at 8 m depth it was almost gone.
Soil proﬁles
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6
L1
A
G
H
A
A
A
L2
A
G
H
G
H
A
L3
A
G
H
G
H
A
L4
A
G
H
G
H
G
L5
A
G
H
G
H
G
L6
A
G
H
G
H
G
L7
A
G
H
G
H
G
Layer
Figure 79.  Soil model with 7 layers
Table 10.  Six diff erent soil proﬁ les. 
Higher values of thermal conductivity is 
indicated with a darker colour.
Figure 80.  Temperature proﬁ les at year 4 at 8.0 m
Figure 81.  Temperature proﬁ les at year 4 at 0.6 m
Figure 82.  Temperature proﬁ les at year 4 at 2.5 m
L1
0.00m
0.60m
1.25m
2.50m
5.00m
8.00m
14.00m
62.00m
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
L7
==PAGE:80==
70
s4 and s5 had a 0.6 m layer of soil type A on top of a soil with larger 
thermal conductivity. Thereby, the soil proﬁ les were able to store large 
amounts of energy and still being able to keep it. This resulted in small 
amplitudes even at 0.6 m depth. 
It can be concluded that the type of soil and the moisture content 
will have an inﬂ uence on the yearly temperatures of the soil. But with 
increased depth, the type of soil will have less of an inﬂ uence and at 8m, 
the temperatures will be very stable regardless of the soil type.
Soil with low thermal conductivity and mass will function as a insulation 
material. The accumulation of energy from the air in summer is hindered 
by the insulation soil but will contain more heat in the winter. Using dense 
soil, the opposite phenomenon will occur. Furthermore, adding dry sand 
on top of other soil types will results in much more stable temperatures.
+
=
HEAT FROM BUILDINGS TO THE GROUND
Not only the ambient air but also heat loss from buildings will add to the 
heat stored in the underground. With the use of COMSOL, the eff ect of 
the heat loss from buildings on ground temperatures was investigated. 
Setting all boundaries as adiabatic except for one heat source allowed 
for investigation of the isocurves from the speciﬁ c sources. By simulating 
the building heat loss and the ambient heat loss one by one, it could be 
seen that these sources had a very diff erent eff ect on the temperature 
proﬁ les. 
Figure 83.  Heat provided by the ambient air
Figure 84.  Heat provided by the building
Figure 85.  Interference of heat sources
The heat from the ambient air is evenly distributed perpendicular to the 
ground surface with the magnitude changing during the year (Figure 83). 
Thereby, the isocurves are straight lines moving up and down according 
to the season. 
As a building is relatively small compared to the ground volume, it can be 
considered as a point source. Very close to the building the isocurves will 
be straight, but with further distance from the building the isocurves will 
circular (Figure 84). The heat from the building can either be provided 
as a steady heat source or the internal temperatures of the building can 
change during the season. If a steady heat source is used, the temperature 
of the ground will increase until a steady state is reached. If the tempera-
tures inside the building is changing during the season, then the rounded 
isocurves will move back and forth depending on the season. 
When combining these two sources in the same simulation the isocurves 
will blend (Figure 85). Close to the building higher temperatures will be 
reached due to having heat provided by both the ambient air and the 
building. Further away from the building the heat loss will have less 
inﬂ uence on the isocurves. Thus, at a certain distance from the building 
the isocurves will be straight.
==PAGE:81==
71
THE EFFECT OF THE SURROUNDINGS
Six cases were studied in order to determine the eff ect of nearby 
buildings on the ground temperatures at diff erent depths. All simulations 
were performed using DS418 soil and simpliﬁ ed building structures in 
COMSOL.
The study based on simulating a case with two buildings placed in soil 
and a case with only one building. By measuring the temperatures from 
both cases and subtracting the results from the two simulations the 
eff ect of the extra building on the soil temperatures was found.
Two cases with no nearby buildings were simulated as a reference. The 
ﬁ rst reference case was a building of 5 m depth to be compared with 
case 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 (Figure 87).  Case 2 was compared with a 8 m deep 
building. The average temperatures at diff erent depths were logged for 
a 20 year period. These measurements were taken at measuring lines at 
diff erent depths (Figure 86). The vertical measurements were done as 
average temperatures at lines placed 1 m away from the building. The 
horizontal measurements were done at a line placed 3 meters below the 
building. The six cases were chosen in order to investigate the inﬂ uence 
of depth, distance, symmetry and asymmetry. 
2.
1.
5.
3.
4.
6.
5 m
28  m
5 m
28 m
5 m
28 m
28 m
15 m
15 m
5 m
5 m
5 m
Figure 86.  Placement of measuring lines
Figure 87.  Symmetrical cases with two buildings. The red box indicates the 
building where measurements are done in the speciﬁ c case.
A
B
C
D
E
U
A
B
C
D
U
0.6m
1.25m
2.5m
5.0m
0.6m
1.25m
2.5m
5.0m
==PAGE:82==
72
Figure 88.  The diff erence of increase of the soil temperatures of case 1
Figure 89.  The diff erence of increase of the soil temperatures of case 2
It can be seen that near the surface the diff erence between the two 
building cases and the one building reference case was not very big, as 
line A was close to zero in all six cases (Figure 88- Figure 93). However, 
the diff erence increased with further depth into the ground and were 
most notable below the building (marked with red). All diff erences 
increased steadily overtime as the soil got heated. 
Placing both the nearby building and the measured building further into 
the ground increased the accumulated heat. Having buildings placed 8 m 
into the ground (Figure 88) rather than 5 m (Figure 89) resulted in a 0.2 
ºC diff erence rather than 0.12 ºC diff erence below the building after 20 
years.
By having the measured building placed 5 m into the ground and the 
nearby building 8 into the ground (Figure 90), caused results in between 
case 1 and 2. But if the nearby building was on ground away then very 
little eff ect could be measured (Figure 91)
If the buildings were placed close to each other the ground tempera-
tures was increased further (Figure 92 and Figure 93). Having a distance 
between buildings of only 15 m apart resulted in a 0.4 ºC diff erence in 20 
years in case 5 and 0.19 ºC in case 6. 
Both the distance to nearby buildings and the depth of the nearby 
buildings did have a large impact in the soil temperatures. Therefore, more 
buildings in contact with the ground will cause the underground temper-
atures in an area to increase. Having more buildings placed deeper into 
the ground and closer will additionally increase the heat accumulation. 
The surroundings can therefore to some extend be used to decrease the 
need for heating as buildings collectively will heat up the shared volumes 
of soil. As seen in all cases underground buildings will in time have to 
spend less energy on heating due to the soil temperatures increasing.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
Temperature (ºC)
Time (year)
Difference in ground temperatures between 
case 1 and reference
A
B
C
D
U
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
Temperature (ºC)
Time (year)
Difference in ground temperatures between 
case 1 and reference
A
B
C
D
U
==PAGE:83==
73
Figure 90.  The diff erence of increase of the soil temperatures of case 3
Figure 92.  The diff erence of increase of the soil temperatures of case 5
Figure 91.  The diff erence of increase of the soil temperatures of case 4
Figure 93.  The diff erence of increase of the soil temperatures of case 6
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
Temperature (ºC)
Time (year)
Difference in ground temperatures between 
case 1 and reference
A
B
C
D
U
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
Temperature (ºC)
Time (year)
Difference in ground temperatures between 
case 1 and reference
A
B
C
D
U
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
Temperature (ºC)
Time (year)
Difference in ground temperatures between 
case 1 and reference
A
B
C
D
U
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
Temperature (ºC)
Time (year)
Difference in ground temperatures between 
case 1 and reference
A
B
C
D
U
==PAGE:84==
74
11  Combine COMSOL and  
IDA ICE
In order to utilize the potentials of both COMSOL and IDA ICE, a combined 
method for making energy simulations was made. Due to the lack of 
vertical heat ﬂ ows in IDA ICE walls some calculation error will occur. The 
error can be minimized by simulating everything on the outside of the 
insulation in COMSOL and export the temperatures to an IDA ICE model 
containing only the insulation layer and the interior walls.
One dimensional heat ﬂ ux simulations of IDA ICE and COMSOL give 
very similar results (appendix 12). However, COMSOL has the ability to 
calculate the heat transfer of the ground in 2D/3D in time, whereas the 
heat transfer in IDA ICE is only one directional in time. In IDA ICE. The heat 
transfer can only occur back and forth from interior to exterior normal 
to the surface plane. For simulations of buildings above ground, this 
simpliﬁ ed heat ﬂ ow will not have as large an inﬂ uence on the result as on 
below ground buildings as seen in this section.
Isocurves of the model is seen in Figure 95. In the soil layers near the 
wall, temperatures will change faster with further depth whereas the 
temperatures underneath the building is more constant. By studying 
the isocurves it is evident that temperatures will be larger closer to the 
middle of the building. 
The disregard of vertical heat ﬂ ows in IDA ICE results in no energy being 
transferred into the ground from the ambient air and no heat can be 
transferred from one layer to another as marked with black arrows in 
Figure 94. Heat from the building walls can only be transferred in the 
horizontal direction in a one dimensional ﬂ ow. That results in the heat 
have to travel a longer distance to reach the ambient especially for the 
upper layers. 
Thus, using IDA ICE for the simulation of the heat ﬂ ows underground will 
lead to very rough assumptions. However, in order to calculate the total 
energy consumption of a building, IDA ICE includes many parameters like 
ventilation, user presence, CO2 etc. that cannot be modelled in COMSOL. 
COMSOL is a tool for investigation of complex ﬂ ows in models with a 
Figure 94.  Heat transfer in soil
Figure 95.  Isocurves in soil (COMSOL screenshot)
4 m
==PAGE:85==
75
Buffer
x
y
Exterior
Wall
Floor
Interior
Insulation
relatively small amount of parameters with a high precision. On the other 
hand, IDA ICE is capable of incorporating many parameters into a complex 
model in which each parameter is relatively simpliﬁ ed. 
A study was, thus, made on how to utilize the strengths of both programs 
in order to increase the quality of the simulations by linking the two 
programs into a work ﬂ ow. Studies have been made for storages placed 
on ground (Christensen and Janssen, 2009, and Bøhm and Ryhl-Svend-
sen, 2011). But as to bee seen in this section, walls is the part causing 
the largest simulation errors. It was not possible to ﬁ nd any standard or 
prescribed methods on making this link for underground buildings why a 
range of possible methods was developed and simulated to be compared 
against the ﬂ ux simulated in COMSOL.
METHOD 
ISO 13370 (2008) includes a method of calculatin the heat ﬂ ux through 
the ﬂ oor to use for dynamic simulation programs. In this method the 
ﬂ oor construction includes half a meter of soil and a thin virtual layer. 
However, this method is often not suitable for horizontal heat ﬂ uxes as 
thicker walls will result in calculations errors which will be explained later 
in this section.
A reference model with 1 m of concrete and 0.5 m of simulation was made 
in COMSOL in which the heat ﬂ ux and temperatures could be measured. 
The diff erent methods utilized the geometry and programs diff erently 
but in Figure 96 the deﬁ nition of diff erent areas of the model can be 
seen. The inner line is the ”Interior”, the outside of the building body is 
deﬁ ned as ”Exterior” and with an off set of 2 m a ”Buff er” line is created. 
The Insulation line is placed on the outside of the insulation layer 
The temperatures for the ambient air were set according to DS418 using 
(18), whereas the internal temperatures used the same function in order 
to have variations from 20 ºC to 25 ºC during the year synchronized with 
the peaks of the ambient temperatures. The study was done for walls 
and ﬂ oors separately since the heat ﬂ ows are signiﬁ cantly diff erent in 
these two areas and because walls in IDA ICE will lack heat transfer in 
the y direction whereas ﬂ oors will lack transfer in the x direction. The soil 
temperatures at year 11 of the COMSOL model were then imported into 
IDA ICE to make a simulation. In order to have similar interior tempera-
tures in both IDA ICE and COMSOl the walls in IDA ICE was disconnected 
to the zone at instead was instead linked to an excel ﬁ le with interior 
temperatures corresponding to COMSOL.
The connection between wall and ﬂ oor is not included in IDA ICE due 
to the calculation of heat transfer being in one direction and would 
have to be included as a line loss. A method for deﬁ ning line losses in 
underground buildings can be appendix 18.
The soil temperatures measured at the buff er line are not the same as 
the temperatures measured at the exterior line or the insulation line. It 
is diffi  cult to determine where to measure the temperatures in COMSOL 
to import into IDA ICE and how much soil should be modelled in IDA ICE in 
order to get the best approximation of the heat loss. In order to determine 
how to calculate the ground temperatures in IDA ICE for the further work 
Figure 96.  Reference model and deﬁ nitions
==PAGE:86==
76
of the thesis, a couple of diff erent methods were developed and tested. 
The ﬂ ux from COMSOL was used as reference values and the ISO 13370 
and ICE3 methods were included in order to determine whether or not 
these new methods was an improvement of the existing method used 
in IDA ICE. The same method was used for the wall and for the ﬂ oor in 
separate simulations. 
The transfer of data from COMSOL to IDA ICE was based on the principle 
seen in Figure 97. Data from the reference model in COMSOL was 
converted into a function in Excel and imported into IDA ICE. Only one 
year from the COMSOL simulation should be imported into IDA ICE in 
order to avoid numerical errors. This work ﬂ ow can be varied in a number 
of ways and the methods tested were as follows: 
When opening an underground wall component in the advanced level of 
IDA ICE, it can be seen that a wall placed under ground has 3 additional 
layers added. The ﬁ rst layer is a 0.1 m thick layer of with properties similar 
to an insulation material. The second layer is 0.5m of standard soil and 
the third layer is a 0.1 thick "virtual layer" with no heat capacity but a low 
heat conductivity. . In the following work, these layers were removed in 
the methods for combining COMSOL and IDA ICE, but kept when using the 
standard methods of IDA ICE. Removing these layers using the standard 
methods in IDA ICE caused very large changes in heat ﬂ ux and a larger 
deviation from the COMSOL reference. If these layers were kept when 
using the new methods, the ﬂ uxes were made to small. The methods 
tested for this study were:
COMSOL (reference)
The heat ﬂ ux from COMSOL was used as a reference for the above 
mentioned results. The ﬂ ux could be exported from COMSOL and imported 
into IDA ICE and used to overrule the ﬂ ux calculated by the walls of IDA 
ICE. However, this would interfere with other functions in IDA ICE based 
on the wall temperatures and the COMSOL ﬂ ux is only used for reference.
ISO 13370
The ISO 13370 method for underground temperatures in IDA ICE was 
used. This method does not involve the use of COMSOL or changing the 
mathematical model of IDA ICE.
ICE3
ICE3 is alternative underground simulation method included as a standard 
in IDA ICE. This method does also not include the use of COMSOL.
Buff er temperature 
In COMSOL, a reference model was generated with both heat from the 
ambient air and heat from the building. The temperatures at the buff er 
line were then exported from COMSOL and used as input for the wall 
temperatures in IDA ICE. In IDA ICE, the soil, concrete and insulation were 
modelled and the additional layers added by IDA ICE for underground 
simulations were removed. Thereby, IDA ICE has the capability of storing 
heat in both part of the buff er soil volume and wall. Beyond the 1 m of 
buff er-soil, the heat storage will be simulated by COMSOL.
Exterior temperature 
In COMSOL, a reference model was generated with both heat from the 
ambient air and heat from the building. The temperatures at the wall 
level was then exported from COMSOL and then used as an input for 
the wall temperatures in IDA ICE. The concrete and the insulation layer 
were modelled in IDA ICE and the 2 additional layers added by IDA ICE for 
underground simulations were removed. All heat storage and 2D ﬂ ows of 
the ground was, thus, simulated in COMSOL.
Insulation temperature
This method was similar to the two before mentioned but was based 
on measuring the temperatures at the insulation line in COMSOL and 
modelling the insulation in IDA ICE. Thus, all heat storage is done in 
COMSOL reference
txt ﬁle
Excel
IDA ICE
prn
Simulation
Output
Post processing
Simulation
Output
Figure 97.  Data ﬂ ow from COMSOL to IDA ICE
==PAGE:87==
77
COMSOL. All simulations were done simulating 11 years in COMSOL and 
using the 11th year for the IDA ICE simulation.
RESULTS
The results of the simulations were plotted with results for walls and 
ﬂ oors separately (Figure 98 and Figure 99). The ISO 13370 method 
deviated signiﬁ cantly from the reference values from COMSOL and 
resulted in very low ﬂ uxes for both walls and ﬂ oors. Some amplitude was 
showing but it was much smaller than the amplitude of the reference. 
The average of ISO 13370 was signiﬁ cantly higher for both the wall and 
the ﬂ oor. Furthermore, by looking at the peak of the curve it can be seen 
Figure 98.  Heat lux from wall with diff erent simulation methods
Figure 99.  Heat ﬂ ux from ﬂ oor with diff erent simulation methods
that the wave time seems to be 3 months behind for the wall and 11 
months behind (or one month to early) in the ﬂ oor simulation.
The ICE3 method provided a better estimation of the heat ﬂ ux in this test. 
For the ﬂ oor (Figure 99) the ICE was a good match with the reference 
from COMSOL, whereas the wall had to low ﬂ ux values and a too large 
amplitude of the curve (Figure 98).
The method of simulating temperatures from COMSOL and exporting 
data to IDA ICE did in general provide results much closer to the reference. 
Placing the boundary between COMSOL and IDA ICE at the buff er line 
caused larger deviations in ﬂ ux and a time off set of around 2 months for 
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Flux (W/m)
Time (days)
Comparision of ﬂux from wall with different simulation 
methods
ISO 13370
COMSOL reference
Insulation temp
Wall temp
ICE3
Buffer temp
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Flux (W/m)
Time (days)
Comparision of ﬂux from ﬂoor with different 
simulation methods
ISO 13370
COMSOL reference
Insulation temp
Wall temp
ICE3
Buffer temp
==PAGE:88==
78
the wall. For the ﬂ oor a similar off set time of 2 months were showing but 
the amplitude of the curve was much larger than the reference and the 
average value was much lower.
Using the method “Wall temperatures“ caused an off set for the wall ﬂ ux 
of around a month as well as the average values being too low compared 
to the reference. However, for the ﬂ oor, using Wall temperatures" resulted 
in values close to the reference.
With the use of the method “Insulation temperatures“, results very close 
to the reference were simulated for the ﬂ oor. For the wall, small deviations 
were present, but were much smaller than for the other methods  
DISCUSSION
None of the methods combining COMSOL and IDA ICE provided an exact 
match with the reference value from COMSOL. Though using “Insulation 
temperatures“ resulted in a good match with the reference. However, 
all the methods using COMSOL in combination with IDA ICE did create 
a better match than using the ISO 13370 and ICE3 methods. The 
"Insulation temperatures“ method was thus used in the further work of 
this thesis.
This study forced the IDA ICE indoor temperatures to be controlled by 
the sine curve in order to be able to compare the results. Normally, indoor 
temperatures in IDA ICE would ﬂ uctuate more and many more parameters 
would be included. In real simulations, it would therefore not be possible 
to have an exact reference value from COMSOL as the heat emitted from 
the building in IDA ICE. For better estimations the heat temperatures of 
the outer layer of insulation in IDA ICE could be used as a new boundary 
condition in COMSOL for a new simulation. The output of this simulation 
could then be used in IDA ICE for a more precise simulation. The iteration 
will thus form a closed loop (Figure 100).
The closed loop would require a need for a method for importing the output 
of IDA ICE into COMSOL. The method for deﬁ ning boundary conditions in 
COMSOL in this thesis has been a build in feature allowing for boundary 
conditions to be deﬁ ned as functions. The temperature patterns from 
COMSOL can easily be deﬁ ned as a function but the temperature output 
from most IDA ICE simulations will be diffi  cult to include in the COMSOL 
model since the temperature pattern is irregular and is hard to ﬁ t into the 
function-setup in COMSOL.
For most of the methods, it will in practice be needed to make an IDA 
ICE simulation with estimated values for the interior boundary conditions 
and then make a COMSOL simulation. The output will then be used for 
the IDA ICE simulation in an open loop work ﬂ ow as seen in Figure 101. 
As the internal temperatures in a museum are relatively strictly deﬁ ned, 
it will be possible to make a reasonably good estimation.
 
COMSOL 
Ground 
temperatures
Indoor
temperatures
IDA ICE
Figure 100.  Closed loop dependence of programs
Ground 
temperatures
Indoor
temperatures
COMSOL 
IDA ICE
Figure 101.  Open loop dependence of programs
==PAGE:89==
79
It was clearly showing that the wall was more diffi  cult to simulate re-
alistically using one directional heat ﬂ ows than the ﬂ oor. This was due 
to most of the heat ﬂ ux in the ﬂ oor was happening normal to the ﬂ oor 
plate. Some heat is transferred horizontally but this amount is not large 
enough to cause large deviations. 
Better simulations were made when a larger part of the wall was done 
in COMSOL rather than in IDA ICE. The reason for the problems when 
simulating walls using one directional heat ﬂ ows are seen in Figure 102. 
The temperatures of the zone is the same from top to bottom and results 
in an even temperature boundary. However, due to the diff erences in 
temperatures from the soil, an uneven boundary is eff ecting the wall 
from the exterior. Some parts of the building component will then be 
heated more than other parts, causing a heat transfer in the wall in the y 
direction in COMSOL. IDA ICE cannot simulate heat transfer between the 
layers in the wall causing some diff erences between the COMSOL heat 
ﬂ ux and the simulation results from IDA ICE. As temperature gradients are 
larger near the ground surface, larger errors will occur when performing 
onedimentional calculations. Thicker walls will also cause larger errors as 
it will result in a larger area for the vertical heat ﬂ ows. 
If the temperatures of the diff erent levels of the wall are needed, then 
using a "wall part" in IDA ICE can be used for adding diff erent temper-
atures at diff erent levels. However, if only one room is below ground 
only there is no need to subdivide the walls and ﬂ oors. A test was done 
comparing a simulation with four walls parts of diff erent temperatures 
and one wall with an average temperature. The deviation between the 2 
simulations was between 0 and 10-5 at diff erent time steps as the small 
deviation was a result of numerical errors. 
Not including the concrete layer or any soil in the IDA ICE model removes 
a big part of the thermal capacity of the IDA ICE model. However, the 
thermal capacity can be split into two phenomenon’s: long term and short 
term thermal capacity. The long term thermal capacity was modelled in 
COMSOL and added to the IDA ICE model through the temperatures of the 
wall and ﬂ oor. This was calculated based on the boundary conditions of 
COMSOL and was thus not aff ected directly by the simulation in IDA ICE. 
The small ﬂ uctuations in temperatures of the interior would not be used 
in the long term thermal capacity of the soil. The rapid ﬂ uctuations in 
temperatures of the interior would have very little eff ect on the outside 
of the insulation due to the time it took for the heat to penetrate the 
insulation layer (appendix 13). This would especially be true with more 
thermal mass added to the interior side of the insulation. As the ﬁ nal 
simulations in this thesis contained internal concrete walls these walls 
would be used for the short term thermal capacity whereas the soil and 
concrete on the external side of the insulation would be used for the long 
term thermal capacity. 
For using this method, it is important that the internal temperatures of the 
building is known. Using a better estimation for the interior temperature 
proﬁ les in COMSOL will result in a more precise simulation. Therefore, 
Exterior
temperatures
Interior
temperatures
Figure 102.  Uneven temperature boundaries of a wall of insulation causing 
vertical heat transfer
==PAGE:90==
80
calculating unheated spaces are not suited for this method Additionally, 
not using insulation is therefore not possible for using this method as 
the distinction between long term and short term thermal storage will 
disappear. This method should only be used if the boundary conditions 
for the interior in IDA ICE and COMSOL corresponds well. 
Another thing to be aware of when using this method is making sure 
that the time from COMSOL, corresponds to the time in IDA ICE. IDA ICE 
uses hourly values for the time vector in the simulation. However, since 
at least 10 years of simulation is needed from COMSOL, hourly values will 
cause a large ﬁ le. Typically, only the data from the last year of a COMSOL 
simulation. But before importing data into IDA ICE it is important to note 
that IDA ICE uses the actual amounts of days in a given year where 
COMSOL years are always 365 days. Thus, these time issues needs to 
be sorted out in excel before importing data into IDA ICE. Having the data 
from COMSOL and the simulation in IDA ICE to be out of sync will have 
a large inﬂ uence on the simulation. As the programs are not automat-
ically linked, errors or changes done in COMSOL will result in a need to 
repeat the work ﬂ ow of exporting, preparing data in excel and importing 
into IDA ICE. Doing iterations or small changes in geometry will with this 
method result in signiﬁ cantly larger amounts of manual labour than if 
these simulations could be done in just one program. 
The destruction between what should be modelled in each program is 
seen in Figure 103. The red dotted line indicates the boundary between 
the IDA ICE and COMSOL geometry. The soil, the parts of the basement 
walls on the outside of the insulation, nearby basements and other 
below ground inﬂ uences are to be simulated in COMSOL. In IDA ICE, only 
the building parts on the interior side of the insulation as well as the 
insulation itself are to be modelled in IDA ICE for the below ground part 
of the model. Above ground all building components are modelled and 
nearby buildings are to be modelled due to the inﬂ uence of shading.
CONCLUSION
The fact that IDA ICE calculates the heat ﬂ ows in one direction will result 
in some errors when simulating walls with an uneven temperature dis-
tribution. It can be concluded that the method "Insulation temperatures" 
resulted in the best match with the reference heat ﬂ ux from COMSOL. 
The method is time consuming, but results in more realistic results than 
the build in functions of IDA ICE. Furthermore, the method allows for more 
factors to be modelled in COMSOL and used for the combined simulation.
COMSOL
IDA ICE
Figure 103.  Selection of parameters to be included in simulations for COM-
SOL and IDA ICE
==PAGE:91==
81
12 Simulations
A series of simulations was done of a simpliﬁ ed museum building using 
dynamic user patterns. For museums above and below ground, the 
insulation thickness, indoor climate requirements and occupancy densities 
were varied in order to study the inﬂ uence on energy consumption. 
Simulations with only one parameter change was used to make further 
studies. These showed that underground museums do have a potential 
lower energy consumption but that thick insulation layers will minimize 
the diff erence. Futhermore,, control strategies had a larger inﬂ uence on 
the energy use than whether or not the museum is placed underground.
As seen in the previous sections, the museum building is a complex 
typology since many parameters has an inﬂ uence on the energy 
consumption. Furthermore, these parameters will have an inﬂ uence on 
each other. Especially the occupancy makes it diffi  cult to analytically 
determine an optimal solution as the amount of people is constantly 
changing. People are source of both CO2, humidity, and heat and thereby 
inﬂ uence both the ventilation system, the humidity control and the 
heating and cooling systems. As both RH and temperatures are to be 
within certain ranges the number of occupants will impact the energy 
use.
A
B
C
Figure 104.  Simulation cases
METHOD
A series of simulations was carried out in order to determine the possible 
advantages by placing museums underground. A simpliﬁ ed museum 
consisting of a 1000 m2 room with 6 m ceiling height was placed at three 
levels as seen in Figure 104. 
Type A was the building above ground which only had contact with the 
ground through the ﬂ oor.
Type B was placed just below ground. The walls were covered but the 
ceiling was in connection with the ambient air. Both the walls and ﬂ oor 
were in connection with the ground.
Type C was placed 4 meters below ground level, having all surfaces in 
connection with the ground.
==PAGE:92==
82
In order to make the types comparable, no windows were placed in either 
type. Identical walls, ﬂ oors and ceilings were used as only the type 
and placement of vapour barrier diff ered from below ground to above 
ground surfaces. Exterior walls were 1 m thick and made of concrete and 
the interior surfaces was a 250 mm thick layer of concrete. The ﬂ oor 
and ceiling consisted of 300 mm concrete slabs. The inﬂ uence of the 
insulation thickness on the result was included by simulating cases with 
150 mm, 300 mm and 500 mm insulation for the three diff erent types. 
Likewise, three diff erent control strategies for the RH was used (Figure 
105). Type "Loose" allowed deviations from 20-80% RH all year, whereas 
"Medium" allowed for 40-60% RH on a yearly basis. Lastly, "Tight" was 
controlled by a maximum of 5%-point change per day with set point 
changing from 55-60% RH in the summer to 40-45% RH in the winter 
in a sinus wave pattern. In all the cases, the internal temperatures were 
20-25 ºC during the year, also controlled by a sinus wave. 
In order to model realistic user patterns, yearly visitor data was used 
from the National Museum of Denmark in combination with investiga-
tions at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark. From this a user schedule 
was made. The amount of users in the museum was calculated based 
on the occupancy density. The average occupancy densities were set to 
six values in the range of 0.00125 to 0.04 pers/m2. Then the inﬂ uence 
of insulation, occupancy density, type of building case and control 
strategy was studied through parameter changes and a large number of 
simulations. 
Afterwards a series of one parameter changes was done. For these 
studies the occupancy density was set to 0.005 pers/m2 being the 
average occupancy density in the gallery in the study at the M/S Maritime 
Museum of Denmark. 300mm of insulation was used and the RH was 
controlled by the "tight" control. Simulations was done where the yearly 
pattern of the National Museum of Denmark was replaced by patterns 
from the Geological Museum and the Zoological museum. The same set 
of simulations was done for both Type A and B.
Another series of one parameter studies was made i order to study:
1) The inﬂ uence of using low weight concrete with good moisture 
buff ering capabilities
2) Not including moisture buff ering in the simulations of concrete. This 
was done by applying very large vapour diff usion resistances to the wall.
3) Low temperatures in combination with loose RH control. The set points 
for heating and cooling were set to 15 ºC and 20 ºC.
4) Using sandy soil in the simulations rather than the standard DS 418 
soil.
These simulations were, likewise, done for both type A and type B in 
order to determine the eff ect of the single parameter changes in relation 
to the museum being placed either above or below ground.
All energy calculations were based on the need for heating, cooling and 
ventilation. Energy factors are, thus, not included.
Figure 105.  Control stragegies for RH
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Jan
Mar
May
Jul
Sep
Nov
RH control strategies
RH (%)
Month
Loose
Medium
Tight
==PAGE:93==
83
Zone
HMwall
COMSOL
temp
User
schedule
Figure 106.  Connection of custom functions to the zone model in IDA ICE
Figure 107.  Connection of custom functions to the zone model in IDA ICE
1
0
X
=
Schedule
Users
User pattern
Implementation
As a standard, IDA ICE does not contain the functions needed for these 
types of simulations. However, new custom functions were connected to 
the mathematical model of the zone in order to extend the capabilities of 
IDA ICE (Figure 106). Thus, in order to simulate a underground museum 
building the following changes were made of the mathematical model:
1) A dynamic user pattern based data from the national museum of 
Denmark and M/S Maritime museum of Denmark was added to the room. 
A room in IDA ICE has a ﬁ xed number of visitors but the user constant 
can be multiplied with a schedule in order to get a dynamic user pattern 
(Figure 107)
2) The HMwall component, described in section 06, was used for humidity 
buff ering.
3) Underground temperatures simulated in COMSOL was connected to 
the walls of the IDA ICE in accordance to the method described in section 
11.
4) A control system was designed in order to both humidify and dehumidify 
the air, as the standard AHU in IDA ICE were not capable of controlling 
humidity with both upper and lower limits (appendix 15). Furthermore, 
the system was made capable of changing the set points during the year 
according to a schedule.
These measures were connected to the zone component of IDA ICE 
as seen in Figure 106. Temperatures from COMSOL were connected to 
the HMwalls which were then connected to the zone. A user schedule 
connected to the zone would then determine the user pattern. Finally, 
the zone would be able to calculate the energy needed for heating, 
cooling and ventilation. Lighting was included in the simulations as a 
heat load, but the energy used for lighting (23.5 kWh/m2 per year) is 
not included in the calculated energy use of the buildings. Only heating 
cooling and ventilation needs are shown in the follow graphs. A more 
detailed description of the IDA ICE model is found in appendix 17.
==PAGE:94==
84
By combining daily patterns with monthly patterns a realistic schedule 
can be developed. The only source of Vr,day available was from the 
study at M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark. From this a user pattern 
for a week was made. Opening hours were 1100 to 1700 with some 
activity outside of this timespan as in the museum study. The schedule 
was therefore made from 8.00 to 18.00 to be able to include this 
activity. The Vr,hour was calculated as hourly values based on the 
8.00-18.00 timespan for each day of the week for one week. Thereby, 
the average Vr,hour value of each day (Figure 108) from 8.00-18.00 is 
1. This vector of values for one week is repeated for the whole year. 
Based on the visitor data from the National Museum of Denmark a 
normalised yearly schedule was calculated using Vr,day (Figure 109). The 
average value for the year is thus 1. By multiplying these two vectors 
a schedule was constructed including both the daily distributions from 
the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark and the yearly variation from the 
National Museum of Denmark (Figure 110). Afterwards, data from the 
Zoological Museum and the Geological Museum was used for additional 
user schedules.
User pattern method
One of the parameters in the simulation is the number of visitors present 
at the museum. Assuming that the number of visitors is constant can 
cause misleading results. The number of visitors will have a large eff ect 
on the cooling-, heating- and humidity loads. Therefore, large ﬂ uctua-
tions in the number of users present will result in a larger energy use if 
the indoor climate is to remain stable. 
Since very little data was available about actual occupancy densities 
at museums, the density of gallery 2 from the study at M/S Maritime 
Museum of Denmark was used as the reference value. The occupancy 
density parameter was then increased and decreased in order to study 
the inﬂ uence on the overall energy use of the building. The method for 
including the dynamic and highly ﬂ uctuation behaviour of visitors is seen 
in the below equation:
(23) 
where:
=
x
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1
11
21
31
41
Vr,hour (-)
Time (h)
Vr,hour for two days
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1
11
21
31
41
Vr (-)
Time (h)
Schedule for two days
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1
11
21
31
41
Vr,day  (-)
Time (h)
Vr,daily for two days
Figure 108.  Hourly visitor ratios
Figure 109.  Daily visitor ratios
Figure 110.  Combined daily values
==PAGE:95==
85
The visitor data from museum entrances did not account for employees. 
As seen in the study of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark in section 
08, the employees can be a signiﬁ cant part of the people present at a 
museum especially during work days. The data from the study measured 
occupancy densities of both visitors and employees and by combining 
the datasets from the National Museum of Denmark with data from the 
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark both employee presence, daily and 
yearly distributions were included. As the museum is closed on Mondays, 
it would result in zero values for most Mondays in the dataset from the 
National Museum. When multiplying the vectors, this would result in no 
activity on Mondays. A small amount of activity equal to an average 
Monday at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark was, thus, added to 
Mondays with no activity in the dataset from the National Museum.
However, since IDA ICE needs a schedule based on values of 0 to 1 a 
transformation of the schedule was needed. By dividing the values in all 
instances of time, with the highest total value during the year, Vr,max, a 
schedule for IDA ICE was made in which 1 is the highest value by:
(24) 
A value of 1 will then correspond to the highest number of people being 
present at the museum during the year. As the number of user in a zone. 
Since the area of the zone is known, the amount of users to be speciﬁ ed 
can be found by multiplying the area with the occupant density. The user 
constant for the zone is then calculated as:
(25) 
where
The result of (24) and (25) will be multiplied in IDA ICE in order to deﬁ ne 
the number of users in the zone at any given time step.
(26)
When applying this method to full year datasets, large ﬂ uctuations 
occurs. This is caused by the instances where high ﬂ uctuations during 
a day is combined with high ﬂ uctuations during a year. This can be seen 
in the ﬁ gures on the following page. A week of normalised weekdays 
(Figure 112) with an maximum value of 4.9 is multiplied by the Vr,day for 
a year (Figure 113) having a maximum value of 6.4. The resulting vector 
(Figure 114) has a maximum value of 21.6. The Vr,max to use in both 
(24) and (25) is therefore 21.6. It must be noted that the Vr,max is not 
necessarily the product of the maximum value of each Vr schedule. In the 
end the Normalised schedule will be below 0.25 and only reach 1 once 
(Figure 115).
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
11
21
31
41
Vr  (-)
Time (h)
Schedule for two days
Figure 111.  Schedule to be used in IDA ICE
==PAGE:96==
86
Figure 114.  Combined pattern of presence
Figure 115.  User schedule input for IDA ICE
Figure 112.  Daily patterns of presence from M/S Maritime Museum of 
Denmark
Figure 113.  Yearly patterns of presence
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Vr (-)
Time (h)
Combined user pattern 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Vr  (-)
Time (h)
Normalised user schedule
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Vr  (-)
Time (h)
Daily pattern for each weekday
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Vr  (-)
Time (h)
Visitor ratio for the National Museum of Denmark for 2013
==PAGE:97==
87
RESULTS
The results of the simulations are presented in a series of graphs on 
the following pages. The ﬁ rst series of simulations compared a building 
placed on the ground (type A), with a building placed just below ground 
(type B). With 150 mm insulation (Figure 116 ), the underground museum 
used less energy partly due to less cooling power needed, but mainly 
due to a lower heating demand. At 300 and 500 mm insulation (Figure 
117 and Figure 118) the diff erences between placing the museum on 
the ground or below was decreasing. At all insulation depths, the set 
point values had a big inﬂ uence which became increasingly inﬂ uential 
with more occupants. With 300 mm of insulation the diff erence between 
above or below ground was 2.1-3.1 kWh/m2 per year depending on the 
occupant density and the control system. In the case of using 150 mm 
insulation, few occupants caused a larger need for heating whereas many 
occupants resulted in a large need for ventilation. The occupancy density 
of around 0.01 pers/m2, therefore, caused the lowest total energy use.
Figure 116.  Energy use of buildings above and just below ground with 
150mm insulation
Figure 117.  Energy use of buildings above and just below ground with 
300mm insulation
Figure 118.  Energy use of buildings above and just below ground with 
500mm insulation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Energy use (kWh/m2)
Average occupant density (pers/m2)
Comparison of energy use of buildings of type A and 
B with 150 mm insulation
A Loose
A Medium
A Tight
B Loose
B Medium
B Tight
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Energy use (kWh/m2)
Average occupant density (pers/m2)
Comparison of energy use of buildings of type A and 
B with 300 mm insulation 
A Loose
A Medium
A Tight
B Loose
B Medium
B Tight
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Energy use (kWh/m2)
Average occupant density (pers/m2)
Comparison of energy use of buildins of type A and B 
with 500 mm insulation
A Loose
A Medium
A Tight
B Loose
B Medium
B Tight
==PAGE:98==
88
Figure 119.  Energy use of buildings just below ground and 4 m below with 
150 mm insulation
Figure 120.  Energy use of buildings just below ground and 4 m below with 
300 mm insulation
Figure 121.  Energy use of buildings just below ground and 4 m below with 
500 mm insulation
When comparing the diff erences of being placed just below ground and 
four meters further into the ground (type C) large diff erences was seen in 
the case of having 150 mm insulation (Figure 119). At 300 mm insulation 
the diff erences were much smaller. Type C would cause a smaller energy 
use in most cases besides when having a very large occupancy density 
(Figure 120). However, with a insulation thickness of 300 mm the 
diff erences between type B and C were very small especially with larger 
occupancy densities. By using 500 mm, the diff erences between the two 
types was almost gone (Figure 121). With all insulation thicknesses, the 
set point strategy used as well as the number of occupants had a large 
inﬂ uence on the energy use. Additionally, the set points had a larger 
impact at larger occupancy densities.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Energy use (kWh/m2)
Average occupant density (pers/m2)
Comparison of energy use of  buildings of type B and 
C with 150 mm insulation 
C Loose
C Medium
C Tight
B Loose
B Medium
B Tight
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Energy use (kWh/m2)
Average occupant density (pers/m2)
Comparison of energy use of buildings of type B and 
C with 300 mm insulation 
C Loose
C Medium
C Tight
B Loose
B Medium
B Tight
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Energy use (kWh/m2)
Average occupant density (pers/m2)
Comparison of energy use of buildings of type B and 
C with 500 mm insulation 
C Loose
C Medium
C Tight
B Loose
B Medium
B Tight
==PAGE:99==
89
Figure 122.  Comparision of having 300mm and 500 mm insulation
Figure 123.  Energy use of simulated museums with 300 mm insulation
The eff ect of increasing the amount of insulation from 300 mm to 500 
mm for type B was tested (Figure 122). At occupancy densities below 
0.023 pers/m2, 500 mm was the most energy saving option and it was 
increasingly beneﬁ cial with a lower number of people. However, above 
0.025 pers/m2 500 mm of insulation caused a larger energy use which 
increased with lighter occupancy density.
Single parameter variation
Simulations on type A and B buildings was done changing the yearly 
visitor pattern from the National Museum of Denmark to the Zoological 
Museum and the Geological Museum respectively (Figure 123). The daily 
pattern was in all simulations still based on M/S Maritime Museum of 
Denmark. Therefore, the mentioned changes would only impact which 
days people were present, not the number of people or the pattern 
during the day. For all single parameter test dense concrete, tight RH 
control, internal temperatures of 20-25 ºC and an occupancy density of 
0.005 pers/m2 was used.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Energy use (kWh/m2)
AkseƟtel
User pattern inﬂuence
Type A
Type B
The National Museum 
of Denmark
Zoological Museum
Geological Museum
32.5
29.6
33.0
30.0
33.3
30.3
The change of schedules did only have a limited inﬂ uence on the energy 
use. For all three cases the underground buildings used around 3 kWh/
m2 per year less than the above ground cases. Shifting museum pattern, 
however, only resulted in an increased use of around 0.7kWh/m2 per year. 
Using the original user pattern a series of single parameter analysis 
was done. For all cases, being placed below ground resulted in a smaller 
energy consumption than being placed above ground, but the magnitude 
of inﬂ uence varied depending on the parameters changed (Figure 124). 
Having loose requirements for the RH resulted in savings of 5.9 kWh/m2 
per year above ground and 6.1 kWh/m2 per year below ground and the 
diff erence between placing the museum above or below ground was 
kept at around 3 kWh/m2 per year.
The ability of LW concrete to absorb humidity caused less need for 
ventilation resulting in 1.2 kWh/m2 of energy saving underground. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
Energy use (kWh/m2)
Average occupant density (pers/m2)
Comparison of energy use of buildings type B
with 300 mm and 500 mm insulation
300mm Medium
300 mm Tight
300 mm Loose
500 mm Loose
500 mm Medium
500 mm Tight
==PAGE:100==
90
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Energy use (kWh/m2)
AkseƟtel
Single parameter inﬂuences
Dense concrete
Tight RH control
20-25 ºC
DS418 soil
Reference simulations
Dense concrete
Loose RH control
20-25 ºC
DS 418 soil
Type A
Type B
LW concrete
Tight RH control
20-25 ºC
DS 418 soil
Dense concrete (no buffering)
Tight RH control
20-25 ºC
DS 418 soil
Dense concrete
Loose RH control
15-20 ºC
DS 418 soil
Dense concrete
Tight RH control
20-25 ºC
Sandy soil
32.5
29.6
26.6
23.5
41.9
28.4
32.4
29.6
14.2
12.6
30.7
28.7
1)
2)
3)
4)
Figure 124.  Single parameter changes
However above ground the loss of thermal mass resulted in an increase 
of 9.4 kWh/m2 per year.
Not accounting for humidity accumulation in the dense concrete walls did 
in the standard case have very little inﬂ uence as only the above ground 
cased was changed by 0.1 kWh/m2 as seen in the "no buff ering" case.
What did have a large impact was lowering the internal temperatures to 
15-20 ºC all season in combination with a loose control of the RH. Both the 
above- and below ground buildings had a very low energy consumption 
of less than half of the consumption of the standard buildings.
Exchanging the standard soil with sandy soil caused a larger need for 
cooling but lowered the need for heating. In total, it resulted in energy 
savings of 1.7 kWh/m2 above ground and 0.8 kWh/m2 below ground.
DISCUSSION
Both above and below ground building were of the same construction. 
This resulted in the above ground buildings to have thick exterior concrete 
walls as well as interior concrete walls and thereby a large thermal mass. 
'
The large thermal mass can be a reason why the change of yearly user 
pattern did not have a larger inﬂ uence since the mass would even out 
the peaks of loads. It must be expected that in a lightweight structure, 
this parameter would cause larger diff erences. An underground museum 
in general will use less energy, based on the simulations. The magnitude 
of this energy saving will depend on the use and type of building. In the 
end, the adjustment of set points and number of users did have much 
larger inﬂ uence on the total energy use than being placed above or below 
ground. This notion of the importance of the set points for the indoor 
climate of the exhibition on the energy consumption is in accordance 
with a recent study (Kramer et al., 2015). 
==PAGE:101==
91
13 Discussion
From the simulations it can be seen that placing museums underground 
can potentially result in a lower energy use. Being placed further into 
the ground can as well be increasingly beniﬁ cial. But very thick insulation 
layers will minimize the eff ect of being placed above or below ground 
since the ambient conditions has less eff ect at lower U-values . 
All studies in this thesis has been done on the running energy use. A 
lower energy consumption during use might not be suffi  ciently energy 
saving to counter the potential large amount of energy used for placing 
the building underground. Such considerations are to be included in a Life 
Cycle Assessment (LCA) analysis in the design of speciﬁ c projects but are 
beyond the scope of this thesis. 
In some cases, parts of a museum are placed underground due to e.g. the 
lack of above ground space. In such cases, it is relevant to study which 
functions would beneﬁ t most from being placed underground. Above 
ground buildings have larger temperature ﬂ uctuations but a better 
access to daylight. Thus, exhibitions areas and storages can beneﬁ t from 
being placed underground. Functions such as auditoriums could beneﬁ t 
from the large thermal mass of the soil in order to minimize the large 
need for cooling. In such a case a small amount of insulation could be 
used as it would give a better access to the thermal properties of the 
soil and since low temperatures outside of the usage hours would be 
acceptable. Storage spaces has not been studied in this thesis but could 
as well beneﬁ t from the stable temperatures.
Boundary conditions
The method developed in this thesis could be used for many types of 
analysis. However, it is important to be aware of the shortcomings of the 
method. Since an estimation of the interior temperatures in COMSOL are 
needed, larger calculation errors will occur when the temperatures in the 
zone in IDA ICE are not similar to the assumed values. By making a new 
boundary condition in COMSOL, based on the IDA ICE results this error 
could be minimized. Unfortunately, this is a very time consuming method 
when performing the parameter analysis and it will also be diffi  cult 
to determine the inﬂ uence of the parameter changes if the boundary 
conditions are changed in the middle of a series of parameter changes. 
The method also has the limitation that the interior temperatures have 
to be estimated beforehand and controlled with rather small bandwidths 
in order for the interior temperatures in COMSOL and IDA ICE to be similar. 
Simulations could be done with larger diff erences between the interior 
temperatures used for the two programs, but it would result in more 
inaccurate results. Museums without any active systems to control the 
temperatures such as Cisternerne are thus not suitable for this method.
The use of COMSOL gives the possibility, when simulating a speciﬁ c 
project, to add additional heat sources to the ground as well as modelling 
soil proﬁ les in accordance to the building site. Thereby, much more realistic 
simulations can be done and the inﬂ uence of e.g.. nearby buildings can 
assessed.
Perfect mixing
It is important to remember that IDA ICE always has either a perfect 
mixing in the zone or a ﬁ xed stratiﬁ cation ratio for the whole simulation. 
However, in a real room, the air will never be perfectly mixed or be 
perfectly linearly stratiﬁ ed. Heat plumes above the occupants, surface 
temperatures of the walls, cold air from the ventilation systems, thermal 
stratiﬁ cation of the air etc. will result in temperatures never being the 
same everywhere in a room. Having a 5% allowed deviation in a real zone 
is therefore a much more strict requirement than having a 5% deviation 
in an IDA ICE model. 
Not having perfectly mixed air in reality is also an issue in regards to the 
control systems of museums. It is possible to have conﬂ icting signals 
from diff erent sensors in the same zone resulting in an enlarged energy 
consumption. Especially, if the set points for heating/cooling and humid-
iﬁ cation/dehumidiﬁ cation are very tight, then the uneven conditions in a 
room could result in an excessive use of the active systems and thereby 
an enlarged energy consumption. I order to ensure a better mixing, many 
==PAGE:102==
92
museums utilize very high ACH with a large amount of recirculated air. A 
previous study was based on an ACH of 7.5 h-1, with min 90% recirculated 
air (Kramer et al., 2015). Such a high ACH would even with a large degree 
of recirculation air result in a larger energy consumption. In the IDA ICE 
simulation no recirculation was used and the ACH varied depending on 
the CO2 concentration. That resulted in an ACH of 0.06-3.8 h-1.
Visitor data
The analysis of visitor presence was made based on entrance statistics 
from museums. But these data did not specify for how long visitors 
stayed and where they stayed during their visit. The study at M/S 
Maritime Museum of Denmark gave some indications of these questions. 
However, this study was only carried out at one museum for one month. 
Furthermore, the ﬂ ow of the occupants will be aff ected by the spacial 
planning of a museum. The exhibition area at the Maritime Museum is 
circular and it is possible to see the whole exhibition in one visit. Therefore, 
most visitors will walk the whole tour of the museum and only aff ect 
the occupancy density by staying in some zones for longer periods of 
time than in other zones. Larger museums such as the National Museum 
of Denmark with many rooms in many stories, it is not possible to see 
everything in one day. Visitors will have to choose what to see and this 
will make some parts of the museum more visited than others. 
Curator
Preservation 
of exhibition
Set points
Energy use
Economy
Economy
Sustainability
PR
Accountants
Management
Building magnement
$
$
+/-
Figure 125.  Impact of the set points on diff erent professions in a museum
Building management data
It would have been relevant to analyse data from the active systems of 
museums. However, it has not been possible to acquire such data. For 
many of the museums contacted for the preparation for this thesis, no 
recording of the performance of the heating and ventilations systems 
were made. These museums had typically only access to a total energy 
bill. Some museums had to pay to get access to data of their energy use 
making the data acquisition more problematic. Other museums seemed 
to have better data but were not allowed to share it. Furthermore, it was 
experienced that asking for too much data resulted often in less chance 
of receiving any data from museums. Since visitor data was most crucial 
for this study, time and energy was in the end used on acquiring such 
data. 
It surprising, that many museums do not have any data on the performance 
of the building. Without proper data, it is diffi  cult to optimize the systems, 
potentially resulting in a too large energy consumption.
User schedule
In the simulations, the same weekly schedule is repeated throughout 
the year. Another method that could make even more realistic results 
would be to use stochastic variables to pick random examples of days 
of the week for each week. This method would result in a more random 
schedule being closer to real life behaviour. However, the use of stochastic 
parameters would result in a increase of the amount of simulations and 
thereby become too time consuming for the type of simulations done 
in this thesis. The user schedule used in the thesis did have a large ﬂ uc-
tuations and usefull in order to determine if museums consume more 
energy being above pr below ground. Another method speciﬁ c for each 
museum would be to further develop the statistical model for the eff ect 
of weather conditions on the number of visitors at museums with more 
parameters and a full year analysis rather than just the summer months. 
By including monthly patterns, events, user group patterns etc. a possibly 
more reﬁ ned model could be developed. 
==PAGE:103==
93
Figure 126.  Use of display cases in museums 
C
o
C
o
Scalability of methods
A problem with using a combination of two simulation programs with 
no automated link is that it is time consuming. To carry out a series of 
parameter investigations did result in much manual labour and could 
therefore be too expensive for an consulting company doing larger 
projects. Likewise, the HMwall needs to be incorporated in the standard 
level of IDA ICE to be usable for real building projects as the advanced 
level is very time consuming and makes it diffi  cult to go back and make 
changes in the model later on in the design process. However, the dynamic 
user schedules could easily be used in many other types of projects if 
data on the user behaviour exists. The in-build user schedule option in 
IDA ICE is only capable of specifying patterns one week at the time and 
therefore the method in this thesis are to be used if full year schedules 
are to be used. 
Set points
One of the interesting aspects of the set points for indoor climate at 
museums is, despite the fact that they can diff er depending on the type 
of exhibition, that the amount of diff erent ﬁ elds of work who are aff ected 
by these requirements is large. For curators the set points are relevant 
for the preservation but for the building management it is a matter of 
achieving the lowest energy use to achieve the required indoor climate 
(Figure 125). As the energy use is often a large part of the museum 
budget, it is highly relevant for accounting as well as the management. 
However, management could also have an interest in the resulting energy 
use from a standpoint of sustainability or PR values. Many curators will 
not have the knowledge on how much a change of the allowed ﬂ uctua-
tions will result in saved energy or saved money. This cross-disciplinary 
dependence on these speciﬁ cations makes optimizations more diffi  cult 
and could be an interesting topic for further research. During a design 
of a new museum or a new system even more interests are involved as 
advisors, entrepreneurs and architects could have diff erent agendas.
Creating diff erent zones with diff erent indoor climate requirements like 
in the competition brief for the Museum for Danish Resistance enables 
possible energy savings. Having these performance goals speciﬁ ed in the 
competition program rather than late in the process makes it possible for 
architects and engineers to implement them early in the design process 
and, thus, design more energy effi  cient buildings.
IDA ICE model
The model was a simpliﬁ ed construction with the same properties and 
control systems. The control systems could be optimized for the diff erent 
cases in order to lower the energy use. However, that would make it hard 
to determine if the changes of energy consumption were due to the 
parameter variations or diff erent control strategies. For the same reason, 
the construction was kept the same for all types and all parameter 
variations.
Relative humidity
Humidity buff ering only had a small eff ect in the exhibition area. Yet, in 
areas in which the RH is only allowed to ﬂ uctuate a few percent, even a 
small buff ering eff ect could be of inﬂ uence. But to be used in practice, full 
scale tests on easily cleanable humidity buff ering surfaces are needed 
as well as making products commercially available. However, humidity 
buff ering only has an eff ect if the ACH is kept relatively low. As a result, 
the humidity buff ering in the simulations had only little inﬂ uence in the 
total energy consumption.
==PAGE:104==
94
14 Conclusion
Placing museums underground can be used to lower the energy 
consumption. The stable temperatures of the ground results in a reduced 
need for the active systems to control the indoor climate. However, by 
increasing the amount of insulation, the eff ect of the exterior tempera-
tures will decrease and placing museums below ground has less inﬂ uence 
on the energy used. 
As seen in the COMSOL simulations the site will have an inﬂ uence on 
the performance of the museum. Diff erent soil types as well as nearby 
buildings will aff ect the temperatures of the soil. A newly build museum 
should have larger heating needs the ﬁ rst couple of years, but in time the 
adjacent soil will be heated and the need for heating by active systems 
will decrease.
User presence in museums are very diff erent from user presence in 
offi  ces and dwellings. Many factors will have an inﬂ uence on when 
people will visit museums and as a result the amount of visitors will vary 
greatly. It is, however, possible to detect patterns at diff erent museums 
and such studies could be used for dimensioning the active systems. A 
big challenge in doing these studies is the lack of data logged at small 
time intervals. The study at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark, thus, 
provided valuable knowledge, but is limited by the fact that the results 
cannot be compared to other measurements of similar type.
The term "museum" is used for a wide range of buildings where some 
focus on the preservation and exhibition of historical objects whereas 
others focus on user involvement and multimedia storytelling. This results 
in museums having very diff erent loads and indoor climate requirements. 
These requirements have proved to have a much larger inﬂ uence on the 
energy used than where the museum is placed.
Therefore, placing the museum underground is, one of the tools that can 
be used for providing a passive system capable of an indoor climate being 
as close to the requirements as possible. But the biggest step towards a 
sustainable museum is loosening the requirements for the indoor climate 
as well as utilizing eff ective active systems and control systems. Less 
stable temperature and RH conditions will have an eff ect on the museum 
collection. What this eff ect is and how large daily ﬂ uctuations can be 
allowed is not to be estimated by the engineer. To design a sustainable 
museum in regards to both energy use and preservation is a task in which 
specialist from the world of conservation and the world of engineering 
have collaborate in order to succeed.
==PAGE:105==
95
15 References
Agency for Culture and Palaces a (2016). (RETNINGSLINJER FOR KLIMA 
(TEMPERATUR OG RELATIV FUGTIGHED) PÅ KULTURARVSBEVAREN-
DE INSTITUTIONER [online] Available at: http://www.kulturstyrelsen.
dk/institutioner/museer/museernes-arbejdsopgaver/bevaring/bevar-
ing-og-haandtering/retningslinjer-for-klima-temperatur-og-relativ-fug-
tighed-paa-kulturarvsbevarende-institutioner/ [Accessed 10 Jan. 2016].
Agency for Culture and Palaces b (2016) SKEMA OVER ANBEFALET 
LYSINTENSITET (LUX), TEMPERATUR OG RELATIV LUFTFUGTIGHED (RF) 
FOR EN RÆKKE GENSTANDSTYPER [online] Available at: http://slks.dk/
museer/museernes-arbejdsopgaver/bevaring/bevaring-og-haandtering/
skema-over-anbefalet-lysintensitet-lux-temperatur-og-relativ-luftfug-
tighed-rf-for-en-raekke-genstandstyper/ [Accessed 8 May 2016].
Andersen P. (2013) Efter økonomisk rod og kaos: Nu åbner Søfartsmu-
seum. Dr.dk. 04. Oct. 2013 [online] Available at: http://www.dr.dk/nyhed-
er/kultur/kunst/efter-oekonomisk-rod-og-kaos-nu-aabner-soefartsmu-
seum [Accessed 7  Jan. 2016].
A.P Møller Fonden a (2014) MERE PLADS PÅ OSLO PLADS Available at:
http://www.apmollerfonde.dk/projekter/den-frie-udstillingsbygning.aspx 
[Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
A.P Møller Fonden b (2014) VALDEMARERNES BORG Available at: http://
http://www.apmollerfonde.dk/PROJEKTER/VORDINGBORG-SLOTSRUIN.
ASPX [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Appel K. (2010) The Plain Truth About Relative Humidity Sensors 
[online] Available at: http://www.qualitydigest.com/inside/twitter-ed/
plain-truth-about-relative-humidity-sensors.html# [Accessed 9 May 
2016].
Archdaily (2015) 5 Finalists Selected for the 2015 EU Prize for Con-
temporary Architecture- Mies van der Rohe Award  (Februrary 25 2015) 
http://www.archdaily.com/602077/5-ﬁ nalists-selected-for-the-2015-
eu-prize-for-contemporary-architecture-mies-van-der-rohe-award 
[Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
ASHRAE (2003) ASHRAE Aplications Handbook. American Society of 
Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc.
Atkinson, J. (2014) Environmental conditions for the safeguarding of col-
lections: A background to the current debate on the control of relative 
humidity and temperature. Studies in Conservation. Volume 59. Issue 4.
Balažic, A., Špela,  H., Mateja. S., Jan.a., K. and Matija S. (2007) Extending 
the useful life of paper - evaluation of the eff ect of various preservation 
actions. Museum Microclimates. Nationalmuseet.
BazJan.ac, V. and Winkelmann, F. (1989) Daylighting Design for the Pacif-
ic Museum of Flight: Energy lmpacts. Energy and Buildings 13.
BBC (2015) Traffi  c study for Portland’s underground Jurassica dinosaur 
museum [online] (Sept 29 2015) Available at: http://www.bbc.com/
news/uk-england-dorset-29877365 [Accessed 9 Jan. 2016).
berlin.de (2016) Jewish Museum [online] Available at: http://www.berlin.
de/en/attractions-and-sights/3560999-3104052-jewish-museum.
en.html [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Big.dk a (2016) SOF http://www.big.dk/#projects-sof [Accessed 7 Jan. 
2016].
Big.dk b (2016) MCB [online] Available at: http://www.big.dk/#pro-
jects-mcb [Accessed  7 Jan. 2016].
==PAGE:106==
96
Brumbaugh, J (2004) Audel HVAC fundamentals 3: Air-Conditioning, 
Heat Pumps and Distribution Systems. Wiley Publishing 
Building Energy Codes Program (2016) Commercial Prototype Building 
Models [online] Available at: https://www.energycodes.gov/develop-
ment/commercial/prototype_models [Accessed 20 Apr. 2016].
Building regulations a (2016) 7.2.5.3 Energiramme for skoler, institu-
tioner m.m. der ikke er omfattet af kap. 7.2.5.2 [online] Available at: 
http://bygningsreglementet.dk/br10_05_id5183/0/42[Accessed 28 
May 2016]
Building regulations b (2016) Dagslys [online] Available at: http://bygn-
ingsreglementet.dk/br15_00_id102/0/42 [Accessed 28 May 2016]
Bundegaard, C. (2014) Moesgaard architecture. Moesgaard Museum & 
Henning Larsens Architects.
Byggecentrum (2014) Ugens projekt: Blåvand Bunker Museum(18. sept 
2014) [online] available at: http://www.byggecentrum.dk/bygnet/ny-
hed/article/ugens-projekt-blaavand-bunker-museum/ [Accessed 7 Jan. 
2016].
Bygtek (2006) Glyptoteket under jorden [online] Sept 5 2006
Available at: http://www.bygtek.dk/artikel/andet/glyptoteket-under-jor-
den [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Bøhm, B. and Ryhl-Svendsen, M (2011) Analysis of the thermal conditions 
in an unheated museum store in a temperate climate. On the thermal 
interaction of earth and store. Energy and buildings 43
Christensen, J. and Janssen, H. (2009) Passive hygrothermal control of a
museum storage building in Vejle. DTU Civil Engineering-Report R-220. 
Department of Civil Engineering
Child, R. (2007) Insect damage as a function of climate. Museum Micro-
climates. Nationalmuseet.
Cisternerne a (2016) CISTERNERNES HISTORIE [online] Available at: 
http://www.cisternerne.dk/om-cisternerne/historien.html [Accessed 8 
Jan. 2016].
Cisternerne b (2016) FOTO OG FILM [online] Available at: http://www.
cisternerne.dk/om-cisternerne/foto-og-ﬁ lm.html [Accessed 8 Jan. 
2016].
Comsol (2016) History [online] Available at: http://www.equa.se/en/
about-us/history [Accessed 10 Mar. 2016].
DAC (2014) DEN SORTE DIAMANT [online] Available at: http://www.
dac.dk/da/dac-learning/netundervisning/arksite-kanon/vaerker/
den-sorte-diamant/ [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
DAN FUGT (2016)  Ultra sonic humidiﬁ cation [online] Available at: http://
danfugt.com/products/ultra-sonic-humidiﬁ cation/ [Accessed 3 Jun. 
2016].
Danish Energy Agency (2016) Bygningers energiforbrug [online] 
Available at: http://www.ens.dk/forbrug-besparelser/byggeriets-energi-
forbrug [Accessed 28 May 2016].
The Danish Castle Centre (2016). Borgens Historie [online] Available at: 
http://www.danmarksborgcenter.dk/DA/OM-OS/BORGENS-HISTORIE 
[Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Danish Meteorological Institute (2016) Vejrarkiv [online] http://www.
dmi.dk/vejr/arkiver/vejrarkiv/[Accessed 18 Apr. 2016].
DMI (2013). 2001 – 2010 Dansk Design Reference Year Supplerende 
datasæt. Teknisk Rapport 13-18. DMI. Klima og Energiministeriet.
==PAGE:107==
97
Druzik, J. and Eshøj B. (2007). Museum lighting: its past and future devel-
opment. MUSEUM MICROCLIMATES. Conference in Copenhagen 19-23 
November 2007. 
DS 418 (2011). Calculation of heat loss from buildings. Danish Standards.
DS/EN 12464 (2011)  Light and Lighting - Lighting of workplaces. 
Danish Standards.
DS/EN 15251 (2007)  Indoor environmental input parameters for 
design and assessment of energy performance of buildings addressing 
indoor air quality, thermal enviorment, lighting and acoustics. Danish 
Standards.
Erhardt, D. , Tumosa, C. & Mecklenburg, M. (2007). Applying science to 
the question of museum climate. MUSEUM MICROCLIMATES. Confer-
ence in Copenhagen 19-23 November 2007.
Erhardt, D. , Mecklenburg, M. , Tumosa, C. and McCormick-Goodhart, M. 
(1995) The Determination of Allowable RH Fluctuations WAAC news-
letter Volume 17, Number.
Fraunhofer,  K. (1995) Simultaneous Heat and Moisture Transport in 
Building Components - One- and two-dimensional calculation using 
simple parameters. Fraunhofer IRB Verlag. Suttgart.
Goldberger, P. (1989) Pei Pyramid and New Louvre Open Today. ny-
times.com ( March 29, 1989) [online] Available at: http://www.nytimes.
com/1989/03/29/arts/pei-pyramid-and-new-louvre-open-today.htm-
l?pagewanted=all [Accessed 07 Jan. 2016].
Google (2016) Popular times [online] Available at: https://support.goog-
le.com/business/answer/6263531?hl=en [Accessed 12 Apr. 2016].
Grzywacz, C. (2006) Monitoring for Gaseous Pollutants in Museum Envi-
ronments: Tools for Conservation. The Getty Conservation Institute.
Haberman, N. (2015) Radiohuset er nu Musikmuseet. Magasinet KBH 
[online] Available at: https://www.magasinetkbh.dk/indhold/musikmu-
seet-radiohuset [Accessed 22 Apr. 2016].
Hamdhan, I. and Clarke, B. (2010). Determination of Thermal Conductivi-
ty of Coarse and Fine Sand Soils. Proceedings World Geothermal Con-
gress 2010. Indonesia.
Hansen, M (2015) Sommerregn har givet museerne besøgsrekorder, 
Kristeligt Dagblad [online] Available at:
http://www.kristeligt-dagblad.dk/danmark/sommerregn-har-givet-mu-
seerne-besoegsrekorder [Accessed 11 Apr. 2016].
Henning Larsen Architects (2016) MOESGAARD MUSEUM ÅBNET FOR 
OFFENTLIGHEDEN [online] http://da.henninglarsen.com/nyheder/nyhed-
sarkiv/2014/10/moesgaard-museum-aabnet-for-off entligheden.aspx
Hjortdal, A. and Nepper-Rasmussen, K. (2015) Dårligt vejr er godt for 
museer og attraktioner. P4FYN [online] Available at: http://www.dr.dk/
p4fyn/artikel/nyheder/2015/07/28/124723.htm [Accessed 11 Apr. 
2016].
The Historical Museum of Northern Jutland (2016) Gråbrødrekloster Mu-
seet [online]Available at: http://nordmus.dk/grabrodrekloster-museet-gb 
[Accessed 26 May 2016].
Hornbeck, S. (2009) A Conservation Conundrum. African Arts Vol. 42 
Issue 3.
==PAGE:108==
98
Højgaard, L. (2006) Finanslov 2016: En bombe under dansk kulturliv. 
Magisterbladet.dk [online] Available at: http://magisterbladet.dk/
news/2016/Jan.uar/ﬁ nanslov2016enbombeunderdanskkulturliv  [Ac-
cessed 23 Apr. 2016].
ICC (2014) IIC announces declaration on Environmental Guidelines [on-
line] Available at: https://www.iiconservation.org/node/5168 [Accessed 
24 May 2016].
Indre By Lokaludvalg (2016) FRIHEDSMUSEET Skitseprojekt [online]
http://www.indrebylokaludvalg.kk.dk/ﬁ les/media/dokumenter/Hoer-
ingssager/2015/Frihedsmuseum/Frihedsmuseet-%20Skitseprojekt.pdf 
[Accessed 8 Jan. 2016]
International Counsil of Museums (2016) Environmental Guidelines
IIC and ICOM-CC Declaration [online] Available at: http://www.icom-cc.
org/332/-icom-cc-documents/declaration-on-environmental-guide-
lines/#.Vyc-CISLTs1 [Accessed 22 Mar. 2016]
ISO 11799 (2015) Information and documentation —Document storage 
requirements for archive and library materials. ISO copyright offi  ce.
ISO 13370 (2008) Thermal perfromance of buildings - Heat transfer via 
the grund - Calculation methods. Danish Standards Association.
ISO 7330 (2006) Ergonomics of the thermal enviorment - Analytical 
determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of 
the PMV and PPD indices and local thermal comfort criteria. 
ISO 8996 (2004) Ergonomics of the thermal environment - Determina-
tion of metabolic heat production. Danish Standards Association. Danish 
Standards Association.
Jacobs A. (2004). Fundamentals. SynthLight Handbook. London Metro-
politan University.
Jensen J. and Lundgaard I (2015) Museer, borgere og bæredygtige løsninger. 
Danish Agency for Culture.
Johannesen, J. (2014) Stjerneløbet 2014 stiller store krav til rytterne. feltet.
dk [online] . Available at: http://www.feltet.dk/nyheder/stjerneloebet_2014_
stiller_store_krav_til_rytterne/#t0Uu1pDQaqHiOGvQ.99  [Accessed 11 Apr. 
2016].
Keepsafe (2016) Showcase Leakage Testing [online] Available at: http://
keepsafe.ca/new-main-menu/consultating-services/showcase-leakage-test-
ing/ [Accessed 15 May 2016].
Kramer, R., Maas, M.,  Martens, M., van Schijndel, A. and Schellen, H. (2015)
Energy conservation in museums using diff erent setpoint strategies: A case 
study for a state-of-the-art museum using building simulations. Applied 
Energy 158.
Kreider, J. (2000) Handbook of Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning. 
.CRC Press. Boca Ranton.
Kristensen K. (1959). Temperature and heat balance of soil. Hydrotechnical 
Laboratory. Royal Veterinary-and Agricultural College.
Kurnitski, J. and Vuolle, M. (2000) Simultaneous calculation of heat, moisture, 
and air transport in a modular simulation environment. Proceedings Estonian 
Acad. Sci. Eng.
Kvisgaard, B. and Hadvig, S. (1980). Varmetab fra fj ernvarmeledninger. Tekn-
isk Forlag.
Larsen P. & Padﬁ eld T (2011) The Off  Grid Museum [online] Available at: 
http://www.conservationphysics.org/musdes/low_energy_museum.php 
[Accessed 11 Apr. 2016].
==PAGE:109==
99
Lienhard, J. and Lienhard, J. (2008) A Heat Transfer Textbook. Phlogiston 
Press. Cambridge Massachusetts.
Löhnert, G., Dalkowski, A., and Sutter, W. (2003) Intergrated Design Pro-
cess - A Guideline for Sustainable and Solar-optimized Building Design. 
International Energy Agency.
Lord, B., Lord, G., and Martin, L. (2012) Manual of Museum Planning: Sus-
tainable Space. Facilities, and Operations. AltaMira Press. 
Lundgaard & Tranberg Architects a (2016) Naturhistorisk Museum  
[online] http://www.ltarkitekter.dk/naturhistorisk-museum/xhb73ullblk-
fwnge3ovm3ssmpwgwe9 [Accessed Jan. 07 2016].
Lundgaard & Tranberg Architects b, (2016)  2016. ARBEJDERMUSEET 
[online] http://www.ltarkitekter.dk/arbejdermuseet-tekst/ [Accessed 4  
Apr. 2016].
Lundgaard & Tranberg Architects c, (2016). Danmarks borgcenter 
[online] Available at: http://www.ltarkitekter.dk/danmarks-borgcenter/ 
[Accessed 26 May. 2016].
Machinery Equipment Online (2016) Humidiﬁ ers [online] Available at: 
http://machineryequipmentonline.com/hvac-machinery/humidiﬁ ers-and-
dehumidiﬁ ersspray-humidiﬁ ers/ [Accesed 4 May. 2016].
Masea (2016) Materialdatensammlung für die energetische Altbausani-
erung. Masea geprüfte Datenbank. [online] Available at: http://www.
masea-ensan.de/ [Accessed 15 May. 2016].
McGlone, P (2014) Smithsonian outlines $2 billion proposal for Mall 
campus renovation. The Washington Post (November 13, 2014) [on-
line] Available at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/entertainment/
museums/smithsonian-hires-big-architecture-group-for-2-billion-
south-mall-renovation-plan/2014/11/13/c784babc-6ab4-11e4-a31c-
77759fc1eacc_story.html [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Meckleburg M. (2007). Micro climates and moisture induced damage to paint-
ings
Meckleburg, M. and Tomusa, C. (1999) ASHRAE Journal, Apr. 1999. Tempera-
ture and Relative Humidity Eff ets on the Mechanical and Chemical Stability 
of Collections.
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark (2016) Arrangementer [online] Available 
at: http://mfs.dk/da/besoeg-os/arrangementer [Accesed 22 Feb. 2016].
Museum Jorn (2016) Museets histore [online] Available at: http://www.muse-
umjorn.dk/da/historie.asp [Accessed 9 Jan. 2016].
The National Museum of Denmark (2013) Vikinger forvandler København 
til markedsplads [online] Available at:http://natmus.dk/presse-og-nyheder/
nyhedsarkiv/2013/vikinger-forvandler-koebenhavn-til-markedsplads/ [Ac-
cessed 11 Apr. 2016].
The National Museum of Denmark (2014) Museum of Danish Resistance 
1940-45 - Restricted design competition December 2014. Nationalmuseet 
[online] Available at:  https://slke.ﬁ lecamp.com/public/ﬁ le/285u-6jiull90 
[Acessed 8 Jan. 2016].
The National Museum of Denmark (2015) Museum of Danish Resistance 
1940-45- Assessment panel report, May 2015 [online] Available at: http://
www.nytfrihedsmuseum.dk/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Frihedsmu-
seet-Dommerbet%C3%A6nkning-5.-maj.pdf [Acessed 8 Jan. 2016].
The National Museum of Denmark (2016) natmus.dk Frihedsmuseet - 
besættelse og modstandskamp [online] Available at: http://natmus.dk/mu-
seerne/frihedsmuseet/ [Acessed 8 Jan. 2016].
New Natural History Museum (2016) Byggeriet [online] Available at: http://
nyt.snm.ku.dk/byggeriet/ [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016]
==PAGE:110==
100
The New York Times (2014) 52 Places to Go in 2014. (Sept 5, 2014) 
[online] Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/01/10/
travel/2014-places-to-go.html?_r=0 [Accessed Jan. 07 2016].
Oliver, A. (1988) Dampness in buildings. BSP proff esional books. 
Olstad, T. and Haugen, A. (2007) Warm feet and cold art: is this the 
solution? Polychrome wooden ecclesiastical art - climate and dimensional 
changes. Museum Microclimates. Nationalmuseet.
Ordrupgaard a (2016) SNØHETTA. HIMMELHAVEN [online] Available at: 
http://ordrupgaard.dk/portfolio_page/himmelhaven/ [Acccessed 7 Jan. 
2016]
Ordrupgaard  b (2016) 360 GRADERS FRIHED [online] availabvle at http://
ordrupgaard.dk/portfolio_page/360-graders-frihed-2/ [Accessed 7 Jan. 
2016]
Padﬁ eld, T. (2007) Introduction to Museum Microclimates-Contributions 
to T. The Copenhagen conference 19 - 23 November 2007. Museum 
Microclimates. Nationalmuseet.
Padﬁ eld, T. (2013) Museum enviormental standards in an age of Energy 
Anxiety. Transcript of a lecture at the National Museum of Wales confer-
ence “Sharing conservationdecisions 2013”.
Padﬁ eld, T. and Jensen L. (2011) Humidity buff ering of building interiors 
by absorbent materials. 9th Nordic Symposium on Building Physics.
Padﬁ eld, T. and Larsen, P. (2004) How to Design Museums with a Natural-
ly Stable Climate. Studies in Conservation 49.
Padﬁ eld, T., Larsen, P., Ryhl-Svendsen, M. and Jensen, L. (2013) Low energy 
Museum Storage. [online] Available at: http://www.conservationphysics.
org/storage/low-energy-museum-storage.php  [Accessed 1 Jun. 2016]
Padﬁ eld, T,. Ryhl-Svendsen, M., Larsen, P., Jakobsen, M. and Jensen, L 
(2006) Climate control in the archive of the Arnamagnaean Institute
[online] Available at: http://www.conservationphysics.org/arna/arna-
magnaean-archive.php [Accessed 1 Jun. 2016]
Parkmuseerne (2014) Kulturnatten i Botanisk Have [online] Available 
at: http://parkmuseerne.dk/kulturnatten-i-botanisk-have/ [Acccessed 9 
May 2016].
PlanetWare (2016) Exploring the Top Attractions of the Louvre Muse-
um: A Visitor’s Guide [online] Available at: http://www.planetware.com/
photos-large/F/france-louvre-museum-pyramid.jpg [Accessed 7 Jan. 
2016].
Pohl W.and Zimmermann A. (2003). Artiﬁ cial Lighting. SynthLight Hand-
book.
Politiken (2014 )Søfartsmuseet kåret som verdens ﬂ otteste kulturbyg-
geri. Politiken (Feb 4 2014) [online] Available at: http://politiken.dk/kul-
tur/arkitektur/ECE2198686/soefartsmuseet-kaaret-som-verdens-ﬂ ott
este-kulturbyggeri/ soefartsmuseum [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Rode C. (2016) Heat and mass transfer in buildings. Course notes 2016. 
DTU BYG.
Rode, C., Peuhkuri, R., Mortensen, L. Hansen, K., Time, B., Gustavsen, 
A., OJanen, T., Ahonsen, J., Svennberg, K., Harderup, L. and Arfvidsson, 
J. (2005) Moistutre buff ering of Building Materials. Nordic Innovation 
Centre. Byg DTU.
Rottensten, R. (2015) Grauballemandens nye luksusbolig. Berlingske 
(Jan. 26 2015) [online] Availale at: http://www.b.dk/kultur/grauballeman-
dens-nye-luksusbolig [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Ryhl-Svendsen, M. (2005) A review of indoor and outdoor air pollution in 
relation to museums.
==PAGE:111==
101
Ryhl-Svendsen, M. and Padﬁ eld, T. (2003) Præventiv konservering, at 
forebygge er bedre end at helbrede. Nationalmuseets Arbejdsmark
Ryhl-Svendsen, M., Jensen. L., Larsen, P., Bøhm, B. and Padﬁ eld, T. (2011) 
Ultra-low-energy Musem Storage. ICOM Committee for Conservation 
16th Triennial Conference. Lisbon.
Sankt Laurentius (2016) Om museet [online] Available at: http://sankt-
laurentius.dk/om-museet/ [Accessed 26 May 2016].
SBI 139 (1984). Bygningers fugtisolering. Andersen. N Christensen G & 
Nielsen F. Statens Byggeforskningsinstitet.
Schellenberg, R. (2002) The Trouble With Humidity: The Hidden Chal-
lenge of RH Calibration [online] Avaiable at: http://www.vaisala.com/
Vaisala%20Documents/White%20Papers/lsh-Trouble-with-Humidity.
pdf [Accesed 9 May 2016].
Schollmeyer, J. (2007) Museums go green. Bulletin of the Atomic Scien-
tists. 11. Vol. 63, No. 3.
Schultz, W. (1994) CAL scientists revise guidelines for museum climate 
control. The Torch, Dec. 1994.
Silkeborg Arkiv (2016) Museum Jorn – Et Jorn-Museum [online] Availa-
ble at: http://www.silkeborgarkiv.dk/?page_id=2572 [Accessed 7 Jan. 
2016].
SNM Competition brief (2011) STATENS NATURHISTORISKE MUSEUM  
kONKURRENCEPROGRAMh [online] Available at: http://cas.ku.dk/plan-
laegning_byggeri/store/SNM_Konkurrenceprogram.pdf [Accessed 7 Jan. 
2016].
Spearpoint, M. (2008) Fire Engineering Design Guide. New Zealand 
Centre for Advanced Engineering. 
Statistics Denmark (2016) Statistikbanken [online] Available at: www.
statistikbanken.dk/10263 [Accessed 12 Apr. 2016].
systemair (2016) Air Humidiﬁ ers [online] Available at: https://www.
systemair.com/globalassets/websites/SK/Katalogy/AirHumidiﬁ -
ers_02_2014_lav.pdf [Accessed 3 Jun. 2016].
Thorsen, D. (2008) Korsriddere på Tøjhusmuseet. Kristendom.dk [online] 
Available at: http://www.kristendom.dk/danmark/korsriddere-på-tøjhus-
museet [Accessed 22 Apr. 2016]
Tsangrassoulis, A. and Synnefa, A. (2004). Integration of Electric Light-
ing-Daylighting. SynthLight Handbook.
Valentín, N. (2007) Microbial Contamination in Archives and Museums: 
Health Hazards and Preventive Strategies Using Air Ventilation Systems. 
Contribution to the Experts’ Roundtable on Sustainable Climate Man-
agement Strategies.
Varde Museum (2012) BIG tegner nyt museumsprojekt i Blåvand 
[online] Available at: http://www.vardemuseum.dk/dk.php/museetsarb/
nyheder/big_tegner_nyt_museumsprojekt_i_blavand [Acessed 9 May 
2012].
Varde Museum (2016) Museumscenter Blåvand [online] Available at: 
http://www.vardemuseum.dk/dk.php/museetsarb/projekter/museum-
scenter_blavand [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Verma, R. (2015) Underground museum at Humayun’s Tomb in 2 years  
The Times of India (Apr. 5 2015) [online] Available at: http://timesoﬁ nd-
ia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Underground-museum-at-Humayuns-Tomb-
in-2-years/articleshow/46809976.cms [Accessed 9 Jan. 2016].
==PAGE:112==
102
The viking Ship Museum (2016) Fortid og nutid mødes på Museumsøen 
[online] Available at: http://www.vikingeskibsmuseet.dk/besoeg/et-lev-
ende-museum/museumsoeen/ [Accessed 18 Apr. 2016].
Visit Copenhagen a (2016) Ordrupgaard [online] Available at: http://
www.visitcopenhagen.dk/da/copenhagen/ordrupgaard-gdk419719 
[Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Visit Copenhagen b (2016) Det Nationale Fotomuseum [online] Avail-
able at: http://www.visitcopenhagen.dk/da/copenhagen/det-nation-
ale-fotomuseum-gdk412288 [Accessed 7 Jan. 2016].
Weather Underground a (2016) Vejr Historik for EKCH [online] Available 
at: https://www.wunderground.com/history/airport/EKCH [Accessed 18 
Apr. 2016].
Weather Underground b (2016) Vejr Historik for EKRK [online] Available 
at: https://www.wunderground.com/history/airport/EKRK [Accessed 18 
Apr. 2016].
Wijeysundera, N. (2016) Principles of Heating, Ventilation and Air Condi-
tioning with Worked Examples. World Scientiﬁ c Publishing. Co. Pte. Ltd. 
Yu, D., Klein, S. and Reindl, D, (2001) An Evaluation of Silica Gel for Hu-
midity Control in Display Cases. Waac. May 2001. Volume 23. Number 2.
==PAGE:113==
103
Appendix
01. 
Programs 
104
02. 
Interview with Morten Ryhl-Svendsen 
106
03. 
Interview with Tim Padﬁ eld 
116
04. 
Resume of conversations with Michael Krabbe Kiær 
119
05. 
Moisture buff ering 
121
06. 
Humidity calculation in IDA ICE 
125
07. 
Correlation between weather and amount of visitors 
127
08. 
Calculations using the Kvisgaard & Hadvig formula 
131
09. 
Average temperatures pr month from standards and Kvisgaard and Hadvig 
133
10. 
COMSOL settings 
134
11. 
Electrical lighting 
137
12. 
Heat transfer comparison 
144
13. 
Inﬂ uence of short term interior heat loads on the long term thermal storage 
148
14. 
Dynamic user schedules 
150
15. 
Use of the HMwall component 
151
16. 
RH control system 
153
17. 
Settings of the IDA Model 
155
18. 
Line loss 
158
==PAGE:114==
104
01.  Programs
COMSOL
The COMSOL group was founded in 1986 in Sweden. The company 
developed COMSOL Multiphysics and in 1998 the ﬁ rst release of the 
program was made (COMSOL, 2016). This thesis work was done with 
the 5.1 version of the program in order to do heat transfer simulations. 
COMSOL is a validated program for heat transfer calculations (Gerlich 
et al., 2013) as well as being able to do a range of other types of cal-
culations like acoustics, chemical reactions, structural mechanics etc 
(COMSOL, 2016). The program can do these types of simulations in 4 
dimensions, being x,y,z and time, however only 2D simulations in time 
was used in this report.
IDA ICE
IDA Indoor Climate and Energy (IDA ICE) is a building simulation tool 
developed by EQUA Simulation. It includes both active and passive 
systems, occupants, weather data and a large amount of other 
parameters. In this thesis the program will be used to make calculations 
of the total energy use and the indoor climate of buildings based on the 
ventilation, heating systems, user inﬂ uence etc. 
EQUA Simulation was founded and in 1998 and the ﬁ rst software from 
the company, IDA Indoor Climate and Energy, was released (EQUA, 2016). 
The version of the program used for this thesis was 4.6.2. IDA ICE has been 
validated in respect to a number of standards including EN 15255-2007 
a nd EN 15265-2007 (EQUA a ,2010) and ASHRAE 140 (EQUA b, 2010). 
Three diff erent user levels are available. The ESBO simpliﬁ ed level using 
a simpliﬁ ed interface with limited parameters, the standard level and the 
advanced level where the mathematical model behind the calculations 
can be changed (Kalamees, 2004)
Figure 127. User interface og COMSOL
Figure 128. user interface of IDA ICE
==PAGE:115==
105
References
Gerlich, V., Sulovská, K. and Zálešák M.  (2013) COMSOL Multiphys-
ics validation as simulation software for heat transfer calculation in 
buildings: Building simulation software validation. Measurement. Volume 
46, Issue 6. July 2013.
COMSOL 2016) Company [online] Available at: https://www.comsol.dk/
company [Accessed 22 Apr. 2016].
EQUA (2016) History [online] Available at: http://www.equa.se/en/
about-us/history [Accessed 22 Apr. 2016].
EQUA a (2010) Validation of IDA Indoor Climate and Energy 4.0 with re-
spect to CEN Standards EN 15255-2007 and EN 15265-2007 [online] 
Available at: http://www.equaonline.com/iceuser/validation/CEN_VALI-
DATION_EN_15255_AND_15265.pdf [Accessed 22 Apr. 2016].
EQUA b (2010) Validation of IDA Indoor Climate and Energy 4.0 build 4 
with respect to ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 140-2004 [online] http://www.
equaonline.com/iceuser/validation/ASHRAE140-2004.pdf [Accessed 
22 Apr. 2016].
Kalamees, T. (2004) IDA ICE: the simulation tool for making the whole 
building energy and HAM analysis. Tallinn Technical University. Annex 
41 MOIST-ENG, Working meeting May 12-14. 
==PAGE:116==
106
02.  Interview with Morten Ryhl-
Svendsen
Følgende interview af Morten Ryhl-Svendsen er foretaget af Mads Panﬁ l 
Jeppesen (indikeret med fed).
Der er forskellige setpoints for forskellige materialer og så er der 
indeklima standarderne. Hvad gør man når man har forskellige krav 
for brugere og udstillingsgenstande? Det virker som om at man pri-
oriter gæster ret højt i forhold til konserveringsindeklimaet?
Det er selvfølgeligt vigtigt at gæsternes komfort er i orden ikke. Man 
er der for gæsternes skyld. I det omfang hvor det ikke er i konﬂ ikt med 
bevaring af samlingerne, der er alt jo ﬁ nt. Og så har man nogen genstande 
der kræveret helt specielt klima som ligger helt udenfor alt menneskeligt 
komfort og det må man jo så fx løse lokalt, det kan være i nogen særlige 
montre. Det kan være nogen særlige genstande der skal opbevares tørt 
fx Det klarer man lokalt kan man sige. Men altså typisk vil det være sådan 
for en hel samling at 90% af genstandende de har det sådan set ﬁ nt 
indenfor komfortzonen. Menneskelig komfort det er nok primært tem-
peraturmæssigt i virkeligheden, og der har man et rimeligt stort spillerum. 
Hvis der så ud over det er genstande som har et fugtbehov, så spiller 
der ikke så stor en rolle at man også styrer dette brugerkomfortmæssigt. 
Det er bare en teknisk komplikation og koster lidt mere energi. Fordi det 
et i virkeligheden drejer sig om, der er ikke et universialklima som er det 
bedste for alt kulturarv i verden. Materialer og genstande er jo forskellige. 
Så det første, hvis maner på et museum, hvor der er en samling og man 
skal bygge et nyt hus og man skal ﬁ nde ud af hvad skal indeklimaet være 
der så skalman kigge på samlingen. Der skal være nogen fagfolk der 
kender deres samling. I det her tilfælde der er de så en kulturhistorisk 
samling. Det er genstande for Zoologisk museum, Geologisk museum og 
botanisk samling. Og der må de samlingsfolk der er der sætte sig ned og 
sige hvad der fællesnævneren for vores samling, hvad kan vi tillade os 
at stå frit i et rum hvor der er almindeligt indeklima og hvad skal have 
specielt indeklima i montre eller særlige sektioner. Man kan jo også 
designe et udstillingsmiljø op sådan at du har særlige klimazoner. Der er 
jo nogen steder hvor man går igennem en sluse eller lign og så kommer 
man igennem et område hvor der er særlig fugtsyring eller lignende hvor 
det kunne være man havde nogen meget sarte middelaldermalerier eller 
et eller andet. Så sådan noget kan du se eksempler på rundt omkring på 
museer i verden. Så man bruger det altså, i stor stil faktisk, indenfor visse 
grænser, der vil også stadigt være udsving, der vil være rigtigt mange 
mennesker og pludselig så er der ikke nogen. 
Hvor udbredt er det at man zoneopdeler det åbne rum som ikke er 
udstillingsbokse?
Hvis du går ind på Nationalmuseet inde i København og går ind i forhallen. 
Hvis du drejer til højre så går du ind i oldtidsudstillingen. Det første rum 
fungerer som en sluse lige når du kommer in i oldtidsudstillingen. Så er 
du så faktisk i en særligt fugtstyret zone. Og det er styret med glasdøre 
og sådan noget. Sådan så du går igennem det. Forlader det. Og når du 
går ud i publikumsarealer igen, gange osv så er du ude af den zone igen. 
Hvis du går til venstre og går ind i det der hedder Egmonthallen der hvor 
der er særudstillinger (man går sådan lige op af en trappe). Det er sådan 
et helt særligt rum hvor man kan styre et hvilket som helst klima man 
ville ønske. Det er til særudstillinger hvor man får alt muligt forskelligt 
ind. Det kan være at det ene er... Så låner man møbler fra Venedig som 
skal have forholdsvis høj luftfugtighed, og så har man det. Og året efter 
så er det noget kinesisk bronzestatue som skal stå meget tørt. Sådan et 
eller andet, det kan man så styre helt separat fra gang til gang. Så det er 
også en zone for sig. På Glyptoteket når du går ind i den franske impres-
sionistafdeling, der går du også igennem et sæt døre som deﬁ nerer en 
klimazone. På Louisiana når du går på den der gang, hvor man kommer 
ind i de første områder, der er en lang passage hvor man går langs haven, 
det er jo et almindeligt klima som i en villa eller hvad som helst, men hvis 
du så træder ind i udstillingsområderne så er der faktisk også nogen 
glasdøre, så træder du ind i en mere fugtkontrolleret zone. Og så det 
inderste skal, hvis man har noget der er helt specielt er helt følsomtog 
har et helt særligt klimakrav så vil det være i et montre så du kan styre 
det. Det vil typisk være noget der skal ligge meget tørt. Det kunne være 
==PAGE:117==
107
et mineral eller sådan noget hvor man bløder salte ud ved høj fugtighed 
eller andre sådan lidt mere specielle absurde ting. Faktisk på Zoologisk 
museum, hvis du går over i den der forholdsvis nye udstilling, der har de 
den der (er det ikke en iskerne?). Det har et eller andet frysemontre, et 
eller andet frossent apparat. Jeg har også set andre steder hvor man har 
en borekerne fra indlandsisen. Den kræver så selvfølgeligt et helt særligt 
klima og det må man så klare meget lokalt.
Jeg snakkede med EKJ for at høre hvad de havde tænkt omkring zon-
er, med at dele det op alt efter hvad der var. Og de virkede ikke helt 
som om at Naturhistorisk museum var nået langt nok til at man ville 
tage det med ind i sine overvejelser så man kunne programmere 
bygningen i forhold til det. Så det de lidt søgte var noget hvor man 
havde mulighed for det hele, overalt. Men det giver selvfølgeligt 
mere energibesparelse hvis man kan lave rummet efter hvad det 
skal kunne.
Ja man kan så sige, at selvom jeg sagde at der ikke et klima i hele verden 
der bare dækker alt. Så er der selvfølgeligt alligevel visse klimaområder 
der dækker bedre end andre. Hvis man tager det som udgangspunkt at 
man skal opfylde temperaturkomfort for mennesker, så er det så givet 
at man skal det der 20, 23 måske 25 grader om sommeren, hvis man 
så ligger der. Så fugtmæssigt så kan langt, langt de ﬂ este materialer i 
denne verden, så har de det udmærket et eller andet sted imellem 40 
og 60% relativ fugtighed. Så så længe man er indenfor det der bånd, så 
går det ikke helt galt. Og der kan du smide 95% af alle samlinger ind. Og 
det har noget at gøre med hvis du kommer meget over de der 60% så 
nærmer du dig grænsen for skimmel ved en 70 måske 75% og der er 
også sådan noget som salte og nogen kemiske reaktioner der begynder 
at gå stærkere når der er meget vand til stede. Og hvis det bliver for tørt 
så er der nogen fysiske forhold: ting der bliver for sprøde og udtørret 
simpelthen, mister noget mekanisk ﬂ eksibilitet. Så sådan et sted mellem 
40-60% så er man sådan ca. hjemme og så er det godt hvis det er stabilt, 
men det må godt svinge på årstidsbasis. Du kan godt tillade at du har 
40% om vinteren og 60% om sommeren. Ligesom har den der årsvaria-
tion, i stedet for fuldstædigt kritikløst aff ugter og befugter til 50%.
Ja jeg kan se at der er nogen af de der standarder, eller guidelines, 
der har en ”deviation” for 24 timer. Men jeg tænkte hvem er det så 
der kommer til at vælge om vi siger 45-55 eller 40-60.
Det er museet. Det er museet som ejer samlingen. Dem som betaler festen 
bestemmer musikken. De kender deres samling, må man gå ud fra og de 
beslutter. Så er der ikke nogen lov. Det er guidelines. Der er ikke nogen 
standarder der er ophøjet til lovtekst. Hverken i dansk standard eller in-
ternationalt. Så nu kender jeg bedst nationalmuseet, da det er der jeg har 
arbejdet tidligere. Der har man det der hedder bevaringsafdelingen og der 
har man nogen ansvarlige. Det er dem der skal høres i byggesager eller 
nyopstiller udstilllinger eller lign. som kendersamlingerne og som tager 
stilling til: ”Den her samling der er det møbler, der tager vi stilling til det 
og det” og ”den her samling der er det udstoppede dyr og der skal vi være 
opmærksom på det og det”.
Så I havde 40 til 60% relativ fugtighed generelt og så havde i nogen 
enkelte zoner hvor i...
Ja det er udgangspunktet i nationalmuseets samlingsmanual. De har 
sådan en udstillingsmanual. Sådan et internt arbejdsdokument. Når man 
haren ny sag, så har man den at køre efter Det er udgangspunktet. Trin 
2 på manualen der er at se på det aktuelle genstande der skal udstilles. 
Er der nogen der kræver noget særligt? Og så vil man så rette ind efter 
det. Jeg mener at på Nationalmuseet der siger man temperaturer max 
25 grader og 40-60% relativ fugtighed og så mulighed for specialklima 
hvis man har behov for det. Og det er også det man i de her guidelines på 
en eller anden måde ﬁ nder som fællesnæver. Typisk når man kigger ud, 
også hvis man kigger på museers egne krav. Så vil du se at kunstmuseer 
de har strengere krav end naturhistoriske eller kulturhistoriske, men 
undtagelse af selvfølgeligt de allerﬁ neste skatte, men der er sådan en 
tendens til at kunstmuseer der skal være lidt ﬁ nere eller man skal passe 
lidt bedre på tingene og det er måske også sartere materialer. Det har i 
hvert fald været præget af en verden med auktioner og gallerier og hvor 
tingene også har en pris. En høj pris. Så typisk så vil du se at kunstmuseer 
de vil sige 45-55% og det kulturhistoriske museum de siger så 40-60 
==PAGE:118==
108
eller 35 til 65. De er sådan lidt mere ”relaxed”. Selvom de i princippet kan 
være fuldstændigt de samme materialer der er udstillet begge steder. 
Men det har også lidt at gøre med pris og værdi, forsikring. Man vil også 
typisk kræve strammere krav når man låner en ting ud end man egentligt 
opfylder hjemme i ens eget museum for at være på den sikre side. Så 
det er lidt en anden historie. Jeg vil tro at når man kigger ned over det 
så ligger fællesnævneren et eller andet sted mellem 40 og 60% relativ 
fugtighed. Og så med det forbehold: Specialklima for specielle genstande. 
Og specielle genstande det kan være noget som fx mineraler der skal 
opbevares meget tørt ellers så smelter de nærmest, saltene løber ud. 
Der er et eller andet med Pyrith eller… Ja der er sådan nogen særlige 
ting. Det kan også være noget som ting af elfenben og tænder. Tand-
materiale sprækker hvis det bliver for tørt. Det kræver egentligt sådan 
ret stabil relativ fugtighed. Det kræver lidt sådan noget. Og så kan det 
være nogen materialer som er nedbrudt i forvejen. Hvis man har noget 
som er meget gammelt eller som tidligere har været angrebet. Der er fx 
den her øvre grænse på 60-65% det er for at man skal være sikker på at 
der ikke kommer skimmelsvamp at der ikke gror mug på tingene og det 
kan der sagtens gøre hvis det har været for fugtigt et stykke tid. Den 
gælder egentligt for nye friske materialer, hvis nu du har en genstand 
som har oplevet skimmeludbrud før: en bog eller et eller andet. Så hvis 
den ikke er blevet renset ordentligt, desinﬁ ceret ordentligt så sidder der 
sporer i som ret nemt vil kunne blomstre op igen. Så den er faktisk mere 
følsom for høj luftfugtighed. Så hvis man har ting som tidligere har været 
angrebet. Så vil man typisk sætte den øvre grænse lavere for at være på 
den sikre side, 55% fx Det kan også være andre typer af skade. Og så er 
der, nu snakkede vi om de her klimagrænser for en ting af gangen, men 
i den virkelige verden så arbejder ting jo på en gang, du har jo ikke kun 
temperatur og relativ luftfugtighed. Du har også lys og luftforurening. 
Du har 117 klimafaktorer, skadedyr. Og der er ting der kan gå i synergi 
og forstærke hinanden. Så hele lysområdet, det er jo et… Jeg ved ikke hor 
meget du kommer ind i?
Nej jeg har levet et undersøgelser eller litterature review for at ﬁ nde 
ud af hvad er det forskellige parametre og hvad er de vigtigste. Og 
eftersom det virker som om de ﬂ este museer virker til gerne vil sty-
re lyset elektrisk i stedet for dagslyset, så er det en faktor som jeg 
skriver om, men ikke kommer så meget videre med. Men det virker 
som om at man nogen steder (og det ved jeg ikke hvor meget man 
bruger) men at det at man ganger lux op med timer og så fordeler 
dem ud.
Jo men det arbejder man meget med. Fordi altså den nemme måde det 
er jo bare at man sætter nogen faste lysgrænser. Hvor det så kun er in-
tensiteten. Der har man så traditionelt snakket om meget lysfølsomme 
materialer. Det er så 50 lux som er meget mørkt og medium det er så et 
par hundrede lux og så er der materialer der kan tåle meget, sten eller 
sådan noget. Det kan så bare få fuldt blus.
Men bare for at være sikker, for at være 100% på at jeg forstår det 
rigtigt. Så man tager et materiale fx der til 200 lux (1 peger i stand-
arden). Tager man så bare det? Og siger at det er hvad den kan få lov 
til i 24 timer?
Det er nemlig et meget godt spørgsmål for der   er nemlig forskel på om 
det er i 12 timer eller 24 timer. De har grænser de er jo typisk sat under at 
man har sådan en normal museumssituation, dvs der er lys på ca 8 timer 
om dagen, 6 dage om ugen, 52 uger om året. Så det er en lysdosis for et 
museums åbningstid.
Så jeg skal bare gange det her med 8 så ﬁ nde ud hvad er det tillade-
lige lux i løbet af et døgn?
Ja dosis. Og så er det helt rigtigt som du siger at udstiller man det i kortere 
tid så kan man egentligt godt tillade sig at skrue op for intensiteten hvis 
man forkorter tiden. Hvis man nu siger den her gwnstand er faktisk kun 
udstillet 4 timer om dagen så kan man have 400 lux i stedet for 200 lux i 
princippet. Men det har jo indﬂ ydelse på dit klima på den måde at det er jo 
en ret betydelig varmekilde. Nu er der selvfølgeligt LED lys mere og mere, 
men det er noget man har kæmpet med førhen. Ikke bare varmeafgivels-
en fra lys men fra alt muligt AV udstyr. Sådan et moderne udstillingsrum 
det er jo fyldt med monitorer og hvad ved jeg. Og der er altså en eff ekt.
==PAGE:119==
109
Ja jeg var oppe i Søfartsmuseet her i forrige uge og snakke med 
deres driftsmand. Og arkitekterne havde arbejdet med at få rene 
overﬂ ader uden for mange ting og ventilationselementer. Men så 
når det blev taget i brug så blev det jo smadret til med projektorer 
og lydanlæg og ting og sager. Så der er jo godt nok meget gear der 
bliver hægtet på sådan et rum.
Ja det er jo en stor eff ekt som så måske skal køles. Fjernes i hvert fald på 
en eller anden måde.
Jeg syntes genetligt det er lidt sjovt. Du har jeg så godt nok også ta-
get lidt yderliggående eksempler med. Men bare sådan i forbindelse 
med temperaturer i forbindelse med energiforbrug, så har man jo 
fx Cisternerne. Det er et meget specielt rum, men hvis man rent en-
ergimæssigt ser på det så er det jo det mest energibesparende over-
hoved. Der er jo ikke nogen isolering og der er ikke nogen varme 
eller køling eller noget som helst. Men egentligt så bruger den jo lidt 
(teknikker), for den har jo den store masse og jordtemperaturerne. 
Så der er jo noget der passivt jævner temperaturerne ud, som ikke 
ville være det samme hvis det bare var et træskur oppe på jorden. 
Men de bruger ingen energi. Og så har jeg kigget på søfartsmuseet 
og har fået design notater fra Rambøll. Hvor man kunne se hvordan 
de har udviklet deres set punkter, fra at de i konkurrencen lå helt 
stramt. Jeg kan ikke helt huske det men +/- 2 grader og +/- 5%. Hvor 
i sidste ende så ender det med 100% komfort. Så de tillader 30-70% 
når kunden i sidste ende ﬁ nder ud af hvad koster det her i energi og 
kroner og øre. Og de er en af de ting som jeg syntes er ret interes-
sant. I forhold til kontorer og boliger hvor man bare slår op om det 
er klasse A, B eller C. Men der er mere diskussion her omkring denne 
parameter end jeg først troede.
Nu sagde du det med at der er meget stor variation og belasting om det 
er den ene uge eller den anden. Tid på dagen og sådan noget. Men er det 
ikke også et meget stort lokale? Der er jo noget kapacitet til at kunne 
optage det og begrænsninger på hvos mange mennesker der må komme 
ind ad gangen.
Det kan være jeg skal vise dig nogen kurver. Det ikke fordi jeg har 
arbejdet så meget med dataen endnu. Men jeg kan vise dig nogen 
af dem. Jeg har fået fra en hel masse museer. Så her er en del af mu-
seerne og plottet hver dag. Det her det er et år og det her er forskel-
lige år, hver kurve er et år pr museum. Og så kan man se, her er det 
måneder og så kan man se om det er over eller under gennemsnit. 1 
Ville være hvis det var gennemsnitlig og her det så fx faktor 4 over 
normalt og faktor 0.5, for at se hvor stor afvigelse der er og det ikke 
så meget jeg har været inde i data, men man kan se at efterårsferien 
er rimelig markant det er en faktor 3 eller 4.
Der er også der de kører aller hårdest på. Der sker alt muligt. Ridderturn-
ering og alt muligt.
Ja Tøjhusmuseets ridder turnering, den tror jeg også var et eller an-
det sted. Ja der. Men det er er meget sjovt er at man se at ud over 
efterårsferien, så er der et mønster pr museum som går rimeligt 
meget igen. Som er speciﬁ kt for det givne museum. Hvor man bare 
kun ved at se på kurven kan se nogenlunde er det her Tøjhusmu-
seet eller er det musikmuseet eller nationalmuseet eller hvad er det 
for et museum. Så i hvert fald hvis man skal dimensionere noget i 
fremtiden så har man i hvert fald en rimelig indikation for hvordan 
det er. Og så kan man lave test på et museum der ikke er bygget 
og se hvordan det performer hvis det (brugerparametren) er mest 
som Nationalmuseet så er det sådan her eller hvis det er mest som 
tøjhusmuseet så kommer den til at være på en anden måde. Fordi 
bruger de er jo til gunst i vinteren, men ugunst og sommeren for at 
holde det nogenlunde jævnt. Og så specielt når den der fugtfaktor 
også kommer til at spille med ind. Jeg har ikke så meget data på det 
endnu, men hvis man ser på ugeplan så er der nogen tendenser til 
at den kører op hen af ugen og så topper i weekenden. Så der er for-
skellige tidspunkter hvor den kører meget op. Jeg tror det her er fra 
nationalmuseet hvor det var noget vikingemarked hvor den bonger 
meget ud i forhold til det andet.
Det vil nemlig altid være sådan nogen helt særlige dage hvor man åbner 
ny udstilling eller et eller andet. Hvor anlægget sikkert ikke kan følge 
med. Det må man bare acceptere. For hvis man bygger for at man kan 
==PAGE:120==
110
følge med på de mest ekstreme situationer så kører man jo med voldsomt 
under… ja
Overdimensioneret system?
Ja lige præcis. Og det er jo så lidt, ja man kan diskutere det lidt i sådan en 
opgave. Men det er et valg man kan tage at 5% af tiden der må man bare 
acceptere at der ligger det udenfor grænserne. 
Ja det var nemlig det der følger op til næste spørgsmål. Normalt når 
man laver indeklima kan man sige at der gør man det for 95% af tid-
en, og de sidste 5% det kan man ikke tage højde for. Er dette også 
ok i museumssammenhæng?
Ja det… altså nu var det bare et tal jeg tog ud af mit hoved. Men det vil 
man typisk acceptere, noget i den størrelsesorden. Fordi alt andet lige 
er vandvid på en eller anden måde. Så det ser jeg ikke noget problem i 
overhovedet. Men det skal selvfølgeligt være noget man har speciﬁ ceret 
på forhånd. For hvis man siger ”Her er et anlæg som vi lover altid vil kunne 
holde alt”, så får man problemer. Men det kan jeg ikke se noget problem 
i. Fordi at man forudsætter alligevel at det særligt følsomme genstande, 
de er jo netop i montre i klimamontre som er en yderligere udjævnende 
barriere. Så de vil være mindre påvirket af at rumklimaet varierer lidt mere 
en halv dag eller hvad der nu sker. Så det er i hvert fald en måde at komme 
rundt om den hurdle på.
Og så i forbindelse med de der klimamontre så har jeg forstået som 
at der er montre som ingenting gør som bare gør at man ikke kan 
røre, stjæle eller der kommer støv eller forskellige andre ting på 
dem. Og så er der nogen der har en lillesmule forsinket luftskifte og 
så er det nogen der har et aktivt system.
Lige præcis. Og du kan løse langt det meste med den der passive løsning 
i midten som forsinker klimaudsvingninger ved at den har en masse af 
hygroskopisk materiale fx som hjælper med at buff ere fugtsvingninger. 
Altså temperatursvingninger de går jo lige igennem glasset på eller 
anden måde. Altså med mindre du bygger et montre med beton og alt 
muligt der bliver termisk tung. Det kan man ikke styre, det må man regne 
med nok går. Men man kan komme rigtigt langt ved at have et montre der 
er tæt. Den har måske et halvt luftskifte i døgnet. Altså det er virkeligt 
tæt. Og så har man under bunden, i plinten, et reservoir af fx silicagel, som 
er sådan et stof som kan optage og afgive vanddamp.
For at give en buff er?
Ja det kunne også være noget så simplet som gasbeton. Der er mange af 
de der byggematerialer, fx tegl der egentligt kan det samme. Ler fx som 
man bruger i sådan nogen passive huse og som ligger som en buff er og 
stabiliserer for fugtniveauet. Og det kombineret med det lave luftskifte 
giver dig en utrolig god fugtstabilitet. Hvis du har nogen variationer i 
lokalet som er forholdsvis hurtige og pludselige så vile de slet ikke blive 
registeret eller kun komme meget langsomt med en lillebitte top an halv 
dag senere. Det er rigtigt nok man kan også få de her aktive systemer…
Men de er ikke så udbredte eller hvad?
Nej, altså de ﬁ ndes. Der er et par stykker på nationalmuseet. For eksempel 
i oldtidssamlingen, som så har en lille aff ugter eller befugter. De virker, 
men du har altid risikoen for der er noget mekanik der går ned, og hvornår 
opdager man det så lige og så er det for dyrt at få skiftet den ud. De 
passive systemer er altså meget sikrere.
Det er selvfølgeligt en meget god pointe. Sikkerheden i at det er 
noget passivt frem for noget aktivt.
De er så simple ikke? De passer bare sig selv
Det var noget nær nogen ting jeg også gerne ville spørge om. Både 
den temperaturbuff er og den relative fugtighedsbuff er. Da jeg 
snakkede med dem på Søfartsmuseet, bare i forbindelse med tem-
peratur. Der spurgte jeg ham om de havde nogen erfaringer med at 
rummet i sig selv havde en termisk kapacitet, og han sagde at de 
==PAGE:121==
111
slukkede for de ﬂ este af deres systemer natten over og så havde de 
kun en ændring på en grad næste morgen når de startede op igen. 
Det vil jeg gerne tro
Men noget andet er fugtmængden. Hvor udbredt er det at andet end 
i selve boksen eller udstillingsmontren hvor man kan bruge et mate-
riale (som buff er). Men at man i selve museet vælger materialer så 
man kan kontrollere et bestemt fugtniveau?
Ikke ret udbredt. Det er simpelthen for dynamisk et system. Altså sådan 
en passiv fugtstyring, den virker bedst hvis du har et lavt luftskifte. Altså 
det er brugt i arkiver og magasinrum, hvor man kan holde luftudskiftnin-
gen nede aktivt. Men det bliver simpelthen overrulet af alle de mennesker 
der går ud og ind og døre der åbner og lukker og sådan noget. Det kan ikke 
følge med. I udstillingssituationer og sådan noget, der skal man gå efter 
en mekanisk løsning til fugtstyring. Men i montrerne hvor du har et lille 
mini passivt system, der har du noget andet. Selvfølgeligt kun passivt så 
længe det gælder om at buff ere. Det er jo klart hvis du skal have et montre 
hvor du skal have et anderledes klima end i rummet. Altså hvis det skal 
være væsentligt mere tørt, eller væsentligt koldere eller et eller andet, 
så skal du selvfølgelig have noget mekanik der hele tiden står og tørrer 
luften ud eller hele tiden køler ud. Men for at stabilisere ud, udjævne og 
for at undgå de der peaks med for høj luftfugtighed om sommeren, der 
er det passive system ﬁ nt. Men jeg kan faktisk ikke komme på en eneste 
udstillingsbygning hvor man er kommet på det i rumniveau til fugtbuff er. 
Jeg tror simpelthen ikke på det vil have nogen særlig eff ekt.
Jeg kan huske jeg læse nogen af der konferencepapirer. Jeg kan ikke 
huske hviken det var. Men hvor man kan se at diskussionerne er 
skrevet ned så man kan se hvem der har sagt hvad. Og så ved jeg 
ikke hvem der sagde det, men han gav som forslag at man tog nogen 
af de bøger som man alligevel skulle skille sig af med nogen steder 
og brugte dem og satte dem ind i rum som.
Jamen det er noget man har snakket meget om og det kommer også op 
ind imellem. Men tror simpelthen ikke det har nogen eff ekt. Altså så skal 
du virkeligt plastre de vægge til og vende dem om så de har papiret ud 
af ikke og alt det der. Jeg tror ikke det har ret stor eff ekt. Så vil det være 
så indgribende i hele din arkitektur så det… Men det er rigtigt nok man 
arbejder meget med, og jeg har da også set, altså også som luftrensende 
at man kan bruge ler, altså lerpuds og sådan noget til at eliminere ozon og 
andre forureningsstoff er. Altså det har en hvis eff ekt. Det er netop så til 
boliger, og vi har også gjort forsøg med det, igen i magasinrum og sådan 
noget. Det har en vis eff ekt, men det er ikke sådan overvældende. Man 
kan komme længere med mekaniske løsninger
Men hver gang man introducerer noget mekanisk, så skal man også 
bruge det ekstra energi. Så hvis man kunne tage noget af det, så 
det mekaniske ikke skulle tage lige så stor en del. Men det kan godt 
være det ikke er noget der reelt kommer til at…
Men altså jeg har for eksempel været med i nogen diskussioner omkring 
nye magasinbygninger inde på nationalmuseet. Hvor vi jo så foreslog 
rådgiverne at her har vi jo muligheden for at prøve en passiv løsning af. 
Skal vi ikke prøve at bygge rummet så de er linet med udbrændte lersten 
på indersiden. Og vi kunne ikke ﬁ nde nogen der ville bygge det, der var 
ikke nogen der ville så inde for det. Det var ikke testet, det var ikke styrket-
estet. Der var det ene og det andet og det tredje galt. Hvordan skulle man 
sætte det op? Hvis det ikke ﬁ ndes som et færdigt kommercielt produkt 
som dem der bygger huset kan ﬁ nde ud af at sprætte op på væggen, 
nemt eller i moduler, så har det ingen gang på jorden. Så er vi i hvert fald 
ude i noget meget dyrt specialbyggeri. Så er det billigere og nemmere 
og på en eller anden måde mindre traumatisk og rulle en aff ugter ind 
og sætte den i et hjørne. Det er sådan lidt personlig erfaring jeg har fra 
nogen projekter, at selvom det ja… Vi er måske lige 10 år for tidligt. Altså 
det jo noget man taler om i sådan økologiske byggerier hvor man kan 
prøve sådan nogen ting af. Men så længe det ikke ﬁ ndes som færdige 
kommercielle produkter. Så tror jeg ikke på det i stor stil. Desværre.
Og der er ikke nogen kommercielle produkter man kunne bruge? Jeg 
==PAGE:122==
112
tænker der er vel forskel på om man putter træ på væggene eller 
man bruger beton eller noget..
Altså lige præcis træ er jo en meget god fugtbuff er, men man er så ikke 
så vild med de stoff er der evt. kan afgasse som kan være korrosive. Så der 
kan være nogen konﬂ ikter der i hvert fald. Det skal man lige tænke over. 
Især også træprodukter. Hvis du er ude i limede ﬁ bre og sådan noget så 
kan lignende være et problem.
Men der skal vel også være en grad af nogen porrer i et materiale før 
er godt til at være en buff er for fugt. Men det gør det vel også svære 
rengøringsmæssigt?
Helt sikkert. Det har du helt ret i. Altså en af de store anker mod det der 
ubrændte ler, som er en fantastisk god buff er. Det er netop at det er 
sådan en let støvende overﬂ ade. Hvordan støvbinder man det så uden 
at miste den der store diff usionsåbenhed? Det kan man måske gøre. Så 
kunne man kalke dem fx ikke? Nu er vi 200 år tilbage i teknologien. Det 
kan du ikke få et malerﬁ rma til at gøre i dag. Eller måske kunne man bruge 
scilicatmaling. Måske… Det er der så nogen der skulle teste ikke. Det må I 
prøve at gøre ude på Byg en gang ikke? Men det er ikke klart. Det er ikke 
klart til markedet endnu. Men i hvert fald for udstillingsrum specielt. Der 
tror jeg ikke på at det har så stor en eff ekt. Det bliver simpelthen overrulet 
af den meget store dynamik, døre der bliver åbnet og lukket og sådan. Så..
Så det har meget med luftskiftet at gøre. At kunne kontrollere det 
på et mikroklimaplan. Men setpunkterne det var en ting som jeg var 
lidt overrasket over. Det andet var selve zoningen i display montre, 
men også fra rum til rum, at man kan have forskellige mikroklimaer 
der bliver skabt i hjørner og bag genstande. Selve den der zonebe-
tragtning der er lidt vigtigere her end i boliger.
Ja. Man kan så sige at du sagde noget at de ikke var helt klar endnu over 
hvad der skulle udstilles og hvad kravene skulle være.
 Ja i hvert fald da jeg snakkede med EKJ sidst. Du skulle vidst også 
snakke med dem?
Ja det er rigtigt. Jeg kender samlingschefen derinde. Han spurgte om 
jeg ville komme ind og snakke med dem og have en lignende snak. Så 
de er simpelthen ikke der endnu i deres proces. Og hvis jeg var dig ville 
jeg simpelthen tage udgangspunkt i de der guidelines. Og så tage den 
diskussion der siger at så tager vi 40 til 60% fugtighed som udgang-
spunkt og under 25 grader. Så man ligesom siger at det er spillerummet. 
Hvis der så kommer nogen særlige forhold senere, så må vi klare det lokalt. 
Hvis du vælger det som udgangspunkt, så er du ikke helt ude i skoven.
Jo mere man kan deﬁ nere hvad en zone skal kunne man dimen-
sionere både det passive og det aktive system og så sænke ener-
giforbruget. Så hvis man vil have noget der kan alt i princippet, så 
kommer man også til at betale for det i sidste ende. Så det kan være 
man bare siger40-60 og deler det ind i mindre zoner.
Det vil være helt ﬁ nt. Altså det er jo ikke fordi du skal det dele den ind i 
117 zoner. Men hvis det var delt ind i 3 eller ﬁ re områder som ville kunne 
styres separat hvis det var. Så er du i hvert fald dækket godt ind. Eller 
hvis man har noget særligt. Nogen steder har man ”skattekammeret” 
eller netop området til særudstilling, det er også et område man ønsker 
særlig kontrol med, for du ved aldrig hvad der kommer ind af underlige og 
mærkelige ting som har specielle krav, så er man helt godt dækket ind.
Jeg har læst at de der 20 og 50 krav opstod ved at man havde de der 
miner, hvor man under 2. verdenskrig lagde (objekterne) derned. 
Jeg syntes bare det er lidt sjovt at det underjordiske museum på en 
eller anden måde..
Kommer tilbage til
Ja eller har det som standard. Men der havde man en lille smule 
opvarmning på minerne ellers så havde man vel ikke en relativ fug-
==PAGE:123==
113
tighed på 50%.
Ja og den ville heller ikke være oppe på 20…. Men bare lige husket ud af 
hovedet så satte man jo alle de her kunstgenstande ud i minerne for at 
de ikke skulle blive bombet. Og det som var specielt det var at klimaet 
var meget stabilt. For typisk så havde malerierne hængt i gallerier inde i 
London hvor der var blevet meget tørt om vinteren. Så var det hele ﬂ aget 
også var det blevet meget fugtigt om sommeren og så en gang året så 
kunne man feje alle ﬂ agerne op og lime dem fast igen. Men pludselig så 
stod de der i stabilt klima og så skete de ingenting. Og så har de måske 
60%. Det med de 20 grader det er kommet som et komfortkrav. De onde 
tunger de siger at 50% det opstod fordi det er midt imellem 0 og 100 
så det var nemt at huske, men det kunne lige så godt være 55, så det er 
sådan lidt. Men det er vist blandt andet noget med, Gary Thompson han 
var jo englænder, at middelklimaet i London, hvis du konditionerer. Varmer 
op om sommeren og køler ned om vinteren så vil det være meget nemt 
at opnå. Så den der engelske standard den er så ligesom spredt ud til 
hele verden uden at være sådan helt baseret på andet end tilfældighed-
er. Men det er meget sjovt at det kommer tilbage til noget underjordisk 
igen. Det er en meget ﬁ n krølle på historien. 
Nu har jeg skrevet dem ned og der er virkeligt mange der bliver byg-
get under jorden nu. Og der er der forskellige årsager til. Men det er 
meget bemærkelsesværdigt at man har gjort det meget tidligere og 
så lige pludseligt så igen så bliver alle museer placeret under jorden 
(Interver oplister en masse museer der er ved at blive bygget eller er bygget for 
nylig op). Det kunne være interessant at se om det var en god eller 
en dårlig ting at gøre. Kan du se nogen problemetikker ved det (at 
bygge museer under jorden)?
Altså den største problemetik er jo når man kommer under grund-
vandsspejlet. Der er jo altid en fare for at det hele står under vand en 
dag. Det kan man selvfølgeligt løse på alle mulige måder. Men på en eller 
anden måde så er det en risiko
Pga. fugten?
Pga. vand. Indtrængende vand. Det ved jeg godt at det sikkert er en 
meget lille risiko, man har sikkert pumper og alt muligt.
Ja det har man i hvert fald i dette tilfælde. Men så selvfølgeligt tæller 
med i det samlede energiregnskab
Ja absolut og hvordan håndterer bygningen det når den er 40 år gammel 
eller 60 år gammel? Det ved jeg ikke, men det er måske bare mig der er 
lidt gammeldags der. Så en ting som man generelt ikke altid får håndteret 
inde i bygninger inde i byen det er, det har ikke noget at gøre med at det er 
gravet ned, men det er luftforurening. At sørge for at den luft man tager 
ind ﬁ ltreret ordentligt. Det er jo ud til Sølvgade der ikke. Der er jo rimligt 
meget traﬁ k der i indre København. Så det er noget med nogen ordentlige 
partikelﬁ ltre og gasﬁ ltrering for NOXer og hvad det skal være. Det er tit 
noget der bliver sparret væk eller som ikke får opmærksomhed nok. Langt 
de ﬂ este museer de ﬁ ltrerer til, der er sådan en standard der ligger på F7, 
men faktisk burde man have F8 i sådan et urbant miljø for et moderne 
museum i det 21 århundrede. Og så aktivt kul eller nogen lignede som er 
specielt designet til NOX forurening. Der ﬁ ndes jo 117 slags kul, du kan 
få det imprægneret og ikke imprægneret og i forskellige porrestørrelser. 
Selv ﬁ lterﬁ rmaerne er meget usikre på det her med kulﬁ ltre, for det er en 
meget lille niche. 98% af alle ﬁ ltre der bliver solgt i Danmark det er par-
tikelﬁ ltre, støvﬁ ltre til industri og sådan noget. Så er det kun nogen helt 
særlige nogen som Novo Nordisk og museer som vil have en gasﬁ ltrering 
også. Der er det så vigtigt at man har ﬁ ltre der er ”target” på den helt 
rigtige type forurening. Som så vil være NOX forurening i det her tilfælde 
fra biltraﬁ k. Så det syntes jeg er vigtigt og få med.  altså med hensyn 
til det nedgravede. Nej. Du var jo selv inde på lyset ikke. Man fj erner jo 
alt dagslyset så der er noget med det elektriske lys som kan være en 
ekstra varmekilde. Jeg følger jo lidt med i hvad der er af arkitektafgange, 
det er jo indenfor samme skole. Det ser jeg også af og til studerende 
der skriver projekter omkring musemsbyggerier, og de ligger alle sammen 
under jorden. Det er virkeligt en trend. Jeg var ude og se, faktisk her sidste 
år. Der var der 3 eller 4 om et nyt Frihedsmuseum for eksempel. Det var 
den oplagte. Så det er åbenbart trenden lige nu. … Jeg tænker lidt på at 
det må stille nogen større krav til ventilation end hvis det lå over jorden. 
==PAGE:124==
114
Der er jo, ud over radon og sådan noget. Den her samling har jo en masse 
præparater i sprit formalin, og de skal faktisk være i bygningen, er det ikke 
noget med det?
Jo det skal ligge sådan ved siden af
Der må være nogen enorme ventilationskrav til et spritlager… og hvis 
nødudgangen er opad, og du har jeg ved ikke hvor mange kubikmeter 
sprit stående. Det er i hvert fald noget man skal overveje hvordan man 
designer. Jeg var i Naturhistorisk Museum i Berlin har sådan et særligt 
sprit præparat rum, hvor man går ind i en sluse og går ind i et særligt 
område område. Det var også omgærdet af helt særlige sikkerheder og 
alt muligt. Man kommer ind og ser det, nærmest som et skatkammer, 
det var utroligt ﬂ ot. Altså hvis der går ild i det så går det stærkt. Men 
altså også bare dampene for almindelig sundhed. Det er i hvert fald en 
udfordring hvis man ligger mange meter under jorden.
Interviewer forklarer omkring specialet og det nye naturhistoriske 
museum 
Skal der være noget biograf eller sådan noget?
Der skal være auditorium nogen steder. Men det ligger dernede sam-
men med udstillingsrummet, lager og forskellige andre funktioner. 
Men der er stadigt noget oppe på jorden.
Men der jo nogen steder hvor der laver store IMAX sale og alt muligt.
Det er i hvert fald en ting jeg vil undersøge, om det kan være at det 
giver mening, at lægge nogen funktioner ned som f.eks auditorier 
eller biografsal om det kan lægges ned. I forbindelse med de der 
magasinbygninger hvor man bruger jordvarmen til at være med til 
bidrage med varmen. De har vel ikke isolering mod jorden. Har det 
været et problem at få lov til i forbindelse med minimumskrav til 
isolering?
Altså bygningerne de ser typisk sådan her ud. At de er jo over jorden.
Ja men princippet er vel det samme at man kan bruge jordvarmen 
mere aktivt, hvis man ikke isolerer sig væk fra den
Man lægger den som sådan en superstruktur ovenpå hvor man har en 
meget velisoleret skal og så har man jorden som varmelager og kuldelager. 
Og det er uisoleret (imod jorden). Så det her er buff er (jorden) og det her 
er forsinker (klimaskærmen) mod klimapåvirkninger udefra. Det er ikke et 
problem med bygningsreglementet så længe bygningen ikke er opvarmet. 
Og det er nemlig hele humlen her at magasinrummet er uopvarmet, så 
har man en lille aff ugter der recirkulerer og træder til hvis det bliver for 
fugtigt. Belastningen er ikke så stor, det er ikke så mange timer om året. 
Og det bliver ikke for tørt fordi temperaturen falder passende. Det er 
noget med hvis man i Danmark, hvis man har en temperatur som er 6 
grader over udetemperaturen, så passer luftfugtigheden ca. til muse-
umsniveu året igennem. Det betyder så også at om sommeren så skulle 
man varme op til 6 grader. Det ville være lidt tosset så der aff ugter men 
i stedet for. Men så længe du ikke varmer kommer du ikke i klemme med 
bygningsreglementet. Det ville man gøre hvis nu man sagde at man ville 
have 12 grader derinde. Så skulle man i hvert fald argumentere på en helt 
særlig måde.
Det var i hvert fald noget jeg tænkte gav menig at kigge på. At se 
hvad betyderisoleringsmængden i forhold til at bruge den kapacitet 
og temperatur som ligger i jorden
Så det her er simpelthen beton på jorden og så med et kapilarbrydende 
lag.
Lidt ligesom Tegners museum som også har lidt af det samme og så 
endda også uden lys. Bare med nogen ovenlysvinduer.
Ja det er vidst rigtigt. Det er godt nok mange år siden jeg har været 
deroppe. Ja men sådan nogen glasfriser oppe i taget.
==PAGE:125==
115
Ja noget translucent, hvide ﬂ ader i loftet hvor lyset kommer ind. 
Men er selvfølgeligt også en anden udstilling end så mange andre, 
og de har også lukket ind over vinteren. Ligesom Cisternerne og så 
har de ting der kan tåle en høj luftfugtighed. Det er jo så meget rum-
met der deﬁ nerer hvilken udstilling der kan være.
En sidste ting. Vi er enige om brugerne vægtes meget højt i forhold 
til selve konserveringen.
Det kommer an på museet. Forskellige museer vil give dig forskelligt svar. 
Nogen siger at vores gæster det er det vigtigste mens andre siger at 
samlingen er det primære og så må gæsterne ﬁ nde sig i at der er mørkt 
og koldt og alt muligt ikke. Så det er der ikke entydigt (svar på). Men jeg 
er da sikker på at i sådan et moderne museum der vægter gæsternes 
komfort meget, men samlingen er også vigtig ikke. Nu kan jeg ikke huske 
de der tal, men der er jo en af de 5 eller 7 største samlinger i verden 
ikke. Det er jo en meget speciel ﬁ n samling vi har i København, især den 
Zoologiske. Så den vil de sikkert syntes er vigtigt også.
Interviewet afsluttes.
==PAGE:126==
116
03.  Interview with Tim Padﬁ eld
The following is an excerpt of the conversation with Tim Padﬁ eld, the 
freelance consultant in preventive conservation and author of several of 
the articles referred to in this thesis.
Usually in the museum design you would start with the speciﬁ cation 
And one part of the speciﬁ cation is the climate, and until recently the 
energy consumption hasn’t been part of the speciﬁ cation, it is something 
new because eventually museums were prestige operations where the 
money for running them, didn’t matter, it just ﬂ owed in by some magic 
mechanism. But now we think energy matters, ﬁ rstly, based on the 
conscience. Saving the planet from itself and from us. And that actually 
that’s just a sentimental argument because the number of museums 
there will ever be in the world compared to dwellings like this is very tiny. 
That they use a disproportional amount of energy does actually not have 
any inﬂ uence at all. What I have encountered is that energy matters now 
because of running costs and therefore they have a much more pragmatic 
obsession with energy because if the save energy they can hire another 
curator or another guard or whatever they are short of. So my view is 
that you have a sort of moral speciﬁ cations in museums, being rather 
pompous institutions in their nature. And therefore the have a reason to 
show the world how they can save energy.
….
The conservation atmosphere is rather easily stated really. It has to be 
around 50% RH, except Cisternerne that seems to have around 100% 
humidity. But most museums museum speciﬁ cations that come your way 
as an architect and engineer. A rule of thumb can therefore be 50% RH 
and temperature, because it is an exhibition space, must be for human 
comfort. Being from 18-25 or so. In that range. Also museum speciﬁ ca-
tions have had a strange dogma about range of change, so you ﬁ nd that 
many standards or guidelines states that you should rely on RH of more 
than 10 percentage points in a day or more than 2 degrees. 
…
You have to understand that the scientiﬁ c underpinning of museum 
conservation is quite slender, at that’s not because there aren’t any 
good people in the ﬁ eld there’s just very few. So you have to look with 
some scepticism on what is stated to be good practice. Unfortunately, 
the standards and guides tend to be taken as speciﬁ cations. Because 
the person who decides is a manager or director who is not a technical 
person. So he takes the advice and turns it into a must have. And this 
is currently a problem, museums have a variety of standards, some with 
more authority than others. … Basically you end up with 50% +/- 10 if 
that’s is what you are being asked to do.
…
There a good deal of model thinking in museums. The national museum 
for instance, when they lend out they put in much tighter speciﬁ cations 
than in their home. That’s the ﬁ rst thing. When these objects come back 
from the exhibition they don’t trust the other institutions. They are afraid 
of insects. So they take the object a put it into a box at plunge the tem-
peratures very fast to minus 35 degrees for a day, and then up again 
to room temperature. So the fun thing is that their speciﬁ cation for an 
exhibition might plus or minus one degree. But when the object comes 
back its plus or minus 40 degrees. That’s the diff erence. Their treatment 
is in a good cause. It’s not careless, its deliberately bad. You have to face 
this complete mental confusion that seems to permeate the profession. 
There’s much mythology almost medieval thought of things.
…
I do have some experience with the control algorithms, and they can 
be extremely wasteful. Even when they are trying not to be, that is the 
interesting thing. Some are just plain mistakes.
… 
There is a lot of risk analysis (of museums) where you cannot follow the 
logic, but the outcome is always the same. The main risk is thieving of 
staff  and then ﬁ re and ﬂ ood. By the time you have done that its 99% of 
the risk. So the climate control going wrongs turns out is nothing at all. 
...
There a thin that makes the museum odd, its only occupied for 8  hours 
a day, when we talk the exhibition. And that has a eff ect because you 
do have a considerably load but it’s for a very distinctive amount of time, 
==PAGE:127==
117
and usually in the middle of the day. So the load on the air-conditioning 
system, that’s is from human CO2 and water as well as heat and lighting. 
… That has some interesting side eff ects. Mainly where do you get the 
energy from. Solar voltaic panels are getting so cheap. And they mesh so 
well with museum metabolism, because the museum are mostly visited 
in the summer. That’s when people move around. Many museums lose 
completely in the winter. So solar panel output coincides beautifully with 
demands of museums particularly.
…
The other matter is as you said connected to the thermal inertia of the 
museum. As you say that’s completely uninsulated to the ground. Then it 
will maintain very stable climate (temperature) which will be uneconomic 
for the ﬁ rst ﬁ ve years because here we start off  with ground at 9 
degrees and you're minimum for human comfort is 18 and you get build 
yourself up from there. And the normal thoughtless way would be to 
pour on insulation at the economical solution. But in fact it is not as it 
heats up the temperature gradient gets smaller and smaller and heat 
ﬂ ow becomes smaller and smaller. A ﬁ ne example of this is Svalbard. It’s 
a storage and it’s the international seed bank it runs a -18 degrees. But 
Svalbard underground is minus 5. So it’s actually cooled, its mechanically 
cooled and costs to begin with. That have to have the most enormous 
cooling capacity to get it done. But gradually this fog of cold spread out 
through the rock … So the Svalbard engineers gradually removed their 
cooling operators and its pottering along with very little cooling and no 
insulation.
…
I have tried to introduce the concept of design limit that people don’t 
understand. They tend to resort to items of unacceptable risk because 
these are internationally renowned irreplaceable objects there the 
slightest exertion over 25 is intolerable. And when you ask them what 
will happen. Well nothing actually. The things you keep at a museum even 
the wax ﬁ gures can go up to 32 degrees and it slightly increases the 
degree of chemical reactions very often, but that gets lost in the noise 
when it gets cold in the winter. So there’s a large element of misunder-
standing. Also an element of being a bit holy an absolutist, because its 
irreplaceable. But chemistry applies to everything independently. It is 
entirely careless of your sentimental values.
…
Most museum objects are in glass cases and this protects them not so 
much against temperatures changes but against humidity change. If you 
get a spike in temperature it will get right through. But the spike of water 
vapour from a lot of people, that won’t. Therefore, the speciﬁ cations of 
the air conditioning will have to include a speciﬁ cation of the enclosures. 
So you have the three environments. You have the outside weather, 
then you have you’re inside building and then you will have your object 
in however is displayed. Very few objects are now displayed in open. It’s 
largely physical security, not so often climatic security…
You get more stability in the underground museum especially if you make 
it with massive rock that gives you massive thermal inertia. And that 
leaves with the humidity control … that’s always a one way process its 
always removal. There are only sources of water vapour indoors there are 
no sinks. So you will have this very unsymmetrical system. And you can 
do it with ventilation …
…
For most of the year the outside temperatures are very low and therefore 
you bring that air in the RH will be very low because you will be heating 
it up. The problem is in summer thing will work against you. Since you 
have an underground museum is cool. And therefore any air taken will 
risen RH because it is cooled at the same it is the time where people 
are coming in. … In principal you can’t take warm air in and get condensa-
tion on the way in (if air is taken through a long underground ductwork)… 
there are buildings for thousands of year that have been using earth 
cooling tunnels.
…
The underground museum could almost be self-heating depending on 
the amount of people, I don’t know.
…
Museum design goes to the star architect, Storage we can manage 
because its basically a dull building. We are good at that. But museums 
==PAGE:128==
118
are basically designed in a very impractical way because they are prestige 
buildings. And there you regard them as, the building is a sculpture on 
its own and then the facilities will have to ﬁ t in and the energy. Many 
modern museums are unsuited to be museums. It’s a trip of the architect. 
Added by the committee. There are some ﬁ ne exceptions really of 
modest museums that work very well and they have gone the election 
committee.
…
There been a recent revolution called the light emitting diode. The main 
reason for museums in a temperate climate like Denmark is air conditioned 
is heat generated by light. Artiﬁ cial light or indeed by daylight coming in. 
And the light effi  cient diode is so eff ective in relation to its predeces-
sors. But it’s a revolution that has not really worked its way through yet. 
Museums still look at it with a certain degree of suspicion.  … But looking 
5 years ahead it will be universal. The National museum has been toying 
with it forever but they say “Well we can’t aff ord to replace the existing 
lamps”. The problem is the capital investment and the running costs. They 
can’t aff ord to have something that costs less to run.
…
Lighting in risk analysis is called a risk factor … but it’s not a risk it’s a 
certainty. 
…
If it’s too simple, it upsets to many things like standards. Standards are 
changed but not a people haven’t noticed. And there are all of these 
engineer’s defensive of their everyday income, maintenance, contracts 
etc. By the time you add all of this together the entire success rate (of 
simplifying the systems) is very small.
…
My guess is over the whole year there is actually no relative humidity 
load. The problem is that we have no of buff ering the relative humidity 
in the way we do with temperature... Heat store happens on a scale 
10 times the moisture storage. In other words, if you have a brick wall 
that you use as a heat sink. And you calculate it to even it out then out 
need that much brick and if you’ll have no more brick it won’t help, that’s 
enough. If you do a similar calculation with humidity, you’ll ﬁ nd out it not 
possible with the materials we know about. It limited by the diff using of 
the humidity of where it’s going to be absorbed and desorbed… As a rule 
of thumb you can say that humidity buff ering is ten times less eff ective 
than thermal buff ering. And thermal buff ering works. It’s an everyday 
phenomenon that’s does happen. Humidity buff ering remains an exotic 
concept. There's no catalogue item called a humidity buff er. The green 
people say these earth buildings are wonderful because the control the 
moisture but that’s just an illusion really when you measure it. It’s just the 
outer millimetres that receives the variation from day to day. So it true in 
principal but in practice it does not have any eff ect.
You basically have two rates of reaction for humidity buff ering. The slow 
rate is useless, there’s no way of doing it. But the fast rate does work. So 
if you'll have a shower in the bathroom its does make a diff erence on the 
condensation on the mirror if you got a porous surface in the shower. If 
you use exposed paper, wallpaper you’ll deﬁ nitely get less condensation 
so it’s having an eff ect to that peak load. But the problem with that is it 
not really quantiﬁ able enough yet. 
==PAGE:129==
119
04.  Resume of conversations with 
Michael Krabbe Kiær
The following is a resume of conversations with Michael Krabbe Kiær, 
building service manager at the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark.
The systems of the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark is only controlled 
by temperatures. But that is a result of the type of objects being exhibited. 
If it were an art museum or the alike there would be stricter set points. 
The museum has been surprisingly good at keeping the same tempera-
tures without the systems running. The heating for many areas in the 
museum is turned off  in the night, but still the temperature has often only 
dropped about one degree when the systems are turned on again next 
morning. The museum does therefore not have run the systems with a 
at low rate, as is often done, but can turn it completely off . The notion 
off  the large variation in the user presence is especially interesting since 
maximum user load is dimensioning for some of the system components. 
The weekly pattern of user presence from the National Museum of 
Denmark is similar to what is experienced at the M/S Maritime Museum 
of Denmark. They have closed many Mondays and recognizes Tuesday 
as the day with the least visitors. The amount of visitors is then slowly 
increasing during the week and tops in the weekend. They do, however, 
not make schedules for the employees based on user statistics or some 
museum presence standard but rather use gut feeling. A certain amount 
of employees is assigned to certain task like ticket sales, café etc. to 
handle an average load of visitors. They cannot just have people working 
at certain hours, but need to make regular schedules for the employees. 
In holidays when more visitors are at the museum, more staff  is taken in 
to a number of tasks like ticket sales. Since the museum is very new and 
thus a lot of people are visiting it, as to be expected with any new public 
area. The admission is decreasing for each year and are still to fall in to a 
regular pattern.
The museum is divided into 5 zones and as activated based on the sensor 
measuring the condition furthest away from the set point. Michael 
is wondering if it would be beneﬁ cial if the museum was divided into 
more zones. Since the zones are rather large, heating for a large area is 
thus engaged even if only a small part of that area is actually in need of 
heating. By having smaller zones, it would thus be possible to have the 
systems run less and thus save energy. The challenge when designing 
indoor climate in the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark is that the public 
area of the museum is basically one big room with no doors or walls to 
isolate any area. It is only possible to such a museum due to the type 
of exhibition and it wouldn’t be possible if it was and art museum with 
sensitive objects like paintings. It can however be a challenge to control 
3500 m2 of museum using 5 AHU. There is no control of the systems 
based on CO2. It would however be interesting especially when dealing 
with larger groups. If all visitors are walking together in one group, then 
the need for ventilation is very local. CO2 detectors could detect the group 
presence and lower the ventilation rate of all other zones in the museum 
to a minimum level. This could save a lot of energy. In general Krabbe Kiær 
has experienced that the way to measure and where to measure can give 
very diff erent results in regards to whether or not the set points are met.
The bridges going across the dock is a sensitive area. The surface to 
volume ratio is rather high and is connected to the ambient all the way 
around since it is not touching the ground. This means these bridges 
are often much colder in the winter than the rest of the exhibition area 
“inside” the dock, but are still connected to the same AHU. Therefore, 
the diff erent conditions of the bridges and the exhibition area leads to 
excess heating due to these areas being in the same ventilation zone. 
Michael notes that more zones are more expensive when being build, 
but will lower the running costs of the system. But the zones have to 
be thought through in terms of the climate of each zone. Maybe this is 
relevant even more for underground than above ground buildings, since 
the diff erence of climate between areas towards the ground and areas 
towards windows are very diff erent. Especially the cuts through the 
building like the bridges are very exposed to the ambient conditions. The 
bridges cause another challenge due to the ﬂ ooring and ceiling being 
==PAGE:130==
120
inclined. Since hot air goes upward the top of these rooms are much hotter 
than the bottom. Since the auditorium is placed in one of the bridges it is 
prone to big temperature diff erences as well as large deviations in users 
present. If the auditorium is full then the AHU will have problems to keep 
the set points. Having all systems running on maximum load will as well 
cause much noise which is not wanted especially during a presentation 
where the acoustics is very important. Since the ﬂ oor in the museum 
is slightly sloping downwards through the museum certain thermody-
namically challenges occur. The required throw length diff er all the way 
through the museum due to diff erent ceiling heights.
In regards to light there is a tendency for the museums to prefer electrical 
lighting since it can be harmful to certain objects. The M/S Maritime 
Museum of Denmark does not have a lot of sensitive objects on display, 
but there is examples of the design being altered due to the presence of 
daylight. One painting placed by the exhibition designer was moved by 
the conservator in order to get away from the windows. An estimated 
60% of the museum area is not exposed to daylight and the light can 
thus be determined 100% by the designers and conservators. The lux 
level used varies through the exhibition. Spotlights are used to be able 
to vary the light levels and to minimize spill light from one display to 
another. Florescent light tubes are placed in the perforated celling, but 
is only used for when the museum is being cleaned, a new exhibition 
is set up or in case of ﬁ re. The perforated plates in the ceiling are used 
to hide all installations and cause a decrease of the performance of the 
ventilation and work lighting of around 30%. This is done according to 
the wishes of the architect to get a cleaner look. However, it results in 
a higher energy use and since the exhibition designer either way place 
spots, loudspeakers, projectors, mounting hooks etc., this clean look is 
not showing when the museum is in use. 
The display boxes are used to protect the objects from the audience. 
There is no individual control of the temperature, RH, smoke detectors 
or the alike.  
During the summer months most energy is needed. This is due to the 
museum being open for more hours during the day and are open in the 
Mondays as well. Little energy is used on cooling and is mainly provided 
by ground water. The systems is prepared for seawater cooling but it 
was considered to expensive. Michael Krabbe Kiæer have been told from 
colleagues that sea water cooling is very high maintenance, since the 
heat exchanger and ﬁ lters in the sea often needs to be cleaned.
==PAGE:131==
121
05. Moisture buff ering
Moisture buff ering was calculated using the following formula:
The volume of the room was set to 6000
The gas constant is 461.5 j/kg. m3.
The ventialtion ﬂ ow diff ered based on the ACH in each case, 
The interior temperature was kept at 20 ºC
The vapour production diff ered depending on the amount of user but a 
production per person was set to 60g/h
The area of the walls was 840 m2
The surface coeffi  cient was set to 2 10-8 kg/(m2sPa) equivalent to natural 
convection in a interior enviorment
The vapour permability was set depending on the material. Permeabili-
ty values was calculted based on the dry cup water vapour restistance 
factor for the materials found in ISO 10456 (2007). 
The interior vapour pressure was calculated based on an temperature of 
20 ºC and a RH of 45%
The exterior vapour pressure, representing the inﬂ ow air, was calculated 
based on a RH of 40% and temperature of 20 ºC.
The penetration depth was fund using the following formula:
The vapour capacity was found using sorbtion curves. The sorbtion 
curves was calculated as the average between absorbtion and desorbtion 
curves based on similar materials found in a sorption isotherms catalogue 
(Hansen 1986). The weight of water gained by an increase of 5% RH 
was used as the capacity for the speciﬁ c material.
The vapour pressure at the penetration depth was found using the 
following formula:
==PAGE:132==
122
Ze-x
x
pv,x
Interior
0
0.00
1052.2
Interior/high dens
6.70E+06
0.00
1052.2
High dens /insulaƟon
1.71E+11
0.25
1036.9
insulaƟon/vb
1.72E+11
0.35
1036.8
Vb/InsulaƟon
6.22E+11
0.35
996.6
InsulaƟon/concrete
6.23E+11
0.35
996.5
Concrete/exterior
1.31E+12
0.55
935.3
Exterior
1.31E+12
1.55
935.3
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Moisture content (weight%)
RH (-)
Dense concrete
AbsorpƟon
DesorpƟon
SorpƟon
Material 
Thickness, d [m]
Vapour 
permaebility, δ 
[kg/msPa]
Diﬀusion 
resistance, Z 
[m2sPa/kg]
Rsi
6.70E+06
High dens
0.25
1.46E-12
1.71E+11
InsulaƟon
0.1
1.90E-10
5.26E+08
Vb
0.00015
4.50E+11
InsulaƟon
0.2
1.90E-10
1.05E+09
Concrete
1
1.46E-12
6.84E+11
Rse
5.00E+07
Dense concrete
The saturated vapour pressure was calculated as:
The RH was calculated as:
The vapour permeability of a material was calculated based on the dry 
cup  vapour resistance factor (μ ) using the following formula:
The diff erential equation was solved in Maple and the solutions was 
exported to excel in order make graphs of the diff erent solutions.
The equations in this appendix was taken from Rode (2016)
==PAGE:133==
123
Material 
Thickness, d [m]
Vapour 
permaebility, δ 
[kg/msPa]
Diﬀusion 
resistance, Z 
[m2sPa/kg]
Rsi
6.70E+06
low dense
0.25
2.38E-11
1.05E+10
InsulaƟon
0.1
1.90E-10
5.26E+08
Vb
0.00015
4.50E+11
InsulaƟon
0.2
1.90E-10
1.05E+09
Concrete
1
1.46E-12
6.84E+11
Rse
5.00E+07
Ze-x
x
pv,x
Interior
0
0.00
1052.2
Interiro/low dens
6.70E+06
0.00
1052.2
Low dens/ insulaƟon
1.05E+10
0.25
1051.1
insulaƟon/vb
1.11E+10
0.35
1051.1
Vb/InsulaƟon
4.61E+11
0.35
1005.2
InsulaƟon/concrete
4.62E+11
0.35
1005.1
Concrete/exterior
1.15E+12
0.55
935.3
Exterior
1.15E+12
1.55
935.3
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Moisture content (weight%)
RH (-)
Cellular concrete
DesorpƟon
AbsorpƟon
SorpƟon
LW Cellular concrete
Material 
Thickness, d 
[m]
Vapour 
permaebility, δ 
[kg/msPa]
Diﬀusion 
resistance, Z 
[m2sPa/kg]
Rsi
5.00E-09
Wood
0.1
1.36E-12
7.37E+10
InsulaƟon
0.1
1.90E-10
5.26E+08
Vb
0.00015
4.50E+11
InsulaƟon
0.2
1.90E-10
1.05E+09
Concrete
1
1.46E-12
6.84E+11
Rse
6.67E+06
Ze-x
x
pv,x
Interior
0
0.00
1052.2
Interior/wood
5.00E-09
0.00
1052.2
Wood /insulaƟon
7.37E+10
0.10
1045.1
InsulaƟon/vb
7.42E+10
0.20
1045.0
Vb/insulaƟon
5.24E+11
0.20
1001.5
InsulaƟon/concrete
5.25E+11
0.40
1001.4
Concrete/exterior
1.21E+12
1.40
935.3
Exterior
1.21E+12
1.40
935.3
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Moisture content (weight%)
RH (-)
Oak
AbsorpƟon
SorpƟon
DesorpƟon
Oak
==PAGE:134==
124
However if sorption, recirculation and ﬁ ltration are set to zero then the 
following formula is derived:
The volume is 6000 m3 and the production depends on the amount of 
people in the room. Each person is assumed to produce 19 l/h according 
to Hansen et al, (2013)
0.15
0.3
0.6
1.2
20
422
211
106
53
40
844
422
211
106
80
1689
844
422
211
ACH
Number of occupants
The following formula was then used in order to estimate the ventilation 
needs i regards to CO2 concentrations. 
where:
References
Hansen, H. Kjerulf-Jensen, P. and Stampe, O. (2013) Varme- og klimateknik 
: grundbog. DANVAK
Rode, C (2016) Heat and mass transfer in buildings. Course 11022. DTU 
BYG
Ventilation calculations
==PAGE:135==
125
06.  Humidity calculation in IDA ICE
The following is an explanation of the code used in IDA ICE for calculating 
humidity. In IDA ICE humidity calculation is done in the zone, being a very 
long code calculation many parameters. The zone code has as well very 
little description of what is being calculated and why. Thus 3 parts of 
the long zone code (in bold) has been put together to show how IDA 
ICE calculates humidity and a description has been made (in italic). The 
moisture calculations are made based on ISO7730 and is to a certain 
extend explaned by Voulle in the paper “AN NMF BASED MODEL LIBRARY 
FOR BUILDING THERMAL SIMULATION “(Voulle 1999).
Part 1
nOccAct[i] := schedOcc[i] * nOcc[i]; 
The number of occupants present (n) is calculated by multiplying 1) The 
occupancy schedule with (-) 2) the number off  occupants speciﬁ ed in the 
zone (n)
 
QCvOcc[i] :=  nOccAct[i] * 1.8 *(fCl[i] * hCl[i] * (TClLoc[i] - TOp) + 
0.0014 * M[i] * 58 * (34 - TOp));
The convective load from occupants is calculated by 1) the number of 
occupants (n) *1.8 (surface area of an adult man m2,  * 2) factor for area 
increase through clothes (-) * 3) heat transfer coeffi  cient from clothes to 
air (-) * 4) the temperatures of clothes (ºC) – 5) the operative tempera-
tures (degrees) +0.0014 * the metabolic rate (1 Met) * 58 (w *m-2) * (34 
(ºC) -The operative temperature (ºC). This equation is based on ISO7730
QLwOcc[i] :=  nOccAct[i] * 1.8 * TCl4[i];
Radiant load from occupants (W) is calculated by the number of occupants 
* 1.8 (surface area of an adult man) (m2)* Radiation(w/m2)
QOccVap[i]:=  nOccAct[i] * 1.8 * ( 3.05E-3 * ( 5733 - 6.99 * (M[i]*58 - 
W[i]) - PVap) + 1.7E-5 * M[i]*58 * (5867 – Pvap)      
Vapor load from occupants (W) are calculated by 1) the number of 
occupants * 1.8 (surface area of an adult man) (m2) ( 3.05E-3 * ( 5733 - 
6.99 * (The metabolic rate (1 Met) * 58 (w *m-2) - the eff ective mechanical 
power (w/m2) – the vapor pressure (Pa) + 1.7E-5 *  (The metabolic rate (1 
Met) * 58 (w *m-2) * (5867 – the vapor pressure (Pa). This equation is 
based on ISO7730 
QOccMet[i] := nOccAct[i] * 1.8 * M[i] * 58 ;
Total load from occupants (W) are calculated by the number of occupants 
(n) * the area of a person (m2)*the metabolic rate (met) * 58 (W *m-2)
QSweat[i]:= IF (QOccMet[i] - (QCvOcc[i] + QLwOcc[i] + QOccVap[i])) < 
0 THEN 0 ELSE (QOccMet[i] - (QCvOcc[i] + QLwOcc[i] + QOccVap[i]))
The sweat from occupants (W) is calculated as follows: 
If The total load from occupants (W) is smaller than the convective-, 
Radiant- and Vapour load then the sweat from occupants (W) is 0.
However if that is not the case then the sweat from occupants is 
calculated as the total load from occupants subtracted by the convective-
, Radiant- and Vapour load
Part 2
VapFOcc2Zone := SUM i=1, nOp
QOccVap[i] + QSweat[i]
END_SUM / 2430000
The vapor ﬂ ow from occupants (kg/s) is calculated as the sum of the 1) 
Vapor load from occupants (W) and the 2) Sweat from occupants (W) 
divided by 2430000 (j/kg) being the latent heat evaporation of air (GENÇ 
and Portier, 2003)
Part 3
PVapSat := SATPRES (TAirMean); 
The saturated pressure is found based on the zone air temperature   
RelativeHum = RELHUM ((P+10**5), PVapSat, XHum); 
The relative humidity is found based on 
1) the Zone air pressure (Pa) 2) The saturated pressure (Pa) and 3) The 
humidity in the zone  (kg/kg)
==PAGE:136==
126
HumFact*MassAir * XHumLoc’ = VapFOcc2Zone 
                  - SUM i=1, nLocUnit Wf[i] END_SUM
                  + SUM i = 1, nUnit 
         
      schedEquip[i] * (VapFSrcEquip[i] + EvapVapFSrcEquip[i]) 
 
   END_SUM                         
 
   + VapF_0 + SUM i=1, nTerminal VapF[i] END_SUM; 
1) The mass of the air (kg) * 2) a factor the increases the humidity storage 
capacity of air (-) * 3) the humidity in the zone (XHUMLOC) (kg/kg)
Is equal to:
1) The vapour ﬂ ow from occupants (kg/s) (VapFOcc2Zone) - 2) the 
sum of condensation from the AHU (kg/s) – 3) the humidty load and 
evaporative humidity load from equipment * the equipment schedule 
(kg/s) +/- the vapourﬂ ow from the terminals (kg/s)
HumSat:=HumRat((P+10**5), PVapSat); 
The saturated humidity (kg/kg) is calculated based on:  1) the Zone air 
pressure (Pa) 2) The saturated pressure (Pa)
 XHum = MIN(HumSat, XHumLoc)
The humidity ratio in the zone (kg/kg) is then calculated as the minium of 
either 1) The saturated humidity (kg/kg) or 2) the humidity in the zone 
(XHUMLOC)
References
Genc and Portier (2003) Sensible and Latent Heat Productions from 
Broilers in Laboratory Conditions [online] Available at: http://journals.
tubitak.gov.tr/veterinary/issues/vet-05-29-3/vet-29-3-10-0305-4.pdf 
[Accessed 30 May 2016].
ISO7730 (2006) Ergonomics of the thermal environment- Analytical 
determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation 
of the PMV and PPD indicies and local thermal comfort criteria. Danish 
Standards Association.
==PAGE:137==
127
07.  Correlation between weather 
and amount of visitors
The data concerning daily visitors in museums was provided by the 
diff erent museums.
Daily data of rain and temperature was taken from Weather underground 
from Roskilde and Kastrup Airport as the Airport measurements was to 
be expected to be of high quality. The data from Kastrup was used for 
the tests on all museums except the Viking Ship Museum. Louisiana   and 
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark was correlated with data from Kastrup 
due to the lack of reliable data in these areas. However as many visitors 
come from the Copenhagen area it was regarded that this weather data 
might be as inﬂ uential on the presence of the museums as the actual 
weather near the museums.
The daily sun hours were daily summations at DMI for the whole northern 
part of Zealand. It was thus not stated where this data was derived from.
The correlation between amount of visitors and either rain, temperature 
or sunhours was done using Excel whereas Rstudio was used for 
calculating R2 based on weekdays and weather data. The output from 
Rstudio calculations are shown on the following pages:
It can be seen that the results diff er much from the diff erent museums.
Geological Museum 2014 
 
 
Coeffi  cients: 
 
 
 
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)
(Intercept) 
32.5161 
16.2053 
2.007  
0.04810 * 
temp 
 
0.7200   
0.6416  
 -1.122  
0.26504
rain 
 
1.0315  
0.7370  
1.400  
0.16541
sun 
 
0.1718  
0.9481  
0.181  
0.85665
dayMon  
6.9355  
8.3589  
0.830  
0.40911
daySat  
4.5215  
 8.4072  
0.538  
0.59216 
daySun   
22.1643 
8.2567  
2.684  
0.00879 ** 
dayThu  
14.2973  
8.5429  
1.674  
0.09802 .
dayTue  
15.6274 
8.5627  
1.825  
0.07163
dayWed  
19.5103 
8.4895  
2.298  
0.02410 *
--- 
 
 
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1 
 
Residual standard error: 21.18 on 82 degrees of freedom  
Multiple R-squared:  0.1558,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.06318  
 
F-statistic: 1.682 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 0.1066 
Geological Museum 2015 
Coeffi  cients: 
 
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|) 
(Intercept) 
44.8692 
29.7275 
1.509  
0.135053   
temp          
0.9542      
1.3687    
0.697   
0.487691
rain          
-0.3972      
1.8777   
-0.212   
0.832989
sun           
-3.8688      
1.8205   
-2.125   
0.036587 *
dayMon      
-50.1220     
14.3389   
-3.496   
0.000766 ***
daySat        
-5.0994     
14.3023   
-0.357   
0.722350
daySun         
1.0623     
14.3515    
0.074   
0.941175
dayThu        
21.7160     
14.6731    
1.480   
0.142709
dayTue        
18.3596     
14.5877    
1.259   
0.211758
dayWed        
21.5985     
14.9389    
1.446   
0.152048
--- 
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1 
 
Residual standard error: 36.13 on 82 degrees of freedom 
Multiple R-squared:  0.3151,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.2399  
==PAGE:138==
128
F-statistic: 4.192 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 0.0001763 
Louisiana 2014
Coeffi  cients:
               
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
2472.356     
498.526    
4.959   
3.76e-06 ***
temp           
-99.890      
29.165   
-3.425   
0.000963 ***
rain            
18.218      
19.737    
0.923   
0.358696    
sun             
-8.565      
22.673   
-0.378   
0.706589    
dayMon       
-2227.891     
257.146   
-8.664   
3.36e-13 ***
daySat        
-206.384     
258.632   
-0.798   
0.427186    
daySun          
78.272     
254.002    
0.308   
0.758744    
dayThu         
158.982     
262.807    
0.605   
0.546891    
dayTue         
306.068     
263.416    
1.162   
0.248640    
dayWed         
211.825     
261.164    
0.811   
0.419667    
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 651.4 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.6639,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.627 
F-statistic:    18 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 4.366e-16
Louisiana 2015
Coeffi  cients:
               
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
1768.576     
580.214    
3.048     
0.0031 ** 
temp            
36.829      
29.166    
1.263     
0.2103    
rain             
1.517      
40.012    
0.038     
0.9698    
sun            
-38.088      
38.794   
-0.982    
0.3291    
dayMon       
-2372.890     
301.182   
-7.879   
1.21e-11 ***
daySat        
-302.317     
312.674   
-0.967    
0.3364    
daySun         
264.850     
306.944    
0.863     
0.3907    
dayThu         
121.840     
302.732    
0.402     
0.6884    
dayTue         
418.648     
306.000    
1.368     
0.1750    
dayWed         
375.923     
302.495    
1.243     
0.2175    
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 770 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.6254,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.5842 
F-statistic: 15.21 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 3.067e-14
M/S Maritime Museum of Denamrk 2014
Coeffi  cients:
               
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)   
(Intercept)   
1.038342    
0.341511    
3.040    
0.00317 **
temp         
-0.003962    
0.013521  - 
0.293    
0.77025   
rain           
0.037823    
0.015532    
2.435    
0.01706 * 
sun           
-0.021650    
0.019979   
-1.084    
0.28171   
dayMon        
0.009926    
0.176156    
0.056    
0.95520   
daySat        
0.590667    
0.177174    
3.334    
0.00129 **
daySun        
0.318174    
0.174002    
1.829    
0.07110 . 
dayThu        
0.539454    
0.180034    
2.996    
0.00361 **
dayTue        
0.560553    
0.180451    
3.106    
0.00260 **
dayWed        
0.446158    
0.178908    
2.494    
0.01465 * 
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 0.4463 on 82 degrees of freedom
  (7 observations deleted due to missingness)
Multiple R-squared:  0.2641,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.1833 
F-statistic: 3.269 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 0.001912
M/S Maritime Museum of Denamrk 2015
Coeffi  cients:
               
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)   
(Intercept)   
1.624432    
0.590619    
2.750    
0.00732 **
temp          
0.022986    
0.029689    
0.774    
0.44102   
rain          
-0.002355    
0.040729   
-0.058    
0.95402   
sun           
-0.115681    
0.039487   
-2.930    
0.00439 **
dayMon       
-0.715476    
0.306584   
-2.334    
0.02206 * 
daySat        
0.098311    
0.318278    
0.309    
0.75819   
daySun       
-0.141951   
0.312444   
-0.454    
0.65080   
dayThu       
-0.079799    
0.308162   
-0.259    
0.79632   
dayTue        
0.267256    
0.311489    
0.858    
0.39340   
dayWed        
0.143498    
0.307918    
0.466    
0.64243   
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 0.7838 on 82 degrees of freedom
  (2 observations deleted due to missingness)
Multiple R-squared:  0.2224,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.137 
==PAGE:139==
129
F-statistic: 2.606 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 0.01069
The National Museum of Denmark 2013
Coeffi  cients:
             
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
2089.87      
805.39    
2.595     
0.0112 *
temp            
19.04       
33.59     
0.567     
0.5723    
rain            
29.40       
75.20     
0.391     
0.6968    
sun            
-69.04       
42.98    
-1.606     
0.1121    
dayMon       
-2422.06      
473.76    
-5.112   
2.04e-06 ***
daySat         
530.79      
437.76    
1.212     
0.2288    
daySun         
858.40      
446.16    
1.924     
0.0578 .  
dayThu         
660.05      
446.20    
1.479     
0.1429    
dayTue         
624.69      
445.19    
1.403     
0.1643    
dayWed         
795.68      
456.23    
1.744     
0.0849 .  
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 1134 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.4797,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.4226 
F-statistic:   8.4 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 8.914e-09
The National Museum of Denmark 2014
Coeffi  cients:
            
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
2572.69      
440.76    
5.837   
1.03e-07 ***
temp           
-37.03       
17.45    
-2.122     
0.0369 *  
rain            
21.79       
20.05     
1.087     
0.2803    
sun            
-14.06       
25.79    
-0.545     
0.5871    
dayMon       
-1588.55      
227.35    
-6.987   
6.79e-10 ***
daySat         
230.00      
228.67    
1.006     
0.3174    
daySun         
463.16      
224.57    
2.062     
0.0423 *  
dayThu          
98.20      
232.36    
0.423     
0.6737    
dayTue         
287.99      
232.89    
1.237     
0.2198    
dayWed         
276.68      
230.90    
1.198     
0.2343    
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 575.9 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:    0.6,     Adjusted R-squared:  0.5561 
F-statistic: 13.67 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 3.919e-13
The Viking Ship Museum 2014
Coeffi  cients:
             
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)  
(Intercept)    
37.193     
302.733    
0.123     
0.9025  
temp           
30.892      
12.416    
2.488     
0.0149 *
rain           
22.905      
11.592    
1.976    
0.0515 .
sun            
-5.986      
15.772  - 
0.380     
0.7053  
dayMon         
-9.274     
166.980   
-0.056     
0.9558  
daySat        
109.602     
162.987    
0.672     
0.5032  
daySun        
171.310     
161.175    
1.063     
0.2910  
dayThu         
-3.830     
162.421   
-0.024     
0.9812  
dayTue         
52.106     
163.031    
0.320     
0.7501  
dayWed         
46.858     
162.893    
0.288     
0.7743  
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 413.8 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.1083,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.01047 
F-statistic: 1.107 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 0.3673
The Viking Ship Museum 2015
Coeffi  cients:
             
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
122.381     
242.682    
0.504   
0.615412    
temp           
42.444      
12.214    
3.475   
0.000819 ***
rain           
-7.242      
13.779    
-0.526   
0.600608    
sun           
-28.170      
16.245    
-1.734   
0.086667 .  
dayMon        
-30.624     
131.194   
-0.233   
0.816014    
daySat        
-92.632    
 134.119   
-0.691   
0.491724    
daySun        
-92.688     
133.590   
-0.694   
0.489752    
dayThu         
97.801     
131.819    
0.742   
0.460247    
dayTue        
118.631     
134.980    
0.879   
0.382036    
dayWed         
90.098     
131.162    
0.687   
0.494073    
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 333.8 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.1574,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.06492 
F-statistic: 1.702 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 0.1017
==PAGE:140==
130
Zoological Museum 2013
Coeffi  cients:
             
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
208.454      
60.533    
3.444   
0.000907 ***
temp           
-4.220       
2.540    
-1.661   
0.100442    
rain           
14.048       
5.485     
2.561   
0.012257 *  
sun            
-8.186       
3.322    
-2.464   
0.015824 *  
dayMon        
-80.416      
33.766    
-2.382   
0.019554 *  
daySat         
27.886      
32.358    
0.862   
0.391325    
daySun         
65.612      
33.542    
1.956   
0.053853 .  
dayThu         
97.336      
34.268    
2.840   
0.005681 ** 
dayTue         
77.065      
33.504    
2.300   
0.023979 *  
dayWed         
56.066      
34.302    
 1.635   
0.105984    
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 85.27 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.4469,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.3862 
F-statistic: 7.362 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 8.622e-08
Zoological Museum 2014
Coeffi  cients:
             
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
148.132      
65.234    
2.271   
0.025751 *  
temp            
2.332       
2.592     
0.899   
0.371025    
rain            
5.119       
3.391     
1.509   
0.134979    
sun           
-16.295       
4.406    
-3.698   
0.000389 ***
dayMon       
-124.228      
38.934    
-3.191   
0.002004 ** 
daySat         
17.847      
39.417    
0.453   
0.651885    
daySun         
78.848      
38.645    
2.040   
0.044500 *  
dayThu         
71.121      
40.073    
1.775   
0.079602 .  
dayTue         
96.108      
40.179    
2.392   
0.019016 *  
dayWed         
89.871      
39.826    
2.257   
0.026662 *  
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 99.37 on 83 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.4515,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.392 
F-statistic:  7.59 on 9 and 83 DF,  p-value: 4.897e-08
Zoological Museum 2015
Coeffi  cients:
             
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)   
(Intercept)   
477.573     
144.476    
3.306    
0.00141 **
temp           
-9.663       
6.366    
-1.518    
0.13289   
rain           
14.167      
10.722    
1.321    
0.19008   
sun           
-23.419       
8.515    
-2.750    
0.00733 **
dayMon       
-183.301      
81.764    
-2.242    
0.02767 * 
daySat         
28.171      
83.881    
0.336    
0.73784   
daySun        
-18.413      
83.131    
-0.221    
0.82526   
dayThu        
109.261      
82.460    
1.325    
0.18885   
dayTue        
123.517      
82.970    
1.489    
0.14040   
dayWed         
84.367      
82.461    
1.023   
 0.30926   
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 210 on 82 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.2958,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.2185 
F-statistic: 3.828 on 9 and 82 DF,  p-value: 0.0004494
Cisternerne 2015
Coeffi  cients:
             
 
Estimate  
Std. Error  
t value   
Pr(>|t|)    
(Intercept)   
301.322      
94.219    
3.198    
0.00197 ** 
temp            
3.234       
4.736     
0.683    
0.49664    
rain           
-9.337      
 6.562    
-1.423    
0.15859    
sun            
-7.825       
6.304    
-1.241    
0.21806    
dayMon       
-326.510      
49.656    
-6.575   
4.39e-09 ***
daySat         
60.121      
50.772    
1.184    
0.23982    
daySun        
126.614      
49.842    
2.540    
0.01299 *  
dayThu        
-78.853      
49.159    
-1.604    
0.11260    
dayTue        
-11.822      
49.694    
-0.238    
0.81256    
dayWed        
-27.542      
49.121    
-0.561    
0.57656    
---
Signif. codes:  0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1
Residual standard error: 125 on 81 degrees of freedom
Multiple R-squared:  0.5719,    Adjusted R-squared:  0.5243 
F-statistic: 12.02 on 9 and 81 DF,  p-value: 7.945e-12
==PAGE:141==
131
This expression is, however, in seconds. By using 30.4 days as an average 
length of a month the following is done to get this expression to be 
related to months:
The t0f is thus often not whole number and linear interpolation is used 
for calculation a value in between two months. The table used for these 
calculations are seen in appendix 09) 
These formulas are based on an average temperature of 9 ºC and a 
thermal diff usivity of 8 ∙10(-7) m2/s. However, in order to make these cal-
culations in accordance to DS418 the simpliﬁ cated formulas are to be 
changed.
Since DS418 will use a thermal conductivity of 2 W/mK and a multiplied 
density and heat capacity of 2∙106 j/m3K the thermal diff usivity is 
calculated as:
Based on Kvisgaard and Hadvig using 2 W/(mK) and the thermal diff usivity 
the heat capacity an desnity can be estimated:
08.  Calculations using the Kvisgaard 
& Hadvig formula
The following the following calculation is done based on equation (19):
Where:
In the book the following constants are used: 
λj=2 W/mK
a=8 ∙10^(-7) m2/s
t0m=9 ⁰C
τ0=3.15*107 s
In order to simplify equation (19) into (20) the following calculation have 
been done:
The simpliﬁ ed formula for the time dependency is calculated as follows:
==PAGE:142==
132
Several values for ρ and c could thus be used but a set of realistic values 
would be ρ = 1600 kg/m3) and c= 1562 J/(kgK). 
By using the DS418 equivalent of the thermal diff usivity value and an 
average temperature of 8 ºC the simpliﬁ ed formula will be as follows:
The simpliﬁ ed formula for the time dependency using DS418 soil is 
calculated as follows:
==PAGE:143==
133
09.  Average temperatures pr month 
from standards and Kvisgaard and 
Hadvig
The following is a list of the average temperatures from diff erent sources. 
Listed values are copied from tables whereas the calculated values are 
following a sinus function of equation (18) using diff erent values for 
average temperature and amplitude. The ISO13370 calculated values are 
based on the mean temperature and the amplitude of the listed values.
Kvisgaard and Hadvig (listed):
A set of monthly values a proposed as input to calculate the soil temper-
atures at diff erent depths using equation (20). The mean values as well 
as the amplitude is calculated as seen in the table.
DS418 (calculated):
Using an equation similar to equation (18) the average monthly tempera-
tures  can be calculated using  a mean value of 8 º C and an amplitude of 
8.5 º C. The calculated monthly values are seen in the table.
ISO13370 (Listed):
ISO13370(listed)
A set of monthly values are listed. in the formula.
ISO13370(calculated)
In order to use the ISO13370 formula a mean value and an amplitude 
is needed. These can be found using the set of listed values for each 
month.
Kvisgaard 
DS418 
ISO13370 ISO13370
& Hadvig
Listed
Calculated
Listed
Calculated
Jan
0.30
-0.50
1.30
0.93
Feb
0.00
0.64
1.80
1.87
Mar
1.50
3.75
3.70
4.45
Apr
5.40
8.00
7.60
7.98
May
11.50
12.25
10.30
11.50
Jun
17.30
15.36
13.50
14.08
Jul
21.00
16.50
15.40
15.03
Aug
18.10
15.36
14.20
14.08
Sept
14.40
12.25
10.40
11.50
Oct
9.00
8.00
7.30
7.98
Nov
4.10
3.75
5.90
4.45
Dec
2.20
0.64
4.30
1.87
Mean
8.73
8.00
7.98
7.98
Amplitude
10.50
8.50
7.05
7.05
==PAGE:144==
134
10.  COMSOL settings
Comsol settings for soil simulation
The soil was calculated using a 2D time depended model. The geometry 
consisted of a set of 35 m wide rectangles with diff erent heights, placed 
at diff erent depths. Smaller rectangles were placed near the top and 
larger towards the bottom.
One boundary condition for the external temperature was applied in 
the top. The rest of the boundairies was calculated as adiabatic. The 
temperature was set with a convective heat ﬂ ux using the formula: 
281.15+8.5*sin((2*pi*(t/(24*(365/12)*60*60)-4)/12)) since comsol 
uses second as units while eq (18) is using months. The heattransferco-
effi  cientis set to 1/0.04 in accordance to DS418
The tetrahedral mesh was set as physics controlled mesh with normal 
size as seen in Figure 1. The minimum element quality is advised by 
COMSOL to be no less than 0.1 (COMSOL, 2014). With these default 
settings the minimum element quality was 0.3676 and thus no further 
mesh reﬁ nement was needed.
The solver type was changed from BDF to Generalized alpha since this 
is a more precise but also less stable method (COMSOL, 2013). In order 
to get a precise solution the absolute tolerance was lowered from 0.1 
initially to 0.000001. This would however still result in simulations in 
which the curves was very jagged with diff erent amplitudes. Thus the 
time steps taken by the solver was changed to “intermediate” from “free” 
which resulted in a much smoother solution with less deviation between 
the years.
Figure 1: The mesh of the soil simulation model for soil
==PAGE:145==
135
Figure 2: the mesh of the soil simulation model for building placed 
in soil
Comsol 
settings 
for 
underground 
building 
simulation
This simulation is building as an extension of the previous model and 
thus the same settings. The upper layer of the soil model was made 
shorter in order to make space for half a building consisting of an outer 
layer of concrete and an inner of insulation. The depth of the building 
was varied as well as the thicknesses of the building layers, but the same 
method and settings was used. In addition to the boundary condition for 
the external temperature two extra boundary conditions was applied. A 
vertical boundary of 20 °C with a was set for the inner
The tetrahedral mesh was set as physics controlled mesh with normal 
size as seen in Figure 2. The minimum element quality was 0.4322 and 
thus no further mesh reﬁ nement was needed.
thermal properties:
Insulation
Thermal conductivity: 0.036 W/(mK)
Density: 20 kg/m3
Heat capacity: 750 J/(kgK)
Concrete
Thermal conductivity: 1.7 W/(mK)
Density: 2300 kg/m3
Heat capacity: 880 J/(kgK)
Above ground buildings and variations of the model was using a similar 
method.
==PAGE:146==
136
REFERENCES
COMSOL 2013 COMSOL Multiphysics Reference Manual
Griesmer. 2014. Size Parameters for Free Tetrahedral Meshing in COMSOL 
Multiphysics https://www.comsol.com/blogs/size-parameters-free-tet-
rahedral-meshing-comsol-multiphysics/
DS418 COMSOL 2013 COMSOL Multiphysics Reference Manual
Griesmer. 2014. Size Parameters for Free Tetrahedral Meshing in COMSOL 
Multiphysics https://www.comsol.com/blogs/size-parameters-free-tet-
rahedral-meshing-comsol-multiphysics/
DS418 2011. Calculation of heat loss from buildings. Danish Standards
==PAGE:147==
137
11.  Electrical lighting
The following shows the exhibition areas in which the use of electrical 
lighting was estimated. 
First the references for the light sources are listed. Thereafter a list of 
the museums and rooms investigated are shown followed by a series of 
images of the exhibition spaces. In the end a table of the calculations are 
shown
The loads were sorted into the following categories:
Small spots 
Wattage:  
5.5W
Model:  
KIT LED CLASSIC PAR16 50
Company:  
OSRAM
Source:  
http://www.osram.com/osram_com/products/
 
 
led-technology/indoor-led-luminaires/downlights/
 
 
kit-led-classic/index.jsp?productId=ZMP_1128980
Medium spots
Wattage:  
35W
Model:  
MODARIO IP20 SPOT HIT 35 W L24 GR
Company:  
OSRAM
Source:  
http://www.osram.dk/osram_dk/produkter/
 
 
armaturer/indendoers-armaturer/skinnesystemer/ 
 
 
modario-ip20ip40-til-t5/modario-spotlight-montage/ 
 
 
smal-lysfordeling-24_%2c-hit-tc-ce/modario-ip20- 
 
 
spot-35w-l24-gr/index.jsp?productId=ZMP_1059559
Large spots
Wattage:  
70W
Model:  
LUNIS SL-T HCI 70 W L24 BK
Company:  
OSRAM
Source:  
http://www.osram.com/osram_com/
 
 
products/luminaires/indoor-luminaires/
 
 
spotlights/lunis-sl-t/lunis-sl-t-hci/index.jsp?produc 
 
 
tId=ZMP_1059512
Projectors 
Wattage:  
283W
Model:   
EX5230 Pro XGA 3LCD
Company: 
EPSON
Source:  
http://www.epson.com/alf_upload/pdfs/projectors/ 
 
 
brochure_ex5230.pdf
Small pendant 
Wattage:  
9W
Model   
PARATHOM CLASSIC GLOBE (light bulb)
Company:  
OSRAM
Source:  
http://www.osram.dk/osram_dk/produkter/led-
 
 
teknologi/lyskilder/profesionelle-led-lyskilder-med- 
 
 
klassiske-former/parathom-classic-globe/index.jsp? 
 
 
productId=ZMP_1292073
Large ﬂ oodlight
Wattage: 150W 
Model: S1538
Company: NIKKON
Source:  
http://www.nikkonlighting.com/led-lighting-
 
 
manufacturer-malaysia/ﬂ oodlight-30/search.php/70w- 
 
 
150w-s1500-series-ﬂ oodlight_23
==PAGE:148==
138
Small luorescent lamps
Wattage:  
10W
Model:  
LUMCOM EL-N/P 10 W WT
Company: 
 OSRAM
Source:  
http://www.osram.com/osram_com/products/ 
 
 
 
luminaires/indoor-luminaires/batten-luminaires/lumi 
 
 
lux-combi-el/lumilux-combi-el-n-t830824/index.jsp
Large ﬂ uorescent lamps. 58W
Wattage:  
58W
Model:   
EUROPLEX T26 1X58 W PRISM
Company:  
OSRAM
Source:  
http://www.osram.com/osram_com/
 
 
products/luminaires/indoor-luminaires/linear-luminaires/ 
 
 
europlex-tc/index.jsp?productId=ZMP_1025879
Screen: 
Wattage:  
22W
Model:  
24” HD Flat TV H4004
Company:  
SAMSUNG
Source:  
http://www.samsung.com/dk/consumer/tv-av/tv/hd/ 
 
 
UE24H4004AWXXE
Museums estimated
The museums investigated were:
The National Museum of Denmark:  
Room 1-12
Thorvaldsens Musuem:   
 
Room: 13-18
Den Frie:  
 
 
 
Room 19-23
Glyptoteket:  
 
 
 
Room 24-33
The Workers’ Museum:   
 
Room 34-43
M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark:  
Room:44-53 
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
==PAGE:149==
139
9
13
11
15
12
16
10
14
17
19
21
23
18
20
22
24
==PAGE:150==
140
33
35
37
39
34
36
38
40
25
27
29
31
26
28
30
32
==PAGE:151==
141
41
49
43
51
45
53
47
42
50
44
52
46
48
==PAGE:152==
142
In order to estimate the area CAD material was provided by the M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark.
A plan of Den Frie: was found at:
http://denfrie.dk/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/09.03.09_1.200_plan_tekst_udentilbyg1.pdf
Small
Medium
Large Projectors Pendant
Large
Flourescent Flourescent
Screen
Daylight
Total
Placed Room width
lentgh
Area
spots spots 
spots
 small
 ﬂoodlight  40cm
 1.5 m
use
(-)
m
m
m^2
5.5W
35W
70W
283W
9W
150W
10W
58W
30W
W
W/m^2
The National Museum of Denmark
A
1
6
14
84
4
9
No
662
7.9
A
2
6.5
11
71.5
10
26
2
No
2736
38.3
A
3
7
25
175
6
17
Dimmed
573
3.3
A
4
7
15.5
109
20
15
1
Dimmed
1443
13.3
A
5
6.6
13.5
89.1
20
6
9
Dimmed
1052
11.8
A
6
7
18
126
17
Dimmed
1190
9.4
A
7
9.5
16
152
23
26
No
1870
12.3
A
8
9
8
72
9
Dimmed
630
8.8
A
9
9
3.5
31.5
8
Dimmed
560
17.8
A
10
4
17
68
6
Dimmed
420
6.2
A
11
6.5
12
78
11
Dimmed
770
9.9
A
12
5
25
125
109
46
Dimmed
1013.5
8.1
Thorvaldsens Museum
U
13
3.5
15
52.5
19
No
665
12.7
U
14
3
37
111
25
25
No
2325
20.9
A
15
3.5
4.5
15.8
Yes
0
0.0
A
16
6
10
60
2
Yes
300
5.0
A
17
5
5.5
27.5
Yes
0
0.0
A
18
3.5
3.5
12.3
Yes
0.0
Den frie
A
19
9.2
12.3
113
12
Dimmed
696
6.2
A
20
9.4
11.5
108
12
Dimmed
696
6.4
A
21
150
20
Dimmed
1160
7.7
A
22
7.2
14.5
104
13
Dimmed
754
7.2
U
23
8.5
11
93.5
3
No
849
9.1
==PAGE:153==
143
Glyptoteket
A
24
8.5
29
246.5
99
33
Dimmed
1699.5
6.9
A
25
6.5
8.5
55.25
14
6
Dimmed
287
5.2
A
26
6.5
13
84.5
30
19
No
830
9.8
A
27
14
14.5
203
27
Dimmed
945
4.7
A
28
14
8
112
24
No
840
7.5
A
29
10.5
26
273
36
Dimmed
1260
4.6
A
30
10.5
36
378
89
Dimmed
3115
8.2
A
31
11.5
30
345
66
Dimmed
2310
6.7
A
32
9.5
9.5
90.25
Yes
0
0.0
A
33
24
33.5
804
20
16
Dimmed
670
0.8
The Workers' Museum
U
34
11
8.5
93.5
12
2
Dimmed
560
6.0
U
35
6
13
78
15
1
2 No
594
7.6
U
36
11
12.5
137.5
6
19
2 Dimmed
758
5.5
U
37
13
5
65
5
8
2
No
873.5
13.4
U
38
12.5
6
75
12
3
1
No
913
12.2
A
39
8
4.5
36
29
1
No
442.5
12.3
A
40
5
5
25
10
1
4 No
245
9.8
A
41
5
5.5
27.5
1
3
1 No
245.5
8.9
A
42
4.5
4.5
20.25
1
Dimmed
5.5
0.3
A
43
6
4
24
Dimmed
0
0.0
M/S MariƟme Museum of Denmark
U
44
160
0
19
10
6
1 No
3093
19.3
U
45
88
41
30
5
3 No
1415.5
16.1
U
46
240
22
4
4
1 Dimmed
1972
8.2
U
47
234
222
28
19
5
1
32
9 No
5545
23.7
U
48
110
32
9
4
28
No
3162
28.7
U
49
380
5
48
8
12
6
No
5723.5
15.1
U
50
190
90
18
Yes
1125
5.9
U
51
185
46
61
10
4
15
4 No
4490
24.3
U
52
545
78
41
18
11 No
8723
16.0
U
53
265
2
2
18
Dimmed
816
3.1
==PAGE:154==
144
12.  Heat transfer comparison
In order to combine heat transfer simulations from COMSOL and IDA ICE 
a comparison of heat ﬂ ux calculations was done. It was concluded that 
transient heat transfers caused larger deviations but that a combined 
method could be used.
A comparison of calculated heat ﬂ ux between IDA ICE, COMSOL and 
hand calculations with DS418 was made. Four diff erent wall types were 
created (Figure 1). The wall was 40 m2 and the interior and exterior tem-
peratures was 20 ºC and -12 ºC. Heat flux is calculated by the following 
formula (DS418):
(1)
Where:
It can be seen that the temperature diff erence between the exterior and 
the interior is the driving force for the heat ﬂ ux. Having a larger surface 
area or larger U-value will increase the ﬂ ux. The U-value can be found 
with the following formula depending on the thermal resistance:
(2)
Where
DS418
COMSOL
IDA ICE
(W)
ﬂux (W)
Dev (%)
ﬂux (W)
Dev (%)
1m L/W concrete
0.5 m insulation
61.76
61.76
0.002%
61.89
0.209%
1m concrete
0.5 m insulation
87.39
87.39
0.004%
87.65
0.296%
1m concrete
0.3 m insulation
140.79
140.80
0.007%
141.47
0.481%
0.5 m concrete
0.5 m insulation
89.18
89.18
0.000%
89.54
0.403%
 Table 1:Comparison of the deviation of calculated ﬂ ux of four cases 
between IDA ICE, COMSOL and hand calculations 
A large thermal resistance will thus result in a low U-value. The thermal 
resistance can be found using the formula:
(3)
Where:
As seen in the formula heat loss can be minimized by either using a thicker
material layer or materials with a higher thermal conductivity.
Temperatures of 20 ºC and -12 ºC are used in accordance to DS418, but 
the test could as well be made with another set of temperatures.
The COMSOL model is set up based on the DS418 and the deviation 
between COMSOL and hand calculations is very small for all four cases. 
A slightly larger deviation is showing when comparing DS418 with IDA 
ICE. Heat transfer coefficients are not user defined in IDA ICE and tem-
peratures are not naturally steady. However, steady temperatures can 
be created as seen in the end of this section. The largest deviation is 
however a mere 0.481% and these three methods thus correspond well.
However these heat transfers seen in Table 1 were all done based 
==PAGE:155==
145
 Figure 2: Variations in temperature proﬁ les on both sides of an building component
 Figure 3: Heat ﬂ ux from type B
Figure 4:  Heat ﬂ ux from type C
on steady interior and exterior temperatures. In real life and thus in 
simulations this will rarely happen, as temperatures will rarely be steady 
on any side of a building component. Especially the external tempera-
tures will change. The steady temperatures of the ﬁ rst test corresponds 
to type A in Figure 2. 
A comparison is thus made on the diff erences of COMSOL and IDA ICE 
when temperatures are ﬂ uctuating on both sides of a 500 mm thick layer 
of insulation. Type B is uses an external temperature ﬂ uctuations being 
smaller than the interior, but with the same period, whereas the period 
off  type C is off set in comparison too the inner temperature curves.  The 
temperatures are set to deviate from 20 -25 ºC for the interior and 0 -10 
ºC for the exterior. In Type C a 4 month off set of the sinusoidal wave has 
been made.
Type C deviates from the COMSOL simulation by an average of 1.4% 
whereas type C deviates with an average of 1.3%. At the peaks the 
deviation is generally much smaller. Simulation transient heat transfers 
thus results in higher deviations between the COMSOL and IDA ICE 
method. As seen in Figure 3and Figure 4 COMSOL tends to  change 
slightly faster than IDA ICE. This could be caused by diff erences in heat 
transfer coeffi  cients from air to insulation. But as these coeffi  cient aren’t 
visible in the code of the wall in IDA ICE it is not possible to change them. 
However deviations are small enough to make combined simulations 
using COMSOL and IDA ICE.
A
B
Exterior
Interior
Insulation
Exterior
Interior
Insulation
c
Exterior
Interior
Insulation
-1.80
-1.60
-1.40
-1.20
-1.00
-0.80
-0.60
-0.40
-0.20
0.00
0
100
200
300
Flux (W/m)
Time (days)
Type B heat ﬂux
COMSOL reference
IDA ICE
-1.8
-1.6
-1.4
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0
100
200
300
Flux (W/m)
Time (days)
Type C heat ﬂux
COMSOL reference
IDA ICE
==PAGE:156==
146
The following is a list of the material properties used for the calculations 
in all three methods
Material properties
Below is shown calculations of heat ﬂ ux in accordance to DS418 for the 
four diff erent cases.
λ (W/mK) ρ (kg/m^3) cp (J/(kg K))
Concrete
1.7
2300
880
L/W concrete
0.15
500
1050
Insulation
0.036
20
750
Te [°C]
-12
Ti [°C]
22
1 m L/W concrete 0.5 m insulation
d (m)
λ (W/mK)
R [m2K/W] Re-x [m2K/W] dx (m)
Tx [°C]
0
-12.0
Exterior
0.13
0.13
0
-11.8
Concrete
1
0.15
6.67
6.80
1
-0.9
Insulation
0.5
0.036
13.89
20.69
1.5
21.9
Interior
0.04
20.73
1.5
22.0
Rtotal [m2K/W]
20.73
U [W/m2K]
0.05
Flux [W]
U [W/m2K] A [m^2]
Ti [°C]
Te [°C]
61.76
0.05
40
20
-12
1 m concrete 0.5 m insulation
d (m)
λ (W/mK)
R [m2K/W] Re-x [m2K/W] dx (m)
Tx [°C]
0
-12.0
Exterior
0.13
0.13
0
-11.8
Concrete
1
1.7
0.59
0.72
1
-10.8
Insulation
0.5
0.036
13.89
14.61
1.5
12.0
Interior
0.04
14.65
1.5
12.0
Rtotal [m2K/W]
14.65
U [W/m2K]
0.07
Flux [W]
U [W/m2K] A [m^2]
Ti [°C]
Te [°C]
87.39
0.07
40
20
-12
1 m concrete 0.3 m insulation
d (m)
λ (W/mK)
R [m2K/W] Re-x [m2K/W] dx (m)
Tx [°C]
0
-12.0
Exterior
0.13
0.13
0
-11.8
Concrete
1
1.7
0.59
0.72
1
-10.8
Insulation
0.3
0.036
8.33
9.05
1.3
2.8
Interior
0.04
9.09
1.3
2.9
Rtotal [m2K/W]
9.09
U [W/m2K]
0.11
Flux [W]
U [W/m2K] A [m^2]
Ti [°C]
Te [°C]
140.79
0.11
40
20
-12
==PAGE:157==
147
0.5 m concrete 0.5 m insulation
d (m)
λ (W/mK)
R [m2K/W] Re-x [m2K/W] dx (m)
Tx [°C]
0
-12.0
Exterior
0.13
0.13
0
-11.8
Concrete
0.5
1.7
0.29
0.42
0.5
-11.3
Insulation
0.5
0.036
13.89
14.31
1
11.5
Interior
0.04
14.35
1
11.5
Rtotal [m2K/W]
14.35
U [W/m2K]
0.07
Flux [W]
U [W/m2K] A [m^2]
Ti [°C]
Te [°C]
89.18
0.07
40
20
-12
In COMSOL the simulation is setup according to DS418. The interior 
and exterior temperatures of 20 º C and 12 ºC is set up as boundary 
conditions. The heat transfer coeffi  cients is as well used in accordance 
to the standard. 
In IDA ICE steady internal and external temperatures does not ”naturally” 
occur. Although a  very narrow dead band  will result in the air temperature 
being very close to 20 ºC, the radiant temperatures will be off . Additional-
ly external temperatures will change in time as well as the wall being able 
absorb and emit energy. The method used in this  test to force stable 
temperatures in this test is as follows:
1) Synthetical weather was choosen and the amplitude was set to zero 
as well as the average temperature being set to -12 ºC.
2) The emittance and arbsorbtance of the wall was set to 1E-11.
3) The wall was disconnected from the zone and a excel sheet was set 
as a source ﬁ le. The ﬁ le contained a row of time indications and a row of 
values of 21 ºC.
==PAGE:158==
148
13.  Inﬂ uence of short term interior 
heat loads on the long term thermal 
storage
A test  wall was made based on a wall consisting of 0.15m concrete interior 
layer of concrete and a 0.3 m exterior layer of concrete. The thickness of 
the insulation varies from 150mm to 500mm.  A 10 m2 room was made 
with no people all week besides 2 people from 9 to 17 Saturday. This 
is thus a high density of people at 0.2 pers / m2 and long period with a 
constant load. The exterior is set to a stable temperature by adjusting 
the synthetic weather and all windows are removed. Furthermore all 
emission and absorption of the external wall is removed. Thereby only 
the change of internal loads will cause diff erences in the wall tempera-
tures. 
Additional nodes are put into each material layer in order to be able to 
measure the temperatures through the materials. Therefore the interior 
walls consists of 2 nodes, the insulation 3 nodes and the exterior wall 2 
nodes. Each node in the wall is logged during the simulation as seen in 
Figure 1 - Figure 3. The brown line of node 4 thus represents the exterior 
surface of the insulation. Even though the internal loads are relatively 
large only a very little peak on the line is showing. Rapid internal load 
changes will thereby only have a minor inﬂ uence on the long term 
thermal storage on the outside of the insulation. 
Figure 1: Temperature curves of wall with 500 mm insulation
==PAGE:159==
149
Figure 2: Temperature curves of wall with 500 mm insulation
Figure 3: Temperature curves of wall with 500 mm insulation
==PAGE:160==
150
14.  Use of the HMwall component
The following is a small introduction to the use of the HMwall component. 
It is only possible to use it in IDA ICE at the advanced level. When used in 
an above ground building the use of HMwall will looks as seen in Figure 2
1) The HMwall is placed either as a new wall or to replaced with the 
existing walls. It must be noted that unlike the standard walls in IDA ICE all 
parameters are to be deﬁ ned manually. The walls include 15 parameters 
to be deﬁ ne. Some parameters are single variables and other are vectors.
2) The connection with the zone is done with three diff erent interfaces. 
The ﬁ rst connects ZONE_A with a term from the zone. This will function 
as a leak transporting energy and humidity. 
The second interface connects RELHUM_A with a humidity sensor 
(READHUMIDITY) in the zone.
The third interface connects the temperaturs of the zone and the wall. 
TQwall from the zone is thus connected to TERM_A from the HMwall
3) The temperature on the B side of the wall is taken from the TQFACE 
if the wall is above ground. Otherwise the connetction could be made to 
the TQground or other methods of determening the undergound temper-
atures as described in this thesis
4) The ambient RH is multiplied with 0.01 in order to get the data in the 
right format. Therefore, place a multiplier and connect a constant of 0.01. 
When opening the multiplier, the window shown in ﬁ gure 1 will appear. 
To connect the ambient ﬁ le click on ”Interfaces” (A), then ”INSIGNALLINK 
1:2” (B) and then doubble-click the unconnected in-signal link to open the 
in-signal link interface (C). Then double-click the name of the in-signal link. 
When the in-signal link interface is open the right click the variable and select 
”binding” (D). It is important that one does not right-click and select 
A
B
C
D
binding in the multiplier interface as the weather-ﬁ le will not be available. 
In the climate ﬁ le connect to ”Rel humidity of air”
5) In interfaces of the HMwall select ZONE_B and connect to OUT2LEAK 
under f$Building body. The connection will not be visible in the zone 
scheme
6) In EMETRQ_WACOBRI the Hmwall will be needed to be connected. 
Select the unconnected ”INPOWER” right-click and select binding. In the 
zone select HMWall and connect to ”QA”
7) With the same method as in ”5” connect the walls in EMETERQ_WALLS.
8) If the HMwall is used for the roof, it must be connected to EMETERQ_
ROOF
 9) Additionally If the HMwall is used for ﬂ oors it must be connected to 
EMETERQ_FLOORS
Figure 1Interface of the multiplier
==PAGE:161==
151
1
2
4
6
7
9
5
8
3
Figure 2 Use of the HMWall in the zone
==PAGE:162==
152
15.  RH control system
The following is a description of the control system made in order to 
control RH. No standard system in IDA ICE is capable of humidiﬁ cation 
and dehumidiﬁ cation thus a further development of "extra heating 
coil (dehumidiﬁ cation" has been made (see Figure 1). Room tempera-
tures are controlled by a ﬂ oor heating system and the volume of air is 
controlled based on CO2 concentrations are to be kept below 900 ppm 
being category II according to DS15251.The control system functions as 
follows:
1) The set points for humidiﬁ cation and dehumidiﬁ cation are typed in. As 
in seen in Figure 1 having set points of 53 and 50 will result in a dead 
band of 3% RH.
2) The heat exchanger retains part of the heat from the interior. Due to 
the large volume of the rooms the effi  ciency has a great inﬂ uence. The 
As standard the effi  ciency is set to 0.7.
3) A schedule deﬁ nes a yearly change of set points. Values from 0-1 will 
change the two set points speciﬁ ed in 1). Values of 0.85 is used from 
November to March. From April to October the value is 0.96 except from 
June to August where 1 is used. Thereby the RH will be largest in the 
summer.
4) A schedule can turn of heat exchanger if needed.
5) RH is measured from return air.
6) A p controller activates humidiﬁ er if the measured value from 5) is 
lower than the lower set point in 1)
7) Air can be preheated or precooled
8) The supply air will be humidiﬁ ed based on the signal from 6)
9) A thermostat compares the upper value of the set point from 3) with 
the RH of the return air
10) A switch will shift between 9 and 21 ºC depending on a need for 
cooling in order to the RH
11) In case of dehumidiﬁ cation the air will ﬁ rst be cooled to 9 ºC by the 
cooler and then reheated to 20 ºC by the heater thus providing air with 
50 %RH
12) A schedule controls the cooling set points
 
Many other systems could be made in order to control RH and more 
energy effi  cient ways of dehumidifying could be modelled. However this 
is based on the standard components of IDA ICE. If components such as 
desiccant dehumidiﬁ ers were used lower energy consumptions of the 
system could be obtained.
Figure 1 Standard AHU system for dehumidiﬁ cation in IDA ICE
==PAGE:163==
153
1
3
4
7
6
8
11
5
9
12
2
10
Figure 2: Control system for humidifying and dehumidifying air
==PAGE:164==
154
16.  Dynamic user schedules
The following is a description of the method used for this thesis in order 
to add dynamic user schedules by connecting a prn ﬁ le to the zone rather 
than using the schedules from IDA ICE. The problem by using IDA ICE 
schedules is that the are made one week at the time and have to be 
typed in manually into the program. Having a 1 year dynamic schedule 
as used in this thesis would take very long time to type in and would be 
prone to typing errors. Thus another method using the advanced level of 
IDA ICE was developed:
1) The SETOCC is disconnected from the zone as seen in Figure 1. 
 
A ) The zone interface is opened
 
B) Left-click on the SETOCC to open the menu
 
C) Right-click on "Binding". In the connection interface select  
 
"DISCONNECT"
A
C
B
2) Create an excel-ﬁ le with a row of hours and a row containing an 
occupancy schedule with values from 0 to 1. Export the Excel ﬁ le as prn. 
3) Add a source ﬁ le (placed under utilities). Click "browse" to ﬁ nd the prn 
ﬁ le. Then press "take the list of variables from ﬁ le" and press "OK"
4) Connect the source ﬁ le with the Zone as an interface for the SETOOC 
should now be open.
This method can be used for creating other inputs in excel an bypass the 
original values of an IDA ICE variable
Figure 1: Interface of the zone
Figure 2: Connecting a source ﬁ le to the zone
i
ﬁl
h
==PAGE:165==
155
17.  Settings of the IDA Model
The IDA IDE model consists of simpliﬁ ed building parts based on early 
sketches of the new Natural History Museum of Denmark. The only 
diff erence between above and below ground buildings are the placement 
and type of vapour barrier. Both above and below ground buildings thus 
have a large thermal mass, especially on the outside of the insulation 
layer. This layer is for the standard case 300 mm but is varied for a 
parameter analysis. 
Properties for materials are based on the DS/EN ISO 10456 standard 
(2008).
For above ground "Icotæt" is used as vapour barrier and Below ground 
Reﬂ ex is used as vapour barrier (Icopal 2016). Being a extremely tight 
barrier to account for the tightness needed to keep out moisture. The 
vapour resistance factor is calculated based on the Diff usion resistance. 
 
High density concrete was used as the 250mm interior layer for all 
simulations except for the two simulations of low weight concrete. the 
exterior layer was high density concrete for all simulations.  
Insulation
250mm
m
m
00
0
1
Insulation
250mm
400mm
Insulation
250mm
m
m
00
0
1
Figure 3: Floor
Table 1: Properties
Figure 2: Wall below ground
Figure 1: Wall above ground
High density Low density
Insulation
Icotæt
Reﬂex
concrete
concrete
vapour barrier vapour barrier
λ  (W/(m·K))
2
1.15
0.036
0.2
0.2
ρ (kg/m3)
2400
600
20
914
466
cp (J/kg ∙ K)
1000
1000
750
1000
1000
WF(kg/m3)
400
250
1580
1.01
1.01
W80 (kg/m3)
25
30
500
1
1
μ wett (-)
130
6
1
27000000
570000
μ dry (-)
80
4
1
27000000
570000
==PAGE:166==
156
Ventilation
The ventilation ﬂ ow was VAV controlled by CO2 to keep the level below 
1100 ppm. 700 ppm  was set as the lower threshold for ventilation. A 
min of 0.1L/s m2.  was used. The humidity was controlled by the AHU as 
seen in appendix 15. Inﬂ ow air was based on schedules synchronized 
with the heating set point schedules.
Humidity control
RH humidity was controlled by the AHU. 
For "loose" settings lower and upper limits for RH control was set to 20 
and 80. The schedule for yearly variation was set to 1 
For "medium" settings lower and upper limits for RH control was set to 
40 and 60. The schedule for yearly variation was set to 1 
For "tight" settings lower and upper limits for RH control was set to 
55and 60. The schedule for yearly variation varied in a sinusoidal pattern 
during the season with a max of 1 and min on 0.82. therby the control 
would be 40-45 in the winter and 55-60 in the summer.
Heating/cooling
The internal temperatures was set according to monthly schedules 
deﬁ ning higher and lower limts. An off set of the maximum and minimum 
was set to 2 degrees to control daily deviation. For Most of the models no 
additional cooling was needed than provided by the ventilation air but for 
most 500 mm cases more cooling than was provided by the ventilation 
system was needed. This cooling was provided by a standard ﬂ oor-heat-
ing/cooling system of 40 W/m2 for both heating and cooling. The off set 
for water based cooling room units was set to 1 ºC. 
Loads
The lighting loads was set to 10 W/m2. The occupant loads was varied 
based on the method described in the thesis. 
27, 54, 108, 216 432 and 864 pers was assigned to the zone io order 
to obtain average occupant densities of: 0.00125, 0.0025, 0.005, 0.01, 
0.02 and 0.04 pers/m2. In order to properly utilize the schedule the 
degree of automatic schedule smoothing was lowered to 1 from the 
standard value of 5.
Simulation method
The calculation was made as a dynamic simulation based on TRY Værløse 
(Copenhagen) weather data using Copenhagen as location with the 
default urban wind proﬁ le. A periodic start-up used and initial temper-
atures in the Hmwalls was set to 20 degrees in order to avoid to large 
initial temperatures.
In Comsol the average temperatures on the exterior side of the insulation 
was measured for the walls and the ﬂ oor. The 11th year of data was in 
excel exported to prn to be added as the exterior temperatures for the 
walls in IDA ICE. Above ground components was conneted to the ambient 
temperatures from the TRY. 
Figure 4: Tempeartures for a year with 500 mm insulation
==PAGE:167==
157
Several COMSOL models had to be made whenever:
- The insulation thicness was changed
- The placement of museum was changed in relation to the ground
- Material properties were changed
- Boundary conditions was changed.
 
Change of boundary condition
By using the DS418 temperatures in COMSOL for boundary conditions 
and compare with above ground buildings in IDA ICE based on TRY will 
give misleading results. The reason for this is that wall temperatures 
in IDA ICE is not only based on air temperatures but also recieved heat 
from radiation. An adjustment on the boundary conditions for COMSOL 
soil was thus made in order to provide similar boundary conditions. The 
input values for the external temperatures of an horizontal surface in 
IDA ICE was measured. This was used to alted the boundary condition in 
COMSOL used ofr the soil (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Adjustment of the boudary condition
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.00E+00
1.00E+03
2.00E+03
3.00E+03
4.00E+03
5.00E+03
6.00E+03
7.00E+03
8.00E+03
Temperatures (°C)
Time (h)
Adjustment of boundary condtion for soil surface
Temperature of surface
Running mean of surface temp
Adjusted
DS418
References 
DS/EN ISO 10456 (2008) Building materials and products - Hygrother-
mal properties - Tabulated design values and procedures for determining 
declared and design thermal values
Icopal (2016) Dampspærrer [online] Available at: http://www.icopal.dk/
Produkter/Damp_fugt_vind/Dampsparrer.aspx [Accessed May 12 2016]
==PAGE:168==
158
18.  Line loss
Line losses are included in the IDA ICE. simulations at all connections 
between building parts in connection with the ambient. The extra ﬂ ux 
that line losses represent are caused by the geometry of the connection 
causing thermal bridges or less insulation. Furthermore corners have 
larger outer surfaces than inner surfaces causing  an increased ﬂ ux.
Line losses will in diff erent buildings diff er due to the types of connections 
not being the same. DS418 does not give a deﬁ nitive answer on how to 
calculate the line loss in an underground building. However all line losses 
in the standard are calculated by subtracting 1 dimensional ﬂ uxes from 
building parts with 2 dimensional ﬂ uxes and dividing by the temperature 
diff erence. This method is seen in ﬁ gure 1. One dimensional ﬂ uxes are 
created by making adiabatic surfaces and measuring the ﬂ uxes at the 
walls. The temperature are then measured around the corner. By diving 
the average ﬂ ux of a year with the average temperatures of a year the 
line loss can be found. 
2D ﬂux
1D ﬂux
Corner temperatu-
-
=(
(
/
Lineloss
This can be done in COMSOL where time, ﬂ uxes and temperatures can 
be exported as vectors into excel. With 300 mm insulation, 1000 mm 
concrete and a 10 year pre-run period the line loss at the connection 
between wall and ﬂ oor are calculated based on average values for year 
11 as:
0.23W/11.39 ºC = 0.020W/K
When increasing the amount of insulation to 500 mm the line loss are 
calculated as:
0.18W/10.13 ºC = 0.018W/K
Due to the constructions are idealized with no connection details the 
line loss is very small. IDA ICE has included line losses in the program for 
losses at diff erent connections. These connections are shown as a the 
value and are graded from "None" to "Very poor". the value of 0.02 W/K 
for a connection between external slab and external walls would be rated 
somewhere in between "None" and "very good".
For the use of simulation values equivalent to "Good" are used at all 
connections in order to use more realistic values for the line losses. In 
reality the values will change from above and below ground buildings, but 
the largest impact will be the choice of connection type.  
Figure: Graphical formula for calculating the lineloss of an underground building
