==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Modelling and Optimisation of Cascade and Mixed 
Refrigerant Cycles for Natural Gas Liquefaction
Nicola Lonardi
June 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Modelling and Optimisation of Cascade and
Mixed Refrigerant Cycles for Natural Gas
Liquefaction
MSc thesis
submitted the 18th June of 2016
and defended the 6th July of 2016
at the
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
for the Master of Science in Sustainable Energy
by
Nicola Lonardi
under suggestion of:
Associate Professor Brian Elmegaard (DTU), main supervisor
Post doc Tuong-Van Nguyen (DTU), main supervisor
==PAGE:4==
Modelling and Optimisation of Cascade and Mixed Refrigerant Cycles
for Natural Gas Liquefaction
Copyright ©2016 by Nicola Lonardi. All rights reserved.
Master Thesis
Font: Utopia typeset with LATEX2ε
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Thermal Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld.40
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Phone: (+45) 45 25 19 60
Fax: (+45) 45 25 19 61
www.mek.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:5==
to those believing in me
also when there was less to believe
a coloro che hanno creduto in me
anche quando c’era meno spazio per crederci
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Knowing yourself is the beginning of all wisdom
Conoscere se stessi è l’inizio di ogni sapienza
— — Aristotle
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Preface
The present thesis was prepared at the Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment of
the requirements for the the Master of Science in Sustainable Energy - Thermal Energy.
The work was carried out from 18th of January 2016 to 18th of June 2016, under supervision of
Associate Professor Brian Elmegaard (DTU) and Post-doc Tuong-Van Nguyen (DTU).
The present project is credited with 30 ECTS.
København, 18th June 2016
Nicola Lonardi
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
This project concludes the adventure that 2 years ago I undertook. Particularly motivated but
highly frightened, I left with the dream of getting different perspectives and of giving myself a
challenge. I cannot forget the difﬁculties and disorientation I initially felt.
However, counting on my motivations and on the help of many people, I can now write these
few lines. They are directed towards those who allowed me to achieve this point and to those
who turned the initial difﬁculties into pure enjoyment for an experience that I will never forget.
First of all, I would like to thank the Technical University of Denmark. It has been a pleasure
to complete my education here in an environment with numerous international people. In
particular, here I could feel the spirit of absorbing the best from each culture, which I identify
in the real European Union. Hence, I highly motivate DTU to keep doing so.
Concerning the development of the thesis project, I would like to thank Brian Elmegaard
for the ﬁnal opportunity to deepen my knowledge within the topic and for agreeing on the
relevance of the investigations.
I express special gratitude to Tuong-Van Nguyen for the great support throughout these
months. Physically or virtually, even when many kilometers were between us, you always
sustained me, donated me conﬁdence and waited for the challenges I could solve.
Thanks to Matteo for dividing with me the ofﬁce in these months, for always been available
for an opinion and for showing me that regularity and perseverance complete a Master thesis
project. Thanks to the friends of the "402 crew" for sharing with me the breaks which topped
up energy and motivation.
Immense gratitude goes to the people that shared with me the whole Master experience
and which made the journey more important than the destination. Thanks to Mattia that
convinced me to come here, thanks to Fernando and Juan for releasing my disorientation in
the ﬁrst assignments, thanks to the Italian friends who helped me not to forget my language,
thanks to Paul, Christoph and Marios for sharing the inevitable "Coffee and Mufﬁn" breaks.
Thanks to Alberto for the funny moments and for distracting me from studying in the last
semester.
ix
==PAGE:12==
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Paul, Fernando and Toni for accepting to visit my home village, donating me
an incredible emotion.
Una mención especial tengo que dedicarla a Toni. Has dividido con migo las mayoria de los
trabajos, pasando mas tiempo con migo que con tu mujer. Entre todos, me has ayudado a
dominar la ansiedad y la prisa en el trabajo y me has enseñado tu idioma. Nunca seré capaz
de recompensar la generosidad de tu y Maria.
Great thanks goes also to the members of the "Ghost House". Even though I was not among
the founders, you accepted me for some great time.
Inﬁne, il mio pensiero è diretto alla mia famiglia. La lontananza mi ha fatto amare anche i
limiti che ha. Un ringraziamento immenso va ai miei genitori. E’ stato meraviglioso vedere la
vostra forza in questa esperienza nuova per voi. Non smetterò mai di ringraziarvi per avere
creduto in me anche quando era difﬁcile farlo. Sapete che in quella dedica iniziale ci siete
anche e soprattutto voi. Grazie a Silvia per esserci sempre quando conta davvero. Grazie ad
Andrea per l’aiuto tecnico e morale. Grazie a Gigi e Cristina per essere così speciali. Grazie
ad Adriana per tutti gli insegnamenti regalati. Grazie a tutti gli amici della Valpolicella che
rendono ogni ritorno una festa. Grazie a Giulia ed Eros per essere venuti ﬁn quassù.
Grazie a Marano di Valpolicella per signiﬁcare così tanto per me.
x
==PAGE:13==
Abstract
In a worldwide society which is acquiring awareness towards the environmental impact of
its energy production and exploitation, the recourse to cleaner energy fuels, still necessary
in the short-term, is undeniable. Natural Gas, as the cleanest fossil fuel, will surely play a
fundamental role in this direction. Liqueﬁed Natural Gas (LNG), whose technology has been
developed for transport simpliﬁcation, is gaining acceptance as energy carrier and as direct
fuel, especially for shipping purposes. As international regulations applied relevant measures
to reduce pollution from shipping, particularly in terms of sulfur emissions, LNG consists of
an attractive alternative fuel.
The present study examines the possible liquefaction technologies to be installed for the LNG
handling in harbors preparing the successive exploitation as shipping fuel.
To date, the principal systems for LNG production consist of cascade conﬁgurations, mixed
refrigerant systems and expansion-based plants, operating between the Natural Gas pre-
treatment and the storage units. The work models and examines the optimisation margin of
conﬁgurations based on cascade and mixed refrigerant cycles. The focus is directed towards
minimizing power expenditure with considerations on equipment speciﬁcations, particularly
on heat exchangers’ performances.
The analysis is based on the interaction between modelling tools, performance assessments
and optimisation techniques. Process modelling phase denoted its suitability for cascade
systems where only pressures and temperatures are to be deﬁned. In this cases, solutions close
to possible design implementations are achieved and the recourse to system optimisation is
not crucial. Efﬁcient cascade systems were in fact improved only from roughly 970 kW per kg/s
of Natural Gas to approximately 915 kW. On the other hand, optimisation integration becomes
fundamental for mixed refrigerant systems where higher computational effort is required in
the system deﬁnition. Power consumption in the system providing the highest performances
was in fact decreased from about 1310 kW per kg/s of Natural Gas to about 850 kW.
The different simulations indicated the crucial relevance of temperature difference driving
forces in limiting thermal irreversibilities and consequent power expenditures. Furthermore,
the effects of the chosen assumptions and the limitations behind the results are widely dis-
cussed, focusing on the heat exchange balances in multiple-stream units.
xi
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Preface
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
Abstract
xi
Contents
xiv
Nomenclature
xvi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Current status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
LNG properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
LNG plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
LNG pre-treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
LNG liquefaction stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
LNG storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
LNG as marine fuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Environmental impact of LNG as marine fuel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods
17
3.1
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Investigation boundaries
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Process Modelling Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Fundamental parameters for LNG plants’ performances . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Optimisation Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Process modelling
25
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Methods and Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
xiii
==PAGE:16==
Nomenclature
4.4
Cascade systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.7
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Optimisation
61
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Optimisation of PRICO cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.4
Optimisation of Cascade cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.5
Optimisation of Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles . . . . . . . . . . .
83
5.6
Overall comparison of multi-objective optimisations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.7
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.8
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
6
Overall discussion
99
6.1
Overall discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7
Overall conclusion
103
7.1
Overall conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
Bibliography
106
xiv
==PAGE:17==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
˙Q
Heat ﬂow rate [kW]
A
Heat transfer area [m2]
COP
Coefﬁcient of Performance [-]
CSTA
Cold side temperature approach [K]
DV
Decision Variable
FOM
Figure of Merit [-]
GA
Genetic Algorithm
GHG
Greenhouse gas
GHG
Single-objective optimisation
h
Speciﬁc Enthalpy [kJ/kg]
HEX
Heat Exchanger
HHV
Higher Heating Value [MJ/kg]
HSTA
Hot side temperature approach [K]
HTPP
Heat Transferred per Power [kWheat/kWpower
J-T
Joule-Thomson
LMTD
Logarithmic mean temperature difference [K]
LNG
Liqueﬁed Natural Gas
MITA
Minimum internal temperature approach [K]
MOO
Multi-objective optimisation
MR
Mixed Refrigerant
xv
==PAGE:18==
Nomenclature
MTPA
Mega-Tons Per Annum
NG
Natural Gas
NG
Natural Gas
P
Power [kW ]
Ref
Refrigerant
s
Speciﬁc Entropy [kJ/(kgK )]
SOO
Single Objective Optimisation
T
Temperature [◦C]
UA
Heat conductance [kW/K]
Greek letters
∆
Difference
Subscripts
0
Ambient conditions
L
Liquid conditions
xvi
==PAGE:19==
1 Introduction
1.1
Current status
Natural Gas has considerably gained relevance as energy fuel during the second part of the
20th century and its contribution to meeting worldwide energy demand has still grown up
to nowadays. In particular, Natural Gas production has passed from 992 billion cubic metres
in 1970 to 1983 billion cubic metres in 1990 to 3203 in 2010 [1]. Only between years 2000-
2010, then, the consumption of natural gas increased 31.4 % [2]. However, in the last years,
Natural Gas recourse has contracted in EU and, in general, in the OECD countries. In EU,
NG consumption has decreased 11.6 % [1]. Nevertheless, world natural gas consumption
has still risen, particularly due to the contribution of emerging countries (among the most
relevant China increasing +8.6 % between 2013 and 2014, Brazil and Middle East +6.3 %) [1]. As
worldwide energy demand is still predicted to grow 1.4 % per annum between 2014 and 2035
(34 % in total), feeding the expected rise of developing countries, Natural Gas is expected to
play a relevant role to sustain this trend (expected to grow 1.8 % per annum until 2035, making
it the fastest growing fossil fuel) [3]. Societies are more notably considering Natural Gas in the
short term time frame as it represents the cleanest fossil fuel with the lowest CO2 emissions,
helping in the conversion towards a more sustainable energy society. In these terms, in fact,
its recourse must be seen as a cleaner possibility to provide the time to improve efﬁciency,
technical management and cost effectiveness of renewable sources and prepare their massive
inclusion in the energy panorama.
Liquefaction of Natural Gas (LNG) has been utilized for more than ﬁfty years, especially in the
USA and Japan, attracting the European energy sector as well [4]. Its recourse found its roots
in the estimation that the higher density of NG comparing to gaseous Natural Gas provides a
more effective economical trade-off than pipeline transportation when the distance between
exporting country and the consumption site gets further 2000 to 5000 km [5]. Moreover, it
brings ﬂexibility and more security of supply in the NG markets [5]. Due to signiﬁcant im-
1
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1. Introduction
provements in large-scale liquefaction processes and to the decrease of production, transport
and storage expenses, LNG has gained acceptance as a possible energy carrier or as direct fuel,
particularly for shipping purposes [4].
In the imminent future, in fact, global shipping industry will have to respond to new legisla-
tion which will considerably regulate sulphur emissions from ships, ﬁrst in North America
and northern Europe [6]. In fact, as onshore industries have been reducing their emission
levels, ship contributions are becoming a signiﬁcant part of global emissions. It is considered
that shipping pollution accounts for 2-4 % of CO2 global emissions, 10-20 % of global NOx
emissions and 4-8 % of global SOx emissions [7]. Speciﬁcally, entered in May 2005, Annex
VI of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) at the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) restricted the sulphur mass content of marine
fuels on global basis ﬁrst to 4.5 % and after to 3.5 %, starting from January 2012. Moreover, in
January 2015, in speciﬁc sulphur emission control areas (SECA), the limit was set to 0.1 % and,
from 2020, a global limit of 0.5 % is expected to be applied . In terms of NOx regulation, three
IMO tiers has been set [7]:
• Tier 1: current limits for engines constructed between 2000 and 2010.
• Tier 2: NOx emissions 20 % below Tier 1 for marine engines constructed from 1st January
2011.
• Tier 3: NOx emissions 80 % below Tier 1 for marine engines constructed from 1st January
2016, if propulsion power is higher than 750 kW .
Therefore, under these circumstances, ship operators have to evaluate different alternatives to
meet the environmental requirements. In the long time frame, after 2020 or 2025, with regard
to sulfur emissions, the possible systems consider [6]:
• the possibility of still exploiting a high sulfur residual fuel, including SOx emission
reduction equipment as selective scrubbers later on in the fuel use chain.
• the possibility of shifting to alternative low sulfur fuels. Among these, LNG represents
an attracting alternative because of its low sulfur content and its price, which stands
below the conventional residual oil based bunker fuels. Moreover, LNG combustion
produces lower NOx emissions than traditional marine fuels.
Nowadays, excluding LNG carriers, only 1 % of the total commercial marine ﬂeet is fuelled
with LNG [6]. Stimulated by the aforementioned normative, the global LNG bunkering market
is expected to expand at around 64 % compound average growth rate (CAGR) until 2025 [8].
Nevertheless, to achieve the expected levels as bunker fuel, LNG has to withstand a signiﬁcant
number of challenges, which deal with investments in ships propulsion and with the assets in
fuel handling systems and bunkering facilities [4].
2
==PAGE:21==
1.2. Purpose of the study
1.2
Purpose of the study
The speciﬁc study is intended to contribute to the performance examination of the main
refrigeration technologies dedicated to possible LNG handling in harbors for the successive
exploitation as shipping fuel.
The ﬁrst objective to achieve is to analyse and model the different processes for NG liquefac-
tion, understanding the fundamental characteristics and working principles. The questions
to address regard the suitability of process modelling for possible design implementations
together with the technical beneﬁts and drawbacks that each technology denotes, deriving the
proper conditions for the respective solutions. This will include inner aspects as the inﬂuence
of crucial thermal parameters as cycle pressures and temperatures and of relevant speciﬁca-
tions as refrigerant and Natural Gas compositions. Afterward, margin for process optimization
is a central asset to investigate with the objective of minimizing power consumption, along
with considerations on equipment requirements. In particular, the expectations are directed
towards deriving the trends in the system parameters for performance enhancement and the
interactions between power expenditure and heat exchangers’ thermal conductances.
1.3
Thesis outline
The present study consists of 7 chapters:
Chapter 1 introduces to the project reporting the current context for LNG recourse and
presenting the purpose of the present study;
Chapter 2 deals with the technical background which allowed the development of the
present thesis, comprising NG properties, a review on LNG production plants’ units and
the speciﬁc state-of-the-art of the implied liquefaction cycles;
Chapter 3 addresses the approach and the identiﬁcation of the systems to be analysed
and it outlines the methodology applied throughout this project. In particular, an
overview of the process modelling tools, the performance analysis indicators and the
optimisation algorithms is to be included;
Chapter 4 deals with the modelling phase of the investigated technologies. The aim of
the analysis and the crucial assumptions are ﬁrst presented. The investigated categories
are individually regarded, starting from an introduction to the process to the speciﬁc
modelling implementation and closing with the obtained outcomes. Furthermore, a
discussion on the attained ﬁndings and implications is performed before highlighting
the crucial points in a brief conclusion;
Chapter 5 deals with the optimisation phase of the chosen technologies. A review
on the main approaches for system optimisation is ﬁrst performed followed by the
speciﬁcation of the common implementation methods. As before, the investigated
3
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 1. Introduction
categories are individually regarded, exposing the speciﬁc optimisation setting and
reporting the attained results. A general discussion on the crucial concepts is performed
followed by the conclusive remarks;
Chapter 6 discusses and compares the overall implications which were gathered through-
out the analyses.
Chapter 7 concludes the thesis, stating the essential ﬁndings and expressing their
relation with the initial expectations and objectives. Finally, suggestions for future
developments are also provided.
4
==PAGE:23==
2 Background
2.1
LNG properties
Natural Gas is not a homogeneous mixture, but its composition depends considerably on the
production area, season and climate. Therefore, NG physical and thermodynamics properties
are dependent on its composition. Typical NG composition ranges with regard to the fun-
damental constituents are reported in Table 2.1, basing on the NGs typically encountered in
Europe [9].
Table 2.1: Composition range of Natural Gas constituents, European Natural Gas database
Volume fraction
CH4
C2H6
C3H8
C4H10
N2
CO2
O2
Min [%]
77.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
Max [%]
97
15
5.1
2.7
19.5
2
0.5
The characteristics of Natural Gas as energy fuel are primarily described by factors as the
methane number, the higher heating value (HHV) and the Wobbe index (WI) [10]. The
methane number of the mixture is deﬁned as the percentage of methane in a methane-
hydrogen mixture. The Wobbe index is a measure of the fuel energy ﬂow rate through a section
under speciﬁc conditions. It is deﬁned as the ratio of the heating value divided by the square
root of the speciﬁc gravity [10]. It represents a relevant parameter since it is correlated with
the ability of an internal combustion engine to use a speciﬁc gas. Higher heating value HHV
deﬁnes the amount of heat released after combustion when the products are returned to
the reference temperature (usually 25◦C), taking into account the latent heat of vaporization
of water in the combustion products. Referring again to the European NG database, the
combustion properties lie generally between [9]:
• 32M J/m3 ≤HHV ≤50M J/m3
5
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Background
• 39M J/m3 ≤WI ≤59M J/m3
LNG is obtained by cooling the NG below its bubble point which, considering methane, ethane,
propane, isobutane and n-butane as main components, would correspond to the boiling point
of methane at the speciﬁc working pressure (-161.5◦C at atmospheric pressure), as it can be
inferred from Table 2.2 [11].
Table 2.2: Boiling points for the fundamental NG constituents at atmospheric pressure
Boiling point temperature at 1 atm
Methane
-161.5
°C
Ethane
-88.58
°C
Propane
-42.11
°C
n-butane
-0.49
°C
Isobutane
-7
°C
Nitrogen
-195.8
°C
The speciﬁc weight of LNG is approximately half than water and its volume is reduced 600
times than the corresponding gaseous NG, meaning a respective increase in energy density.
As a comparison, Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) to 25 MPa presents a density of 185 kg/m3
while LNG production permits to go up to 460 kg/m3.
The history of liqueﬁed natural gas starts back in 1914, when Godfrey Cabot received the ﬁrst
patent for an LNG process. In 1941, the ﬁrst commercial LNG production installation was
developed in Cleveland, Ohio, while the ﬁrst base-load LNG plant was launched in Arzew,
Algeria in 1964 [12]. In the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s, LNG ﬁgures rose considerably reaching a
volume in LNG trade of 173 million ton in 2008 with a speciﬁc increase of 31 % from 2004 [5].
The success of LNG is seen in the ﬂexibility of LNG supply and transport when compared to
natural transmission by pipeline [5]. Further, LNG’s share of global gas trade reached 33.4 %
in 2014 growing 2.4 % from 2013 [1]. Speciﬁcally, the total nameplate liquefaction capacity
consists of 298 MTPA while global LNG imports achieved 239.2 Mt, with roughly 75 % of global
LNG demand by Asia. 40 % of global LNG volumes are supplied by the Middle-East, with Qatar
playing the world leading role with 24.5 million tons. Nigeria represents the second exporter
with a volume of 10 million tons [13]. The world’s LNG production is directed towards 30
importing countries with 110 LNG receiving terminals and a total regasiﬁcation capacity of
751 MTPA. Japan represents the most relevant importer receiving roughly 47 % of the total
LNG prduction. Other signiﬁcant LNG direction are towards Korea, India, Brazil and Argentina.
In Europe the biggest import is set by UK [13].
6
==PAGE:25==
2.2. LNG plants
2.2
LNG plants
According to their size and destination, LNG plants are usually identiﬁed as [14]:
• Base-load plants: they consist of large plants directly linked to a speciﬁc gas ﬁeld
development and serve to transport gas from the ﬁeld. They typically provide production
capacities higher than 3 MTPA of LNG. The fundamental worldwide LNG production is
fed by this category of plants.
• Peak-shaving plants: they represent smaller plants which are connected to a gas network.
In periods of limited gas requirements, NG is liqueﬁed and LNG is stored as a gas buffer.
LNG is then re-vaporized in short time horizons when gas demand is considerable.
These plants present a limited liquefaction capacity while a signiﬁcant storage and
vaporization capability is needed in order to deal with sudden and relevant variations in
gas demand. These systems have been developed especially in the United States.
• Small-scale plants: they are connected to a gas network for continuous LNG production
in a smaller scale. LNG is then supplied by LNG carriers to customers with moderate
need of fuel for energy uses. This type of LNG plant has a typical production capacity
lower than 0.5 MTPA. Several plants within this operational category have been built-up
in Norway and China.
Typically, an LNG plant comprises the following units: feed gas compression, CO2 removal,
NG liquefaction, refrigeration system and make-up unit, LNG storage and loading [15].
2.3
LNG pre-treatment
Before its liquefaction, Natural Gas needs a pre-treatment section. Treatment implies the
removal of carbon dioxide, condensate, organic sulfur compounds and Hg. The objective
of pre-treatment is to avoid blockage in the liquefaction process, prevent damage to the
equipment and ensure the suitable standards in terms of NG composition and heat content,
which differs from country to country [16]. The ﬁrst stage consists of CO2 and H2S removal.
Speciﬁcally, CO2 molar fraction is reduced below 50 ppm in the Natural Gas feed in order to
avoid relevant freezing in the liquefaction process pipelines while H2S and total sulfur content
are respectively brought below 4 ppm and 25 ppm, respectively [14]. An amine solvent process
is the most adopted solution. The process includes an absorber tower in which lean solvent
contacts the NG and absorbs acid gas components, thus turning to rich solvent. The rich
solvent exits the bottom of the absorber and regenerates with a drop in pressure and with heat
supply in a stripper tower. The obtained lean solvent is then again recirculated and pumped
up to the absorber pressure [14].
7
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Background
The second stage implies dehydration to reduce water freezing issues in the liquefaction
pipelines. The NG feed should be completely dried before approaching the heavy duty cooling
section of the liquefaction process. The effective drying process usually implies 0.01 µg
m3 as
admitted threshold in feed water content [16]. The dominating primary solvent in processing
industry to dehydrate gases is Triethylene Glycol (TEG), which mixes with the moist natural
gas in a contactor tower. The tower includes a structured packing bed to optimize the mixing
between the NG feed and TEG, rising the contact time and surface. However, TEG cannot
ensure the complete desired dehydration level since small amount of water escapes the
process. Successive molecular sieves are used to respond to this purpose. A third precautional
step takes place in the NG pre-cooling of the liquefaction process, where remaining molecules
of water are condensed and ﬂashed [16].
The successive step consists of Hg removal. Hg has to be removed since it causes corrosion
in the pipelines and in the heat exchangers. An activated bed ﬁlter is used for the purpose
which must be replaced every four years on average since a very effective Hg ﬁltration must
be ensured. In fact, an Hg content in the range of 10 ng
m3 is enough to damage the system
equipment [16].
The ﬁnal step in the treatment process consists of a Duster installation in order to free the NG
feed from small solid particles which could provoke clogging in the system connections [16].
The overall process is depicted in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Simpliﬁed scheme for Natural Gas pre-treatment process
2.4
LNG liquefaction stage
Heat transfer across a ﬁnite temperature difference leads to irreversibilities, which directly
affect power consumption in the refrigeration process. The inﬂuence of the heat-transfer
temperature driving force increases with decreasing temperature level at which the heat
transfer occurs [17]. Thus, in processes for natural gas liquefaction, the temperature difference
in the heat exchangers should be reduced as much as possible in order to ensure an energy
efﬁcient design. This is also the reason why meticulous thermodynamic modelling should be
performed in the design procedure to ensure practical feasibility of the ﬁnal design solution
[17]. Since Natural gas consists of a zeotropic mixture, its phase change occurs with a varying
8
==PAGE:27==
2.4. LNG liquefaction stage
temperature proﬁle. Hence, to be able to provide an effective matching of the composite
curves in the liquefaction process, systems adopt multi-stage refrigeration cycles combined
in a cascade or imply mixed refrigerant agents which evaporate and condense at gliding
temperature, allowing close correspondence with the NG cooling curve even in a single stage
[12].
In general, with regard to the solutions in use, the processes for Natural Gas liquefaction can
be distinguished according to three fundamental approaches: cascade, mixed-refrigerant
and expander or turbine-based cycles [18]. The three categories can be recognized in the
classiﬁcation provided by Bahadori [14], together with some possible future possibilities and
trends.
2.4.1
Cascade cycles
With regard to the cascade refrigerant cycle, NG is typically cooled, condensed and sub-
cooled in three separated circuits which use propane, ethylene (or ethane) and methane as
characteristic refrigerant ﬂuids, respectively. The three circuits can be equipped with multiple
sub-stages [18]. The system is also often addressed as ConocoPhillips® as it was ﬁrst installed
in 1969 in ConocoPhillips® liquefaction facility at Kenai, Alaska. After that, ConocoPhillips®
Optimized Cascade Process has been licensed to nine additional trains for a total of 36.4 MTPA
[19]. Its simpliﬁed conﬁguration is depicted in Figure (2.2). The cascade cycles need low
amounts of power, since the ﬂow of required refrigerant in the component circuits is limited.
It guarantees certain ﬂexibility since each circuit can be dealt separately [4]. Conversely, their
fundamental drawback deals with the relevant investment and maintenance costs due to the
high number of components required in the refrigeration sub-circuits. Therefore, cascade
cycles are only used for large-scale plants [4]. Another peculiar feature of the ConocoPhillips®
process lies in the ’two-trains-in-one’ concept: plants are conﬁgured so that equipment with
higher maintenance costs as gas turbines and compressors are duplicate leading to higher
production efﬁciency, wider range of capacity and maintenance ﬂexibility and optimization of
plant efﬁciency [19].
2.4.2
Mixed refrigerant processes
Mixed-refrigerant cycles (MRC) imply single or multiple mixed refrigerants instead of the
pure refrigerants used in cascade cycles. Mixtures of nitrogen and hydrocarbons are usually
adopted in order to construct a proper temperature proﬁle which matches the NG proﬁle. The
characteristic of mixture processes ensures small temperature driving forces which increase
process efﬁciency [18]. The principal LNG production plant using mixed refrigerant as working
ﬂuid consists of the Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant Process (2.3), also known as APCI
since it was ﬁrst licensed by Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.® or denoted as C3-MR (Propane-
Mixed refrigerant). Currently this system represents about 77 % of total LNG production
capacity. The ﬁrst section is a propane cooling stage which cools the mixed refrigerant and
9
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Background
Figure 2.2: Typical cascade cycle
inlet treated Natural Gas below -30◦C. Condensation and further cooling of the NG take place
in a heat exchanger tower (cryogenic column) using a mixed refrigerant. Speciﬁcally, the
mixed refrigerant is splitted in a heavy cooler agent which cools the Natural Gas warm bundle
(bottom part of the cryogenic column) to roughly -50◦C and a light coolant which chills the
NG stream to -160◦C in its cold bundle (upper part of the heat exchanger tower) [16]. In
both bundles, the cooling effect takes place by previous expansion of the respective mixed
refrigerant which cools itself and the NG stream. The heat exchangers in the tower are usually
spiral wound heat exchangers (SWHE) because of their ﬂexible and controllable operation
and their capability to provide effective and relevant heat exchange.
Another developed technology in this ﬁeld is the Dual Mixed Refrigerant process (DMR) which
use two mixed working ﬂuids throughout the cooling chain. Speciﬁcally, Natural Gas is pre-
cooled by a ﬁrst suitable mixture of Ethane, Propane, Butane and Methane while the further
liquefaction is provided by another mixed refrigerant made by a suitable combination of
Nitrogen, Methane. Ethane and Propane [14]. The process is considered to be among the most
efﬁcient possible systems.
Furthermore, the Mixed Fluid Cascade system (MFC) implies mixed coolants in the LNG
production process. The conﬁguration was developed by Linde®/Statoil® LNG Technology
Alliance and was ﬁrst applied in Snohvit LNG plant, Norway, in 2007, representing the ﬁrst
European base-load LNG plant. The pre-cooling process uses a mixture of Ethane and Propane
whereas for the liquefaction process the suitable blend consists of a combination of Methane,
Ethane and Propane. Finally, the sub-cooling process implies a mixture of Methane, Ethane
and Nitrogen. Pre-cooling, liquefaction and sub-cooling stages occur in a cascade system
[20]. Therefore, the conﬁguration combines the advantages of cascade and mixed refriger-
ant approaches, attaining high efﬁciency levels and very low cycle compressor shaft power
requirements [21].
10
==PAGE:29==
2.4. LNG liquefaction stage
In general, systems using mixed refrigerants present relevant advantages seen in a simpler
conﬁguration and a limited amount of equipment as it requires only one compressor and
suitable vessels for the refrigerant separation for the different stages. The discretization in
different stages needs to ﬁnd a trade-off between the increase in energy efﬁciency and the
greater complexity. A higher number of stages reduce the refrigerant ﬂow and hence power
consumption. Therefore, power requirements close to the ones of cascade systems can be
obtained, but with signiﬁcantly simpler conﬁgurations [4]. One relevant feature of these
systems is their sensitivity to changes in feed gas composition which require variations in
refrigerant composition in order to maintain good correspondence between the temperature
proﬁles and, therefore, to ensure efﬁcient operation and full capacity [18].
Figure 2.3: Typical propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant cycle
2.4.3
Expander and turbine-based processes
Turning to the expander or turbine-based technologies, process refrigeration is usually ob-
tained by compression and successive expansion of a single-component gas stream. In
particular, the liquefaction technologies which belong to this category consist mainly of [14]:
• Pre-cooled Joule-Thomson (J-T) cycle: a closed-cycle refrigerator (often using Propane
as refrigerant) precools compressed NG, which is then partially liqueﬁed during suit-
able expansion in a J-T valve. The robust and simple cycle does not provide relevant
efﬁciency.
• Nitrogen refrigeration cycle: it is addressed as closed Brayton/Claude cycle. Nitrogen
works as refrigerant in a closed-cycle refrigerator with a compressor, turboexpander and
heat exchanger. NG is cooled and liqueﬁed in the heat exchanger. The simple cycle does
11
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Background
not let considerable efﬁciency. However, it can be increased by multiple refrigeration
stages. As summed in Figure 2.4, the cold gas stream at low pressure after the expander
ﬂows through a number of heat exchange stages where it cools the incoming NG and also
the incoming cycle gas. The gas is then re-compressed by the main-cycle compressor
and booster compressor. The refrigerant gases used in the expander cycle are normally
methane or nitrogen [18].
• Open cycles with turboexpander (Claude cycle): a near-isentropic turbo-expander cools
the compressed NG stream, which is further liqueﬁed through expansion in a J-T valve.
They have the advantage that no refrigerants other than Natural Gas are used. Efﬁciency
can be risen by more complex cycle conﬁgurations.
• Turboexpander at gas pressure drop: high-pressure NG is received and low-pressure
gas is sent out to distribution lines. By expansion, a fraction of LNG can be liqueﬁed
with little or no compression power expense, which make the technology attracting.
However, special circumstances need to be encountered to apply this design, which is
applied for peak-shaving purpose.
In general, expander cycles allow rapid and simple start-ups and shut-downs, making them
very attractive for peak-shaving plants. As the refrigerant is gaseous and the heat exchange is
performed with wider temperature differences, they can stand feed gas composition changes
with low technical requirements [18]. A crucial drawback of expander cycles stays in their
relatively high power consumption, compared with the cascade and MRCs, which represents
the main reason why they are only utilized for small ﬂexible plants, where cycle’s simplicity is
privileged [4].
Figure 2.4: Typical expander cycle
Finally, some other simpler solutions or other possibilities still under testing and experimental
phase can be found in the ﬁeld of LNG production. In particular, they consist of [14]:
12
==PAGE:31==
2.5. LNG storage
• Liquid nitrogen open-cycle evaporation: Liquid nitrogen is boiled and super-heated
in heat exchangers, cooling and liquefying the counter-ﬂowing NG stream. Warmed
nitrogen is discharged to the atmosphere as it is harmless. It represents an extremely
simple device which has been used for limited LNG production. Cost-effectiveness
largely depend on the price paid for liquid nitrogen as more than 1 kg of liquid nitrogen
is necessary to attain 1 kg of LNG.
• Stirling cycle: it consists of a cold gas closed cycle using regenerative heat exchangers
and gas displacer to yield cryogenic temperatures which can partially liquefy NG. The
pistons shuttle the working gas back and forth between the heated space above the
piston and the cooled space below it through a regenerator. Until now, only very small-
capacity Stirling refrigerators are recorded.
• Thermo-acoustic driver oriﬁce pulse tube refrigerator (TADOPTR): Heat is applied to
maintain standing wave that drives working ﬂuid through a Stirling-based cycle. The
TADOPTR technology is essentially a cooling machine based on a modiﬁed Stirling
refrigeration cycle, except that the working gas that achieves the cooling is not displaced
and (de)compressed by means of pistons, but by means of acoustic wave power. The
working gas consists of Helium. The advantage is that no moving parts are implied [22].
Currently, applications including LNG production for transporting purposes are being
developed. However, they are still in demonstration stage, both for small-scale and
ﬁeld-scale levels .
2.5
LNG storage
After the completion of the liquefaction process, LNG needs to be stored before the ship-
ping loading. There are three main types of LNG storage, which are addressed as ’single
containment’, ’double containment’ and ’full containment’. The differences lie in the way
the secondary containment is dealt, which ensures safety protection in the event of a leak
[14]. ’Single containment’ storage implies a 9 % nickel inner tank and a carbon steel outer
wall. The secondary containment is ensured by a dike surrounding the tank since the outer
carbon steel walls are not capable of holding cryogenic materials. Secondary containment in
the case of ’double containment’ storage is provided by the outer tank walls since they consist
of post-tensioned concrete which holds cryogenic stress. The containment is not ’full’ since
cold vapors in contact with the roof may cause its failing, event which is avoided in the ’full
containment’ technology as the tank roof is made of more suitable materials [14].
2.6
LNG as marine fuel
LNG has served as a marine fuel for about ﬁfty years, but essentially on LNG carriers as ’boil-
off’ gas. At present, it can represent a marine fuel and replace the heavy fuel oils (HFO) and
marine Diesel oils (MDO). In order to reach higher efﬁciency levels, LNG has been adopted in
13
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Background
Diesel engines, two and four strokes. Until now, the adopted conﬁgurations consist of Dual
fuel or Three fuel engines. They can run on heavy fuel oils, marine Diesel oils and Natural Gas.
In both conﬁgurations, a pilot dose of liquid fuel (usually 1 % of marine Diesel oil) needs to
be injected to ensure the self-ignition of the NG-air mixture [7]. This conﬁguration ensures
the current emission requirements but would not allow meeting the NOx emission levels
required by IMO Tier 3. In this case, selective catalytic reactors would be needed to puriﬁcate
the exhaust gases. An opportunity to meet NOx requirements would be to further develop
spark ignition marine engines, which were not considered for marine purposes before the
year 2000 [7].
In addition, an advantage of LNG is that engines need less maintenance as gas combustion is
considerably cleaner than HFO or MDO options [23].
Clearly, some drawbacks of choosing LNG as shipping fuel exist. Since its density is signif-
icantly lower than traditional fuels, the space occupied by tanks is greater, and for safety
reasons, additional space is needed to isolate the gas system. The total volume used by all LNG
facilities on board is approximately 3-4 times as high as for conventional fuels. This directly
mean relevant space loss for most cargo-ships. However, until now, the main disadvantage
consists in large-scale LNG availability. Especially for ships requiring route ﬂexibility, LNG
availability is not yet widespread and relevant improvements in the supply chain need to be
attained [23].
2.7
Environmental impact of LNG as marine fuel
The interest towards the implementation of LNG as shipping fuel has been fed by the possibil-
ity to reduce sulfur and NOx emissions. To achieve environmental sustainability, an energy
fuel must not only present low emission factors during its exploitation, but also the whole fuel
life cycle including extraction, production and distribution must be assessed [24]. LNG shows
to reduce pollution from SO2 and NOx, which decrease the acidiﬁcation and eutrophication
potentials in the life cycle comparing to heavy fuel oils (HFO) [24].
However, even if CO2 emissions are roughly 25 % lower compared with fuel oils due to
the higher heating value and the lower carbon content in the Natural Gas [25], total CO2-
equivalent emissions in the whole perspective are not necessarily reduced. In fact, a non-
negligible percentage of methane by-passes the combustion process and leaks out unburnt.
Methane presents a Global Warming Potential (GWP) 72 times as high as CO2 for a 20-year
perspective and 25 times as high in a 100-year time horizon [25]. The impact on climate
change in terms of GHG emissions denoted to stay within a range of -20 % to +5 % with respect
to HFO [26].
Hence, it can be inferred that LNG reduces the regional and local environmental impacts
whilst its impact on climate change is of the same order of magnitude as with HFO exploitation
[24] considering its global warming potential in the life cycle.
14
==PAGE:33==
2.7. Environmental impact of LNG as marine fuel
Therefore, in order to enhance LNG attractiveness also in terms of GHG emissions, the decrease
of the methane slip from the ship engines must be achieved. Brynolf et al. [24] comments
on the fact that the recourse to LNG can prepare the implementation the use of liqueﬁed
methane and methanol from biomass which have the potentials to decrease the climate
impact. However, the greenhouse gas emissions connected to land use change and the large
use of electricity during bio-gas production should as well be included for a reliable overall
picture.
15
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
3 Methods
3.1
Approach
The present work analyses Natural Gas liquefaction following a common approach among
the investigated systems. First, process modelling of the different technologies is performed
by means of Aspen Plus V7.2 from Aspentech group [27]. The aim is to derive the peculiar
characteristics of each technology, determining the main driving parameters which affect the
performances and which need to be taken into account for suitable system design. Subse-
quently, system optimisation is pursued by connecting Matlab R2014a [28] optimisation tools
with Aspen Plus process models. The feature was developed by Laboratoire d’Energetique
Industrielle (LENI) of Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL) in the OSMOSE
Platform project as a tool for the design and analysis of integrated energy systems [29]. The
objective is to assess the margin of improvement for the different solutions and the directions
to follow for satisfactory design.
3.2
Investigation boundaries
The project deals with NG liquefaction technologies based on cascade systems and mixed
refrigerant cycles. Applications within the small scale purpose are investigated, with limited
Natural Gas ﬂow rates. With regard to cascade systems, conﬁgurations with single or multiple
sub-stages are investigated. Concerning mixed refrigerant systems, single mixed refriger-
ant cycles and propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant cycles are examined. The objective of
the analyses is to investigate the opportunities for maximizing the performance of the LNG
process. Furthermore, considerations on equipment technical speciﬁcations are assessed,
particularly focusing on heat exchangers.
The present work is seen as complementary with the Thesis project "Techno-economic analy-
17
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Methods
sis of LNG production alternatives" developed by Matteo Nagy within the Sustainable Energy
MSc at Technical University of Denmark, which focuses on expansion-based liquefaction
processes and provides economic comparisons among the different technologies. The two
analyses are therefore meant to complete the overall insight on the main LNG production
systems which are employed in the industry.
3.3
Process Modelling Tool
Aspen Plus is one of the most popular process simulation software and is used by the bulk,
ﬁne, specialty and biochemical industries for the design, operation and optimization of manu-
facturing facilities [27]. In Aspen Plus, modelling of the different technologies is performed by
ﬁrst implementing their process ﬂowsheet, which deﬁnes the operation units and the relative
involved streams. Process simulation is then set by specifying the chemical components in
the system, deﬁning the suitable property methods to determine the thermophysical condi-
tions and ﬁnally by precising the input speciﬁcations for the streams and the unit operation
models. In detail, the software solves the sets of equations related to mass and heat balances
using a sequential approach [30]. Process simulation by ﬂowsheeting can be implemented
towards different aims. Speciﬁcally, it can pursue a design target, where it proposes a new
system which can satisfy the requirements, an operation objective, where the analysis tries to
reproduce the behaviour of an existing installation, and a rating evaluation, which examines if
given components can comply with the design speciﬁcations [30]. Finally, simulations may be
steady-state or dynamic.
Furthermore, in the performed simulations, three peculiarities of Aspen Plus were regularly
implemented:
• Sensitivity Analysis: studying the sensitivity of process performances to changes in
operational variables. With Aspen Plus, inputs are allowed to vary and the effects are
tabulated on a results set.
• Design Speciﬁcations: meeting a speciﬁc design output by manipulating a simulation
input variable.
• Transfer: transferring the speciﬁed conditions for a block or a stream to a speciﬁc item
in order to allow correspondence.
When performing modelling simulations, a fundamental phase regards the estimation of
the thermophysical properties of pure components and mixtures. In Aspen Plus, the feature
is pursued by deﬁning a suitable property method. It consists of an estimation tool which
calculates a number of thermodynamic (fugacity, enthalpy, entropy, Gibbs free energy and vol-
ume) and transport (viscosity, thermal conductivity, diffusion coefﬁcient and surface tension)
18
==PAGE:37==
3.4. Fundamental parameters for LNG plants’ performances
parameters [27]. In the case of Peng-Robinson property method, which supports the widest
operational range and the largest variety of systems, the thermodynamic entities are related in
the equation of state (EOS) according to:
P =
RT
(c +Vm)−b −
a
(Vm +c)(Vm +c +b)+b(Vm +c −b)
(3.1)
where a, b, c are the component speciﬁc parameters. They are taken from Aspen Plus database
for pure components or recalculated for mixture components [27].
Particularly relevant for the assumptions and the limitations of the present work, the software
evaluates the feasibility of the heat exchange in multiple-stream units by lumped approach per
zone [27]. The method is also known in the literature as Distributed parameters models (DPM)
and discretizes the heat exchanger in multiple zones where assumptions as constant ﬂuid
properties within each zone can be fulﬁlled [31]. The other option would be to divide the heat
exchanger into elements of some given length following a geometry-oriented approach [31].
In these terms, the logarithmic mean temperature difference LMTD, which is used throughout
the analyses as a parameter describing the matching between the temperature proﬁles, is
evaluated by Aspen Plus as an average based on the zone discretization. Therefore, single
LMTDs are calculated by the software in each zone and a ﬁnal average asset is then provided.
3.4
Fundamental parameters for LNG plants’ performances
The thermodynamic performances of the different liquefaction systems were evaluated by
energy and exergy indicators. The energy-based indication was provided by deriving the
Coefﬁcient of Performance COP of the overall liquefaction cycle as ratio between the Natural
Gas cooling demand and the power expenditure in the whole cycle:
COP = NG Cooling demand
Ptotal
(3.2)
The performances of the component cycles (as for cascade conﬁgurations and pre-cooling
auxiliary sections) were estimated as ratios between the total cooling duty provided in the
relative heat exchangers and the power consumption in the speciﬁc compressors. Since the
previous deﬁnition of COP only considers the chilling down of Natural Gas as cooling effect
and gven the fact that component cycles are also meant to cool down their own hot refrigerant
streams, the indicator for the component cycles was indicated as Heat Transferred per Power
(HTPP), for the sake of consistency. It indicates the amount of heat ﬂow rate absorbed by the
refrigerant per kW of power expenditure (kWheat/kWpower ). As the considered cooling effect
is higher, including refrigerant own cooling demand, HTPPs stands above system COP which
assumes only NG coolind demand as useful effect. They evaluated the performance of the
19
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Methods
heat exchange in the components’ sections and were only compared among correspondent
cycles.
Exergy-based overall performances were provided by comparing the exergy ﬂow rate of Natural
Gas along the liquefaction process and the actual power consumption required for the overall
process. The Natural Gas exergy ﬂow rate corresponds to the ideal power which would be
spent in the system if no irreversibilities occur. The major irreversibilities in LNG processes
are caused by losses in the compression and associated after-cooling, temperature difference
driving forces across the heat exchangers and losses due to the refrigerant letdown. World-
scale optimised LNG plants can require more than 2.5 times the minimum theoretical power
requirements [32]. The indicator comparing ideal and actual power consumption is denoted
as Figure of Merit (FOM) and is derived as [33]:
FOM = Pideal
Preal
(3.3)
where the ideal power is calculated as the Natural Gas exergy ﬂow rate in the liquefaction
process, referring to 293 K as ambient temperature (T0):
Pideal =
˙
mNG[(hL −h0)−T0(sL −s0)]
(3.4)
In the present analyses, the Figure of Merit and COP were calculated referring to the NG stream
entering the overall liquefaction process and to the Liqueﬁed Natural Gas stream exiting the
last unit ( at -150◦C and 33 bar). Since the focus of the work was to liquefy Natural Gas with the
most effective solution through refrigeration processes, the successive ﬂashing stag was not
included in the evaluations. Its inclusion becomes important if economic evaluations are to
be performed as the amount of LNG and ﬂash gas after the expansion may vary according to
Natural Gas composition. Since the present investigations regarded only process evaluations,
the focus was directed only towards the refrigeration cycle whose NG inlet and outlet streams
were regarded as boundaries. Hence, mass ﬂow rate in Equation 3.4 only refers to the NG feed
stream and does not take into account successive ﬂash gas.
Furthermore, a ﬁrst evaluation on equipment requirements was assessed, which particularly
regarded the heat exchange units. It aimed at deriving the total heat conductance (UA) in
the system network, which represents a measure of the size and heat transfer level the heat
exchangers need to attain.
Total system UA considered not only the heat exchangers in the NG liquefaction chain but also
the coolers included in the refrigerant cycles. In fact, coolers are implied in order to chill down
the refrigerant streams from the compressor outlet conditions to the desired conditions at the
20
==PAGE:39==
3.5. Optimisation Tools
inlet of the liquefaction system. Heat conductance for the heat exchangers participating to the
liquefaction chain were estimated by Aspen Plus software by heat exchange zone analysis. UAs
for the refrigerant coolers were instead estimated assuming typical cooling by ﬂowing water at
10◦C as inlet temperature and at 40◦C as exiting temperature. Once the overall logarithmic
mean temperature difference is evaluated by Equation 3.5, heat conductance in the cooler is
estimated from the cooling demand (heat duty) as in Equation 3.6:
LMT D = ∆T1 −∆T2
ln( ∆T1
∆T2 )
(3.5)
UAcooler =
˙Q
LMT D
(3.6)
∆T1 represents the temperature difference between the inlet temperature of the hot stream
entering the cooler and the water outlet temperature while ∆T2 consists of the temperature
difference between the outlet hot stream temperature and the inlet water temperature, since
counter-current conﬁguration is assumed.
3.5
Optimisation Tools
The OSMOSE platform implies a Genetic Algorithm for the optimisation phase of energy
systems [29]. Speciﬁcally, a Genetic Algorithm is an heuristic solution search method which
applies evolutionary processes to evolve solutions to speciﬁc problems. GAs operate on a
population of artiﬁcial chromosomes. Each chromosome symbolizes a solution to a problem
and presents a ﬁtness coefﬁcient which measures how suitable a solution is to a particular
criterion [34]. The calculation approach starts from a random population of chromosomes
from which GA performs a process of ﬁtness-based selection and recombination to reproduce
a successive generation of possible solutions [34]. The objective of the reproduction operator
is then to emphasize good solutions and erase unfeasible or ineffective solutions in a popula-
tion, while keeping its size constant. Therefore, the algorithms makes multiple copies of good
solutions which are set in place of the unfeasible and bad ones [35].
Two fundamental mechanisms support the recombination process: genetic operators cross-
overs and mutation [34]. Cross-over implies the mixing of genetic material (in general terms,
decision variables of previously experimented solutions) from two selected parent chromo-
somes, characterised by high ﬁtness, to produce one or two child chromosomes. Mutation
operators, on the other hand, act on individual chromosomes, ﬂipping single values inside the
set of decision variables. The reason to mutation lies in the need of keeping diversity in the
population in order to investigate the multiple directions of optimisation in problems with
high number of dimensions [34]. As the recombination process gets further, a sequence of
21
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Methods
successive generations evolves and the mean ﬁtness of the chromosomes increases towards a
desired level.
The optimisation tool builds the possible solutions by assigning suitable values to the speciﬁed
decision variables of the system. Decision variables represent the degrees of freedom in the
system, namely the numerical quantities whose level is not deﬁned and whose impact needs
to be evaluated [30].
The suitability of the built solution is assessed by respect to an objective function which
provides a quantitative performance that needs to be minimized or maximized. In the present
work, total system power consumption and total heat conductance UA represented the two
considered objective functions. Improvements in terms of power consumption were analysed
through single-objective optimisation (SOO), which evaluates the performance of each possi-
ble solution only by respect to the desired asset.
Conversely, minimization of total heat conductance UA was pursued by multi-objective opti-
misation (MOO) together with power reduction target. The reduction of the UA value would
aim at reducing the size and the heat transfer coefﬁcients in the heat exchangers of the system,
with beneﬁts in their associated investment costs.
Hence, multi-objective optimisation deals with several objective functions simultaneously. As
a reduction in power consumption usually requires more efﬁcient equipment, and, in case of
heat exchangers, higher heat conductance level, the two objective functions are conﬂicting.
Hence, it is not possible to pursue a solution which minimizes both solutions, and the inﬁnite
set of the so-called Pareto solutions is seeked. A solution is deﬁned as Pareto-optimal if it is
not anymore possible to make one objective function better off without making the other
objective worse off [30]. Pareto optimal solutions are grouped in Pareto fronts. Figure 3.1
represents one example in which the feasible and unfeasible regions can be distinguished,
together with the two solutions minimising objective function A or B, respectively. The feasible
region is denoted as sub-optimal since margin for Pareto improvement is still left, i.e. it is
possible to make one objective better off without making the other criterion worse off.
Pareto solutions are seeked since they imply that the objectives have been improved as much
as possible without losing anything in exchange [36]. Two main approaches are related to
Pareto based decision-making. In the ﬁrst, the two objective functions are combined to deﬁne
an Aggregate Objective Function, which provides a single optimal solution. The second one
implies generating many potential Pareto optimal designs, followed by choosing the most
attractive among them. [36].
Furthermore, the analysis on multi-objective optimisations examined the level of dependency
between the decision variables and the optimisation objectives by deriving the so-called Pear-
son’s linear correlation coefﬁcients ρ. They measure the strength of the linear relation between
22
==PAGE:41==
3.5. Optimisation Tools
Figure 3.1: Example of Pareto front for multi-objective optimisation
two assets [37]. Speciﬁcally, 1 means total positive linear correlation, 0 no deﬁned correla-
tion, and -1 represents linear negative correlation. Two categories of correlation coefﬁcients
between the decision variables and the objective functions were derived: linear correlation
coefﬁcients and partial linear correlation coefﬁcients. In the ﬁrst case, the correlation between
one decision variable and the objective function is evaluated when the other variables are
allowed to be adjusted to achieve Pareto optimal conditions. Hence, it represents an indication
on how the overall system reacts to the change in the single variable if Pareto optimality is
desired to be attained. In the second case, the inﬂuence of a given decision variable on each
objective is assessed when the effects of all the other decision variables are off, namely when
their level is kept constant [30].
Finally, another fundamental feature of the optimisation approach is to implement suitable
penalty functions in order to erase unfeasible solutions from the search for the optimal one.
In detail, when a decision set does not respect a speciﬁc system constraint, a penalty function
addresses to it an extremely high value of the objective function in order to cross it out from
further research.
23
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
4 Process modelling
4.1
Introduction
This chapter deals with the process modelling phase of the chosen liquefaction technologies.
In particular, the aim is to build reliable baseline cases which will be employed as reference in
the optimisation assessments. Moreover, considerations on the suitability of process mod-
elling for possible deﬁnitive system design are to be addressed. Furthermore, investigations on
the role of system parameters and feed stream conditions are included to extend the insights.
Assumptions and limitations behind the process modelling are discussed in order to assess
their impact.
Speciﬁcally, Section 4.2 presents the crucial assumptions and approaches which were main-
tained throughout the process modelling of the different technologies. Section 4.3, 4.4 and 4.5
deal with the three speciﬁc technologies to be investigated: single mixed refrigerant systems,
Cascade systems and propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant cycles. In detail, each Section
ﬁrst perform a description of the main process, together with the exposition of the speciﬁc
methods. Successively, the obtained outcomes are there presented and brieﬂy discussed.
Section 4.6 gathers the fundamental outcomes and discusses the main implications. Finally
4.7 underlines the essential ﬁndings.
4.2
Methods and Assumptions
The thermodynamic modelling phase was based on some crucial assumptions which regarded
Natural Gas feed conditions and composition, its desired cooling level and the fundamental
parameters for system equipment. In order to provide consistent comparison and to derive the
fundamental differences, the chosen speciﬁcations were kept constant among the modelled
liquefaction systems. In particular, the choices covered the following aspects:
25
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
• Natural Gas feeds the systems at 20◦C and 33 bar and is thought to be cooled down to
-150◦C. Subsequently, it is expanded to 1.7 bar, which corresponds to the desired delivery
temperature of LNG for marine fuels, reaching approximately -160◦C. Furthermore, it is
to be separated into its ﬂash gas fraction and its liquid fraction (LNG). The latter consists
of the desired product from the liquefaction system. The speciﬁc values are suggested
by Kosan Crisplant ® [38].
• The reference composition of Natural Gas which was adopted in the present and further
simulations was taken from the Danish case, once pentanes, CO2 and water had been
removed [5]. It is speciﬁed in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Assumed Natural Gas composition in the thermodynamic modelling of the different liquefaction
systems
Denmark
Methane
90.30%
Ethane
6.02%
Propane
2.43%
n-Butane
0.57%
Isobutane
0.37%
n-Pentane
0.00%
Isopentane
0.00%
Nitrogen
0.31%
Carbon dioxide
0.00%
Water
0.00%
• Natural gas mass ﬂow rate to be liqueﬁed is kept at 1 kg/s during the simulations.
Therefore, the results of compression power spent in the liquefaction system, even if
indicated as kW, are intended as kW per single kg/s of Natural Gas or simply kJ per kg of
NG. The two notations hence provide the same outcome. The present NG ﬂow rate is
suitable for small or limited scale applications.
• Compressor performances were addressed by assessing suitable values of polytropic
and mechanical efﬁciencies. In particular, the former was set to 0.82 while the latter
was assumed to be 1. The level of polytropic efﬁciency was established with a conser-
vative approach based on the values found in literature. Ransbarger (ConocoPhillips
®) conﬁrms that current efﬁciencies for centrifugal compresion in liquefaction service
are in excess of 80 % [39]. Finn [40] and Jones et al. [41] expect compressor polytropic
efﬁciency to approach 85 % . Hence, 82 % was considered a suitable and reliable level,
which was assumed, among the others, by Martin [42] for centrifugal compressors for
Natural Gas liquefaction processes.
• Thermodynamic properties were evaluated through Peng-Robinson property method. It
consists of one of the most common and reliable property methods and is used, among
the others, by Chang [33], Lee et al. [43] and Wang et al. [44].
26
==PAGE:45==
4.3. Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO)
• In the heat exchangers, axial temperature equilibrium was assumed both for inlet and
outlet conditions. Therefore, streams entering and exiting the heat exchangers are
intended to present the same temperature when belonging to the same side (hot or
cold). The approach is commonly adopted in modelling refrigeration processes and is
consistently implied in their work by Chang [33] and Wang [44].
• The desired minimum temperature approach for the heat exchangers in the different
simulations was chosen at 3◦C. The value is considered as reliable and conservative. In
their work, Chang [33] assumes ideal conditions with minimum temperature approach
set to zero while Austbø and Gundersen [17] assume 2 K as minimum temperature
difference. The present level of 3 K was set in order to pursue efﬁcient and feasible
heat exchange. In practice, for instance, plate heat exchangers can present temperature
differences as low as 2◦C [45].
• No pressure drops were assumed for the streams in the heat exchangers and in the
connections between the different elements of the liquefaction systems.
• Longitudinal heat transfer and internal ﬂow instabilities were neglected.
4.3
Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO)
4.3.1
Introduction to the process
The process represents one of the simplest conﬁgurations currently in operation in the industry.
The system is more commonly known as ’PRICO’ process (Poly Refrigerant Integrated Cycle
Operations). The process was ﬁrst used in 1981 at the LNG plant of Skilda, Algeria, with three
liquefaction trains [32]. The refrigerant is a suitable mixture containing methane, ethane (or
ethylene), propane, butanes, pentanes and nitrogen [14]. Speciﬁcally, as depicted in ﬁgure
4.1, mixed refrigerant is compressed and driven through the main heat exchanger where it
is condensed. Afterwards, it is expanded across a J-T valve and returned to the compressor
by ﬂowing counter-currently in the heat exchanger, thus providing the cooling effects to its
own condensing stream and to the natural gas. The composition of the refrigerant used in
the process is largely depending on feed composition, feed pressure, ambient temperature
and operating pressures [14]. In fact, refrigerant composition is related to the NG since
matching between the temperature proﬁles must be pursued, particularly in the phase change
zones which occur at non-constant temperatures as they both consist of zeotropic mixtures.
The advantages of the described system consist in its simplicity, in the small equipment
requirements along with the consequent reduction in capital costs. Conversely, its drawbacks
are seen in the considerable amount of refrigerant required in the system, which leads to a
relevant compression power, especially if the system is not optimised. As a result, its capacity
is currently limited to 1.2 MTPA per train and therefore more trains would be necessary to
achieve higher capacity levels [14].
27
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Figure 4.1: Principal ﬂowsheet diagram for the SMR PRICO process
4.3.2
Assumptions and Modelling
With regard to the speciﬁc process modelling for the PRICO technology, its fundamental
deﬁning points regarded:
• Mixed refrigerant entering the cryogenic cold box is assumed at 20◦C and 18 bar (State
6). The assumed low refrigerant pressure after the expansion valve (state 8) is 3 bar [46].
• With regard to the mixed refrigerant composition, a ﬁrst typical solution was imple-
mented, considering methane, ethane and propane as main components [46]. For
the ﬁrst cases, pentanes were not included in order to ensure vapor conditions at the
compressor inlet, given the fact that the temperatures at the cold stream outlet of the
heat exchanger could not drive their complete vaporization at the speciﬁc pressure.
Pentanes, as the heaviest component species, present in fact the highest boiling point.
The chemical composition for the mixed refrigerant is reported in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Composition on molar basis of mixed refrigerant for the baseline case of the PRICO system
Composition - Molar basis
Refrigerant
Methane
0.284
Ethane
0.307
Propane
0.14
n-Butane
0.08
Isobutane
0.072
n-Pentane
0
Isopentane
0
Nitrogen
0.117
Carbon dioxide
0
Water
0
28
==PAGE:47==
4.3. Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO)
• Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate was instead set in order to meet the desired 3 K of Minimum
Internal Thermal Approach (MITA) in the cold box. Aspen Plus design speciﬁcation tool
was employed for the purpose.
4.3.3
Results
The outcomes from PRICO technology with the speciﬁed inputs and conditions are presented
in Table 4.3. Furthermore, the heat exchange occurring at the cold box is described by the
temperature proﬁle depicted in Figure 4.2. As it can be noticed, the compression power results
to be relevant as a consequence of the considerable refrigerant mass ﬂow rate. The reason
to the high ﬂow rate is seen in the ineffective matching between the temperature proﬁles. In
fact, the average logarithmic mean temperature difference stands roughly 4 times as high as
the minimum allowable temperature difference. The ﬁgure of merit FOM overcomes 20 %,
stating that considerable space for further optimisation is left. In particular, considering
the simple technical conﬁguration, the direction needs to be oriented towards optimising
the refrigerant composition in order to pursue a more accurate correspondence between
the proﬁles, reducing the required mass ﬂow rate and the irreversibilities connected to the
temperature difference driving forces [17].
However, the lower local temperature differences lead to a heat exchange unit which would
require a greater value of heat conductance UA (increase in heat exchange area or in the overall
heat transfer coefﬁcient U).
Table 4.3: Fundamental results from PRICO base simulation
Power consumption
2070
kW
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
11.12
kg/s
Refrigerant high pressure
18
bar
Refrigerant low pressure
3
bar
NG pressure
33
bar
NG mass ﬂow rate
1
kg/s
NG Cooling demand
793
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424.6
kW
FOM
20.51%
[-]
COP
0.38
[-]
Average LMTD
13.3
K
UA HEX
596
kW/K
29
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Figure 4.2: Temperature proﬁles in the cold box of PRICO
Conﬁguration with 2-stream heat exchangers
Furthermore, the PRICO system was also analysed separating the previous cold box (3-stream
heat exchange) into two 2-stream heat exchangers. The ﬂowsheet diagram is accordingly
modiﬁed as depicted in Figure 4.3. The reason behind the simulation lies in the fact that the
conﬁguration with split heat exchange would present plate heat exchangers which are suitable
for small-scale applications with easier design requirements and lower cost investments.
Figure 4.3: Flowsheet diagram for the PRICO process with 2-stream heat exchangers
As shown by Table 4.4, system performances are worsened when the cold box is split into two
2-stream heat exchangers. Essentially, a higher mass ﬂow rate is required to ensure the heat
exchange in both sections respecting the same minimum temperature difference. The fact
leads to higher local temperature differences and average LMTDs and affects signiﬁcantly the
30
==PAGE:49==
4.3. Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO)
Figure of Merit and the COP which fall below 15 % and 0.3, respectively. Figures 4.4 present
the details of the temperature proﬁles in the two units of the cold box.
Table 4.4: Results from the PRICO solution with 2-stream HEXs
Power consumption
3013
kW
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
17.05
kg/s
Refrigerant high pressure
18
bar
Refrigerant low pressure
3
bar
NG Cooling demand
793
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424.6
kW
FOM
14.09%
[-]
COP
0.26
[-]
Average LMTD HEX 1
15.4
K
Average LMTD HEX 2
10.4
K
(a) Temperature proﬁle HEX 1 (Ref-Ref)
(b) Temperature proﬁle HEX 2 (Ref-NG)
Figure 4.4: Temperature proﬁles in the 2-stream heat exchangers for the PRICO case with splitting
Analysis of the assumptions for the heat exchange calculations
The comparison between the solution with 3-stream heat exchangers and 2-stream heat
exchangers provided a direct insight upon the approach assumed by Aspen Plus for heat
exchange calculations, indicated as lumped approach per zone. Speciﬁcally, in case of mul-
tiple stream heat exchangers, the unit is separated into a certain number of zones. In each
component zone, streams pertaining to the same side (hot or cold) are assumed to enter and
exit at the same temperature levels, with their thermodynamic properties considered constant
within the speciﬁc zone.
Hence, in the present case, Natural Gas and hot refrigerant present common temperature level
31
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
at the inlet and outlet of each discretization. Since the cooling demand of the hot refrigerant is
much higher than the one of Natural Gas (total heat duty at roughly 8000 kW and speciﬁc NG
cooling demand at about 800 kW), in each zone cold refrigerant is set to absorb considerably
more heat from the hot refrigerant than from Natural Gas.
In particular, in the 3-stream case, heat exchange calculations are set to make the hot streams
following the hot composite curve (red line in Figure 4.2). In the split 2-stream case, hot
streams exchange heat in two independent units and therefore follow their inner proﬁle re-
lated to their different mass ﬂow rate and speciﬁc heat cp. In the split situation, Natural Gas
follows a steeper proﬁle since its heat exchange is not adjusted zone by zone in order to meet
the composite curve. Therefore, a higher cold refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is required to maintain
3 K as MITA and ensure the heat exchange feasibility. In fact, higher refrigerant mass ﬂow
rate is translated into a more horizontal proﬁle which makes it exiting the heat exchanger at a
lower temperature.
Figure 4.5 presents the graphical comparison between the proﬁle of Natural Gas in the 3-
stream and in the individual 2-stream situations. The ﬁgure illustrates the temperature level of
Natural Gas and cold refrigerant corresponding to each zone of discretization. In both cases,
the 3-stream heat exchanger and the individual 2-stream units were divided into 25 zones to
which lumped approach was applied in the multiple stream case. As it can be denoted, the
proﬁle of Natural Gas follows the composite curve in the ﬁrst case, while in the second case it
presents a much steeper liquefaction zone.
Consequently, cold refrigerant cannot maintain the same temperature levels per zone as in
the 3-stream case. In order to avoid cross-overs, in the Natural Gas-Refrigerant 2-stream heat
exchange unit, cold refrigerant needs to exit at lower temperature and therefore needs to
present higher mass ﬂow rate. The higher cold refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is also translated in a
higher refrigerant own cooling duty.
Furthermore, it can be derived that, if the cold refrigerant can maintain the same temperature
levels zone by zone in the 3-stream heat exchanger and in the 2-stream heat exchangers
without violating any of the individual hot proﬁles’ constraints, the sum of the cold refrigerants
in the 2-streams heat exchangers will be equal to the total sum in the 3-stream case. In fact,
the cold refrigerant streams will operate between the same temperature levels with partial
ﬂow rates.
In the present case, the feature was not possible because of the steeper Natural Gas proﬁle
in the individual 2-stream heat exchanger which would have caused internal cross-over.
Moreover, since the inlet and the desired cooling temperatures are assumed at the same level
between Natural Gas and hot refrigerant, the sum of the cold refrigerant mass ﬂow rates in the
individual case is equal to the total one in the 3-stream situation, only if the cold refrigerants
can maintain the same temperature levels per each zone without violating any internal MITA.
32
==PAGE:51==
4.3. Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO)
Figure 4.5: Analysis on the differences in the temperature proﬁles between the 3-stream and 2-stream conﬁgura-
tions in the cold box
Effects of Natural Gas and Refrigerant conditions and compositions
NG feed pressure and temperature
Furthermore, some initial evaluations were performed
in order to assess the impact of Natural Gas conditions and composition on system power
consumption and Figure of Merit. Table 4.5 denotes that an increase of NG feed pressure de-
creases the required compression power since the system cooling demand is also lowered. The
positive effect of the higher NG pressure is not extended to the FOM as the decline in cooling
demand and in exergy ﬂow rate overcomes the decrease in power consumption. The reason
to the lower FOM is shown by the higher average logarithmic mean temperature difference
(LMTD) which implies less correspondence in the temperature proﬁles. The features are in fact
derived employing the mixed refrigerant at the same pressure and composition. It is important
to state that in the present analyses, the compression power required to compress the Natural
Gas feed stream before the liquefaction cycle is not included. Therefore, the improvements
that can be obtained in the liquefaction section by implying an higher NG pressure are not
always directly translated into a reduction of the total power expenditure.
The role of NG feed temperature was also evaluated and is presented in Table 4.6. A decrease
in feed temperature naturally decreases the NG cooling demand, reducing both power con-
sumption and refrigerant ﬂow rate. In this case, the improvements in compression power
are also followed by a positive trend in FOM, as the average LMTD between the proﬁles is
decreased.
NG composition
In addition, the relevance of Natural Gas composition on power consump-
tion and FOM was assessed. Speciﬁc relevant compositions were taken from typical indigenous
33
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Table 4.5: Impact of Natural gas feed pressure on system performances
NG pressure
Base value
Increase in p
Decrease in p
Value [bar]
33
50
25
Power consumption [kW]
2070
2006
2100
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate [kg/s]
11.12
10.77
11.28
Cooling demand [kW]
793
768
804
Exergy ﬂow [kW]
424.6
380
456.6
FOM [-]
20.51%
18.95%
21.74%
Average LMTD [K]
13.3
14.17
12.48
Table 4.6: Impact of Natural gas feed temperature on system performances
NG Temperature
Base value
Increase in T
Decrease in T
Value [◦C]
20
50
0
Power consumption [kW]
2070
2097
1946
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate [kg/s]
11.12
11.12
10.45
Cooling demand [kW]
793.06
864.39
745.44
Exergy ﬂow rate
424.65
421.30
423.04
FOM
20.51%
20.09%
21.74%
Average LMTD
13.30
13.29
12.82
European supplies [5]. In particular, compositions representing different ranges in methane
content were evaluated in order to derive appreciable differences. The chosen compositions
are summarised in Table 4.7. Speciﬁcally, the Danish case represented the most typical com-
position with high methane content, presence of heavier hydrocarbons and little nitrogen
content. The Romanian and the Polish cases were considered because of the very low methane
content. However, the former is particularly relevant because of the high presence of ethane,
methane and heavier hydrocarbons while the latter is characterized by a considerable ni-
trogen molar fraction and few traces of heavier hydrocarbons. The Italian case, ﬁnally, was
investigated as a representation of a NG composition almost reducible to pure methane.
Table 4.7: Chosen NG compositions from different European indigenous production. Molar fractions
Denmark
Romania
Italy
Poland
Methane
90.30%
77.50%
99.66%
71.34%
Ethane
6.02%
12.20%
0.06%
0.78%
Propane
2.43%
6.40%
0.03%
0.10%
n-Butane
0.57%
0.00%
0.00%
0.01%
Isobutane
0.37%
1.50%
0.01%
0.02%
n-Pentane
0.00%
1.10%
0.00%
0.00%
Isopentane
0.00%
1.40%
0.00%
0.00%
Nitrogen
0.31%
0.00%
0.24%
27.73%
Carbon dioxide
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
34
==PAGE:53==
4.3. Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO)
Table 4.8: Impact of Natural Gas composition on system performances
Denmark
Romania
Italy
Poland
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate [kg/s]
11.12
10.63
11.40
8.60
Power consumption [kW]
2071
1980
2122
1602
Cooling demand [kW]
793
759
813
614
Exergy Flow rate [kW]
424
346
477
401
FOM [-]
20.50%
17.47%
22.49%
25.03%
COP [-]
0.38
0.38
0.38
0.38
MITA [K]
3
3
3
3
LMTD [K]
13.30
14.67
11.76
10.40
HHV [MJ/kg]
54.45
53.50
55.33
33.39
Power per HHV [kJel /M Jth]
38.03
37.01
38.35
47.98
As pointed out in Table 4.8, Natural gases with considerable methane content increase system
power consumption since a higher cooling demand is required. The correspondence between
power consumption and cooling demand for the different cases can be directly performed as
the COP of the system is constant. In fact, no changes occur on system conﬁguration and on
refrigerant side in terms of composition, temperature and pressure levels. Among the cases
with low methane contents (Romania and Poland), a composition rich in nitrogen requires less
compression power than a solution rich in heavier hydrocarbons. The considerable reduction
in power for the nitrogen-rich composition contributes to its high Figure of Merit, once again
conﬁrmed by the lower LMTD.
However, the quality of the Natural Gas to be liqueﬁed must not be forgotten. In fact, if the ratio
expressing the amount of power spent per ﬂow of Higher Heating Value (HHV) is evaluated,
the Nitrogen-rich case denotes that a relevant amount of power would be used for liquefying a
low quality fuel. Therefore, even though the system would be operating in an efﬁcient way, the
solution is not attractive because of the very low HHV of the feed fuel. Therefore, among the
low-methane Natural Gases, a composition similar to the Romanian case is to be preferred
because of the higher presence of other hydrocarbons which do not worsen dramatically the
caloriﬁc value and make the ratio Power/HHV attractive.
Among the methane-rich Natural Gases, the methane level rises the power consumption and,
for the PRICO system under the present conditions, the Figure of Merit. In fact, a higher
presence of ethane and propane tends to worsen the temperature proﬁles’ correspondence
more relevantly than methane and Nitrogen, as it is denoted by the Danish and the Romanian
case.
Figures 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8 present graphically the discussed outcomes. Finally, it is crucial to
state that the boundary conditions of the NG feed streams (with different compositions), in
terms of supply pressure and temperature, were kept constant in the assessments. However,
indigenous NG productions might be supplied at different pressures and operating conditions
can be different. Moreover, especially in the Polish case, the high nitrogen content could
be removed by pre-treatment (reducing the mass ﬂow rate to liquefy and hence its cooling
35
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
demand) or the ﬂash pressure after liquefaction completion could be set in order to reduce
the level of nitrogen in the liquid.
Figure 4.6: Effect of NG composition from different European indigenous productions on Figure of Merit for the
PRICO system
Figure 4.7: Effect of NG composition from different European indigenous productions on Power consumption
for the PRICO system
Figure 4.8: Comparison among the different NG compositions in terms of compression requirement per MJ of
available NG Higher Heating Value
36
==PAGE:55==
4.3. Single mixed refrigerant process (PRICO)
Refrigerant composition
Subsequently, the impact of the refrigerant composition for the
PRICO case was also analysed, considering the fundamental role it plays in systems based on
mixed refrigerants. Four different possibilities were assessed, each of them characterized by a
relevant increase of a particular species and by a proportional decrease of the remaining ones.
Each case was denoted by the name of the increased speciﬁc component followed by a + sign.
Therefore, Table 4.9 speciﬁes the chosen values for the main components’ molar fractions
(excluding butanes and pentanes) compared to base ones.
Table 4.9: Main components’ molar fractions for the refrigerant compositions chosen in the analyses
Base
Methane +
Propane +
Nitrogen +
Ethane +
Methane molar fraction
[-]
0.284
0.404
0.264
0.244
0.194
Ethane molar fraction
[-]
0.307
0.217
0.207
0.207
0.450
Propane molar fraction
[-]
0.140
0.120
0.280
0.120
0.120
Nitrogen molar fraction
[-]
0.117
0.107
0.097
0.280
0.087
As a consequence, Table 4.11 provides the outcomes from the simulations implementing the
different refrigerant compositions in the PRICO system.
Refrigerant compositions rich in Methane and Nitrogen signiﬁcantly increase power consump-
tion and therefore worsen the Figure of Merit and COP (since NG cooling demand and exergy
ﬂow rate do not vary). It is fundamental to remember that the refrigerant needs to cool down
itself in addition to chilling down the Natural Gas stream. As noticed also for the impact of NG
composition on system performances, Methane presents a higher cooling demand than the
heavier hydrocarbons. In fact, among hydrocarbons, the cooling demand becomes higher if
the boiling point is lower.
Table 4.10 reports the values of enthalpy of vaporization of the four species, referring to the
refrigerant operational pressure at 18 bar, together with the total speciﬁc enthalpy difference
of each species between inlet and outlet conditions from the cold box.
The speciﬁc values were derived by use of Engineering Equation Solver (EES) [47]. It conﬁrms
that heavier hydrocarbons demand lower latent heat to be liqueﬁed and their overall enthalpy
difference is decreased, hence declining total heat duty. Nitrogen instead presents very low
cooling demand because of the limited required latent heat.
As a consequence, on one hand, the implementation of a refrigerant mixture rich in methane
leads to reducing the ﬂow rate required to chill down the Natural Gas stream because of its
higher cooling capacity (higher heat of vaporization on the cold side). However, on the other
hand, methane+ leads to considerably increase the required refrigerant ﬂow rate to cool down
its own hot stream. The higher cooling demand hides the positive aspect of the higher cooling
capacity and a higher ﬂow becomes necessary to reach the same MITA since the matching
between the temperature proﬁles tends to become worse. Moreover, for mixtures rich in
37
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Methane and Nitrogen, a higher mass ﬂow rate is further required in order to complete the
pre-cooling and liquefaction sections of the cold box. In fact, in the higher sections of the
heat exchanger, methane+ and nitrogen+ mixtures can mainly transfer their sensible heat,
as their primary vaporization process occurs at lower temperatures, for the present speciﬁc
pressure. Implementing a mixture rich in Nitrogen, instead, considerably worsens the system
performances because a relevant increase in refrigerant ﬂow rate is required to cool down the
NG because of its very low cooling capacity.
In addition to the considerations in terms of refrigerant mass ﬂow rates, it is fundamental
to notice that the required power for compressing a speciﬁc mass ﬂow rate level is signiﬁ-
cantly higher for Methane and Nitrogen than for ethane and propane, contributing to further
increasing the power expenditure.
Table 4.10: Comparison among the required cooling demands for the different components of the mixed
refrigerant
Methane
Ethane
Propane
Nitrogen
Enthalpy of Vaporization (18 bar)
[kJ/kg]
35
340
279
123
Total Enthalpy difference (18bar)
[kJ/kg]
839
762
373
198
Table 4.11: Effect of the different refrigerant compositions on system performances
Base
Methane +
Propane +
Nitrogen +
Ethane +
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
[kg/sec]
11.12
14.42
10.55
17.11
9.93
Power consumption
[kW]
2071
2894
1616
3269
1772
NG Cooling demand
[kW]
793.34
793.34
793.34
793.34
793.34
NG Exergy Flow rate
kW
424.60
424.60
424.60
424.60
424.60
FOM
[-]
0.21
0.15
0.26
0.13
0.24
COP
[-]
0.38
0.27
0.49
0.24
0.45
MITA
C
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
Average LMTD
K
13.30
15.89
9.14
13.68
10.28
Figure 4.9 presents a graphical comparison between Methane+ and Ethane+ compositions.
In particular, it depicts the relevant increase in terms of heat duty for the Methane+ case and
the more effective matching in the Ethane+ case, especially at the lower temperatures, which
contributes to limiting the required refrigerant mass ﬂow rate. Moreover, since the inﬂuence
of the heat-transfer temperature driving force on exergy losses increases with decreasing
temperature level [17], the smaller temperature differences at the lowest temperatures makes
the Figure of Merit in the Ethane+ case more attractive.
38
==PAGE:57==
4.4. Cascade systems
Figure 4.9: Comparison among the temperature proﬁles for Methane+ and Ethane+ refrigerant compositions
4.4
Cascade systems
4.4.1
Introduction to the Process
As already described in Section 2.4.1, in a pure-refrigerant cascade process, the combination
of different refrigerants operating at different temperature levels is employed. Following
the conﬁguration typically adopted, the modelled cascade system implies three separated
refrigeration cycles which use propane, ethylene (or ethane) and methane as characteristic
working ﬂuids. Respectively, their operation zones pertain to the pre-cooling, liquefaction
and sub-cooling of the NG stream. As shown in Figure 4.10, the pretreated NG enters the
ﬁrst cooling section using propane as refrigerant. This stage cools the NG to approximately
-35/-40◦C and it also chills down the other two refrigerants to the same temperature. The NG is
then sent to the second stage where ethylene brings it to roughly -95/-100◦C. Ethylene is used
as second stage refrigerant as it condenses methane at a pressure above the atmospheric one
and it can be condensed by propane. After this stage, the compressed natural gas is already
converted to liquid phase, but it is further sub-cooled to about -150◦C in the third stage which
uses methane as suitable refrigerant. Furthermore, the NG stream is again expanded across
J-T valve in order to decrease the temperature to about -160◦C. Sub-cooling and successive
expansion take place in order to ensure that, when the LNG is ﬂashed, the gas produced
does not exceed 5 %. Flash gas can be used as fuel in the gas turbines which drive the system
compressors [16].
4.4.2
Assumptions and Modelling
The thermodynamic modeling of the Cascade process was performed by following some
fundamental assumptions and conditions, which are added to the general ones described in
39
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Figure 4.10: Flowsheet diagram for the Cascade process with one stage per heat exchange section and single-
stage compression
Section 4.2.
• For the starting simulation, refrigerant high pressure levels are taken from the work of
Chang [33]. In particular, propane high pressure level is 9.5 bar (Point 6), ethylene high
pressure level stands to 15 bar (Point 12 while for methane is 23 bar (State 18).
• Refrigerant low pressure levels are instead calculated as saturation pressures in order to
obtain always 3 K as temperature difference between the cold inlet temperature and the
desired hot outlet temperature (indicated as CSTA, Cold Side Temperature Approach).
The lowest threshold for the refrigerant pressures was set at the atmospheric level, in
order to respect technical constraints in terms of size and leakage [48].
• Refrigerant mass ﬂow rates were set to achieve 3 K as temperature difference between
the hot stream inlet temperature and the cold stream outlet temperature (indicated as
HSTA, Hot Side Temperature Approach). In fact, for temperature proﬁles using pure
refrigerants in their evaporation phase change, the minimum temperature difference
occurs at the cold or hot ends.
• Natural Gas outlet temperature in the pre-cooling section (Point 2) and in the liquefac-
tion section (State 3) are again assumed in relation to the analysis of Chang [33]. How-
ever, the speciﬁc temperatures were adjusted in order to set refrigerant low pressures
higher than the atmospheric level (and ensuring 3 K as temperature difference). Specif-
ically, NG temperature at the outlet of the pre-cooling section (Point 2) was assumed
at -39◦C (allowing a propane low pressure of 1.024 bar corresponding to a saturation
temperature of -42◦C) and NG outlet temperature after the ethylene block (State 3) was
set at -100◦C (ensuring an ethylene low pressure higher than the atmospheric one).
Moreover, the analysis on Cascade processes analysed also the solution in which two stages
per heat exchange section are set and multi-compressions take then place. Figure 4.11 illus-
40
==PAGE:59==
4.4. Cascade systems
trates the speciﬁc ﬂowsheet. In this case, additional intermediate temperature levels needed
to be assumed between the stages belonging to the same heat exchange section. As ﬁrst
approximation, intermediate temperatures close to the mathematical mean of the NG inlet
and outlet temperatures from the speciﬁc heat exchange sections were taken. Therefore, the
intermediate NG temperature between the two heat exchangers in the pre-cooling section was
assumed as -10◦C (Point 2), in the liquefaction block as -70◦C (Point 4) and in the sub-cooling
block rounded as -130◦C (Point 6).
Figure 4.11: Flowsheet diagram for the Cascade process with two stages per heat exchange section and two-stage
compression
4.4.3
Results
Cascade with one stage per heat exchange section
Base conﬁguration
The results of the process modelling of the Cascade system with one
stage per heat exchange section and single-stage compressions are ﬁrst presented. Two
different cases are reported in order to derive the parameters which can improve system
performances and their impact on temperature proﬁles’ matching. First, the situation with
the base conditions and assumptions is recorded. As it can be seen in Table 4.12 and in Figure
4.12, the required power consumption is considerably high as consequence of a non-effective
matching between the temperature proﬁles. The fact is particularly evident in the liquefaction
and sub-cooling sections.
Speciﬁcally, the ethylene cold stream inlet temperature in the liquefaction block does not
41
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
match with the hot proﬁle in the liquefaction and sub-cooling phases. The non-correspondence
becomes clear between the two ﬂat patterns corresponding to the ethylene evaporation phase
in the second block (blue ﬂat proﬁle around -100◦C) and to the methane condensation phase
in the third block (red ﬂat pattern at about -100◦C). In fact, NG liquefaction is completed
before in the ethylene block because of its higher pressure level. The non-effective interplay
increases dramatically the average logarithmic mean temperature in the second and third
heat exchangers, increasing the required refrigerant mass ﬂow rates and thus rising the system
power consumption. Obviously, FOM and COP of the system are very low, standing at only
16.85 % and 0.3, respectively. Figure 4.13 reports the comparison among the heat transferred
per power expenditure per each component cycle. The parameter is analogue to a Coefﬁcient
of Performance but takes into account the heat transferred by the refrigerant to its own hot
stream, since part of power is spent to achieve that purpose as well. It can be inferred that
propane cycle is the component section allowing to transfer more heat per kW of power.
Ethylene stands slightly above methane cycle.
Table 4.12: System and heat exchangers’ results of the process modelling under base conditions for the Cascade
process with one stage per heat exchange section
Propane mass ﬂow rate
4.44
kg/s
Ethylene mass ﬂow rate
2.35
kg/s
Methane mass ﬂow rate
2.81
kgt/s
Total Power consumption
2520
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424
kW
NG Cooling demand
793
kW
COP
0.31
[-]
FOM
16.85%
[-]
Average LMTD_HEX1
6.17
K
Average LMTD_HEX2
17.3
K
Average LMTD_HEX3
22.5
K
Table 4.13: Comparison of Heat Transferred per Power spent (HTPP) among the three refrigeration cycles
composing the Cascade system
Heat duty [kW]
Power [kW]
HTPP [kWheat /kWpower ]
Precooling
2256
737
3.1
Liquefaction
1285
704
1.8
Sub-cooling
1657
1079
1.5
Conﬁguration with 2-stream heat exchangers
Similarly to the approach followed in the
PRICO analysis, the initial Cascade system was also investigated implementing 2-stream heat
exchangers in place of the multi-stream ones simulating the use of plate heat exchangers,
more suitable for small scale applications. The evaluation denoted that it is possible to obtain
42
==PAGE:61==
4.4. Cascade systems
Figure 4.12: Temperature proﬁles in the starting simulation for the Cascade process with one stage per heat
exchange section and single-stage compressions
the same outcomes in terms of power consumption and refrigerant mass ﬂow rates attained
by implementing multiple stream heat exchangers. Contrary to the PRICO outcome, where the
possibility of obtaining internal minimum temperature differences did not allow to achieve
the same refrigerant mass ﬂow rates, the ﬁnding is implied for the cascade system because of
the use of pure refrigerants. In fact, with pure evaporating refrigerants, no internal violations
can occur if temperature differences are controlled at both ends. Therefore, it is possible to set
partial refrigerant mass ﬂow rates which are split into the different 2 stream heat exchangers
and follow the same evaporation pattern between the same inlet and outlet temperatures.
If the minimum temperature difference is speciﬁed at both ends for each 2-stream heat
exchanger, no internal temperature cross-over can then occur and the partial refrigerant ﬂows
are then mixed at the same temperature at the compressor inlet. The total sum of the partial
refrigerant ﬂow rates provides the same level which was implied in the multi-stream unit.
Figures 4.13, 4.14 and 4.15 present the individual temperature proﬁles corresponding to the
composite curves in the multiple-stream heat exchangers in the starting simulation (Figure
4.12. In particular, the very low matching in the last section is particularly noticeable in the
methane-methane heat exchanger, which considerably increases temperature differences and
power consumption in the cycle (the highest in the conﬁguration). In all the individual heat
exchangers pertaining to the same component cycle, partial refrigerant ﬂows operate between
the same temperature levels.
43
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Figure 4.13: Temperature proﬁles in the 2-stream heat exchangers composing the multi-stream heat exchanger
in the propane cycle
Figure 4.14: Temperature proﬁles in the 2-stream heat exchangers composing the multi-stream heat exchanger
in the ethylene cycle
Improved conﬁguration
The second evaluation improves the system by adjusting the refrig-
erant high pressure levels. In particular the aim was to increase the thermal matching between
the proﬁles. Speciﬁcally, methane condensation was shifted to the second heat exchange,
also considering the higher HTPP of the ethylene block by respect to the methane one. The
feature was obtained by increasing the methane high pressure level, which was set at 30 bar
44
==PAGE:63==
4.4. Cascade systems
Figure 4.15: Temperature proﬁles in the 2-stream heat exchangers composing the multi-stream heat exchanger
in the methane cycle
(at point 18 of Figure 4.10. As it can be noticed in Figure 4.16, the feature allows making the
temperature proﬁles closer with considerable reduction of the LMTDs and of the refrigerant
mass ﬂow rates in the last two sections.
Therefore, the present simulations were seen as very relevant in indicating the direction to
pursue for system improvement in the optimisation phase. Speciﬁcally, the second evaluation
denoted the importance of the refrigerant high pressure levels, whose contribution, together
with the outlet temperatures from the pre-cooling and liquefaction blocks, will be further
analysed in the optimisation phase.
Cascade system with two stages per heat exchange section
As mentioned in the presentation of the assumptions for the thermodynamic modeling of
Cascade systems, the solution with two stages per heat exchange section and with multi-stage
compressions was also assessed. In this case, the outcomes for the solution with two sub-
stages are referred to the conditions which allowed to improve the simpler conﬁguration.
As it can be derived from 4.15, the subdivision into multiple sub-stages provides signiﬁcant
improvement to system performance. In fact, as directly noticeable by referring to Figure 4.17,
an increase in the number of stages makes the temperature proﬁles closer since it reduces
the amplitude of the single ﬂat proﬁles. Ideally, an inﬁnite number of stages would zero local
temperature differences as refrigerant evaporation proﬁles would be reduced to single points.
As shown below, maintaining the same refrigerant high pressure levels between one-stage and
two-stage solutions, the splitting of heat exchange blocks into multiple sub-stages reduces
45
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Table 4.14: System and heat exchangers’ results of the improved solution for the Cascade process with one stage
per heat exchange section and single-stage compressions
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.78
kg/s
Ethylene mass ﬂow rate
1.74
kg/s
Methane mass ﬂow rate
0.47
kgt/s
Power propane cycle
474
kW
Power ethylene cycle
522
kW
Power methane cycle
210
kW
Total Power consumption
1206
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424
kW
NG Cooling demand
793
kW
FOM
35.21 %
[-]
COP
0.66
[-]
HTPP propane
2.98
[-]
HTPP ethylene
1.82
[-]
HTPP methane
1.33
[-]
Average LMTD_HEX1
5.5
K
Average LMTD_HEX2
14.03
K
Average LMTD_HEX3
16.45
K
Figure 4.16: Temperature proﬁles in the improved solution for the Cascade process with one stage per heat
exchange section and single-stage compressions
power consumption from 1206 to 969 kW. With regard to the Figure of Merit and COP, the multi-
stage modeling correspondingly increases the former from 35.21 to 43.82 % and the latter
from 0.66 to 0.82. Moreover, the improvements are also translated to the single performances
of the component cycles, which are denoted by the higher heat transfer per power expenditure
in each of them, as a consequence of the lower irreversibility level in the heat exchange.
46
==PAGE:65==
4.5. Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems
Table 4.15: System and heat exchangers’ results for the Cascade process with two stages per heat exchange
section
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.84
kg/s
Ethylene mass ﬂow rate
1.77
kg/s
Methane mass ﬂow rate
0.49
kgt/s
Power Propane cycle
417
kW
Power Ethylene cycle
421
kW
Power Methane cycle
131
kW
Total Power consumption
969
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424
kW
NG Cooling demand
793
kW
FOM
43.82%
[-]
COP
0.82
[-]
HTPP propane
3.33
[-]
HTPP ethylene
2.19
[-]
HTPP methane
1.96
[-]
Figure 4.17: Temperature proﬁles for the Cascade process with two stages per heat exchange section
4.5
Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems
4.5.1
Introduction to the process
The present section deals with the process modelling of the most employed category of Natural
Gas Liquefaction systems, namely Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles, indicated
also as C3-MR.
Speciﬁcally, the reasons behind the implementation of pre-cooling sections in mixed refrig-
erant systems lie in the possibility to exploit their contribution at the highest temperature,
considering the high HTPP propane can attain. The calculation of the HTPPs of the differ-
ent cycles composing cascade systems showed in fact the attractiveness of propane among
pure refrigerant ﬂuids. Another important reason lies also in the possibility of improving
the thermal correspondence between the proﬁles at lower temperatures by suitable mixed
47
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
refrigerant composition. In fact, in the modelling and optimisation phases, it is easier to
provide satisfactory correspondence between cold and hot proﬁles if the mixed refrigerant
operates within a smaller temperature range. Moreover, the focus on increasing the proﬁles’
matching at lower temperatures further beneﬁts the overall efﬁciency considering that the
inﬂuence of the temperature difference driving forces increases when the level at which the
heat transfer takes place decreases [17].
In the speciﬁc analyses, two mixed refrigerant systems were evaluated and modelled. In the
ﬁrst investigation, the simpler C3-MR system was considered.
The respective ﬂowsheet diagram is represented in Figure 4.18. As it can be noticed, the simple
C3-MR system consists of a single level of propane pre-cooling stage and a single liquefaction
heat exchanger. Propane cycle cools down both NG and mixed refrigerant to approximately
-40◦C through expansion in J-T valve while further NG liquefaction is ensured by expansion of
the mixed refrigerant and heat exchange in the second cold box.
The second investigation regarded the most typical C3-MR process, with phase separator
and two cryogenic heat exchangers employing mixed refrigerant, whose conﬁguration is
reported in Figure 4.19. After being pre-cooled with the mixed refrigerant to roughly -40◦C
by the propane pre-cooling cycle, NG is directly sent to the main cryogenic heat exchanger,
while the mixed refrigerant is separated in a ﬂash drum into vapor stream (presenting the
lighter components) and liquid stream (with heavier components) [44]. The liquid stream is
sub-cooled in the ﬁrst heat exchanger of the liquefaction section, then undergoes pressure
and temperature reduction by expansion in valve. Conversely, the vapor refrigerant stream is
liquiﬁed in HEX 2, sub-cooled in HEX 3 and expanded in J-T valve in order to cool down itself
and the Natural Gas. After acting as cold stream for the last heat exchange unit, the two mixed
refrigerant streams merge and function as cold stream for HEX 2 which is evaporated and
super-heated in order to avoid liquid drops at the compressor inlet [44]. Therefore, the two
mixed refrigerant streams need to be expanded in the two J-T valve to the same pressure level.
Figure 4.18: Flowsheet diagram for the simpler C3-MR conﬁguration
48
==PAGE:67==
4.5. Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems
Figure 4.19: Flowsheet diagram for the C3-MR conﬁguration with phase separator
4.5.2
Assumptions and Modelling
As for PRICO and Cascade modelling, the investigations upon Propane pre-cooled mixed
refrigerant systems respected a number of assumptions and conditions.
• Refrigerant composition is initially assumed to cover solely Methane, Ethane, Propane
and Nitrogen. This was decided to ensure vapor conditions (at the speciﬁc pressures)
for the mixed refrigerant stream entering the compressor, considering the high boiling
point of butanes and pentanes. In fact, when pre-cooling cooling demand is covered by
propane cycle, the mixed refrigerant stream exits its section at a much lower temperature
than in the PRICO system (around -40◦C). Therefore, heavier hydrocarbons can be still
liquid according to the speciﬁc pressure level. Moreover, there is no need to exploit their
latent heat if pre-cooling is not provided by heat exchange with the mixed refrigerant
stream. Table 4.16 speciﬁes the initial refrigerant composition.
Table 4.16: Assumed Natural Gas and Refrigerant compositions for the thermodynamic modeling of the propane
pre-cooling systems
Refrigerant composition
Methane
0.30
Ethane
0.400
Propane
0.18
n-Butane
0.00
isobutane
0.00
n-Pentane
0.00
Isopentane
0.00
Nitrogen
0.12
• Propane and refrigerant high pressure are initially assumed as 9.5 (State 7 for the simple
49
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
conﬁguration and 8 for the conﬁguration with phase separator) and 35 bar (State 12 and
13), as performed by Chang [33].
• The ﬂash drum separator is assumed perfectly isobaric and no external heat duty is
provided.
• Mixed Refrigerant low pressure level is assumed to be at the atmospheric threshold [44]
(State 15, States 17 and 21 for the conﬁguration with phase separator).
• As for the process modelling of Cascade systems, the pre-cooling section operates
between 20◦C (Point 1) and -39◦C (Point 2). The latter was again considered as the
lowest limit since it led to an expansion pressure at the valve of the propane cycle close
to the atmospheric value (saturation pressure corresponding to -42◦C). In fact, as for
the Cascade investigations, propane low pressure level is set in order to ensure the
minimum allowable temperature difference at the cold end of the heat exchanger.
• Furthermore, in both solutions for the C3-MR system, propane mass ﬂow rate was
established to achieve the MITA between the hot stream inlet temperature and the cold
stream outlet temperature (HSTA, hot side temperature difference).
• With regard to the simple C3-MR conﬁguration, mixed refrigerant mass ﬂow rate was as
well calculated to avoid cross-overs in the liquefaction block and guarantee the desired
level of MITA.
• Turning to the C3-MR solution with phase separator, the constraint on the ﬁrst unit of
the liquefaction section (no cross-overs and 3 K as MITA) is met by control on mixed
refrigerant mass ﬂow rate while the heat exchange in HEX 3 is veriﬁed by suitable level
of refrigerant high pressure level (reaching the desired MITA).
• Concerning the second system, the NG outlet temperature from the ﬁrst unit of the
mixed refrigerant cycle (State 3) was set at -130◦C, as performed in the work by Chang
[33].
4.5.3
Results
The ﬁndings from the process modelling for the two mixed refrigerant cycles implementing
propane pre-cooling are here summarized.
Simple C3-MR conﬁguration
Table 4.17 presents the outcomes from the analysis on the simpler C3-MR system while Figure
4.20 depicts its overall temperature proﬁle. As it can be noticed, the inclusion of the auxiliary
pre-cooling system allowed to improve signiﬁcantly the performance of the PRICO system.
The higher attractiveness of the pre-cooling cycle is denoted by its higher HTPP by respect
to the HTPP of the mixed refrigerant section. The overall temperature proﬁle conﬁrms that
50
==PAGE:69==
4.5. Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems
signiﬁcant margin of improvement is left in the system. In particular, thermal matching in MR
cycle needs to be improved by setting suitable composition. Moreover, pre-cooling cycle could
be performed in two sub-stages in order to further reduce temperature differences (denoted
by the high average LMTD).
Table 4.17: System parameters for the starting simulation of the simple C3-MR conﬁguration
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.4
kg/s
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
2.1
kg/s
Power Propane section
410
kW
Power MR section
901
kW
Total Power consumption
1311
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424.6
kW
NG Cooling demand
793.3
kW
FOM
32.39%
[-]
COP
0.61
[-]
HTPP propane
2.985
[-]
HTPP MR
1.5
[-]
Average LMTD HEX 1
17.57
K
Average LMTD HEX 2
13.33
K
Figure 4.20: Temperature proﬁles for the thermodynamic modeling of the simpler C3-MR
Conﬁguration with 2-stream heat exchangers
As for the other systems, an analysis on the
conﬁguration employing 2-streams heat exchangers was performed for the simpler case. In
detail, the same total propane mass ﬂow rate (as attained in cascade systems) and the same
total mixed refrigerant mass ﬂow rate were obtained when the 3-stream heat exchangers were
split into two individual 2-stream units. Differently from PRICO case, the cold mixed refriger-
ant could operate in both heat exchangers between the same inlet and outlet temperatures
without violating any internal pinch point requirements, leading to the same total mass ﬂow
rate. Figure 4.21 illustrates the speciﬁc feature. It depicts the separated temperature proﬁles
51
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
corresponding to the multiple-stream unit in the mixed refrigerant cycle. The cold mixed
refrigerant works between the same temperature levels.
Figure 4.21: Temperature proﬁles in the two 2-stream heat exchangers in the MR liquefaction cycle for the
simple C3-MR system
Analysis on pre-cooling temperature
Furthermore, the beneﬁt of including a pre-cooling
section in the mixed-refrigerant conﬁguration was further examined by direct comparison
with the PRICO system, setting different levels for the hot outlet temperature from the pre-
cooling unit.
Table 4.18 presents the obtained outcomes while Figure 4.22 illustrates the temperature pro-
ﬁles in the different cases.
Speciﬁcally, the original pre-cooling temperature (-39◦C) was increased to -20◦C and 0◦C
in order to approach the PRICO system. The mixed refrigerant composition assumed for
the present case (different from PRICO original asset since no butanes were included) was
re-implemented in the PRICO case, which considerably worsened its performance because
of the extremely low thermal matching (average LMTD of 21.7 K) and the higher methane
content in the MR. The most relevant feature lies in the fact that, for the particular mixed
refrigerant composition and conditions, a lower pre-cooling temperature favors system per-
formances. In fact, if the speciﬁc mixed refrigerant cycle includes part of the pre-cooling duty,
the matching between the proﬁles becomes worse, especially at the higher temperatures. As
a consequence, a higher mas ﬂow rate is necessary to sustain the additional irreversibilities,
whose level becomes extreme in the PRICO case. On the other hand, the solution with pre-
cooling temperature at -39◦C allows completing the cooling duty at higher temperatures in
an efﬁcient way and setting satisfactory proﬁles at the MR cycle. In fact, MR operates more
effectively since its temperature range is smaller. Hence, LMTD in the MR section is reduced
to 13.3 K if it is set to operate between -150◦C and -39◦C. The outcomes are to be examined in
52
==PAGE:71==
4.5. Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems
the optimisation phase when more suitable MR compositions are computed.
Table 4.18: Comparison of results between PRICO and simple C3-MR at different pre-cooling temperature levels
PRICO
Simple C3-MR
Pre-cooling temperature
\
-39
-20
0
Power propane cycle
\
410
239
101
Propane mass ﬂow rate
\
2.4
2.3
1.9
MR mass ﬂow rate
14.5
2.1
2.9
5.0
Power MR cycle
\
901
1314
2435
Power consumption
4638
1311
1553
2536
NG cooling pre-cooling
\
151
96
48
NG cooling liquefaction
\
642
697
746
NG exergy ﬂow rate
425
425
425
425
NG cooling demand
793.3
793
793
793
FOM
0.09
0.32
0.27
0.17
COP
0.17
0.61
0.51
0.31
HTPP propane
\
2.98
4.38
7.64
HTPP MR
\
1.50
1.47
1.44
Average LMTD HEX 1
\
17.6
13.7
8.6
Average LMTD HEX 2
21.7
13.3
18.5
25.2
Figure 4.22: Comparison of temperature proﬁles between PRICO and simple C3-MR with different pre-cooling
temperature levels
53
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
C3-MR system with phase separator
As it can be noticed in Table 4.19, the process modelling of the conﬁguration with phase
separator allowed to slightly reduce power consumption by respect to the simpler case, partic-
ularly because of the reduction in MR mass ﬂow rate. A better exploitation of the MR cooling
capacity is in fact attained by splitting its vapor and liquid fractions at the phase separator.
The reduction in refrigerant mass ﬂow rate implies a decline in propane ﬂow rate as well and
balances the lower correspondences in the last part of the sub-cooling process. The lower
refrigerant ﬂow overcomes the slightly lower HTPP of the mixed refrigerant cycle, particularly
because of the increased temperature differences in the last heat exchange unit (average
LMTD of about 16 K). Figure 4.23 depicts the speciﬁc temperature proﬁles, which presents
a spike at the sub-cooling section. The reason lies in the fact that the lighter stream (vapor
stream from the phase separator) exits from the last heat exchanger at a higher temperature
than the heavier stream (liquid stream from the phase separator) from the expansion valve.
Table 4.19: System results for the process modeling of the C3-MR technology with phase separator
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.05
kg/s
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
1.96
kg/s
Power Propane section
348
kW
Power Refrigerant section
956
kW
Total Power consumption
1304
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424.6
kW
NG Cooling demand
793.3
kW
FOM
32.56%
[-]
COP
0.61
[-]
HTPP propane
2.99
[-]
HTPP MR
1.22
[-]
Average LMTD HEX 1
18.09
K
Average LMTD HEX 2
11.33
K
Average LMTD HEX 3
16.18
K
54
==PAGE:73==
4.5. Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems
Figure 4.23: Temperature proﬁles for the process modeling of the C3- MR system with phase separator
Comparison between simpler and phase separator conﬁgurations
Moreover, in the mod-
elling phase, it was seen that the beneﬁt of implementing phase separation in the C3-MR
system considerably depended on mixed refrigerant composition. Another example was there-
fore reported in order to address the relevance of mixture composition on liquefaction systems.
Refrigerant composition was taken from the analysis of Wang et al. [44] which was speciﬁed
by 46 % methane, 46 % ethane and 8 % nitrogen (molar fractions). Table 4.20 and Figure 4.24
report the direct comparison among the main system outcomes and the temperature proﬁles
between the two C3-MR systems. It can be noticed that, for the speciﬁc MR composition, the
inclusion of the phase separator in the typical C3-MR system allows to considerably increase
the thermal matching in the cycle, especially because lighter components after separation
are mainly addressed to the sub-cooling phase. It can be noticed that the average LMTD is
reduced from the overall 27 K in the simpler conﬁguration to 10.17 K and 4.9 K in the two heat
exchange units in the phase-separation conﬁguration. In particular, temperature differences
are effectively limited at the lowest range, which further beneﬁt the system. Therefore, as a
whole, even if refrigerant mass ﬂow rate is slightly higher, the required power consumption
is signiﬁcantly reduced because of the much lower thermal irreversibilities, especially at the
lowest levels. The more effective MR cycle is conﬁrmed by its notable increase in COP. In this
case, the phase separator solution increased the Figure of Merit of the simpler conﬁguration
from about 20.5 % to more than 36 %.
55
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
Table 4.20: Comparison between simpler C3-MR and C3-MR with phase separator for a different speciﬁc MR
composition
Simple C3-MR
C3-MR phase separator
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.6
2.7
MR mass ﬂow rate
3
3.2
Power propane cycle
450
468
Power MR cycle
1616
692
NG cooling demand
793
793
NG exergy ﬂow rate
424
424
Total Power consumption
2066
1160
FOM
20.55%
36.60%
COP
0.38
0.68
HTPP propane
2.99
2.99
HTPP MR
1.24
2.87
Average LMTD HEX 1
13.5
13.4
Average LMTD HEX 2
26.9
10.17
Average LMTD HEX 3
\
4.9
(a) Proﬁles simpler C3-MR
(b) Proﬁles C3-MR phase separator
Figure 4.24: Comparison between the temperature proﬁles for simpler C3-MR and C3-MR with phase separator
with the different speciﬁc mixed refrigerant composition
4.6
Discussion
The process modelling of the chosen liquefaction systems provided relevant implications
which are to be completed and developed by the successive optimisation phase. First, sys-
tems implying mixed refrigerants turned out to be more difﬁcult to model and attained the
lowest performances in terms of FOM and COP. In fact, when refrigerant composition needs
to be chosen, signiﬁcant investigation effort is required considering the number of chemical
species involved. Therefore, computational support from optimisation algorithms needs to be
implemented.
In these terms, PRICO system required the highest power consumption (2070 kW in order
to liquefy 1 kg/s of Natural Gas) as a consequence of the considerable refrigerant mass ﬂow
56
==PAGE:75==
4.6. Discussion
rate, the absence of a pre-cooling section and the signiﬁcant temperature differences between
the streams at the cold box. Therefore, irreversibilities connected to temperature difference
driving forces played a relevant role.
On the other hand, Cascade systems only imply pure refrigerants and, consequenctly, process
modelling only regard temperatures and pressures. Hence, satisfactory system designs can be
already obtained within the limited possibilities of the present phase. However, as shown by
the ﬁrst solution, if the fewer variables are set in a non-effective way, weak outcomes can be
easily attained. More accurate modelling solutions achieved 1206 kW (FOM of 35.21 %) and
969 kW (FOM at 43.82 %) for the Cascade system with one stage per heat exchange section and
with two sub-stages, respectively. The separation into sub-stages provided signiﬁcant bene-
ﬁts to the system as it contributed to reducing local temperature differences and improved
the compression phase reducing pressure ratios. Fundamental parameters consisted in the
pre-cooling and liquefaction temperatures. Both were privileged towards their lowest feasible
values in order to exploit the advantage of the HTPP of the propane cycle over the ethylene
block and of the HTPP of the ethylene section over the methane cycle.
Propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems offered performances which stood between
PRICO and Cascade systems. In fact, as seen, the pre-cooling section implementing propane
as working ﬂuid consists of an efﬁcient possibility which does not require substantial mod-
elling effort. Pre-cooling parameters were adjusted in order to obtain the minimum allowable
temperature difference at both ends of the unit. In this case, the analysis on pre-cooling
temperature level showed the attractiveness of setting it towards the lowest threshold as the
HTPP of the propane cycle was higher than the one of the mixed refrigerant section. In fact,
composition of the mixture was again the most difﬁcult entity to model and the chosen set
did not allow to reduce temperature differences to a level in which MR HTPP becomes as
attractive as the HTPP of the propane cycle. The C3-MR conﬁguration with phase separator
offered the possibility to improve the simpler system, but the margin of improvement highly
depended on the chosen initial composition. It offered the possibility of exploiting lighter
components of the mixed refrigerant stream at lower temperatures and the heavier ones at
intermediate ones. The best outcome for the simpler conﬁguration reached 1311 kW for a
FOM of 32.4 % while the highest performances for C3-MR with phase separator achieved 1160
kW with a corresponding FOM of 36.6 %
The analysis on Natural Gas composition was assessed by simulations on the PRICO system.
It denoted the importance of combining the information from the liquefaction efﬁciency
(FOM) with the information on the gas quality (HHV). In particular, high Figure of Merit with
low power consumption was attained in case of Natural Gases with poor methane contents
and high nitrogen levels. However, the efﬁcient cycle would be set for a low quality fuel with
limited HHV. The feature raises important basis for economic considerations which were
57
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 4. Process modelling
further developed in the complementary work "Techno-economic analysis of LNG production
alternatives". Natural Gases rich in methane require higher power consumptions because of
the higher cooling demand. However, their FOM is still increased because of the higher exergy
ﬂow supplied to the NG stream. Natural Gases with limited methane content but considerable
level of heavier hydrocarbons were particularly attractive in terms of expenditure per unit of
heating value of the feed stream. Their required power consumption was limited because of
their lower cooling demand.
The investigation of the characteristics of mixed refrigerant composition denoted that an
increase in methane content rises power consumption as it increases its own cooling demand,
leading to higher mass ﬂow rates in order to respect the temperature proﬁles.
The considerations on the assumptions and limitations behind the outcomes provided signiﬁ-
cant implications. It showed that in the case of cascade systems implying pure refrigerants
it was possible to achieve the same power consumption when multiple-stream units were
separated into 2-stream individual units. The fact occurred as refrigerants’ partial ﬂows could
operate between the same temperature levels without violating any internal constraint if tem-
perature differences at both ends were controlled. On the other hand, when mixed refrigerants
are adopted, refrigerants partial ﬂows cannot always operate between the same temperature
levels because of their gliding proﬁle and because of the steeper proﬁle of Natural Gas in the
independent unit. Hence, partial ﬂow rates might need to be increased with negative repercus-
sions on power consumption. A relevant consequence of the theoretical analysis was therefore
derived. If a 3-stream heat exchanger is assumed and the heat exchange between Natural Gas
and cold refrigerant is disadvantaged compared to the hot refrigerant stream (in order to make
Natural Gas ideally following the hot composite curve), a lower cold refrigerant ﬂow rate can
be employed with respect to the case of two separated units. The effective feasibility of the
theoretical approach in the practice is a matter of debate and discussion.
4.7
Conclusion
In this chapter, process modelling of the chosen liquefaction technologies was performed. In
particular, single mixed refrigerant cycle (PRICO), cascade systems and propane pre-cooled
mixed refrigerant systems were examined. In the aims, the investigations estimated the
suitability of process modelling for satisfactory design solutions and denoted if further optimi-
sation techniques should be applied. The analysis was carried out by means of Aspen Plus V7.2
from AspenTech group [27]. Fundamental assumptions lied in Natural Gas conditions and
composition and equipment performances. The outcomes revealed that process modelling
approaches satisfactory solutions for systems where only pressure and temperature levels are
going to be established and pure refrigerants are employed. Cascade systems represented the
emblematic case. On the other hand, when mixed refrigerants are adopted, suitable composi-
58
==PAGE:77==
4.7. Conclusion
tion needs to be established, which requires high modelling effort. Therefore, in these cases,
relevant need for successive optimisation phase is required. PRICO and propane pre-cooled
mixed refrigerant belonged to this category.
Speciﬁcally, cascade systems with two sub-stages per heat exchange section achieved ap-
proximately 970 kW in power expenditure for the liquefaction of 1 kg/s of Natural Gas, corre-
sponding to a Figure of Merit FOM of roughly 44 %. Mixed refrigerant systems attained lower
performances, which turned to be highly dependent on the refrigerant composition. Initial
modelling of PRICO stayed at 2070 kW (FOM of 20.5 %) while more accurate investigation on
C3-MR achieved about 1300 kW (FOM around 32 %) for the simpler conﬁguration and 1160
kW (FOM at 36.6 %) in the solution with phase separator.
Furthermore, the evaluations particularly denoted the role of temperature differences in liq-
uefaction processes. Limited power consumption can be solely obtained if irreversibilities
connected with temperature differences driving forces are restricted. For the simple cascade
conﬁguration, the reduction of the relevant temperature differences, especially at the lowest
levels, allowed to reduce power consumption from about 2500 kW to 1206 KW, approximately
doubling the FOM.
Crucial assumption behind the results regards the heat exchange balance in multiple-stream
units. When pure refrigerants are employed, same total refrigerant ﬂow rate is found when
splitting the heat exchange into 2-stream individual units. In this cases, refrigerants’ partial
ﬂows could operate between the same temperature levels when temperature differences at
the ends are controlled. The fact made cascade systems more efﬁcient if 2-streams units are to
be implemented. On the other hand, when mixed refrigerants are adopted, the splitting into
2-stream heat exchangers can be translated into higher ﬂow rates and power consumptions.
In the case of PRICO, the feature worsened the performances from 20.5 % to roughly 14 % in
terms of FOM.
59
==PAGE:78==
==PAGE:79==
5 Optimisation
5.1
Introduction
As partially shown before, designing an LNG plant can be signiﬁcantly complex and usually
involves many degrees of freedom to set. Moreover, physical properties of mixed refrigerants,
two-phase streams and heat exchange are variable, non-linear and highly interdependent.
Therefore, it is not possible to obtain direct mathematical correlations implying these variables
[49].
As a consequence, optimization techniques are developed in order to provide improved solu-
tions once robust models have been evolved [50].
In the speciﬁc literature, a relevant number of papers has focused on optimization studies of
LNG systems. Some effort has been spent on using the optimisation procedure in commercial
technical software as Aspen Plus or Aspen HYSIS. As an example, Venkatarathnam [46] per-
formed an optimization study on a C3-MR cycle using the Sequential Quadratic Programming
(SQP) method, available in the ASPEN Plus optimization tool. Refrigerant composition and
compressor pressure ratios were adjusted aiming at maximizing the cycle exergy efﬁciency.
Nevertheless, these tools adopt quadratic methods which highly depend on the provided
initial values [49] and, therefore, more sophisticated approaches need to be implemented.
Modern mathemathical methods have then been proposed and employed, as, among the oth-
ers, the Box method, the Graphical Targeting Approach, the Tabu Search, and the Nelder-Mead
Downhill Simplex (NMDS) and the genetic algorithm (GA).
Aspelund et al. [51] modeled Prico cycle using HYSYS and optimized it using a Tabu Search
(TS) method combined with the Nelder-Mead Downhill Simplex (NMDS) methods. The reason
for combining the global TS with the NMDS local search was that the local search usually
converges to the best solution in the TS-detected area more rapidly than the TS.
Vaidyaraman et al. [52] used NLP to minimize the power consumption of a cascade MR cycle.
Their optimization variables were refrigerant composition (Methane, Ethane, Propane and
n-butane), vaporization fraction in ﬂash tanks and compressor pressure ratios. However,
61
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
considering only temperature crosses at the ends of heat exchangers, the Second Law of
thermodynamics was not guaranteed in terms of internal cross-overs. Alabdulkarem et al.
[50] chose genetic algorithm (GA) for optimization of propane pre-cooled MR (C3-MR) and
reported the relative power consumption at different pinch temperatures.
As stated in Section 3.5, optimisation purposes are carried out by connect use of genetic
algorithm (GA) in Matlab optimization toolbox with Aspen Plus modelling software.
Genetic Algorithms were ﬁrst extended by John Holland in order to derive good solutions
to problems otherwise computationally intractable. They are originally inspired by the Dar-
winian idea of evolution through genetic selection [34]. Their approach considerably differs
from traditional optimisation methods in the fact that they work with a population of solutions
instead of a single solution. Moreover they operate with a coding of variables instead of the
variables themselves and use probabilistic rules to guide the search [35].
They are often chosen for the optimisation phase of energy systems since they do not require
derivatives or initial points speciﬁcations.
Furthermore, following the present introduction, Section 5.2 explains the common assump-
tions and approaches among the optimisation phases of the chosen systems. Section 5.3, 5.4
and 5.5 examines the three investigated technology groups: single mixed refrigerant systems,
cascade systems and propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant cycles. Respectively, they address
the speciﬁc optimisation method with the peculiar decision variables and provide the key
outcomes together with the main reasons behind them. Section 5.7 discusses the attained
ﬁndings, consequences and limitations. Finally 5.8 recalls the crucial outcomes together with
indications for further examinations.
5.2
Method
The setting of the optimisation algorithm for the different systems mainly regarded the choice
of the speciﬁc decision variables and penalty functions. Moreover, the chosen decision
variables are varied within suitable ranges in the algorithm to build possible solutions (’chro-
mosomes’). Each solution is implemented in Aspen Plus to derive its behavior relatively to the
objective function. The obtained information is used to derive the next possible solution by
cross-over or mutation which is again to be tested in the thermodynamic model.
The choice of decision variables depended on the system and identiﬁed the degrees of freedom
which were not possible to ﬁx during the process modelling phase. Typically, they regarded
high and low refrigerant pressure levels, refrigerant ﬂow rates, composition of mixed refrig-
erants, temperature levels of intermediate heat exchangers (cascade) and auxiliary systems
(pre-cooling).
When mixed refrigerants’ composition was included in the algorithm, the approach chose the
62
==PAGE:81==
5.3. Optimisation of PRICO cycle
components’ partial molar ﬂow rates as decision variables. The reason lies in the fact that they
offer the advantage of releasing refrigerant total ﬂow rate from the decision set. Moreover, if
molar fractions had been chosen, an additional constraint of populations with 1 as sum of the
molar fractions should have been implemented, further complicating the algorithm.
The other fundamental feature of the optimisation approach concerned the penalty functions.
In particular, the two parameters which were controlled were the Minimum Internal Tempera-
ture Approach at the different heat exchangers and the refrigerant vapor fraction at the inlet
of the compressor. If the set of decision variables does not succeed to provide a minimum
temperature difference within 3 K and a compressor’s inlet vapor fraction close to 1, a penalty
function addresses to the speciﬁc decision set an extreme value of the objective criterion in
order to cross it out from the research. In detail, the possible solutions were erased if MITAs
were not higher than 2.99 K and/or if vapor fractions were below 0.995, allowing a limited
tolerance range.
For all the different optimisations, the described assumptions and conditions described in
Section 4.2 were maintained. In particular, it is crucial to remember that the systems were
optimised for a Natural Gas mass ﬂow rate of 1 kg/s at its reference composition, at its process
pressure of 33 bar and between the desired temperature levels of 20 and -150◦C. Hence, the
horizon within small-scale applications was maintained in the optimisation phase.
5.3
Optimisation of PRICO cycle
5.3.1
Method
The ﬁrst system which was investigated in the optimisation phase was the Single Mixed
Refrigerant cycle. The approach needed to identify the decision variables and to set suitable
ranges in which the algorithm could vary them. For the speciﬁc system, described in Figure
4.1 in Section 4.3.1, the chosen decision variables with the respective variation ranges are
reported in Figure 5.1:
Concerning refrigerant low pressure level, its calculation was kept as a degree of freedom set by
the system constraints. Speciﬁcally, in order to converge towards feasible solutions, refrigerant
low pressure was recalculate per each iteration to ensure the Minimum Internal Temperature
Approach (MITA) at the cold box (3 K). In other words, per each decision set tested in the
process, a suitable expansion pressure was addressed to meet the desired level in temperature
difference. The feature was possible by use of Aspen Plus’ tool ’design speciﬁcation’ explained
in Section 3.3.
63
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Table 5.1: Decision variables chosen for optimisation of PRICO with their associated variation range
Decision Variables (DV)
Speciﬁed Range
Methane molar ﬂow rate
[0.02 0.12]
kmol/s
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
[0.02 0.15]
kmol/s
Propane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.8]
kmol/s
n-Butane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.6]
kmol/s
Isobutane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.6]
kmol/s
n-Pentane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.6]
kmol/s
Isopentane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.6]
kmol/s
Nitrogen molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.6]
kmol/s
Refrigerant high pressure
[5 40]
bar
Considering the simplicity of the system and the limited amount of constraints, it was possi-
ble to additionally guide the algorithm through suitable deﬁnition of penalty functions. In
particular, the MITA unfeasible region was divided into the range of negative values and the
range with positive values but below 2.99. Similarly, the unfeasible region in terms of vapor
fraction was discretized into a range of vapor fractions below 0.9 and into a range between 0.9
and 0.995. The different mutual combinations between MITA and vapor fraction were then
distinguished and a lower value of the penalty function was set if the two constraints were
approaching the feasible region. The considered combinations are presented in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Penalty functions’ deﬁnition according to the values for the constraint parameters for the PRICO
system
MITA
Vapor fraction VF
Objective Function (Power [kW])
<= 0
VF <= 0.9
1.00E+08
<= 0
0.9 < VF <= 0.995
1.00E+06
<= 0
VF > 0.995
1.00E+06
0 < MITA <= 2.99
VF <= 0.9
1.00E+06
0 < MITA <= 2.99
0.9 < VF <= 0.995
1.00E+05
0 < MITA <= 2.99
VF > 0.995
1.00E+04
MITA > 2.99
VF <= 0.9
1.00E+06
MITA > 2.99
0.9 < VF <= 0.995
1.00E+04
MITA > 2.99
VF > 0.995
NO PENALTY
5.3.2
Results
Single-objective optimisation
The speciﬁc values of the decision variables which attained the best performances in terms of
compression power minimization are presented in Table 5.3, together with their values in the
previous process modelling. The outcomes from the implementation of the speciﬁc decision
variables’ levels are recorded in Table 5.4, again comparing with the process modelling phase.
As it can be noticed, the decision variable selection conﬁrmed some of the general conclusions
64
==PAGE:83==
5.3. Optimisation of PRICO cycle
obtained in the sensitivity analysis on refrigerant composition for the PRICO process (Section
4.3.3). In particular, it conﬁrms that methane content is only limited to a necessary level
because of its cooling capacity, especially at low temperatures, but that it is kept towards the
lower threshold in the decision range since its increase considerably affects power consump-
tion. Nitrogen level is also limited because of its low cooling capacity which would increase
refrigerant mass ﬂow rate.
The simulation shows the relevance of heavier hydrocarbons C2+. In particular, ethane con-
sists of the main component and its contribution is particularly important in the liquefaction
zone at intermediate temperatures. In addition, n-butane turned out to be a relevant compo-
nent and its main contribution occurs in the pre-cooling zone because of its higher boiling
point. In the present system, n-butane substituted the role of propane for the pre-cooling
part, hence limiting its level. Isopentane is almost not included in the refrigerant composition
as consequence of its high boiling point which could cause liquid fractions (at the speciﬁc
pressures) in the refrigerant ﬂow entering the compressor. With regard to refrigerant pressures,
it is inferred that it is convenient to make closer the two pressure levels lowering compression
pressure ratio.
Table 5.3: Obtained values after optimisation for the assumed decision variables for the PRICO system and
comparison with the original ones
Number (in the algorithm)
DV
Before
After
1
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
1.06 e-01
7.806 e-02
kmol/s
2
Propane molar ﬂow rate
4.85 e-02
3.839 e-03
kmol/s
3
Methane molar ﬂow rate
9.85 e-02
2.966 e-02
kmol/s
4
Refrigerant High Pressure
1.80 e+01
7.189 e+00
bar
5
Isobutane molar ﬂow rate
2.50 e-02
4.518 e-03
kmol/s
6
Isopentane molar ﬂow rate
0.00
5.308 e-04
kmol/s
7
Nitrogen molar ﬂow rate
4.06 e-02
8.109 e-03
kmol/s
8
n-Butane molar ﬂow rate
2.77 e-02
1.777 e-02
kmol/s
9
n-Pentane molar ﬂow rate
0.00
3.292 e-02
kmol/s
The adjustment of decision variables led to the possibility of reducing power consumption
from 2070 kW to 925 kW for a corresponding increase in FOM and COP from 20.51 % to 45.90
% and from 0.383 to 0.857, respectively.
Therefore, as general conclusion, it can be stated that the algorithm operated towards ap-
proaching the refrigerant pressure levels while making temperature proﬁles as close as possible
by suitable refrigerant composition.
The more effective thermal correspondence is depicted in Figure 5.1 which represents the
temperature proﬁles before and after power optimisation. The satisfactory matching is de-
noted by the limited value of LMTD, which was reduced about 3 times from the original value.
Furthermore, the simulation and the speciﬁc proﬁles showed that temperature difference
driving forces are more important at very low temperature in terms of irreversibilities. In this
65
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
case, in fact, temperature proﬁle match at low and intermediate levels while diverge at higher
difference (with an HSTA, hot end difference, of 18 K).
In addition, power and temperature differences reductions require an increase in total heat
conductance UA in order to transfer the correspondent heat. Naturally, if local temperature
differences are reduced, heat exchange units with higher heat transfer areas or higher overall
transfer coefﬁcients need to be implemented. In this case, the speciﬁc ﬁgure of UA is almost
doubled by respect to the original simulation. The mutual relation was further analysed by the
multi-objective simulation.
Table 5.4: Outcomes from the implementation of the optimal decision variables in the PRICO system
Before optimisation
After optimisation
Power consumption
2070
925
kW
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
11
6.93
kg/s
Refrigerant high pressure
18
7.19
bar
Refrigerant low pressure
3
1.28
bar
NG Exergy Flow rate
424
424
kW
NG Cooling effect
793
793
kW
FOM
20.51%
45.90%
[-]
COP
0.38
0.86
[-]
Average LMTD
13.3
4.75
[K]
UA HEX
596
1023.7
kW/K
(a) Temperature proﬁle before optimisation
(b) Temperature proﬁle after optimisation
Figure 5.1: Comparison between the temperature proﬁles before and after the optimisation process for the
PRICO system
66
==PAGE:85==
5.3. Optimisation of PRICO cycle
Conﬁguration with 2-stream heat exchangers
Consistently to what was done in the process
modelling, power minimization for the PRICO system implying the splitting into two 2-stream
heat exchangers was also assessed. As it can be derived from Table 5.6, it is not possible to
reach the same power minimization level because of the considerable increase in required
refrigerant mass ﬂow rate. Moreover, power consumption is also enhanced because of the
higher methane content in the refrigerant mixture, connected with its higher cooling capacity
in order to chill down Natural Gas in the 2-stream heat exchanger without violating the MITA
desired level. The speciﬁc values of the decision variables are reported in Table 5.5. The
temperature proﬁles, before and after optimisation, are presented in Figure 5.2. It can be
noticed that particular improvement in the matching is attained for the refrigerant-refrigerant
heat exchange while for the refrigerant-Natural Gas little amelioration is obtained.
Table 5.5: Obtained values of the decision variables for the optimal solution of the PRICO system design with
2-stream heat exchangers
Methane molar ﬂow rate
8.251 e-02
kmol/s
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
8.370 e-02
kmol/s
Propane molar ﬂow rate
3.736 e-03
kmol/s
n-Butane molar ﬂow rate
2.446 e-03
kmol/s
Isobutane molar ﬂow rate
3.887 e-02
kmol/s
n-Pentane molar ﬂow rate
4.820 e-02
kmol/s
Isopentane molar ﬂow rate
7.366 e-03
kmol/s
Nitrogen molar ﬂow rate
2.685 e-02
kmol/s
Refrigerant Low Pressure
1.065 e+00
kmol/s
Table 5.6: Outcomes from the implementation of the optimal decision variables in the PRICO system with
2-stream heat exchangers
Before optimisation
After optimisation
Power consumption
3013
1488.5
kW
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
17.05
11.17
kg/s
Refrigerant high pressure
18
5.67
bar
Refrigerant low pressure
3
1.07
bar
NG Cooling effect
793
793
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424
424
kW
FOM
14.09 %
28.53%
[-]
COP
0.263
0.533
[-]
LMTD HEX 1
15.4
6.4
K
LMTD HEX 2
10.4
9.3
K
67
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Figure 5.2: Comparison among the temperature proﬁles in the 2-stream heat exchangers before and after the
optimisation process
Multi-objective optimisation
The outcomes from the multi-objective optimisation MOO are reported in Figure 5.3. The
pattern representing the Pareto optimal points depicts the threshold in power consumption
which cannot be further reduced by the optimisation process. The limit lies between 900
and 1000 kW. Moreover, along the Pareto optimal curve, it is not possible to make power con-
sumption better off (reduction) without making total heat conductance worse off (increase).
Moreover, in the asymptotic region of the power reduction limit, it is required a very signiﬁcant
increase of UA for attaining a small reduction in power consumption. Conversely, an analogue
limit in the possible reduction of system UA exists, which is found around 200 kW/K. Similarly,
in order to pursue a limited reduction in total heat conductance, power consumption needs to
be risen considerably.
In order to further derive the mutual relation between system power consumption and heat
conductance UA, Figure 5.4 presents the temperature proﬁles of the two different Pareto
optimal points which minimize power consumption and UA value, respectively. It has to be
noticed that the solution which minimizes power consumption derived from the Pareto curve
does not correspond completely with the one obtained by single objective optimisation. In
fact, SOO usually slightly improves the outcomes obtained by multiple objective algorithm.
68
==PAGE:87==
5.3. Optimisation of PRICO cycle
Figure 5.3: Pareto front from the multi-objective optimisation for PRICO system
Two opposite trends can be noticed. When power consumption is to be minimised, tempera-
ture proﬁles need to be match effectively in order to reduce the correspondent irreversibilities,
especially at low temperatures.
On the other hand, when heat conductance is desired to be limited, local temperature differ-
ences in the heat exchanger are kept at high level. In this way, the heat transfer area or the
overall heat transfer coefﬁcient U can be reduced to exchange the same heat ﬂow.
(a) Temperature proﬁle for Power minimisation
(b) Optimised temperature proﬁle HEX 2 (Refrigerant-
Natural Gas)
Figure 5.4: Comparison of temperature proﬁles between Power and UA minimisation solutions
Table 5.7 further develops the relations between the two objective functions and reports how
the decision variables are varied along the Pareto optimal curve. It conﬁrms once again the
trend for power minimisation in the decision variable range. The solution for low power
69
==PAGE:88==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
consumption is in fact characterised by low methane molar ﬂow rate, considerable contribu-
tion from ethane, signiﬁcant presence of n-butane and n-pentane and limited level of high
pressure level (limited to roughly 12 bar).
On the other hand, in order to pursue reduction of heat conductance UA, temperature differ-
ences need to be risen, which is translated into an increase in methane content, limited ethane
ﬂow rate, signiﬁcant n-butane contribution and, especially, high pressure level (towards the
top threshold at almost 40 bar).
The interplay among the decision variables explains why power consumption is considerably
increased in case of UA minimisation. As reported, the higher temperature differences allows
slightly reducing mixed refrigerant mass ﬂow rate in the system (less ﬂow rate is necessary to
transfer heat if higher local differences are set). However, the higher methane ﬂow rate and, in
particular, the much more signiﬁcant refrigerant pressure level require higher power input to
the system. Moreover, the irreversibilities connected with the higher temperature difference
driving forces further increase the required power expenditure in the system.
Table 5.7: Decision variable variation among different points along Pareto curve for the PRICO system
DV number
Low Power
Intermediate
Low UA
Power
980
1116
1735
UA
768
369
200
1
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
6.26 e-02
4.05 e-02
3.60 e-02
2
Propane molar ﬂow rate
4.21 e-03
2.40 e-03
2.46 e-03
3
Methane molar ﬂow rate
2.58 e-02
2.63 e-02
5.73 e-02
4
Refrigerant high pressure
11.9
26.3
39.97
5
iso-butane molar ﬂow rate
1.123 e-06
3.20 e-03
9.24e-03
6
iso-pentane molar ﬂow rate
6.88 e-03
5.04 e-03
3.80e-03
7
Nitrogen molar ﬂow rate
9.39 e-03
3.08 e-03
7.99 e-06
8
n-butane molar ﬂow rate
1.26 e-02
1.16 e-02
1.15 e-02
9
n-pentane molar ﬂow rate
1.66 e-02
9.67 e-03
4.78 e-03
MR ﬂow
5.17
3.75
3.93
Correlation coefﬁcients
As mentioned in Section 3.5, correlation coefﬁcients for the deci-
sion variables of the PRICO system were evaluated in order to assess their inﬂuence on the
objective functions. Number of the decision variables refer to Table 5.3 and 5.7. Pearson
linear correlation coefﬁcients for the PRICO system are presented in Figure 5.5. They present
the dependency of the decision variable on the objective function when all other variable
are allowed to be adjusted in order to reach Pareto optimal conditions. Moreover, Figure
5.6 reports the actual range in the decision variable speciﬁcation which was adopted in the
optimisation evaluations for power consumption reduction. As it can be inferred, refrigerant
high pressure, methane molar ﬂow rate and ethane molar ﬂow rate were among the variables
which were mostly varied in the algorithm.
70
==PAGE:89==
5.3. Optimisation of PRICO cycle
Figure 5.5: Linear correlation coefﬁcients between decision variables and objective functions for the PRICO
system
Figure 5.6: Actual decision variables’ range evaluated for power reduction by the optimisation algorithm
As obtained from the analysis performed in the process modelling, methane molar ﬂow
rate (decision variable number 3) presents a correlation coefﬁcient with respect to power
consumption which approaches 1. The feature allows then to derive that a correlation which
is close to the linear dependency takes place between the two items. The speciﬁc pattern is
shown in Figure 5.7. Furthermore, an increase in refrigerant high pressure levels tends to rise
71
==PAGE:90==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
power consumption while ethane ﬂow presents a negative correlation. Its higher inclusion in
the mixed refrigerant composition contributes to reduce system power consumption. Nitrogen
molar ﬂow rate provided a strong negative correlation with respect to power consumption.
Therefore, its increase beneﬁts the system. The feature is in contrast with what was obtained
in the process modelling analysis (Section 4.3.3). However, the range of variation applied
by the algorithm to the algorithm was limited with levels not comparable with the previous
analysis.
Figure 5.7: Linear correlation pattern between methane molar ﬂow rate and power consumption for the PRICO
system
On the other hand, some decision variables do not present highly deﬁned correlation with the
objective functions. Speciﬁcally, n-butane molar ﬂow rate presents a low correlation feature,
whose pattern in relation to the evaluated optimal points is illustrated in Figure 5.8. As it
can be noticed, the dependency is more scattered, leading to the fact that in some ranges
an increase in n-butane ﬂow can rise power consumption while in others it can provide the
opposite effect.
Partial correlation coefﬁcients were also extracted from the algorithm, expressing the inﬂuence
of one decision variable once the effect of the remaining ones is switched off. As it can be
noticed from Figure 5.9, methane molar ﬂow rate conﬁrms to have the highest correlation with
power consumption. On the other hand, butanes and pentanes provide a smaller dependency
with respect to power consumption, conﬁrming that they do not represent the variables to
be ﬁrst considered in designing the system. The analysis showed that opposite coefﬁcients
are obtained when looking at total heat conductance UA minimisation. The feature conﬁrms
the mutual relation between power and UA as power minimisation goes towards reducing
local temperature differences which require, in order to allow the same heat exchange level, a
72
==PAGE:91==
5.3. Optimisation of PRICO cycle
Figure 5.8: Linear correlation pattern between n-butane molar ﬂow rate and power consumption for the PRICO
system
Figure 5.9: Partial linear correlation coefﬁcients between decision variables and objective functions for the
PRICO system
higher heat transfer area A or a higher overall heat transfer coefﬁcient U.
It is fundamental to state that the patterns provide only information on the mutual relations
between variables and objective functions. A higher value of the correlation coefﬁcient only
denotes that the speciﬁc variable surely affects the objective function but it cannot be con-
cluded that it provides the highest impact. In fact, depending on the variation range and
initial values, the same change applied to a variable with smaller correlation coefﬁcient can
cause a higher impact on the target parameter. The Pearson coefﬁcient analysis informs only
if the speciﬁc decision variable always affects in the same way the system throughout the
73
==PAGE:92==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
simulation. Pearson information are extremely precious for the designer since they indicate
which variables should be ﬁrst modiﬁed to achieve correspondent results. In the PRICO
case, for instance, if the designer wants to obtain results on power consumption with high
certainty, methane molar ﬂow rate should be the ﬁrst variable to take into consideration, since
it provides immediate and controlled effect.
74
==PAGE:93==
5.4. Optimisation of Cascade cycles
5.4
Optimisation of Cascade cycles
5.4.1
Method
The optimisation phase for cascade systems aimed at improving the performances both for
the conﬁguration with one stage per heat exchange section and with two sub-stages. The
two simulations followed similar approaches with regard to the investigated decision variables.
Concerning the simple cascade process, as indicated by the work of Austbo and Gundersen
[17], 11 degrees of freedom are available for the process design and optimisation. These
regard the two pressure levels (high and low after expansion) and the refrigerant ﬂow rate
in each component cycle, with the addition of the two intermediate temperatures (end of
pre-cooling section and end of liquefaction block) of the Natural Gas stream. In order to
reduce the number of dealt decision variables and help the genetic algorithm converging
towards feasible solutions, a number of them was let free in the process model in order to meet
the system constraints. Speciﬁcally, they were re-calculated per each decision set (containing
the remaining decision variables) to obtain feasible solutions satisfying the constraints. Once
again, design speciﬁcation tool was employed in Aspen Plus.
In particular, similarly to the thermodynamic modelling approach expressed in Section 4.4.2,
refrigerant low pressure and mass ﬂow rate in each component cycle of the cascade system
were adjusted according to the level of the remaining decision variables. In fact, refrigerant low
pressure level was controlled to achieve 3 K at the cold end of the heat exchangers (according to
the pre-cooling and liquefaction outlet temperatures). No control was necessary on methane
low pressure level since Natural gas desired cooling temperature was supposed as constant.
Therefore, the decision variables which were varied in the genetic algorithm were:
Table 5.8: Decision variables for the simple Cascade system and associated variation ranges
Propane high pressure
[5 25]
bar
Ethylene high pressure
[5 40]
bar
Methane high pressure
[15 60]
bar
Pre-cooling temperature
[-39 -25]
C
Liquefaction temperature
[-101 -85]
C
Turning to the Cascade process with two stages per heat exchange section, refrigerants’ evapo-
ration takes place at two temperature levels. Therefore, the degrees of freedom are consider-
ably increased since intermediate temperatures and refrigerant pressures between two stages
of the same section must be decided. As performed for the simpler cascade conﬁguration,
a number of degrees of freedom was used to control the system constraints. Hence, fewer
decision variables were varied in the algorithm. In particular, the degrees of freedom to control
the system restrictions regarded (referring to Figure 4.11 in Section 4.4.2):
75
==PAGE:94==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
• Refrigerants’ low pressure level are set to achieve the minimum temperature difference
at the cold end (CSTA) of the second heat exchanger in each component cycle (HEX 2
and HEX 4). Once again, methane low pressure level is kept constant since NG ﬁnal
cooling temperature is not varied.
• Refrigerants’ intermediate pressures are calculated to achieve 3 K as CSTA for the ﬁrst
heat exchanger per each component cycle (HEX 1, HEX 3 and HEX 5).
• Refrigerants’ total mass ﬂow rate for the desired HSTA level at the ﬁrst heat exchanger
per each component cycle (HEX 1, HEX 3 and HEX 5).
• Flow fractions at the different splitters aiming at obtaining 3 K as HSTA at the second
heat exchanger per each component cycle (HEX 2, HEX 4 and HEX 6) .
Summarizing, in each component cycle, four degrees of freedom were controlled, namely
refrigerants’ low and intermediate pressures, refrigerants’ partial ﬂow rate in each second
sub-stage and total refrigerants’ mass ﬂow rate. As a consequence, the optimisation process
for the cascade system with two sub-stages considered the same decision variables of the
simpler conﬁguration with the addition of (Approach 1):
Table 5.9: Additional decision variables for the Cascade solution with two stages per heat exchange section
Intermediate temperature - Pre-cooling section
[-30 10]
◦C
Intermediate temperature - Liquefaction section
[-90 -50]
◦C
Intermediate temperature - Sub-cooling section
[-140 -110]
◦C
However, as suggested by Austbø and Gundersen [17], if the ﬁndings for the simple Cascade
cycle in terms of pre-cooling and liquefaction temperatures and in terms of refrigerants’ pres-
sures are assumed to hold also in the two sub-stage cycle, the number of decision variables
could be directly reduced to the additional ones of Table 5.9 (Approach 2). The two approaches
have been compared and the outcomes are presented in Section 5.4.2.
As it can be noticed, the increase of complexity of the system needed a more effective coop-
eration between the optimisation algorithm and the process modelling because of the high
number of constraints and possible violations. Therefore, less margin of free operation was let
to the optimisation process and the process model needed to guide the algorithm towards
feasible solutions. The relevant number of contraints and speciﬁcations is translated into
a signiﬁcant number of penalty functions since an higher number of heat exchangers and
compressors is involved. Particularly, 6 and 12 constraints needed to be veriﬁed in the penalty
function speciﬁcation, for the simple and complex conﬁgurations, respectively, leading to a
heavier optimisation phase.
76
==PAGE:95==
5.4. Optimisation of Cascade cycles
5.4.2
Results
Cascade with one stage per heat exchange section
Table 5.10 presents the assumed decision variables for the simpler Cascade conﬁguration
with one stage per heat exchange section. It can be noticed that the outcomes from the
optimisation algorithm reﬂected the levels obtained from the process modelling. In partic-
ular, outlet temperature from the pre-cooling section is set to the lowest possible value as
propane presented the highest HTPP among the employed pure refrigerants. Similarly, outlet
temperature from the liquefaction block is set among towards the lowest temperatures in the
variation range since ethylene presented higher HTPP than methane and therefore favors
power reduction.
Table 5.10: Decision variables for the optimal solution of the Cascade system with single stage per heat exchange
section and comparison with the values from process modelling
DV
Before optimisation
After optimisation
Propane high pressure
9.5
8.367
bar
Ethylene high pressure
15
14.973
bar
Methane high pressure
30
28.866
bar
Precooling temperature
-39
-38.997
◦C
Liquefaction temperature
-100
-97.326
◦C
The speciﬁc results from the implementation of the optimal values of the decision variables
denote that little improvement was obtained by respect to the best solution attained in the
thermodynamic modelling phase. Power consumption was reduced only from 1206 to 1152
kW for a correspondent increase in Figure of Merit from 35.21 % to 36.86 %. The slight im-
provements were mainly obtained in the temperature correspondence at the ethylene block
(average LMTD passing from 14 to 9.6 K) and in the propane HTPP because of a more suitable
pressure level which reduced power consumption even though it implied a slightly higher
propane mass ﬂow rate.
As a consequence of the small improvements and the similar levels for the decision vari-
ables, the temperature proﬁles turn to be almost identical with only small differences in the
liquefaction section.
Cascade with two stages per heat exchange section
The more complex Cascade system with two sub-stages per heat exchange section was also
examined in the optimisation process and both approaches presented in Section 5.4.1 were
considered. Speciﬁcally, all possible decision variables were ﬁrst included in the optimisation
process (Approach 1) while the second approach implemented the ﬁndings from the simpler
77
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Table 5.11: Results from the implementation of the optimal decision variables in the Cascade system with single
stage per heat exchange section and comparison with the outcomes before optimisation
Before
After
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.78
2.81
kg/s
Ethylene mass ﬂow rate
1.74
1.75
kg/s
Methane mass ﬂow rate
0.47
0.52
kg/s
Power propane
474
437
kW
Power ethylene
522
484
kW
Power methane
210
231
kW
Total Power consumption
1206
1152
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424
424
kW
NG Cooling demand
793
793
kW
FOM
35.21%
36.86%
[-]
COP
0.658
0.689
[-]
HTPP propane
2.99
3.27
[kWheat /kWpower ]
HTPP ethylene
1.82
1.95
[kWheat /kWpower ]
HTPP methane
1.33
1.35
[kWheat /kWpower ]
LMTD_HEX1
5.5
5.5
K
LMTD_HEX2
14
9.6
K
LMTD_HEX3
16.4
17.1
K
(a) Temperature proﬁles before optimisation
(b) Temperature proﬁles after optimisation
Figure 5.10: Comparison between the overall temperature proﬁles before and after the optimisation process for
the Cascade system with single stage per heat exchange section
conﬁguration (Approach 2). Table 5.12 reports the values of the decision variables following
both approaches. It can be inferred that the values approached similar levels. Pre-cooling
and liquefaction temperature were at the lowest levels in the temperature variation range,
exploiting the HTPP of propane over ethylene and of ethylene over methane, respectively.
The ﬁnal results turned to provide very similar levels. Both systems reduced power con-
sumption in the propane section because of the better trade off high pressure/mass ﬂow rate.
The ﬁrst optimisation approach considerably reduced power consumption in the ethylene
78
==PAGE:97==
5.4. Optimisation of Cascade cycles
Table 5.12: Decision variables for the optimal solutions of the Cascade system with two sub-stages according to
the described approaches and comparison with the values from process modelling
Number
DV
Before
Approach 1
Approach 2
1
Ethylene high pressure
15
14.98
14.97
bar
2
Intermediate Liquefaction
-70
-70.3
-69.97
◦C
3
Liquefaction temperature
-100
-94.1
-97.3
◦C
4
Methane high pressure
30
32.2
28.87
bar
5
Intermediate pre-cooling
-10
-9.65
-9.98
◦C
6
Pre-cooling temperature
-39
-38.99
-38.99
◦C
7
Propane high pressure
9.5
8.37
8.37
bar
8
Intermediate sub-cooling
-130
127.13
-129.2
◦C
block since it implied a higher hot outlet temperature from the liquefaction section (-94◦C
vs -100◦C). However, power consumption in the methane cycle need to be risen in order to
supply the higher cooling demand. The second optimisation approach performs a better
compromise between the power reduction in the ethylene section and the increase in the
methane cycle. Figure 5.11 depicts the comparison of the temperature proﬁles between the
solution from process modelling and the two solutions from the optimisation phase. As it
can be noticed, differences are minimal and only regard the liquefaction section and the
intermediate temperature in the sub-cooling cycle.
Table 5.13: Results from the two optimisation approaches for the Cascade system with two stages per heat
exchange section and comparison with the best solution from process modelling
Before
Approach 1
Approach 2
Propane mass ﬂow
2.84
2.90
2.87
kg/s
Ethylene mass ﬂow
1.77
1.78
1.78
kg/s
Methane mass ﬂow
0.49
0.61
0.54
kg/s
Power Propane
417
384
380
kW
Power Ethylene
421
364
394
kW
Power Methane
131
174
141
kW
Total Power
969
922
915
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424
424
424
kW
NG Cooling demand
793
793
793
kW
FOM
43.82%
0.461
46.41%
[-]
COP
0.819
0.860
0.867
[-]
HTPP propane
3.33
3.7
3.69
[kWheat /kWpower ]
HTPP ethylene
2.19
2.5
2.33
[kWheat /kWpower ]
HTPP methane
1.96
1.84
2.02
[kWheat /kWpower ]
Multi-objective optimisation
Multi-objective optimisations were performed for both Cascade conﬁgurations and Figure 5.12
represents their direct comparison. Ideally, the solution with two sub-stages allows shifting
79
==PAGE:98==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Figure 5.11: Comparison among the temperature proﬁles for the Cascade with two sub-stages before and after
the single objective optimisations
leftward the curve of the simpler system. Therefore, the more complex system provides the
possibility to reduce power consumption without compromising the total heat conductance of
the system. The reason to this lies in the substantial reduction of the irreversibilities connected
with the heat exchange that the complex solution allows. In synthesis, it increases the amount
of heat exchanged per kW of power expenditure without affecting the total heat conductance
since less heat losses occur as the temperature difference driving forces are limited [17].
The distribution of the decision variables along the Pareto front was investigated in order to
assess their behavior towards the two objective functions. In both cases, refrigerants’ high
pressure levels are considerably risen (around the highest threshold in the decision variable
range) in order to pass from power minimisation to heat conductance reduction. Table 5.14
presents the speciﬁc features for the complex Cascade system (decision variable set from
Approach 1). The ﬁnding occurs in order to provide higher temperature differences at the heat
exchangers by shifting upward hot refrigerant curves (allowing pure refrigerants’ condensation
at higher temperatures). The fact, together with the considerably increased irreversibilities
in the heat exchangers, require much higher compression power since pressure ratios are
increased. The feature is more relevant than the possible slight reduction in refrigerant ﬂow.
80
==PAGE:99==
5.4. Optimisation of Cascade cycles
Figure 5.12: Pareto fronts after multi-objective optimisations for the two analysed cascade conﬁgurations
Table 5.14: Decision set values for different points of the Pareto optimal curve implementing all decision
variables of the Cascade system with 2 sub-stages
DV number
Low Power
Intermediate
Low UA
Power
927
1065
1528
kW
UA
428
287
190
kW/K
1
Ethylene high pressure
15.30
18.75
40
bar
2
Intermediate Liquefaction
-69.78
-64.83
-64.83
◦C
3
Liquefaction temperature
-94.14
-95.39
-100.97
◦C
4
Methane high pressure
42.12
44.38
50
bar
5
Intermediate pre-cooling
-9.56
-9.46
-5
◦C
6
Pre-cooling temperature
-38.87
-38.93
-39
◦C
7
Propane high pressure
8.37
8.37
19.80
bar
8
Intermediate sub-cooling
-120.45
-119.66
-119.66
◦C
The analysis on partial linear correlation coefﬁcients allowed estimating the inﬂuence of
the different decision variables on the objective functions and to understand how deﬁned
the correlations were. In the present case, the Pearson coefﬁcients for the multi-objective
optimisation of the complex cascade system are presented (again following the Approach 1 in
term of decision variable dealing). The dependencies are shown in Figure 5.13.
In particular, Figure 5.13 denotes that ethylene and propane high pressure levels (variables
1 and 7, respectively) present all positive correlation coefﬁcients by respect to total power
consumption. Therefore, an increase in their level tends to rise power expenditure. It is
relevant to derive that liquefaction and pre-cooling temperatures (variables 3 and 6) attain
negative coefﬁcients. The feature seemed to go against the outcomes obtained in the process
modelling.
However, the effective range of variation of the the two temperatures was very narrow (es-
81
==PAGE:100==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Figure 5.13: Partial correlation coefﬁcients after multi-objective optimisation of the Cascade system with two
sub-stages implementing all decision variables
pecially for pre-cooling with small variations around -39◦C) and pointed towards the lowest
threshold so no real inconsistency with the previous results was found.
82
==PAGE:101==
5.5. Optimisation of Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles
5.5
Optimisation of Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles
5.5.1
Method
The optimisation phase again dealt with the two solutions which were analysed in the process
modelling. For both systems, crucial importance is given to the optimisation of the refrigerant
composition. Similarly to what is done in the work of Hatcher et al. [53], in both simulations
refrigerant composition comprises of Methane, Ethane, Propane, Butanes and Nitrogen. As
performed in the process modelling, considering the lower MR temperature at the compressor
inlet with respect to the PRICO system, pentanes were not included among the decision
variables in order to ensure vapor conditions at the speciﬁc pressures. Besides refrigerant
composition, additional degrees of freedom for both systems regarded pre-cooling section’s
parameters (propane high and low pressure levels, propane mass ﬂow rates, pre-cooling outlet
temperature), together with mixed refrigerant high and low pressures. Refrigerant total ﬂow
rate was already controlled by setting the partial molar ﬂow rates of the chemical components.
The optimisation of the pre-cooling section was partly performed in the process modelling
by controlling suitable degrees of freedom to meet the speciﬁc constraints. In particular, in
both solutions and in correspondence to what was done in the Cascade optimisation phase,
propane low pressure level was recalculated to guarantee the desired temperature difference
level between the exiting hot streams and the entering cold stream (CSTA). Propane mass
ﬂow rate was instead set to control the hot end temperature difference. Therefore, the only
decision variables concerning the pre-cooling section regarded propane high pressure and
the desired outlet temperature of the hot streams.
Simple C3-MR conﬁguration
Speciﬁcally to the simpler C3-MR and referring to Figure
4.18 in Section 4.5.1, MR expansion pressure was included in the set of decision variables.
Conversely, its high level was instead adapted in the process model to each decision set to
ensure the desired refrigerant vapor fraction at the inlet of the compressor. In the penalty
expression, the constraints regarded the MITAs of the two heat exchangers and the vapor
fractions at the two compressors (propane and mixed refrigerant cycles). In synthesis, the
assumed decision variables and the relative variation ranges for the simpler propane pre-
cooled mixed refrigerant cycle are presented in Table 5.15:
83
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Table 5.15: Decision variables for the simple C3-MR system and their variation range
Decision variable
Variation range
Unit
Methane molar ﬂow rate
[0.0015 0.12]
kmol/s
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
[0.02 0.15]
kmol/s
Propane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.08]
kmol/s
n-butane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.06]
kmol/s
isobutane molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.06]
kmol/s
Nitrogen molar ﬂow rate
[0 0.06]
kmol/s
Ref low pressure
[1.013 5]
bar
Propane high pressure
[5 30]
bar
Pre-cooling temperature
[-39 -25]
C
C3-MR with phase separator conﬁguration
Turning to the typical C3-MR (Figure 4.19 of
Section 4.5.1), the same decision variables were maintained with the only addition of the
intermediate temperature level for the NG cooling between the two heat exchangers in the
Liquefaction block. Penalty functions regarded consistently the MITAs of the three heat
exchangers and the two vapor fractions at the compressor inlets.
5.5.2
Results
The results of the optimisation analyses on C3-MR systems are summarised in the present
Section.
Simple C3-MR conﬁguration
Table 5.16 reports the assumed values of the decision variables for the simpler C3-MR con-
ﬁguration. Consistently with the ﬁndings from the modelling and optimisation phases on
PRICO system, in order to reduce power consumption, the algorithm tends to reduce methane
molar ﬂow rate and conversely increase the contribution of ethane and butanes. Once again,
isobutane and n-butane are preferred as refrigerant components for the pre-cooling phase,
considerably reducing the ﬂow of propane. Refrigerant low pressure is kept at the atmospheric
level and the high pressure was accordingly adjusted in the model. A relevant ﬁnding regarded
pre-cooling temperature. Differently from cascade systems, pre-cooling temperature was
here set at its highest level in the variation range. The explanation was seen in the effective
matching between the temperature proﬁles that the optimisation process provided and which
made the mixed refrigerant attractive to cool down the Natural Gas also between -39◦C and
-25◦C.
Table 5.17 presents the outcomes corresponding to the speciﬁc decision variables for the
simple C3-MR conﬁguration. It can be inferred that considerable improvement was met,
particularly in the mixed refrigerant section. Power consumption was reduced from 1311
kW to 847 kW, achieving the best outcome among the investigated systems. FOM and total
84
==PAGE:103==
5.5. Optimisation of Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles
Table 5.16: Optimal values for the decision variables for the simpler C3-MR system and comparison with their
level from process modelling phase
DV
Before
After
Methane molar ﬂow rate
2.31 e-02
1.84 e-02
kmol/s
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
3.04 e-02
3.91 e-02
kmol/s
Propane molar ﬂow rate
1.37 e-02
1.82 e-05
kmol/s
n-butane molar ﬂow rate
0.00
6.59 e-03
kmol/s
isobutane molar ﬂow rate
0.00
1.36 e-02
kmol/s
Nitrogen molar ﬂow rate
8.8 e-03
2.01 e-03
kmol/s
Ref low pressure
1.013
1.013
bar
Propane high pressure
10
8.37
bar
Pre-cooling temperature
-39
-25.01
◦C
COP rose from 32.39 % to 50.13 % and from 0.605 to 0.937, reaching the highest features. It
is fundamental to notice that HTPP of the mixed refrigerant cycle is signiﬁcantly risen and
achieves the same HTPP level of the pre-cooling section for solution before optimisation
process (with pre-cooling temperature level at -39◦C). This was seen as an indication of
the attractiveness of mixed refrigerant even when including part of the pre-cooling section.
Propane HTPP is also risen, but mainly because of the lower temperature difference the
refrigeration cycle has to supply (only to -25◦C). The signiﬁcant thermal correspondence built
by the system in the mixed refrigerant cycle is conﬁrmed by the relevant reduction of average
LMTD in the second heat exchanger from 13.33 to 4.26 K. The feature is directly noticeable in
Figure 5.14 which presents the comparison between the temperature proﬁles before and after
the optimisation process for the present C3-MR system.
Table 5.17: Results from the optimisation process for the simpler C3-MR system and its comparison with the
outcomes from process modelling
Before
After
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.4
2.3
kg/s
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
2.1
2.7
kg/s
Power Propane section
410
251
kW
Power Refrigerant section
901
596
kW
Total Power consumption
1311
847
kW
NG Exergy ﬂow rate
424
424
kW
NG Cooling demand
793
793
kW
FOM
32.39%
50.13%
[-]
COP
0.60
0.94
[-]
HTPP propane
2.98
4.42
[kWheat /kWpower ]
HTPP MR
1.50
2.98
[kWheat /kWpower ]
Average LMTD HEX1
17.57
14.98
K
Average LMTD HEX2
13.33
4.26
K
85
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
(a) Temperature proﬁle before optimisation
(b) Temperature proﬁle after optimisation
Figure 5.14: Comparison between the temperature proﬁles before and after the optimisation process for the
simple C3-MR system
Conﬁguration with 2-stream heat exchangers
The solution attained for the simple C3-MR
conﬁguration was evaluated also in the case with 2-stream heat exchangers, consistently to
what was performed in the process modelling and in order to further examine the assumptions
behind multiple stream heat exchange of Section 4.3.3. In detail, the same speciﬁc solution
could not be implemented in the two-stream conﬁguration without violating any internal
pinch point. Differently from the case in the process modelling, mixed refrigerant could not
operate between the same temperature levels and a higher mass ﬂow rate was required in
order to validate the heat exchange. Hence, a single objective optimisation was performed
on the C3-MR system with 2-streams heat exchangers. The essential results are condensed in
Table 5.18.
Table 5.18: Essential results from power optimisation on simple C3-MR system with 2-stream heat exchangers
Propane mass ﬂow
2.99
kg/s
Power propane cycle
447
kW
MR ﬂow rate
3.28
kg/s
Power MR cycle
711
kW
Total Power consumption
1116
kW
FOM
38.05%
[-]
COP
0.71
[-]
As it can be directly inferred, a higher mixed refrigerant ﬂow rate is required to feed the
cooling demands in the two individual 2-stream heat exchangers, leading to higher power
consumptions both in the MR and propane cycles. Figure 5.15 presents the temperature
proﬁles in the 2-stream optimised case. It can be derived that in the Natural Gas-Refrigerant
heat exchanger, the mixed refrigerant cannot operate between the same temperature levels
and a higher mass ﬂow rate is then required to respect the internal minimum temperature
86
==PAGE:105==
5.5. Optimisation of Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles
difference. Hence, MR exits the heat exhanger at a lower temperature.
Figure 5.15: Temperature proﬁles in the 2-stream heat exchangers of the liquefaction section for the optimised
solution of the simpler C3-MR with split heat exchange
C3-MR conﬁguration with phase separator
The speciﬁc outcomes for the decision variables of the complete C3-MR system are provided
in Table 5.19, together with their values from the process modelling phase. Consistently with
the approach followed for Cascade systems, the best outcome from the modelling phase was
chosen for the direct comparison with the optimal solution. The features described for the
simpler conﬁguration are again conﬁrmed, in terms of reduction of methane molar ﬂow rate,
increase of heavier hydrocarbons’ ﬂow and decrease of pre-cooling temperature. In this case, in
order to limit power consumption, refrigerant low pressure is slightly risen. With regard to the
additional decision variable with respect to the simpler system, the intermediate temperature
in the mixed refrigerant section is considerably risen from -130◦C to approximately -82◦C.
The speciﬁc outcomes from system optimisation are recorded in Table 5.20, recalling the best
ﬁndings from thermodynamic modelling. The most relevant improvements regard the mixed
refrigerant cycle, which allowed to reduce total power consumption from 1160 kW to 922 kW,
reaching 46.50 % as FOM and 0.86 as total COP. The thermal matching in the liquefaction
section is in overall increased, especially in its ﬁrst heat exchange unit (HEX 2). Nevertheless,
the second unit of the mixed refrigerant cycle (HEX 3) presents a slightly higher average LMTD.
However, its contribution is extended to -82◦C, considerably rising its cooling duty. Mixed
refrigerant HTPP is highly improved, overcoming pre-cooling HTPP in the thermodynamic
modelling phase (with pre-cooling temperature of -39◦C). The feature allows to give reason
87
==PAGE:106==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Table 5.19: Obtained optimal values for the decision variables for the C3-MR system with phase separator and
comparison with their level from process modelling phase
DV number
DV
Before
After
1
High propane pressure
10
8.47
bar
2
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
6.22 e-02
6.16 e-02
kmol/s
3
Propane molar ﬂow rate
0.00
2.87 e-03
kmol/s
4
Methane molar ﬂow rate
6.22 e-02
2.29 e-02
kmol/s
5
Isobutane molar ﬂow rate
0.00
1.22 e-02
kmol/s
6
Nitrogen molar ﬂowrate
1.08 e-02
1.91 e-03
kmol/s
7
n-Butane molar ﬂow rate
0.00
9.79 e-04
kmol/s
8
Low refrigerant pressure
1.013
1.55
bar
9
Intermediate Liquefaction temperature
-130
-81.73
◦C
10
Precooling temperature
-39
-33.45
◦C
to the fact that pre-cooling temperature is risen in the improved system because of the high
performance of the optimised mixed refrigerant cycle even at pre-cooling temperatures. In
fact, the whole mixed refrigerant section, with a temperature range from -150◦C to about -33◦C
provided a HTPP slightly lower than the HTPP of propane cycle, with a temperature range
from -33◦C to 20◦C. Moreover, the reason why pre-cooling temperature is slightly increased
might consist in the fact that the decrease in HTPP of the suitable MR operating with a higher
temperature range can be lower than the decrease in HTPP of a a propane cycle which has
to cool down to the lowest pre-cooling temperature limit. Figure 5.16 presents graphycally
the considerations. It illustrates the higher intermediate liquefaction section and the effective
thermal correspondence throughout the mixed refrigerant section.
Table 5.20: Results from the optimisation of the C3-MR conﬁguration with phase separator and comparison
with the outcomes from process modelling
Before
After
Propane mass ﬂow rate
2.75
2.88
kg/s
Refrigerant mass ﬂow rate
3.17
3.17
kg/s
Compr Propane section
468
392
kW
Compr Refrigerant section
692
530
kW
Total Power consumption
1160
922
kW
Exergy ﬂow rate
424.6
424.6
kW
NG Cooling demand
793.3
793.3
kW
FOM
36.60%
46.05%
[-]
COP
0.684
0.860
[-]
HTPP propane
2.986
3.642
[-]
HTPP refrigerant
2.870
3.590
[-]
LMTD HEX1
13.44
13.77
K
LMTD HEX2
10.17
6.89
K
LMTD HEX3
4.94
5.52
K
88
==PAGE:107==
5.5. Optimisation of Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles
(a) Temperature proﬁle before optimisation
(b) Temperature proﬁle after optimisation
Figure 5.16: Comparison between the temperature proﬁles before and after the optimisation process for the
C3-MR system with phase separator
Investigation on Dual Mixed Refrigerant system
In order to complete the overview on mixed refrigerant systems, the solutions obtained for
power minimisation in the case of C3-MR with phase separator was implemented in the
process modelling of a dual mixed refrigerant cycle. Speciﬁcally, the system presents the same
structure as the C3-MR ﬂowsheet but implies another zeotropic mixture for the pre-cooling
section in place of propane. The same MR composition obtained in the optimised C3-MR was
implemented in the liquefaction cycle of the dual mixed refrigerant system. In the pre-cooling
section, a mixture of mainly ethane and propane was employed [54], whose levels are reported
in Table 5.21.
A power consumption level below the C3-MR conﬁguration (but slightly higher than simpler
C3-MR) with phase separator was obtained, conﬁrming that suitable mixed refrigerants in
the pre-cooling section can be implied as well. Almost 50 % in molar basis of the pre-cooling
mixed refrigerant still consists of propane. It is fundamental to remind that the present result
was obtained before optimisation phase and hence is expected to be further enhanced since
considerable margin of improvement is still seen in the composition set of the pre-cooling
mixture and in the pressure and temperature levels. Temperature proﬁles are presented in
Figure 5.17. In place of the typical evaporation pattern with super-heating pertaining to pure
refrigerants, the use of a mixed refrigerant in the pre-cooling section implies a proﬁle with
phase change occurring with a temperature glide. If the mixture composition is set accurately,
the fact leads to lower local temperature differences, lower irreversibilities and associated
power consumption.
The investigation showed the relevant potential of dual mixed refrigerant systems which are
known for presenting the highest efﬁciency among the liquefaction cycles [55]. For the present
system, the optimisation phase was not carried on considering the high number of decision
89
==PAGE:108==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
variables (both mixed refrigerant compositions) which would have created convergence and
stability issues. One approach could have been to optimise separately the liquefaction and
pre-cooling sections ﬁxing a speciﬁc pre-cooling temperature level. The present analysis
was seen as a performance comparison in order to derive the working principles and the
potentialities of dual mixed refrigerant systems.
Table 5.21: Main results for the Dual mixed refrigerant system using the outcomes from single objective
optimisation of C3-MR with phase separator
Molar fraction
Ethane
35.20%
[-]
Propane
47.10%
[-]
n-Butane
19.10%
[-]
MR mass ﬂow rate
4.25
kg/s
MR pressure
12
bar
Power pre-cooling
374
kW
Power liquefaction
530
kW
Total power consumption
904
kW
FOM
46.97 %
kW
COP
0.88
kW
Figure 5.17: Temperature proﬁle for the Dual mixed refrigerant system using the outcomes from single objective
optimisation of C3-MR with phase separator
90
==PAGE:109==
5.5. Optimisation of Propane Pre-cooled Mixed Refrigerant cycles
Multi-objective optimisation
Multi-objective optimisations were also extended to C3-MR systems and the outcomes for
both solutions are depicted in Figure 5.18. The two curves denote that the C3-MR system with
phase separator is slightly shifted leftward and therefore offers lower power consumption at
the same total heat conductance level.
Moreover, smaller convergence range is found, especially for the C3-MR with phase separator,
as its optimal points are within a narrower interval of power consumption levels. The reason
to the smaller convergence margin was identiﬁed in the high number of decision variables
which combine the setting of the refrigerant composition with pressure and temperature
levels. Hence, the algorithm became heavier.
Figure 5.18: Pareto fronts after multi-objective optimisations for the two analysed C3-MR conﬁgurations
The trend of the values of the decision variables was examined for different points of the
Pareto optimal curve for both conﬁgurations. The analysis on the simpler C3-MR system
conﬁrmed the investigations on the PRICO system. In fact, solutions for attaining low power
consumptions present low methane ﬂow rate, higher ethane and butanes contents and higher
refrigerant low pressure. As seen in the single objective optimisation, the included pre-cooling
temperature is slightly risen for power consumption minimisation while it is kept at the lowest
threshold for UA minimisation case.
In the latter case, the reason lies in the possibility to reduce propane low pressure level when
pre-cooling temperature is at the minimum. The higher pressure ratio is then translated in
higher temperature differences at the pre-cooling section which beneﬁt the system in terms of
UA minimisation.
The variation of the decision variables for the conﬁguration with phase separator is presented
in Table 5.22. Since smaller convergence range was achieved, the decision variables do not
91
==PAGE:110==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
differ as much as in the other cases (PRICO, for instance). Hence, the oscillation range of the
objective functions is as well limited. However, it can be inferred that, in order to pass from
low power to low UA situation, pressure ratios are increased both in the propane cycle and
in the mixed refrigerant cycle. In particular, low refrigerant pressure is reduced in order to
move downward the cold refrigerant curve (evaporation of the different species occur at lower
temperatures) since the re-calculation on refrigerant high pressure level kept its level at 10
bar. The effect of the ampliﬁed pressure ratio was more important than the slightly lower
mixed refrigerant mass ﬂow rate which is required in the system. Once again, the fact of the
higher thermal irreversibilities connected with the higher temperature differences must be
considered in the increase of system power consumption.
Table 5.22: Decision set values for the C3-MR conﬁguration with phase separator at different point of its Pareto
optimal curve
DV number
Low Power
Intermediate
Low UA
Power
925
993
1098
kW
UA
472
371
310
kW/K
1
High propane pressure
8.40
8.47e+00
8.62
bar
2
Ethane molar ﬂow rate
6.19 e-02
6.06 e-02
6.13 -02
kmol/s
3
Propane molar ﬂow rate
2.99 e-03
2.81 e-03
2.92 e-03
kmol/s
4
Methane molar ﬂow rate
2.29 e-02
2.30 e-02
2.29 e-02
kmol/s
5
Isobutane molar ﬂow rate
1.18 e-02
1.09 e-02
8.50 e-03
kmol/s
6
Nitrogen molar ﬂowrate
1.92 e-03
1.18 e-03
1.39 e-03
kmol/s
7
n-Butane molar ﬂow rate
1.12 e-03
4.87 e-04
8.71 e-04
kmol/s
8
Low refrigerant pressure
1.54
1.28
1.01
bar
9
Intermediate Liquefaction
-81.9
-82.7
-82.1
◦C
10
Precooling temperature
-33.58
-36.24
-38.79
◦C
MR ﬂow rate
3.16
3.01
2.92
kg/s
MR high pressure
10
10
10
bar
The investigation on partial correlation coefﬁcients for the simpler conﬁguration conﬁrmed
some of the relations derived for the PRICO system. Increase in methane content tended to
increase power consumption and presented an almost complete linear correlation. On the
other hand, refrigerant pressure must be adjusted if effective power reduction is targeted, as
it denoted total negative correlation. Differently from PRICO system, increases in heavier
hydrocarbons’ ﬂow rates showed a more deﬁned tendency to reduce power consumption
(negative correlation). As derived in the single-objective optimisation, increases in pre-cooling
temperature beneﬁts power expenditure when adequate MR composition takes place.
The analysis on partial correlation coefﬁcients for the conﬁguration with phase separator
is instead reported in Figure 5.19. Given the fact of the lower convergence margin which
was attained in the simulation, the main reliable coefﬁcients regard propane high pressure
(variable 1), refrigerant low pressure level (variable 8) and pre-cooling temperature (variable
10). The other variables were kept in narrow ranges which ensured convergence with feasible
92
==PAGE:111==
5.6. Overall comparison of multi-objective optimisations
solutions. Speciﬁcally, refrigerant low pressure level denoted negative correlation coefﬁcient
with respect to power consumption. Its increase rises pressure ratio and hence power expendi-
ture. Opposite correlation is obtained with regard to total heat conductance as derived by the
analysis of the decision variables’ value distribution along the Pareto front. The striking feature
regards pre-cooling level. As already noticed in the previous outcomes, limited increases in
pre-cooling temperature beneﬁt the system in terms of power consumption when mixed
refrigerant composition is optimised. The reason to the ﬁnding is seen in the attractiveness of
optimised mixed refrigerant cycle also at higher temperatures. Moreover, it is inferred that ,if
pre-cooling temperature is decreased, reduction in propane cycle’s HTTP (due to higher tem-
perature difference) is higher than the decrease in MR HTTP when pre-cooling temperature
slightly rises.
Figure 5.19: Partial linear coefﬁcients for the decision variables in the multi-objective optimisation of the C3-MR
system with phase separator
5.6
Overall comparison of multi-objective optimisations
The general behavior of the modelled systems with respect to power consumption and heat
conductance was highlighted by direct comparison of their Pareto optimal curves.
Furthermore, outcomes from multi-objective optimisations on the remaining relevant cat-
egory of LNG plants, namely expander-based cycles, were as well included for the sake of
completeness. Their outcomes refer to the complementary project "Techno-economic analy-
sis of LNG production alternatives" developed by Matteo Nagy. Figure 5.20 reports the speciﬁc
patterns.
As it can be noticed, complex cascade and the two C3-MR systems present a similar threshold
in power consumption. However, complex cascade system allows to achieve it at a limited
heat conductance level. Expansion systems cannot achieve the power consumption levels of
93
==PAGE:112==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
Figure 5.20: Comparison of Pareto optimal curves for the solution investigated in the present and complementary
work
the systems here investigated. As it can be noticed in Figure 5.20, they are located in a range
characterised by higher power consumption and correspondent lower total heat conductance.
The Pareto pattern referring to the expander based cycles reports in fact the behavior of the
most efﬁcient solution (leftward) together with the simpler conﬁgurations (rightward).
5.7
Discussion
The implications from the optimisation phase were complementary with the ﬁndings dis-
cussed in the process modelling. In particular, the most relevant improvements were attained
in mixed refrigerant systems, as refrigerant composition represents a key design asset which
requires high computational effort. In these terms, power consumption in the PRICO system
was halved and achieved a level close to the Cascade conﬁguration with two sub-stages per
heat exchange section.
On the other hand, as already realized in the process modelling, systems where only pressure
and temperature levels are to be chosen present less margin for optimisation. Cascade systems
represented the emblematic case in this regard. In fact, optimisation allowed to improve the
94
==PAGE:113==
5.7. Discussion
Figure of Merit from 35.21 % to 36.86 % for the simpler Cascade conﬁguration and from 43.82 %
to 46.41 % for the more complex solution.
Conversely, PRICO system passed from 20.51 % to 45.90 %.
Furthermore, propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems denoted an intermediate optimi-
sation margin as they combine composition design and deﬁnition of internal temperatures
and pressures.
Moreover, the simulations showed that the optimisation algorithm better performs for simple
systems with limited number of decision variables and fewer constraints (over all, PRICO sys-
tem). In simpler systems, where multiple solutions are feasible, high demand for optimisation
occurs since it is difﬁcult to achieve attractive design solutions already in the modelling phase.
On the other hand, systems with considerable number of decision variables and constraints,
which limit the number of feasible solutions, present lower operational margin with higher
stability and convergence issues. However, the higher number of constraints requires a more
accurate modelling phase, which attains solutions not far from possible design implementa-
tion.
With regard to the comparison of the performances for the investigated systems, the con-
ﬁguration which provided the highest efﬁciency level was the simpler C3-MR conﬁguration
(obtained by single objective optimisation). In this case, as shown by the Pareto fronts of
Figure 5.18, a lower power expenditure was expected from the case of C3-MR system with
phase separator rather than the simpler conﬁguration. However, once more, the search for
the optimal solution turned to be more effective in the simpler system which presented fewer
decision variables and constraints and, in general, fewer convergence issues. Optimised
solutions for PRICO, Cascade with two sub-stages and C3-MR with phase separator provided
similar power consumption levels.
Moreover, the analysis on the substitution of propane with a suitable mixed refrigerant in the
pre-cooling section (Dual Mixed Refrigerant system) denoted the possibility to further improve
system performances. Before optimisation of the pre-cooling mixed refrigerant, efﬁciency
level close to the best solution of C3-MR systems was attained. The baseline investigation
showed the potentialities and attractiveness of dual mixed refrigerant systems to achieve the
highest performances as they allow to minimize temperature differences along the whole
operational temperature range [55]. Clearly, refrigerant compositions are crucial.
The overall comparison of Pareto optimal curves for the analysed systems, depicted in Figure
5.20 and including expansion-based processes, provided the prompt for signiﬁcant impli-
cations. Speciﬁcally, it denoted that the similar minimum levels in power consumption are
instead achieved at different total heat conductance levels. Cascade systems with two sub-
stages presented a nearly vertical proﬁle which reached low power consumption at limited
UAs (below 1000 kW already at 300 kW/K). However, further small improvements in power
95
==PAGE:114==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
consumption require considerable investment in total heat conductance. C3-MR with phase
separator seems to achieve slightly lower power consumption at lower UA levels than the
simpler conﬁguration. However, a lower number of operating solutions was attained.
PRICO system presents a very wide operational range and it can achieve a similar power
threshold. However, this is possible only at the highest heat conductance levels (for power
consumption lower than 1000 kW, UAs around 600 kW/K had to be provided). The feature
provides matters in terms of economic and technical consequences. In fact, cascade systems
require smaller total UA value but imply a greater number of heat exchangers. Conversely,
PRICO presents one single unit which require high heat transfer quality. Hence, higher heat
transfer area or heat transfer coefﬁcient are necessary. Therefore, conﬂicting approaches
would be compared: PRICO would require a single but expensive unit, while Cascade would
imply simpler but numerous units. The economic implications were from here derived in the
mentioned complementary project.
Simple cascade systems show to be not effective and denote the crucial importance of multiple
sub-stages in heat exchange and compression phases to reduce temperature difference driving
forces and pressure ratios.
The outcomes obtained after the optimisation phase for the cascade system were found to
mirror the ﬁndings from Austbø and Gundersen [17]. In their analyis, a simple cascade system
with single stage per heat exchange section and a system with three sub-stages were modelled
in order to liquefy a Natural Gas feed stream of 1 kg/s with similar composition. Differences
regarded feed pressure, minimum temperature difference in the heat exchangers and com-
pressor efﬁciency.
A minimum power consumption of roughly 1200 kW was there obtained for the simple conﬁg-
uration while the complex system achieved about 790 kW [17]. The lower power expenditure
for the complex system with respect to the present case is seen in the higher number of sub-
stages (3 vs 2) and in the lower minimum allowed temperature difference (2 K). Both features
contribute to approach the temperature proﬁles further reducing irreversibilities.
Concerning expansion-based processes, their operation range pertains to higher power ex-
penditures and limited heat conductance levels (below 100 kW/K). The low required heat
conductance level is essentially connected to the higher temperature differences which occurs
in expander-based systems which allow to employ simpler units. The ﬁndings conﬁrm their at-
titude to deal only with small-scale and peak-shaving installations where power consumption
is not the only asset and where restricted equipment cost is pursued (limited UA level) [14].
For detailed analysis on liquefaction systems based on expansion processes, from technical
and economic perspective, the reader is recalled to the complementary work.
Finally, it is crucial to remind that the discussed outcomes were obtained implying multiple-
stream heat exchangers under the assumptions presented in Section 4.3.3. As seen, multiple-
stream heat exchangers allowed to limit the required refrigerant ﬂow rate in case of mixtures
with possibilities of internal cross-overs. The assumption behind the ﬁnding lies in the
96
==PAGE:115==
5.8. Conclusion
lumped approach per zone which assumes equal inlet and outlet temperatures of the streams
pertaining to the same side (hot or cold) within each zone. The fact would mean that in order
to make the streams reaching a common temperature at the outlet of each zone, the heat
exchange must be adjusted in each zone favoring one of the two streams, according to their
thermal capacity. Further analysis should be directed towards assessing the distance between
the practice and the assumed approach.
In these terms, if 2-stream heat exchangers are only implied, allowing the use of plate heat
exchangers within the small-scale horizon, the cascade system with multiple sub-stages
becomes the most efﬁcient conﬁguration as it does not imply higher refrigerants’ ﬂow rates
when separating multiple-stream units. Conversely, because of the inner proﬁle of mixtures,
whose evaporation presents a temperature glide, it is not always possible a mixed refrigerant
to operate between the same temperature proﬁles without violating internal temperature
constraints. Hence, same total ﬂow rate cannot always be ensured.
5.8
Conclusion
The chapter dealt with the optimisation phase of the chosen systems for Natural Gas lique-
faction, considering their complexity and the number of degrees of freedom involved. The
analyses were performed by connecting Matlab R2014a [28] optimisation tools with Aspen
Plus process models, employing Genetic Algorithm (GA).
The optimisation algorithm provided considerable improvement margin in conﬁgurations
adopting mixed refrigerants. In this regard, PRICO system passed from 2070 to about 925 kW,
increasing the Figure of Merit from 20.5 % to almost 46 %. Signiﬁcant improvements were
obtained for the propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems, with the simpler conﬁgu-
ration attaining the highest overall performances. It registered approximately 850 kW and
overcame 50 % in FOM. In this regard, the optimisation algorithm showed to better perform
for simple systems where fewer decision variables and constraints take place, attaining higher
performances in the simpler conﬁguration of the C3-MR category.
On the other hand, with regard to cascade systems, the optimisation phase provided slight
improvements. In fact, when only pressure and temperature levels are implied as decision
variables, satisfactory process modelling can be achieved. Furthermore, setting process pa-
rameters to achieve the minimum temperature difference at both ends of the heat exchangers
was already meant in direction of optimisation.. Consequently, cascade conﬁguration with
two sub-stages was improved only from 969 KW to 915 kW in terms of power consumption
(from about 44 % to roughly 46.5 % in terms of FOM).
Multi-objective optimisations provided the possibility to estimate the relation between power
consumption and total network heat conductance. Cascade with sub-streams, C3-MR systems
and PRICO presented a similar power consumption threshold. However, the correspondent
97
==PAGE:116==
Chapter 5. Optimisation
values of heat conductance were different. In particular, PRICO system attained low power
consumption only at very high UA levels. Cascade conﬁguration allowed to limit total heat
conductance but increased the number of implied units. On the other hand, MR cycles needed
higher UAs but decreased the number of employed units. The investigated systems denoted
to be more efﬁcient than expansion-based liquefaction cycles, whose higher power level and
limited heat conductance make them suitable for small applications where simpler design
and lower equipment cost are desired.
Finally, the assumptions behind the results were often remarked. In particular, in multiple-
stream heat exchangers, lumped approach per zone made the individual streams following the
composite curve. Splitting multiple-stream units into 2-stream heat exchangers considerably
modiﬁed the panorama of the performances. Cascade systems were the only ones which
allowed maintaining the same refrigerants’ ﬂow rate and system power consumption as the
same operational temperatures could be maintained in the individual units without causing
internal violations. In these terms, the cascade conﬁguration with two sub-stages per heat
exchange section became the most performing system, dramatically rising, however, the
number of heat exchangers in the system. Performance of PRICO system and simple C3-
MR conﬁguration were instead worsened to about 1480 kW and approximately 1120 kW,
respectively.
98
==PAGE:117==
6 Overall discussion
The present section is intended as a small summary of the main implications and conse-
quences from the attained results. For more detailed analysis, the reader is sent to the results
and discussion sections within Process Modelling and Optimisation chapters.
6.1
Overall discussion
At ﬁrst, the performed process modelling denoted its high suitability with regard to cascade
conﬁgurations, giving the fact that they employ pure refrigerants and, therefore, only pres-
sure and temperature levels need to be established. Moreover, the greater number of system
constraints provided the support for deﬁning a considerable number of degrees of freedom,
attaining relevant outcomes. On the other hand, systems adopting mixed refrigerants as work-
ing ﬂuids require a more elaborate modelling phase to achieve compelling results, considering
the high number of variables within ﬂuid composition. In this case, the recourse to system
optimisation is crucial given the high number of feasible solutions.
Moreover, the analyses on the working processes of the examined conﬁgurations denoted
the central role played by temperature differences in the heat exchangers towards power con-
sumption. In fact, only by limiting the irreversibilities connected with temperature difference
driving forces it is possible to restrict power expenditure in liquefaction systems. Therefore, the
fundamental condition for maximizing process performance is to attain the highest thermal
matching between the temperature proﬁles.
Before the recourse to system optimisation, the cascade conﬁguration with two sub-stages
per heat exchange section achieved about 970 kW for a correspondent FOM of almost 44 %. In
cascade systems, however, low temperature differences can be obtained only when additional
sub-stages are integrated.
Conversely, accuracy in mixed composition deﬁnition needs to be performed if satisfactory
thermal matching and high performance level are desired. In particular, the baseline process
modelling allowed to achieve 2070 kW (20.5 % in FOM) for the single mixed refrigerant cycle
99
==PAGE:118==
Chapter 6. Overall discussion
and around 1160 kW (FOM of about 36.5 %) in the best solution of propane pre-cooled mixed
refrigerant cycles (C3-MR), respectively.
With regard to the optimisation phase, the implications are consistent with the modelling
stage. In detail, the peculiarities of the genetic algorithm are particularly crucial for systems
employing mixed refrigerants. In fact, their composition showed to play the decisive role in
system performances, overcoming pressure and temperature levels. The suitable combina-
tions were essential to increase thermal correspondence among the proﬁles, reducing the
implied ﬂow rates and irreversibilities.
Moreover, the algorithm denoted to better perform in systems with fewer degrees of freedom
and constraints, where multiple directions of optimisation could be assessed. The simpler
C3-MR provided the best outcomes from the optimisation phase, conﬁrming the peculiarities
of their highest recourse in the practice. Its power consumption level was registered at about
850 KW overcoming 50 % in terms of Figure of Merit. The most signiﬁcant improvement from
the process modelling was recorded for the PRICO system which passed from 2070 kW to 925
kW. With regard to cascade systems, the slight achieved amelioration was due to the signiﬁcant
results found in the process modelling phase and to the high number of constraints which
complicated the search for optimal solutions. For the conﬁguration with multiple sub-stages,
power expenditure was decreased from about 970 kW to 915 kW, increasing the FOM to almost
46.5 %.
By implementing the outcomes from C3-MR optimisation in a dual mixed refrigerant system,
the analysis showed the attractiveness of a suitable mixture covering pre-cooling demand as
well. The high performance attained before optimisation adjustment denoted the suitability of
such systems for highly efﬁcient liquefaction cycles and the incentive to their higher recourse
in the practice.
The simulations in terms of multi-objective optimisations pinpointed that similar thresholds
in power consumption were attained for the dealt conﬁgurations. However, the power level
is achieved at different heat conductance levels, as cascade conﬁguration with sub-stages
allowed to achieve low power consumption at limited UAs while PRICO became efﬁcient only
at very high UAs. On the other hand, cascade system implies an increase of the number of
heat exchange units. The comparison with expansion-based systems conﬁrmed their lower
performance level and their suitability in applications where power consumption is not the
only regard and considerations on components simplicity (limited heat conductance level)
are strongly perceived.
Furthermore, the evaluations on multi-objective optimisations allowed to estimate the corre-
lations between the decision variables and the objective functions. In order to restrict power
100
==PAGE:119==
6.1. Overall discussion
expenditures, refrigerants’ pressure ratios were limited and, in case of mixed refrigerant cycles,
low methane content, high ethane presence and relevant contribution of heavier hydrocar-
bons were set in the mixture composition. Lower pressure ratios are necessary in order to
approach the temperature proﬁle curves while lower methane content is targeted to restrict
refrigerant own cooling demand. Opposite trends were instead registered when UA minimiza-
tion is pursued.
Throughout the analyses, important effort was directed towards assessing the assumptions
and the limitations behind the recorded outcomes. In particular, heat exchange balance in
multiple-stream heat exchangers was discussed, implying lumped approach per zone. The
evaluations denoted that cascade systems, even though increasing the number of required
units, became the most performing solutions when multiple-stream heat exchangers are
separated into individual 2-stream units. In these conditions, cascade systems allowed to
maintain the same power consumption level, achieving the same total refrigerants’ ﬂow rates.
Conversely, systems implying mixed refrigerants could require higher ﬂow rates and hence
power expenditures when splitting into 2-stream heat exchangers. Speciﬁcally, refrigerants’
split ﬂows could not always operate between the same temperatures without violating internal
thermal constraints when individual hot streams were released from their composite curves.
Optimal performances of PRICO system and simple C3-MR conﬁguration were then worsened
to about 1480 kW (from 925 kW) and approximately 1120 kW (from 850 kW), respectively.
The feature led to the consideration that, when multiple-stream units are included in mixed
refrigerant cycles, the suitable adjustment of the quality of the heat exchange towards the
different hot streams, with the objective of deﬁning their proﬁle according to the hot composite
curve, can lead to lower power consumptions comparing to a solution adopting 2-stream heat
exchangers.
101
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
7 Overall conclusion
7.1
Overall conclusion
The present project examined a number of relevant technologies in the ﬁeld of Natural Gas
Liquefaction, given the greater consideration LNG is gaining as energy fuel, particularly for
shipping purposes. The study focused on cascade systems and mixed refrigerant cycles, which
are known to achieve the best performances in terms of power consumption limitation. The
objective was to derive the driving parameters and minimize power expenditure in the liq-
uefaction cycle. Considerations on equipment requirements, with particular regard to heat
exchangers’ total heat conductance, were as well assessed.
Hence, the study was divided into a process modelling and an optimisation phases. Process
modelling was performed by suitable implementations in Aspen Plus from AspenTech group
[27]. The aim was to derive its appropriateness for possible system design and to understand
the key working principles of the different technologies. The analyses showed that process
modelling is not far from design implementation when only pressure and temperature speci-
ﬁcations need to be established, i.e. cascade systems. On the other hand, when refrigerant
composition needs to be deﬁned, high demand for optimisation tools takes place given the
considerable number of solutions.
The second phase of the project involved the optimisation process, where further improve-
ments in system performances were targeted. The analyses were performed by connecting
Matlab R2014a [28] optimisation tools with Aspen Plus. The feature was developed by Labora-
toire d’Energetique Industrielle (LENI) of Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL) in
the OSMOSE Platform project [29] and employed a Genetic Algorithm (GA) as optimisation
technique.
103
==PAGE:122==
Chapter 7. Overall conclusion
The target was to derive when optimisation techniques are necessary and which directions
of operation they imply. Relevant implications were obtained which satisfactorily met the
initial expectations. The optimisation tool denoted to better perform for simpler systems
and provided considerable improvement margin in mixed refrigerant cycles. The outcomes
showed the attractiveness of propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant systems when suitable
mixtures are implied. Its simpler conﬁguration achieved roughly 850 kW of power expenditure
per 1 kg/s of Natural Gas to be liqueﬁed. The solution from the cascade system was not
considerably improved and attained approximately 915 kW. Space for further power reduction
was seen in the implementation of suitable dual mixed refrigerant cycles.
Moreover, throughout the analyses, crucial role was played by temperature differences on
power consumption deﬁnition. Limited differences reduced thermal irreversibilities and the
required power expenditures to sustain the processes.
Furthermore, the simulations in terms of multi-objective optimisations signiﬁcantly con-
tributed to meet the desired objectives. In fact, they allowed to derive the operational range of
the different technologies, their mutual relation between power consumption and total heat
conductance and the speciﬁc correlations between the degrees of freedom and the objective
functions.
The efﬁcient solutions among the investigated systems denoted close levels of minimum
power consumptions but different requirements in terms of total network heat conductance.
The highest UA levels were recorded for the PRICO system (more than 600 kW/K for low power
levels). The comparison with expansion-based systems conﬁrmed their lower performance
level and their suitability in small-scale and peak-shaving applications.
A relevant effort was directed towards estimating the assumptions and the approaches in-
volved in the calculations. In particular, the approach assumed in the heat exchange balance
with regard to multiple-stream heat exchangers was investigated. Hence, in each system,
conﬁgurations adopting 2-stream heat exchangers were examined, considering the additional
possibility of employing simpler heat exchange units, suitable for applications within small-
scale horizon. The relevant implication regarded the fact that, in mixed refrigerant cycles, the
split conﬁguration could lead to higher ﬂow rates and consequent power expenditures.
7.2
Future work
In conclusion, throughout the project development, additional investigations are possibly
seen to move a step aside in the analysis of Natural Gas liquefaction facilities, starting from
the performed examinations. In particular, as the study mainly directed towards the role of
the irreversibilities connected with the heat transfer, exergy analysis could be integrated to
assess the role of the remaining exergy losses. Given the number of modelled systems and the
104
==PAGE:123==
7.2. Future work
correspondent complexity, which in the present cases regarded the deﬁnition of refrigerant
composition for mixed refrigerant cycles and the number of units for cascade conﬁgurations,
the analysis should be ﬁrst included in simpler systems, deriving the relative magnitude levels
of system irreversibilities.
Considerations on the behavior of the investigated technologies in part-load conditions, when
Natural Gas feed ﬂow rate registers small variations, are suggested to be evaluated. In partic-
ular, the impact on heat conductance of the heat exchangers and on refrigerants’ ﬂow rate
adjustment are relevant to be assessed, when control on process temperature is desired to be
achieved.
Finally, the suitability of the examined refrigeration processes towards the use of bio-gas
represents a feature likely to be included in further analyses. In particular, the changes in
pre-treatment dealing and in consequent overall system consumption should be assessed,
considering the notably higher CO2 content bio-gas carries [56].
105
==PAGE:124==
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1] BP. BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2015. Technical report, BP, 2015. URL
http://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/pdf/energy-economics/statistical-review-2015/
bp-statistical-review-of-world-energy-2015-full-report.pdf.
[2] Alessandro Trigilio, Alexis Bouza, and Sabrina Di Scipio. Modelling and simulation of
natural gas liquefaction process. INTECH Open Access Publisher, (2002), 2012.
[3] BP.
BP Energy Outlook 2016 edition.
Technical report, BP, 2016.
URL
http://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/pdf/energy-economics/energy-outlook-2016/
bp-energy-outlook-2016.pdf.
[4] Jens Brendeng, Einar; Hetland. STATE OF THE ART IN LIQUEFACTION TECHNOLOGIES
FOR NATURAL GAS. In Jens; Gochitashvili Hetland, editor, Security of Natural Gas Supply
through Transit countries, pages 75–102. 2004.
[5] Massimo Ferrera. INGAS - Integrating GAS Powertrain. Low emissions, CO2 optimised
and efﬁcient CNG engines for passenger cars (PC) and light duty vehicles (LDV), 2010.
URL http://www.ingas-eu.org/docs/DB0.1.pdf.
[6] F. Adamchak and A. Adede. LNG As Marine Fuel. LNG-17 Conference, pages 1–10, 2013.
ISSN 01972782.
[7] Jerzy Herdzik. LNG AS A MARINE FUEL – POSSIBILITIES AND PROBLEMS. Journal of
KONES Powertrain and Transport, 18(2):3–10, 2011. URL http://ilot.edu.pl/kones/2011/
2{_}2011/2011{_}herdzik{_}lng{_}as{_}a{_}marine{_}fuel.pdf.
[8] Oil Marketing & Trading International. Oil Marketing & Trading International, 2016. URL
http://www.oil-marketing.com.
[9] K. Loubar, C. Rahmouni, O. Le Corre, and M. Tazerout. A combustionless determination
method for combustion properties of natural gases. Fuel, 86(16):2535–2544, 2007. ISSN
00162361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2007.02.024. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0016236107000993.
[10] Amir-Hasan Kakaee, Amin Paykani, and Mostafa Ghajar. The inﬂuence of fuel com-
position on the combustion and emission characteristics of natural gas fueled en-
gines. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 38:64–78, 2014. ISSN 13640321.
107
==PAGE:126==
Bibliography
doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2014.05.080. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1364032114004055.
[11] AirLiquide. Air Liquide, 2016. URL https://www.airliquide.com/.
[12] Bjørn Austbø, Sigurd Weidemann Løvseth, and Truls Gundersen. Annotated bibliography-
Use of optimization in LNG process design and operation. Elsevier - Computers and
Chemical Engineering, 71:391–414, 2014. ISSN 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2014.09.010. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2014.09.010.
[13] GIIGNL. The LNG Industry in 2014. Technical report, GIIGNL, 2015. URL http://www.
giignl.org/system/ﬁles/giignl{_}the{_}lng{_}industry{_}2013.pdf.
[14] Alireza Bahadori. Liqueﬁed Natural Gas. In Natural Gas Processing - Technology and
Engineering Design, chapter 13, pages 591–632. Gulf Professional Publishing, 1 edition,
2014. ISBN 9780124202047. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-099971-5.00013-1.
[15] Linde Group. LNG Technology. Linde, 2003.
[16] Universiy of Oklahoma OU. Refrigeration Basics and LNG. 2005. URL http://www.ou.
edu/class/che-design/che5480-07/RefrigerationBasicsandLNG.pdf.
[17] Bjørn Austbø and Truls Gundersen. Using thermodynamic insight in the optimization
of LNG processes, volume 33. Elsevier, 2014. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63455-9.50047-7.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63455-9.50047-7.
[18] T. R. Finn, A. J.; Johnson, G. L.; Tomlinson. Developments in Natural Gas Liquefaction.
Hydrocarbon Processing, 78(4):47–57, 1999.
[19] ConocoPhillips
Company.
Conoco
Phillips
Optimized
Cascade
Process,
2009.
URL
http://www.santosglng.com/media/pdf1673/
AnnexureK{_}ConocoPhillips{_}Optimized{_}Cascade{_}Process.pdf.
[20] Gianfranco Rodriguez, Alessandro D Trigilio, Simon Bol, Sabrina Di Scipio, Fabiana Arias,
and Maria G. Quintas. Simulation and Sensitivity Analysis of a Mixed Fluid Cascade
Lng Plant in a Tropical Climate Using a Commercial. (February 2016):15, 2012. doi:
10.13140/2.1.3837.6000. URL https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264975031.
[21] Linde Group. Linde Technology. Technical Report May, Linde AG, Wiesbaden, Germany,
2003. URL http://www.the-linde-group.com/internet.global.thelindegroup.global/en/
images/Linde{_}Technology{_}1{_}2003{_}EN14{_}9684.pdf.
[22] W.C. Wijngaarden van. Page 1 of 16. In Manager, pages 1–16, Houston, 1999. B.V., Stork
Engineers & Contractors. URL http://www.lanl.gov/thermoacoustics/Pubs/MSGR99F.
pdf.
108
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
[23] Pablo Semolinos, Gunnar Olsen, and Alain Giacosa. LNG As Marine Fuel: Challenges To
Be Overcome. 17th International Conference & Exhibition on Liquiﬁed Natural Gas, pages
1–20, 2013. ISSN 01972782. URL http://www.gastechnology.org/Training/Documents/
LNG17-proceedings/7-2-Pablo{_}Semolinos.pdf.
[24] Selma Brynolf, Erik Fridell, and Karin Andersson. Environmental assessment of marine
fuels: Liqueﬁed natural gas, liqueﬁed biogas, methanol and bio-methanol. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 74(X):86–95, 2014. ISSN 09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.03.052.
[25] Hulda Winnes, Linda Styhre, and Erik Fridell. Reducing GHG emissions from ships in
port areas. Research in Transportation Business and Management, 17:73–82, 2015. ISSN
22105395. doi: 10.1016/j.rtbm.2015.10.008. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rtbm.2015.
10.008.
[26] Selma Bengtsson. Life Cycle Assessment of Present and Future Marine Fuels Department
of Shipping and Marine Technology. 2011.
[27] Aspentech. Aspen Plus V7.2. URL http://www.aspentech.com/products/engineering/
aspen-plus/.
[28] MathWorks. MATLAB R2014a, 2014. URL http://se.mathworks.com/products/matlab/.
[29] LENI. Osmose Platform. URL http://leni.epﬂ.ch/osmose.
[30] Tuong-Van Nguyen. Modelling, analysis and optimisation of energy systems on off shore
platforms. Technical Report October, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby,
2014. URL http://orbit.dtu.dk/ws/ﬁles/108666028/S170{_}Tuong{_}Van{_}Nguyen.pdf.
[31] Julio Cesar Pacio. Multiscale thermo-hydraulic modeling of cryogenic heat exchangers.
PhD thesis, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 2012.
[32] C. W. Remeljej and A. F A Hoadley. An exergy analysis of small-scale liqueﬁed natural
gas (LNG) liquefaction processes. Energy, 31(12):1669–1683, 2006. ISSN 03605442. doi:
10.1016/j.energy.2005.09.005.
[33] Ho Myung Chang. A thermodynamic review of cryogenic refrigeration cycles for liq-
uefaction of natural gas. Cryogenics, 72:127–147, 2015. ISSN 00112275. doi: 10.1016/j.
cryogenics.2015.10.003. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cryogenics.2015.10.003.
[34] John McCall. Genetic algorithms for modelling and optimisation. Journal of Com-
putational and Applied Mathematics, 184(1):205–222, 2005.
ISSN 03770427.
doi:
10.1016/j.cam.2004.07.034.
[35] Kalyanmoy Deb. An introduction to genetic algorithms. Sadhana, 24(4-5):293–315, 1999.
ISSN 0256-2499. doi: 10.1007/BF02823145.
109
==PAGE:128==
Bibliography
[36] Christopher A Mattson and Achille Messac. Pareto Frontier Based Concept Uncertainty ,
with Visualization Selection under Corresponding Author. Optimization and Engineering,
6(1):85–115, 2005. ISSN 1573-2924. doi: 10.1023/B:OPTE.0000048538.35456.45.
[37] Jan Hauke and Tomasz Kossowski. Comparison of Values of Pearson’s and Spearman’s
Correlation Coefﬁcients on the Same Sets of Data. Quaestiones Geographicae, 30(2):87–93,
2011. ISSN 0137-477X. doi: 10.2478/v10117-011-0021-1.
[38] Kosan Crisplant, 2016. URL http://www.kosancrisplant.com/en/home/.
[39] Weldon Ransbarger. A fresh look at LNG process efﬁciency. Hydrocarbon Engineer-
ing, 12(SUPPL.), 2007. ISSN 14689340. URL http://lnglicensing.conocophillips.com/
Documents/SMID{_}016{_}WeldonsPaperLNGIndustry.pdf.
[40] A.J. Finn. Are ﬂoating LNG facilities viable options? Hydrocarbon Processing, jul 2009.
URL http://www.hydrocarbonprocessing.com/.
[41] Adam Jones, Grant Johnson, and Costain Natural Resources. A new process for improved
cascade cycle. (September), 2013.
[42] Py Martin and B Fischer. Natural gas liquefaction processes comparison. AICHE Spring
Natianal Meeting, France, pages 1–10, 2003. URL http://scholar.google.com/scholar?
hl=en{&}btnG=Search{&}q=intitle:NATURAL+GAS+LIQUEFACTION+PROCESSES+
COMPARISON{#}7.
[43] Inkyu Lee, Kyungjae Tak, Wonsub Lim, Kwangho Choi, and Il Moon. Optimization of
Pure-Refrigerant Cycle Compressing Ratio on C3-MR Process, volume 31. Elsevier B.V.,
2012. ISBN 9780444595058. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-59506-5.50125-5. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-59506-5.50125-5.
[44] Meiqian Wang, Jian Zhang, and Qiang Xu. Optimal design and operation of a C3MR
refrigeration system for natural gas liquefaction. Computers and Chemical Engineering,
39:84–95, 2012. ISSN 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2011.12.003. URL http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2011.12.003.
[45] Alfalaval. Alfalaval, 2016. URL http://www.alfalaval.com/increase-efﬁciency/products/
compact-heat-exchangers/.
[46] G. Venkatarathnam. Cryogenic Mixed Refrigerant Processes, volume 33. Springer, New
York, 2008. ISBN 9780387785134. doi: 10.1016/j.ijrefrig.2009.11.013.
[47] S.A. Klein. Engineering Equation Solver EES.
[48] Hamid Sanavandi and Masoud Ziabasharhagh. Design and comprehensive optimization
of C3MR liquefaction natural gas cycle by considering operational constraints. Journal of
Natural Gas Science and Engineering, 29:176–187, 2016. ISSN 18755100. doi: 10.1016/j.
jngse.2015.12.055. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jngse.2015.12.055.
110
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
[49] Le Cao, Jinping Liu, and Xiongwen Xu. Robustness analysis of the mixed refrigerant
composition employed in the single mixed refrigerant (SMR) liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG)
process. Applied Thermal Engineering, 93:1155–1163, 2016. ISSN 13594311. doi: 10.1016/
j.applthermaleng.2015.10.072.
[50] A. Mortazavi, C. Somers, Y. Hwang, R. Radermacher, P. Rodgers, and S. Al-Hashimi.
Performance enhancement of propane pre-cooled mixed refrigerant LNG plant. Applied
Energy, 93(6-7):125–131, 2012. ISSN 03062619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2011.05.009. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2010.12.003.
[51] A. Aspelund, T. Gundersen, J. Myklebust, M. P. Nowak, and A. Tomasgard. An optimization-
simulation model for a simple LNG process. Computers and Chemical Engineering, 34
(10):1606–1617, 2010. ISSN 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2009.10.018. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2009.10.018.
[52] Shankar Vaidyaraman and Costas D. Maranas. Optimal synthesis of refrigeration cycles
and selection of refrigerants. AIChE Journal, 45(5):997–1017, 1999. ISSN 00011541. doi:
10.1002/aic.690450510. URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/aic.690450510.
[53] Prue Hatcher, Rajab Khalilpour, and Ali Abbas. Optimisation of LNG mixed-refrigerant
processes considering operation and design objectives. Computers and Chemical Engi-
neering, 41:123–133, 2012. ISSN 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2012.03.005.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2012.03.005.
[54] Mohd Shariq Khan, I. A. Karimi, and Moonyong Lee. Evolution and optimization of the
dual mixed refrigerant process of natural gas liquefaction. Applied Thermal Engineering,
96:320–329, 2016. ISSN 13594311. doi: 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.11.092. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.11.092.
[55] Ji Hyun Hwang, Myung Il Roh, and Kyu Yeul Lee. Determination of the optimal operating
conditions of the dual mixed refrigerant cycle for the LNG FPSO topside liquefaction
process. Computers and Chemical Engineering, 49:25–36, 2013. ISSN 00981354. doi:
10.1016/j.compchemeng.2012.09.008. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.
2012.09.008.
[56] Benjamin Oyegbile and Satyanarayana Narra. Impending Natural Gas Supply Glut and
Biogas Developments in Europe: Economic and Environmental Implications. Journal
of Environment and Earth Science, 2(11):1–7, 2012. URL http://www.iiste.org/Journals/
index.php/JEES/article/view/3677.
111
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
==PAGE:132==
No matter what your life is,
choosing it changes everything.
Non importa che vita sia,
sceglierla fa la differenza.
— Andre Agassi
==PAGE:133==
==PAGE:134==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark 
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone (+45) 4525 1360
Fax  (+45) 4588 4325
www.mek.dtu.dk
