==PAGE:1==
 
Comprehension and Improvement Through Litera-
ture Review and Empirical Study 
By 
Ebou Touray (s093515) 
Andreas Strøjer Tynan Schmidt (s103423) 
Supervisor: Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen 
June 2016 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
Comprehension and Improvement Through Literature Review and Empirical Study 
Thesis version 1 
2016 
By 
Ebou Touray (s093515) 
Andreas Strøjer Tynan Schmidt (s103423) 
Supervisor: Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen 
Copyright: 
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary 
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc. 
Published by: 
Department of Management Engineering, Produktionstorvet, Building 424, DK-
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
Request report from: 
www.man.dtu.dk 
ISSN: 
[0000-0000] (electronic version) 
ISBN: 
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version) 
ISSN: 
[0000-0000] (printed version) 
ISBN: 
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version) 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
Since offshoring was a no-brainer to circumvent manufacturing costs in the 80’s and 90’s, a lot 
has happened. As offshoring has contributed to globalization, it has also contributed to the de-
velopment of the emerging countries, ultimately changing the global equilibrium. During the last 
decade, manufacturing costs have gone up in this part of the world along with the development 
of infrastructure, education, and market sizes. There is a strong need to reconsider the interna-
tional location decision and now, it is not a no-brainer. 
Despite the wide attention to offshoring and reshoring in media and research, a limitation in re-
search is understanding the underlying processes and dynamics of international location deci-
sions. While research show that firms find it difficult to deal with the complexity of the decision, 
limited frameworks and models have been developed to assist the decision-maker in structuring 
and balancing efforts. This thesis deals with the problem of addressing these two gaps; by en-
hancing comprehension of processes and developing a model to assist the practitioner in scoping 
his efforts. 
The gaps in research and practice have been addressed through an extensive literature review 
of over 100 publications and an in-depth exploratory survey study of 17 Danish manufacturing 
firms from different industries and in all sizes – from some of the largest firms in the C20 Cap 
index to medium and small-sized local firms.  
The study showed a clear correlation between processes and performance to validate the angle 
of studying the process from a bottom-up approach rather a traditional top-down approach. Five 
shortcomings in current practice were identified in the study and validated in literature: unstruc-
tured and unbalanced, non-involvement, static approach, lack of synthesis and no learning. A 
factor framework was developed from literature for the study, which revealed infrastructure as 
the most important element, while cost no longer is most dominant factor. 
The Scope Model was developed from insights of the ex-
ploratory study and a thorough review of current models 
and frameworks. The model considers four main aspects 
in iterations through different abstraction levels: the cur-
rent state, a future state, change requirements for 
achieving future state and last, change capabilities of the 
firm. The model empowers the decision-maker to bal-
ance efforts and structure the process, while ensuring 
both a strategic fit and an in-depth analysis to develop a 
solid decision support. It encourages the use of organi-
zational learning, change management, multi-criteria de-
cision analysis, and applying dynamic capabilities.  
 
==PAGE:4==
 
International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
5 
More than a year after commencing research on production movement and location decisions, it 
is our honest belief that our research in form of this thesis can have a positive impact for firms 
who are either in the process of deciding on a location for the production facility or are to do it in 
the future. As we’ve learned, despite the importance and impact of deciding to locate manufac-
turing in a certain place, surprisingly few do it the “right” way. This has consequences – for some 
firms, that means extra cost, poor quality, longer lead-times, and for a few cases, it means that 
a finished facility will never even be put to use. For the local societies, this means losing jobs and 
other far-reaching consequences, which has been a constant theme in popular media since the 
offshoring and outsourcing trend began dominating in the 80’s. Thus, we see a mismatch in both 
industry and research, between effort and importance. 
But what are the current ways? Documentation of how firms go from an idea to a location decision 
is surprisingly scarce. Reasoning behind final decisions are often limited to simple drivers and 
factors. “We offshored our production because there was lower labor cost” and 10 years later: 
“We reshored our production back home because the quality wasn’t up to standard and we want 
to be closer to our customers”. These explanations are widely available, but we don’t think they 
cover the full image and thereby, don’t give a satisfactory answer to an important question. This 
is where our research jumps in to document the path from start to finish in 17 Danish manufac-
turing firms of all sizes, from smallest to the very biggest of our country.  
And what is the “right” way? Is it just doing a greater effort and making more analysis and fore-
casts, or put more expensive consultants to evaluate the options? Maybe there is no one “right” 
way. As we’ve learned, different scenarios demand for different solutions. Nonetheless, many 
important aspects are generally overlooked and firms generally benefit greatly from including 
them into their considerations and decision support. We believe we’ve found some of these by 
pinpointing the deviations from theory to practice and reformulating a new framework based on 
knowledge from academia and synthesized with our new-found practical knowledge. 
Unlike most theses that serve to conclude a Master of Science degree in any field, this thesis is 
structured with fragmented emphasis in the shape of two highly focused, mutually-independent, 
but collectively supportive articles. These are further supported by the main thesis report, which 
connects the dots from the articles and elaborates details in a broader perspective. Such struc-
ture is chosen in order to direct the research towards publishing articles in scientific management-
related journals and thereby, create research with impact.  
Specifically, we have chosen the International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Man-
agement (IJPDLM) – of which we have targeted formatting, structure and content. Practically 
speaking, this explains the layout differences the reader will encounter through this thesis and 
the repetition of reference lists, which each refer to the its own part; thesis, article 1 or article 2. 
 
 
Kongens Lyngby, June 2016 
 
 
Ebou Touray 
& 
Andreas S. T. Schmidt 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
6 
 
Ever since the existence of humanity there has always been fierce competition in one form or 
another; for either dominance, control, resources and power. Being competitive has always been 
a natural instinct and a necessity for survival. This is now in turn mirrored in the nature of various 
firms dominating various industries in today's businesses. Competitiveness and dynamism are 
incumbent on any firm that seeks to sustain its business, and the concepts should be profoundly 
rooted in a firm’s DNA and reflected in its culture. According to Porter (1986), firms can primarily 
be competitive on two dimensions, i.e. by means of cost leadership or product leadership. In 
other words, a firm can gain a competitive advantage by executing activities in their value chain 
at either a lower cost or in a unique way relative to their competitors. Looking into the product 
leadership dimension, many firms have over the years constantly explored ways in which they 
could be innovative (incrementally and radically) with their respective products in order to appear 
significantly unique in the eyes of their customers compared to their competitors. Furthermore, 
prolong their product life cycles and prevent product obsolescence. On the cost dimension, var-
ious firms have been seeking creative ways in which they could suppress various costs e.g. by 
means of economies of scale, supply chain innovation or by identifying low-cost countries to 
offshore to through location decision processes.  
In its early years, offshoring was primarily seen as a means of circumventing high production 
costs by gaining access to cheap labor but has subsequently become a means of gaining access 
to knowledge, skills, know-how from various corners of the world (Pedersen et al., 2013). Since 
its beginning in the 80’s the trend of offshoring has over the years been facilitated by the 
advancement of information and communication technology (ICT), the increase in international 
trade and the loosening of policies (Mol, 2007; Pedersen et al., 2013; UNCTAD, 2004). None-
theless, firms gradually began to realize that the once so favorable business environments for 
production were causing them more money than initially expected. Most firms failed to realize 
that factors affecting a regions attractiveness change significantly over time (Ellram et al., 2013). 
Antecedent low-cost regions suffer from decreased responsiveness and quality, higher raw ma-
terial costs and higher labor costs as evident in China (Anon, 2012; Li et al., 2012; Tate et al., 
2014). Thus, negating the intended effect for firms who were seeking means of cost minimization. 
Furthermore, decision makers tend to overlook the current and future hidden costs pertained to 
operating on foreign grounds, the amount of resources required to manage a globally dispersed 
organization and the cost of knowledge transfer (Pedersen et al., 2013; Porter and Rivkin, 2012). 
Hence, this has led firms to witness the harsh consequence of failing to pick the right processes, 
calculate operational and structural risks, and match organizational forms to live up to the initial 
expectations of the offshoring activities (Aron and Singh, 2005). Firms are now increasingly mov-
ing beyond cost savings to consider impacts on total cost, profitability, and customer value 
creation when determining preferred regions for manufacturing location decisions (Ellram et al., 
2013). 
The negating effects of the above mentioned issues have led to talks about the repatriation of 
manufacturing and the return of job, thus has been spread wide into the popular media and sub-
sequently, academic research. The enticing idea of bringing back jobs that were once lost to the 
offshoring regime that has dominated since the 80’s has brought excitement and started several 
supporting political initiatives (Goodwill, 2012). Documented cases include firms such as Apple, 
Ford Motors, Walmart and General Electric (Deligio, 2014; Ellram et al., 2013). Having some of 
the best-rated supply chains on board with the trend may be part of the reason why ‘reshoring’ 
or ‘backshoring’ has caught so much attention. Although preliminary conclusions from the studies 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
7 
on reshoring show that the trend is not as widespread as presumed, it is not a myth either (Cohen 
& Lee, 2015). While reshoring is not necessarily the answer to the shift in global equilibrium, it 
requires firms to re-evaluate the location of their global supply chain network, including the loca-
tion of manufacturing 
In this reconsideration, firms need to appraise various alternatives through an international loca-
tion decision (ILD) process. This demands the need to have a full understanding of the process. 
Despite the importance of ILD, there is surprisingly little progress made it comprehending the 
process in details for optimization purposes. Therefore, this thesis is dedicated to enhancing the 
comprehension of the process and the development of framework to facilitate the process. 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
8 
 
This section endeavors to elaborate and give a comprehensive understanding of how our project 
is framed and explicitly specify the definition of central concepts and the targeted firms that are 
to be considered in our research. 
 
This thesis has two overall purposes, which each are dealt with in the two articles separately. 
The first purpose, which is addressed in article 1, is to understand the decision-making process 
behind ILDs in Danish manufacturing firms through an empirical study. On the contrary of past 
studies on the subject which mainly use a top-down approach, this study goes beyond single 
factors and drivers as explanations for location decisions and takes a more holistic and in-depth 
approach to analyzing the decision. It examines how firms have structured, prioritized, and dis-
tributed its resources and emphasis both through the phases leading up to the decision and 
during the final decision-making.  
The second purpose, which is addressed in article 2 is to suggest immediate improvements to 
current ways of making location decisions and a framework to facilitate the process by combining 
real-world data on Danish manufacturing firms with leading theories and frameworks from inter-
national academic research. This is done by combining the findings from our empirical study 
documented in article 1 with a thorough literature review of location decision theory to form a 
theoretically-based, practically-adjusted framework for international location decisions. 
 
Overall, this thesis seeks to answer to main research questions divided into the two articles: 
Article 1: How do Danish manufacturing firms make their international location decisions 
and what processes lead them to such? 
Article 2: How can theory of location decisions be synthesized with practical knowledge 
from the study to create a framework that helps facilitation of the process? 
 
Critical to any academic research that seeks to build and test theories about phenomena is a firm 
foundation anchored in good definitions (Wacker, 2004). Therefore, we define precisely what we 
mean by both ‘international location decision’ and ‘Danish manufacturing firm’ in the following 
subsections. 
The starting point and perspective in our definitions and our study as a whole, is the decision-
making support and authority, i.e. the group of people who has had the main responsibility of the 
decision analysis and the main authority to make the decision.  
 
As previously stated in the introduction of this thesis, location decisions are related and in some 
cases, equal to the concepts of offshoring, reshoring, nearshoring, and similar, as they too deal 
with locating, allocating, or relocating firm activities to a certain location. However, as each of 
these concepts has been subject to vague, contradictory, and/or inappropriate definitions (Rice 
and Stefanelli, 2014), it is vital to ensure a profound foundation in our research. Therefore, we 
define our first definition as follows; 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
9 
Definition 1 
An international location decision is a macro-level decision made by a firm, 
to pinpoint the geographic location of a partly or fully owned facility from a 
set of international alternatives. 
First, definition 1 emphasizes the international consideration of the decision but doesn’t demand 
an international outcome, i.e. location outside the country. That means if other country locations 
were considered, even the decision of locating a facility in Denmark for a Danish firm can be 
considered an international location decision (ILD hereafter) in the context of our study. Second, 
we stress the necessity of having at least part ownership of the located facility, which means that 
a fully outsourced activity is not of interest.  
 
Figure 1. Dimensions and alternatives to the international location decision. Marks to the right indicate the 
inclusion of an alternative in this study. 
Figure 1 illustrates the dimensions of the manufacturing location decision and their respective 
immediate options. When a firm decides to locate a manufacturing facility, they have three op-
tions regarding ownership; full ownership, part ownership, or no ownership. Similarly, there are 
three main options regarding the location dimension: choosing the same country as the decision 
makers (onshoring or reshoring), a near-to-home location of the decision makers but in a different 
country (nearshoring), and a far-away location relative to the decision maker, typically on a 
different continent (offshoring). 
The main difference between an international location decision and its different “shoring” options, 
is its unbiased nature in seeking a solution. While reshoring and offshoring deal with a specific 
phenomenon and paths of movement, the international location decision deals with a generic 
optimization problem. The discussion of orientations of related terms is elaborated in the literature 
review of article 1. 
There are two main reasons for focusing on manufacturing firms in this study. First, we expect 
the proportion of firms who at some point face an ILD problem is significantly higher for manu-
facturing firms than for most other industries. This means we have a higher chance of getting a 
useful survey response from our population. Second, we expect to see more commonalities be-
tween the location problems of manufacturing firms than the location problems in total, across 
industries. With less divergence, we will be more likely to see patterns and be able to understand 
the current process and pinpoint the aspects that can be improved. 
The international consideration is required for two reasons: First, in literature and discussions 
with companies and other academics, we have seen a great deal of misunderstanding about 
what exact problem we are referring to. To make sure it is clear that we are not looking to solve 
the site selection problem within e.g. western Jutland, we require international alternatives in the 
International 
Location Decision
Location
Onshoring/ 
Reshoring
Nearshoring
Offshoring (far)
Ownership
Full ownership
Part ownership
No ownership
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
10 
decision analysis and thus eliminating possible misunderstandings. Second, the purpose of un-
derstanding the manufacturing location decision process is not just to be able to improve the 
success rate for manufacturing firms, but from a government perspective to get a deeper under-
standing of why facilities and its associated jobs move from one country to the other. For this 
reason, the decision processes we study must have included the consideration of international 
alternatives. 
Last, the consideration of the ownership dimension, but the exclusion of complete outsourcing 
has the following explanation, the main issue subject to this study is the location dimension. 
Nonetheless, the ownership dimension is often embedded in the same problem since outsourc-
ing often is considered in the same situations as location decisions with full ownership. However, 
despite this similarity, alternatives in the outsourcing problem tend to be more linked to the spe-
cific vendor than its location and outsourcing activities may entail production of simple generic 
goods. Additionally, the amount of investment and thus commitment to the decision is often sig-
nificantly different in outsourcing and for this reason, we exclude the option of taking no owner-
ship. Some outsourcing activities, however, may include large investments and commitment, 
which gives the company part direct ownership or a hybrid version, where future ownership is an 
option in the outsourcing contract. 
 
On closer inspection, “a Danish manufacturing firm” can have several interpretations; it is unclear 
whether it is defined by its country of foundation, the parent country of the current firm owner, the 
country of main activities, or the country where the headquarters are placed. Thus, there is a 
need to define the target of this study. Therefore, we define this as; 
Definition 2 
A Danish manufacturing firm in the context of this study is a firm or depart-
ment of a firm, which is located geographically within the borders of Den-
mark and has the main authority to make an international location decision. 
It is registered for activities in a public manufacturing industry. 
Thus, the firm does not necessarily have to be founded in Denmark to be considered Danish in 
this context. We are interested in what drives Danish location decisions, i.e. decisions made by 
groups or departments of people, geographically located in Denmark. An example could be a 
company with headquarters in an overseas location and has a decentralized organizational struc-
ture, which allows a Danish department to be the primary decision makers of an international 
relocation. However, the recognize that these are few. 
There are three motivations for this definition. First, understanding the relocation patterns of Dan-
ish firms to better understand reshoring, i.e. the repatriation of manufacturing to Denmark, and 
offshoring, i.e. the relocation of manufacturing from Denmark to a foreign location. The subject 
has been of special interest in recent decades in popular media, first as jobs left the country and 
now, as hopes are rising for them to come back. Second, easy access from geographic location 
of study (Technical University of Denmark). Third, scarce research both generally on the manu-
facturing location decision and no documentation found at all for the location decision process in 
Danish firms. 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
11 
 
The first article of two follows on the next page. This article has the main focus of covering the 
survey research study conducted in connection to this thesis. The questions from the survey of 
the study can be found in Appendix A on page 67. In addition, the documentation for development 
of hypotheses and survey can be found in Appendix B on page 94.
==PAGE:12==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
12 
The International Location Decision: A Study of 
Danish Manufacturing Firms 
 
Andreas Strøjer Tynan Schmidt*  
Ebou Touray**  
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen*** 
 
Technical University of Denmark, Management Engineering, 2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
*) 
E-mail: astys@dtu.dk, Tel: +45 25321777 
 
**) 
E-mail: s093515@student.dtu.dk, Tel: +45 52556023 
 
**) 
E-mail: znlh@dtu.dk, Tel: +45 45254440 
 
ABSTRACT 
Purpose – The aim of this paper is to build a broader comprehension of the international 
location decision (ILD) of manufacturing by investigating and mapping the activities along the 
underlying processes in Danish manufacturing firms and thereby, develop a broad comprehen-
sion of current practice and its shortcomings relative to the recommended practice in academic 
research.  
Design/methodology/approach – The research for this paper was conducted using an 
exploratory survey research approach with a thorough foundation in a broad academic 
literature related to the ILD. Comprehensive, in-depth responses were collected from 17 exec-
utives in Danish manufacturing firms who had a central role in the ILD process and final de-
cision-making.  
Findings – The study presented in this paper provides insights into the underlying processes 
of ILD. The study reveals less emphasis on cost than in past studies and a large unstructured 
human influence. A presented factor framework documents the importance of categories and 
an assessment of single-factors within these categories. Lastly, the paper identifies five major 
shortcomings in current practice: unstructured and unbalanced, non-involvement, static ap-
proach, lack of synthesis, and not learning. 
Research limitations/implications – This paper identifies a significant gap in literature 
in documenting the processes underlying ILDs. Although this paper advances research on the 
subject, more comprehensive research is needed to form behavioral theories and models. Fur-
ther, the shortcomings identified should be addressed with appropriate models and frame-
works.  
Practical implications – For practitioners, this paper reveals the current practice of locating 
manufacturing for Danish firms and identifies shortcomings to focus on.  
Originality/value – Most research on the ILD focuses on specific directions (e.g. offshoring 
or reshoring) and has historically used a top-down approach; observing activities of movement 
and seeking explanations thereafter. On the contrary, this paper investigates the ILD in an 
inclusive manner, using a bottom-up approach; observing the underlying processes and how 
different elements interplay to form a final ILD. Thereby, this paper contributes with novel 
insights to the comprehension of ILDs. 
Keywords: International Location Decisions; Decision process; Manufacturing; Denmark; 
Offshoring; Reshoring 
==PAGE:13==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
13 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Making decisions of locating manufacturing facilities in an international context is 
widely considered a key strategic decision with a wide-ranging impact on the business 
as a whole (Dou and Sarkis, 2010; Kinkel and Maloca, 2009; Yang and Lee, 1997). For 
this reason a location decision is a complex task to master – one thing is to gather, analyze 
and understand the potential consequences based on limited available data, but another 
thing is to combine the comprehensive factors, both qualitative and quantitative, tangible 
and intangible into one final recommendation and ultimately, a decision (Bruch et al., 
2014; Hoffman and Schniederjans, 1994). Both in the past and today, firms have been 
overwhelmed with the complexity of the task, causing them to rely heavily on simple 
rules of thumb and gut feeling (Bellgran et al., 2013; Porter and Rivkin, 2012). There is 
thus reason to believe such decisions often are flawed (Gray et al., 2013).  
Traditionally called the location selection or site selection problem, the problem itself 
has been studied since the dawn of the industrialization era (Viswanadham and Ka-
meshwaran, 2007). However, there is a vast difference in scope of these problems. While 
for small-reaching regional firms, the decision may be relatively easy, the opposite goes 
for the far-reaching global firms (Kodali and Routroy, 2006). That makes it vital to dis-
tinguish the two, as they demand different approaches and the latter, a strong need for 
keeping focus and balancing efforts (Meijboom and Vos, 1997).  
The decision not only has an impact on the firm itself. Since the offshoring trend emerged 
in the 80s many firms have relocated their activities and with them, millions of jobs in 
attempts to lower cost primarily on labor (Bettis et al., 1992; Mol, 2007; Mullin, 1996). 
This has had a major impact on societies in the developed world and in the emerging 
economics, and as the topic evokes emotions in the public, the popular media has not 
been late to cover anecdotal evidence as vividly as possible (Gray et al., 2013; Mol, 
2007). In recent years, reconsiderations of the manufacturing location have emerged. In 
particular, repatriation of manufacturing, known as reshoring or backshoring, and hence 
the return of jobs has become a topic of interest in popular media and subsequently, in 
academic research. Reshoring, which fundamentally is a location decision (Gray et al., 
2013) is slowly becoming a more viable option for firms due to alteration of previous 
favorable conditions from low production cost countries among other reasons. However, 
reshoring may not necessarily be the best reaction to these alterations. “It is crucial for 
us to have our production where our market is”, a large Danish firm has proclaimed 
(Arlbjørn et al., 2013). What if the market is not the same as ‘home’? E.g. for North 
American firms, this may very well be the case, but for countries with smaller home 
markets such as Denmark, a large part of their business relies on foreign markets. For 
this reason, it is particularly important for firms from countries like Denmark to evaluate 
all options rather than investigating particular options of reshoring or offshoring. 
The focus of both academic research and popular media has been directed at patterns and 
trends of manufacturing relocations (adhered to the “shoring”-terms) rather than the de-
cision problem itself, which is not necessarily the best angle for helping either govern-
ments or international firms (Kinkel and Maloca, 2009). A limitation of the current re-
search is, therefore, the lack of in-depth analyses of location decision processes including 
the identification of what location factors are considered during the process (Bruch et al., 
2014). From a government and policy-maker perspective, to fully understand the causes 
behind these decisions is nearly impossible without an understanding of the process be-
==PAGE:14==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
14 
hind. From a research perspective, creating frameworks and models with practical impli-
cation and real impact is, too, difficult without having such insights (Porter and Rivkin, 
2012; Steenhuis and De Bruijn, 2004).  
Research on the location decision process, in particular, is scarce, and there is even less 
research on the subject has been studied empirically. Instead, most research relies more 
heavily on case studies and anecdotal evidence from past experiences of scholars, con-
sultants, and self-reflection from firms (e.g. Bellgran et al., 2013; De Meirleir, 2008; 
Immelt, 2012).  
1.1. 
Objective and organization of paper 
Hence, this paper seeks to address the gap in research on the international location deci-
sion processes in Danish manufacturing firms to create insights that are valuable for in-
ternational firms. This objective is achieved through an empirical study using survey 
questionnaire.  
In short, this paper seeks to investigate the overall question: 
 How do Danish manufacturing firms make their international location decisions 
and what are the underlying process? 
Additionally, it is the ambition of this paper to identify the current shortcomings of these 
processes compared to the best practice prescribed by academic research to scope future 
research efforts in a direction that maximize practical implications. As of such, the paper 
is novel in its scope, as little research has been done in this area. 
The paper is organized into four main sections: the following section 2 outlines the meth-
odology applied. Section 3 provides a review of literature that describes the location de-
cision process in firms, further divided into the elements we found appropriate. Hereafter, 
section 4 presents two novelties developed for this study; a new definition of interna-
tional location decision and a factor framework, which encapsulates the factors that 
emerged from the literature review. Finally, the findings are presented in section 5, re-
vealing the current practice and shortcomings. Last, a discussion is carried out in section 
6, and conclusions, limitations, and future research are provided in section 7. 
2. 
METHODOLOGY 
As research of location decision processes has generally been conducted with a limited 
and particularly in Denmark, an explorative research approach was found appropriate. 
To build hypotheses subject to this study, a rigorous and extensive literature review was 
carried out (section 2.1). On this basis, a survey questionnaire was developed and tested 
(section 2.2). An appropriate sample was selected (section 2.3) and is summarized in 
section 2.4. 
2.1. 
Literature Review and Hypotheses Development 
The abductive method is applied as it is considered specifically appropriate for creating 
new insights (Kovács and Spens, 2005). The purpose of reviewing literature in this paper 
is to develop an understanding of location processes to create a hypothetical foundation 
subject for testing in the empirical study. Consistent with the abductive method repeated 
analysis and interpretation have developed an analytical understanding of the decision 
process. 
==PAGE:15==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
15 
The literature review was conducted according to the guidelines described by Rowley 
and Slack (2004). The process can be divided into two parts; 1) literature search and 2) 
the actual review. 
The literature search was initiated with a broad search of journal articles, conference 
papers, consultancy white papers, reports, books, and other written material. These were 
searched for initially by a briefsearch in the library database of the Technical University 
of Denmark, called DTU Findit. The database includes a complete coverage of published 
articles from all major STM publishers1. Search keywords included, but were not limited 
to: ‘location decision’, ‘location problem’, ‘offshoring’, ‘nearshoring’, ‘reshoring’ ‘back-
shoring’, ‘site selection’, ‘production location decision’, ‘manufacturing location deci-
sion’, and ‘outsourcing’. The initial search process yielded 124 publications of different 
kinds, most of which were journal articles. These were then screened for relevance to 
subject with an estimated score of 1-10. Those with no relevance at all were then dis-
carded bringing the number of sources down to 42 and a deeper text analysis began. 
The analyzing part of the literature review utilized a so-called literature review matrix to 
sort information from articles according to the area in our research it affected. The rele-
vance score was subsequently corrected in each case as new information was discovered. 
Although this stage was comprised of analysis of currently gathered sources, more 
sources were, too, collected through the so-called citation pearl growing, i.e. retrieving 
documents through the references in analyzed sources (Rowley and Slack, 2004). These 
were then added to the literature review matrix and went through the same analysis as 
described above, thus creating a search loop until no more significantly relevant sources 
emerged. 
The relevance of sources was subjected to two specific areas of interest: 
1. Documented studies of the processes behind international location decisions. 
These should document what decision support included, how it was created, and 
how the final decision eventually was made.  
2. Guidelines, frameworks, recommendations and tools to aid the international lo-
cation decision process. 
2.2. 
Survey Questionnaire 
On the basis of the literature review matrix, a list of hypotheses was made to include all 
possible information that could be tested among the targeted population subject to the 
study. As scarce information and documentation were available concerning our targeted 
population, most information from studies outside Denmark could be made into 
hypotheses subject to testing. Thus, 63 hypotheses were formulated while simultane-
ously, factual information needed from firms to test these were noted separately in a 
survey draft. The survey questionnaire was then constructed and structured into sections 
using the guidelines from Bradburn et al. (2004) to ensure the most accurate result as 
possible. The total number of questions initially formulated, which were all documented 
in academic publications, summed up to 103 – with many of them being information 
heavy questions. 
A strict analysis was then executed to evaluate the importance of the formulated ques-
tions to the purpose of the study and its significance in our selection of sources gathered 
                                                 
1 STM is an abbreviation for International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical Publishers. A 
full list content from DTU Findit is available through: 
http://api.libguides.com/api_box.php?iid=3935&bid=13937966  
==PAGE:16==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
16 
in the literature review matrix. All questions related to factual information about the firm 
that could be gathered outside the questionnaire were eliminated. Thus began an iterative 
process to bring down the numbers until hypotheses were down to 46 and the questions 
down to 72. The distribution of questions to the different parts of the survey is shown in 
Table 2.1. Notice that some questions are more comprehensive than others, as some re-
quire answering multi-dimensional aspects in one question. 
Table 2.1. Distribution of questions in survey study. 
Part of survey 
No. of questions 
Practical information 
13 
The decision process 
32 
The factors 
9 
The final decision 
7 
Post assessment 
11 
Total 
72 
The medium of survey was selected among four alternatives to be Google Forms. This 
choice of medium was made due to the following reasons: 
 Easy to use, easy to read and the benefit that respondents already are familiar with 
the Google user interface. 
 The ease with which it can be operated reduces complexity for us and the time 
needed to create the survey. 
 The possibility of exporting data to excel, thus enabling further analysis for the 
extraction of findings. 
 The enablement of multiple editors on the same survey, thus making it feasible 
for us to work the same time on the same survey. 
2.3. 
Sample Selection 
The scope of this study is limited to Danish manufacturing firms, which in Denmark 
ranges in the following industry codes: 
10.00.00 to 34.99.99 – Fremstillingsvirksomheder, Dansk Branchekode, DB07 
(Danmarks Statistik, 2007) 
Based on this, a list of firms was extracted from the public firm registry (Erhvervsstyrel-
sen, 2016) as inspired by Arlbjørn et al. (2013) using the following additional constraints: 
 A minimum of 20 employees, as we believe smaller firms are unlikely to face a 
manufacturing location decision. 
 Firms with advertising protection were filtered out. 
 Firms in bankruptcy and similar situations were filtered out. 
According to definition 2, one particular criterion was not possible to evaluate using the 
public registry; the decision authority. As we discovered, a significant amount of firms 
registered in Denmark did not possess the authority to make a location decision. Either 
they had been acquired by a foreign firm and thereby, lost their decision authority or; 
were a subsidiary of a foreign firm and therefore, didn’t have the authority. 
==PAGE:17==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
17 
The nature of this study is very specific. Although the topic of moving production and 
deciding on locations is popular, and most employees gladly discuss and share the loca-
tion decisions of their firms, very few have actual insights to anything beyond the surface. 
This was discovered after many hours of discussions at firm fairs, through phone calls, 
visits and e-mail correspondences with firm representatives. Since the persons directly 
involved in the decision process of a large firm represents only a tiny fraction of the 
company, chances are that the survey will be passed along through a number of people 
before landing with the right person. The individuals in this process need to know clearly 
who they are looking for. Therefore, we described the ideal survey respondent as: 
 Has possessed a role, which is central enough to have insights into the whole 
process (all phases) of the international location decision project. 
 The decision authority of the facility location decision in question (if not of the 
respondent) was primarily in Denmark.  
 Is willing or has time to survey. 
However, despite great effort to describe and explain the scope of the study and the pos-
sible respondent, the nature of the study as described above caused a natural barrier in 
getting responses. For this reason, we specifically targeted a diverse firm base in regards 
to industry and size, to represent the broadest possible population within our scope. 
This study is taking a different approach than (Arlbjørn et al., 2013) and is, therefore, 
complimentary and doesn’t have the same aim or intend to exceed it. 
2.4. 
Study Sample 
In Table 2.2, the industry representation is listed in numbers, compared to Danish indus-
try totals. An exploratory approach should reflect diversity in several dimensions over 
total sample size, and as it shows, the study firms are well spread-out to represent the 
manufacturing industry as broadly as possible (Flint et al., 2002). 
The sample consists of 17 Danish manufacturing firms According to Isaac and Michael 
(1995), small sample sizes are justiﬁable in the context of exploratory research and pilot 
studies and when the research seeks greater depth than breadth, which is the case of this 
study. 
It is worth noticing the last column depicting the revenue distribution, as it puts the num-
ber of firms in an economic context. This means for example that while the pharmaceu-
tical industry in Denmark represents only 0.9% of the total number of firms, it represents 
a total of 11.9% of the total revenue, thus being a very important industry economically, 
relative to its size. On the other hand, while the industries that are not represented in this 
survey (referred to as ‘Others’) account for a bit over one fourth of the numbers of firms, 
it accounts for less than one eights of the total revenue.  
Although the study firms represent the manufacturing industry well, it is important to 
clarify that they are by no means statistically significant and the study can, therefore, not 
make any statistically significant conclusions. It can, however, indicate whether obser-
vations and hypotheses from academic literature and international studies are evident in 
Denmark, which is the aim of this study. 
On Table 2.3, the study firms are listed according to their size (number of employees) 
and compared with the Danish manufacturing industry totals. As we can see, the study 
firms are more evenly distributed among the three size intervals than the totals of the 
industry. 
==PAGE:18==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
18 
Table 2.2. Study sample industry distribution compared to Danish industry totals 
Industry representation (Manufacturing industries only) 
 
Number of firms 
Percent of total 
Revenue distri-
bution 
Industry name2 
Denmark3 
Study 
firms 
Denmark 
Study firms 
Denmark 
Food and tobacco 
(CA) 
1,585 
3 
10.5% 
17.6% 
23.0% 
Wood and paper (CC) 
1,497 
1 
9.9% 
5.9% 
4.7% 
Chemicals (CE) 
223 
2 
1.5% 
11.8% 
5.6% 
Pharmaceuticals (CF) 
91 
1 
0.6% 
5.9% 
11.9% 
Rubber and plastics 
(CG) 
1,031 
2 
6.8% 
11.8% 
8.3% 
Computer (CI) 
563 
3 
3.7% 
17.6% 
5.1% 
Electrical equipment 
(CJ) 
460 
1 
3.1% 
5.9% 
3.3% 
Machinery (CK) 
1,631 
2 
10.8% 
11.8% 
21.1% 
Other manufacturing 
(CM) 
3,967 
2 
26.3% 
11.8% 
4.7% 
Other 
4,014 
0 
26.6% 
0% 
12.3% 
TOTAL 
15,062 
17 
100% 
100% 
100% 
Table 2.3. Study sample firm size compared to Danish industry totals 
Size of manufacturing firms (Numbers of employees) 
 
Number of firms 
Percent of total 
Size 
Denmark4 
Study firms 
Denmark 
Study firms 
0 - 99 
11,788 
6 
78.3% 
35.3% 
100 - 499 
2,729 
6 
18.1% 
35.3% 
500 + 
545 
5 
3.6% 
29.4% 
TOTAL 
15,062 
17 
100% 
100% 
                                                 
2 Letters in brackets refer to the statistical classification of economic activites in the European Community, 
NACE Rev. 2 by Eurostat: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3859598/5902521/KS-RA-07-015-
EN.PDF. The category ‘Other’ covers CB, CD, CH, and CL, which are not represented by study firms. 
3 Numbers of manufacturing firms in different industries are extracted from the latest available data by 
Statistics Denmark (2013).  
4 Numbers of manufacturing firms in different employee size categories are extracted from the latest avail-
able data by Statistics Denmark (2013).  
==PAGE:19==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
19 
Most of the survey respondents in this study can be considered part of top management, 
while some may be part of middle management. The most recurring roles are executive 
vice-presidents (EVP), chief operating officers (COO), and chief executive officers 
(CEO), as seen in Figure 2.1 – all of which are part of top management. It is important 
to remark that we in the survey description and communication set no requirements of 
high positions in the firm. Instead, we merely required a sufficient level of insight to be 
able to answer the questionnaire. 
One general characteristic of our study firms is their global reach. At least half of the 
firms are covering each continent, with 89% selling to the European market as the highest 
percentage, followed by the Asian market. This overview the global reach of the sample 
firms are shown in Figure 2.3. The year of the location decisions subject to the analysis 
ranges from 2004 to 2016 with higher frequency in recent years, as seen in Figure 2.2. 
Further, most of our study firms (94%) conduct business to business activities (B2B), 
while only one-fourth conduct business to customer activities (B2C). As per requirement 
of the survey, our study firms all have ownership of the resulting facility; most of them 
have full ownership while 18% partnered up for joint ownership.  
 
Figure 2.1. The role of survey respondents in study firms. 
Figure 2.2 Year of ILDs 
Figure 2.3. Markets served by study firms. 
 
3. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The literature review is structured in the following way: The first section offers a brief 
review of the meaning of location decision-related terms, as found in extant literature 
(section 3.1). Then, it reviews the motivations for initiating the location decision process 
(section 3.2), followed by the phases and parts of the decision process itself that forms 
0
1
2
3
4
Business Development Director
Chief accountant
Director R&D
Factory manager
HR Manager
Supply Chain Director
CFO
CEO
COO
EVP
Number of respondents
Role in firm
0
2
4
6
8
10
2004 -
2007
2008 -
2012
2013 -
2016
Number of location 
decisions
Year of location decision
0%
20%
40%
60%
80% 100%
Oceania
Middle East
South America
North America
Asia
Europe
Percentage of participating firms
==PAGE:20==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
20 
the decision support (section 3.3). Subsequently, the factors that affect the decision are 
reviewed in more detail (section 3.4), before the final decision and the post assessment 
of the outcome are analyzed (section 3.5 and 3.6). 
3.1. 
Clarification of Related Terms 
A ’location decision’ can refer to many things in a management context; in short, every 
choice of where to place an activity or object. Not only is this meaning excessively broad, 
the terms related to academic research often use different meanings and parallel defini-
tions, too. Additionally, we have often encountered misunderstandings of the meaning in 
our communication with firms and even research colleagues. For this reason, we strongly 
believe there is a need to clarify the meaning of the terms that are vital to this study and 
in a popular context to avoid misunderstandings.  
The vast majority of references to facility location decisions in academic research and 
popular media come through “shoring” terms, e.g. offshoring, nearshoring, and 
reshoring. These terms refer to specific outcomes of location decisions. Another category 
of terms refers to location decisions with a different angle, namely as problems, e.g. site 
selection, manufacturing location decision, and production localization decision prob-
lem, just to mention a few. In Table 3.1, an overview of the main terms used in relation 
to location decisions is shown. 
Table 3.1. Clarification of location decision-related terms 
Solution-oriented (”shoring”-terms) 
Problem-oriented 
 
Main term (descrip-
tion) 
Related terms 
Main term (description) 
Related terms 
 
Near home 
Reshoring  
Moving 
manufacturing back 
to the country of its 
parent company 
(Ellram et al., 
2013). Prerequisite: 
A manufacturing fa-
cility in an offshore 
location. 
Nearshoring (Rice and 
Stefanelli, 2014), Back-
shoring (Fratocchi et 
al., 2014), Onshoring 
(Gunasekaran et al., 
2015), Homeshoring 
(Tate et al., 2014). 
Facility site selection 
Selecting the best 
suited facility site within 
a previously selected 
country using mathe-
matical models (Hoff-
man and Schnieder-
jans, 1994). 
Location model (Garcia-
Diaz and Smith, 2013), 
Industrial location 
(Arauzo-Carod et al., 
2010), Location decision 
(Bocci and Rocco, 
2015), Location selection 
(Viswanadham and Ka-
meshwaran, 2007) 
Micro-level 
Far from home 
Offshoring 
Moving manufactur-
ing out of the coun-
try to an owned 
subsidiary; owner-
ship and control is 
kept in-house 
(Lewin and Peeters, 
2006).  
Far-shoring (Pedersen 
et al., 2013), Captive 
offshoring (Kinkel and 
Maloca, 2009), Foreign 
direct investment (Han-
sen, 2011). 
Manufacturing loca-
tion decision 
Finding the appropriate 
location in relation to 
expansion, relocation, 
upgrading or closing 
down of manufacturing 
facilities (Pongpanich, 
2000). 
Production localization 
(Bjelkemyr et al., 2013), 
Production location (An-
dersson et al., 2013), 
Plant location decision 
(Brush et al., 1999) Man-
ufacturing facility location 
(Chen et al., 2014). 
Macro-level 
The table is divided horizontally into the two categories; solution-oriented terms, which 
refer to specific outcomes or solutions, and problem-oriented terms, which refer to the 
problem itself without a predefined solution. The division is inspired by the two perspec-
tives presented by Steenhuis and De Bruijn (2004) and Hayter (1997); those of 
internationalizing firms and governments. While firms must solve an open location prob-
lem for own prosperity, governments must organize themselves to attract the decision 
and become the solution to the problem. Thus, the perspectives are reflected in the terms. 
Although based on an extensive literature review, it is important to notice that the table 
of terms is by no means exhaustive, but sufficient for the purpose of this research. 
==PAGE:21==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
21 
Solution-oriented terms can further be divided between near-to-home locations and far-
from-home locations. In the latter category, offshoring has been well-known for over 
three decades and actively used for over a hundred year (Hansen, 2011), while in recent 
years, the former category represented by reshoring and backshoring has received in-
creasing attention (Ellram et al., 2013). Although some disagreement in the definition of 
both terms can found, offshoring refers in many cases to the movement of production 
from a nearby location to a far-away location, while reshoring refers to the reverse action 
– with the slight modification that near-by refers to the home country of the parent com-
pany specifically.  
The problem-oriented terms are divided between micro and macro level decisions, a di-
vision that is inspired by the two-stage model for structuring global facility site selection 
decisions, proposed by Hoffman and Schniederjans (1994). The division refers to the two 
levels of decisions that have to be made before the decision can be finally realized; coun-
try-selection (macro) and specific site selection (micro). The same level-divided structure 
is supported by several others (Au et al., 2005; Yurimoto and Masui, 1995).  
Comparing the amount of academic literature found within the two orientations, a high 
misbalance was noticed as a much larger body of literature was found in the solution-
focused category. As such, in light of the attention dominance this category possess over 
the other, we are lead to the conclusion; there is a much greater public interest in knowing 
where manufacturing ends up than understanding the process of how it got there. 
As this paper uses the problem-oriented approach and investigates the issues at a macro-
level, our definition is related to the bottom right of Table 3.1. However, since no formal 
definition was found for this category during the literature review and due to the overall 
divergence in meaning for location decision-related terms, we later present a definition 
we have found adequate for an optimal use and precise understanding in section 4.1. 
3.2. 
Motivations for Initiating Decision Process 
While academic literature offers a vast amount of factors and drivers for final location 
decisions, the triggers and forces for initiating the consideration for a new location are 
not nearly as frequently discussed (Kazmer, 2014). These can be constituted as the driv-
ers for change, rather than drivers for a particular solution. One of the most cited works 
within this context is Dunning (1998) who identified four types of motivations in his 
Eclectic Theory: resource seeking, market seeking, efficiency seeking and strategic asset 
seeking. Although these originally were proposed for foreign direct investments (FDI), 
they have recently been related to the reverse location decision as well, i.e. reshoring 
(Ellram et al., 2013). In a more simplistic view, Kodali and Routroy (2006) suggests 
firms consider location decisions either to enhance competitiveness and/or come closer 
to their customers. These are not opposing views, as the two outcomes of the latter can 
be achieved through the motivations in the former. The suggestions of different motiva-
tions for location decisions are many, and most of them incorporate and confirm the same 
as the previously mentioned (Caves, 2007; Johanson and Vahlne, 1977; Viswanadham 
and Kameshwaran, 2007). 
In a practical context, Bellgran et al. (2013) suggest a location decision can relate to 
different settings. There are “1) the search for a new production location, 2) the decision 
to improve manufacturing capabilities, 3) the decision to relocate production, 4) the 
decision to reallocate production and 5) the decision to close production”. The motiva-
tions and settings combined are supported by Jungthirapanich and Benjamin (1995). 
==PAGE:22==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
22 
In regards to initiating the consideration or analysis of a location decision, it is important 
to understand that most location decisions are strategic decisions, which are made at the 
highest level in an organization (Bjelkemyr et al., 2013; Sule, 2008). Moreover, there is 
evidence from Sweden, which suggests that top management is the motivators and pro-
posers of the decision, too (Bellgran et al., 2013). Thus, the approach from the beginning 
is predominantly, a top-down approach. 
3.3. 
The Decision Process 
This section of the literature review is dedicated to the decision process itself, i.e. the 
process of investigating, analyzing, and evaluating the alternatives to form decision sup-
port and documentation. First, the process is mapped into phases (section 3.3.1). Second, 
the initiation, scope, and dedicated team are reviewed (section 3.3.2). Third, the infor-
mation gathering and analytical process are reviewed (section 3.3.3), and fourth, the eval-
uation process for final recommendations (section 3.3.4). 
3.3.1. Mapping the Process 
A decision analysis process typically consists of five phases as illustrated in Figure 3.1. 
This is mainly inspired by Windmark and Andersson (2016), Andersson et al. (2013). 
These can briefly be described as: P1) Initiation - Establish motives and goals for chang-
ing the manufacturing footprint. P2) Scoping - Establish a project organization and plan 
for executing the relocation project and roughly estimate the costs and benefits. P3) Cur-
rent situation - Analyze the current footprint and the requirements for and consequences 
of changing the footprint. P4) Alternatives analysis - Establish and analyze various loca-
tion alternatives. P5) Location decision - Prepare to select the most suitable production 
location. 
  
Figure 3.1. Generic location decision analysis process 
Additionally, it can be noted that most firms have no formal decision process, but some 
develop a non-articulated process to follow (Bellgran et al., 2013). 
3.3.2. Organization and Scoping 
As in any project, firms must plan for a desired outcome. The goal of a location decision 
analysis is to decide if a new location provides more cost advantages than the current one 
or which of several alternative locations provides the most cost advantages (Windmark 
and Andersson, 2016). Indeed, finding and comparing alternatives is a fundamental part 
of most location decision processes (Immelt, 2012; Kinkel and Maloca, 2009). Nonethe-
less, it is not sufficient to have a traditional one-dimensional cost minimization approach; 
rather a holistic method when making manufacturing location decisions is needed (Bell-
gran et al., 2013). 
Lee (2014) argues that the generation of alternatives to the decision is often not balanced 
with the level of detail in the subsequent comparison analysis. In other words, the anal-
ysis phase of comparing alternatives often assumes that no superior alternative exists, 
although often limited investigation was initially conducted to explore this question. Fur-
ther, the alternatives considered are often limited by existing interpersonal links and 
knowledge rather than universally unlimited (Kinkel and Maloca, 2009). 
P1: Initiation
P2: Scoping
P3: Current 
situation
P4: 
Alternatives 
analysis
P5: Location 
decision
==PAGE:23==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
23 
Finding the right people to conduct the location decision is recognized as a problem for 
many firms (MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003). Even so, this is a crucial step in the 
process of any major organizational change according to change management theory 
(Kræmmer and Divert, 2009). This is recognized by Christodoulou et al. (2007), who 
argue that to capture the complexity of the challenge and create buy-in, there is a need to 
involve all business units, geographical locations, and functions. A similar view is shared 
by Bjelkemyr et al. (2013), who suggests both including people from all business units 
and using these units as elements of the analysis. In line with this argument, a factor 
framework of business units has also been proposed (Andersson et al., 2013). 
Christodoulou et al. (2007) further argue that the decision process, while taking between 
six months to two years, require a dedicated full-time team that consists of people from 
board-level to factory level. Nonetheless, evidence from Sweden suggests that firms con-
duct location decisions on a strategic level using a homogenous team (non-cross func-
tional) (Bruch et al., 2014), thus not taking full advantage of the benefits of diverse teams. 
3.3.3. The Analytical Process 
Once the location decision project is properly organized, the analytical process can com-
mence. Fundamental to this process is a profound data collection to base the decision 
support upon. In this phase, several sources suggest a challenging task. Data on econom-
ics, marketing and other information required for planning varies a great deal amongst 
countries in availability, depth, and reliability, thus making the analytical process of al-
ternatives complex (Dymsza, 1972). 
Firms devaluate the importance of qualitative factors such as social, cultural, quality of 
life and their impact on the operational level when making manufacturing location deci-
sions (Bruch et al., 2014; Brush et al., 1999; Zegordi et al., 2009). Reason for this may 
be that many factors are not easily quantifiable – these often relate to different kinds of 
risk and the difficulties of operating a facility in an unknown environment (Gray et al., 
2013; Steenhuis and De Bruijn, 2004). Many firms, therefore, tend to neglect them and 
focus more on the quantifiable factors, as the qualitative cannot fit directly into calcula-
tions. 
Including too many stakeholders can increase the complexity and effectiveness of the 
decision-making process due to conflicting interests while including too few can reduce 
the accuracy of the decision as obvious challenges related to certain functions of the or-
ganization are overlooked (Bellgran et al., 2013). This is especially true when top man-
agement make the decision without understanding the implications on operational capa-
bilities (Bellgran et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 2014; Steenhuis and De Bruijn, 2004). 
Chen et al. (2014) suggest a use of the triple bottom line for evaluating alternatives and 
subsequently, measuring performance. The awareness and use of sustainability in the 
location decision for companies are, however, unknown. 
Since location decision processes are so complex and dynamic, they are often made on 
the basis of “rules-of-thumb” (Bellgran et al., 2013; McIvor, 2013). 
3.3.4. The Evaluation Process 
When analyzed data is in place for all decision alternatives, the evaluation process must 
combine the acquired facts, knowledge, and uncertainties with goals and targets set for 
the location decision to form final recommendations. The evaluation often measures the 
==PAGE:24==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
24 
costs, benefits, equity, and efficiency of each alternative (Chan, 2011) to mention a few. 
These must be combined in a cohesive manner to make them comparable. 
Many popular location consultants use the multi-criteria technique of directly assigning 
weights and scores and combining them in a linear additive fashion to get a ﬁnal rank 
(Viswanadham and Kameshwaran, 2007).  
Most firms justify their reasoning behind a location decision based on quantifiable eco-
nomic factors (Arauzo-Carod et al., 2010). 
3.4. 
The Factors 
Different geographic locations offer different conditions and political boundaries for 
manufacturing firms to operate with and within. These conditions and boundaries are 
assessed and contrasted against one another by means of various location decision fac-
tors; hence enabling various manufacturing firms, in most cases, to successfully pinpoint 
an optimum location that offers the highest degree of strategic fit. It is no longer sufficient 
enough for firms to have a traditional one-dimensional cost minimization approach when 
conducting location decisions (Bellgran et al., 2013); rather they must consider both 
quantitative and qualitative factors in an interrelated manner to make a holistic decision. 
This in turn, increases the degree of complexity (Kodali and Routroy, 2006; MacCarthy 
and Atthirawong, 2003) with which the decision team and maker(s) have to work with. 
When conducting international location decisions, manufacturing firms primarily lay 
prudent emphasis on quantitative factors, while deprioritizing qualitative factors; which 
have substantial implications for the eventual success of a location decision. This is 
emphasized by Bruch et al. (2014) who conducted a case study on a large Swedish 
manufacturing firm, found that factors such as social, cultural and quality of life were 
deprioritized by top management when conducting location decision; despite their 
substantial effects on the operational level when implemented. Brush et al. (1999) found 
similar findings in their study, where they found that the firms they were investigating 
did not rank language, culture, and politics very high and that they found striking. 
Historically, firms assessed various geographic alternatives based on factors that were 
seen from a static perspective; thus considerations on the impacts of the long-term 
changes of the factors were not made (Tate et al., 2014). It is crucial and incumbent upon 
firms to acknowledge that location decision factors are dynamic in nature, thus, alter over 
time (Ellram, 2013; Hayter, 1997; Kinkel and Maloca, 2009; Porter and Rivkin, 2012) at 
different rates (Dymsza, 1972). Furthermore, various factors are associated with various 
risks, with different degrees of consequences (in monetary terms) and the probability of 
occurring. 
Table 3.2, which has been realized through a rigorous and extensive literature review, 
consolidates various factors, that are most commonly mentioned to be relevant to and 
should be considered during ILDs, in addition to cost; which is mentioned in every con-
sidered literature.  
Table 3.2. Literature review of factors of location decisions. 
Factors 
References 
Infrastructure: entails modes of transportation, 
availability of utilities, information and communi-
cation systems. 
(Arauzo-Carod et al., 2010; Au et al., 2005; Bocci 
and Rocco, 2015; Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011; 
De Meirleir, 2008; Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich 
and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 
2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Yurimoto and Masui, 
1995) 
==PAGE:25==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
25 
Labor and social characteristics: entails wage 
level, competence level, educational level, work 
ethics, labor availability, language, culture, wel-
fare, crime rates 
(Au et al., 2005; Brush et al., 1999; De Meirleir, 
2008; Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich and Benja-
min, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; 
Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; 
Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Government and Regulations: entails legal sys-
tems, policies, political stability 
(Au et al., 2005; Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011; 
De Meirleir, 2008; Hayter, 1997; Jungthirapanich 
and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 
2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; 
Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Economics: entails GDP, tax structures, inflation 
rates national debt  
(Brush et al., 1999; Chan, 2011; De Meirleir, 2008; 
Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995; MacCarthy 
and Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 2000; Porter 
and Rivkin, 2012; Yurimoto and Masui, 1995) 
Market and resources: entails Proximity to cus-
tomers, raw materials, market, suppliers  
(Au et al., 2005; Brush et al., 1999; Hayter, 1997; 
MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003; Pongpanich, 
2000; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; Yurimoto and Ma-
sui, 1995) 
Having the knowledge of which factors to consider during a location decision does not 
solely benefit manufacturing firms, but also policy makers; i.e. by providing them with 
the knowledge needed to provide incentives to attract investors  (Bocci and Rocco, 2015; 
Kalantari, 2013; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003). With an understanding of how 
firms think when making a location decision, governments can provide the in-depth in-
formation and data needed by firms to facilitate their analytical process. Nonetheless, 
firms need to be critical of the information and data they receive, to a certain degree, due 
to the risk of them being biased, in order for them to attract more firms. 
3.5. 
The Final Decision 
The final decision on where a firm should geographically locate/relocate its manufactur-
ing facility is invariably made on the top level of the organization (Bruch et al., 2014; 
Steenhuis and De Bruijn, 2004). In literature, there is a consensus that firms’ decisions 
on where to locate manufacturing is not executed in the most efficient and prudent man-
ner. This is quite surprising due to the fact that location decision is a strategic decision, 
that involves the irreversible allocation of a firm’s capital and often has a crucial impact 
on key measures of the firm’s supply chain performance, such as inventory, lead time, 
responsiveness to demand variability, flexibility, and quality (Kodali and Routroy, 2006). 
In some cases; despite the provision of various analytical facts and knowledge, top man-
agement base their final judgement on gut feelings, experience (Bruch et al., 2014) and 
personal ties (Steenhuis and De Bruijn, 2004). Furthermore, top management often con-
duct location decisions without understanding the implications on operational capabili-
ties (Bellgran et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 2014), which in turn negates the holistic purpose 
of an location decision. In order for location decisions to be successful, firms must iden-
tify facility sites that offer a good fit with their internal strengths and weaknesses (Hoff-
man and Schniederjans, 1994). This can be a complex challenge for top management, 
since the degree of significant economic, marketing and other information required, for 
analysis and a decision foundation, varies a great deal among countries in availability, 
depth, and reliability (Dymsza, 1972). This could explain why top management mostly 
pivot more towards their gut feeling and experience when making decisions to compen-
sate for the information and insecurity gap. Moreover, top management face the intrinsic 
difficulty of prioritizing and making numerous trade-offs amongst various crucial factors 
==PAGE:26==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
26 
(Kodali and Routroy, 2006; Montibeller and Yoshizaki, 2011). E.g. cost is a major con-
sideration in international location decisions, but there may be trade-offs between differ-
ent types of costs  (Kodali and Routroy, 2006).   
3.6. 
Post Assessment 
The suitability of a site rests on how well those responsible in the decision making pro-
cess assess the impact that a plant site will have on the fulfillment of corporate objectives 
(Jungthirapanich and Benjamin, 1995). Hence, being able to measure progress or failure 
is crucial for top management, when measuring the effect of their final decision and eval-
uating if they are moving the firm towards realizing their goal or derailing them from it. 
Despite the importance of post assessment, only few companies revisit their location de-
cisions and one of the reasons according to Porter and Rivkin (2012) is that it takes for-
ever to extract economic information through incompatible ERP systems. Furthermore, 
the time from which a location decision is made until the actual production begins at the 
new facility is usually between 3 to 5 years (De Meirleir, 2008); hence, it takes years 
before adequate data can be consolidated, structured and analyzed in order to deduce 
progress measurements to present to top management for evaluation. Nonetheless, firms 
need to reconsider their location decision on a regular basis in order to maintain compet-
itiveness and gain better advantages from other potential locations. A good location to-
day, might not be a good one in a year or so (Kalantari, 2013). 
4. 
A NEW DEFINITION AND FRAMEWORK 
On the basis of the literature review in section 3, we present a new definition of the 
problem concerning international localization of manufacturing facilities related to the 
study presented in this paper and a factor framework that encapsulates the single factors 
identified. The need for creating the factor framework was seen due to different kinds of 
literature applying different taxonomies of ILDs factors and yet having consistencies in 
factors considered. The framework provides an overview and elaborates on main factors 
that affect ILDs along with respective sub-factors that should be considered.  
4.1. 
Definition of ‘International Location Decision’ 
Critical to any academic research that seeks to build and test theories about phenomena 
is a firm foundation anchored in good definitions (Wacker, 2004). As discussed in section 
3.1, location decisions can be interpreted and comprehended in different ways, as evident 
in academic research. The use of both the level of analysis (micro or macro), the perspec-
tive (solution or problem-oriented) and the ownership dimension differ in academic lit-
erature. As we were not able to identify an adequate definition in our extensive literature 
search, we found it necessary to formulate a new one, to build a common understanding 
of the problem, both for study firms involved and for future research in both a firm and 
government perspective. 
Therefore, we present our definition of what we call the international location decision 
(ILD, hereafter): 
An international location decision is a macro-level decision made by 
a firm, to pinpoint the geographic location of a partly or fully owned 
facility from a set of international alternatives. 
==PAGE:27==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
27 
The definition can thus be considered to be a problem-oriented, macro-level location 
decision, cf. Table 3.1. It has a clear emphasis on the international aspect and the open-
ness of the problem. In other words, it covers the decisions which were subject to the 
consideration of several country locations. There are several reasons for this. First, in a 
firm perspective, to narrow down the type of problem and ensure less divergence and 
more relevance of findings. Second, in a government perspective, to define those deci-
sions that had a chance of being attracted. This has the benefits of a clearer view of the 
attractiveness of a country, e.g. by filtering out the decisions stemming from correction 
mechanisms and not voluntary votes on the competitiveness of a country (Kinkel and 
Maloca, 2009). In addition, it requires a minimum part ownership to filter out outsourcing 
decisions that are to a higher degree motivated by the outsourcing firm itself than the 
country it is located in and thereby, further contributing to increasing relevance of find-
ings. 
Thus, the use of the term ILD can be subjected to both discussion and research in a firm 
perspective by seeking the most suitable location for maximum prosperity and in a gov-
ernment perspective by developing the most suitable environment for maximum attrac-
tiveness for the firms in the ILD process. The definition omits the direct relation to ‘man-
ufacturing’ intentionally and can, therefore, be used in a broader context as well. 
4.2. 
A Framework for Location Appropriateness of Alternatives 
The following factor categories, depicted in Figure 4.1, have been identified as the main 
influences of ILD alternatives and are unique to each potential alternative, thus providing 
a basis for comparison. The framework builds upon the work of MacCarthy and At-
thirawong (2003), who presented the most comprehensive and logic categorization 
among the reviewed publications. Our main contribution, besides additional single fac-
tors to all categories, is a sixth category – markets and resources. To avoid confusing the 
framework with other frameworks, we will refer to it hereafter as the CLIPEM framework 
(initial letters of the categories). 
 
Figure 4.1. CLIPEM Framework: The main factors affecting location appropriateness 
of an alternative. 
Location 
Appropriateness
1 Cost
2 Labor and 
social 
characteristics
3 Infrastructure
4 Politics and 
regulations
5 Economics
6 Markets and 
resources
==PAGE:28==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
28 
The six categories of factors together cover the main aspects of location appropriateness 
(Pongpanich, 2000), which refers to the suitability of a particular location for certain 
manufacturing activities of a firm. This is an important distinction from the ILD problem 
as a whole, which involves matching these characteristics in a broader context of the 
characteristics of a firm and its current manufacturing footprint and capabilities. The cat-
egories or elements of the CLIPEM framework can be described as follows: 
1. Cost: This dominating factor concerns the various costs pertained to the realiza-
tion of an ILD. Sub-factors in this category entails costs of labor, transportation, 
management, coordination, energy, construction, new machinery, etc.    
2. Labor and social characteristics: This factor concerns the availability of labor 
and the degree to which their skills and education fit the needs of the respective 
firm. Furthermore, societal factors that can affect the steadfast efficiency of labor 
are also considered. Sub-factors in this category entails educational level, crime 
rates, language, the standard of living, culture and norms, etc. 
3. Infrastructure: This factor concerns the availability of basic physical and organ-
izational structures and facilities that facilitate operations. Sub-factors in this cat-
egory entails existing modes of transportation, availability of utilities and infor-
mation and communication systems. 
4. Politics and regulations: This factor concerns the type of governmental struc-
tures potential alternatives operate with and the various regulations and policies 
in place, that form the boundaries within which the firm can operate in. Sub-
factors in this category entails governments attitudes towards FDI, political sta-
bility, consistency of policies, etc.    
5. Economics: This factor concerns the economic status of the various potential al-
ternatives. Sub-factors in this category entails tax structures, financial incentives 
from government, inflation rate, GDP, national debt, etc. 
6. Market and resources: This factor concerns market sizes, their respective pur-
chasing powers and the proximity to upstream and downstream supply chain 
nodes. Sub-factors in this category entails proximity to raw materials, customers, 
suppliers, etc. 
5. 
FINDINGS 
The following section presents the various findings from our research study and a struc-
tured overview of key findings can be seen in Table 5.1. 
5.1. 
The ILD Process 
More than half of the study firms, considered in this study, indicated increased efficiency 
as the biggest motivator for initiating ILDs, followed by strategic asset, market and re-
source – seeking. On an average they were found to take nine months to conduct an ILD 
i.e. the elapsed time between the initiation of the project until a final decision have been 
made. Within that time span, the study firms were found to distribute their efforts differ-
ently, as depicted in Table 5.1. Surprisingly, it could be concluded that small firms gen-
erally have a more profound focus on analyzing their current situation relative to medium 
to large sized firms and have a slight more focus on their post assessment phase. Large 
firms generally allocated more efforts towards generating alternatives compared to small 
and medium sized firms 
==PAGE:29==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
29 
5.1.1. Current situation 
When ILD processes are initiated, they are motivated by a vision for improvement. Thus, 
65% of the study firms envisioned an increase in production capacity as the most bene-
ficial outcome of their respective ILDs, followed by cost reductions (59%). Thus, cost 
does not seem to be the dominator of location decisions anymore. Other expected benefits 
through the realization of ILDs included; better service to customer (47%), business ex-
pansion (41%), additional profit (41%), decrease in lead time (24%) and enhancement of 
product quality (18%).  
5.1.2. Alternative generation 
On an average the study firms considered 2.4 alternatives pr. ILD, which is found to be 
lower than we originally had expected. Most of the study firms generated the different 
alternatives mainly based on antecedent experience with the respective alternatives; ex-
isting interpersonal links to the location alternatives considered were found in 62% of 
the total alternatives considered. In 53% of location decisions, study firms indicated hav-
ing existing interpersonal links to every single alternative location prior to the analysis. 
Other means of generating alternatives was through market trend, resource availability, 
market size, suggestions from external consultancy and surprisingly few generated alter-
natives through a comprehensive worldwide analysis. Denmark was considered an alter-
native in 24% of the cases. 
5.1.3. Analysis 
The analytical process of an ILD is crucial to the holistic quality the decision since it 
provides the foundation for the decision. The level of team dedication in the analytical 
process varied across the study firms. In most cases (65%), a team is partly dedicated to 
the process, while in some cases (23%) a team is fully dedicated and in a few cases, no 
team is dedicated at all (12%). The teams consisted of members from the strategic level 
in all cases, members from the tactical level in most cases (80%) and in less than half of 
the cases members from operational level (47%). In 60% of the cases, teams worked with 
a reciprocal performance work process, while in 40% and 7% of the cases, teams worked 
with a sequential and pooled performance work process respectively. The study firms 
that applied a sequential performance had a higher perception of success regarding their 
ILD than firms using reciprocal performance. This may indicate that sequential perfor-
mance is more suited for ILD processes. Two-thirds of study firms used external exper-
tise, such as consultants, local partners, and agents to aid the process. The teams experi-
enced the process of gathering data for the analytical phase to be predominantly chal-
lenging. More than half indicated the use of assumptions to a high degree in their respec-
tive analysis. The degree of quality of data used in the decision analyses was on average 
rated as 76%, while the degree of variation of quality across alternatives was on average 
60%, although varying widely between all degrees. 
5.1.4. Evaluation 
Prior to making the final decision on where to locate, various alternatives must be ap-
praised against one another, to pinpoint the alternative that offers the highest degree of 
strategic fit. Despite the importance of utilizing a framework/tool for the synthesis of 
quantitative and qualitative factors to make a holistic decision, 31% of the study firms 
did not apply any, while the remaining 69% applied a cost-benefit analysis. However, 
the challenge of quantifying all qualitative impact in monetary terms is unlikely to be 
mastered by the firms. Thus, the degree to which gut feeling influenced the decision was 
==PAGE:30==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
30 
found to be significantly high as asserted by Bruch et al. (2014) and Steenhuis and De 
Bruijn (2004). The use of gut feeling is further substantiated by the fact that half of the 
study firms decided to locate their new facilities in locations they have ties to. Surpris-
ingly, two study firms reshored their manufacturing facility back to Denmark from Nor-
way and Sweden, for business expansion, increase in production quality, better service 
to customer and increase in production capacity purposes. Furthermore, it could be con-
firmed that top management invariably makes the final decision on where to locate or 
relocate a manufacturing facility internationally. 
5.1.5. Post assessment 
Imperative to ILDs is post assessment, for the assessment of attainment of respective 
goals. In the study, it is confirmed that all the study firms conducted post assessments of 
their ILDs but the degree to which they do it varies significantly. 18% of the study firms 
asserted that they seldom conduct post assessments, for reasons being; requirement of 
too many resources, lack of time/down prioritizing, lack of mutual understanding of 
importance with local managers, lack of synchronization in data systems as asserted by 
Porter and Rivkin (2012) and surprisingly due to post assessment never being intended 
as part of the project. Factors affecting a location’s attractiveness alter significantly over 
time (Ellram, 2013). Therefore, it is crucial as initially stated that firms re-evaluate their 
ILDs to assure that the locations still provide a strategic fit. Table 5.1 depicts the fre-
quency distribution of which the study firms re-evaluated their ILDs. Most notably, 25% 
of the study firms did not re-evaluate their ILDs, and 12% stated that they re-evaluated 
their respective ILDs monthly, which is found to be extreme. This indicates that the orig-
inal decision was not based on a solid analytical foundation. 
Porter and Rivkin (2012) asserted that hidden costs are often overlooked when conduct-
ing ILDs and may be one of the primary reasons for why many firms attain ineffective 
results. This was confirmed in our study, where more than half of the study firms expe-
rienced an increase of 10% or more in total cost relative to forecast. Nonetheless, 33% 
of the study firms stated that they did not witness any hidden costs after realizing their 
respective location decisions.  
Conducting ILDs is an intractable project, thus committing errors is inevitable. 35% of 
the study firms stated that they did not commit any errors during their respective ILDs 
which arises skepticism. Nonetheless, the remaining study firms mentioned the misjudg-
ment of the type of costs to be the most common error committed during ILDs, followed 
by inaccurate assumptions, unbalanced analysis, wrong human judgment, and judgment 
made on poor analysis. Despite these errors, firms generally perceived their ILDs as suc-
cessful. 
 
Figure 5-1: Frequency distribution of ILD re-evaluations. 
Every 5 years
6%
Every month
12%
Every quarter
13%
Every year
44%
Never
25%
==PAGE:31==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
31 
Table 5.1. Current practice: Key findings from the study. 
 
*Authors perception of findings being in accordance with literature.
ILD Process 
Part 
1. Current situation 
2. Alternatives Generation 
3. Analysis 
4. Evaluation 
5. Post assessment 
Distribution 
of efforts  
Grouped by 
number of 
employees 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
The ILD process most often 
consist of 4 phases and is 
most frequently motivated by 
efficiency, followed by stra-
tegic assets, markets and 
last, resources.  The ILD 
project is in all cases sug-
gested by top management. 
Alternatives are generated 
based on previous experi-
ence, market trends and 
suggestions from consult-
ants. This is the part where 
large firms distribute the 
most significant part of their 
efforts.  
The analysis of alternatives 
is based on data with vary-
ing quality. The depth and 
sophistication of analysis 
varies greatly. Two thirds of 
firms had external help from 
consultants, local partners 
and agents. 
For evaluating the alterna-
tives, 65% of firms claim to 
conduct cost-benefit anal-
yses, but gut feeling and 
personal preferences are in-
fluencing to a large degree.  
Denmark was considered in 
24% of cases and chosen in 
half of those (reshoring). 
Efforts of post assessment 
seem to vary greatly among 
firms, from very low to very 
high. ILDs are re-evaluated 
annually by 44% of firms 
and has never been con-
ducted by 25% (the rest are 
in between). Perception of 
success is generally high.  
Most notice-
able findings  
The analysis of the current 
situation is where firms put 
most effort, particularly for 
small firms. 
‘Increasing production ca-
pacity’ was the most fre-
quent expected benefit of 
the ILD, surpassing ‘cost re-
duction’ and ‘increased ser-
vice to customers’. Least fre-
quent were ‘increasing the 
production quality’ and ‘re-
ducing lead-time’.  
On average, firms only con-
sider 2.4 alternatives in the 
ILD.  
62% of the total alternatives 
considered had existing in-
terpersonal links to the firm. 
In 53% of ILDs, such links 
existed to all alternatives. 
Study firms with no existing 
interpersonal links had the 
lowest perception of suc-
cess. 
53% indicated the data foun-
dation had a high degree of 
assumptions.  
While 60% of teams used 
reciprocal performance and 
40% used sequential perfor-
mance, teams using the lat-
ter perceived 20% higher 
success rate than teams us-
ing the former. The analysis 
part is where small firms put 
lesser effort than anywhere 
else. 
The bigger the firm, the 
more efforts are distributed 
to evaluating alternatives.  
35% of firms did not use any 
tools or frameworks to eval-
uate alternatives.  While half 
of ILDs were placed in loca-
tions with previous or current 
manufacturing, 1/3 had 
never before moved to the 
country or continent of the 
new location. 
A significant change in fac-
tors from the time of the de-
cision till project implemen-
tation was observed by 41% 
of the firms. 
Errors experienced during 
ILD process were by 24% 
‘types of costs’ and by 18% 
‘inaccurate assumptions’, 
‘unbalanced analysis’, and 
‘wrong human judgement’.  
Accordance 
with litera-
ture* 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
32 
5.2. 
The Factors 
Using the CLIPEM framework presented in section 4.2, respondents were able to indicate 
their prioritization among categories by distributing weights. Subsequently, they were 
able to indicate which single factors they included for consideration in each category. 
Infrastructure is overall the highest rated factor element, followed by cost, markets, and 
resources, labor and social characteristics and economics equally, and politics lastly. The 
emphasis on infrastructure is in line with Steenhuis and De Bruijn (2004) who assert that 
as the manufacturing industry is an integrated industry, meaning it highly depends on the 
overall environment, it is dependent on infrastructure. On Figure 5.2. Weighing of factors 
according to firm size. 
 
Figure 5.2. Weighing of factors according to firm size. 
As is evident from these results, small-sized study firms focus on cost more than anything 
else. However, this is not the case for middle and large-sized firms as other elements are 
prioritized higher. This may indicate a reduced focus on cost than historically and that 
firms are beginning to realize that cost alone does not reveal the complete picture, in line 
with Cheng et al. (2009). Large-sized firms have a far higher focus on politics and regu-
lations than the others, and a more evenly distributed weighing of elements in general. 
Medium-sized study firms have the highest focus on infrastructure.  
To investigate the relative importance of single factors, we calculated an impact score, 
based on its frequency of inclusion in ILDs and the average category weight of where it 
belongs;  
impact scorei = 
(frequency  category weight)i 
 100 
(frequency  category weight)max 
In accordance with literature, labor cost is the single factor with the highest impact on 
ILDs (e.g. Carlino, 2012; Fratocchi et al., 2014; Kinkel, 2014; Tate et al., 2014). It thus 
becomes the denominator of the fraction of the impact score calculation and thereby, the 
basis of how the rest of the single factor impact scores are calculated. Nonetheless, it is 
important to notice that this does not mean it has a high impact on all ILDs – only that it 
is relatively the most significant. In Table 5.2, an overview of all single factors docu-
mented in this study is shown, grouped by their category and listed by their impact score, 
21%
17%
18%
15%
14%
16%
18%
23%
19%
12%
10%
18%
16%
15%
13%
17%
20%
15%
0 - 99
100 - 499
500 +
Relative Factor Importance
Number of Employees
1 Cost
2 Labor and Social characteristics
3 Infrastructure
4 Politics and Regulations
5 Economics
6 Markets and Resources
==PAGE:33==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
33 
which is listed in the middle column. Following labor cost, education, experience, and 
skills is the second most influencing factor, followed by existing modes of transportation, 
and availability of labor. 
Table 5.2. Relative scoring of single factors of the international location decision. 
 
Factor 
Impact 
Score 
Factor 
 
1 - Cost 
Labor cost 
Trend in labor cost 
Transportation Cost 
Management cost 
Energy cost 
Coordination cost 
Construction cost 
100 
54 
54 
38 
31 
23 
8 
83 
70 
45 
32 
26 
19 
19 
6 
6 
6 
Education, experience and skills 
Availability of labor 
Language 
Culture and norms 
Attitudes towards work 
Labor Union flexibility 
Motivation 
Standard of living 
Religion 
Crime rate 
2 - Labor and Social Characteristics 
3 - Infrastructure 
Existing modes of transportation 
Reliability and quality of transporta-
tion modes 
Availability of utilities 
Reliability and quality of utilities 
Telecommunication systems 
83 
58 
 
58 
41 
41 
46 
26 
26 
 
7 
Stability (historical and current) 
Consistency of policies 
Government attitude towards 
FDI 
Government structure 
4 - Politics and Reg-
ulations 
5 - Economics 
Tax structures and policies 
Financial incentives from govern-
ment 
Exchange rate 
Strength of currency 
Inflation rate 
59 
37 
 
30 
22 
7 
52 
52 
35 
17 
9 
Market size 
Proximity to customer 
Proximity to raw materials 
Proximity to competition 
Purchasing power of market  
6 - Markets and Re-
sources 
5.3. 
Shortcomings in the ILD Process Compared to Literature 
From the analysis of responses to our survey questionnaire, we have identified five short-
comings in the ILD processes of our study firms compared to the recommended practice 
in literature. An overview of the shortcomings is shown in 
Table 5.3. 
5.3.1. Unstructured and Unbalanced 
Our study shows various indications of the ILD processes being managed and executed 
in an unstructured way. Only few firms were conscious about using tools and frameworks 
to help analyzing, evaluating, and facilitate the process to find an appropriate location, 
while the vast majority did not use any. The perception of structure through the ILD 
process varied greatly – some firms perceived a high degree while others a low. Almost 
half of the firms indicated a medium to low level of structure, while using a non-articu-
lated process or having no formal process at all. While the lack of a systematic approach 
==PAGE:34==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
34 
contributes to an unbalanced ILD, 18% of study firms directly indicated having commit-
ted the error of making an unbalanced analysis. Considering the importance and impact 
of the decision, it may seem surprising that firms do not apply more structure to the ILD 
process, nonetheless, this has been indicated before in literature (Bellgran et al., 2013; 
Bruch et al., 2014; McIvor, 2000).  
5.3.2. Non-involvement 
In many cases the ILD process to be an exclusive club only for top management (Bellgran 
et al., 2013; Immelt, 2012). Considering the far-reaching implications on all aspects of 
an organization an ILD can have potentially, scholars have argued how the involvement 
people from all levels and business units can provide vital insights to the consequences 
of the decision (Bjelkemyr et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 2014). Even so, more than half of 
the study firms did not involve the people who are closest to manufacturing and who are 
most likely to be implementing the decision; the operational level. In addition, more than 
a third indicated a low to medium level of integrating stakeholders, while almost half 
indicated a low to medium degree of having cross-functional teams in the process.  
5.3.3. Static Approach 
The results of our study indicate a lack of dynamic perspective and balance in the analy-
sis. This is evident as under half of firms indicate to have considered a dynamics per-
spective in evaluating the factors of the decision. Further, while labor cost is the single 
factor with highest impact on ILDs, the trend of labor cost is only included in analyses 
half of the time. Integrating a dynamics perspective is essential for the robustness of the 
decision as is seen in this study: already during the implementation process, which ranges 
from half a year to two years, 44% of firms experienced a significant change in factors 
involving all elements of the CLIPEM framework. Several publications advocate this 
integration to build a more sustainable, long-term manufacturing network (Arlbjørn and 
Mikkelsen, 2014; Christodoulou et al., 2007; Dou and Sarkis, 2010; Yang and Lee, 
1997). 
5.3.4. Lack of Synthesis 
While analyzing and evaluating a decision along several dimensions, decision-makers 
are forced to make tradeoffs (Yang and Lee, 1997). De Meirleir (2008) even argues from 
experience that for ILDs, the best location does not exist and instead, firms should settle 
with a “good enough” solution. Nevertheless, the objective of synthesizing decision anal-
yses is to be consciously aware of these tradeoffs and purposely assign importance to the 
dimensions of the decision (Belton and Stewart, 2002).  
In this study, more than a third of the firms did not use any tool or method to integrate 
non-quantifiable, qualitative and non-tangible factors into the consideration. Not a single 
ILD process used any type of multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) despite recom-
mendations in literature (Chan, 2011; De Meirleir, 2008; Montibeller and Yoshizaki, 
2011; Yang and Lee, 1997). Instead, two-thirds of our study firms claim to use a cost-
benefit analysis (CBA, hereafter). Integrating social benefits into a CBA is a complex 
task that requires state-of-the-art calculation algorithms and access to data which may be 
challenging to collect in some countries. Even if firms overcome this challenge, some 
decision factors are impossible to monetize and thus, should be combined with methods 
such as MCDA for a complete synthesis (Barfod et al., 2011). Instead, firms are more 
likely be using a less comprehensive and formal version of CBA – in any case, without 
synthesizing the analysis. 
==PAGE:35==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
35 
 
Table 5.3. Shortcoming in current practice of the ILD process. 
 
Unstructured & unbalanced 
Non-involvement 
Static Approach 
Lack of synthesis 
Not learning 
Indications of 
shortcoming 
 25% of firms indicate a low 
degree of structure in their 
ILD process.  
 88% of firms did not use 
any specific tools/frame-
works to facilitate the ana-
lytical process.  
 18% experienced their anal-
ysis as unbalanced. 
 Less than half of ILD pro-
cesses included people 
from the operational level 
of the firm.  
 More than a third had a 
medium to low degree of 
stakeholder integration. 
 47% medium to low de-
gree of cross-functional 
teams. 
 Under half of firms con-
sider the dynamics of ILD 
factors during the process. 
 The trend of labor cost has 
an impact score of almost 
half of current labor cost. 
 44% of firms experienced 
a significant change in fac-
tors during implementa-
tion. 
 35% did not utilize any tool 
to combine and appraise 
quantitative and qualitative 
factors during evaluation. 
 29% admitted to have a 
predominant focus on 
quantitative factors. 
 There is no correlation be-
tween experience, degree 
of structured approach and 
perception of success. 
 The firm with most experi-
ence in ILDs indicated the 
lowest perception of suc-
cess and process structure 
of all firms. 
Consequence 
A higher chance of overlook-
ing important factors and an 
opaque process that is diffi-
cult to understand and com-
municate. Affects the effec-
tiveness of the ILD. 
In this study, the firms with 
the least structured ILD pro-
cess had least perception of 
success, while the firms with 
the most structured ILD pro-
cess had the highest percep-
tion of success. 
A lack of understanding of 
the implications on the 
manufacturing activity that 
is being located. Valuable 
insights are disregarded 
about the implementation 
and operation phase result-
ing from the decision. In-
stead, improper assump-
tions about operations in 
the new location can poten-
tially cause extra costs and 
poor performance. 
Low robustness in the deci-
sion and high risk of having 
to relocate within a short 
timeframe. In this study, 
more than half of the firms 
experienced 10% extra 
costs or more than ex-
pected. The more extra cost, 
the less did they consider 
dynamics of factors over 
time. 
Failing to synthesize the 
many inputs of quantitative 
and qualitative factors will 
leave the decision-maker in 
a complicated situation with-
out a good overview and un-
derstanding of the neither 
costs, benefits, nor the level 
of risk in the project. Typi-
cally, underestimating quali-
tative factors. 
The main consequence of 
not learning is that the firm 
remains status quo in re-
gards to outcome of the ILD. 
Not learning from errors re-
duces the efficiency of ILD 
process and resources will 
be underutilized for correc-
tional purposes. 
Accordance 
with literature 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
36 
Although 29% admitted having a predominant focus on quantitative factors in the eval-
uation, 65% of study firms claim to balance the evaluation evenly between quantitative 
and qualitative factors. This clearly does not go in line with the above arguments. A 
possible explanation for this contradiction may lie in the nature of the study methodol-
ogy. According to Bradburn et al. (2004), survey respondents may seek the neutral option 
if they are not sure of the answer, which in this case is also the optimal answer. As firms 
do not utilize methods of synthesizing factors, they will not have a good understanding 
of how tradeoffs are made and thus, not be able to answer the question. 
5.3.5. Not Learning 
The last shortcoming identified in this study was a lack of learning. This is indicated as 
there is no correlation between experience (number of ILDs conducted historically) and 
three points: 1) perception of success, 2) degree of structure, and 3) formalization of the 
process. We would expect these three to develop with time as a consequence of the learn-
ing curve normally experienced in repetitive efforts. By filtering by firm size regarding 
either revenue or number of employees, the same lack of correlation with the three points 
is present. This leads to the unintuitive conclusion that as a firms gain more experience 
and grow larger, they do not develop their ILD process or increase their success rate. 
Including processes for learning in building a global manufacturing footprint or network 
is recommended by literature (Christodoulou et al., 2007; Contractor et al., 2010).   
6. 
DISCUSSION 
The research presented in this paper used an inductive bottom-up approach that investi-
gated the ILD problem and the process that lead to a solution. In most research on the 
subject, the approach is using the inverse order by investigating the solution and subse-
quently the explanatory factors behind it. This is the case for most research of the “shor-
ing” terms, such as offshoring and reshoring. The approach taken in this paper brings an 
essential piece to the puzzle as this has previously been identified as a limitation of cur-
rent research (Bruch et al., 2014).  
Reason for approaching the solution first is often for understanding patterns and trends 
of the global manufacturing movement. This could be more in the interest of the govern-
ment as such research can help predict the movement of jobs and national economics. 
However, it rarely helps the firm navigating in the global market and finding the most 
suitable location for their manufacturing activities. As is evident in this study and the 
literature, current ILDs are often flawed and thus, there is a need for assisting the firm in 
this process (Gray et al., 2013; Lee, 2014; Porter and Rivkin, 2012). This should be in 
the interest of governments as well, as such decisions will cause the firm to correct the 
instability of the situation and potentially move thousands of jobs recently placed in the 
country. Thus, they may fall in subsidy trap or similar situations where firms can only 
remain profitable in the short term removing focus from building real competitiveness 
(Porter and Rivkin, 2012). In short, both governments (societies) and firms will benefit 
from improving the ILD processes in firms in the long run. 
Within this study, we observed two cases which could be classified as reshoring back to 
Denmark. Meanwhile, the remaining relocations were either moving from one foreign 
country to another or offshoring, away from Denmark. Thus, this study has not shown 
any sign of reshoring being a dominant trend. This raises the question of whether the 
increasingly turbulence and switching global economic balance demands for rethinking 
==PAGE:37==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
37 
the manufacturing footprints, rather than necessarily reshoring the activities (Rice and 
Stefanelli, 2014). 
7. 
CONCLUSION  
In recent years, globalization has caused a shift in global equilibrium as emerging econ-
omies have developed from low production cost to highly skilled and savvy manufactur-
ing experts with increased cost. This has caused international firms to reconsider their 
current manufacturing footprint, and the topic of investigation the process international 
location decisions (ILD) is, therefore, more relevant than ever. 
This research investigated the dynamics of international location decisions in Danish 
manufacturing firms through an exploratory survey research approach to enhance current 
comprehension of the decisions behind these dynamics. Following an extensive literature 
review, it became clear that there is a need for a new definition and presented the ILD 
and clarified its macro-level and problem orientation to ensure a common understanding 
for respondents of the study presented in this paper and for future use and interpretations 
hereof. Additionally, a modified framework of existing literature to combine all factor 
elements identified. 
Our interpretations suggest that understanding underlying ILD processes and the organ-
izational aspects of the decision-making firm might be critical to comprehending the 
global locational dynamics of manufacturing. The findings in our study suggest that as-
pects linked to the alternative location in consideration such as the elements of the 
CLIPEM framework (see section 4.2) do not solely affect the decision-making process 
nor reflect the final ILD reasoning. Furthermore, we see indications that the success rate 
is dependent on the chosen processes towards the realization of the ILD. This is interest-
ing in a research perspective of the firm as efforts to optimize ILD processes can be 
rewarded in performance output. 
Of the most noticeable findings, three are especially worth mentioning: First, cost is not 
the most dominant factor of ILDs as has been the case in previous research. Second, ILDs 
are largely influenced by the bounded human rationale as decision scope is mainly within 
personal networks and gut-feeling and personal preferences have high impact in the de-
cision. Third, seldom do firms apply tools and frameworks in during the various phases 
of the ILD process. 
This study has identified five major shortcomings in current practice. These included the 
lack of unstructured and unbalanced, non-involvement, static approach, lack of synthesis, and 
not learning. Indications of these shortcomings were both directly pinpointed by the sur-
vey respondents and indirectly by other results pointed to the same observation. 
7.1. 
Limitations and Future Research 
Although the data sample of this study complied with the requirements of exploratory 
research (Dattalo, 2007), it is important to recognize the limitations of the study at hand. 
Firstly, it is not possible to have statistical significance meaning from the results. How-
ever, the findings are indications rather than verifications which was the aim of this study. 
Second, despite efforts to make the study as explorative and open-ended as possible, the 
nature of survey research demand a certain level of structure in response options or at 
best, a structuring of open responses. This may limit the respondents in answering within 
the given frame of reference and exclude some aspects of reality. Third, the respondents 
of this survey were all executives and most of them, main persons responsible for the 
==PAGE:38==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
38 
ILD. This causes responses to be biased to some degree, whereas having had respondents 
from lower level may have yielded different results. 
For future research directions, we suggest further international research on the ILD pro-
cesses to examine how the different types of processes affect the success of the decision. 
Firstly, investigating the teamwork methods most suitable for making ILDs as this 
seemed to be a differentiator in our study. Secondly, building a larger empirical founda-
tion or specifically investigate industries as different types of products require different 
strategies. This study showed significant differences between small, medium and large 
firms, which may suggest different approaches for these will be more suited. Thirdly, 
future research should focus on addressing the shortcomings identified in this paper by 
means of identifying and applying adequate tools and frameworks. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge the survey respondents’ efforts in participating 
in our study. The authors truly appreciate that this study was prioritized by important 
executive level practitioners from the Danish manufacturing industry and hope this paper 
will give them some important insights in return.  
REFERENCES 
Andersson, C., Bellgran, M., Bruch, J., Rösiö, C., Wiktorsson, M., Windmark, C., 2013. 
Production Location Handbook: Forming Your Strategic Manufacturing Foot-
print. Sweden: Media-Tryck, Lund. 
Arauzo-Carod, J.-M., Liviano-Solis, D., Manjon-Antolin, M., 2010. Empirical Studies in 
Industrial Location: An Assessment of Their Methods and Results. J. Reg. Sci. 
50, 685–711. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9787.2009.00625.x 
Arlbjørn, J.S., Lüthje, T., Mikkelsen, O.S., Schlichter, J., Thoms, L., 2013. Danske pro-
ducenters udflytning og hjemtagning af produktion. Kraks Fond Byforskning, In-
stitut for Entreprenørskab og Relationsledelse, Syddansk Universitet. 
Arlbjørn, J.S., Mikkelsen, O.S., 2014. Backshoring manufacturing: Notes on an im-
portant but under-researched theme. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 60–62. 
doi:10.1016/j.pursup.2014.02.003 
Au, K.F., Wong, W.., Zeng, X.., 2005. Decision model for country site selection of over-
seas clothing plants. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. doi:10.1007/s00170-004-2505-
9 
Barfod, M.B., Bang, S., Kim, Leleur, Steen, 2011. Composite decision support by com-
bining cost-benefit and multi-criteria decision analysis. Decis. Support Syst. 51, 
167–175. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2010.12.005 
Bellgran, M., Bruch, J., Rösiö, C., Wiktorsson, M., 2013. Decision support for produc-
tion localization: Process, activities and localization factors, in: 20th EurOMA 
Conference, Operations Management at the Heart of Recovery, 7th-12th June 
2013, Dublin, Ireland. 
Belton, V., Stewart, T.J., 2002. Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis - An Integrated Ap-
proach. Springer. 
==PAGE:39==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
39 
Bettis, R.A., Bradley, S.P., Hamel, G., 1992. Outsourcing and industrial decline. Exec. 
19389779 6, 7. 
Bjelkemyr, M., Wiktorsson, M., Rösiö, C., Bruch, J., Bellgran, M., 2013. Production 
Localization Factors: An Industrial and Literature Based Review, in: Proceedings 
of the 11th International Conference on Manufacturing Research (ICMR2013). 
Cranfield, United Kingdom. 
Bocci, C., Rocco, E., 2015. Modelling the location decisions of manufacturing firms with 
a 
spatial 
point 
process 
approach. 
J. 
Appl. 
Stat. 
1–14. 
doi:10.1080/02664763.2015.1093612 
Bradburn, N.M., Sudman, S., Wansink, B., 2004. Asking Questions: The Definitive 
Guide to Questionnaire Design - For Market Research, Political Polls, and Social 
and Health Questionnaires. John Wiley & Sons, inc. 
Bruch, J., Wiktorsson, M., Bellgran, M., 2014. On the production location decision: a 
case study on process and criteria. Int. J. Manuf. Res. 9, 74–91. 
doi:10.1504/ijmr.2014.059600 
Brush, T.H., Maritan, C.A., Karnani, A., 1999. The Plant Location Decision in Multina-
tional Manufacturing Firms: An Empirical Analysis of International Business and 
Manufacturing Strategy Perspectives. Prod. Oper. Manag. 8. 
Carlino, G.A., 2012. Economies of scale in manufacturing location: Theory and measure. 
Caves, R.E.., 2007. Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, 3rd ed. 
Chan, Y., 2011. Location Theory and Decision Analysis: Analytics of Spatial Infor-
mation Technology, 2nd ed. Springer. 
Chen, L., Olhager, J., Tang, O., 2014. Manufacturing facility location and sustainability: 
A literature review and research agenda. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 149, 154–163. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.05.013 
Cheng, Y., Farooq, S., Johansen, J., 2009. Redesigning Manufacturing footprint from 
dynamic perspective: a holistic approach, in: Proceedings of 14th Cambridge In-
ternational Manufacturing Symposium, Institute for Manufacturing. University 
of Cambridge Cambridge, UK. 
Christodoulou, P., Fleet, D., Hanson, P., Phaal, R., Probert, D., Shi, Y., 2007. Making 
the Right Things in the Right Places: A Structured Approach to Developing and 
Exploiting Manufacturing Footprint Strategy. University of Cambridge, Institute 
for Manufacturing, Cambridge. 
Contractor, F.J., Kumar, V., Kundu, S.K., Pedersen, T., 2010. Reconceptualizing the firm 
in a world of outsourcing and offshoring: The organizational and geographical 
relocation of high-value company functions. J. Manag. Stud. 47, 1417–1433. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2010.00945.x 
Danmarks Statistik, 2007. Publikation: Dansk Branchekode DB07 [WWW Document]. 
URL http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/Publikationer/VisPub?pid=732 (accessed 
4.1.16). 
Dattalo, P., 2007. Determining Sample Size: Balancing Power, Precision, and Practical-
ity. Oxford University Press. 
De Meirleir, M., 2008. Location, Location, Location: A Plant Location and Site Selection 
Guide. The Haworth Press, Taylor and Francis Group, New York. 
==PAGE:40==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
40 
Dou, Y., Sarkis, J., 2010. A joint location and outsourcing sustainability analysis for a 
strategic 
offshoring 
decision. 
Int. 
J. 
Prod. 
Res. 
48, 
567–592. 
doi:10.1080/00207540903175145 
Dunning, J.H., 1998. Location Enterprise: the Multinational Neglected. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 
40, 45–66. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8490024 
Dymsza, W.A., 1972. Multinational Business Strategy. McGraw-Hill Inc.,US, New 
York. 
Ellram, L.M., 2013. Offshoring, Reshoring and the Manufacturing Location Decision. J. 
Supply Chain Manag. 49, 3–5. doi:10.1111/jscm.12023 
Ellram, L.M., Tate, W.L., Petersen, K.J., 2013. Offshoring and Reshoring: An Update on 
the Manufacturing Location Decision. J. Supply Chain Manag. 49, 14–22. 
doi:10.1111/jscm.12019 
Erhvervsstyrelsen, 
2016. 
CVR-udtræk 
[WWW 
Document]. 
URL 
https://datacvr.virk.dk/data/cvr-hj%C3%A6lp/cvr-udtr%C3%A6k 
(accessed 
2.15.16). 
Flint, D.J., Woodruff, R.B., Gardial, S.F., 2002. Exploring the Phenomenon of Custom-
ers’ Desired Value Change in a Business-to-Business Context. J. Mark. 66, 102–
117. doi:10.1509/jmkg.66.4.102.18517 
Fratocchi, L., Di Mauro, C., Barbieri, P., Nassimbeni, G., Zanoni, A., 2014. When man-
ufacturing moves back: Concepts and questions. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 54–
59. doi:10.1016/j.pursup.2014.01.004 
Garcia-Diaz, A., Smith, J.M., 2013. Facilities Planning and Design: Pearson New Inter-
national Edition, 1st ed. Pearson. 
Gray, J.V., Skowronski, K., Esenduran, G., Rungtusanatham, M.J., 2013. The Reshoring 
Phenomenon: What Supply Chain Academics Ought to know and Should Do. J. 
Supply Chain Manag. 49, 27–33. doi:10.1111/jscm.12012 
Gunasekaran, A., Irani, Z., Choy, K.-L., Filippi, L., Papadopoulos, T., 2015. Performance 
measures and metrics in outsourcing decisions: A review for research and appli-
cations. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 161, 153–166. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.12.021 
Hansen, Z.N.L., 2011. On Outsourcing and Offshoring: Challenges Facing Management 
and Engineering. Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. 
Hayter, R., 1997. The Dynamics of Industrial Location: the Factory, the Firm and the 
Production System. Wiley. 
Hoffman, J.J., Schniederjans, M.J., 1994. A two-stage model for structuring global facil-
ity site selection decisions. The case of the brewing industry. Int. J. Oper. Prod. 
Manag. 14, 79–96. doi:10.1108/01443579410056065 
Immelt, J.R., 2012. The CEO of General Electric On Sparking an American Manufactur-
ing Renewal. Harv. Bus. Rev. 90, 43–46. 
Isaac, S., Michael, W.B., 1995. Handbook in Research and Evaluation:, 3rd edition. ed. 
Edits, San Diego, Calif. 
Johanson, J., Vahlne, J.-E., 1977. The Internationalization Process of the Firm—A Model 
of Knowledge Development and Increasing Foreign Market Commitments. J. Int. 
Bus. Stud. 8, 23–32. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8490676 
==PAGE:41==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
41 
Jungthirapanich, C., Benjamin, C.O., 1995. A Knowledge-Based Decision-Support Sys-
tem For Locating A Manufacturing Facility. Iie Trans. 27, 789–799. 
Kalantari, A.H., 2013. Facility Location Selection for Global Manufacturing (Theses and 
Dissertations). University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. 
Kazmer, D.O., 2014. Manufacturing outsourcing, onshoring, and global equilibrium. 
Bus. Horiz. 57, 463–472. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2014.03.005 
Kinkel, S., 2014. Future and impact of backshoring-Some conclusions from 15 years of 
research on German practices. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 63–65. 
doi:10.1016/j.pursup.2014.01.005 
Kinkel, S., Maloca, S., 2009. Drivers and antecedents of manufacturing offshoring and 
backshoring-A German perspective. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 15, 154–165. 
doi:10.1016/j.pursup.2009.05.007 
Kodali, R., Routroy, S., 2006. Location in Competitive Supply Chain. J. Adv. Manuf. 
Syst. 5, 89–110. 
Kovács, G., Spens, K.M., 2005. Abductive Reasoning in Logistics Research. Int. J. Phys. 
Distrib. Logist. Manag. 35, 132–144. doi:10.1108/09600030510590318 
Kræmmer, M., Divert, H., 2009. Change & Effect: Five Principles for Implementing Real 
Organizational Change. Implement Press. 
Lee, R.T., 2014. Making Better Offshoring and Onshoring Decisions. J. Corp. Account. 
Finance 25, 35–38. doi:10.1002/jcaf.21986 
Lewin, A.Y., Peeters, C., 2006. Offshoring Work: Business Hype or the Onset of Funda-
mental 
Transformation? 
Long 
Range 
Plann. 
39, 
221–239. 
doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2006.07.009 
MacCarthy, B.L., Atthirawong, W., 2003. Factors affecting location decisions in inter-
national operations – a Delphi study. 
McIvor, R., 2013. Understanding the Manufacturing Location Decision: The Case for 
the Transaction Cost and Capability Perspectives. J. Supply Chain Manag. 49, 
23–26. doi:10.1111/jscm.12010 
McIvor, R., 2000. A practical framework for understanding the outsourcing process. Sup-
ply Chain Manag. 5, 22–36. doi:10.1108/13598540010312945 
Meijboom, B., Vos, B., 1997. International manufacturing and location decisions: bal-
ancing configuration and co-ordination aspects. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 17, 
790–805. 
Mol, M.J., 2007. Outsourcing: Design, Process, and Performance. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Montibeller, G., Yoshizaki, H.T.Y., 2011. A Framework for Locating Logistic Facilities 
with Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 6576, 505–519. 
Mullin, R., 1996. Managing the Outsourced Enterprise. J. Bus. Strategy 17, 28–36. 
doi:10.1108/eb039792 
Pedersen, T., Bals, L., Ørberg Jensen, P.D., Larsen, M.M. (Eds.), 2013. The Offshoring 
Challenge. Springer London, London. 
==PAGE:42==
  
  
Article 1: The International Location Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms 
42 
Pongpanich, C., 2000. Manufacturing Location Decisions: Choosing the Right Location 
for International Manufacturing Facilities. University of Cambridge, Institute for 
Manufacturing. 
Porter, M.E., Rivkin, J.W., 2012. Choosing the United States. Harv. Bus. Rev. 90, 80. 
Rice, J., Stefanelli, F., 2014. Reshoring: New Day, False Dawn, or Something Else? In-
dustryWeek. 
Rowley, J., Slack, F., 2004. Conducting a literature review. Manag. Res. News 27, 31–
39. doi:10.1108/01409170410784185 
Steenhuis, H.-J., De Bruijn, E.J., 2004. Assessing manufacturing location. Prod. Plan. 
Control 15, 786–795. doi:10.1080/09537280412331309217 
Sule, D.R., 2008. Manufacturing Facilities: Location, Planning, and Design, Third Edi-
tion. CRC Press. 
Tate, W.L., Ellram, L.M., Schoenherr, T., Petersen, K.J., 2014. Global competitive con-
ditions driving the manufacturing location decision. Bus. Horiz. 57, 381. 
Viswanadham, N., Kameshwaran, S., 2007. A Decision Framework for Location Selec-
tion in Global Supply Chains 704–709. 
Wacker, J.G., 2004. A theory of formal conceptual definitions: developing theory-build-
ing 
measurement 
instruments. 
J. 
Oper. 
Manag. 
22, 
629–650. 
doi:10.1016/j.jom.2004.08.002 
Windmark, C., Andersson, C., 2016. Cost modelling as decision support when locating 
manufacturing 
facilities. 
Int. 
J. 
Prod. 
Manag. 
Eng. 
4, 
15–27. 
doi:10.4995/ijpme.2016.4177 
Yang, J., Lee, H., 1997. An AHP decision model for facility location selection. Facilities 
15, 241–254. doi:10.1108/02632779710178785 
Yurimoto, S., Masui, T., 1995. Design of a decision support system for overseas plant 
location in the EC. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 41, 411–418. doi:10.1016/0925-
5273(95)00017-8 
Zegordi, S.H., Khosrojerdi, A.H., Jamali, S.S., 2009. Performance measurement frame-
work for location decisions on supply chain design. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. 
Eng. Eng. Manag. 1603–1607. doi:10.1109/IEEM.2009.5373110 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
43 
 
The second article of two follows on the next page. With a foundation in the study and academic 
literature, this article presents our developed model and specific theories and frameworks we 
have found adequate in dealing with the issues presented in the first article.
==PAGE:44==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
44 
Presenting the Scope Model for International Location 
Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
 
Andreas Strøjer Tynan Schmidt*  
Ebou Touray**  
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen*** 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark, Management Engineering, 2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
*) 
E-mail: astys@dtu.dk, Tel: +45 25321777 
 
**) 
E-mail: s093515@student.dtu.dk, Tel: +45 52556023 
 
**) 
E-mail: znlh@dtu.dk, Tel: +45 45254440 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to address current shortcomings in international 
location decisions (ILD); unstructured and unbalanced, non-involvement, static approach, 
lack of synthesis and no learning, which were identified through literature and exploratory 
study by developing a model that comply with previous limitations in research and 
encapsulate adequate theories and frameworks. 
Design/methodology/approach – A grounded exploratory approach was adopted, using 
survey research on the ILD processes in 17 Danish manufacturing firms, which represented 
diversity along four dimensions; size, industry, motivation, and markets served. Emerging 
shortcomings and gaps to best practice from the current processes were addressed with 
adequate tools and frameworks, leading to the development of a comprehensive model. 
Findings – While current frameworks and models identified in literature are excellent tools 
to cope with specific tasks during the ILD process, no model was found able to scope the 
entire aspect of the ILD problem. Based on insights from a literature review of over a 
hundred publications and the exploratory study, the Scope Model was developed in 
compliance with the MECE principle. 
Practical implications – By adopting the model managers who are considering making 
an ILD will be aided in structuring thoughts and activities from the conceptualization phase 
to a final decision, while ensuring a balance between implementation plans and 
organizational capabilities.  
Originality/value – This paper presents an application-oriented model for facilitating ILDs 
in manufacturing firms, which is unique in its way of being exhaustive and yet able to 
decompose the ILD problem in different aspects and abstraction levels to assist firms in 
balancing and aligning their efforts with strategic goals and organizational values. Unlike 
previous models and frameworks for ILDs, this model is flexible for customizing to different 
situations, thus encouraging co-creation and ownership for optimal adaptability. 
Keywords: The International Location Decision; Framework; Scope model; Supply Chain 
Management; Reshoring; Offshoring 
==PAGE:45==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
45 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
During the 80’s a lot of jobs within the manufacturing industry in the developed world 
were lost to the offshoring trend to low-cost countries (Bettis et al., 1992; Mol, 2007; 
Mullin, 1996). Many firms who followed the trend, saw it as a means of circumventing 
high production costs primarily by gaining access to inexpensive labor (Mullin, 1996; 
Pedersen et al., 2013). The process of offshoring was enabled mainly due to increased 
international trade and the economic liberalization of low production cost countries; most 
notably China and India (Mol, 2007). Moreover, the advancement of information and 
communication technologies facilitated the process of planning, coordinating, reporting, 
communicating and leveraging of knowledge between the host and parent countries of 
firms (Mol, 2007; Pedersen et al., 2013; UNCTAD, 2004).  
However, development in wages is a natural consequence of globalization (Kazmer, 
2014). Thus, firms have over the years gradually observed the once favorable conditions 
offered by low production cost countries altering in an undesired direction in the 
developing world. Most notably, labor cost in China have increased significantly (Anon, 
2012; Li et al., 2012), which has a significant influence on competitiveness on the cost 
leadership dimension (Porter, 2008). On the other hand, globalization has also brought 
more positive development to the developing world. As the economy has improved, 
education systems, infrastructure, and perhaps most importantly, markets have 
developed. This has lead firms to reconsider their manufacturing footprint, but while 
offshoring was a no-brainer during the 80’s and 90’s, the reverse action of repatriating 
manufacturing, otherwise known as reshoring or backshoring, does not seem to be 
gaining the same dominance (Brereton et al., 2014; Cohen and Lee, 2015). Instead of 
looking at specific trends in external independent decisions, firms must seek suitable 
solutions to fit their specific needs, as failing to do so can have a fatal impact on the 
business. 
Therefore, it is a matter of solving the location decision problem without a pre-defined 
solution. However, globalization and its associated changes have increased complexity 
significantly in recent years, and firms do not seem to adapt well to this change. Studies 
reveal that some firms oversimplify the problem and rely on simple heuristics, such as 
following customers or low labor cost while executing the process in an unstructured 
manner (Bellgran et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 2014; McIvor, 2013). Further, firms base their 
decisions on factors that were seen from a static perspective the fail to capture the global 
dynamics of today (Hayter, 1997; Kinkel, 2014). Moreover, firms often overlook the 
current and future hidden costs, which in turn affects the efficiency of the decision (Porter 
and Rivkin, 2012). 
This implies a need for frameworks and models to help the facilitation for decision-
making firms. Nonetheless, relative to the constant public attention to the topic and the 
amount of research generated for the last four decades, limited research has focused on 
models and framework to assist analysts and decision-makers in the process of finding 
the most suitable location (Windmark and Andersson, 2016). Even less research has 
achieved to empower practitioners with understanding and balance to the problem to 
reduce the perception of complexity. 
The objective of this paper is thus to fill this gap in research by developing a model which 
both complies with the needs of practitioners of a simple, comprehensible model, while 
encouraging the balancing of efforts into both broad reflections at a strategic level and 
sophisticated in-depth analysis to build solid decision support and recommendations. 
==PAGE:46==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
46 
To clarify the scope of this paper further, we adhere our study to the definition of the 
international location decision (ILD, hereafter) as being a macro-level decision made by 
a firm, to pinpoint the geographic location of a partly or fully owned facility from a set 
of international alternatives (Schmidt et al., 2016). 
This article is structured into six main sections. In the following section 2, the 
methodology applied for exploratory study and literature review is described. In section 
3, the current shortcomings in current ILD processes identified in the study and literature 
are presented. A rigorous and extensive literature review on theory and practice related 
to the issues are then provided in section 4. In section 5, our model is presented along 
with a theoretically-based practical recommendation to address the current shortcomings. 
Last, a discussion and conclusions are found in section 6 and 7, respectively. 
2. 
METHODOLOGY 
The aim of the research in this paper is explorative as it seeks to investigate a topic of 
limited coverage in literature, and therefore, an exploratory research approach is needed. 
A survey questionnaire is a way of conducting such a study (Bradburn et al., 2004). The 
paper thus, builds upon an exploratory study of Danish manufacturing firms, which is 
conducted through an in-depth, comprehensive survey questionnaire. The objective of 
the study was to develop an improved comprehension of the decision processes that lead 
to final location decisions. The target population represented the Danish manufacturing 
firms selected according to their registration in the Central Business Register (CVR) 
administered by the Danish Business Authority (Erhvervsstyrelsen, in Danish). The data 
was collected from 17 firms, which reflected diversity along several dimension; size 
(numbers of employees), manufacturing industry, location decision setting, and markets 
served. The respondents carried top titles in their firms, such as EVP, COO, CEO, and 
CFO. The sample is consistent with the recommendations for exploratory research 
approaches (Dattalo, 2007; Flint et al., 2002; Isaac and Michael, 1995). The study 
investigated various aspects of the ILD problem through 72 questions distributed in the 
different areas as shown in Table 2.1. The main issues in the ILD process identified are 
presented in section 3. The next steps attempt to validate these issues in literature and 
review the frameworks which deal with their solution. 
Table 2.1. Distribution of questions in the survey study. 
Part of survey 
No. of questions 
Practical information 
13 
The decision process 
32 
The factors 
9 
The final decision 
7 
Post assessment 
11 
Total 
72 
We conducted a systematic review of the pertinent literature with two targets in focus; 
firstly, to validate the emergent issues of location decision in extant literature as general 
issues rather than solely connected to the Danish manufacturing industry, and secondly, 
==PAGE:47==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
47 
to establish a theoretical foundation for addressing the emerging issues. To accomplish 
this, we used the literature search technique known as citation pearl growing (Rowley 
and Slack, 2004) to trace as many important publications on the subject as possible. The 
domain of the research synthesis is journal articles, books, and other academically-based 
material which seeks to aid the location decision of manufacturing facilities.  
The methodology of extrapolating our study from Denmark to generalize the issues and 
shortcomings stemming from the location decision process can be considered inductive 
(Eltantawy et al., 2014). The validation thus allows a broader audience than the Danish, 
to use and apply the framework and recommendations that emerge from this paper. 
3. 
SHORTCOMINGS IN CURRENT PRACTICE 
The following show the key challenges the surveyed firms had with ILDs. These emerged 
from various independent question responses through the majority of firms and are 
subsequently validated in broader literature. 
3.1. 
Unstructured and Unbalanced Process 
From the study, it can be concluded that one-fourth of the firms realized their ILDs 
through an unstructured process, while almost half did not have a formalized process. 
Nine out of ten did not utilize any frameworks or tools to facilitate their analytical 
process, which was perceived as unbalanced in one out of five cases. 
Several observations have been made of location decisions being carried out in an 
unstructured manner (Bruch et al., 2014). Further, Bellgran et al. (2013) describe several 
decision processes as being without a formal decision process and with varying structure. 
This observation is supported by McIvor (2000), who believes the disorganization has 
consequences for the understanding of long-term implications on the business. The lack 
of systematic processes can further cause the firm to overlook important factors and 
obscure the process for both the responsible project team and for others (Pongpanich, 
2000). 
3.2. 
Non-involvement of People 
Top management made their respective final decisions while mostly omitting inputs from 
the operational level. The study showed that only 47% of the study firms incorporated 
inputs from the operational level in their final decision. A third of the firms had a low to 
medium degree of stakeholder integration, and almost half did not use cross-functional 
teams in the ILD project. 
The issues emerging from not including the right people during the decision process is 
evident in several cases across literature. A series of case studies from Sweden indicate 
issues stemming from the omission of operational level in the decision process, as these 
subsequently were to implement the decision and were not able to contribute with their 
valuable insights before the decision was taken. (Bellgran et al., 2013). A Danish case 
study observes this challenge in the process of communicating and getting feedback from 
the right people (Hansen, 2011). The issue of gathering the right people in the location 
project seem to be a general concern, as confirmed by a world-wide study (MacCarthy 
and Atthirawong, 2003). 
==PAGE:48==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
48 
3.3. 
Static Approach 
Under half of the study firms considered the dynamic nature of factors to account for 
changes in the future. In terms of the most significant single factor, almost half of firms 
did not consider its trend and development. In perspective, 44% of firms experienced a 
significant change in factors already within the frame of implementing the decision. 
Although it has been proved essential to account for dynamics of factors in decision 
analysis to achieve long-term success (Brereton et al., 2014; Bruch et al., 2014), most 
decisions historically have not taken into account the dynamics of factors during 
evaluation (Kinkel and Maloca, 2009; Tate et al., 2014). For some firms, these dynamics 
increase the complexity of the decision to such degree that instead, they make the 
decisions by simple rules of thumb (Porter and Rivkin, 2012). Moreover, Contractor et 
al. (2010) argue that traditional frameworks such as the OLI paradigm (Dunning, 1992) 
or the resource-based view (Barney and Hesterly, 2006) have a rather static focus and 
thus not encouraging firms to emphasize this aspect. The lack of dynamic consideration 
is supported by Brouwer et al. (2004) who observes criticism of neoclassical and 
behavioral theories for the same reason.  
3.4. 
Lack of Synthesis in Evaluation 
Through our study, it was found that 29% of the study firms were more quantitatively 
oriented, and 6% were more qualitatively oriented when evaluating alternatives for their 
ILDs. 65% of the study firms said they equally considered both forms of factors when 
evaluating their respective alternatives. However, no firms utilized tools to synthesize 
factors completely. This is found to be surprising since it is well known from phycology 
that the human brain can only simultaneously consider a limited amount of information, 
so all factors cannot be resolved in one’s head (Belton and Stewart, 2002). 
At the end of the decision analysis phase, firms must arrive at a synthesis to make a final 
decision (De Meirleir, 2008). In order to arrive at this synthesis, the challenge of 
combining quantifiable and non-quantifiable factors must be addressed. These two 
categories of factors are also referred to as tangible and non-tangible, quantitative and 
qualitative factors (Gray et al., 2013; Kodali and Routroy, 2006). Kodali and Routroy 
(2006) recognize that “a complexity stems from the multitude of the two-factor 
categories influencing location choices, as well as the intrinsic difficulty of making 
numerous trade-offs among those factors.” Further, in the Delphi-study conducted by 
MacCarthy and Atthirawong (2003), the panelists argued that this combination affects 
the decision process significantly and make the decision-making more complex.  
3.5. 
Not Learning 
The study firms who had conducted multiple ILDs did not demonstrate any significant 
dominance in success rate, the degree of formality, nor the ability to balance between 
quantitative and qualitative factors, when compared to fledgling firms. Even the most 
experienced and highly global firm in this study had the least structure and lowest 
perception of success. 
For inexperienced firms and managers, adopting an externally developed procedure can 
be a good starting point (Pongpanich, 2000). However, during the decision process firms 
learn that some actions work out well and others do not. Thus, the seemingly obvious 
choice of action would be to correct the procedure for the next location decision project 
to maximize effectiveness and efficiency. Nonetheless, this does not seem to be the case 
for most firms; studies have shown (Bellgran et al., 2013). Additionally, despite often 
==PAGE:49==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
49 
being portrayed as a strategic business decision, the recent trend of reshoring 
manufacturing back to the home country has in a large study of German manufacturing 
firms proven to be a correction mechanism in most cases (Kinkel and Maloca, 2009). In 
other words, there is a reason to believe that firms return to the location of their parent 
firm as a consequence of a previous flawed decision (Gray et al., 2013). This both proves 
both that despite decades of global relocation of manufacturing, many location decisions 
are still experiencing challenges as firms do not seem to learn from their mistakes nor 
develop processes on top of experiences. 
4. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In this section, we focus on reviewing theories and models from literature in regards to 
their possibility of aiding the decision-maker in dealing with the issues in current 
practice. In Table 4.1, an overview of the linkages from topics in section 3 and 4 is shown. 
Table 4.1. Suggested research areas for addressing shortcomings 
Sec. 
Type of shortcoming 
 
Suggested research area 
Sec. 
3.1 
Unstructured process 
 
ILD Frameworks and Models 
4.1 
3.2 
Non-involvement of people 
 
Change management 
4.2 
3.3 
Static and unbalanced analysis 
 
Dynamic perspective 
4.3 
3.4 
Lack of synthesis in evaluation 
 
Multi-criteria decision analysis 
4.4 
3.5 
Not learning 
 
Organizational learning 
4.5 
4.1. 
ILD Frameworks and Models 
As a consequence of an unsystematic approach to the ILD process, firms are more likely 
to fail in capturing vital aspects of the decisions and thereby, less likely to achieve 
success in the manufacturing location project eventually. According to Pongpanich 
(2000), benefits of using a systematic approach include: 1) a facilitated decision-making 
process, 2) the reassurance that important factors are not overlooked, 3) a transparent 
decision-making process, encouraging communication between project teams, 4) 
reduced demand on senior management time, 5) improved project management. 
As highlighted by Bruch et al. (2014), little research address the decision process in itself 
and the specific activities that are performed within it. Instead, most literature deal with 
the factors that need to be considered when making the decision. 
Relative to the large body of literature existing of ILD-related issues, the angle of aiding 
the location decision process has received limited attention (Bruch et al., 2014). 
Nonetheless, some comprehensive frameworks and models that are developed, which are 
reviewed in this section. An overview of these is shown in Table 4.2. The list is by no 
means exhaustive. 
Table 4.2. Literature review of models and frameworks 
Reference 
Type of model/framework 
Strength (S) / Weakness (W) 
==PAGE:50==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
50 
Andersson et al. 
(2013) 
Stage-gate decision process 
Factor framework 
S: An easy-to-understand, solid, and wide-
ranging guide for location decision-makers. 
W: Dictates the location decision process and 
thereby, does not leave room for co-creation. 
Christodoulou et al. 
(2007) 
Roadmapping (visualization 
and planning model) 
Multi-stage model 
Mountain model 
S: A broad and flexible framework which 
consciously puts the location decision in the 
right context. Accentuates the need for creating 
a burning platform. 
W: Lack of in-depth quantitative analysis and 
cost calculations 
De Meirleir (2008) 
Factor framework 
S: 40-years-of-experience worth of all-around 
useful insights and cases of location decisions. 
W: Lack of boiled-down models that 
encapsulate the broad understanding and 
overview. 
Johanson and 
Vahlne (1977) 
Internationalization model 
(basic mechanism) – also 
referred to as the Uppsala 
model. 
S: In relation to location decisions, it explains 
the basic dynamics of movement to new 
markets, which can be used to explore 
opportunities. 
W: Little to no contribution in aiding the 
decision-maker. 
MacCarthy and 
Atthirawong (2003) 
Factor framework developed 
from Delphi study 
S: A well-organized and simple, yet thorough 
factor framework. 
W: Mainly focus on aspects of the alternative 
and less on the organization. 
Pongpanich (2000) 
Stage-gate decision process 
Factor framework 
S: Concise and pedagogical guidelines and 
valuable insights. 
W: Lack of comprehensive cost analysis tools 
Windmark and 
Andersson (2016) 
Cost model for location 
decisions 
S: A very concrete methodology for estimating 
the cost in location decision support. 
W: Highly quantitative and lack of qualitative 
impact on cost. 
Yang and Lee 
(1997) 
Location decision evaluation 
model based on analytical 
hierarchy process (AHP) 
S: The combination of qualitative and 
quantitative factors to identify a best solution. 
W: Lack of attention to profitability. 
4.2. 
Change Management 
The ILD is widely considered a key strategic decision with operational impact for firms 
(Bjelkemyr et al., 2013; Dou and Sarkis, 2010; Kalantari, 2013; Kinkel and Maloca, 
2009; Kodali and Routroy, 2006; Viswanadham and Kameshwaran, 2007; Yang and Lee, 
1997; Zegordi et al., 2009). Depending on the specific setting, the location decision can 
potentially redefine the identity and strategy of the firm; e.g. from being national to 
global, from being cost leadership to differentiation (Porter, 2008). Any such decision 
should consider applying change management theory (Hayes, 2014). This is especially 
true as people are heavily involved in the process (Kræmmer and Divert, 2009). 
Only limited publications recognize directly the potential benefits location decision 
projects can achieve from the application of change management concepts (e.g. Hansen, 
2011). However, many scholars implicitly use elements from these (Bellgran et al., 2013; 
==PAGE:51==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
51 
Bruch et al., 2014; Christodoulou et al., 2007). The appropriateness of use is supported 
by research on the global firm by Yip et al. (1988) who asserts that for a company to 
have a global strategy it must have a global culture, processes, structure and people, 
which demand change management process. This is indeed a consequence of any firm 
conducting ILD. 
It is crucial to involve recommendations, evaluate critics and ideas from the operational 
level and moreover from other business units (Christodoulou et al., 2007); in order to 
make a holistic and informed decision. The benefits pertained to involving various inputs 
from various business units are; firm will minimize the presence of black swans 
(unknown unknowns) in the decision process, thus enhancing the quality and accuracy 
of the final decision; top management will gain different perspectives towards the matter 
at hand and less monetary resources will eventually be needed to rectify errors after the 
implementation of the final decision (Hayes, 2014). Nonetheless, it is crucial for firms to 
have a balance in their stakeholder integration; too few creates black swans and too many 
increases complexity. In addition to gathering knowledge, involvement can create 
engagement and commitment and ease the implementation afterward (Kræmmer and 
Divert, 2009).  
 
Figure 4.1. Main Factors affecting/influencing ILDs (Schmidt et al., 2016) 
4.3. 
Dynamic Perspective 
ILD factors are dynamic in nature (Ellram, 2013; Hayter, 1997; Kinkel and Maloca, 
2009; Porter, 2008; Tate et al., 2014; Yang and Lee, 1997) thus, alter overtime due to 
various influential forces such as political (laws, trend in policies), market (demand, raw 
material price), global (fuel prices, ethics) etc. To comply with the increasing global 
dynamics, firms must adapt a dynamic perspective (Dou and Sarkis, 2010). Depending 
on the individual firms, this can be a drastic change to the current procedures. One such 
comprehensive implementation is that of dynamic capabilities (Teece et al., 1997). It 
emphasizes the integration of continuously adapting to external changes and 
reconfiguring the firm’s capabilities hereafter (Arlbjørn and Mikkelsen, 2014). In a more 
continuous context than the ILD, this may involve viewing supply chain design and 
supply chain innovation as dynamic capabilities. In line with the proactive approach 
considered here, developing a manufacturing footprint strategy is another way of 
Location 
appropriateness
1 Cost
2 Labor and 
social 
characteristics
3 
Infrastructure
4 Politics and 
regulations
5 Economics
6 Markets and 
resources
==PAGE:52==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
52 
preparing the firm for continuous change and adaption to the environment 
(Christodoulou et al., 2007). 
However, applying a dynamic perspective can have several levels. Applying forecasts of 
global and regional shifts such as demonstrated by Kazmer (2014) can supply the analysis 
with a simple dynamic perspective to comply with expected shifts rather than preparing 
for the unknown. An aggregated factor framework for analyzing the location 
appropriateness and applying a dynamic perspective is shown in Figure 4.1. 
4.4. 
Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis 
Conducting ILDs is complex in nature; due to the combination of quantitative and 
qualitative factors (Kodali and Routroy, 2006; MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003). 
Nonetheless, firms are forced to make decisions on where to locate globally in order to 
stay dynamic and competitive. Executing ILDs involves the irreversible allocation of a 
firm’s capital after its implementation (Kodali and Routroy, 2006). Thus, firms have to 
rigorously appraise various alternatives in a prudent manner before making a final 
decision. Therefore, in this section the Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA, 
hereafter) is suggested as an effective method to utilize in the evaluation phase of ILDs 
to assist decision makers in making a final decision. This method has been suggested 
because the very nature of a multi-criteria problem is that there is much information of a 
complex and conflicting nature, often reflecting differing viewpoints and often changing 
over time (Belton and Stewart, 2002); which suits the ILD problem.  
A firm’s objective when conducting ILDs is to always pinpoint the most optimal location 
to project a manufacturing facility in. Unfortunately, a true optimal location only exists 
if one single criterion is considered. Thus, firms need to apply the MCDA to combine 
both quantitative and qualitative factors to make holistic decisions. MCDA, which is also 
termed Multi-Criteria Decision Aid or Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) is a 
collection of formal approaches which seek to take explicit account of multiple, 
conflicting criteria in aiding decision makers to choose, rank or sort alternatives within a 
finite set (Belton and Stewart, 2002; Chen et al., 2008). Furthermore, help organize and 
synthesize information in a way that leads decision makers to make decisions they feel 
comfortable and confident about making, thus, minimizing the potential for post-decision 
regrets (Belton and Stewart, 2002). The MCDA process leads to better consideration, 
justifiable and explainable decisions and the analytical process provides an audit trail for 
decision (Belton and Stewart, 2002). Hence, the MCDA method will ideally help 
decision makers understand and identify fundamental criteria in the decision problem 
and avoid making crucial decisions only out of habit (Barfod, 2012). 
4.5. 
Organizational Learning 
Organizational learning (OL, hereafter) is a dynamic process (Crossan et al., 1999) that 
is crucial and incumbent on any firm that wishes to enhance future performance through 
insights from antecedent experiences. Generically organizations are said to be learning 
when they acquire information (knowledge, understanding, know-how, techniques, or 
practices) of any kind and by whatever means (Argyris and Schön, 1996) and encoding 
it into routines that guide actions (Levitt and March, 1988). In literature, there is a 
widespread acceptance of the notion that OL increases the effectiveness of firms actions 
and results in positive outcomes such as improved organizational performance (Baker 
and Sinkula, 1999; Fiol and Lyles, 1985; Flores et al., 2012; King, 2009). For firms to 
realize an optimum effect of organizational learning, they must impose a culture that is 
conducive to learning for it to take place (Fiol and Lyles, 1985; Flores et al., 2012). 
==PAGE:53==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
53 
Therefore, firms must create the necessary culture, environment and provide the 
necessary mechanisms needed for capturing, consolidating and distributing information 
within the organization. Thus, organizations must develop and maintain learning 
systems, that not only will influence their immediate employees actions, but the actions 
of future generations of employees too  (Fiol and Lyles, 1985). 
Change does not necessarily imply learning (Fiol and Lyles, 1985) as evident in our 
previous study (Schmidt et al., 2016); where it could be seen that firms who executed 
numerous ILDs did not become more structured in any form or commit fewer errors in 
their respective decision processes. This accentuates the need for organizations to create 
mechanisms that facilitate the internal leveraging of knowledge for OL purposes and 
motivate members of their respective ILD teams to participate actively in documenting 
their experiences during the decision process. These experience could entail various 
errors committed, complexities and barriers faced during the various phases and provided 
elaborations on how they ended up solving the various challenges and recommendations 
for future ILDs. Furthermore, interferences derived from post assessments of the ILD 
can be utilized to draw final conclusions on what went well and what went wrong, for 
future references too. 
5. 
THE SCOPE MODEL FOR INTERNATIONAL LOCATION 
DECISIONS 
Based on our research on ILD’s in Danish manufacturing firms and extensive literature 
reviews of other studies, models, frameworks, and guidelines, we propose a model which 
encompasses the main lessons from both practice and theory: The Scope Model, shown 
in Figure 5.1. During our research, several sources have served as inspiration for the 
development of the model – although we cannot document all inspiration, some of the 
most important are listed in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1. Features and some references of inspiration 
Feature 
Reference of inspiration 
Abstraction levels through phases 
(Christodoulou et al., 2007) 
Co-creation and customization through 
flexibility 
(Kræmmer and Divert, 2009) 
Continuous reflection and improvement 
(Christodoulou et al., 2007) 
Division of state and change (recurring 
and non-recurring) 
(De Meirleir, 2008; Hayter, 1997; Johanson and 
Vahlne, 1977) 
Matching organizational and alternative 
aspects 
(Pongpanich, 2000) 
Mutually exclusive collectively 
exhaustive 
(Friga, 2008) 
Structure and balance 
(Bjelkemyr et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 2014; 
Windmark and Andersson, 2016) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
54 
 
Figure 5.1. The Scope Model for International Location Decisions 
Five supporting comments to the model 
 
1. The location decision scope model is about approaching the center in order to 
determine a solution to the location decision problem. The rings of the scope represent 
abstraction levels – the closer to the center, the more concrete the considerations 
become and the closer the process is to a decision. 
2. The top half represents the stability aspects; the current state and a future desired state, 
while the bottom half represents the change aspects; the requirements for changing 
into the future state and the organizational capabilities of changing.  
3. The right half represents the organizational aspects, while the left half represents the 
alternative aspects. This emphasizes the need for matching a firm with a location – the 
objective is suitability to comply with criteria and limitations. 
4. The examples of activities written in italics are merely suggestions and 
recommendation yielded from our study. They can be replaced with any tool or activity 
to customize the model to the specific case. 
5. The firm should at all stages of their analysis fully circle the model to make sure all 
important aspects are covered; the future state is fulfilling needs from the current state, 
and change capabilities of the organization match the change requirements of the future 
state, thus allowing for decomposed analysis. This is a real strength of the model, as it 
designed according to the MECE principle (mutually exclusive and collectively 
exhaustive). 
  
Current state 
Future state 
Change capabilities 
Change requirements 
Organizational aspects 
Alternative aspects 
Manufacturing 
footprint analysis 
Interpersonal 
links 
MCDA 
Cost-benefit 
analysis 
Vision 
Strategy of 
execution 
Location decision 
experience 
Implementation 
Risk analysis 
Drivers for change 
Location 
visits 
Cultural 
understanding 
State aspects 
Change aspects 
Investment cost 
estimation 
Non-recurring 
costs analysis 
Recurring 
costs analysis 
Implementation 
planning 
Potential 
markets 
Resource 
availability 
Current markets 
served 
Supply chain 
analysis 
Willingness to 
change 
Available 
investment funds 
Identification 
of alternatives 
Capacity 
analysis 
Organizational 
learning 
Qualitative 
factors  
External 
support 
Transferability 
of skills 
Leverage of 
know-how 
SWOT 
analysis 
Alignment with 
strategy 
Business 
performance 
Future 
trends 
Organizational 
values 
KMS 
Regulations 
and policies 
Competitive 
activities 
==PAGE:55==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
55 
 
The model is illustrated by a unit circle within a polar coordinate system; wherein each 
quadrant represents an element of the model which must repeatedly be considered in the 
decision process as the firm moves closer to the center and thereby, a concrete location 
decision. The firm should not move towards the center before a full 360° movement has 
been made.  
The model is both a multi-dimensional framework, which symbolizes the scoping in on 
a target until sufficient decision support is generated to make a final ILD with sufficient 
confidence. The path starts at the periphery of the circle by making rough estimates and 
loose analyses. Then, the analyst increases the level of detail and efforts in considerations 
and moves closer to the center of the circle, thus moving from a high to a lower 
abstraction level. The model does not dictate a certain procedure or a precise number of 
phases but encourages the firm itself to make one.  
5.1. 
Systematic and Balanced Approach 
If the firm has not developed an approach or procedure – or has not made any location 
decisions before, there are several suggestions of decision processes that are readily 
available to start with (see Table 4.2 in section 4.1). These stage-gate models are helpful 
tools to ensure first things first. However, in order to create real commitment and 
engagement, firms must explore their own approach (Kræmmer and Divert, 2009). This 
is an ideal situation for using the Scope Model as it does not dictate a predefined path to 
the location decision, but balances efforts and defines the boundaries arriving at the right 
decision. 
Taking it a step further is to develop a so-called manufacturing footprint strategy 
(Andersson et al., 2013; Christodoulou et al., 2007). A footprint strategy is an iterative, 
long-term process that needs to be integrated into overall strategy and planning of the 
business. It requires a long-term vision which is then regularly updated. Implementation 
is via a portfolio of projects which are continuously optimized and tested for consistency 
and alignment (Christodoulou et al., 2007). Developing a manufacturing footprint 
strategy is a proactive approach, which can ease the pressure when a need for change is 
present. This could potentially deal with the barrier of too little time to execute the 
decision process, as highlighted in another Danish study (Arlbjørn et al., 2013). 
An example of a location decision process in five steps is shown below in Figure 5.2. 
Generic location decision analysis process (Schmidt et al., 2016). 
  
Figure 5.2. Generic location decision analysis process (Schmidt et al., 2016) 
The lack of systematic approach in current practice can partly be explained with the 
perception of ad hoc problem solving, as well as for organizational learning. This causes 
demotivation or prioritization of the problem-solving itself over the project management 
efforts it demands to deploy or develop a systematic approach. However, our research 
shows that very firms make only one location decision for manufacturing and considering 
the dynamics of the modern world, it is unlikely that new demand for relocation or 
expansion into new markets will not emerge in the future. 
P1: Initiation
P2: Scoping
P3: Current 
situation
P4: 
Alternatives 
analysis
P5: Location 
decision
==PAGE:56==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
56 
5.2. 
Widespread Participation with Change Management 
Having too many stakeholders can increase the complexity of the decision due to 
increased inputs, conflicting interests and a number of evaluations needed to make trade-
offs. Therefore, firms need to pinpoint and only involve key stakeholders from different 
business units that can add value. This can be accomplished by means of mapping 
internal stakeholders that can contribute with feedbacks and inputs e.g. project managers 
and functional managers; who possess crucial knowledge regarding their respective 
projects and business functions. Moreover, the process of involvement can be simplified 
and facilitated if the firm already has an organizational learning platform in place. Top 
management and decision teams will have access to consolidated knowledge from 
antecedent ILD inferences, which also entails results from post assessments. Considering 
ILD factors change over time at different rates (Dymsza, 1972; Ellram, 2013; Hayter, 
1997; Kinkel and Maloca, 2009; Porter and Rivkin, 2012) and from place to place, top 
management, and the decision team will still need insights from few internal stakeholders 
to validate if the information is still up-to-date.  
5.3. 
Evaluation Synthesis 
The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP, hereafter) has been proposed in recent literature 
as an emerging solution approach to large dynamic and complex real world multi-criteria 
decision-making problems (Yang and Lee, 1997). AHP is a systematic pair wise 
comparison approach, where alternatives are compared and assigned weights according 
to the AHP scale (Belton and Stewart, 2002; Goodwin and Wright, 2014). The weight 
depends on how alternatives perform against one another according to the decision 
makers view. Yang and Lee (1997) present an elaborative means of applying the AHP 
for locating facilities consisting of seven steps. An alternative to the AHP is the Simple 
Multi-Attribute Rating Technique (SMART, hereafter). SMART is a simple and 
transparent method, that despite not always captures all the details and complexities of a 
decision illuminates the important aspects of a problem and how they relate to each other 
(Goodwin and Wright, 2014).  
The synthesis of alternatives is an activity in the future state as it serves to evaluate the 
different scenarios developed to comply with both strategic and operational needs. 
5.4. 
Dynamic Perspective 
A dynamic perspective is embedded in the Scope Model. The upper half should include 
an understanding of the current state (upper right) in a dynamic perspective to understand 
the implications in the future of the current state and find gaps to the future desired state 
(upper left) led by the strategy and exemplified with an ILD alternative. Firms should 
forecast the rate of change of the mentioned main factors in the CLIPEM framework 
(Schmidt et al., 2016) by heeding and analyzing historic data of their respective change 
to understand the location appropriateness in a dynamic perspective. From this, 
mathematical models can be developed to simulate the dynamics of the various factors 
and their respective sub-factors by identifying dependencies and interdependences on an 
ongoing basis (Christodoulou et al., 2007). This will enable firms to create different 
scenarios for appraisal purposes. Nonetheless, it should be acknowledged that there is no 
forecasting method or mathematical model that is accurate enough to give an exact 
prediction of the rate of change of factors over the next ten to twenty years due to black 
swans and the unpredictive nature of the world itself. 
==PAGE:57==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
57 
5.5. 
Knowledge Management Systems 
A barrier for learning from past location decision is by several scholars suggested to be 
the ad hoc nature of the decision; the idea that a location decision project is close to a 
one-time experience which makes learning redundant (Arlbjørn et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 
2014; Christodoulou et al., 2007; Church and Murray, 2008; Pongpanich, 2000). This 
view is seen as a general limitation in current research, too, as “current models consider 
location decisions as a one-off strategic decision” (Bruch et al., 2014). 
For organizational learning to take place, firms must implement a knowledge 
management system (KMS, hereafter) (King, 2009; Liao and Wu, 2010). KMS is the 
planning, organizing, motivating and controlling of people, processes and systems in an 
organization to ensure that its knowledge-related assets are improved and effectively 
utilized. Knowledge-related assets entail printed documents such as manuals and patents, 
electronic repositories such as a best-practice database, employees’ knowledge about 
best ways to execute a task and knowledge that is held by teams who have been working 
on focused problems (King, 2009). The processes of KM entails knowledge acquisition, 
creation, refinement, storage, transfer, sharing and utilization (King, 2009). The process 
of implementing KM is most efficiently realized through the utilization of knowledge 
management systems; which refers to any IT system that consolidates and retrieves 
knowledge, locates knowledge sources and mines repositories for hidden knowledge 
(Frost, 2010). By implementing knowledge management systems, firms can facilitate 
organizational learning. The knowledge provided by the system, through inputs from 
antecedent experiences, can be utilized to avoid or minimize errors in the ILD process. 
Errors, such as types of cost, inaccurate assumptions, and application of wrong analysis 
(Schmidt et al., 2016). Furthermore, firms will be able to save time and resources by not 
needing to rectify problems, hence becoming more effective at their execution of ILDs. 
6. 
DISCUSSION 
A theoretically grounded conceptualization of the ILD, i.e. the Scope Model, derives 
from both an empirical, explorative study of Danish firms and extant literature, 
underpinned by 
the 
theory 
of 
manufacturing footprint strategy and the 
internationalization model. The systematic literature review corroborated that balance in 
efforts during the ILD process, good scenario planning with future trends, and 
readjustment between firm and location characteristics are some of the shortcomings in 
current practice and not sufficiently emphasized in current frameworks.  
The model proposed in this paper emphasizes these points; the four quadrants together 
reinforce each other in making sound, balanced analysis, evaluation and eventually a 
solution which complies with both current resources and future goals in an efficient and 
effective manner. The iterative aspect of the model, illustrated by the circular shape and 
the various rings, encourages the firm to repeatedly ensure a balance between all four 
aspects at several abstraction levels. This model design is in line with Christodoulou et 
al. (2007), who assert that considerations of options at too high a level will oversimplify 
the problem while considerations at a too low level will lose sight of the underlying 
strategic principles. Additionally, they express the need for flexibility in being able to 
tailor a framework to a particular situation. This fits well with experiences within change 
management, as co-creation of processes rather than a step-by-step model create real 
commitment and engagement in the project (Kræmmer and Divert, 2009).  
==PAGE:58==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
58 
A limitation in current research is the assumption built up around ILDs that these are 
related to limited options, such as building a new plant (Bruch et al., 2014). This 
emphasizes the need for flexibility to include considerations of a broad selection of 
options. This is in line with the suggested research direction of ILDs regardless of chosen 
solution in contrast to the “shoring” terms as advocated by Schmidt et al. (2016). This 
limitation is addressed in the model presented in this paper, as it encourages a more open 
investigation of solutions to the problem. However, the openness of the model may also 
be its own flaw. Although simplistic models may help the analyst grasp the problem 
better, there is a chance of oversimplification and failure to analyze and understand the 
implications of all aspects to a sufficient degree. It is, therefore, vital to understand the 
dimension of abstraction levels in the model; starting high at the periphery and finishing 
low in the center. In this process, comprehensive investigations and analysis should be 
made to concretize considerations and build solid decision support. 
7. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, an exploratory research was carried out to identify shortcomings in current 
ILD processes and corresponding suggested frameworks and models that facilitates the 
process. The research is based on insights from a study of Danish manufacturing firms 
and shows that Danish firms; 1) carried out their respective ILDs in an unsystematic 
manner, 2) omitting inputs from the operational level, 3) considered both quantitative 
and qualitative factors in a static manner, 4) rarely applied any tools for synthesizing both 
types of factors to makes holistic decisions, and 5) firms did not learn from their 
antecedent ILDs. These shortcomings were further validated through an extent literature 
review, thus showing that the problems are not solely limited to Danish manufacturing 
firms. With regards to suggested frameworks, models and guidelines, many were found 
to be viable, but none was found to encapsulate the entire problem in a holistic manner 
but rather mostly addressed specific phases of the ILD. The scope model, which is 
designed to facilitate the ILD process by reducing complexity, offering flexibility and 
customization to suit different firm sizes without dictating a predefined order of 
approaching the problem, is thus developed to address the gaps. The model motivates 
firms to consider their current state and create a burning platform, envision a future state, 
assess change requirements for realizing the future state and lastly assess their change 
capabilities. The assessment in the first step from high abstraction levels. By considering 
these aspects, the firm is assured a good start in identifying an ideal location that provides 
the highest degree of strategic fit. Moreover, by approaching the problem from an 
abstract perspective, firms will not overlook imperative factors before going further in-
depth with detailed analysis. The model suggests the application of theories such as 
change management, dynamic perspective, MCDA and organizational learning as means 
of tackling the identified shortcomings.   
7.1. 
Future research directions 
For future research directions, we suggest the testing of the Scope Model’s effectiveness 
and efficiency towards realizing ILDs and moreover domestic location decisions. 
Findings from such kind of research can be utilized to eventually optimize the model and 
enhance its value. ILDs affect members from all levels of an organization in one way or 
the other, thus necessitating the need for change management depending on the nature of 
the ILD. A study into the different types of change management strategies that are 
appropriate to different types of ILDs and their distinct nature could prove valuable. 
Simulation of the dynamics of factors based on historic data, to create future scenarios 
==PAGE:59==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
59 
for investigating uncertainty and calculate risk, was suggested as a means of considering 
ILD factors with a dynamic perspective. No concrete method was found on how to 
simulate the dynamism of the factors, thereby creating the need to research into the best 
ways in which data can be collected, models can be designed, and simulations of dynamic 
factors can be made most optimally. Furthermore, we suggest investigating the effect of 
personal network expansion efforts on the success of a firm. This idea is based on the 
fact that firms seem to be most comfortable considering countries they already have 
knowledge of and direct interpersonal links. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank Professor Carin Andersson of Lund University and Dr. Chaipong 
Pongpanich for their willingness to share their research with us. 
REFERENCES 
Andersson, C., Bellgran, M., Bruch, J., Rösiö, C., Wiktorsson, M., Windmark, C., 2013. 
Production Location Handbook: Forming Your Strategic Manufacturing 
Footprint. Sweden: Media-Tryck, Lund. 
Anon, 2012. The end of cheap China. The Economist. 
Argyris, C., Schön, D.A., 1996. Organizational Learning 2: Theory, Method and practice. 
Arlbjørn, J.S., Lüthje, T., Mikkelsen, O.S., Schlichter, J., Thoms, L., 2013. Danske 
producenters udflytning og hjemtagning af produktion. Kraks Fond Byforskning, 
Institut for Entreprenørskab og Relationsledelse, Syddansk Universitet. 
Arlbjørn, J.S., Mikkelsen, O.S., 2014. Backshoring manufacturing: Notes on an 
important but under-researched theme. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 60–62. 
doi:10.1016/j.pursup.2014.02.003 
Baker, W.E., Sinkula, J.M., 1999. The synergistic effect of market orientation and 
learning orientation on organizational performance. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 27, 411–
427. doi:10.1177/0092070399274002 
Barfod, M.B., 2012. An MCDA approach for the selection of bike projects based on 
structuring and appraising activities. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 218, 810–818. 
doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2011.11.038 
Barney, J.B., Hesterly, W.S., 2006. Strategic Management and Competitive Advantage: 
Concepts and Cases. Pearson. 
Bellgran, M., Bruch, J., Rösiö, C., Wiktorsson, M., 2013. Decision support for 
production localization: Process, activities and localization factors, in: 20th 
EurOMA Conference, Operations Management at the Heart of Recovery, 7th-
12th June 2013, Dublin, Ireland. 
Belton, V., Stewart, T.J., 2002. Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis - An Integrated 
Approach. Springer. 
Bettis, R.A., Bradley, S.P., Hamel, G., 1992. Outsourcing and industrial decline. Exec. 
19389779 6, 7. 
Bjelkemyr, M., Wiktorsson, M., Rösiö, C., Bruch, J., Bellgran, M., 2013. Production 
Localization Factors: An Industrial and Literature Based Review, in: Proceedings 
==PAGE:60==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
60 
of the 11th International Conference on Manufacturing Research (ICMR2013). 
Cranfield, United Kingdom. 
Bradburn, N.M., Sudman, S., Wansink, B., 2004. Asking Questions: The Definitive 
Guide to Questionnaire Design - For Market Research, Political Polls, and Social 
and Health Questionnaires. John Wiley & Sons, inc. 
Brereton, C., Mattelaer, F., De La Hoz, J.D., Stokes, P., 2014. Fit for business: Preparing 
for dramatic change within the eurozone. PricewaterhouseCoopers. 
Brouwer, A.E., Mariotti, I., van Ommeren, J.N., 2004. The firm relocation decision: An 
empirical investigation. Ann. Reg. Sci. 38, 335–347. doi:10.1007/s00168-004-
0198-5 
Bruch, J., Wiktorsson, M., Bellgran, M., 2014. On the production location decision: a 
case study on process and criteria. Int. J. Manuf. Res. 9, 74–91. 
doi:10.1504/ijmr.2014.059600 
Chen, Y., Kilgour, D.M., Hipel, K.W., 2008. Screening in multiple criteria decision 
analysis. Decis. Support Syst. 45, 280–292. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2007.12.017 
Christodoulou, P., Fleet, D., Hanson, P., Phaal, R., Probert, D., Shi, Y., 2007. Making 
the Right Things in the Right Places: A Structured Approach to Developing and 
Exploiting Manufacturing Footprint Strategy. University of Cambridge, Institute 
for Manufacturing, Cambridge. 
Church, R.L., Murray, A.T., 2008. Business Site Selection, Location Analysis and GIS, 
1 edition. ed. Wiley, Hoboken, N.J. 
Cohen, M.A., Lee, H.L., 2015. Global Supply Chain Benchmark Study: An Analysis of 
Sourcing and Re-structuring Decisions. Supply Chain Navig. 
Contractor, F.J., Kumar, V., Kundu, S.K., Pedersen, T., 2010. Reconceptualizing the firm 
in a world of outsourcing and offshoring: The organizational and geographical 
relocation of high-value company functions. J. Manag. Stud. 47, 1417–1433. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2010.00945.x 
Crossan, M.M., Lane, H.W., White, R.E., 1999. An organizational learning framework: 
From intuition to institution. Acad. Manage. Rev. 24, 522–537. 
Dattalo, P., 2007. Determining Sample Size: Balancing Power, Precision, and 
Practicality. Oxford University Press. 
De Meirleir, M., 2008. Location, Location, Location: A Plant Location and Site Selection 
Guide. The Haworth Press, Taylor and Francis Group, New York. 
Dou, Y., Sarkis, J., 2010. A joint location and outsourcing sustainability analysis for a 
strategic 
offshoring 
decision. 
Int. 
J. 
Prod. 
Res. 
48, 
567–592. 
doi:10.1080/00207540903175145 
Dunning, J.H., 1992. Multinational enterprises and the global Economy. Addison-
Wesley, International Business. 
Dymsza, W.A., 1972. Multinational Business Strategy. McGraw-Hill Inc.,US, New 
York. 
Ellram, L.M., 2013. Offshoring, Reshoring and the Manufacturing Location Decision. J. 
Supply Chain Manag. 49, 3–5. doi:10.1111/jscm.12023 
==PAGE:61==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
61 
Eltantawy, R., Giunipero, L., Handfield, R., 2014. Strategic sourcing management’s 
mindset: strategic sourcing orientation and its implications. Int. J. Phys. Distrib. 
Logist. Manag. 44, 768–795. 
Fiol, C.M., Lyles, M.A., 1985. Organizational Learning. Acad. Manage. Rev. 10, 803–
813. doi:10.5465/AMR.1985.4279103 
Flint, D.J., Woodruff, R.B., Gardial, S.F., 2002. Exploring the Phenomenon of 
Customers’ Desired Value Change in a Business-to-Business Context. J. Mark. 
66, 102–117. doi:10.1509/jmkg.66.4.102.18517 
Flores, L.G., Zheng, W., Rau, D., Thomas, C.H., 2012. Organizational Learning. J. 
Manag. 38, 640–667. doi:10.1177/0149206310384631 
Friga, P.D.N., 2008. The McKinsey Engagement: A Powerful Toolkit For More Efficient 
and Effective Team Problem Solving. McGraw Hill Professional. 
Frost, A., 2010. Knowledge Management Systems [WWW Document]. URL 
http://www.knowledge-management-tools.net/knowledge-management-
systems.html (accessed 6.13.16). 
Goodwin, P., Wright, G., 2014. Decision analysis for management judgement. John 
Wiley & Sons. 
Gray, J.V., Skowronski, K., Esenduran, G., Rungtusanatham, M.J., 2013. The Reshoring 
Phenomenon: What Supply Chain Academics Ought to know and Should Do. J. 
Supply Chain Manag. 49, 27–33. doi:10.1111/jscm.12012 
Hansen, Z.N.L., 2011. On Outsourcing and Offshoring: Challenges Facing Management 
and Engineering. Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. 
Hayes, J., 2014. The Theory and Practice of Change Management, 3rd ed. Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Hayter, R., 1997. The Dynamics of Industrial Location: the Factory, the Firm and the 
Production System. Wiley. 
Isaac, S., Michael, W.B., 1995. Handbook in Research and Evaluation:, 3rd edition. ed. 
Edits, San Diego, Calif. 
Johanson, J., Vahlne, J.-E., 1977. The Internationalization Process of the Firm—A Model 
of Knowledge Development and Increasing Foreign Market Commitments. J. Int. 
Bus. Stud. 8, 23–32. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8490676 
Kalantari, A.H., 2013. Facility Location Selection for Global Manufacturing (Theses and 
Dissertations). University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. 
Kazmer, D.O., 2014. Manufacturing outsourcing, onshoring, and global equilibrium. 
Bus. Horiz. 57, 463–472. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2014.03.005 
King, W.R., 2009. Knowledge management and organizational learning. Springer. 
Kinkel, S., 2014. Future and impact of backshoring-Some conclusions from 15 years of 
research on German practices. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 63–65. 
doi:10.1016/j.pursup.2014.01.005 
Kinkel, S., Maloca, S., 2009. Drivers and antecedents of manufacturing offshoring and 
backshoring-A German perspective. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 15, 154–165. 
doi:10.1016/j.pursup.2009.05.007 
==PAGE:62==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
62 
Kodali, R., Routroy, S., 2006. Location in Competitive Supply Chain. J. Adv. Manuf. 
Syst. 5, 89–110. 
Kræmmer, M., Divert, H., 2009. Change & Effect: Five Principles for Implementing Real 
Organizational Change. Implement Press. 
Levitt, B., March,  james G., 1988. Organizational Learning. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 14, 319–
338. doi:10.1146/annurev.so.14.080188.001535 
Li, H., Li, L., Wu, B., Xiong, Y., 2012. The End of Cheap Chinese Labor. J. Econ. 
Perspect. 26, 57–74. doi:10.1257/jep.26.4.57 
Liao, S.-H., Wu, C., 2010. System perspective of knowledge management, 
organizational learning, and organizational innovation. Expert Syst. Appl. 37, 
1096–1103. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2009.06.109 
MacCarthy, B.L., Atthirawong, W., 2003. Factors affecting location decisions in 
international operations – a Delphi study. 
McIvor, R., 2013. Understanding the Manufacturing Location Decision: The Case for 
the Transaction Cost and Capability Perspectives. J. Supply Chain Manag. 49, 
23–26. doi:10.1111/jscm.12010 
McIvor, R., 2000. A practical framework for understanding the outsourcing process. 
Supply Chain Manag. 5, 22–36. doi:10.1108/13598540010312945 
Mol, M.J., 2007. Outsourcing: Design, Process, and Performance. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Mullin, R., 1996. Managing the Outsourced Enterprise. J. Bus. Strategy 17, 28–36. 
doi:10.1108/eb039792 
Pedersen, T., Bals, L., Ørberg Jensen, P.D., Larsen, M.M. (Eds.), 2013. The Offshoring 
Challenge. Springer London, London. 
Pongpanich, C., 2000. Manufacturing Location Decisions: Choosing the Right Location 
for International Manufacturing Facilities. University of Cambridge, Institute for 
Manufacturing. 
Porter, M.E., 2008. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and 
Competitors. Simon and Schuster. 
Porter, M.E., Rivkin, J.W., 2012. Choosing the United States. Harv. Bus. Rev. 90, 80. 
Rowley, J., Slack, F., 2004. Conducting a literature review. Manag. Res. News 27, 31–
39. doi:10.1108/01409170410784185 
Schmidt, A.S.T., Touray, E., Herbert-Hansen, Z.N.L., 2016. The International Location 
Decision: A Study on Danish Manufacturing Firms. Work. Pap. DTU Manag. 
Eng. Tech. Univ. Den. 1. 
Tate, W.L., Ellram, L.M., Schoenherr, T., Petersen, K.J., 2014. Global competitive 
conditions driving the manufacturing location decision. Bus. Horiz. 57, 381. 
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G., Shuen, A., others, 1997. Dynamic capabilities and strategic 
management. Strateg. Manag. J. 18, 509–533. 
UNCTAD, 2004. World Investment Report 2004: The Shift Towards services. United 
Nations. 
==PAGE:63==
 
Article 2: The Scope Model for International Location Decisions: A Framework for Manufacturing Firms 
63 
Viswanadham, N., Kameshwaran, S., 2007. A Decision Framework for Location 
Selection in Global Supply Chains 704–709. 
Windmark, C., Andersson, C., 2016. Cost modelling as decision support when locating 
manufacturing 
facilities. 
Int. 
J. 
Prod. 
Manag. 
Eng. 
4, 
15–27. 
doi:10.4995/ijpme.2016.4177 
Yang, J., Lee, H., 1997. An AHP decision model for facility location selection. Facilities 
15, 241–254. doi:10.1108/02632779710178785 
Yip, G.S., Loewe, P.M., Yoshino, M.Y., 1988. How to Take Your Company to the Global 
Market. Columbia J. World Bus. 23, 37–48. 
Zegordi, S.H., Khosrojerdi, A.H., Jamali, S.S., 2009. Performance measurement 
framework for location decisions on supply chain design. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf. 
Ind. Eng. Eng. Manag. 1603–1607. doi:10.1109/IEEM.2009.5373110 
 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
64 
 
This thesis had the overall purpose of increasing comprehension and practice of the ILD through 
extensive literature review and a comprehensive exploratory survey study on 17 Danish manu-
facturing firms. The chosen approach to comprehension was a bottom-up investigation of the ILD 
processes rather than a top-down approach as most studies on the subject have been tradition-
ally (typically studies on e.g. offshoring and reshoring). This approach was chosen as it was 
identified as a limitation and encouraged by scholars (Bruch et al., 2014). The rationale was that 
understanding the process behind ILDs would have the potential to form more accurate theories 
and models to address issues for practitioners as they are based on where the firms are now, 
instead of an assumption hereof.  
In the development of the survey, it quickly became clear that the lack of literature directly con-
cerning the processes would both make it difficult to develop a complete understanding before-
hand, but as well that we were on to a path of addressing a real gap in current research. After 
reviewing over a hundred academic journal papers, conference papers, and books, we had finally 
caught enough fragmentations to form a thorough documentation and groundwork for the survey. 
After dealing with issues of collecting responses from the right people, we concluded 17 Danish 
manufacturing firms, which represented the Danish manufacturing industry through diversity 
along several dimensions, such as size and sub-industry, which complied with the requirements 
of an exploratory study (Dattalo, 2007).  
For the purpose of clarifying the study and lack of definitions in literature, we formulated a defi-
nition for the international location decision and developed a factor framework through the 
synthesis of literature, called CLIPEM (abbreviations for cost, labor and social characteristics, 
infrastructure, politics and regulations, economics, and markets and resources). 
The findings of the survey (article 1) were many and the synthesis could have taken several 
directions. Most importantly, a clear connection between the processes conducted by firms and 
their outcome was found, validating the study of ILD processes as a potentially beneficial re-
search area. Further, the rest of the important findings were subsumed into three areas; the ILD 
process, the factors, and the shortcomings of current processes compared to recommendations 
in literature. The first area summarized main findings in five parts of the process; analyzing the 
current situation, generation of alternatives, analyzing alternatives, evaluation alternatives, and 
post assessment. Divided into three firm size categories, the distribution of efforts was depicted 
in each of these parts, showing that smaller firms spend most of their efforts analyzing the current 
situation, while larger firms prioritize generation of alternatives and the evaluation. A similar as-
signing of weights to factor elements of the CLIPEM framework was depicted, revealing infra-
structure as the most influential element, followed by cost. A special impact score was calculated 
for the sub-factors within the elements, revealing ‘labor cost’ as still being the most important 
factor, followed by ‘education, experience and skills’ and ‘existing modes of transportation’. Most 
importantly, the study identified five shortcomings in the ILD process: unstructured and unbal-
anced, non-involvement, static approach, lack of synthesis and no learning. 
Building on the findings of the study, the second focus was to develop a model and find appro-
priate frameworks, theories and models to address the shortcomings in the process identified. 
As the shortcomings became the frame of reference for article 2, we validated them in literature 
to extrapolate and use the findings in a broader perspective than in Denmark. As we analyzed 
literature, we found a number of well-suited frameworks to address some of the most specific 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
65 
issues previously identified. However, a need for a holistically balanced, structured and exhaus-
tive model to reduce the perception of complexity was identified. This became the foundation of 
developing what we call the Scope Model; a circular model derived inductively from practical 
findings and extant literature, which encapsulates the suggested activities during the ILD pro-
cess, placing them according to quadrant and rings, which represent organizational and alterna-
tive location aspects, and abstraction levels accordingly. The model was found to comply with 
the requirements of practitioners and the gap identified in academic research. 
For future research directions, we suggest more research on the ILD processes taking the bot-
tom-up approach by testing different methods and approaches chosen. The reason for this gen-
eral recommendation is the clear impact we identified in this study of a different constellation. 
Further, we suggest testing the Scope Model in both a practical setting through case studies and 
in a research setting by application and discussions of its use. 
 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
66 
 
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen, Assistant Professor & Supervisor for this thesis. 
For taking that extra time to discuss the broad context of location decisions and research. 
 
 
Anon, 2012. The end of cheap China. The Economist. 
Arlbjørn, J.S., Mikkelsen, O.S., 2014. Backshoring manufacturing: Notes on an important but 
under-researched theme. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 60–62. doi:10.1016/j.pur-
sup.2014.02.003 
Aron, R., Singh, J.V., 2005. Getting offshoring right. Harv. Bus. Rev. 83, 135. 
Bruch, J., Wiktorsson, M., Bellgran, M., 2014. On the production location decision: a case study 
on process and criteria. Int. J. Manuf. Res. 9, 74–91. doi:10.1504/ijmr.2014.059600 
Burkholder, N.C., 2005. Outsourcing : the definitive view, applications and implications. Wiley. 
Dattalo, P., 2007. Determining Sample Size: Balancing Power, Precision, and Practicality. Oxford 
University Press. 
Deligio, T., 2014. The Truth About Reshoring. Plast. Technol. 60, 26. 
Ellram, L.M., Tate, W.L., Petersen, K.J., 2013. Offshoring and Reshoring: An Update on the Man-
ufacturing 
Location 
Decision. 
J. 
Supply 
Chain 
Manag. 
49, 
14–22. 
doi:10.1111/jscm.12019 
Goodwill, D., 2012. From offshoring to reshoring. Can. Transp. Logist. 115, 46. 
Kedia, B.L., Mukherjee, D., 2009. Understanding offshoring: A research framework based on 
disintegration, location and externalization advantages. J. World Bus. 44, 250–261. 
doi:10.1016/j.jwb.2008.08.005 
Kotabe, M., 1998. Efficiency vs. effectiveness orientation of global sourcing strategy: A compar-
ison of U.S. and Japanese multinational companies. Acad. Manag. Exec. 12, 107–119. 
Li, H., Li, L., Wu, B., Xiong, Y., 2012. The End of Cheap Chinese Labor. J. Econ. Perspect. 26, 
57–74. doi:10.1257/jep.26.4.57 
Mol, M.J., 2007. Outsourcing: Design, Process, and Performance. Cambridge University Press. 
Pedersen, T., Bals, L., Ørberg Jensen, P.D., Larsen, M.M. (Eds.), 2013. The Offshoring Chal-
lenge. Springer London, London. 
Porter, M.E., 1986. Changing Patterns of International Competition. Calif. Manage. Rev. 28, 9–
40. doi:10.2307/41165182 
Porter, M.E., Rivkin, J.W., 2012. Choosing the United States. Harv. Bus. Rev. 90, 80. 
Rice, J., Stefanelli, F., 2014. Reshoring: New Day, False Dawn, or Something Else? Industry-
Week. 
Tate, W.L., Ellram, L.M., Schoenherr, T., Petersen, K.J., 2014. Global competitive conditions 
driving the manufacturing location decision. Bus. Horiz. 57, 381. 
UNCTAD, 2004. World Investment Report 2004: The Shift Towards services. United Nations. 
Wacker, J.G., 2004. A theory of formal conceptual definitions: developing theory-building meas-
urement instruments. J. Oper. Manag. 22, 629–650. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2004.08.002 
 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
67 
 
 
Thank you for choosing to participate in our survey.  
Our research focuses on documenting the process of the location decision in the Danish manu-
facturing industry. The purpose is to understand and improve the decision process with the in-
tention of influencing the quality of the final decision. The research includes all cases where a 
final decision has been made, i.e. either fully implemented or in the process of being imple-
mented. In order to facilitate comprehension and eliminate misunderstandings, the following def-
initions of an international location decision and a Danish manufacturing firm is provided: 
An international location decision is a decision made by a firm, to pinpoint the geographic location 
of a partly or fully owned facility from a set of international alternatives. A Danish manufacturing 
firm in the context of this study is a firm or department of a firm, which is located geographically 
within the borders of Denmark and has the main authority to make an international location de-
cision. 
For your overview, these are the parts you will go through in this survey: 
Part 1: Practical information (10%) 
Part 2: The decision analysis process (40%) 
Part 3: The factors (15%) 
Part 4: The final decision (20%) 
Part 5: Post assessment (15%) 
Estimated time to complete survey: 15 minutes. 
 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of question 
1.  
Have you been involved in an in-
ternational location decision in a 
Danish manufacturing firm as de-
scribed above? * 
Multiple choice type 
 
Yes, let's get 
started! 
 
Yes, but let me 
know more about 
the study first. 
 
No, I'm not eligible 
to this survey. 
Ensuring the survey 
respondent is eligible 
to the study. 
If the participant 
wants to know more, 
he/she is sent to 
“elaborated infor-
mation”, if “yes, let’s 
get started!”, send to 
Part 1 and if “no”, 
send to “unfortu-
nately…” 
 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
68 
 
 
The facility location problem has been present in manufacturing firms and research for over a 
century and despite this fact, decisions of locating manufacturing are too often based on rule-of-
thumbs, gut-feelings, following trends, and other simplifications which hardly reflect the im-
portance and impact of the decision. As history goes, this often starts with a flawed offshoring 
decision covered up as a brilliant move to cut cost and when it doesn't work out, the return back 
to the home country may be covered up as following a new trend such as reshoring to bring jobs 
back. In reality, firms often do very few location decisions in the time span of a full employee 
replacement cycle, so experience is hard to collect on the subject. 
In recent decades, themes such as offshoring and outsourcing have been widely popular in the 
media and research, and most recently, the trend of reshoring (returning to the home country) 
has caught attention with promises of a manufacturing renaissance to the manufacturing jobs 
once lost to far-away countries. Although research on these themes seek to document the trend 
in numbers and the influencing factors, little research has been trying to go beyond the surface 
and document what actually happens behind the decisions of locating manufacturing and jobs in 
new places, i.e. the process from an idea, through analysis and consideration to a final decision. 
That is what this research tries to focus on as the first empirical study in Denmark and in Scan-
dinavia. 
From this survey, two articles will emerge in scientific journals. Article #1 is about understanding 
the location decision-making process of Danish firms and article #2 is about ways to improve 
current processes for better results in the long run. We’ve researched intensely on existing stud-
ies and literature, and now, we need real-world input from as many firms as possible who have 
actually been in the process of making the decision themselves or aiding the decision. This is 
where you come into the picture and we greatly appreciate your help. 
 
Since rigorous academic research requires a firm foundation anchored in good definitions, we’d 
like to make sure you know exactly what you’re responding to in this survey. First, here’s how we 
define an international location decision: 
Definition 1: An international location decision is a decision made by a firm, 
to pinpoint the geographic location of a partly or fully owned facility from a 
set of international alternatives. 
Thus, we're not interested in regional site-level decisions between Herning and Slagelse, for 
example. We’re looking at location decisions that have considered several countries. That’s what 
we mean with ‘international’. Should Denmark be the final choice, we will still consider it an inter-
national location decision if the process included an analysis of international alternatives. 
Second, we define a Danish manufacturing firm as: 
Definition 2: A Danish manufacturing firm in the context of this study is a 
firm or department of a firm, which is located geographically within the bor-
ders of Denmark and has the main authority to make an international loca-
tion decision. 
Therefore, your firm does not have to be founded in Denmark nor have its headquarters within, 
but your department does have to have the authority to make the location decision, so there’s 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
69 
ownership of the decision. Furthermore, your firm must be a manufacturing firm. Reason being 
that this survey has a profound focus on firms who are registered publicly for manufacturing (i.e. 
having branch codes ranging from 10.00.00-34.99.99), your firm will automatically comply with 
this requirement. Some firms may have manufacturing as a secondary industry. 
Essential to the survey answer is that you possess comprehensive insights in the decision-mak-
ing process from the initial motivation to the final decision and preferably, the subsequent evalu-
ation process (if this existed, of course), so you’re able to respond on the behalf of the firm you 
represent in this survey (being current or former employment). 
For your overview, these are the parts you will go through in this survey: 
Part 1: Practical information 
Part 2: The decision analysis process 
Part 3: The factors 
Part 4: The final decision 
Part 5: Post assessment 
 
Last notes before getting started 
In respect of the respondent’s time, some questions can be skipped if not marked by a star (*) or 
be marked as ‘I don’t know’ if you feel you aren’t confident to answer the particular question. 
However, some information is essential to our research and therefore, has to be answered. In 
addition, we hope you’ll answer the questions in this survey as honest as possible. 
Once you’ve read and understood what our research and this survey is about, please finally 
indicate your involvement in such decision process as described above and thereby, your suita-
bility to this survey (in regards to ‘international location decision and ‘Danish manufacturing’). At 
the end of the survey, you will have a chance to comment on the survey, express wish to con-
tribute further and getting the results from our study. 
All the best, 
Ebou Touray and Andreas Schmidt, 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
This page serves to document practical information about you and your firm. In order to register 
a survey response from your firm, we need the name. However, as some of the information 
requested in this survey can be considered sensitive, we fully understand and will respect if any 
anonymity is wanted. We therefore, start by clearing that issue.  
 
No. 
Survey question  
Question type 
Purpose of question  
2.  
Would you like to be anony-
mous or can we publish your 
firm name? * Hint: If you’re 
fully anonymous, no name or 
obvious references will figure 
in publications. If you choose 
to be public, your name may 
Multiple-choice: 
 
Fully anonymous 
 
Public 
To clear the disclosure 
question right from the 
start as this might be a 
major concern for the 
respondent going into 
the survey. 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
70 
be published in supporting 
the research. 
3.  
Name of firm represented in 
survey * 
Text type 
Needed for ticking off 
in the database and 
not send wrongful re-
minders. 
 
Name of survey respondent 
Text type 
Optional 
4.  
Position within firm and role in 
the decision * 
Paragraph 
To examine the role of 
the respondent; was 
he or she central in the 
decision-making 
and/or decision analy-
sis, or more on the 
side. 
 
Year of establishment  
Text type (year YYYY) 
To see how long the 
firm has operated.  
 
Industry of which the firm op-
erates in primarily* 
Checkboxes type (where 
they can add their industry 
if not mentioned- other 
function) 
 
See list in appendix 
In order to be able to 
pinpoint commonalities 
and differences within 
industries and find is 
there are key factors 
considered more in 
one industry than the 
other 
 
On the scale between inte-
grated and island, how would 
you define your industry? 
Hint: Integrated industries are 
highly dependent on the over-
all environment. Examples of 
these dependencies are: na-
tional economic situation, im-
port policies, competitiveness 
of local supply industries 
(price, quality, delivery lead-
time) and communication in-
frastructure. On the other 
hand, island industries are ra-
ther independent of their 
overall environment (for ex-
ample, less dependent on a 
minimum level of infrastruc-
ture for transportation and 
communication, and skills for 
manufacturing as well as 
management). An example of 
this is the software industry. 
Scale 1-5, 1: island, 5: inte-
grated 
H7 
In order to have the 
firm define in industry 
environment them-
selves of which they 
operate. 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
71 
(Steenhuis and De Bruijn, 
2004) 
5.  
Type of product and/or ser-
vices rendered (some few ex-
amples) 
Paragraph type 
In order to get an idea 
of the type of goods 
and/or services the 
firm is rendering to its 
costumers  
6.  
What types of business activi-
ties does your firm have? 
Please tick one or several 
types. Hint: Examples are: 
Customer-tied activities: di-
rect sales, on-site customer 
service, and physical delivery. 
Resource-tied activities: ex-
traction of natural resources. 
Non-tied, mobile activities: 
Research, software develop-
ment, and production of 
goods with modest transport 
costs. (Porter and Rivkin, 
2012). B2B is business to 
business and B2C is 
business to customer. 
Check boxes: 
 
Customer-tied 
 
Resource-tied 
 
Non-tied, mobile 
 
B2B 
 
B2C 
H8 
For further categoriza-
tion if needed and to 
get a better under-
standing of what the 
firm does. 
 
Total number of employees in 
your firm * Hint: Including all 
departments world-wide. An 
approximation is fine. 
Text type 
To find if there is a link 
between firm size and 
location decision time 
span and resource al-
location.  
 
Number of employees in Den-
mark. 
Text type 
To find if there is a link 
between firm size and 
location decision time 
span and resource al-
location.  
7.  
Approx. yearly revenue (in 
DKK) * 
Text type 
 
8.  
Which geographic markets 
does your firm serve? * 
Paragraph type or check-
boxes type with following 
options:  
 
Europe 
 
Asia 
 
Middle East 
 
Africa 
 
North America 
 
South America 
 
Oceania 
To pinpoint where in 
the world they have 
their biggest market 
and find if there are 
some relationships be-
tween the market size 
and location decision. 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
72 
 
When did the firm make its 
first location decision?  
Text type (specify year, 
YYYY) 
 
9.  
How many times has your 
firm roughly executed a loca-
tion decision? Hint: Please 
specify in numbers. 
Text type (specify number) 
To have an idea of if 
the firm has conducted 
location decision be-
fore, thus, haven 
maybe steepen their 
learning curve (if they 
have adopted organi-
zational learning – part 
of recommendation).  
10.  
When was the location deci-
sion you were involved with 
made? 
Text type (specify year, 
YYYY) 
 
11.  
How long was the location 
decision process in months? 
Hint: The time from when the 
location decision became a 
serious consideration and the 
organization began till the 
time of the final decision. 
Please specify a number, e.g. 
"25" and disregard the word 
'month'. An approximation is 
fine. 
Text type 
To have an idea of the 
time span of location 
decision and eventu-
ally compare it to in-
dustry, firm size etc. to 
see if there is a pat-
tern.  
12.  
Which of the following set-
tings is the location decision 
related to? 
Multiple-choice 
1) the search for a new pro-
duction location,  
2) the decision to improve 
manufacturing capabilities,  
3) the decision to relocate 
production,  
4) the decision to reallocate 
production 
5) Other – please specify 
H3 
13.  
What kind of ownership did 
your firm possess of the facil-
ity resulting from the deci-
sion? 
Multiple-choice: 
 
Full ownership 
 
Part ownership with 
local partner 
 
Part ownership with 
other non-local 
partner 
 
Part ownership in 
hybrid outsourcing 
contract 
To map the ownership 
dimension of the deci-
sion and double check 
for eligibility to survey 
(omit outsourcing). 
==PAGE:73==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
73 
No ownership (outsourcing 
– remember to send to end 
if chosen) 
 
 
The second part of this survey is the biggest as it serves to document in more detail, the decision 
process that led the firm to decide on a particular location. It’s been divided into the following 
sub-parts: 
1) Part 2.1 Motivation for initiating the decision process 
2) Part 2.2: Mapping of Firm Process 
3) Part 2.3: Organization and scoping 
4) Part 2.4: The Dedicated Team 
5) Part 2.5: The Information Gathering Process 
6) Part 2.6: The Analytical Process 
7) Part 2.7: The Evaluation Process 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of question 
14.  
What was the motivation that 
initiated the thought of a loca-
tion decision? Hint: The an-
swer options refer to the 
framework by Dunning 
(1998). E.g. firms hoping to 
cut cost on production are ef-
ficiency seeking, while market 
seeking firms are hoping to 
find new revenue streams. 
Checkboxes type 
 
Resource seeking  
 
Market seeking  
 
Efficiency seeking  
 
Strategic asset 
seeking 
 
Other – please 
specify  
H2, H33, partly H5 
To pinpoint the moti-
vations behind the re-
locations of Danish 
manufacturing facili-
ties and confirm the 
various hypotheses 
regarding this context   
15.  
Who suggested the idea of 
locating or relocating manu-
facturing originally? Hint: 
Please select one or more 
sources of suggestion. 
Checkboxes type 
 
Top management 
 
Middle manage-
ment 
 
Operational level – 
involved in produc-
tion 
 
Internal consulting 
 
External consulting 
 
Local partner 
 
Other – please 
specify. 
To pinpoint the source 
of suggestion of the 
location decision. This 
makes it later possible 
to compare with the 
involvement in the de-
cision-making process 
– e.g. suggested at 
the operational level, 
decided at the top 
level, etc. 
 
 
 
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Phase 4
Phase 5
==PAGE:74==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
74 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
16.  
How do you consider the 
process of the location decision 
in your firm? 
Multiple choice type 
 
Formalized pro-
cess 
 
Non-articulated 
process based on 
earlier decisions 
 
No formal process 
 
Other – please 
specify 
H18 
17.  
How many phases would you 
estimate the location decision 
process went through? 
Drop-down: 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 
7; 8; 9; 10, “Division into 
phases is not possible”. 
H13 
To get a number of 
phases, which can 
be given each a 
headline in the sub-
sequent question. 
18.  
Please title the location decision 
phases in the sequential order 
by which the firm conducted the 
location decision. Hint: E.g. “1. 
Initiation, 2. Analysis,…” 
Paragraph type 
 
 
How would you classify this 
process? 
Tick-boxes: 
 
Linear 
 
Iterative 
 
… 
 
 
 
 
No. 
Survey question  
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion  
 
What was the initial goal of the 
location decision analysis to op-
timize in order to select the best 
alternative? 
Check-box type 
 
Cost advantage 
 
Value advantage 
 
A combination 
 
No goal was ini-
tially formally de-
fined 
 
Other – please 
specify 
H11, H20, H33 
To understand the 
goal of the location 
decision from the be-
ginning of the organi-
zation and what they 
seek to optimize. 
19.  
How many international alterna-
tive locations were generated 
initially and thereby, subjected 
to the analysis? Please enter a 
number. 
Text type. 
H6 
==PAGE:75==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
75 
20.  
If the location decision involved 
relocation or allocation of al-
ready existing activities, where 
were these activities located 
originally? Hint: Please state the 
name of the country. If none, 
leave blank. 
Text type 
 
21.  
How were the alternatives se-
lected/generated? Hint: If none 
of our suggestions fit your case, 
please specify in ‘other’. 
Check boxes 
 Selected based on 
previous firm experi-
ence 
 Suggested by external 
consultancy 
 Selected based on 
market trends 
 Comprehensive world-
wide analysis 
 Selected based on 
market sizes 
 Selected based on re-
source availability 
 Other – please specify 
H6 
22.  
Was Denmark considered as an 
alternative? 
Multiple choice type 
Yes, No 
 
23.  
Which of the following parts of 
the world were the alternatives 
located within? Hint: Please 
choose or more parts of the 
world to specify the parts of the 
world that were considered in 
the analysis. 
Check boxes 
 
EU-15 
 
EU member coun-
tries since 2004 
 
Europe outside of 
EU 
 
North America 
 
South and Central 
America 
 
Africa 
 
Asia 
 
Oceania 
 
24.  
How many of the alternative lo-
cations had existing interper-
sonal links to the firm previous 
to the location decision pro-
cess? Hint: Please enter a num-
ber. 
Text type. 
H10 
25.  
To what degree was a decision-
making team or task force team 
created and dedicated to the 
process? Hint: This question re-
fers to whether the firm had 
chosen specific employees to 
be responsible for the decision 
support, partly or not at all. The 
Multiple-choice type 
 A team was fully dedi-
cated to the process 
 A team was partly dedi-
cated to the process 
 No team was formally 
dedicated to the pro-
cess 
To understand how 
many companies ac-
tually dedicate a 
team for the process. 
If no team was for-
mally created, skip 
next section. 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
76 
latter refers to cases, where 
employees mainly had sporadic 
work related to the process. 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of question 
 
How would you describe the 
task of appointing the right 
people for the task? 
Multiple choice type 
 
1: straight forward, 
5: challenging 
H1 
 
26.  
To what degree did you utilize 
a cross-functional team to 
make the analysis? Hint: A 
cross-functional team is a 
group of people with different 
functional expertise working 
toward a common goal.  
Scale type 
1: uniform, 5: cross-func-
tional 
H14, H19 
The answers given in 
this question will be 
used to see how many 
firms make their loca-
tion decision on the 
strategic level and 
how many use a 
cross-functional team.  
27.  
From which of the following 
levels of your organization did 
the team consist of? 
Checkboxes type 
 
Strategical level  
 
Tactical level 
 
Operational level 
H19 
The answer given in 
this question will be 
used to see the distri-
bution of team mem-
bers from the three or-
ganizational levels 
28.  
To what degree was there 
conflicting interests within the 
team that resulted in the in-
crease in complexity? 
Scale-Type 
1: Low degree– 5: High de-
gree  
To see if there is any 
correlation between 
having a diverse team 
and complexity due to 
conflicting interest. 
 
What criteria do you consider 
when assembling a decision-
making team?  
Checkboxes type with fol-
lowing options: 
Know-how, Skills (analyti-
cal, data collection etc.), 
Experience, Previous en-
gagement in similar pro-
jects 
other 
If other, please state  
To have an idea what 
type of knowledge is 
vital according to them 
to make an optimal 
decision, and perhaps 
pinpoint if there are 
some knowledge that 
particularly influential 
in one industry and 
not the other 
 
29.  
In which manner does the 
team work and make deci-
Checkboxes type 
To have an idea of 
how the decision-
making team work to-
gether and eventually 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
77 
sions together? Hint: The an-
swers refers to the three 
types of team performances. 
Separated and independent 
contributions (pooled per-
formance) 
Specific tasks in a predeter-
mined order (sequential 
performance) 
Intense interaction and co-
ordination of efforts (recip-
rocal performance) 
Other – please specify 
 
see if one form of con-
ducting work is more 
efficient and effective. 
 
 
Elaboration of mentioned terms**  
Pooled performance: Group members make separate and independent contributions towards 
the group performance. Overall group performance is the sum of performance of the individual 
members. 
Sequential performance: Group members perform specific tasks in a predetermined order. 
The performance of one group member affects the work of others. 
Reciprocal performance: The work performed by each group member is fully dependent on the 
work performed by other group members. Group members have to share information, intensely 
interact with one another, and co-ordinate their efforts in order to achieve its goals. 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
 
What kind of information does 
the decision-making team con-
sider? 
Check boxes type  
 (list listing options 
must be generated) 
 
 
How does the decision-making 
team gather the information 
needed? 
Checkboxes type with 
other function 
Survey; Interviews; Re-
search; Traveling and in-
vestigating; other 
 
30.  
How was the quality of the infor-
mation gathered in general 
across the alternatives? 
Scale type 
H9 
31.  
To what degree did the quality of 
information and data vary from 
country to country? 
Scale type 
H9 
32.  
How did the team consider the 
process of gathering satisfactory 
information? 
Scale type  
1-5, 1 being easy, 5 being 
difficult. 
H1 
==PAGE:78==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
78 
 
Between quantitative and qualita-
tive information, where did you 
focus most on gathering infor-
mation?  
Scale type 
1: Quantitative, 5: Qualita-
tive 
H20, H22, H26 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
33.  
How would you overall rate the de-
gree of sophistication and depth of 
the location decision analysis con-
ducted by your firm?  
Scale type 
1: Low, 5: High 
H36, H37, H36 
34.  
In your opinion, what degree of as-
sumptions did you feel your firm 
made relative to the entire infor-
mation gathering subjected to the 
analysis? 
Scale type  
1-5, 1 Low, 5 High 
 
35.  
Were there any specific 
tools/frameworks that you applied 
during your analysis? If yes, which 
one(s)? 
Paragraph type 
 
36.  
Did you consider the amount of re-
sources needed to leverage know-
how, strengths, and capabilities to 
the different alternative locations?  
Multiple-choice type 
 
Yes 
 
No 
 
I don’t know 
H32 
37.  
To what degree did you incorpo-
rate the capabilities, resources 
and limitations of your firm into the 
analysis in order to maximize the 
suitability of the location and your 
firm? Hint: The degree to which a 
firm considers its own organiza-
tional strengths and limitations in 
terms compared to what is ade-
quate and suitable to the firm con-
sidered.  
Scale type 
1: Not at all 
5: High degree 
H32, H41 
38.  
To what degree did you incorpo-
rate a sustainability perspective 
into the analysis? Hint: By use of a 
related framework, like the triple 
bottom line, which refers to three 
parts: social, environmental and 
economical. 
Scale type: 
1: Not at al  
5: High degree 
H27 
39.  
To what degree do you feel that 
the decision process becomes 
more complex when considering 
Scale type 
H17 
==PAGE:79==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
79 
qualitative factors in addition to the 
quantitative? 
1: Does not add com-
plexity, 5: Adds a lot of 
complexity 
40.  
Did you conduct a risk analysis? 
Multiple choice type 
Yes, No, I don’t know 
 
 
If yes, are there any frequent risks 
that are occasionally ranked high 
Paragraph type 
too open and no hy-
pothesis to test 
41.  
What was the degree of stake-
holder integration in the analytical 
process? Hint: The integration of 
viewpoints from different internal 
and external stakeholders. 
Scale type 
1-5 (1: Low, 5: High) 
H15, H19 
42.  
Did you utilize any external 
expertise?  
Checkboxes type (with 
other option)  
Consultants, Local 
agents, local Partners, 
Other 
If other, please state  
To see how many 
firms use external 
expertise and even-
tually see if those 
who use them face 
fewer complexities  
43.  
How structured did you feel the 
analysis process of the location 
decision was? 
Scale type 
1-5 (1: very unstructured, 
5:very structured)  
 
 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
44.  
Do you apply any tool/framework 
for comparing and evaluating the 
different alternative?  
Checkboxes type with 
other option  
Analytical hierarchy pro-
cess (AHP) 
Multi-criteria decision 
analysis (MCDA) 
Cost-benefit analysis 
Other – please specify 
H25 
45.  
How was the evaluation of alter-
natives balanced between the 
quantitative and the qualitative 
analysis? Hint: 1 for a purely 
quantitative measure of the alter-
native, 5 for a purely qualitative, 3 
for an even weighing of the two. 
Scale type 
1: Quantitative, 5: Quali-
tative 
H16, H20, H22, H26 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
80 
 
In brief, what was the reason for 
balancing the qualitative and 
quantitative analysis like this? 
Paragraph text. 
H22, H26 
 
The factors affecting/influencing International location decisions can be categorized into 6 main 
factors, which include;  
1) Cost 
2) Labor and social characteristics 
3) Infrastructure 
4) Politics and regulations 
5) Economic 
6) Markets and resources. 
 (The table of factors are located in the appendix) 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
46.  
How was the emphasis on the 
different categories below dis-
tributed in the decision analysis 
and support? 
Multiple choice grid (with 
percentages of 5 pct inter-
vals) 
1) Cost 
2) Labor and social charac-
teristics 
3) Infrastructure 
4) Politics and regulations 
5) Economic 
6) Markets and resources. 
H12, H26, H29, 
H41 
47.  
Please check the following fac-
tors which affected the decision 
analysis and support from the 
subcategories. Hint: If you've 
put 0% in the above question as 
the importance, please leave 
blank, else choose factors listed 
or 'other'. 
List of check boxes for each 
of the following categories 
(6 questions in total): 
1) Cost 
2) Labor and social charac-
teristics 
3) Infrastructure 
4) Politics and regulations 
5) Economic 
6) Markets and resources. 
 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
81 
 
To what degree do you gener-
ally feel the factors of location 
decisions change over time? 
Scale factor  
1: very rarely 
5: very often 
H12, H28, H30 
48.  
Did any factors change signifi-
cantly from the time of the deci-
sion until the time it was imple-
mented? If so, which categories 
were affected? 
Checkbox type 
 
No changes. 
 
Category 1 
 
… 
H21, H28, H30 
49.  
Did the analysis account for a 
dynamic change in factors over 
time? 
Multiple-choice type 
 
Yes 
 
No 
 
I don’t know 
H30 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
 
Who made the final location de-
cision? 
Multiple-choice type 
 
The board of direc-
tors 
 
The CEO 
 
a vice president 
 
A manufacturing 
buyer 
 
A member of the 
advisory staff 
 
Other – please 
specify 
H39 
50.  
Which country did you finally se-
lect to place your production fa-
cility in? 
Text type 
H40 
51.  
In what part of the world is the 
country located? 
Multiple-choice type 
 
EU-15 
 
EU member coun-
tries since 2004 
 
Europe outside of 
EU 
 
North America 
 
South and Central 
America 
 
Africa 
 
Asia 
 
Oceania 
H40 
The parts of the 
world are listed ac-
cording to what is 
used by Danmarks 
Statistik. 
52.  
Was this country the same deci-
sion that was recommended 
from the analysis? 
Multiple-choice 
 
Yes, No 
 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
82 
53.  
Has your firm previously made a 
location decision in the same 
country or part of the world? 
Checkboxes type 
 
Yes, in the same 
country 
 
Yes, in the same 
part of the world, 
but outside the 
country 
 
No, never before 
H40 
54.  
What were the expected bene-
fits at the time of the final loca-
tion decision?  
Checkboxes type 
1) Increase in production 
capacity 
2) Increase in production 
quality 
3) Additional profit 
4) Business expansion 
5) Better service to cus-
tomers  
6) Increase in stockhold-
ers’ dividend 
7) Cost reduction 
8) Decrease in manufac-
turing lead-time 
9) Other – please specify 
H4 
Consider adding 
more options. 
55.  
To what degree did gut feeling, 
intuition and personal prefer-
ences of the decision maker(s) 
factor in the final decision? Hint: 
This refers the subjective influ-
ence from the decision maker in 
the final decision, which goes 
outside the analysis.  
Scale type (1-5), 1: None, 
5: a lot 
H14, H37, H36, 
H38, H41 
56.  
Has the final decision been im-
plemented? 
Multiple-choice 
 
Yes 
 
No 
Yes: Send to Part 
5a 
No: Send to Part 5b 
 
 
Post assessment refers to the period after implementing the decision. 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
57.  
To what degree has your firm 
conducted post assessment of 
the location decision to ana-
lyze if it has fulfilled the ex-
pected projections? 
Scale type 
0: None 
1: Low degree 
5: High degree 
H42, H44 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
83 
58.  
If you answered “none” or “low” 
in the above question about 
post assessment, what has 
been the reason for this? Hint: 
If you answered any other op-
tion, leave blank. 
Checkboxes type 
 
Lack of time/down 
prioritized 
 
Difficulty of collecting 
data 
 
Too many resources 
required 
 
Never intended as 
part of the project 
 
Lack of synchroniza-
tion in data systems 
 
Lack of mutual un-
derstanding of im-
portance with local 
management 
 
Other – please spec-
ify 
H44, H45 
 
59.  
How do you overall consider 
the location decision? 
Scale type 
1: A failure, 5: A success 
H35 
60.  
How do you define success in 
the context of the location deci-
sion? 
Paragraph type 
 
61.  
Did you formally define suc-
cess criteria before executing 
the location decision? 
Multiple choice type 
Yes, No 
 
62.  
Looking back on the location 
decision-making process, how 
were the efforts of the firm dis-
tributed among the following 
tasks? Please make sure they 
sum to 100%. 
Multiples choice grid 
[0%;100%] intervals of 5%. 
Tasks: 
 
Generating/identify-
ing alternatives 
 
Scoping and organiz-
ing process  
 
Analyzing current 
situation, needs, and 
resources in the firm 
 
Analyzing alterna-
tives 
 
Evaluating and mak-
ing the decision 
H13, H6, H32, H35 
63.  
Did you allocate any KPI’s to 
assess implemented location 
decision on an ongoing basis? 
Hint: If yes, please list some, 
else, leave blank. 
Paragraph type 
H42, H44 
64.  
How often do you re-evaluate 
your location decision? Hint: 
By re-evaluation we mean all 
kinds of post assessments you 
have done after the decision. 
Multiple-choice type 
 
Every month 
 
Every quarter 
 
Every year 
 
Every 2 years 
 
Every 5 years 
 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
84 
 
Never 
 
Other – please spec-
ify 
65.  
Were there any hidden or un-
expected cost you experienced 
after implementing the deci-
sion, and if so, how much extra 
cost did that account for? (Hint: 
If your firm was so fortunate to 
have had lower cost than ex-
pected, please specify that un-
der ‘other’. 
Multiple-choice type 
 
None, 0% 
 
2% 
 
5% 
 
10% 
 
15% 
 
20% 
 
30% 
 
40% 
 
50% 
 
Other – please spec-
ify 
H23, H31, H35, 
H46 
66.  
Did you experience any of the 
following mistakes made dur-
ing the location decision pro-
cess? Hint: Please either tick 
‘none’ or one or more mistakes 
from the list. 
Checkboxes type  
 
Wrong human judg-
ment 
 
Judgment made on 
poor analysis 
 
Limited analysis 
scope 
 
Unbalanced analysis 
 
Inaccurate modeling  
 
Inaccurate assump-
tions 
 
Types of costs 
 
Other – please spec-
ify 
 
No, none 
H24, H34, H35 
67.  
How long was the implementa-
tion process from the decision 
was taken till the facility was 
fully functional? In months or 
years. 
Text type 
H43 
 
 
 
 
No. 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of ques-
tion 
 
How was the efforts of the firm 
distributed among the following 
tasks during the location decision-
making process? 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
85 
 
Unfortunately, you're not eligible to this survey 
Don't worry about it, you can still help! If you know someone in your company or elsewhere who 
has been involved in the process of making a location decision, please send them this survey 
link and help us achieve our research goal and make a positive impact on the subject. We greatly 
appreciate any help as such. 
Link: http://goo.gl/forms/dkhYdaCFzZ  
If you're interested in the results of our research, you can write down your e-mail below and get 
a copy once we're finished. 
Thank you and goodbye! 
 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of question 
Would you like to receive 
the results of this study 
and thesis or other docu-
ments? Hint: Tick the doc-
uments you’re interested 
in, leave blank if none. 
Check boxes types 
 
Full thesis incl. articles 
(late June) 
 
Article #1: based on this 
survey (late June) 
 
Article #2: improve-
ments of location deci-
sions (late June) 
 
Final publications when 
accepted by peer-review 
and published (approx. 
end of this year or be-
ginning of next year) 
 
Survey documentation 
(incl. references – avail-
able now) 
 
If you marked any of the 
above check boxes, please 
leave your contact infor-
mation  
Hint: Name, e-mail, tele-
phone.  
Paragraph text 
In order to get clarification if 
some answered might be 
insufficiently answered or 
to do some follow-ups if the 
firm seems to be interesting 
or is willing to do some fur-
ther work with us 
 
 
Thanks for your participation and patience. We greatly appreciate it! Since this is our first major 
academic study, we are open to criticism and suggestions for improvement of future studies. 
 
Survey question 
Question type 
Purpose of question 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
86 
Do you have comments, cri-
tique or suggestions to this 
survey? 
Paragraph type 
 
Would you like to contribute 
further if it becomes rele-
vant? 
Check boxes: 
 
Yes, I’d like to answer 
follow-up questions 
 
Yes, I’d like to do a per-
sonal interview (phone 
or in person) 
 
Yes, I’d like to host a 
company visit to dis-
cuss location decisions. 
 
Would you like to receive 
the results of this study and 
thesis or other documents? 
Hint: Tick the documents 
you’re interested in, leave 
blank if none. 
Check boxes types 
 
Full thesis incl. articles 
(late June) 
 
Article #1: based on 
this survey (late June) 
 
Article #2: improve-
ments of location deci-
sions (late June) 
 
Final publications when 
accepted by peer-re-
view and published 
(approx. end of this 
year or beginning of 
next year) 
 
Survey documentation 
(incl. references – 
available now) 
 
If you marked any of the 
above check boxes, please 
leave your contact infor-
mation  
Hint: Name, e-mail, tele-
phone.  
Paragraph text 
In order to get clarification if 
some answered might be 
insufficiently answered or to 
do some follow-ups if the 
firm seems to be interesting 
or is willing to do some fur-
ther work with us 
Thank you once again for your contribution to our research. If needed, you’re welcome to contact 
us on e-mail: 
Ebou Touray: s093515@student.dtu.dk 
Andreas Schmidt: s103423@student.dtu.dk  
 
 
Bruch, J., Wiktorsson, M., Bellgran, M., 2014. On the production location decision: a case study 
on process and criteria. Int. J. Manuf. Res. 9, 74–91. doi:10.1504/ijmr.2014.059600 
Brush, T.H., Maritan, C.A., Karnani, A., 1999. The Plant Location Decision in Multinational Man-
ufacturing Firms: An Empirical Analysis of International Business and Manufacturing 
Strategy Perspectives. Prod. Oper. Manag. 8. 
Dunning, J.H., 1998. Location Enterprise: the Multinational Neglected. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 40, 45–
66. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8490024 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
87 
Hoffman, J.J., Schniederjans, M.J., 1994. A two-stage model for structuring global facility site 
selection decisions. The case of the brewing industry. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 14, 79–
96. doi:10.1108/01443579410056065 
Kalantari, A.H., 2013. Facility Location Selection for Global Manufacturing (Theses and Disser-
tations). University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. 
Kodali, R., Routroy, S., 2006. Location in Competitive Supply Chain. J. Adv. Manuf. Syst. 5, 89–
110. 
MacCarthy, B.L., Atthirawong, W., 2003. Factors affecting location decisions in international op-
erations – a Delphi study. 
Porter, M.E., Rivkin, J.W., 2012. Choosing the United States. Harv. Bus. Rev. 90, 80. 
Steenhuis, H.-J., De Bruijn, E.J., 2004. Assessing manufacturing location. Prod. Plan. Control 
15, 786–795. doi:10.1080/09537280412331309217 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
88 
The list of industries1 below is derived from the UN Statistics Division classification of industries 
(ISIC rev. 4). This is the list where the EU classification (NACE rev. 2) is derived from and even-
tually, where the Danish classification (DB07) is derived from. Firms are obligated to choose one 
main industry and have the possibility of choosing one or more secondary industries as well. 
Hence, all Danish firms will be registered in one industry or another and thereby, we ensure 
correct naming delete the possibility of misinterpretation. 
 
A - Agriculture, forestry, and fishing 
 
B - Mining and quarrying 
 
C – Manufacturing 
o 
10 - Manufacture of food products 
o 
11 - Manufacture of beverages 
o 
12 - Manufacture of tobacco products 
o 
13 - Manufacture of textiles 
o 
14 - Manufacture of wearing apparel 
o 
15 - Manufacture of leather and related products 
o 
16 - Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and cork, except furniture; 
manufacture of articles of straw and plaiting materials 
o 
17 - Manufacture of paper and paper products 
o 
18 - Printing and reproduction of recorded media 
o 
19 - Manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products 
o 
20 - Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products 
o 
21 - Manufacture of basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical prepa-
rations 
o 
22 - Manufacture of rubber and plastics products 
o 
23 - Manufacture of other non-metallic mineral products 
o 
24 - Manufacture of basic metals 
o 
25 - Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and equip-
ment 
o 
26 - Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products 
o 
27 - Manufacture of electrical equipment 
o 
28 - Manufacture of machinery and equipment n.e.c. 
o 
29 - Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers 
o 
30 - Manufacture of other transport equipment 
o 
31 - Manufacture of furniture 
o 
32 - Other manufacturing 
o 
33 - Repair and installation of machinery and equipment 
 
D - Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply 
 
E - Water supply; sewerage, waste management, and remediation activities 
 
F – Construction 
 
G - Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles 
 
H - Transportation and storage 
 
I - Accommodation and food service activities 
 
J - Information and communication 
 
K - Financial and insurance activities 
 
L - Real estate activities 
 
M - Professional, scientific and technical activities 
 
N - Administrative and support service activities 
 
O - Public administration and defense; compulsory social security 
 
P – Education 
 
Q - Human health and social work activities 
 
R - Arts, entertainment, and recreation 
                                                     
1 UN Statistics Division: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cr/registry/regcst.asp?Cl=27  
==PAGE:89==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
89 
 
S - Other service activities 
 
T - Activities of households as employers; undifferentiated goods- and services-produc-
ing activities of households for own use 
 
U - Activities of extraterritorial organizations and bodies 
 
Cost 
Labor and Social characteristics 
☐ Labor cost   
☐ Trend in labor cost  
☐ Transportation Cost  
☐ Energy cost 
☐ Management cost 
☐ Construction cost  
☐ Coordination cost 
 
☐ Availability of labor  
☐ Education and/or experience/skills 
☐ Labor Union flexibility 
☐ Motivation  
☐ Attitudes towards work 
☐ Culture and norms 
☐ Standard of living 
☐ Religion 
☐ Language 
☐ Crime rate 
Infrastructure 
Politics and Regulations 
☐ Existing modes of Transportation: roads, Air-
ports, railroads and Sea ports 
☐ Reliability and quality of transportation modes 
☐ Availability of utilities (water supply, power 
supply, water treatment) 
☐ Reliability and quality of utilities  
☐ Telecommunication systems 
 
 
☐ Stability (historical and current) 
☐ Consistency of policies 
☐ Government attitude towards FDI 
☐ Government structure 
☐ Legal system 
☐ Compensation and Insurance laws   
☐ Environmental regulations 
Economic 
Markets and Resources 
☐ Tax structures and policies 
☐ Financial incentives from government 
☐ Strength of currency against US dollar or Eu-
ropean Euro 
☐ National debt   
☐ Exchange rate 
☐ Inflation rate 
☐ National bank interest rates  
☐ GDP 
 
☐ Market size 
☐ Proximity to customer  
☐ Purchasing power of market (income per 
capita) 
☐ Proximity to competition 
☐ Proximity to raw materials 
☐ Service quality and reliability of suppliers  
 
 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
90 
 
 
 
 
Survey  
Documenta-
tion 
International Location Decision in Danish Manu-
facturing Firms  
 
 
Ebou Touray & Andreas S. T. Schmidt 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
91 
Table of Contents 
Addressing the Research Gap and Assisting Practitioners ................................................................ 3 
Exploratory Survey Research and Literature Review ....................................................................... 3 
Insights to Danish Manufacturing Firms ........................................................................................ 3 
The Scope Model and Adequate Application of Theory ................................................................... 3 
1 
Introduction
 
2 
Scope
 
2.1 
Purpose of thesis ................................................................................................................. 8 
2.2 
Research questions.............................................................................................................. 8 
2.3 
Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 8 
3 
Article 1: The Empirical Study
 
4 
Article 2: Framework for location decisions
 
5 
Conclusions
 
6 
Acknowledgements
 
7 
References
 
Appendix A – Survey Questionnaire
 
1 
Short Survey Information
 
 
Introductory notes ............................................................................................................. 67 
 
Check question – qualify for survey ................................................................................... 67 
2 
Elaborated Survey information
 
 
Context of survey and its purpose ....................................................................................... 68 
 
Definitions and scope ........................................................................................................ 68 
 
Last notes before getting started ......................................................................................... 69 
3 
Part 1: Practical Information
 
4 
Part 2: The Decision Process
 
 
Part 2.1 Motivation for initiating the decision process .......................................................... 73 
 
Part 2.2: Mapping of Firm Process ..................................................................................... 73 
 
Part 2.3: Organization and scoping ..................................................................................... 74 
 
Part 2.4: The Dedicated Team ............................................................................................ 76 
 
Part 2.5: The Information Gathering Process ....................................................................... 77 
 
Part 2.6: The Analytical Process ......................................................................................... 78 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
92 
 
Part 2.7: The Evaluation Process ........................................................................................ 79 
5 
Part 3: The Factors
 
6 
Part 4: The Final Decision
 
7 
Part 5a: Post Assessment
 
8 
Part 5b: Post Assessment Planning
 
9 
Page Information for Non-Eligibles
 
10 
Finishing notes
 
11 
References (Not included in the survey)
 
Appendix
 
Appendix B – Survey Documentation
 
1 
Brief Introduction
 
2 
Purpose of Survey
 
3 
Scope and Target
 
3.1 
International location decision ........................................................................................... 94 
3.2 
Danish Manufacturing Firms ............................................................................................. 96 
4 
Hypotheses
 
4.1 
Company situation before decision process ......................................................................... 97 
4.2 
Scoping project and generating alternatives ......................................................................... 97 
4.3 
Decision analysis process .................................................................................................. 98 
4.4 
The decision ..................................................................................................................... 99 
4.5 
Implementation and Post-assessment ................................................................................ 100 
5 
Survey Structure and Content
 
5.1 
Information for survey respondent .................................................................................... 101 
5.2 
Part 1: Practical information ............................................................................................ 101 
5.3 
Part 2: The decision analysis process ................................................................................ 101 
5.4 
Part 3: The factors........................................................................................................... 101 
5.5 
Part 4: The final decision ................................................................................................. 101 
5.6 
Part 5: Post assessment .................................................................................................... 101 
5.7 
Finishing notes ............................................................................................................... 101 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
93 
6 
Medium of Survey
 
6.1 
Alternatives .................................................................................................................... 102 
6.2 
Choice of medium .......................................................................................................... 102 
7 
Pre-sending Evaluation
 
7.1 
Deleted questions – information we find ourselves ............................................................ 103 
8 
Study Population and Communication Strategy
 
8.1 
Population selection ........................................................................................................ 104 
8.2 
The ideal survey respondent ............................................................................................ 104 
8.3 
Communication strategy .................................................................................................. 104 
9 
References
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
94 
 
This paper serves to document the survey conducted in relation to the master thesis in the MSc 
program in Engineering Management at the Technical University of Denmark, by Ebou Touray 
(s093515) and Andreas S. T. Schmidt (s103423). 
 
In short, the purpose of this survey is to understand the decision making process behind interna-
tional location decisions in Danish manufacturing firms.  
More specifically, we want to use the survey to investigate:  
1) The type of industry and market Danish firms conducting manufacturing location deci-
sions operate in and the type of products they offer; 
2) What initiated the consideration and what drove the decision;  
3) What the decision analysis and support consist of;  
4) How the decision analysis was performed and the degree of formalization; 
5) How the final decision was taken and how it was subsequently assessed. 
According to many of our sources (Bellgran et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 2014; Ellram, 2013; Gray, 
2013; Porter and Rivkin, 2012; Tate, 2014), there are reasons to believe that most location deci-
sions are flawed and executed in an unstructured manner. Despite the extensive impact the de-
cision has on the company’s value stream and its business as a whole, it’s often rushed, based 
on gut feelings, and rule-of-thumb simplifications (Arlbjørn et al., 2013; Bellgran et al., 2013; 
Bruch et al., 2014; Lee, 2014; Porter and Rivkin, 2012). 
Consequently, we will strive to learn from both successful and non-successful cases, by pinpoint-
ing factors that have the greatest impacts on success and subsume these into industries and 
types of products to make final recommendations and suggest various frameworks that can en-
hance the success rate of manufacturing location decisions. 
 
This section endeavors to elaborate and give a comprehensive understanding of how our project 
is framed and explicitly specify the firms that are to be considered in our survey and research. 
Critical to any academic research that seeks to build and test theories about phenomena is a firm 
foundation anchored in good definitions (Wacker, 2004). Therefore, we define exactly what we 
mean by both ‘manufacturing location decision’ and ‘Danish firm’ in the following sections. 
The starting point and perspective in our definitions and our study as a whole, is the decision-
making authority, i.e. the group of people who has had the main responsibility of the decision 
analysis and the main authority to actually make the decision. 
 
There have been many references and definitions to this phenomenon, each with their ad-
vantages and disadvantages. We provide our own definitions in subsection 3.1.1 and 3.2.1, which 
are designed to improve the accuracy of our study. 
 
An international location decision is a decision made by a firm, to pinpoint 
the geographic location of a partly or fully owned facility from a set of inter-
national alternatives. 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
95 
First, the definition 3.1.1 emphasizes the international consideration of the decision, but doesn’t 
demand an international outcome, i.e. location outside the country. This means, even the deci-
sion of locating a facility in Denmark for a Danish firm can be considered an international location 
decision in the context of our study, if other country locations were considered.  Second, we 
stress the necessity of having at least part ownership of the located facility, which means that a 
fully outsourced activity is not of interest. Third, the decision is made by a manufacturing firm, i.e. 
a firm registered in a manufacturing industry. 
 
Figure 2: Illustration of the two main decision dimensions with their respective options and inclusion in this 
study. 
Figure 2 illustrates the dimensions of the manufacturing location decision, and their respective 
immediate options. When a firm decides to locate a manufacturing facility, they have the following 
options regarding ownership:  
1) Take full ownership of the facility, otherwise known as a foreign direct investment (FDI) 
(Dunning, 1998); 
2) Take no ownership by outsourcing the task completely, or; 
3) An in-between solution with either a local investment partner or a hybrid outsourcing, i.e. 
taking part ownership. 
Similarly, there are three main options regarding the location dimension: 
1) Same country as the decision makers, i.e. onshoring or reshoring. 
2) Nearby the location of the decision makers, but in a different country. 
3) A far away location relative the decision maker, typically on a different continent. 
In this study, we adhere the shoring terms to the location dimension. 
 
The motivation and reasoning for inclusions and omissions in this study, which are consequences 
of the definition design. 
Focus on manufacturing firms:  
1. The proportion of companies who at some point face a facility location problem is signif-
icantly higher for manufacturing firms than for most other industries. This means we have 
a higher chance of getting a useful survey response from our population. 
2. We expect to see more commonalities between the location problems of manufacturing 
firms than the location problems in total, across industries. With less divergence, we will 
be more likely to see patterns and be able to understand the current process and pinpoint 
the aspects that can be improved. 
The international consideration required: 
1. In literature and in discussions with companies and other academics, we’ve seen a great 
deal of misunderstanding about what exact problem we’re referring to. To make sure it’s 
International 
Location Decision
Location
Onshoring/ 
Reshoring
Nearshoring
Offshoring (far)
Ownership
Full ownership
Part ownership
No ownership
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
96 
clear that we are not looking to solve the site selection problem within e.g. western Jut-
land, we require international alternatives in the decision analysis. 
2. The purpose of understanding the manufacturing location decision process is not just to 
be able to improve the success rate for manufacturing firms, but as well to get a deeper 
understanding of why facilities and its associated jobs move from one country to the 
other. For this reason, the decision processes we study must have included the consid-
eration of international alternatives. 
Consideration of the ownership dimension, but exclusion of complete outsourcing:  
1. The main issue subject to this study is the location dimension. Nonetheless, the owner-
ship dimension is often embedded in the same problem since outsourcing often is con-
sidered in the same situations as location decisions with full ownership. However, despite 
this similarity, alternatives in the outsourcing problem tend to be more linked to the spe-
cific vendor than its location. Additionally, the amount of investment and thus commit-
ment to the decision is often significantly different in outsourcing and for this reason, we 
exclude the option of taking no ownership. 
2. Some outsourcing activities, however, may include large investments and commitment, 
which gives the company part direct ownership or a hybrid version, where future owner-
ship is an option in the outsourcing contract. 
 
 
A Danish manufacturing firm in the context of this study is a firm or depart-
ment of a firm, which is located geographically within the borders of Den-
mark and has the main authority to make an international location decision. 
It is registered for activities in a public manufacturing industry. 
Thus, the firm doesn’t necessarily have to be founded in Denmark to be considered Danish in 
this context. We’re interested in what drives Danish location decisions, i.e. decisions made by 
groups or departments of people, geographically located in Denmark. An example could be a 
company with headquarters in an overseas location and has a decentralized organizational struc-
ture, which allows a Danish department to be the primary decision makers of an international 
relocation. 
 
1. Understanding the relocation patterns of Danish firms in order to truly understand reshor-
ing, i.e. the repatriation of manufacturing to Denmark, and offshoring, i.e. the relocation 
of manufacturing from Denmark to a foreign location. The subject has been of special 
interest in recent decades in popular media, first as jobs left the country and now, as 
hopes are rising for them to come back. 
2. Denmark is an extreme country in regards to level of operational costs of a business and 
therefore, interesting to investigate. The country has one of the highest level of labor cost 
and energy cost in the world, e.g. highest cost of electricity2. 
3. Easy access (low-hanging fruits) from geographic location of study (Technical University 
of Denmark) 
4. Scarce research both generally on the manufacturing location decision and no documen-
tation found at all for the location decision process in Danish firms. 
                                                     
2 Governmental study in the UK: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/international-do-
mestic-energy-prices 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
97 
 
In this section a series of hypotheses have been synthesized based on various insights gained 
from an extensive literature review regarding international location decision. These hypotheses 
will base the foundation of our study and survey questions. 
Danish firms are subjected to the following hypotheses. Nonetheless, the descriptions are often 
taken from another context (the source in brackets) and not entirely transformed to our study. 
However, their intention is already to relate to the context of this study. 
 
H1. 
Finding the right information (quality) and people (experience) to conduct the location 
decision is a problem for firms (MacCarthy and Atthirawong, 2003) 
H2. 
Firms are motivated to conduct international location decision due to one or more of the 
following reasons: Resource seeking, Market seeking, Efficiency seeking and Strategic 
seeking (Dunning, 1998). 
H3. 
A production location decision can relate to different settings, such as 1) the search for 
a new production location, 2) the decision to improve manufacturing capabilities, 3) the 
decision to relocate production, 4) the decision to reallocate production and 5) the deci-
sion to close production (Bellgran et al., 2013).  
H4. 
Firms seek a suitable location to provide favorable contributions to its market competi-
tiveness. These may include 1) increase in production capacity, 2) additional profit, 3) 
business expansion, 4) better service to customers, 5) increase in stockholders’ wealth, 
6) cost reduction, 7) decrease in manufacturing lead-time (Jungthirapanich and Benja-
min, 1995). 
H5. 
Location decisions become even more significant with the emergence of efficient supply 
chain management as an important frontier of competition (Kodali and Routroy, 2006). 
 
H6. 
The generation of alternatives to the decision is often not balanced with the level of detail 
in the subsequent comparison analysis. In other words, the analysis phase of comparing 
alternatives often assumes that no superior alternative exists, although often limited in-
vestigation was initially conducted to explore this question (Lee, 2014). Test: How much 
effort is put on generating alternatives? 
H7. 
Industries can be defined somewhere between the poles of integrated and island (iso-
lated) industries. The more integrated, the more dependent it is on the country as a whole 
(education system, infrastructure, etc.) and vice versa, the isolated, the less dependent 
it is on the country as a whole and more of the specifics of the industry (Steenhuis and 
De Bruijn, 2004). 
H8. 
Business activities can be distinguished in three types: customer-tied activities, re-
source-tied activities and non-tied mobile activities (Porter and Rivkin, 2012). 
H9. 
The degree of significant economic, marketing and other information required for plan-
ning varies a great deal amongst countries in availability, depth and reliability, thus mak-
ing the selection of alternatives complex (Dymsza, 1972). 
H10. 
The options considered (or alternatives) are limited by existing interpersonal links and 
knowledge rather than universally unlimited (Kinkel and Maloca, 2009). 
H11. 
The goal of a location decision analysis is to decide if a new location provides more cost 
advantages than the current one or which of several alternative locations provides the 
most cost advantages (Windmark and Andersson, 2016).  
Different countries have different methods of gathering various information of necessity that are 
vital towards an optimal decision making. Furthermore, the profoundness of the analysis and its 
reliability (source) may vary significantly. This will must definitely add complexity, since the base-
line upon which the various information/factors are to be compared will be difficult to compare. 
H12. 
Firms must deal with multiple elements such as political, social, cultural, legal and eco-
nomic and all these elements have different rates of change (Dymsza, 1972) thus making 
the decision process much more complex. 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
98 
 
  
Figure 3: Generic location decision analysis process 
H13. 
A decision analysis process typically consists of five phases as illustrated on Figure 3. 
This is inspired by Windmark and Andersson (2016). These can briefly be described as: 
P1) Initiation - Establish motives and goals for changing the manufacturing footprint. P2) 
Scoping - Establish a project organization and plan for executing the relocation project 
and roughly estimate the costs and benefits. P3) Current situation - Analyze the current 
footprint and the requirements for and consequences of changing the footprint. P4) Al-
ternatives analysis - Establish and analyze various location alternatives. P5) Location 
decision - Prepare to select the most suitable production location. 
H14. 
Firms conduct location decisions on a strategic level by means of utilizing a homogenous 
team (non-cross functional), who base their judgments on gut feeling and experience 
(Bruch et al., 2014).  
H15. 
Including too many stakeholders can increase the complexity and effectiveness of the 
decision making process due to conflicting interests, while including too few can reduce 
the accuracy of the decision as obvious challenges related to certain functions of the 
organization are overlooked (Bellgran et al., 2013). 
H16. 
Most firms justify their reasoning behind a location decision based on quantifiable eco-
nomic factors (Arauzo-Carod et al., 2010). 
H17. 
The degree of complexity regarding a location decision is based on the number of qual-
itative factors considered alongside quantitative once in the analysis. 
It is a fact that international location decisions are based on the analysis of both quantitative and 
qualitative factors, thus making the decision making process complex. This can be due to the 
fact that their units can’t be combined in a manner that makes complete sense. When conducting 
an international location decision, a lot more qualitative factors are needed for consideration thus 
making the decision process a lot more complex. 
H18. 
Most firm have no formal decision process, but some develop a non-articulated process 
to follow (Bellgran et al., 2013). 
H19. 
Top management often make the decision without understanding the implications on 
operational capabilities (Bellgran et al., 2013; Bruch et al., 2014; Steenhuis and De 
Bruijn, 2004). 
H20. 
It is not sufficient to have a traditional one-dimensional cost minimization approach; ra-
ther a holistic approach when making production location decisions is needed (Bellgran 
et al., 2013). 
H21. 
Initial assumptions and conditions regarding location decisions often change due to the 
amount of years it takes to implement (Brush et al., 1999) 
H22. 
Many factors are not easily quantifiable – these often relate to different kinds of risk and 
the difficulties of operating a facility in an unknown environment (Gray, 2013; Steenhuis 
and De Bruijn, 2004). Many firms therefore tend to neglect them and focus more on the 
quantifiable factors, as the qualitative can’t fit directly into calculations. 
H23. 
Hidden costs are often overlooked and may be one of the primary reasons why many 
companies are ineffective at making location decisions. 
H24. 
Four points are often wrong with the location decision analysis: 1) limited analysis scope, 
2) inaccurate modelling (e.g. treating coordination costs as transaction costs), 3) inaccu-
rate assumptions, 4) types of costs (Lee, 2014). 
H25. 
Many popular location consultants listed by Global Direct Investment Solutions use the 
multi-criteria technique of directly assigning weights and scores and combining them in 
a linear additive fashion to get a ﬁnal rank (Viswanadham and Kameshwaran, 2007). 
Hypothesis here is that most companies do not use scoring systems to combine tangible 
and intangibles, quantitative and qualitative factors, such as AHP, MCDA, etc. 
H26. 
Firms devaluate the importance of qualitative factors such as social, cultural, quality of 
life and their impact on operational level when making manufacturing location decisions 
(Bruch et al., 2014; Brush et al., 1999; Zegordi et al., 2009). 
P1: Initiation
P2: Scoping
P3: Current 
situation
P4: 
Alternatives 
analysis
P5: Location 
decision
==PAGE:99==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
99 
H27. 
Chen et al. (2014) suggests a use of the triple bottom line for evaluating alternatives and 
subsequently, measuring performance. The awareness of sustainability in the location 
decision for companies is, however, unknown. We suggest a low awareness as this phe-
nomenon isn’t perpetrated in many publications. 
H28. 
Factors of the location decision are dynamic and change over time (Ellram, 2013). 
H29. 
In practice, offshoring location decisions are often based on labor cost (Kinkel and 
Maloca, 2009). 
H30. 
Firms have historically looked at their manufacturing locations in too static a manner. 
They have not considered the impact of long-term changes, such as labor and fuel cost 
increases and changing consumer demand (Tate, 2014). 
H31. 
Companies are increasingly moving beyond cost savings to consider impact on total 
cost, profitability, and customer value creation when determining preferred regions for 
manufacturing locations (Ellram, 2013). 
H32. 
Location decisions are essentially about suitability; the characteristics of a firm must suit 
the characteristics particular to a location and particular site. A suitable location for one 
firm may not be suitable for another. This is (still poorly) illustrated on Figure 4. Yet, most 
reasoning for choosing a location omits the firm side and focuses on the characteristics 
of the location. 
 
Figure 4: The Atom Model: Location suitability is a two-way street 
 
 
H33. 
Firms conduct location decisions in order to enhance competitiveness and/or come 
closer to their customers (Kodali and Routroy, 2006) 
H34. 
There can be two types of decision making errors i.e. behavioral and non-behavioral 
error. 
H35. 
There is reason to believe both offshoring and reshoring location decisions are flawed. 
If the original offshoring decisions is flawed, the subsequent reshoring decision is often 
a correction mechanism for this and not necessarily an active vote on the competitive-
ness of the home country (Gray, 2013; Kinkel, 2014; Windmark and Andersson, 2016) 
H36. 
Since location decision processes are so complex and dynamic, they are often made on 
basis of “rules-of-thumb” (Bellgran et al., 2013; McIvor, 2013). 
H37. 
Managers do not just use analysis for their decision-making but rely to a large extent on 
intuition. Within the framework of research this viewpoint was conﬁrmed (Steenhuis and 
De Bruijn, 2004). 
H38. 
Location decisions are often influenced by existing interpersonal links rather than by sys-
tematically collected research (Kinkel and Maloca, 2009). 
H39. 
Location decisions may be managed by the board of directors, a vice president, a man-
ufacturing buyer, or any member of the advisory staff (Meirleir, 2008). 
H40. 
Location choices often build on one another, with an initial decision leading to more in-
vestments in the same location (Porter and Rivkin, 2012). 
H41. 
Some central aspects that influence the manufacturing location decision are underesti-
mated as determinants as they don’t reflect the final destination chosen, but rather the 
firm itself and both the conscious and unconscious constraints it has created. Some of 
these are illustrated in Figure 5. These can mainly be considered to be at the firm side. 
Location 
decision
Firm's 
idiosyncracy
Location's 
idiosyncracy
==PAGE:100==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
100 
 
Figure 5: The 6 circumstantial influences of location decisions 
 
H42. 
Only few companies revisit location decisions – which is no surprise as it takes forever 
to extract economic information through incompatible ERP systems, etc. (Porter and Riv-
kin, 2012) 
H43. 
The time from when a concept is developed for a new manufacturing facility until the time 
when actual production begins at the new plant is usually 3 to 5 years (Meirleir, 2008). 
H44. 
The effect of decisions is not always easy to analyze since, decision makers do generally 
not evaluate past decisions, to analyze if they have fulfilled the expected projections. 
(Bellgran et al., 2013). 
H45. 
Few companies have readily-available data to assess the company (Porter and Rivkin, 
2012). 
H46. 
Most firms moving production offshore experienced an increase in total landed costs, 
contrary to their expectations of cost savings (Porter and Rivkin, 2012) 
 
Figure 6: Factors of success and failure in executing the location decision 
Location 
Decision
Decision 
Time 
Horizon
Risk 
Aversion
Personal 
Prerefences
Allocated 
Resources
Stakeholder 
Integration
Strategy and 
Culture
Factors of 
success
Factors of 
failure
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
101 
 
In this section an elaborative description of how the survey is structured is provided. The survey 
is divided into 6 sections, that covers questions regarding practical information about the respec-
tive firms, their motivations for relocation, their decision making processes and the factors affect-
ing and influencing their decisions. In addition, a section containing detailed information regard-
ing the survey is provided for the surveyee to read before commencing with answering it and 
lastly, the survey will end with some finishing notes.  
 
In this section the survey respondent will be introduced to us and the purpose of our thesis. The 
goal of this section is to provide the survey respondent with adequate information in order for 
him/her to grasp the idea behind our thesis and have an understanding of how crucial their con-
tribution is towards the realization of the thesis. 
 
Overall aim: 1) to gain knowledge about the company; its size, in terms of revenue and employ-
ees, type of products, industry, etc. 2) to get practical information about the decision; make/buy, 
timeline (when was the decision taken). 
 
Overall aim: to understand the structure of their decision making process, the degree of formali-
zation of process and documentation, and what led the company to investigate the decision in 
the first place? 
 
Overall aim: to understand which factors have influenced the decision to map the commonalities 
between. 
By listing the factors found in literature, we let the survey-taker tick off the factors that influenced 
the decision and the degree to which it influenced. 
 
 
The aim is to understand the level of post assessment that has been done by the company and 
their assessment on the decision. 
 
- 
Thank you 
- 
Possibility to read finished articles 
- 
Possibility to participate further in e.g. case study 
 
In this section various mediums for surveying are evaluated. All the mentioned mediums are free 
versions, thus providing a baseline for comparison. Therefore, the various mediums will be com-
pared on the number of available functions e.g. ask questions, receive answers, export data etc. 
and their respective degree of freedom e.g. the no. of questions that can be asked and it's type 
(statement, dropdown, multiple choice etc.), the no. of respondents that can respond, the possi-
bility of exporting data to excel for analysis etc. Five mediums for surveying have been identified 
==PAGE:102==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
102 
as favorites and compared by means of comparing their respective pros and cons i.e. in terms of 
functions and degree of freedom. Furthermore, each medium is thereafter allocated a score (1-
low and 5-very high) and the one with the highest score is chosen for our research.  
 
Alternatives 
Pros 
Score 
Survey Monkey 
1. Well designed 
2. Easy to use  
3. 13 question types   
2 
Typeform 
1. Elegant interface 
2. Unlimited surveys  
3. Unlimited respondents 
4. Data export  
5. 14 question types  
4 
Google form 
1. Unlimited surveys 
2. Unlimited respondents  
3. Multiple users  
4. Data export  
5. Possibility of embedding survey into emails 
and websites 
6. 9 question types  
7. Easy to use  
5 
Survey Gizmo 
1. Unlimited questions 
2. Unlimited surveys  
3. Unlimited respondents  
4. Data export  
4 
 
 
Based on the allocation of scores in the above table, Google form is chosen as our medium for 
surveying due to the following reasons: 
 
The ease with which it can be operated, reduces complexity for us and the time needed 
to create the survey. 
 
The possibility of exporting data to excel, thus enabling further analysis for the extraction 
of various conclusions. 
 
The various means by which the survey can be distributed i.e. mail or website 
 
The enablement of multiple editors on the same survey, thus making it feasible for us to 
work the same time on the same survey 
 
Since we have a large population to send our survey to, it's a major advantage to be able 
to send unlimited surveys and have an unlimited no. of respondents to respond. 
 
In order to ensure the final outcome of survey reflects its purpose and goal, this section is created 
to evaluate the different parts of its documentation and final design of survey before it’s sent out 
to the respondents. In Table 1, a check list is provided with sub-goals that are set to ensure the 
quality. 
Table 1: Check list for survey documentation and design 
 
OBJECTIVE 
 
Purpose 
==PAGE:103==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
103 
 
The purpose is clearly and unambiguously stated 
 
Hypotheses 
 
All relevant points from the literature review matrix are reflected in a hypothesis 
 
Hypotheses are documented either by references or by arguments 
 
Hypotheses reflect the purpose of the survey 
 
Survey questionnaire 
 
Clear description of study and the targeted firms and survey respondent 
 
Clearly and unambiguous stated definitions of ‘location decisions’ and ‘Danish manufac-
turing firms’.  
 
Intuitive structure of survey 
 
Survey questions reflect the hypotheses and test them respectively 
 
Unmistaken formulation all through the survey 
 
The option of expressing lack of knowledge throughout the survey, i.e. “I don’t know”. 
 
Red thread all through the survey and no ‘surprise’ jumps. 
 
Balance between detail and generality, as firms have varying levels of effort and docu-
mentation in the process of locating manufacturing. 
 
Option to jump a section if it doesn’t apply to firm 
 
Broadcasting strategy 
 
All possible Danish manufacturing firms have been included from beginning. 
 
Firms have been contacted personally at the DSE Fair. 
 
Survey has been widely available and efforts are made to contact as many companies as 
time allows us to. 
 
Expected results 
 
The possible results from survey represent previously non-published material and will 
take a significant leap to understand the location decisions in Danish firms from current 
known data. 
 
The outcome of the survey will provide enough material for two journal publications if at 
least 20 firms respond; both for understanding the current nature of the decisions and 
suggesting valuable improvement suggestions for these. 
 
Results from the survey can answer the problem statement of the survey and provide 
publication material for both article #1 and #2 – if the above points are checked. 
 
 
Year of establishment (see registration or company website) 
 
Industry in which the company operates (see registration) 
 
Number of employees in total and in Denmark (see registration or company website) 
 
Approx. yearly revenue (see proff.dk) 
==PAGE:104==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
104 
 
 
As defined in section 3 (definitions in subsections 3.1.1 and 3.2.1), the population is limited to 
Danish manufacturing firms, which in Denmark ranges in the following industry codes: 
10.00.00 to 34.99.99 (Fremstillingsvirksomheder, Dansk Branchekode, DB073) 
Based on this, we’ve extracted a list of firms from the public firm registry (CVR-udtræk4) using 
the following additional constraints: 
 
A minimum of 20 employees, as we believe smaller firms are unlikely to face a manufac-
turing location decision and that way, focusing our population. 
 
Firms with advertising protection were filtered out. 
 
Firms in bankruptcy and similar situations were filtered out. 
This selection left us with 2,292 firms, 1,694 of which had a registered phone number and 739 of 
which had a registered e-mail address. The information is stored in Excel. 
 
This subsection describes briefly who the ideal survey respondent is, in order for us to be clear 
in the description for passing on the survey link. Since the persons directly involved in the deci-
sion process of a big firm represents only a tiny fraction of the company, chances are that the 
survey will be passed along through a number of people before landing at the right person. The 
people in this process need to know clearly who they are looking for. Therefore, we describe the 
ideal survey respondent as: 
 
Has possessed a role, which is central enough to have insights to the whole process (all 
phases) of the manufacturing location decision project. 
 
The decision authority of the facility location decision in question (if not of the respondent) 
was primarily in Denmark.  
 
Is willing to spend 15 minutes on an online survey to help research that aims to help a 
broad audience of Danish companies 
 
Our communication strategy encompasses personal contact at a company fair, social media, 
phone calls and e-mails. These are described in more detail in the following. 
 
From our list of firms extracted (described in subsection 8.1 above), 28 had booked a stand at 
the DSE company fair at the Technical University of Denmark, 16-17 March 2016. We saw this 
as a brilliant option to discuss our thesis directly with the companies and get a contact, who could 
pass on our survey to a person that has been involved in the location decision process of the 
company. 
Out of the 28 firms, 11 were concluded as “not participating”. The main reason was location 
decision authority outside the borders of Denmark, e.g. an American firm owning the company 
and the decision authority being at top management level. Few had, despite official manufactur-
ing industry registration, no actual manufacturing activities in-house. 
                                                     
3 Danish industry code DB07 (Dansk branchekode): 
http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/Publika-
tioner/VisPub?pid=732  
4 The Danish Central Business Register Extraction, CVR-udtræk: https://datacvr.virk.dk/data/cvr-
hj%C3%A6lp/cvr-udtr%C3%A6k  
==PAGE:105==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
105 
The remaining companies were predominantly interested in our study. Although one firm repre-
sentative had been involved in a location decision and few had contact to someone who had 
been involved, most representatives had little to no idea who in the company had been a part of 
the decision analysis or taken the decision. Their notion was that this process was performed at 
the highest level of the company, due to the enormous investment it would require and the gen-
eral impact on the business as a whole. This was also the reason why the Danish subsidiaries of 
foreign firms weren’t allowed the authority to take such a decision. 
The general agreement with the companies was to send an e-mail with a brief description of the 
study and the survey, so they could pass it on to the right person. It became very clear how 
important the accuracy and sharpness of this description is, which corresponds well with the time 
taken to make proper definitions. 
 
Generally, all directly contacted survey respondents will eventually receive an e-mail with a brief 
description of the project and a link. However, since more phone numbers than e-mail addresses 
are available in our database, we will try to contact as many as possible by phone in order to 
gain access to the right survey respondent in the firm. 
English:  
“Subject: DTU survey on facility location decisions / spørgeskema om lokationsbeslutninger 
Dansk version længere nede. 
Dear [Name], 
 
We are at DTU currently researching on facility location decisions in the Danish manufacturing 
industry, i.e. deciding on which country to locate a production facility. We would kindly like to 
ask a representative from your firm to fill out our survey. 
  
The representative should have been involved in a location decision and have sufficient in-
sights to answer our questions about the analytical process of the decision. The decision can 
both be implemented already or be in the process of implementation, as long as a final decision 
has been made. More information about the study can be found when entering the survey. The 
survey is in English, it takes about 15 minutes and can be found through the following link: 
 
http://goo.gl/forms/GS7dKSutyD   
 
We close for survey responses on 1 May and hope to get an answer from you before then. The 
results will be used in a series of publications in scientific journals and will be the first in Den-
mark of its kind. We are happy to share our results subsequently and we greatly appreciate 
contributions. 
 
Best regards, 
 
==PAGE:106==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
106 
Ebou Touray & Andreas Schmidt 
Management Engineering, 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Danish: 
Kære [Navn], 
 
Vi er på DTU ved at forske i lokationsbeslutninger for danske fremstillingsvirksomheder, dvs. 
beslutningen om hvilket land man skal placere sin produktion. Vi vil derfor venligst bede en re-
præsentant fra jeres virksomhed om at udfylde vores spørgeskema.  
 
Repræsentanten bør have været involveret i en lokationsbeslutning for at have nok indsigt til at 
kunne svare på spørgsmålene omkring den analytiske del af beslutningen. Beslutningen kan 
både være blevet implementeret allerede eller være ved at blive implementeret, så længe en 
endelig beslutning er taget om lokationen. Spørgeskemaet er på engelsk, det tager omkring 15 
minutter og kan findes via nedenstående link: 
 
http://goo.gl/forms/GS7dKSutyD  
 
Vi lukker for besvarelser d. 1. maj og håber at få en besvarelse fra jer inden da. Resultaterne vil 
blive brugt i en række publikationer i videnskabelige journaler og vil være den første i Danmark 
med dette specifikke fokus. Vi vil med glæde dele resultaterne med jer efterfølgende og sætter 
pris på ethvert bidrag. 
 
Med venlig hilsen, 
 
Ebou Touray & Andreas Schmidt 
Management Engineering, 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Reminder: DTU spørgeskema om lokationsbeslutninger 
Hej [Navn], 
 
Vi har på DTU Management tidligere kontaktet din virksomhed i forbindelse med vores spørge-
skema omkring lokationsbeslutninger for produktionsfaciliteter. Vi har dog endnu ikke registeret 
nogen besvarelse fra jer. Vi respekterer fuldt ud hvis I ikke har tid, men det vil betyde alt for vo-
res undersøgelse af få jer repræsenteret. Hvis I har nogen tvivl eller spørgsmål eller vi på no-
gen måde kan være behjælpelige, skal I være velkommen til at skrive eller ringe. 
 
==PAGE:107==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
107 
De fleste danske fremstillingsvirksomheder har på et tidspunkt besluttet sig for hvor de skal 
lægge deres produktionsfaciliteter – og de fleste har i det mindste overvejet udenlandske lokati-
oner. Det er processen og overvejelserne der har ført dem frem til beslutningen, som vi primært 
er interesseret i. Enhver medarbejder som har en nogenlunde idé om hvordan dette er foregået 
for et givent produktionsanlæg, vil kunne svare på dette spørgeskema. Skulle der opstå 
spørgsmål man ikke har mulighed for at svare på, kan man i de fleste tilfælde efterlade en 
blank besvarelse – vi har nemlig sørget for at kun de mest essentielle spørgsmål er påkrævet. 
Således tager det mellem 5 og 15 minutter alt afhængig af besvarelsen. Spørgeskemaet kan 
findes her: 
 
http://goo.gl/forms/GS7dKSutyD  
 
Vi har valgt at udskyde deadline til besvarelse indtil d. 7. maj, da vi endnu ikke er tilfredse 
med mængden af besvarelser. Det vil derfor betyde utroligt meget for os og vores undersøgel-
ses succes, at få jeres svar med. 
 
Vi ser frem til at høre fra jer og på forhånd tak! 
 
Med venlig hilsen/Best regards, 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
108 
Phone call: 
Åbning 
“Goddag, du taler med Andreas Schmidt/Ebou Touray fra Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, 
DTU. Vi er i øjeblikket med at lave en undersøgelse omkring danske virksomheders lokations-
beslutninger for produktion og kunne rigtigt godt tænke os i den forbindelse at en repræsentant 
fra jeres firma besvarede et spørgeskema omkring dette.” 
Kan du forklare mig lidt nærmere omkring undersøgelsen? 
”Ja, det kan jeg i hvert fald. Vi undersøger en forståelse for hvordan danske virksomheder en-
der frem til at placere deres produktion i et bestemt sted. Dvs. hvad har sat overvejelsen i gang, 
hvordan har man organiseret projektet, hvordan har man analyseret – arbejdsmetode, model-
ler, m.m. – hvordan har man evalueret alternativer, hvordan har man endeligt taget beslutnin-
gen og hvad er der sket efterfølgende.” 
Hvad er specielt ved jeres undersøgelse? 
”Til trods for at lokationsbeslutningen har kæmpe indflydelse for virksomhedens forretning og 
de involverede samfund, så viser tidligere studier at mange træffer disse beslutninger på et fejl-
agtigt grundlag; man har enten ikke lavet analysen godt nok, man har modelleret forkert, over-
simplificeret eller simple menneskelige fejl og mangel på viden. Vores undersøgelse bliver den 
første i Danmark og Skandinavien som reelt kortlægger denne proces og kaster et lys over den 
for vi kan forstå den og forbedrer den. Helt konkret vil vi laver en publikationsserie baseret på 
denne undersøgelse som først beskriver de nuværende processer og siden kombinerer teori og 
praktisk for at adressere de største fejl danske virksomheder begår.  
Hvem skal svare på spøgeskemaet? 
”En person, som har været involveret i en lokationsbeslutning for at have nok indsigt til at 
kunne svare på spørgsmålene omkring den analytiske del af beslutningen. Beslutningen kan 
både være blevet implementeret allerede eller være ved at blive implementeret, så længe en 
endelig beslutning er taget om lokationen.” 
Andre detaljer? 
Spørgeskemaet tager ca. 15 minutter og er på engelsk. Vores deadline for besvarelse er 1. 
maj. 
 
In order to get a hold of our contacts, who work in manufacturing companies and have contact to 
someone who has been involved with the location decision, we will post both on Facebook and 
LinkedIn with a very brief description of the project. The description could be something like: 
English version: 
“DTU Research: We need survey respondents who have been involved in a facility location de-
cision in a Danish manufacturing industry to help us map and improve the decision process. If 
you, or someone you know, fit that description, we would greatly appreciate your help!” 
 
Arauzo-Carod, J.-M., Liviano-Solis, D., Manjon-Antolin, M., 2010. Empirical Studies in Industrial 
Location: An Assessment of Their Methods and Results. J. Reg. Sci. 50, 685–711. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9787.2009.00625.x 
==PAGE:109==
 
 
 
Thesis: International Location Decisions in Danish Manufacturing Firms 
109 
Arlbjørn, J.S., Lüthje, T., Mikkelsen, O.S., Schlichter, J., Thoms, L., 2013. Danske producenters 
udflytning og hjemtagning af produktion. Kraks Fond Byforskning, Institut for Entrepre-
nørskab og Relationsledelse, Syddansk Universitet. 
Bellgran, M., Bruch, J., Rösiö, C., Wiktorsson, M., 2013. Decision support for production locali-
zation: Process, activities and localization factors, in: 20th EurOMA Conference, Opera-
tions Management at the Heart of Recovery, 7th-12th June 2013, Dublin, Ireland. 
Bruch, J., Wiktorsson, M., Bellgran, M., 2014. On the production location decision: a case study 
on process and criteria. Int. J. Manuf. Res. 9, 74–91. doi:10.1504/ijmr.2014.059600 
Brush, T.H., Maritan, C.A., Karnani, A., 1999. The Plant Location Decision in Multinational Man-
ufacturing Firms: An Empirical Analysis of International Business and Manufacturing 
Strategy Perspectives. Prod. Oper. Manag. 8. 
Chen, L., Olhager, J., Tang, O., 2014. Manufacturing facility location and sustainability: A litera-
ture 
review 
and 
research 
agenda. 
Int. 
J. 
Prod. 
Econ. 
149, 
154–163. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.05.013 
Dunning, J.H., 1998. Location Enterprise: the Multinational Neglected. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 40, 45–
66. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8490024 
Dymsza, W.A., 1972. Multinational Business Strategy. McGraw-Hill Inc.,US, New York. 
Ellram, L.M., 2013. Offshoring and Reshoring: An Update on the Manufacturing Location Deci-
sion. J. Supply Chain Manag. 49, 14–22. doi:10.1111/jscm.12019 
Gray, J.V., 2013. The Reshoring Phenomenon: What Supply Chain Academics Ought to know 
and Should Do. J. Supply Chain Manag. 49, 27–33. doi:10.1111/jscm.12012 
Jungthirapanich, C., Benjamin, C.O., 1995. A Knowledge-Based Decision-Support System For 
Locating A Manufacturing Facility. Iie Trans. 27, 789–799. 
Kinkel, S., 2014. Future and impact of backshoring-Some conclusions from 15 years of research 
on German practices. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 20, 63–65. doi:10.1016/j.pur-
sup.2014.01.005 
Kinkel, S., Maloca, S., 2009. Drivers and antecedents of manufacturing offshoring and backshor-
ing-A German perspective. J. Purch. Supply Manag. 15, 154–165. doi:10.1016/j.pur-
sup.2009.05.007 
Kodali, R., Routroy, S., 2006. Location in Competitive Supply Chain. J. Adv. Manuf. Syst. 5, 89–
110. 
Lee, R.T., 2014. Making Better Offshoring and Onshoring Decisions. J. Corp. Account. Finance 
25, 35–38. doi:10.1002/jcaf.21986 
MacCarthy, B.L., Atthirawong, W., 2003. Factors affecting location decisions in international op-
erations – a Delphi study. 
McIvor, R., 2013. Understanding the Manufacturing Location Decision: The Case for the Trans-
action Cost and Capability Perspectives. J. Supply Chain Manag. 49, 23–26. 
doi:10.1111/jscm.12010 
Meirleir, M.D., 2008. Location, Location, Location: A Plant Location and Site Selection Guide. 
The Haworth Press, Taylor and Francis Group, New York. 
Porter, M.E., Rivkin, J.W., 2012. Choosing the United States. Harv. Bus. Rev. 90, 80. 
Steenhuis, H.-J., De Bruijn, E.J., 2004. Assessing manufacturing location. Prod. Plan. Control 
15, 786–795. doi:10.1080/09537280412331309217 
Tate, W.L., 2014. Global competitive conditions driving the manufacturing location decision. Bus. 
Horiz. 57, 381. 
Viswanadham, N., Kameshwaran, S., 2007. A Decision Framework for Location Selection in 
Global Supply Chains 704–709. 
Wacker, J.G., 2004. A theory of formal conceptual definitions: developing theory-building meas-
urement instruments. J. Oper. Manag. 22, 629–650. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2004.08.002 
Windmark, C., Andersson, C., 2016. Cost modelling as decision support when locating manufac-
turing facilities. Int. J. Prod. Manag. Eng. 4, 15–27. doi:10.4995/ijpme.2016.4177 
Zegordi, S.H., Khosrojerdi, A.H., Jamali, S.S., 2009. Performance measurement framework for 
location decisions on supply chain design. 2009 IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Eng. Eng. Manag. 
1603–1607. doi:10.1109/IEEM.2009.5373110 
 
 
