==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Direct Use of Biogas in SOFCs
Anna Winiwarter (s141826)
DTU Risø Campus, Roskilde 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Risø Campus
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Phone (+45) 46 77 58 00
info@energy.dtu.dk
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Biogas formed by the anaerobic digestion of biomass is a high potential sustainable
fuel consisting mainly of methane and carbon dioxide. Currently employed combustion
methods for electricity and heat generation have low efficiency, can only use biogas with a
high methane content and contribute to air pollution, which all could be improved by the
use of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). While extensive research is available on SOFCs
operated on methane containing fuel with single impurities added, only few studies
tested the use of real biogas, none of them using dry-reforming. In this work, SOFC
performance under dry-reforming of synthetic biogas with different gas compositions was
studied and compared with that under the direct use of biogas from a landfill.
The long term performance of state-of-the-art fuel cells was studied over sections
of 100 h (total runtime of a test 600 h) varying gas composition, current density and
gas flow rate. Different ratios of CH4 to CO2 in synthetic biogas, and landfill gas with
and without active carbon gas filter were used. The cells were characterised by DC
polarisation and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy before and after the tests, and
in regular intervals in between. The electrochemical analysis was supported by post-test
SEM analysis of the cells and GC-MS analysis of the landfill gas.
Dry reforming of CH4 lead to stable cell performance in the tested compositions. A
ratio of CH4 to CO2 of 2/3 in the synthetic biogas provided the lowest degradation rate.
Also using real landfill gas with CO2 added to achieve a ratio close to 2/3, yielded stable
cell performance. Degradation rates of 71.2 to 21.0 mV/1000h over a total runtime of 62 h
(corresponding to 8.3 and 2.4 %/1000h) and 74.5 mV/1000h over 28.5 h (corresponding
to 8.7 %/1000h), with and without gas cleaning were found, respectively.
The applicability of using dry-reforming for the direct use of biogas in SOFC was
shown. On the basis of these results, scale up to cell-stacks and further optimisation of
operating conditions is possible.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Declaration of intent
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
at the Technical University of Denmark under supervision of Anke Hagen in fulfilment
of the requirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Materials and Manufacturing Engi-
neering.
DTU Risø Campus, Roskilde,
July 1, 2016
Anna Winiwarter (s141826)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Doing my thesis in a new department, on a subject that was completely new for me,
I would not have been able to complete my work without the help of many kind people.
First of all I want to thank my supervisor Anke Hagen for involving me in this
exciting project, for her helpful advice, for putting me in contact with the right people
for every issue I had, for the patient guidance in the writing process, and for keeping me
from wanting to do too much.
I want to thank Ole Hansen for organizing the transport of landfill gas from Odense
to Risø, for all the help in connecting the gas cylinders to the rig, and for staying long
hours to be able to stretch the runtime on biogas as long as possible. Henrik Henriksen
for managing all the changes I needed at the test rig, Mahbooba Davodi for showing me
how to set up a cell test, and Jens Høgh and Anne Hauch for the guidance on how to
plan a cell-test and operate the test rig software.
I would like to acknowledge the help from Karl Thydén introducing me to SEM
characterisation of fuel cells, from Janet Bentzen spending hours in front of the SEM
with me and from Ebtisam Abdellahi for preparing the polished cross-sections.
Further I owe thanks to Chris Graves for the fuel cells, for helping me with his
software Ravdav and with fitting of impedance spectra. I am grateful to Alexandra
Ploner for always helping out if someone else didn’t have time to answer my questions
and to Stéven Pirou for helping me with the micro-GC (even though I had to give up
on it in the end).
Gas cleaning and characterisation would not have been possible without the cooper-
ation with DTU Chemical Engineering: Many thanks to Rasmus Gadsbøll and Jesper
Ahrenfeldt for the active carbon and to Helge Egsgaard and Zsusza Sárossy for being so
kind to do GC-MS analysis of the landfill gas.
The main goal of this thesis could not have been fulfilled without access to real
biogas. Thanks therefore to Rasmus Olsen and Ulrik Lønkjær at Odense Renovation for
providing me with landfill gas.
I also want to thank the group of PhD and Master students at Risø for all the fun
lunches together at the fjord and everyone else who was involved, but I did not mention
here by name.
Last but not least, I want to thank my friends and my family for all their support
and for making it possible to pursue my dream of doing my master’s in Denmark.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Declaration of intent
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of terms
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Fuel Cells and Biogas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theoretical background
9
2.1
Internal reforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Electrochemical properties of fuel cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Effect of Impurities on SOFC performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Microscopic visualisation methods for SOFCs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Materials and Methods
23
3.1
Fuel cell setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Test parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Electrochemical characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Microstructural characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5
Landfill gas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results and Discussion
33
4.1
Electrochemical properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Microstructural development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3
Gas characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4
Discussion and summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Conclusion
65
6
Future work
67
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A
Gas analysis
69
B
Impedance spectra
71
References
73
==PAGE:11==
List of terms
Abbreviations
AC
Alternating current
ASR
Area specific resistance
BSE
Backscattered electrons
CPE
Constant phase element
DC
Direct current
EI
Electron ionisation
EIS
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
Emf
Electromotive force
FC
Fuel cell
FU
Fuel utilisation
GC-MS
Gas chromatography - mass spectrometry
CGO
Ceria gadolinium oxide
i-V curve
Current density - voltage curve
LHV
Lower heating value
LSC
Strontium doped lanthanum cobaltite
LSCF
Strontium doped lanthanum cobaltite ferrite
LSF
Strontium doped lanthanum ferrite
LSM
Strontium doped lanthanum manganite
MCFC
Molten carbonate fuel cell
OCV
Open circuit voltage
PVD
Physical vapour deposition
RWGS
Reversed watergas shift reaction
ScSZ
Scandia/ceria stabilized zirconia
ScYSZ
Scandia/yttria stabilized zirconia
SE
Secondary electrons
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
SOFC
Solid oxide fuel cell
TPB
Three phase boundary
VOC
Volatile organic compounds
YSZ
Yttria stabilized zirconia
==PAGE:12==
x
List of terms
Symbols
C
Capacitance
F
∆G
Gibbs free energy
kJ/mol
∆H298K
Enthalpy of reaction at 298 K
kJ/mol
E
Potential
V
E°
Standard potential (at standard conditions)
V
η
Overpotential
V
F
Faraday constant = 96485 C/mol
I
Current
A
i
Current density
A/cm2
n
Amount of substance
mol
P
Power density
W/cm2
¯p
Average partial pressure
bar
pa
Partial pressure of a gas at the anode
bar
pc
Partial pressure of a gas at the cathode
bar
Q0, n
Fitting parameters for CPE
R
Ideal gas constant = 8.314 J/(K mol)
R
Resistance
Ω
T
Temperature
K
t
Time
s
U,V
Voltage across an external load
V
z
Electrons transferred per ion
Z
Impedance
Ω
Z’ = Re = Zreal
Impedance, real part
Ω
Z” = Im = Zimag
Impedance, imaginary part
Ω
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Here’s what I think the truth is: We are all addicts of fossil fuels in a state
of denial, about to face cold turkey. And like so many addicts about to face
cold turkey, our leaders are now committing violent crimes to get what little
is left of what we’re hooked on. - Kurt Vonnegut, 2004 [1]
American author Kurt Vonnegut compared our society’s use of fossil fuels with the
behaviour of a drug addict towards their dope. If we do not manage to change our
behaviour and find alternatives to fossil fuels on time, the world will run into a major
crisis. But even if fossil fuels were never ending, we would have to deal with the side
effects of our drug: Climate change, which is without doubt one of the greatest challenges
society has to face in the current century. The only way to battle climate change is a
change towards sustainability. We have to drastically reduce the amount of greenhouse
gas emissions which can only be achieved by turning away from fossil fuels completely
and moving on to using sources of renewable energy.
In the last decades, many different ideas have been developed into applicable tech-
nologies. In Denmark, for example, wind energy already accounts for 40 % of the energy
supply [2].
Other technologies are based on solar power, hydro power, biomass, or
geothermal energy, just to name a few.
Biogas, being produced by the anaerobic digstion of organic matter, is one of the high
potential sources for renewable energy. It can be derived from many different sources of
residual biomass such as waste, manure, sewage sludge, and agro-industrial residues [3].
It consists mostly of methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) and can be converted
to electricity and heat using conventional thermomechanical processes. However, using
solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) instead, much higher efficiencies can be obtained, as the
chemical energy is directly converted to electrical energy, which among others reduces
CO2 emissions per energy unit produced. A second effect of using SOFCs is that due
to the different reaction process, only very low amounts SOx and no NOx are produced.
Additionally, a lower methane content is necessary than in conventional processes, mak-
ing the use of currently discarded gas possible. Thereby reduction of overall methane
emissions is possible as well. This is relevant, as CH4 is one of the largest contributors to
global warming, with 25 times the global warming potential of CO2 (over a time horizon
of 100 years) [4]. While conventional processes are only sufficiently efficient in large scale,
SOFCs could also be used in medium and small scale plants. They are therefore well
suited for decentralized electricity production and transport of biomass can be avoided,
which is important to be able to maintain a positive energy balance [5]. Employing
biogas in SOFC has another advantage compared to conventional applications: It does
not require expensive upgrading treatment after cleaning, such as conversion to syngas
or removal of CO2 to use the remaining CH4 as natural gas substitute. In SOFCs, the
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
nickel present in the anode serves as catalyst for the reforming reaction of biogas to
produce H2 and CO that can be utilized electrochemically. Therefore no external gas
conversion is necessary, while at the same time advantage is taken of the exothermic
electrochemical reactions for supplying heat for the endothermic conversion.
Being so abundant makes it interesting not only in the Western World, but all around
the globe. Several studies in the literature show a high potential of using biogas. For
example in rural China, biogas is a key pillar in the rural sustainbable development
programme. As biogas is only used for cooking and heating, currently leftover gas is
released to the atmosphere, which could be used in SOFC instead [6]. In Pakistan, where
electricity is scarce resource, especially small, delocalized biogas plants could improve
the electrical power supply of the general public [7] Also for Mexico [8], Uruguay [9],
Turkey [10] and Nigeria [11], as well as Sub-Saharan Africa in general [12], just to name
some examples, it has been shown that there is a potential for biogas contributing to
the energy supply in the future. A limitation to this is the need for water in anaerobic
digestion which is problematic in arid regions, such as Sub-Saharan Africa [12].
1.1
Objective of this thesis
The objective of this thesis was to evaluate the effect of employing biogas from a Danish
landfill on performance and durability of a state-of-the-art solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC).
The option of utilising CO2 already contained in the biogas as an internal reforming
agent was of particular interest. To this end, synthetically mixed biogas containing dif-
ferent ratios of CO2 to CH4 was tested. Furthermore, the effect of impurities that are
potentially contained in the landfill gas was tested by comparing performance with and
without gas cleaning. The impurity content of biogas was analysed using gas chromatog-
raphy and the effects on cell microstructure investigated by post-test scanning electron
microscopy of the cells.
1.2
Fuel Cells and Biogas
Fuel cells
are electrochemical devices similar to batteries consisting of two electrodes
(anode and cathode) separated by an electrolyte (ionic conductor). Hereby the oxidation
and the reduction parts of a redox reaction are spatially separated creating an electron
surplus at the anode and a deficiency at the cathode. If the electrodes are now connected
externally by an electrical conductor, a current will flow which can be utilized by an
appliance. In contrast to batteries, the reactants are different from the electrode material
and can therefore be supplied continuously [13].
The most simple fuel cells run on the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen. Over time
several different types have been developed. An overview is given in Tab. 1.1. They can
be divided into two main groups: those that run at low temperatures (60-200 °C) and
those operating at high temperatures (600-1000 °C). The prior, such as alkaline fuel cells,
polymer membrane fuel cells and phosphoric acid fuel cells, have the clear advantage of
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Fuel Cells and Biogas
3
Figure 1.1: Schematic of a typical anode supported solid oxide fuel cell.
the low operating temperatures being less demanding on materials and they are more
suitable for small, transportable devices. The latter, such as molten carbonate fuel cells
(MCFCs) and solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) on the other hand provide higher efficiency
and do not require expensive catalysts at the electrodes (esp. anode), as reactions are
faster at the higher working temperatures. This goes hand in hand with the possibility
to employ other fuels than hydrogen (H2), such as methane (CH4) and carbon monoxide
(CO) which would poison platinum catalysts in low temperature fuel cells.
SOFCs are the least sensitive to impurities of the cell types mentioned. Therefore
they are most interesting for being used with fuel such as biogas, containing significant
amounts of impurities.
As SOFCs were employed in the work for this thesis, they are presented in more
detail in the following. Fig. 1.1 illustrates the cross section of a typical anode supported
solid oxide fuel cell. The conventional materials used in state-of-the-art cells are Y2O3
stabilized ZrO2 (YSZ) as electrolyte, a composite of metallic Ni and YSZ as anode and a
composite of perovskite-type Sr-doped LaMnO3 (LSM) and YSZ as cathode. The struc-
ture is either anode or electrolyte supported. Other materials that have become more
common as cathode materials in recent years are Sr-doped LaCoO3 (LSC), Sr-doped
LaFeO3 (LSF) and LSCF, a non-stoichometic single-phase mixture of both. In contrast
to LSM, a pure electronic conductor, all three are mixed ionic-electronic conductors and
therefore advantageous. As they are not as compatible with YSZ, they are often used
in combination with Ga doped CeO2 (CGO) to improve ionic conductivity further [14].
While the reaction at the cathode is the same for all SOFCs, the reactions at the
anode depend on the fuel. In the most simple systems fed with hydrogen the following
reactions are expected to occur: [14]
Cathode:
1
2O2 + 2 e−−−→O2−
(1.1)
Anode:
H2 + O2−−−→H2O + 2 e−
(1.2)
At the anode of cells fuelled with carbon containing gas like methane and biogas
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
Table 1.1: Overview over the most common fuel cell types [3, 13, 15]
Alkaline FC
Polymer
electrolyte
membrane FC
Phosphoric
acid FC
Molten
carbonate FC
Solid oxide FC
Operating
temperature °C
50-200
30-100
160-220
600-650
500-1000
Transported
species
OH–
H+
H+
CO 2–
3
O2–
Catalyst
Pt/Pd, Ni
Pt
Pt
Ni
Ni
Fuel
H2 (pure)
H2 (pure)
H2
H2, CO, (CH4)
H2, CO, CH4, NH3
Advantages
high power
density
high power density,
minimum material
and corrosion
problems
high efficieny in
co-generative
applications
highest impurity
tolerances
high efficiency, high temperature,
internal reforming
Disadvantages
fuel purity,
liquid
electrolyte
degeneration
challenging H2O
management
liquid, corrosive
electrolyte
CO2 recirculation
required, life and
stability of
materials
thermal stresses in
ceramic/metal
combinations
high cost of noble metal catalysts
long start up time due to temperature
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Fuel Cells and Biogas
5
follwing additional electrochemical reaction can take place: [14]
CO + O2−−−→CO2 + 2 e−
(1.3)
Also the direct electrochemical oxidation of CH4 has been reported, although with
high resistances [16].
SOFCs produce electricity much more efficiently than conventional thermomechani-
cal power generators, such as internal combustion engines or turbines. In these, chemical
energy stored in the fuel is first converted to heat, then to mechanical energy and finally
to electricity. Taking several steps makes the process subject to considerable losses. In
addition the efficiency of the conversion is limited by the Carnot efficiency and usually
lies around 25-35 % [17]. In fuel cells, on the other hand, chemical energy is directly
converted into electricity, skipping the two intermediate steps. Efficiencies calculated
for fuel cells differ highly, since there are several different definitions being used in the
literature, and the type of fuel cell and type of fuel being employed also have an effect.
However, they are generally significantly higher than in combustion engines [13]. The
electric efficiencies estimated for solid oxide fuel cells fuelled with biogas, which are most
relevant for this thesis lie in the order of 38.2 % [18] and 51.6 % [19].
Biogas
originates from anaerobic digestion of organic material by bacteria. It is a
very interesting alternative to hydrogen gas as fuel. It’s energy density is twice as high:
The lower heating value (LHV) of hydrogen is approximately 10.8 MJ/Nm3 [20], while
that of biogas is 18-28 MJ/Nm3 [3]. Another advantage is, as mentioned before, that
biogas is a side product of many waste treatment processes. It is formed naturally in
landfills and wastewater treatment plants. Also animal manure produces a lot of biogas
on decomposition, which is currently often released into the atmosphere [6, 12, 21–23].
This, as well as other agricultural, domestic and industrial waste can be converted into
biogas in digester plants.
Table 1.2: Most common impurities in biogas [3]
H2S
Halogenated
hydrocarbons
VOC
Siloxanes
NH3
ppmv
v%
mg/Nm3
mg/Nm3
mg/Nm3
0-4000
1-5
5-300
0-50
100-2000
Depending on the source the composition varies significantly. However, in general,
the main constituents are methane (CH4, 50-80 %) and carbon dioxide (CO2, 30-50 %).
Gas from sources that are not well isolated from air can contain up to 10% oxygen and
nitrogen (O2 and N2). Usually, biogas also contains impurities such as hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) or volatile organic compounds (VOCs) [3]. An overview is given in Tab. 1.2.
The main components being well known greenhouse gasses make using them instead
of releasing them to the atmosphere very interesting also from an environmental point
of view.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
State of the art
First preliminary tests using landfill gas in solid oxide fuel cells
were carried out in 1998 and 2000 by Staniforth and Kendall [24, 25]. They first mixed
CO2 and CH4 in different ratios and found that in contrast to combustion engines,
the fuel cell (conventional Ni-YSZ anode, YSZ electrolyte and LSM cathode) showed
satisfying performance down to 20 % CH4. Further tests involved the gas collected at
three different landfills. Two main sources for performance reduction were identified:
Deposition of carbon at the anode, which could be reduced by adding air or oxygen to
the fuel gas, and poisoning of the anode by sulphur compounds present in the gas. The
performance of the cells varied very much between the different gases due to the different
composition and amount of impurities. While the gas from one landfill yielded stable
performance over 60 minutes, cells fuelled with gas from the two others showed significant
degradation already within this short test period. The poisoning could significantly be
reduced by bubbling the gas through Na2CO3 solution to remove H2S.
Since then, research has mainly focussed on these two main problems. On the one
hand, different oxidizers were added to synthetic biogas (60 % CH4, 40 % CO2), to
find a gas composition that minimizes carbon deposition. Staniforth and Ormerod [26]
found that the maximum performance of a cell was reached at 45 % CH4. Studies by
Yentetakis et al. [27, 28] agree and concluded that a 1:1 ratio of CH4:CO2 provided the
highest reaction rate. Lanzini and Leone [29] found significant degradation by carbon
deposition using the standard biogas composition. This could be inhibited by both steam
and dry reforming, as well as partial oxidation, which resulted in stable performance over
50 h. Guerra et al. [30] concluded that equimolar (synthetic) biogas and CO2 yielded
better performance than higher CO2 contents. Furthermore, the kinetics of the reforming
reaction were studied separately from fuel cells as the production of synthesis gas by
reformation of methane is also very relevant in other applications such as the Fisher-
Tropsch synthesis. Also the gas reactions over typical anode materials were analysed [31,
32]. The gas reactions expected to take place at the anode are described in section 2.1.
On the other hand, the effect of impurities was studied in detail in order to optimize
operating conditions and to develop new electrode materials, that could be able to
withstand higher amounts of impurities. This is discussed more thoroughly in section 2.3.
Most studies use synthetic biogas mixed from CH4 and CO2, with impurities added
in specific amounts. Except for the already mentioned investigations by Staniforth and
Kendall few groups studied the effect of using real biogas. In a series of studies Shiratori
et al. [33–35] analysed the effect of using biogas generated from municipal organic wastes.
They employed anode supported cells with Sc2O3/CeO2 stabilized zirconia (ScSZ) elec-
trolytes, Ni-ScSZ composite anodes and LSM-ScSZ cathodes at 800 °C. Initially, the
variations in gas composition were regarded as problematic. This was, however, proven
wrong in later experiments. Using the raw gas containing 790 ppm H2S without cleaning
lead to very fast, detrimental degradation. Cleaning the gas with FeO reduced the H2S
concentration down to 0.5 ppm and lead to stable performance over a month (degrada-
tion rate less than 0.4 %/1000h), even though significant carbon deposition was found.
This could be reduced by mixing the gas with air in a ratio of 1:1 (i.e. by partial oxi-
dation). Again stable performance was observed over 350 h, despite re-oxidation of Ni
at the anode. Papurello et al. [36] connected a pilot plant also utilizing organic waste
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Structure of the thesis
7
to a 40 cell stack. They concluded that by employing gas cleaning (in this case using
an activated carbon bed), the concentration of detrimental impurities (mainly VOCs,
and compounds containing chlorine and sulphur) was reduced sufficiently to allow stable
performance over 420 h. To prevent carbon deposition the gas was partially oxidized.
Simulations were also frequently employed and generally agreed with experimental
observations. The equimolar mixture of CO2 and biogas was confirmed to maximize
power output of the cell [37–39].
1.3
Structure of the thesis
The current first chapter of this thesis, provided an introduction to the topic.
The second chapter gives an overview over the theoretical background relevant for
the analysis and discussion of experimental results.
First, the chemistry of internal
reforming is explained, as it is expected to occur at the fuel cell anode. This is backed
with thermodynamic calculations on carbon deposition. Then electrochemical properties
of fuel cells and different methods for their determination are elaborated on, followed by
a description of the effects of different fuel gas impurities on cell performance. Finally,
a microscopic visualisation method specifically developed for SOFCs is introduced.
In the third chapter, materials and methods used in the experiments are described.
Results of all experiments, as well as their discussion are given in Chapter 4. First,
results of the electrochemical characterisation are presented and discussed individually,
followed by microstructural and gas analysis. The most important results and their
connections are summarized in a combined discussion at the end of the chapter.
In the final chapters, the conclusions from this work are given, as well as an outlook
to future work based on these results.
==PAGE:20==
8
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical background
In this chapter, the chemical and physico-chemical processes expected to influence the
performance of the fuel cell anode are discussed. Also an introduction to experimen-
tal methods for characterisation of the electrochemical properties is given, in order to
provide a basis for the analysis of experimental results. Finally a method for SEM char-
acterisation of SOFCs is introduced. Any effects on the cathode are not considered, as
it was not focus of the experiments, and the contribution to the cell performance was
considered negligible [40].
2.1
Internal reforming
One of the main advantages of high temperature fuel cells is that at high temperatures,
methane and other small hydrocarbons, as well as short-chain alcohols can be reformed
internally. Depending to the way oxygen for the reforming reaction is provided, two
main mechanisms can be differentiated: steam reforming (with addition of H2O) and
dry reforming (with the addition of CO2). Oxygen can also be added directly in pure
form or as air (known as partial oxidation), reacting with the hydrogen present to form
steam. All these reactions are catalysed by nickel present at the anode.
Reforming reactions
In the case of steam reforming, methane reformation is en-
dothermic according to following equation (∆H298K = 206 kJ/mol) [37]:
CH4 + H2O −−⇀
↽−−3H2 + CO
(2.1)
Also the main reaction of methane in the dry reforming process is endothermic
(∆H298K = 247 kJ/mol), hence both mechanisms require rather high temperatures. The
conversion occurs spontaneously above 640 °C [41].
CH4 + CO2
↽−−−
T>640◦C
−−−−−⇀2 H2 + 2 CO
(2.2)
An advantage of employing internal reforming in a fuel cell is that heat generated by
the electrochemical reactions can be used that way, saving heating of an external reactor
and cooling of the fuel cell with air. Both increases the electrical efficiency of the overall
system. At the same time this cooling effect can be a major drawback, as the reforming
reaction takes place localized at the fuel inlet, leading to large temperature gradients,
especially in the case of larger fuel cell stacks [42].
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Theoretical background
In the case of partial oxidation two reactions can be expected. Both are exothermic
(∆H298K = –36 kJ/mol and ∆H298K = –242 kJ/mol, respectively) [37].
CH4 + 1
2 O2 −−⇀
↽−−CO + 2 H2
(2.3)
H2 + 1
2 O2 −−⇀
↽−−H2O(g)
(2.4)
In all these cases, the conversion is connected to several disadvantagous side reac-
tions: The reversed watergas shift reaction (RWGS) reduces the amount of hydrogen
produced [37].
CO + H2O −−⇀
↽−−CO2 + H2
(2.5)
And various reactions lead to the formation of solid carbon which can be deposited
at the anode and poison or cover the nickel catalyst [37, 41].
2 CO ↽−−−
T<700◦C
−−−−−⇀CO2 + C(s)
(2.6)
CH4
↽−−−
T>557◦C
−−−−−⇀2 H2 + C(s)
(2.7)
CO + H2 −−⇀
↽−−C + H2O
(2.8)
While the equilibrium of the first carbon formation reaction (the Boudouard reaction,
Eq. 2.6) lies more on the side of the products at temperatures below 700 °C, for the second
reaction (Eq. 2.7) to occur, the temperature has to be above 557 °C. The third reaction
is exothermic, and therefore expected to preferentially occur at lower temperatures.
Equilibrium calculations
In order to determine the susceptibility of different gas
compositions to carbon deposition in more detail, ternary phase diagrams of the sys-
tem C-O-H in equilibrium were calculated at different temperatures using the software
FactSage. The resulting phase diagram is shown in Fig. 2.1. At all temperatures above
100 °C, two regions can be separated: The region in which solid carbon is stable, and the
region in which only gasses are present in equilibrium. At 25 °C liquid water is present
additionally, except when the oxygen or hydrogen content is very low. The size of the
region in which carbon deposition is expected decreases with temperature.
The mole fractions of the elements in different gas mixtures were calculated. Their
positions are also shown in the diagram. The filled markers show the three compositions
chosen to run the fuel cell with. Methane and carbon dioxide in a ratio 30/70 was stated
in the literature as giving the lowest carbon deposition [30, 39]. At 750 °C, this point is
well in the region without carbon deposition. The two other compositions were chosen
to be closer to the composition that can be expected from biogas, while still being in
the region where solid carbon is not stable in equilibrium. As mentioned earlier, biogas
usually consists of 60 % CH4 and 40 % CO2. This composition is marked by a hollow
circle in the phase diagram. Even at the highest temperature shown in the diagram,
850 °C, it is in the region where carbon can be deposited. Therefore it is clear, that
addition of oxygen donating species is necessary to prevent carbon covering of the anode.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Internal reforming
11
Figure 2.1: Ternary phase digram of the system C-H-O at 1 atm, temperatures from
25 °C to 850 °C. The positions of mixtures of CH4 and CO2 in different ratios are shown.
Full markers refer to compositions later used in the experiments.
The hollow circle
shows the composition expected for crude biogas. The other two hollow markers show
to extrema
The other two mixtures shown in the diagram, with 90 % CH4 and CO2 and 10 % of the
other, respectively, were added to show how changes in ratio would further influence the
carbon deposition. Increasing the content in CH4 to more than 40 % moves the mixture
into the region with carbon deposition at 750 °C. Reducing the methane content, of
course, moves the gas mix further into the region without carbon deposition. However,
already at slightly lower temperatures, carbon deposition becomes more and more likely:
At 600 °C the threshold is in the position of a gas mix containing only 10 % methane.
To prevent carbon deposition an operating temperature of at least 700 °C is therefore
required for a gas mixture with CH4/CO2 = 30/70, and higher temperatures at higher
methane content.
The high temperature sensitivity of thermodynamic stability of carbon formation
makes it likely that, even though the cell was operated in the “safe” region, carbon
might deposit in the gas inlet, where the temperature is high enough to facilitate fast
reaction, but too low to prevent carbon.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Theoretical background
Also fuel utilisation (FU) can influence the carbon deposition. Under current, the
amount of oxygen in the gas is increased, as O2– ions are supplied from the cathode
side. At higher FU, more oxygen is supplied per unit fuel, making carbon deposition
less likely [43].
2.2
Electrochemical properties of fuel cells
As fuel cells are electrochemical devices, their electrochemical properties are of major
interest. The main processes contributing to the cell polarisation are presented and
different methods for characterisation are introduced in the following.
2.2.1
Contributions to cell polarisation
The main processes taking place at a fuel cell can be summarized as the following: Chem-
ical reactions in the gas, diffusion of gas through the porous electrodes, electrochemical
reactions at the electrodes, transport of ions through the electrolyte, and transport of
electrons through the electrodes. All these processes have different properties and de-
pendencies on overall process parameters such as gas composition, temperature and cell
composition.
If fuel gas is provided to the anode and oxygen containing gas to the cathode, a
potential difference is established between the electrodes.
This open circuit voltage
(OCV) is theoretically given by the Nernst equation. Assuming only hydrogen being
employed as fuel (for simplicity), this Nernst potenial, or electromotive force (Emf) can
be calculated from the following equation and is directly related to the Gibbs free energy
∆G for the reaction [44]:
E = E◦+ RT
2F ln
(pa
H2(pc
O2)1/2
pa
H2O
)
= −∆G
2F
(2.9)
If an external load is connected to the cell, the voltage across the load will be smaller
than the theoretical voltage, due to losses and the finite velocity of the involved transfer
and conversion processes. This difference η(i) is called overpotential or polarisation and
is defined according to Eq. 2.10 for a voltage V(i) accross the external load [44].
η(i) = E(i) −V (i)
(2.10)
Theoretically, the potential E should not depend on the current (see Eq. 2.9). How-
ever, if the gas flow rates are not large enough to ensure constant gas composition even
at high current densities, these changes in composition will result in E being a function
of current density.
The contributions to the overpotential are generally divided into three groups:
1. Ohmic polarisation can be seen as the resistance to ion- and electron transport
in the electrolyte, the electrodes and the connections between, where the prior
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Electrochemical properties of fuel cells
13
usually has the largest resistance. The processes are fast, so the characteristic
response time is very small.
2. Concentration polarisation: The relation between conversion rate of the elec-
trochemical reaction and current is given by Faraday’s law:
n
t = I
zF
(2.11)
If a current is drawn from a fuel cell, the amount of gas being converted at the elec-
trodes has to follow this law. Diffusion through the porous electrode can become a
limiting factor for the reaction, especially at high current density. This resistance
to mass transfer is called concentration polarisation. It mainly depends on elec-
trode microstructure and thickness, gas partial pressure, the binary diffusivity of
the fuel gas in the fuel gas mixture and the current density, of course. As hydrogen
diffusion is very fast, in case of similar electrode thicknesses, the contribution of
the cathode will be larger. For anode supported fuel cells a similar contribution
of anode and cathode can be expected.
3. Activation polarisation is the overpotential originating from the different pro-
cesses taking place at the electrodes themselves, such as ad- and desorption of
reactants, surface diffusion and charge transfer. Besides depending on microstruc-
ture, gas composition, current density and general material properties, activation
polarisation is strongly temperature dependant, easing the differentiation from
concentration polarisation effects. Charge transfer resistance is the main contribu-
tion at low current density. In contrast to concentration polarisation, activation
polarisation is reduced in a fine microstructure with low porosity. Therefore a
trade off between low ηconc and ηact has to be made.
2.2.2
Characterisation
To evaluate the effect of operating conditions on fuel cell performance, it is important
to be able to determine the different contributions and separate them. The background
of characterisation methods used in this work is presented in the following.
2.2.2.1
DC methods
One of the most simple methods to characterise fuel cells is DC polarisation: The voltage
is measured as a function of current density (in the following called i-V curve).
A
schematic of the typical shape of such a curve is shown in Fig. 2.2. Starting at OCV at
zero current density, the voltage decreases with increasing current due to the polarisation
processes described in the previous section (2.2.1). At low current density, the major
contribution is due to the activation polarisation.
At intermediate current densities
activation polarisation is constant, while the ohmic contribution increases according to
Ohm’s law, resulting in linear increase of the cell voltage. At very high current densities
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Theoretical background
activation polarisation
concentration polarisation
V
i
OCV
Figure 2.2: Schematic of a typical iv-curve.
(or limited fuel flow/low turbulence in the fuel flow) concentration effects start to play
a role, leading to a larger decrease of the cell voltage with current.
The (secant) area specific resistance (ASR) can be calculated from i-V curves accord-
ing to Eq. 2.12.
ASRsec = Emf −U
i
(2.12)
with Emf calculated from the inlet gas composition and U and i being the voltage and
the current density measured across the cell, respectively. It provides a cell characteristic
that can be used both for determination of cell degradation, and for comparing different
cells. There are two major drawbacks, however: It contains both ohmic and polarisation
resistances originating from anode, cathode and electrolyte and as the Emf can be very
sensitive to gas composition, the fuel utilisation and the presence of leaks will have a
large influence on the ASR.
By modelling the consumption of fuel along the cell as in a chemical reactor, the
change in Emf can be calculated and the variations in Emf due to different fuel utili-
sation accounted for. The most simple model, valid in case of turbulent gas flow and
fast diffusion, is the continuously stirred tank reactor. Instead of using the inlet gas
composition to calculate the Emf, here the outlet gas composition is used, assuming this
to represent better the average gas composition. Another approach is the model of a
plug flow reactor, which takes into account the change in composition along the cell from
gas in- to outlet. The average Emf calculated from a first order approximation is given
in Eq. 2.13. Even though this model neglects the actual flow pattern, as well as other
influences such as temperature gradients, the corrected ASR will be more accurate [45].
Emfavg = E◦+ RT
2F ln
( ¯pH2(¯pO2)1/2
¯pH2O
)
(2.13)
where ¯p are the respective average partial pressures calculated from in- and outlet gas.
The contributions from the different sources of polarisation as described in section 2.2.1
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Electrochemical properties of fuel cells
15
can only be distinguished by exploiting the property that the activation polarisation
is predominant at low current density, while gas diffusion is limiting at high current
densities.
Gas leaks present in the cell, either due to cracks, or due to insufficient sealing will
also influence the ASR. Assuming the leak having a homogeneous influence across the
whole cell area, the measured OCV of the cell can be used instead of the calculated Emf
when calculating the ASR. The different composition of the gas is so accounted for [45].
2.2.2.2
AC methods
As mentioned, the individual contributions of the different electrodes cannot easily be
separated using DC methods. In wet electrochemisty, reference electrodes are usully
employed to measure individual electrode contributions. To this end, electrodes have
to be positioned in the electrolyte, which imposes a considerable obstacle in the case of
thin film solid electrolytes. A powerful alternative to conventional DC characterisation
is Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) [45].
EIS can be used in many different applications, where both the experimental tech-
nique and the interpretation of results can be very different. Also the depth of theoretical
background that is needed for valid interpretation is varying. In the following, general
aspects of EIS are presented that are relevant for the degradation analysis of SOFCs in
this work.
In EIS a small amplitude AC voltage is used to excite an electrochemical system close
to the open circuit voltage. At this voltage, a linear response can be expected according
to the Butler-Volmer relation. The different processes described in the introduction to
this section have different time-response behaviour.
Exposing a system, in this case the SOFC, to a potential difference leads to a het-
erogeneous charge distribution (= polarisation) at the interfaces of the system. Such
interfaces are for example the macroscopic interfaces between electrodes, electrolyte and
gas phase, but also microscopic interfaces such as grain boundaries in the solid phases.
The rate of change of polarisation at these interfaces is characteristic for the respective
interface i.e. for the processes taking place leading to the polarisation. While trans-
port of electrons and ions within a solid has a short response time, diffusion and gas
conversion reactions are very slow. Charge transfer and surface diffusion on electrodes
show intermediate response time. Due to these differences, the resistances caused by
the individual processes can be differentiated by measuring the impedance of the cell in
a broad range of frequencies.
The resistance term in Ohm’s law is replaced by the impedance Z when using AC
voltage:
I(t) = E(t)
Z
(2.14)
where Z depends on the frequency of the voltage and can be written in complex numbers
as
Z(ω) = Z′ + jZ′′
(2.15)
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Theoretical background
Z’ is the real part, sometimes also termed Re or Zreal and Z” the imaginary, also written
as Im or Zimag.
From the definition of basic circuit elements and their behaviour in AC voltage, their
impedance written in complex numbers can easily be derived. These impedances are
given in Tab. 2.1. Both capacitance and inductance are functions of frequency, as it is
clear from the definition in the said table. However, their dependency is different, im-
plying that by varying the frequency and measuring the response, they can be separated.
Also different capacitative/inductive contributions can be distinguished when changing
the frequency, as the response will show different scaling.
Real systems usually don’t show ideal response as capacitor or inductor, but rather
a distribution of a number of similar ones. This is due to the material properties being
distributed on a microscopic level, but only the average response being accessible in
the measurement. Besides that also non-local processes taking place in homogeneous
material (such as diffusion) lead to non-ideal response [46]. The constant phase element
(CPE) is an electrical circuit element, created to take this distribution into account.
Table 2.1: Impedance of basic circuit elements
Element
Impedance
Resistance R
R
Capacitance C
1
jωC
Inductance L
jωL
Constant Phase
Element CPE
1
Q0(jω)n
Any electrochemical system is, of course, more complex than these basic components:
In addition to the ohmic resistance of (mainly) the electrolyte, electrochemical double
layers at interfaces, e.g. between electrode and electrolyte, pose capacitative behaviour,
while diffusion processes are even more complicated. Therefore several of these ideal
components have to be combined, to describe the impedance response of an electro-
chemical system. Such model circuits are constructed where individual processes are
represented by individual or a combination of these basic elements, to interpret EI spec-
tra in detail. The parameters are then fitted to the measured spectra using Complex
Non-Linear Least Square Fitting (CNLS). This method is very powerful, if there is a
direct connection between the elements being fitted and the physical processes taking
place. Care has to be taken, however, as the spectra of circuits containing more than two
elements are not unique for one specific circuit. This poses one of the main limitations
of EIS, as it is very easy to fit non-physical circuits with very good results for fitting,
but no relevance.
Equivalent circuit for SOFC There are two main approaches that are used in the
fitting of SOFC impedance spectra: If not so much detailed knowledge on the individual
processes is required, a simple equivalent circuit modelling the shape of the impedance
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Electrochemical properties of fuel cells
17
spectrum only, can be used: A resistor for ohmic resistance in series with two elements
of a CPE and a resistor in parallel each. These two R-CPE elements model the sum
of low- and high frequency processes, respectively. From these values the contributions
due to mass transport phenomena (low frequency) and from charge transfer (high fre-
quency) can be estimated. The sum of the two resistances gives the total polarisation
resistance [47].
In many applications in research, this simple distinction is not enough, as one is
interested in the differentiation between the individual processes taking place at anode
and cathode. State of the art for detailed analysis is a circuit consisting of an inductance
(originating from the wiring), a resistance (ohmic term) and several R-CPE-elements
in series for the electrode processes and gas conversion/gas diffusion. The number of
processes depends very much on the actual composition of the cell, as well as on the
composition of anode and cathode gasses. Sometimes also more specialized elements such
as Warburg or Gerischer are employed for modelling diffusion or cathode processes [48–
52]. A newer approach is moving away from fitting model circuit elements, that don’t
have real physical meaning, towards fitting phyiscally more meaningful values such as
diffusion coefficients. This enables direct characterisation of diffusion properties of the
electrodes and prevents fitting of too many, potentially meaningless parameters [40].
Calculation of differences In many cases a detailed analysis as gained from CNLS
fitting is not required for all recorded spectra. As the approximate frequencies at which
the contributions of different processes can be expected are often known, a lot of in-
formation can already be extracted by plotting the imaginary part of the impedance
as a function of frequency (known as Bode plot). To visualize small changes in these
contributions it can be useful to calculate the difference of these spectra and plot the
difference as a function of the frequency [53].
Frequency ranges Tab. 2.2 gives an overview over the frequency ranges that can
be expected for different processes at state-of-the-art anodes. If the frequency ranges
are not known, because the fuel cell or gas deviate too much from state-of-the-art, a
series of tests can be carried out, varying anode- and cathode gasses and temperature.
Comparing the resulting impedance spectra, the contributions can then be assigned to
be anode-gas, cathode-gas or temperature dependent, from which they can further be
assigned to physical processes, as for example described in [40, 48, 49].
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Theoretical background
Table 2.2: Frequency range of different anode polarisation processes in impedance spec-
tra obtained between 650-1000 °C. Adopted from [53].
Summit
frequency
range Hz
Related processes
Key parameter(s)
I
35000-20000
Ionic transport in ce-
ramic matrix
Temperature
II
4500-500
Charge transfer at Ni-
YSZ TPB
Temperature, H2 par-
tial pressure
III
100-10
Gas diffusion in anode
support/ gas channels
H2 and O2 partial pres-
sures, microstructure
IV
5-0.1
Gas conversion/ diffu-
sion/ reforming reac-
tions
H2 and O2 partial pres-
sures, ratio of C/H/O
in fuel
2.3
Effect of Impurities on SOFC performance
As mentioned in the introduction, biogas contains a lot of impurities that can be poi-
sonous for fuel cells.
The specific content of impurities depends even more on the
origin of the gas than the overall composition itself. In addition to H2S, organic com-
pounds containing sulphur or chlorine and higher hydrocarbons are usually expected to
be present [3]. In recent years, due to the extensive use of siloxanes in cosmetic and
body care products, these have also become a major issue in biogas originating from
landfills and waste water treatment plants [54–56].
Despite being the type of fuel cell that is most tolerant to impurities in the fuel
gas, a long, stable lifetime for SOFCs is only given, if the fuel gas is sufficiently pure.
The exact tolerances vary over several orders of magnitude depending on the materials
and operating conditions of the fuel cells and whether cells are operated by themselves
or as part of cell stacks. In the following, first an overview over possible degradation
mechanisms of different impurities is given. Then the effect of hydrogen sulphide is
discussed in more detail, being one of the most thoroughly studied impurities.
2.3.1
Types of electrode poisoning
Depending on the kind, concentration and combination of impurities present, following
main types of poisoning can be differentiated: [56]
1. Adsorption type poisoning is seen by sulphur in the presence of low amounts of
carbon. Fuel access to the catalyst is reversibly blocked.
2. Sublimation type poisoning is typical for Cl containing impurities: NiCl2 is
formed and sublimes leading to the loss of Ni from the anode.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Effect of Impurities on SOFC performance
19
3. Deposition type degradation permanently blocks the catalyst surface. It can
occur due to siloxanes as well as sulphur and hydrocarbons (in form of carbon
deposition).
4. Reaction type poisoning: At high carbon content and/or low temperatures, sul-
phur can react with Ni to form Ni sulfides which effectively block fuel access.
5. Grain growth type poisoning leads to a decrease of the TPB area and Ni perco-
lation and is typical for boron containing impurities.
6. Eutectic type poisoning can be seen from phosphorous and sulphur (at high
carbon content and temperature): The catalyst surface is covered by an eutectic
formed.
Considering the impurities most commonly present in biogas, the main types of
poisoning that can be expected are deposition type and, depending on the amount
of sulphur containing species, adsorption, or reaction type poisoning. If considerable
amounts of chlorine containing compounds are present, also sublimation type poisoning
can occur.
2.3.2
Effect of hydrogen sulphide (H2S)
Hydrogen sulphide is not only present in biogas, but also in other sources for methane
containing gasses (such as natural gas and syngas from gasifiers). Therefore the effect
of H2S on fuel cells has been in the focus of research for years.
The main effect of
the presence of hydrogen sulphide is a cell voltage drop attributed to the poisoning
of active sites for the electrode reaction, present both in pure hydrogen and in carbon
containing fuels [52, 54, 56–60]. Depending on concentration and operating temperature,
this voltage drop can be reversible or irreversible. At temperatures above 600 °C and
H2S concentrations below 100 ppm the effect is generally believed to be reversible [53].
At higher concentrations non-reversible reactions such as formation of nickel sulfides
can lead to permanent performance loss. The impact of S poisoning of Ni is even higher
for the catalysis of the reforming reaction of carbon containing gasses, especially in the
case of steam reforming.
[60–62] A recent study shows that dry reforming, which was
employed in this work, seems to be less sensitive to S poisoning [63].
Two specific effects are discussed in more detail below: potential increase of carbon
deposition in connection with H2S and loss of Ni percolation.
2.3.2.1
Impact on gas reforming and carbon deposition
As described in section 2.1, carbon deposition is an issue in fuel cells operated with
carbon containing fuels. When using such gasses, besides being relevant for the charge
transfer reaction, Ni in the anode plays a second important role as catalyst of the
reforming reaction (also described in section 2.1). Therefore poisoning by sulphur can
deteriorate the catalytic properties and increase the occurrence of side reactions such as
carbon formation.
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Theoretical background
Shiratori et al. [35] suggested from experiments using actual biogas that the presence
of H2S in the gas increased carbon deposition significantly, compared to a synthetic gas
mixture with a similar ratio of CH4/CO2. In contrast to that, catalytic studies by the
group of Lakshminarayanan [61, 62] and Johnson et al. [63] suggest that H2S can reduce
the activity of the Ni catalyst towards CH4 so much that no conversion takes place and
hence no carbon is deposited. The catalytic studies were carried out on powdered anode
material, hence the results are not necessarily applicable to real cells.
There is less debate on effect of sulphur on the reforming reaction itself: As men-
tioned before, the reforming capabilities of Ni are clearly reduced in the presence of
H2S, with steam reforming being more sensitive than dry reforming. It is suspected that
the increased sensitivity in steam reforming originates from steam promoting a higher
interaction of the catalyst surface with sulphur: The mobility on the surface is assumed
to be increased, leading to S diffusing to and blocking the sites most active for methan
conversion [61–63]. Interestingly, similar effects have also been seen for the H2S adsorp-
tion properies of active charcoal: The adsorption capacity is significantly increased if
steam is present in the gas [64–67].
2.3.2.2
Loss of Ni-percolation
To ensure functionality of fuel cell electrodes, they have to be both ionic and electronic
conducting and catalyse the electrode reaction. In the case of Ni/YSZ anodes, Ni pro-
vides electronic and YSZ ionic conductivity. For optimal performance, a percolating
network is required to ensure conductivity throughout the anode.
This network can be lost in the presence of H2S in the fuel, leading to irreversible cell
degradation. It can be seen from the irreversible increase of ohmic and high frequency
anode resistance in impedance spectra corresponding to the ionic conductivity in the
anode. Additionally, SEM at low voltage (described in section 2.4) can directly visualize
the loss of percolation and increase in porosity in the active anode layer. The same effect
was also found at a fuel cell operated at higher overvoltage. Therefore it was concluded,
that loss of Ni percolation is rather a result of pushing a cell to it’s limits, than of H2S
specifically [57].
2.4
Microscopic visualisation methods for SOFCs
Establishing a sufficient contrast between Ni, YSZ and pores with microscopic meth-
ods is not trivial. While it is possible using optical microscopy, the resolution of this
method is largely not sufficient for the fine microstructure of Ni-YSZ anodes. At normal
acceleration voltages (10-20 kV), however, the backscatter coefficient of Ni and YSZ is
too similar to provide sufficient contrast. Using SEM at accelaration voltages below
approx. 4 kV, the backscatter coefficent of Ni increases, while that of YZS is constant.
However, these voltages are too low for the backscatter detector to work efficiently. A
low-voltage method for field-emission SEM developed by Thydén et al. [68] makes use
of the influence of the backscatter coefficient on the SE image. An image obtained from
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Microscopic visualisation methods for SOFCs
21
(a) Lateral SE image
(b) Percolation image
Figure 2.3: SEM images showing percolation effect on Ni-grains. The arrows point to
two grains, that could be identified as Ni from (a) but are not percolating, as they appear
dark in (b).
the lateral SE detector at acceleration voltage of 0.95 kV is shown in Fig. 2.3a. The
light grey phase is Ni, the darker grey phase YSZ and the dark regions are pores filled
with epoxy. Besides being brighter, Ni also exhibits a larger amount of scratches, as it
is very soft compared to YSZ.
At the same acceleration voltage, a different effect can be used to illuminate perco-
lating Ni, also developed by Thydén et al. [68]. As only percolating Ni provides paths
for electron transport, it is relevant to be able to differentiate these grains from non-
percolating ones.
Ni exhibits a secondary electron yield above 1 around 1 kV. This
means, that electrons have to be supplied from ground to fill in for secondary electrons
emitted. If a grain is not percolating it will charge positively reducing the secondary
electron emission. This leads to a contrast between percolating and non-percolating
phase visible in an in-lense SE detecor. Such an image is shown in 2.3b. The bright
phase is percolating Ni, the dark phase is YSZ, epoxy (pores) and non-percolating Ni.
The arrows point at two grains that were identified as Ni from the lateral SE image, but
are not percolating from the percolation image.
==PAGE:34==
22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Materials and Methods
In order to investigate the effect of gas composition of synthetically mixed gasses on the
one hand and gas from a landfill on the other hand, two sets of tests (in the following
called test 1 and test 2) were carried out.
The fuel cell set-up and the parameters
for each of these tests are given in the first part of this chapter. In the second part,
electrochemical and microstructural characterisation methods are explained.
Finally
gas acquisition and characterisation are described.
3.1
Fuel cell setup
Testing was carried out in test rigs equipped with a furnace containing the cell house,
gas supply with thermal mass flow controllers (Brooks and MKS), an electronic load, the
possibility of switching between fuel cell and electrolysis cell mode and a sophisticated
safety system for the gas supply. A different test rig was used for the second test series;
the influence on the results should be minimal, though. The setup is described in more
detail for example in [45]. All gas flows and temperatures were regulated using an on-
line software system. Also the electrochemical measurements (i-V curves, impedance
spectra) were initiated through software.
3.1.1
Fuel cells
In the experiments described here, anode supported fuel cells with a nominal surface
area of 16 cm2 (4 cm x 4 cm) were used, consisting of an anode/electrolyte half cell from
Topsoe Fuel Cells provided with a barrier layer and cathode at DTU Energy. Fig. 3.1a
shows a photograph of the cathode side of the fuel cell used in test 2 after the end of
the test.
The anodes consisted of a Ni-YSZ porous support and a Ni-YSZ porous active anode
layer. The electrolyte was dense YSZ. On the cathode side of the electrode, a CGO
(cerium gadolinium oxide) barrier layer (applied by PVD) was followed by a LSC-CGO
cathode and a LSC current collection layer. The layer-structure is illustrated in a SEM
image in Fig. 3.1b. All cells were taken from TOFC batch number 1200003700.
3.1.2
Cell house
To be able to provide fuel gas to the anode and oxygen containing gas to the cathode
without mixing them, the fuel cell was mounted into a cell house. Besides separating the
anode and cathode side, the cell house also provides electrical contacts. An Al2O3 cell
test house with gas probe outlets for on-line gas analysis at the gas inlet and outlet sides
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Materials and Methods
(a) Photograph of the cathode side of the
fuel cell after test 2
(b) SEM image of the reference cell showing the cell
microstructure.
Figure 3.1: Fuel cell
Figure 3.2: Photograph of the Al2O3 cell house. The top consist of two parts: the frame,
holding the fuel cell in place, and an insert providing electrical contact (gold mesh) and
oxygen containing gas to the cell.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Test parameters
25
Figure 3.3: Sketch showing the cross section of the cell house with fuel cell, sealing and
current collectors.
of the anode and a two-part top consisting of an Al2O3 frame and an insert was used. A
photograph of the cell house is shown in Fig. 3.2. The insert of the top part was placed
in a way to achieve cross flow of anode and cathode gasses. Temperature probes were
positioned in the corners of the cell at the cathode side as close as possible to the actual
cell surface. A schematic of the cross section of how the fuel cell is assembled to the cell
house is shown in Fig. 3.3. To achieve good electrical contact with the anode and at the
same time supply fuel gas homogeneously, the anode side of the fuel cell was applied to
a Ni-plate (0.1 mm, in contact with the cell house) and two types of Ni-mesh (a fine
mesh, 0.22 mm thick and a rough mesh, corrugated). The outside of the cell was sealed
with two Au-foil frames and an Al2O3 frame in the middle. The cell house top-insert
was covered in Au-foil and Au-mesh to achieve gas supply and current collection on the
cathode side.
3.2
Test parameters
The following start up procedure was applied for each of the two tests: After assembling
the cell to the cell house and the cell house to the furnace, the whole set up was heated
to 850 °C with a heating rate of 1 °C/min under Ar at the anode side. After sealing
at this temperature for 2 h, the anode gas was switched to 9 % H2 in N2 and reduction
started. After another 2 h, the gas was switched to 20.5 L/h H2 containing 2.5 % H2O
for 1 h, followed by 25 L/h dry H2 for another hour. The cathode gas flow (air) was
slowly increased to 140 L/h at the same time.
After reduction, the “fingerprint” of the cell was recorded. This is a standardized
set of gas- and temperature variations to check the performance of the cell compared to
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Materials and Methods
other cells. The first step in the fingerprint is testing of gas leaks by variation of gas
flows at anode and cathode. Then impedance spectra were recorded at 850, 800, 750
and 700 °C in H2 with 4, 20 and 50 % H2O at the anode, and 140 L/h air or O2 at the
cathode, respectively. For all combinations except when containing 50 % H2O also i-V
curves were recorded.
After the fingerprint, the fuel gas was changed. The further procedure is described
in the following separately for each test.
At the end of each test the fingerprint procedure was repeated to compare cell per-
formance before and after.
For SEM analysis, a reference cell was prepared by reducing it under the same pa-
rameters described above. After reduction, the cell was cooled down and further treated
in the same way as the other cells.
3.2.1
Test 1 - synthetic biogas
For the first test, synthetic biogas was employed. Methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide
(CO2), were mixed and diluted with nitrogen (N2) to simulate the expected composition
of the landfill gas used in later experiments.
First the cell degradation behaviour at different current densities was monitored.
Then the gas composition was varied. First a ratio of CH4 to CO2 of 30 to 70 % was em-
ployed, as this should give the minimal carbon deposition according to the literature [30,
39]. As a ratio CH4/CO2 = 60/40 was expected in the actual biogas, the CH4 con-
tent was then stepwise increased guided by the thermodynamic calculations described
in section 2.1 to avoid carbon deposition.
Table 3.1: Overview over experimental parameters in the first test using synthetic biogas
Segment
number
Gas flow L/h
Tcenter
°C
Current
density
A/cm2
Duration
h
Comments
CO2
CH4
N2
0
10.5
4.5
5
742.6
OCV
44
1
10.5
4.5
5
750.2
1.0
100
2
10.5
4.5
5
747.5
0.5
100
3
9.75
5.25
5
747.5
0.5
100
4
9.0
6.0
5
747.5
0.5
100
5
10.5
4.5
5
750.7
0.5
100
reproduction
of segment 2
A detailed overview over gas flow and current settings is given in Tab. 3.1. The
chronological sequence of test segments is given in Fig. 3.4. The times at which impedance
spectra and i-V curves were recorded are indicated in the figure.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Test parameters
27
Figure 3.4: Timeline of test segments marking times at which i-V curves and impedance
spectra (at OCV and under current) were recorded. FP indicates the cell fingerprint
recorded at the beginning and the end of each test. For information regarding operating
conditions of the individual segments see Tab. 3.1 for test 1 and Tab. 3.2 for test 2.
3.2.2
Test 2 - landfill gas
In test 1, significant degradation of the cell could be seen in the first 200 h.
The
lowest degradation rate was found in segment 4 with a ratio of CH4/CO2 = 2/3. This
gas composition was therefore chosen for the tests involving landfill gas. To avoid the
degradation at the beginning of the test to interfere with the interpretation of the effect
of the landfill gas, the first 400 h of the test were run using the synthetic biogas mix of
the same composition as in test 1, segment 4. An overview over the test segments of
test 2 is given in Tab. 3.2. The timeline is shown in Fig. 3.4. Argon was used as inert
gas instead of nitrogen, as a different test rig was used where argon was the only inert
gas available.
Due to problems when changing to carbon containing gasses after the fingerprint
procedure, the anode was exposed to 0.5 L/h oxygen only, for approximately one minute.
As cell voltage and impedance spectrum showed no significant degradation, the test
programme was continued after repetition of the fingerprint measurements at 750 °C.
The amount of biogas from the landfill available for the experiments was very limited.
As the aim was to use landfill gas for a time period as long as possible, the fuel flow rate
was decreased compared to test 1. To evaluate the effect of using landfill gas without
it being concealed by the effect of higher fuel utilisation due to lower fuel flow rate, the
total fuel flow rate was reduced from 20 L/h to 8.25 L/h of synthetic biogas after the
first segment in test 2, providing a reference value at lower fuel supply. Due to the lower
limits of the MFCs, the inert gas content had to be increased from 25 to 30 % at the
lower fuel flow rate.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Materials and Methods
The four gas bottles containing landfill gas were filled with CO2 prior to connecting
them to the rig to provide a similar ratio of CH4/CO2 as the synthetic gas (for details
see section 3.5). Only one bottle could be connected to the gas line at a time. To prevent
damage to the cell, the current was reduced to zero and the gas switched to synthetic
biogas when changing the gas bottle. In the first section using landfill gas (section 4),
three gas bottles were used. The test was interrupted and set back to synthetic biogas
after 71 h due to public holidays. Afterwards one bottle was used in the 6th section
without a gas filter, to see the effect of the gas filter.
Table 3.2: Overview over experimental parameters in the second test using synthetic
biogas and real landfill gas. L stands for landfill gas.
Segment
number
Gas flow L/h
Tcorner
°C
Current
density
A/cm2
Duration
h
Comments
CO2
CH4
Ar
L
1
9
6
5
-
745.3
0.5
136.5
gas
cleaner
connected
after 118 h
2
3.45
2.3
2.5
-
749.6
0.5
98
3
3.45
2.3
2.5
-
749.3
OCV
185.5
4
-
-
-
5
748.4
0.5
62
interrupted
for
change
of gas bottle
5
3.45
2.3
2.5
750.0
0.5
91
6
-
-
-
5
748.7
0.5
28.5
without gas
cleaner
3.3
Electrochemical characterisation
The electrochemical performance of the cell was analysed prior and after the long term
tests and in regular intervals in between.
Two methods were employed: impedance
spectroscopy and DC polarisation of the cells.
3.3.1
Polarisation (i-V curves)
A Delta Elektronika DC power supply was used for recording current-voltage curves. The
parameters used are given in Tab. 3.3. The current was first increased until reaching
either the current or voltage limit and then decreased again. Smaller current steps were
employed at the beginning and close to reaching the voltage limit, as indicated in the
table.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Electrochemical characterisation
29
Table 3.3: Setup for recording i-V curves.
Parameter
Setting
Current step
1
0.25 A
2
1 A
3
0.1 A
Current limit
40 A
Voltage limit
600 mV
Time between steps
5 s
3.3.2
Impedance spectroscopy
Impedance spectroscopy was used to gain more insight into different resistance contri-
butions.
Different devices were used in the course of experiments: during the first fingerprint
tests of test 1, a Solartron 1252A frequency response analyser directly connected to the
rig was used. Later a Solartron 1255A frequency response analyser was used, which was
connected through the network. This was also used for test 2, until the end of segment
2, after which a Solartron 1255B was again directly connected to the test rig.
The setup for impedance measurements is given in Tab. 3.4. For test 1, and test 2 un-
til the end of segment 2, only the first three frequency segments were measured. During
the tests with landfill gas, a low frequency segment was added to better resolve the low
frequency processes. Impedance spectra were automatically corrected for contributions
of the setup. No correction data was available for frequencies below 0.09 Hz, therefore
the spectra were used without correction if low frequency data had been recorded.
Table 3.4: Setup for recording of impedance spectra.
Parameter
Setting
Amplitude
3 V
Polarisation
0 V
Frequency
descending
12 points/decade
Segments
1
2
3
4
Integration time / s
200
100
50
5
Max. Frequency / Hz
96850
6.598
0.6598
0.0954
Min. Frequency /Hz
6.7
0.67
0.08/0.11
0.02
1 0.08 Hz when only three segments were measured, 0.1 Hz when a fourth
segment was added
3.3.3
Data analysis
The data acquired using the different methods was analysed and plotted using the in-
house developed data analysis software Ravdav [69].
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Materials and Methods
Calculation of cell voltage degradation rate
The rate of cell voltage degradation
was calculated for each segment using the cell voltage data after removing data points
recorded at times when i-V curves or impedance spectra were recorded. A straight line
was fitted to the data by linear least square fitting and the negative of the slope taken
as degradation rate. To calculate the rate in percent, the rate was related to the cell
voltage at the end of the segment.
Calculation of ASR
The area specific resistance was calculated from the i-V curves
according to Eq. 2.12. As reference Emf, the OCV at the start of the i-V curve was used.
For test 1, also fuel utilisation corrected ASR was calculated using in-house developed
software. The calculation was based on modelling the gas flow through the cell as a plug
flow reactor as described in [45].
Impedance spectra
Before plotting impedance spectra, the inductance was esti-
mated based on the Kramers-Kronig transform and subtracted using Ravdav. Difference
spectra of impedance spectra were calculated by directly subtracting the impedance at
the respective frequencies.
3.4
Microstructural characterisation
The microstructure of the fuel cells was analysed after the long term test using scanning
electron microscopy. A reference cell was prepared by reducing a cell from the same
batch following the procedure described in section 3.2.
Cross sections of each cell were prepared by embedding in epoxy and polishing. To
this end the cell was cut in half as shown in Fig. 3.5. The microstructure was investigated
in three regions of interest: the region close to the gas inlet, the middle of the cell and
close to the outlet. For analysis of the fractured cross section, the non-embedded halves
of the cells were fractured perpendicular to the fuel flow direction as indicated in Fig. 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Sketch of the positions of cut and fracture for obtaining cross sections of the
fuel cells which were analysed using SEM.
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Landfill gas
31
A Zeiss SUPRA 35 field emission scanning electron microscope was used, equipped
with a lateral and an in-lens secondary electron detector, as well as a back-scatter electron
detector. The fracture cross-sections were first analysed at an acceleration voltage of
15 kV (working distance approx. 9 mm). Images with the lateral SE and the BSE
detector were obtained. Then the acceleration voltage was reduced to 0.95 kV (working
distance approx. 5 mm) to take percolation images (as described in section 2.4) using
the in-lens SE detector. The polished cross sections were only analysed at 0.95 kV and
5 mm working distance. Images were recorded with both the in-lense and the lateral SE
detector.
3.5
Landfill gas
Biogas was collected from Odense Landfill Stige Ø.
3.5.1
Acquisition and storage
The landfill gas was filled into conventional 50 L gas cylinders directly at the gas collec-
tion site of the old landfill on Stige Ø. The landfill is covered by at least 1 m earth in
the whole area. The gas developing as product of anaerobic decomposition of organic
matter is collected through pipes applying slight under-pressure at various points across
the landfill area and brought together. The merged gas was then compressed to approx-
imately 3.0-3.5 bar and dried to a dewpoint of 3 °C by condensation before filling it into
the bottles.
In order to reduce carbon deposition and increase the dry reforming capability of the
landfill gas when used by the SOFC, the CO2-content of the gas should be increased.
As the pressure in the gas bottles was only around 3 bar, it was decided to directly add
approximately 0.75 bar pure CO2 directly into the bottles. The gas from the bottles
was then fed to the test rigs without further gas addition. Using information from a gas
analysis provided from the gas supplier (as given in Appendix A), a very rough estimate
of the gas composition after addition of CO2 was made. It is given in Tab. 3.5. The
gas analysis had been carried out several years ago on a mixture of gas from different
areas of the landfill. Significant differences between the result of this analysis and the
gas used here can therefore be expected.
Table 3.5: Estimated composition of landfill gas after addition of CO2.
Gas content [%]
CO2
CH4
N2
O2
44
32
23.2
0.8
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Materials and Methods
3.5.2
Cleaning strategy
From a gas analysis provided by the gas supplier (see Appendix A), significant amounts
of impurities had to be expected in the gas. To reduce the poisoning effect of the gas,
the feed was lead through a tube filled with 10 g activated carbon pellets (Norit ROZ 3,
Cabot, USA) at room temperature before entering the cell in test 2, segment 4. In test
2, segment 6 the gas was used without prior cleaning.
3.5.3
Characterisation
The gas was analysed for the presence of impurities using gas chromatography - mass
spectrometry. The gas samples were taken directly from the gas cylinder after use at
the rig, i.e. with CO2 already added.
A Varian Saturn 4D mass spectrometer (ion trap mass analyser) with a 3400 gas
chromatograph was used. The settings of operating parameters are shown in Tab. 3.6.
A 1 mL gas sample was injected using a VICI Pressure-Lok Analytical Syringe.
Table 3.6: Parameter settings of the GC-MS
GC-conditions
Column
GsBP PoraPLOT Q-Equivalent,
l: 30 m, i.d.: 0.32 mm, 15 µm particles
Heating
Segment
Tstart
[°C]
Heating rate
[°C/min]
Time
[min]
1
50
0.0
5.00
2
200
10.0
15.00
3
200
0.0
5.00
Injector temperature
250 °C
Transfer line temperature
200 °C
MS-conditions
Ion Mode
EI
Mass range
40-100 m/z
Scan time
0.5 s
Fil./Mul. Delay
0 or 2 min
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, first the data of the electrochemical characterisation of the cells during
the tests are shown and discussed. Then the results of the microstructural analysis, and
finally the results of the gas analysis are given. At the end of the chapter an overall
discussion summarizes and compares important results from the different methods. The
aim of the first test was to evaluate the effect of different ratios of CH4 to CO2 in
synthetic biogas on the cell performance with emphasis on signs of carbon deposition.
In the second test, the cell performance with landfill gas as fuel was compared to the
performance when using a synthetic gas mixture. The discussion of results was therefore
focussed on these main interests.
4.1
Electrochemical properties
4.1.1
Development of cell voltage over time
A major goal in this study was to determine the long-term effect of biogas fuel on
the performance of SOFCs.
Cell voltage is an easy-to-measure characteristic of fuel
cells, giving a fast measure of the overall performance for easy comparison of equivalent
cells or to monitor changes over time. The cell voltage at OCV depends on the fuel
composition and can give information on the gas tightness of the setup and an estimate
of the grade of gas conversion in case of carbon containing fuels. Under current, while
still being sensitive to fuel composition, it gives information about cell polarisation. This
information then has to be combined with information from i-V curves and impedance
spectroscopy in order to draw conclusions on details of processes taking place in the gas
and the cell.
Figures 4.1 and 4.2 show the cell voltage as a function of time as well as the oxygen
potentials measured at the gas outlet for the two tests. The oxygen potential is the
potential across a YSZ-membrane due to different concentrations of oxygen. One side of
the membrane is exposed to the outlet gas of the cell, while the other is supplied with
air. The potential difference can be directly related to the oxygen concentration by the
Nernst equation.
Jumps in cell voltage are observed when changing gas composition or current density.
In the graphs, the different segments are distinguished by colour. For both tests, the
data was cleared of variations in cell voltage due to measurement of i-V curves and
impedance spectra, for better readability of the graphs. The oxygen potential at the
gas inlet was also measured. It did not correlate with either cell voltage or potential at
the outlet, nor with gas composition or current density. It is assumed that the position
didn’t allow analysis of the fully mixed gas. Therefore the data is not presented here.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.1: Development of cell voltage and oxygen potential at gas outlet over the
runtime of test 1 (excluding the fingerprint test at beginning and end). The arrows
indicate when the cell was operated at OCV. 15 L/h CH4 and CO2 in varied ratios,
5 L/h N2, varied current density, 750 °C.
In the graph for test 1 (Fig. 4.1), the open circuit cell voltage (OCV) at the beginning
and between the individual segments is shown (as indicated by arrows). It decreases
from segments 0 to 2 and further to 5, although the same gas composition was used. It
increases as expected when changing the gas composition to a gas with lower oxygen
content in segments 3 and 4. It clearly depends both on runtime and gas composition.
The oxygen potential at the cell outlet at OCV is slightly lower than the cell voltage,
probably due to minor gas leaks and a higher temperature at the outlet. The change
in OCV over time could be due to deterioration of the set-up tightness or to changes in
gas composition as a result of degradation of the Ni catalyst (e.g. by deposits).
Looking at the differences in cell voltage between the different segments, excluding
segment 0, the largest difference is between segment 1, with i = 1 A/cm2 and the other
segments with half the current density. The effect of changing gas composition is much
smaller. Increasing the current changes both the fuel utilisation (which changes fuel com-
position and thus cell voltage, see Tab. 4.1) and the ohmic resistance of the electrolyte
(according to Ohm’s law). A large effect could therefore be expected. More details on
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
35
the effect of varying gas composition can be seen in i-V curves and impedance spectra
as discussed in section 4.1.3. The largest difference between the different segments is in
the slope, i.e. the degradation rate. This is further discussed in section 4.1.2.
Table 4.1: Fuel utilisation for selected segments of tests 1 and 2. The fuel utilisation of
biogas is based on assumptions regarding composition given in Tab. 3.5.
Test
Segment
number
Gas composition
Current
density
A/cm2
Gas flow
rate L/h
Fuel utili-
sation
%
1
1
CH4/CO2 = 30/70
1.0
20
40.5
1
2
CH4/CO2 = 30/70
0.5
20
20.7
1
3
CH4/CO2 = 35/65
0.5
20
19.2
1
4
CH4/CO2 = 40/60
0.5
20
17.6
2
1
CH4/CO2 = 40/60
0.5
20
13.8
2
2
CH4/CO2 = 40/60
0.5
8.25
37.3
2
4
Landfill gas + CO2
0.5
5
53.5
In the second test, the effect of synthetic biogas with CH4/CO2 = 40/60 was com-
pared with the effect of using real landfill gas diluted with CO2 to achieve a similar
composition as the synthetic mixture. The development of cell voltage with time is
shown in Fig. 4.2. As for test 1, the cell voltage is not shown or was interpolated at
times when i-V curves and impedance spectra were taken.
Towards the end of segment 1 a step change occurred both in the cell voltage and
the oxygen potential at the gas outlet. This is a result of changing the gas flow to pass
through the active carbon gas cleaner before entering the cell at this point of the test.
In segment 2, the cell voltage is similar to the first segment, while the oxygen potential
at the outlet is much lower. The fuel flow was reduced to less than half for segment
2, increasing the fuel usage (see Tab. 4.1) and hence changing the composition of the
outlet gas. A higher fuel usage means a higher content of oxygen containing species and
hence a lower oxygen potential as the difference in oxygen content between the exhaust
gas and air is lower. In the third segment the cell voltage and the potential at the outlet
lie close together as the cell was run at OCV. The difference of 13 mV can be explained
by minor gas leaks and the higher temperature at the outlet, as also observed in test 1
(see Fig. 4.1).
Landfill gas diluted with CO2 was used in the fourth segment for the first time. Three
gas bottles were used sequentially, switching to the synthetic mixture in between, which
caused small steps in cell voltage (see Fig. 4.2; the different bottles are indicated by a, b
and c). Both cell voltage and oxygen potential at the outlet are slightly lower than when
using the synthetic mixture in segments 2 and 5 (Fig. 4.2). As the exact composition
of the landfill gas is not known, at this point it is not possible to say whether this
difference is due to the composition of the landfill gas being different than expected, or
due impurities poisoning the anode leading to a different anode gas composition. In
segments 5 synthetic biogas of the same gas composition and with the same fuel flow
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.2: Development of cell voltage and oxygen potential at gas outlet over the
runtime of test 2 using synthetic biogas and real landfill gas at different gas flow rates
and current densities (excluding the fingerprint test at beginning and end) at 750 °C.
rate was used as in segment 2. No differences in cell voltage and oxygen potential can be
seen, indicating that the use of landfill gas in between those segments did not introduce
any obvious damage to the cell. The gas cleaning unit was bypassed in segment 6 so
that landfill gas was used directly without passing through the gas filter. Strikingly the
difference between segment 4 and 6 is very low. Neither in segments 4 nor 6 typical
effects of impurities, such as the typical drop in cell voltage in the case of H2S [52, 53,
57, 70] were observed.
4.1.2
Cell voltage degradation
The cell voltage degradation was calculated for each segment from the cell voltage de-
velopment over time (as shown in Figures 4.1 and 4.2). A linear degradation behaviour
was assumed for the individual segments and the degradation rate calculated from the
slope of a line fit to the cell voltage. The resulting degradation rates for both tests are
shown in Tab. 4.2.
The cell degradation rate was approx. 23 mV/ 1000 h at the beginning of test 1
(segment 0). With the same gas composition (ratio CH4/CO2 = 30/70), the degradation
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
37
Table 4.2: Cell voltage degradation rates calculated for the individual segments by linear
least squares fitting. Total gas flow 20 L/h if not indicated otherwise
Segment
number
Current
density
A/cm2
Cell voltage
degradation
mV(%)/1000 h
Test
Gas composition
0
CH4/CO2 = 30/70
OCV
22.8 (2.3)
1
CH4/CO2 = 30/70
1.0
267 (36.6)
1
2
CH4/CO2 = 30/70
0.5
224 (27.6)
3
CH4/CO2 = 35/65
0.5
115 (14.3)
4
CH4/CO2 = 40/60
0.5
-11.5 (-1.4)
5
CH4/CO2 = 30/70
0.5
66.1 (8.4)
1
CH4/CO2 = 40/60
0.5
43.4 (4.9)
2
CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 8.25 L/h
0.5
23.6 (2.7)
3
CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 8.25 L/h
OCV
-4.4 (-0.4)
2
4a
71.5 (8.3)
4b
Landfill gas + CO2, 5 L/h
0.5
20.9 (2.4)
4c
33.1 (3.9)
5
CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 8.25 L/h
0.5
27.4 (3.1)
6
Landfill gas + CO2, no filter,
0.5
74.5 (8.7)
5 L/h
rate is more than 10 times higher in segments 1 and 2 at 0.5 and 1.0 A/cm2. In segment
5 the same conditions were used as in segment 2, but the degradation rate was less than
half. Due to processes in the cell microstructure the cell degradation rate is expected to
be greater initially (during the first 100-200 h of operation) and decreasing over longer
testing times [71]. The difference between segments 2 and 5 can be attributed to this
effect. On the other hand, higher current is also known to lead to increased degradation,
as the higher overpotential can lead to processes damaging the cell [57]. Comparing the
different gas compositions tested (segments 2 to 4), the cell degradation clearly slows
down when providing more fuel (CH4). When using 40 % CH4 in respect to CO2, the
degradation rate is negative, indicating recovery (activation) of the cell. The degradation
rate at CH4/CO2 = 35/65 is smaller than for CH4/CO2 = 30/70 in segment 2, but higher
than in segment 5. It is therefore not possible to distinguish whether the difference is
due to the gas composition or a time-effect. From the equilibrium phase diagram in
section 2.1, carbon deposition is more likely to occur, the higher the methane content.
Therefore faster degradation was expected at higher methane content, in contrast to the
observations. However, Leone et al. [29, 72] have described increased performance of
SOFC in the first hours of operation under biogas (containing 60 % CH4) which they
attribute to better conductivity of the anode due to the deposited carbon. It is therefore
possible that limited carbon deposition took place, leading to better cell performance
by improving electrical conductivity of the anode without blocking the sites for gas
conversion and electrochemical reactions. This is further discussed in section 4.4.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Results and Discussion
From test 1, synthetic biogas with a ratio of CH4/CO2 = 40/60 was chosen to be
used in the second test for direct comparison with landfill gas as it yielded the slowest
degradation (see Tab. 4.2 and Fig. 4.1). CO2 was added to the landfill gas with the aim of
achieving a similar composition as the synthetic mix. There were only limited amounts
of landfill gas available and the runtime of the test should be maximised. The total gas
flow rate was reduced to 8.25 L/h in segment 2 to test the effect of reduced availability
of fuel. The amount of inert gas had to be increased from 25 % when using 20 L/h
in total, to 30 % when using 8.25 L/h due to limitations of the mass flow controllers.
Reducing the gas flow rate almost halved the degradation rate from 43 to 24 mV/1000h
0.5 A/cm2 in segment 2. At OCV and low gas flow of synthetic biogas, the cell was
activated slightly (4 mV/1000h).
When switching to landfill gas, the degradation rate increased to 72 and 75 mV/1000h
(over 19 and 28.5 h) with and without active carbon gas cleaning, respectively. Without
gas cleaning, the degradation rate then decreased to 21 mV/1000h when using the second
gas cylinder for further 21 h, and 33 mV/1000h for the last 22 h. The gas filter does
not seem to have a significant influence.
From this data it cannot be concluded, if
the decrease in degradation rate at later times without filter is due to differences in
gas composition in the different cylinders, or a time phenomenon.
Even the higher
degradation rates, however, are still in the same order of magnitude to the synthetic
mix with a higher amount of CO2 after a similar total runtime of the test.
While the degradation rate was higher in the first 200-300 h in test 1, this was not
observed in the second test: The degradation rate in segments 2 and 5 is almost the
same.
Comparing the degradation rates with state-of-the-art cell stacks from different in-
dustrial players, the results of the tests using biogas are very promising. Degradation
rates vary between <0.5 % per 1000 h up tp 4 % per 1000 h, depending on the concept
and test conditions [73]. With just over 5 % per 1000 h, the degradation of the cell using
landfill gas cleaned with a simple active carbon gas cleaner is in a similar region already,
with the possibility of optimisation of gas cleaning and CO2 addition to further improve
performance and stability.
4.1.3
Cell performance in biogas
The cell voltage development presented in the previous section gives a good measure of
the influence of biogas on the overall cell performance. To get a deeper insight, the cell
was characterised both with DC polarisation and EIS at several points during the tests
(as given in Fig. 3.4). These results are presented in the following.
4.1.3.1
DC polarisation
During the first test, DC polarisation curves were recorded at the start of the test,
after segments 0 to 3 and before and after segments 4 and 5.
The i-V curves are
shown in Fig. 4.3. The curves correlate very well with the degradation trends seen in
the cell voltage measured at constant current: The slope (and hence the area specific
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
39
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Current density [A/cm2 ]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Cell voltage [V]
(a)
start
after segment 0
after segment 1
after segment 2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Current density [A/cm2 ]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(b)
after segment 2
after segment 3
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Current density [A/cm2 ]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Cell voltage [V]
(c)
start segment 4
after segment 4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Current density [A/cm2 ]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(d)
start segment 5
after segment 5
Figure 4.3:
Comparison of DC polarisation curves (i-V curves) of test 1 before
and after the individual segments:
(a) Comparison before/after segments 0 to
2 (CH4/CO2 = 30/70).
(b) Comparison after segment 2 (CH4/CO2 = 30/70)
and 3 (CH4/CO2 = 35/65).
(c) and (d) Comparison before/after segment 4
(CH4/CO2 = 40/60) and 5 (CH4/CO2 = 30/70), respectively, all at 750 °C.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Results and Discussion
resistance) increases significantly between segments 0, 1 and 2, where the degradation
rate during operation is high. The difference after segments 2 (CH4/CO2 = 30/70) and 3
(CH4/CO2 = 35/65) is minimal. Here the cell degradation is most likely masked to some
extent by the increased amount of fuel in the gas after changing segment, which increased
the cell voltage. There is no difference between start and end of segment 4. Between
the start and end of segment 5, the slope increases slightly, corresponding to some
degradation as observed in the cell voltage for this segment (see Fig. 4.1 and Tab. 4.2).
Only at the start and after segment 0, the decrease of cell voltage becomes significantly
larger at higher currents, indicating a contribution of concentration polarisation. At all
later times, the concentration polarisation is not observed. Due to a higher ASR, the
lower cell voltage limit (set to 600 mV) is reached before the current density becomes
large enough to consume sufficient amounts of fuel for making diffusion a limiting factor.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Current density [A/cm2 ]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Cell voltage [V]
(a)
CH4/CO2 = 40/60
start
after segm. 1
after segm. 3
after segm. 5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Current density [A/cm2 ]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
(b)
Landfill gas
start segm. 4, 7.5 L/h
start segm. 4, 5 L/h
after segm. 6
Figure 4.4: Comparison of DC polarisation curves (i-V curves) after the individual
segments: (a) Comparison between segments with synthetic biogas: at the start 20 L/h,
at all later times 8.25 L/h. (b) Comparison between segments with landfill gas. All at
750 °C.
In Fig. 4.4, the polarisation curves recorded between the segments of the second test
are shown. At the start of the test, the curve looks similar to the ones in the first test.
The maximum current density is higher than at the beginning of test 1. This is most
likely due to the fuel composition (CH4/CO2 = 40/60 here in contrast to 30/70 in test
1), since the cell used in test 2 shows worse performance in the fingerprint (in H2 fuel)
than the one used in test 1. Reducing the total fuel flow from 20 L/h to 8.25 L/h,
the current density approaches a limit at approx. 1 A/cm2. Concentration polarisation
becomes significant already at this comparatively low current density. Other than in
test 1, the curve is only very slightly shifted towards lower current density values with
time (i.e. after segment 5 compared with segment 3), indicating very low degradation
of cell performance. This agrees well with the much lower degradation rates observed
in the cell voltage as shown in Fig. 4.2. It can therefore be concluded that the reason
for concentration polarisation becoming relevant is the reduced fuel flow. An alternative
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
41
explanation could be the impairment of diffusion due to significant amounts of carbon
being deposited in the pores of the anode and anode support. This, however, would
lead to degradation of the cell voltage with time, which was not observed. Furthermore,
carbon deposition would increase the ASR by blocking active Ni sites, which was not
observed either.
As already noted, the performance is not significantly reduced even after employing
landfill gas for 71 h: No clear difference can be seen between segments 3 and 5, the
segments using the synthetic gas mix before and after the use of landfill gas. When
switching to landfill gas, at first a flow rate of 7.5 L/h was used, leading to a similar
shape of the i-V curve as with the synthetic mixture. This means that the amount of
fuel provided was very similar, indicating a higher content of methane in the landfill gas
than in the synthetic mix. The current density maximum decreased, when reducing the
flow rate down to 5 L/h. The change is again solely attributed to the reduced fuel flow
and higher fuel utilisation thereby. No differences could be seen between the segments
with and without gas cleaning, thus indicating a negligible influence of gas impurities
on the DC polarisation behaviour.
Table 4.3: Expected and measured open circuit voltage for the different segments of test 2
at 750 °C. For landfill gas, the theoretical values were calculated from the estimated
composition of the diluted landfill gas, given in section 3.5
Open circuit voltage
mV
theoretical
measured
synthetic biogas (CH4/CO2 = 40/60)
segment 1 (20 L/h)
1048
1034
segment 5 (8.25 L/h)
1048
1040
landfill gas
start segment 4, 7.5 L/h
1053
1051
start segment 4, 5 L/h
1053
1051
after segment 6, 5 L/h
1053
1055
In Tab. 4.3, the open circuit voltage measured at different times during test 2 is
compared with the theoretical OCV at the respective gas composition and flow rate. The
theoretical values for landfill gas were calculated based on the assumed gas composition
including CO2 as given in Tab. 3.5.
For the synthetic gas, the differences between
theoretical and actual values are below 15 mV, indicating sufficient gas tightness of the
set-up. The OCV for landfill gas is 15-21 mV higher than for the synthetic gas, thus
indicating a higher CH4 content of the prior. There is no difference between the different
fuel flow rates. The difference in measured OCV between segment 4 and 6 can be due
either to the use of a different gas cylinder or change in gas composition due to the
absence of the gas filter in segment 6. The measured OCV is in a similar order as the
theoretical one, indicating that the estimation of gas composition is quite accurate.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Results and Discussion
4.1.3.2
Area specific resistance (ASR)
The area specific resistance was calculated from i-V curves according to Eq. 2.12. As
reference Emf, the OCV at the beginning of the i-V curve was used to correct for gas
leaks. The ASR was calculated for all measured current densities and the minimum found
at current densities higher than 0.1 A/cm2. These minimum ASR values are shown in
Fig. 4.5. For the data from test 1, also fuel utilisation corrected ASR was available
from in-house developed software estimating the corrected Emf according to Eq. 2.13,
taking into account the equilibrium gas composition. They are shown for comparison
(full markers in Fig. 4.5a). As they show the same trend as the non-corrected values,
the comparison of the non-corrected values from the second test was justified. The ASR
for 30 % CH4 was calculated from data recorded in segment 5, i.e. the second segment
in which this gas composition used, to avoid confounding with time-effects.
0,22
0,24
0,26
0,28
0,3
0,32
25
30
35
40
45
ASR [Ω cm2] 
Methane content [% in respect to carbon dioxide] 
ASR test 1, 20 L/h
ASR corr test 1, 20 L/h
ASR test 2, 20 L/h
ASR test 2, 8.25 L/h
(a) Comparison of different gas composition
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
0,2
0,25
0,3
0,35
0,4
CH4/CO2= 40/60,
8,25 L/h
Landfill gas, 7.5 L/h,
filtered
Landfill gas, 5 L/h,
filtered
Landfill gas, 5 L/h,
unfiltered
ASR  [Ω cm2]  
CH4/CO2= 40/60, 
 8.25 L/h 
Landfill gas,  
7.5 L/h, filtered 
Landfill gas,  
5 L/h, filtered 
Landfill gas,  
5 L/h, unfiltered 
(b) Comparison of synth. mix with landfill gas
Figure 4.5: Differences in ASR using various synthetic biogas mixtures and landfill gas,
750 °C. See text for more details.
The ASR given in Fig. 4.5a decreases clearly the more methane is contained in the
gas. At the same CH4 content, the ASR is slightly higher in test 2, when employing the
gas filter, and even higher when reducing fuel flow. The gas filter could affect fuel com-
position and thereby the ASR, however, as a different cell was used it is more likely that
the difference is due to the different cell. At higher fuel flow, the increased concentration
polarisation can lead to a higher ASR. Care has to be taken when interpreting these
trends, however. Minimum ASR calculated in the described way is strictly speaking only
valid, if concentration polarisation does not become significant in the measured current
density-interval.
The effect of using landfill gas on ASR compared to the synthetic mix is shown
in Fig. 4.5b. Here it was not possible to correct for fuel utilisation, as the true gas
composition was not known. When using 7.5 L/h landfill gas, the ASR is slightly reduced
compared to the synthetic mixture. This agrees with the higher OCV indicating a higher
methane content in the landfill gas resulting in a similar amount of fuel being available
for the cell (see Tab. 4.3). Reducing the gas flow rate to 5 L/h increases the ASR, which
can be attributed to the reduction in fuel supply and increase in fuel utilisation. A small
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
43
difference can be seen between the filtered and unfiltered gas. The ASR is higher if no
gas filter is employed. This could be due to a different gas composition, originating
either from the filter itself, the use of a different gas bottle, or due to poisoning effects.
As significant concentration polarisation could be seen at higher current densities (see
Fig. 4.4), these differences in ASR can also be an artefact of the calculation.
4.1.3.3
Power density
Power density P, defined as the product of voltage and current density was calculated
from the i-V curves. The power density as a function of current density for selected
conditions is shown in Fig. 4.6. The differences between the different conditions are not
very large. When using a gas flow of 20 L/h, the maximum power density is reached
at the maximum current density employed. When using lower gas flows, both for the
synthetic gas mixture and for the real landfill gas, the power density decreases after
reaching a maximum at lower values. This is most probably due the reduction in fuel
and increase in fuel utilisation (as discussed in section 4.1.3.1). The insert in Fig. 4.6
shows the power density at the cell voltage of 0.7 V. At this voltage and a temperature of
750 °C, state-of-the-art cells as reported in the literature reach power densities between
0.29-0.7 W/cm2 depending highly on the cell type, fuel and test conditions [73]. The
values reached both with synthetic biogas and landfill gas fit very well within this scale.
Figure 4.6: Power density curves calculated from i-V curves for different gas composition
and flow rates. The insert shows the power density at 0.7 V cell voltage and 750 °C.
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Results and Discussion
4.1.3.4
Impedance spectra (AC characteristics)
As described in section 2.2.2.2, EIS spectra can give more detailed information on elec-
trode processes than i-V curves. The spectra recorded while using synthetic biogas and
landfill gas as fuel are presented and discussed in this section. Prior to plotting, the
inductance was estimated and subtracted from the data (see section 3.3.3).
Figure 4.7: Impedance spectra at the start/end of the individual segments of test 1
at OCV. Segments 0, 1, 2 and 5: CH4/CO2 = 30/70; segment 3: CH4/CO2 = 35/65;
segment 4: CH4/CO2 = 40/60. 15 L/h CH4 and CO2, 5 L/h N2. 750 °C. For segments
see Fig. 4.1. (a) Nyquist plot. (b) Bode plot.
In the first test, the aim was to analyse the effect of using different ratios of CH4
to CO2 in the fuel. Fig. 4.7 shows the impedance spectra recorded during test 1 at
OCV at the times indicated by arrows in Fig. 4.1. The top diagram in the figure shows
the Nyquist plot, giving an overview of the magnitudes of resistances.
The bottom
diagram shows the Bode plot where the imaginary impedance is plotted as a function of
frequency. The resistance contributions can be related to the frequency by comparing
the magnitude of Zimag in both plots.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
45
The imaginary impedance shows a clear maximum at frequencies in the order of 102
to 103 Hz. According to Tab. 2.2, impedance in this frequency range can be attributed
to charge transfer at the Ni-YSZ three phase boundary. The larger contribution to the
resistance (i.e. the arc at lower values for Zreal) can therefore be attributed to the charge
transfer. With time, this resistance contribution increases and the top frequency shifts
towards lower frequencies; an indication of degradation at the anode. This trend overlaps
with any effects of changing gas composition making the evaluation more difficult.
Figure 4.8: Impedance spectra under current at the start of the individual segments of
test 1. Segments 1, 2 and 5: CH4/CO2 = 30/70; segment 3: CH4/CO2 = 35/65; segment
4: CH4/CO2 = 40/60. i = 0.5 A/cm2 except segment 1 (i = 1.0 A/cm2). 15 L/h CH4
and CO2, 5 L/h N2. 750 °C. For segments see Fig. 4.1. (a) Nyquist plot. (b) Bode plot.
Under current load, the response of the cell in EIS is different, as fuel is consumed,
and oxygen ions are supplied to the anode. Impedance spectra of test 1 recorded under
current load are shown in Fig. 4.8. As for the spectra at OCV, the top graph shows the
Nyquist, the bottom graph the Bode plot. Two arcs can be separated in the Nyquist
plot which are related to two peaks in the Bode plot: a larger one at frequencies in
the order of 103 to 104 Hz and a small one around 1 to 10 Hz.
The peak at high
frequencies corresponds to the charge transfer, while the peak at low frequencies can be
attributed to gas conversion and gas diffusion (mass transfer, see Tab. 2.2). The charge
==PAGE:58==
46
4 Results and Discussion
transfer impedance is lower under current than at OCV, as expected. The mass transfer
impedance, on the other hand, is higher due to the consumption of fuel. During segment
1 the current density was double that of the other segments. In this segment, the low
frequency impedance is larger and the charge transfer impedance is smaller than in the
other segments, as it could be expected.
The intersection with the x-axis at low Zreal in the Nyquist plot corresponding to
the ohmic resistance does not change between the segments, neither at OCV nor under
current (Fig. 4.7 and 4.8). This indicates, that the are no differences in conductivity of
electrodes and electrolytes when changing fuel composition.
In order to evaluate the effect of changing gas composition, difference spectra at OCV
and at 0.5 A/cm2 were calculated. The spectra recorded in CH4/CO2 = 30/70 at the
end of segment 5 (see Fig. 4.7 and 4.8) were used as reference, as is was expected that the
influence of overall anode degradation on the comparison was lower at this late stage in
the experiment. These difference spectra are shown in Fig. 4.9. The top diagram shows
the differences at OCV, the bottom one under current load. In both cases, there are
two regions in which the spectra differ: There are small differences in the order of 0.1
to 1 Hz, and larger differences between 102 and 103 Hz at OCV, and around 103 Hz at
0.5 A/cm2. As before, the response at the smaller frequencies corresponds to the mass
transfer, the response at the higher frequencies to charge transfer. The impedance in
CH4/CO2 = 35/65 is very similar to the reference with only small differences in the
charge transfer impedance both at OCV and under current. In CH4/CO2 = 40/60, the
charge transfer impedance is significantly higher than in CH4/CO2 = 30/70 at OCV, but
equal at 0.5 A/cm2. The reason for this effect is not quite clear. Both a higher content
of methane in the gas in equilibrium or carbon deposition at the active sites could hinder
charge transfer by blocking active sites and thereby increase the resistance. In both cases
the supply of oxygen ions under current could remove the blockage (see discussion in
segment 4.4). Nevertheless, the impedance is generally smaller under current, regardless
of any carbon effects. Therefore also the differences between the different conditions
become smaller.
However, also the overall cell degradation over time has to be considered.
The
difference between a spectrum from the beginning of the test (segment 2) and one at a
later time (segment 5) with the same gas composition (CH4/CO2 = 30/70) is shown as
a third difference spectrum in Fig. 4.9. Here the spectrum from the beginning of the
test was used as reference, corresponding to the negative of using the spectrum from
segment 5 as reference as was done for the other spectra in the figure. This is indicated
by “-∆Zimag”. The charge transfer impedance increases with time, both at OCV and
under current load. Between 0.1 and 1 Hz, the impedance decreases slightly with time.
These effects are attributed to changes in the microstructure. As the overall degradation
is rather large, it is difficult to draw conclusions about the the effect of the CH4/CO2
ratio. The aim of the present testing approach with changing gas composition in the
course of a cell test was to save valuable testing time when obtaining information. The
results here show, however, that this approach only worked to a limited extent in this
specific test.
As CH4/CO2 = 40/60 showed the lowest degradation rate in test 1 (see section 4.1.2)
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
47
Figure 4.9: Differences in impedance between the different gas compositions. The spec-
trum from CH4/CO2 = 30/70 in segment 5 was used as reference. The negative difference
was plotted for CH4/CO2 = 30/70 from segment 2 (see text). (a) Differences at OCV
(b) Differences at i = 0.5 A/cm2.
this composition was chosen for testing of synthetically mixed biogas and gas from a
landfill in test 2. As mentioned before, CO2 was added to the landfill gas to allow for
internal reforming in a similar manner as in the synthetic mix (see section 3.5). The
impedance spectra recorded at the start and end of the individual segments of test 2
at OCV are shown in Fig. 4.10. The spectra show raw data, i.e. without correction
of the impedance contributions of the measurement setup, as correction data was not
available for the full frequency spectrum that was measured. Therefore these data only
allow direct comparison within the same setup. The top diagram shows the Nyquist
plot, the bottom one the Bode plot, as before. For segments 2 to 5 two main arcs at
high and low frequencies, respectively, can be differentiated with a third smaller arc in
between. The spectrum from segment 1 shows a large arc at higher frequency, while
the arc at low frequency is very small. The corrected spectrum (see Appendix B) is
comparable with those recorded under the same conditions during test 1, showing that
both cells performed similarly under these conditions. In segment 2 (light blue diamonds
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Results and Discussion
in Fig. 4.10 which are overlapping with pink triangles), the gas flow rate was reduced
from 20 L/h to 8.25 L/h, increasing the amount of inert gas from 25 % to 30 %. This
lead to an increase in impedance at low frequencies (corresponding to mass transfer) and
a reduction at high frequencies (attributed to the charge transfer reaction). While the
prior was expected, the latter effect is surprising. Reducing fuel flow increases the fuel
utilisation and changes the gas composition such that diffusion can become a limiting
factor. Also the charge transfer resistance can be affected. It is not clear, however, why
the resistance is reduced if less fuel is available. In addition to changing gas flow rate,
the path was changed to pass through the gas cleaning unit at the end of segment 1. It
cannot be ruled out that this is the cause of this phenomenon (see more in section 4.4).
Figure 4.10: Raw impedance spectra at the start/end of the individual segments of test
2 at OCV (i.e. no correction for setup impedance). Segment 1: CH4/CO2 = 40/60,
20 L/h; Segments 2, 3 and 5: CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 8.25 L/h; segment 4: landfill gas
diluted with CO2, 750 °C. For segments see Fig. 4.2. (a) Nyquist plot. (b) Bode plot.
After segment 2, the cell was left in the same gas at OCV for 150 h. The green spectra
in Fig. 4.10 show that there was no degradation of the cell during this period. Afterwards,
landfill gas was used as fuel (cleaned through an active carbon filter). The cell resistance
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
49
Figure 4.11: Raw impedance spectra under current at the start of the individual segments
of test 2 (i.e. no correction for setup impedance). Segment 1: CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 20 L/h;
Segments 2 and 5: CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 8.25 L/h; segments 4 and 6: landfill gas diluted
with CO2 with/without gas filter, respectively. 750 °C. For segments see Fig. 4.2. (a)
Nyquist plot. (b) Bode plot.
increased (orange/yellow curves in Fig. 4.10), in particular the charge transfer resistance.
Interestingly, the cell seems to activate as the resistance at the end of this segment was
lower than initially in landfill gas (segment 4 end, filled orange squares in Fig. 4.10).
However, this spectrum was recorded right after switching to OCV. Therefore, there was
probably not sufficient time for equilibration. Three different gas bottles of landfill gas
were used in segment 4. No differences in impedance spectra could be seen between the
different bottles (data shown in Appendix B). The detailed composition in these three
bottles is unfortunately not known. Returning to the synthetic biogas, the resistance
decreased to the initial value (pink triangles in Fig. 4.10) indicating that there was no
overall cell degradation.
Impedance spectra under current load were also recorded in test 2. The results are
shown in Fig. 4.11. Again the top diagram shows the Nyquist plot, the bottom one the
Bode plot. As for the spectra at OCV, raw data was plotted since correction data for the
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Results and Discussion
impedance of the set-up was not available for the whole frequency range. The trends are
similar to those at OCV. Two main arcs can be distinguished at high and low frequencies
with a small intermediate arc at middle frequencies visible in the Nyquist plot. Using
20 L/h of the synthetic mixture with CH4/CO2 = 40/60 in segment 1, the charge transfer
impedance is higher than in the later segments, the mass transfer impedance is lower.
The spectra in the two segments, where 8.25 L/h synthetic biogas were used (2 and 5)
are very similar, indicating a negligible influence of time. Also the response of the two
segments where landfill gas was employed (4 and 6), was very similar.
Again, the differences in ohmic resistance (i.e. the intersection of the spectrum with
the x-axis at low Zreal) between the spectra were very small both at OCV and under
current. Only in segment 2, the ohmic resistance was lower. The reason for this is not
clear.
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
105
f [Hz]
1
0
1
2
3
Zimag raw  [
cm2]
OCV, reference:
CH4 /CO2  = 40/60, 8.25 L/h
Landfill gas, 7.5 L/h
Landfill gas, 5.0 L/h
(a) Difference between synthetic biogas and landfill gas at OCV
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
105
f [Hz]
1
0
1
2
3
Zimag raw  [
cm2]
0.5 A/cm2 , reference:
CH4 /CO2  = 40/60, 8.25 L/h
Landfill gas, 5.0 L/h
(b) Difference between synthetic biogas and landfill gas at 0.5 A/cm2
Figure 4.12:
Difference spectra calculated from raw impedance data (i.e.
no cor-
rection for setup impedance) showing the difference between using synthetic biogas
(CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 8.25 L/h) and landfill gas (gas flow rate 7.5 L/h and 5 L/h). 750 °C.
For a more detailed analysis of the impedance spectra, difference spectra were cal-
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Electrochemical properties
51
culated to highlight the effect of using landfill gas compared to the synthetic mixture.
These difference spectra are shown in Fig. 4.12. At OCV, the impedance is decreased
in the region of 0.01 to 0.1 Hz (mass transfer) when using landfill gas compared to the
synthetic mixture. Between 102 and 103 Hz (charge transfer), the impedance is higher
when using landfill gas. At higher fuel flow, the impedance of landfill gas is generally
lower, which was expected. Under current (0.5 A/cm2), the mass transfer resistance is
slightly higher with landfill gas, while there are no differences at higher frequencies. A
large difference in charge transfer resistance that vanishes under current was also seen
for different gas compositions in test 1. The reason for this effect is not completely clear,
as discussed above. It is expected to be related to carbon deposition or direct oxidation
of methane. However, current diminishes resistances in general and therefore also the
differences between different conditions. The increased mass flow resistance under cur-
rent is probably related to the low gas flow for landfill gas, leading to diffusion or gas
conversion becoming limiting factors. Furthermore, the real gas composition might be
different than expected.
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
105
f [Hz]
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Zimag raw  [
cm2]
0.5 A/cm2 , reference: no gas filter
Landfill gas, 5.0 L/h, filtered
Figure 4.13: Difference spectra calculated from raw impedance data (i.e. no correction
for setup impedance) showing the difference between using landfill gas with and without
gas cleaning. 5 L/h, 750 °C.
The landfill gas was expected to contain impurities such as hydrogen sulphide known
to reduce the performance of fuel cells. Therefore the gas was lead through an active
carbon filter to remove these impurities in segment 4 as described before. In segment
6, the filter was bypassed to evaluate the effect of using raw landfill gas on the fuel
cell. The difference spectrum between the raw impedance spectra with and without
filtering is shown in Fig. 4.13. No significant differences could be found. This means
that employing the gas filter had no effect on the impedance suggesting that either the
gas was cleaner than expected, or the cell more tolerant. It is possible that impurities
adsorbed to the walls of the gas cylinders used for transport of the landfill gas, or the
gas supply tubes and did not reach the cell. This would only be possible for very small
impurity concentrations. In addition, it cannot be ruled out that carbon was deposited
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Results and Discussion
in the tubes prior to the cell, as the gas composition allows for carbon deposition at
lower temperatures (during fuel heating, see Fig. 2.1), and that this carbon acted as a
filter. In further tests, these options will be investigated.
4.1.4
Comparison of cell performance using different CH4
containing fuels
At the beginning and end of both tests, a series of i-V curves and impedance spectra was
recorded at different gas compositions at both anode and cathode, as well as at different
temperatures. This standard procedure, the so-called fingerprint, records characteristic
properties of cell and of the conditions under which it is used.
As the same set of
conditions has been used for many tests in the past, it makes it possible to compare the
parameters and the change of parameters determined from the results of these tests and
evaluate the effect of different operating conditions.
Two tests were selected for comparison that were carried out at the DTU Energy in
2007 and 2008. Results of these tests have been published in [70]. In both cases methane
was used as fuel under steam reforming conditions at 850 °C. The runtime was around
600 h, of which 500 h were with 2 ppm H2S. In the first test, a cell consisting of Ni/YSZ
- YSZ – LSM was used, which degraded irreversibly. In the second test, instead of YSZ,
ScYSZ was used and the cell degradation was reversible. From the i-V curves during
the fingerprint procedure before and after the test, the ASR was calculated as described
in the section 4.1.3.2.
The increase of ASR in percent with respect to the start value of these two tests, as
well as the two tests carried out in this work, is shown in Fig. 4.14. In the case of the
non-reversible degradation, the increase in ASR is between 60 and 80 % at the different
temperatures. For all other tests, the increase is less than a quarter of this value. The
test with dry reforming of synthetically mixed biogas (referred to as test 1 above, number
(3) in the figure) lead to a similar or slightly higher increase in ASR as the test with
steam reforming and reversible degradation (number (2) in the figure). The test with
synthetic biogas with a higher methane content and landfill gas (referred to as test 2
above, number (4) in the figure) clearly shows even less degradation (only in the order
of 5 % after 600 h). Even though operating conditions (temperature, flow rates and
current density) and specific cell composition were different, it is fair to conclude from
these results, that dry reforming of synthetic biogas and landfill gas leads to similar, or
less, overall degradation of state-of-the-art fuel cells than steam reforming of methane.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Microstructural development
53
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
850 °C
800 °C
750 °C
Increase in ASR  in % compared to start 
(1) 500h Steam reformimg, synthetic mix, 2ppm H2S, 850 °C, irrev. degradation
(2) 500h Steam reforming, synthetic mix, 2ppm H2S, 850 °C, rev. degradation
(3) 600h Biogas dry reforming, synthetic mix, varied composition, 750 °C
(4) 600h Biogas dry reforming, incl. landfill gas, 750 °C
Figure 4.14: Comparison of increase in ASR from fingerprint before and after the test
from different long term tests (500-600 h) in CH4 containing fuels. ASR recorded between
750 and 850 °C in wet H2 (20-25 % H2O) at the anode, air at the cathode. Tests of (1)
and (2) have been published in [70], (3) is test 1 and (4) is test 2 in this work
4.2
Microstructural development
Changes in cell performance can in many cases be related to various changes in the
microstructure of the fuel cell. Cells from both experiments were analysed using scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) to determine the presence of such changes. In all pictures,
the focus was put on the anode area, as most changes were expected to happen in this
region.
Secondary electron (SE) images
The embedded and polished cross sections of the
two cells employed for the two tests, as well as a reference cell were analysed at low
voltage. Pictures obtained from the lateral secondary electron detector are shown in
Fig. 4.15. The major part of the images shows the porous Ni-YSZ anode support and
active anode. Ni and YSZ appear light grey. The contrast between them is very low.
Differentiation is possible at higher magnifications from the larger amount of scratches
visible on the softer Ni grains. At the bottom remains of the cathode are visible, however
it broke off extensively, which is probably an artefact of the polishing process. The
distribution of porosity in the anodes of all three cells is very regular. However, grains
and pores in between appear larger in both cells that had been tested. This is attributed
to the grain growth that can be expected from operating the cell at elevated temperatures
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Results and Discussion
(a) Reference fuel cell
(b) Fuel cell test 1
(c) Fuel cell test 2
Figure 4.15: Comparison of lateral SE-SEM images of polished cross sections of the fuel
cells showing the distribution of pores in the anode and anode support
for a long time.
Backscattered electron (BSE) images
were taken of the fractured cross section
of the cells. They are shown in Fig. 4.16. Here at the top again the porous anode and
anode support can be seen. The middle region is dense, with single grains visible by
channelling contrast in Figures 4.16a (reference cell) and 4.16c (cell from test 2). In
Fig. 4.16b (cell from test 1), the fractured surface was not flat enough to allow for this
effect. This middle region is the dense electrolyte. Beneath the electrolyte a second
dense region can be seen, the GDC barrier layer, followed by the porous cathode. In
contrast to the polished cross sections, both in the reference cell and the cell from test
2, the adhesion of the cathode is very good. This was also found in other regions of
these cells, reinforcing the assumption that the break off in the polished samples was
due to the polishing. In the cell from test 2 a crack is visible between the barrier layer
and the cathode region, which was present in large regions of the cell. It is assumed
to have occurred at the fracture, as the electrolyte was damaged due to poor fracture,
too. Also, cathode delamination to such a large extent would be expected to reduce
cell performance significantly. [71] The appearance of all three cells is very similar. No
changes in microstructure due to operation can be seen with this method.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Microstructural development
55
(a) Reference fuel cell
(b) Fuel cell test 1
(c) Fuel cell test 2
Figure 4.16: Comparison of BSE-SEM images of the fractured cross section of the fuel
cells showing the grains in the electrolyte
Percolation images
Fracture surfaces of the cells were further analysed using the in-
lense secondary electron detector at low voltage for obtaining images of Ni-percolation
(see section 2.4). As described in section 2.3.2.2, the percolation of electrons through
the network of Ni grains in the anode can be disrupted permanently bringing along an
irreversible decrease in cell performance, if a fuel cell is heavily strained.
The percolation images of the fractured cross sections obtained at low acceleration
voltage are shown in Fig. 4.17, where bright areas indicate electron percolation. The
images are representative for the whole analysed cell area. They show a higher magnifi-
cation than the ones shown before. The layer at the bottom of the images is the YSZ
electrolyte which is not electronically conducting and hence appears black. The major
part of the images shows anode and anode support, where percolating Ni grains appear
as bright spots, while YSZ, non-percolating Ni and pores appear dark. The bright spots
are homogeneously distributed across the whole area in all three cells. However, there
are fewer bright grains for both cells that had been tested, especially the cell of test
2 (Fig. 4.17c). This can be related to the overall cell degradation over the cell run-
time of 600 h. The percolation differences between the cells from the different tests
((Fig. 4.17c)b and c) are not very large. As fractured surfaces were analysed, quantifica-
tion was not possible, as the fracture does not lead to a cross section representative of
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Results and Discussion
(a) Reference fuel cell
(b) Fuel cell test 1
(c) Fuel cell test 2
Figure 4.17: Comparison of secondary electron SEM images recorded at low acceleration
voltage. Bright regions show percolated electrically conducting Ni-grains in the anode
and anode support. Images are representative for the whole cell. Notice that these
images were taken at a higher magnification than in Fig. 4.15 and 4.16)
the volume. Also many different artefacts can lead to an apparent reduction in percola-
tion, such as the percolation effect itself and irregularities due to the fracture. Therefore
care has to be taken as not to interpret too much into apparent differences between the
cells. Comparison with polished cross sections and quantification was not possible due
to poor quality of the images caused by charging of the surface.
4.3
Gas characterisation
GC-MS analysis was carried out on the gas from one of the four cylinders with landfill
gas after the cylinder had been attached to the rig.
This means that the gas was
analysed after addition of CO2. The chromatogram is shown in Fig. 4.18. There are
two peaks visible after 1.35 and 1.66 minutes. Based on retention time and respective
mass spectra, the first one is attributed to CH4, the second one to CO2. The first peak
shows a small shoulder at the start, which is attributed to N2 and O2 in the gas. The
intensity of the second peak (CO2) is approx. 20 times larger than the first peak. This,
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Gas characterisation
57
however, can be attributed to the much higher sensitivity of the detector for CO2. No
calibration for the individual gasses was available, hence quantification was not possible.
The mass spectrum for the CO2 peak (scan 201) is shown in Fig. 4.19. The presence
of CO2 is clear from the high intensity at m/z = 44. Besides CO2 and CH4, traces of
higher hydrocarbons based on 3 to 4 C atoms were found. A zoom of the chromatogram
showing these peaks is shown in Fig. 4.20.
Figure 4.18: Gas chromatogram of landfill gas diluted with CO2. Identification of peaks
was done combining retention time and mass spectra.
No trace of sulphur containing compounds (H2S, COS, CH3SH) could be found. For
COS a limit of detection of approx. 0.3 ppm could be expected. The sensitivity to H2S
is expected to be a bit lower, due to interference with other gas components such as
O2. However, when taking gas samples, small amounts of biogas were released to the
atmosphere. The released gas did not have the characteristic smell of H2S. As the human
nose is very sensitive to to H2S, this is another indication that the concentration of H2S
in the landfill gas must have been very low. From the gas analysis provided by the gas
supplier, also the presence of aromatic compounds was expected (see Appendix A). In
the present analysis, no traces of aromatic compounds could be found either. However,
the column material contains aromatic structures. This means that it is possible that
either the presence of such is masked by long elution times, or that aromatic compounds
originating from the column are detected.
From the present results the presence of
aromatic impurities in the gas can therefore neither be confirmed nor ruled out.
The absence of sulphur containing compounds agrees well with the low degradation
rate when using landfill gas, also without a gas filter. The presence of CH4 and CO2
in the gas on the other hand is reassuring that it was really landfill gas that had been
tested.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Results and Discussion
Figure 4.19: Mass spectrum of the peak attributed to CO2 (scan 201). The large peak
at m/z = 44 corresponds to CO2.
Figure 4.20: Gas chromatogram of landfill gas diluted with CO2 — zoom-in to the small
peaks attributed to organic impurities (3-4 C atoms).
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Discussion and summary
59
4.4
Discussion and summary
In the previous sections, results of the experiments have been discussed individually.
Here these findings are summarized to give an overview over the most important results
and to bring out the links between the results from different measurement techniques.
4.4.1
Effect of different methane content and fuel utilisation
In test 1, different ratios of CH4/CO2 were used. Moreover, different current densities
were used for CH4/CO2 = 70/30. In test 2, the total fuel flow was reduced from 20 L/h to
8.25 L/h. In all these cases, the fuel utilisation (FU) was changed (as given in Tab. 4.1).
While it is decreased by increasing the CH4 content, it is increased by increasing the
current density or reducing fuel flow.
The main factor influencing cell performance besides inital degradation due to mi-
crostructural changes, was expected to be carbon deposition, since the influence of im-
purities present in the commercial gasses that were used was considered neligible. From
thermodynamic calculations (see section 2.1), no carbon deposition should occur for any
of the gas compositions employed. Under current the probability for carbon deposition
should be further decreased [43]. However, lowering the temperature slightly, quickly
moves the gasses into the carbon-deposition regime. Therefore local variations in tem-
perature (e.g. due to the cooling effect of dry reforming) or gas composition can lead to
carbon deposition.
0,22
0,24
0,26
0,28
0,3
0,32
25
30
35
40
45
ASR [Ω cm2] 
Methane content [% in respect to carbon dioxide] 
ASR test 1, 20 L/h
ASR test 2, 20 L/h
ASR test 2, 8.25 L/h
(a) Comparison of ASR, diagram also shown
in Fig. 4.5a
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
25
30
35
40
45
Cell voltage degradation  
[mV/1000h] 
Methane content [% in respect to carbon dioxide] 
Test 1 - 0.5 A/cm², 20L/h
Test 1 - 1.0 A/cm², 20L/h
Test 2 - 0.5 A/cm², 20L/h
Test 2 - 0.5 A/cm², 8.25 L/h
(b) Comparison of cell voltage degradation
rate
Figure 4.21: Differences in cell voltage degradation rate and ASR in synthetic biogas,
varying methane content, current density and fuel flow rate at 750 °C.
Increasing the CH4-content decreases the minimum ASR (shown in Fig. 4.21a). This
is likely due to the decreased FU (as more fuel is available) which reduces the minimum
ASR by increasing the current density where concentration polarisation becomes relevant.
When reducing the fuel flow rate in test 2, the ASR increased. This can also be attributed
to increased FU. Differences between test 1 and 2 can be due to the fuel cell, or to
differences in operating conditions such as temperature, where slight variations cannot
be excluded. However, as indicated before, when interpreting these results, it has to be
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Results and Discussion
kept in mind that the minimum ASR can be influenced by concentration polarisation
effects, resulting in inaccurate values.
The trends in cell voltage degradation regarding different amounts of CH4 in the gas
(see dark blue squares in Fig. 4.21b) are not as clear as for the ASR. The degradation
rate is the lowest for the gas with the highest methane content (CH4/CO2 = 40/60).
The differences between the other two compositions are small. However, it is not clear,
whether this is due to similar performance, or to the initial degradation overlaying the
degradation in case of CH4/CO2 = 35/65. As stated before, the FU is lower at higher
methane concentration. If effects of carbon deposition are considered negligible at a
current density of 0.5 A/cm2 (see below), the lower overpotential at lower FU could be
an explanation for the reduced degradation rate at higher methane content [57]. The
effect of using higher current density (green circle in Fig. 4.21b) on the degradation is
most likely conceiled by the initial degradation rate. The high current density was only
used in the beginning of the test (test 1, segment 1). However, a higher degradation
rate not related to carbon deposition or time-effects, could be expected also at higher
current density due to higher demand on the cell [57].
Looking at the trends in impedance spectra, they first seem to contradict what was
seen in ASR and cell voltage degradation. The charge transfer impedance at OCV in-
creases when increasing the methane content of the gas from CH4/CO2 = 30/70 to 40/60,
which could be related to degradation. The mass transfer resistance is hardly influenced.
Under current, the differences disappear (see Figures 4.8, 4.7 and 4.9). The impedance
at CH4/CO2 = 35/65 is very similar to 30/70 which is attributed to interference with
time effects and therefore not further discussed.
Considering that the FU is lower the higher the CH4 content and the lower the
current density, and that a low FU has been related to a higher predisposition to carbon
depostion [74], as stated before, can clear these contradictions. As the gas composition
was close to the border of the carbon deposition regime, it is possible that the higher
charge transfer resistance at OCV is due to small amounts of carbon blocking the sites
active for the charge transfer reaction. When increasing the current density, the FU is
also increased and oxygen is available at the anode, which could remove the deposited
carbon. The minimum ASR was determined at high current densities. In this case,
the FU could be high enough to prevent carbon deposition. Therefore, in this case the
performance will be limited only by concentration polarisation which is more pronounced
at higher FU. Also increasing the current density from 0.5 to 1.0 A/cm2, or reducing
the fuel flow rate from 20 to 8.25 L/h (see Fig. 4.8 and Fig. 4.10 and 4.11, respectively)
increased the FU, as mentioned before. In both cases, the charge transfer resistance was
higher at low FU than at high FU. The effect is the most pronounced when changing fuel
flow rate, where the change in FU is the largest (compared to changing current density
or methane content, see Tab. 4.1). Also in these cases, the increased FU could lead to
a reduction in carbon deposition and thereby a reduction in charge transfer impedance.
An alternative explanation for the increased charge transfer impedance at higher
CH4 content could be a direct oxidation of carbon-species (CH4 or CO). This was pro-
posed as cause for increased polarisation resistance in impedance spectra at higher CH4
concentrations by Chen et al. [75]. From their study, it is not clear whether the effect
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Discussion and summary
61
was seen at OCV or under current. Nevertheless, the increased availability of oxygen
at the anode under current could reduce the methane available for direct oxidation and
thereby decrease the charge transfer resistance as seen here. As mentioned in section
4.1.2, Leone et al. [29, 72] argued that small amounts of carbon improved cell perfor-
mance, due to reduction of ohmic resistance. The ohmic resistance did not change when
changing fuel composition (or FU in general). This could be an indication, that either
no carbon is being deposited, but the performance directly influenced by the higher
amounts of CH4 in the gas, or that the effect seen in their work only occurs under very
specific conditions.
In conclusion, reducing the FU (either by increasing CH4 content or the gas flow,
or decreasing current density) lead to an increase in charge transfer resistance. Carbon
deposition or direct oxidation of methane are proposed as possible mechanisms, however
from the present results a distinction it is not possible.
Also a completely different
mechanism cannot be ruled out.
4.4.2
Effect of using landfill gas
In second test, the main goal was to compare the performance when using synthetic
biogas with CH4/CO2 = 40/60 with the performance under real landfill gas diluted with
CO2 to obtain a similar composition.
As it is one of the most common impurities in landfill gas, performance reduction due
to poisoning with H2S was expected. This typically leads to an initial cell voltage drop,
even at low H2S concentrations (2̃ ppm) [54, 60] (among others). No such degradation
behaviour was seen neither when cleaning the landfill gas with an active carbon filter,
nor without the filter (see Fig. 4.2). Gas analysis using GC-MS, which was carried out
after the test, showed no presence of hydrogen sulphide (typical detection limit <1 ppm)
or other sulphur containing impurities, explaining the absence of the degradation effect.
Small amounts of larger hydrocarbons (3-4 carbon atoms) were found in the gas.
Papurello et al. [47] showed that hydrocarbons such as toluene affect fuel cell perfor-
mance and can even lead to irreversible cell degradation in high concentrations. Never-
theless, the effect of smaller hydrocarbons in low concentrations is not clear.
When comparing synthetic biogas to landfill gas with gas cleaning and landfill gas
without cleaning, the trends in ASR and cell voltage degradation rate are not completely
clear. Regarding the minimum ASR (as shown in Fig. 4.22a), the lowest values are found
for the synthetic gas, and the highest for the unfiltered landfill gas. Using landfill gas at a
higher fuel flow rate leads to a similar ASR as the synthetic gas. In the previous section,
the differences in minimum ASR have been attributed to concentration polarisation
effects. Such effects can also explain the differences in ASR between the synthetic and
the filtered gas. The 8.25 L/h synthetic biogas and 7.5 L/h landfill gas provide the
cell with similar amounts of fuel, as the landfill gas supposedly contains more CH4 and
less inert gas. Therefore the limit for concentration polarisation is reached at similar
current densities leading to similar minimum ASR. Reducing the fuel flow to 5 L/h
increases the FU enough for concentration polarisation to become relevant already at
lower current densities, increasing the ASR. Other effects, such as poisoning of the cell
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Results and Discussion
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
0,2
0,25
0,3
0,35
0,4
CH4/CO2= 40/60,
8,25 L/h
Landfill gas, 7.5 L/h,
filtered
Landfill gas, 5 L/h,
filtered
Landfill gas, 5 L/h,
unfiltered
ASR  [Ω cm2]  
CH4/CO2= 40/60, 
 8.25 L/h 
Landfill gas,  
7.5 L/h, filtered 
Landfill gas,  
5 L/h, filtered 
Landfill gas,  
5 L/h, unfiltered 
(a) Comparison of ASR, diagram also shown
in Fig. 4.5b
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
CH4/CO2= 40/60, 8.25
L/h
Landfill gas, 5L/h,
filtered
Landfill gas, 5 L/h,
unfiltered
Cell voltage degradation  
[mV/1000h] 
CH4/CO2= 40/60, 
8.25 L/h
cylinder 1 
cylinder 2 
cylinder 3 
(b) Comparison of cell voltage degradation
rate at 0.5 A/cm2.
Figure 4.22: Differences in cell voltage degradation rate and ASR using synthetic biogas
and landfill gas at different fuel flow rates and with and without gas filter at 750 °C.
due to insufficient gas cleaning by the filter seem to be negligible. Without gas filter,
the ASR is higher. As no significant amounts of impurities were found in the gas, this
is attributed to differences in gas composition due to passing through the gas filter.
The cell voltage degradation was measured for 8.25 L/h synthetic biogas and 5 L/h
landfill gas. Using landfill gas, the degradation rate is similar in the first 19-28 h both
with and without gas cleaning and significantly higher than for the synthetic biogas.
After changing the gas bottle the degradation rate decreased to values similar to the
synthetic mix for the cleaned landfill gas.
Unfortunately, there was not enough gas
available to extend the experimental time with the unfiltered gas. At the given gas flow
rates and the employed current density of 0.5 A/cm2, the FU of the synthetic biogas
is much lower. In the previous section, a higher degradation rate at higher FU was
related to the increase in overpotential. As a higher FU was assumed for the landfill
gas, this could explain the higher degradation rate when using the first cylinder with
cleaning and the one without. Nevertheless, the drastic reduction of degradation rate
when changing to the second cylinder challenges this explanation, as the cell voltage,
and hence the overpotential, did not change significantly. Therefore the reason for the
change in degradation rate remains unclear. Longer testing times would be necessary
to establish a clearer picture of the changes with time. The fact that the degradation
rate with and without gas filter is similar is not surprising, considering the low amount
of impurities in the gas.
In the impedance spectra at OCV, the charge transfer resistance is increased when
using landfill gas (both at 7.5 and 5 L/h, filtered) compared to synthetic biogas, while
the mass transfer resistance is slightly decreased (see Fig. 4.12a). At a current density
of 0.5 A/cm2, the difference in charge transfer resistance disappears, while the mass
transfer resistance increases slightly when using biogas (Fig. 4.12b). When increasing
FU, an increase in charge transfer resistance at OCV was seen for the synthetic mixture
as described above. The same mechanisms are possible in this case: carbon deposition or
direct electrochemical oxidation of methane. Here the mechanism is not solely related
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Discussion and summary
63
to FU, however. As noted before, 8.25 L/h synthetic biogas and 7.5 L/h landfill gas
result in a similar FU. Nevertheless, the landfill gas most likely contains larger amounts
of methane than the synthetic mix. According to Kuhn and Kesler [74], the risk of
carbon deposition increases, the higher the methane content of the gas at the same
FU. Similar effects could also be expected for the other mechanisms proposed for the
changes in charge transfer resistance. When using 20 L/h synthetic biogas, the mass
transfer resistance was not relevant at OCV. In the present tests, increasing the CH4
concentration lead to a decrease in mass transfer resistance at OCV, probably due to
the lower fuel flow rates employed. Under current, however, the fuel utilisation was
much higher when using landfill gas despite the higher CH4 content, resulting in a slight
increase of mass transfer resistance.
No differences can be seen in the impedance spectra under current when using the
filtered landfill gas compared to using it without a gas filter (Fig. 4.13). This agrees
with the small differences in degradation rate in the first hours using landfill gas with
or without filter.
Summarized, the differences between using synthetic biogas and landfill gas could
to a large extent be related to differences in FU or methane content, agreeing with the
effects seen in the tests with synthetic biogas of various composition. The calculation
of FU is based in a rough estimation of the gas composition, however, which should be
verified by analysing the gas composition in detail. No clear differences could be seen
with or without gas cleaning through an active carbon filter. This is in agreement with
very small amounts of impurities found in the GC-MS gas analysis.
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
Long term performance tests of state-of-the-art fuel cells were carried out with synthetic
biogas mixed from pure gasses with different CH4-to-CO2-ratios, and biogas from Odense
landfill, in order to determine the long-term performance of state-of-the-art SOFCs under
biogas dry-reforming conditions.
Synthetic biogas was mixed from pure gases with CH4 to CO2 ratios varied from
30/70 to 40/60. The gas mixture with a ratio of CH4/CO2 = 40/60 showed the best
performance under current at 750 °C: The degradation rate (23.6 - 27.4 mV/1000h over
100 h at 37 % FU) as well as the minimum ASR (0.29 Ωcm2 at 0.83 A/cm2at 37 %
FU) were lower than for the gasses with higher CH4 content. At a current density of
0.5 A/cm2 the differences in impedance spectra between different gas compositions were
negligible while the charge transfer resistance was increased at OCV. This was attributed
to either carbon deposition or direct electrochemical oxidation of CH4 at low current
density due to lower fuel utilisation. The dependency on fuel utilisation was undermined
by the behaviour on changing current density and fuel flow.
Real landfill gas diluted with CO2 to reach a similar composition as the synthetic
biogas was successfully used for 62 h with active carbon gas cleaning filter and 28.5 h with-
out. The degradation rates were between 71.5 and 21.0 mV/1000h and 74.5 mV/1000h,
respectively. FU was calculated from an estimated gas composition. Trends in ASR
and impedance spectroscopy in relation to FU agree well with the findings in synthetic
biogas. Gas cleaning appeared not to have a significant influence on the electrochemical
performance. The reason for differences in degradation rate in the course of using landfill
gas from different bottles remains unclear.
Additional analysis of the cells and the gas composition support the findings for
electrochemical performance. No significant differences could be seen in post-test SEM
analysis of the cells, neither between the cells employed for synthetic and real biogas, nor
compared to a reference cell. This fits very well with the small losses of electrochemical
performance found during electrochemical testing.
In the gas, no traces of sulphur
containing compounds and only minor amounts of other impurities (VOCs) were found
by GC-MS analysis, explaining the good performance also without gas cleaning.
The increase of ASR of the cell between the start and the end of both the test in
synthetic, and real biogas was found to be comparable with that of a test of similar
runtime using CH4 fuel with 2 ppm H2S under steam reforming conditions (showing
reversible degradation). The ASR increase in case of a similar test with irreversible cell
degradation was much higher.
In conclusion, the applicability of dry-reforming for the direct use of landfill gas in
state-of-the-art SOFCs was demonstrated by the means of long term testing (approx.
90 h) under constant current.
==PAGE:78==
66
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6
Future work
The objectives for future work can be divided into two groups:
1. Improving the understanding of the chemical and electrochemical processes at the
cell discussed in this work
2. Working towards a prototype for on-site application of SOFCs at a landfill
Improving process understanding
Several points in the interpretation of results
remained unclear, because the exact composition of the landfill gas was not known. To
understand the processes more thoroughly, gas analysis should be improved to be able
to determine the ratio of CH4 to CO2 in the gas. Gas analysis directly at the test rig
would also allow the determination of methane conversion, which would allow to identify
poisoning of the reforming reaction. With an established gas analysis, fuel utilisation
could be varied systematically and the reason for discrepancies between AC- and DC
characterisation in the performance with and without gas cleaning could be illuminated.
Impedance spectra could be analysed in more detail by fitting of a model circuit in order
to quantify the individual contributions (mass transfer and charge transfer). Further-
more, the effects of carbon deposition (e.g. on the different impedance contributions)
could be studied systematically, for example by using model electrodes covered with
carbon.
Scale up
According to the results presented in this thesis the direct use of biogas in
SOFC is very promising. As a next steps towards application, the cells should be run
for longer test times. To this end, either the pressure in the gas cylinders has to be
increased, or a test set-up built on-site to have direct gas supply from the landfill. In
such a test set-up, up-scaling to cell-stacks would be possible. Gas cleaning and process
conditions could then be optimized.
==PAGE:80==
68
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A
Gas analysis
Figure A.1: Gas analysis of the landfill gas as provided by the gas supplier.
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Impedance spectra
Figure B.1: Comparison of impedance spectra from segment 4 in test 1 and segment
1 in test 2. Both recorded at OCV, CH4/CO2 = 40/60, 15 L/h CH4 and CO2, 5 L/h
N2 (test 1) or Ar (test 2), 750 °C. The difference between the spectra is negligible. (a)
Nyquist plot. (b) Bode plot.
==PAGE:84==
72
B Impedance spectra
Figure B.2: Comparison of impedance spectra recorded during segment 4, test 2 using
5 L/h landfill gas from three different gas cylinders at i = 0.5 A/cm2, 750 °C. The raw
spectra are shown, i.e. without correction of set-up contributions. A minimal increase in
impedance is seen between the first and the second cylinder, but none further on. The
difference is considered negligible. (a) Nyquist plot. (b) Bode plot.
==PAGE:85==
References
[1]
K. Vonnegut. “Cold Turkey”. In These Times (2004). http://inthesetimes.com/
article/cold_turkey (retrieved: 23/06/2016).
[2]
A world-leader in wind energy. http://denmark.dk/en/green-living/wind-energy/
(retrieved: 23/06/2016).
[3]
E. Bocci, A. Di Carlo, S. J. McPhail, K. Gallucci, P. U. Foscolo, M. Moneti, M.
Villarini, and M. Carlini. “Biomass to fuel cells state of the art: A review of the
most innovative technology solutions”. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
39.36 (2014), pp. 21876–21895.
[4]
P. Forster, V. Ramaswamy, P. Artaxo, T. Berntsen, R. Betts, D. Fahey, J. Hay-
wood, J. Lean, D. Lowe, G. Myhre, J. Nganga, R. Prinn, G. Raga, M. Schulz,
and R. Van Dorland. “Changes in atmospheric constituents and in radiative forc-
ing”. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change. Ed. by S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,
K. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H. Miller. Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA:
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[5]
M. Pöschl, S. Ward, and P. Owende. “Evaluation of energy efficiency of various bio-
gas production and utilization pathways”. Applied Energy 87.11 (2010), pp. 3305–
3321.
[6]
Y. Chen, W. Hu, Y. Feng, and S. Sweeney. “Status and prospects of rural bio-
gas development in China”. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 39 (2014),
pp. 679–685.
[7]
W. Uddin, B. Khan, N. Shaukat, M. Majid, G. Mujtaba, A. Mehmood, S. M. Ali,
U. Younas, M. Anwar, and A. M. Almeshal. “Biogas potential for electric power
generation in Pakistan: A survey”. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 54
(2016), pp. 25–33.
[8]
M. Rios and M. Kaltschmitt. “Electricity generation potential from biogas pro-
duced from organic waste in Mexico”. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
54 (2016), pp. 384–395.
[9]
I. Lopez Moreda. “The potential of biogas production in Uruguay”. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 54 (2016), pp. 1580–1591.
[10]
G. Ozsoy and I. Alibas. “GIS mapping of biogas potential from animal wastes in
Bursa, Turkey”. International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering
8.1 (2015), pp. 74–83.
==PAGE:86==
74
References
[11]
T. T. Olugasa, I. F. Odesola, and M. O. Oyewola. “Energy production from biogas:
A conceptual review for use in Nigeria”. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
32 (2014), pp. 770–776.
[12]
J. U. Smith, A. Fischer, P. D. Hallett, H. Y. Homans, P. Smith, Y. Abdul-Salam,
H. H. Emmerling, and E. Phimister. “Sustainable use of organic resources for
bioenergy, food and water provision in rural Sub-Saharan Africa”. Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 50 (2015), pp. 903–917.
[13]
J. Larminie and A. Dicks. “Introduction”. Fuel Cell Systems Explained. West Sus-
sex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2003, pp. 1–24.
[14]
J. Fleig, K. Kreuer, and J. Maier. “Chapter 3.2 - Ceramic fuel cells”. Handbook of
Advanced Ceramics. Ed. by F. Aldinger, N. Claussen, M. Kaneno, K. Koumoto,
S. Sōmiya, R. M. Spriggs, and K. Uchino. Oxford, UK: Academic Press, 2003,
pp. 59–105.
[15]
V. Ramani. “Fuel cells”. Electrochemical Society Interface 15.1 (2006), pp. 41–44.
[16]
D. Mogensen, J.-D. Grunwaldt, P. V. Hendriksen, K. Dam-Johansen, and J. Nielsen.
“Internal steam reforming in solid oxide fuel cells: Status and opportunities of ki-
netic studies and their impact on modelling”. Journal of Power Sources 196.1
(2011), pp. 25–38.
[17]
N. De Arespacochaga, C. Valderrama, C. Peregrina, A. Hornero, L. Bouchy, and
J. L. Cortina. “On-site cogeneration with sewage biogas via high-temperature fuel
cells: Benchmarking against other options based on industrial-scale data”. Fuel
Processing Technology 138 (2015), pp. 654–662.
[18]
J. Van herle, Y. Membrez, and O. Bucheli. “Biogas as a fuel source for SOFC
co-generators”. Eighth Ulmer Electrochemische Tage 127.1–2 (2004), pp. 300–312.
[19]
A. Trendewicz and R. Braun. “Techno-economic analysis of solid oxide fuel cell-
based combined heat and power systems for biogas utilization at wastewater treat-
ment facilities”. Journal of Power Sources 233 (2013), pp. 380–393.
[20]
Lower and higher heating values of fuels. http://hydrogen.pnl.gov/tools/lower-and-
higher-heating-values-fuels (retrieved: 14/03/2016).
[21]
R. Broun and M. Sattler. “A comparison of greenhouse gas emissions and potential
electricity recovery from conventional and bioreactor landfills”. Journal of Cleaner
Production 112 (2016), pp. 2664–2673.
[22]
A. Vlyssides, S. Mai, and E. M. Barampouti. “Energy generation potential in
greece from agricultural residues and livestock manure by anaerobic digestion tech-
nology”. Waste and Biomass Valorization 6.5 (2015), pp. 747–757.
[23]
O. I. Hernandez-De Lira, D. H. Huber, T. Espinosa-Solares, and N. Balagurusamy.
“Methane emission and bioenergy potential from livestock manures in Mexico”.
Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy 7.5 (2015).
[24]
J. Staniforth and K. Kendall. “Biogas powering a small tubular solid oxide fuel
cell”. Journal of Power Sources 71.1-2 (1998), pp. 275–277.
==PAGE:87==
References
75
[25]
J. Staniforth and K. Kendall. “Cannock landfill gas powering a small tubular solid
oxide fuel cell - a case study”. Journal of Power Sources 86.1 (2000), pp. 401–403.
[26]
J. Staniforth and R. Ormerod. “Implications for using biogas as a fuel source for
solid oxide fuel cells: internal dry reforming in a small tubular solid oxide fuel cell”.
Catalysis Letters 81.1-2 (2002), pp. 19–23.
[27]
I. Yentekakis. “Open- and closed-circuit study of an intermediate temperature
SOFC directly fueled with simulated biogas mixtures”. Journal of Power Sources
160.1 (2006), pp. 422–425.
[28]
I. Yentekakis, T. Papadam, and G. Goula. “Electricity production from wastewater
treatment via a novel biogas-SOFC aided process”. Solid State Ionics 179.27-32
(2008), pp. 1521–1525.
[29]
A. Lanzini and P. Leone. “Experimental investigation of direct internal reforming
of biogas in solid oxide fuel cells”. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 35.6
(2010), pp. 2463–2476.
[30]
C. Guerra, A. Lanzini, P. Leone, M. Santarelli, and D. Beretta. “Experimental
study of dry reforming of biogas in a tubular anode-supported solid oxide fuel
cell”. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 38.25 (2013), pp. 10559–10566.
[31]
N. Triantafyllopoulos and S. Neophytides. “The nature and binding strength of
carbon adspecies formed during the equilibrium dissociative adsorption of CH4 on
Ni-YSZ cermet catalysts”. Journal of Catalysis 217.2 (2003), pp. 324–333.
[32]
N. Triantafyllopoulos and S. Neophytides. “Dissociative adsorption of CH4 on
NiAu/YSZ: The nature of adsorbed carbonaceous species and the inhibition of
graphitic C formation”. Journal of Catalysis 239.1 (2006), pp. 187–199.
[33]
Y. Shiratori, T. Oshima, and K. Sasaki. “Feasibility of direct-biogas SOFC”. Inter-
national Journal of Hydrogen Energy 33.21 (2008), pp. 6316–6321.
[34]
Y. Shiratori, T. Ijichi, T. Oshima, and K. Sasaki. “Generation of electricity from
organic bio-wastes using solid oxide fuel cell”. ECS Transactions 25.2 (2009),
pp. 1051–1060.
[35]
Y. Shiratori, T. Ijichi, T. Oshima, and K. Sasaki. “Internal reforming SOFC run-
ning on biogas”. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 35.15 (2010), pp. 7905–
7912.
[36]
D. Papurello, A. Lanzini, M. Santarelli, D. Papurello, S. Silvestri, and L. Tognana.
“Waste to energy: Exploitation of biogas from organic waste in a 500 Wel solid
oxide fuel cell (SOFC) stack”. Energy 85 (2015), pp. 145–158.
[37]
V. Chiodo, A. Galvagno, A. Lanzini, D. Papurello, F. Urbani, M. Santarelli, and
S. Freni. “Biogas reforming process investigation for SOFC application”. Energy
Conversion and Management 98 (2015), pp. 252–258.
[38]
E. Vakouftsi, G. Marnellos, C. Athanasiou, and F. Coutelieris. “CFD modeling of
a biogas fuelled SOFC”. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Solid
State Ionics 192.1 (2011), pp. 458–463.
==PAGE:88==
76
References
[39]
A. Lanzini, P. Leone, M. Pieroni, M. Santarelli, D. Beretta, and S. Ginocchio.
“Experimental investigations and modeling of direct internal reforming of biogases
in tubular solid oxide fuel cells”. Fuel Cells 11.5 (2011), pp. 697–710.
[40]
C. R. Graves and J. Hjelm. “Advanced impedance modeling of solid oxide electro-
chemical cells”. Proceedings of 11th European SOFC and SOE Forum 2014 (2014).
[41]
D. Pakhare and J. Spivey. “A review of dry (CO2) reforming of methane over noble
metal catalysts”. Chemical Society Reviews 43.22 (2014), pp. 7813–7837.
[42]
D. Mogensen, J.-D. Grunwaldt, P. Hendriksen, J. Nielsen, and K. Dam-Johansen.
“Methane steam reforming over an Ni-YSZ solid oxide fuel cell anode in stack
configuration”. Journal of Chemistry 2014 (2014).
[43]
J. Kuhn and O. Kesler. “Carbon deposition thresholds on nickel-based solid oxide
fuel cell anodes II. Steam:carbon ratio and current density”. Journal of Power
Sources 277 (2015), pp. 455–463.
[44]
E. Ivers-Tiffée and A. V. Virkar. “Chapter 9 - Electrode polarisations”. High Tem-
perature and Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science,
2003, pp. 229–260.
[45]
M. Mogensen and P. Hendriksen. “Chapter 10 - Testing of electrodes, cells and
short stacks”. High Temperature and Solid Oxide Fuel Cells. Amsterdam, Nether-
lands: Elsevier Science, 2003, pp. 261–289.
[46]
J. R. Macdonald and W. B. Johnson. “Fundamentals of impedance spectroscopy”.
Impedance Spectroscopy Theory, Experiment, and Applications. Hoboken, New Jer-
sey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005, pp. 1–26.
[47]
D. Papurello, A. Lanzini, D. Drago, P. Leone, and M. Santarelli. “Limiting factors
for planar solid oxide fuel cells under different trace compound concentrations”.
Energy 95 (2016), pp. 67–78.
[48]
A. Leonide, V. Sonn, A. Weber, and E. Ivers-Tiffée. “Evaluation and modelling of
the cell resistance in anode supported solid oxide fuel cells”. ECS Transactions 7.1
(2007), pp. 521–531.
[49]
R. Barfod, M. Mogensen, T. Klemenso, A. Hagen, Y.-L. Liu, and P. V. Hendriksen.
“Detailed characterization of anode-supported SOFCs by impedance spectroscopy”.
Journal of the Electrochemical Society 154.4 (2007).
[50]
A. Hauch and M. B. Mogensen. “Ni/YSZ electrode degradation studied by impe-
dance spectroscopy: Effects of gas cleaning and current density”. Solid State Ionics
181.15-16 (2010), pp. 745–753.
[51]
A. Hauch, M. B. Mogensen, and A. Hagen. “Ni/YSZ electrode degradation studied
by impedance spectroscopy — Effect of p(H2O)”. Solid State Ionics 192.1 (2011),
pp. 547–551.
[52]
A. Hauch, A. Hagen, J. Hjelm, and T. Ramos. “Sulfur poisoning of Ni/stabilized-
zirconia anodes – Effect on long-term durability”. ECS Transactions 57.1 (2013),
pp. 615–625.
==PAGE:89==
References
77
[53]
A. Hagen, G. B. Johnson, and P. Hjalmarsson. “Electrochemical evaluation of
sulfur poisoning in a methane-fuelled solid oxide fuel cell: Effect of current density
and sulfur concentration”. Journal of Power Sources 272 (2014), pp. 776–785.
[54]
K. Haga, S. Adachi, Y. Shiratori, K. Itoh, and K. Sasaki. “Poisoning of SOFC
anodes by various fuel impurities”. Solid State Ionics 179.27-32 (2008), pp. 1427–
1431.
[55]
H. Madi, A. Lanzini, S. Diethelm, D. Papurello, J. Van herle, M. Lualdi, J. Gutzon
Larsen, and M. Santarelli. “Solid oxide fuel cell anode degradation by the effect of
siloxanes”. Journal of Power Sources 279 (2015), pp. 460–471.
[56]
K. Sasaki, K. Haga, T. Yoshizumi, D. Minematsu, E. Yuki, R.-R. Liu, C. Uryu,
T. Oshima, S. Taniguchi, Y. Shiratori, and K. Ito. “Impurity poisoning of SOFCs”.
ECS Transactions 35.3 part 3 (2011), pp. 2805–2814.
[57]
A. Hauch, A. Hagen, J. Hjelm, and T. Ramos. “Sulfur poisoning of SOFC anodes:
Effect of overpotential on long-term degradation”. Journal of the Electrochemical
Society 161.6 (2014).
[58]
D. Papurello, A. Lanzini, S. Fiorilli, F. Smeacetto, R. Singh, and M. Santarelli.
“Sulfur poisoning in Ni-anode solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs): Deactivation in single
cells and a stack”. Chemical Engineering Journal 283 (2016), pp. 1224–1233.
[59]
T. Yoshizumi, C. Uryu, T. Oshima, Y. Shiratori, K. Ito, and K. Sasaki. “Sulfur
poisoning of SOFCs: Dependence on operational parameters”. ECS Transactions
35.2 part 2 (2011), pp. 1717–1725.
[60]
J. F. B. Rasmussen and A. Hagen. “The effect of H2S on the performance of SOFCs
using methane containing fuel”. Fuel Cells 10.6 (2010), pp. 1135–1142.
[61]
J. Kuhn, N. Lakshminarayanan, and U. Ozkan. “Effect of hydrogen sulfide on the
catalytic activity of Ni-YSZ cermets”. Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical
282.1-2 (2008), pp. 9–21.
[62]
N. Lakshminarayanan and U. Ozkan. “Effect of H2O on sulfur poisoning and cat-
alytic activity of Ni-YSZ catalysts”. Applied Catalysis A: General 393.1-2 (2011),
pp. 138–145.
[63]
G. Johnson, P. Hjalmarsson, K. Norrman, U. Ozkan, and A. Hagen. “Biogas cat-
alytic reforming studies on nickel-based solid oxide fuel cell anodes”. Fuel Cells
16.2 (2016), pp. 219–234.
[64]
A. Primavera, A. Trovarelli, P. Andreussi, and G. Dolcetti. “The effect of water in
the low-temperature catalytic oxidation of hydrogen sulfide to sulfur over activated
carbon”. Applied Catalysis A: General 173.2 (1998), pp. 185–192.
[65]
N. Abatzoglou and S. Boivin. “A review of biogas purification processes”. Biofuels
Bioproducts and Biorefining 3.1 (2009), pp. 42–71.
[66]
G. Monteleone, M. De Francesco, S. Galli, M. Marchetti, and V. Naticchioni. “Deep
H2S removal from biogas for molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC) systems”. Chemical
Engineering Journal 173.2 (2011), pp. 407–414.
==PAGE:90==
78
References
[67]
R. Sitthikhankaew, D. Chadwick, S. Assabumrungrat, and N. Laosiripojana. “Ef-
fects of humidity, O2, and CO2 on H2S adsorption onto upgraded and KOH im-
pregnated activated carbons”. Fuel Processing Technology 124 (2014), pp. 249–
257.
[68]
K. Thydén, Y. Liu, and J. Bilde-Sørensen. “Microstructural characterization of
SOFC Ni-YSZ anode composites by low-voltage scanning electron microscopy”.
Solid State Ionics 178.39-40 (2008), pp. 1984–1989.
[69]
C. Graves. RAVDAV data analysis software. 2012.
[70]
A. Hagen, J. Rasmussen, and K. Thydén. “Durability of solid oxide fuel cells using
sulfur containing fuels”. Journal of Power Sources 196.17 (2011), pp. 7271–7276.
[71]
A. Hagen, R. Barfod, P. V. Hendriksen, Y.-L. Liu, and S. Ramousse. “Degradation
of anode supported SOFCs as a function of temperature and current load”. Journal
of the Electrochemical Society 153.6 (2006).
[72]
P. Leone, A. Lanzini, M. Santarelli, M. Cali, F. Sagnelli, A. Boulanger, A. Scaletta,
and P. Zitella. “Methane-free biogas for direct feeding of solid oxide fuel cells”.
Journal of Power Sources 195.1 (2010), pp. 239–248.
[73]
A. Hagen. “SOFC: Cell, stack and system level”. Fuel Cells : Data, Facts and Fig-
ures. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA., 2016, pp. 304–
320.
[74]
J. Kuhn and O. Kesler. “Carbon deposition thresholds on nickel-based solid oxide
fuel cell anodes I. Fuel utilization”. Journal of Power Sources 277 (2015), pp. 443–
454.
[75]
Z. Chen, L. Bian, L. Wang, N. Chen, H. Zhao, F. Li, and K. Chou. “Effect of
hydrogen and carbon dioxide on the performance of methane fueled solid oxide
fuel cell”. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 41.18 (2016), pp. 7453–7463.
