==PAGE:1==
Methanation activity of
size-selected nanoparticles
by
Alexander Krabbe, s093887
Supervisor:
Ib Chorkendorﬀ
Co-Supervisor:
Jakob Riedel
Methanation activity of mass-selected nanoparticles
Center for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality, CINF
Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DTU
2016 June 24th.
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis has investigated CO methanation reactions in a Si µ-reactor de-
veloped at CINF. Two diﬀerent catalysts are tested in two separate µ-reactor
setups. The primary study has been a methanation reaction activity study on
Ni75Fe25 mass-selected nanoparticles produced in the cluster source OMICRON
at CINF. Four diﬀerent sized nanoparticles have been investigated. The nanopar-
ticles were 3.5 nm, 5 nm, 7 nm or 9 nm in diameter. Samples were characterised
with XPS and ISS prior to measuring chemical activity. Some samples have also
been characterised with SEM before and after methanation reactions. The ex-
periment is carried out in 1 bar of syngas containing 2% CO in H2 and heated
up to 225 ◦C. The experiment shows that the 7 nm nanoparticles are the most
active of the sizes. However, variation in chemical activity within same sized
nanoparticles is observed. This variation in chemical activity can be lowered by
comparing samples to their respective ISS spectra. Depositing carbon by ex-
posing the samples to CO at 225 ◦C have shown stable CH4 signals reacted oﬀ
at 200 ◦C during a H2-TPD. This provide strong indications that H2-TPDs is
a promising method for measuring the active surface area of the nanoparticles
and potentially decreasing the variation in chemical activity within same sized
nanoparticles. The SEM images show no signs of particle migration or sintering.
The second catalyst is an industrial Ni/Al2O3. The catalytic activity during
methanation reaction was tested in an identical syngas. The catalyst was tested
with H2-TPDs ramped at 20 K min−1 up to 410 ◦C. This is the highest tem-
perature any catalyst has been tested at in the µ-reactor setup and yield an
impressive tolerance from the µ-reactor. When depositing carbon on the surface
the signal from the H2-TPDs revealed two diﬀerently bound carbon on the sur-
face. The ﬁrst CH4-peak is found at 150 ◦C and the second CH4-peak is observed
at 380 ◦C. By exposing the catalysts to CH4 at 250 ◦C instead of CO at 250 ◦C
the CH4-peak from the H2-TPD is shifted towards more strongly bound carbon
than otherwise seen.
i
==PAGE:4==
CHAPTER 0. ABSTRACT
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Methanation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Catalysts in methanation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Heterogenous catalysis
5
2.1
What is Heterogeneous catalysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Newns Anderson model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Increasing activity through tuning reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Studying catalysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Experimental background
11
3.1
µ-reactor design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Gasﬂow in capillary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.2
Controlling temperature and heating . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Introducing catalyst in the reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.4
Anodic bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Equipment for analysing in UHV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.2
XPS, ISS and SEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results
33
4.1
Methanation on mass-selected nanoparticles . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Preparing samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Flow ﬁle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.3
Methanation activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.4
TPD results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.5
Characterisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
iii
==PAGE:6==
4.2
Industrial catalyst in the µ-reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.1
TPD results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Conclusion
61
Appendices
63
Appendix A
Short introduction to the energy crisis
65
iv
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The scope of this master thesis is to study methanation reaction activity on
size-selected nanoparticles in µ-reactor systems. This is done to further develop
the knowledge and bridging the pressure gab within fundamental and applied
heterogenous catalysis. This work is important for optimising existing catalysts
or ﬁnd new catalytic alloys to realise a future with sustainable and clean energy
together with a production of chemicals without using fossil fuels.
A short introduction to the energy crisis in the world can be read in ap-
pendix A. As Peter C. K. Vesborg beautifully writes in his article from 2013 in
Weekendavisen, it seems like the politician does not take this energy crisis seri-
ously and hence does not spend enough resources in the diﬀerent research ﬁelds
within energy production and related topics nor on test facilities to help de-
velop immature technologies [1]. The common denominator for most renewable
energy technologies such as wind turbines and photovoltaics is the production
of electricity. This can either be used directly or converted into chemicals so
the energy can be stored as for instance hydrogen, methane or methanol. This
conversion from electricity to chemically bound energy in the form of hydrogen
through electrolysis and back again has some losses and only 60-70% of the
energy harvested from the sun will be assessable [2, 3].
1.1
Methanation
Within the scope of this master thesis lies the Fischer-Tropsch process. In this
process a mixture of H2 and CO called a syngas is converted into methane or
higher hydro-carbons. This conversion is dependent on the gas mixture, the
partial pressure and the temperature conditions the reaction is run at. Also the
selectivity of the catalyst used, will determine which hydrocarbons and how
much that will be produced. As an energy carrier both hydrogen and synthetic
natural gas are good solutions to bind the energy chemically.
Methanation of coal or biomass-derived carbon dioxides have been investi-
gated for over a century beginning with the work from Sabatier and Sanders in
1902 [4]. In recent years the focus on methanation has returned due to the pos-
sibility of producing Synthetic Natural Gas (SNG) using renewable biomass or
syngas from wood which in combination with hydrogen production from water
1
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Table 1.1: Table of possible reactions involved in the methanation of carbon
oxides. Table adapted from [7] originally from [8, 9].
Reaction no. and name
Reaction formula
∆H298 K [kJ mol−1]
R1: CO methanation
CO + 3 H2 −−→CH4 + H2O
-206.1
R2: CO2 methanation
CO2 + 4 H2 −−→CH4 + 2 H2O
-165.0
R3: Inverse methane reforming
2 CO + 2 H2 −−→CH4 + CO2
-247.3
R4: Boudouard reaction
2 CO −−→C + CO2
-172.4
R5: Water-gas shift
CO + H2O −−→H2 + CO2
-41.2
R6: Methane cracking
CH4 −−→2 H2 + C
74.8
R7: Carbon monooxide reduction
CO + H2 −−→C + H2O
-131.3
R8: Carbon dioxide reduction
CO2 + 2 H2 −−→C + 2 H2O
-90.1
splitting has the potential to produce fuels and chemicals while reducing the
carbon emission into the atmosphere [5]. Methan or SNG is ideal as an energy
carrier due to a high energy density (55.5 MJ/kg [6]) and easy to implement
since the infrastructure is already in place. The two key reactions in methanation
is
CO + 3 H2 −−→CH4 + H2O
(1.1.1)
CO + 4 H2 −−→CH4 + 2 H2O.
(1.1.2)
Although the methanation process is thermodynamically favourable with Gibbs
free energy ∆G of −141.8 kJ mol−1 and −113.2 kJ mol−1 respectively multiple
side reactions are also possible [7]. These side reaction including the two key
reactions can be seen in table 1.1 adapted from [7, 8, 9].
Reaction number R1, R2, R3, R4 and R7 have the highest equilibrium con-
stant below 500 ◦C and therefore play a more essential role in the methanation
reaction. All reactions except R6, methane cracking, are exothermic and their
equilibrium constant decreases with increasing temperature [7]. This goes that
optimal condition for methanation must be low temperature e.i. below 400 ◦C.
Both reaction R4 and R7 leaves carbon to be deposited on the surface of the
catalyst. This is to some extent a good reaction, since carbon on the surface
of the catalyst is considered as an important intermediate during methanation
[10]. The water-gas shift reaction R5 is known to change the morphology and
chemistry of a catalyst [11]. Methanation of CO is sensitive to the condition at
which the reaction is run [12, 13, 14]. A thorough theoretical study of the ther-
modynamics of the methanation reaction with diﬀerent reaction conditions is
done in [7]. Their study shows that a high CH4 yield is given with low tempera-
ture and high pressure with a high H2 to CO ratio. The eﬀect of including steam
in the gas showed to suppress carbon deposition and including small traces of
C2H4 or O2 in the syngas decreases the CH4 yield signiﬁcantly and should be
2
==PAGE:9==
1.2. CATALYSTS IN METHANATION
Figure 1.1: Plot of CO dissociative energy on diﬀerent transition metals against
their activities. A vulcano trend is seen with a maximum around −1.4 eV. Figure
is adapted from [16].
avoided. If the temperature that the reaction is run at exceeds 450 ◦C the re-
verse water gas shift reaction become favourable which increases CO and more
carbon deposited on the surface of the catalyst. The elevated temperature also
increases the amount of unreacted hydrogen and carbon dioxide. The reduction
of fully oxidised CO is an eight electron process which in combination with the
favourable low temperature requires a very active catalyst [15].
1.2
Catalysts in methanation
The most widely used catalyst in methanation reactions is a Ni based catalyst
on an oxide support like Al2O3. This is because Ni shows relatively high activ-
ities and selectivities at a low cost. However Ni is not the most active catalysts
towards carbon monoxide methanation which Bligaard et al calculated [16]. In
ﬁgure 1.1 their results can be seen. They have calculated the dissociative energy
of CO on diﬀerent transition metals and compared to their respespective activ-
ities at 550 K. The plotted data form a clear Vulcano trend with Ru and Co at
the top and Fe and Ni at a lower activity but one binding the CO too strongly
and the other binds too weakly. The top of the Vulcano lies around −1.4 eV
which is in good agreement with Nørskov et al. [17]. Previous experiments on
carbon monoxide methanation on Ni based catalysts includes [18, 19, 20]. In
these experiments the mass loading was between 10 and 40 wt% of Ni as the
main active metal and reactor pressure was in the range from 0.1 MPa to 3 MPa.
The catalysts used had a yield of 95-98% CO conversion and 75-100% CH4 selec-
tivity. Ni-based catalysts for methanation are often Ni-nanoparticles dispersed
3
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
on an oxide supports with high surface area. The activities and selectivities of
the supported Ni-catalysts are strongly inﬂuenced by the interaction between
the catalyst and the support as well as the amount and size of the catalytic
particles [21, 18, 22]. Of the diﬀerent support materials used Al2O3 is widely
examine[23, 24, 25]. This support material is highly complex because of the
many diﬀerent crystallographic phases. Carbon monoxide methanation reaction
is highly sensitive to the structure of the catalyst and support [13]. The step
sites of Ni play an important role in the methanation reaction [26]. Some issues
with Ni as a catalyst for methanation includes sintering, carbon deposition and
Ni(CO)4 formation [27, 28]. There has been discovered three types of carbon
formation on Ni from methanation reaction [24, 27]. To avoid carbon formation
on the surface two action can be taken. Either the reaction conditions are op-
timised according to temperature and pressure or for instance letting additive
like steam in the syngas to suppress carbon formation [7, 29]. Another approach
would be to modify the catalyst by alloying or adding promotors [23, 30, 31]. Sin-
tering is an issue that comes from the highly exothermic methanation reaction.
This has been studied and found to be governed more by particle migration and
coalescence than by Ostwald rippening. Hence, sintering changes the structure
of the catalyst and could potentially decrease the activity of the catalyst [26].
However, Ni sintering can also be decreased by adding promoters [23, 24, 31, 32].
The promoters are used in two diﬀerent ways however some promoters might
work as both. The ﬁrst is an electron promoter to increase the electron density
of Ni to increase the electron mobility and hence increase reactivity. The second
way to use promoters is as a structural promoter to increase thermal stability
or change chemical components or crystal texture or just increase mechanical
strength. MgO has shown good to minimise sinteren of Ni and TiOx can increase
electron density of Ni which facilitate dissociation of CO [23]. Alloying would
make structural changes as well as change the electron density. In ﬁgure 1.1 it
can be seen that Fe binds too strongly and Ni binds too weakly which is why a
combination of the two would potentially give high activities compared to Ru
and still be cheaper. This is also proposed by Andersson et al. [33] and why the
choice of particles to investigate is Ni75Fe25.
4
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Heterogenous catalysis
Catalysis is an important ﬁeld of research since many reactions in modern pro-
cesses would not be able to run without a catalyst [34]. A catalyst is an agent
which improves the activity of a reaction without being consumed. By using
a catalyst, the activation barrier of the reaction is lowered as seen in ﬁgure
2.1. This lowering of the activation barrier lets the reactants react more easily.
Haber-Bosch is one of the most important processes where Ammonia, which is
used in fertiliser, is created by running the reaction 3 H +
2 N2 −−→2 NH3. This
reaction is run at high temperature and pressure conditions meaning the conver-
sion requires extreme amounts of energy. This is due to the strong triple bond
in N2 and the amount of methane used to produce H2 which comes primarily
from steam reforming1. For the Haber-Bosch process to occur at a desirable
rate, a catalyst is needed. This catalyst consist of iron on various support like
Al2O3. Since the energy requirement for this process is so enormous improving
the catalyst will have an impact on the total global energy consumption.
2.1
What is Heterogeneous catalysis
In heterogeneous catalysis the catalyst is a solid and the reactants and products
are gas species or liquids [34]. As a solid, the reaction can only occur at the
surface of the metal and hence the surface area needs to be as large as possible
to increase activity per mass. This is why the catalytic material in heterogeneous
catalysis often are particles with a size in the nanometer range. The catalytic
reaction that happens on the surface can either take the form that both molecule
A and B adsorbs to the surface where after they dissociate and diﬀuse on the
surface until the diﬀerent atoms meet each other and react to a product that
then desorbs from the surface. Alternatively, only one of the two molecules A or
B will adsorb to the surface and then form bonds to the other molecule where
after the product desorbs from the surface of the catalyst freeing a new site for
the next reaction to happen.
1http://energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-production-natural-gas-reforming
5
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. HETEROGENOUS CATALYSIS
Figure 2.1: Schematic diagram showing the eﬀect on the activation barrier using
a catalyst. Schematics adapted from [35].
2.2
Newns Anderson model
The interaction between a molecule and a transition metal can be qualitatively
explained within the Newns Anderson approximation. This model describes
the adsorption of an adsorbate approaching the surface. The situation where
a molecule is chemisorbed to the surface can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2. The interac-
tion with the broad sp-band lowers both the bonding and anti-bonding orbital
gaining about 5 eV and the interaction with the narrow d-band splits both the
bonding and anti-bonding orbitals into bonding and anti-bonding chemisorbtion
orbitals [34]. If the splitting of the orbitals is strong enough, the splitting will
rise the binding orbital above the fermilevel and the anti bonding below the
fermilevel. This will move electrons from the bonding orbital of the molecule
to the antibonding orbital as shown in ﬁgure 2.2. The molecule is then desta-
bilised and the interaction with the surface is enhanced which is the essence of
catalysis.
2.3
Increasing activity through tuning reactivity
A catalyst cannot beat thermodynamics, hence a catalyst only increases the rate
at which a reaction is reaching equilibrium. Introducing a catalyst complicates
the reaction signiﬁcantly as it introduces diﬀerent and sometimes more inter-
mediate steps. The ultimate goal is to have an optimal catalyst which reacts
strongly enough to break or dissociate the bonds of the reactants but not so
strongly that the products cannot desorb from the surface. The consequence is
that an optimum for the turn over frequency most lie at an intermediate value
for binding energy. This is known as the Sabatier’s principle. Even more freely
spoken the Sabatier principle states that the interaction between the substrate
and the reactants should be "just right". Hence, a heterogeneous catalyst can
6
==PAGE:13==
2.3. INCREASING ACTIVITY THROUGH TUNING REACTIVITY
Figure 2.2: This ﬁgure describes qualitatively the interaction a molecule has with
a transition metal when it is chemisorbed to the surface. Schematic is adapted
from [34].
be tuned with respect to the dissociative adsorption energy and thereby opti-
mised to diﬀerent reactions. The shape of such plots are a triangle or reverse
parabola which have given these plots the name "Volcano plot". In ﬁgure 2.3
two examples of Sabatier’s principle are shown for two diﬀerent reactions. The
left plot shows the activity of dehydrogenation of formic acid as function of en-
thalpy of formation of metal formate. In the right plot the activity of ammonia
synthesis as a function of d-band ﬁlling for diﬀerent transition metals gives a
volcano shape and also demonstrates Sabatier’s principle.
As previously stated in heterogeneous catalysis, the catalytic activity hap-
pens at the surface hence nanoparticles have the advantage of large surface area
to mass ratio. Nanoparticles furthermore have the advantage that they feature
more kinks and edges than larger particles and hence more under-coordinated
sites which are more reactive. This can be used to tune the reactivity of the
nanoparticle. If the nanoparticle follows a Wulﬀconstruction the scaling for
facets, edges and corners will go as the power of 2, 1, and 0 to the diameter of
the nanoparticle [37]. Wulﬀconstruction uses energy minimisation arguments
to identify that certain crystal planes are preferred over others. This gives a
theoretical shape of a crystal with of a ﬁxed volume. When the particle be-
comes too small to follow a Wulﬀconstruction at a few nanometers, this scaling
breaks down and odd features and sites can exist [37, 38]. That the reactivity
of a catalyst can be size dependent and thereby manipulated accordingly to
Sabatier’s principle to increase the activity of a catalyst. This is why a study of
size dependent activity of nanoparticles is interesting [21, 39, 40].
7
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. HETEROGENOUS CATALYSIS
Figure 2.3: This ﬁgures shows two plots which beautifully shows the Sabatier
Principle. The left plot shows the activity of dehydrogenation of formic acid
HCOOH as a function of the enthalpy of formation for diﬀerent metal formate.
The right plot shows the activity of ammonia synthesis as a function of the
ﬁlling of the d-band. Both plots have an excellent top and thereby yields the
most eﬀective pure transition metal for the two given reactions. Schematics are
adapted from [36].
2.4
Studying catalysis
The complexity of catalysis is huge. All the diﬀerent intermediate states and
possible bi-products complicates the possibility of investigating the catalyst in
action and get a thorough knowledge of its underlaying mechanisms. So far most
catalysis has been developed with trial and error and knowhow about the eﬀects
of a catalyst in a speciﬁc reaction [34]. To increase the academic knowledge and
underlying physical properties the investigation of catalysis happens in a highly
controllable environment in which the reaction can take place. In surface science
there is a well-deﬁned unit called langmuir. This unit is only used in relation to
ultra high vacuum (UHV) experiments. The langmuir unit relates the exposure
time of gas for a surface and one langmuir (1 L) is deﬁned as the exposure
equivalent of 10−6 Torr or 1.33 × 10−6 mbar in one second. If every molecule
that hits the surface sticks to its i.e having a sticking coeﬃcient of one, then
1 lagmuir will correspond to a covererage of one monolayer adsorbed on the
surface. This is also why UHV has to be in the order of 10−10 mbar. This low
pressure will give an in the order of hours of worktime before the entire surface
is hit and completely covered with contaminants [41]. An ultra-high vacuum
chamber is extremely good for controlling the atmosphere and these experiments
have given information about structural and electronic properties of surfaces as
well as how reactions are inﬂicted by adsorbates on surfaces [34, 42]. However,
the major drawback of the UHV equipment is that a single crystal catalyst might
behave complete diﬀerent than expected under industrial conditions with high
pressure >30 bar and high temperatures >700 ◦C. This diﬀerence between UHV
8
==PAGE:15==
2.4. STUDYING CATALYSIS
experiments and real uses of catalyst is known as the pressure and material gap
[42]. Approaches to overcome this gab has been to use diﬀerent in-situ techniques
[43]. With the introduction of chemical potential in density functional theory
DFT combining UHV techniques with ab intio calculations has become more
common [13]. It is in bridging the pressure gab the µ-reactor developed at DTU
in the CINF group is an extremely usefull tool [44]. By scaling down the reactor
volume one can have a good control of the reactants and their ﬂow in the reactor.
The small reactor volume yield a small residence time in the reactor which gives
a fast time response. Furthermore, by using a µ-reactor one can study a catalyst
under more realistic conditions. It is easy to expose the sample to a pressure of
2 bar-3 bar and temperatures up to 300 ◦C-500 ◦C and still use UHV techniques
such as a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) to investigate the products thus
yielding a high sensitivity.
9
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. HETEROGENOUS CATALYSIS
10
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Experimental background
In this chapter an introduction to the experimental equipment and setup will
be given. This include a description of the design of the µ-reactor used in this
project and why the µ-reactor is a useful tool for investigating catalytic re-
actions. The deposition of a catalyst in the µ-reactor with the clustersource
"OMICRON" sealing the reactor with anodic bonding will be explained. Fi-
nally, the advantages of diﬀerent characterisation and analysing methods used
in this setup and in other UHV-chambers will be discussed.
3.1
µ-reactor design
The µ-reactor has a long history at DTU and is developed by multiple PhD
students from CINF is described in detail in [37, 44, 45, 46]. Hence this will
only give a brief description of the design. The µ-reactor is produced from a 4"
silicon wafer with the capacity of up to 12 µ-reactors/wafer. The design can be
seen in ﬁgure 3.1. It has four holes in one end of the reactor. Two of them are
inlet holes and conveniently labelled I1 and I2 and the two holes remaining are
outlet holes labelled O1 and O2. In the other end the reactor volume is visible
measuring 10 mm in radius and 3 µm in depth, giving a total volume of 240 nL.
From the two inlet holes a mixing channel runs back and forth before it is led
all the way through to the reactor volume. This is to ensure that the gasses are
mixed completely homogeneous by diﬀusion before the gas mixture enters the
reactor volume. When the gas enters the reactor volume all of the reactants and
products will be led out to outlet O2. This outlet has a capillary, which will be
discussed later in section 3.1.1. The main point of this capillary is to achieve
molecular ﬂows for a Quadrupol Mass Spectrometer (QMS) to analyse the gas
products after reaction. To maintain a constant speciﬁed pressure under reaction
conditions, a pressure controller is coupled to the ﬁrst outlet O1. The channel
leading to O1 cohere with the channel from the two inlets I1 and I2 in front of
the reactor volume with a smaller tube leading the gas into the reactor volume
to avoid back diﬀusion [44]. In this way it is ensured that there is a constant
"buﬀer" of the gas mixture in front of the reactor volume and that all gas that
enter the reactor volume only leaves through O2. Hence, with this design all
gas that enters the reactor volume will be analysed. In ﬁgure 3.7 the backside
of the µ-reactor can be seen where the heating elements of the µ-reactor and
11
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.1: This ﬁgure shows the design of the µ-reactor developed at CINF,
DTU. It has four holes in one end of the reactor. Two of them are inlets holes
and conveniently labelled I1 and I2 and the two holes remaining are outlet holes
labelled O1 and O2. From the two inlet holes a mixing tube is mixing the gases
with diﬀusion before entering the reactor volume of 240 nL. Most of the gas is
ﬂushed out through O1 before entering the reactor volume through a pressure
controller to specify the pressure condition of the reaction. With a smaller tube
just before the reactor volume ensure that all gas in the reactor volume leaves
through outlet O2 and into the Quadrupol Mass Spectrometer for analysis. The
heating is done by two heating elements made of platinum and temperature
measurement is done by four-point measurement of the resistance of a platinum
string RTD. Photo by Thomas Pedersen.
temperature control resistance temperature detector (RTD) is placed. The µ-
reactor is attached to an interface block seen in ﬁgure 3.2. The inlets and outlets
are only sealed to the interface block with O-rings. To compensate two diﬀerent
methods are used. Either the O-rings are ﬂushed with Ar during an experiments.
This is done on the old setup. The other way it is place the interface block inside
a chamber that can be evacuated. This is done on the NG setup.
3.1.1
Gasﬂow in capillary
The µ-reactor has proven its worth as a tool to investigate catalysis and bridging
the pressure gab with the exceptionally well designed capillary. This capillary is
placed at the end of the channel just before outlet O2. The sole purpose of the
capillary is to manage the gas ﬂow and limit the amount of products to be anal-
ysed in the mass spectrometer. Through the capillary the ﬂow will change from
a bulk laminar viscous ﬂow mostly dominated by collision between molecules to
a molecular ﬂow mostly dominated by collision between the molecules and the
wall [47, 48]. With a molecular gas ﬂow ﬂowing out of the reactor the amount of
products are few enough to be analysed with traditional UHV equipment such
as a QMS which will be described later. A schematics of the capillary adapted
from [45] can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3. This shows a graphical interpretation of the
gas ﬂow starting with pressure p1 in the begging which is equal to the pressure
in the reactor chamber and is often set to be equal to 1 bar. At the other end the
pressure is denoted p3 and this is equal to the pressure in the main chamber that
the mass spectrometer is connected to. The pressure in the main chamber is in
12
==PAGE:19==
3.1. µ-REACTOR DESIGN
Figure 3.2: This ﬁgure shows a schematics of the interface block. At the inlet
and outlets the interface block and µ-reactor is sealed with o-rings. These O-
rings are either ﬂushed with Ar or a containment volume around the interface
block is evacuated to avoid contaminants from air. Adapted from [44].
the order of 10−7 to 10−10 mbar hence p3 can easily be set to be zero compared
to p1. The pressure in the middle denoted p2 is deﬁned to be the pressure where
the gas ﬂow changes from a viscous ﬂow to a molecular ﬂow. The nature of a
gas ﬂow through a cylindrical tube with cross sectional diameter of d can be
understood through two diﬀerent dimensionless numbers namely the Knudsen
number Kn and the Reynolds number Re which are deﬁned as
Kn = λ
d
(3.1.1)
Re = ρυd
η .
(3.1.2)
Here λ is the mean free path of the molecules and d is the cross sectional
diameter of the tube. The last three parameters ρ, υ, η is the density, velocity
and viscosity of the gas respectively. The ﬂow can be in one of three diﬀerent
states. The ﬁrst state is the bulk or viscous state which apply for gasses with
Kn = 0.01. In this viscous regime the gas can be either turbulent or laminar
deﬁned by the Reynolds number. If Re exceeds 2200 the gas ﬂow will be entirely
turbulent and if Re is below 1200 the gas ﬂow will be entirely laminar and gasses
will only be mixed by diﬀusion [45]. If the Reynolds number is in between the two
numbers, the ﬂow can be either turbulent or laminar dependent on the geometry
and roughness of the surface of the tube. The second state is the intermediate
state where the gas ﬂow has a Kn between 0.01 and 1 and the third state is
the molecular state where the gas has a Kn above 1 e.i the molecules in average
collide into the wall before they meet each other [48, 49]. The mean free path
of molecules is
λ =
kBT
√
2πd2
0P
(3.1.3)
13
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.3: This schematic is a graphical interpretation of the ﬂow through the
capillary in the µ-reactor design. The pressure p1 is equal to the pressure in the
reactor chamber which in turn is deﬁned by the pressure controller at outlet O1.
Pressure at the other end p3 is equal to the pressure in the mass spectrometer
which is insigniﬁcant compared to p1 and hence can be set equal to zero. The
pressure in the middle p2 is deﬁned to be at the edge where the gas goes from
intermediate ﬂow regime to the molecular ﬂow regime i.e. having a Knudsen
number below 0.05. Reprinted from [45].
where kB, T, d2
o and P are boltzmanns constant, absolute temperature, diameter
of the molecule (10−8 m) and pressure respectively. With this formula and the
knowledge of the nature of the ﬂow through the Knudsens number we can calcu-
late at which pressure the gas ﬂow goes from laminar and viscous ﬂow through
intermediate further down to a molecular ﬂow. The capillary is 3 µm × 5 µm
giving a total cross sectional area of 15 µm. This corresponds to a circular tube
structure with a cross sectional diameter of 4.4 µm. The circular approximation
makes it possible to derive an analytical expression for the total ﬂux through
the capillary since there are analytical expressions for gas ﬂow through a circu-
lar tube in all three ﬂow regimes. The molecular dimensions of air d0 is around
380 pm and a standard value for pressure during an experiment is 1 bar. At
room temperature the gas ﬂow has a Knudsen number of Kn = 0.0145 and the
gases movement in the capillary is therefor in the intermediate ﬂow regime. If
the mean free path of the molecules is set to the dimensions of the capillary
the pressure where the gas ﬂow changes from intermediate to molecular can be
calculated to be approximately 14.7 mbar.
To derive an analytical expression for the total ﬂux through the capillary the
ﬂux in the intermediate and molecular regime through a circular tube has to be
combined. The two expressions (intermediate and molecular respectively) are
given by
˙N =
1
kBT
 
π
8
˜pd4
ηlint
+ 8
3
rπ
2
d3
lintυ
1 + 2 dυ˜p
η
1 + 2.48 dυ˜p
η
!
(p1 −p2)
(3.1.4)
˙N =
1
kBT
8
3
rπ
2
d3
lmolυ (p2 −p3).
(3.1.5)
Where lint and mol are the section length of the capillary with intermediate
and molecular ﬂow, υ =
q
m
kBT , ˜p = (p1 + p2)/2 is the average pressure in the
ﬂow regime and p1, p2, p3 is the pressure at the beginning, at the point in the
14
==PAGE:21==
3.1. µ-REACTOR DESIGN
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
SEM current / nA
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Time / h
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
420
440
Temperature / K
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Reactor pressure / bar
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
SEM current / nA
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Time / h
CO signal
Temperature
Reactor pressure
Figure 3.4: This ﬁgure shows how the ﬂux through the capillary is eﬀected by
temperature and pressure in the reaction chamber. As predicted by equation
3.1.6 the ﬂux decreases with increasing temperature or decreasing pressure in
the reactor volume.
capillary where the ﬂow changes from intermediate to molecular ﬂow and the
pressure at the end of the capillary. The total length of the capillary must be
equal to the two sections l = lint + lmol and it is now possible to derive an
analytical expression for the total ﬂux
˙N =
1
kBT
1
l
 π
8
˜pd4
η
+ 8
3
rπ
2
d3
υ
1 + 2 dυ˜p
η
1 + 2.48 dυ˜p
η

(p1 −p2)
+8
3
rπ
2
d3
υ (p2 −p3)
!
.
(3.1.6)
From this equation a most important fact about the movement of the gas
through the capillary can be understood. The total number of molecules pass-
ing through the capillary and into the mass spectrometer is proportional to the
pressure in the reaction chamber and the inverse of the temperature. This is very
important to have in mind when interpreting data from the mass spectrometer,
since an increase in temperature will decrease the number of molecules detected.
In ﬁgure 3.4 this feature can be examined. The setup was set to run over night
with diﬀerent pressure settings and at each pressure setting the temperature was
15
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
varied to visualise the eﬀects. The analytical expression has been tested exper-
imentally by Toke Riishøj Henriksen [44, 45] by relating the pressure diﬀerence
in a ﬁxed volume to the ﬂux measured through the QMS and found good agree-
ment. From his data the ﬂux at room temperature is 6 × 1014 molecules s−1.
With this the residence time or gases in the reactor volume can be calculated to
be around 10 seconds since the volume is 240 nL which from the ideal gas law
is equivalent 6.5 × 1015 molecules. From equation 3.1.6 it can be seen that the
ﬂux will decrease proportionally to an increase in temperature and hence the
residence time will increase during experiments.
3.1.2
Controlling temperature and heating
To heat up the µ-reactor during experiments two heating elements made of plat-
inum are placed on the backside. They are aligned directly beneath the reactor
volume to increase time response and homogeneous heating. The two heating
elements are controlled separately by two diﬀerent power suppliers. To ensure
homogeneous heating across the complete reactor volume a short study with a
thermal camera and diﬀerent power settings was done. The test was evaluated
with diﬀerent power ratios ranging from power supplier 1 being 2.5 higher than
power supplier 2 and changed all the way to the opposite ratio of 1:2.5. The
temperature was varied from 30 ◦C to 300 ◦C at each power ratio setting. The
pictures are then analysed with the image processing software mageJ to esti-
mate the settings that provide the most homogeneous heating across the reactor
volume. The images are only analysed in the vertical direction across the two
heating elements. The homogeneity of the heating along a horizontal line of
each heating element is improved with a simple ceramic lid placed on top of the
sample holder. The best setting was found to be at 2:1 with the heating element
closest to the outlet and inlet holes receiving the greatest power. This can be
seen in ﬁgure 3.5 where two pictures taken at around 60-70◦Cand their analysis
is shown. Figure 3.5a is showing the picture with a voltage ratio of 1.5 to 1 and
ﬁgure 3.5c shows the picture with voltage ratio of 2.0 to 1. In both cases the
heating element in the top of the picture receives the greatest power. However,
as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6 when the temperature rises above 280 ◦Cthe homo-
geneity drops slightly for both 1.5 to 1 and 2.0 to 1 and the better setting would
be around 1.8 to 1. Even though this is known, the settings are set to be 2 to
1 through all temperatures. The loss in homogeneity is acceptable compared to
the extra programming needed and the increased risk of software failure in the
temperature programme that follows.
To measure the temperature a thermocouple is placed on top of the µ-reactor.
Unfortunately, due to low thermal conductivity of the Pyrex lid there is a tem-
perature gradient across the lid which lowers the sensitivity and time response of
the temperature control. This is overcome with the use of a Resistance Temper-
ature Detector (RTD) instead. The reason to keep the thermocouple is to ensure
that the electrical connection to the RTD is not lost during the experiments.
If the RTD lost the parts of the electrical connection this would then show as
an inconsistency with the thermocouple temperature. The RTD is placed in the
space in between the two heating elements as a four-point probe to eliminate
internal resistance as seen in ﬁgure 3.7. In this RTD setup a current is sent
through a wire which is made of platinum. The resistance of a wire is highly
temperature dependent and precise temperature measurements can be done.
16
==PAGE:23==
3.1. µ-REACTOR DESIGN
(a) Thermal picture with power
ratio of 1.5 to 1.
(b) Heat proﬁle along the y-axis in ﬁgure 3.5a.
(c) Thermal picture of microreator
with power ratio of 2.0 to 1.
(d) Heat proﬁle along the y-axis in ﬁgure 3.5c
Figure 3.5: This ﬁgure shows two diﬀerent thermal pictures of the µ-reactor at
approximately the same temperature around 60−70◦C and their corresponding
heat proﬁle along the vertical axis. The black box is the area where the heat
measurement was taken and also the approximately area of the reactor volume.
The diﬀerence between ﬁgure 3.5a and ﬁgure 3.5c is the power settings for each
of the two heating elements of respectively 1.5 to 1 and 2.0 to 1. The maximum
power is given to the heating element closest to the in and outlet holes (The
top of both pictures). As it can be seen by comparing the two heat proﬁles the
power setting 2.0 to 1 provides the most homogenous heating across the reactor
volume.
17
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
(a) Thermal picture with power
ratio of 1.5 to 1.
(b) Heat proﬁle along the y-axis in ﬁgure 3.6a.
(c) Thermal picture with power ra-
tio of 1.5 to 1.
(d) Heat proﬁle along the y-axis in ﬁgure 3.6c.
Figure 3.6: This ﬁgure shows two diﬀerent thermal pictures of the µ-reactor
at approximately the same temperature around 285◦Cand their corresponding
heat proﬁle along the vertical axis. The black box is the area where the heat
measurement was taken and also the approximately area of the reactor volume.
The diﬀerence between ﬁgure 3.6a and ﬁgure 3.6c is the power settings for each
of the two heating elements of respectively 1.5 to 1 and 2.0 to 1. The maximum
power is given to the heating element closest to the in and outlet holes (The
top of both pictures). As it can be seen by comparing the two heat proﬁles they
are both fairly homogeneous. However, the power setting 1.5 to 1 provides too
little power in the bottom of the reactor volume and 2.0 to 1 provides too much
power in the top end of the reactor volume.
When the temperature increases so will the resistance since the mean free path
of the electrons will be smaller. The thermal conductivity of silicon is high and
gives fast time response and high sensitivity. The diﬀerent heat losses include
primarily losses to the air around the µ-reactor by convection. To decrease the
heat transfer to the interface block, a spacer made from a glass with low ther-
mal conductivity has been placed on the backside of the reactor in the end with
the outlet and inlet holes as seen in ﬁgure 3.7. The temperature is controlled
with a simple PID controller but due to a SD-card broke down these settings
were initially lost. The settings were recovered experimentally by running diﬀer-
ent temperature ramps while tuning the Proportionality and Integration term
but setting the Derivative term to zero as was done by Robert Jensen in [50].
The result can be observed in ﬁgure 3.8. Since the interest is on rapid temper-
ature changes the PID controller were set to be Kp = 0.5 and Ki = 0.2. Kp
18
==PAGE:25==
3.1. µ-REACTOR DESIGN
Figure 3.7: This ﬁgure reveals the backside of the µ-reactor. It consists of two
heating elements in both ends made from platinum. In between the two heating
elements and across the middle of the reactor chamber is a four-probe Resistance
Temperature Detector(RTD). In the end with the inlet and outlet holes a glas
ceramic is placed to decrease heat losses to the interface block. Photo by Thomas
Pedersen.
and Ki are two constant multiplied to the proportionality and integrations term
respectively. This setting gives control to change the temperature 100◦C very
rapidly with a minor overshot of the temperature before stabilising at the given
temperature.
3.1.3
Introducing catalyst in the reactor
The silicon µ-reactor is in itself not very useful if there is no catalyst introduced
in the reactor to be measured. One easy way to introduce a catalyst in the
reactor is by drop casting. Here a catalyst of interest for instance Ni on alumina
is dissolved in a solution of water or ethanol. The advantage of ethanol solutions
is the lower surface tension, letting the solution ﬂow more smooth to the edges of
the reactor chamber giving a more uniform distribution of the catalyst. The issue
could be if the catalyst is extremely reactive at room temperature in which case
carbon from the ethanol could bind to the catalyst creating diﬀerent carbide and
thereby decreasing the activity of the catalyst. A rule of thumb is to produce
a concentration of c = 1 g L−1 and drop a 40 uL droplet1. However, diﬀerent
activities for diﬀerent catalysts will require diﬀerent amounts of said catalyst to
avoid full conversion in which one is mass transport limited and stops studying
the diﬀerent properties of the catalyst.
Another way to introduce a catalyst is with physical vapour deposition meth-
ods such as sputtering. This method is also used at CINF. Sputtering requires
vacuum since it relies on a long mean free path of the molecules. In the sputter
chamber a target of selected material for instance Ni is mounted. A gas of Ar is
ionised and accelerated towards the target to sputter oﬀthe metal. The metal
will then move towards the sample and deposit all over the reactor creating a
nice clean homogenous thin ﬁlm as seen in ﬁgure 3.9. This is also the concept
in which the cluster source uses. The cluster source has been the primary tool
used to create samples in this project. The cluster source can be seen in ﬁgure
3.10. A target is mounted and in front of the target is an argon plasma which
is bombarded towards the target with a speciﬁc energy. The plasma is held in
1Said by Daniel Trimiarco
19
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.8: This ﬁgure shows the diﬀerent temperature runs calibrating the
PID controller. Due to a wish for fast ramping the setting Kp=0.5 and Ki=0.2
was chosen(Blue) even though this setting overshoots the target by a couple of
percent before stabilising at the given temperature.
place with multiple magnets behind the target. This conﬁnes the plasma and
enhances the sputtering. With the speciﬁc energy given to the Ar+ one can con-
trol in detail the sizes of the particles that comes oﬀthe target. The particles
created are then led by a He feed through the chamber into a time of ﬂight
(TOF) mass ﬁlter. Here the time in the TOF is correlated to the mass to charge
ratio m/z. Since the probability of double ionisation is small it is safe to assume
the great majority of the particles is with the speciﬁc mass. In ﬁgure 3.11 the
time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter can be seen. When the particles travel through the time
of ﬂight a radio frequent signal is applied. This will give particles with a too
low or too high mass an unstable trajectory either colliding into the side walls
or simply not be aﬀected enough by the signal and never bump into the right
corridor.
3.1.4
Anodic bonding
When the channels in the silicon reactor has been edged and the RTD has been
created it is time for the catalyst to be introduced into the reactor. When the
catalyst has been placed in the reactor chamber a sealing of the top must be
done to complete the reactor. This is done with a pyrex lid that has to be
completely air tight to ensure a controllable environment where no gas escapes
the reactor chamber other than through the capillary and no unknown gases
interfere with the reaction. This is done with anodic bonding or electrical ﬁeld
assisted bonding. The method is describe in 1969 by Wallis et al. [52] and the
method is very well known in the semiconductor industry since this method is
20
==PAGE:27==
3.1. µ-REACTOR DESIGN
Figure 3.9: The reactor after being deposited with Ni in the sputter chamber
without mask. The reactor is completely covered with a 100 nm thick Ni thin
ﬁlm.
Figure 3.10: A schematics of OMICRON cluster source. In the left is the Ni75Fe25
target placed where Ni75Fe25 nanoparticles are sputtered oﬀ. By changing the
strength of the sputtering ﬁeld a distribution of particles is achieved which can
be tuned in so most of the particles are already in the correct size. The parti-
cles are then led into a time of ﬂight mass separator to ensure only particles of
the correct size (or mass) are led through to the µ-reactor in the UHV cham-
ber to be deposited on. The samples are then analysed with ISS and XPS for
characterisation. Schematics adapted from [51]
21
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.11: The of the time of ﬂight mass separator used in the cluster source.
The ions enter the TOF from left in an unﬁltered beam. After a while all ions
will feel a big electrical puls upwards from plate 1 towards plate 2. A second big
electrical puls is then exerted from plate 2 towards plate 1. This gives ions with
the correct mass to charge ratio a stable trajectory eﬀectively ﬁltering oﬀall
other ions with diﬀerent mass and therefore unstable trajectories through the
TOF. Figure provided by Béla Sebők.
used to bond two diﬀerent silicon wafers together with an intermediate glass
substrate [53]. The method is used to bond a Pyrex glass lid on top of the
silicon reactor creating a hermetic sealing. This is done by heating up the Pyrex
to around 400 ◦C-500 ◦C. At this temperature the cations in the Pyrex become
mobile. By applying an electrical ﬁeld of -1kV on the cathode put on top of
the glass the Na+ is directed towards the cathode and the O2– is directed
towards the anode. The silicon wafer or reactor in this case is the anode. At
the glass/silicon interface the Si and O2– makes strong covalent bonds creating
a strong hermetic seal of the reactor. The time to completely bond the entire
reactor diﬀers from an hour to an hour and a half. A sketch of the method can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.12.
The main issue with this procedure is the heating of the catalyst while bond-
ing. Nanoparticles can be highly inﬂuenced by this heat treatment and begin
to sinter or change morphology and deactivate before even beginning the test
of the catalysts’ abilities [55]. To avoid these problematic features an anodic
bonding method with active cooling of the sensitive part of the reactor was de-
veloped at CINF and described in [56]. Figure 3.13 is adapted from [56]. This
ﬁgure shows the concept of the anodic bonding method with active cooling. The
idea is to place the reactor chamber on a cold ﬁnger. This ﬁnger is made from
copper and the copper block is cooled by 25 ◦C house cooling water. On top
of the Pyrex lid, a block made of aluminium is placed. This block is used as a
heating element from the top. The aluminium block has a hole through it from
top to bottom with a slightly larger diameter than the reactor chamber. This
hole is to be placed on top of the reactor chamber to decrease heat transfer
from the heating block to the sensitive catalyst. The heating is done by two
light bulbs that are put inside the block of aluminium. In ﬁgure 3.14 a ﬁnite
element analysis adapted from [56] of the enhanced bonding setup can be seen.
The setup has a radially symmetry axis and the aluminium block was kept at
constant temperature of 475◦Csuitable places and the copper ﬁnger was kept
at 12.5 ◦C. The analysis yields a maximum temperature of 90 ◦C in the reactor
22
==PAGE:29==
3.2. EQUIPMENT FOR ANALYSING IN UHV
Figure 3.12: A sketch of the anodic bonding method to create an irreversible
hermetic tight bond between the silicon reactor with a Pyrex lid. The Heating
element heat the setup to around 400 ◦C-500 ◦C to make the cations (Na+)
mobile and a voltage of around -1kV is applied on the cathode to move the Na+
towards the cathode leaving a negative depletion layer with excess of O2– to
form strong covalent bonds to the silicon at the glass/metal interface. Schematic
adapted from [54].
and below 50 ◦Cwithin the critical inner circle with 8 mm in diameter. With
these conditions it’s safe to say the catalysts are preserved as intentioned when
produced and it is possible to perform reliable measurements.
3.2
Equipment for analysing in UHV
The diﬀerent samples have been analysed with diﬀerent techniques. Most of
them have been analysed with X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy (ISS) to verify the composition of the Ni75Fe25
metal alloy and a handful of the samples have been investigated with Secondary
electron microscopy (SEM) to verify the sizes of the samples and to image the
physical diﬀerences in the morphology of the nanoparticles. During an exper-
iment the products have been analysed with Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
(QMS). These diﬀerent techniques will be described brieﬂy in this section.
3.2.1
Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry
The most important technique used in this setup is the Quadrupol Mass Spec-
trometer (QMS). This is used to analyse all products leaving the µ-reactor
through the capillary and into the main chamber. In ﬁgure 3.15 a schematic of
the QMS can be seen. The idea of a QMS is to create a mass ﬁlter that ﬁlters
away all lighter and heavier molecules than a speciﬁc mass or more precise mass
to charge ratio m/z allowing only a single m/z ratio to be detected. This is done
by ionising the molecules with a hot ﬁlament normally made from tungsten due
to a high melting point. The ions are then led in between four parallel rods that
are pairwise electrically connected. These rods are nothing special but a simple
conducting metal of around 15 to 20 cm of length with an electrical ﬁeld around
them. Both pair of rods are then connected to a radio frequent potential. The
amplitudes and frequency of the RF potential of a single pair of rods will then
divert molecules with a low mass to charge ratio more extreme than molecules
23
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.13: A sketch of the anodic bonding method to create an irreversible
hermetic tight bond between the silicon reactor with a Pyrex lid. The Heating
element heat the setup to around 400 ◦C-500 ◦Cto make the cations (Na+) mobile
and a voltage of around -1kV is applied on the cathode to move the Na+ towards
the cathode leaving a negative depletion layer with excess of O2– to form strong
covalent bonds to the silicon at the glass/metal interface. Figure adapted from
[56].
Figure 3.14: The FEA done by [56]. The analysis is done with a radially symme-
try axis drawn to the left. The aluminium block was kept at constant 475 ◦Cat
suitable sides and the copper block was supplied with a heat sink of 12.5 ◦C. The
results of the analysis yielded no higher temperature of 90 ◦Cin the total reactor
chamber and no higher temperatures than 50 ◦Cin the inner critical circle with
a diameter of 8mm. Figure adapted from [56].
24
==PAGE:31==
3.2. EQUIPMENT FOR ANALYSING IN UHV
than molecules with high mass to charge ratio. Hence smaller molecules will
be more susceptible to change their trajectory. The two pairwise rods are also
connected to a DC potential of opposite sign of each other e.i. with one pair
having a positive DC potential applied and the other pair a negative DC poten-
tial. The pair of rods with a positive DC potential will stabilise the trajectory
of the molecules since they will constantly repel the molecules who have lost an
electron. The RF potential will then destabilise the trajectory of molecules with
a low mass to charge ratio since they are most eﬀected by the RF potential.
This allows all masses that have a high mass to charge ratio to have a stable
trajectory which eﬀectively creates a high mass pass ﬁlter. The other pair of
rods are in contrary connected to a negative DC potential. This will constantly
attract the molecules and the RF potential have the possibility to stabilise the
trajectory of the molecules. However, only molecules with a low mass to charge
ratio are aﬀected by the RF potential and heavier molecules will be diverted
into an unstable trajectory creating a low mass pass ﬁlter. By regulating the
DC potential and the frequency or magnitude of the RF potential the QMS can
sweep across diﬀerent masses and easily diﬀerentiate masses separated as low as
m/e = 1 [57]. The most common way to operate the QMS is by keeping the DC
and AC potential at a constant ratio. This can best be illustrated with ﬁgure
3.16 adapted from [57]. The x-axis and y-axis are two parameters controlling
the trajectory of the molecules moving through an ideal simple quadrupole with
hyperbolic cross section [58, 59]. The y-axis parameter is denoted a and the
x-axis parameter is denoted q and they are equal to
a =
4eU
mr2ω2
(3.2.1)
q =
2eV
mr2ω2 .
(3.2.2)
Where U and V are the DC and RF potential respectively and ω is the frequency
of the RF potential applied, r is the distance from the the centre of the z-axis to
any of the four rods and m is the mass of the ions. These parameters (a and q)
are derived from the electrical ﬁeld given by the four rods, the force exerted on
molecules in an electrical ﬁeld and Newton’s second law of motion. The solution
for a stable trajectory is marked by the grey area on the ﬁgure. If everything else
but the mass is kept constant one obtains the mass scan line. Every point on the
mass scan line represents a diﬀerent mass with decreasing masses as one goes up
the line. By tweaking and tuning the ratio between the DC potential, U, and the
RF potential, V, it is possible to reach resolutions of 1 part in 1500 [57]. Only
masses on the line that falls within the grey area will have a stable trajectory
through the QMS and will be detected. The detector is a Secondary Electron
Multiplier, SEM. This detector consists of multiple charged metal plates. When
the ﬁrst metal plate hit this induces multiple electrons. These electrons then
accelerate towards the next charged metal plate and induce emission of even
more electrons. This will then be repeated multiple times to increase the number
of electrons collected by the metal anode in the end. In ﬁgure 3.17 a mass
spectrum of methane taken from the online database webbook.nist.gov can be
seen. Methane has mass m/z = 16 but due to the temperature of the ﬁlament
and the less bound hydrogen mass m/z = 15 is measured with almost just as
high intensity. The second and third hydrogen atoms are bound more strongly
and hence as it is seen from the ﬁgure mass 14, 13 and 12 is less probable to
25
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.15: A schematic of a QMS system. The four rods are paired (Top-
Bottom, Back-Front) and a DC potential of equal magnitude but opposite sign
is applied. Further is a RF potential applied to the two pairs shifted out of
phase of each other with 180◦. This eﬀectively creates a narrowband mass ﬁlter.
Reprinted from [57]
be measured. Due to other molecules having the same mass as methane (m/z
= 16) it is chosen to measure methane at the second largest intensity m/z = 15
to avoid doubt about what have been measured. This however cannot be done
with N2 or CO which both have the mass m/z = 28 and with no less bound
atoms likely to be lost due to the heat of the ﬁlament that ionises the molecules.
3.2.2
XPS, ISS and SEM
The main tool in this thesis have been the µ-reactor connected to a QMS for
analysis of gas products while running diﬀerent temperature programs. To char-
acterise the samples they have been examined with X-ray Photoelectron Spec-
troscopy, Ion Scattering Spectroscopy before methanation reaction and some of
the samples have been examined with Secondary Electron Microscopy (SEM, not
to be confused with SEM detector) before and after to ensure visual certainty
that particles have not migrated or sintered during methanation reaction.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XPS
The XPS techniques is among the most used in surface science and catalysis. It
takes advantage of the photoelectric eﬀect where electromagnetic waves interact
with a solid and kick out electrons to be detected [41, 60]. The kinetic energy
of the electron detected will then be equal to
Ek = Eλ −Eb −φ,
(3.2.3)
where Ek is the kinetic energy of the detected electron, Eλ is the energy of the
incident photon given by hν where h is Planck’s constant and ν is the frequency
of said photon. Eb is the binding energy of the electron detected and φ is the work
function of the analyser. This makes it possible to map out the electron density of
a solid as function of binding energy. This function is uniquely correlated to each
element and XPS can be used not only to determine which elements there is in
26
==PAGE:33==
3.2. EQUIPMENT FOR ANALYSING IN UHV
Figure 3.16: This ﬁgure shows the best conceptual visualisation of the QMS.
On x and y-axis two parameters, a and q, are plotted against each other. The
parameters are a function of U and V which are the DC and RF potential
respectively and ω which is the frequency of the RF potential applied, r which
is the distance from the the centre of the z-axis to any of the four rods and m is
the mass of the ions. These parameters (a and q) are derived from the electrical
ﬁeld given by the four rods, the force exerted on molecules in an electrical
ﬁeld and Newton,s second law of motion. The solution for a stable trajectory
is marked by the grey area on the ﬁgure. If everything else but the mass is
kept constant one obtains the mass scan line. Every point on the mass scan line
represents a diﬀerent mass with decreasing masses as one goes up the line. Only
masses on the line that falls within the grey area will have a stable trajectory
through the QMS and will be detected. Reprinted from [57]
27
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.17: A diagram of methane mass spectrum. diagram is found in the on-
line database at webbook.nist.gov. Clearly the ﬁrst hydrogen atom is so loosely
bound in methane that the atom is easily lost and methane can be measured at
m/z = 15.
the solid but also the chemical composition making this technique an extremely
useful method for characterisation. To perform the measurement one will need
to have a reliable monochromatic X-ray source as any instability would render
the results very hard to interpret. The X-ray source used is usually a AlKα12 or
MgKα12 anode which emits nice x-rays with energies of 1486.3eV and 1253.6 eV
respectively. When the anode is bombarded with electrons the material might
excite the atoms which after a short time will relax under emission of a photon.
The excited electrons come from the 1s shell and the relaxed electron comes
from either 2p 3
2 or 2p 1
2 . That is why the anodes are denoted Kα1 and Kα2.
The two diﬀerent peaks are separated in energy due to spin orbit coupling of
around 0.5 eV. Furthermore, the two peaks are unfortunately not delta function
of energy but has a broadening which for Al anode is around 0.7 eV per peak.
With a small overlap between the two peaks this gives a total broadening of
the spectral line of around 1 eV at full width half maximum (FWHM) as can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.18. Other features to be aware of include the so called ghost
peaks that arrive from impurities on the anode. For instance would aluminium
contamination on a magnesium anode give rise to ghost peaks shifted 233eV
compared to the real peak [41]. Another feature are satellite peaks that occur
due to the possibility of ions in the anode being left in an excited state. This
will give less energy for the emitted X-ray and hence less kinetic energy for
the electron to be detected. These satellite peaks can be limited by having a
monochromator or using synchrotron facilities. The intensity of the incoming
electron is given by
I = I0exp(−x
λ)
(3.2.4)
where lambda is the mean free path of the electron. The mean free path of an
electron in a solid follows the universal curve which can be seen in ﬁgure 3.19.
As it can be seen the mean free path of an electron in a solid is 1-3 nm in the
range of 1000 eV to 2000 eV. This implies that with electrons detected in XPS
using either an Al or Mg anode comes from the ﬁrst 5 layer of atoms and hence
28
==PAGE:35==
3.2. EQUIPMENT FOR ANALYSING IN UHV
Figure 3.18: This ﬁgure illustrates the uncertainties of X-rays emitted from an
Al anode leading to a broadening of alpha line peaks. Figure is adapted from
[41].
is a highly surface sensitive technique.
The detector used in this case is the hemispherical analyser which can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.20. This analyser as the name implies uses hemispherical structures
in which two diﬀerent hemispheres are applied with a potential. This potential
is determined by the a pass energy in which an electron will have a stable
trajectory through the entire circular motion. The pass energy is determined
by the resolution wanted. The resolution is a constant percentage of the pass
energy (roughly 1% [41]). So with a low pass energy a high resolution can be
achieved however this will be on the cost of intensity and thereby the signal to
noise ratio will increase. It is a trade oﬀand often pass energies lies between 5
eV and 100 eV. The electrons to be detected needs to be slowed down to the pass
energy and a retarded grid is placed in front of the entrance to the detector. The
potential set on the retarded grid determines which electrons that can pass. If
the resolution should be 0.2 eV the pass energy should be 20 eV and the retarded
potential should be the energy of the electron to be detected for instance -1000
eV plus the pass energy which yield a retarded potential of -980 V (Example
taken from [41]).
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy, ISS
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy is a technique that relies on the scattering of the
ions on the surface. These ions are often He+ but Ne+ can also be used and could
potentially increase sensitivity when scattering on heavier elements. However,
with heavier probing ions comes a greater risk since these heavier ions might
sputter oﬀmolecules ruining the surface. The ions are created with an ion gun
and typically have an energy of 1-2 keV and are directed towards the surface
29
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 3.19: This ﬁgure shows the universal curve. The universal curve reveal
that an electrons mean free path is only dependent on the energy of the electron
and hence material independent. Figure is adapted from [60].
Figure 3.20: This ﬁgure illustrates the hemispherical analyser [41]. The electrons
enter in the top of the ﬁgure and is electrically guided through the hemisphere.
Only electrons with the correct energy will pass through the analyser.
30
==PAGE:37==
3.2. EQUIPMENT FOR ANALYSING IN UHV
Figure 3.21: A schematic of the ISS technique. Light ions are accelerated from an
ion gun with an angle towards the surface. 99% of the ions will be neutralised but
the remain will be scattered elastically on the top surface layer. The diﬀerence
in kinetic energy from the ion gun and the detector is useful to calculate the
mass of the surface atom. Adapted from [41]
on which the ions will scatter elastically on the top surface atoms. A schematic
of the technique can be seen in ﬁgure 3.21. Most of the ions will neutralise
when they come in contact with the surface. The 1% that do survive have a
large scattering cross section and ultimately only ions that scatter on the top
surface layer will survive and can be detected. The scattering is elastic which
will preserve not only the momentum but also the kinetic energy. This allows
for easy analysis to establish an analytical solution which consist only of the
four parameters: The energy of the ion before and after the collision and the
masses of the ion as well as the probed element. All but the mass of the element
in the surface is known and hence the mass of the element can be calculated.
If the ion gun and analyser is angled this have to be taken into consideration.
These angles are known parameters and the mass of the element can still be
calculated.
Scanning Electron Microscopy, SEM Scanning electron microscopy is
a nice technique to visualise the surface topography and somewhat also the
composition giving insight to the size and shape of nanoparticles supported on
for instance SiO2 as is the case with a µ-reactor. The microscope uses an electron
gun to accelerate an electron beam towards the sample and the electrons interact
with the surface. One of two modes to operate in is back scattered electrons
(BSE). Here electrons that come from the electron beam scatter on elements like
in the ISS method. The heavier the elements the electrons scatter on the more
kinetic energy will the electrons have and the brighter will the elements appear.
This gives an idea of the chemical composition [60]. With energies around 1keV
the backscattered electrons will also originate from scattering deeper into the
sample as explained by the mean free path of electrons in a solid as seen on the
universal curve. The other method is secondary electrons(SE) where electrons
kicked out of the surface with an energy between 5-50 eV will be detected. These
electrons will be easier detected if they have a surface normal to the detected
than otherwise and a topography of the surface can be recreated visualising
holes and hills.
31
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL BACKGROUND
32
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
Results
During this thesis two diﬀerent catalysts have been tested. The main experiment
is methanation activities of size-selected Ni75Fe25 nanoparticle with sizes ranging
from 3.5 nm to 9 nm being investigated. Also an industrial Ni catalyst on alumina
has been tested in the µ-reactor with H2-TPDs after exposure to various gas
compositions to investigate carbon formation on the surface.
4.1
Methanation on mass-selected nanoparticles
4.1.1
Preparing samples
The samples are prepared by Béla Sebök with use of the OMICRON machin-
ery. The µ-reactors are tested ﬁrst by eye sight to see if they are intact. Then
the ohmic resistance is measured through the RTD to ensure the heating ele-
ments are not connected in any way with the RTD and also to make sure the
small platinum line across the µ-reactor is not broken. The µ-reactors are then
cleaned in ethanol and sonicated before rinsing in milli-Q water (18.2 MΩ). The
µ-reactors are then mounted into the OMICRON where they are placed in front
of the TOF mass separator outlet and deposited with Ni75Fe25 nanoparticles.
The particles are assumed to have a sphere like structure when leaving the TOF
and they are assumed to have a halfsphere structure when adsorbed onto the
surface while maintaining the same volume. With this assumption all µ-reactors
are deposited with the same coverage of 10 % regardless of the particle size. Af-
ter depositing the nanoparticles on to the µ-reactors they were taken outside
in air and bonded using the anodic bonding method with active cooling of the
reactor volume.
4.1.2
Flow ﬁle
The ﬂow ﬁle used in the project has changed many times. This was done to op-
timise and tweak the experiment for reveal the most information in the shortest
time frame. The changes includes the ramping speed of the temperature during
TPDs, the time length at which the temperature were held constant, the amount
of diﬀerent gases, and diﬀerent time range for the methanation reaction. The
ﬂow ﬁles are the automatic system to achieve highly reproducible experiments.
33
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
This ﬁle determines gas ﬂows, temperature, and pressure in the reactor. The
structure of the recent optimised experiment can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1. First the
samples were reduced in hydrogen at 225 ◦C for 30 min to react oﬀany carbon
and clean the surface. After the cleaning treatment of the sample the metha-
nation process was done at 100 ◦C, 125 ◦C, 150 ◦C, 175 ◦C, 200 ◦C, up to 225 ◦C
and back again to 100 ◦C. At each temperature step the temperature was kept
constant for an hour except at 225 ◦C where the system was kept constant for
2 h. The syngas is a mixture of 2% CO in H2 sometimes with a carrier gas of
Ar in the ratio of 1/10 to the hydrogen. The reactor was kept at 1 bar for 3 h to
ensure that all gases were stable. After methanation the sample were evacuated
and ﬂushed with Ar in 0.5 bar twice to rinse the reactor volume of all other
gas species. The reactor volume is then ﬁlled with H2 to 1 bar in 45 min before
ramping the temperature up to 225 ◦C at 120 K min−1. This cycle is repeated
multiple times to investigate degradation of the catalyst.
4.1.3
Methanation activities
This project started back in January and preliminary results are seen in ﬁgure
4.2. In this ﬁgure the methanation reaction activities of a 3.5 nm, 7 nm, 9 nm,
and two 5 nm samples are shown. The methane signal measured at m/z = 15 is
normalised to the signal of hydrogen measured at m/z = 2. This ﬁgure clearly
shows that diﬀerent sizes have diﬀerent methanation activities. The most active
seems to be the 7 nm sample which at 150 ◦C is more than twice as active as the
9 nm sample. Also the 7 nm sample reaches full conversion around 200 ◦C. Some
issues with the QMS software were resolved after an involuntary down time due
to the construction of the foundation of a new dormatory, and the SEM voltage
was changed. This change in SEM current (and QMS software) unfortunately
did comparison of diﬀerent samples measured before and after impossible. The
activities towards methanation reaction was then done on a number of samples
loaded with diﬀerently sized nanoparticles. The new measurements can be seen
for each size 3.5 nm, 5 nm, 7 nm, and 9 nm in ﬁgure 4.3a, 4.3b, 4.4a, and 4.4b
respectively. In each ﬁgure the methane signal is normalised to the signal of
hydrogen. The 9 nm sample seems to be the least active and deactivates very
much. The 3.5 nm deactivates less extremely than the 9 nm, but otherwise have
similar if not a bit higher methanation reaction activity. Only one of each 3.5 nm
and 9 nm size sample have been successfully measured after the changes in the
SEM-detector current. The 7 nm show same tendency of being the most active
as before the changes. Three diﬀerent 7 nm samples have been measured success-
fully and two of them (MR61 and MR46) show signiﬁcantly more activity than
the third MR52. One of them is so active it reaches full conversion at 200 ◦C
which also was observed before the changes of the SEM detector. The 5 nm has
also three diﬀerent successful measurements which all show the same similar be-
haviour. The best 5 nm show the same or slight better activity compared to the
least active 7 nm and the least active 5 nm show worse activities compared to
both that of the 3.5 nm, and the 9 nm. All successful measurements are combined
in ﬁgure 4.5. The black line show the temperature on the right axis. The 3.5 nm,
5 nm 7 nm, and 9 nm are coloured Red, Green, Blue, and Yellow respectively. At
each temperature step the methanation reaction activity of each size was taken
to be a single data point. This value is then plotted versus the temperature.
The resulting plot can be seen in ﬁgure 4.6a. The colour coding for each size
34
==PAGE:41==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Flowrate / [mL min−1]
CO
H2
Ar
300
350
400
450
500
Temperature / [K]
Flowchart
Figure 4.1: This ﬁgure shows the structure of the ﬂowﬁle. The black line is the
temperature and the blue, green and red lines are H2, Ar and CO respectively.
First the sample is reduced in H2 at 1 bar for 30 min where after the sample is
cooled to room temperature. Then the reactor chamber is evacuated twice with
Ar ﬂush in between at 0.5 bar. Then the methanation is done with a syngas
mixture of 2% CO in hydrogen carried by 10% Ar at 1 bar. This is done in
the temperature range from 100 ◦C to 225 ◦C and back again in steps of 25 ◦C.
The temperature is kept constant for an hour at each step. When the sample is
cooled to room temperature after methanation the reactor chamber is evacuated
twice with Ar ﬂush in between before performing a H2 TPD to burn of carbon.
The complete cycle is repeated to visualise degradation.
35
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
6
8
10
12
14
16
Time / [h]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
5 nm (MR36)
9 nm (MR44)
3.5 nm (MR39)
5 nm (MR34)
7 nm (MR41)
360
380
400
420
440
460
480
500
520
Temperature / [K]
Methane activities before SEM changes
Figure 4.2: This ﬁgure shows the methanation activities before the SEM current
and QMS software was changed and updated. The black line is the temperature
right y-axis. The blue line is µ-reactor44 (MR44) loaded with a 9 nm nanopar-
ticles. The green line is is MR41 loaded with 7 nm nanoparticles. The red and
turquoise lines are MR36 and MR 34 both loaded with 5 nm nanoparticles. The
purple line is MR39 loaded with 3.5 nm nanoparticles. The 7 nm nanoparticles
are the most active and reaches full conversion at 200 ◦C (475 K).
36
==PAGE:43==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
Table 4.1: Apparent activation energies from the ﬁtted Arrhenius plot in ﬁgure
4.6b
Size
Apparent Ea [eV]
3.5 nm
0.75
5 nm
0.77
7 nm
1.09
9 nm
0.77
is the same as in the previous ﬁgure. As can be seen there is a clear indication
that the 7 nm is the most active and the more active of the 7 nm samples start
methanation reaction at 423 K where all other samples start methanation at
447 K. To further analyse the data, a plot of the activities on a log scale versus
the inverse of the temperature can be seem in ﬁgure 4.6b. The data shows an
Arrhenius behaviour for all sizes and the data has been ﬁtted to this too. The
apparent activation energy can be seen in table 4.1. The apparent activation
energies vary slightly between the diﬀerent sizes, but most pronounced is again
the samples loaded with the 7 nm with and apparent activation energy 20 %
higher than the others.
4.1.4
TPD results
Many diﬀerent attempts on characterising the surface area have been taken.
The various methanation activities within each size (5 nm and 7 nm) could be
because the cluster source OMICRON create nanoparticle inconsistently. In the
beginning of the project, the idea was to measure the surface area with a CO-
TPD and a H2-TPD. First the sample was reduced in hydrogen for 30 min at
225 ◦C whereafter it was evacuated and cooled to room temperature. Then the
sample was ﬂushed with CO at room temperature. After this the reactor was
evacuated and a H2-TPD was done. Quickly it was discovered that no informa-
tion came from the CO-TPD done before methanation but late in the process
it was also discovered that no correlation could be found between methana-
tion reaction activities and the CO-TPDs done after methanation. Jakob Lind
Olsen experimented with diﬀerent carbon formation on Ru surface by dosing
either CO or CH4 before doing a H2-TPD [37]. The gases was dosed for 10
min at 200 ◦C. By dosing CH4 the carbon bound more strongly to the surface
and shifted the CH4 peak to higher temperatures. However, this procedure have
now been tested with the Ni75Fe25 nanoparticles on two diﬀerent 5 nm samples
(MR28 and MR36). The ﬁrst sample MR36 have only been tested with CO
dosing. The ﬂowchart over the complete experiment can be seen in ﬁgure 4.7a.
First the sample is reduced for 30 min at 1 bar of H2 at 225 ◦C. Then the reactor
volume is ﬁlled with 2% CO in Ar to 1 bar pressure. When the gas signals were
stable the reactor was heated to 225 ◦C for 15 min to deposit carbon on the
surface. Then the reactor volume is evacuated and ﬂushed twice with Ar at 0.5
bar. The reactor is then ﬁlled with 1 bar of H2 and the reactor is once again
37
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time / [h]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
MR56
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
M15 for all 3.5 nm reactors
(a) This ﬁgure shows the methanation activities for a 3.5 nm sample.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time / [h]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
MR60
MR34
MR36
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
M15 for all 5 nm reactors
(b) This ﬁgure shows the methanation activities for three 5 nm samples.
Figure 4.3: Figure a) shows the methanation activity for all 3.5 nm samples and
ﬁgure b) shows the methanation activity for all 5 nm samples. All activities are
normalised to the hydrogen signal. The temperature is the black line.
38
==PAGE:45==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time / [h]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
MR46
MR52
MR61
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
M15 for all 7 nm reactors
(a) This ﬁgure shows the methanation activities for three 7 nm samples.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time / [h]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
MR59
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
M15 for all 9 nm reactors
(b) This ﬁgure shows the methanation activities for a 9 nm sample.
Figure 4.4: Figure a) shows the mathanation activity for all 7 nm samples and
ﬁgure b) shows the methanation activity for all 9 nm samples. All activities are
normalised to the hydrogen signal. The temperature is the black line.
39
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time / [h]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
5 nm
9 nm
3.5 nm
7 nm
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
M15 for all reactors after SEM
Figure 4.5: This ﬁgure shows the methanation of all succesfull µ-reactor. All
activities are normalised to the hydrogen signal. The temperature is the black
line. The red line is the 3.5 nm sample. All green lines are 5 nm samples and
all blue lines are the 7 nm samples. The yellow line is the 9 nm sample. The
7 nm is generally the most active. The other three sizes are more diﬃcult to
distinguish.
40
==PAGE:47==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
300
350
400
450
500
Temperature / [K−1]
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
0.008
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
Methanation activities versus reciprocal temperature
3.5 nm
5 nm
7 nm
9 nm
(a) This ﬁgure shows the methanation activities versus the temperature.
0.0020
0.0022
0.0024
0.0026
0.0028
0.0030
0.0032
0.0034
Temperature / [K−1]
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
Methanation activities versus reciprocal temperature
3.5 nm
5 nm
7 nm
9 nm
(b) This ﬁgure shows the methanation activities on a log scale versus reciprocal
temperature. All activities are normalised to the hydrogen signal.
Figure 4.6: Figure a) Shows the methanation activity of all samples at each
temperature. Figure b) shows the methanation activity of each size on a log scale
versus the reciprocal temperature. Each sample is measured at each temperature
plateau and then average to get each data point. Not enough measurements were
done to calculate error bars for 3.5 nm and 9 nm size. Red, Blue, Green and
Yellow correspond to 3.5, 5, 7, 9 nm sizes respectively.
41
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
heated to 225 ◦C this time at a rate of 120 K min−1. The surface is then once
again reduced for 30 min at 1 bar of H2 at 225 ◦C before running methanation
reacting with 2% CO in H2 at 1 bar for 14 hours at diﬀerent temperatures.
The sample is then reduced for the last time before doing a CO adsorption and
H2-TPD as was done in the beginning. The signal from the H2-TPD before and
after methanation can be seen in ﬁgure 4.8. For some reason the signal is 2-3
times higher after the catalyst have been used for methanation. This is odd
since all previous results indicates that most of the methanation activity can be
recovered after reducing the sample with only a slight decrease in the activity.
This can be seen in ﬁgure 4.9 where three continues methanation reactions were
run with the same sample MR34.
The same procedure was done with the MR28 sample also loaded with 5 nm
particles. A CH4 step was added to the procedure which was done almost like
the CO step and followed with a H2-TPD also as before. The complete cycle can
be seen in ﬁgure 4.7b and the results for H2-TPD after CO can be seen in ﬁgure
4.10. A H2-TPD signal after dosing CH4 was not present and no useful informa-
tion came out from this. However, it seems like there came an excess of CH4 in
the tubing that would not disappear no matter how many times the reactor vol-
ume was evacuated and ﬂushed with Ar. Interestingly enough, the signals from
the H2-TPD both before and after methanation reaction have approximately
the same height, which is diﬀerent from the other sample, MR36. This would
ﬁt together with the previous measurements where it is observed that the cata-
lyst can be reactivated by reducing in hydrogen. However, the high background
signal of CH4 in ﬁgure 4.10b comes from a malfunctioned ﬂowcontroller or mis-
read of the ﬂowﬁle. It is diﬃcult to say whether the CH4 participates in some
reaction while running the H2-TPD or simply just increases the background
signal. The methanation activities of the two samples, MR28 and MR36, can
be seen in ﬁgure 4.11. The two samples show very similar activities towards
methane production. Interestingly, the peak height of the H2-TPD signals for
MR36 seen in ﬁgure 4.8b is similar to the peak height found for MR28 in ﬁgure
4.10a. To further investigate if any useful information about the catalysts can
be estimated with a H2-TPD the MR28 sample have been used once again. The
ﬂowchart of the experiment can be seen in ﬁgure 4.12. The sample MR28 with
5 nm nanoparticles is reduced in 1 bar of H2 for 30 min at 225 ◦C to clean the
surface from any carbon. After this, the reactor volume is evacuated and ﬂushed
with Ar at 0.5 bar twice to remove excess non noble gas molecules. The reactor
volume is then again ﬁlled with 1 bar of a gas containing 2% CO in Ar and the
reactor is then heated to 225 ◦C for 15 min to deposit carbon on the surface of
the catalyst. The reactor volume is once again evacuated twice with an Ar-ﬂush
to clear out excess gas molecules. The reactor is then ﬁlled with 1 bar of H2 and
heated with 120 K min−1 to 225 ◦C to react of the deposited carbon. This exact
procedure is then done four times in a row. The results from the H2-TPDs can
be seen in ﬁgure 4.13. It is clearly seen that the same features appears at the
same temperature around 200 ◦C and the peaks are all in similar shape and size.
42
==PAGE:49==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Flowrate / [mL min−1]
Ar
H2
CO
300
350
400
450
500
Temperature / [K]
Flowchart
(a) Complete ﬂowchart for the carbon deposited by CO study on sample MR36.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Flowrate / [mL min−1]
Ar
H2
CH4
CO
300
350
400
450
500
Temperature / [K]
Flowchart
(b) Partial ﬂowchart of the carbon deposited by CO or CH4 study on sample MR28.
From t = 0 to t = 25 is repeated after t = 52.
Figure 4.7: Flowcharts to study carbon deposited by CO or CH4 on sample
MR36 and sample MR28. Green, blue, red, and yellow are the ﬂows of Ar, H2,
CO, CH4.
43
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
11.52
11.54
11.56
11.58
11.60
11.62
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
SEM current / [A]
×10−11
CH4
CO2
CO
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
First H2-TPD for MR36
(a) Figure shows the signal of Methane from a H2-TPD after dosing CO at
225 ◦C. MR36 5 nm.
44.64
44.66
44.68
44.70
44.72
44.74
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
SEM current / [A]
×10−11
CH4
CO2
CO
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
Second H2-TPD for MR36
(b) Figure shows the signal of Methane from a H2-TPD done after methana-
tion for 14 hours, reducing the surface, and dosing CO at 225 ◦C. MR36 5 nm.
Figure 4.8: Comparison of methane signal from a H2-TPD after dosing CO at
225 ◦C. The second TPD was done after a 14 hour methanation run and then
reduced before dosing CO. The blue line is the methane signal M15. The red
line is carbon monoxide (CO) signal M28 and grey line corresponds to carbon
dioxide M44.
44
==PAGE:51==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time / [h]
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
MR34 ﬁrst
MR34 second
MR34 third
340
360
380
400
420
440
460
480
500
520
Temperature / [K]
Methane activities before SEM changes
Figure 4.9: This ﬁgure shows the recover of methanation activity by reducing
the sample in H2 .
4.1.5
Characterisation
Most of the samples have been characterised by both ISS and XPS and some
have also been characterised with SEM before and after measuring the metha-
nation reactions activities of the sample. The characterisation with XPS and
ISS were done by Belá Sebők in the OMICRON right after deposition. SEM
images and TEM is done by Elisabetta Maria Fiordaliso from CEN, DTU.
XPS data
Five samples in total have been characterised by XPS and successfully measured.
These samples are MR56, MR60, MR52, MR61, and MR59 one of each size and
two of the 7 nm. In ﬁgure 4.14 all spectra can be seen for each size. The spectra
are normalised to the Si 2p peak. In every spectra it is found that the samples
contains Si, O which comes from the µ-reactor. Furthermore, as expected, Ni
and Fe is present as well. In ﬁgure 4.15a the scans from all sizes showing the Fe
2p 3/2 can be seen. The peaks have been subtracted a Shirley background and
normalised to the Si 2p peak. This has also been done for the Ni 2p 3/2 peaks
seen in ﬁgure 4.15b. As it can be seen, the scans in each spectra look reasonably
equal and the Fe content can be estimated. This is between 20% and 26% with
the 3.5 nm sample showing the lowest Fe content and the 9 nm showing the
largest Fe content.
ISS data
In ﬁgure 4.16 the ISS spectra from multiple samples can be seen. Only one sam-
ple loaded with 3.5 nm, 5 nm, or 9 nm nanoparticles were characterised with ISS
and successfully measured the methanation activities in the µ-reactor. Three
samples loaded with 7 nm nanoparticles were characterised with ISS and suc-
cessfully measured methanation activities in the µ-reactor. All spectra are nor-
45
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
9.58
9.60
9.62
9.64
9.66
9.68
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
SEM current / [A]
×10−11
CH4
CO2
CO
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
First H2-TPD for MR28
(a) Figure shows the signal of Methane from a H2-TPD after dosing CO at
225 ◦C. MR28 5 nm.
61.32
61.34
61.36
61.38
61.40
61.42
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
SEM current / [A]
×10−11
CH4
CO2
CO
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
Second H2-TPD for MR28
(b) Figure shows the signal of Methane from a H2-TPD done after methana-
tion for 14 hours, reducing the surface, and dosing CO at 225 ◦C. MR28 5 nm.
Figure 4.10: Comparison of methane signal from a H2-TPD after dosing CO at
225 ◦C for 15 min. The second TPD was done after a 14 hour methanation run
and then reduced before dosing CO for 15 min. Both have a clear peak at 200 ◦C.
The blue line is the methane signal M15. The red line is carbon monoxide (CO)
signal M28 and grey line corresponds to carbon dioxide M44.
46
==PAGE:53==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
Time / [h]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Methane signal M15 / [A]
×10−10
MR28
MR36
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
Methanation for MR28 and MR36
Figure 4.11: Comparison of methanation activities between MR36 and MR28.
Both samples have very similar activities from 150 ◦C to 225 ◦C. MR36 starts
slightly higher at 225 ◦C but deactivates faster than MR28. The blue line cor-
responds to the methane signal M15.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Flowrate / [mL min−1]
Ar
H2
CO
250
300
350
400
450
500
Temperature / [K]
Flowchart for MR28
Figure 4.12: Figure shows the ﬂowchart used for the repeatability of H2-TPD
after dosing CO study. Green is the ﬂow of Ar, blue is the ﬂow of H2, red is the
ﬂow of CO all seen in the left axis. The black line is the temperature seen on
the right axis. A H2-TPD after dosing CO occurs at t = 9.7, 22.2, 34.7, 47.2 [h].
47
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
SEM current / [A]
×10−11
CH4
CO
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
Repeated CO dose and H2-TPDs
Figure 4.13: This ﬁgure is a combination of the four interesting TPDs done at t
= 9.7, 22.2, 34.7, 47.2 [h] seen in ﬁgure 4.12. This is easy visual comparison of
signals from a H2-TPD after dosing CO at 225 ◦C. A clear peak arise at 200 ◦C
in all four cases. The blue line is the methane signal measured at mass 15 and
the red line is CO signal measured at mass 28.
48
==PAGE:55==
4.1. METHANATION ON MASS-SELECTED NANOPARTICLES
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
1
2
3
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
1
2
3
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
1
2
3
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
1
2
3
3.5 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor (MR56)
normalized intensity [a.u.]
binding energy [eV]
Ni 2s
C KLL
Ni 2p
O KLL
Fe 2p
O 1s
C 1s
Si 2s
Si 2p
O 2s
Ni 3p
Ni LMM
Fe LMM
5 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor (MR60)
normalized intensity [a.u.]
binding energy [eV]
Ni 2s
Ni 2p
O KLL
Fe 2p
O 1s
Ar 2p
Si 2s
Si 2p
O 2s
Ni 3p
Ni LMM
Fe LMM
7 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor 
(MR52 and 
MR61 )
normalized intensity [a.u.]
binding energy [eV]
Ni 2s
C KLL
Ni 2p
O KLL
Fe 2p
O 1s
C 1s
Si 2s
Si 2p
O 2s
Ni 3p
Ni LMM
Fe LMM
9 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor (MR59)
normalized intensity [a.u.]
binding energy [eV]
Ni 2s
Ni 2p
O KLL
Fe 2p
O 1s
Si 2s
Si 2p
O 2s
Ni 3p
Ni LMM
Fe LMM
Figure 4.14: Figure shows XPS data for each size. Only the 7 nm samples have
been measured on two diﬀerent samples. Figure by Belá Sebők.
malised to the Si peak that comes from the µ-reactor. Ni and Fe are almost
equal in mass and the small diﬀerence in mass is too small to identify with ISS.
Their peaks are simply indistinguishable. The diﬀerent ISS scans looks quali-
tatively the same. The ratio between Si and O is approximately the same and
also the Ni and Fe peak is approximately the same as for Si. Only the 7 nm
MR61 sample diﬀers signiﬁcantly from this behaviour with a Ni and Fe peak
that is closely to 2.5 times higher than the Si peak. The 7 nm MR46 sample
diﬀers slightly having an Ni and Fe peak 1.2 times higher than the one of Si.
This diﬀerence in peak intensity is unexpected. All samples should have very
similar surface area since the deposition is calculated as 10% coverage of the
reactor surface for every sample. This would give the catalyst in each sample
approximately the same surface area regardless of the size of the nanoparticles
deposited. However, the diﬀerence in peak intensity indicates that there might
be something diﬀerent with the coverage when depositing 7 nm particles on to
a sample. Another possible explanation lies in the time between depositing the
nanoparticles and measuring ISS. If this is considerable amount of time, crap
could be on the surface. However, in that case an explanation for the consistent
Si peak can be diﬀerent sticking coeﬃcients for SiO2 and Ni75Fe25 nanoparticles.
49
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
714
713
712
711
710
709
708
707
706
705
704
703
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 3.5 nm MR56
 5 nm MR60
 7 nm MR52
 7 nm MR61
 9 nm MR59
NiFe particles in 
-reactor 
(Fe 2p 3/2
)
normalized intensity [a.u.]
binding energy [eV]
(a) Figure showing all XPS scans of Fe 2p 3/2 peak for diﬀerent sizes.
862
860
858
856
854
852
850
848
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
 3.5 nm MR56
 5 nm MR60
 7 nm MR52
 7 nm MR61
 9 nm MR59
NiFe particles in 
-reactor 
(Ni 2p 3/2
)
normalized intensity [a.u.]
binding energy [eV]
(b) Figure showing all XPS scans of Ni 2p 3/2 peak for diﬀerent sizes
Figure 4.15: Figure shows detailed XPS scans of Ni 2p 3/2 and Fe 2p 3/2 peaks.
All scans have been normalised to the Si 2p 3/2 peak. Figure by Belá Sebők.
50
==PAGE:57==
4.2. INDUSTRIAL CATALYST IN THE µ-REACTOR
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
1
2
3
normalized inetensity [a.u.]
kinetic energy [eV]
O
Si
Ni & Fe
3.5 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor (MR56)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
1
2
3
5 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor (MR60)
normalized inetensity [a.u.]
kinetic energy [eV]
O
Si
Ni & Fe
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
1
2
3
7 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor 
(MR46 , MR52, 
MR61 )
normalized inetensity [a.u.]
kinetic energy [eV]
O
Si
Ni & Fe
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
1
2
3
9 nm NiFe particles in 
-reactor (MR59)
normalized inetensity [a.u.]
kinetic energy [eV]
O
Si
Ni & Fe
Figure 4.16: Figure shows ISS data for each size. Figure by Belá Sebők.
SEM data
There is no non-destructive way to do open an anodic bonded µ-reactor. To open
the reactor for SEM imaging the reactor is mechanically opened. This destroys
the reactor completely with no possibility to do experiments after. In ﬁgure 4.17
two SEM images can be seen of identical area of the same reactor before and
after methanation reactions. Figure 4.17a is an image before methanation reac-
tion and before anodic bonding. In ﬁgure 4.17b is an image after methanation
reaction. The reactor is MR60 loaded with 5 nm samples. There are no visual
changes to the particle size nor to the placement of the particles. This proves
two things. Firstly that the anodic bonding with local cooling of the catalyst is
not harmful and does not alter the nanoparticle before methanation. Secondly
that the nanoparticles are resistant to particle migration and sintering at 225 ◦C
and 1 bar of H2 with 2% CO for longer periods of time (e.i 14 hours). Many
more images were taken to ensure this resistance was true for all particles and
not just found in one spot on the reactor.
4.2
Industrial catalyst in the µ-reactor
The µ-reactor setup has also been used to investigate an industrial Ni/Al2O3
catalyst. This was originally done to compare with the activities of the Ni75Fe25
nanoparticles. However, the measurements on the industrial catalyst was done in
the old µ-reactor setup and it has shown to be diﬃcult to compare measurements
absolute values from the two diﬀerent setups. Still some useful information came
from this. To prepare the catalyst for use in the µ-reactor the catalysts were
51
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) SEM image of sample before methana-
tion experiments.
(b) SEM images of sample after methana-
tion experiments.
Figure 4.17: Figure shows SEM images of the same reactor at the same place
before and after methanation activity experiments. Images by Elisabetta Maria
Fiordaliso.
crushed to smaller pieces in a mortar. Then the catalysts were put in water to
create a solution of c = 0.18g/l. This was then sonicated to make the solution
homogeneous. 15 µL was deposited on the lid to the µ-reactor. After a couple
of hours the water had evaporated and a µ-reactor cold bonded with the before
mentioned lid.
4.2.1
TPD results
In ﬁgure 4.19 the ﬂowchart of the catalyst and the methanation activity can
be seen. The syngas is the same as in the other setup with 2% CO in H2.
The reactor is ﬁlled to 1 bar and the stable before heating the sample up to
225 ◦C. After methanation the reactor volume is ﬂushed with argon to clean the
volume for any excess gas. The reactor volume is then ﬁlled with 1 bar of H2
before heating the sample to 350 ◦C at 120 K min−1. In ﬁgure 4.18 the H2-TPD
can be seen. It is clear that two methane peaks arise which represent diﬀerent
bound carbon on the surface. The ﬁrst peak comes of at 200 ◦C and the other
peak ends when the temperature ramp stops at 350 ◦C which indicates higher
temperatures are needed. Furthermore, both a CO and a CO2 peak arises at that
same temperature. The shoulder of the CO signal is constant with temperature
which could indicate that the O-rings are leaking. Then the signal corresponds
to N2 being observed since CO and N2 both have the same mass and hence
are indistinguishable in a QMS. Another sample prepared from the same batch
has been measured to investigate this high temperature CH4 peak from stronger
bound carbon. The ﬂowchart can be seen in ﬁgure 4.20. The sample is reduced in
excess of H2 at 350 ◦C to clean the surface. Then the reactor volume is evacuated
and ﬂushed with Ar twice to remove any excess gas from the previous step. The
reactor is then ﬁlled with CO and heated to 250 ◦C to deposit carbon on the
surface. The reactor is then evacuated and ﬁlled with H2 to 1 bar. When the
hydrogen signal M2 stabilise the reactor is heated to 410 ◦C at 20 K min−1. The
reactor is then evacuated and ﬂushed with Ar twice and the process is repeated
52
==PAGE:59==
4.2. INDUSTRIAL CATALYST IN THE µ-REACTOR
17.15
17.20
17.25
17.30
17.35
Time / [h]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
SEM current / [A]
×10−9
CO2
CO
CH4
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Temperature / [K]
Signals from TPD after methanation
Figure 4.18: Figure shows the H2-TPD after a methanation reaction. The tem-
perature is ramped with 120 K min−1. At 200 ◦C the ﬁrst CH4 peak is seen
corresponding to light bound carbon on the surface. At 350 ◦C the second CH4
peak is seen corresponding to carbon more strongly bound to the surface. Also a
CO and CO2 peak is seen at this temperature. However, the temperature ramp
ends before the top of the peaks are seen. Higher temperatures are therefor
needed. The shoulder of the CO peak could indicate that the o-rings are leaking
in N2 since both are measured at mass 28 in the QMS.
with CH4. In ﬁgure 4.21a the ﬁrst H2-TPD can be seen. Two clear CH4 peaks
arises around 150 ◦C and 380 ◦C. A mass 28 peak is also seen with a top at
the end of the ramp. This could be a CO desorbtion feature from strongly
bound CO. The peak could also be N2 comming a from leaking o-rings at these
temperatures. The CO2 peak present is very likely coming from these o-rings
more than being a feature. In ﬁgure 4.21b the second H2-TPD can be seen.
Two clear CH4 peaks arises just below 150 ◦C and 380 ◦C. The peaks have less
intensity than the H2-TPD done after CO adsorption. The height of the two
temperature peaks are a factor of 7 lower after CH4 than CO but the width
of the peaks are very the similar. Also, after dosing CH4 there is more of the
strongly bound carbon on the surface. A mass 28 shoulder is also seen together
with mass 44. The peaks are most likely N2 and CO2 comming a from leaking
o-rings at these temperatures.
53
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Flowrate / [mL min−1]
H2
Ar
CO
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Temperature / [K]
Flowchart of methantion and single H2-TPD
(a) Flowchart for the industrial catalysts. Flow2, Flow4, and Flow5 is the ﬂow
of CO, H2, and Ar respectively. The unit is ml/min on the left y-axis. The tem-
perature is the pink line and set on the right y-axis. First the sample is reduced
in excess of H2 then the reactor volume is ﬁlled with a syngas of 2% CO in H2
before methanation reaction. This reaction is then run a diﬀerent temperature
steps where after the reactor volume is evacuated and ﬂushed with Ar to remove
any excess gas species. The reactor volume is then ﬁlled with H2 and heated to
350 ◦C at 120 K min−1.
0
5
10
15
20
Time / [h]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SEM current / [A]
×10−9
CH4
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Temperature / [K]
Methanation activity of Ni/Al2O3
(b) Methanation activitiy at diﬀerent temperatures. M15 correspond to the
methane signal. The catalysts deactivates very little especially compared to some
of the Ni75Fe25 nanoparticles.
Figure 4.19: Figure shows the ﬂowchart and the methanation of the catalyst.
54
==PAGE:61==
4.2. INDUSTRIAL CATALYST IN THE µ-REACTOR
0
5
10
15
20
25
Time / [h]
0
1
2
3
4
5
Flowrate / [mL min−1]
H2
Ar
CH4
CO
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Temperature / [K]
Flowchart for TPDs of CO and CH4 deposited carbon
Figure 4.20: Figure shows the ﬂowchart of an industrial catalyst. Flow2, Flow3,
Flow4, and Flow5 is the ﬂow of CO, CH4, H2, and Ar respectively. The unit is
ml/min on the left y-axis. First the sample is reduced in excess of H2 at 350 ◦C
to clean the surface of the catalyst. The reactor volume is then evacuated and
ﬂushed with Ar twice before it is ﬁlled with CO and heated to 250 ◦C for 15
min. The reactor volume is once again evacuated before ﬁlled with H2. When
the H2 signal is stable the µ-reactor is heated to 410 ◦C at 20 K min−1. This is
then repeated with CH4 instead of CO.
55
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
10.10
10.15
10.20
10.25
10.30
10.35
10.40
10.45
10.50
Time / [h]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
SEM current / [A]
×10−9
CH4
CO
CO2
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Temperature / [K]
TPD signal after exposure to CO
(a) This ﬁgure shows the H2-TPD done after the sample have been exposed to
1 bar CO at 250 ◦C. Two mass 15, CH4, peaks arises just above of 150 ◦C and
380 ◦C. Also at 410 ◦C there is a visual mass 28 peak. This might be a CO feature
where higher temperature is needed or it can be the o-rings leaking in N2. The
CO2 "shoulder" deﬁnitely comes from o-rings leaking.
19.35
19.40
19.45
19.50
19.55
19.60
19.65
19.70
19.75
Time / [h]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
SEM current / [A]
×10−9
CH4
CO
CO2
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Temperature / [K]
TPD signal after exposure to CH4
(b) This ﬁgure shows the H2-TPD done after the sample have been exposed to
CH4 at 250 ◦C. Two mass 15, CH4, peaks arises just shy of 150 ◦C and around
380 ◦C. At 380 ◦C the o-rings are leaking which can be seen from the mass 28 and
mass 44 signals (N2 and CO2).
Figure 4.21: These two ﬁgures show the H2-TPR to 410 ◦C at 20 K min−1. The
top ﬁgure has been exposed to 1 bar of CO and the bottom ﬁgure have been
exposed to 1 bar CH4 at 250 ◦C for 15 min.
56
==PAGE:63==
4.3. DISCUSSION
4.3
Discussion
Methanation activities have now been measured on diﬀerent size-selected Ni75Fe25
nanoparticles and an industrial Ni/Al2O3 catalyst. The two diﬀerent experi-
ments have been done on two diﬀerent setups both utilising the µ-reactor de-
sign. The two diﬀerent setups have shown that it is diﬃcult to compare absolute
values of a sample measured in both setups. This is because the two setups uses
two diﬀerent QMS and have two diﬀerent ways to keep air out of the µ-reactor.
The newest µ-reactor setup is using a containment volume to surround the µ-
reactor which then can be evacuated. The old µ-reactor setup use a ﬂush of Ar
on the o-rings. This will, to some extent, keep air out of the reactor but a sig-
niﬁcant signal will arise at mass 40 (Ar) in the QMS. Furthermore, the software
controlling the QMS has been changed and while that happened the voltage
on the SEM was changed. This was done while all turbos were spun down for
14 days due to construction work. This diﬀerence in SEM voltage has made it
impossible to compare absolute values between measurements done before and
after the changes. It was tried to compare relative values of diﬀerent samples
on the two setups, but even that was inconsistent.
Another issue that is observed while an experiment is running, is failure of the
RTD or heating elements. If the RTD fails during an experiment the measured
temperature is diﬀerent from the actual temperature. This will set the heating
elements with wrong settings leading to an increase in the diﬀerence from the
measured temperature and the actual temperature. Also failures of one of the
heating elements have been observed. These temperature related failures can
have signiﬁcant impact on the experiment since the chemical activity of a cata-
lyst is exponentially dependent on temperature. It is easily seen if the RTD fails
during an experiment. The RTD data is just correlated with the temperature
data obtained from the thermocouple and failed experiments can be discarded.
However, if one heating element fails during an experiment the other will just
gain more power to make up for the lost heat. This will result in an extreme
temperature gradient across the reactor and the chemical activity will be highly
inﬂuenced by this. In the situation of a single heating element failing, this will
be hard to discover in the data that is logged. The temperature measured with
the thermocouple and the RTD will be in an agreement with each other and
the given temperature datapoint. In the future, the power settings of the two
heating elements will be logged. This will make it possible to discover failure of
a single heating element after an experiment is done by analysing the data.
The µ-reactors are also very vulnerable during cold bonding. The ﬁnger that
actively cools the sensitive part of the reactor is only same size as the reactor
area. Also the aluminium block that is heated during anodic bonding has a hole
of the same size as the reactor area. The reactor is placed on the ﬁnger manually
and so is the aluminium block on top of the reactor lid. Misalignment of one
of the two parts would cause heating of the sensitive area which might cause
sintering of the nanoparticles before the experiments are begun. This does not
seem to be the case for the reactors that were characterised by SEM and it can
be safely assume anodic cold bonding the reactors is not harmful to the Ni75Fe25
nanoparticles.
The variation of methanation reaction activity within each size of the size-
selected nanoparticles is not expected. However, it was also observed before the
57
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
SEM detector current was changed. This was seen with the two 5 nm samples
that was successfully measured. The naive hope was that a CO-TPD before
activity measurement in combination with a H2-TPD would be a measure of the
active Ni surface area. These CO-TPDs have shown not to be consistent with
the activity of the catalyst. It has deliberately been chosen not to investigate
O2-TPDs because this might interact and oxidise Fe and deactivate the catalyst.
From Jakob Lind Olsen the idea of heating the sample while exposed to CO is
found. His work was done on Ru to measure the diﬀerence in carbon formation
on the surface if exposed to either CO or CH4 at 225 ◦C [37]. This was done on
the industrial catalyst which showed good response to this treatment. This is
why it was also tried on the Ni75Fe25 nanoparticles. Two diﬀerent 5 nm samples
have been measured. They show approximately the same methanation reaction
activity seen in ﬁgure 4.11. The corresponding H2-TPDs done after methanation
reaction can be seen in ﬁgure 4.10b for MR28 and in ﬁgure 4.8b for MR36. It is
a little tricky to interpret since MR28 was also treated with CH4. Furthermore,
the signal from MR36 before methanation is not consistent with the signal after.
In this case the signals from H2-TPD are higher after methanation. However, if
focusing on the TPDs that was done after methanation, the MR28 has a large
excess background of mass 15 that comes from dosing methane into the system
earlier. Otherwise, the CH4 peak heights and widths are very similar for the two
samples as is the methanation reaction activity. If an H2-TPD, after exposure
to CO at 250 ◦C, should be used as an indicator of the amount of active surface
area of the nanoparticles towards methanation reactions, the signals from the
H2-TPD needs to be consistent within one sample of itself. This can be seen in
ﬁgure 4.13, where MR28 have been exposed four times in a row to CO at 250 ◦C,
each time followed by an H2-TPD. Here, the signal is not disturbed by the CH4
background and both TPDs show similar behaviour with a high CH4 peak and
a smaller CO peak. This gives the possibility that these H2-TPDs could be used
as an indicator of active surface area of the catalyst since they are stable. This
needs to be systematically done on numerous samples within the same size to
compare with methanation reaction activity.
These various activities could possibly also be normalised to the ISS spectra.
Comparing the Ni and Fe peak in ﬁgure 4.16 it is clear for the 7 nm size that
they are not equal. The MR61 is 2.6 times the Si signal, and MR46 is 1.4 times
the Si signal, where as the MR52 is equal to that of the Si signal. The ISS peak
should be a measure of the amount of surface atoms. This implies that diﬀerent
ISS spectra would only occur in the event of diﬀerent catalyst loading in the µ-
reactor. So, if the methanation activities in ﬁgure 4.4a were to be normalised to
the ratio of Ni and Fe to Si, the data does actually become much more coherent.
This is seen in ﬁgure 4.22. Unfortunately, only the three 7 nm samples were all
characterised by ISS and this normalisation idea cannot be veriﬁed from the
three 5 nm samples. This should be done in the future for all samples.
The apparent activation energies are a best ﬁt to the 4 data points in the mid
temperature range in ﬁgure 4.6b. In the higher temperatures the 7 nm samples
is mass limited and hence these data points were excluded from the Arrhenius
ﬁt. However, the ﬁt for the 7 nm samples could have been closer to the ﬁt of
the other three sizes and still be inside the errorbars so the activation energies
come with great error estimates.
58
==PAGE:65==
4.3. DISCUSSION
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time / [h]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Normalized Mass 15 to Mass 2 signal / [a.u]
MR46
MR61
MR52
300
350
400
450
500
550
Temperature / [K]
M15 for all 7 nm reactors normalised to ISS
Figure 4.22: Figure shows the methanation activity for the 7 nm samples nor-
malised to their respective ISS spectra. This decreases the variation in activity
seen with same sized nanoparticles.
The old µ-reactor setup was used to investigate an industrial Ni/Al2O3 cat-
alyst. These results were originally thought as a supplement to the story of the
Ni75Fe25 nanoparticle. However, this could not be the case as the two setups did
not comply with each other in absolute values. The industrial catalyst was then
investigated to test the ability of the µ-reactor and to observe trends and fea-
tures in a Ni-based catalyst tested with the µ-reactor setup. This was thought
to give an idea of what to expect from the nanoparticles and which features to
look for. First that was discovered was two carbon peaks in the form of CH4
from H2-TPDs. These were investigated by dosing CO to 1 bar followed by a
H2-TPD. Inspired by the work from Jakob Lind Olsen [37], the samples were
heated while exposed to CO or CH4. This gave much higher intensities and pro-
nounced peaks. In ﬁgure 4.21a the H2-TPD done after CO exposure can be seen.
The two peaks correspond to two diﬀerent kinds of carbon bound to the surface
of the catalyst. The ﬁrst peak was originally observed at 200 ◦C but decreasing
the speed of the temperature ramp from 120 K min−1 to 20 K min−1 lowered
this to be around 150 ◦C. The stronger bound carbon is reacted oﬀthe surface
at around 380 ◦C. The strongest bound carbon has only been reacted oﬀat a
rate of 20 K min−1. The broadening of the last peak could maybe beneﬁt from
a faster ramping speed but this would be at the expense of shifting the lower
temperature peak to higher temperatures. Comparing the two peaks coming oﬀ
after exposure to CO and CH4 the signal is much lower after CH4. This is seen in
ﬁgure 4.21b. This indicates that CO is much more easily dissociatively adsorbed
to the surface than CH4. Furthermore, the ratio between the low temperature
peak and the high temperature peak is much larger for the CH4, than that of
59
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
the CO. This could indicate that the carbon coming from CH4 tends to favour
to be strongly bound to the surface compared to carbon coming from CO. This
is also somewhat in agreement with the results of Jakob Lind Olsen, who found
that CH4 shifted the carbon peaks to higher temperatures.
The CO and CO2 shoulders seen in ﬁgure 4.21 are probably features from
leaking O-rings. This is expected since the O-rings leak more and more the
hotter they become. At some point the Ar ﬂush to prevent air from coming
into the reactor volume is not enough. This could maybe be investigated in the
newest µ-reactor setup where the air around the µ-reactor is evacuated instead
of Ar ﬂushing over the O-rings. However, caution must be taken. It has been seen
that the lid on the µ-reactors tend to bend or even explode oﬀthe sample when
heated to 300 ◦C. The reason why this has not happened to any µ-reactors that
have been tested with the old setup might be found in the pressure equilibrium
across the lid having 1 bar of gas inside and 1 bar of air outside the reactor. The
lid might get soft, but since there is 1 bar of some gas inside the reactor volume
and 1 bar of air around the µ-reactor, there is no actual pressure gradient. This
would also imply that to investigate at these temperatures the µ-reactorNG
needs to be slightly modiﬁed so the containment volume is not evacuated but
ﬁlled with 1 bar of Ar. This would allow high temperature experiments with
no air leaking inside the reactor and with no risk of blowing oﬀthe reactor lid
during the experiment.
60
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The µ-reactor setup has been utilised in investigating CO methanation reactions
in two diﬀerent catalytic experiments. The use of a µ-reactor helps bridging the
pressure gap in heterogenoues catalysis. Both methanation experiments were
conducted with syngas containing 2% CO in H2 at 1 bar and up to 225 ◦C.
Some H2-TPDs were carried out at astonishing 410 ◦C.
The primary work was a methanation reaction activity study on size-selected
Ni75Fe25 nanoparticles. This alloy was chosen based on DFT calculations done
by Andersson et. al [33]. The nanoparticles were produced in the OMICRON
by magnetron sputtering and using a Time-Of-Flight mass ﬁlter to separate
particles with diameters of 3.5 nm, 5 nm, 7 nm, and 9 nm resulting in a total of
4 diﬀerent samples. Most of the samples were characterised with ISS and XPS.
Some of the samples were also characterised with SEM to visualise that no
particles migrated or sintered during methanation reactions. The results from
the methanation reactions suggest that a size eﬀect on the activity indeed is
present and that the 7 nm is the most active. Some variation has been observed
in the methanation activity within the same size. This variation in methanation
activity for the 7 nm samples can be lowered signiﬁcantly if the samples are
compared to their respective ISS spectra. Furthermore, dosing CO at 225 ◦C for
15 min showed consistent CH4 peaks from H2-TPDs for two diﬀerent 5 nm sam-
ples with similar methanation activities. These TPDs can be a good supplement
to measure the active surface area of the nanoparticles. Both the hypotheses of
normalising the methanation activity of a sample to the respective ISS spec-
tra and H2-TPDs after depositing carbon must be investigated further. In the
future a mass-selected size study of clean Ni nanoparticles will be a good sup-
plement to the methanation study. Another interesting study would be to study
the methanation activity of diﬀerent metals with the same sized nanoparticles
for instance 5 nm.
The other catalytic experiment conducted in this thesis was methanation
reactions over an industrial catalyst. Multiple samples were produced with a
15 µL droplet from a solution with 0.2 g L−1. These all showed equal methanation
activities. The experiments were not directly comparable in absolute nor relative
values with the size-selected nanoparticle study, since the two experiments were
done at two diﬀerent µ-reactor setups. From the industrial catalyst two types
61
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
of carbon were identiﬁed. Both types of carbon were reacted oﬀthe surface
during an H2-TPD to 410 ◦C at 20 K min−1. The ﬁrst CH4-peak comes at 150 ◦C
and the second peak is seen at 380 ◦C. If the carbon is deposited from CO at
225 ◦C for 15 min there is an equal peak height for strongly and loosely bound
carbon. If the carbon is deposited from CH4 at 225 ◦C for 15 min, the peak
intensities are far lower than for the CO deposited carbon. Furthermore, the
stronger bound carbon is more likely to be deposited than the loosely bound
carbon. These high temperatures have never previously been conducted in the
µ-reactor before. These temperatures were only possible because there is no
pressure gradient across the Pyrex lid. This lid tends to blow oﬀthe reactor
when heated to just shy of 300 ◦C and having a pressure gradient of 1 bar. At
these high temperatures the O-rings becomes very leaking and air comes into the
reactor. Future experiments could include pressurising the containment volume
around the µ-reactor with Ar so that when the O-rings starts leaking, it is Ar
and not air contaminating the experiment.
62
==PAGE:69==
Appendices
63
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Short introduction to the
energy crisis
One of the most widely discussed reasons to decrease the use of fossil fuels is
the eﬀect of greenhouse gases on the climate change. This can be seen in ﬁgure
1 where the temperature increases more rapidly than ever before in the Earth’s
history beginning with the industrial revolution. The ﬁgure is adapted from [61]
based on the work by Mann et al. [62] and Jouzel et al. [63]. However, the main
advantage to becoming a fossil free world is to get rid of the uncertainty of when
natural occurring coal, oil and methane can not sustain our energy demands as
they are a scarce and limited resource. In ﬁgure 2 the total energy of the world
supply by fuel sources is plotted. In ﬁgure 3 the total energy of the world’s
supply in 1973 and 2013 is shown as percentages by fuel source [64]. With these
two graphs in mind it is easy to conclude that mankind is relying primarily on
one main source to deliver the world energy supply i.e. fossil fuels which is highly
vulnerable to geopolitical decisions, the latest of which is seen in the political
conﬂict between Russia and Ukraine [65].
This energy crisis is further complicated by the rising of living standards for
the middle class in third world countries with emphasis on India and China as
seen in ﬁgure 4 which is a scatterplot of the annual consumption of electricity
used per capita in a country versus the human development index. This ﬁgure
shows the need for energy to have and maintain a high living standard as is
the case for western developed countries. The ﬁgure also tells the scary story of
how China and India with a third of the world’s population will increase their
energy demands drastically as they continue to develop. From this situation
there is the possibility to decrease our living standards or to develop new ways
to produce energy from sources other than fossil fuels. As Peter C. K. Vesborg
beautifully writes it in his article from 2013 in weekendavisen it seems like the
politician does not take this energy crisis seriously and hence does not spend
enough resources in the diﬀerent research ﬁelds within energy production and
related topics nor on test facilities to help develop immature technologies [1].
The common denominator for most renewable energy technologies such as wind
turbines and photovoltaics is the production of electricity. This can either be
used directly or converted into chemicals so the energy can be stored as for
example hydrogen, methan or methanol. This conversion from electricity to
chemical bound energy in the form of hydrogen through electrolysis and back
65
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX A
SHORT INTRODUCTION TO THE ENERGY CRISIS
Figure 1: This ﬁgure shows the famous hockey stick where the temperature
suddenly increases more rapidly than ever before beginning shortly after the
industrial revolution and the introduction of fossil fuels as the main energy
supplier. The ﬁgure is adapted from [61] based on the work by Mann et al. [62]
and Jouzel et al. [63].
Figure 2: Graph displaying the development of global energy supply per fuel
from 1973 through 2013. Fossil fuels (oil coal and natural gas) stands for more
than 10.000 Million Tonnes Oil Equivalent (TMOE) in 2013. Figure adapted
from [64].
66
==PAGE:73==
Figure 3: The ﬁgure displays the diﬀerence in total energy supply by fuel sources
from 1973 and 2013 in percentage. Fossil fuels (oil coal and natural gas) stands
for more than 66% in 2013. Figure adapted from [64].
again has some losses and only 60-70% of the energy harvested from the sun
will be assessable [2, 3].
67
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX . APPENDIX A
SHORT INTRODUCTION TO THE ENERGY CRISIS
Figure 4: The ﬁgures displays annual consumption of electricity used per capita
in a country versus the human development index. Noticeable are countries
like China and India who are increasing their living standards for many of their
citizen. This will probably follow an increase in electricity used per capita. Figure
adapted from [64].
68
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1] Peter C. K. Vesborg.
Europa har et kolossalt energiproblem.
Weeken-
davisen, October 2013.
[2] John R. Wilson and Griﬃn Burgh. Energizing Our Future: Rational Choices
for the 21st Century. Wiley, 2007.
[3] Egbert Boeker and Rienk van Grondelle. Environmental Physics, Sustan-
able Energy and Climate Change. Wiley, 2011.
[4] Jiajian Gao, Qing Liu, Fangna Gu, Bin Liu, Ziyi Zhong, and Fabing Su.
Recent advances in methanation catalysts for the production of synthetic
natural gas. RSC Adv., 5(29):22759–22776, 2015.
[5] J. Kopyscinski, M.C. Seemann, R. Moergeli, S.M.A. Biollaz, and T.J.
Schildhauer. Synthetic natural gas from wood: Reactions of ethylene in
ﬂuidised bed methanation. Applied Catalysis A: General, 462–463:150 –
156, 2013.
[6] G Maggio, S Freni, and S Cavallaro. Light alcohols/methane fuelled molten
carbonate fuel cells: a comparative study.
Journal of Power Sources,
74(1):17–23, 1998.
[7] Jiajian Gao, Yingli Wang, Yuan Ping, Dacheng Hu, Guangwen Xu, Fangna
Gu, and Fabing Su. A thermodynamic analysis of methanation reactions of
carbon oxides for the production of synthetic natural gas. RSC Advances,
2(6):2358, 2012.
[8] G. Alex Mills and Fred W. Steﬀgen.
Catalytic methanation.
Catalysis
Reviews, 8(1):159–210, 1974.
[9] G. A. Nahar and S. S. Madhani. Thermodynamics of hydrogen production
by the steam reforming of butanol: Analysis of inorganic gases and light
hydrocarbons.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35(1):98–109,
2010.
[10] P. R. Wentrcek, B. J. Wood, and H. Wise. The role of surface carbon in
catalytic methanation. Journal of Catalysis, 1976.
[11] Y. Borodko and G.A. Somorjai. Catalytic hydrogenation of carbon oxides
– a 10-year perspective. Applied Catalysis A: General, 186(1-2):355–362,
1999.
69
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] Isabel Kiendl, Marco Klemm, Andreas Clemens, and André Herrman. Di-
lute gas methanation of synthesis gas from biomass gasiﬁcation.
Fuel,
123:211–217, 2014.
[13] M. P. Andersson, F. Abild-Pedersen, I. N. Remediakis, T. Bligaard,
G. Jones, J. Engbæk, O. Lytken, S. Horch, J. H. Nielsen, J. Sehested,
J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, J. K. Nørskov, and I. Chorkendorﬀ. Structure sen-
sitivity of the methanation reaction: H2-induced CO dissociation on nickel
surfaces. Journal of Catalysis, 255(1):6–19, 2008.
[14] Jung Nam Park and Eric W. McFarland. A highly dispersed Pd-Mg/SiO2
catalyst active for methanation of CO2. Journal of Catalysis, 266(1):92–97,
2009.
[15] Wei Wang, Shengping Wang, Xinbin Ma, and Jinlong Gong. Recent ad-
vances in catalytic hydrogenation of carbon dioxide. Chemical Society re-
views, 40(7):3703–27, 2011.
[16] T. Bligaard, J. K. Nørskov, S. Dahl, J. Matthiesen, C. H. Christensen, and
J. Sehested. The Brønsted-Evans-Polanyi relation and the volcano curve
in heterogeneous catalysis. Journal of Catalysis, 224(1):206–217, 2004.
[17] J.K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, S. Bahn, L.B. Hansen,
M. Bollinger, H. Bengaard, B. Hammer, Z. Sljivancanin, M. Mavrikakis,
Y. Xu, S. Dahl, and C.J.H. Jacobsen. Universality in Heterogeneous Catal-
ysis. Journal of Catalysis, 209(2):275–278, 2002.
[18] Guoquan Zhang, Tianjun Sun, Jiaxi Peng, Shudong Wang, and Sheng
Wang. A comparison of Ni/SiC and Ni/Al2O3 catalyzed total methana-
tion for production of synthetic natural gas. Applied Catalysis A: General,
462-463:75–81, 2013.
[19] Shengli Ma, Yisheng Tan, and Yizhuo Han. Methanation of syngas over
coral reef-like Ni/Al 2O 3 catalysts. Journal of Natural Gas Chemistry,
20(4):435–440, 2011.
[20] Sunhwan Hwang, Joongwon Lee, Ung Gi Hong, Jeong Gil Seo, Ji Chul Jung,
Dong Jun Koh, Hyojun Lim, Changdae Byun, and In Kyu Song. Methane
production from carbon monoxide and hydrogen over nickel–alumina xero-
gel catalyst: Eﬀect of nickel content. Journal of Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry, 17(154-157), 2011.
[21] J. P. den Breejen, P. B. Radstake, G. L. Bezemer, J. H. Bitter, V. Froseth,
a. Holmen, and De Jong K. P. On the Origin of the Cobalt Particle Size
Eﬀects in. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 131(22):7197–7203,
2009.
[22] Jiajian Gao, Chunmiao Jia, Jing Li, Meiju Zhang, Fangna Gu, Guangwen
Xu, Ziyi Zhong, and Fabing Su. Ni/Al2O3 catalysts for CO methanation:
Eﬀect of Al2O3 supports calcined at diﬀerent temperatures. Journal of
Energy Chemistry, 22(6):919–927, 2013.
70
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[23] Dacheng Hu, Jiajian Gao, Yuan Ping, Lihua Jia, Poernomo Gunawan, Ziyi
Zhong, Guangwen Xu, Fangna Gu, and Fabing Su. Enhanced Investigation
of CO Methanation over Ni/Al 2 O 3 Catalysts for Synthetic Natural Gas
Production. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 51(13):4875–
4886, 2012.
[24] Izabela Czekaj, Francois Loviat, Fabio Raimondi, Jörg Wambach, Serge
Biollaz, and Alexander Wokaun. Characterization of surface processes at
the Ni-based catalyst during the methanation of biomass-derived synthesis
gas: X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Applied Catalysis A: Gen-
eral, 329:68–78, 2007.
[25] Gabriella Garbarino, Ioannis Valsamakis, Paola Riani, and Guido Busca.
On the consistency of results arising from diﬀerent techniques concerning
the nature of supported metal oxide (nano)particles. the case of NiO/Al
2O3. Catalysis Communications, 51(3):37–41, 2014.
[26] J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, K. Pedersen, and J. Sehested. High temperature
methanation. Sintering and structure sensitivity. Applied Catalysis A: Gen-
eral, 330(1-2):134–138, 2007.
[27] Jens Sehested. Four challenges for nickel steam-reforming catalysts. Catal-
ysis Today, 111(1-2):103–110, 2006.
[28] H.H. Gierlich, M Fremery, A Skov, and Rostrup-Nielsen JR.
Deactiva-
tion phenomena of a Ni-based catalyst for high temperature methanation.
Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, 6:459–469, 1980.
[29] Tomoyuki Inui, Takashi Hagiwara, and Yoshinobu Takegami. Prevention
of catalyst deactivation caused by coke formation in the methanation of
carbon oxides. Fuel, 61(6):537–541, 1982.
[30] Eranda Nikolla, Adam Holewinski, Johannes Schwank, and Suljo Linic.
Controlling carbon surface chemistry by alloying: Carbon tolerant reform-
ing catalyst. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 128(35):11354–
11355, 2006.
[31] Qing Liu, Jiajian Gao, Meiju Zhang, Huifang Li, Fangna Gu, Guangwen
Xu, Ziyi Zhong, and Fabing Su.
Highly active and stable Ni/γ-Al 2 O
3 catalysts selectively deposited with CeO 2 for CO methanation. RSC
Advances, 4(31):16094, 2014.
[32] Anmin Zhao, Weiyong Ying, Haitao Zhang, Ma Hongfang, and Dingye
Fang.
Ni/Al 2O 3 catalysts for syngas methanation: Eﬀect of Mn pro-
moter. Journal of Natural Gas Chemistry, 21(2):170–177, 2012.
[33] Martin P. Andersson, Thomas Bligaard, Arkady Kustov, Kasper E. Larsen,
Jeﬀrey Greeley, Tue Johannessen, Claus H. Christensen, and Jens K.
Nørskov.
Toward computational screening in heterogeneous catalysis:
Pareto-optimal methanation catalysts. Journal of Catalysis, 239(2):501–
506, 2006.
[34] Ib. Chorkendorﬀand Hans Niemantsverdriet. Concepts in modern catalysis
and kinetics. Wiley-VCH, 2003.
71
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[35] 2016-06 https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/15/CatalysisScheme.png.
[36] Zhen Ma and Francisco Zaera. Heterogeneous Catalysis by Metals. Encyclo-
pedia of Inorganic Chemistry. Encyclopedia of Inorganic and Bioinorganic
Chemistry, (MARCH 2006):1–17, 2011.
[37] Jakob Lind Olsen. Heterogeneous catalysis in highly sensitive microreactors.
PhD thesis, Technical Universisty of Denmark, May 2010.
[38] E. Ringe, R. P. Van Duyne, and L. D. Marks. Wulﬀconstruction for alloy
nanoparticles. Nano Letters, 11(8):3399–3403, 2011.
[39] D. Wayne Goodman.
Chemistry: Precious little catalyst.
Nature,
454(7207):948–949, 2008.
[40] Jens K Nørskov, Thomas Bligaard, Britt Hvolbaek, Frank Abild-Pedersen,
Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Claus H Christensen. The nature of the active site in
heterogeneous metal catalysis. Chemical Society reviews, 37(10):2163–71,
2008.
[41] Ib Chorkendorﬀ. Surface Physics/Chemistry. Department of Physics, DTU,
2010.
[42] R. J. Behm R. Imbihl and R. Schloegl. Bridging the pressure and mate-
rial gap in heterogeneous catalysis. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
9(27):3459, 2007.
[43] Heiko Oosterbeek. Bridging the pressure and material gap in heterogeneous
catalysis : cobalt Fischer – Tropsch catalysts from surface science to indus-
trial application. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, pages 3570–3576,
2007.
[44] Toke R. Henriksen, Jakob L. Olsen, Peter Vesborg, Ib Chorkendorﬀ, and Ole
Hansen. Highly sensitive silicon microreactor for catalyst testing. Review
og Scientiﬁc Instruments, 80, 2009.
[45] Toke R. Henriksen. Silicon Microreactors for Measurements of Catalytic
Activity. PhD thesis, 2010.
[46] Peter C.K. Vesborg.
Photocatalysis in µ-reactors and related activities.
PhD thesis, Technical University Denmark, 2010.
[47] Microﬂows - Fundamentals and Simulation.
Springer-Verlag New York,
2002.
[48] Vacuum Technology. Elsevier Science, New York, 1990 3 ed.
[49] Ulrich J. Quaade Søren Jensen, Ole Hansen. Fabrication and modeling of
narrow capillaries for vacuum system gas inlets. Journal of Applied Physics,
2005.
[50] Robert Jensen.
microreactors for Heterogeneous Catalysis.
PhD thesis,
Technical Universisty of Denmark, 2012.
72
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[51] Patricia Hernandez-Fernandez, Federico Masini, David N. McCarthy, Chris-
tian E. Strebel, Daniel Friebel, Davide Deiana, Paolo Malacrida, Anders
Nierhoﬀ, Anders Bodin, Anna M. Wise, Jane H. Nielsen, Thomas W.
Hansen, Anders Nilsson, Ifan E. L. Stephens, and Ib Chorkendorﬀ. Mass-
selected nanoparticles of PtxY as model catalysts for oxygen electroreduc-
tion. Nature Chemistry, 6(8):732–738, 2014.
[52] George Wallis and Daniel I. Pomerantz. Field assisted glass-metal sealing.
Journal of Applied Physics, 40(10):3946–3949, 1969.
[53] a. Gerlach, D. Maas, D. Seidel, H. Bartuch, S. Schundau, and K. Kaschlik.
Low-temperature anodic bonding of silicon to silicon wafers by means of
intermediate glass layers. In Microsystem Technologies, volume 5, pages
144–149. 1999.
[54] 2016-06
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/30/B-a-
schemeanodicbondprocess.png.
[55] Yves Fukamori, Michael König, Bokwon Yoon, Bo Wang, Friedrich Esch,
Ueli Heiz, and Uzi Landman.
Fundamental insight into the substrate-
dependent ripening of monodisperse Clusters. ChemCatChem, 5(11):3330–
3341, 2013.
[56] Peter C K Vesborg, Jakob L. Olsen, Toke R. Henriksen, I. B. Chorkendorﬀ,
and Ole Hansen. Note: Anodic bonding with cooling of heat-sensitive areas.
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 81(1):38–41, 2010.
[57] Philip E. Miller and M. Bonner Denton. The quadrupole mass ﬁlter: Basic
operating concepts. Journal of Chemical Education, 63(7):617, 1986.
[58] S. Taylor and F.M. Ma. Simulation of ion trajectories through the mass
ﬁlter of a quadrupole mass spectrometer. IEE Proceedings - Science, Mea-
surement and Technology, 143(1):71–76, 1996.
[59] Colin Steel and Michael Henchman. Understanding the Quadrupole Mass
Filter through Computer Simulation.
Journal of Chemical Education,
75(8):1049, 1998.
[60] J. W. Niemantsverdriet. Spectroscopy in Catalysis - An Introduction. 2007.
[61] 2016-03 http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/GlobalWarming/page3.php.
[62] Michael E Mann, Zhihua Zhang, Malcolm K Hughes, Raymond S Bradley,
Sonya K Miller, Scott Rutherford, and Fenbiao Ni.
Proxy-based recon-
structions of hemispheric and global surface temperature variations over
the past two millennia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 105(36):13252–7, sep 2008.
[63] J. Jouzel, V. Masson-Delmotte, O. Cattani, G. Dreyfus, S. Falourd, G. Hoﬀ-
mann, B. Minster, J. Nouet, J. M. Barnola, J. Chappellaz, H. Fischer, J. C.
Gallet, S. Johnsen, M. Leuenberger, L. Loulergue, D. Luethi, H. Oerter,
F. Parrenin, G. Raisbeck, D. Raynaud, A. Schilt, J. Schwander, E. Selmo,
R. Souchez, R. Spahni, B. Stauﬀer, J. P. Steﬀensen, B. Stenni, T. F. Stocker,
J. L. Tison, M. Werner, and E. W. Wolﬀ. Orbital and millennial antarctic
73
==PAGE:80==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
climate variability over the past 800,000 years. Science, 317(5839):793–796,
2007.
[64] Key World Energy Statistics. International Energy Agency, IEA, 2015.
[65] 2016-03
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/ukraine-
crisis-putin-will-cut-gas-to-europe-unless-russia-is-paid-by-the-end-of-the-
week-10071475.html.
74
