==PAGE:1==
Reuse of Calcium Carbonate Pellets from 
Drinking Water Softening
July 2016
Camilla Tang, s103371
==PAGE:2==
Reuse of Calcium Carbonate Pellets from Drinking Water Softening
Master Thesis
Camilla Tang, July 2016
Supervisors:
Professor Hans-Jørgen Albrechtsen, the Technical University of Denmark, Department of Environmental Engineering
Water Quality Specialist Laure Lopato, HOFOR
Laboratory technician Sinh H. Nguyen, the Technical University, Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Within the last decade there has been an increasing interest in central drinking water softening in Den-
mark. The Copenhagen utility HOFOR will implement central drinking water softening using the pellet
technology starting in 2017. Other utilities such as VandCenter Syd and Frederiksberg Forsyning are
also investigating the possibilities for implementing central softening. Although it is generally agreed
that central softening is associated with both socio-economic and environmental beneﬁts, the soften-
ing process produces the by-product calcium carbonate pellets. If no reuse applications are identiﬁed,
the expected annual pellet production of 14,000 t risks ending as a waste product which reduces the
overall sustainability of the softening process. The aim of this thesis was to investigate the possibilities
for optimizing the reuse of pellets from softening. Potential reuse applications were identiﬁed through
literature and a study trip to the Netherlands where pellet softening has been implemented since the
1970s and where solutions for pellet reuse already exist. Multiple industries including agriculture, glass
production and desulphurization of ﬂue gas use limestone in their production which can potentially
be substituted by pellets. However, the pellets must meet criteria regarding parameters such as the
chemical composition, reactivity, particle size and color. Pellet characteristics were examined through
laboratory analyses of 16 pellets from Danish pilot scale experiments and Dutch full scale reactors.
The chemical composition has already been determined from previous projects, but the pellets were
further characterized by determining their mineralogy from Powder X-Ray Diffraction, speciﬁc surface
from the BET method and reactivity using the method of Sauerbeck & Rietz. The results show that the
inﬂuent water quality affects the chemical composition of the pellets and their color. The largest vari-
ations are found for iron, 22 - 9,300 mg/kg dry matter, and manganese, < 1 - 996 mg/kg dry matter.
Heavy metals (As, Pb, Cd, Cr, Hg and Ni) were generally below the limit of quantiﬁcation except. All
the analyzed pellets meet the suggested future heavy metals guideline concentrations for use as soil
improvement for agriculture. The pellets have crystallized as calcite in all the pilot scale experiments.
Furthermore, the pellets all have very limited porosity resulting in a low speciﬁc surface area, < DL -
0.0498 m2/g (0.1778 m2/g of pellets from Lindved), and reactivity, 7.39 - 25.7 %. The reactivity is low
compared to commercial limestone products where it typically exceeds 70 %. By combining data from
previous projects and the analyses performed as a part of this thesis, it was possible to make an assess-
ment of which reuse applications are technically feasible. The use as soil improvement in gardens is
the most promising whereas most of the pellets fail to meet the criteria for purity in for instance ﬂue
gas desulphurization and glass production. The thesis concludes that it is possible to optimize the soft-
ening process in terms of pellet quality. By placing the softening process as the last treatment step at
the waterworks, the iron and manganese concentration in pellets can be reduced by as much as 99 %
resulting in more potential reuse applications. The purity of pellets can be further increased by replac-
ing the quartz sand seeding material with limestone either from a quarry or by crushing the pellets and
reusing them internally. The economic and environmental effects from pellet reuse as well as the possi-
bilities for optimizing the pellet quality can be taken into account when planning the softening process
to ensure a more circular resource utilization in the Danish drinking water sector.
i
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like give my thanks to my two supervisors, Hans-Jørgen Albrechtsen from DTU Environment
and Laure Lopato from HOFOR, for excellent guidance and good discussions as well as valuable (and
endless) comments on my report. Thanks to Sinh H. Nguyen from DTU Environment for guidance and
help with pellet analyses.
Thanks to Lars Orio from Frederiksberg Forsyning for letting me be a part of the pilot scale experi-
ments at Frederiksberg waterworks and collaborating in the planning phase as well as execution.
A special thanks to Cor Merks from Witteveen+Bos for helping me plan my study trip to the Nether-
lands and taking your time to introduce me to the many options in pellet reactor design. Thanks to
Jessy Rietdijk from Witteveen+Bos for a warm welcome and showing me Amsterdam. Thanks to Olaf
van der Kolk from Reststoffenunie for introducing me to the Dutch solutions for pellet management
and providing me with Dutch pellet samples. Thank you, Eric Baars, for an interesting talk and tour at
Weesperkarspel Water Treatment Plant.
I also would like to thank Finn Andersen and Michael Braae from Faxe Kalk for an interesting meet-
ing and for analyzing pellet samples with the Sauerbeck & Rietz method in their laboratory facilities.
Thanks to Ida Fabricius from DTU Civil Engineering for helping me with interpreting XRD patterns and
taking SEM images.
Thanks to Sanita Dhaubanjar for proofreading sections in my report and to Steffen Davidsen for as-
sisting me with pellet photos. Finally, thanks to Sebastian Kyster for helping me with the graphical
design of my report and loving support.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was complemented at the Department of Environmental Engineering at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, in collaboration with HOFOR. The thesis amounts to 30 ECTS
credits and was completed from February 1st to July 1st 2016. Prior to the thesis a 5 ECTS special course
“Softening of Drinking Water with Pellet Reactor - Literature Review” was completed in January 2016.
Findings in the special course are included in this thesis and will be cited as Tang (2016).
Camilla Tang
Kongens Lyngby, July 1st 2016
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Report Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Pellet Softening
4
2.1
Water Hardness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Softening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Pellet Softening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Pellet Reactor Design Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Characterization of Pellets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Materials and Method
19
3.1
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Study Trip to the Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Pilot Scale Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Laboratory Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Pellet Characteristics
27
4.1
Pellet Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Inﬂuent Water Quality and Pellet Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Mineralogy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Speciﬁc Surface Area and Reactivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Pellet Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Pellet Applications
42
5.1
Lessons from the Dutch Experience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Applications in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Potential Reuse Applications of Pellets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Optimizing Pellet Reuse
51
6.1
Possibilities for Optimizing the Pellet Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Economy and Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Establishing an Industrial Symbiosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Conclusion
57
References
58
A
R Code
64
B
Raw Water Quality
65
C
Water Quality - Dutch WTPs
66
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
D
Pellet Composition
67
E
XRD Results
68
F
Sieve Analyses
80
G
BET Results
82
v
==PAGE:8==
1
|
Introduction
High water hardness causes the formation of lime scale in household appliances and reduces their en-
ergy efﬁciency. Moreover, it increases the consumption of soap, shampoo and cleaning agents (van
Dijk, 2007; Mons et al., 2007). Especially Eastern Denmark including the Copenhagen area suffer from
high water hardness (> 18 ◦dH) (GEUS, 2010). Despite the negative effects of high water hardness there
is no guideline concentration in Danish legislation, although it is recommended that the water hard-
ness is between 5 and 30 ◦dH (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, 2015) which practically includes nearly all
drinking water supplied (GEUS, 2010). Due to high water hardness, point of use softening technologies,
commenly ion exchangers, are already integrated in most dishwashers and laundry services to mitigate
the negative effects (Andreasen and Stubsgaard, 2002)
It is generally agreed that there are positive socio-economic and environmental beneﬁts from the im-
plementation of central softening and within the last decade there has been an increasing interest in
Denmark. COWI (2011) estimates that central softening is relevant to 60 % of the drinking water sup-
plied by the utilities and Aktor (2006) concludes that the annual savings are as high as DKK 430 mil-
lion if the ﬁnal hardness is between 10 and 20 ◦dH. More recent studies also estimate a positive socio-
economic effect from central softening, but also recognize that assumptions about for instance the ex-
tended service life of appliances can affect these conclusions (Delloite, 2015a; COWI, 2015b). Godske-
sen et al. (2012) conclude that softening of water with a hardness of 20.3 ◦dH has a positive environ-
mental effect at a softening depth of only 1.2 ◦dH. There is an estimated reduction in CO2 equivalents
emissions, fossil resources consumption and chemical consumption of 20 %, 33 % and 10 % respec-
tively by softening to 8 ◦dH in the supply area of the utility Nordvand (COWI, 2015a).
Figure 1.1: Calcium carbonate pel-
lets from drinking water softening
The Copenhagen based utility HOFOR has decided to implement
central softening using pellet softening starting at its Brønd-
byvester waterworks in 2017 (HOFOR, 2016). During pellet soft-
ening water enters a ﬂuidized bed reactor from the bottom. A
chemical base is added to increase pH causing the water to be su-
persaturated with respect to calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Sand is
also added to the reactor to provide a surface where CaCO3 pre-
cipitates as pellets (Figure 1.1) reducing the water hardness. As
the pellets grow larger they settle towards the bottom and are re-
moved from the reactor for disposal or reuse (van Dijk, 2007). No
current practice for pellet reuse exists in Denmark since pellet
softening is a new technology. HOFOR expects an annual pro-
duction of pellets of about 14,000 t when softening has been fully implemented (Lopato, 2016). Land-
ﬁlling the pellets is not desirable from either an environmental or economic point of view where costs
are estimated to be 900 DKK/t (COWI, 2011). Although pellet softening is a desirable solution to high
water hardness in Denmark it can cause a waste problem if solutions for pellet reuse are not found.
Pellet softening has been implemented in the Netherlands since the 1970s (Merks and Nederlof, 1995).
The Dutch utilities earn a proﬁt from their by-products, including pellets, that are handled by the com-
pany Reststoffenunie (Reststoffenunie, 2014). However, it is not likely that the Dutch solutions for pellet
1
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1. Introduction
management can be directly transferred to Denmark. First, the industries currently using pellets in the
Netherlands may not exist in Denmark and transportation to the Netherlands increase the costs of reuse
(van der Kolk, 2016). Second, Danish groundwater varies from Dutch surface and groundwater caus-
ing the pellet quality to be different (de Moel et al., 2006). Third, majority of quarry limestone in the
Netherlands is imported from either Belgium or Germany (van der Kolk, 2016), whereas Denmark has
several local limestone quarries. Finally, the annual production of pellets in the Netherlands is about
68,000 t (Reststoffenunie, 2014) which is more than ﬁve times than what is expected from HOFOR. Nev-
ertheless, the experience from the Netherlands provides valuable insight on possible reuse applications
as well as the quality criteria that the pellets must meet for such applications. These criteria include for
instance purity, color and particle size (Baars, 2016).
Pilot scale experiments with pellet softening have been conducted at seven waterworks in Denmark.
The primary objectives of the experiments have been to collect data to assist the dimensioning of full
scale softening, quantify the removal of different ions and investigate the development and chemical
composition of pellets (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). The pellets produced from the experiments are as-
sumed to be representative of pellets to be produced from a full scale reactor. Analyzing them provides
knowledge on the expected pellet characteristics and can facilitate the identiﬁcation of pellet reuse ap-
plications.
Different conﬁgurations of pellet softening exist including variation in the reactor design, choice of
chemical base and seeding material, and where in the drinking water treatment process softening is
implemented (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). However, the pilot scale experiments were conducted at
nearly identical conditions expect for cases where the inﬂuent water was changed from raw groundwa-
ter to water after sand ﬁltration (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). Experience from other countries combined
with the theoretical principles of pellet softening and crystallization can provide insight in how varying
operating conditions affect the pellet characteristics with the purpose of optimizing the pellet “quality”.
Such understanding will allow for pellet optimization to be included from an early design phase and be
implemented from the very beginning of pellet softening in Denmark.
1.1
Aim
The primary objective of this thesis is to investigate the possibilities for optimizing the quality of pel-
lets from central softening in Denmark for reuse. A secondary aim is to couple the experimental ob-
servations to crystallization theory in order to gain a more thorough understanding of crystallization
processes in the pellet reactors. The objectives are met by answering the following questions:
1. Which reuse applications for pellets exist in Denmark and which quality criteria must the pellets
meet for such reuse?
2. What characteristics are the pellets expected to have?
3. How do operating conditions and reactor design affect the quality of the pellets?
4. How can the observations from pilot scale experiments be described by crystallization theory?
The questions are answered by collecting data including a study trip to the Netherlands. This is fur-
ther supported by experimental work further characterizing the pellets produced from pilot scale ex-
periments and by performing additional pilot scale experiments at Frederiksberg waterworks testing
different seeding materials.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.2. Report Outline
1.2
Report Outline
The thesis is structured as follows: Chapter 2 provides the theoretical background of pellet softening
and crystallization. The materials and methods applied are described in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 presents
the results from laboratory analyses providing an overview of pellet characteristics. This is coupled with
potential reuse applications in Chapter 5. Suggestions on how to optimize the pellet quality as well as
the economic and environmental effects from pellet reuse are discussed in Chapter 6 and Chapter 7
summarizes the conclusions.
The research questions stated in the aim are primarily addressed in the sections summarized in Ta-
ble 1.1.
Table 1.1: Overview of sections and chapters addressing the research questions of this thesis.
Theory
Method
Results
1. Reuse Applications
-
Section 3.1
Chapter 5
Section 3.2
2. Expected Pellet Quality
Section 2.6
Section 3.3
Chapter 4
Section 3.4
3. Pellet Softening Design
Section 2.1
Section 3.2
Section 4.2.4
Section 2.3
Section 4.4
Section 2.5
4. Crystallization Theory
Section 2.4
-
Chapter 4
3
==PAGE:11==
2
|
Pellet Softening
Pellet softening is implemented to reduce drinking water hardness. This chapter provides the theoret-
ical background of water hardness and the motivation for implementing water softening. The basic
principles in the pellet softening process are provided. An important process is pellet softening is crys-
tallization which is a complex phenomenon. Understanding the crystallization mechanisms allows for
a more thorough understanding of how changing the reactor and process design affects both water
and pellet quality. This chapter provides an introduction to crystallization theory relevant to the pellet
softening process and to different options in the design of the softening process.
2.1
Water Hardness
Hardness is deﬁned as the sum of the concentrations of calcium (Ca2+) and magnesium (Mg2+) ions.
Together with carbonate (CO2−
3 ) these can precipitate in the form of calcium carbonate (lime scale,
CaCO3) and magnesium carbonate (MgCO3) (van Dijk, 2007). Hardness is expressed in variations of
units. In this thesis, hardness is expressed in German hardness degrees, ◦dH, where 1 ◦dH is equivalent
to 10 mg CaO/L. The concentrations of Ca2+ (CCa2+) and Mg2+ (CMg2+) in mg/L are converted to CaO
equivalents and ◦dH from the following equation:
Hardness [◦dH] =
CCa2+
MCa · MCaO +
CMg2+
MMg · MCaO
10
= CCa2+
7.15 +
CMg2+
4.33
(2.1)
Where MCa, MMg and MCaO are the molecular weight of Ca, Mg and CaO respectively [mg/mmol]. Wa-
ter hardness is often divided into temporary and permanent hardness. Temporary hardness is caused
by Ca2+, Mg2+ and HCO−
3 that are removed by precipitation if boiling the water. Permanent hardness is
other the other hand caused by dissolved salts such as sulphates or chlorides and it not reduced from
boiling. If the molar concentration of HCO−
3 exceeds the molar concentration of Ca2+ and Mg2+, the
permanent hardness is zero. The sum of temporary and permanent hardness is known as total hard-
ness (Winther et al., 2010).
Hardness is classiﬁed into different categories based on the total hardness. There is no deﬁnition in
Danish legislation, however, the hardness classiﬁcation found in for instance Jensen (1969) and adapted
by GEUS (2010) is commonly applied. There are areas in Denmark suffering from high water hardness.
This is mainly the Eastern Denmark including the islands of Fyn and Zealand (Figure 2.1). The precip-
itation of CaCO3 is dependent on the degree of supersaturation. The saturation index of CaCO3 (SI) is
deﬁned by (Nazaroff and Alvarez-Cohen, 2001):
SI = log
Ã[Ca2+]γCa2+[CO2−
3 ]γCO2−
3
Ksp
!
(2.2)
Where γCa2+ and γCO2−
3 are the activity coefﬁcients for Ca2+ and CO2−
3 , [Ca2+] and [CO2−
3 ] are the con-
centrations of Ca2+ and CO2−
3 , and Ksp is the solubility constant of CaCO3.
The degree of supersaturation can also be quantiﬁed by the calcium carbonate precipitation poten-
4
==PAGE:12==
2.2. Softening
Figure 2.1: Average water hardness in the Danish municipalities (GEUS, 2010).
tial (CCPP), which is a measure of the amount of calcium carbonate that theoretically can precipitate
(de Moel et al., 2013). Both SI and CCPP are positive for a solution supersaturated with respect to CaCO3
and negative for an undersaturated solution. A negative value of CCPP is also known as “aggressive
carbon dioxide” (de Moel et al., 2013) which according to Danish drinking water standards must not ex-
ceed 2 mg/L (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, 2015). The CCPP can be determined either experimentally
(Danish Standard, 1977), iteratively, via a modelling software or theoretically by making the simpliﬁca-
tion of for instance [HCO−
3 ] = 2[Ca2+] (de Moel et al., 2013).
2.2
Softening
2.2.1
Motivation for Softening
High water hardness causes the formation of lime scale in household appliances, increases the con-
sumption of soap, shampoo and cleaning agents and reduces the energy efﬁciency of appliances (van
Dijk, 2007; Mons et al., 2007). Reducing the water hardness, known as softening, mitigates these nega-
tive effects. Van der Bruggen et al. (2009) conclude that there is a socio-economic positive effect from
softening at softening depth (i.e. the reduction in water hardness) as low as 2.8 ◦dH from an initial
hardness of 26.4 ◦dH. Softened water reduces the solubility of metals from pipe materials. This is due
to water with a high CaCO3 content having low pH values (Mons et al., 2007). Thus, softening has an
indirect positive health impact since it reduces metal leaching. From a drinking water perspective,
copper and lead are the most important metals in piping material (van Dijk, 2007). Another motiva-
tion for reducing the copper and lead concentrations in drinking water is to reduce the loads reaching
the wastewater treatment plants (van Dijk, 2007). The heavy metals end in the sludge and can enter
the environment if for instance the sludge is used on agricultural soil where they have adverse toxic
effects (Metcalf & Eddy, 2003). Mons et al. (2007) argue that central softening has the advantage that
fewer households purchase point of use softening units for their homes. These systems have a risk for
improper use and can hence pose a risk towards human health if for instance contaminated with mi-
croorganisms.
The interest for central drinking water softening has started more recently in a Danish context. There
is no guideline limit for drinking water hardness in the Danish legislation, although it is recommended
that the hardness is between 5 and 30 ◦dH (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, 2015). Furthermore, the use
of copper and lead piping is very limited, and limited to household installations only (Andersen, 2015).
Thus, the main motivation for implementing softening is the reduction of lime scale and hence a cus-
tomer convenience point of view.
5
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2. Pellet Softening
Several studies have been made to assess the socio-economic and environmental effects of central soft-
ening in Denmark. Aktor (2006) has assessed the economic effect of softening with pellet softening, ion
exchange and nanoﬁltration. It is concluded that there are annual potential saving of DKK 430 million
from pellet softening if the ﬁnal hardness is between 10 and 20 ◦dH. According to COWI (2011) cen-
tral drinking water softening is relevant when the hardness exceeds 15 ◦dH which corresponds to 60
% of the water supplied by the utilities in Denmark. Godskesen et al. (2012) performed a life cycle as-
sessment (LCA) study on pellet softening of very hard water (20.3 ◦dH). It was concluded that there are
environmental beneﬁts at a softening depth of only 1.2 ◦dH.
Recent studies done for the two utilities Forsyning Ballerup and Nordvand are more sceptical about
softening. Delloite (2015a) conclude a positive socio-economic effect of pellet softening for households
in the supply area of Forsyning Ballerup, however, the results are very sensitive to assumptions made
concerning e.g. the extended service life of household appliances. Delloite (2015b) focuses on the ef-
fect of central softening for the four largest industries in the supply area: BASF, TOMS, Novo Nordisk
and Leo Pharma. The results show that softening will be an additional cost for the businesses ranging
from 0.5 to 5.8 DKK/m3. COWI (2015a,b) compared pellet softening and ion exchange from a economic
and environmental perspective. The analyses were based on the supply area of Nordvand focusing on
households. The results show that there is a socio-economic beneﬁt of softening between 1.9 and 8.6
DKK/m3 water supplied (depending on the waterworks) with pellet softening when health effects are
included. As in Delloite (2015a), the assumptions made concerning the extended service life of ap-
pliances affects the results greatly. The environmental effects from pellet softening were estimated in
COWI (2015a). The estimated reduction in CO2 equivalents is 20 % compared to the baseline scenario,
whereas the reduction in fossil resources and chemical consumption is 33 % and 10 % respectively.
2.2.2
Softening Technologies
Existing technologies for central drinking water softening include (van Dijk, 2007; COWI, 2011):
• Dosing of a base (lime softening or pellet softening): Precipitation of Ca2+ as either sludge or
pellets by adding a base to increase pH
• Ion exchange: Exchange of Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions with typically Na+ ions
• Nanoﬁltration: Partially removal of Ca2+ and Mg2+ using a nanoﬁltration membrane
• Reverse Osmosis: (Almost) complete removal of Ca2+ and Mg2+ using a reverse osmosis mem-
brane
In addition, alternative technologies such as magnetism and ultrasound exist. These technologies do
not remove Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions, but claim to reduce the tendency of lime scaling (COWI, 2011).
The objective of this thesis is to investigate the possibilities of reusing pellets from pellet softening.
Thus, the other technologies will not be addressed further. Pellet softening was developed in the Nether-
lands in the 1970s (Merks and Nederlof, 1995). Today, about 50 % of the Dutch water production is
softened (Mons et al., 2007). Among other countries where pellet softening has been implemented are
Australia (Perth), Belgium and Sweden (Mons et al., 2007; Van der Bruggen et al., 2009; Sydvatten, 2016)
The following will introduce the basic principles of pellet softening. Denmark is entirely supplied by
groundwater (Bækgaard, 1997) and hence the effect of softening on water quality will be from a ground-
water point of view.
6
==PAGE:14==
2.3. Pellet Softening
2.3
Pellet Softening
The basic principles are the same in all pellet reactors although different conﬁgurations and types of
reactors exist (Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: Conceptual representation of pellet reactor
Water enters the reactor from the bottom together with a chemical base. The increase in pH makes
the water supersaturated with respect to CaCO3. Typically, either sodium hydroxide (NaOH), soda ash
(Na2CO3) or lime (Ca(OH)2) is used as the chemical bare (van Dijk, 2007). A seeding material (sand or
limestone) is also added to the reactor which the CaCO3 crystallizes on.
When softening with NaOH the following reactions take place:
NaOH+CO2 →HCO−
3 +Na+
(2.3)
NaOH+HCO−
3 +Ca2+ →CaCO3 +Na+ +H2O
(2.4)
The added NaOH is consumed for neutralization of CO2 and for the actual softening reaction. This
means that the required concentration of NaOH is dependent on both the CO2 concentration in the
inﬂuent water, the initial hardness and the desired ﬁnal hardness (van Dijk, 2007). When using Ca(OH)2
or Na2CO3, CO2 is also neutralized and the following reactions take place (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991):
Ca(OH)2 +HCO−
3 +Ca2+ →2CaCO3 +2H2O
(2.5)
Na2CO3 +Ca2+ →CaCO3 +2Na+
(2.6)
Although the above reactions are relatively simple, the phenomenon of crystallisation is complex with
many parameters affecting the process. The following section will introduce the the crystallization
mechanisms relevant to pellet softening.
2.4
Crystallization
Calcium carbonate is an ionic crystal where Ca2+ and CO2−
3 are held together in a lattice by electrostatic
forces (Mullin, 2001). CaCO3 can crystallize into different crystalline forms known as polymorphs. Poly-
morphs are chemically identical but possesses different physical properties. For example, carbon can
crystallize into both graphite and diamond. Under given pressure and temperature only the polymorph
with the lowest solubility is thermodynamically stable (Mullin, 2001). CaCO3 has six different poly-
morphs: amorphous, monohydrated, hexahydrated and three crystalline forms: Calcite, aragonite and
vaterite (Wagterveld et al., 2014). Calcite is considered the most thermodynamically stable polymorph
at room temperature and pressure (Mullin, 2001). At temperatures exceeding 50 ◦C CaCO3 is frequently
7
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Pellet Softening
reported to crystallize as aragonite (Koutsoukos, 2010). Aragonite is also the main polymorph in the
shell of marine organisms such as mollusks (Boulos et al., 2014). Vaterite is reported to form only rarely
and most often as a transient phase transforming into aragonite or calcite (Koutsoukos, 2010). Figure
2.3 illustrates different types of CaCO3.
(a) Mollusk
(b) Limestone quarry
(c) Lime scale in boiler.
Figure 2.3: Different formations of calcium carbonate (Invertebrate Project, 2016; Visit Køge, 2016; BBC,
2014)
CaCO3 is expected to precipitate as calcite during pellet softening since the average temperature in the
Danish drinking water pipe network is about 12 ◦C (Danish Standard, 1977). However, precipitation
as the other polymorphs cannot be ruled out as discussed in the following. It has been observed that
about 75 % of the crystallization occurs in the bottom 1.5 m of the reactor when using NaOH as base
(van Dijk, 2007; Hammes et al., 2011). Hammes et al. (2011) suggest that CaCO3 initially precipitates in
an amorphous form in the top part of the reactor. This increases the speciﬁc surface area due to its high
porosity and increases the crystallization rate. In the bottom part of the reactor, CaCO3 crystallizes as
calcite.
Ostwald’s Rule of Stages
Solids do not always crystallize into the most stable polymorph. Wilhelm Ostwald has generalized this
behaviour in the “rule of stages”. The rule of stages states that an unstable system does not always
transform directly to the most stable system, but instead to the one which is the most similar to its
own. Thus, it transforms into a transient stage associated with the smallest loss of free energy. The
metastable crystal will often transform into a more stable phase, however, the rate of transformation
is highly variable (Mullin, 2001). While calcite is expected to be the most stable polymorph of CaCO3
during pellet softening, precipitation of for instance aragonite or vaterite is possible.
Heterogeneous Nucleation
Even though a solution is supersaturated, there must exist a number of nuclei that can act as centres
of crystallization. The formation of these centres is known as nucleation (Lin and Singer, 2005). In the
case of pellet softening, nuclei are introduced in the form of for instance sand particles added to the re-
actor to increase the surface area available for crystallization (van Schagen et al., 2008). When a foreign
particle acts as the nuclei heterogeneous nucleation occurs, in contrast to homogeneous nucleation
where the nuclei is formed in the water phase (Mullin, 2001). It is generally agreed that heterogeneous
nucleation can be initiated at a lower degree of supersaturation compared to homogeneous (Lin and
Singer, 2005). In case of a high degree of supersaturation (SI > 2.5) homogeneous nucleation can occur
as well, which is not desired in pellet softening. Homogeneous nucleation increases the water turbidity
and furthermore risks clogging a following sand ﬁlter (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991).
8
==PAGE:16==
2.4. Crystallization
The interfacial tension, or surface tension, between the foreign nuclei (solid surface), the crystalline
phase and the liquid phase is of great importance in heterogeneous nucleation. This is expressed by
the contact angle, θ, between the crystalline phase and the foreign surface as indicated in Figure 2.4
(Mullin, 2001).
Figure 2.4: Contact angle and interfacial tension between two solids and a liquid. Adapted from (Mullin,
2001).
θ is an expression of the crystalline solid’s afﬁnity towards the foreign solid relatively to the liquid phase
and determines the efﬁciency of the seeding material. Under the addition of a foreign nuclei, the Gibbs
free energy of heterogeneous nucleation can be expressed as follows:
∆G′
crit = φ∆Gcrit
(2.7)
Where ∆Gcrit is the Gibbs free energy of homogeneous nucleation and φ having value less than unity
depends on the contact angle (Mullin, 2001):
φ = (2+cosθ)(1−cosθ)2
4
(2.8)
In the case of no afﬁnity between the crystalline and foreign solid, θ will be 180◦and φ will be 1. This
means that the energy required for heterogeneous nucleation is the same as for homogeneous nucle-
ation (Equation 2.7). In the opposite case of complete afﬁnity, the free energy of heterogeneous nu-
cleation will be zero which corresponds to seeding the solution with crystals of the crystalline deposit
itself (Mullin, 2001).
Bargir et al. (2009) for instance use the concept of contact angle to investigate the work of adhesion
between CaCO3 and various surfaces in water in order to identify surfaces less prone to lime scale. A
high contact angle and subsequent low interfacial tension indicate surfaces more prone to lime scale.
The study concludes that CaCO3 has the lowest afﬁnity towards surfaces coated with amorphous car-
bon coatings and the highest for the coating in kettles and steel. In pellet softening the opposite is
desired as a low contact angle indicates high afﬁnity between the seeding material and precipitating
CaCO3. Based on Equation (2.7) this will be in the case of CaCO3 precipitating on CaCO3. This will be
further addressed in Section 2.5.4 and 4.4.5.
Effect of impurities
The crystallization process inside a pellet reactor can be interfered by foreign ions present in the inﬂu-
ent water. Figure 2.5 illustrates how impurities can be incorporated into the crystal lattice either when
foreign atoms replace an atom or occupy the space between the atoms. Finally, vacancy where an atom
is missing can occur as well. These impurities can affect the physical properties of the crystal (Mullin,
2001).
9
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Pellet Softening
Figure 2.5: Examples of crystal impurities. A: Incorporation of foreign ion into lattice. B: Occupation of
space between atoms. C: Missing atom in lattice. Adapted from Mullin (2001).
Foreign ions can affect which polymorph CaCO3 crystallizes into. Waly et al. (2012) report that magne-
sium (Mg2+), nickel (Ni2+), cobalt (Co2+), iron (Fe3+), zink (Zn2+) and copper (Cu2+) prevents the trans-
formation of aragonite into the more stable calcite, whereas manganese (Mn2+), cadmium (Cd2+), cal-
cium (Ca2+), strontium (Sr2+), lead (Pb2+) and barium (Ba2+) favour the formation of calcite. Mg2+ con-
centrations exceeding Ca2+ concentrations are reported to promote the formation of aragonite (Park
et al., 2008). However, the other concentrations are not reported and since ions favouring both arag-
onite and calcite are present in groundwater, it is not possible to predict the CaCO3 polymorph based
on this information only. The formation of “ﬂuffy” pellets that are easily crushed is a known problem
when the phosphate (PO3−
4 ) concentration exceeds 0.5 mg/L (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991) or when the
iron concentration exceeds 3 mg/L (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). PO3−
4 is reported to favour the formation
of the hexahydrated polymorph (CaCO3· 6H2O) . Moreover, CaCO3 is reported to precipitate as the hex-
ahydrated polymorph during softening with Na2CO3 (sludge based softening) in surface water in the
presence of PO3−
4
(Slack, 1980) which might explain the phenomenon of “ﬂuffy” pellets .
As mentioned, it varies how foreign atoms are incorporated into the crystal lattice of CaCO3. Mn2+,
Mg2+ and Zn2+ are easily incorporated (as atom A in Figure 2.5) into the lattice due to their atomic
radii being similar to the one of Ca2+ (Koutsoukos, 2010; Cheng et al., 2001). On the other hand Sr2+
has a larger ionic radius than Ca2+ and is not easily incorporated into CaCO3 (Koutsoukos, 2010). Even
though Mn2+ is easily incorporated into the crystal lattice, the properties of the crystal can change in
terms of interactions with other impurities (Cheng et al., 2001). Foreign ions can also inhibit the crys-
tallization process. Their presence can cause complexation which decreases the activities of Ca2+ and
CO2−
3
leaving less ions for crystallization. Foreign ions can block growth sites due to adsorption dur-
ing nucleation and inhibit crystal growth (Waly et al., 2012). The importance of this is not known in
connection to pellet softening.
Effect of Temperature
Temperature can affect the crystallisation of pellets in terms of polymorph formation and the crystal-
lization rate (Mullin, 2001). The solubility constant of CaCO3, KSP, is temperature dependent and hence
temperature has a effect on the softening process. The KSP of CaCO3 increases with decreasing temper-
ature. Thus, at a lower temperature the crystallisation rate decreases (van Schagen et al., 2008). The
higher temperature furthermore has an inﬂuence on the porosity of the ﬂuidized bed. In Amsterdam
the treated water is surface water which can vary from 3 to 20 ◦C (van Schagen et al., 2008). In order to
take this into account and ensure a large surface area regardless of temperature, pellets are larger in the
summer (1.1 mm) compared to in the winter (0.85 mm) (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). In Denmark tem-
perature variations are not expected since the water source is groundwater with limited temperature
variations (Danish Standard, 1977).
10
==PAGE:18==
2.5. Pellet Reactor Design Considerations
2.5
Pellet Reactor Design Considerations
When designing the pellet softening process there are several possibilities for choosing the chemical
base, reactor type etc. These choices affect both the water quality as well as pellet characteristics. In
addition to the design parameters described in the following, the daily operating conditions will have
to be optimized with respect to (van Schagen et al., 2008):
• Water ﬂow through the reactor
• Water ﬂow through the bypass
• Base dosage
• Acid dosage
• Seeding material dosage
• Pellet discharge
The following will focus on the parameters important during the design phase of the process and on
parameters affecting pellet quality.
2.5.1
Choice of Base
The choice of base for softening inﬂuences the efﬂuent water quality (van Dijk, 2007). It is a condition
for the softening process that the water quality complies with the limits set by Danish legislation (Table
2.1).
Table 2.1: Selected guideline concentrations of chemical parameters in Danish drinking water legislation
relevant to pellet softening (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, 2015)
Unit
Limit
Remarks
Sodium
mg/L
175
-
Calcium
mg/L
-
Should not exceed 200 mg/L
Magnesium
mg/L
50
-
Hardness
◦dH
-
Should be between 5 and 30 ◦dH
Bicarbonate
mg/L
-
Should be greater than 150 mg/L
Aggressive carbon dioxidea
mg/L
2
-
Iron
mg/L
0.1
-
Manganese
mg/L
0.02
-
a Negative CCPP
1 mol NaOH decreases the HCO−
3 and Ca2+ concentrations by 1 mol while the Na+ concentration is in-
creased by 1 mol (Table 2.2). This is an issue if the Na+ concentration in the inﬂuent water is close to the
guideline concentration of 175 mg/L (Table 2.1). Ca(OH)2 does not increase Na+ but consumes twice
the amount of HCO−
3 . The use of Ca(OH)2 doubles the production of pellets which should be taken into
account when choosing the base. Na2CO3 adds 2 mols of Na+ for each mol of CaCO3 removed, however,
it consumes no HCO−
3 . Thus, Na2CO3 is suitable if the HCO−
3 and Na+ concentrations of the inﬂuent
water are low (van Dijk, 2007).
11
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Pellet Softening
Table 2.2: Molar change due to softening with sodium hydroxide, calcium hydroxide and sodium car-
bonate. Adapted from van Dijk (2007)
HCO−
3
Ca2+
Na+
Sodium hydroxide
NaOH
-1
-1
1
Calcium hydroxide
Ca(OH)2
-2
-1
0
Sodium carbonate
Na2CO3
0
-1
2
The choice of base affects where in the reactor crystallization takes place. Figure 2.6 illustrates the dif-
ferences in Ca2+ concentration, CaCO3 SI and pH over the reactor height when dosing with NaOH and
Ca(OH)2 respectively. Both chemicals are dosed from the bottom of the reactor. NaOH is readily dis-
solved in the reactor causing the highest SI and hence highest Ca2+ removal at the bottom of the reactor
(van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). At low temperatures the removal of Ca2+ can shift upwards due to a lower
crystallization rate (van Schagen et al., 2008). Ca(OH)2 has a lower solubility than NaOH (1.7 g/L). As
a consequence, it takes some time before all lime particles are dissolved. This maintains a lower pH at
the bottom of the reactor, while it increases with increasing reactor height (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991).
Thus, reactors designed for dosing with Ca(OH)2 are often taller than those designed for NaOH (Merks
and Nederlof, 1995). The precipitation process is more evenly distributed over the reactor height when
softening with Ca(OH)2 compared to NaOH (Figure 2.6). From Figure 2.6 it might seem that no CaCO3
Figure 2.6: Modelled calcium concentration, SI of CaCO3 and pH over reactor depth with NaOH and
Ca(OH)2 as base. Figures from van Dijk (2007)
precipitation occurs in the top of the reactor when softening with NaOH. However, according to Baars
(2016) and Merks (2016) there is a “polishing effect” in this part of the reactor which removes additional
ions from the water phase increasing the efﬂuent quality.
Other ions than HCO−
3 , Ca2+ and Na+ are affected by the softening process. Iron and manganese are
incorporated into the pellets and are removed from the efﬂuent water (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). Iron
removal of 84 to 94 % and manganese removal of 96 to 98 % has been reported for Danish pilot scale
experiments softening raw groundwater (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016) (See Section 3.3 for a description of
pilot scale experiments). In addition to macro ions, a number of trace metals (including heavy metals)
can be present in groundwater. The concentrations of these also change during softening (Lyster Larsen
12
==PAGE:20==
2.5. Pellet Reactor Design Considerations
et al., 2016). The incorporation of ions during pellet softening affects the pellet purity and hence which
applications are technically feasible. This will be further described in Section 5.
Base Dosage
The required dosage of base is dependent on the inﬂuent water quality and the desired softening depth.
In some cases a larger softening depth and higher chemical dosage will surprisingly allow for a lower
required bed height. This is due to the higher degree of supersaturation increasing the crystallization
rate (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). The optimum concentration can be determined experimentally by
gradually increasing the NaOH concentration over time and measuring the efﬂuent water quality. One
approach is to determine the optimum concentration by minimizing the CCPP. In this approach two
graphs are produced: One with hardness in the efﬂuent as a function of the NaOH concentration and
another with the softening depth as a function of CCPP. The optimum hardness reduction is found in
the second graph and the corresponding NaOH concentration from the ﬁrst (KIWA, 1996).
2.5.2
Reactor Type
The reactor shape and size inﬂuences the overall softening process. Figure 2.7 illustrates the three most
common reactors used in the Netherlands. The nomenclature “A”, “B” and “C” is the same as in Merks
and Nederlof (1995). A key feature of a pellet reactor is to ensure proper mixing of water and base in the
presence of seeding material. Otherwise there will be areas with high degree of supersaturation where
homogeneous nucleation can occur (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). The different reactors and especially
Figure 2.7: Typical reactor types found in the Netherlands. A: Conical reactor with “bottom ﬂaps”. B:
Conical reactor with tangential inlet. C: Cylindrical reactor. Adapted from Merks and Nederlof (1995)
the bottom conﬁguration, create different internal ﬂow regimes. In a cylindrical reactor, or Amsterdam
reactor (type C), there is only turbulence near the bottom whereas the rest of the reactor has plug ﬂow
conditions. Due to this, stratiﬁcation occurs and pellets from a cylindrical reactor are very uniform
in size. This reactor has been designed speciﬁcally for NaOH due to its high solubility (van Dijk and
Wilms, 1991). Reactor type B has a tangential water and chemical inlet which creates turbulence over
the reactor height. Pellets from this type of reactor vary in size. Reactor type A has bottom with holes
covered with rubber ﬂaps to cause turbulence. The ﬂow regime of this type is somewhere in between
the two others. The conical top part of the reactor decreases the upward velocity and reduces carry over
of ﬁne particles (van Dijk, 2007).
Other reactors combining the principles for the ones in Figure 2.7 are also available. The reactor planned
at Brøndbyvester waterworks is cylindrical at the bottom and conical at the top. The base is dosed from
three pipes going tangentially into the reactor. Proper mixing is ensured by having a sufﬁciently small
diameter of the reactors (HOFOR, 2014).
13
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Pellet Softening
2.5.3
Process Scheme
In Denmark, groundwater treatment typically consists of two processes: Aeration and rapid sand ﬁltra-
tion (Bækgaard, 1997). This allows for three possible placements for a pellet reactor: 1) Before aeration
(raw groundwater), 2) after aeration (aerated groundwater) and 3) after ﬁltration (aerated and ﬁltered
groundwater) (Figure 2.8).
Figure 2.8: Potential placements of pellet softening in a waterworks treatment scheme.
Where in the treatment scheme the softening process is placed has a large inﬂuence on the composi-
tion of pellets and the water quality. During aeration, iron is oxidized from Fe2+ to Fe3+ and manganese
is oxidized from Mn2+ to Mn4+. These ions are removed as Fe(OH)3 and MnO2 during sand ﬁltration
(Arvin, 2002). If softening is done prior to ﬁltration, manganese and iron are partially removed with the
pellets hence reducing the load on the ﬁlter (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991).
Raw groundwater contains CO2 which consumes base without any softening effect until the soften-
ing process is initiated (Equation 2.3). Placing the pellet reactor after aeration will reduce the chemical
dosage required due to CO2 being removed during aeration (Rankin and Sutcliffe, 1999). The phe-
nomenon of “ﬂuffy pellets” is not observed when the water is softened after aeration. This is because
the oxidized iron forms both iron hydroxide and iron phosphate (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991) which pre-
vent the formation hexahydrated of CaCO3.
Softening water after ﬁltration has the same advantages as aerated water in terms of the reduced CO2
concentration. Furthermore, pellets with a higher purity are produced since iron and manganese are
not crystallised with the pellets. A disadvantage of this placement is that a second ﬁltration step is re-
quired to remove carry over CaCO3 (van Dijk, 2007). In Figure 2.8 the waterworks already has two sand
ﬁlters and the softening process can be placed in between these. However, in the case the waterworks
only has a single ﬁlter it is necessary to construct a second ﬁlter.
2.5.4
Seeding material
Different materials are currently used as seeding material:
• Quartz sand
• Garnet sand
• CaCO3 - either commercial quarry limestone or crushed pellets
The seeding material diameter is inﬂuenced by its density. Quartz sand and calcite have nearly the same
density (2.65 g/cm3 and 2.71 g/cm3) whereas garnet sand has a density of 4.10 g/cm3. Due to this, it is
possible to use seeding material with a smaller diameter (e.g. 0.25 mm) when using garnet sand instead
of quartz and calcite (0.5 mm) (Baars, 2016). The smaller diameter increases the speciﬁc surface area in
the top of the reactor which reduces the required dosage of base (van Schagen et al., 2008). A beneﬁt of
calcite is that the core of the pellets consists of the same material as the rest of the pellet. Thus, from a
14
==PAGE:22==
2.5. Pellet Reactor Design Considerations
reuse point of view the pellets are more pure and have a higher sales value (Schetters et al., 2015). This
will be further discussed in Section 5.
When using an external seeding material (i.e. from outside the waterworks) it has to be disinfected
before added to the reactor. Furthermore, it has to be washed at a ﬂow rate slightly higher than the
ﬂow rate inside the reactor to remove ﬁne particles (“ﬁnes”) that are otherwise end in the efﬂuent water
(van Dijk, 2007). If pellets are crushed at the waterworks the risk of external contamination is reduced
which potentially can eliminate the disinfection step. On the other hand, this option requires equip-
ment for crushing and sieving the pellets. In the Netherlands, the company Reststoffenunie plans the
construction of a central facility for crushing pellets (see Section 5.1).
Seeded precipitation
Three studies investigating the crystallization of CaCO3 in the presence of a seeding material are pre-
sented in Table 2.3. The studies are all based on lab scale experiments where artiﬁcial hard water was
prepared from either a solution of CaCl2 and Na2CO3 (Lin and Singer, 2005; Mercer et al., 2005) or from
CaNO3 and NaHCO3 (Lioliou et al., 2007). The precipitating phase was calcite in all cases (based on
XRD analysis). It is important to note that none of these studies consider conditions with tempera-
tures lower than 25 ◦C. Thus, the results cannot be directly related to the conditions of groundwater
treatment. Furthermore, the studies consider sludge based softening and not pellet softening.
Table 2.3: Seeding material and its characteristics in studies exploring heterogeneous precipitation of
CaCO3. -: Data not reported.
Seeding material
BET surface area
TOC
Mg2+
Reference
[m2/g]
[mg/g]
[mg/g]
Reagent grade calcite seed 1a
0.278
-
-
(Mercer et al., 2005)
Reagent grade calcite seed 2b
2.572
-
-
(Mercer et al., 2005)
Softening precipitate (sludge), Florida
4.316
0.17
14.1
(Mercer et al., 2005)
Softening precipitate (sludge), Ohio
1.679
5.6
11.1
(Mercer et al., 2005)
Quartz
0.053
-
-
(Lin and Singer, 2005)
Reagent grade calcite seed 1
0.278
-
-
(Lin and Singer, 2005)
Softening precipitate (sludge), Ohio
1.631
5.6
11.1
(Lin and Singer, 2005)
Reagent grade calcite seed 2
2.572
-
-
(Lin and Singer, 2005)
Dolomite
3.65
-
-
(Lin and Singer, 2005)
Softening precipitate (sludge), Florida
4.316
0.17
14.1
(Lin and Singer, 2005)
Calcite
-
-
-
(Lioliou et al., 2007)
Quartz
-
-
-
(Lioliou et al., 2007)
aReagent grade
bReagent grade, crushed calcite
Lin and Singer (2005) compared different seeding materials in a lab scale pH-stat system. The results
indicate that calcite based seeding materials exhibit catalytic properties increasing crystallization. It
was furthermore concluded that the crystallization rate increases with increasing surface area of seed-
ing material.
Mercer et al. (2005) investigated the effect of seeding with calcite as well as dried CaCO3 sludge. It
was concluded that seeding the solution increased the removal of Ca2+ ions and that the efﬁciency of
seeding material is dependent on the available surface area. The study furthermore found that pure
calcite performed better than dried CaCO3 sludge despite the dried sludge having a larger speciﬁc sur-
face area. This is most likely due to impurities in the sludge blocking the active sites for crystallization.
15
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Pellet Softening
Lioliou et al. (2007) compared spontaneous CaCO3 precipitation to seeding with calcite and quartz
respectively. CaCO3 crystallized as calcite when using calcite as seeding material. It was not possible to
initiate CaCO3 crystallization on quartz given the experimental conditions (25 ◦C, SI = 0.16-1.33). How-
ever, no characteristics are speciﬁed for the calcite and quartz seeding material and hence the results
are difﬁcult to compare with the other studies.
The three studies show how using calcite as seeding material increases the crystallization rate. This
can be explained by the phenomena introduced in Section 2.4: The Gibbs free energy of heterogeneous
nucleation is lower when CaCO3 crystallizes on CaCO3 compared to a foreign crystal. It is important to
notice that the seeding material is primarily present in the top of the reactor since it is less dense than
pellets and that as soon the pellet has started to grow, the softening process is indifferent to the seeding
material surface characteristics. However, a polishing effect is observed in the top of the reactor. This
effect can be enhanced by choosing an appropriate seeding material. Experience from Weesperkarspel
WTP shows that garnet sand is the most efﬁcient due to the smaller diameter and larger surface area.
Crushed pellets, or quarry limestone, are the second best because CaCO3 crystallize more easily on a
CaCO3. Another reason for crushed pellets being more efﬁcient is that the crushing process creates
edges and cracks which increases the surface area compared to quartz sand (Baars, 2016).
The above sections have provided an overview of different aspects that can affect the crystallization
of pellets in the softening process. Crystallization is a complex phenomenon where the presence of
foreign ion can inﬂuence the chemical composition of pellets and which polymorph CaCO3 crystallizes
into. Moreover, different options exist when designing the softening process in terms of where soften-
ing is placed in the treatment scheme, which chemical base and seeding material are used and which
type of reactor is chosen. Because of this complexity it is not possible to predict pellet characteristics
based on theory alone. Nevertheless, the above theory can support the ﬁndings of pellets characterized
from Danish pilot scale experiments. The following section will introduce the theoretical principles of
the laboratory analyses performed as a part of this thesis.
2.6
Characterization of Pellets
Solids can be characterized from a range of parameters including density, surface tension, refractive
index, crystal hardness and heat capacity (Mullin, 2001). A number of analyses have been performed
in connection with pilot scale experiments in Denmark and are further described in Lyster Larsen et al.
(2016). The aim of this section is to provide an overview of characteristics that were analysed as a part of
this thesis. They are all interesting from a pellet reuse point of view as they provide more details on the
crystalline structure of pellets and their rate of dissolution. This allows for a comparison to commercial
limestone products.
2.6.1
Mineralogy
The mineralogy characterizes which polymorph CaCO3 has crystallized into. Powder X-Ray Diffraction
(XRD) is a technique for the identiﬁcation of crystalline materials. The crystalline sample is exposed
to X-ray radiation with a wavelength of about 10−10 m and the diffraction is detected (Warren, 1990).
Figure 2.9 shows the concept of X-ray diffraction between two atomic planes. Diffraction of X-rays
occurs only when Bragg’s law is satisﬁed (Warren, 1990):
nλ = 2dsinθ
(2.9)
Here n is an integer (if the diffraction occurs in deeper atomic layers), λ is the wavelength, d is the per-
pendicular distance between two atomic layers (interatomic distance) and θ is the angle between the
surface and incident X-rays.
During analysis, 2θ is varied from 2 to 65◦and the intensity of the reﬂected X-rays is detected. From this
16
==PAGE:24==
2.6. Characterization of Pellets
Figure 2.9: Conceptual drawing of two atomic planes and the diffraction of X-ray radiation.
a XRD pattern with the intensity on the Y-axis and 2θ on the X-axis is produced. Crystalline solids have
a unique XRD pattern. Thus, comparing the XRD pattern to the patterns of known minerals allows for
the identiﬁcation of an unknown mineral (Nguyen, 2009a).
2.6.2
Speciﬁc Surface Area (BET)
The speciﬁc surface area (Aspec) is the total surface area of a solid per mass [m2/g]. A high Aspec in-
creases the reaction rate of pellets (Kontogeorgis and Kiil, 2015). Thus, Aspec provides knowledge on if
porosity is formed during crystallization or if the pellets are densely packed with a low surface area.
Aspec has been measured from an adsorption experiment. The equation below shows the adsorption
isotherm developed by Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET) which is widely applied for the measure-
ment of Aspec (Kontogeorgis and Kiil, 2015).
1
VA
³
P0
P −1
´ =
1
CVm
+ C −1
CVm
P
P0
(2.10)
Here VA is the volume of adsorbed gas [cm3], Vm is the monolayer coverage [cm3/g], P0 is the equi-
librium vapour pressure [Pa], P is the pressure [Pa] and C is a measure of the difference in heat of
adsorption of the 2nd, 3rd, ... layer compared to the heat of creation of the ﬁrst layer [-] (Kontogeorgis
and Kiil, 2015). The two speciﬁc parameters Vm and C can be determined from a linear plot of
1
VA
³ P0
P −1
´
as a function of P
P0 . From Vm, Aspec can be calculated:
Aspec = VmNA
Vg
A0
(2.11)
Here NA is Avogadro’s number (6.022 · 1023 mol−1), Vg is the gas volume at 1 atm and 273 K (22,414
cm3/mol) and A0 is the area occupied by one gas molecule (0.162 nm2 for N2 at 77 K).
The BET theory has a number of limitations. Most importantly is that it is only valid for relative pres-
sures up to 0.4. Furthermore, it does not include lateral interactions between absorbed molecules (Kon-
togeorgis and Kiil, 2015).
2.6.3
Reactivity
Reactivity is a measure of the rate of dissolution and is dependent on the speciﬁc surface area and the
crystalline structure (Faxe Kalk, 2015). A smaller particle size results in a higher speciﬁc surface area
and hence a higher reactivity (Kiil et al., 1999). Reactivity is important when considering applications
using the alkaline properties of pellets and often a high reactivity is desired (Tang, 2016).
In this thesis, reactivity was measured using two different methods by the laboratory of Faxe Kalk and
17
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Pellet Softening
Fødevarestyrelsen respectively. The principle of the two methods is the same. The carbonate species
react with an acid in a deﬁned time period where pH is kept constant (pH-stat conditions):
MgCO3 +2H+ →Mg2+ +H2O+CO2 ↑
(2.12)
CaCO3 +2H+ →Ca2+ +H2O+CO2 ↑
(2.13)
The two methods differ in the choice of acid and the data treatment which is described in Section 3.4.3.
18
==PAGE:26==
3
|
Materials and Method
A special course was conducted in January 2016 with the aim of identifying potential applications of
pellets as well as the quality criteria that pellets must meet in the different applications (Tang, 2016).
The special course forms the theoretical base of pellet applications corresponding to the ﬁrst research
question in Section 1.1. This chapter will introduce the methods applied in this thesis: A study trip
to the Netherlands and a meeting with the limestone quarry Faxe Kalk retrieved more information on
the practical circumstances of pellet reuse and gather information that cannot be found in literature.
Additional theory about the principles of pellet softening and crystallization was included. This knowl-
edge was coupled to previous analyses and additional pellet analyses from pilot-scale experiments.
Finally, a pilot-scale experiment was designed at Frederiksberg Waterworks to get further insight into
how changing the seeding material affects pellet characteristics.
3.1
Literature Review
A literature review was conducted as a special course in January 2016 (Tang, 2016). A literature search
was performed searching for scientiﬁc literature and books. The literature search was performed pri-
marily in the database DTU Findit offered by the Technical University of Denmark. Web of Science,
which is included in DTU Findit, was used to search among literature reviews. Moreover, a number of
reports have been completed investigating the effects of central water softening in Denmark (COWI,
2011; Delloite, 2015a,b; COWI, 2015b,a; Aktor, 2006). These reports were found searching in Danish in
Google.
A visit to the Danish limestone quarry Faxe Kalk A/S was made on February 5th 2016 to get an insight
into which CaCO3 products are commercially available and which quality criteria are important when
identifying technically feasible applications for pellets.
3.2
Study Trip to the Netherlands
As a part of the data collection, a study trip to the Netherlands was made in the period March 28th to
30th 2016. The purpose of this trip was to gain a deeper insight in pellet reuse in the Netherlands, where
pellet softening has been implemented since the 1970s (KWR, 2003). Furthermore, the purpose was
to identify recent trends within pellet softening which potentially can be implemented in Denmark as
well. Interviews were made with the following:
• Olaf van der Kolk, CEO Reststoffenunie: The current practices for pellet reuse in the Netherlands
(van der Kolk, 2016)
• Cor Merks, Senior Consultant, Witteveen+Bos: The inﬂuence of operating conditions of pellet
quality and the overall performance of the process (Merks, 2016)
• Eric Baars, Process Engineer, Weesperkarspel, Waternet: The use of crushed pellets as seeding ma-
terial at Weesperkarspel Water Treatment Plant (Baars, 2016)
19
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3. Materials and Method
As a part of the trip, a visit was made to the water treatment plant Weesperkarspel (Figure 3.1). At
Weesperkarspel different seeding materials have been used including quartz sand and the heavier gar-
net sand. The current use is crushed pellets.
Figure 3.1: Full scale pellet softening reactor at Weesperkarspel Water Treatment Plant
3.3
Pilot Scale Experiments
HOFOR constructed a pilot scale reactor in 2011 in order to conduct experiments with softening at
different waterworks. The pilot reactor has been set up at four different waterworks treating seven
types of water. In addition to these experiments, a project has been conducted lead by VandCenter Syd,
a utility based in Odense, and HOFOR in collaboration with the Technical University of Denmark. As
a part of this project, the pilot reactor was set up at two waterworks in Odense treating three different
types of water (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). Table 3.1 provides an overview of the different pilot scale
experiments.
Table 3.1: Overview of waterworks where pilot scale experiments have been conducted including the wa-
ter types and the time period of operation. X indicates the placement of the pilot scale reactor.
Waterworks
Well ﬁeld
Before aeration
After ﬁltration
Dates of Operation
Marbjerg
Marbjerg
X
11.7.2011-4.10.2012
Brokilde
X
11.7.2011-4.10.2012
Brøndbyvester
Brøndbyvester
X
X
24.2-3.3 and 24.3.-28.3 2014
Regnemark
X
31.3-14.4. 2014
Søndersø
Søndersø
X
14.11-11.12 2014
Dalum
Dalum
X
16.3.-20.5.2015
Dalum
X
22.5.-15.6.2015
Lindved
Lindved
X
15.7.2015-28.8.2015
Lejre
Lejre
X
11.1. - 28.4.2016
The primary objective of the experiments has been to evaluate the effect of softening on the efﬂuent
water quality. As a part of the experiments the chemical composition of the produced pellets has been
determined with respect to reuse on agricultural soil. Furthermore, each experiment has also had in-
dividual objectives that are further explained in Lyster Larsen et al. (2016). For instance, at Søndersø
waterworks an objective was to evaluate the development of pellets over time.
20
==PAGE:28==
3.3. Pilot Scale Experiments
It is the same reactor that has been used for all the Danish experiments. The reactor is placed in three
containers and can be transported between different waterworks (Figure 3.2). The height of the reactor
is 6.66 m and its inner diameter is 9.94 cm (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016).
Figure 3.2: The pilot scale plant at Frederiksberg waterworks.
The pilot scale reactor was operated with an upwards ﬂow velocity of 107 m/h except for at Lindved
waterworks where it was operated at 45 m/h. NaOH was dosed from a single tangential inlet in concen-
trations ranging from 122 mg/L to 213 mg/L. The seeding material was different types of quartz sand
(Table 3.2). After the pellet reactor the pH was adjusted using CO2. For more details on operating con-
ditions see Lyster Larsen et al. (2016). The pilot scale reactor was emptied for pellets when changing to
Table 3.2: Seeding material used in the different pilot scale experiments.
Seeding material
Marbjerg
Dansand 33
Brøndbyvester
Dansand 29
Regnemark
Dansand 29
Søndersø
Dansand 29
Dalum
Weber "Ovntørret kvartssand"
Dalum
Weber "Ovntørret kvartssand"
Lindved
Weber "Ovntørret kvartssand"
Lejre
Dansand 40
a different water type at Brøndbyvester waterworks, but not at the other waterworks. Due to this the
pellets have be exposed to different water quality causing carry over from one experiment to the next.
This causes uncertainty when comparing pellets and water quality since the residence time is much
longer for pellets (days) than for the water (minutes).
3.3.1
Pilot Scale Experiments at Frederiksberg Waterworks
From May 13th to July 1st 2016 pilot scale experiments were conducted at Frederiksberg waterworks
which is operated by the utility Frederiksberg Forsyning. The experiments were planned to take into
account representative pellet sampling. As a consequence the reactor was emptied for pellets in be-
tween changing operating conditions in order to avoid carry over. Furthermore, daily sieve analyses
were performed in order to monitor the development of pellets over time.
Since the inﬂuent water to Frederiksberg waterworks has high concentrations of chlorinated solvents
that are current removed using granular activated carbon, the objective of the experiments was to test
21
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3. Materials and Method
the pilot scale reactor in connection to an air stripping column in order to reduce chlorinated solvents.
In total four different experiments were conducted:
1. Softening raw groundwater using Dansand 29 as seeding material
2. Softening raw groundwater using quarry limestone 0.3-0.6 mm from Lhoist as seeding material
3. Softening after ﬁltration and air stripping using quarry limestone 0.3-0.6 mm from Lhoist as seed-
ing material
4. Softening raw groundwater after air stripping using quarry limestone 0.3-0.6 mm from Lhoist as
seeding material
In each experiment a dosing experiment was conducted when the pellet diameter had reached 1-1.2
mm. In the dosing experiment the NaOH concentration was increased in steps and the method de-
scribed in Section 2.5.1 was used to determine the optimum NaOH concentration. The CCPP and
SI were calculated using the modelling software AquaCalc by Cor Merks, Senior Consultant at Wit-
teveen+Bos. Since the pilot scale experiments were completed simultaneously to the completion of
this thesis, only the results from the two ﬁrst experiments are included in this thesis.
In parallel to the pilot scale experiments Frederiksberg Forsyning performed maintenance work on its
ﬁve groundwater wells (FF1-FF5). The wells were taken out one week at the time (Table 3.3).
Table 3.3: Duration of the different experiment at Frederiksberg waterworks including which ground
water well was out of operation.
Duration
Well not operating
Experiment 1
May 13th - June 3rd 2016
FF2 (from May 25th)
Experiment 2
June 4th - June 10th 2016
FF1 (from June 6th)
Experiment 3
June 14th - June 24th 2016
FF4
Experiment 4
June 25th - July 1st 2016
FF5
The groundwater wells vary in water quality. For instance, the hardness in FF2 is 41 ◦dH which is higher
than the 23 ◦dH reported in FF1 (GEUS, 2016). Due to this, the inﬂuent water quality has varied during
the experiments making comparison between the results, and particularly the effect of using quarry
limestone instead of quartz sand, difﬁcult.
3.4
Laboratory Analyses
In addition to the analyses described in the next sections, the following analyses have been performed
in the context of Lyster Larsen et al. (2016) and the pilot scale experiments of HOFOR:
• Chemical composition by total acid digestion (US EPA 3051A, Inductively Coupled Plasma - Opti-
cal Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) and Inductively Coupled Plasma - Mass Spectrometry (ICP-
MS))
• Reactivity (citric acid method)
• Particle size distribution (sieve analysis)
• Chemical composition after “softer” acid digestion in 0.5 M HCl for 24 h (ICP-OES ad ICP-MS)
• Crystalline structure (SEM)
Water samples from Marbjerg and Brokilde have been analyzed by Euroﬁns for HOFOR, whereas the re-
maining has been analyzed by the laboratory at DTU Environment. The analyzed elements are sodium
22
==PAGE:30==
3.4. Laboratory Analyses
(Na), magnesium (Mg), aluminium (Al), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), chromium (Cr),
manganese (Mn), iron (Fe), cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), arsenic (As), strontium (Sr),
thallium (Tl), lead (Pb) and lithium (Li).
The pellets “Marbjerg 11”, “Brokilde 23”, “Brøndbyvester 4”, “Søndersø 18” and “Lejre 10” have been
analyzed by Euroﬁns, whereas the remaining have been analyzed by DTU Environment. Due to this,
some metals have only been analyzed in speciﬁc pellets and the limit of quantiﬁcation varies between
the two laboratories. The analyzed elements are the same as in the water samples. In addition mercury
(Hg), chromium(VI) (Cr(VI)) and tin (Sn) were analyzed.
The methodology of these analyses can be found in Lyster Larsen et al. (2016) expect for the citric acid
method for reactivity measurement which is described in Section 3.4.3.
Additional SEM images of Dalum pellets from the bottom of the reactor (5 and 5.7m depth) were pro-
duced by Professor Ida Lykke Fabricius, DTU Civil Engineering.
3.4.1
X-Ray Diffraction
Prior to analysis the pellets were crushed to powder (< 50 µm) using an agate mortar. The powder was
then ﬁlled into a sample holder cavity. Using an object glass the powder was pressed into the cavity
until it was ﬁlled completely.
The XRD analyses were performed by laboratory technician Sinh H. Nguyen from DTU Environment.
The diffractive pattern was measured with Cu Kα radiation scanning from 2◦to 65◦2θ with a speed of
0.1◦/2 s. The tube voltage was set to 40 kV and the current to 10 mA. The equipment used was a Philips
PW 1830 XRD generator, a Philips PW 1050/25 monochromator, a Philips PW 1710 diffractometer and
a Philips PW 2273/20 Cu-X-ray tube.
The XRD pattern was interpreted based on the interatomic distances, d, and the signal intensity by
comparing these values to the known d values and intensities of different minerals. The minerals in-
cluded in this analysis were calcite (CaCO3), aragonite (CaCO3), vaterite (CaCO3), manganoan calcite
((Ca, Mn)CO3), magnesian calcite ((Ca, Mg)CO3), dolomite (CaMgCO3) and quartz (SiO2). Successful
interpretation of XRD pattern by manual comparison of known XRD patterns requires training as well
as a pre-knowledge of which minerals are present in the sample (Nguyen, 2009a). Due to this the in-
terpretation of the results was done in collaboration with laboratory technician Sinh H. Nguyen and
Professor Ida Lykke Fabricius.
3.4.2
BET Surface Area
Test tubes including their stopper were initially weighed and about 2 g of sample was added to each tube
in duplicates. The tubes were then degassed with nitrogen gas at 60 ◦C for at least 4 hours (FlowPrep
060) in order to remove air and excess humidity from the samples. The test tubes were cooled and
stored in a desiccator until analysis. Before analysis, the tubes were weighed again in order for the mass
of the sample to be calculated from:
msample = mempty tube + sample −mempty tube
(3.1)
The BET analysis was performed on a Micrometrics Gemini III 2375 Surface Area Analyzer. Liquid ni-
trogen was added to the dewar ﬂask to about 1 cm from the top between each sample. Initially, P0
was determined from an empty test tube on each individual day of analysis. The absorbed volume was
determined at ﬁve different relative pressures ( P
P0 ) from 0.05 to 0.3. The speciﬁc surface area was calcu-
lated automatically by the StarDrvr software.
23
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3. Materials and Method
The limit of detection of the method in 1.07 m2/g based on quartz and the limit of quantiﬁcation is
1.43 m2/g based on chalk (Nguyen, 2008).
3.4.3
Reactivity
The rate of dissolution, or reactivity, has been measured using two different methods: The citric acid
method at the laboratory of Fødevarestyrelsen and the Sauerbeck & Rietz method at the laboratory of
Faxe Kalk.
Citric Acid Method
The citric acid method is described in the European Standard DS/EN 16357 “Carbonate liming materi-
als - Determination of reactivity - Automatic titration method with citric acid” (Danish Standard, 2013).
The standard is used for determining the reactivity of CaCO3 and MgCO3 materials (RC A) with a maxi-
mum diameter of 6.3 mm.
In order to determine RC A, a number of additional analyses much be performed based on the following
standards:
• DS/EN 12048 Solid fertilizers and liming materials - Determination of moisture content - Gravi-
metric method by drying at (105 ± 2) ◦C (ISO 8190, modiﬁed)
• DS/EN 12945 Liming materials - Determination of neutralising value - Titrimetric methods
• DS/EN 12947 Liming materials - Determination of magnesium content - Atomic absorption spec-
trometric method
In the method approx. 5 g of sample is added to a beaker which is ﬁlled with distilled water. A titration
with a aqueous solution of mono hydrated citric acid (500 g C6H8O7· H2O in 1 L water) is performed for
15 minutes maintaining a pH of 4.5. RC A is then calculated from the following equation:
RC A = 100·
µVC A
12
¶
·
µ CC A
457.17
¶
·
µ 5
mt
¶
·
µ
56
NVAR
¶
·
µ((4−1)· MgO)
21
+1
¶
(3.2)
Here VC A is the volume of citric acid [mL], CC A is the concentration of citric acid [g/L], mt is the sample
mass [g], NVAR is the neutralising value of the test sample determined from DS/EN 12945 and MgO is
the magnesium content determined from DS/EN 12947. The coefﬁcients refer to reference conditions.
12 mL is the reference volume, 457.17 g/L is the nominal concentration of citric acid, 5 g is the stan-
dardized sample mass and 56 is the neutralising value of pure dry CaCO3. The last part of the equation
takes into account the content of dolomite in the sample since dolomite is known to dissolve slowly in
the test, but be more efﬁcient in ﬁeld conditions (Danish Standard, 2013).
The pellets did not dissolve during analysis (i.e. a reactivity of 0 %). Due to this, the pellets were crushed
prior to analysis which is expected to increase the reactivity compared to pellets that are not crushed.
This adds uncertainty to the results.
Sauerbeck & Rietz
Another approach for determining reactivity is described in Sauerbeck and Rietz (1984). This method
determines the reactivity of lime particles up to 3.15 mm (RSR).
5.000 g of sample is added to a beaker which is ﬁlled with distilled water. pH is maintained at 2 for
10 minutes using 5 M hypochloric acid (HCl). The analysis is repeated for a sample of pure CaCO3
(Faxe Kalk, 2015). RSR is then computed from the following:
RSR =
VHCl, sample
VHCl, standard
·100%
(3.3)
24
==PAGE:32==
3.4. Laboratory Analyses
Here VHCl, sample and VHCl, standard is the consumed volume of HCl for the sample and pure CaCO3 re-
spectively [mL]. Thus, the Sauerbeck & Rietz method does not correct for the content of dolomite.
During the measurement of reactivity of Sauerbeck & Rietz, the pellets were not crushed prior to anal-
ysis.
3.4.4
Interpretation of Sieve Analysis
Sieve analyses have been performed as a part of the pilot scale experiments in order to monitor the
development of pellet size. The sieve analyses were interpreted by plotting the cumulative percentage
passing through the sieves as a function of mesh size . The values of 10 % (D10), 50 % (D50) and 60 %
(D60) passing through the mesh was read from these graphs (Leschonski, 1979). D50 is known as the
median grain size. Figure 3.3 illustrates how the values were read from the graph. Furthermore, the
uniformity coefﬁcient (UC) was calculated from (Nguyen, 2009b):
UC = D60
D10
(3.4)
Figure 3.3: Example of interpretation of sieve analysis
3.4.5
Statistical Data Treatment
In order to examine the correlation between different parameters, the Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient
for a sample (r) was calculated (Johnson, 2011):
r =
1
n −1
nX
i=1
µxi −x
sx
¶µ yi −y
sy
¶
(3.5)
Here n is the sample size, xi and yi are data points, x and y are the sample mean values and sx and sy
are the sample standard deviations. r can vary between -1 and 1, where a value close to -1 or 1 indicate
a strong linear correlation. Values close to 0 indicate no linear correlation. In this thesis r less than -0.5
and higher than 0.5 are considered a moderate correlation, whereas r less than -0.8 and higher than 0.8
is considered a strong correlation.
In case of a strong linear correlation, the parameters were ﬁtted in a linear regression model. The sig-
niﬁcance of the slope was computed from a t-test with n-2 degrees of freedom (Johnson, 2011):
t = (b −β)
se
p
Sxx
(3.6)
25
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Materials and Method
Here b is the ﬁtted slope, β is the null hypothesis (in this case 0), se is the standard error of the estimate
and Sxx is a least square estimator. P-values less than 0.001 are assigned ***, less than 0.01 ** and less
than 0.1 *. The statistical analysis was performed in the software R (R Core Team, 2013). The R code is
available in Appendix A.
26
==PAGE:34==
4
|
Pellet Characteristics
The potential reuse applications of pellets in Denmark was identiﬁed by comparing quality criteria
deﬁned by different industries to the pellet characteristics from previous analyses and the analyses
performed in this thesis. This chapter investigates the last two divided into the following characteristics:
• Chemical composition and pellet color
• Mineralogy
• Speciﬁc surface area and reactivity
The aim is to provide an overview of the pellet characteristics, but also investigate what determines pel-
let characteristics. Gaining a more thorough insight to the mechanisms determining the pellet chemi-
cal composition, mineralogy and reactivity will allow for suggestions on how to optimize the softening
process from a pellet reuse point of view.
4.1
Pellet Samples
A single pellet sample from each of the previous pilot scale experiments was selected for further anal-
ysis and data treatment (Table 4.1). The previous experiments have shown that it takes a while (about
two weeks depending on the initial hardness) for the ﬂuidized bed to stabilize and the pellets to reach
their ﬁnal size and chemical composition (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). Due to this, the sample selected
from each experiment are from the last withdrawal of pellets to ensure that the ﬂuidized bed had sta-
bilized and that the pellets are representative of a continuous, full scale operation. The name of the
pellets indicates the raw water source. The pellet numbering refers to previous experiments and are
continued in this thesis to allow for comparison. The “Frederiksberg 4” pellets were withdrawn after
only ﬁve days of operation and it is unlikely that the pellets had stabilized by then (Table 4.1). The re-
actor conﬁgurations have been very similar in the Danish pilot scale experiments: The pilot reactor has
been placed prior to aeration, NaOH was used as chemical base, the ﬂow has been constant and the
seeding material has been quartz sand. An exception to this scheme are the pellets from Regnemark
and Dalum where water after ﬁltration was softened and the pellets from Frederiksberg where quarry
limestone was used as seeding material (Section 3.3). Having constant operating allows for an investi-
gation of the effects of the inﬂuent water quality.
Four pellet samples from the Netherlands have also been included in this thesis (Figure 4.1). Unlike the
Danish pellets, the pellets originate from full scale reactors operated at different conditions in terms of
raw water source, placement of the reactor, the base and seeding material (Table 4.2). Including these
pellets allows for a comparison of nearly all the different options in the softening process design pre-
sented in Section 2.5. The only design option not represented among the included pellets is the use of
Na2CO3 as chemical base.
27
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4. Pellet Characteristics
Table 4.1: Analyzed pellets including the sampling date and the number of days the pilot reactor had been
operating at the date of sampling.
Pellet ID
Picture
Sampling date
Days of operation
Marbjerg 10
July 26th 2012
16
Brokilde 27
October 3rd 2012
10
Brøndbyvester 4
March 31st 2014
13
Regnemark 6a
April 14th 2014
6
Søndersø 18
December 10th 2014
26
Dalum
May 20th 2015
65
Daluma
June 15th 2015
24
Lindved
August 14th 2015
30
Lejre 10
February 3th 2016
24
Frederiksberg 13
May 24th 2016
11
Frederiksberg 4b
June 9th 2016
5
a Inﬂuent water after ﬁltration (treated water)
b Quarry limestone as seeding material
28
==PAGE:36==
4.2. Inﬂuent Water Quality and Pellet Composition
Table 4.2: Overview of softening process at selected Dutch water treatment plants (KWR, 2003; van der
Kolk, 2016).
Water source
Process scheme
Reactor
Chemical
Seeding material
Seppe
Groundwater
After aeration
B
Ca(OH)2
Quarry limestone
Weesperkarspel
Surface water
After ﬁltration
A
NaOH
Crushed pellets
de Beitel
Groundwater
After aeration
B
NaOH
Garnet sand
Hoogeveen
Groundwater
After pre-ﬁltration
C
Ca(OH)2
Quartz sand
(a) Seppe
(b) Weesperkarspel
(c) de Beitel
(d) Hoogeveen
Figure 4.1: Pellet samples from four Dutch water treatment plants
4.2
Inﬂuent Water Quality and Pellet Composition
The water chemical composition in the inﬂuent to the pilot scale reactor has varied in the different ex-
periments. This is due to variations in the groundwater quality depending on the different well ﬁelds
and if the softening process has been placed before aeration, after aeration or after ﬁltration. This sec-
tion provide an overview of the inﬂuent water quality and pellet composition. The correlation between
these two is investigated together with parameters affecting pellet color.
4.2.1
Inﬂuent Water Quality
The hardness of the inﬂuent water in the included Danish water treatment plants (WTPs) varies from
17.9 ◦dH at Lindved to 33.5 ◦dH at Brøndbyvester (Table 4.3). This is classiﬁed from quite hard (“tem-
melig hårdt”) to extremely hard (“særdeles hårdt”) (GEUS, 2010). The Dutch WTPs generally receive
softer water than the Danish ranging from 13.0 to 20.9 ◦dH (Table 4.3 based on Appendix C). Actually,
the water at Weesperkarspel WTP meet the Dutch guideline concentration of 14 ◦dH even before the
softening process. Thus, the water is most likely softened to increase customer satisfaction. The ﬁnal
hardness is between 8.2 and 9.5 ◦dH (KWR, 2003) which is slightly below the 10 ◦dH that HOFOR is
planning to achieve (HOFOR, 2016).
The largest variations in concentrations are found for iron and manganese. Manganese varies from
0.17 to 246 µg/L whereas iron varies from 2.0 to 3,830 µg/L (Table 4.3). The variations are due to differ-
ences in groundwater composition, but also if the water is before aeration or after ﬁltration. Iron and
manganese are removed in the waterworks treatment processes (Arvin, 2002) and hence lower concen-
trations are measured after ﬁltration.
Three different water qualities are reported for Frederiksberg WTP because the groundwater wells were
maintained during the pilot scale experiments (Table 4.3). The inﬂuent water during normal oper-
ations has a hardness of 29.4 ◦dH. This is the water quality that the “Frederiksberg 13” pellets were
produced under. The dosing experiment was performed in a period where the well FF2 was taken out.
FF2 has a hardness of 41 ◦dH (GEUS, 2016) so during the period it was maintained the inﬂuent hard-
ness decreased to 24.7 ◦dH. During the experiments where the quartz seeding material was replaced
29
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4. Pellet Characteristics
with quarry limestone it was another well (“FF1”) that was maintained. The hardness of FF1 is 23 ◦dH
(GEUS, 2016) which caused an increase in hardness to 31.2 ◦dH during the formation of the “Frederiks-
berg 4” pellets. The differences in inﬂuent water quality makes comparison between the two types of
seeding material difﬁcult as it is not known if changes are due to water quality or the seeding material
characteristics. Water quality parameters not reported in Table 4.3 are available in Appendix B
Table 4.3: Inﬂuent water quality during Danish pilot scale experiments and the inﬂuent water quality to
the pellet reactors in the Netherlands (KWR, 2003). < QL: Below limit of quantiﬁcation. - indicates no
data available (not analyzed).
WTP
Hardness
Fe
Mn
As
Pb
Cd
Ca
Cr
Mg
Ni
Zn
Na
K
P
◦dH
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
mg/L
µg/L
mg/L
µg/L
µg/L
mg/L
mg/L
µg/L
Marbjerg
20.0
170
19
-
-
-
110
-
20
3.8
-
12
3.3
11
Brokilde
20.7
2,000
28
-
-
-
110
-
23
0.38
-
17
2.8
22
Brøndbyv.
33.5
1,200
28
1.8
1.4
0.9
190
0.3
30
38
26
94
7.3
< QL
Regnemarka
23.6
2.0
0.17
0.25
0.26
0.042
128
0.1
25
0.58
23
75
4.7
< QL
Søndersø
21.3
2,720
71
0.30
0.05
< QL
126
< QL
16
1.3
6.9
34
3.5
32
Dalum
20.7
563
246
1.2
0.54
0.007
125
< QL
14
1.1
13
40
4.1
28
Daluma
20.7
13
0.51
0.79
0.25
0.009
126
< QL
13
1.6
56
39
3.8
< QL
Lindved
17.9
6.6
140
3.6
0.06
0.01
104
< QL
14
2
27
36
5
< QL
Lejre
18.4
1,000
40
-
-
-
95
-
22
0.31
-
89
4.9
24
Frederiksberg
29.4
3,830
-
-
-
-
166
-
27
-
-
50
-
-
Frederiksbergb
24.7
3,750
-
-
-
-
138
-
23
-
-
36
-
-
Frederiksbergc
31.2
3,600
-
-
-
-
172
-
31
-
-
60
-
-
Seppe
14.7
4,400
75
-
-
-
95
-
6.3
-
-
-
-
-
Weesperkarspel
13.0
< 20
31
-
-
-
82
-
6.6
-
-
-
-
-
de Beitel
20.9
10
10
-
-
-
137
-
7.3
-
-
-
-
-
Hoogeveen
14.5
50
250
-
-
-
91
-
7.8
-
-
-
-
-
a After ﬁltration
b Excluding FF2
c Excluding FF1
As mentioned in Section 2.4, phosphate and iron concentrations exceeding 0.5 mg/L and 3 mg/L can
affect the crystallization causing “ﬂuffy” pellets (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). Converting the total phos-
phorus concentration to phophate (PO3−
4 ) yields concentrations between 34 and 98 µg/L which is be-
low 0.5 mg/L. The iron concentration on the other hand exceeds 3 mg/L in the inﬂuent water to Fred-
eriksberg WTP. Nevertheless, hard and crystalline pellets were formed in all the pilot-scale experiments
indicating that the hexahydrated polymorph was not formed despite the high iron concentration at
Frederiksberg WTP. The iron concentration at Seppe WTP is 4,4 mg/L which is higher than observed at
the Danish WTPs and it was not possible to soften the raw water at Seppe do to the formation of “ﬂuffy”
pellets (van der Kolk, 2016).
The above illustrates how the inﬂuent water quality to the pilot scale reactor has varied depending on
the waterworks and where in the treatment scheme the reactor was placed. The following will present
the pellet composition and investigate how that correlates to the inﬂuent water quality.
4.2.2
Pellet Composition
Only parameters used in the assessment of possible applications are reported in Table 4.4. Appendix
D provides a full overview of pellet composition at the different WTPs. The concentrations vary from
those reported in Lyster Larsen et al. (2016) since the concentrations in Table 4.4 are from a single pellet
sample whereas Lyster Larsen et al. (2016) report the average concentration after the pellet production
had stabilized.
30
==PAGE:38==
4.2. Inﬂuent Water Quality and Pellet Composition
Table 4.4: Pellet composition based on previous analyses. - indicates no data available (not analyzed).
The unit is mg/kg dry matter.
Sample ID
Fe
Mn
As
Pb
Cd
Ca
Cr
Cr(VI)
Hg
Mg
Ni
Zn
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
Marbjerg 11
5,500
110
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
400,000
< 1
< 1
< 0.01
3,900
1.6
3.4
Brokilde 23
2,000
63
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
360,000
< 1
< 1
< 0.01
3,200
2.7
9.5
Brøndbyv. 4
3,100
54
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
330,000
< 1
< 1
< 0.01
4,100
24
31
Regnemark 6
40
< 1
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
350,000
< 1
< 1
< 0.01
3,700
< 1
81
Søndersø 18
9,300
210
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
370,000
< 1
< 1
< 0.01
2,600
< 1
11
Dalum
2,300
996
0.1
0.1
< 0.007
404,000
1.1
-
-
3,700
3.8
< 1.7
Daluma
22
1
0.3
0.2
0.01
403,000
1.4
-
-
3,600
4.3
31
Lindved
1,700
672
1.0
0.1
0.01
373,000
< 0.494
-
-
3,100
3.1
18
Lejre 10
4,200
200
< 1
< 2
< 0.03
400,000
< 1
< 0.5
< 0.01
4,300
< 1
1.7
Frederiksberg 13
8,700
218
0.2
0.1
0.03
378,000
0.4
-
-
3,800
10
80
Frederiksberg 4b
7,600
238
0.2
1
0.09
390,000
0.3
-
-
3,900
10
82
Seppeb
2,400
-
< 2.8
< 14
< 0.5
390,000
< 5
-
< 0.070
970
< 4
< 14
Weesperkarspelb
200
-
< 3
< 15
< 0.6
370,000
< 5
-
< 0.073
2,600
< 4
< 15
De Beitel
80
-
< 3.1
< 16
< 0.6
400,000
< 5
-
< 0.077
1,200
< 4
< 16
Hoogeveen
180
-
< 4.1
< 21
< 0.8
350,000
< 7
-
< 0.11
800
< 6
< 21
aAfter ﬁltration
bCalcite seeding material
During the acid digestion of the pellets the quartz sand grain was not dissolved and quantiﬁed. Thus,
the concentrations represent the CaCO3 part of the pellets excluding the seeding material sand grain.
Due to this, there is no difference in the calcium concentration when comparing pellets with a quartz
sand core (330,000 mg/kg - 404,000 mg/kg) to pellets with a limestone core (370,000 mg/kg - 390,000
mg/kg).
As for the inﬂuent water, the largest variations are observed for iron and manganese. The pellet iron
concentrations vary from 22 to 9,300 mg/kg and the manganese concentrations vary from < 1 to 996
mg/kg. Heavy metals (As, Pb, Cd, Cr, Hg and Ni) are measured in concentrations lower than the limit of
quantiﬁcation in most of the pellets. An exception is the zinc concentration that range from < 1.7 to 82
mg/kg.
Lyster Larsen et al. (2016) compared the total acid digestion to a digestion in 0.5 M HCl for 24 h. 25.2 - 26
% of the pellets were dissolved after that time period. The concentrations of different elements were an-
alyzed in the supernatant with ICP-OES and ICP-MS similarly to the other pellet analyses. It is assumed
that it is the “outer” part of the pellets that have dissolved. Since the pellets are largest in the bottom
of the reactor, the analysis is expected to represent CaCO3 that has precipitated in the bottom part of
the reactor. By comparing these concentrations to a total acid digestion it is possible to investigate if
all elements precipitate with CaCO3 throughout the reactor height or if speciﬁc elements precipitate
mainly in the top or bottom. The results indicate that most elements precipitate in the entire reactor.
Phosphorus is an exception to this as the results indicate that phosphorus primarily is removed in the
top of the reactor. This might explain why the formation of “ﬂuffy” pellets is observed at high phos-
phate concentrations: If phosphate causes CaCO3 to crystallize in an amorphous polymorph in the top
of the reactor, CaCO3 cannot adhere properly to the seeding material and hard, crystalline pellets are
not achieved.
4.2.3
Correlation Between Inﬂuent Water and Pellet Composition
As mentioned, the iron and manganese concentrations in the pellets follow the same tendency as the
inﬂuent water: The lowest concentrations are found when the softening process is placed after ﬁltra-
tion than before aeration. The correlation between the inﬂuent water quality (Table 4.3) and pellet
composition (Table 4.4) was investigated using a Pearson’s correlation test (Section 3.4.5). In the case
31
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4. Pellet Characteristics
of concentrations below the limit of quantiﬁcation (QL), the concentration was set to:
C = 0.5·QL
(4.1)
Manganese was not analyzed in the Dutch pellets and results from water sample analyses from Fred-
eriksberg were not available within the time frame of this thesis. Thus, the results for manganese in-
clude only pellets from the previous Danish pilot scale experiments.
The results indicate poor correlation between the calcium concentration in the pellets and the wa-
ter calcium concentration (r = -0.2129, Figure 4.2a). The calcium concentration is strongly correlated
to the water hardness and can be interpreted as an expression of the pellet purity. With that in mind
the results indicate that the pellet purity is not dependent on the water hardness and it is foreign ions
affecting the pellet purity. The Dutch pellets show the same tendency as the Danish.
Magnesium and manganese show a moderate and strong positive correlation between the concentra-
tions in pellets and in the inﬂuent water (Figure F.2b and 4.2c). As described in Section 2.4, Mn2+ can
substitute Ca2+ in the crystal lattice of calcium carbonate. The results indicate that manganese readily
replaces calcium within the range of inﬂuent concentrations observed in this thesis.
(a) Calcium.
(b) Magnesium.
(c) Manganese.
(d) Iron.
Figure 4.2: Scatter plots of the pellet concentration as a function of inﬂuent water quality including Pear-
son’s correlation coefﬁcient (r) and signiﬁcance of linear regression model slope for iron, magnesium,
calcium and manganese.
There is a moderate positive correlation between the total iron concentration in pellets and in the in-
ﬂuent water (Figure F.1c). From the scatter plot it is seen that especially one data point, Seppe, has a
pellet iron concentration lower than expected compared to the inﬂuent concentration. Since the Seppe
pellets are produced after aeration it is expected that iron is predominantly present as Fe3+ and not
Fe2+ as in the raw groundwater samples. According to van Dijk and Wilms (1991), Fe3+ forms Fe(OH)3
32
==PAGE:40==
4.2. Inﬂuent Water Quality and Pellet Composition
and FePO4. If these are not incorporated into the CaCO3 crystal lattice, this can explain the relatively
lower iron concentration of the Seppe pellets. Some iron is precipitated with the pellets after aeration
which appears to have an effect on the pellet color. This will be further investigated in Section 4.2.4.
Excluding the pellets from after aeration (Seppe and de Beitel) from the calculations yields a Pearson’s
correlation coefﬁcient of 0.8414 and hence a strong positive correlation.
The above results show that how different metals are incorporated into the crystal lattice of CaCO3
is dependent on how well the ions substitute Ca2+ or if they precipitate with other anions as in the case
of Fe3+. Thus, assuming a linear correlation between the inﬂuent water quality and pellet composition
is not a valid assumption for all foreign ions. Nevertheless the positive correlation between the inﬂuent
water and pellet composition shows that decreasing for instance the iron concentration in the inﬂuent
will also decrease the pellet iron concentration. This can be taken into account if optimizing the pellet
quality in terms of pellet purity.
4.2.4
Pellet Color
Figure 4.3:
Fe(OH)3 rust in
pipe.
From Table 4.1 it is evident that the pellets have different colors.
Pure CaCO3 is white, however, impurities can change the color (An-
dersen, 2016).
Pellet color is important if reusing pellets in the
glass industry or as ﬁll material in for instance paints, paper and
other products where the pellets should be as white as possible
(Tang, 2016).
On the other hand when using pellets as soil im-
provement in gardens it is desired that pellets are not too bright
and pellets reused in this application in the Netherlands are se-
lected based on their color (van der Kolk, 2016). This section aims
to investigate which parameters affect the color of pellets and if
pellet color can be controlled in the design of the softening pro-
cess.
The brightness of the pellets can be quantiﬁed for instance based on the radiation reﬂected and can
provide an indication of the pellet “whiteness” (ISO, 2014). The pellet color was not quantiﬁed in this
thesis, so the following is a visual comparison of the pellets. “Brøndebyvester 4” and “Dalum” pellets
from after ﬁltration appear the most white, whereas “Lindved” and “Regnemark 6” pellets have a rust
red color. The “Søndersø 18”, “Lejre 10” and the two “Frederiksberg” pellets have a slightly green shade.
According to Baars (2016) the color of pellets is dependent on the iron and manganese concentration.
When iron is oxidized it precipitates as iron hydroxide or rust, Fe(OH)3, whereas manganese precipi-
tates as black manganese oxide, MnO (Arvin, 2002). The red color of some pellets is comparable to the
color of Fe(OH)3 (Figure 4.3). Figure 4.4 visualizes the pellets in order of increasing iron concentration.
Figure 4.4: Visual appearance of pellets as a function of the iron concentration.
If the color of pellets is dependent on the iron concentration only, it is expected that the whiter pellets
are found in the left hand side of Figure 4.4. This is the case for the white Dalum pellets (after ﬁltration)
33
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4. Pellet Characteristics
that have a lower iron concentration compared to the pellets before aeration. It is expected that the
rust red pellets, Lindved and Regnemark, have a relatively high iron concentration. However, the white
“Brøndbyvester 4” pellets have a higher iron concentration compared to these. This indicates that other
parameters than the iron concentration affect the color of pellets.
Iron is oxidized chemically under aerobic conditions. Thus, pellets are expected to be more white if
anaerobic conditions are maintained in the reactor. Figure 4.5 compares the color of pellets to the
pellet iron concentration and the oxygen concentration in the efﬂuent of the pilot scale reactor. It is as-
sumed that this concentration is a good representation of the oxygen concentration inside the reactor
although the ﬂow regime is plug ﬂow.
Figure 4.5: Visual appearance of pellets as a function of the efﬂuent water oxygen concentration.
When considering the pellets produced from water before aeration (excluding Dalum and Regnemark),
it appears that a lower oxygen concentration results in whiter pellets. “Frederiksberg 13” and “Fred-
eriksberg 4” pellets have a relatively high iron concentration of 8,700 and 7,600 mg/kg, however, since
conditions inside the reactor were anaerobic the pellets are white with a slightly green shade. The green
color is potentially caused by Fe2+ which is green when dissolved in water. The pellets from Lindved
have an iron concentration more than 5 times lower than the “Frederiksberg 13” pellets, however, due to
more aerobic conditions the rust red color indicates that iron was oxidized and precipitated as Fe(OH)3
in the pellets.
The Dutch pellets from Seppe have an iron concentration of 2,400 mg/kg. Although the oxygen con-
centration in the reactor efﬂuent is not known, it is assumed that it is close to saturation (10.4 mg/L at
12 ◦C) since the pellet reactor is placed after aeration. The Seppe pellets are the darkest pellets included
in this study, however, the iron concentration is lower than several of the Danish pellets. This indicates
that when iron is fully oxidized the color is affected making it darker. The de Beitel pellets are also pro-
duced after aeration, however, the iron concentration of the inﬂuent water is about 45 times lower than
in Seppe. The pellets are white indicating that the iron concentration is so low that the color is not af-
fected by Fe(OH)3. The pellets from Hoogeveen are produced after a pre-ﬁltration step where Fe(OH)3
has been removed and hence only very little iron is precipitated in the pellets. These pellets have a color
similar to the pellets from Seppe although the shade is much lighter. Finally, the Weesperkarspel pellets
have a red color similar to the “Regnemark 6” pellets. In both cases the softening process is placed after
ﬁltration and the pellets have similar iron concentrations of 200 and 40 mg/kg respectively.
It is not possible to conclude which parameters determine the color of pellets. The results indicate that
not only the iron concentration, but also if conditions inside the reactor are aerobic or anaerobic, affect
the pellet color. Thus, if white pellets are desired, either the iron concentration must be sufﬁciently low
34
==PAGE:42==
4.3. Mineralogy
or conditions in the reactor should be kept strictly anaerobic to avoid the oxidation of iron.
4.3
Mineralogy
4.3.1
Interpreting XRD Data
Figure 4.6 shows two XRD patterns of pellets from Frederiksberg as an example of how XRD patterns
were interpreted. The corresponding interatomic distances, d, calculated from Bragg’s law (Equation
2.9) are also presented in Figure 4.6.
(a) Frederiksberg 13 pellets (sand as seeding material).
(b) Frederiksberg 4 pellets (limestone as seeding material).
Figure 4.6: XRD pattern and corresponding interatomic distances for Frederiksberg pellets with sand and
limestone as seeding material respectively. Blue = quartz. Red = calcite.
The d values expected with high intensity for calcite are in descending order of intensity: 3.04 (2θ =
26.60), 2.29, 2.10, 1.91, 1.88, 2.50, 3.86 and 1.60 Å. These are all present in both Figure 4.6a and 4.6b.
Thus, it is concluded that the pellets consist of calcite. Figure 4.6a has an additional peak at 3.34 Å
which is expected for quartz together with 4.26, 1.82, 1.54, 2.46, 2.28, 1.37 and 1.38 Å. Some of these
values are outside the scanned range whereas others are the same as for calcite. However, from the
high intensity signal at 3.34 Å it is concluded that “Frederiksberg 13” pellets also contain quartz.
4.3.2
Mineralogy of Pellet Samples
The results show that CaCO3 has precipitated as calcite in all the pellets (Table 4.5). It is furthermore
possible to identify quartz in the pellets where quartz sand was used as seeding material. The miner-
alogy of the pellets from Dalum and Lindved was not analyzed with XRD, however, it is expected that
these also consist of calcite and quartz. The XRD patterns, d values and intensities are available in Ap-
pendix E.
The “Søndersø 18” pellets show an additional peak (Appendix E) that can indicate an iron based min-
eral in addition to calcite (Fabricius, 2016). However, it was not possible to identify the mineral from a
35
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Pellet Characteristics
Table 4.5: Mineralogy of the different pellets determined by XRD
Sample Name
Mineralogy
Marbjerg 10
Quartz + calcite
Brokilde 27
Quartz + calcite
Brøndbyvester 4
Quartz + calcite
Søndersø 18
Quartz + calcitea
Regnemark 6
Quartz + calcite
Lejre 10
Quartz + calcite
Frederiksberg 13
Quartz + calcite
Frederiksberg 4
Calcite
Seppe
Calcite
Weesperkarspel
Calcite
de Beitel
Calcite
Hoogeveen
Quartz + Calcite
a In addition to calcite, there was an additional peak which could indicate an iron based mineral. However, it was not
possible to identify this mineral based on a single peak.
single peak only. Calcite was the only identiﬁed mineral in the pellets with quarry limestone or crushed
pellets as seeding material (“Frederiksberg 4”, “Seppe” and “Weesperkarspel”). It was not possible to
identify the garnet sand seeding material in the pellets from de Beitel since the intensity of peaks, not
caused by calcite, were too low.
The XRD analysis provides knowledge on the mineralogy of the pellets but not how the different min-
erals are distributed inside the pellets and their concentrations. The relative concentrations have been
indicated by analyses performed by Euroﬁns for HOFOR. The mass % of sand has been estimated and
varies between 1.88 to 11.4 % in the pellets “Marbjerg 10”, “Brokilde 27”, “Brøndbyvester 4”, “Regnemark
6”, “Lejre 10” and “Søndersø 18” (Table 5.3). The relatively high concentration of calcite compared to
the seeding material can explain why identifying other minerals in addition to calcite in the XRD pat-
terns was difﬁcult.
Foreign ions can inﬂuence which polymorph is formed. Nevertheless, the results indicate that despite
the varying concentrations of foreign ions in the inﬂuent water, CaCO3 has crystallized in its most sta-
ble polymorph. This corresponds well with the fact that it was possible to soften the raw water without
the formation of “ﬂuffy” pellets at all the Danish WTPs.
4.3.3
Scanning Electron Microscope images
Another approach in determining the mineralogy is by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) which
is often used in combination with XRD (Thomsen, 2016). The principle of SEM is that electrons are
accelerated and collides with the sample. After they are reﬂected, the signal is detected and an image is
produced (Khursheed, 2011). Quartz has a slightly lower density (2.65 g/cm3) compared to calcite (2.71
g/cm3). Due to this quartz absorbs more electrons than calcite making quartz darker in SEM images
(Fabricius, 2016). The images illustrate how the lighter calcite has precipitated on the darker quartz
crystals. This shows how calcite and quartz minerals identiﬁed using XRD are distributed inside the
pellets.
36
==PAGE:44==
4.4. Speciﬁc Surface Area and Reactivity
(a) 5.7 m depth.
(b) 5 m depth.
Figure 4.7: SEM images of pellets from Dalum waterworks in 5.7 m (bottom of reactor) and 5 m depth
respectively.
4.4
Speciﬁc Surface Area and Reactivity
The section presents the measured BET surface area for the different pellets, Aspec, the particle sizes,
D10, D50 and D60, the uniformity coefﬁcient, UC and reactivity measured with the Citric Acid Method
and Sauerbeck & Rietz Method. Appendix G provides the raw data from the BET analyses.
4.4.1
Particle Size
The median particle size D50 of the pellets varies between 0.98 mm and 1.60 mm (Table 4.6). This is
within the 1.0-1.2 mm typically observed for full scale reactors (van Dijk, 2007), with the exception of
“Brøndbyvester 4” and “Regnemark 6” that are larger. The curves from sieve analyses are available in
Appendix F. No sieve analyses were performed for pellets from Lindved, however, they visually appear
smaller than the others and there is seeding material among the pellets. This indicates that the ﬂuidized
bed was not fully stabilized at the time of sampling. The reason for this is that the seeding material
contained a large fraction of ﬁnes. Due to this the pilot scale reactor was operated at a lower ﬂow
compared to the other experiments (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). As a consequence the softening process
did not run efﬁciently.
Table 4.6: Median particle size, 10 and 60 % quantiles and uniformity coefﬁcient from pellet sieving
analyses.
D10
D50
D60
UC
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
Brøndbyvester 4
1.40
1.60
1.68
1.20
Regnemark 6
1.17
1.32
1.37
1.17
Søndersø 18
0.91
1.10
1.15
1.26
Daluma
0.98
1.15
1.20
1.22
Dalumb,c
0.70
0.98
1.04
1.49
Lejre 10
1.01
1.18
1.10
1.09
Frederiksberg 13
1.02
1.18
1.20
1.18
Frederiksberg 4
1.02
1.18
1.22
1.20
a Pellets from May 8th 2015
b After ﬁltration
c Pellets from June 10th 2015
Stratiﬁcation of pellets where the smaller pellets are in the top and the larger in the bottom occurs inside
37
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Pellet Characteristics
full scale cylindrical pellet reactors. During pilot scale experiments the degree of stratiﬁcation can be
investigated visually and from the pellet uniformity. When stratiﬁcation is created UC will be close to 1
because only the largest pellets are removed. Generally, the pellet samples are generally uniform with
UC values close to 1. The Dalum pellets from water after ﬁltation have the lowest D50 and highest UC.
This indicates that the ﬂuidized bed had not reached stratiﬁcation at the time of sampling. However,
the uniformity of the samples cannot be assessed solely based on UC but should take the sieve curve
into account as well (Winther et al., 2010). The “Frederiksberg 4” pellets for instance have a UC of 1.20
based on D10 and D60, but the sample contains 5 % pellets larger than 2 mm (Appendix F). These are
not expressed by the D10 and D60 and hence the UC value expresses a higher degree of uniformity than
what is the case.
4.4.2
Speciﬁc Surface Area
The speciﬁc surface area, Aspec, ranges from < DL to 0.0498 m2/g excluding the pellets from Lindved
with an Aspec of 0.1778 m2/g (Table 4.7). However, as mentioned in the previous section these pellets
are smaller since the softening process did not stabilize and are not considered representative of full
scale softening. The pellet Aspec is low compared to for instance the reference CaCO3 with a Aspec of
1.4561 m2/g. Crushing the sample increases the speciﬁc surface area and hence the area that can react.
This can be seen from the crushed sample of “Brøndbyvester 4” pellets where the Aspec of 0.3450 m2/g
is 7.6 times higher than the sample that was not crushed.
Table 4.7: BET surface area and reactivity measured by Citric Acid Method and Sauerbeck & Rietz. -
indicates not measured. < DL: Below limit of detection
Sample ID
Aspec
RC A
RSR
Citric Acid Method
Sauerbeck & Rietz
[m2/g]
[%]
[%]
Marbjerg 10
0.0225
28.4 ± 5.48
16.6
Brokilde 27
0.0498
30 ± 5.79
11.2
Brøndbyvester 4
0.0434
72.1 ± 13.91
10.7
Brøndbyvester 4
0.3450a
-
-
Regnemark 6
< DL
56 ± 10.80
15.8
Søndersø 18
< DL
35
11.3
Dalum
0.0029
-
7.39
Dalumb
0.0021
-
10.6
Lindved
0.1778
-
11.8
Lejre 10
0.0215
23
15.1
Frederiksberg 13
0.0005
-
17.7
Frederiksberg 4
0.0010
-
25.7
Seppe
0.0018
-
17.4
Weesperkarspel
< DL
-
22.1
de Beitel
< DL
-
9.60
Hoogeveen
< DL
-
15.9
a Crushed sample
b After ﬁltration
The measured Aspec values are all lower than the method limit of quantiﬁcation (Nguyen, 2008) and are
hence associated with uncertainty. The low surface areas indicate that the pellets crystallize with very
limited porosity. Section 4.2 showed that the pellet composition vary according to the inﬂuent water
quality and the design of the softening process. However, the previous section and the results in Table
4.7 indicate that the crystallization process is not affected by the inﬂuent water quality. The speciﬁc
38
==PAGE:46==
4.4. Speciﬁc Surface Area and Reactivity
surface area is low regardless where in the treatment scheme the reactor was placed and the inﬂuent
water quality. Due to the low surface area it is expected that the pellets will have a limited amount of
sites for reaction and a subsequent low reactivity. This will be described in the following. In the case
that “ﬂuffy” pellets were formed these are expected to have a larger degree of porosity and higher Aspec.
However, this type of pellets easily break against the reactor walls causing ﬁnes in the efﬂuent water
(van Dijk and Wilms, 1991) and is not desired from a water quality point of view.
4.4.3
Reactivity
From Table 4.7 it can be seen that the reactivity measured by the Citric Acid Method range from 28.4 ±
5.48 to 72.1 ± 13.91 % which is higher than the reactivity measured by the Sauerbeck & Rietz method
ranging from 7.39 to 25.7 %. The methods both compare the pellets to a reference of pure CaCO3. More-
over, it is expected that the results are correlated so that pellets with a high RC A also have a high RSR,
however, the two parameters are not correlated (r = -0.322). The difference is most likely due to the
samples being crushed prior to analysis in the Citric Acid Method which was not the case for the Sauer-
beck & Rietz method. The particle size was not determined after crushing the pellets in the Citric Acid
analysis and might differ among the samples creating additional uncertainty to the results.
The Citric Acid Method corrects for dolomite based on the magnesium concentration (?), however,
the XRD analysis does not show dolomite in the pellets (Table 4.5). Hence, it is questionable if this
correction is valid for pellets from softening and might introduce further uncertainty to these results.
4.4.4
Statistical Correlation
Different impurities are reported to affect the reactivity. Magnesium is reported to signiﬁcantly de-
crease the reactivity of CaCO3 (Ahlbeck et al., 1995). Iron oxides in a concentration of 1.5 - 2.2 % are
reported to increase the reactivity, whereas concentrations exceeding 5 % can decrease it (Yin and Guo,
2011). The correlation between magnesium, iron and reactivity are investigated in this section.
It is expected that a high Aspec will result in a higher reactivity. However, if plotting the reactivity based
on Sauerbeck & Rietz as a function of Aspec, there does not appear to be a trend between the two param-
eters (Figure 4.8a). This is conﬁrmed by a r coefﬁcient of -0.2544 indicating that there is poor correla-
tion between the two parameters. It should be kept in mind, that the BET measurements are below the
limit of quantiﬁcation and hence associated with some degree of uncertainty. The effect is potentially
more profound in samples with a higher Aspec. This can explain why the expected trend is not observed.
Poor correlation is also observed between the median particle size and reactivity (r = -0.01519). On
the other hand, crushing the “Brøndbyvester 4” pellets into a µm range diameter increased the Aspec by
more than 7 times which is expected to increase the reactivity.
There is a moderate correlation between the pellet magnesium concentration and reactivity which may
indicate that magnesium as reported in Yin and Guo (2011) decreases the reactivity (Figure 4.8c). When
considering the scatter plot of the reactivity as a function of Fe2O3, there appears to be an increasing
tendency to about 1.7 %. After this the reactivity decreases. This correlates well with the observations
of an “optimum” iron oxide concentration with respect to reactivity. However, there are few data points
in both Figure 4.8c and 4.8d and it is recommended that additional analyses are performed to conﬁrm
these trends.
39
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Pellet Characteristics
(a) Speciﬁc surface area.
(b) Median particle size.
(c) Magnesium.
(d) Iron oxide (Fe2O3).
Figure 4.8: Scatter plots of the reactivity (Sauerbeck & Rietz) as a function of pellet composition, surface
area and median particle size including Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient (r).
The pellet diameter can be reduced in order to increase the reactivity. This is done by withdrawing
pellets more frequently (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). However, when increasing the removal of pellets,
additional seeding material must be added to maintain the ﬂuidized bed height. For instance reducing
the pellet diameter from 1.0 mm to 0.8 mm increases the required amount of seeding material (in this
case garnet sand) by 50 % (Van Schagen et al., 2008). Another approach in reducing the pellet diameter
is by crushing the pellets to the desired diameter. This increases the costs of reuse but is a widely ap-
plied practice in the Netherlands (van der Kolk, 2016).
CaCO3 reactivity is a complex phenomena both dependent on the speciﬁc surface area, the particle
size and the chemical composition (Ahlbeck et al., 1995). The results indicate that there is a correlation
between pellet impurities and reactivity. However, the Aspec and D50 ranges examined are most likely
a too narrow to observe an effect on the pellet reactivity. The two highest and the fourth highest RSR
was measured in the pellets with a limestone seeding material. As mentioned in Section 2.4, the lowest
Gibbs free energy is related to crystallizing on the a crystal of the same type. CaCO3 can potentially be
imitating the more porous structure of limestone compared to quartz sand resulting in a higher reac-
tivity. However, the effect appears to be limited and it will require more samples in order to perform a
statistical test to examine if there is a signiﬁcant difference. Thus, no conclusion can be made on how
the pellet reactivity can be increased from the design of the softening process, however, crushing the
pellets is expected to increase the speciﬁc surface area and reactivity.
4.4.5
Speciﬁc Surface Area of Seeding Material
This section will focus speciﬁcally on the seeding material used in the different pilot scale experiments.
As mentioned earlier, the seeding materials affects the purity of the pellet but can also increase the
“polishing effect” observed in the top of the reactor. Table 4.8 shows the diameter and Aspec for selected
40
==PAGE:48==
4.5. Pellet Characteristics
seeding material used in the pilot scale experiments and an additional sample of quarry limestone.
Table 4.8: Diameter and Aspec of seeding materials used in the pilot scale experiments. - indicates not
measured.
Sample ID
Mineralogy
Diameter
Aspec
[mm]
[m2/g]
Dansand 29
Quartz
0.18-0.50a
0.0553
Dansand 33
Quartz
0.18-0.71a
0.0892
Dansand 40
Quartz
0.25-0.71a
-
Weber
Quartz
0.3-0.6b
-
Lhoist 0.1-0.3
Quarry limestone
0.1-0.3c
0.2065
Lhoist 0.3-0.6
Quarry limestone
0.3-0.6c
0.1275
a(Dansand, 2016)
b(Weber, 2016)
c(Andersen, 2016)
It is expected that a smaller diameter will result in a higher Aspec. This is observed for Lhoist 0.1-0.3
mm with an Aspec of 0.2065 m2/g and Lhoist 0.3-0.6 mm with an Aspec of 0.1275 m2/g. The same is not
the case for Dansand 29 and 33 where the smaller diameter (0.18-0.50 mm) is associated with a Aspec
of 0.0553 m2/g and the higher diameter (0.18-0.71 mm) of 0.0892 m2/g. This is probably due to the
low Aspec values resulting in uncertainty in the measurements. Comparing the two types of seeding
material used at Frederiksberg waterworks, Dansand 29 and Lhoist 0.3-0.6, the quarry limestone has a
Aspec about 2.3 times higher compared to the quartz sand. This indicates that the quarry limestone is a
more efﬁcient seeding material (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). The increased “polishing effect” observed
in the top of the pellet reactor when replacing quartz sand with quarry limestone can be due to two
mechanisms: The increased surface area which allows for more sites of crystallization and that calcite
crystallizing on calcite has a lower Gibbs free energy compared to calcite crystallizing on quartz (Section
2.4). It is not possible to quantify the effect of each separate mechanism based on the results in this
thesis.
4.5
Pellet Characteristics
It is assumed that the pellets produced as a part of the pilot scale experiments are representative of
pellets from full scale softening. However, there are uncertainties transferring results from pilot scale
experiments to full scale conditions. The inner diameter of the pilot scale reactor is 9.96 cm. In a small
reactor, there is a risk that the walls affect the ﬂow regime inside the reactor and can inhibit pellet size
stratiﬁcation (Merks, 2016). This is important to take into account if for instance measurements over
the reactor depth are performed. However, the results in the previous sections have shown that the
pellets removed from the reactor are uniform and have median diameters similar to those of full scale
operation. Thus, it is assumed that the results provide a good indicator for the pellet characteristics of
full scale operations unless the inﬂuent water quality and other conditions are changed from the pilot
scale experiments.
The pellet characterization has shown, that the pellets produced from the Danish pilot scale experi-
ments vary greatly in terms of their chemical composition and color. The speciﬁc surface area and
reactivity are on the other hand generally low regardless of the inﬂuent water quality and operating
conditions included in the experiments. The following will present different pellet applications and
compare the quality criteria to the results from this chapter in order to identify potential pellet reuse
applications.
41
==PAGE:49==
5
|
Pellet Applications
In the next decade HOFOR plans to implement pellet softening at 12 waterworks. During the soften-
ing process, pellets formed from crystallization of CaCO3 are continuously removed from the reactor
as they settle towards the bottom. If no reuse applications are identiﬁed the pellets will have to be
landﬁlled. Figure 5.1 shows how the pellet production will increase from about 580 t at Brøndbyvester
waterworks in the spring of 2017 to about 14,000 t when central softening has been fully implemented
by HOFOR. Some pellets will be from pellet reactors placed prior to aeration whereas the others will be
from reactors placed after ﬁltration (Lopato, 2016). If other Danish utilities implement central softening
using pellet reactors the total amount of pellets will be even higher.
Figure 5.1: Expected annual pellet production from HOFOR’s waterworks (Lopato, 2016).
Several studies investigate the economic and environmental effects from central softening (for instance
Aktor (2006); COWI (2011); Godskesen et al. (2012); Delloite (2015a,b); COWI (2015b,a)). However, none
of them investigate the reuse of pellets in Denmark. COWI (2011) assumes that pellets are landﬁlled at
a cost of 900 DKK/t, but recognizes that reusing pellets will reduce this cost. Godskesen et al. (2012)
assume that pellets can be used in agriculture for soil improvement substituting commercial limestone
products. COWI (2015a) likewise assume that pellets can substitute other limestone products, however,
speciﬁc applications are not mentioned.
The annual production of limestone from quarries in Denmark was 2.6 million t in 2014 (Danmarks
Statistik, 2014). In addition, the cement producer Aalborg Portland annually consumes about 3 million
t limestone which is mined from their own quarry (Aalborg Portland, 2014). Thus, pellets from HOFOR
will constitute only a small percentage of the annual production of limestone.
This section will describe different industries using conventional CaCO3 products and which quality
criteria the CaCO3 must meet. Many of the presented applications were identiﬁed as a part of the spe-
cial course Tang (2016). In addition a case from the Netherlands is introduced as an example of pellet
management.
42
==PAGE:50==
5.1. Lessons from the Dutch Experience
5.1
Lessons from the Dutch Experience
In the Netherlands all pellets from central water softening are handled by the company Reststoffenunie
(RU). RU was founded in 1995 by the ten Dutch drinking water utilities and handles all by-products from
drinking water treatment as well as by-products from wastewater treatment (Reststoffenunie, 2014). In
addition to pellets, other by-products handled by RU include iron sludge, powdered activated carbon,
aluminium sludge, ﬁlter sand/gravel and struvite (van der Kolk, 2016). In the period 2012-2014, pellets
were primarily sold to nine different industry sectors (Table 5.1).
Table 5.1: Pellets applications in the Netherlands in 2012-2014 based on sectors (Reststoffenunie, 2014).
2012
2013
2014
[t]
[t]
[t]
Construction material
13,829
26,831
27,013
Residential construction
26,624
15,333
11,600
Glass industry
144
3,597
6,571
Mineral commodity trade
16,739
14,814
8,143
Energy generation
2,593
1,673
-
Carpet industry
-
-
4,608
Ceramic products
1,729
1,685
5,142
Floriculture
3,648
2,505
3,041
Aquaria/terraria
456
489
437
Other
202
190
160
Total
65,964
67,117
66,715
Pellet reuse applications within the glass industry, ceramics and carpet industry are increasing, whereas
applications within construction, mineral commodity trade and energy generation are decreasing (Ta-
ble 5.1). Pellets were initially used widely in the construction industry substituting sand products. Ac-
cording to Olaf van der Kolk, CEO in Reststoffenunie, the changes are due to a shift towards markets
where pellets have a higher sales value (van der Kolk, 2016). This is caused by an increase in pellet qual-
ity, which will be described in the following, but also pellets being branded as a “green”, environmentally
friendly source of CaCO3. Thus, the markets in which pellets are sold are characterized as niches where
pellets are considered more valuable than conventional limestone products (van der Kolk, 2016). A re-
cent development in the Netherlands is a collaboration with the carpet tile producer Desso that uses
CaCO3 in the backing material in their carpets. Desso is Cradle to Cradle® certiﬁed and demanded an
environmentally friendly substitution for quarry limestone. Desso is expected to use as much as 20,000
t pellets annually (Desso, 2014).
According to van der Kolk (2016) there are several methods to increase the market value of pellets.
One approach is to increase the pellet quality by changing the seeding material from garnet sand or
quartz sand to calcite and by softening water after ﬁltration. RU plans to construct of a central facility
for drying, crushing and sieving pellets in order to supply crushed pellets as seeding material for all
utilities and achieve the pellet diameters demanded by the customers. As a part of marketing pellets,
RU achieved a REACH certiﬁcation in 2011, which further increased the pellet sales value.
Another key aspect of successful pellet reuse is to ensure that pellets are available when demanded
by the customers (van der Kolk, 2016). This can be ensured by planning for ﬂexible pellet storage. For
instance pellet silos should be designed for easy access by the trucks collecting the pellets and have
extra capacity. Figure 5.2 shows an example of a pellet silo at Weesperkarspel WTP where a truck can
drive underneath the silo. There is a balance underneath the truck which weighs the pellets in order
43
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5. Pellet Applications
to control the amount delivered to the customer. RU also aims to minimize transportation distances
to both minimize the use of fossil fuels and to reduce operating costs. For this reason a specialized
truck has been designed which uses surplus heat to dry pellet during transportation (Figure 5.2). This
eliminates transport to and from a facility for drying pellets.
Figure 5.2: Left: Pellet silo at Weesperkarspel water treatment plant. Right: Truck that dries pellets during
transportation (van der Kolk, 2016).
Based on their size, the shareholders (the utilities) contribute with total of about e 800,000 to RU each
year. Of this amount, 25 % is dedicated to research whereas the remaining is utilized for daily opera-
tions. The proﬁts are on the other hand distributed according to the value of each utiliy’s by-products
creating an incentive to continuously increase the value of by-products (van der Kolk, 2016). In 2014,
RU had a proﬁt of e 1.5 million and returned about e 1 million to the utilities (Reststoffenunie, 2014).
Thus, the utilities currently earn a proﬁt from their by-products including pellets.
The case from the Netherlands is an example of how pellet management can be solved by collaboration
between the utility companies. It has taken twenty years to develop the current concept, but RU has
transitioned from a “buyer of waste products” to a “seller of by-products” (van der Kolk, 2016). Today,
RU handles nearly 67,000 t pellets annually which far exceeds the 580 t expected from Brøndbyvester
waterworks. Thus, it is highly unlikely that a similar concept will arise in Denmark within the next few
years. Nevertheless, the experience from RU shows that pellet reuse is not only dependent on the pellet
quality, but also on ensuring supply security for the customers by having a high degree of ﬂexibility.
Pellet reuse can be facilitated by integrating pellet quality and storage into the design of the softening
process from an early stage. Furthermore, as pellet softening is implemented at more of HOFOR’s wa-
terworks, and potentially by other utilities as well, the case of RU shows how collaboration allows for
sharing both costs and beneﬁts of pellet management while maximizing supply reliability.
5.2
Applications in Denmark
Multiple industries use conventional limestone products from quarries. In some applications, lime-
stone is used directly whereas in others it is an ingredient for another product. Limestone is further-
more used in a number of water and ﬂue gas treatment processes. Tang (2016) presented a number of
these including the quality criteria that limestone/pellets must meet. The most important conclusions
are summarized in the following together with new ﬁndings from literature, the meeting with Faxe Kalk
and the ﬁndings in Section 5.1.
5.2.1
Direct Applications
As mentioned earlier, the only application mentioned in a Danish context as of yet, is the use as soil im-
provement in agriculture (Godskesen et al., 2012; HOFOR, 2014; Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). The Danish
AgriFish Agency has deﬁned future guideline concentrations for pellets used in agriculture (Table 5.2)
(Lyster Larsen et al., 2016). In addition to meeting the guideline concentrations, the pellets must have a
sufﬁciently high reactivity. This is to ensure a fast acting effect once the limestone has been distributed
on the ﬁeld (DLG, 2010).
44
==PAGE:52==
5.2. Applications in Denmark
Table 5.2: Guideline concentrations of heavy metals in CaCO3 pellets for use on agricultural soil
(Lyster Larsen et al., 2016)
Heavy Metal
Guideline
[mg/kg dry matter]
Cd
3
Cr(VI)
2
Hg
2
Ni
120
Pb
150
As
60
Commercial limestone products typically have a reactivity, measured with the Sauerbeck & Rietz method,
higher than 70 % (Andersen and Braae, 2016). An exception to this is dolomite limestone which has a
reactivity of 20 - 30 % and a high magnesium content of 6 - 10 % (DLG, 2010; Danish Agro, 2016b). Ac-
cording to Van der Bruggen et al. (2009) pellets are used in agriculture in Belgium, but are disposed at
a cost of 7 e/t indicating that it is not an attractive application. This is conﬁrmed by experience from
the Netherlands that has shown that the reactivity of pellets is too low for use on agricultural soil (van
Dijk and Ros, 2011). Pellets are instead sold as environmentally friendly soil improvement for house-
hold gardens (Figure 5.3). Compared to other commercial products it is a beneﬁt that the pellets cause
no dust which compensates for the lower reactivity. Furthermore, it is, unlike most other applications,
desired in this application that pellets are not too bright (van der Kolk, 2016)
Figure 5.3: Garden product consisting of pellets from central drinking water softening (Ecostyle, 2016)
Another application discussed in Tang (2016) is pellet use as a supplement to chicken feed. Chicken
constantly require CaCO3 for egg production, however, they only eat and consume CaCO3 in a limited
time period each day, so it is necessary that the CaCO3 dissolves slowly. Limestone products for this use
typically have a diameter between 2 and 4 mm to ensure a sufﬁciently low dissolution rate (Andersen,
2016). The annual consumption of limestone for chicken feed in Denmark is 7-8,000 t (Andersen and
Braae, 2016). However, it is not known if the dissolution of pellets matches the required dissolution
rates in order for this application to be relevant.
In Sweden, pellets from central drinking water softening are used for pH adjustment in lakes (Sydvat-
ten, 2016). In Denmark, most lakes are rich in CaCO3 (Naturstyrelsen, 2016) and hence the pellet reuse
potential is expected to be limited within this application.
5.2.2
Ingredient in Other Products
CaCo3 is used as a ﬁll material in for instance paints and coatings, paper, plastic, rubber, ﬂame re-
tarders and pesticides. CaCO3 reduces the production costs and can improve the performance of some
products (Oates, 1998). Moreover, CaCO3 is widely used in the construction industry, which is also
45
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5. Pellet Applications
substituted by pellets in the Netherlands (Table 5.1). As mentioned earlier, Aalborg Portland annually
consumes about 3 million t for the production of Portland cement, but it is not known which criteria
CaCO3 must meet for this application. Another use of pellets in the construction industry is as re-
placement of sand due to its particle size. When used in concrete tiles, pellets have an advantage over
conventional limestone products as they, due to their round shape, ﬁll up the casting mold faster than
crushed limestone (van der Kolk, 2016).
CaCO3 is also used in the production of soda-lime glass. Pellets are increasingly used in glass pro-
duction in the Netherlands with an increase from 144 t in 2012 to 6,571 t in 2014 (Table 5.1). The glass
industry has a demand for high purity ingredients. For instance the iron concentration is of high im-
portance and must not exceed 0.05-0.06 % measured as Fe2O3 (Andersen, 2016). In addition, the quartz
content should not constitute more than 2 % (Andersen and Braae, 2016). Not too many particles must
exceed 1-2 mm as they melt slowly, whereas too many ﬁne particles (< 75 µm) result in foam formation
which reduces heat transfer during melting (Oates, 1998). Thus, commercial limestone products for the
glass industry range from 0.1 to 2 mm in diameter where 90 % are less than 1 mm (Andersen, 2016).
5.2.3
Water and Flue Gas Treatment
Another potential application of pellets is to use them as seeding material in the softening process
as they increasingly are in the Netherlands (Figure 5.4). This requires drying, crushing and sieving to
remove ﬁne particles (Baars, 2016). At Weesperkarspel WTP about 10 % of the pellet production is
transported to another company where they are dried, crushed and sieved, returned to Weesperkarspel
and used as seeding material (Baars, 2016).
Figure 5.4: Tendency of using CaCO3 as seeding material in the Netherlands (Reststoffenunie, 2014)
Another application of CaCO3 is for removal of sulphur dioxide, SO2, in ﬂue gas (desulphurization). In
this process, CaCO3 and SO2 are converted to gypsum (CaCO4·2H2O) and CO2 gas (Kiil et al., 1999). It is
not known what the minimum reactivity required in desulphurization is, but a high rate of dissolution
is important for an efﬁcient SO2 removal. This is ensured by using particles with a size less than 100 µm
(Kiil et al., 1999). Because the produced gypsum can be reused in the production of wall board, there
are strict criteria for the CaCO3 purity in order to avoid contamination and coloring. The MgCO3 con-
centration should not exceed 2 % and ﬂuoride, aluminium and iron should be kept as low as possible
(Oates, 1998).
In the applications mentioned so far pellets substitute either quarry limestone or sand. However, there
are potentially applications where pellets can substitute other resources or chemicals. Limestone can
act as a cheaper alternative to sodium hydroxide (NaOH) for neutralization of acid wastewater at low
pH (∼2) (Andersen, 2016). It is not known if pellets are suitable for this application due to their low
46
==PAGE:54==
5.3. Potential Reuse Applications of Pellets
reactivity, however, using the alkaline properties of pellets can provide alternative applications where
pellets substitute high value chemicals.
5.2.4
Summary
The previous sections have shown that there are multiple applications where pellets potentially can
substitute quarry limestone, sand or even sodium hydroxide. These applications can roughly be di-
vided into direct applications, applications where the pellets act as an ingredient in another product
and applications within water and ﬂue gas treatment. Based on the quality criteria it is not possible
to make an unambiguous deﬁnition of the “optimum” pellet. For instance it is an advantage that pel-
lets are brown/red when used in household gardens whereas a white color is required in for instance
desulphurization and production of clear glass. Nevertheless, there is a tendency that pellets with a
high CaCO3 purity will have more potential applications since many criteria are set based on the iron,
manganese and heavy metal concentrations. Five reuse applications have been selected for a further
assessment in the following:
1. Soil improvement for agriculture
2. Soil improvement for gardening
3. Ingredient in glass production
4. Flue gas desulphurization
5. Seeding material in the softening process
The applications have been chosen as they represent different industries and quality criteria (Table
5.4). Furthermore, they are all relevant in a Danish context. The criteria presented in Table 5.4 may
vary from the actual criteria as these can vary from business to business. However, they provide an
indication making an assessment of potential reuse applications possible.
5.3
Potential Reuse Applications of Pellets
The criteria in Table 5.4 and the expected pellet characteristics in Chapter 4 were compared in order to
make an assessment of which reuse applications are technically feasible (Table 5.3). The reactivity was
found directly in Table 4.7. Since the Sauerbeck & Rietz method is the most applied in agriculture in
Denmark (Knudsen, 2016; Andersen and Braae, 2016), RSR is reported in Table 5.3. The concentration
of iron and magnesium in Table 4.4 were converted to % Fe2O3 and MgCO3 since the criteria are deﬁned
in these units. It is not known if iron and magnesium are in the form of Fe2O3 and MgCO3 in pellets as
the ICP analyses measure single elements only. However, the conversion allows for comparison of the
concentrations. Since all pellets meet the guideline concentrations for soil improvement, heavy metals
concentrations are not reported in Table 5.3. The pellet particle size was compared with the required
particles diameters based on the D50 values in Table 4.7. Due to the high degree of uniformity it is
assumed that this value is representative of the overall particle size of the pellet samples. In cases where
D50 exceeds the required particle size, the application is still considered plausible since D50 can be
reduced by crushing the pellets. The pellet colors were roughly divided into white, red and white/green
based on the pictures in Table 4.1.
It is assumed that the pellets must meet all the criteria in order for an application to be technically
feasible. The results show that this is only the case for speciﬁc pellets in the applications in garden-
ing, seeding material and potentially in the glass industry (Table 5.4). These ﬁndings will be further
elaborated in the following.
47
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5. Pellet Applications
Table 5.3: Summary of pellet characteristics relevant to the assessment of potential reuse applications. -
indicates no data available (not measured). dm: dry matter.
Fe2O3
MgCO3
Sand Cont.
Color
D50
RSR
[% dm]
[% dm]
[% dm]
[-]
[mm]
[%]
Marbjerg 11
1.6
1.4
1.9
Red
-
16.6
Brokilde 23
0.6
1.1
11.4
Red
-
11.2
Brøndbyvester 10
0.9
1.4
3.1
White
1.60
10.7
Regnemark 6
0.01
1.3
1.9
Red
1.32
15.8
Søndersø 18
2.7
0.9
4.8
Red
1.10
11.3
Dalum
0.6
1.3
-
Red
1.15
7.39
Daluma
0.006
1.2
-
White
0.98
10.6
Lindved
0.5
1.1
-
Red
-
11.9
Lejre 10
1.2
1.5
1.6
Red
1.18
15.1
Frederiksberg 13
2.5
1.3
-
White/green
1.70
17.7
Frederiksberg 4
2.2
1.4
-
White/green
1.18
25.7
a After ﬁltration
Table 5.4: Required pellet characteristics in selected applications and indication of which pellet samples
meet the requirements.  indicates criteria met.  indicates criteria not met. ? indicates no data available
(not analyzed).
Agriculture
Gardening
Glass Industry
Desulphurization
Softening
Reactivity (> 70 %)
Heavy metals (Table 5.2)
Color (red/brown)
Heavy metals (Table 5.2)
Fe2O3 (< 0.06 %)
Quartz (< 2 %)
Color (white)
Particle size (0.1-2 mm)
Reactivity (high)
MgCO3 (< 2 %)
F, Fe and Al (minimum)
Color (white)
Particle size (< 100 µm)
Limestone core (yes)
Marbjerg 11














Brokilde 23














Brøndbyv. 10














Regnemark 6














Søndersø 18














Dalum





?








Daluma





?








Lindved





?








Lejre 10














Frederiksberg 13





?








Frederiksberg 4





?








a After ﬁltration
48
==PAGE:56==
5.3. Potential Reuse Applications of Pellets
5.3.1
Soil Improvement for Agriculture and Gardens
The use as soil improvement in agriculture is the only application mentioned in Denmark as of yet.
However, all pellets fail to meet the required reactivity of > 70 %. The magnesium concentration of
the pellets range from 0.3 to 0.4 mg/kg dry matter (Table 4.4). Thus, the low reactivity cannot be com-
pensated by a high magnesium concentration as in the case of dolomite limestone. The reactivity can
potentially be increased by crushing the pellets. Since quarry limestone is also crushed it is unlikely that
this is an economically attractive solution (Andersen and Braae, 2016). On the other hand, the pellets
can potentially be used as soil improvement in gardens maybe except for the white pellets “Regnemark
6” (after ﬁltration), Dalum after ﬁltration and the pellets from Frederiksberg since they are too bright.
It is not straightforward why a low reactivity can be accepted when used in household gardens and
not in agriculture. The purpose of limestone in both cases is to increase the soil pH. Guidelines for lim-
ing ﬁelds often emphasize that a effect within a short time period is desired and it is recommended that
liming is performed every three to four years (DLG, 2010; Danish Agro, 2016b). By using a liming mate-
rial that dissolve more slowly the soil pH is potentially kept more constant keeping the required soil pH
for longer time periods. A drawback might be that it is more difﬁcult to control when the desired effect
is reached which is usually planned accordingly to the crops life cycle. Conventional limestone for agri-
culture causes dust and pellets are potentially easier to distribute on a ﬁeld. Thus, some of the beneﬁts
from using pellets over quarry limestone in gardens might also be valid for applications in agriculture.
5.3.2
Glass Industry
Only the pellets produced after ﬁltration (“Regnemark 6” and “Dalum”), meet the criteria of < 0.06 %
Fe2O3 for use in the glass industry (Table 5.3). “Regnemark 6” meets the criteria of < 2 % quartz, whereas
the sand content in the Dalum pellets is unknown. The red color of the Regnemark pellets is potentially
a barrier, especially if producing clear glass. The pellets do not meet the requirement of 90 % being
smaller than 1 mm. This can be solved by crushing the pellets or by mixing the pellets into a mixture of
ﬁner particles in order to achieve the demanded particle size distribution.
5.3.3
Desulphurization
All pellets meet the requirement of < 2 % Mg as MgCO3 for desulphurization. However, the iron con-
centration and consequent red color is most likely too high in all pellets except the Dalum pellets after
ﬁltration. It is not known if the quartz core is limiting for this application and hence it is not known if the
Dalum pellets are suitable. Moreover, the low reactivity is also a barrier for use in desulphurization as
the particle size already is very small (< 100 µm). There are guideline concentrations for SO2 emissions
of 50 mg/m3 or lower from waste incineration plants and power plants (Miljøministeriet, 2012b, 2013).
Due to these guidelines and the subsequent penalty for failing to meet them, it is unlikely that indus-
tries are willing to substitute limestone with low reactivity pellets and risk not meeting the guideline
concentrations.
5.3.4
Seeding material
The “Frederiksberg 4” pellets are the only pellets with a limestone core and hence the only pellets suit-
able for reuse as seeding material in the softening process. Reusing them will require drying, crushing
and sieving either at the waterworks or at another business. It is important to be aware that if these
pellets are used as seeding material in a process placed after ﬁltration, crushed “Frederiksberg 4” pel-
lets can contaminate the pellets with iron and other impurities. In this case either pellets after ﬁltration
or quarry limestone should be used as seeding material to avoid contamination. Nevertheless, a single
batch of quarry limestone will be sufﬁcient to replace the quartz sand core and allow for pellets being
reused as seeding material. It is important to notice that the application as seeding material will never
be relevant to the total amount of pellets. Only about 10 % of the pellets from the Dutch Weesperkar-
49
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5. Pellet Applications
spel WTP are reused as seeding material (Baars, 2016). Thus, it is necessary to identify additional reuse
applications.
5.3.5
Other Applications
The results show that the pellets produced from Danish pilot scale experiments have limited reuse
applications among the ones included in Table 5.4. The use as soil improvement in gardens seems
promising, but it is not known if all the pellets can be used in this applications or if the market size
is too limited. The pellets produced after ﬁltration have more potential applications due to the lower
concentration of impurities. Despite the low iron concentration in the pellets from Regnemark, the red
color is potentially a barrier for applications in the glass industry and desulphurization. Some mar-
kets for pellets are difﬁcult to identify as they are niches with only a single or few production facilities
compared to for instance agriculture or the construction industry. The example of the Dutch carpet
producer Desso illustrates this. Reststoffenunie had been managing pellets for nearly 20 years before
the potential for collaboration was identiﬁed. The application in carpet production is a very different
industry compared to the other industries that RU had supplied with pellets so far. Thus, the applica-
tions mentioned in this thesis can serve as inspiration for industries using limestone, but should not be
considered an exhaustive list.
The use as ﬁll material in the construction industry was not included in the assessment. It is assumed
that all the pellets can replace sand in for instance concrete tiles as it has been the case in the Nether-
lands. Likewise if crushing the pellets they can act as a ﬁll material in construction work (Andersen
and Braae, 2016). Compared to the other applications, the sales value of pellets is low in applications
substituting sand (van der Kolk, 2016; Andersen and Braae, 2016). Thus, this is not considered the most
attractive from an economic point of view. This is further discussed in Section 6.2.
The applications where pellet can substitute limestone focuses solely on substitution of CaCO3. How-
ever, quick lime and slacked lime are commercial lime products that are produced from limestone
(CaCO3) and have other applications than CaCO3. Quick lime is produced from thermal dissociation of
limestone (Oates, 1998):
CaCO3
heat
−−−→CaO+CO2
(5.1)
Whereas slacked lime is produced from a reaction between water and quick lime:
CaO+H2O →Ca(OH)2
(5.2)
As mentioned in Section 2.5.1, Ca(OH)2 can act as a base in the softening process, so if pellets can be
modiﬁed to Ca(OH)2 they can be reused internally. However, the diameter of the pellets is too small
for the ovens for producing quick lime where diameters > 10 mm are required (Andersen and Braae,
2016). The oven and other equipment required for the production of quick lime are expected to be too
expensive to be placed at each waterworks. Transporting pellets to a quarry with the required facilities
is likely to be more expensive compared to using limestone from the quarry. Thus, it is assumed more
likely to ﬁnd viable applications within industries using CaCO3.
When identifying applications for pellets it is relevant to take into account the amount of pellets that a
given industry consumes. In the Netherlands, all the pellets are not used a single application. Thus, it
is not a requirement that an industry can use the total amount of pellets. If a business consumes only a
few ton of limestone annually, it is unlikely that the transportation is economically feasible unless the
business is located very close to the waterworks. On the other hand, the total amount of pellets might
be too small for a business such as Aalborg Portland as the environmental beneﬁts from using pellets,
that constitute only about 0.5 % of the total amount of limestone, are too limited compared to the trans-
portation costs from Zealand to Aalborg. The results from Danish pilot scale experiments indicate that
some pellets will have more potential applications than others. Which applications are the “optimum”
will depend on economic as well as environmental aspects which will be discussed in the following.
50
==PAGE:58==
6
|
Optimizing Pellet Reuse
The primary focus of this thesis has been to identify which applications are possible from a technical
perspective. The assessment of viable applications has been made based on the pellet characteristics
and the quality criteria set by the different industries. The results show that operating conditions such
as the placement of the reactor and choice of seeding material affects the pellet quality. This section
will provide suggestions on how the softening process can be optimized from a pellet point of view.
Moreover, economic and environmental aspects are decisive when choosing operating conditions and
reuse applications and will also be discussed. There are other aspects and barriers to address when
by-products from one industry acts as the raw material in another industry’s production, or enter an
industrial symbiosis. It is important to be aware of these barriers once applications have been identi-
ﬁed. Examples of such barriers will be presented in the ﬁnal part of this discussion which is concluded
by the perspectives of this thesis work.
6.1
Possibilities for Optimizing the Pellet Quality
The conditions in the pilot-scale experiments were based on HOFOR’s plans of full scale softening (HO-
FOR, 2014). Nevertheless, the theory in Section 2.5 and the results in Chapter 4 illustrate that operating
conditions affect pellet characteristics. Hence it is possible to optimize the softening process not only
from a water quality perspective, but from a pellet reuse point of view as well. The reactor type and
choice of chemical have not been varied in the pilot scale experiments. The effect on pellet quality by
varying these was described in Section 2.5 and will not be addressed further. The following will discuss
the effect of changing the seeding material and placement of the reactor in the process scheme mainly
from a pellet characteristics point of view. However, varying these conditions also affect the overall pro-
cess which will also be discussed as this should also be taken into account when designing the softening
process.
6.1.1
Softening Process Placement
Comparing the pellets from Dalum before aeration and after ﬁltration, the iron and manganese con-
centrations in the pellets are reduced by 99 % by changing the placement of the reactor in the treatment
scheme. Likewise, the “Regnemark 6” pellets and Dutch pellets from Weesperkarspel and Hoogeveen
have lower iron and manganese concentrations compared to pellets from before aeration. This corre-
lates well with experience found in literature (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991; van Dijk, 2007). Thus, placing
the softening process after ﬁltration produces pellets with a higher purity because iron and manganese
precipitate with CaCO3. Other metals are not precipitated in pellets to the same extent as iron and
manganese (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016).
From a pellet reuse point of view, the optimum placement of the softening process seems to be after
ﬁltration. However, the placement of the reactor affects the overall treatment process and determining
the optimum placement is not straightforward. In the Netherlands all three potential placements are
used (KWR, 2003). Placing the softening process as the ﬁrst treatment step before aeration removes the
majority of iron and manganese with the pellets (van Dijk and Wilms, 1991). This reduces the load on
the following sand ﬁlters. On the other hand, the required base dosage in the pellet reactor is higher due
51
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6. Optimizing Pellet Reuse
to CO2 that must be neutralized before the softening process is initiated. Placing the pellet reactor after
aeration reduces the required chemical dosage (van Dijk, 2007). How much the concentration of base
can be reduced depends on the CO2 concentration of the inﬂuent water. Preliminary calculations to the
pilot scale experiments at Frederikberg WTP showed that the optimum NaOH dosage could be reduced
from 197 mg/L to 140 mg/L, a reduction of 29 %, by softening after aeration instead of before. Based on
the pellets from Seppe where softening is done after aeration, the oxidized iron and manganese appear
to make the pellet color darker after aeration than pellets before aeration. This should be taken into ac-
count if choosing this process scheme. Placing softening after ﬁltration requires an additional ﬁltration
step which increases investment costs. On the other hand, the softening process will not interfere with
the other treatment processes.
Iron sludge removed from sand ﬁlters during backwashing can be reused in different applications if
heavy metals, and especially arsenic, guideline concentrations are met. The applications include re-
duction of hydrogen sulphide in wastewater pipelines and biogas reactors as well as phosphorus pre-
cipitation during wastewater treatment (Niras, 2014b). By removing iron with CaCO3 before aeration
or ﬁltration, the amount of iron sludge is reduced. In cases where iron sludge fails to meet the guide-
line concentrations of arsenic, it has to be landﬁlled. In such cases reducing the amount of iron sludge
might be interesting from both an economic and environmental point of view. However, in cases where
the iron sludge can be reused, placing the softening process after ﬁltration allows for the reuse of two
by-products with an optimum purity.
In practice, conditions such as the available area for softening and/or additional ﬁltration inside the
waterworks buildings can also be determining for where the softening process is placed in order to
minimize investment costs. The placement of the softening process is a part of the initial planning of
the process and is difﬁcult to change at a later stage of operation.
6.1.2
Oxygen Concentration
The pellets from anaerobic water are generally more white than pellets from aerobic water (Section
4.2.4). The results indicate that there is a correlation between the oxygen concentration, iron concen-
tration and pellet color. Thus, if a red color should be avoided, keeping conditions inside the reactor
anaerobic can prevent iron from being oxidized. This can for instance be achieved by closing the pellet
reactor to avoid oxygen entering the reactor from the top. The red color can still be a challenge even
though softening is placed after ﬁltration. It is not possible to keep conditions anaerobic at this stage in
the treatment scheme since the water has been aerated. Thus, either the iron concentration should be
reduced sufﬁciently during the other treatment steps in order to avoid the red color or applications in-
different to the pellet color should be chosen. On the other hand, if a white color should be avoided (for
instance for use in gardens), increasing the oxygen concentration can make the pellets more red. How-
ever, fouling caused by iron oxides and lime scaling inside the pellet reactor and pipes is problematic
and hence this is most likely not a technically feasible solution.
6.1.3
Seeding Material
Unlike the placement of the pellet reactor, the seeding material can be changed in an already exist-
ing reactor. Changing the seeding material from sand to crushed pellets will require replacement of
the equipment for seeding material management if pellet crushing is performed at the waterworks.
Seeding material from an external supplier requires disinfection and washing to remove ﬁne particles
(“ﬁnes”) (van Dijk, 2007). Crushed pellets require equipment for crushing and sieving at the waterworks
(or transportation to another business). However, since the pellets originate from the softening process,
the risk of external contamination is eliminated and there will most likely not be a need to disinfect the
seeding material.
Replacing the quartz sand grain with either quarry limestone or crushed pellets increases the purity
52
==PAGE:60==
6.2. Economy and Environment
of the pellet. A calcite core is furthermore an advantage if the pellets are crushed since limestone is less
abrasive to the crushing equipment (van der Kolk, 2016). The seeding material has limited effect on the
softening process compared to for instance changing the placement of the reactor. Nevertheless, the
results show that quarry limestone has a larger speciﬁc surface area than quartz sand and is hence ex-
pected to be a more efﬁcient seeding material. Due to these advantages, there is an increasing tendency
of using calcite as seeding material in the Netherlands (Figure 5.4). The costs of limestone and quartz
sand have not been compared, but it is a potential barrier for replacing the seeding material if the costs
of limestone exceeds the costs of quartz sand. Nevertheless, using limestone as seeding material is a
trend that is relatively easy to implement in a Danish context.
The seeding materials considered in Denmark and the Netherlands so far have been different types
of sand or calcite (Lyster Larsen et al., 2016; KWR, 2003). It is interesting to consider other types of
seeding material that potentially can change the pellet mineralogy and physical/chemical properties.
Precipitated Calcium Carbonate (PCC) is produced from a suspension of Ca(OH)2 which is treated with
CO2 or solution of CaCl2 treated with NaOH and Na2CO3. The aim is to form the metastable aragonite
polymorph which is favorable to use in paper coating, plastic and rubber as it increases the brightness
(Park et al., 2008). The formation of a speciﬁc polymorph can be facilitated by seeding the solution with
the desired polymorph (Mullin, 2001). Thus, when producing PCC, seeding the solution with aragonite
can promote the crystallization of aragonite over calcite (Park et al., 2007). In addition to seeding with
the desired polymorph, different organic additives can promote one polymorph over another (Mullin,
2001). As of yet, no attempts of designing the pellet mineralogy has been reported. The addition of
organic substances is not desired from a drinking water perspective but is it not known if seeding the
solution with aragonite is sufﬁcient. It is interesting from an economic and by-product reuse point of
view if softening reactors can act as reactors for the production of a high value aragonite product while
softening drinking water.
6.2
Economy and Environment
Choosing one application over another will have different economic and environmental effects. It has
not been the scope of this thesis to quantify these effects. The following will discuss aspects that should
be further investigated when identifying reuse applications.
6.2.1
Economic Effects of Pellet Reuse
In order to achieve a positive business case for pellet reuse, the revenue from pellet sales must exceed
the costs associated with pellet management. The costs associated with pellet reuse are for instance
(van der Kolk, 2016):
• Transportation costs
• Pellet analyses
• Pellet drying, crushing and sieving
• Administration and sales management
The costs can for instance be minimized by identifying industries placed physically close to the water-
works and by ﬁnding applications that require no drying and crushing.
Even though commercial limestone products are mined from the same quarries, the market price varies
greatly depending on the application. A brief review of market prices of different limestone products
was conducted in order to compare the prices in different applications. Limestone for use on agri-
cultural soil is sold at 300 DKK/t, whereas the price of gravel is about 100 DKK/t (Table 6.1). In both
applications relatively large amounts (t) are sold. In comparison, limestone for use in gardens costs
53
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6. Optimizing Pellet Reuse
1,600-2,500 DKK/t and mussel shells for chicken retails at 4,300 DKK/t (Table 6.1). Both products are
sold in smaller bags (15-25 kg) at a higher market price. Prices of 10,000 DKK/t have been observed
for sodium hydroxide. However, as mentioned earlier the low reactivity will most likely not allow for a
full substitution of sodium hydroxide. It was not possible to ﬁnd the prices on limestone sold for glass
production and other production industries.
Table 6.1: Price examples of limestone products and sodium hydroxide.
Product
Price
Reference
[DKK/t]
Gravel
100
(Mogenstrup Grusgrav, 2016)
Agriculture limestone
300
(Agro 365, 2016)
Gardening limestone
1,600
(XL Byg, 2016)
2,500
(Danish Agro, 2016a)
Chicken shells
4,300
(Søndervang, 2016)
Sodium hydroxide
10,000
(Danish Agro, 2016c)
It is likely that there are industries using limestone in Denmark, that are willing to pay an additional
amount for pellets because pellets have characteristics different from quarry limestone that can be
favorable including:
• Pellets cause no dust
• Pellets do not break during transportation (van der Kolk, 2016)
• Compared to crushed limestone, pellets are very uniform in size (UC close to 1) (Table 4.7)
• Pellets are considered a “green” source of limestone because they are a by-product rather than a
non-renewable resource mined from quarries (van der Kolk, 2016)
The price examples illustrate the importance of taking the sales value of pellets into account when
evaluating the feasibility of different applications and designing the softening process. For instance, it
might be more expensive to use limestone as seeding material compared to sand, however, if the sales
price of pellets is increased as a consequence, changing the seeding material might be economically
feasible. Assuming that HOFOR can earn a proﬁt of 10 % of the market value of the different products
and has an annual production of 14,000 t, the annual revenue can vary from DKK 140,000 when used
in construction to DKK 3.5 million when used as soil improvement in gardens. If landﬁlling pellets at
a cost of DKK 900/t as estimated by COWI (2011) the disposal costs will amount to DKK 12.6 million
annually. Thus, even though the sales revenue is uncertain, any reuse of pellets will most likely be
economically feasible due to the high costs of landﬁlling. The higher sales value of some products can
further outweigh investment costs from optimizing the softening process with respect to pellet reuse.
6.2.2
Environmental Effects of Pellet Reuse
The Danish waste management legislation is based on a “waste hierarchy” where landﬁlling is the least
desired (Miljøministeriet, 2012a). Thus, any reuse application will be more desired than landﬁlling
from an environmental point of view (Figure 6.1). However, the environmental effects depend on how
the pellets are managed and which resource they substitute. Furthermore, the environmental effects
depend on transportation distances and if the pellets are dried, crushed and sieved which consumes
energy. Thus, as with costs, the environmental impact can be reduced by identifying industries placed
geographically close to the waterworks and by avoiding further processing if not required.
54
==PAGE:62==
6.3. Establishing an Industrial Symbiosis
Figure 6.1: The “waste hierarchy”. Adapted from Det Europæiske Miljøagentur (2016)
Dutch Reststoffenunie has compared the greenhouse gas emissions in CO2 equivalents for the pro-
duction of pellets compared to the production of commercial limestone products from quarries and
seashells. It is concluded that pellets have a negative emission meaning that CO2 equivalents are re-
moved. This is due to the environmental beneﬁts from the softening process (van der Kolk, 2016).
There are other environmental effects to consider in addition to climate impacts. Limestone is one
of the minerals extracted in the largest amounts from the Earth’s crust. More limestone is extracted for
cement production and other purposes than for instance iron ore (Neri and Sanchez, 2010). Limestone
is not considered a scarce resource, however, limestone quarries cause quite dramatic changes to the
landscape which remain for a long time period after ended activities (Gunn and Bailey, 1993; Neri and
Sanchez, 2010). If pellets are used as a substitute for sodium hydroxide in the neutralization of acid
wastewater, the environmental effects will be different. Sodium hydroxide is produced by electrolysis
of sodium chloride salt (NaCl) which is both resource and energy intensive with resulting environmen-
tal and climate impacts (Hong et al., 2014). Thus, the environmental beneﬁts from replacing sodium
hydroxide are expected to be greater than substituting quarry limestone, but again transportation dis-
tances etc. should be taken into account. Reusing pellets on a construction site adjacent to the water-
works might be more environmentally feasible than substituting sodium hydroxide if that is associated
with pellet processing and many kilometres of transportation. Which applications are the most envi-
ronmentally feasible can be estimated from a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) or similar analysis (Graedel
and Allenby, 2010).
The above discussion illustrates how including economic and environmental aspects can facilitate the
identiﬁcation of the “optimum” reuse application. The transportation distances and if the pellets are
dried and crushed, will affect the overall environmental effects and costs of pellet reuse. Knowing which
applications are the most feasible can provide knowledge on the demanded pellet quality and hence if
measures to improve the pellet quality should be taken.
6.3
Establishing an Industrial Symbiosis
In an industrial symbiosis the unwanted by-products of one industry become the new materials for an-
other (Graedel and Allenby, 2010). Reusing pellets is classiﬁed as an “end of the pipe” type symbiosis
where the aim is transform a waste stream into a by-product (Chertow, 2007). It is expected that some of
the barriers experienced when establishing industrial symbiosis are relevant in the case of pellet reuse
and should be taken into account. Establishing an industrial symbiosis requires a high degree synergy
between the by-product and the raw material that it substitutes (Graedel and Allenby, 2010). This has
been the main objective in this thesis and hence the following will address additional barriers in a sym-
biosis collaboration between two industries.
55
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6. Optimizing Pellet Reuse
Chertow (2007) has performed a review of why industrial symbiosis projects fail and how these issues
can be addressed. Often formally planned symbiosis projects fail even though there are both environ-
mental and economic beneﬁts. On the other hand self-organized symbioses are more successful per-
haps due to a higher degree of ownership. Barriers for establishing industrial symbioses in Denmark
are for instance legal barriers as some by-products traditionally are classiﬁed as waste and applying for
the required permits can be time consuming (Niras, 2014a). Exchange of resource streams between two
industries is a type of collaboration that is unusual to many businesses. Another barrier is the depen-
dency created when one of the businesses is dependent on raw materials from the other. Once pellet
softening has been implemented it is expected that the supply of pellets will be constant which can
help ensuring supply security (Niras, 2014a).
Industrial symbiosis is an important part of achieving a more circular economy where resources en-
ter circular loops instead of linear “take-make-dispose” patterns (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2014).
Thinking pellet reuse into the design of the softening process can be an important step for the drinking
water industry to move towards a circular economy.
6.4
Perspectives
This thesis has been done in collaboration with HOFOR with the motivation of solving a challenge in
connection to the implementation of pellet softening in the Copenhagen area. Nevertheless, pellet
samples from waterworks operated by utilities VandCenter Syd and Frederiksberg Forsyning as well as
pellet samples from the Netherlands have been included in the analyses and the conclusions in this
thesis are applicable for other utilities implementing pellet softening.
Optimizing a process with respect to its by-products is an unusual approach. Typically, a drinking wa-
ter treatment process is optimized focusing on water quality which has been the primary focus in the
previous projects. However, identifying solutions for pellet reuse after the softening process has been
implemented limits the potentials for optimizing pellet quality and ensuring that pellet characteristics
meet the industry demands. Additional work is required in terms of quantifying the economic and en-
vironmental effects from different pellet reuse applications. Including these aspects into the design
of the softening process together with investment costs, operating costs, water quality, reuse of other
by-products such as iron sludge etc. will allow for pellet reuse to be integrated into the design of the
softening process from the very beginning.
56
==PAGE:64==
7
|
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to identify potential reuse applications for pellets from central drinking water soft-
ening and investigate how the softening process can be optimized with respect to pellet quality. The
results show that multiple industries use either sand or limestone in their productions where pellets
potentially can be reused. These include applications such as soil improvement in agriculture or gar-
dening, glass production and desulphurization of ﬂue gas. A fraction of the pellets can furthermore
be crushed and reused internally as seeding material in the softening process. Quality criteria for the
pellet chemical composition, particle size, reactivity and color have been identiﬁed. The pellet sales
value and the environmental effects from pellet reuse depends on the application as well as transporta-
tion distances and pellet processing. However, experience from the Netherlands show that pellets can
be a valuable by-product and not a simple waste stream for disposal. In the Netherlands, it has been
possible to achieve a positive business case for pellet reuse by ensuring supply security and that pellet
characteristics meet the industry demands.
Pellet characteristics were investigated from analyses of 16 pellets from Danish pilot scale experiments
and Dutch full scale reactors. The results show that the iron, manganese and magnesium concen-
trations correlate positively with the inﬂuent water concentration. The results furthermore show that
it is not only the iron concentration affecting pellet color, but also if iron has been oxidized to ferric
iron(Fe3+) resulting in a rust red color. The pellet mineralogy has been analyzed and it is concluded
that the pellets have crystallized as calcite. This corresponds well with the fact that no “ﬂuffy” pellets
consisting of the hexahydrated polymorph has been formed despite the inﬂuent iron concentration
exceeding 3 mg/L at Frederiksberg waterworks. The pellets furthermore crystallize with hardly any
porosity resulting in a low speciﬁc surface area of < DL - 0.0498 m2/g (0.1778 m2/g for pellets from
Lindved) and a reactivity measured by the Sauerbeck & Rietz method of 7.39 - 25.7 %. This is a barrier
if the pellets are to be used as soil improvement in agriculture, which has been the primary focus in
Danish literature as of yet.
There are several possibilities for optimizing the softening process with respect to pellet quality and
reuse. By placing the reactor as the last treatment step, the iron and manganese concentrations in the
pellets can be reduced by as much as 99 %. If also replacing the quartz sand seeding material with ei-
ther quarry limestone or crushed pellets, the pellets can achieve an even higher purity. This allows for
a broader range of applications and a higher pellet sales value. The quarry limestone used as seeding
material at Frederiksberg waterworks has a speciﬁc surface area about 2 times larger than the quartz
sand used in the other pilot scale experiments. This indicates that, in addition to achieving pellets of
a higher purity, limestone is a more efﬁcient seeding material which can increase the efﬂuent water
quality. In a future perspective the pellet reactor can potentially act as a reactor for both drinking water
softening and for the production of high grade limestone products. This thesis concludes that think-
ing pellet reuse into the softening process design can act as an important step towards a more circular
resource management within the drinking water sector.
57
==PAGE:65==
References
Aalborg Portland (2014).
Miljøredegørelse 2014 - grønt regnskab og arbejdsmiljø.
http://
www.aalborgportland.dk/default.aspx?m=2&i=83. Accessed January 30 2016.
Agro 365 (2016).
Alm. 80 % jordbrugskalk 32 ton.
http://agro365.dk/billig/kalk/alm-80-
jordbrugskalk-32-ton/. Accessed June 21 2016.
Ahlbeck, J., Engman, T., Fältén, S., and Vihma, M. (1995). Measuring the reactivity of limestone for wet
ﬂue-gas desulfurization. Chemical Engineering Science, 50(7):1081–1089.
Aktor (2006). Central blødgøring af vand i danmark? AKTOR Innovation.
Andersen, A. (2015). Corrosion in drinking water. Lecture note for 12121 Water Supply, the Technical
University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
Andersen, F. (2016). Personal correspondance january 14. Sales Director, Faxe Kalk A/S.
Andersen, F. and Braae, M. (2016). Personal correspondance february 5. Sales Director and Market
Manager, Faxe Kalk A/S.
Andreasen, P. and Stubsgaard, A. (2002).
Reduktion af miljøbelastningen fra tøjvask - effek-
ten af blødgøring af brugsvand inden vask.
http://www2.mst.dk/common/Udgivramme/
Frame.asp?http://www2.mst.dk/udgiv/publikationer/2002/87-7972-345-4/html/
default.htm. Miljøstyrelsen. Accessed June 10 2016.
Arvin, E. (2002). Note 6: Filtration of drinking water. Lecture note for 12121 Water Supply, the Technical
University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
Baars, E. (2016). Personal correspondance march 30, 2016. Engineer, Waternet.
Bargir, S., Dunn, S., Jefferson, B., Macadam, J., and Parsons, S. (2009). The use of contact angle measure-
ments to estimate the adhesion propensity of calcium carbonate to solid substrates in water. Applied
Surface Science, 255(9):4873–4879.
BBC (2014).
Hardness of water.
http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/science/
triple_ocr_gateway/chemistry_out_there/hardness_of_water/revision/1/.
Accessed
June 28 2016.
Bækgaard, A. (1997). Introduction to water supply in denmark. Vandteknik, 6:270–272.
Boulos, R. A., Zhang, F., Tjandra, E. S., Martin, A. D., Spagnoli, D., and Raston, C. L. (2014). Spinning up
the polymorphs of calcium carbonate. Scientiﬁc Reports, 4:3616.
Cheng, L., Sturchio, N., and Bedzyk, M. (2001). Impurity structure in a molecular ionic crystal: Atomic-
scale x-ray study of CaCO3:Mn2+. Physical Review B, 63(14):1–5.
Chertow, M. R. (2007). “ Uncovering ” Industrial Symbiosis. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 11(1):11–30.
COWI (2011). Central blødgøring af drikkevand. Naturstyrelsen.
58
==PAGE:66==
References
COWI (2015a). Miljøvurdering af blødgøring af vand. Nordvand.
COWI (2015b). Samfundsøkonomisk screening af blødgøring af vand på nordvands anlæg. Nordvand.
Danish Agro (2016a). Havekalk 25 kg "perlekalk". http://danishagroshoppen.dk/hus-og-have/
hus-og-have. Accessed June 21 2016.
Danish Agro (2016b).
Kalk – jordbrugskalk,
magnesium kalk og dolomitkalk.
http://
ipaper.ipapercms.dk/DanishAgro/Planteavl/Kalk/. Accessed June 21 2016.
Danish
Agro
(2016c).
Kausisk
soda
25
kg.
https://kundeportal.danishagro.dk/
index.php?action=shop_show_item&varenr=v_10123. Accessed June 21 2016.
Danish Standard (1977). Water analysis – components of the carbonate system - (calculation method).
DS 256:1977.
Danish Standard (2013). Carbonate liming materials - determination of reactivity - automatic titration
method with citric acid. DS/EN 16257.
Danmarks Statistik (2014). Rst01: Råstoﬁndvinding (1000 m3) efter område og råstoftype. http://
www.statistikbanken.dk/rst01. Accessed June 2 2016.
Dansand (2016). Datablade industri og byggeri. http://www.dansand.dk/downloads/datablade/.
Accessed June 14 2016.
de Moel, P., Verberk, J., and van Dijk, J. (2006). Drinking Water - Principles and Practices. World Scientiﬁc
Publishing, Singapore, 1st edition.
de Moel, P. J., van der Helm, a. W. C., van Rijn, M., van Dijk, J. C., and van der Meer, W. G. J. (2013). Assess-
ment of calculation methods for calcium carbonate saturation in drinking water for DIN 38404-10
compliance. Drinking Water Engineering and Science, 6(2):115–124.
Delloite (2015a). Samfundsøkonomisk analyse af central blødgøring af vand på forsyning ballerups
værker – konsekvenser for husholdninger. Forsyning Ballerup.
Delloite (2015b). Samfundsøkonomisk analyse af central blødgøring af vand på forsyning ballerups
værker – screening af konsekvenser for virksomheder. Forsyning Ballerup.
Desso (2014). Cradle to cradle carpet company desso launches new circular economy material stream.
http://www.desso.ro/news-events/news-overview/2014/11/cradle-to-cradler-carpet-
company-desso-launches-new-circular-economy-material-stream-of-up-to-20000-
tonnes-of-chalk-from-local-water-companies/. Accessed January 28 2016.
Det Europæiske Miljøagentur (2016). Affald og materialeressourcer. http://www.eea.europa.eu/da/
themes/waste/intro. Accessed June 29 2016.
DLG (2010). Jordbrugskalk fra dankalk sikrer optimal plantevækst. https://www.dlg.dk/. Accessed
May 3 2016.
Ecostyle (2016). Az-kalk. http://www.ecostyle.nl/tuin/producten/az-kalk. Accessed June 2 2016.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2014).
Towards the circular economy vol 3 - accelerating the scale
up across global supply chains.
http://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/
towards-the-circular-economy-vol-3-accelerating-the-scale-up-across-global-
supply-chains. Accessed March 14 2016.
Fabricius, I. (2016). Personal correspondance may. Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, The
Technical University of Denmark.
Faxe Kalk (2015). Reaktivitet (sauerbeck & rietz). Unpublished lab method.
59
==PAGE:67==
References
GEUS (2010).
Water hardness.
http://data.geus.dk/geusmap/?mapname=drikkevand#zoom=
5.3478764411769575&lat=6225000&lon=664500&visiblelayers=Topographic&filter=
&layers=&mapname=drikkevand&filter=&epsg=25832&mode=map&map_imagetype=
png&wkt=. Accessed March 21 2016.
GEUS (2016). Jupiter: Adgang til alle data. http://www.geus.dk/DK/data-maps/jupiter/Sider/
data-dk.aspx. Accessed June 20 2016.
Godskesen, B., Hauschild, M., Rygaard, M., Zambrano, K., and Albrechtsen, H.-J. (2012). Life cycle
assessment of central softening of very hard drinking water. Journal of Environmental Management,
105:83–89.
Graedel, T. and Allenby, B. (2010). Industrial Ecology and Sustainable Engineering. Pearson Education,
New Jersey, 1st edition.
Gunn, J. and Bailey, D. (1993). Limestone quarrying and quarry reclamation in Britain. Environmental
Geology, 21(3):167–172.
Hammes, F., Boon, N., Vital, M., Ross, P., Magic-Knezev, A., and Dignum, M. (2011). Bacterial Coloniza-
tion of Pellet Softening Reactors Used during Drinking Water Treatment. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 77(3):1041–1048.
HOFOR (2014). Procesansøgning for blødgøring af drikkevand. Brøndby Kommune.
HOFOR (2016). Den videre proces. http://www.hofor.dk/vand/den-videre-proces/. Accessed
January 31 2016.
Hong, J., Chen, W., Wang, Y., Changqing, X., and Xu, X. (2014). Life Cycle Assessment of Green Buildings:
A Case Study in China. Journal of Cleaner Production, 66:113–120.
Invertebrate
Project
(2016).
Mollusa
(mollusk)
phylum.
https://
invertebrateproject.wordpress.com/mollusa-mollusk-phylum/. Accessed June 28 2016.
ISO (2014). Iso 2469:2014 paper, board and pulps - measurement of the diffuse radiance factor (diffuse
reﬂectance factor). https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:2469:ed-5:v1:en.
Accessed
January 27 2016.
Jensen, E. (1969). Vandets fysiske, kemiske og bakteriologiske forhold. In Vandforsyning, pages 119–152.
Teknisk Forlag, København, 1st edition.
Johnson, R. (2011). Probability and Statistics for Engineers. Miller & Freund’s, Boston, 8th edition.
Khursheed, A. (2011). Scanning electron microscope optics and spectrometers. University of Singapore,
Singapore, 1st edition.
Kiil, S., Johnsson, J. E., and Dam-Johansen, K. (1999). Modelling of limestone dissolution in wet FGD
systems: The importance of an accurate particle size distribution. PowerPlant Chemistry, 1(5):26–30.
KIWA (1996).
Proeﬁnstallatie-onderzoek naar ontharding met een korrelreactor op waterproduk-
tiebedrief katvijk. Technical Report.
Knudsen, L. (2016). Personal correspondance february 15. Senior Consultant, SEGES.
Kontogeorgis, G. and Kiil, S. (2015). Introduction to applied colloid and surface chemistry. Lecture note
for 28315 Applied Colloid and Surface Chemistry, DTU Chemistry, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
Koutsoukos, P. (2010). Calcium carbonate scale control in industrial water systems. In Amjad, Z., editor,
The Science and Technology of Industrial Water Treatment, chapter 3, pages 39–57. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, Florida, 1st edition.
60
==PAGE:68==
References
KWR (2003).
Overzicht van de korrelreactoren in nederland.
KIWA Water Research Project No.
30.4832.011.
Leschonski, K. (1979). Sieve analysis, the Cinderella of particle size analysis methods? Powder Technol-
ogy, 24(2):115–124.
Lin, Y. P. and Singer, P. C. (2005). Effects of seed material and solution composition on calcite precipita-
tion. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 69(18):4495–4504.
Lioliou, M. G., Paraskeva, C. A., Koutsoukos, P. G., and Payatakes, A. C. (2007). Heterogeneous nucle-
ation and growth of calcium carbonate on calcite and quartz. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
308(2):421–428.
Lopato, L. (2016). Personal correspondance. Water Quality Specialist, HOFOR.
Lyster Larsen, S., Hedegaard, M., Ryssel, S., Vang, O., Albrechtsen, H.-J., Lopato, L., Elkjær, J., Lind, S.,
Juul, H., Dollerup Nielsen, O., and Holst, H. (2016). Blødgøring af drikkevand - opsætning og analyse
af pilotanlæg til fjernelse af calciumcarbonat.
Mercer, K., Lin, Y., and Singer, P. (2005). Enhancing calcium carbonate precipitation by heterogeneous
nucleation during chemical softening. Journal AWWA, 97(12):116–125.
Merks, C. (2016). Personal correspondance march 29. Senior Consultant, Witteveen+Bos.
Merks, C. and Nederlof, M. (1995). Stand van zaken ontharden in korrelreactoren in nederland. KIWA.
Metcalf & Eddy (2003). Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and Resource Recovery. McGraw Hill Edu-
cation, Boston, 4th edition. Tchobanoglous, G. and Stensel, D. H. and Tsuchihashi, R. and Burton,
F.
Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet (2015). Bek nr. 1310 af 25/11/2015 bekendtgørelse om vandkvalitet og
tilsyn med vandforsyningsanlæg (drikkevandsbekendtgørelsen).
Miljøministeriet (2012a).
Bek nr. 1309 af 18/12/2012 bekendtgørelse om affald (affaldsbekendt-
gørelsen).
Miljøministeriet (2012b). Bek nr. 1451 af 20/12/2012 bekendtgørelse om anlæg, der forbrænder affald
(affaldsforbrændingsbekendtgørelsen).
Miljøministeriet (2013). Påbud om nye emissionsgrænseværdier til luft m.m. fra 1. januar 2016.
Mogenstrup Grusgrav (2016). Priser erhverv – varer med råstofafgift. http://grusgrav.net/priser/.
Accessed June 21 2016.
Mons, M., van Dijk, H., Gatel, D., Hofman, J., Nguyen, M.-L., and Slaats, N. (2007). Drinking water hard-
ness: reasons and criteria for softening and conditioning of drinking water. Global Water Research
Coalition.
Mullin, J. (2001). Crystallization. Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 4th edition.
Naturstyrelsen (2016).
Søer og vandløb.
http://naturstyrelsen.dk/vandmiljoe/soeer-og-
vandloeb/. Accessed June 6 2016.
Nazaroff, W. and Alvarez-Cohen, L. (2001). Environmental Engineering Science. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1st edition.
Neri, A. C. and Sanchez, L. E. (2010). A procedure to evaluate environmental rehabilitation in limestone
quarries. Journal of Environmental Management, 91(11):2225–2237.
61
==PAGE:69==
References
Nguyen, S. (2008). Surface area analyzer by nitrogen adsorption gemini iii 2375. Unpublished. Manual
for analysis, DTU Environment.
Nguyen, S. (2009a). Mineral identiﬁcation by x-ray powder diffraction. Unpublished. Manual for anal-
ysis, DTU Environment.
Nguyen, S. (2009b). Particle size analysis by sieving and sedigraph. Unpublished. Manual for analysis,
DTU Environment.
Niras (2014a).
Industriel symbiose – metodebeskrivelse.
http://docplayer.dk/8214686-
Industriel-symbiose-metode-beskrivelse.html.
Dansk SymbioseCenter. Accessed June 25
2016.
Niras (2014b).
Okkerslam – generisk case.
https://groenomstilling.erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/
sites/default/files/Okkerslam.pdf.
Erhvervsstyrelsen og Dansk SymbioseCenter. Accessed
June 25 2016.
Oates, J. (1998). Lime and Limestone: Chemistry and Technology, Production and Uses. Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim, 1st edition.
Park, W.-K., Ahn, J.-W., Ko, S.-J., and Han, C. (2007). Crystal growth of aragonite precipitated calcium
carbonate by seeded method. Materials Science Forum, 544-545:693–696.
Park, W. K., Ko, S. J., Lee, S. W., Cho, K. H., Ahn, J. W., and Han, C. (2008). Effects of magnesium chloride
and organic additives on the synthesis of aragonite precipitated calcium carbonate. Journal of Crystal
Growth, 310(10):2593–2601.
R Core Team (2013).
R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
https://www.r-
project.org/. Accessed April 24 2016.
Rankin, A. H. A. H. and Sutcliffe, P. J. C. J. C. (1999). Morphology, chemistry and growth mechanisms of
calcite concretions from an industrial water-softening process: implications for the origin of natural
ooids in. Proc. Geol. Assoc., 110(1):33–40.
Reststoffenunie (2014). Annual report 2014.
Sauerbeck, D. and Rietz, E. (1984). Ein Verfahren Zur Bestimmung der Reaktionsfähigkeit kohlensaurer
Düngekalke. Landwirtschaftliche Forschung, 41:682–690.
Schetters, M. J. a., van der Hoek, J. P., Kramer, O. J. I., Kors, L. J., Palmen, L. J., Hofs, B., and Koppers, H.
(2015). Circular economy in drinking water treatment: reuse of ground pellets as seeding material in
the pellet softening process. Water Science & Technology, 71(4):479–486.
Slack, J. G. (1980). Calcium carbonate hexahydrates: Its properties and formation in lime-soda soften-
ing. Water Research, 14:799–804.
Søndervang (2016). Foder & brændsel. http://www.soendervang.dk/side.asp?Id=140413. Accessed
June 21 2016.
Sydvatten (2016). Sydvatten – collaborating for public welfare.
Tang, C. (2016). Softening of drinking water with pellet reactor - literature review. Special course, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
Thomsen, K. (2016). Personal correspondance february 3. Associate Professor, Department of Chemical
and Biochemical Engineering, The Technical University of Denmark.
Van der Bruggen, B., Goossens, H., Everard, P. A., Stemgée, K., and Rogge, W. (2009). Cost-beneﬁt anal-
ysis of central softening for production of drinking water. Journal of Environmental Management,
91(2):541–549.
62
==PAGE:70==
References
van der Kolk, O. (2016). Personal correspondance march 29, 2016. Managing Director, Reststoffenunie.
van Dijk, J. (2007). Chapter 9: Softening. Lecture note for CT4471 Drinking Water Treatment1, TU Delft,
Delft, Netherlands.
van Dijk, J. and Wilms, D. (1991). Water treatment without waste material Fundementals and state of
the art of pellet softening. J Water SRT - Aqua, 5:263–280.
van Dijk, T. and Ros, G. (2011). Reactiviteit en beoordeling van kalkkorrels afkomstig van drinkwa-
terbedrijven. Wageningen,Nutriënten Management Instituut.
van Schagen, K., Rietveld, L., Babuška, R., and Baars, E. (2008). Control of the ﬂuidised bed in the pellet
softening process. Chemical Engineering Science, 63(5):1390–1400.
Van Schagen, K. M., Rietveld, L. C., and Babuška, R. (2008). Dynamic modelling for optimisation of
pellet softening. Journal of Water Supply: Research and Technology - AQUA, 57(1):45–56.
van Schagen, K. M., Rietveld, L. C., Babuska, R., and Kramer, O. J. I. (2008). Model-based operational
constraints for ﬂuidised bed crystallisation. Water Research, 42(1-2):327–337.
Visit Køge (2016). Turforslag – køge. http://www.visitkoege.dk/koege/turforslag-koege. Ac-
cessed June 28 2016.
Wagterveld, R. M., Yu, M., Miedema, H., and Witkamp, G. J. (2014). Polymorphic change from vaterite to
aragonite under inﬂuence of sulfate: The "morning star" habit. Journal of Crystal Growth, 387:29–35.
Waly, T., Kennedy, M. D., Witkamp, G. J., Amy, G., and Schippers, J. C. (2012). The role of inorganic ions
in the calcium carbonate scaling of seawater reverse osmosis systems. Desalination, 284:279–287.
Warren, B. (1990). X–Ray Diffraction. Dover Publications INC, Mineola, New York, 1st edition.
Weber (2016). Sand og grus. http://www.weber.dk/sand-og-grus/produkter/sand.html. Accessed
June 14 2016.
Winther, L., Linde, J., and Winther, H. (2010). Vandforsyningsteknik. Polyteknisk Forlag, Kongens Lyn-
gby, 5th edition.
XL Byg (2016).
Kalk – pindstrup perlekalk m/magnesium 20 kg.
http://www.xl-byg.dk/
produkter/haven/jord-goedning/kalk/pindstrup-pindstrup-perlekalk-mmagnesium-
20-kg-kalk.htm. Accessed June 21 2016.
Yin, L. and Guo, J. (2011). Study on wet FGD limestone quality. Proceedings - 3rd International Confer-
ence on Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation, ICMTMA 2011, 3:605–608.
63
==PAGE:71==
A
|
R Code
Correlation Analysis
The correlation analysis was performed by reading a text ﬁle with the water and pellet data into R. The
correlation between the variables was determined from the function “cor”.
library ( "car" )
Stat_ All <−read . table ( " Stat_ All . txt " , header = TRUE, sep="" )
names( Stat_ All )
pairs ( Stat_ All )
cor ( Stat_All ,method="pearson" )
Linear Regression Model
A linear regression model was made in order to compute the signiﬁcance of the slope. The linear model
was created using the function “lm”.
Reg_mn <−lm( Mn$P_Mn ~ Mn$W_Mn)
summary(Reg_mn)
64
==PAGE:72==
B
|
Raw Water Quality
Table B.1: Part 1: Water quality of inﬂuent to pellet reactor.
Na
Mg
Al
P
K
Ca
Cr
Mn
Fe
mg/L
mg/L
µg/L
µg/L
mg/L
mg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
Marbjerg
12
20
-
11
3.3
110
-
19
170
Brokilde
17
23
-
22
2.8
110
-
28
2000
Brøndbyvester
94
30
< QL
< QL
7.3
190
0
28
1195
Regnemark
75
25
< QL
< QL
4.7
128
0
0.17
2.0
Søndersø
34
16
0.55
32
3.5
126
< QL
71
2718
Dalum
40
14
< QL
28
4.1
125
< QL
246
563
Daluma
39
13
< QL
< QL
3.8
126
< QL
0.51
13
Lindved
36
14
< QL
< QL
5.2
104
< QL
140
6.6
Frederiksberg
50
27
-
-
-
166
-
-
3830
Frederiksbergb
36
23
-
-
-
138
-
-
3754
Frederiksbergc
60
31
-
-
-
172
-
-
3604
a After ﬁltration
b Excluding FF2
c Excluding FF1
Table B.2: Part 2: Water quality of inﬂuent to pellet reactor.
Co
Ni
Cu
Zn
As
Sr
Cd
Sn
Tl
Pb
Li
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
µg/L
Marbjerg
-
3.8
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Brokilde
0.38
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Brøndbyvester
5.6
38.3
1.2
25.9
1.8
2542
0.9
0.02
0.5
1.4
-
Regnemark
0.1
0.6
4.1
23.4
0.3
2912
0.04
< QL
0.1
0.3
-
Søndersø
< QL
1.3
0.2
6.9
0.3
1605
< QL
< QL
0.0
0.0
-
Dalum
0.2
1.1
2.1
13.2
1.2
702
0.01
0.3
< QL
0.5
13.0
Daluma
0.2
1.6
7.9
55.7
0.8
706
0.01
< QL
< QL
0.2
13.6
Lindved
0.1
1.6
5.6
27.1
3.6
1366
0.01
< QL
< QL
0.1
22.2
Frederiksberg
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Frederiksbergb
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Frederiksbergc
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
a After ﬁltration
b Excluding FF2
c Excluding FF1
65
==PAGE:73==
C
|
Water Quality - Dutch WTPs
Raw Water Quality
Table C.1: Raw water (groundwater or surface water) quality at the Dutch water treatment plants (KWR,
2003)
Seppe
Weesperkarspel
De Beitel
Hoogeveen
pH
[-]
7.3
7.5
7.15
6.89
Conductivity
[mS/m]
43.5
53
61.5
49.8
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
mg/L
28
-
35
77.2
Bicarbonat (HCO−
3 )
mg/L
325
284
310
324
Chloride (Cl)
mg/L
15
42
23
18.9
Sulphate (SO2−
4 )
mg/L
2.7
10
60
0
Sodium (Na)
mg/L
12
24
6.4
14
Calcium (Ca)
mg/L
95
85
137
90.5
Magnesium (Mg)
mg/L
6.3
6.6
7.3
7.84
Hardness
◦dH
14.7
13.4
20.9
14.5
Ammonium (NH−
4 )
mg/L
0.5
1.6
0.05
0.56
Iron (Fe)
mg/L
4.4
5.3
0.01
8.7
Manganese (Mn)
mg/L
0.075
0.31
0.01
0.25
Aluminium (Al)
µg/L
< 5
-
7
0.28
Temperature
◦C
12
11
10.2
10.6
Water Quality in Inﬂuent to Reactor
Table C.2: Water quality in inﬂuent to pellet reactor at the Dutch water treatment plants (KWR, 2003)
Seppe
Weesperkarspel
De Beitel
Hoogeveen
pH
[-]
7.8
7.75
-
7.66
Conductivity
[mS/m]
43.6
52
-
49.8
Carbon dioxide (CO2)
mg/L
8.3
-
-
13
Bicarbonat (HCO−
3 )
mg/L
319
223
-
297
Chloride (Cl)
mg/L
-
-
-
-
Sulphate (SO2−
4 )
mg/L
-
-
-
-
Sodium (Na)
mg/L
-
25
-
-
Calcium (Ca)
mg/L
-
82
-
-
Magnesium (Mg)
mg/L
-
6.6
-
-
Hardness
◦dH
-
13.0
-
-
Ammonium (NH−
4 )
mg/L
-
< 0.04
-
-
Iron (Fe)
mg/L
-
< 0.02
-
0.05
Manganese (Mn)
mg/L
-
-
-
-
Aluminium (Al)
µg/L
-
-
-
-
Temperature
◦C
-
12.5
-
-
66
==PAGE:74==
D
|
Pellet Composition
Table D.1: Part 1: Pellet composition. The unit is kg/mg dry matter.
Fe
Mn
Al
As
Pb
Cd
Ca
Cr
Cr6
Co
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
Marbjerg 11
5,500
110
-
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
400,000
< 1
< 1
-
Brokilde 23
2,000
63
-
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
360,000
< 1
< 1
-
Brøndbyvester 4
3,100
54
-
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
330,000
< 1
< 1
-
Regnemark 6
40
< 1
-
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
350,000
< 1
< 1
-
Søndersø 18
9,300
210
-
< 2
< 3
< 0.05
370,000
< 1
< 1
-
Dalum
2,263
996
35
0.14
0.12
< QL
403,866
1.15
-
0.78
Daluma
22
1.1
20
0.35
0.19
0.01
403,273
1.43
-
0.63
Lindved
1,676
672
22
0.99
0.13
0.01
372,528
< QL
-
0.58
Lejre 10
4,200
200
-
< 1
< 2
< 0.03
400,000
< 1
< 0.5
-
Frederiksberg 13
7,757
238
-
0.21
0.84
0.09
390,273
0.28
-
8.0
Frederiksberg 4
8,726
218
-
0.23
0.13
0.03
377,915
0.35
-
8.2
a After ﬁltration
Table D.2: Part 2: Pellet composition. The unit is kg/mg dry matter.
Cu
Li
Hg
Mg
Ni
P
K
Na
Sr
Tl
Sn
Zn
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
Marbjerg 11
< 2
-
< 0.01
3,900
1.6
< 100
-
-
-
-
7.2
3.4
Brokilde 23
< 2
-
< 0.01
3,200
2.7
< 100
-
-
-
-
5
9.5
Brøndbyvester 4
< 2
-
< 0.01
4,100
24
< 100
-
-
-
-
< 0.2
31
Regnemark 6
< 2
-
< 0.01
3,700
< 1
< 100
-
-
-
-
< 0.2
81
Søndersø 18
< 2
-
< 0.01
2,600
< 1
< 100
-
-
-
-
< 0.02
11
Dalum
0.32
1.6
-
3,693
3.8
161
121
1,567
1631
< QL
< QL
< QL
Daluma
6.65
1.4
-
3,601
4.3
< QL
129
1,475
1,613
< QL
< QL
31
Lindved
0.69
1.3
-
3,069
3.1
66
< QL
850
2,982
< QL
< QL
18
Lejre 10
< 2
< 0.01
4,300
< 1
88
-
-
-
-
< 0.2
1.7
Frederiksberg 13
0.33
1.6
-
3,934
10
71
< 97
1,479
6,273
0.20
-
82
Frederiksberg 4
0.22
1.4
-
3,814
10
87
< 97
1,679
7,013
0.070
-
80
a After ﬁltration
67
==PAGE:75==
E
|
XRD Results
Brøndbyvester
Figure E.1: XRD pattern for Brøndbyvester 4 pellets
Table E.1: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Brøndbyvester
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
20.9
4.2469
180
6
23.1
3.8472
273
9
26.7
3.3361
297
9
29.5
3.0255
3197
100
31.5
2.8378
98
3
36
2.4927
511
16
39.5
2.2796
512
16
43.2
2.0925
601
19
47.2
1.9241
178
6
47.6
1.9088
454
14
48.6
1.8719
509
16
56.6
1.6248
114
4
57.5
1.6015
224
7
58.2
1.5839
49
2
60.7
1.5245
133
4
61.5
1.5066
68
2
63.1
1.4722
54
2
64.5
1.4435
156
5
64.7
1.4396
174
5
68
==PAGE:76==
Marbjerg
Figure E.2: XRD pattern for Marbjerg 10 pellets
Table E.2: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Marbjerg
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.2
3.8308
250
8
26.7
3.3361
207
7
29.5
3.0255
3163
100
31.6
2.8291
100
3
36.1
2.4861
483
15
39.5
2.2796
501
16
43.3
2.0879
505
16
47.3
1.9202
164
5
47.7
1.9051
440
14
48.7
1.8683
434
14
56.7
1.6222
115
4
57.5
1.6015
250
8
60.8
1.5222
144
5
61.5
1.5066
73
2
63.4
1.4659
36
1
64.8
1.4376
176
6
69
==PAGE:77==
Appendix E. XRD Results
Søndersø
Figure E.3: XRD pattern for Søndersø 18 pellets
Table E.3: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Søndersø
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.1
3.8472
286
10
26.6
3.3484
544
20
29.4
3.0356
2692
100
31.5
2.8378
154
6
34
2.6347
177
7
36
2.4927
430
16
39.4
2.2851
471
17
42.2
2.1397
246
9
43.2
2.0925
535
20
47.2
1.9241
165
6
47.6
1.9088
512
19
48.6
1.8719
491
18
50.1
1.8193
55
2
56.6
1.6248
98
4
57.4
1.604
206
8
60.7
1.5245
146
5
61.5
1.5066
63
2
63.1
1.4722
42
2
64.7
1.4396
160
6
70
==PAGE:78==
Regnemark
Figure E.4: XRD pattern for Regnemark 6 pellets
Table E.4: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Regnemark
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.1
3.8472
244
6
26.6
3.3484
183
5
29.4
3.0356
4034
100
31.5
2.8378
119
3
36
2.4927
452
11
39.4
2.2851
528
13
43.2
2.0925
515
13
47.1
1.9279
181
4
47.5
1.9126
546
14
48.5
1.8755
559
14
56.6
1.6248
105
3
57.4
1.604
257
6
60.7
1.5245
148
4
61
1.5177
110
3
61.4
1.5088
73
2
63.1
1.4722
48
1
64.7
1.4396
154
4
71
==PAGE:79==
Appendix E. XRD Results
Brokilde
Figure E.5: XRD pattern for Brokilde 27 pellets
Table E.5: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Brokilde
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
20.9
4.2469
177
7
23.1
3.8472
278
11
26.6
3.3484
1042
41
29.5
3.0255
2534
100
31.5
2.8378
115
5
36
2.4927
422
17
36.5
2.4597
95
4
39.5
2.2796
454
18
40.3
2.2361
62
2
42.4
2.1301
50
2
43.2
2.0925
505
20
45.9
1.9755
44
2
47.2
1.9241
170
7
47.6
1.9088
425
17
48.6
1.8719
424
17
50.1
1.8193
146
6
54.8
1.6738
59
2
56.6
1.6248
101
4
57.5
1.6015
193
8
59.9
1.5429
207
8
60.1
1.5383
146
6
60.7
1.5245
117
5
61.5
1.5066
70
3
63.2
1.4701
42
2
64.7
1.4396
131
5
72
==PAGE:80==
Lejre
Figure E.6: XRD pattern for Lejre 10 pellets
Table E.6: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Lejre
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
20.9
4.2469
180
6
23.1
3.8472
273
9
26.7
3.3361
297
9
29.5
3.0255
3197
100
31.5
2.8378
98
3
36
2.4927
511
16
39.5
2.2796
512
16
43.2
2.0925
601
19
47.2
1.9241
178
6
47.6
1.9088
454
14
48.6
1.8719
509
16
56.6
1.6248
114
4
57.5
1.6015
224
7
58.2
1.5839
49
2
60.7
1.5245
133
4
61.5
1.5066
68
2
63.1
1.4722
54
2
64.5
1.4435
156
5
64.7
1.4396
174
5
73
==PAGE:81==
Appendix E. XRD Results
Frederiksberg (sand)
Figure E.7: XRD pattern for Frederiksberg 13 pellets
Table E.7: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Frederiksberg (sand)
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.1
3.8472
199
6
26.6
3.3361
1212
40
29.5
3.0255
3056
100
31.6
2.8378
97
3
36.1
2.4861
608
20
39.5
2.2796
453
15
43.3
2.0879
522
17
47.3
1.9202
148
5
47.7
1.9051
486
16
48.7
1.8683
445
15
56.7
1.6222
113
4
57.5
1.6015
240
8
60.8
1.5222
138
5
63.2
1.4701
54
2
64.8
1.4376
189
6
74
==PAGE:82==
Frederiksberg (limestone)
Figure E.8: XRD pattern for Frederiksberg 4 pellets
Table E.8: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Frederiksberg (limestone)
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.2
3.8308
191
7
29.5
3.0155
2779
100
31.6
2.8291
138
5
36.2
2.4794
465
17
39.6
2.2740
499
18
42.3
2.1349
135
5
43.4
2.0833
471
17
47.4
1.9164
158
6
47.7
1.9051
497
18
48.7
1.8683
506
18
56.8
1.6196
97
3
57.6
1.5989
251
9
60.9
1.5200
149
5
61.6
1.5044
73
3
63.3
1.4680
49
2
64.9
1.4356
173
6
75
==PAGE:83==
Appendix E. XRD Results
de Beitel
Figure E.9: XRD pattern for de Beitel pellets
Table E.9: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - de Beitel
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.1
3.8472
277
12
26.6
3.3484
131
6
29.5
3.0255
2261
100
31.5
2.8378
127
6
36.0
2.4927
534
24
39.5
2.2796
485
21
42.2
2.1397
159
7
43.2
2.0925
633
28
47.2
1.9241
174
8
47.5
1.9126
491
22
48.5
1.8755
545
24
56.6
1.6248
142
6
57.4
1.6040
264
12
58.1
1.5864
45
2
60.7
1.5245
171
8
61.0
1.5177
103
5
61.4
1.5088
82
4
63.1
1.4722
60
3
64.7
1.4396
223
10
76
==PAGE:84==
Weesperkarspel
Figure E.10: XRD pattern for Weesperkarspel pellets
Table E.10: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Weesperkarspel
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.1
3.8472
216
6
26.6
3.3484
105
3
29.5
3.0255
3372
100
36.0
2.4927
457
14
39.5
2.2796
487
14
43.2
2.0925
545
16
47.2
1.9241
183
5
47.6
1.9088
561
17
48.6
1.8719
451
13
56.6
1.6248
120
4
57.4
1.6040
229
7
58.2
1.5839
46
1
60.7
1.5245
169
5
61.0
1.5177
102
3
61.4
1.5088
83
2
63.1
1.4722
48
1
64.7
1.4396
168
5
77
==PAGE:85==
Appendix E. XRD Results
Hoogeveen
Figure E.11: XRD pattern for Hoogeveen pellets
Table E.11: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Hoogeveen
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.1
3.8472
241
9
26.6
3.3484
148
6
29.5
3.0255
2608
100
31.5
2.8378
134
5
36.0
2.4927
390
15
39.5
2.2796
408
16
42.2
2.1397
82
3
43.2
2.0925
441
17
47.6
1.9088
473
18
48.6
1.8719
449
17
56.6
1.6248
96
4
57.4
1.6040
180
7
60.7
1.5245
130
5
61.0
1.5177
111
4
63.1
1.4722
43
2
64.7
1.4396
156
6
78
==PAGE:86==
Seppe
Figure E.12: XRD pattern for Seppe pellets
Table E.12: Angle, d space, intensity and relative intensity from XRD analysis - Seppe
2θ
d(Y)
Intensity
RelInt(Y)
23.1
3.8472
258
8
26.6
3.3484
139
4
29.4
3.0356
3279
100
31.4
2.8466
174
5
36.0
2.4927
416
13
39.4
2.2851
490
15
42.2
2.1397
187
6
43.2
2.0925
417
13
47.5
1.9126
588
18
48.5
1.8755
500
15
56.6
1.6248
92
3
57.4
1.6040
221
7
60.7
1.5245
120
4
61.4
1.5088
78
2
63.0
1.4743
42
1
64.6
1.4416
137
4
79
==PAGE:87==
F
|
Sieve Analyses
(a) Brøndbyvester 4.
(b) Regnemark 6.
(c) Søndersø 18.
(d) Dalum before aeration.
(e) Dalum after ﬁltration.
(f) Lejre 10.
80
==PAGE:88==
(a) Frederiksberg 13.
(b) Frederiksberg 4.
81
==PAGE:89==
G
|
BET Results
Table G.1: Results from BET speciﬁc surface area analyses.
Sample
Sample Name
Sample + test tube
Empty tupe
Sample weight
BETsingle
BETmulti
R2
[g]
[g]
[g]
[m2/g]
[m2/g]
1-1X
Brøndby 4
15.6604
13.2639
2.3965
0.0406
0.0413
0.99837
1-2X
Brøndby 4
15.8200
13.2800
2.5400
0.0466
0.0454
0.99755
1-3X
Brøndby 4 - crushed
15.7741
13.3041
2.4700
0.3509
0.345
0.99999
2-1X
Marbjerg 10
16.1812
13.2984
2.8828
0.0258
0.0277
0.98618
2-2X
Marbjerg 10
16.2324
13.3749
2.8575
0.0162
0.0172
0.91835
3-1X
Søndersø 18
15.9253
13.3131
2.6122
-
-
-
3-2X
Søndersø 18
16.5106
13.3780
3.1326
-
-
-
4-1X
Regnemark 6
16.0895
13.1551
2.9344
-
-
-
4-2X
Regnemark 6
16.0489
13.3553
2.6936
-
-
-
5-1X
Marbjerg 27
16.1523
13.1798
2.9725
0.0543
0.0552
0.99658
5-2X
Marbjerg 27
16.4550
13.3271
3.1279
0.0443
0.0444
0.99823
6-1X
Lejre 10
15.0389
12.0428
2.9961
0.0154
0.0144
0.93628
6-2X
Lejre 10
16.4396
13.3274
3.1122
0.0282
0.0285
0.98733
7-1X
Dansand 29
16.0585
13.2720
2.7865
0.0532
0.0533
0.98894
7-2X
Dansand 29
15.0758
12.2433
2.8325
0.0558
0.0573
0.99807
8-1X
Dansand 33
16.1989
13.3510
2.8479
0.0836
0.0859
0.9994
8-2X
Dansand 33
15.7548
13.0993
2.6555
0.0906
0.0925
0.99896
QC-1X
Ref
14.5717
13.2984
1.2733
1.3849
1.4515
0.99993
QC-2X
Ref
14.8669
13.3748
1.4921
1.3956
1.4606
0.99995
9-1X
Dalum Råvand
15.9820
13.1551
2.8269
0.0026
0.0035
0.9775
9-2X
Dalum Råvand
16.3153
13.3129
3.0024
0.0024
0.0023
1
10-1X
Dalum Rent vand
16.3401
13.2637
3.0764
0.0043
0.0021
0.44518
10-2X
Dalum Rent vand
16.2119
13.2797
2.9322
0.0037
0.0021
0.55467
11-1X
Lindved
16.4792
13.3778
3.1014
0.1701
0.1732
0.99992
11-2X
Lindved
15.2502
12.0429
3.2073
0.1795
0.1824
0.99997
1-1X
De Beitel
-
-
3.2802
0.0019
0.0018
0.83415
2-1X
Weesperkarspel
-
-
3.3097
0.0113
-
0
3-1X
Hoogeveen
-
-
3.3084
-
-
0
4-1X
Seppe
-
-
3.3012
-
-
0
4-L-1X
Seppe
-
-
14.3670
-
-
0
Faxe1-1
Faxe 0.1-0.3 mm
15.8929
13.2995
2.5934
0.1981
0.2012
0.99989
Faxe1-2
Faxe 0.1-0.3 mm
16.2081
13.5670
2.6411
0.207
0.2118
0.99996
Faxe2-1
Faxe 0.3-0.6 mm
16.7480
13.9076
2.8404
0.1157
0.117
0.99971
Faxe2-2
Faxe 0.3-0.6 mm
16.1765
13.3754
2.8011
0.1353
0.1379
0.99887
Pellets-13-1
FF sand 13
16.2418
13.3054
2.9364
0.0012
0.0005
0.46234
Pellets-13-2
FF sand 13
16.0923
13.1813
2.9110
0.0005
-
-
Pellets-4-1
FF kalk 4
16.4419
13.3144
3.1275
0.0026
0.001
0.46894
Pellets-4-2
FF kalk 4
16.2450
13.1007
3.1443
0.0097
-
-
82
