==PAGE:1==
E F F E C T S O F T R E E S TO WA R D S C L I M AT E A D A P TAT I O N I N
C O P E N H A G E N
andreas sune konring & susanne bjerg petersen
==PAGE:2==
The front page shows the tree cover in the City of Copenhagen.
Andreas Sune Konring & Susanne Bjerg Petersen: Effects of trees towards cli-
mate adaptation in Copenhagen , Master’s thesis c⃝June 2016
ENV-MSc-2016-s103357
ENV-MSc-2016-s103351
supervisors:
Senior Researcher Martin Drews, DTU Management
Professor Peter Steen Mikkelsen, DTU Environment
==PAGE:3==
A B S T R A C T
In the coming decades the City of Copenhagen is planning to invest bil-
lions of DKK on holistic solutions where climate adaptation measures to-
wards pluvial ﬂooding will support urban improvements of a greener city.
At the same time the municipality has an additional strategic goal of plant-
ing 100,000 trees in the city in the period 2015-2025. Urban trees provide
multiple ecosystem services that increase the utility and amenity values of
the urban environment. One of the central ecosystem services provided by
trees, which is rarely included in urban adaptation modelling, is the reten-
tion of water by canopy interception of rainfall and evapotranspiration of
soil water. Quantifying the effects of urban trees on these hydrological pro-
cesses can therefore help to improve the synergy between the two strategies.
In addition, mapping the tree cover (TC) and Leaf Area Index (LAI) accu-
rately can enable the quantiﬁcation of other ecosystem services such as air
quality, water quality, and temperature regulation for a complete valuation
of urban trees.
In this study the semi-distributed hydrological model i-Tree Hydro has been
used to simulate the effects of trees in Copenhagen based on historical
hourly weather data from 11 years (2005-2015). High-resolution mapping
of tree characteristics using remote sensing was conducted to provide an ex-
act estimate of the current state of the city. Estimates of TC and the fraction
of evergreen TC were derived from the national aerial Light Detection And
Ranging (LiDAR) dataset and Near Infrared ortophotos. Further, the LAI of
the TC was estimated using LiDAR with a Beer-Lambert law based model
to provide a spatial distribution of leaf storage.
The current TC in Copenhagen Municipality is estimated to be 13.5% while
average LAI of the TC is 3.4. Model results show that combined effects
of evaporation of intercepted precipitation and evapotranspiration of trees
amounts to 4.5% of the yearly precipitation in Copenhagen Municipality.
Planting of 100,000 trees was estimated to cause an increase in TC to 15.4%;
an estimate based on allometric tree growth analysis of common urban trees
species in Copenhagen. A more conservative estimate is 14.5% and an op-
timistic estimate is 16.3%. This would lead to an overall increase of evapo-
ration and of evapotranspiration by 0.1%-0.3% and 0.3%-0.7% respectively.
The avoided runoff related to the evaporation from the 100,000 trees will
correspond to approximately 112,000 m3 per year.
Application of different scenarios with varying TC showed that the yearly
effects of evaporation and evapotranspiration increase linearly with TC. A
similar trend was observed when increasing LAI. However, the effects of a
higher LAI increase with an increasing TC. From this is can be concluded
that the effect of trees are greater on a local scale: In locations with high
TC and high LAI, such as parks, the hydrological effects of trees will be
considerably higher than in other places.
iii
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
First and foremost we would like to express our gratitude to our main
supervisor Martin Drews (DTU Management) and our co-supervisor Peter
Steen Mikkelsen (DTU Environment), who have shown great interest and
provided us with guidance and constructive feedback throughout our
project.
Furthermore, we wish to thank Martin Isenburg, who granted us three
months free use of LAStool, COWI for giving us permission to use their
licensed near infrared ortophotos, HOFOR for providing us with their Land
Cover classiﬁcations of Copenhagen, the i-Tree Hydro team for allowing us
to use their extended output of i-Tree Hydro version 5., and Københavns
Kommune for meeting with us to discuss the current and future strategies
in relation to the 100,000 trees goal.
A special thanks to Rikke H. Hammershøj, Kristina L. Hansen, and
Nina T. Andersen who gave us priceless feedback. We owe you a beer.
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
P R E FA C E
This thesis has been completed at the Departments of Management En-
gineering and Environmental Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark in the period January 4th to June 4th 2016. The thesis serves
as fulﬁlment of the MSc in Environmental Engineering. The thesis work
amounts to 30 ECTS for each individual.
Andreas Sune Konring & Susanne Bjerg Petersen
Kgs. Lyngby, June 2016
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
C O N T E N T S
1
introduction
1
1.1
Project Description
2
2
approach
3
3
background
5
3.1
Copenhagen Plans and Politics
5
3.2
i-Tree Hydro
6
3.2.1
Canopy Interception
6
3.2.2
Evaporation and Evapotranspiration
8
3.3
Retrieving Tree Characteristics Using Remote Sensing
10
3.3.1
Spatial Data and Data Acquisition Techniques
10
3.3.2
Tree Cover and Delineation
12
3.3.3
Leaf Area Index
13
4
methods
15
4.1
Study area
15
4.2
Tree Characteristics
16
4.2.1
Data Sources
16
4.2.2
Estimating Tree Cover
19
4.2.3
Estimating Future Tree Cover
21
4.2.4
Estimating Leaf Area Index
22
4.3
i-Tree Hydro: Model set-up
22
4.3.1
Step 1: Project Area Information
22
4.3.2
Step 2: Land Cover Parameters
25
4.3.3
Step 3: Hydrological Parameters
26
4.4
Scenarios
28
5
results & evaluation of tree characteristics
31
5.1
Results of Tree Characteristics
31
5.2
Evaluation of Tree Characteristics
35
6
results from the i-tree hydro model
41
6.1
Weather Data
41
6.2
Results of i-Tree Scenarios
45
6.2.1
Effects of the Current Tree Cover
45
6.2.2
Effects of Future Scenarios
50
6.2.3
Effects of LAI
51
6.2.4
Variations in Subcatchments
52
7
discussion
55
7.1
Effects of Trees in Copenhagen
55
7.1.1
Current Effects of Evaporation and Evapotranspira-
tion processes
55
7.1.2
Effects of LAI
56
7.1.3
Local Effects
57
7.1.4
Effects of Future Tree Cover
57
7.2
Perspectives
59
7.2.1
Modelling Perspectives
59
7.2.2
Management Perspectives
60
8
conclusions
63
bibliography
65
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
contents
a
i-tree hydro
73
a.1
I-tree sub-processes
73
a.1.1
Depression Storage
73
a.1.2
Inﬁltration
74
a.1.3
Runoff
74
b
processing scripts
75
b.1
CHM workﬂow scripts
75
b.2
Tree growth
79
b.3
LAI workﬂow scripts
80
b.4
Weather station data
81
b.5
Land cover workﬂow scripts
84
b.6
Land cover classiﬁcation
86
c
results
89
c.1
Land cover statistics
89
c.2
Weather statistics
92
==PAGE:11==
L I S T O F F I G U R E S
Figure 1
Example of Airborne LiDAR interaction with the sur-
face objects
10
Figure 2
Spectral reﬂectances of various land classes com-
pared with the visible range and the typical LiDAR
wavelength at 1064 nm
11
Figure 3
Division
of
Copenhagen
and
Frederiksberg:
(a)
administrative
borders.
(b)
cloudburst
catch-
ments
15
Figure 4
Example
of
LiDAR
data
visualised
in
Fu-
groViewerTM
17
Figure 5
Example of the DDO 2014 and GeoDanmark 2015
near-infrared ortophotos
18
Figure 6
Example of Buildings layer and the Land Cover
map
19
Figure 7
Workﬂow for creating the TC in Copenhagen
20
Figure 8
Workﬂow for creating the LAI in Copenhagen
23
Figure 9
Workﬂow for creating the Land Cover classiﬁcation
in Copenhagen
27
Figure 10
Study areas: 1. Cph, 2. the subcatchment Bisbeb-
jerg Vest, and 3. the subcatchment Sønder Boule-
vard
29
Figure 11
Differences in tree characteristics between the sub-
catchments.
32
Figure 12
Land cover map of the research area.
34
Figure 13
Comparison between modelled and digitised TC
from NIR ortophoto in test areas
36
Figure 14
Comparison of TC estimation method for the city
boroughs.
37
Figure 15
Scatter plot of the Tree Age and Area of street trees
in Copenhagen.
38
Figure 16
Histogram of the LAI values of the TC in the city of
Copenhagen.
39
Figure 17
Evaluation of LAI performance on different tree loca-
tions and sizes
40
Figure 18
Monthly
summary
statistics
of
input
weather
data.
42
Figure 19
Precipitation per month from 2005 to 2015 and the
maximum daily precipitation in the month.
43
Figure 20
Monthly evaporation, interception and precipitation
from 2005 to 2015.
45
Figure 21
The seasonal distribution of evaporation as percent-
age of total yearly precipitation.
46
Figure 22
The correlation between evaporated precipitation
and precipitation per evaporation event, color-coded
after the event duration.
47
xi
==PAGE:12==
xii
List of Figures
Figure 23
Evaporation events (a) starting at 12.00 on November
9, 2009 and (b) 18.00 on July 26, 2007
47
Figure 24
Monthly evapotranspiration compared with monthly
precipitation from 2005 to 2015.
49
Figure 25
The seasonal distribution of evapotranspiration as a
percentage of total yearly precipitation from 2005 to
2015.
50
Figure 26
Comparison of Copenhagen Scenarios for the period
2005-2015 based on seasons.
51
Figure 27
Copenhagen: Yearly evaporation and evapotranspi-
ration as a percentage of yearly precipitation for the
period 2005-2015.
51
Figure 28
Effects of LAI on evaporation and evapotranspiration
for three different scenarios in Copenhagen.
52
Figure 29
Effects of LAI in Copenhagen: Yearly evaporation
and evapotranspiration as a percentage of yearly pre-
cipitation for the period 2005-2015.
53
Figure 30
Differences in evaporation from canopies and evapo-
transpiration internally in Copenhagen: CPH, BV and
SB
54
Figure 31
Comparison of the effects in SB and BV with Copen-
hagen: Yearly evaporation and evapotranspiration as
a percentage of yearly precipitation for the period
2005-2015.
54
Figure 32
Weather Station Data input
81
Figure 33
METAR DATA
82
==PAGE:13==
L I S T O F TA B L E S
Table 1
Distribution of planted and planned trees in Copen-
hagen with associated planting and maintenance
costs per tree
5
Table 2
Average tree stem growth at breast height, predicted
stem diameter growth and projected crown area at
year 0, 5 and 10 after planting.
21
Table 3
i-Tree
Hydro:
STEP
1:
Project
Area
Informa-
tion
23
Table 4
Required input weather station data for i-Tree Hydro
Step 1
24
Table 5
i-Tree Hydro: STEP 2: Land Cover Parameters
25
Table 6
i-Tree Hydro STEP 3: Hydrological Parameters
27
Table 7
i-Tree Hydro Scenarios: Inputs for the municipality of
Copenhagen (Cph) as well as the two cloudburst sub-
catchments Bispebjerg Vest (BV) and Sønder Boule-
vard (SB)
29
Table 8
Tree Characteristics for the current TC (baseline) in
Copenhagen (CPH), Bispebjerg Vest (BV) and Sønder
Boulevard (SB)
33
Table 9
Copenhagen: Predicted increase in TC in 2025 for
minimum, average and maximum growth scenarios
for 100,000 new trees
33
Table 10
Comparison of tree cover area between the modelled
and digitised TC.
37
Table 11
Averages for weather input data in the period from
2005 to 2015.
43
Table 12
Yearly precipitation (P) and maximum daily precipi-
tation per year (Max P) in mm.
43
Table 13
Yearly evaporation listed as absolute values in mm
depth and normalized in respect to the precipita-
tion on tree cover (TC P) and total precipitation (Tot
P).
46
Table 14
Weather statistics and evaporation removal of two
evaporation events from July 26, 2007 and Novem-
ber 9, 2009. Air and dew point temperature (Tair
and Tdew), net Radiation (Rn) and wind speed (U)
are mean observations of the events. Precipitation
(Acum. P) and evaporation (Acum. E) are accumu-
lated depths at the end of the events.
48
Table 15
Yearly evapotranspiration listed as absolute values in
mm depth and normalised with respect to precipita-
tion on tree cover (TC P) and total precipitation (Tot
P)
49
Table 16
a′ and α′ parameters for each allomeetric type de-
ﬁned by Pretzsch et al., 2015
79
Table 17
Estimated growth of the seven most common treee
species in Copenhagen.
79
xiii
==PAGE:14==
xiv
List of Tables
Table 18
Land cover statistics of the subcatchments in the city
of Copenhagen.
90
Table 19
Land Cover statistics of the administrative boroughs
in the city of Copenhagen.
91
Table 20
Mean, Standard deviation, minimum and maximum
values for aggregated monthly weather data.
92
Table 21
List of monthly precipitation in the period 2005-2015
from ofﬁcial SVK summary, I-Tree Input and Out-
put.
93
==PAGE:15==
A C R O N Y M S
BAI Bark Area Index
CHM Canopy Height Model
DEM Digital Elevation Model
DSM Digital Surface Model
DTM Digital Terrain Model
LAI Leaf Area Index
LiDAR Light Detection And Ranging
METAR METeorological Aerodrome Report
NIR Near Infra-Red
NDVI Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
RGB Red-Green-Blue
SVK Spildevands-komiteen
TC Tree Cover (% tree canopy cover)
UHI Urban Heat Island
xv
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Trees are an integral part of the urban area and provide many essential
ecosystem services. The beneﬁts can be divided in utility and amenity bene-
ﬁts. The utility beneﬁts of trees are their direct environmental functions that
can be quantiﬁed. This includes the hydrological effects in form of evap-
oration from intercepted rain and evapotranspiration (Wang et al., 2008).
Water quality can be improved by inﬁltration of water into the root zone
and soil contamination can be reduced by phytoremediation (Pulford and
Watson, 2003). Trees regulate the urban microclimate through their hydro-
logical, shading and wind break effects. These effects decrease the Urban
Heat Island Effect (UHI) and reduce energy use for cooling (Bolund and
Hunhammar, 1999; Akbari et al., 2001). Air quality is improved by the set-
tling of airborne particulates on the leaves or through uptake of gaseous
pollutants (Nowak and Dwyer, 2007). Trees also function as a carbon sink
by sequestering CO2 from the air (Nowak et al., 2013). The amenity beneﬁts
are social effects of trees that contribute to the well being and quality of
life. Psychological studies have shown that trees reduce fear of crime and
reduce stress (Kaplan and Kaplan, 1989). In fact it has been shown that hos-
pital patients with views to trees recover faster (Ulrich, 1984). Trees also
increase amenity beneﬁts through their recreational value by encouraging
to outdoor activity and contributing to engagement in the local community
(Nowak and Dwyer, 2007).
Trees in an urban environment are characterized as either street or park
trees on public spaces but also trees on private properties. Common is that
they all form an urban forest characterised by growing close to areas of high
human inﬂuence (Nowak and Dwyer, 2007). This creates challenging condi-
tions where space is often limited which generally reduces tree growth. The
vitality, stability and growth of trees are governed by many factors but most
important is the soil conditions and the availability of soil space for root
growth. This poses the major challenge for urban trees as urban soils differs
from natural soils by being subject to compaction, deicing salts and other an-
thropogenic contaminants (Smith, 1995). Typically, a necessary evil in urban
development, soil compaction from pavements removes macropores in the
soil proﬁle thus reducing the trees root elongation and penetration capaci-
ties. In addition, pavements reduces soil aeration and drainage capabilities
thus limiting growth conditions (Day et al., 1995). The inherent challenges
of urban forests require careful planning and design for optimal beneﬁts.
Planning involves planting suitable tree species that ﬁt both natural and
urban requirements. Additionally, planners have to consider tree diversity
and species with good growth experience in urban areas that are not prone
to pests (Nowak and Dwyer, 2007). After planting, trees need to be main-
tained by watering and pruning for strength and health. Incorporating trees
into urban areas is thus not an easy solution for the promotion of a sustain-
able urbanisation but studies has shown that beneﬁts clearly exceeds cost of
maintenance (Mcpherson et al., 2005).
1
==PAGE:18==
2
introduction
Trees are an essential part of the strategy for City Nature (in danish: bynatur)
in Copenhagen Municipality, which aims to promote the conditions for all
living organisms in the city. As a part of this strategy, Copenhagen Munic-
ipality has the intention of increasing the tree cover (TC) in the city to 20%
by 2025 (Copenhagen Municipality, 2015c). By improving the green features
of city, the quality of life is improved for the residents. This green thinking
led to the concrete proposal of planting 100,000 new trees in Copenhagen
Municipality in period 2015-2025. At same time, Copenhagen and Frederiks-
berg municipalities and the utility company of Greater Copenhagen (HO-
FOR) are undergoing a major climate adaptation plan to improve resilience
towards pluvial ﬂooding (Copenhagen Municipality, 2011). 300 projects are
planned to be implemented during the next decades with total investment
costs of DKK 11 billions. A central measure in the plan is to divert stormwa-
ter from the existing drainage system by implementing green infrastructure
solutions. In doing so, the City of Copenhagen intends to create holistic so-
lutions where climate adaptation measures support current urban improve-
ments of a greener city (Copenhagen Municipality, 2015b). Copenhagen
Muncipality aims to integrate the strategies of climate adaptation and city
nature with the framework Københavnermodellen. This framework incorpo-
rates an ecosystem service approach that values amenity and utility beneﬁts
equally. Thereby can the City of Copenhagen include the total beneﬁts of
trees in the holistic solutions of future climate adaptation projects.
1.1
project description
This thesis aims to quantify the effect of trees on the urban water balance in
Copenhagen Municipality, Denmark. In order to quantify these effects, the
hydrological processes affected by trees and the distribution and extent of
the tree canopy cover are studied. The current research areas and best avail-
able practices are investigated through a comprehensive literature study to
obtain the newest knowledge about urban trees.
Initially, the extent and spatial distribution of the urban tree canopy are
estimated using spatial data. Characteristics of trees relevant for the hydro-
logical processes are investigated.
Following, the information obtained about the current TC is implemented
into a hydrological model, which includes the concept of canopy intercep-
tion of precipitation as well as other processes affected by the presence of
trees.
The model including trees is ﬁnally tested on different scenarios reﬂecting
the current and future TC.
==PAGE:19==
2
A P P R O A C H
The speciﬁc effect of trees on the urban water balance has to our knowl-
edge not been studied before in Denmark. In Copenhagen, urban hydrolog-
ical modelling efforts in climate adaptation projects have focused on either
coupling urban drainage models with 2D overland ﬂow models for ﬂood
analysis or on integrated hydrological modelling of catchments for inﬁltra-
tion potentials (Copenhagen Municipality, 2011; Rambøll, 2013; ALECTIA,
2012). Both modelling approaches are spatially distributed but lack the spe-
ciﬁc hydrological processes of trees. Instead, vegetation are mostly included
as grass i.e. focusing more on permeable surfaces than on vegetation types.
Vegetation types mainly rely on national thematic and topographic GIS lay-
ers that are at ﬁeld parcel scale (Levin et al., 2012). However, urban forests
are often a minor part of most land cover types at parcel scale and are thus
not represented in national land cover maps. Hence, the major challenges of
this study is the mapping of the urban forest of Copenhagen and including
trees in a hydrological model.
The focus of urban forest mapping was initially to determine the current
number of trees in Copenhagen in order to compare it with the 100.000
trees goal. This led us to search for tree delineation approaches in the ﬁelds
of urban forestry and forest management. Within these ﬁelds of science,
trees are mainly delineated from remotely sensed LiDAR data, which are
freely available in Denmark (Maltamo et al., 2014; SDFE, 2016a). The Li-
DAR data allowed for high resolution mapping of the urban forest but did
also require licensed software. We were granted 3 months use of LAStools
by Isenburg, (2016), which made it possible to process extreme amounts of
data efﬁciently. Vegetation classiﬁcation of LiDAR points were error prone
and therefore we contacted COWI which gave us permission to use their
licensed near infrared ortophotos. This made it possible to correct mistakes
in the LiDAR mapping. Still delineating individual trees in an urban for-
est proved to be troublesome due to the intertwined tree canopies. Instead,
the mapping effort was turned to estimating TC and other tree parameters
that are important for the hydrological modelling and predictions of future
effects.
Initially, the plan was to include speciﬁc tree inputs in the 2D overland ﬂow
model MIKE 21 in order to determine the spatial effect of trees in extreme
pluvial events (DHI, 2015). This proved to be problematic in extreme events
as hydrological processes such as interception, evaporation and evapotran-
spiration become insigniﬁcant and inﬁltration becomes the only relevant
process for vegetated surfaces. Soil inﬁltration can vary several magnitudes
due to local soil variations thus the speciﬁc effect of trees would be difﬁcult
to estimate (Bartens et al., 2009). Integrated hydrological modelling tools
such as MIKE SHE include more vegetation processes (DHI, 2016). However,
since the primary focus was on speciﬁc tree processes, this was assumed to
be too time consuming to set up. Therefore, our focus shifted from spatially
3
==PAGE:20==
4
approach
distributed models to semi-distributed models which actually include trees.
We ended up using the semi distributed model i-Tree Hydro from the freely
available software package i-Tree developed by United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service (USDA Forest Service, 2016). This is
currently the only tool that can model the hydrological effects of trees on
catchment scale and United States Environmental Protection Agency recom-
mend it as the best management practice for modelling of urban forests (US
EPA, 2015).
Development of i-Tree Hydro is targeted catchments in United States and
Canada. The model is set up to read hourly weather data from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)’s Climate Data Online
(CDO) database (USDA Forest Service, 2014). Furthermore, a U.S. substitute
project location needs to be speciﬁed, which the program uses to calculate
the solar radiation based on the latitude. All of the above complicate the
model setup for locations outside North America. Weather data needs to be
modiﬁed in order to comply with the exact speciﬁcations given in default
input data. Additionally, the required weather data are often not freely avail-
able outside the U.S.. These challenges were approached by implementing
freely available METeorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) observations
from Copenhagen airport which resemble the CDO weather data in time
step and format. Other weather sources such as Danish Meteorological In-
stitute or European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF)
could be used but this would limit the observation time steps to daily or
3 hours and thus remove the daily variation of temperature and net radi-
ation. European METAR data does not include precipitation depths so the
METAR data was fused with precipitation from the nearest rain gauge of
Spildevands-komiteen (SVK). The current model version does not output
sub-processes such as interception and evapotranspiration so an extended
model version was provided by the i-Tree Hydro developer team.
==PAGE:21==
3
B A C K G R O U N D
This chapter is divided into three parts that provide background informa-
tion relevant to this study. The ﬁrst part, Copenhagen plans and politics, in-
troduces the current plans for the implementation of 100,000 new trees in
Copenhagen. The second part, i-Tree Hydro, provides an introduction to the
model and the model processes that have been used to assess the hydrolog-
ical effects of trees in an urban environment. The third part, Retrieving Tree
Characteristics Using Remote Sensing, gives an introduction to the data acqui-
sition technologies of the spatial data used in this study and how this data
can be used to determine essential information about the trees.
3.1
copenhagen plans and politics
In august 2015, the municipality of Copenhagen adopted a proposal to plant
100,000 trees in the period from 2015 to 2025. The idea of 100,000 trees in
Copenhagen was initiated in 2008 with inspiration from the 1 million trees
campaign presented in New York in 2007 (MillionTreesNYC, 2007). How-
ever, in 2008 the municipality did not have a tree policy incorporated in
the urban planning process which prevented the idea from becoming real-
ity (Copenhagen Municipality, 2016c). It was not until May 2nd 2016 that
a plan for the realisation of the proposal and a tree policy were presented
(Copenhagen Municipality, 2016d). With the investment in 100,000 new trees
and stricter policies to retain existing trees, Copenhagen Municipality has
an aspirational goal of 20 % TC in 2025.
Table 1: Distribution of planted and planned trees in Copenhagen with associated
planting and maintenance costs per tree (Copenhagen Municipality, 2016a)
Communal areas
Other
Total
Trees
Trees
Forest
Partner
impervious
pervious
trees
trees
Planted
673
2,261
13,500
300
16,734
Planned
13,135
9,500
41,000
19,980
83,615
Total
13,808
11,761
54,500
20,280
100,349
%
13.8
11.7
54.3
20.2
Planting
costs(DKK)
25,000 -
125,000
1,000 -
20,000
15 - 500
100 - 500
Maintenance
costs(DKK/tree)
100 - 2,000
100 - 1,000
1-5
-
5
==PAGE:22==
6
background
Some of the highlights from the 2016 plan of planting 100,000 trees is pre-
sented in table 1. Since the policy became effective in 2015, some trees have
already been planted or are ﬁnanced and will be planted by the end of 2016.
Therefore, the plan differentiates between Planted trees and Planned trees.
Almost 17,000 trees have been planted and/or are already ﬁnanced to be
planted, cf. table 1. The current strategy for planting the remaining 83,000
planned trees is also shown in table 1. The plans for the trees are grouped
into four major classes: 1. Trees impervious, which primarily includes street
trees where impervious covers are removed to make room for the trees, 2.
Trees pervious, which includes park trees where trees are planted in pervi-
ous areas, 3. Forest trees are planted in afforestation areas such as Amager
Fælled, while 4. Partner trees will be planted in collaboration with citizens
in addition to private and public companies on non-municipal areas.
The planting costs include tree costs, construction of planting holes and re-
construction of pavement. Maintenance costs include watering and pruning
of the trees. The cost of planting 83,000 trees distributed as given in table 1 is
expected to be between DKK 0.34 billion and DKK 2.17 billion with an aver-
age of DKK 1.15 billion. Trees on impervious cover has the highest planting
and maintenance cost corresponding to 2/3 of the total costs (Copenhagen
Municipality, 2016a).
3.2
i-tree hydro
i-Tree Hydro is a process-based hydrological model that simulates the ef-
fects of changes in TC on the water balance in an urban environment. The
model is a semi-distributed, topographical-based model that describes the
hydrological processes relevant to rainfall-runoff relations in an urban set-
ting. The model integrates a number of established algorithms which in
relevant cases have been simpliﬁed and/or adapted to better suit an urban
context (Wang et al., 2008).
Model Processes
i-Tree Hydro incorporates the hydrological processes of canopy interception,
evaporation and evapotranspiration, depression storage, inﬁltration, and
runoff. The primary focus of this study is the canopy interception, evapora-
tion and evapotranspiration. These processes are described in the following.
For completeness, a brief description of the subprocesses depression stor-
age, inﬁltration and runoff can be found in Appendix A.1. Unless indicated
otherwise, please refer to Wang et al., (2008) in the following sections.
3.2.1
Canopy Interception
Canopy interception is deﬁned as that part of the precipitation that is inter-
cepted by the canopies of trees and lower vegetation. The intercepted water
or snow is stored in the leaves and bark of the vegetation and from there it
==PAGE:23==
3.2 i-tree hydro
7
can be evaporated or sublimated. The part of the precipitation that is not in-
tercepted will drop through the canopies and fall onto the impervious and
pervious ground surfaces below as throughfall.
Canopy interception is a process controlled by a number of parameters
including precipitation, evaporation, sublimation, and tree characteristics
(Wang et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2011). The canopy interception model applied
in i-Tree Hydro is a deterministic model based on the Rutter interception
model (Rutter et al., 1971; Rutter et al., 1975). The Rutter model is in its
original form intended to describe the canopy interception by homogenous
forest areas but has been modiﬁed on several occasions in attempt to over-
come some shortcomings of the model. Gash et al., (1995) and Valante et al.,
(1997) adjusted the model to ﬁt sparse vegetation, where the evaporation
rate from wetted surfaces is determined only for the area covered by trees
and not the entire watershed as is the case of the original model (Muzylo et
al., 2009). Dijk, (2001) made further alterations to the sparse model by incor-
porating seasonal variations in the vegetation characteristics. These concepts
along with a running water balance of the tree canopy is incorporated into
the i-Tree Hydro interception routine.
The basic concept of the interception model in i-Tree Hydro is described as
follows:
∆C
∆t = P −R −E
(3.1)
where C [m] is the depth of water on the unit canopy at time t, ∆t [s] is
the considered time interval, P [m/s] is the above canopy precipitation, R
[m/s] is the canopy throughfall, and E [m/s] is the evaporation rate from
wet canopy.
Gash, (1979) introduced a concept where the interception of precipitation
is subdivided into three phases that impacts the available canopy storage
capacity, S, in various ways. This three-phase concept is also utilized in i-
Tree Hydro:
1. canopy wetting-up C ≤S; the phase lasts from the start of the precipi-
tation until the canopy storage capacity is ﬁlled and
almost all precipitation is intercepted.
2. saturation
C = S; the canopy storage is ﬁlled and all excess pre-
cipitation falls through the canopy onto the ground.
3. drying
C ≤S; the precipitation ceases and the canopy stor-
age capacity is restored.
i-Tree allows sublimation and evaporation to occur in all tree interception
phases; hence storage capacity is recovered during a precipitation event.
In the ﬁrst phase of canopy interception, the canopy wetting up, a small
amount of the precipitation, Pf , is allowed to fall freely through the canopy
without being intercepted even though interception is active and the canopy
storage is not ﬁlled. Consequently, the troughfall equals Pf during the
canopy wetting up-phase. Pf is determined based on the work of Dijk,
(2001):
Pf = P(1 −(1 −e−κLAI))
(3.2)
==PAGE:24==
8
background
where LAI (unitless) is the Leaf Area Index of the vegetation, and κ (unitless)
is an extinction coefﬁcient set as 0.7 by default in i-Tree Hydro based on
empirical values.
The storage capacity of the tree canopy, S, is essential to the amount of
precipitation being intercepted. The storage term is linearly dependent on
LAI:
S = SLLAI
(3.3)
SL [m] is the speciﬁc leaf storage, which is set by default as 0.2 mm for trees
and 0.15 mm for shrub and herbaceuos vegetation, based on averages from
empirical studies (Dickinson, (1984) as in Wang et al., (2008); I-Tree Hydro
Support, (2016)).
Due to the seasonal variations and growth of vegetation, LAI is not a con-
stant parameter, but is has a temporal difference based on considerations
of leaf-on, leaf-off, transition periods as well as growth. The total LAI is
described as:
LAI = BAI + LAImax,const · flea f
(3.4)
where BAI is the Bark Area Index (a constant which describes the storage
capacity of the branches and trunks), LAImax,const (a constant corresponding
to the maximum total LAI minus the BAI), and the fraction of the vegetation
cover which is in-leaf (flea f ).
In i-Tree Hydro, the daily variations of LAI is calculated based on the maxi-
mum LAI (where flea f = 1 on a summer day) and the minimum LAI (where
flea f = percentage of TC that is evergreen on a winter day). The function
used in i-Tree is adapted from Koller and Upadhyay, (2005) as cited in Wang
et al., (2008):
LAI(daily) = LAI(max) −LAI(min)
1 + e−0.37(daya−dayb)
+ LAImin
(3.5)
where 0.37 is a growth constant and daya −dayb describes the day of the
year relative to a leaf-on/off period.
3.2.2
Evaporation and Evapotranspiration
The transfer of water to the atmosphere is regulated by the available water
in the canopies, in the depression storage, on the surfaces, and in the soil. In
order to account for this, i-Tree Hydro distinguishes between ﬁve different
potential evaporation and transpiration terms:
PETree
Potential Evaporation from the tree canopy
PE
Potential Evaporation from the ground
PET
Potential Evapotranspiration of soil water through direct
evaporation and transpiration of trees and lower vegetation
PESnow
Potential Sublimation of snow cover from ground
==PAGE:25==
3.2 i-tree hydro
9
PETreeSnow Potential Sublimation of snow cover from the Tree Canopy
The intercepted water stored in canopies and depression storages will evap-
orate; a process that continuously recovers the available storage. The evapo-
ration ﬂux E [m/s], is a function of the stored water:
E = (C
S )2/3 · PE
(3.6)
Where PE represents the respective potential evaporation rates (PE and
PETree), C is the stored water in canopies and depression storages) and S
represents the storage capacity of canopies and depression storages (Wang
et al., 2008; I-Tree Hydro Support, 2016). The sublimation and evaporation
in the canopies reduces the available energy for sublimation/evaporation
and evapotranspiration in the lower layers. This is incorporated by having
a running energy balance which reduces the available energy in the lower
layers.
The actual evapotranspiration is diminished by the moisture resistance in
soil. The rate of evapotranspiration, ET [m/s], is determined as:
ET = PET(1 −SR
Smax
)
(3.7)
where SR is the root zone storage deﬁcit and Smax is the maximum allowable
storage deﬁcit.
The potential evaporation and evapotranspiration is determined by the
modiﬁed Penman-Monteith equation. The Penman-Monteith equation is a
resistance-based model combining energy balance with mass transfer ﬂux
(Shuttleworth, 1992; Hirabayashi and Endreny, 2015):
PET =
1
λρw
( ∆Rn + ρacpD/ra
∆+ γ(1 + rs/ra))
(3.8)
where λ [MJ/kg] is the latent heat of vaporisation, ρw [kg/m3] is the den-
sity of water, ∆(unitless) is the saturated vapour pressure gradient, Rn
[MJ/(m2 · day)] is the net radiation at the surface of the Earth, ρa [kg/m3]
is the density of air, cp [1.013kJ/(kg ·◦C)] is the speciﬁc heat of moist air,
D [kPa] is the vapour pressure deﬁcit, γ [kPa ·◦C] is the psychrometric
constant, rs [s/m] is the surface resistance of the crop, and ra [s/m] is the
aerodynamic resistance.
The surface resistance of the canopy, rs, is a function of LAI and is equal to
zero when considering potential evaporation (Shuttleworth, 1992). The aero-
dynamic resistance, ra, controls the rate of water vapor transfer from the
surface to the atmosphere and is inversely proportional to the wind speed
and decreases with the height of the vegetation. Hence, water intercepted
in taller vegetation such as trees evaporates faster than that than that inter-
cepted in shorter vegetation (Shuttleworth, 1992). For detailed calculations
of ra for PETree, PE, PET, PESnow, and PETreeSnow, see Hirabayashi and
Endreny, (2015).
==PAGE:26==
10
background
3.3
retrieving tree characteristics using remote sensing
Hydrological models require location speciﬁc information about the catch-
ment surface and area. This information is derived from spatially dis-
tributed data which means data that is associated to a geographic location.
Mapping of tree characteristics such as TC and LAI requires vast amounts
of spatial data which is easily obtainable using remotely sensed information
(Maltamo et al., 2014).
3.3.1
Spatial Data and Data Acquisition Techniques
The following sections describe the active remote sensing technology LiDAR
and the passive remote sensing technology Aerial photography.
light detection and ranging (lidar)
LiDAR is an active remote
sensing method that can be used for a wide range of mapping applications.
The main principle behind LiDAR is a round trip time measurement, which
is translated by the speed of light and the spatial position of the sensor to
a (x,y,z)-coordinate point, see ﬁgure 1. The method is also known as laser
scanning or 3D scanning. It is analogous to Radar (RAdio Detection And
Ranging) which uses the longer radio wavelengths (mm to m) whereas Li-
DAR utilizes wavelengths close to or in the visible spectrum (500-1500 nm)
(Renslow, 2012).
LiDAR can be applied terrestrially by placing the instrument on a stationary
tripod or mobile by attaching it to a moving vehicle. This allow for high den-
sity scans for e.g. accurate 3D modelling even inside buildings (Jamali et al.,
2015). Topographic applications of LiDAR are captured with low-altitude
airborne objects such as an aircraft, a helicopter or an unmanned aerial vehi-
cle. Moreover, spaceborne LiDAR systems are used to map global topography
and vegetation structures at low point densities (Popescu et al., 2011).
Figure 1: Example of Airborne LiDAR interaction with the surface objects. Taken
from Yan et al., (2015).
A LiDAR system consists of a laser, a scanner, a receiver and position/ori-
entation systems, see ﬁgure 1. Typically, the laser has a near-infrared wave-
length at 1064 nm for ground surveying due to optimal atmospheric trans-
==PAGE:27==
3.3 retrieving tree characteristics using remote sensing
11
mittance, cf. ﬁgure 2. In airborne LiDAR systems, the laser beam divergence
and ﬂight altitude determine the laser footprint on ground. This is normally
less than 1 m for topographic applications also denoted small-footprint
(Renslow, 2012).
The scanner usually emits more than 100,000 laser pulses per second in
airborne systems with an off nadir angle of 7-30 deg. Thus angle, altitude,
velocity of the aircraft, and pulse frequency determine the point density of
the scanning. The backscattered energy is recorded by a receiver either as
discrete returns or as full-waveform where the complete return is digitized.
Up to 5 echos are automatically recorded in discrete systems depending on
the amount of signiﬁcant peaks in the backscattered signal. Each echo is
recorded with an intensity and position of the return order (Gatziolis and
Andersen, 2008). The returns are directly georeferenced by a differential
global navigation satellite system receiver in combination with an intertial
measurement unit. This allows for an accuracy in the range of 5-20 cm where
the vertical accuracy is a factor 3 higher than the horizontal (Maltamo et al.,
2014).
Figure 2: Spectral reﬂectances of various land classes compared with the visible
range and the typical lidar wavelength at 1064 nm. Taken from Yan et al., (2015).
Available LiDAR point cloud datasets are normally classiﬁed into classes
such as ground, vegetation, building, water and outliers (ASPRS, 2013).
However, classiﬁcation algorithms are not completely accurate and they are
laborious to validate due to extreme data volumes from a LiDAR survey
(Meng et al., 2010). The classiﬁed point clouds are used to generate products
such as a digital elevation model (DEM) from the ground classiﬁed points
or a digital surface model (DSM) from the highest point in each raster grid
cell. Specialized raster models of speciﬁc objects are also generated from the
point cloud e.g. trees in a canopy height model (CHM)(Renslow, 2012).
aerial photography
Aerial photographs capture the reﬂectance of
the solar radiation and is therefore a passive remote sensing technique. The
mapping procedure of aerial photography is performed with an aircraft
with an image sensor which captures overlapping vertical images. The im-
age sensor convert the solar radiation into electric signals that are normally
separated into the Red, Green and Blue (RGB) spectral bands of the visible
==PAGE:28==
12
background
spectrum. However, some image sensors are also capable of capturing re-
ﬂectance in the near-infrared spectral band where vegetation has a distinct
reﬂectance as seen in ﬁgure 2.
Aerial photographs need to be ortorectiﬁed before they are georeferenced in
order to remove perspective and relief effects so that they can be mosaicked
into a continuous image. However, there will still be shadow effects in an
ortorectiﬁed image e.g. high building shadowing the ground. Ortorectiﬁed
aerial photographs are also called ortophotos; this term that will be used for
aerial photographic datasets in this study (Congalton, 2010).
Near-Infrared ortophotos are useful for vegetation analysis by deriving the
greenness of vegetation with vegetation indices. Normalised Differenced
Vegetation Index (NDVI) is a common vegetation index that is computed
from the reﬂectance in the red (R) and near-infrared (NIR) bands (Kriegler
et al., 1969):
NDVI = NIR −R
NIR + R
(3.9)
The disadvantage of using NDVI is that it can reach saturation and thus
do not show difference in strong vegetation. Moreover, the ground cover
reﬂection and variation in solar radiation inﬂuence the recorded reﬂectance
of the canopy. Other vegetation indices such as Soil Adjusted Vegetation
Index (SAVI) can perform better than NDVI by adjusting for soil reﬂectance
(Bannari et al., 1995). However, the vegetation analysis from optical sensors
still only give information about the top layer of the canopy.
3.3.2
Tree Cover and Delineation
LiDAR data has been used for operational forestry inventories in the last
two decades, mostly in the form of airborne LiDAR. Aerial Photography is
also used in forestry, however airborne LiDAR has the advantage of being
able to characterize the 3D structure of a forest (Maltamo et al., 2014). In
an urban forest context, LiDAR has been used as well to gather information
of e.g. mapping of tree species in addition to TC estimation (Alonzo et al.,
2014). Usually, a Canopy Height Model (CHM) acts as the starting point for
LiDAR derived biophysical parameters of forests (Hyyppä et al., 2008). The
simplest and most frequently used method for computing a CHM is to sub-
tract a DEM (Digital Elevation Model) from a DSM (Digital Surface Model)
to create a normalised DSM (Khosravipour et al., 2014). Hence, the values in
a CHM characterise an absolute canopy height. Forest parameters can be de-
rived with either area based or single tree approaches. With the ever increas-
ing point densities in LiDAR surveys, the recent research in forestry focuses
on the single tree approach (Kaartinen et al., 2012). Here, delineation of the
tree crowns is an important processing step, which segments the tree peaks
of the CHM. However, the heterogeneity of the tree canopy and pits in the
CHM limit the accuracy of tree detection and has generally been approached
with smoothing of the CHM and thereby altering the height values (Hyyppä
et al., 2008). Khosravipour et al., (2014) has avoided the pits by developing
a pit-free algorithm that interpolates CHMs at multiple height thresholds
to remove the pits. For the individual tree detection Khosravipour et al.,
(2014) used a variable window method developed by Popescu and Wynne,
==PAGE:29==
3.3 retrieving tree characteristics using remote sensing
13
(2004) for detecting the local tree maxima in the CHM. Other studies use
an inverted watershed delineation approach for tree canopy segmentation
(Hyyppä et al., 2008). Reviews of different tree detection algorithms show
accuracies of 70-80 % for coniferous trees and 50-60 % for deciduous trees
due to their more complex crown structures (Kaartinen et al., 2012). How-
ever, accuracies are strongly depending on forest structure and point density
of the LiDAR data.
In urban areas, CHMs has been used to assess e.g. the TC, urban green
volume and biomass (Lee et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2013; O’Neil-Dunne et al.,
2014). Deriving a CHM in urban areas requires further processing to remove
all non vegetated objects. This can be achieved by fusion with multispectral
optical data such as ortophotos that can identify the vegetated objects with
vegetation indices such as the NDVI (Huang et al., 2013). O’Neil-Dunne et
al., (2014) reached accuracies of 93-98 % in urban TC by including vector
data of roads and building in addition to Near-infrared ortophotos in a
geographic object based image analysis. However, manual corrections were
still performed and for e.g. New York 2025 man-hours were required for a
total area of 788 km2 (O’Neil-Dunne et al., 2014).
The greater accessibility in urban areas allows for other LiDAR methods
such as mobile and terrestrial. (Holopainen et al., 2013) compared three dif-
ferent LiDAR methods for the mapping and monitoring of individual trees.
These approaches enable even more precise measurements of individual
trees in the urban environment. When extracting vegetation in such dense
point clouds, the classiﬁcation of points for extraction of objects becomes
crucial (Yan et al., 2015). (Sirmacek and Lindenbergh, 2015) improved the
automatic classiﬁcation of point clouds in tree and non-tree by applying a
probability computation matrix algorithm. The classiﬁcation accuracy was
estimated to be 92 % and 98 % for airborne and mobile LiDAR respectively.
3.3.3
Leaf Area Index
Leaf Area Index, LAI, is an important biophysical parameter in the rainfall
interception of trees and in the estimation of ecosystem beneﬁts of trees
(Peper and McPherson, 2003). It denotes the ratio of leaf area to ground sur-
face area. LAI is the parameter used to describe the vegetation soil exchange
processes in e.g. the Penman-Monteith equation and the leaf storage rele-
vant to the interception process, cf. section 3.2.2 and 3.2.1. As described in
section 3.2.1 LAI has a temporal variation due to the leaf foliation in decidu-
ous trees. In the following, the LAI referred to corresponds to the maximum
LAI (the LAI(max) described in section 3.2.1).
Multiple remote sensing techniques been used as indirect methods of deter-
mining the LAI (Zheng and Moskal, 2009). These rely on the Beer-Lambert
law that describes the attenuation of the incoming radiation in an absorb-
ing compound. Hence, it is analogous to solar or laser radiation penetrating
the canopy when assuming that the canopy act as a homogeneous layer of
randomly distributed leaves (Yang et al., 1993). This assumption cannot be
met in tree crowns which have non-random clumping structures of leaves
and branches. Instead the term effective LAI is used for indirect derived LAI
==PAGE:30==
14
background
(Zheng and Moskal, 2009). The reference indirect method for estimating
LAI is the ﬁeld based instrument LAI-2000 which measures transmittance
of light trough the canopy from ground perspective (Solberg et al., 2006).
The Beer-Lambert law can be reformulated for deriving LAI from LiDAR
with equation 3.10-3.12. Equation 3.10 is a standard differential formulation
of the law (Rosenberg et al., 1983):
dI
dx = −kI
(3.10)
where I is the radiation intensity, x is distance in the media and k is an
extinction coefﬁcient. The solution to the differential equation can be written
as the following where an initial intensity I0 is included before reaching the
media:
kx = −ln I
I0
(3.11)
In a LiDAR perspective, the intensities, I and I0 in eq. 3.11, are analogous to
ground returns below canopy (Rg) and total returns (Rt) respectively. Thus
LAI from LiDAR can be estimated from the above equation as a representa-
tion of the penetration depth in the canopy (Richardson et al., 2009):
LAI = −1
k · ln Rg
Rt
(3.12)
The extinction coefﬁcient k includes the radiation type and direction and the
canopy structure and clumbing. In addition, the leaf angle distribution in the
canopy affects the extinction capacity (Solberg et al., 2006). (Richardson et
al., 2009) found the best ﬁt at k = 0.485 with a r2 of 0.665 in a heterogeneous
mixed forest at 10 m grid spacing.
Pilegaard et al., (2003) found the effective LAI in Danish beech trees to vary
from less than 1 during leaf-off to a maximum of 5 in the summer. Leaf
defoliation started in October and reached the minimum in December. The
same values were estimated by Holst et al., (2004) in German beech trees.
==PAGE:31==
4
M E T H O D S
This chapter is divided into four sections. The ﬁrst section, Study Area gives
an overview of the area of interest. The second section, Tree Characteristics,
describes the data used for this project and how this is used to determine
the characteristics of trees in Copenhagen; TC, evergreen TC, tree growth
and LAI. These data are relevant to the hydrological processes that are in-
corporated in the i-Tree Hydro model. The third section, i-Tree Hydro: Model
set-up, describes the input parameters required by i-Tree Hydro, how they
have been obtained, and which assumptions that have been made about
input parameters in connection with this study. The last section, Scenarios,
introduces the different scenarios that was tested in this study.
4.1
study area
The study was delineated to the municipalities of Copenhagen and Fred-
eriksberg. The reason to include Frederiksberg is that it is surrounded com-
pletely by Copenhagen Municipality and the hydrological catchment of
Copenhagen. The plan of planting 100,000 trees only includes Copenhagen
Municipality and its city boroughs, cf. the administrative borders in ﬁgure
3a. However, since the focus of this study was the hydrological effects of the
trees, Frederiksberg was included because the cloudburst subcatchments
(in Danish: skybruds-deloplande) overlap with the administrative borders,
cf. ﬁgure 3b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Division of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg: (a) administrative borders (b)
cloudburst subcatchments.
15
==PAGE:32==
16
methods
4.2
tree characteristics
Processing of spatially distributed data for deriving tree characteristics were
achieved using LAStools and open source geospatial software packages for
Windows OSGEO4w.
LAStools, which was used for LiDAR processing, is a collection of
command-line tools for a wide range of LiDAR applications. All tools can
be used freely for non-proﬁt purposes, with some limitations e.g. point lim-
its and output distortions. This study was granted use of the full licensed
version through the science aid program LASmoons. This allowed for an
optimization of the batch scripts in a way not possible with the free version.
OSGEO4w is a binary distribution of geospatial software packages which
includes both desktop applications and geospatial libraries. The majority of
processing of geodata were achieved with use of the open source Geospatial
Data Abstraction Library (GDAL)/OGR. As LAStools, GDAL consists of a
library of binaries and scripts that can perform a wide range of raster and
vector processing. This made it possible to process multiple raster ﬁles with
batch script capabilities through the OSGEO4W shell.
The open source desktop application QGIS that is distributed by OSGEO4w
was used as the general GIS tool to visualize data and create maps for the re-
port. It is currently the most popular Open Source GIS software and through
its processing toolbox, QGIS combines the algorithms of most of the other
tools from OSGEO4w such as GDAL. LAStools are also integrated as algo-
rithms in the QGIS toolbox while other functionalities can be added with
plugins. Hence, the workﬂows presented in the next sections could be inte-
grated in a Graphical User Interface (GUI) and automated in QGIS by de-
veloping a plugin. However, to optimise the processing of hundreds of ﬁles
it was more effective to implement in a commandline environment without
introducing a GUI.
4.2.1
Data Sources
Since 2013, all basic spatial data has been freely available in Denmark. This
means that national datasets can be downloaded free of charge from the
Danish Agency for Data Supply and Efﬁciency at the national data por-
tal Kortforsyningen (SDFE, 2016a). Municipal datasets were obtained from
Opendata.dk which is a voluntary open data portal for the Danish munici-
palities including Copenhagen and Frederiksberg.
lidar
There have been two nationwide airbone LiDAR campaigns in
Denmark which both are called Danmarks Højdemodel (DHM). The latest
campaign was ran in 2014-2015 and is the ofﬁcial maintained DHM, while
the ﬁrst campaign from 2006-2007 is denoted DHM-2007 (SDFE, 2016a). In
this study the DHM products DHM/punktsky (pointcloud) as well as the
DTM-2007 (a digital terrain model from the 2007-DHM) at a resolution of
10 m were used.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 tree characteristics
17
The DHM/punktsky dataset includes all captured LiDAR returns and are
georeferenced in EPSG 25832. Point density is 4-5 points/m2 and the foot-
print is 40 cm. Accuracy has been measured to be 5 cm vertically and 15 cm
horizontally (Ministry of Environment, 2015). Points have been digitized in
discrete returns with up to 5 returns and have been automatically classi-
ﬁed in 11 categories following the ASPRS LAS point cloud format speciﬁ-
cation version 1.4 (ASPRS, 2013). Vegetation is dividided into three classes
depending on the height above ground: Low vegetation (0-0.3 m), medium
vegetation (0.3-2.0 m) and high vegetation (>2 m). Intensity, scanline ID,
return number and RGB colors from a simultaneous captured ortophoto
are included for each point (Ministry of Environment, 2015). RGB colors
are currently only available for daylight surveys but the Danish Agency for
Data Supply and Efﬁciency are working on fusing RGB values from other
ortophoto sources (SDFE, 2016b). Unfortunately, point cloud data of Copen-
hagen were captured during night thus no RGB values were included in
the current dataset. The data are supplied as 10 km x 10 km zipped blocks
containing 1 km x 1 km ﬁles in the compressed binary format .laz. In total,
139 tiles from 6 blocks were needed to cover the study area. The date of
capture is November 6th, 2014. Examples of the data coloured after point
classiﬁcation is shown in ﬁgure 4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4: Example of LiDAR data visualised in FugroViewer TM(Fugro, 2016). Points
are colored by classiﬁcation. Dark green represents "high vegetation" (a) Trees (b) Er-
ror: Building facade falsely categorised as "high vegetation" (c) Error: Cranes falsely
categorised as high vegetation" (c) Error: Spirs on top of a building falsely cate-
gorised as high vegetation"
==PAGE:34==
18
methods
The DTM-2007 is a DEM product derived from the ﬁrst DHM where point
density of the survey was 1/2.2 point/m2. Water bodies are corrected to
ensure ﬂatness and sea level is set to mean sea level. The data is supplied in
1.6 m and 10 m resolution in .asc format (KMS, 2014).
ortophoto
Each year nationwide ortophotos are captured during both
spring and summer conditions. Since 2014, the near infrared band has been
included in addition to the RGB bands, which allows for a better vegetation
analysis. Spring ortophotos are managed by the Danish Agency for Data
Supply and Efﬁciency as a part of the basic topographic open data pack-
age called GeoDanmark (SDFE, 2016a). Summer ortophotos are licensed by
COWI and distributed as the product Danmarks Digitale Ortofoto (DDO R⃝)
(COWI, 2014). Examples of Geodanmark 2015 and DDO 2014 are shown in
ﬁgure 5.
The best available summer ortophoto for the analysis was assumed to be
DDO 2014 which was photographed in the period from mid-May to mid-
July in 12 cm pixel size. Hence, it is 4-6 months before the LiDAR campaign.
The data was generously supplied by COWI in 1.5 km x 1.5 km tiles with a
25 cm pixel size.
The spring ortophoto from GeoDanmark was photographed in the period
from mid-March to end of April 2015 thus before leaf foliation. Pixel size is
10 cm and the data are distributed as 10 km x 10 km blocks in .ecw format.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Example of near infrared ortophotos (a) Summer: DDO 2014 (provided by
COWI) (b) Spring: GeoDanmark 2015
thematic gis layers
Basic topographical data was acquired through
GeoDanmark datasets. This include buildings, municipal boundaries and
tree points. More specialized datasets from Copenhagen municipality were
downloaded from opendata.dk. Here road surfaces, parks, administrative
boroughs and street tree point data were obtained. Additionally, cloudburst
plans including subcatchments of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg munici-
pality were downloaded. All vector data were downloaded in .shp format.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 tree characteristics
19
A land cover raster with 25 cm pixel size was supplied by the utility com-
pany of Greater Copenhagen, HOFOR, that uses the land cover map in their
MIKE Urban/FLOOD models of Copenhagen. The classiﬁcation is divided
into various classes of impervious surfaces and one type of pervious sur-
face, cf. Appendix B.5. Despite the fact that Frederiksberg Municipality is
geographically surrounded by Copenhagen, it is not part of HOFOR. Thus
the land cover classiﬁcation in Frederiksberg is not as accurate as for Copen-
hagen municipality.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: Example of Buildings layer and the Land Cover map. (a) building layer (b)
Land cover from HOFOR
water;
pervious areas; all other colors represent
different types of impervious areas (buildings, streets, etc.)
4.2.2
Estimating Tree Cover
The workﬂow of deriving the TC of Copenhagen is shown in ﬁgure 7. An
initial CHM and TC were derived using the pit-free CHM method devel-
oped by Khosravipour et al., (2014) in collaboration with LAStools. Scripts
to implement the algorithm are provided in LAStools. The modiﬁed script
with parameters used for this study is available in appendix B.1. The pixel
size for the CHM was 40 cm corresponding to the pixel size in the DHM
grid products.
The pit-free CHM algorithm was developed for forested areas which caused
some challenges as the LiDAR classiﬁcation in the DHM is not always cor-
rect for "high vegetation" (cf. ﬁgure 4). Roofs and facades of buildings are
frequently classiﬁed as high vegetation, which creates problems with trian-
gulation between the incorrectly classiﬁed points and closely connected true
vegetation points. To avoid this error both vegetation and building points
were included in the initial CHM raster, to avoid triangulation between
buildings and vegetation.
The workﬂow presented in ﬁgure 7 aims at isolating vegetation from build-
ings in the initial CHM raster. This is mainly achieved with an auto-
mated gdal batch script available in appendix B.1. The summer ortophoto
DDO2014 was used to compute a NDVI, which was then combined with the
CHM. This effectively removed most building cells when applying a thresh-
old value of 0.1 for the NDVI. However, high reﬂective roofs (such as glazed
ceramic roofs), and building facades as well as green roofs also have a high
==PAGE:36==
20
methods
NDVI, and these were therefore not removed in the ﬁrst step. To overcome
this, the building vector layer for Copenhagen was buffered 2 meters and
rasterized with 40 cm grid cells to have the same extents as the CHM and
NDVI rasters. To allow for canopies overhanging buildings, all cells within
buildings with a NDVI above 0.4 were included in the corrected CHM. An
assumption was made that a tree canopy will consist of at least 4 connected
cells and smaller clusters were removed. High reﬂective roofs were still not
removed completely and by polygonizing the CHM it was possible to re-
move features that were completely within the building buffer layer. The
CHM was polygonized with the GRASS command r.to.vect due to the inefﬁ-
ciency of the corresponding GDAL command. Thus, the last two operations
in the workﬂow in ﬁgure 7 were done manually in QGIS. The ﬁnal output
is a vector dataset of the urban TC (TC CPH) of the valid raster cells.
Figure 7: Workﬂow for creating the TC in Copenhagen. See scripts in App. B.1
Datasets; Operations using tools:
LAStools
GDAL
QGIS.
evergreen tc
The evergreen fraction of the TC was estimated based
on the NDVI computed with the spring ortophoto. It was assumed that
an NDVI of 0.2 on the spring ortophoto is a sufﬁcient threshold for the
==PAGE:37==
4.2 tree characteristics
21
evergreen trees. However, grass beneath deciduous trees can have a high
NDVI in spring that could result in some erroneous commissions.
4.2.3
Estimating Future Tree Cover
In order to determine the increase in TC caused by the 100,000 new trees
in Copenhagen, the canopy size, also referred to as crown projected area
(CPA), of a new tree had to be estimated. This was done using allometric
analysis, which predicts the CPA based on the growth of trees.
tree growth
The growth of urban trees was determined with allomet-
ric analysis that relates the CPA to the stem diameter at breast height (DBH)
(Pretzsch et al., 2015):
ln CPA = a′ + α′ · ln DBH
(4.1)
where a′ and α′ are allometric constants. The normal perimeter size of newly
planted street trees is 18-20 cm corresponding to a mean stem diameter of 6
cm (Copenhagen Municipality, 2016c; Kristoffersen, 2012). Yearly stem diam-
eter growth of street trees in Copenhagen was estimated in 2005 by Bühler
et al., (2006). These estimates were related to CPA estimates of open grown
urban trees from the study of Pretzsch et al., (2015). 22 common urban tree
species were clustered in 5 extension crown types with different allometric
relationships. In total, 7 different tree species contributing to 82% of the to-
tal street tree population in Copenhagen were included in the tree growth
analysis (Copenhagen Municipality, 2014). As Copenhagen Municipality try
to avoid planting dominant tree species, it was assumed that that the tree
species will have same planting fraction. CPA was calculated in the year of
planting (year 0), year 5 and year 10 in order to include the uncertainty of
time of planting and growth of the 100,000 new trees towards 2025.
Table 2: Average tree stem growth at breast height, predicted stem diameter growth
and projected crown area at year 0, 5 and 10 after planting.
Stem growth
Stem diameter
Crown Projection Area
Year 0
Year 5
Year 10
Year 0
Year 5
Year 10
[cm/yr]
[cm]
[cm]
[cm]
[m2]
[m2]
[m2]
0.89
6.0
10.5
14.9
8.7
16.8
25.5
The predicted canopy area of a tree derived from the allometric relationship
with stem diameter for urban trees planted in the period from 2015 to 2025
are listed in table 2. At planting, the average CPA was predicted to be 8.7
m2 assuming that the planted trees have an initial diameter of 6 cm. After
5 years it will be almost doubled at 16.8 m2 while at year 10, the area is
assumed to be 25.5 m2. Complete calculations of stem diameter and area for
each of the 7 included tree species can be found in Appendix B.2.
==PAGE:38==
22
methods
4.2.4
Estimating Leaf Area Index
The workﬂow of deriving the maximum LAI is shown in ﬁgure 8. LAI
was estimated using the Beer-Lambert law derived equation developed
by (Richardson et al., 2009) as explained in section 3.3.3. Initially, the
DHM/punktsky tiles were clipped to the extents of the urban TC (TC CPH)
with LASclip from LAStools. Moreover, points not classiﬁed as ground or
vegetation were removed from the tiles. LASgrid was used to both count the
total points and the total ground points per grid cell by omitting the vegeta-
tion points above 2 m. The grid size were set to 6 m to get better estimate of
LAI. Script for the LAStools processing part is available in appendix B.3.
The LiDAR data were captured in November which is in the middle of the
leaf transition period. In order to accommodate for the bias between decid-
uous and evergreen trees during this period, the evergreen tree fraction was
corrected with the extinction coefﬁcient. Given an extinction factor of 0.485
from Richardson et al., (2009), the extinction factors were set to 0.4 for ev-
ergreen and 0.8 for deciduous trees (Pilegaard et al., 2003). LAI was then
computed for the deciduous and evergreen fraction using equation 3.12. Fi-
nally, these fractions were combined into a single dataset for a complete
LAI of the TC CPH. LAI statistics were derived by transferring the value
from the coarser LAI raster to the ﬁner TC CPH raster. Thus, the fraction of
the LAI grid cells not within the TC CPH raster were not included in the
computed average LAI for the subcatchments.
4.3
i-tree hydro: model set-up
This study utilise the i-Tree Application i-Tree Hydro version 5 with ex-
tended outputs for each of the subprocesses. The original version includes
an output of the total water balance, whereas the extended version includes
outputs of each of the model subprocesses described in section 3.2. The ex-
tended output version has been provided after correspondence with i-Tree
Hydro developers team.
The graphical user interface of i-Tree Hydro is divided into three input steps:
1. Project Area Information, 2. Land Cover Parameters and 3. Hydrological
Parameters. The model set-up also includes an option of creating an alter-
native scenario to compare with the baseline scenario. This option was how-
ever not utilised in the present study. The three input steps are elaborated
in the following sections.
4.3.1
Step 1: Project Area Information
The Project Area Information, provides the most distinctive information on
the study area relevant to the analysis, including the topographics, weather
data, and tree cover and characteristics. The required input data can be
found in table 3.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 i-tree hydro: model set-up
23
Figure 8: Workﬂow for creating the LAI in Copenhagen, see script in App. B.3.
Datasets; Operations using tools:
LAStools
GDAL
QGIS.
Table 3: i-Tree Hydro: STEP 1: Project Area Information
Required Input
Digital Elevation Model
DEM
Project Location
Substitute U.S. Project Location
Basic Watershed Characteristics
Watershed Land Area
Tree Cover (%)
Leaf Area Index (-)
Evergreen Tree Cover (%)
Evergreen Shrub Cover (%)
Weather Station Data
digital elevation model
Elevation data is required either as an dig-
ital elevation model (DEM) Minimum grid size required in the model is
10 meters so the DHM derived digital terrain model called DTM-2007 was
used in its original 10 meter resolution.
project location
i-Tree Hydro is currently only developed for the US,
Canada, and Australia. i-Tree requires a project location in one of these
==PAGE:40==
24
methods
areas in order to process input weather data to correctly account for pro-
cesses of evaporation and evapotranspiration. For project locations outside
of these areas, a similar U.S. location is chosen based on elevation and lati-
tude (USDA Forest Service, 2014). The city of Copenhagen has an elevation
of 5.2 m and the latitude 55.617917N (Patokallio, 2016). The project location
chosen was the city of Klawock, located in the county of Prince of Wales-
Outer Ketchikan, Alaska, USA. The city has an elevation of 24.4 m and the
latitude 55.579167N (Patokallio, 2016). Since this, in terms of elevation and
latitude is quite similar to Copenhagen it is reasonable to suggest that this
substitute project location is acceptable.
basic watershed characteristics
The Basic Watershed Character-
istics contains the primary information about the characteristics of the wa-
tershed; size of the area, TC, LAI, and the fraction of evergreen TC.
A detailed description of TC, LAI, and Evergreen TC were presented in
section 4.2. The Evergreen fraction of the Shrub Cover was set to zero, as the
focus of this study was the effect of trees.
The Watershed Land Area was calculated in QGIS based on the municipal
boundaries and cloudburst subcatchments (skybrudsdeloplande) datasets.
i-Tree Hydro also provides the opportunity to calibrate the model using
measured stream ﬂow data. However, as the investigated study area is non-
watershed area, this option was not utilized in the study.
weather station data
i-Tree Hydro requires an input of weather data
containing information about precipitation as well as a number of parame-
ters relevant to the processes of evaporation and evapotranspiration. The
required input parameters are listed in table 4. The input ﬁle had to be a
ﬁxed-width textﬁle and an example of the required input ﬁle can be found
in Appendix B.4. Weather data is provided from January 1st, 2005, to 31st
of December, 2015.
Table 4: Required input weather station data for i-Tree Hydro Step 1
Parameter
Acronym
Unit
Wind direction
DIR
-
Wind speed
SPD
m/h
Cloud ceiling – lowest opaque layer with
5/8 or greater coverage
CLG
hundreds of ft
Sky cover
SKC
-
Air temperature
TEMP
F
Dew point temperature
DEWP
F
Station pressure
STP
mb
Hourly precipitation
PCP01
in/h
==PAGE:41==
4.3 i-tree hydro: model set-up
25
All relevant weather data (apart from precipiation data) was METAR data
from Copenhagen airport, station ID EKCH, located at UTM Zone 33N,
6165655, 351697 (Iowa State University of Science and Technology, 2016).
The METAR data provides wind direction, wind speed, air temperature,
dew point temperature with an interval of approximately 30 minutes. Infor-
mation on how to determine cloud ceiling, sky cover and station pressure
based on the METAR data, can be found in Appendix B.4.
Precipitation data was collected from Spildevandskomitéens (SVK) station
5755, Tårnbypumpestation 4, located at UTM Zone 32N 6171028, 726328.
The SVK data gives information on rain events using the KM2-format and
was translated to mm/min using a Pythonscript provided by DTU Environ-
ment. This was then aggreated in MATLAB to inches/h using the timesteps
speciﬁed by the METAR-data, see Appendix B.4.
4.3.2
Step 2: Land Cover Parameters
In i-Tree Hydro, the land cover of the watershed is divided into the follow-
ing classes: tree, shrub, herbaceous, water, impervious and soil (cf. table 5).
Combined these land cover classes should add up to 100%. In addition to
these land cover classes, i-Tree Hydro also accounts for the surface cover
beneath the tree cover, which can be classiﬁed as either pervious and im-
pervious, cf. table 5. The connected impervious cover was set to 100%. All
Table 5: i-Tree Hydro: STEP 2: Land Cover Parameters
Required Input
Surface Cover Types
Tree Cover (%)
Tree LAI (-)
Shrub Cover (%)
Shrub LAI (-)
Herbaceous Cover (%)
Herbaceous LAI (-)
Water Cover (%)
Impervious Cover (%)
Connected IC (%)
Soil Cover (%)
Beneath Tree Cover
Pervious Cover (%)
Impervious Cover (%)
types of pervious covers were categorised as soil. Shrub and herbaceous
cover were omitted in this analysis. In an urban context it would be reason-
able to suggest that the soil cover should be set to approximately zero and
replaced by a combination of shrub and herbaceous cover. The rationale for
replacing shrub and herbaceous cover with soil cover is the way i-Tree Hy-
dro processes the evapotranspiration and interception of these land cover
types. One problem is that i-Tree Hydro produces a combined evapotranspi-
ration output for trees, shrub, and herbaceous cover. By excluding the inputs
of shrub and herbaceous cover, it was possible to get a better estimate of the
evapotranspiration from trees. However, the interception and evaporation
from shrub and herbaceous cover affect the overall energy balance and in-
cluding these in the model would reduce the available energy for the evapo-
transpiration, cf. section 3.2.2. Hence, introducing the shrub and herbaceous
==PAGE:42==
26
methods
cover to the model would reduce the evapotranspiration from trees. This ar-
gument would support the inclusion of shrub and herbaceous cover. What
militate against this is the way the evaporation of intercepted water in shrub
and herbaceous cover is calculated in the present version of i-Tree Hydro;
Currently, the evaporation from these are calculated based on the potential
evaporation from trees (I-Tree Hydro Support, 2016). Hence, the evapora-
tion of these land cover types are ultimately too high. Consequently, it was
decided to eliminate shrub and herbaceous cover in the present study.
The surface cover types are determined based on the HOFOR land cover
raster dataset and the TC (described in section 4.2.2). The HOFOR land cover
dataset provides a detailed classiﬁcation of different impervious, pervious
and water covered areas, where each classiﬁcation is given a speciﬁc value
between 0 and 10 (pervious area = 0, water = 7, and various impervious
areas accounts for the remaining classiﬁcations), cf. Appendix B.5. However,
in the HOFOR land cover dataset some parking lots and pavements are
wrongly classiﬁed as pervious areas. In order to correct for these errors, the
vector datasets from Copenhagen municipality of street surface and parks
have been used. Thereby, the pervious areas within the impervious street
surface area, such as median strips, can be included in the analysis.
Figure 9 shows the workﬂow of the land cover classiﬁcation. The corre-
sponding batch script can be found in Appendix B.5. Initially, the park
and street surface datasets were rasterized and each given a unique value
(greater than 10) before they were combined by addition. Then, the HOFOR
Land cover data was added to this output. In order to differentiate the tree
cover from the other classiﬁcations, the TC was assigned a value of 50 be-
fore it was added to the others. Hence, each cell had a classiﬁcation value
given by the combined input datasets. The classiﬁcation values were then
reclassiﬁed into the four land cover categories used for i-tree hydro; Tree,
pervious, water and impervious cover.
The QGIS tool zonal statistics were applied to count the raster cells of each
reclassiﬁed output dataset within the cloudburst subcatchments and mu-
nicipality borders. By dividing with the total count of raster cells within
the speciﬁed area, the fraction of each surface cover type type can be deter-
mined.
The workﬂow in Figure 9 also provides the needed information about the
surface cover types beneath the TC. When the TC is added to the modiﬁed
HOFOR land cover dataset, each cell has a unique classiﬁcation value given
by the combined input datasets. Hence, tree covered areas with pervious
cover are assigned different values than those of tree covered areas.
4.3.3
Step 3: Hydrological Parameters
Soil types in the research area vary from boulder clay with low hy-
draulic conductivity soil to marine deposits with high hydraulic conduc-
tivity (Greve et al., 2013). The soil type chosen was sandy clay with the
associated Green-Ampt parameter values stated in table 6. The depth of
root zone and initial soil saturation were set to the default values also stated
==PAGE:43==
4.3 i-tree hydro: model set-up
27
Figure 9: Workﬂow for creating the Land Cover classiﬁcation in Copenhagen, see
script in App. B.5
Datasets; Operations using tools:
GDAL
QGIS.
in table 6. Advanced vegetation parameter BAI was set to 1 based on the
ﬁndings of Pilegaard et al., (2003). Shrub Area Index was set to zero to ex-
clude evapotranspiration from shrub and herbaceous cover from the model.
Advanced parameters consisting of mainly calibration parameters for the
auto-calibration of stream ﬂow were set to default values as well.
Table 6: i-Tree Hydro STEP 3: Hydrological Parameters
Parameter
Unit
Value
Default Value
Wetting Front Suction
m
0.239
yes
Wetted Moisture Content
m
0.1605
yes
Surface Hydraulic Conductivity
cm/h
0.06
yes
Depth of Root Zone
m
0.05
yes
Initial Soil Saturation Condition
%
50
yes
BAI
(-)
1
no
Shrub Area Index
(-)
0
no
==PAGE:44==
28
methods
4.4
scenarios
Different scenarios were set up in i-Tree Hydro to estimate the effects of the
hydrological processes and the increase in tree population towards 2025 in
the Municipality of Copenhagen.
The following scenarios were tested for the municipality of Copenhagen:
Baseline
(TC = 13.5%) A baseline scenario was in-
cluded in order to determine the current effect
of trees.
100.000 min
(TC = 14.5%) A minimum scenario for the
2025 goal of 100.000 new trees was compared
with the baseline scenario.
100.000 avg
(TC = 15.4%) An average scenario for the 2025
goal of 100.000 new trees was compared with
the baseline scenario.
100.000 max
(TC = 16.3%) A maximum scenario for the
2025 goal of 100.000 new trees was compared
with the baseline scenario.
20 % Tree Cover
(TC = 20.0%) The goal of 20% tree cover in
2025 were compared with other scenarios.
Effects of LAI
The effects of increasing LAI to the default
value of i-Tree Hydro (LAIdeault, corespond-
ing to a LAImax,const = 5 and a BAI = 1.7)
where compared with the Copenhagen scenar-
ios (LAICPH, coresponding to a LAImax,const =
2.4 and a BAI = 1)
Variations in subcatchments A baseline scenario for the subcatchment
Bispebjerg Vest, BV, and Sønder Boulevard,
SB, was compared with baseline scenario of
Copenhagen, cf. ﬁgure 10.
The i-Tree Hydro inputs for the CPH, BV, and SB scenarios are listed in
table 7. The subcatchment, BV, has a high TC (22%) and a high LAI (2.9)
compared with CPH, whereas the subcatchment SB has a lower TC (8%)
and a lower LAI (2.4) than CPH.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 scenarios
29
Table 7: i-Tree Hydro Scenarios: Inputs for the municipality of Copenhagen (Cph)
as well as the two cloudburst subcatchments Bispebjerg Vest (BV) and Sønder Boule-
vard (SB)
CPH
BV
SB
100,000 trees
Baseline
min
avg
max
20% TC
1. Project Area Information
Area
km2
90
7.2
2.6
TC
(%)
13.5
14.5
15.4
16.3
20
22
8
LAI 1
(-)
2.4
2.2
2.9
Evergreen TC
(%)
11
15
9
2. Land Cover Parameters
Water
(%)
2.5
12
0
Impervious
(%)
52
52
51.7
51.6
51
34
75
Soil
(%)
32
31
30.4
29.6
26.5
32
17
Cover beneath TC
Pervious
(%)
86
89
74
Impervious
(%)
14
11
26
3. Hydrological Parameters
BAI 2
(-)
1
1
1
1 LAImax,const in eq. 3.4. Values is the effective LAI found using remote sensing (cf. section 4.2.4) minus
BAI.
2 Based on Danish estimates of effective LAI during leaf-off season (Pilegaard et al., 2003).
Figure 10: Overview of the municipalities Frederiksberg and Copenhagen and their
subcatchments. Study areas: 1. Copenhagen (witout Frederiksberg), 2. the subcatch-
ment Bisbebjerg Vest (BV), and 3. the subcatchment Sønder Boulevard (SB)
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
5
R E S U LT S & E VA L U AT I O N O F
T R E E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S
This chapter is divided into two sections. The ﬁrst section, Results of Tree
Characteristics, presents the results of the ﬁndings of the spatial analysis on
trees in Copenhagen. The section presents the TC, the evergreen TC, LAI,
Pervious cover as well as the future TC and the Land Cover distribution in
Copenhagen. The second section, Evaluation of Tree Characteristics, gives an
evaluation of the Tree Characteristics results. The TC have been evaluated
by comparing with a manual digitizing of four test sites, as well as by com-
paring with an analysis conducted by the Municipality of Copenhagen. The
estimates for the future TC have were evaluated based on an analysis con-
ducted in the current project of some of the street trees in Copenhagen. LAI
results were evaluated by comparing with values found in literature and by
comparing the results with other ﬁeld studies.
5.1
results of tree characteristics
Differences in TC between the subcatchments are shown in ﬁgure 11a. TC is
largest in the suburban part of Copenhagen in the subcatchments of Bisbe-
bjerg Vest and Svanemøllen with 22% and 21% respectively. TC is however
also high in Fr. Alle og Vodroffsvej with a TC of 20%. The lowest TC is found
in Nordhavn where only 2% of the area is covered with trees. This is an old
industrial harbour built on reclaimed land which has only recently been
converted to residential area. Other areas witch have a low TC are found
at the medieval city center in the subcatchments of Indre By Midt and Syd
where TC ranges from 3% to 7%.
Evergreen TC that are shown in ﬁgure 11b vary from 2% in Nordhavn to
19% in Grøndal Å and Teglholmen. In general, the highest evergreen TC
in subcatchments with large cemeteries where a major part of vegetation is
evergreen e.g Vestre Kirkegård located in Teglholmen. Suburban subcatch-
ments also have high evergreen TC.
The differences in LAI of the TC between subcatchments are shown in ﬁgure
11c. LAI ranges from 3.0 to 4.0. The highest LAI is found in Fr. Alle og
Vodroffsvej subcatchment possibly due to high share of park areas with old
trees. Lowest LAIs are located in the subcatchments close to the sea such as
Nordhavn and Amager Syd. Subcatchments as Sønder Boulevard and Indre
By Midt in the densely built parts of the city have low LAIs. Common for
subcatchments with low LAI is the low share of parks that that normally
enable larger trees with higher LAI.
Pervious cover beneath tree canopy shown in ﬁgure 11d differs from 45% in
Indre By Syd to 99% in Amager Vest. The older city districts, Brokvartererne,
surrounding the inner city are densely populated and hence the pervious
31
==PAGE:48==
32
results & evaluation of tree characteristics
cover beneath trees are lower ranging from 70% to 78%. Subcatchments that
are within Frederiksberg have higher percentage pervious than the nearby
catchments.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 11: Differences in tree characteristics between the subcatchments. (a) Tree
cover percentage of subcatchment area (TC), (b) Evergreen tree cover percentage
of total tree cover (Evergreen TC), (c) Leaf Area Index of tree cover (LAI) and (d)
Pervious cover percentage beneath TC.
Within the research area but outside the
cloud burst catchment area;
Included subcatchments.
Table 8 summarises the tree characteristics for the entire municipality of
Copenhagen and the subcatchments Bispebjerg Vest, BV, and Sønder Boule-
vard, SB. The complete lists of tree characteristics for all subcatchments and
the city districts are listed in appendix C.1.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 results of tree characteristics
33
Table 8: Tree Characteristics for the current TC (baseline) in Copenhagen (CPH),
Bispebjerg Vest (BV) and Sønder Boulevard (SB)
CPH
BV
SB
TC
[%]
13.5
22
8
LAI
[-]
3.4
3.9
3.2
Evergreen TC
[%]
11
15
9
Pervious Cover
[%]
32
32
17
future tree cover
Total area estimations of 100,000 new trees using
the crown projected areas from year 0, 5 and 10 after planting are listed as
minimum, average and maximum scenarios respectively in table 9. The aver-
age scenario results in a 1.9% increase in tree cover corresponding to a total
tree cover increase from 13.5% to 15.4% for the municipality of Copenhagen.
Table 9: Copenhagen: Predicted increase in TC in 2025 for minimum, average and
maximum growth scenarios for 100,000 new trees
Baseline
100,000 min
100,000 avg
100,000 max
Increase in TC
[%]
-
1
1.9
2.8
TC
[%]
13.5
14.5
15.4
16.3
land cover
The division of land cover in tree, pervious, impervious
and water fractions can be seen in ﬁgure 12. The map shows the subcatch-
ments with dotted lines and the research area extents with the solid black
line. The circle charts show distribution of land cover classes in the sub-
catchments. For a complete list of land cover classes see appendix C.1. Im-
pervious cover is highest in Indre By Syd with 88% while the inner parts of
the city also have high impervious covers in the range of 68% to 80% with
the exception of Nørrebro with only 58%. These subcatchments are densely
populated with no major parks resulting in a high impervious cover. In the
suburban subcatchment, the impervious cover is in the range of 26% to 54%.
Here, private gardens increase the pervious cover and thus reduce impervi-
ous cover when comparing to the inner parts of the city. Largest fractions
of pervious cover are located in the subcatchments of Amager Vest and Am-
ager Øst with 38% and 36% respectively. Here, large open areas such as
Amager Fælled and allotments secure a large pervious cover.
==PAGE:50==
34
results & evaluation of tree characteristics
Figure 12: Land cover map of the research area divided in 4 classes: tree, pervious,
impervious and water. Circle charts show the distribution of land cover classes for
each subcatchment.
==PAGE:51==
5.2 evaluation of tree characteristics
35
5.2
evaluation of tree characteristics
evaluation of tree cover
The TC analysis was validated by digitiz-
ing the TC in small test sites that reﬂect different characteristics observed
in the research area. Moreover, the test areas exemplify the heterogeneity of
the urban forest in the city of Copenhagen. The summer NIR ortophoto was
used as ground truth while Google Street View was used to some extent for
distinguishing shrubs from trees based on ground height. An overview of
the test sites is shown in ﬁgure 13a and comparisons between ground truth
and CHM are shown in ﬁgures 13b to 13e. Differences in area between the
two methods are shown in table 10. The test area at Blågårdsplads shows
mature trees forming a coherent TC. The automatic and digitised derived
TC are almost the same and no large error can be seen within the test area.
Outside the test area, there are errors at the facade of buildings where the
perspective of the ortophoto and a high NDVI are making it difﬁcult to dis-
tinguish between building facades and trees. In total the area of the TC is
4.3% higher than the digitised.
The Fanøgade test site in Østerbro is a representative area of the older dis-
tricts in Copenhagen with residential perimeter block development. The in-
ner space in the perimeter block often contains trees. It was however not
possible to estimate the height of the vegetation from the ortophoto and
therefore it was excluded from the validation. As seen in ﬁgure 13c, the
TC is underestimated in the LiDAR method. This can be explained by the
LiDAR acquisition in the leaf transition period, where trees are not fully
foliated. Another error source is the difference the LiDAR scanning angle
and camera tilt of the ortophoto which can explain the underestimation of
especially the south-west part of the tree crowns. Furthermore, two newly
planted trees are not recognised in the LiDAR derived TC because of the
small canopy area and low NDVI due to reﬂection of the impervious sur-
face below the trees. There is a 40% difference between the digitized and
automatic TC indicating that the model underestimate small street trees.
At Tølløsevej in Vanløse, a surburban part of Copenhagen characterised by
detached housing, the tree canopy is highly heterogenous and mostly within
private property. It is difﬁcult to distinguish trees from shrub especially from
the ground truth and since Google Street View gives limited views into pri-
vate property, there is no optimal way to validate the canopy extent without
measuring each tree in the ﬁeld. The LiDAR derived TC include long strips
close to houses. This strip could be errors in the modelled TC that are caused
a high NDVI from e.g. grass and a height above the chosen threshold. Omit-
ting these types of errors are difﬁcult when using the LiDAR method. The
area is underestimated with 12.6% by the modelled TC compared with the
digitised TC, but digitised TC is also uncertain and ﬁeld survey would be
the only way to estimate the correct TC. However, the elapsed time since the
LiDAR acquisition would also lead to uncertain ﬁeld survey.
The test area at Vor Frue Kirke in ﬁgure 13e show that the digitised TC is al-
most exact the same with only a 2.1% difference. A small area in south-east
part of the test area is the only error within the test area. This shows that the
TC is estimated correctly for larger trees but that small errors are almost im-
==PAGE:52==
36
results & evaluation of tree characteristics
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 13: Comparison between modelled and digitised TC in test areas with NIR
ortophoto as background. (a) Location of the test areas, (b) Blågårdsplads, Nørre-
bro (c) Fanøgade, Østerbro (d) Tølløsevej, Vanløse (e) Vor Frue Kirke, Indre By.
Automated Tree Cover;
Digitized Tree Cover
Extent of Test areas.
possible to remove with the remote sensing approach of combining LiDAR
and ortophoto.
The municipality of Copenhagen has conducted an analysis of the TC in
relation to the city nature strategy to assess the indicator of 20% TC in
==PAGE:53==
5.2 evaluation of tree characteristics
37
Table 10: Comparison of tree cover area between the modelled and digitised TC.
Test site
Modelled TC
Digitised TC
Difference %
Fanøgade
277
466
-40,6
Tølløsevej
1541
1764
-12,6
Vor Frue
876
840
4,3
Blågårdsplads
3204
3137
2,1
2025. By using the Open Source Canopy Cover Audit (OSCCA), the TC was
estimated to be 16.1 %. The method of OSCCA is to classify the land cover
by manually identifying randomly selected points within the study area. In
Copenhagen, 3,000 points were classiﬁed in each borough using the summer
ortophoto from 2014. The land cover were categorised in municipal/non
municipal trees, other vegetation, pavements, buildings, water and other.
TC estimates for the boroughs from the municipality study and our study
are shown in ﬁgure 14.
Figure 14: Comparison of TC estimation methods for the city boroughs.
TC
derived in this study;
TC derived by Copenhagen Municipality using OSCCA
The TC estimated with OSCCA is generally 1-3% higher with exception of
Bispebjerg and Østerbro where the TC estimates are identical. The largest
difference is in Amager Vest with 11%, which corresponds to an estimate by
OSCCA that is twice as high as the results found in this study. Additionally,
Amager Vest is the largest borough of Copenhagen (22.4%) which makes
the bias even more noticeable on the total TC estimates. The main reason
for the large difference is presumably the differentiation between shrub and
trees. Amager Vest has large open areas with bushes and trees. The method
used in this study sets a height threshold so it is possible to differentiate
between shrub and trees. This is however not possible when using only an
ortophoto. Moreover, the data source used by the municipality does not use
NIR ortophoto and thus it becomes more difﬁcult to distinguish vegetation
from other land cover types.
evaluation of future tree cover
In addition to the allometric anal-
ysis, the canopy area of street trees in Copenhagen was analysed by delimit-
ing trees from the street tree dataset maintained by Copenhagen Municipal-
ity.
==PAGE:54==
38
results & evaluation of tree characteristics
The street tree dataset was joined with the vectorized TC CPH dataset
dataset. By doing so, tree characteristics such as tree canopy cover were
joined with tree repository information about tree species and planting year.
The QGIS plug-in Group Stats was used to count the number of tree points
per canopy polygon so the analysis only included clearly deﬁned trees that
had only one registered tree within the same canopy cover polygon. Inter-
twined tree canopies were removed under the assumption that an optimal
tree crown is circular. Following this assumption, the circular crown area
(Acirc) can be derived from the crown perimeter (P):
Acirc = π · P/π
2
P
(5.1)
The circular crown area was compared with the actual crown area by com-
puting the ratio between the two. It was found that a actual crown area/cir-
cular crown area ratio greater than 0.47 sufﬁciently removed canopies that
where incorrectly delimited. The low ratio is caused by the gridded vector-
ization of the canopy cover that increases the perimeter length of circular
objects.
The relationship between projected crown area and the tree age was anal-
ysed for open grown street trees in Copenhagen. In total 5,047 out of 13,000
street trees from the ofﬁcial street tree repository were included in the anal-
ysis. Figure 15 shows the canopy size of trees planted in Copenhagen after
1965, which includes 4,783 trees. The ﬁgure shows that the canopy size of
trees planted in the same year varies greatly e.g. from 1 to 45 m2 in the year
of planting and from 1 to 35 m2 10 years after planting. These large varia-
tions emphasise the difﬁculties of estimating exactly how much an increase
of 100,000 trees will increase the overall TC. It should however be noted
that only single standing street trees are included in this analysis, which
means that the larger trees with intertwined canopies are not included. Fur-
thermore, the street tree dataset from Copenhagen Municipality might not
be completely updated. Consequently, the estimated increase in future TC
is neither conﬁrmed nor rejected based on this analysis. The analysis does
however indicate the future TC estimates are not unrealistic.
Figure 15: Scatter plot of the Tree Age and Area of street trees in Copenhagen.
Average canopy size
==PAGE:55==
5.2 evaluation of tree characteristics
39
lai evaluation
The LAI estimates were evaluated by comparing to ref-
erence LAI of speciﬁc trees from litterature. The extinction factors for decid-
uous and evergreen trees were set to corresponding values of Richardson
et al., (2009) with correction for acquisition date. The assumed extinction
factors were evaluated by the distribution of the histogram, see ﬁgure 16.
The histogram of LAI in Copenhagen values is normal distributed with a
maximum frequency at 3.4. A slight tailing can be seen at higher LAI of
6 to 8. In the lowest end of the histogram of the values between 0 and 1,
frequencies do not reach 0 and are increasing towards 0. This is most likely
non-tree objects included in the TC that do not absorb the energy but only
reﬂect. Hence, the TC analysis could be improved by including a threshold
for LAI in addition to the NDVI threshold.
Figure 16: Histogram of the LAI values of the TC in the city of Copenhagen.
A study by Ingerslev et al., (2014) used a maximum LAI of 3.5 in 2012 for
nutrient balance modelling of Linden street trees planted in 2009. Three
of the trees from the study are shown in ﬁgure 17a and 17b from 2014. The
modelled mean LAI of the trees is 2.7 i.e. lower than the reference study LAI
of 3.5 conducted two years earlier. However, the TC modelling of such small
trees suffer from the difference in perspective between LAI and ortophoto.
Furthermore, leaf foliation irregularities between the tree species and tree
location could inﬂuence LAI because of the LiDAR acquisition on November
5th.
LAI of mature Beech trees was measured to a maximum of 5 by Pilegaard et
al., (2003) in a forest on Zealand in Denmark. This was used as the reference
for the beech tree shown in center of ﬁgures 17c and 17d from September
2010. LAI of the beech tree canopy ranges from 4 to 6 with a mean of 5.1.
This corresponds to the expected values and is hence good indication of LAI
mature trees.
Figure 17e and 17f illustrate some of the inherent errors of using LiDAR
for deriving LAI. Here LAI values approach 12 close to the water, while
the same canopy not overhanging the water body has a LAI of 4. This is
caused by the low reﬂectance of water at the LiDAR wavelength of 1064 nm
which results in a very low point density of water objects. Therefore, LAI
values could be overestimated in subcatchments with many tree canopies
overhanging water bodies such as Bispebjerg Vest.
==PAGE:56==
40
results & evaluation of tree characteristics
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 17: Evaluation of LAI performance on different tree locations and sizes. (a)
Linden street trees on Øster Alle and (b) photo from June 2014. (c) Beech park trees
in Fælledparken with (d) photo from September 2010. (e) Willow trees at Kastellet
with (f) photo from September 2010. Blue angle marker show the direction of the
photo. Photos are taken from Google Streetview c⃝.
==PAGE:57==
6
R E S U LT S F R O M T H E I - T R E E
H Y D R O M O D E L
This chapter is divided into two sections. The ﬁrst section, Weather Data,
presents statistics on the input weather data time series for the years 2005-
2015, to see if the data is representative for the period. Furthermore, the
section describes the uncertainties related to the way the input weather data
is processed by i-Tree Hydro. The second section, Results of i-Tree Scenarios,
presents the results of scenarios presented in section 4.4. Included in these
results are the evaporation and evapotranspiration for the baseline TC, for
the different future TC scenarios, and the effects of increasing LAI and the
variations in the subcatchments Bispebjerg Vest and Sønder Boulevard.
6.1
weather data
Statistics on the weather data from 2005 to 2015 processed by the i-Tree Hy-
dro model are shown in ﬁgure 18. The data is aggregated to monthly means
and the ﬁgure shows the monthly variability as minimum, maximum, mean
and standard deviation of the 11 year long time series. Climate normals
for Copenhagen from the period 1961-1990 are included for air temperature
and precipitation.
The air temperature, shown in ﬁgure 18a, is lowest in February with 1 ◦C
while highest temperature occur in July with 18 ◦C. Highest variation per
month is generally observed in the winter season with December having
the largest difference between minimum and maximum temperature. Mean
temperature is higher than the climate normal in all months and actually cor-
responds approximately to the minimum monthly temperature from April
to September.
The dew point temperature, shown in ﬁgure 18b, follows the same pattern
as the air temperature ranging from -2 ◦C in February to 13 ◦C in July. The
difference between air temperature and dew temperature is highest in the
summer months with a difference of 5 ◦C.
The wind speed, shown in ﬁgure 18c, peaks in January with a mean of 5.5
m/s. This decreases to a steady mean of approximately 4 m/s in the period
from April to August. The Net Radiation, shown in ﬁgure 18d, varies from a
minimum of 20 W/m2 in December to 220 W/m2 in June. Largest variation
in net radiation is observed in August with a minimum of 150 W/m2 to 180
W/m2.
Precipitation is the most variable weather input and the seasonal variations
are not as clear as for the other inputs. The highest precipitation rates occur
in the summer months with August standing out as being the month with
highest observed minimum, maximum and mean with 40 mm, 223 mm and
41
==PAGE:58==
42
results from the i-tree hydro model
117 mm respectively. Moreover, the variation in July and August is clearly
higher than the other months. When comparing to the climate normal, the
2005-2015 precipitation average is higher from May to August and with the
highest month shifted from July to August. Precipitation averages for March
and April are lower than the climate normal while the autumn and winter
months are close to the climate normal.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 18: Monthly summary statistics of input weather data including mean:
,
standard deviation:
, minimum:
and maximum:
. (a) Air temperature in-
cluding climate normal:
(b) Dew point temperature (c) Wind speed (d) Net
radiation (e) Precipitation including climate normal
.
The averages for the 11 year period are listed in table 11 for the ﬁve inputs.
Temperature and Precipitation are 1.5◦C and 62 mm higher than the climate
normals.
The precipitation time series is shown as monthly sums in ﬁgure 19 together
with the maximum daily precipitation each months. Maximum daily and
==PAGE:59==
6.1 weather data
43
Table 11: Averages for weather input data in the period from 2005 to 2015.
Air temp
Dew point temp
Net radiation
Wind speed
Precipitation
[◦C]
[◦C]
[W/m2]
[m/s]
[mm]
9.5
6.0
97
4.5
685
monthly precipitation generally occurred in the summer months with 50-
100 mm and 150-200 mm respectively. Highest maximum daily precipitation
was in June 2005 with 78 mm despite a low total monthly precipitation of
110 mm. No precipitation were included for September 2009 due to rain
gauge outfall.
Figure 19: Precipitation per month from 2005 to 2015 and the maximum daily pre-
cipitation in the month.
Precipitation;
Maximum daily Precipitation.
Yearly precipitation and maximum daily precipitation per year for the pe-
riod 2005-2015 are listed in table 12. The lowest yearly precipitation of 564
mm is biased by the station outfall. Highest yearly precipitation occurred in
2014 with 938 mm.
Table 12: Yearly precipitation (P) and maximum daily precipitation per year (Max P)
in mm.
Year
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
P
[mm]
679
690
796
679
564
644
721
628
589
938
607
Max P [mm]
78
40
53
61
41
66
66
23
62
77
30
weather data uncertainties
The weather input to i-Tree Hydro
was prepared to ﬁt accordingly to the speciﬁcation given in the manual
and the referred examples of the format of the raw weather data input (cf.
Appendix B.4 (USDA Forest Service, 2014). i-Tree Hydro converts the raw in-
put given in imperial units to SI units. This was not an issue for the METAR
weather input which by standard is in imperial units. However, precipitation
was ﬁrst converted to imperial units and then converted back to SI units by
i-Tree which is of course not optimal. Another issue is the way i-Tree Hydro
interpolates between precipitation rates if there is multiple weather obser-
vations within the hourly model time-step. When comparing weather input
==PAGE:60==
44
results from the i-tree hydro model
and output, only one precipitation rate per hour is included in the output in-
stead of interpolating between precipitation rates within the time-step. The
same issue was found in the sample project of the program. This can cause
large discrepancies especially if a high intensity precipitation rate, during a
small observation time-step, is translated into an hourly precipitation depth.
A perfect example is the maximum daily precipitation in 2005 with 78 mm
on June 3rd. According to the i-Tree processed precipitation, 70 mm/h is
falling during one time-step (i.e. in 1 hour) but when observing the input
data this rate is only observed in 8 minutes. This issue causes unrealistically
high precipitation depths and it also omits smaller rainfall rates that occur
within the same hour. Both of these issues would result in poorer perfor-
mance of the evaporation process that is increased at low intensity rates
and short event duration. This issue could be resolved by aggregating the
raw weather input to hourly time-steps.
The yearly precipitation derived from i-Tree Hydro is on average 7% higher
than the SVK input precipitation ranging -3% in 2011 to +29% in 2005. Max-
imum daily precipitation per month is on average 17% higher than for the
SVK input. Hence, the simulated precipitation could resemble a future cli-
mate prediction where more frequent extreme events are expected. However,
extreme rain events with return periods greater than the simulated period
is already present. Thus, they are already occurring more frequently than
the climate normal in the period 1961-1990.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 results of i-tree scenarios
45
6.2
results of i-tree scenarios
The following section presents the results of the i-Tree Hydro model scenar-
ios. In the ﬁrst part, Effects of the current Tree Cover, the baseline scenario of
Copenhagen is presented in detail. This implies analyses of the time series
variations in evaporation from interception and evapotranspiration in rela-
tion to precipitation. Speciﬁc events are also identiﬁed for evaporation for vi-
sualisation of the sub-processes. In the second part, Effects of future scenarios,
the seasonal effects of scenarios 100,000 trees and 20% Tree Cover are com-
pared with the baseline scenario for evaporation and evapotranspiration.
Moreover, the seasonal effects of an increased LAI and the subcatchments
Bisbebjerg Vest and Sønder Boulevard are compared with the baseline.
The results of evaporation and evapotranspiration are generally presented
as a depth or normalized in respect to the precipitation. The normalized
results are either in percentage of the precipitation falling on the total catch-
ment area (% of Total P) or as percentage of precipitation on the tree cover
area (% of P TC).
6.2.1
Effects of the Current Tree Cover
evaporation from interception
Evaporation from tree canopy, in-
terception and precipitation depths are shown in ﬁgure 20 for the complete
time series aggregated to monthly sums. The depths of interception and
evaporation are the same except in winter months. Highest evaporation was
in July 2007 with 15.8 mm while interception peaks with 16.5 mm in Febru-
ary 2005. No precipitation occurred in September 2009 thus there is no inter-
ception and evaporation in this month. The second lowest interception and
evaporation depths were in November 2011 with 1.0 mm.
Figure 20: Monthly evaporation, interception and precipitation from 2005 to 2015.
Evaporation;
Interception;
Precipitation
Table 13 list the evaporation aggregated to yearly depths that varies from
56.1 mm in 2005 to 78.5 mm in 2007. When normalizing in respect to the
precipitation on tree cover, the lowest percentage evaporation of 7.1 % was
==PAGE:62==
46
results from the i-tree hydro model
in 2014 while the highest was in 2015 with 11.1 %. This corresponds to 1.0
% and 1.5 % of the total precipitation.
Table 13: Yearly evaporation listed as absolute values in mm depth and normalized
in respect to the precipitation on tree cover (TC P) and total precipitation (Tot P).
Year
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
E
[mm]
56
71
79
66
56
68
69
69
57
67
67
TC P [%]
8.3
10.2
9.9
9.7
9.8
10.6
9.6
11.0
9.6
7.1
11.1
Tot P [%]
1.1
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.4
1.3
1.5
1.3
1.0
1.5
The normalised evaporation is shown in ﬁgure 21 where the percentage
evaporation of total precipitation are aggregated to seasons and plotted for
the complete length of the time series. Generally, the evaporation is highest
in summer season and lowest in the winter of a speciﬁc year.
Figure 21:
The seasonal distribution of evaporation as percentage of total yearly
precipitation.
The model results for Copenhagen were sorted in evaporation events. Evap-
oration events are here deﬁned as a continuous time series that starts when
precipitation starts and the leaf storage starts ﬁlling up and ends when the
leaf storage is empty again. This resulted in 730 evaporation events where
the longest duration of a single event was 540 hours. The scatter plot in ﬁg-
ure 22 displays the correlation between precipitation and the percentage of
evaporated precipitation for each evaporation event. Moreover, the points
are color-coded after the duration of the event. Note that the precipitation
is normalised with the area and is thus deﬁned as the depth per tree cover
area. The maximum removal of precipitation by evaporation is 90% for low
intensity rains of up to 1 mm precipitation. The lowest removal is 1 % for
an event with 45.5 mm precipitation.
Table 14 and ﬁgure 23 show event statistics and event series respectively for
two different events with comparable precipitation and event duration. The
events start at 18:00 on July 26, 2007 and at 12:00 on November 9, 2009 and
had precipitation totals of 26.4 mm and 26.7 mm respectively. This resulted
in evaporation of 2.75 mm corresponding to 10.4 % of total precipitation for
==PAGE:63==
6.2 results of i-tree scenarios
47
Figure 22: The correlation between evaporated precipitation and precipitation per
evaporation event, color-coded after the event duration.
the July event and 0.61 mm corresponding to 2.3 % for the November event.
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: Evaporation events (a) starting at 12.00 on November 9, 2009 and (b) 18.00
on July 26, 2007
Precipitation;
Interception;
Accumulated evaporation;
Leaf Storage.
==PAGE:64==
48
results from the i-tree hydro model
Table 14: Weather statistics and evaporation removal of two evaporation events from
July 26, 2007 and November 9, 2009. Air and dew point temperature (Tair and Tdew),
net Radiation (Rn) and wind speed (U) are mean observations of the events. Precip-
itation (Acum. P) and evaporation (Acum. E) are accumulated depths at the end of
the events.
Start time
Dur
Tair
Tdew
Rn
U
Acum. P
Acum. E
LAI
[hr]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[W/m2]
[m/s]
[mm]
[mm]
[%]
[-]
20091109 12:00
96
16.5
13
169.5
5.4
26.7
0.61
2.3
1.26
20070726 18:00
63
6.1
4.7
19.0
5.1
26.4
2.74
10.4
3.4
Precipitation, interception, leaf storage and accumulated evaporation time
series of the November event is shown in ﬁgure 23a. The precipitation oc-
curred in ﬁve single rain storms was ranging from 0.25 mm to 22.4 mm in to-
tal precipitation with a maximum hourly rain of 3 mm. Interception during
precipitation ranged from 0.06 mm/hr to 0.24 mm/hr. The corresponding
model outputs for July event are shown in ﬁgure 23b. Precipitation fell in 7
single rain events with total precipitation from 0.25 mm to 11.4 mm where
highest hourly precipitation was 5.8 mm. Interception reached a maximum
of 0.63 mm/hr and was at minimum 0.06 mm/hr.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 results of i-tree scenarios
49
evapotranspiration
The monthly evapotranspiration depth is shown
in ﬁgure 24 together with the monthly precipitation for the complete time-
series in the period 2005-2015. There is a clearly seasonal variation in evap-
otranspiration ranging from 1.3 mm in December 2010 to 33.2 mm in June
2007. Lowest yearly maximum occurred in 2015 with 24.5 mm in June.
Figure 24: Monthly evapotranspiration compared with monthly precipitation from
2005 to 2015. Note y maximum at 100 mm.
Evapotranspiration;
Precipitation
Yearly evapotranspiration depths are listed in table 15 for the period 2005-
2015 ranging from 152 mm in 2013 to 182 mm in 2007. When normalising
the evapotranspiration with precipitation on the TC the lowest percentage
was in 2014 with 18 % while the highest evapotranspiration percentage was
in 2015 with 26 %. Corresponding percentages of total precipitation were
2.4 % and 3.5 % respectively. 2009 had a normalised evapotranspiration of
27%, but since the precipitation was not measured in september of this year,
the actual number will be lower.
Table 15: Yearly evapotranspiration listed as absolute values in mm depth and nor-
malised with respect to precipitation on tree cover (TC P) and total precipitation (Tot
P)
Year
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
ET
[mm]
160
152
182
173
150
153
175
158
152
166
158
TC P
[%]
24
22
23
25
27
24
24
25
26
18
26
Tot P
[%]
3.2
3.0
3.1
3.4
3.6
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
2.4
3.5
Figure 25 shows the seasonal distribution of evapotranspiration as a percent-
age of total yearly precipitation from 2005 to 2015. As it appears from the
ﬁgure the evapotranspiration is very low in the winter period and highest
in the summer season.
==PAGE:66==
50
results from the i-tree hydro model
Figure 25: The seasonal distribution of evapotranspiration as a percentage of total
yearly precipitation from 2005 to 2015.
6.2.2
Effects of Future Scenarios
The hydrological effects of planting 100,000 new trees in Copenhagen is
compared with the effects of the current baseline tree cover (13.5% TC) and
a 20% TC. Three different 100,000 trees scenarios were investigated due to
the uncertainty of the the crown size and by extending the uncertainty of
the increase in TC; a minimum scenario (14.5% TC), an average scenario
(15.4% TC), and a maximum scenario (16.3% TC).
Figure 26a and 26b show the average normalised evaporation and evapo-
transpiration based on season in the period 2005-2015. The evaporation of
intercepted precipitation have been normalised in respect to the precipita-
tion falling on the total catchment area. The same applies for the evapotran-
spiration. The normalised evaporation and evapotranspiration are shown
for the 5 scenarios: The baseline scenario, the three 100,000 new trees scenar-
ios, and the 20% TC scenario.
Figure 26a show that the normalised evaporation for the baseline scenario
is 1.0% in the winter, 1.6% in the spring, 1.4% in the summer, and 1.2% in
the autumn. For the normalised evapotranspiration the numbers are 0.7% in
the winter, 5.0% in the spring, 4.1% in the summer, and 2.2% in the autumn.
Figures 26a and 26b indicate a linear correlation between the TC and the
normalised evaporation and between the TC and the normalised evapotran-
spiration. In both cases in there is a percentage increase of 7% for the 100,000
min scenario, 14% for the 100,000 avg scenario, 21% for the 100,000 max sce-
nario, and 48% for the 20% TC scenario relative to the baseline scenario.
Figure 27 shows the yearly effects of evaporation and evapotranspiration.
Here, the linearity is also clear. The total effects of increasing the TC are
generally higher for evapotranspiration than for evaporation because the
evapotranspiration contributes more to the removal of precipitation than
evaporation except in the winter season. The normalised evaporation is in-
==PAGE:67==
6.2 results of i-tree scenarios
51
creased by 0.1% when TC is increased by 1%. The normalised evapotranspi-
ration is increased by 0.22% when TC is increased by 1%.
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: Comparison of Copenhagen Scenarios for the period 2005-2015 based
on seasons. Five scenarios are shown: Baseline (13.5% TC), 100,000 min (14.5% TC),
100,000 av (15.4% TC), 100,000 max (16.3% TC) and 20% TC: (a) Evaporation (E) as a
percentage of total precipitation (b) Evapotranspiration (ET) as a percentage of total
precipitation
Figure 27: Copenhagen: Yearly evaporation and evapotranspiration as a percentage
of yearly precipitation for the period 2005-2015. The points on the graphs indicate
the current TC (13.5%), the 100,000 min TC (14.5%), the 100,000 avg TC (15.4%), the
100,000 max TC (16.3%) and the 20% TC
Evaporation;
Evapotranspiration
6.2.3
Effects of LAI
For the current study a the total LAI was determined to be 3.4 for the Mu-
nicipality of Copenhagen, cf. section 5.1. The value for LAICPH consists of a
BAI of 1 and a LAImax,const (refered to as LAI in the i-Tree set-up) of 2.4. This
corresponds to a minimum LAI in the winter of 1.26 and a maximum LAI
in the summer of 3.4 for Copenhagen. i-Tree Hydro has a default LAIde f ault
consisting of 1.7 for BAI and 5 for LAImax,const, corresponding to a mini-
mum LAI in the winter of 2.25 and a maximum LAI in the summer of 6.7
for Copenhagen.
Figure 28a shows the normalised evaporation for the LAICPH and the
LAIde f ault. The evaporation has been normalised relative to the total precip-
==PAGE:68==
52
results from the i-tree hydro model
itation in the subcatchment. The normalised evaporation is shown for three
scenarios: 1. the baseline (13.5% TC), 2. the average 100,000 new trees (15.4%
TC) and 3. the 20% TC. The results show that increasing LAI to LAIde f ault
will increase the normalised evaporation with 32% in the winter, 49 % in the
spring, 49% in the summer and 45% in the autumn relative to the scenarios
where LAICPH is used.
A similar analysis was conducted for the normalised evapotranspiration.
Similiar to the evaporation, the evapotranspiration have been normalised to
the total precipitation in the catchment. Figure 28b shows the percentage
evapotranspration of total precipitation for the LAICPH and the LAIde f ault.
The effects of changing LAI are generally lower for the evapotranspiration
than the evaporation. The results show that increasing LAI will increase the
evapotranspiration of total precipitation with 0% in the winter, 15 % in the
spring, 8% in the summer and 17% in the autumn relative to the scenarios
where LAICPH is used.
Figure 29 shows the yearly effects of evaporation and evapotranspiration
for LAICPH and LAIde f ault. The effect of a higher LAI increases when the
TC increases. The total effects of increasing the TC are higher for evapora-
tion than for evapotranspiration. The normalised evaporation is increased
by 0.14 percent point when TC is increased by 1% when applying LAIde f ault.
The normalised evapotranspiration is increased by 0.25 percent point when
TC is increased by 1% when applying LAIde f ault.
(a)
(b)
Figure 28: Effects of LAI on evaporation and evapotranspiration for three different
scenarios in Copenhagen: 1. baseline (13.5% TC), 2. 100,000 avg (15.4% TC) and 3.
20% TC. Increased effect of LAI shown as line extensions of the bars.
6.2.4
Variations in Subcatchments
Figure 30a shows the normalised evaporation for the Municipality of Copen-
hagen and the two subcatchments Bispebjerg Vest, BV, and Sønder Boule-
vard, SB. The evaporation has been normalised relative to the total precip-
itation in subcatchment. Bispebjerg Vest (TC = 22% and LAI = 3.9) has a
normalised evaporation ranging from 1.7% in the winter season to 2.9% in
spring season. Sønder Boulevard (TC = 8% and LAI = 3.2) has the lowest
normalised evaporation ranging from 0.6% in the winter season to 0.9% in
==PAGE:69==
6.2 results of i-tree scenarios
53
Figure 29: Effects of LAI in Copenhagen: Yearly evaporation and evapotranspira-
tion as a percentage of yearly precipitation for the period 2005-2015. The points on
the graphs indicate the current TC (13.5%), the 100,000 avg TC (15.4%), and the
20% TC scenarios where in the LAIde f ault scenarios.
Evaporation (LAICPH);
Evapotranspiration (LAICPH);
Evaporation (LAIde f ault);
Evapotranspiration
(LAIde f ault)
spring season. Copenhagen (TC = 13.5% and LAI = 3.4) has intermediate
values ranging from 1.0% in the winter season to 1.6% in spring season.
Figure 30b shows the normalised evapotranspiration for the Municipality of
Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Vest and Sønder Boulevard. Bispebjerg Vest has the
largest normalised evapotranspiration ranging from 1.2% in the winter sea-
son to 8.6% in summer season. Sønder Boulevard has the lowest normalised
evaporation ranging from 0.4% in the winter season to 2.9% in summer sea-
son. Copenhagen has values ranging from 0.7% in the winter season to 5.0%
in the summer season.
Figure 11a shows the yearly effects of evaporation and evapotranspiration
for BV and SB compared with the effects in Copenhagen. The ﬁgure shows
that the effects of the tree cover is more inﬂuential than the effect of LAI.
For the subcatchment BV, the normalised evaporation is 0.1 percent points
higher than the trend for Copenhagen, and the evapotranspiration is 0.3
percent points higher. For the subcatchment SB, the normalised evaporation
and evapotranspiration is 0.1 percent points lower than the trend for Copen-
hagen.
==PAGE:70==
54
results from the i-tree hydro model
(a)
(b)
Figure 30: Differences for the current canopy cover in Copenhagen (CPH), Bispeb-
jerg Vest (BV) and Sønder Boulevard (SB): (a) Normalised evaporation: Percentage
of evaporation from canopies from total precipitation (b) Normalised evapotranspi-
ration: Percentage of evapotranspiration from canopies from total precipitation
Figure 31: Comparison of the effects in SB and BV with Copenhagen: Yearly evapo-
ration and evapotranspiration as a percentage of yearly precipitation for the period
2005-2015.
Evaporation CPH trendline;
Evapotranspiration CPH trendline;
SB (8% TC and LAI = 3.2);
BV (22% TC and LAI = 3.9)
==PAGE:71==
7
D I S C U S S I O N
7.1
effects of trees in copenhagen
The results of this study have shown that trees have an effect on the urban
water cycle and contribute to the removal of water by means of interception
and evapotranspiration. However, the effects of trees vary throughout the
year, since both interception and evapotranspiration are lower in the winter
season. The degree of interception is greatly affected by the intensity and
duration of a rainfall. During high intensity rainfall, interception is virtually
non-existent and for long-duration rainfall, the interception is also greatly
reduced. However, when the precipitation is of low intensity and has a short
duration, the trees can intercept almost all of the precipitation falling onto
the canopies.
7.1.1
Current Effects of Evaporation and Evapotranspiration processes
Evaporation is highly dependent on the interception which is governed by
the maximum leaf storage of the trees. The leaf storage varies due to the
seasonality of LAI. Additionally, high temperatures and net radiation are
important factors for a rapid evaporation. Considering these combined im-
pacting factors, one would expect a more effective removal of precipitation
in the summer. This effect is clearly observable in the presented July evapo-
ration event in ﬁgure 23b, where 10.4% of the precipitation is evaporated. In
this evaporation event several short-duration rainfalls allow for an optimal
evaporation process. The opposite case is presented in the November evapo-
ration event, where the effect of evaporation is reduced to merely 2.3%. This
is due to a 20 hours period of continuous rainfall and the fact that LAI is
at its minimum. These seasonal effects of evaporation are however not clear
when observing the monthly evaporation in ﬁgure 20. The reason for this
is that high-intensity rain storms occur in the summer season (cf. ﬁgure 19).
High-intensity rain results in very low interception, which limits the relative
effects of evaporation. This is e.g. seen in the summer of 2014 where only
1% of the total precipitation was intercepted and evaporated. In summers
with no extreme rain events, such as the summer of 2015, evaporation from
intercepted rain contributed to as much as 3% removal of the total precipi-
tation.
Evapotranspiration has clear seasonal variations; maximal in the summer
and minimal in the winter (cf. ﬁgure 24). The process is less dependent
on direct rain input like precipitation because it utilises the soil water stor-
age. There are however observed some variations in the maximum evapo-
transpiration. In 2007, the maximum evapotranspiration was 7 mm higher
than in 2015. The higher evapotranspiration in 2007 can be explained by the
55
==PAGE:72==
56
discussion
fact that more rain fell in the summer and the preceding spring of 2007. In
2015, the spring and summer seasons were dryer than normal. Hence, the
soil water storage must be the limiting factor for evapotranspiration in the
model. Since the groundwater level in Copenhagen is generally quite high
this might not be as inﬂuential for trees planted on pervious surfaces. How-
ever, trees planted on impervious surfaces have limited soil storages and
are prone to droughts in summer corresponding to the model predictions
(Nielsen et al., 2007).
7.1.2
Effects of LAI
The results from the LAI analysis of showed that LAI is of great impor-
tance to the evaporation of intercepted precipitation. By increasing LAI from
LAICPH to LAIde f ault the evaporation was increased from 32% to 49% for all
seasons. The reason for the signiﬁcant increase in evaporation in the winter
is related to the 70% increase in BAI (from 1 to 1.7) which constitutes the
primary part of LAI in the winter period. The effects of an increased LAI
is highest in the spring and summer period (49%), as the LAI reaches its
maximum in these seasons and the relative difference between LAIde f ault
and LAICPH will be at its maximum in this period. something else that the
results showed, were that the effects of LAI are also affected by the TC; The
higher the TC, the greater the effects of an increased LAI will be.
The increase of LAI was of less importance to the evapotranspiration. By
increasing LAI from LAICPH to LAIde f ault the evapotranspiration increased
from 0% to 17% for all seasons. The reason for the non-effect occurring in
the winter period is that trees go into dormancy and increasing LAI will
therefore have practically no effect.
Increasing the value of LAI, which in practical terms means a combination
of BAI and LAImax,const, will cause a noticeable increase in both evaporation
and evapotranspiration. However, as discussed previously, the maximum
value for LAI determined by using remote sensing (LAI = 3.4 for Copen-
hagen) has a reasonable magnitude and is in the range of what would be
expected based on other studies, cf. section 5.2. Using the i-Tree default
values would based on the analysis and literature search conducted in this
study, result in an evaporation and evapotranspiration that is falsely high.
One can argue that LAICPH might decrease slightly for the future scenarios,
because the younger trees generally have slightly lower a LAI, cf. section
5.2. However, in the 100,000 average scenario the new trees would consti-
tute only 12% of the total TC. If all new trees were to have a LAI of 2.7, this
would result in a LAICPH of 3.3. The effects of this change would be negli-
gible for the total evaporation and evapotranspiration. Furthermore, these
small effects could also be evened out by a possible increase in LAI of the
existing TC.
==PAGE:73==
7.1 effects of trees in copenhagen
57
7.1.3
Local Effects
The results of comparing the subcatchments with Copenhagen showed that
there is a large variability in the hydrological effects within the city of Copen-
hagen. The greatest effects were achieved by increasing the TC, whereas the
relatively small variations in LAI did not contribute signiﬁcantly to the hy-
drological effects. This result emphasises that the local effects of trees are
high: the higher the TC, the larger the hydrological effects are. The largest
hydrological effects were found in the subcatchment Bispebjerg Vest, which
is also the catchment with the highest percentage of TC (and the highest
LAI). Bispebjerg Vest has a TC that is 2.8 times greater than the subcatch-
ment Sønder Boulevard. The effects of both evaporation and evapotranspi-
ration were 3 times higher.
At a smaller scale such as parks and cemeteries, TC are often higher than
50% accompanied by large fractions of evergreen TC. An example is the
cemetery Assistens Kirkegård situated in the Nørrebro subcatchment which
has a TC of 52% of which 38% is evergreen and a maximum LAI of 3.8.
This alters the seasonal LAI compared to Copenhagen in general so that it
only varies from a minimum of 2.1 to maximum of 3.8. The local effects
of evaporation and evapotranspiration at Assistens Kirkegård will thus be
much greater than the remaining parts of the Nørrebro subcatchment. At
this TC, the increase in maximum LAI by 0.4 compared to Copenhagen,
will lead to a steeper removal rate for both processes.
7.1.4
Effects of Future Tree Cover
The expected increase in TC due to the planting of 100,000 new trees in
Copenhagen will result in increases of 0.1%-0.3% for evaporation of total
precipitation and 0.3%-0.7% for evapotranspiration of total precipitation.
The total effects of will be an increase from 4.3% to 5.3% of the total precip-
itation. The estimated effects are of course uncertain due to the estimation
of TC, growth of trees and changes in climate.
In this analysis it was assumed, that all of the 100,000 new trees were to be
planted evenly across the municipality of Copenhagen. However, according
to the current strategies approximately 50% of the trees are to be planted
in Amager Fælled (cf. table 1 (Copenhagen Municipality, 2016a)) that is
not included in the cloudburst subcatchments in Copenhagen (cf. ﬁgure
10). In the urban hydrology perspective these trees would therefore have
no real importance and it would probably be more realistic to consider a
scenario, where 50,000 new trees were to be planted in Copenhagen. In an
average 50,000 trees scenario, the effects of the TC would correspond to the
minimum 100,000 trees scenario.
The analysis and evaluation of tree growth indicate that it is difﬁcult to es-
timate the growth of especially street trees during the ﬁrst years after plant-
ing. This can be caused by the fact that tree mortality and pruning are not
included. Including these could decrease the TC estimates of 100,000 tress
that are based on non-pruned trees. Growth and maintenance of existing
==PAGE:74==
58
discussion
trees could also be major uncertainty factors. However, if assuming that the
current TC is constant, then the minimum, average and maximum scenarios
for the 100,000 trees scenarios could be seen as a growth indicator for the
100,000 trees after the planting period 2015-2025. During the decade follow-
ing 2025, the planted trees will likely continue the same growth rate as from
0 to 10 years after planting (Moser et al., 2015). Hence, it might be manage-
able to reach the 20% TC goal in the municipality of Copenhagen in 2035 by
maintaining number of trees planted towards 2025. If this goal is reached,
the total effects of of evaporation and evapotranspiration will increase from
4.3% (in the present day scenario) to 6.4% of the total precipitation.
The effect of climate change scenarios on the evaporation and evapotran-
spiration processes has not been included in simulation of the future TC.
Increased temperatures in the future climate will have a positive effect on
the processes but the increased rain intensity and more winter precipitation
could limit the effectiveness of evaporation in urban water balance.
==PAGE:75==
7.2 perspectives
59
7.2
perspectives
7.2.1
Modelling Perspectives
i-tree modelling potentials
The i-Tree Hydro Application version
6 is expected to be released during the autumn of 2016. Version 6 differs
from version 5 by being fully spatially distributed instead of merely semi-
distributed (I-Tree Hydro Support, 2016). The advantage of the fully dis-
tributed model is that it is able to account for the spatial distribution of the
input variables e.g. the physical input parameters. This will be interesting,
as it will make it possible to extract more detailed information about the
local effects of the trees, e.g. in the implementation of green solutions. This
can also be interesting in relation to some of the other sub-processes such as
inﬁltration, which have not been thoroughly investigated in this study; e.g.
when the tree roots can loosen the soil and thereby increase the hydraulic
conductivity (Wang et al., 2008).
integration of results in other hydrological models
The
tree characteristics derived in this study provide novel approaches to the
estimation of TC and LAI. No other dataset offers the same mapping of
urban trees. Unfortunately, the high spatial resolution of the derived LC
and LAI do not fulﬁl their full potentials in semi-distributed models. How-
ever, both TC and LAI can improve the vegetation classiﬁcation of spatially
distributed models so that the local hydrological impacts of trees can be
estimated. The MIKE URBAN/FLOOD models use high spatial resolution
data of the surface, which is normally divided in pervious or impervious
cover. An example is the land cover classiﬁcation of Copenhagen maintained
by HOFOR. This dataset includes different types of impervious land cover
but do not differentiate between pervious land cover (cf. appendix B.5). De-
spite that this study has shown how investigated hydrological processes of
trees have limited effects in extreme rain events, other processes such as
hydraulic surface resistance and inﬁltration are higher for trees than other
pervious surfaces (DHI, 2015). Thus, it could be relevant to include TC as a
land cover type especially if a catchment area has a high TC. The integrated
hydrological model MIKE SHE for the Copenhagen catchment by Rambøll,
(2013) uses estimates of LAI from the national water balance model (Ref-
sgaard and Stisen, 2011). This model sets a maximum LAI for deciduous
forest to 6 and maximum grass LAI to 5. These estimates are arguably too
high when comparing with the LAI estimates of this study and grass LAI
estimates of 1-2 from Bühler et al., (2010). Hence this study could provide a
better insight in the determination of urban tree LAI in Copenhagen.
urban heat island effects
In addition to the direct effects on the ur-
ban hydrology, the evaporation and evapotranspiration of trees do also have
positive effects on the urban heat island (UHI) effect. According to Bühler
et al., (2010) the UHI effect is already a problem in Copenhagen, especially
in the central parts of the city with Vesterbro being affected the most. The
evaporation and transpiration of all types of vegetation contribute to the
cooling effects. Trees are however more effective than shrub and grass. One
==PAGE:76==
60
discussion
reason for this is that the root zone of trees goes deeper and therefore trees
will continue to transpire even during dry periods, where they can collect
water at deeper soil depths. Shrub and grass have a more superﬁcial root
zone and are therefore more likely to dry out (Bühler et al., 2010). In ad-
dition to this, the LAI of trees are higher than those of shrub and grass
(ranging from 1-2). Hence, the energy use for evapotranspiration and evapo-
ration will be higher for trees (Bühler et al., 2010), and by extension so is the
cooling effects. The correlation between LAI and surface temperature was
also studied by Hardin and Jensen, (2007) that showed a linear correlation
where an increase of LAI by 1 resulted in a reduction of surface temperature
by 1.2◦C. UHI effects are also affected the shading that trees provide (Bühler
et al., 2010). The analysis of the urban TC and LAI conducted in this study
showed a high percentage of impervious cover, a low TC, and generally
a lower LAI in the inner parts of the city. This corresponds to the affected
UHI areas found by Bühler et al., (2010). Investigating these relations further
would be an interesting follow-up on the current study.
air pollution
Reducing the air pollution was part of the motivation for
the proposal of 100,000 new trees in Copenhagen (Copenhagen Municipal-
ity, 2015a). Trees can remove air pollution either by uptake of the gaseous air
pollution through the leaves or by intercepting airborne particles. The inter-
cepted airborne particles are released back into the air, fallen to the ground
surface during leaf fall or washed off during rainfall. Apart from air pol-
lution concentrations and weather conditions, the air pollution removal the
trees are dependent on the LAI. A higher LAI (and TC) have a positive effect
on the removal of air pollutants (Nowak and Dwyer, 2007). Some trees are
also associated by negative effects due to the emissions of volatile organic
compounds which contribute to an increase of CO and O3-concentrations.
However, these are temperature dependent and the cooling effects of trees
are expected to compensate for these emissions (Nowak and Dwyer, 2007).
7.2.2
Management Perspectives
Cities are complex places, where many different interests need to be con-
sidered. In the perspective of urban climate adaptation, it is necessary to
create holistic solutions that takes the multifunctionality of urban spaces
into consideration. Management of trees in an urban area involves multiple
stakeholders that value differently aspects. The prioritisation of tree-aspects
for stakeholders can be seen analogous to the water-aspects presented in
the Three Point Approach by Fratini et al., (2012). Water professionals ac-
countable for the climate adaptation solutions prioritise the logical and eco-
nomic aspects of trees in a water perspective, i.e. how will trees contribute
to the removal of run-off in the city. Other stakeholders such as landscape
architects, urban planners and biologists share aesthetic, sensitive and so-
cial aspects. These amenity aspects are well recognised for trees but are
not prioritised by water professionals and lack the economic aspect. Politi-
cians, which ultimately decide the future strategies, have to prioritise the
economic aspect but also the social and aestetic aspects to maintain their
public support. A key element to identifying and integrating the relevant
priorities in the climate adaptation measures is communication between
==PAGE:77==
7.2 perspectives
61
the different stakeholders. Copenhagen Municipality is trying to counter
these difﬁculties in a newly developed framework called Københavermodellen.
Københavermodellen is a communication and prioritising tool that aims to
integrate city nature and climate adaptation measures in the urban plan-
ning process in Copenhagen. It incorporates an ecosystem service approach
that values amenity and utility aspects equally. This introduces a common
framework in which the stakeholders can communicate (Copenhagen Mu-
nicipality, 2016b).
The evaporation volume from tree canopies are often used to determine
the avoided runoff, which can be translated into a utility value by multi-
plying with the wastewater treatment costs (Rogers et al., 2015). For the
current TC in Copenhagen, the yearly evaporation from tree canopies is
799,152 m3 while the predicted average TC in 2025 will yield a yearly evap-
oration of 911,625 m3. Average treatment cost of wastewater in Copenhagen
is 6.29 DKK/m3 (Lynettefællesskabet I/S, 2016) which gives a current value
of DKK 5,027,000 and a predicted value of DKK 5,734,000 in 2025. How-
ever, these calculations do not take into account the potential depression
storage and inﬁltration that will still occur without trees. By accounting for
these processes, the avoided runoff is approximately 30% of the evapora-
tion (Hirabayashi, 2013). The increased utility value of avoided runoff from
planting 100,000 trees is therefore negligible in relation to the estimated
investment cost of DKK 1.2 billion. A study from London quantiﬁed all
beneﬁts of trees both related to amenities and utilities (Rogers et al., 2015).
London had similar TC of 14% and is approximately 3 times larger than
Copenhagen. They found that pollution removal generated the largest util-
ity value of £58 million per year which was approximately a factor of 100
higher than the utility value of avoided runoff. However, the amenity value
of trees was £17.6 billion and was by far exceeding the total value of the
utility beneﬁts.
An additional consideration is that the population in Copenhagen Munici-
pality is expected to increase with 90,000 from 2015 to 2025 corresponding
to an increase of 15% (Copenhagen Municipality, 2015d). This development
will likely result in more residential areas that will increase the impervious
cover of the city. A tendency which has been observed in European cities
during the last 30 years (Skougaard Kaspersen et al., 2015). Potentially, this
could even out the hydrological effects of planting more trees in the city.
The space requirements are also an important issue in realisation of the
100,000 trees strategy. Trees need space to grow which makes it difﬁcult to
plant more trees in parks that already have an established tree canopy or in
streets where the soil spaces are limited. Additionally, open pervious spaces
in the city cannot just be planted with trees because of the current uses of
these places e.g. sunbathing. Yet another management issue is where trees
can provide the greatest beneﬁt. As described above, the current plan is to
plant 50,000 trees as a part of an afforestation of Amager Fælled. For a space
requirement perspective this makes sense but in a hydrological perspective
it will have no effect.
This study can improve the logical understanding of trees so it can be recog-
nised by water professionals and provide a basis for a clearer evaluation
of the economic aspect. Putting all stakeholders on equal terms will pro-
==PAGE:78==
62
discussion
vide for an optimal decision making in the role of trees in urban areas and
climate adaptation projects.
==PAGE:79==
8
C O N C L U S I O N S
The City of Copenhagen is planning to invest billions of DKK in its cli-
mate adaptation plan during the next decades to promote holistic solutions
that will incorporate both climate adaptation measures and urban improve-
ments. In the aftermath, Copenhagen Municipality is increasing its support
to other urban green solutions by initiating a city nature strategy, an urban
tree policy and a strategic goal of planting 100,000 new trees in the period
2015-2025. This paradigm shift in urban planning gives rise to the central
research question of this study: What are the effect of trees on the climate
adaptation in Copenhagen? In this analysis, the question was approached
by using the semi-distributed model i-Tree Hydro that is currently the most
advanced modelling tool in respect to quantifying the hydrological effects
of urban trees. The hydrological effects were estimated based on the evapo-
ration of intercepted precipitation and evapotranspiration of trees. In order
to quantify these effects central tree characteristics such as TC, evergreen TC
and LAI had to be estimated. These characteristics were estimated using a
remote sensing approach.
The results of the remote sensing analysis showed that the current TC in
Copenhagen is 13.5%, the evergreen fraction of the TC is 11%, and the
LAI is 3.4. The yearly hydrological effects of the evaporation and evapo-
transpiration equals 4.5% of the total yearly precipitation, with the largest
contribution coming from evapotranspiration. The effects of both processes
vary throughout the year and are generally highest in the summer period
and lowest in the winter period. Evaporation of intercepted water is highly
affected by the intensity and duration of a rainfall: during high-intensity
and long-duration rainfall a very low fraction of the precipitation is inter-
cepted and evaporated. During low-intensity and short-duration rainfall a
very high fraction of the precipitation can be intercepted and evaporated.
The evapotranspiration is not as directly affected by the precipitation, but is
primarily governed by the soil water storage.
By increasing the tree population with 100,000 trees, the TC is expected to
rise to 15.4% by the year 2025. A more conservative estimate is a minimum
increase to 14.5% and an optimistic estimate is a maximum increase to 16.3%.
The predicted future TC will result in an increase in the evaporation of
0.1% to 0.3% of the total precipitation while evapotranspiration will increase
with 0.3% to 0.7% of total precipitation. The avoided runoff related to the
evaporation from the 100,000 new trees will correspond to approximately
112,000 m3 per year.
The modelled scenarios also showed that the hydrological effects of evap-
oration and evapotranspiration increase linearly with the TC. From this it
can be concluded that the local effects of trees are the most signiﬁcant: the
higher the TC, the greater the hydrological effects will be. In addition to
this, the results showed that LAI is also signiﬁcant for the hydrological ef-
63
==PAGE:80==
64
conclusions
fects: the higher LAI, the greater the hydrological effects will be. Further-
more, the effects of a higher LAI increase with an increasing TC. This result
further supports the signiﬁcance of the local effects of trees. Locations with
high density of trees, such as parks and cemeteries, have high TC, high ever-
green TC and high LAI. Hence, the hydrological effects in these areas will be
considerably higher than in other places. In continuation of this, the effects
related to the hydrological processes such as cooling will also be local.
The current strategy is that approximately 50,000 out of the 100,000 trees are
to be planted in Amager Fælled, which is not a part of the cloudburst sub-
catchments in Copenhagen. In the perspective of climate adaptation these
trees will not contribute to avoided run-off and other hydrological related
processes such as reducing urban heat island effects. However, the newly
developed framework Københavnermodellen, which is created to enhance
communication and prioritisation in the context of climate adaptation mea-
sures, valuates biodiversity and amenity aspects as high as utility aspects,
but in a hydrological perspective it might be more reasonable to consider a
50,000 trees scenario rather than a 100,000 trees scenario.
In conclusion, this study improves the understanding of urban trees so that
water professionals can recognise and include the hydrological effects of
trees in future planning. The mapping of tree characteristics can also be
used to quantify the effect of trees on the urban heat island effect and other
ecosystems services to facilitate the holistic assessment of the existing city
nature in climate adaptation projects.
==PAGE:81==
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Akbari, H., M. Pomerantz, and H. Taha (2001). “Cool surfaces and shade
trees to reduce energy use and improve air quality in urban areas”. In:
Solar Energy 70.3, pp. 295–310.
ALECTIA (2012). Integreret hydrologisk modellering af faskiner i den nordøstlige
del af København. Tech. rep. Copenhagen Municipality.
Alonzo, Michael, Bodo Bookhagen, and Dar A. Roberts (2014). “Urban tree
species mapping using hyperspectral and lidar data fusion”. In: Remote
Sensing of Environment 148, pp. 70–83.
ASPRS (2013). Las Speciﬁcation Version 1.4 -R13.
Bannari, A, D Morin, F Bonn, and A R Huete (1995). “A review of vegetation
indices”. In: Remote Sensing Reviews 13.1, pp. 95–120.
Bartens, Julia, Susan D. Day, J. Roger Harris, Theresa M. Wynn, and Joseph
E. Dove (2009). “Transpiration and root development of Urban trees in
structural soil stormwater reservoirs”. In: Environmental Management 44.4,
pp. 646–657.
Bolund, Per and Sven Hunhammar (1999). “Ecosystem services in urban
areas”. In: Ecological Economics 29.2, pp. 293–301.
Bühler, O., C. Tøttrup, R. Borgstrøm, and M.B. Jensen (2010). Urban Heat
Island i København. Beskrivelse af fænomenet, vurdering af omfang i København,
input til strategi for håndtering. Tech. rep. Copenhagen: Skov & Landskab,
KU Life.
Bühler, Oliver, Palle Kristoffersen, and Søren Ugilt Larsen (2006). Evaluer-
ing af træplantningsmetoder i Københavns Kommune, Arbejdsrapport Skov &
Landskab nr. 27-2006. Tech. rep. 27. Arbejdsrapport Skov og Landskab.
Congalton, Russell G. (2010). “Remote Sensing: An Overview”. In: GIScience
& Remote Sensing 47.4, pp. 443–459.
Copenhagen Municipality (2011). Copenhagen Climate Adaptation Plan. Tech.
rep. City of Copenhagen.
– (2014). Fordeling af træslægter for gadetræer i København og for bydelene. url:
https://www.kk.dk/file/12914/download.
– (2015a). 16. Medlemsforslag om 100.000 træer i København (2015-0011227).
url: https://www.kk.dk/indhold/teknik- og- milj%7B%5C%%7DC3%
7B%5C%%7DB8udvalgets- m%7B%5C%%7DC3%7B%5C%%7DB8demateriale/
24082015/edoc- agenda/df4a3cc9- 4e84- 4cdc- aed5- bd06f5ebdd76/
c4802d9d-bc9a-4c99-8b30-9fcc11f2f2a1 (visited on 05/07/2016).
– (2015b). “Budget 2016 for klimatilpasning”. Financing of Climate Adap-
tion Projects 2016. url: https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/
edoc/48e74ac4-cb92-494b-ac94-d98cb710e52c/a9c843f9-af5b-494f-
99e6-fb4cae0df403/Attachments/13487881-15193599-1.PDF.
– (2015c). Bynatur i København. Tech. rep. City Nature in Copenhagen: Tech-
nical and Environmental Administration, City Development. url: https:
/ / www . kk . dk / sites / default / files / edoc / a4a8251c - bf9e - 4920 -
8fba - 61391157d364 / 6161482a - 9132 - 4816 - 8e17 - a7d2a7e9a00a /
Attachments/13820605-16290433-1.PDF.
65
==PAGE:82==
66
Bibliography
Copenhagen Municipality (2015d). Status På København Nøgletal for Køben-
havn 2015. Tech. rep. url: https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/
uploaded-files/Nogletalsrapport%7B%5C_%7D2015.pdf.
– (2016a). 18. Plan for at plante 100.000 træer i København (2016-0025907). url:
http://www.kk.dk/indhold/teknik-og-milj%7B%5C%%7DC3%7B%5C%
%7DB8udvalgets-m%7B%5C%%7DC3%7B%5C%%7DB8demateriale/02052016/
edoc- agenda/2306412b- ae72- 49dc- 82d6- 04512a405931/93d8fe9d-
495d-4991-a196-d897e1c9ee2c (visited on 05/06/2016).
– (2016b). Klimatilpasning & Bynatur. Tech. rep. Teknik og Miljøforvaltning i
samarbejde med SLA.
– (2016c). Meeting with Technical and Environmental Administration.
– (2016d). Teknik- og Miljøudvalgets mødemateriale 2/5 2016. url: http://www.
kk.dk/indhold/teknik-og-milj%7B%5C%%7DC3%7B%5C%%7DB8udvalgets-
m%7B%5C%%7DC3%7B%5C%%7DB8demateriale/02052016/edoc- agenda/
2306412b-ae72-49dc-82d6-04512a405931 (visited on 05/06/2016).
COWI (2014). Danmarks Digitale Ortofoto DDO R⃝2014 Danmarks mest detal-
jerede landsdækkende ortofoto. url: http://www.cowi.dk/menu/service/
geografiskinformationogit / kortoggeodataprodukter / ortofotos /
ddo2014/.
Day, Sd, Nl Bassuk, and H. Van Es (1995). “Effects of Four Compaction
Remediation Methods for Landscape Trees on Soil Aeration, Mechanical
Impedance and Tree Establishment”. In: Journal of Environmental Horticul-
ture 13, pp. 64–71.
DHI (2015). Storm Water Runoff from Green Urban Areas - Modellers ’ Guideline
Report. Tech. rep. March. Copenhagen.
– (2016). MIKE SHE - Integrated Catchment Modelling. url: https://www.
mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-she (visited on 05/07/2016).
Dickinson,
R.
E.
(1984).
“Modeling
Evapotranspiration
for
Three-
Dimensional Global Climate Models”. In: Climate Processes and Climate
Sensitivity, Geophysica, pp. 29–58.
Dijk, van (2001). “Modelling Rainfall Interception By Vegetation of Variable
Density Using an Adapted Analytical Model. Part 1. Model Description”.
In: Journal of Hydrology 247, pp. 230–238.
Fratini, C F, G D Geldof, J Kluck, and P S Mikkelsen (2012). “Three Points
Approach (3PA) for urban ﬂood risk management: A tool to support cli-
mate change adaptation through transdisciplinarity and multifunctional-
ity”. In: Urban Water Journal 9.5, pp. 317–331. url: %7B%3C%7DGo%20to%
20ISI%7B%3E%7D://WOS:000309123400003$%5Cbackslash$nhttp://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/1573062X.2012.668913.
Fugro, N.V. (2016). FugroViewer. Leidschendam, The Netherlands. url: http:
//www.fugroviewer.com/disclaimer.asp.
Gash, J. H. C. (1979). “An analytical model of rainfall interception by
forests”. In: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 105.443,
pp. 43–55. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/qj.49710544304.
Gash, J. H., C. R. Lloyd, and G. Lachaud (1995). “Estimating sparse forest
rainfall interception with an analytical model”. In: Journal of Hydrology
170.1-4, pp. 79–86.
Gatziolis, D and H.E. Andersen (2008). “A Guide to LIDAR Data Acquisi-
tion and Processing for the Forests of the Paciﬁc Northwest”. In: General
Technical Report PNW-GTR-768 July, pp. 1–40. url: http://www.arlis.
org/docs/vol1/A/276932054.pdf.
Greve, Mette B. Mogens H., Mette B. Mogens H. Greve, Peder K. Bøcher,
Thomas Balstrøm, Henrik Breuning-Madsen, and Lars Krogh (2013).
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
67
“Generating a Danish raster-based topsoil property map combining choro-
pleth maps and point information”. In: Geograﬁsk Tidsskrift-Danish Journal
of Geography 107.2, pp. 1–12. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00167223.
2007.10649565$%5Cbackslash$nhttp://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
abs/10.1080/00167223.2007.10649565.
Hardin, Perry J. and Ryan R. Jensen (2007). “The effect of urban leaf area
on summertime urban surface kinetic temperatures: A Terre Haute case
study”. In: Urban Forestry and Urban Greening 6.2, pp. 63–72.
Hirabayashi, Satoshi (2013). i-Tree Streets / Design / Eco Rainfall Interception
Model Comparisons. url: https://www.itreetools.org/eco/resources/
iTree % 7B % 5C _ %7DStreets % 7B % 5C _ %7DDesign % 7B % 5C _ %7DEco % 7B %
5C_%7DRainfall%7B%5C_%7DInterception%7B%5C_%7DModel%7B%5C_
%7DComparisons.pdf.
Hirabayashi, Satoshi and Theodore A Endreny (2015). Surface and Upper
Weather Pre-processor for i-Tree Eco and Hydro. Tech. rep. Syracuse, New
York 13210, United States, pp. 1–19.
Holopainen, Markus, Ville Kankare, Mikko Vastaranta, Xinlian Liang, Yi Lin,
Matti Vaaja, Xiaowei Yu, Juha Hyyppä, Hannu Hyyppä, Harri Kaartinen,
Antero Kukko, Topi Tanhuanpää, and Petteri Alho (2013). “Tree mapping
using airborne, terrestrial and mobile laser scanning - A case study in a
heterogeneous urban forest”. In: Urban Forestry and Urban Greening 12.4,
pp. 546–553. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2013.06.002.
Holst, T., S. Hauser, A. Kirchgäßner, A. Matzarakis, H. Mayer, and D.
Schindler (2004). “Measuring and modelling plant area index in beech
stands”. In: International Journal of Biometeorology 48.4, pp. 192–201.
Huang, Yan, Bailang Yu, Jianhua Zhou, Chunlin Hu, Wenqi Tan, Zhim-
ing Hu, and Jianping Wu (2013). “Toward automatic estimation of urban
green volume using airborne LiDAR data and high resolution Remote
Sensing images”. In: Frontiers of Earth Science 7.1, pp. 43–54.
Hyyppä, J., H. Hyyppä, D. Leckie, F. Gougeon, X. Yu, and M. Maltamo
(2008). “Review of methods of small footprint airborne laser scanning for
extracting forest inventory data in boreal forests”. In: International Journal
of Remote Sensing 29.5, pp. 1339–1366.
Ingerslev, Morten, Simon Skov, Per Bjergager, and Lars Bo Pedersen (2014).
Alternativ glatførebekæmpelse i København. Tech. rep. Copenhagen Univer-
sity: Institut for Geovidenskab og Naturforvaltning.
Iowa State University of Science and Technology (2016). ASOS-AWOS-
METAR Data Download. url: https://mesonet.agron.iastate.edu/
request/download.phtml?network=DK%7B%5C_%7D%7B%5C_%7DASOS
(visited on 05/05/2016).
Isenburg, Martin (2016). LASmoons: Andreas Konring and Susanne Bjerg Pe-
tersen. url: https://rapidlasso.com/2016/01/26/lasmoons-andreas-
konring-susanne-bjerg-petersen/ (visited on 06/03/2016).
I-Tree Hydro Support (2016). Personal communication with the I-Tree Hydro
Support.
Jamali, A., A. A. Rahman, P. Boguslawski, and C. M. Gold (2015). “An Auto-
mated 3D Indoor Topological Navigation Network Modelling”. In: Remote
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences II.2/W2, pp. 47–53. url: http://
www.isprs-ann-photogramm-remote-sens-spatial-inf-sci.net/II-
2-W2/47/2015/.
Kaartinen, Harri, Juha Hyyppä, Xiaowei Yu, Mikko Vastaranta, Hannu
Hyyppä, Antero Kukko, Markus Holopainen, Christian Heipke, Manuela
Hirschmugl, Felix Morsdorf, Erik Næsset, Juho Pitkänen, Sorin Popescu,
==PAGE:84==
68
Bibliography
Svein Solberg, Bernd Michael Wolf, and Jee Cheng Wu (2012). “An in-
ternational comparison of individual tree detection and extraction using
airborne laser scanning”. In: Remote Sensing 4.4, pp. 950–974.
Kaplan, Rachel and Stephen Kaplan (1989). The Experience of Nature: A Psy-
chological Perspective, p. 6.
Khosravipour, Anahita, Andrew K. Skidmore, Martin Isenburg, Tiejun
Wang, and Yousif a. Hussin (2014). “Generating Pit-free Canopy Height
Models from Airborne Lidar”. In: Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote
Sensing 80.9, pp. 863–872. url: http : / / essential . metapress . com /
openurl.asp?genre=article%7B%5C&%7Did=doi:10.14358/PERS.80.
9.863.
KMS (2014). Danmarks Højdemodel 2007 , DHM-2007 / Terræn. url: https:
//kortforsyningen.dk/sites/default/files/old%7B%5C_%7Dgst/
DOKUMENTATION/Data/dk%7B%5C_%7Ddhm-2007%7B%5C_%7Dterraen%7B%
5C_%7Dokt%7B%5C_%7D2014.pdf.
Koller, M. and S.K. Upadhyay (2005). “Prediction of Processing Tomato
Yield Using a Crop Growth Model and Remotely Sensed Aerial Image”.
In: Transactions of the ASAE 48.6, pp. 2335–2341.
Kriegler, F.J., W.A. Malila, R.F. Nalepka, and W. Richardson (1969). “Prepro-
cessing transformations and their effects on multispectral recognition”. In:
Remote Sensing of Environment, pp. 97–131.
Kristoffersen, Palle (2012). Kvalitetsstandard for planteskoletræer. Tech. rep.
Skov & Landskab, pp. 1–5.
Lee, Jun-Hak, Yekang Ko, and E. Gregory McPherson (2016). “The feasibility
of remotely sensed data to estimate urban tree dimensions and biomass”.
In: Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 16, pp. 208–220. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.02.010.
Levin, G., M.R. Jepsen, and M. Blemmer (2012). Basemap. Technical documen-
tation of a model for elaboration of a land-use and land-cover map for Denmark.
Tech. rep. 11, p. 47. url: http://www.dmu.dk/Pub/TR11.pdf.
Lynettefællesskabet I/S (2016). Lynetten i tal. url: http://www.lyn- is.
dk/Lynetten/Lynetten%7B%5C_%7Di%7B%5C_%7Dtal.aspx (visited on
06/04/2016).
Maltamo, Matti, Erik Næsset, and Jari Vauhkonen (2014). Forestry Appli-
cations of Airborne Laser Scanning. Ed. by Matti Maltamo, Erik Næsset,
and Jari Vauhkonen. Vol. 27. Managing Forest Ecosystems. Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-
94-017-8663-8.
Mcpherson, Greg, James R Simpson, Paula J Peper, Scott E Maco, and
Qingfu Xiao (2005). “Municipal Forest Beneﬁts and Costs in Five US
Cities”. In: Journal of Forestry 103, pp. 411–416.
Meng, Xuelian, Nate Currit, and Kaiguang Zhao (2010). Ground ﬁltering al-
gorithms for airborne LiDAR data: A review of critical issues.
MillionTreesNYC (2007). A PlaNYC Initiative with NYC Parks and New York
Restoration Project. url: http://www.milliontreesnyc.org/html/home/
home.shtml (visited on 05/06/2016).
Ministry of Environment (2015). Danmarks Højdemodel , DHM / Punktsky.
Tech. rep. Point Cloud Speciﬁtcation - Data version 2.0, pp. 1–11.
Moser, A., T. Rötzer, S. Pauleit, and H. Pretzsch (2015). “Structure and
ecosystem services of small-leaved lime (Tilia cordata Mill.) and black lo-
cust (Robinia pseudoacacia L.) in urban environments”. In: Urban Forestry
and Urban Greening 14.4, pp. 1110–1121. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.ufug.2015.10.005.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
69
Muzylo, A., P. Llorens, F. Valente, J. J. Keizer, F. Domingo, and J. H C Gash
(2009). “A review of rainfall interception modelling”. In: Journal of Hydrol-
ogy 370.1-4, pp. 191–206. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.
2009.02.058.
Nielsen, Christian N., Oliver Bühler, and Palle Kristoffersen (2007). “Soil
water dynamics and growth of street and park trees”. In: Arboriculture and
Urban Forestry 33.4, pp. 231–245.
Nowak, David J. and John F. Dwyer (2007). “Urban and Community Forestry
in the Northeast”. In: Urban and Community Forestry in the Northeast. Ed.
by J. E. Kuser. 2nd ed. New York City: Springer. Chap. 2, pp. 25–46. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-4289-8%7B%5C_%7D1.
Nowak, David J., Eric J. Greenﬁeld, Robert E. Hoehn, and Elizabeth Lapoint
(2013). “Carbon storage and sequestration by trees in urban and commu-
nity areas of the United States”. In: Environmental Pollution 178, pp. 229–
236.
O’Neil-Dunne, Jarlath, Sean MacFaden, and Anna Royar (2014). “A versatile,
production-oriented approach to high-resolution tree-canopy mapping in
urban and suburban landscapes using GEOBIA and data fusion”. In: Re-
mote Sensing 6.12, pp. 12837–12865.
Patokallio, Jani (2016). OpenFlights. url: http://openflights.org/html/
apsearch (visited on 05/29/2016).
Peper, Paula J. and E. Gregory McPherson (2003). “Evaluation of four meth-
ods for estimating leaf area of isolated trees”. In: Urban Forestry & Urban
Greening 2.1, pp. 19–29. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1618866704700205.
Pilegaard, K, T N Mikkelsen, C Beier, N O Jensen, P Ambus, and H Ro-
Poulsen (2003). “Field measurements of atmosphere biosphere interac-
tions in a Danish beech forest”. In: Boreal Environment Research 8.Decem-
ber, pp. 315–333. url: http://www.borenv.net/BER/pdfs/ber8/ber8-
315.pdf.
Popescu, Sorin C and Randolph H Wynne (2004). “Seeing the Trees in the
Forest : Using Lidar and Multispectral Data Fusion with Local Filtering
and Variable Window Size for Estimating Tree Height”. In: Photogrammet-
ric Engineering & Remote Sensing 70.5, pp. 589–604.
Popescu, Sorin C., Kaiguang Zhao, Amy Neuenschwander, and Chinsu Lin
(2011). “Satellite lidar vs. small footprint airborne lidar: Comparing the
accuracy of aboveground biomass estimates and forest structure metrics
at footprint level”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 115.11, pp. 2786–2797.
Pretzsch, Hans, Peter Biber, Enno Uhl, Jens Dahlhausen, Thomas Rötzer,
Juan Caldentey, Takayoshi Koike, Tran van Con, Aurélia Chavanne,
Thomas Seifert, Ben du Toit, Craig Farnden, and Stephan Pauleit (2015).
“Crown size and growing space requirement of common tree species in ur-
ban centres, parks, and forests”. In: Urban Forestry and Urban Greening 14.3,
pp. 466–479. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2015.04.006.
Pulford, Ian D. and C. Watson (2003). Phytoremediation of heavy metal-
contaminated land by trees - A review.
Rambøll (2013). Potentiale for Nedsivning Af Regnvand - Integreret Hydrologisk
Modellering. Tech. rep. 1100006239.
Refsgaard, Jens Christian and Simon Stisen (2011). Vandbalance i Danmark
Vejledning i opgørelse af vandbalance ud fra hydrologiske data for perioden 1990-
2010. Tech. rep. DANMARKS OG GRØNLANDS GEOLOGI SKE UN-
DERSØGELSE. url: http://vandmodel.dk/xpdf/77- 2011%7B%5C_
%7Dvandbalance.pdf.
==PAGE:86==
70
Bibliography
Renslow, Michael (2012). Manual of Airborne Topographic Lidar. American So-
ciety for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ASPRS).
Richardson, Jeffrey J., L. Monika Moskal, and Soo Hyung Kim (2009). “Mod-
eling approaches to estimate effective leaf area index from aerial discrete-
return LIDAR”. In: Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 149.6-7, pp. 1152–
1160.
Rogers, K., K. Sacre, J. Goodenough, and K. Doick (2015). Valuing London’s
Urban Forest. url: https://www.itreetools.org/resources/reports/
Valuing%7B%5C_%7DLondons%7B%5C_%7DUrban%7B%5C_%7DForest.pdf.
Rosenberg, Norman J., Blad Blaine, and Shashi B. Verma (1983). Microclimate:
the biological environment. 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Rossman, Lewis A. and Wayne C. Huber (2016). Storm Water Management
Model Reference Manual Volume I Hydrology. Tech. rep. January. US EPA,
pp. 74–77.
Rutter, A J, K A Kershaw, P C Robins, and A J Morton (1971). “A Predictive
Model of Rainfall Interception in Forests, 1. Derivation of the model from
observations in a plantation of corsican pine”. In: Agricultural Meteorology
9.1971, pp. 367–384.
Rutter, A J, P C Robins, and A J Morton (1975). “A Predictive Model of Rain-
fall Interception in Forests . II . Generalization of the Model and Compari-
son with Observations in Some Coniferous and Hardwood Stands Author
( s ): A . J . Rutter , A . J . Morton , P . C . Robins Published by : British
Ecologi”. In: Journal of Applied Ecology 12.1, pp. 367–380.
SDFE (2016a). Kortforsyningen - Download. url: http : / / download .
kortforsyningen.dk/ (visited on 05/07/2016).
– (2016b). So Ein GIS Ding #3 - Presentation of DHM.
Shuttleworth, W.J. (1992). “Evaporation”. In: Handbook of Hydrology. Ed. by
D.R. Maidment. eds. New York: McGraw-Hill. Chap. 4, pp. 4.1–4.53.
Sirmacek, B. and R. Lindenbergh (2015). “Automatic Classiﬁcation of Trees
From Laser Scanning Point Clouds”. In: ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry,
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences II-3/W5, pp. 137–144. url:
http : / / www . isprs - ann - photogramm - remote - sens - spatial - inf -
sci.net/II-3-W5/137/2015/.
Skougaard Kaspersen, P., N. Høegh Ravn, K. Arnbjerg-Nielsen, H. Mad-
sen, and M. Drews (2015). “Inﬂuence of urban land cover changes and
climate change for the exposure of European cities to ﬂooding during
high-intensity precipitation”. In: Proceedings of the International Association
of Hydrological Sciences 370, pp. 21–27. url: http://www.proc-iahs.net/
370/21/2015/.
Smith, J.U. (1995). “Urban Soil in Landscape Design”. In: Journal of Environ-
ment Quality 24.4, p. 793.
Solberg, Svein, Erik Næsset, Kjersti Holt Hanssen, and Erik Christiansen
(2006). “Mapping defoliation during a severe insect attack on Scots pine
using airborne laser scanning”. In: Remote Sensing of Environment 102.3-4,
pp. 364–376.
Ulrich, R S (1984). “View through a window may inﬂuence recovery from
surgery.” In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 224.4647, pp. 420–421.
US EPA (2015). Green Infrastructure Modelling Tools. url: https://www.epa.
gov/green-infrastructure/green-infrastructure-modeling-tools
(visited on 06/07/2016).
USDA Forest Service (2014). i-Tree Hydro User ’ s Manual v.5. Tech. rep.
Syracuse, New York 13210, United States, pp. 1–49. url: http://www.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
71
itreetools.org/resources/manuals/Hydro%7B%5C_%7DManual%7B%5C_
%7Dv5.pdf.
– (2016). i-Tree Hydro. Syracuse, New York 13210, United States. url: https:
//www.itreetools.org/index.php.
Valante, F., J. S. David, and J. H C Gash (1997). “Modelling interception
loss for two sparse eucalypt and pine forests in central Portugal using
reformulated Rutter and Gash analytical models”. In: Journal of Hydrology
190.1-2, pp. 141–162.
Wang, J., T.a. Endreny, and D.J. Nowak (2008). “Mechanistic Simulation of
Tree Effects in an Urban Water Balance Model”. In: Journal of American
Water Resources Association 44.1, pp. 75–85. url: http://doi.wiley.com/
10.1111/j.1752-1688.2007.00139.x.
Wang, Jun, Theodore A. Endreny, and James M. Hassett (2005). “A ﬂexible
modeling package for topographically based watershed hydrology”. In:
Journal of Hydrology 314.1-4, pp. 78–91.
Yan, Wai Yeung, Ahmed Shaker, and Nagwa El-Ashmawy (2015). “Urban
land cover classiﬁcation using airborne LiDAR data: A review”. In: Remote
Sensing of Environment 158, pp. 295–310. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.rse.2014.11.001.
Yang, Xiusheng, David R. Miller, and Michael E. Montgomery (1993). “Ver-
tical distributions of canopy foliage and biologically active radiation in a
defoliated / refoliated hardwood forest”. In: Agricultural and Forest Meteo-
rology 67, pp. 129–146.
Yang, Yang, Theodore A. Endreny, and David J. Nowak (2011). “iTree-Hydro:
Snow hydrology update for the urban forest hydrology model”. In: Journal
of the American Water Resources Association 47.6, pp. 1211–1218.
Zheng, Guang and L. Monika Moskal (2009). “Retrieving Leaf Area Index
(LAI) Using Remote Sensing: Theories, Methods and Sensors”. In: Sensors
9.4, pp. 2719–2745. url: http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/9/4/2719/.
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
A
I - T R E E H Y D R O
a.1
i-tree sub-processes
In order to simulate the effects of trees in an urban environment, the hydro-
logical model i-Tree Hydro incorporates the processes interception, evapo-
ration & evapotranspiration, depression storage, inﬁltration and runoff. The
focus of this study is the interception and evaporation & evapotranspiration
processes. This appendix provides a brief description of the other model pro-
cesses included in the model: Depression storage, inﬁltration and runoff.
a.1.1
Depression Storage
Depression storage is a volume of water on the ground surface which needs
to be ﬁlled prior to the generation of runoff (Rossman and Huber, 2016).
Included in this depression storage is e.g. the surface wetting, interception
by the ground and surface ponding. The water stored in the depression
storage can be removed by evaporation or sublimation (on impervious and
pervious areas) or by inﬁltration (only on pervious areas) (Rossman and
Huber, 2016). Hence, water stored in the impervious depression storage
will deplete more slowly than that of pervious areas, and the impervious
depression storage will therefore take relatively long to restore its storage
capacity (Rossman and Huber, 2016).
The depression storage in i-Tree Hydro is based on a non-slope related al-
gorithm (hence, not based on e.g. a DEM-analysis) similar to that utilized
in the United States Environmental Protection Agency Storm Water Man-
agement Model (SWMM). Therefore, i-Tree recommends to use standard
storage values from SWMM or other ﬁeld-derived values. In SWMM, the de-
pression storage values is characterized as an initial loss/abstraction, which
have been derived from a simple correlation between rainfall and runoff
from impervious areas: runoff occurs provided that the rainfall exceeds the
maximum depression storage capacity (Rossman and Huber, 2016):
V = c(P −ds)
(A.1)
Where V (m) is the depth of runoff, c (-) is a coefﬁcient, P (m) is precipitation
and ds is the maximum depression storage capacity (m). In i-Tree Hydro
the available depression storage is continuously updated by the removal of
water by sublimation, evaporation and inﬁltration (Wang et al., 2008; Yang
et al., 2011).
73
==PAGE:90==
74
i-tree hydro
a.1.2
Inﬁltration
The part of the precipitation that falls onto the pervious surface of the wa-
tershed is divided between inﬁltration, ponding, and runoff. The inﬁltra-
tion routine is based on a concept that combines inﬁltration with saturation
and inﬁltration excess processes (Wang et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2005). The
inﬁltration process is based on a modiﬁed Green-Ampt model, where the
inﬁltration rate, i (m/s), is given as:
i =
∆ψ + Z
R z=z
z=0
1
Kz dz
(A.2)
Where Kz is the hydraulic conductivity (m/s) at depth Z (m) and ∆ψ is the
effective wetting front suction.
When the soil is saturated, any water that falls on the surface will gener-
ate surface runoff, the so-called saturation excess runoff. In the event of
precipitation rates exceeding inﬁltration rates, the water on the surface will
start ponding and eventually generate inﬁltration excess runoff. The model
dynamically moves between these different inﬁltration scenarios with con-
sideration to both time and space.
a.1.3
Runoff
The total streamﬂow per unit watershed area (m/s) consists of a surface
runoff, qsubsur f ace, and a subsurface ﬂow. The surface runoff is constituted
by two types of runoff; an impervious ﬂow, qimpervious, and an overland ﬂow
from the pervious areas qoverland.
qtotal = qsubsur f ace + qimpervious + qoverland
(A.3)
The subsurface ﬂow, qsubsur f ace, is the inﬁltrated water that reaches the
stream channel from the saturated subsurface zone.
The impervious surface runoff, qimpervious, is generated on impervious areas
when the maximum capacity of the depression storage is exceeded (Wang
et al., 2008). Runoff from impervious areas, that are not connected to a
drainage system, is assumed to ﬂow to pervious areas, where it will be
included in the inﬁltration processes.
The total overland ﬂow, qoverland, consists of the inﬁltration and saturation
excess ﬂow from the pervious areas. The ﬂow is calculated as:
qoverland = ASaturated
A
· Pw
(A.4)
where ASaturated/A is the quotient of saturated area to the total hillslope
area and Pw is the weighted average precipitation consisting of the canopy
throughfall and the open sky precipitation.
==PAGE:91==
B
P R O C E S S I N G S C R I P T S
b.1
chm workflow scripts
::
:: a batch
script for
generating a pit-free
CHM as
outlined in the
Silvilaser
2013
poster by A.
Khosravipour et al. with an additional
step that
incorporated
the beam
width of the laser to
"
airbrush "
a fuller
canopy.
::
This
version
uses a (multi-core) pipeline of
blast2dem
calls
::
::
:: specify
parameters
::
:: allows you to run the script
from
other
folders
set PATH=%PATH%;F:\s103357\LAStools\bin;
:: specify
the
desired
resolution
set STEP =0.4
:: specify
the radius of the laser
beam
set
BEAM_RADIUS =0.2
:: specify
the
sub-resolution
for the beam file (
about
half the step)
set
SUB_STEP =0.2
:: specify
the
desired
triangle
kill (about 3 times
the step)
set KILL =1.2
::create
directories
mkdir
tiles_raw
mkdir
tiles_height
mkdir
tiles_thin
mkdir
tiles_chm
mkdir
chm_final
::
:: do the actual
processing
::
:: create
buffered
tiling
lastile -i Punktsky \*. laz
-files_are_flightlines ^
-tile_size
1000
-buffer 25 ^
-o tiles_raw\tile
-olaz ^
-cores 16
lasheight -i tiles_raw\tile *.laz ^
-replace_z ^
75
==PAGE:92==
76
processing scripts
-classify_below -2 7 ^
-classify_above 50 7 ^
-keep_class 2 5 6 ^
-odir
tiles_height
-olaz ^
-cores 16
lasthin -i tiles_height\tile *.laz ^
-highest ^
-step
%SUB_STEP% ^
-subcircle
%BEAM_RADIUS% ^
-odir
tiles_thin
-olaz ^
-cores 16
blast2dem -i tiles_thin\tile *.laz ^
-drop_z_below 3 -use_tile_bb ^
-step
%STEP%
-kill
%KILL% ^
-odir
tiles_chm
-odix _03 -obil ^
-cores 16
blast2dem -i tiles_thin\tile *.laz ^
-drop_z_below 5 -use_tile_bb ^
-step
%STEP%
-kill
%KILL% ^
-odir
tiles_chm
-odix _05 -obil ^
-cores 16
blast2dem -i tiles_thin\tile *.laz ^
-drop_z_below 10 -use_tile_bb ^
-step
%STEP%
-kill
%KILL% ^
-odir
tiles_chm
-odix _10 -obil ^
-cores 16
blast2dem -i tiles_thin\tile *.laz ^
-drop_z_below 15 -use_tile_bb ^
-step
%STEP%
-kill
%KILL% ^
-odir
tiles_chm
-odix _15 -obil ^
-cores 16
blast2dem -i tiles_thin\tile *.laz ^
-drop_z_below 20 -use_tile_bb ^
-step
%STEP%
-kill
%KILL% ^
-odir
tiles_chm
-odix _20 -obil ^
-cores 16
:: merge
partial
CHMs
together
into
pit-free CHM ’
lasgrid -i tiles_chm \*. bil
-merged ^
-step
%STEP%
-highest ^
-o chm_final\chm_total.tif ^
-cores 16
echo
" bye bye "
:: Batch
script for rem oving
errors
from the
computed
pit-free
CHM
::Working
directories
cd C:\Users\askonring\Documents\DTU\Speciale
::Make
temp and final
directory
REM mkdir
temp
mkdir
final
::Inputs
==PAGE:93==
B.1 chm workflow scripts
77
::CHM
input
tiff
set CHM=C:\Users\askonring\Dropbox\Speciale\Data\CHM\
chm_total.tif
::Orto NIR folder
set orto=C:\Users\askonring\Documents\DTU\Speciale\
Orto\Sommer
::Building
shape
file
set
building=C:\Users\askonring\Dropbox\Speciale\Data
\ bygning_copenhagen .shp
::Set
temp
folder
set TEMP=C:\Users\askonring\Documents\DTU\Speciale\
temp
::Convert
orto
raster to 0.4 m pixel
size by looping
input
directory , using
bilinear
resampling , ~dpn =
directory
path name
for %%F in ( " %orto% \∗. t i f " ) do gdalwarp
-ot Byte -r
bilinear
-tr 0.4 0.4
"%%F"
"%TEMP%\%%~nF_40 . t i f "
::Calculate
NDVI for all input
raster tiles ,
gdal_calc is a nested
batch
script
thus we need
the Call
command
for %%F in ( "%TEMP%\∗_40 . t i f " ) do Call
gdal_calc -A
"
%%F"
--A_band 1 -B
"%%F"
--B_band 2 --outfile= "
%TEMP%\%%~nF_NDVI . t i f "
--calc= " (A. astype ( f l o a t )−B)
/ (A. astype ( f l o a t ) +B ) "
--NoDataValue =0 --type=
Float32
--co=COMPRESS=LZW
::Replace
nodata
value
with 0
for %%F in ( "%TEMP%\∗_NDVI . t i f " ) do gdal_translate
"
%%F"
"%TEMP%\%%~nF_NDVI0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot
Float32
-co
COMPRESS=LZW
:: Merge
NDVI
rasters
gdalbuildvrt
-te 716000
6168000
730000
6182500
-tr
0.4 0.4 %TEMP%\ndvi.vrt %TEMP% \* _NDVI0.tif
::Combine in one tif to avoid
problems
with poor
alignment
gdalwarp
-ot
Float32 -r bilinear
-te 716000
6168000
730000
6182500
-tr 0.4 0.4
-co
COMPRESS=LZW -co
BIGTIFF=YES -co TILED=YES %CHM%
%TEMP%\CHM_aligned
.tif
::Correct
CHM with NDVI , Keep
output
binary for speed
and ease
Call
gdal_calc -A %TEMP%\CHM_aligned.tif -B %TEMP%\
ndvi.vrt
--outfile=%TEMP%\CHM_NDVI.tif --calc= "
l o g i c a l _ a n d (A. astype ( f l o a t ) >0 ,B . astype ( f l o a t ) >0.1)
∗1 "
--NoDataValue =0 --type=Byte --co=COMPRESS=LZW
gdal_translate
%TEMP%\CHM_NDVI.tif %TEMP%\CHM_NDVI_0.
tif
-a_nodata
none -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
::Buffer
building
shape
==PAGE:94==
78
processing scripts
ogr2ogr.exe -f
" ESRI
S h a p e f i l e "
%TEMP%\Byg_Buff.shp
%Building%
bygning_copenhagen
-dialect
sqlite
-sql
"SELECT ST_Buffer (
geometry
,
2
) ,∗FROM ’
bygning_copenhagen ’
: : R a s t e r i z e
building
b u f f e r
g d a l _ r a s t e r i z e
−burn 1 −a_nodata 0 −l Byg_Buff
%TEMP%/Byg_Buff . shp %TEMP%/Byg_Buff . t i f
−te
716000
6168000
730000
6182500
−tr
0 . 4
0 . 4
−ot Byte −co
COMPRESS=LZW
g d a l _ t r a n s l a t e
%TEMP%/Byg_Buff . t i f
%TEMP%/Byg_Buff_0 .
t i f
−a_nodata none −ot Byte −co COMPRESS=LZW
: :
Remove buildings
but
keep
overhanging
canopies
(
Outputs 0 and
1)
Call
g d a l _ c a l c −A %TEMP%\CHM_NDVI_0 . t i f −B
%TEMP%/Byg_Buff_0 . t i f −C %TEMP%\ndvi . v r t
−−outfile
=%TEMP%\CHMNDVIBYG1. t i f
−−calc=" logical_or(
logical_and(A.astype(int) >0,B<1),logical_and(B>0,C
.astype(float) >0.4))*1 " −−NoDataValue=0 −−type=
Byte −−co=COMPRESS=LZW
: :
Set
0
to
NoDatavalue
g d a l _ t r a n s l a t e %TEMP%\CHMNDVIBYG1. t i f %TEMP%\
CHMNDVIBYG_bin_0 . t i f
−a_nodata none −ot Byte −co
COMPRESS=LZW
: :
Remove
r a s t e r
clumps
smaller
than
4
p i x e l s
with a
4
connectness
Call
gdal_sieve
−st 4 %TEMP%\CHMNDVIBYG_bin_0 . t i f
%TEMP%\CHMNDVIBYG_bin_sieved . t i f
==PAGE:95==
B.2 tree growth
79
b.2
tree growth
Allometric parameters derived by (Pretzsch et al., 2015) for estimating
canopy projected area from diameter at breast height.
Table 16: a′ and α′ parameters for each allomeetric type deﬁned by Pretzsch et al.,
2015
Allometric type
a′
α′
Large Size moderate slope
1
0.4424
1.1624
Medium size medium slope
2
-0.8683
1.3149
Medium size Steep slope
3
-1.824
1.597
Medium size - Flat slope
4
0.3554
0.9641
Table 17: Estimated growth of the seven most common treee species in Copenhagen.
Tree
Stem
Stem Diameter
Crown Projected Area
species
Type Dist. Dist. growth 0 years 5 years 10 years 0 years 5 years 10 years
%
% cm/yr
cm
cm
cm
mˆ2
mˆ2
mˆ2
Acer
4
8.9 14.3
0.75
6
9.75
13.5
8.0
12.8
17.5
Fraxinus
2
7.8 14.3
0.98
6
10.9
15.8
4.4
9.7
15.8
Platanus
1 13.5 14.3
1.01
6
11.05
16.1
12.5
25.4
39.4
Quercus
3
4.9 14.3
0.69
6
9.45
12.9
2.8
5.8
9.6
Robinia
1
5.9 14.3
1.15
6
11.75
17.5
12.5
27.3
43.4
Sorbus
4
9.8 14.3
0.8
6
10
14.0
8.0
13.1
18.2
Tilia
1 31.2 14.3
0.85
6
10.25
14.5
12.5
23.3
34.8
Sum/Average
82 100
0.89
6
10.45
14.9
8.7
16.8
25.5
==PAGE:96==
80
processing scripts
b.3
lai workflow scripts
::
::This
script
clips
point
clouds to the extent of the
UTC and counts the ground and total
points per
grid cell
:: Set
connection to LAStools
binary
folder
set PATH =\ %PATH\%;F:\s103357\LAStools\bin;
:: Create
clipped
point
cloud and result
directories
mkdir
punktsky_clip
mkdir res
:: Clip raw point
cloud to UTC
extents
lasclip -i Punktsky \*. laz -poly
chm_final\chm_shape.
shp -odir
punktsky_clip
-olaz -v -cores 8
:: Drop
noise
points (7) and count
points in each 6x6
grid cell
lasgrid -i punktsky_clip \*. laz -step 6 -merged
-counter_16bit
-drop_class 7 -o res\
total_density_6 .tif ^
:: Drop
noise and
vegetation
points (7) and count
points
below the canopy in each 6x6 grid cell
lasgrid -i punktsky_clip \*. laz -step 6 -merged
-counter_16bit
-drop_class 5 7 -o res\
ground_density_6 .tif ^
echo
" bye bye "
==PAGE:97==
B.4 weather station data
81
b.4
weather station data
Weather station data for input to i-Tree
i-Tree Hydro requires an input in a ﬁxed-width text ﬁle. The weather data in-
put needs to be in an American METAR-data format. METAR data is always
given in UTC0-format. An example of the required format of the input data
ﬁle is shown in ﬁgure 32. Due to the choice of project location (Klawock,
Alaska (UTC -8), the timeseries needs to be shifted 8 hours for i-Tree to
calculate the correct output (e.g. timestep 200501010800 corresponds to an
actual danish time of 200501010000).
Figure 32: Example of i-Tree input Weather Station Data: DIR (wind direction), SPD
(wind speed), CLG (cloud ceiling – lowest opaque layer with 5/8 or greater cover-
age, in hundreds of feet), SKC (sky cover), TEMP (air temperature in F), DEWP (dew
point temperature), STP (station pressure in mb), and PCP101 (hourly precipitation
in inches). The remaining columns does not require an input, cf. (USDA Forest Ser-
vice, 2014)
METAR data
The METAR data gives the desired information on wind direction, wind
speed, air temperature, dew point temperature, cf. ﬁgure 33. Determination
of cloud ceiling, sky cover and station pressure based on the METAR data
is shown bellow.
station pressure
The station pressure, STP, is calculated based on the
pressure altimeter (alti = Pa) and the station elevation hm (= 5m for the
EKCH weather station):
Pstm = Pa((288 −0.0065 · hm)
288
)5.2561
(B.1)
==PAGE:98==
82
processing scripts
Figure 33: Example of METAR DATA: tmpf (air temperature in F), dwpf (dew point
temperature in F), drct (wind direction), sped (wind speed), alti (pressure altimeter
in inches), skyc1 (sky level 1 coverage), skyc2 (sky level 2 coverage), skyc3 (sky level
3 coverage), skyl1 (sky level 1 altitude in feet), skyl2 (sky level 2 altitude in feet), and
skyl3 (sky level 3 altitude in feet)
sky cover
the sky cover, SKC, is determined based on sky level 1 cover-
age, sky level 2 coverage, and sky level 3 coverage (skyc1, skyc2 and skyc3).
Sky cover in i-Tree is divided into: clear (CLR), scattered (SCT), broken
(BKN), overcast (OVC). The European METAR data have a slightly different
format which apart from the before-mentioned also includes a type "FEW"
which is a subdivision of the i-Tree "SCT". The sky cover is determined
based on highest level of sky cover in the three categories skyc1, skyc2 and
skyc3.
cloud ceiling
the cloud ceiling, CLG, is determined based on sky level
1, sky level 2, sky level 3 (skyl1, skyl2, skyl3) and the sky cover. The cloud
ceiling is the lowest sky level (skyl in hundreds o feet) where the sky cover
is "BKN" or "OVC" (corresponding to the lowest opaque layer having 5/8
or greater coverage). If the sky cover is neither "BKN" or "OVC" the clould
ceiling has no value.
Precipitation data
Precipitation data were aggregated from observations per minute to
timesteps corresponding to the input data of the METAR data using the
following MATLAB code:
% Script for
aggregating
precipitation
data from
observations
per minute (in micrometer/s) to
==PAGE:99==
B.4 weather station data
83
timesteps
consistent
with the METAR
data (in
inches/h):
clear all; close all; clc;
% Importing
timesteps
from the METAR
data:
date = importdata( ’ date . t x t ’ );
ts_METAR = datenum(date (:,1));
% Importing
precipitation
data from SVK
station
5755:
One minute
data (in micrometer /s) starting
from
2005 -01 -03
13:14:00 to 2015 -12 -31
23:59:
precip1 = importdata( ’ 5755 _ t s . t x t ’ );
% Extending
the
precipitation
series to start on
2005 -01 -01
00:00:00
and
convert
from
micrometer/s
to inches/h:
precip = [zeros (1 ,60*24*2+60*13+13) .’; precip1
]*3600*3.937*10^( -5);
% Creating a time
series for the
precipitation
data
from 2005 -01 -001 00:00 to 2015 -12 -31 23:59
with a
one minute
interval:
ts_precip=transpose(datenum
(2005 ,01 ,01 ,0 ,0:(60*24*2+60*13+13+5781151 -1) ,0));
% Generating a loop to aggregate
the
precipitation
data:
dataOut = [ts ,zeros(1, length(ts)).’];
precip_Sum = 0;
iInterval =1;
obs =0;
for i = 1: length(precip)
if (ts_precip(i,1) < ts_METAR(iInterval ,1))
precip_Sum = precip_Sum + precip(i,1);
obs=obs +1;
else
dataOut(iInterval ,2) = (precip_Sum + precip(i
,1))/obs;
precip_Sum = 0;
iInterval = iInterval + 1;
obs = 0;
end
end
==PAGE:100==
84
processing scripts
b.5
land cover workflow scripts
::Script
for land
cover
workflow
::Input
datasets
set Street=C:\Users\askonring\Dropbox\Speciale\Data\
Overfladeanalyse \vejflade.shp
set Parks=C:\Users\askonring\Dropbox\Speciale\Data\
Overfladeanalyse \park_groent.shp
set
HOFOR_LC=C:\Users\askonring\Dropbox\Speciale\Data
\ Overfladeanalyse \ Hofor_analyse_40 .tif
set CHM=C:\Users\askonring\Dropbox\Speciale\Data\CHM\
CHM_bin_all.tif
::Set
directories
set TEMP=C:\Users\askonring\Documents\DTU\Speciale\
temp
set out=C:\Users\askonring\Dropbox\Speciale\Data\
Overfladeanalyse
::
::Rasterize
street
surface
with the same
extents
and
resolution as the CHM
gdal_rasterize
-burn 24 -a_nodata 0 -l vejflade
%Street%
%TEMP%\vejflade.tif -te 716000
6168000
730000
6182500
-tr 0.4 0.4 -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=
LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
gdal_translate
"%TEMP%\ v e j f l a d e . t i f "
"%TEMP%\
v e j f l a d e _ 0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
::Rasterize
park and green
area
polygon
with the same
extents
and
resolution as the CHM
gdal_rasterize
-burn 11 -a_nodata 0 -l park_groent
%Parks%
%TEMP%\park_groent.tif -te 716000
6168000
730000
6182500
-tr 0.4 0.4 -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=
LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
gdal_translate
"%TEMP%\park_groent . t i f "
"%TEMP%\
park_groent_0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
::Overlay
streets
and parks
with
addition
Call
gdal_calc -A %TEMP%\vejflade_0.tif -B %TEMP%\
park_groent_0.tif
--outfile=%TEMP%\
vejflade_m_groent .tif --calc= "A+B"
--NoDataValue =0
--type=Byte --co=COMPRESS=LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
==PAGE:101==
B.5 land cover workflow scripts
85
gdal_translate
"%TEMP%\vejflade_m_groent . t i f "
"
C%TEMP%\vejflade_m_groent_0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none
-ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
::Overlay
HOFOR
land
cover by addition
Call
gdal_calc -A %TEMP%\ vejflade_m_groent_0 .tif -B
%HOFOR_LC%
--outfile= %temp%overflade_u_trae .tif
--calc= "A+B"
--NoDataValue =0 --type=Byte --co=
COMPRESS=LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
gdal_translate
" %temp%overflade_u_trae . t i f "
"
%temp%overflade_u_trae_0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot
Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
gdal_translate
"%CHM%"
" %temp%CHM_bin_all_0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
::Change
CHM value
from 1 to 50
Call
gdal_calc -A %temp%CHM_bin_all_0 .tif
--outfile=
%temp%\CHM_bin_all_50 .tif --calc= "A∗50 "
--NoDataValue =0 --type=Byte --co=COMPRESS=LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
gdal_translate
"%temp%\CHM_bin_all_50 . t i f "
"%temp%\
CHM_bin_all_50_0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
::Overlay
CHM with
addition
Call
gdal_calc -A %temp%\ overflade_u_trae_0 .tif -B
%temp%\ CHM_bin_all_50_0 .tif
--outfile=%temp%\
overflade_m_trae .tif --calc= "A+B"
--NoDataValue =0
--type=Byte --co=COMPRESS=LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
gdal_translate
"%temp%\overflade_m_trae . t i f "
"%temp%\
overflade_m_trae_0 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot Byte
-co
COMPRESS=LZW
::As
green in HOFOR
land
cover is given the value 0,
it was needed to change
this.
Call
gdal_calc -A %temp%\ overflade_m_trae_0 .tif
--outfile=%temp%\ overflade_0_200 .tif --calc= " (A<1)
∗200 "
--NoDataValue =0 --type=Byte --co=COMPRESS=
LZW
::Rem ove no data sign
gdal_translate
"%temp%\ overflade_0_200 . t i f "
"%temp%\
overflade_200 . t i f "
-a_nodata
none -ot Byte -co
COMPRESS=LZW
==PAGE:102==
86
processing scripts
::Zeroes
replaced
with 200 for areas
only
covered by
HOFOR_LC
Call
gdal_calc -A %temp%\overflade_200.tif -B %temp%\
CHM_bin_all_50_0 .tif
--outfile=%temp%\
overflade_klar .tif --calc= "A+B"
--NoDataValue =0
--type=Byte --co=COMPRESS=LZW
::Final
landcover
map
clipped to the
research_area.
gdalwarp
-ot Byte -q -of GTiff
-dstnodata 0 -tr 0.4
-0.4 -tap
-cutline
C:/Users/askonring/Dropbox/Speciale/Data/Grundkort/research_area
.shp
-crop_to_cutline
-co
COMPRESS=LZW -co
PREDICTOR =1 %temp%\ overflade_klar.tif
%out%/overflade_clip .tif
b.6
land cover classification
HOFOR land cover
The HOFOR land cover map is classiﬁed into following classes.
Signaturforklaring:
0 = Grønt
1 = Bygning < 20m fra Vej og/eller areal større end 50m2
2 = Vej
3 = Internvej
4 = Parkering
5 = Cykelsti
6 = Sø
7 = Øvrigt befæstet < 13m fra Vej
8 = Øvrigt befæstet > 13m fra Vej og med nedløbsrist
9 = Øvrigt befæstet > 13m fra Vej og uden nedløbsrist
10 = Bygning > 20m fra Vej og areal mindre end 50m2
GRASS reclassiﬁcation rules
The following are reclassﬁcation text used in the GRASS r.reclass algorithm
in the last step of the land cover classiﬁcation workﬂow.
Tree
50 thru 100 = 1
* = NULL
==PAGE:103==
B.6 land cover classification
87
Grass
0 = 1
11 = 1
35 thru 49 = 1
* = NULL
Impervious
1 thru 5 = 1
7 thru 10 = 1
12 thru 34 = 1
* = NULL
Water
6 = 1
* = NULL
==PAGE:104==
==PAGE:105==
C
R E S U LT S
c.1
land cover statistics
List of abbreviations used in table 18 and 19:
TC Tree Cover
PC Pervious Cover
IC Impervious Cover
WC Water Cover
EC Evergreen Cover
PCbTC Pervious Cover beneath Tree Cover
ICbTC Impervious Cover beneath Tree Cover
LAI Leaf Area Index
89
==PAGE:106==
90
results
Table 18: Land cover statistics of the subcatchments in the city of Copenhagen.
Catchment
Subcatchment
Area
TC
PC
IC
WC
EC
PCbTC
ICbTC
LAI
km2
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
-
Amager og Christianshavn
Christianshavn
0.4
14
15
71
0
3
80
20
3.3
Amager Øst
7.3
12
36
51
1
13
87
13
3.0
Amager Vest
13.2
13
38
49
0
7
99
1
3.2
Kbh og Frederiksberg Vest
Harrestrup Å
10.0
17
33
45
6
15
88
12
3.5
Grøndals Å
4.6
16
30
54
0
19
92
8
3.3
Gåsbækrenden
8.1
17
33
50
0
12
94
6
3.6
Teglholmen
6.7
13
27
60
0
19
87
13
3.4
Nørrebro
Nørrebro
2.6
13
18
59
11
5
70
30
3.9
Østerbro
Indre Østerbro
2.1
12
16
72
0
8
71
29
3.7
Nordhavn
3.0
2
25
71
3
2
74
26
3.1
Ydre Østerbro
1.4
9
23
67
1
4
76
24
3.4
Ladegårdsåen
Sønder Boulevard
2.6
8
17
76
0
9
74
26
3.2
Fr.berg Alle og Vodroffsv
3.1
20
28
48
5
12
98
2
4.0
Bispeengbuen
2.7
12
21
68
0
9
91
9
3.4
Assistens Kirkegården
2.3
16
17
62
6
15
78
22
3.7
Indre By
Indre By Nord
1.9
13
19
61
7
9
74
26
3.9
Indre By Midt
1.1
3
9
88
0
3
57
43
3.1
Indre By Syd
0.7
7
12
80
1
3
45
55
3.6
Bispebjerg
Lersøgrøften
6.0
14
23
63
0
8
78
22
3.8
Bispebjerg Vest
7.2
22
32
36
12
15
89
11
3.9
Svanemøllen
1.0
21
32
47
0
18
81
19
3.8
==PAGE:107==
C.1 land cover statistics
91
Table 19: Land Cover statistics of the administrative boroughs in the city of Copenhagen.
Boroughs
Area
TC
PC
IC
WC
EC
PCbTC
ICbTC
LAI
km2
%
%
%
%
%
%
%
-
Amager Øst
9.8
9
33
52
0
11
84
16
3.0
Amager Vest
19.3
13
49
37
1
4
93
7
3.1
Bispebjerg
6.7
18
27
52
3
16
85
15
3.8
Brønshøj-Husum
8.7
20
33
41
6
14
90
10
3.7
Frederiksberg
8.7
18
28
51
3
13
100
0
3.8
Indre By
10.3
9
16
52
10
5
73
27
3.7
Nørrebro
4.1
11
15
71
3
13
75
25
3.6
Østerbro
8.8
11
24
64
1
7
77
23
3.7
Valby
9.2
16
31
53
0
11
87
13
3.5
Vanløse
6.7
15
31
47
7
16
84
16
3.4
Vesterbro - Kongens Enghave
8.2
12
26
62
0
16
86
14
3.4
==PAGE:108==
92
results
c.2
weather statistics
Table 20: Mean, Standard deviation, minimum and maximum values for aggregated
monthly weather data.
Air Temperature
Jan Feb Mar Apr May
Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Mean
1.6 1.2 3.5 7.9 12.1 15.5 18.7 17.7 14.6 10.5
6.7 3.5
STD
2.1 1.8 2.3 1.4
0.9
1.0 1.6
0.7 0.9 1.4
1.3 2.6
Min
-2.2 -1.1 -0.6 6.1 10.6 14.0 16.7 16.6 13.6 8.7
4.0 -2.8
Max
4.9 4.8 6.2 10.0 13.3 16.9 21.6 18.8 16.4 12.7
8.3 6.9
Dew Temperature
Mean
-0.4 -1.0 0.1 3.2
7.1 10.4 13.5 13.4 11.0 7.7
4.8 1.7
STD
1.9 1.8 2.6 1.1
0.9
0.9 1.2
0.6 1.1 1.7
1.4 2.6
Min
-3.8 -3.4 -5.6 1.0
5.9
9.0 11.3 12.2 9.7 5.4
2.5 -4.1
Max
2.7 2.1 2.9 4.9
8.2 11.9 15.0 14.3 13.5 10.5
6.4 5.4
Net Radiation
Mean
11.8 31.1 67.5 120 173 213.2 204 166 102 49.8 18.0 7.1
STD
0.6 1.7 2.0 3.7
5.7
5.2 5.2
7.0 3.9 2.4
0.7 2.3
Min
10.8 28.7 64.2 116 165
204 197 156 97.8 45.1 16.5 0.0
Max
12.9 34.7 70.9 129 187
220 211 182 112 53.9 19.1 8.9
Wind speed
Mean
5.5 5.1 4.7 4.1
4.0
4.0 3.9
4.1 4.4 4.7
5.1 5.0
STD
1.0 0.8 0.5 0.3
0.4
0.4 0.4
0.4 0.5 0.5
0.4 0.7
Min
4.0 4.0 4.1 3.5
3.1
3.4 3.2
3.4 3.7 3.6
4.5 3.6
Max
6.9 6.4 5.6 4.5
4.7
4.5 4.6
4.7 5.1 5.2
5.8 6.1
Precipitation
Mean
1.6 1.1 1.0 0.9
2.0
2.3 2.4
3.8 1.6 1.9
2.2 1.8
STD
1.0 0.5 0.5 0.4
0.7
1.4 2.1
2.3 0.9 1.1
1.4 1.0
Min
0.4 0.6 0.1 0.4
0.5
0.1 0.5
1.3 0.0 0.5
0.2 0.0
Max
3.0 1.7 1.9 1.6
3.1
4.8 6.8
7.2 2.8 4.7
5.5 3.5
==PAGE:109==
C.2 weather statistics
93
Table 21: List of monthly precipitation in the period 2005-2015 from ofﬁcial SVK
summary, I-Tree Input and Output.
SVK ofﬁcial Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
2005 25
38
32
12
46
53 85
99
14
66
38
46 554
2006 14
40
29
47
63
8 35 193
29
83
88
70 699
2007 99
48
28
16
77 130 165
70
54
42
34
43 806
2008 45
17
59
38
57
33 35 160
33
64
47
58 645
2009 21
35
37
10
67 102 79
38
45 102
43
2010 15
34
40
30
56
66 23 186
48
47
86
20 651
2011 44
26
35
15
77
52 219 134
65
40
7
53 767
2012 87
19
10
34
13
90 60
35
74
58
60
69 610
2013 50
21
5
27
51
51 18
46
78
94
61
64 566
2014 64
49
25
27
81
57 40 163
69 143
44
98 859
2015 73
19
51
29
53
47 54
51
65
20 154
97 712
Average 49
31
32
26
58
63 74 107
53
64
66
60 687
I-Tree In Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
2005 23
36
28
11
44
51 84
97
12
64
36
43 528
2006 13
38
27
43
61
7 34 190
26
79
83
66 668
2007 94
45
26
15
75 128 162
68
50
40
31
38 773
2008 42
15
56
37
56
32 34 158
32
62
43
56 621
2009 19
31
35
9
65 101 77
37
43
98
41
2010 12
31
38
30
54
64 23 184
46
45
80
18 624
2011 42
25
32
14
76
51 216 132
63
37
6
49 743
2012 86
17
10
34
11
88 58
33
72
55
55
64 584
2013 47
18
3
26
49
50 17
45
75
91
57
61 539
2014 61
46
23
24
79
55 40 161
67 140
39
95 831
2015 68
16
49
28
50
45 52
49
62
17 147
94 675
Average 46
29
30
25
56
61 72 105
50
61
61
57 659
I-Tree Out Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year
2005 31
42
30
12
79 110 102 108
15
58
46
45 679
2006 14
43
28
49
64
6 45 194
26
70
87
63 690
2007 93
46
28
13
81 145 174
54
54
39
31
38 796
2008 42
17
61
38
60
47 33 181
33
63
46
57 679
2009 21
31
36
12
70 114 56
40
41 101
42
2010 12
29
35
33
53
67 22 203
44
45
81
19 644
2011 42
26
30
13
62
64 211 113
63
40
7
50 721
2012 96
17
10
35
14
85 70
43
70
62
57
70 628
2013 47
17
4
31
53
45 15
91
84
81
54
68 589
2014 65
47
26
27
97
43 38 223
69 153
42 108 938
2015 88
15
49
34
44
37 43
41
75
17 164 100 707
Average 50
30
31
27
61
69 74 117
53
61
65
60 707
